
Assignments and quizzes are prebuilt, making it easy to get started  
with MyMathLab. When creating your course, simply choose the  
Ready to Go version.
Quick & Easy
Author Selected
Getting Ready
Successful Students
The author has chosen homework assignments, quizzes, and tests that will help  
students get the most out of learning through online assessments. You  
have the flexibility to edit, change, and add to the Ready to Go assignments  
at any time.
Skill review quizzes are integrated throughout the Ready to Go MyMathLab  
course, testing students on prerequisite knowledge. Students receive personalized,  
just-in-time review assignments, based on quiz results, allowing for additional practice 
on forgotten concepts.
MyMathLab improves the quality of learning in any environment—lab-based,  
hybrid, fully online, and traditional classroom settings. Implementing and requiring  
MyMathLab leads to quantifiable results in student retention and success.
Ready to Go!
It’s easier than ever to get started with MyMathLab!  
Students benefit from immediate feedback on homework 
assignments, additional practice, and review resources—all 
aimed at improving their results.
Scan the code or visit  
www.mymathlab.com/success-stories  
for a growing list of case studies.

Achieve Your Potential
The authors J.S. Ratti and Marcus McWaters, have developed specific content in  
MyMathLab® to ensure you have many resources to help you achieve success in  
mathematics—and beyond! 
The MyMathLab features described here will help you:
•	 Brush up on math skills and concepts you may have forgotten.
•	 Retain new concepts as you move through your math course.
•	 Develop skills that will help with your transition to college and to your profession.
Adaptive Study Plan
Skills for Success
The Study Plan will help you study 
more efficiently and effectively.
Your performance and activity are 
assessed continually in real time, 
providing a personalized experience 
based on your individual needs.
The Skills for Success Module  
supports your continued success  
in college.
This module provides tutorials and 
guidance on a variety of topics,  
including the transition to college,  
online learning, time management,  
and more.
Additional content is provided to help 
with the development of professional 
skills such as resume writing and  
creation and interview preparation.

Are you frustrated when you 
know you learned a math concept 
in the past but you can’t quite  
remember the skill when it’s time 
to use it? Don’t worry!
The authors have included  
Getting Ready material so that  
you can brush up on forgotten  
material efficiently by taking a 
quick skill review quiz to pinpoint the areas in which you need help. 
Then a personalized homework assignment provides additional  
practice on those forgotten concepts, right when you need it.
Getting Ready
Scan the code or visit www.mymathlab.com/success-stories to learn how  
students across the country have used MyMathLab to achieve their potential and 
be successful in their math courses.
Maintaining Skills
As you work through  
your math course, these  
MyMathLab® exercises support 
ongoing review to help you 
maintain essential skills.
The ability to recall important 
math concepts as you continu-
ally acquire new mathematical 
skills will help you be successful 
in this math course and in your 
future math courses.

This page intentionally left blank 

College Algebra  
and TrigonometryaEii

This page intentionally left blank 

College Algebra  
and Trigonometry
Third Edition
J. S. Ratti
University of South Florida
Marcus McWaters
University of South Florida
Boston   Columbus   Indianapolis  New York   San Francisco   Upper Saddle River
Amsterdam   Cape Town   Dubai   London   Madrid   Milan   Munich   Paris   Montréal   Toronto    
Delhi   Mexico City   São Paulo   Sydney   Hong Kong   Seoul   Singapore   Taipei   Tokyo aEii

Editorial Director: Christine Hoag
Editor in Chief: Anne Kelly
Executive Content Editor:  
  Christine O’Brien
Editorial Assistant: Judith Garber
Marketing Manager: Peggy Lucas
Marketing Assistant: Justine Goulart
Director of Production:  
  Sarah McCracken
Senior Managing Editor:  
  Karen Wernholm
Senior Production Project Manager:  
  Beth Houston
Procurement Specialist: Debbie Rossi
Associate Design Director: Andrea Nix
Program Design Lead: Barbara Atkinson
Cover and Text Designer:  
  Amanda/Kavanagh/Ark Design
Cover image: Waterscape Blue/White 1.  
  Copyright Jim Nickelson Photography.  
  All rights reserved.
Digital Assets Manager:  
  Marianne Groth
Math XL Content Supervisor:  
  Kristina Evans
Senior Content Developer:  
  John Flanagan
Senior Author Support/Technology  
  Specialist: Joe Vetere
Image Manager: Rachel Youdelman
Media Director: Ruth Berry
Media Producer: Tracy Menoza
Full-Service Project Management:  
  PreMediaGlobal
Composition: PreMediaGlobal
Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with 
­permission, in this textbook appear on the appropriate page within text or on page C–1.
Many of the designations by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products  
are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and the 
publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in 
initial caps or all caps.
Copyright © 2015, 2011, 2009 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved. Manu-
factured in the United States of America. This publication is protected by Copyright, 
and permission should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited 
reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any 
means, electronic, ­mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. To obtain 
permission(s) to use material from this work, please submit a written request to 
Pearson Education, Inc., ­Permissions Department, One Lake Street, Upper Saddle 
River, New Jersey 07458, or you may fax your request to 201-236-3290.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ratti, J. S., author.
  College algebra and trigonometry / J.S. Ratti, University of South Florida,  
Marcus McWaters, University of South Florida. — 3 [edition].
       pages cm
  ISBN 0-321-86751-3 (student edition) — 
 1.  Algebra—Textbooks.  2.  Trigonometry—Textbooks.  I.  McWaters, Marcus,  
author.  II.  Title.
  QA152.3.R38 2015
  512’.13—dc23
  2013028603
  
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1-RRD-16 15 14 13 12		
	
ISBN 13: 978-0-321-86751-3
	
ISBN 10: 0-321-86751-3
www.pearsonhighered.com

To Our Wives,
Lata and Debra

This page intentionally left blank 

Foreword
We’re pleased to present this new edition of our course for College Algebra and 
Trigonometry. Our experience teaching this material at the University of South 
Florida has been exceptionally rewarding. Because students are accustomed to in-
formation being delivered by electronic media, the introduction of MyMathLab® 
into our courses was seamless. We hope you’ll have a similar experience.
Many challenges face today’s college algebra and trigonometry students and 
instructors. Students arrive with various levels of comprehension from their previ-
ous courses. Instead of really learning the concepts presented, students often resort 
to memorization to pass the course. As a result, a course needs to get students to a 
common starting point and engage them in becoming active learners, without sac-
rificing the solid mathematics essential for conceptual understanding. Instructors 
in this course are faced with the task of providing students with an understanding 
of college algebra and trigonometry, preparing them for the next step, and ensuring 
that they find mathematics useful and interesting. Our efforts, however, have been 
aided considerably by the many suggestions we have received from users of the first 
and second editions of this course.
In this course, there is a strong emphasis on both concept development and real-
life applications. Topics such as functions, graphing, the difference quotient, and 
limiting processes provides thorough preparation for the study of calculus and will 
improve students’ comprehension of algebra. Just-in-time review throughout the 
text ensures that all students are brought to the same level before being introduced 
to new concepts. Numerous applications are used to motivate students to apply the 
concepts and skills they learn in college algebra and trigonometry to other courses, 
including the physical and biological sciences, engineering, and economics, and to 
on-the-job and everyday problem solving. Students are given ample opportunities 
throughout this course to think about important mathematical ideas and to practice 
and apply algebraic skills.
Throughout the course, we emphasize why the material being covered is impor-
tant and how it can be applied. By thoroughly developing mathematical concepts 
with clearly defined terminology, students see the “why” behind those concepts, pav-
ing the way for a deeper understanding, better retention, less reliance on rote memo-
rization, and ultimately more success. The level of exposition was selected so that 
the material is accessible to students and provides them with an opportunity to grow.
It is our hope that once you have looked through this course, you will see 
that we were able to fulfill our initial goals of writing for today’s students and 
for you, the instructor.
vii
(Marcus McWaters)
(J. S. Ratti)

viii
	
	
Preface   xvii
Resources   xx
Acknowledgments   xxii
About the Authors   xxiii
Chapter P
Basic Concepts of Algebra  1
P.1	
The Real Numbers and Their Properties   2
Classifying Numbers  ■  Equality of Numbers  ■  Classifying Sets of Numbers  ■   
Rational Numbers  ■  Irrational Numbers  ■  The Real Number Line  ■   
Inequalities  ■  Sets  ■  Definition of Union and Intersection  ■  Intervals  ■   
Absolute Value  ■  Distance Between Two Points on a Real Number Line  ■   
Arithmetic Expressions  ■  Properties of the Real Numbers  ■  Subtraction and 
Division of Real Numbers  ■  Algebraic Expressions    
P.2	
Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation   17
Integer Exponents  ■  Rules of Exponents  ■  Simplifying Exponential  
Expressions  ■  Scientific Notation    
P.3	
Polynomials   28
Polynomial Vocabulary  ■  Adding and Subtracting Polynomials  ■  Multiplying 
Polynomials  ■  Special Products  ■  Squaring a Binomial Sum or Difference  ■   
The Product of the Sum and Difference of Terms     
P.4	
Factoring Polynomials   38
The Greatest Common Monomial Factor  ■  Factoring Out a Monomial  ■   
Factoring Trinomials of the Form x2 + bx + c  ■  Factoring Formulas  ■   
Perfect-Square Trinomials  ■  Difference of Squares  ■  Difference and Sum  
of Cubes  ■  Factoring by Grouping  ■  Factoring Trinomials of the Form 
Ax2 + Bx + C    
P.5	
Rational Expressions   47
Rational Expressions  ■  Lowest Terms for a Rational Expression  ■  Multiplication 
and Division of Rational Expressions  ■  Addition and Subtraction of Rational 
Expressions  ■  Complex Fractions    
P.6	
Rational Exponents and Radicals   58
Square Roots  ■  Simplifying Square Roots  ■  Other Roots  ■  Like Radicals  ■   
Radicals with Different Indexes  ■  Rationalizing Radical Expressions  ■   
Conjugates  ■  Rational Exponents    
Chapter P Summary  ■  Chapter P Review Exercises  ■   
Chapter P Practice Test    
Contents

ix
Chapter 1
Equations and Inequalities  75
1.1	
Linear Equations in One Variable   76
Definitions  ■  Equivalent Equations  ■  Solving Linear Equations in One  
Variable  ■  Formulas  ■  Applications    
1.2	
Quadratic Equations   91
Factoring Method  ■  The Square Root Method  ■  Completing the Square   ■   
The Quadratic Formula  ■  Applications  ■  Golden Rectangle    
1.3	
Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with  
Complex Solutions   104
Complex Numbers  ■  Addition and Subtraction  ■  Multiplying Complex  
Numbers  ■  Complex Conjugates and Division  ■  Quadratic Equations with 
Complex Solutions    
1.4	
Solving Other Types of Equations   115
Solving Equations by Factoring   ■  Rational Equations  ■  Equations Involving 
Radicals  ■  Equations with Rational Exponents  ■  Equations That Are  
Quadratic in Form    
1.5	
Inequalities   129
Inequalities  ■  Linear Inequalities  ■  Combining Two Inequalities  ■  Using Test 
Points to Solve Inequalities    
1.6	
Equations and Inequalities Involving Absolute Value   142
Equations Involving Absolute Value  ■  Inequalities Involving Absolute Value    
Chapter 1 Summary  ■  Chapter 1 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 1 Practice 
Test A  ■  Chapter 1 Practice Test B    
Chapter 2
Graphs and Functions  155
2.1	
The Coordinate Plane   156
The Coordinate Plane  ■  Scales on a Graphing Utility  ■  Distance Formula  ■   
Midpoint Formula    
2.2	
Graphs of Equations   165
Graph of an Equation  ■  Intercepts   ■  Symmetry  ■  Circles  ■  Semicircles    
2.3	
Lines   178
Slope of a Line  ■  Equation of a Line  ■  Slope–Intercept Form  ■  Equations of 
Horizontal and Vertical Lines  ■  General Form of the Equation of a Line  ■   
Parallel and Perpendicular Lines  ■  Modeling Data Using Linear Regression    

x
	
	
2.4	
Functions   194
Functions  ■  Function Notation  ■  Representations of Functions  ■  The Domain 
of a Function  ■  The Range of a Function  ■  Graphs of Functions  ■  Function 
Information from Its Graph  ■  Building Functions  ■  Functions in Economics    
2.5	
Properties of Functions   214
Increasing and Decreasing Functions  ■  Relative Maximum and Minimum  
Values  ■  Even–Odd Functions and Symmetry  ■  Average Rate of Change    
2.6	
A Library of Functions   226
Linear Functions  ■  Square Root and Cube Root Functions  ■  Piecewise  
Functions  ■  Graphing Piecewise Functions  ■  Basic Functions    
2.7	
Transformations of Functions   239
Transformations  ■  Vertical and Horizontal Shifts  ■  Reflections  ■  Stretching  
or Compressing  ■  Multiple Transformations in Sequence    
2.8	
Combining Functions; Composite Functions   257
Combining Functions  ■  Composition of Functions  ■  Domain of Composite  
Functions  ■  Decomposition of a Function  ■  Applications of Composite Functions    
2.9	
Inverse Functions   270
Inverses  ■  Finding the Inverse Function  ■  Finding the Range of a One-to-One 
Function  ■  Applications    
Chapter 2 Summary  ■  Chapter 2 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 2 Practice 
Test A  ■  Chapter 2 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 2 Cumulative Review 
Exercises Chapters P–2    
Chapter 3
Polynomial and Rational Functions  291
3.1	
Quadratic Functions   292
Quadratic Functions  ■  Standard Form of a Quadratic Function  ■  Graphing  
a Quadratic Function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c  ■  Applications    
3.2	
Polynomial Functions   306
Polynomial Functions  ■  Power Functions  ■  End Behavior of Polynomial  
Functions  ■  Zeros of a Function  ■  Zeros and Turning Points  ■  Graphing  
a Polynomial Function    
3.3	
Dividing Polynomials   323
The Division Algorithm  ■  Synthetic Division  ■  The Remainder and Factor Theorems    
3.4	
The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function   335
Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  ■  Rational Zeros Theorem  ■  Descartes’s 
Rule of Signs  ■  Bounds on the Real Zeros  ■  Find the Real Zeros of a  
Polynomial Function    

xi
3.5	
The Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function   347
Conjugate Pairs Theorem    
3.6	
Rational Functions   355
Rational Functions  ■  Vertical and Horizontal Asymptotes  ■  Translations of 
f 1x2 = 1
x
  ■  Graphing Rational Functions  ■  Oblique Asymptotes  ■  Graph of 
a Revenue Curve    
3.7	
Variation   374
Direct Variation  ■  Inverse Variation  ■  Joint and Combined Variation    
Chapter 3 Summary  ■  Chapter 3 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 3 Practice 
Test A  ■  Chapter 3 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 3 Cumulative Review 
Exercises Chapters P–3    
Chapter 4
Exponential and Logarithmic Functions  391
4.1	
Exponential Functions   392
Exponential Functions  ■  Evaluate Exponential Functions  ■  Graphing  
Exponential Functions  ■  Simple Interest  ■  Compound Interest  ■  Continuous 
Compound Interest Formula  ■  The Natural Exponential Function  ■  Natural 
Exponential Growth and Decay    
4.2	
Logarithmic Functions   410
Logarithmic Functions  ■  Evaluating Logarithms  ■  Basic Properties of  
Logarithms  ■  Domains of Logarithmic Functions  ■  Graphs of Logarithmic 
Functions  ■  Common Logarithm  ■  Natural Logarithm  ■  Investments  ■   
Newton’s Law of Cooling    
4.3	
Rules of Logarithms   425
Rules of Logarithms  ■  Number of Digits  ■  Change of Base  ■  Growth and 
Decay  ■  Half-Life  ■  Radiocarbon Dating    
4.4	
Exponential and Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities   438
Solving Exponential Equations  ■  Applications of Exponential Equations  ■   
Solving Logarithmic Equations  ■  Logarithmic and Exponential Inequalities    
4.5	
Logarithmic Scales   450
pH Scale  ■  Earthquake Intensity  ■  Loudness of Sound  ■  Musical Pitch  ■   
Star Brightness    
Chapter 4 Summary  ■  Chapter 4 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 4 Practice 
Test A  ■  Chapter 4 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 4 Cumulative Review 
Exercises Chapters P–4    

xii
	
	
Chapter 5
Trigonometric Functions  470
5.1	
Angles and Their Measure   471
Angles  ■  Angle Measure  ■  Degree Measure  ■  Radian Measure  ■  Relationship 
Between Degrees and Radians  ■  Complements and Supplements  ■  Length of 
an Arc of a Circle  ■  Area of a Sector  ■  Linear and Angular Speed    
5.2	
Right-Triangle Trigonometry   485
Trigonometric Ratios and Functions  ■  Relations between Trigonometric  
Functions  ■  Function Values for Some Special Angles  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric 
Functions Using a Calculator  ■  Complements  ■  Applications    
5.3	
Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle   500
Trigonometric Functions of Angles  ■  Quadrantal Angles  ■  Coterminal  
Angles  ■  Signs of the Trigonometric Functions  ■  Reference Angle  ■   
Using Reference Angles  ■  Circular Functions    
5.4	
Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions   514
Properties of Sine and Cosine  ■  Domain and Range of Sine and Cosine  ■  Zeros 
of Sine and Cosine Functions  ■  Even-Odd Properties  ■  Periodic Functions  ■  
Graphs of Sine and Cosine Functions  ■  Graph of the Sine Function  ■  Graph of 
the Cosine Function  ■  Five Key Points  ■  Amplitude and Period  ■  Biorhythm 
States  ■  Phase Shift  ■  Vertical Shifts  ■  Simple Harmonic Motion    
5.5	
Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions   536
Tangent Function  ■  Graph of y = tan x  ■  Graphs of the Reciprocal Functions    
5.6	
Inverse Trigonometric Functions   547
The Inverse Sine Function  ■  The Inverse Cosine Function  ■  The Inverse  
Tangent Function  ■  Other Inverse Trigonometric Functions  ■  Evaluating  
Inverse Trigonometric Functions  ■  Composition of Trigonometric and  
Inverse Trigonometric Functions    
Chapter 5 Summary  ■  Chapter 5 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 5 Practice 
Test A  ■  Chapter 5 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 5 Cumulative Review 
Exercises Chapters P–5    
Chapter 6
Trigonometric Identities and Equations  567
6.1	
Verifying Identities   568
Fundamental Trigonometric Identities  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions 
Using the Fundamental Identities  ■  Simplifying a Trigonometric Expression  ■  
Trigonometric Equations and Identities  ■  Process of Verifying Trigonometric 
Identities  ■  Methods of Verifying Trigonometric Identities    

xiii
6.2	
Sum and Difference Formulas   582
Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine  ■  Cofunction Identities  ■  Sum and 
Difference Formulas for Sine  ■  Reduction Formula  ■  Sum and Difference  
Formulas for Tangent    
6.3	
Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas   595
Double-Angle Formulas  ■  Power-Reducing Formulas  ■  Alternating Current  ■   
Half-Angle Formulas    
6.4	
Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas   606
Product-to-Sum Formulas  ■  Sum-to-Product Formulas  ■  Verify Trigonometric 
Identities  ■  Analyzing Touch-Tone Phones    
6.5	
Trigonometric Equations I   614
Trigonometric Equations  ■  Trigonometric Equations of the Form 
a sin 1x −c2 = k, a cos 1x −c2 = k, and a tan 1x −c2 = k  ■   
Trigonometric Equations and the Zero-Product Property  ■  Equations with 
More Than One Trigonometric Function  ■  Extraneous Solutions    
6.6	
Trigonometric Equations II   624
Equations Involving Multiple Angles  ■  Using Sum-to-Product Identities  ■   
Equations Containing Inverse Functions    
Chapter 6 Summary  ■  Chapter 6 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 6  
Practice Test A  ■  Chapter 6 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 6 Cumulative 
Review Exercises Chapters P–6    
Chapter 7
Applications of Trigonometric Functions  639
7.1	
The Law of Sines   640
Solving Oblique Triangles  ■  The Law of Sines  ■  Solving AAS and ASA  
Triangles  ■  Solving SSA Triangles—the Ambiguous Case  ■  Bearings    
7.2	
The Law of Cosines   654
The Law of Cosines  ■  Derivation of the Law of Cosines  ■  Solving SAS  
Triangles  ■  Solving SSS Triangles    
7.3	
Areas of Polygons Using Trigonometry   662
Geometry Formulas  ■  Area of SAS Triangles  ■  Area of AAS and ASA  
Triangles  ■  Area of SSS Triangles  ■  Polygons    
7.4	
Vectors   672
Vectors  ■  Geometric Vectors  ■  Equivalent Vectors  ■  Adding Vectors  ■   
Algebraic Vectors  ■  Unit Vectors  ■  Vectors in i, j Form  ■  Vector in Terms  
of Magnitude and Direction  ■  Applications of Vectors    

xiv
	
	
7.5	
The Dot Product   685
The Dot Product  ■  The Angle Between Two Vectors  ■  Orthogonal Vectors  ■   
Projection of a Vector  ■  Decomposition of a Vector  ■  Work    
7.6	
Polar Coordinates   696
Polar Coordinates  ■  Converting Between Polar and Rectangular Forms  ■   
Converting Equations Between Rectangular and Polar Forms  ■  The Graph  
of a Polar Equation  ■  Limaçons    
7.7	
Polar Form of Complex Numbers; DeMoivre’s Theorem   711
Geometric Representation of Complex Numbers  ■  The Absolute Value of a 
Complex Number  ■  Polar Form of a Complex Number  ■  Product and Quotient 
in Polar Form  ■  Powers of Complex Numbers in Polar Form  ■  Roots of  
Complex Numbers    
Chapter 7 Summary  ■  Chapter 7 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 7 Practice 
Test A  ■  Chapter 7 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 7 Cumulative Review 
Exercises Chapters P–7    
Chapter 8
Systems of Equations and Inequalities  727
8.1	
Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables   728
System of Equations  ■  Graphical Method  ■  Substitution Method  ■   
Elimination Method  ■  Applications    
8.2	
Systems of Linear Equations in Three Variables   740
Systems of Linear Equations  ■  Number of Solutions of a Linear System  ■   
Nonsquare Systems  ■  Geometric Interpretation  ■  An Application to CAT Scans    
8.3	
Partial–Fraction Decomposition   752
Partial Fractions  ■  Q(x) Has Only Distinct Linear Factors  ■  Q(x) Has Repeated 
Linear Factors  ■  Q(x) Has Distinct Irreducible Quadratic Factors  ■  Q(x) Has 
Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factors    
8.4	
Systems of Nonlinear Equations   763
Systems of Nonlinear Equations  ■  Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equations by 
Substitution  ■  Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equations by Elimination  ■   
Applications    
8.5	
Systems of Inequalities   770
Graph of a Linear Inequality in Two Variables  ■  Systems of Linear Inequalities 
in Two Variables  ■  Nonlinear Inequality  ■  Nonlinear Systems    

xv
8.6	
Linear Programming   782
Linear Programming  ■  Solving Linear Programming Problems  ■  Applications    
Chapter 8 Summary  ■  Chapter 8 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 8  
Practice Test A  ■  Chapter 8 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 8 Cumulative 
Review Exercises Chapters P–8    
Chapter 9
Matrices and Determinants  797
9.1	
Matrices and Systems of Equations   798
Definition of a Matrix  ■  Using Matrices to Solve Linear Systems  ■  Gaussian 
Elimination  ■  Gauss–Jordan Elimination    
9.2	
Matrix Algebra   814
Equality of Matrices  ■  Matrix Addition and Scalar Multiplication  ■  Matrix 
Multiplication  ■  Computer Graphics    
9.3	
The Matrix Inverse   827
The Multiplicative Inverse of a Matrix  ■  Finding the Inverse of a Matrix  ■   
A Rule for Finding the Inverse of a 2 : 2 Matrix  ■  Solving Systems of Linear 
Equations by Using Matrix Inverses  ■  Applications of Matrix Inverses     
Cryptography    
9.4	
Determinants and Cramer’s Rule   842
The Determinant of a 2 : 2 Matrix  ■  Minors and Cofactors  ■   
The Determinant of an n : n Matrix  ■  Cramer’s Rule    
Chapter 9 Summary  ■  Chapter 9 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 9  
Practice Test A  ■  Chapter 9 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 9 Cumulative 
Review Exercises Chapters P–9    
Chapter 10
Conic Sections  860
10.1	 Conic Sections: Overview   861
10.2	 The Parabola   863
Geometric Definition of a Parabola  ■  Equation of a Parabola  ■  Translations  
of Parabolas  ■  Reflecting Property of Parabolas    
10.3	 The Ellipse   875
Definition of Ellipse  ■  Equation of an Ellipse  ■  Translations of Ellipses  ■   
Applications    

xvi
	
	
10.4	 The Hyperbola   887
Definition of Hyperbola  ■  The Asymptotes of a Hyperbola  ■  Graphing  
a Hyperbola with Center 10,02   ■  Translations of Hyperbolas  ■  Applications  ■   
How Does LORAN Work?    
Chapter 10 Summary  ■  Chapter 10 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 10  
Practice Test A  ■  Chapter 10 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 10 Cumulative 
Review Exercises Chapters P–10    
Chapter 11
Further Topics in Algebra  909
11.1	 Sequences and Series   910
Sequences  ■  Recursive Formulas  ■  Factorial Notation  ■  Summation  
Notation  ■  Series    
11.2	 Arithmetic Sequences; Partial Sums   921
Arithmetic Sequence  ■  Sum of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence    
11.3	 Geometric Sequences and Series   929
Geometric Sequence  ■  Finding the Sum of a Finite Geometric Sequence  ■   
Annuities  ■  Infinite Geometric Series    
11.4	 Mathematical Induction   940
Mathematical Induction  ■  Determining the Statement Pk+1 from the  
Statement Pk    
11.5	 The Binomial Theorem   946
Pascal’s Triangle  ■  The Binomial Theorem  ■  Binomial Coefficients    
11.6	 Counting Principles   953
Fundamental Counting Principle  ■  Permutations  ■  Combinations  ■   
Distinguishable Permutations  ■  Deciding Whether to Use Permutations,  
Combinations, or the Fundamental Counting Principle    
11.7	 Probability   964
The Probability of an Event  ■  The Additive Rule  ■  Mutually Exclusive Events  ■   
The Complement of an Event  ■  Experimental Probabilities    
Chapter 11 Summary  ■  Chapter 11 Review Exercises  ■  Chapter 11  
Practice Test A  ■  Chapter 11 Practice Test B  ■  Chapter 11 Cumulative 
Review Exercises Chapters P–11    
Answers to Selected Exercises   A-1
Credits   C-1
Index   I-1

xvii
Students begin college algebra and trigonometry classes 
with widely varying backgrounds. Some haven’t taken a 
math course in several years and may need to spend time re-
viewing prerequisite topics, while others are ready to jump 
right into new and challenging material. In Chapter P and in 
some of the early sections of other chapters, we have pro-
vided review material in such a way that it can be used or 
omitted as appropriate for your course. In addition, students 
may follow several paths after completing a college algebra 
and trigonometry course. Many will continue their study of 
mathematics in courses such as finite mathematics, statis-
tics, and calculus. For others, college algebra and trigonom-
etry may be their last mathematics course.
Responding to the current and future needs of all of these 
students was essential in creating this course. We introduce 
each exercise set with several concept exercises. These ex-
ercises consist of fill-in-the-blank and true–false exercises. 
They are not computation-reliant, but rather test whether 
students have absorbed the basic concepts and vocabulary 
of the section. Exercises asking students to extrapolate in-
formation from a given graph now appear in much greater 
number and depth throughout the course. We continue to 
present our content in a systematic way that illustrates how 
to study and what to review. We believe that if students use 
this material well, they will succeed in this course.
New To The Third Edition
Exercises
■	 We continue to improve the balance of exercises and 
have added more challenging exercises.
■	 Answers to the Practice Problems have been moved to 
the end of the section, just before the exercises.
■	 New Maintaining Skills exercises, placed at the end 
of each exercise set, help refresh important concepts 
learned in previous chapters and allow for practice of 
skills needed for more advanced concepts in upcoming 
chapters.
■	 Overall, approximately 20% of the exercises have 
been updated, and we’ve added over 1000 additional 
exercises.
Chapter 1
■	 Applications of linear equations have been relocated in 
Section 1.
■	 A separate section “Complex Numbers: ­Quadratic 
Equations with Complex Solutions” introduces 
­complex numbers and discusses complex roots of qua-
dratic equations.
■	 Polynomial and rational inequalities are now discussed 
in Section 5.
Chapter 2
■	 Discussion of the domain of composite functions has 
been expanded and includes more examples.
Chapter 3
■	 New examples of quadratic functions have been  
included.
■	 The procedure for graphing rational functions has been 
rewritten to identify the relation of the graph to hori-
zontal and oblique asymptotes.
Chapter 4
■	 The number e is now introduced in Section 1.
■	 A new section on logarithmic scales has been added.
Chapter 7
■	 The ambiguous case is now included in Section 7.1.
■	 Section 7.3 has been expanded to include the areas of 
regular polygons.
Chapter 8
■	 Partial-Fraction Decomposition has been moved to 
immediately follow Section 2, “Systems of Linear 
Equations in Three Variables.”
Features
Chapter Opener  Each chapter opener includes a 
description of applications relevant to the content of the 
chapter and the list of topics that will be covered in the 
chapter. In one page, students see what they are going to 
learn and why they are learning it.
Application  The discussion in each section begins 
with a motivating anecdote or piece of information that 
is tied to an application problem. This problem is solved 
in an example later in the section, using the mathematics 
covered in the section.
Section Openers  The application section openers 
lend continuity to the section and its content, utilizing ma-
terial from a variety of fields: the physical and biological 
sciences (including health sciences), economics, art and  
architecture, the history of mathematics, and more. Of 
special interest are contemporary topics such as the green-
house effect and global warming, CAT scans, and computer 
graphics.
Review  On the first page of each section is a list of top-
ics that students should review prior to starting the chapter. 
Preface

xviii
	
	
Section references with page numbers accompany the sug-
gested review material so that students can readily find the 
material. The Objectives of the section are then clearly 
stated and numbered. Each numbered objective is paired 
with a similarly numbered subsection so that students can 
quickly find the section material for an objective.
Definitions and Theorems  All are boxed for 
emphasis and titled for ease of reference, as are lists of 
rules and properties.
Figures  All figures are titled to make it easy to iden-
tify what is being illustrated.
Examples  The examples include a wide range of 
computational, conceptual, and modern applied problems 
that are carefully selected to build confidence, competency,  
and understanding. Every example has a title that indicates 
its purpose. For every example, clarifying side comments 
are provided for each step in the detailed solution.
Practice Problem  All examples are followed 
by a Practice Problem for students to try so that they can 
check their understanding of the concept covered. The  
answers to these problems are placed at the end of each 
section, just before the exercises.
Procedure Boxes  These boxes, interspersed 
throughout the text, present important procedures in 
numbered steps. Special Procedure in Action boxes 
present important multistep procedures, such as the 
steps for doing synthetic division, in a two-column for-
mat. The steps of the procedure are given in the left col-
umn, and an example is worked, following these steps, 
in the right column. This approach provides students 
with a clear model with which they can compare when 
encountering difficulty in their work. These boxes are a 
part of the numbered examples.
Summary of Main Facts  These boxes sum-
marize information related to equations and their graphs, 
such as those of the conic sections.
Historical Notes  When appropriate, historical 
notes appear in the margin, giving students information 
on key people or ideas in the history and development of 
mathematics. This information is included to add flavor to 
the subject matter.
Technology Connections  Although the use 
of graphing calculators is optional in this course, Technol-
ogy Connections give students tips on using calculators 
to solve problems, check answers, and reinforce concepts.
Warnings  These boxes appear as appropriate through-
out the text to let students know of common errors and  
pitfalls that can trip them up in their thinking or calculations.
Recall  Located in the margins, Recall Notes period-
ically remind students of a key idea they learned earlier 
in the text that will help them with the new problems at 
hand.
Side Notes  Students are given hints for handling 
newly introduced concepts.
Do You Know?  These marginal notes provide stu-
dents with additional interesting information on nones-
sential topics to keep them engaged in the mathematics 
presented.
Exercises  The heart of any textbook is its exercises. 
Knowing this, we made sure that the quantity, quality, 
and variety of exercises meet the needs of all students. 
The problems in each exercise set are carefully graded to 
strengthen the skills developed in the associated section. 
Exercises are divided into three categories: Basic Skills 
and Concepts (developing fundamental skills), Applying 
the Concepts (using the section’s material to solve real-
world problems), and Beyond the Basics (providing more 
challenging exercises that give students an opportunity to 
reach beyond the material covered in the section). Exer-
cises are paired so that the even-numbered Basic Skills 
and Concepts exercises closely follow the preceding odd-
numbered exercises. All application exercises are titled 
and relevant to the topics of the section. Basic Skills and 
Concepts and Applying the Concepts exercises are intend-
ed for a typical student, whereas the Beyond the Basics ex-
ercises, generally more theoretical in nature, are suitable 
for honors students, special assignments, or extra credit. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing exercises appear 
in each exercise set and are designed to develop students’ 
higher-level thinking skills and to reinforce and extend 
comprehension of the material. Calculator problems are 
included where appropriate.
End-of-Chapter  The chapter-ending material in-
cludes a Summary of Definitions, Concepts, and For-
mulas; Review Exercises; and two Practice Tests. The 
chapter summary, a brief description of key topics indicat-
ing where the material occurs in the text, encourages stu-
dents to reread sections rather than memorize definitions 
out of context. The Review Exercises provide students 
with an opportunity to practice what they have learned in 
the chapter. (Students should then be prepared for Practice 
Test A in the usual open-ended format and Practice Test B, 

xix
covering the same topics, in multiple-choice format.) All 
tests are designed to increase student comprehension and 
verify that students have mastered the skills and concepts 
in the chapter. Mastery of these materials should indicate 
a true comprehension of the chapter and the likelihood of 
success on the associated in-class examination.
The new Maintaining Skills  exercises, placed 
at the end of each exercise set, help refresh important 
concepts learned in previous chapters and allow for prac-
tice of skills needed for more advanced concepts in up-
coming chapters.
Cumulative Review Exercises  Starting with 
Chapter 2, these exercises appear at the end of every chap-
ter to remind students that mathematics is not modular and 
that what is learned in the first part of the book will be use-
ful in later parts of the book and on the final examination.

xx
	
	Resources for Success
MyMathLab® Online Course (Access Code Required) 
MyMathLab delivers proven results in helping individual students succeed. It provides engaging experiences that 
personalize, stimulate, and measure learning for each student. And, it comes from an experienced partner with educa-
tional expertise and an eye on the future. MyMathLab helps prepare students and gets them thinking more conceptually 
and visually through the following features:
Adaptive Study Plan
The Study Plan makes studying more efficient 
and effective for every student. Performance 
and activity are assessed continually in real 
time. The data and analytics are used to provide 
­personalized content–reinforcing concepts that 
target each student’s strengths and weaknesses.
Getting Ready
Students refresh prerequisite topics through 
assignable skill review quizzes and ­personalized 
homework integrated in MyMathLab.
Video Assessment
Video assessment is tied to key Example Solution videos to check  
student’s conceptual understanding of important math concepts.
Enhanced Graphing 
Functionality
Functionality allows graphing of 
3-point quadratic functions, 4-point 
cubic graphs, and transformations 
in exercises.
Skills for Success Module in MyMathLab helps students succeed in collegiate 
courses and prepare for future professions.
Maintaining Skills exercises help refresh important concepts and allows for practice 
of skills needed for more advanced topics. These exercises are also assignable in MyMathLab.

xxi
Instructor Resources
Additional resources can be downloaded from www.
pearsonhighered.com or hardcopy resources can be  
ordered from your sales representative.
Ready to Go MyMathLab® Course
Now it is even easier to get started with MyMathLab. The 
Ready to Go MyMathLab course option includes author-
chosen preassigned homework, integrated review, and more.
TestGen®
TestGen® (www.pearsoned.com/testgen) enables instruc-
tors to build, edit, print, and administer tests using a com-
puterized bank of questions developed to cover all the  
objectives of the text.
PowerPoint® Lecture Slides
Fully editable slides that correlate to the textbook.
Annotated Instructor’s Edition
This version of the text includes answers to all exercises 
presented in the book. Sample homework assignments, 
selected by the authors, are annotated with an underline. 
Instructor’s Solutions Manual
Includes fully worked solutions to all textbook exercises.
Student Resources
Additional resources to help student success.
Video Lectures
■	 Section Summary videos cover key definitions and 
procedures for most sections. Example Solution vid-
eos walk students through the detailed solution pro-
cess for many examples in the textbook.
■	 There are over 20 hours of video instruction specifi-
cally filmed for this book, making it ideal for dis-
tance learning or supplemental instruction on a home 
computer or in a campus computer lab.
■	 Videos include optional subtitles in English and 
Spanish.
Student’s Solutions Manual
Provides detailed worked-out solutions to odd-numbered 
exercises.

xxii
	
	
We would like to express our gratitude to the reviewers of this 
and previous editions, who provided such invaluable insights 
and comments. Their contributions helped shape the develop-
ment of the text and carry out the vision stated in the preface.
Reviewers
Alison Ahlgren, University of Illinois at Urbana– 
  Champaign
Mohammad Aslam, Georgia Perimeter College
Mario Barrientos, Angelo State University
Ratan Barua, Miami-Dade College
Sam Bazzi, Henry Ford Community College
Diane Burleson, Central Piedmont Community College
Maureen T. Carroll, University of Scranton
Melissa Cass, State University of New York–New Paltz
Jason Cates, Lone Star College–Montgomery
Charles Conrad, Volunteer State Community College
Irene Coriette, Cameron University
Douglas Culler, Midlands Technical College
Baiqiao Deng, Columbus State University
Hussain Elaloui-Talibi, Tuskegee University
Kathleen M. Fick, Methodist University-Fayetteville
Junko Forbes, El Camino College
Gene Garza, Samford University
Steven Gonzales, San Antonio College
Bobbie Jo Hill, Coastal Bend College
Fran Hopf, University of South Florida
Natalie Hutchinson, Old Dominion University
Yvette Janecek, Coastal Bend College
Rose M. Jenkins, Midlands Technical College
Mohammad Kazemi, University of North Carolina  
  at Charlotte
David Keller, Kirkwood Community College
Diana Klimek, New Jersey Institute of Technology
Mile Krajcevski, University of South Florida
Lance Lana, University of Colorado–Denver
Alexander Lavrentiev, University of Wisconsin–Fox Valley
Rebecca Leefers, Michigan State University
Paul Morgan, College of Southern Idaho
Kathy Nickell, College of DuPage
Catherine Pellish, Front Range Community College
Betty Peterson, Mercer County Community College
Edward K. Pigg, Southern Union Community College
Marshall Ransom, Georgia Southern University
Janice F. Rech, University of Nebraska-Omaha
Dr. Traci Reed, St. Johns River Community College
Linda Reist, Macomb Community College
Jeri Rogers, Seminole Community College–Oviedo Campus
Jason Rose, College of Southern Idaho
Mehdi Sadatmousavi, Pima Community College–West
Christy Schmidt, Northwest Vista
Nyeita Schult, Coastal Carolina University
Delphy Shaulis, University of Colorado–Boulder
Cindy Shaw, Moraine Valley Community College
Cynthia Sikes, Georgia Southern University
James Smith, Columbia State Community College
Linda Snellings-Neal, Wright State University
Jacqueline Stone, University of Maryland–College Park
Kay Stroope, Phillips County Community College
Robert J. Strozak, Old Dominion University
Helen Timberlake, Rochester Institute of Technology
Frances Tishkevich, Massachusetts Maritime Academy
Jo Tucker, Tarrant County College–Southeast
Roger Werbylo, Pima Community College–West
Tom Worthing, Hutchinson Community College
Vivian Zabrocki, Montana State University–Billings
Marti Zimmerman, University of Louisville
Our sincerest thanks go to the legion of dedicated individu-
als who worked tirelessly to make this book possible. We 
express special thanks to Elka Block and Frank Purcell of 
Twin Prime Editorial, Lenore Parens, Abby Tanenbaum, and 
Carrie Green for the excellent work they did as the develop-
ment editors on the text and art development. We would also 
like to express our gratitude to our typist, Beverly DeVine-
Hoffmeyer, for her amazing patience and skill. We must 
also thank Dr. Praveen Rohatgi, Dr. Nalini Rohatgi, and 
Dr. ­Bhupinder Bedi for the consulting they provided on all 
material relating to medicine. We particularly want to thank 
Professors Mile Krajcevski, Viktor Maymeskul, and Scott 
Rimbey for many helpful discussions and suggestions, par-
ticularly for improving the exercise sets. Further gratitude is 
due to Irena Andreevska, Gokarna Aryal, Ferene Tookos, and 
Christine Fitch for their assistance on the answers to the ex-
ercises in the text. In addition, we would like to thank Twin 
Prime Editorial, Viktor Maymeskul, Rhea Meyerholtz and 
Beverly Fusfield, for their meticulous accuracy in checking 
the text. Thanks are due as well to Erin Donahue and Pre-
Press PMG for their excellent production work. Finally, our 
thanks are extended to the professional and remarkable staff 
at Pearson Education. In particular, we would like to thank 
Greg Tobin, President; Anne Kelly, Editor in Chief; Christine 
O’Brien, Project ­Editor; Judith Garber, Editorial Assistant; 
Beth ­Houston, ­Senior Production Project Manager; Peggy 
Sue Lucas, ­Senior Marketing Manager; Dona Kenly, Market 
Development Manager; Justine Goulart, Marketing Assistant; 
Barbara Atkinson, Cover Designer; Tracy ­Menoza, Media 
Producer; Karen Wernholm, Senior Managing Editor; and 
Joe Vetere, Senior Author Support/Technology Specialist.
We invite all who use this book to send suggestions for 
improvements to Marcus McWaters at mmm@cas.usf.edu.
Acknowledgments

xxiii
J. S. Ratti
Education
PhD Mathematics Wayne State University
Teaching
Wayne State University (teaching assistant and instructor)
University of Nevada at Las Vegas (instructor)
Oakland University (assistant professor)
University of South Florida (professor and past chair)
Undergraduate courses taught: college algebra and trigo-
nometry, trigonometry, finite mathematics, calculus (all 
levels), set theory, differential equations, linear algebra
Graduate courses taught: number theory, abstract algebra, 
real analysis, complex analysis, graph theory
Awards
USF Research Council Grant
USF Teaching Incentive Program (TIP) Award
USF Outstanding Undergraduate Teaching Award
Academy of Applied Sciences grants
Research
Complex analysis, real analysis, graph theory, probability
Personal Interests
Fan of Tampa Bay Buccaneers
Marcus McWaters
Education
BS Major: mathematics Minor: physics Louisiana State 
University New Orleans
PhD Major: mathematics Minor: philosophy University of 
Florida
Teaching
Louisiana State University (teaching assistant)
University of Florida (teaching assistant and graduate  
fellow)
University of South Florida (associate professor and  
department chair)
Undergraduate courses taught: college algebra, trigonom-
etry, finite mathematics, calculus, business calculus, life 
science calculus, advanced calculus, vector calculus, set 
theory, differential equations, linear algebra
Graduate courses taught: graph theory, number theory, dis-
crete mathematics, geometry, advanced linear algebra, to-
pology, mathematical logic, modern algebra, real analysis
Awards
Graduate Fellow, University of Florida (Center of Excel-
lence Grant)
USF Research Council grant
USF Teaching Incentive Program (TIP) Award
Provost’s Award
Research
Topology, algebraic topology, topological algebra
Founding member, USF Center for Digital and Compu-
tational Video
Personal Interests
Traveling with his wife and two daughters, theater, water-
skiing, racquetball
About the Authors

This page intentionally left blank 

Basic Concepts  
of Algebra
P
Many fascinating patterns in human and natural processes 
can be described in the language of algebra. We investigate 
events ranging from chirping crickets to the behavior of falling 
objects.
Topics
P.1	 The Real Numbers and  
Their Properties
P.2	 Integer Exponents and  
Scientific Notation
P.3	 Polynomials
P.4	 Factoring Polynomials
P.5	 Rational Expressions
P.6	 Rational Exponents and  
Radicals
C h a p t e r 

2	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
The Real Numbers and 
Their Properties
Classifying Numbers
In algebra, we use letters such as a, b, x, y, and so on, to represent numbers. A letter that 
is used to represent one or more numbers is called a variable. A constant is a specific
number such as 3 or 1
2 or a letter that represents a fixed (but not necessarily specified) num- 
ber. Physicists use the letter c as a constant to represent the speed of light 1c ≈300,000,000 
­meters per second2.
We use two variables, a and b, to denote the results of the operations of addition 1a + b2, 
subtraction 1a - b2, multiplication 1a * b or a # b2, and division aa , b or a
bb. These
operations are called binary operations because each is performed on two numbers.
Cricket Chirps and Temperature
Crickets are sensitive to changes in air temperature; their chirps speed up as the 
­temperature gets warmer and slow down as it gets cooler. It is possible to use the chirps 
of the male snowy tree cricket (Oecanthus fultoni), common throughout the United 
States, to gauge temperature. (The insect is found in every U.S. state except Hawaii, 
Alaska, ­Montana, and Florida.) By counting the chirps of this cricket, which lives in 
bushes a few feet from the ground, you can gauge temperature. Snowy tree crickets 
are more accurate than most cricket species; their chirps are slow enough to count, and 
they synchronize their singing. To convert cricket chirps to degrees Fahrenheit, count 
the number of chirps in 14 seconds and then add 40 to get the temperature. To convert 
cricket chirps to degrees Celsius, count the number of chirps in 25 seconds, divide by 3, 
and then add 4 to get the temperature. In Example 10, we evaluate algebraic expres-
sions to learn the temperature from the number of cricket chirps.
Before Starting this Section, 
Review from your previous  
mathematics texts
1	 Arithmetic of signed numbers
2	 Arithmetic of fractions
3	 Long division involving integers
4	 Decimals
5	 Arithmetic of real numbers
Objectives
1	 Classify sets of real numbers.
2	 Use the ordering of the real numbers.
3	 Specify sets of numbers in roster or  
set-builder notation.
4	 Use interval notation.
5	 Relate absolute value and distance  
on the real number line.
6	 Identify the order of operations in  
arithmetic expressions.
7	 Identify and use properties of real numbers.
8	 Evaluate algebraic expressions.
S e c t i o n P.1
1	
Classify sets of real numbers.

Section P.1    ■     The Real Numbers and Their Properties        3
We frequently omit the multiplication sign when writing a product involving two 
variables (or a constant and a variable) so that a # b and ab indicate the same product. 
Both a and b are called factors in the product a # b. This is a good time to recall that 
we never divide by zero. For a
b to represent a real number, b cannot be zero.
Equality of Numbers
The equal sign, = , is used much like we use the word is in English. The equal sign means 
that the number or expression on the left side is equal or equivalent to the number or 
expression on the right side. We write a ≠b to indicate that a is not equal to b.
Classifying Sets of Numbers
The idea of a set is familiar to us. We regularly refer to “a set of baseball cards,” a “set 
of CDs,” or “a set of dishes.” In mathematics, as in everyday life, a set is a collection of 
­objects. The objects in the set are called the elements, or members, of the set. In the study 
of algebra, we are interested primarily in sets of numbers.
In listing the elements of a set, it is customary to enclose the listed elements in braces, 
5 6, and separate them with commas.
We distinguish among various sets of numbers.
The numbers we use to count with constitute the set of natural numbers: 
51, 2, 3, 4, . . .6.
The three dots . . . may be read as “and so on” and indicate that the pattern continues 
indefinitely.
The whole numbers are formed by including the number 0 with the natural ­numbers 
to obtain the set 50, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .6.
The integers consist of the set of natural numbers together with their opposites and  
0: 5c, -4, -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .6.
Rational Numbers
The rational numbers consist of all numbers that can be expressed as the quotient or ratio, 
a
b of two integers, where b ≠0.
Examples of rational numbers are 1
2, 5
3, -4
17 , and 0.07 =
7
100. Any integer a can be 
expressed as the quotient of two integers by writing a = a
1. Consequently, every integer is 
also a rational number. In particular, 0 is a rational number because 0 = 0
1.
The rational number a
b can be written as a decimal by using long division. When any 
integer a is divided by an integer b, b ≠0, the result is always a terminating decimal 
such as a1
2 = 0.5b or a nonterminating repeating decimal such as a2
3 = 0.666 cb.
We sometimes place a bar over the repeating digits in a nonterminating repeating decimal. 
Thus, 2
3 = 0.666 c = 0.6 and 141
110 = 1.2818181 c = 1.281.
Here is one difficulty with attempt-
ing to divide by 0: If, for example, 
5
0 = a, then 5 = a # 0. However, 
a # 0 = 0 for all numbers a. 
So we would have 5 = 0; this 
­contradiction means that there is no 
appropriate choice for 5
0.
Side  
Note
Converting Decimal Rationals to a Quotient
EXAMPLE 1
Write the rational number 7.45 as the ratio of two integers in lowest terms.

4	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Solution
Let x = 7.454545 c. Then
100x = 745.4545c	
Multiply both sides by 100.
and  x =
7.4545c 
99x = 738	
Subtract x from 100x.
x = 738
99 	
Divide both sides by 99.
= 82 * 9
11 * 9	
Common factor
x = 82
11	
Reduce to lowest terms.
Practice Problem 1  Repeat Example 1 for 2.132132132 c.
Irrational Numbers
An irrational number is a number that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. This means 
that its decimal representation must be nonrepeating and nonterminating. We can construct 
such a decimal using only the digits 0 and 1, such as 0.01001000100001. . . . Because each 
group of zeros contains one more zero than the previous group, no group of digits repeats. Other 
numbers such as p (“pi”, see Figure P.1) and 12 (the square root of 2, see Figure P.2) can also 
be expressed as decimals that neither terminate nor repeat; so they are irrational numbers as 
well. We can obtain an approximation of an irrational number by using an initial portion of 
its decimal representation. For example, we can write p ≈3.14159 or 12 ≈1.41421, 
where the symbol ≈is read “is approximately equal to.”
No familiar process, such as long division, is available for obtaining the decimal 
­representation of an irrational number. However, your calculator can provide a useful 
­approximation for irrational numbers such as 12. (Try it!) Because a calculator displays a 
fixed number of decimal places, it gives a rational approximation of an irrational number.
It is usually not easy to determine whether a specific number is irrational. One helpful 
fact in this regard is that the square root of any natural number that is not a perfect square 
is irrational. So 16 is irrational but 116 = 242 = 4 is rational.
Because rational numbers have decimal representations that either terminate or repeat, 
whereas irrational numbers do not have such representations, no number is both rational 
and irrational.
The rational numbers together with the irrational numbers form the real numbers.  
    The diagram in Figure P.3 shows how various sets of numbers are related. For example, 
every natural number is also a whole number, an integer, a rational number, and a real number.
An integer is a perfect square if it 
is a product a # a, where a is an 
integer. For example, 9 = 3 # 3 is a 
perfect square.
Recall
Figure P.3  Relationships among sets of real numbers
Rational numbers
Real Numbers
Integers
Whole numbers
0, 1, 2, 3, . . .
Natural numbers
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .
. . ., 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, . . .
3,  , 0,
, 3
1
2
2
3
2
5 , 5.78
Irrational numbers
2, , 3, 15
Figure P.1  Definition of p
diameter
circumference
diameter
 
Figure P.2 
1
1
2

Section P.1    ■     The Real Numbers and Their Properties        5
The Real Number Line
We associate the real numbers with points on a geometric line (imagined to be extended 
indefinitely in both directions) in such a way that each real number corresponds to exactly 
one point and each point corresponds to exactly one real number. The point is called the 
graph of the corresponding real number, and the real number is called the coordinate of 
the point. By agreement, positive numbers lie to the right of the point corresponding to 0 
and negative numbers lie to the left of 0. See Figure P.4.
Notice that 1
2 and -1
2, 2 and -2, and p and -p correspond to pairs of points exactly 
the same distance from 0 but on opposite sides of 0.
2	
Use the ordering of the real 
numbers.
When coordinates have been assigned to points on a line in the manner just described, 
the line is called a real number line, a coordinate line, a real line, or simply a number 
line. The point corresponding to 0 is called the origin.
Inequalities
The real numbers are ordered by their size. We say that a is less than b and write a 6 b, 
provided that b = a + c for some positive number c. We also write b 7 a, meaning the 
same thing as a 6 b, and say that b is greater than a. On the real line, the numbers ­increase 
from left to right. Consequently, a is to the left of b on the number line when a * b. Simi-
larly, a is to the right of b on the number line when a 7 b. We sometimes want to indicate 
that at least one of two conditions is correct: Either a 6 b or a = b. In this case, we write 
a … b or b Ú a. The four symbols 6, 7, …, and Ú are called inequality symbols.
Decide whether each of the following is true or false.
a.	 5 7 0        b.  -2 6 -3        c.  2 … 3        d.  4 … 4
Solution
a.	 5 7 0 is true because 5 is to the right of 0 on the number line. See Figure P.5.
b.	  -2 6 -3 is false because -2 is to the right of -3 on the number line.
c.	 2 … 3 is true because 2 is to the left of 3 on the number line. (Recall that 2 … 3  
is true if either 2 6 3 or 2 = 3.)
d.	 4 … 4 is true because 4 … 4 is true if either 4 6 4 or 4 = 4.
Identifying Inequalities
EXAMPLE 2
Notice that the inequality sign 
always points to the smaller 
­number.
2 6 7, 2 is smaller.
5 7 1, 1 is smaller.
Side  
Note
Practice Problem 2  Decide whether each of the following is true or false.
a.	 -2 6 0        b.  5 … 7        c.  -4 7 -1
The following properties of inequalities for real numbers are used throughout this text.
Trichotomy Property:  Exactly one of the following is true:
a 6 b, a = b, or a 7 b
Transitive Property:  If a 6 b and b 6 c, then a 6 c.
Figure P.4  The real number line

3
2.25
1
0
1 unit
1
2
3

2.25
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
Figure P.5 
5 is right of 0
2 is right of 3
2 is left of 3
4  4
2
3
1
0
1
2
3
4
5

6	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
The trichotomy property says that if two real numbers are not equal, then one is larger 
than the other. The transitive property says that “less than” works like “smaller than” or 
“lighter than.” Frequently, we read a 7 0 as “a is positive” instead of “a is greater than 0.” 
We can also read a 6 0 as “a is negative.” If a Ú 0, then either a 7 0 or a = 0, and we 
may say that “a is nonnegative.”
Sets
To specify a set, we do one of the following:
1.	 List the elements of the set (roster method)
2.	 Describe the elements of the set (often using set-builder notation)
Variables are helpful in describing sets when we use set-builder notation. The ­notation 
5x x is a natural number less than 66 is in set-builder notation and describes the set 
51, 2, 3, 4, 56 using the roster method.
We read 5x x is a natural number less than 66 as “the set of all x such that x is a natural 
number less than six.” Generally, 5x x has property P6 designates the set of all x such that 
(the vertical bar is read “such that”) x has property P.
It may happen that a description fails to describe any number. For example, consider  
 5x x 6 2 and x 7 76. Of course, no number can be simultaneously less than 2 and ­greater 
than 7; so this set has no members. We refer to a set with no elements as the empty set, or 
null set, and use the special symbol ∅ to denote it.
Definition of Union and Intersection
The union of two sets A and B, denoted A ´ B, is the set consisting of all elements that are 
in A or B (or both). See Figure P.6a. The intersection of A and B, denoted A ¨ B, is the set 
consisting of all elements that are in both A and B. In other words, A ¨ B consists of the 
elements common to A and B. See Figure P.6b.
3	
Specify sets of numbers in 
roster or set-builder notation.
Find A ¨ B, A ´ B, and A ¨ C if A = 5-2, -1, 0, 1, 26, B = 5-4, -2, 0, 2, 46, and 
C = 5-3, 36
Solution
A ¨ B = 5-2, 0, 26, the set of elements common to both A and B. 
A ´ B = 5-4, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 46, the set of elements that are in A or B (or both).
A ¨ C = ∅.
Practice Problem 3  Find A ¨ B and A ´ B if A = 5-3, -1, 0, 1, 36 and  
B = 5-4, -2, 0, 2, 46.
Intervals
We now turn our attention to graphing certain sets of numbers. That is, we graph each 
­number in a given set. We are particularly interested in sets of real numbers, called 
­intervals, whose graphs correspond to special sections of the number line.
If a 6 b, then the set of real numbers between a and b, but not including either a or 
b, is called the open interval from a to b and is denoted by 1a, b2. See Figure P.7. Using 
set-builder notation, we can write
1a, b2 = 5x a 6 x 6 b6.
We indicate graphically that the endpoints a and b are excluded from the open interval by 
drawing a left parenthesis at a and a right parenthesis at b. These parentheses enclose the 
numbers between a and b.
Forming Set Unions and Intersections
EXAMPLE 3
4	
Use interval notation.
FIGURE P.6  Picturing union and 
intersection
A
B
(a) A ø B
A
B
(b) A ù B
Figure P.7  An open interval
a
b

Section P.1    ■     The Real Numbers and Their Properties        7
The closed interval from a to b is the set
3a, b4 = 5x a … x … b6.
The closed interval includes both endpoints a and b. We replace the parentheses with square 
brackets in the interval notation and on the graph. See Figure P.8. Sometimes we want to include 
only one endpoint of an interval and exclude the other. Table P.1 below shows how this is done.
An alternative notation for indicating whether endpoints are included uses open circles 
to show exclusion and closed ­circles to show inclusion. See Figure P.9.
If an interval extends indefinitely in one or both directions, it is called an unbounded 
interval. For example, the set of all numbers to the right of 2,
5x x 7 26,
is an unbounded interval denoted by 12, ∞2. See Figure P.10.
The symbol ∞ (“infinity”) is not a number, but is used to indicate all numbers to the 
right of 2.
The symbol - ∞ is another symbol that does not represent a number. The notation 
1- ∞, a2 is used to indicate the set of all real numbers that are less than a. The notation 
1- ∞, ∞2 represents the set of all real numbers.
Table P.1 lists various types of intervals that we use in this book. In the table, when 
two points a and b are given, we assume that a 6 b. This is because if a 7 b, then 1a, b2 
is the empty set.
Table P.1 
Interval Notation 
Set Notation
Graph
1a, b2 
5x a 6 x 6 b6
a
b
3a, b4 
5x a … x … b6
a
b
1a, b4 
5x a 6 x … b6
a
b
3a, b2 
5x a … x 6 b6
a
b
1a, ∞2 
5x x 7 a6
a
3a, ∞2 
5x x Ú a6
a
1- ∞, b2 
5x x 6 b6
b
1- ∞, b4 
5x x … b6
b
1- ∞, ∞2 
5x x is a real number6
The symbols ∞and - ∞ are 
always used with parentheses, not 
square brackets. Also note that 6
and 7 are used with parentheses 
and that … and Ú are used with 
square brackets.
Side  
Note
Consider the two intervals I1 = 1-3, 42 and I2 = 32, 64.
Find:  a.	 I1 ´ I2        b.  I1 ¨ I2
Solution
a.	 From Figure P.11, we see that I1 ´ I2 = 1-3, 64. We note that every number in the 
interval 1-3, 64 is in either I1 or I2 or in both I1 and I2.
b.	 We see in Figure P.11 that I1 ¨ I2 = 32, 42. Every number in the interval 32, 42 is in 
both I1 and I2. Notice that while 4 is in I2, 4 is not in I1.
Union and Intersection of Intervals
EXAMPLE 4
Figure P.10  An unbounded interval 
Figure P.9  Endpoint inclusion and 
exclusion
a
b
Open interval (a, b)
(a)
a
b
Closed interval [a, b]
(b)
Figure P.8  A closed interval
a
b
2

8	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Practice Problem 4  Let I1 = 1- ∞, 52 and I2 = 3-2, ∞2. Find the following.
a.	 I1 ´ I2        b.   I1 ¨ I2
Absolute Value
The absolute value of a number a, denoted by 0 a0 , is the distance between the origin and the 
point on the number line with coordinate a. The point with coordinate -3 is 3 units from the 
origin, so we write 0 -30 = 3 and say that the absolute value of -3 is 3. See Figure P.12.
5	
Relate absolute value and 
distance on the real  
number line.
Finding the absolute value requires 
knowing whether the number or 
expression inside the absolute value 
bars is positive, zero, or negative. If 
it is positive or zero, you can simply 
remove the absolute value bars. If 
it is negative, you remove the bars 
and change the sign of the number 
or expression inside the absolute 
value bars.
Side  
Note
Find the value of each of the following expressions.
a.	 0 40         b.  0 -40         c.  0 00         d.  0 1-32 + 10
Solution
a.	 0 40 = 4	
Because the number inside the absolute value bars is 4 and 4 Ú 0, just 
remove the absolute value bars.
b.	 0 -40 = -1-42 = 4	
Because the number inside the absolute value bars is -4 
and -4 6 0, remove the bars and change the sign.
c.	 0 00 = 0	
Because the number inside the absolute value bars is 0 and 0 Ú 0, just 
remove the absolute value bars.
d.	 0 1-32 + 10 = 0 -20 	
Because the expression inside the absolute value 
	
= -1-22 = 2	
bars is 1-32 + 1 = -2 and -2 6 0, remove the 
bars and change the sign.
Practice Problem 5  Find the value of each of the following.
a.	 0 -100         b.  0 3 - 40         c.  0 21-32 + 70
Determining Absolute Value
EXAMPLE 5
The absolute value of a number represents a distance. Because distance can never be 
negative, the absolute value of a number is never negative; it is always positive or zero. 
However, if a is not 0, - 0 a0  is always negative. Thus, - 0 5.30 = -5.3, - 0 -40 = -4, and 
- 0 1.180 = -1.18. 
Warning
Figure P.11 
4
5
6
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
6
I1
4
5
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
I2
Figure P.12  Absolute value
3
0
1
2
1
3 units
For any real number a, the absolute value of a, denoted 0 a0 , is defined by
0 a0 = a if a Ú 0  and  0 a0 = -a if a 6 0.
Absolute Value
       

Section P.1    ■     The Real Numbers and Their Properties        9
D i s ta n c e  F o r m u l a  o n  a  N u m b e r  L i n e
If a and b are the coordinates of two points on a number line, then the distance 
­between a and b, denoted by d1a, b2, is 0 a - b0 . In symbols, d1a, b2 = 0 a - b0 .
Find the distance between -3 and 4 on the number line.
Solution
Figure P.13 shows that the distance between -3 and 4 is 7 units. The distance formula gives 
the same answer.
d1-3, 42 = 0 -3 - 40 = 0 -70 = - 1-72 = 7.
Finding the Distance Between Two Points
EXAMPLE 6
The absolute value function on your 
graphing calculator will find the 
value of the expression entered and 
then compute its absolute value. 
Technology
Connection
Notice that reversing the order of -3 and 4 in this computation gives the same answer. That 
is, the distance between 4 and -3 is 0 4 - 1-320 = 0 4 + 30 = 0 70 = 7. It is always true 
that 0 a - b0 = 0 b - a0 . See Figure P.14.
Practice Problem 6  Find the distance between -7 and 2 on the number line.
We summarize the properties of absolute value next.
P r o p e r t i e s  o f  A b s o l u t e  Va l u e
If a and b are any real numbers, the following properties apply.
Property
Example
1.	 0 a0 Ú 0 
0 -50 = 5 and 5 Ú 0
2.	 0 a0 = 0 -a0  
0 30 = 0 -30
3.	 0 ab0 = 0 a0 0 b0  
0 31-520 = 0 30 0 -50
4.	 ` a
b ` = 0 a0
0 b0 , b ≠0 
` -7
3 ` = 0 -70
0 30
5.	 0 a - b0 = 0 b - a0  
0 2 - 70 = 0 7 - 20
6.	 a … 0 a0  
-2 … 0 -20 , 3 … 0 30
7.	 0 a + b0 … 0 a0 + 0 b0   
(the triangle inequality)
0 -2 + 50 … 0 -20 + 0 50
Arithmetic Expressions
When we write numbers in a meaningful combination of the basic operations of arithmetic, 
the result is called an arithmetic expression. The real number that results from perform-
ing all operations in the expression is called the value of the expression. In arithmetic and 
algebra, parentheses 12 are grouping symbols used to indicate which operations are to be 
performed first. Other common grouping symbols are square brackets 34, braces 56, frac-
tion bars - or >, and absolute value bars 0  0 .
6	
Identify the order of operations 
in arithmetic expressions.
Distance Between Two Points on a Real Number Line
The absolute value is used to define the distance between two points on a number line.
Figure P.13  Distance on the number line
0
3
2
1
2
3
4
1
3  4  7 units
3 units
4 units
Figure P.14 
a
b

10	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
T h e  O r d e r  o f  O p e r at i o n s
Whenever a fraction bar is encountered, work separately above and below it.
When parentheses or other grouping symbols are present, start inside the 
­innermost pair of grouping symbols and work outward.
Step 1	 Do operations involving exponents.
Step 2	 Do multiplications and divisions in the order in which they occur, working 
from left to right.
Step 3	 Do additions and subtractions in the order in which they occur, working 
from left to right.
Use order of operations to evaluate each of the following.
a.	 3 # 25 + 4        b.  5 - 13 - 122
Solution
a.	 3 # 25 + 4 = 3 # 32 + 4	
Do operations involving exponents first, 25 = 32.
= 96 + 4	
Multiplication is done next, 3 # 32 = 96.
= 100	
Addition is done next, 96 + 4 = 100.
b.	 5 - 13 - 122 = 5 - 1222	
Work inside the parentheses first, 3 - 1 = 2.
= 5 - 4	
Next, do operations involving exponents, 22 = 4.
= 1	
Subtraction is done next, 5 - 4 = 1.
Practice Problem 7  Evaluate.
a.	 1-32 # 5 + 20    b.  5 - 12 , 6 # 2    c.  9 - 1
4
- 5 # 7    d.  -3 + 16 - 422
Evaluating Arithmetic Expressions
EXAMPLE 7
Properties of the Real Numbers
When doing arithmetic, we intuitively use important properties of the real numbers. We 
know, for example, that if we add or multiply two real numbers, the result is a real num-
ber. This fact is known as the closure property of real numbers. For each property listed 
below, a, b, and c represent real numbers.
7	
Identify and use properties  
of real numbers.
P r o p e r t i e s  o f  t h e  R e a l  N u m b e r s
Name
Addition (A)
Multiplication (M)
Examples
Closure
a + b is a real number
a # b is a real number
A:	 1 + 12 is a real number.
M:	2 # p is a real number.
Commutative
a + b = b + a
a # b = b # a
A:	 4 + 7 = 7 + 4
M:	3 # 8 = 8 # 3
Associative
1a + b2 + c = a + 1b + c2
1a # b2 # c = a # 1b # c2
A:	 12 + 12 + 7 = 2 + 11 + 72
M:	15 # 92 # 13 = 5 # 19 # 132
Identity
There is a unique real  
number 0, called the ­additive 
identity, such that a + 0 = a 
and 0 + a = a.
There is a unique real number 1,  
called the multiplicative identity,  
such that a # 1 = a and 1 # a = a.
A:	 3 + 0 = 3 and 0 + 3 = 3
M:	7 # 1 = 7 and 1 # 7 = 7
Evaluating (finding the value of) arithmetic expressions requires carefully applying the 
following conventions for the order in which the operations are performed.
The order of operations is built into 
your graphing calculator. 
Technology
Connection
You can remember the order of 
operations by the acronym PEMDAS 
(Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally):
Parentheses
Exponents
Multiplication
Division
Addition
Subtraction
Side  
Note

Section P.1    ■     The Real Numbers and Their Properties        11
Two other useful properties of 0 involve multiplication rather than addition.
Name
Addition (A)
Multiplication (M)
Examples
Inverse
There is a unique real  
number -a, called the  
opposite of a, such that 
a + 1-a2 = 0 and 
1-a2 + a = 0.
If a ≠0, there is a unique real 
number 1
a, called the reciprocal 
of a, such that a # 1
a = 1 and
1
a # a = 1.
A:	 5 + 1-52 = 0 and 
1-52 + 5 = 0
M:	4 # 1
4 = 1 and 1
4 # 4 = 1
Distributive
Multiplication distributes  
over addition:
a # 1b + c2 = a # b + a # c
1a + b2 # c = a # c + b # c
3 # 12 + 52 = 3 # 2 + 3 # 5
12 + 52 # 3 = 2 # 3 + 5 # 3
a - b = a + 1-b2
Subtraction
If a and b are real numbers and b ≠0, division of a by b is defined with the use of a 
and 1
b
 ; to divide a by b, multiply a by the reciprocal of b.
For b ≠0, a
b is called the quotient, “the ratio of a to b,” or the fraction with ­numerator a 
and denominator b. Here are some useful properties involving opposites, subtraction, and 
division.
Throughout, we assume that the denominator of a fraction is nonzero.
P r o p e r t i e s  o f  O p p o s i t e s
 1-12a = -a	
-1-a2 = a	
1-a2b = a1-b2 = -1ab2
 1-a21-b2 = ab	
-1a + b2 = -a - b	
-1a - b2 = b - a
-a
b
=
a
-b = -a
b	
-a
-b = a
b	
a1b - c2 = ab - ac
To combine real numbers by means of the division operation, we use the following proper-
ties. We write “x { y” as shorthand for “x + y or x - y”.
If b ≠0,    a , b = a
b = a # 1
b 
a
0 is undefined.
Division
0 # a = 0 and a # 0 = 0
If a # b = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0.
Zero-Product Properties
Subtraction and Division of Real Numbers
You may have noticed that all of the properties discussed to this point apply to the 
­operations of addition and multiplication. What about subtraction and division? We see 
next that ­subtraction and division can be defined in terms of addition and multiplication.
Subtraction of the number b from the number a is defined with the use of a and -b;  
to subtract b from a, add the opposite of b to a.
On your graphing calculator, the 
opposite of a is denoted with a 
shorter horizontal hyphen than that 
used to denote subtraction. It is also 
placed somewhat higher than the 
subtraction symbol. 
Technology
Connection

12	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
The property ac
bc = a
b, equivalently a
b = ac
bc, can be used to produce a common denominator
when adding or subtracting fractions.
P r o p e r t i e s  o f  F r a c t i o n s
All denominators are assumed to be nonzero.
a
c { b
c = a { b
c     a
b { c
d = ad { bc
bd
a
b # c
d = ac
bd  
 a
b , c
d = a
b # d
c
ac
bc = a
b  
 a
b = c
d  means a # d = b # c
Perform the indicated operations.
a.	 5
3 + 3
2        b.  5
6 - 2
3        c.  4
3 # 15
8         d. 
2
5
 9
25 
Solution
a.	 5
3 + 3
2 = 5 # 2
3 # 2 + 3 # 3
2 # 3	
a
b = ac
bc
= 5 # 2 + 3 # 3
3 # 2
= 19
6 	
a
c + b
c = a + b
c
b.	 5
6 - 2
3 = 5
6 - 2 # 2
3 # 2	
a
b = ac
bc
= 5 - 2 # 2
6
= 1
6	
a
c - b
c = a - b
c
c.	 4
3 # 15
8 = 4 # 15
3 # 8 	
a
b # c
d = a # c
b # d
=  4 #  3 # 5
 3 #  4 # 2 = 5
2	
a # c
b # c = a
b
d.	
2
5
 9
25 
= 2
5 # 25
9 	
a
b , c
d = a
b # d
c
= 2 # 25
5 # 9 	
a
b # c
d = a # c
b # d
= 2 #  5 # 5
 5 # 9
= 10
9 	
a # c
b # c = a
b
Practice Problem 8  Perform the indicated operations.
a.	 7
4 + 3
8        b.  8
3 - 2
5        c.  9
14 # 7
3        d. 
5
8
 15
16 
Adding, Subtracting, Multiplying, and Dividing Fractions
EXAMPLE 8
Part a of Example 8 can also be 
done as:
5
3 + 3
2 = 5 # 2 + 3 # 3
3 # 2
using a
b { c
d = ad { bc
bd
 
directly. Part b can be done similarly.
Side  
Note

Section P.1    ■     The Real Numbers and Their Properties        13
Algebraic Expressions
In algebra, any number, constant, variable, or parenthetical group (or any product of them) 
is called a term. A combination of terms using the ordinary operations of addition, subtrac-
tion, multiplication, and division (as well as exponentiation and roots, which are discussed 
later in this chapter) is called an algebraic expression, or simply an expression. If we 
replace each variable in an expression with a specific number and get a real number, the 
resulting number is called the value of the algebraic expression. Of course, this value 
depends on the numbers we use to replace the variables in the expression. Here are some 
examples of algebraic expressions:
x - 2  1
x + 17  10
y + 3  1x + 0 y0 , 5
8	
Evaluate algebraic 
expressions.
Incorrect
Correct
 51x + 12 = 5x + 1
 a1
3 xba1
3 yb = 1
3 xy
 x - 14y + 32 = x - 4y + 3
 
 51x + 12 = 5x + 5
 
 a1
3 xba1
3 yb = 1
9 xy
 x - 14y + 32 = x - 4y - 3
Warning
Evaluate the following expressions for the given values of the variables.
a.	 319 + x2 , 74 # 3 - x	
for x = 5
b.	 0 x0 - 2
y	
for x = 2 and y = -2
Solution
a.	 319 + x42 , 74 # 3 - x = 319 + 52 , 74 # 3 - 5	
Replace x with 5.
= 314 , 74 # 3 - 5	
Work inside the parentheses.
= 2 # 3 - 5	
Work inside the brackets.
= 6 - 5	
Multiply.
= 1	
The value of the expression
b.	 0 x0 - 2
y = 0 20 -
2
-2	
Replace x with 2 and y with -2.
= 2 -
2
-2	
Eliminate the absolute value, 0 20 = 2.
= 2 - 1-12	
2
-2 = -1; division occurs before subtraction.
= 3	
The value of the expression
Practice Problem 9  Evaluate.
a.	 1x - 22 , 3 + x  for x = 3	
b.  7 -
x
0 y0   for x = -1, y = 3
Evaluating an Algebraic Expression
EXAMPLE 9
Write an algebraic expression for converting cricket chirps to degrees Celsius. Assuming 
that you count 48 chirps in 25 seconds, what is the Celsius temperature?
Finding the Temperature from Cricket Chirps
EXAMPLE 10

14	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Solution
Recall from the introduction to this section that to convert cricket chirps to degrees Celsius, 
you count the chirps in 25 seconds, divide by 3, and then add 4 to get the temperature.
Temperature in 
Celsius degrees
=  aNumber of chirps in 25 seconds
3
b + 4
If we let C = temperature in degrees Celsius and N = number of chirps in 25 seconds, 
we get the expression
C = N
3 + 4.
Suppose we count 48 chirps in 25 seconds. The Celsius temperature is
 C = 48
3 + 4
 = 16 + 4 = 20 degrees.
Practice Problem 10  Use the temperature expression in Example 10 to find the  
Celsius temperature assuming that 39 chirps are counted in 25 seconds.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 710
333    2. a. true  b. true   c. false 
3. A ¨ B = 506, A ´ B = 5-4, -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 46 
4. a. 1- ∞, ∞2  b. 32, 52    5. a. 10  b. 1  c. 1
6. 9    7. a. 5  b. 1  c. -33  d. 1    8. a. 17
8   b. 34
15  c. 3
2 
d. 2
3    9. a. 10
3   b. 22
3     10. 17°C
Exercises
section P.1
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 Whole numbers are formed by adding the number  
 to the set of natural numbers.
	 2.	 The number -3 is an integer, but it is also a(n) 
 and a(n) 
.
	 3.	 If a 6 b , then a is to the 
 of b on the  
number line.
	 4.	 If a real number is not a rational number, it is a(n)  
 number.
	 5.	 True or False. If -x is positive, then -x 7 0. 
	 6.	 True or False. -5
2
6 -2 1
2. 
In Exercises 7–14, write each of the following rational  
numbers as a decimal and state whether the decimal is 
repeating or terminating.
	 7.	 1
3 
	 8.	 2
3 
	 9.	 - 4
5 
	10.	 - 3
12 
	11.	 3
11 
	12.	 11
33 
	13.	 95
30 
	14.	 41
15 
In Exercises 15–22, convert each decimal to a quotient of two 
integers in lowest terms.
	15.	 3.75  
	16.	 -2.35 
	17.	 -5.3 
	18.	 9.6 
	19.	 2.13 
	20.	 3.23 
	21.	 4.523 
	22.	 1.4235 
In Exercises 23–30, classify each of the following numbers as 
rational or irrational.
	23.	 -207 
	24.	 -114 
	25.	 181 
	26.	 - 125 
	27.	 7
2 
	28.	 -15
12 
	29.	 112 
	30.	 13 
In Exercises 31–40, use inequality symbols to write the given 
statements symbolically.
	31.	 3 is greater than -2. 
	32.	 -3 is less than -2. 
	33.	 1
2 is greater than or equal to 1
2. 
	34.	 x is less than x + 1. 
	35.	 5 is less than or equal to 2x. 
	36.	 x - 1 is greater than 2. 

Section P.1    ■     The Real Numbers and Their Properties        15
	37.	 -x is positive. 
	38.	 x is negative. 
	39.	 2x + 7 is less than or equal to 14. 
	40.	 2x + 3 is not greater than 5. 
In Exercises 41–44, fill in the blank with one of the symbols =, 
*, or + to produce a true statement.
	41.	 4  
 24
6
	42.	 -5  
 -2
	43.	 -4  
 0
	44.	 - 9
2  
 -4 1
2
In Exercises 45–52, find each set if A = 5−4, −2, 0, 2, 46, 
B = 5−3, 0, 1, 2, 3, 46, and C = 5−4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 26.
	45.	 A ´ B 
	46.	 A ¨ B 
	47.	 A ¨ C 
	48.	 B ´ C 
	49.	 1B ¨ C2 ´ A 
	50.	 1A ´ C2 ¨ B 
	51.	 1A ´ B2 ¨ C 
	52.	 1A ´ B2 ´ C 
In Exercises 53–60, find the union and the intersection of the 
given sets.
	53.	 I1 = 1-2, 34; I2 = 31, 52 
	54.	 I1 = 31, 74; I2 = 13, 52 
	55.	 I1 = 1-6, 22; I2 = 32, 102 
	56.	 I1 = 1- ∞, -34; I2 = 1-3, ∞2 
	57.	 I1 = 1- ∞, 52; I2 = 32, ∞2 
	58.	 I1 = 1-2, ∞2; I2 = 10, ∞2 
	59.	 I1 = 1- ∞, 32 ´ 35, ∞2; I2 = 3-1, 74
	60.	 I1 = 1- ∞, 24 ´ 16, ∞2; I2 = 3-3, 04
In Exercises 61–72, rewrite each expression without absolute 
value bars.
	61.	 0 -40 
	62.	 - 0 -170 
	63.	 ` 5
-7 `  
	64.	 ` -3
5 ` 
	65.	 0 5 - 120 
	66.	 0 12 - 50 
	67.	  23 - 2 
	68.	 3 - p 
	69.	
8
0 -80 
	70.	 -8
0 80 
	71.	 0 5 - 0 -70 0 
	72.	 0 0 40 - 0 70 0 
In Exercises 73–80, use the absolute value to express the 
distance between the points with coordinates a and b on the 
number line. Then determine this distance by evaluating the 
absolute value expression.
	73.	 a = 3 and b = 8 
	74.	 a = 2 and b = 14 
	75.	 a = -6 and b = 9 
	76.	 a = -12 and b = 3 
	77.	 a = -20 and b = -6 
	78.	 a = -14 and b = -1 
	79.	 a = 22
7  and b = - 4
7 
	80.	 a = 16
5  and b = - 3
5 
In Exercises 81–88, graph each of the given intervals on a  
separate number line and write the inequality notation for each.
	81.	 1-3, 14 
	82.	 3-6, -22 
	83.	 3-3, ∞2 
	84.	 30, ∞2 
	  85.	 1- ∞, 54 
	  86.	 1- ∞, -14 
	  87.	 a- 3
4, 9
4b 
	  88.	 a-3, -1
2b 
In Exercises 89–92, use the distributive property to write each 
expression without parentheses.
	  89.	 41x + 12 
	  90.	 1-3212 - x2 
	  91.	 51x - y + 12
	  92.	 213x + 5 - y2 
In Exercises 93–96, find the additive inverse and reciprocal of 
each number.
Number
Additive Inverse
Reciprocal
	 93.	 5  
	 94.	 - 2
3
	 95.	 0    
	 96.	 1.7  
In Exercises 97–108, name the property of real numbers that 
justifies the given equality. All variables represent real numbers.
	  97.	 1-72 + 7 = 0 
	  98.	 5 + 1-52 = 0 
	  99.	 1x + 22 = 1 # 1x + 22 
	100.	 3a = 1 # 3a 
	101.	 71xy2 = 17x2y 
	102.	 3 # 16x2 = 13 # 62x 
	103.	 3
2
 a2
3b = 1 
	104.	 2 a1
2b = 1 
	105.	 13 + x2 + 0 = 3 + x 
	106.	 x12 + y2 + 0 = x12 + y2 
	107.	 1x + 52 + 2y = x + 15 + 2y2 
	108.	 13 + x2 + 5 = x + 13 + 52 
In Exercises 109–130, perform the indicated operations.
	109.	 3
5 + 4
3 
	110.	 7
10 + 3
4 
	111.	 6
5 + 5
7 
	112.	 9
2 + 5
12 
	113.	 5
6 + 3
10 
	114.	 8
15 + 2
9 
	115.	 5
8 - 9
10 
	116.	 7
8 - 1
5 
	117.	 5
9 - 7
11 
	118.	 5
8 - 7
12 
	119.	 2
5 - 1
2 
	120.	 1
4 - 1
6 
	121.	 3
4 # 8
27 
	122.	 9
7 # 14
27 
	123.	
8
5
16
15
 
	124.	
5
6
15
6 
	125.	
7
8
21
16 
	126.	
3
10
7
15 

16	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
	127.	 5 # 3
10 - 1
2 
	128.	 2 # 7
2 - 3
2 
	129.	 3 # 2
15 - 1
3 
	130.	 2 # 5
3 - 3
2 
In Exercises 131–140, evaluate each expression for x = 3 and 
y = −5.
	131.	 21x + y2 - 3y 
	132.	 -21x + y2 + 5y 
	133.	 30 x0 - 20 y0 
	134.	 70 x - y0 
	135.	 x - 3y
2
+ xy 
	136.	 y + 3
x
- xy 
	137.	
211 - 2x2
y
- 1-x2y
	138.	
312 - x2
y
- 11 - xy2
	139.	
14
x + 1
2
-y
4 
	140.	
4
-y + 8
x
y
2 
In Exercises 141–150, correct the error in each formula.
	141.	 x
y + x
3 =
x
1y + 32 
	142.	 1x + 221x + 32 = x + 2x + 3
	143.	 51x + 32 = 5x + 3 
	144.	 125x214x2 = 100x 
	145.	 x - 13y + 22 = x - 3y + 2 
	146.	 2x - 14y - 52 = 2x - 4y - 5
	147.	 x + y
x
= 1 + y 
	148.	 x + y
x + z = 1 + y
z 
	149.	 1x + 121y + 12 = xy + 1
	150.	
1
x
1
y
= 1
xy 
	151.	 Let P and Q be two points on a number line with coordi-
nates a and b, respectively. Show that the point M on the 
	
	
number line with coordinate a + b
2
 is the midpoint of the 
	
	
line segment PQ. [Hint: Show that d1P, M2 = d1Q, M2.]
	152.	 Find 100 rational numbers between - 4
13 and 7
13. 
	
	
(Hint: - 4
13 = - 40
130 and 7
13 = 70
130;
	
	
-40 6 -31 6 -30 6 c 6 0 6 1 6 c 6 69.)
Applying the Concepts
	153.	 Media players. Let A =  the set of people who own MP3 
players and B =  the set of people who own DVD players.
a.	 Describe the set A ´ B. 
b.	 Describe the set A ¨ B. 
	154.	 Standard car features. The table below indicates whether 
certain features are “standard” for each of three types of cars.
Navigation 
System
Automatic 
Transmission
Leather 
Seats
2011 Lexus LS 460 
yes
yes
yes
2011 Lincoln  
Town Car 
no
yes
yes
2011 Audi A4 
no
no
yes
Source: http://autos.yahoo.com
Use the roster method to describe each of the following sets.
a.	 A = cars in which a navigation system is standard 
b.	 B = cars in which an automatic transmission is standard 
c.	 C = cars in which leather seats are standard 
d.	 A ¨ B 
e.	 B ¨ C 
f.	 A ´ B 
g.	 A ´ C 
	155.	 Blood pressure. A group of college students had systolic 
blood pressure readings that ranged from 119.5 to 134.5 
inclusive. Let x represent the value of the systolic blood pressure 
readings. Use inequalities to describe this range of values 
and graph the corresponding interval on a number line. 
	156.	 Population projections. Population projections suggest 
that by 2050, the number of people 60 years and older in 
the United States will be about 107 million. In 1950, the 
number of people 60 years and older in the United States 
was 30 million. Let x represent the number (in millions) of 
people in the United States who are 60 years and older. Use 
inequalities to describe this population range from 1950 to 
2050 and graph the corresponding interval on a number line. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 
	157.	 Heart rate. For exercise to be most beneficial, the opti-
mum heart rate for a 20-year-old person is 120 beats per 
minute. Use absolute value notation to write an expression 
that describes the difference between the heart rate achieved 
by each of the following 20-year-old people and the ideal 
exercise heart rate. Then evaluate that expression.
a.	 Latasha: 124 beats per minute 
b.	 Frances: 137 beats per minute 
c.	 Ignacio: 114 beats per minute 
	158.	 Downloading music. To download a 4 MB song with a  
56 Kbs modem takes an average of 15 minutes. Use absolute 
value notation to write an expression that describes the differ-
ence between this average time and the actual time it took to 
download the following songs. Then evaluate that expression.
a.	 Irreplaceable (Beyoncé): 14 minutes 
b.	 Fallin’ (Alicia Keys): 17.5 minutes 
c.	 Your Song (Elton John): 9 minutes 
Negative calories. In Exercises 159 and 160, use the fact that 
eating 100 grams of broccoli (a negative calorie food) actually 
results in a net loss of 55 calories.
	159.	 If a cheeseburger has 522.5 calories, how many grams of 
broccoli would a person have to consume to have a net gain 
of zero calories? 
	160.	 Carmen ate 600 grams of broccoli and now wants to eat just 
enough French fries so that she has a net calorie intake of 
zero. If a small order of fries has 165 calories, how many 
orders does she have to eat? 
  

	
Section P.2    ■    Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation
17
S e c t i o n
Integer Exponents
The area of a square with side 5 feet is 5 # 5 = 25 square feet.
The volume of a cube that has sides of 5 feet each is 5 # 5 # 5 = 125 cubic feet.
5 ft
5 ft
Area  5.5 square feet  
 
 
5 ft
5 ft
5 ft
Volume  5.5.5 cubic feet
A shorter notation for 5 # 5 is 52 and for 5 # 5 # 5 is 53. The number 5 is called the base 
for both 52 and 53. The number 2 is called the exponent in the expression 52 and indicates 
that the base 5 appears as a factor twice.
Coffee and Candy Consumption  
in America
In 2012, Americans drank about 110 billion cups of coffee and spent more than 
$29 ­billion on candy and other confectionery products. The American population at 
that time was about 314 million. Because our day-to-day activities bring us into ­contact 
with more manageable quantities, most people find large numbers like those just ­cited 
a bit difficult to understand. Using exponents, the method of scientific notation ­allows 
us to write large and small quantities in a manner that makes comparing such ­quantities 
fairly easy. In turn, these comparisons help us get a better perspective on these quanti-
ties. In Example 10 of this section, without relying on a calculator, we see that if we 
distribute the cost of the candy and other confectionery products used in 2012 evenly 
among all individuals in the United States, each person will spend over $92. ­Distributing 
the coffee used in 2012 evenly among all individuals in the United States gives each 
person about 350 cups of coffee.
Integer Exponents and  
Scientific Notation
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Properties of opposites (Section P.1,  
page 11)
2	 Variables (Section P.1, page 13)
Objectives
1	 Use integer exponents.
2	 Use the rules of exponents.
3	 Simplify exponential expressions.
4	 Use scientific notation.
P.2
1	
Use integer exponents.

18	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
If a is a real number and n is a positive integer, then
an = a # a # c# a
n factors
The number an is called the nth power of a and is read “a to the nth power”, or “a to 
the n”. The number a is called the base; n, the exponent. We adopt the convention 
that a1 = a.
Positive Integer Exponent
(++)++*.
Evaluate each expression.
a.	 53        b.   1-322        c.   -32        d.   1-223
Solution
a.	 53 = 5 # 5 # 5 = 125
b.	 1-322 = 1-321-32 = 9    1-322 is the opposite of 3, squared.
c.	 -32 = -3 # 3 = -9    Multiplication of 3 # 3 occurs first. 1-32 is the opposite of 32.2
d.	 1-223 = 1-221-221-22 = -8
Practice Problem 1  Evaluate the following.
a.	 23        b.   13a22        c.   a1
2b
4
Evaluating Expressions That Use Exponents
EXAMPLE 1
The notation for 53 on a graphing 
calculator is 5^3. Any ­expression on 
a calculator enclosed in ­parentheses 
and followed by ^n is raised to the 
nth power. A ­common error is to 
forget parentheses when computing 
an expression such as 1-322, with 
the result being -32.
Technology
Connection
In Example 1, pay careful attention to the fact (from parts b and c) that 1-322 ≠-32. In 
1-322, the parentheses indicate that the exponent 2 applies to the base -3, whereas in -32, 
the absence of parentheses indicates that the exponent applies only to the base 3. When n 
is even, 1-a2n ≠-an for a ≠0.
For any nonzero number a and any positive integer n,
a0 = 1 and a-n = 1
an.
Zero and Negative Integer Exponents
Negative exponents indicate the reciprocal of a number. Zero cannot be used as a base 
with a negative exponent because zero does not have a reciprocal. Furthermore, 00 is not 
­defined. We assume throughout this book that the base is not equal to zero if any of the 
exponents are negative or zero.
Warning
Evaluate.
a.	 1-52-2        b.   -5-2        c.   80        d.   a2
3b
-3
Solution
a.	 1-52-2 =
1
1-522 = 1
25	
The exponent -2 applies to the base -5.
Evaluating Expressions That Use Zero or Negative 
­Exponents
EXAMPLE 2

Section P.2    ■     Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation        19
b.	 -5-2 = - 1
52 = - 1
25	
The exponent -2 applies to the base 5.
c.	 80 = 1	
By definition
d.	 a2
3b
-3
=
1
a2
3b
3 = 1
8
27
= 27
8 	
a2
3b
3
= 2
3 # 2
3 # 2
3 = 8
27
Practice Problem 2  Evaluate.
a.	 2-1        b.   a4
5b
0
        c.   a3
2b
-2
In Example 2, we see that parts a and b give different results. In part a, the base is -5 
and the exponent is -2, whereas in part b, we evaluate the opposite of the expression with 
base 5 and exponent -2.
Rules of Exponents
We now review the rules of exponents.
Let’s see what happens when we multiply a5 by a3. We have
a5 # a3 = 1a # a # a # a # a2 # 1a # a # a2 = a # a # a # a # a # a # a # a = a8.
	
5 factors	
3 factors	
5+3 = 8 factors
Similarly, if you multiply m factors of a by n factors of a, you get m + n factors of a.
2	
Use the rules of exponents.
(++)++*
(++++)++++*
(+)+*
In equation (1), remember that a 
must be nonzero if the exponent is 
zero or negative.
Recall
P r o d u c t  R u l e  o f  E x p o n e n t s
If a is a real number and m and n are integers, then
(1)	
am # an = am+n.	
To multiply exponential expressions with the same base, keep the base and add exponents.
Simplify. Use the product rule and (if necessary) the definition of a negative exponent or 
reciprocal to write each answer without negative exponents.
a.	 2x3 # x5        b.   x7 # x -7        c.   1-4y2213y72
Solution
a.	 2x3 # x5 = 2x3+5 = 2x8	
Add exponents: 3 + 5 = 8.
b.	 x7 # x -7 = x7+1-72 = x0 = 1	
Add exponents: 7+ 1-72 = 0; simplify.
c.	 1-4y2213y72 = 1-423y2y7	
Group the factors with variable bases.
= -12y2 + 7	
Add exponents.
= -12y9	
2 + 7 = 9.
Practice Problem 3  Simplify. Write each answer without using negative exponents.
a.	 x2 # 3x7        b.   122 x3214 x -32
Using the Product Rule of Exponents
EXAMPLE 3
To evaluate an expression such 
as 53+4 on a calculator, you must 
enclose 3 + 4 in parentheses. 
Otherwise, 4 is added to the result 
of 5^3.
Technology
Connection

20	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Look what happens when we divide a5 by a3. We have
a5
a3 = a # a # a # a # a
a # a # a
= a # a # a
a # a # a # a # a
1
= a # a = a2.
So a5
a3 = a5 # 1
a3 = a5 # a-3 = a5-3 = a2. You subtract exponents because the three factors 
in the denominator cancel three of the factors in the numerator.
Q u o t i e n t  R u l e  f o r  E x p o n e n t s
If a is a nonzero real number and m and n are integers, then
	
am
an = am-n.	
To divide two exponential expressions with the same base, keep the base and subtract 
exponents.
Remember that if a ≠0, then 
a0 = 1; so it is okay for a 
­denominator to contain a  
nonzero base with a zero  
exponent. For example, 
3
50 = 3
1 = 3.
Side  
Note
Simplify. Use the quotient rule to write each answer without negative exponents.
a.	 510
510        b.   2-1
23         c.   x -3
x5
Solution
a.	 510
510 = 510-10 = 50 = 1
b.	 2-1
23 = 2-1-3 = 2-4 = 1
24 = 1
16
c.	 x -3
x5 = x -3-5 = x -8 = 1
x8
Practice Problem 4  Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
a.	 34
30        b.   5
5-2        c.   2x3
3x -4
Using the Quotient Rule of Exponents
EXAMPLE 4
To introduce the next rule of exponents, we consider 12324.
12324 = 23 # 23 # 23 # 23	
a4 = a # a # a # a; here a = 23
= 12 # 2 # 2212 # 2 # 2212 # 2 # 2212 # 2 # 22
= 212
So 12324 = 23#4 = 212.
This suggests the following rule.
P o w e r - o f - a - P o w e r  R u l e  f o r  E x p o n e n t s
If a is a real number and m and n are integers, then
1am2n = amn.
To find the power of a power, keep the base and multiply exponents.

Section P.2    ■     Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation        21
Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
a.	 15220        b.   31-32243        c.   1x32-1        d.   1x -22-3
Solution
a.	 15220 = 52 # 0 = 50 = 1
b.	 31-32243 = 1-322 # 3 = 1-326 = 729	
For 1-326, the base is -3.
c.	 1x32-1 = x31-12 = x -3 = 1
x3
d.	 1x -22-3 = x1-221-32 = x6
Practice Problem 5  Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
a.	 17-520        b.   1702-5        c.   1x -128        d.   1x -22-5
We now consider the power of a product.
12 # 325 = 12 # 3212 # 3212 # 3212 # 3212 # 32	
a5 = a # a # a # a # a; here a = 2 # 3.
= 12 # 2 # 2 # 2 # 2213 # 3 # 3 # 3 # 32	
Use associative and commutative properties.
= 25 # 35
So 12 # 325 = 25 # 35.
This suggests the following rule.
Using the Power-of-a-Power Rule of Exponents
EXAMPLE 5
P o w e r - o f - a - P r o d u c t  R u l e
If a and b are real numbers and n is an integer, then
	
1a # b2n = an # bn.
Simplify. Use the power-of-a-product rule to write each expression without negative 
exponents.
a.	 13x22        b.   1-3x2-2        c.   1-3223        d.   1xy2-4        e.   1x2y23
Solution
a.	 13x22 = 32x2 = 9x2
b.	 1-3x2-2 =
1
1-3x22 =
1
1-322x2 =
1
9x2	
Negative exponents denote reciprocals.
c.	 1-3223 = 1-1 # 3223 = 1-12313223 = 1-121362 = -729
d.	 1xy2-4 =
1
1xy24 =
1
x4y4	
Negative exponents denote reciprocals.
e.	 1x2y23 = 1x223y3 = x2 # 3y3 = x6y3	
Recall that 1x223 = x2 # 3.
Practice Problem 6  Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
a.	 a1
2xb
-1
        b.   15x -122        c.   1xy223        d.   1x -2y2-3
Using the Power-of-a-Product Rule
EXAMPLE 6

22	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
To see the last rule, we consider a3
2b
5
. We have
 a3
2b
5
= 3
2 # 3
2 # 3
2 # 3
2 # 3
2
 = 3 # 3 # 3 # 3 # 3
2 # 2 # 2 # 2 # 2
 = 35
25.
More generally, we have the following rules.
P o w e r - o f - Q u o t i e n t  R u l e s
If a and b are nonzero real numbers and n is an integer, then
(2)  aa
bb
n
= an
bn
(3)  aa
bb
-n
= ab
ab
n
= bn
an.
Simplify. Use the power-of-quotient rules to write each answer without negative ­exponents.
a.	 a3
5b
3
b.	 a2
3b
-2
Solution
a.	 a3
5b
3
= 33
53 = 27
125	
Equation (2)
b.	 a2
3b
-2
= a3
2b
2
= 32
22 = 9
4	
Equation (3) followed by equation (2)
Practice Problem 7  Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
a.	 a1
3b
2
        b.   a10
7 b
-2
Using the Power-of-Quotient Rules
EXAMPLE 7
Simplifying Exponential Expressions
3	
Simplify exponential 
expressions.
R u l e s  f o r  S i m p l i f y i n g  E x p o n e n t i a l  E x p r e s s i o n s
An exponential expression is considered simplified when
(i)	 	 each base appears only once,
(ii)		 each exponent is a positive number, and
	(iii)	 no power is raised to a power.
Incorrect
Correct
 13x22 = 3x2
 1x225 = x7
 x3x5 = x15
13x22 = 32x2 = 9x2
1x225 = x 2 # 5 = x10
x3x5 = x3+5 = x8
Warning

Section P.2    ■     Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation        23
Scientific Notation
Scientific measurements and calculations often involve very large or very small positive 
numbers. For example, 1 gram of oxygen contains approximately
37,600,000,000,000,000,000,000 atoms
and the mass of one oxygen atom is approximately
0.0000000000000000000000266 gram.
Such numbers contain so many zeros that they are awkward to work with in calculations. 
Fortunately, scientific notation provides a better way to write and work with such large and 
small numbers.
Scientific notation consists of the product of a number less than 10, and greater than or 
equal to 1, and an integer power of 10. That is, scientific notation of a number has the form
c * 10n,
where c is a real number in decimal notation with 1 … c 6 10 and n is an integer.
Simplify the following.
a.	 1-4x2y3217x3y2        b.   a x5
2y-3 b
-3
Solution
a.	 1-4x2y3217x3y2 = 1-42172x2x3y3y	
Group factors with the same base.
= -28x2+3y3+1	
Apply the product rule to add exponents; 
remember that y = y1.
= -28x5y4
b.	 a x5
2y-3 b
-3
=
1x52-3
12y-32-3	
The exponent -3 is applied to both the numerator and 
the denominator.
=
x51-32
2-31y-32-3	
Multiply exponents in the numerator; apply the 
­exponent -3 to each factor in the denominator.
=
x -15
2-3y1-321-32	
Power rule for exponents; 51-32 = -15.
= x -15
2-3y9	
1-321-32 = 9
= x -15x1523
x15232-3y9	
Multiply numerator and denominator by x1523.
=
23
x15y9	
x -15x15 = x0 = 1; 232-3 = 20 = 1
=
8
x15y9	
23 = 8
Practice Problem 8  Simplify each expression.
a.	 12x42-2        b.   
x21-y23
1xy223
Simplifying Exponential Expressions
EXAMPLE 8
4	
Use scientific notation.
There are many correct ways to 
simplify exponential expressions. 
The order in which you apply the 
rules for exponents is a matter of 
personal preference.
Side  
Note

24	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
C o n v e rt i n g  a  D e c i m a l  N u m b e r  t o  S c i e n t i f i c  N o tat i o n
1.	 Count the number, n, of places the decimal point in the given number must be 
moved to obtain a number c with 1 … c 6 10.
2.	 If the decimal point is moved n places to the left, the scientific notation is c * 10n.  
If the decimal point is moved n places to the right, the scientific notation is c * 10-n.
3.	 If the decimal point does not need to be moved, the scientific notation is c * 100.
To write numbers in scientific 
notation on a graphing calculator, 
you first must change the mode to 
scientific. Then on most graphing 
calculators, you will see the number 
displayed as a decimal number, 
followed by the letter E, followed 
by the exponent for 10. So 421000 
is shown as 4.21E5 and 0.0018 is 
shown as 1.8E-3. Some calculators 
omit the E.
Technology
Connection
Write each decimal number in scientific notation.
a.	 421,000        b.   10        c.   3.621        d.   0.000561
Solution
a.	 Because 421,000 = 421000.0, count five spaces to move the decimal point between 
the 4 and the 2 and produce the number 4.21.
421,000 = 4 2 1 0 0 0.
5 places
	
Because the decimal point is moved five places to the left, the exponent is positive and 
we write
421,000 = 4.21 * 105.
b.	 The decimal point for 10 is to the right of the units digit. Count one place to move the 
decimal point between 1 and 0 and produce the number 1.0.
10 = 1 0 . 0
1 place
	
Because the decimal point is moved one place to the left, the exponent is positive and 
we write
10 = 1.0 * 101.
c.	 The number 3.621 is already between 1 and 10, so the decimal does not need to be 
moved. We write
3.621 = 3.621 * 100.
d.	 The decimal point in 0.000561 must be moved between the 5 and the 6 to produce the 
number 5.61. We count four places as follows:
0 . 0 0 0 5 6 1
4 places
	
Because the decimal point is moved four places to the right, the exponent is negative 
and we write
0.000561 = 5.61 * 10-4.
Practice Problem 9  Write 732,000 in scientific notation.
Converting a Decimal Number to Scientific Notation
EXAMPLE 9
Note that in scientific ­notation, 
“small” numbers (positive ­numbers 
less than 1) have negative 
­exponents and “large” numbers 
(numbers greater than 10) have 
positive exponents.
Side  
Note

Section P.2    ■     Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation        25
M a i n  Fa c t s  A b o u t  E x p o n e n t s
an = a # a ca for a ≠0, a0 = 1 and a-n = 1
an
n factors
Product Rule: am # an = am+n	
Quotient Rule: am
an = am-n
Power-of-Power Rule: 1am2n = amn	
Power-of-a-Product Rule: 1ab2m = ambm
Power-of-Quotient Rules: aa
bb
n
= an
bn; aa
bb
-n
= ab
ab
n
= bn
an, b * 0
(+)+*
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 8  b. 9a2  c. 1
16    2. a. 1
2  b. 1  c. 4
9    3. a. 3x9  b. 16
4. a. 81  b. 125  c. 2x7
3     5. a. 1  b. 1  c. 1
x8  d. x10
6. a. 2
x  b. 25
x2  c. x3y6  d. x6
y3    7. a. 1
9  b. 49
100
8. a. 1
4x8  b. - 1
xy3    9. 7.32 * 105    10. $89 per person
Exercises
section P.2 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 In the expression 72, the number 2 is called the 
.
	2.	 In the expression -37, the base is 
.
	3.	 The number 1
4-2 simplifies to the positive integer  
.
	4.	 The power-of-a-product rule allows us to rewrite15a23 as 
.
	5.	 True or False. 1-11210 = -1110. 
	6.	 True or False. The exponential expression 1x223 is  
considered simplified. ­
At the beginning of this section, we mentioned that in 2012, Americans drank about 
110 ­billion cups of coffee and spent more than $29 billion on candy and other confec-
tionery products. To see how these products would be evenly distributed among the 
population, we first ­convert those numbers to scientific notation.
 110 billion is 110,000,000,000 = 1.1 * 1011
 29 billion is 29,000,000,000 = 2.9 * 1010.
The U.S. population in 2012 was about 314 million, and 314 million is 
314,000,000 = 3.14 * 108.
To distribute the coffee evenly among the population, we divide:
1.1 * 1011
3.14 * 108 = 1.10
3.14 * 1011
108 = 110
314 * 1011-8 ≈0.35 * 103 = 350 cups per person
To distribute the cost of the candy evenly among the population, we divide:
2.9 * 1010
3.14 * 108 = 2.90
3.14 * 1010
108 = 290
314 * 1010-8 ≈0.92 * 102 = 92,
or about +92 per person
Practice Problem 10  If the amount spent on candy consumption remains unchanged 
when the U.S. population reaches 325 million, what is the cost per person when cost is 
distributed evenly throughout the population?
Distributing Coffee and Candy in America
EXAMPLE 10

26	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
In Exercises 7–16, name the exponent and the base.
	7.	 173 
	8.	 102 
	9.	 90 
	10.	 1-220 
	11.	 1-525 
	12.	 1-9922 
	13.	 -103 
	14.	 - 1-327 
	15.	 a2 
	16.	 1-b23 
In Exercises 17–46, evaluate each expression.
	17.	 61 
	18.	 34 
	19.	 70 
	20.	 1-820 
	21.	 12322 
	22.	 13223 
	23.	 1322-2 
	24.	 1722-1 
	25.	 15-223 
	26.	 15-123 
	27.	 14-32 # 1452 
	28.	 17-22 # 1732 
	29.	 30 + 100 
	30.	 50 - 90 
	31.	 3-2 + a1
3b
2 
	32.	 5-2 + a1
5b
2 
	33.	 -2-3 
	34.	 -3-2 
	35.	 1-32-2 
	36.	 1-22-3 
	37.	 211
210 
	38.	 36
38 
	39.	
15324
512 
	40.	
19522
98 
	41.	 25 # 3-2
24 # 3-3 
	42.	 4-2 # 53
4-3 # 5 
	43.	 -5-2
2-1 
	44.	 -7-2
3-1 
	45.	 a11
7 b
-2 
	46.	 a13
5 b
-2 
In Exercises 47–86, simplify each expression. Write your 
answers without negative exponents. Whenever an exponent is 
negative or zero, assume that the base is not zero.
	47.	 x4y0 
	48.	 x -1y0 
	49.	 x -1y 
	50.	 x2y-2 
	51.	 x -1y-2 
	52.	 x -3y-2 
	53.	 1x -324 
	54.	 1x -522 
	55.	 1x -112-3 
	56.	 1x -42-12 
	57.	 -31xy25 
	58.	 -81xy26 
	59.	 41xy-122 
	60.	 61x -1y23 
	61.	 31x -1y2-5 
	62.	 -51xy-12-6 
	63.	
1x322
1x225 
	64.	
x2
1x324 
	65.	 a2xy
x2 b
3 
	66.	 a5xy
x3 b
4 
	67.	 a -3x2y
x
b
5 
	68.	 a -2xy2
y
b
3 
	69.	 a -3x
5 b
-2 
	70.	 a -5y
3 b
-4 
	71.	 a4x -2
xy5 b
3 
	72.	 a3x2y
y3 b
5 
	73.	 x3y-3
x -2y 
	74.	 x2y-2
x -1y2 
	75.	 27x -3y5
9x -4y7 
	76.	 15x5y-2
3x7y-3 
	77.	 1
x31x223 x -4 
	78.	 18a3b2-4 a2a
b b
12 
	79.	 1-xy2231-2x2 y22-4
	80.	 c
1-x2 y23 y-4
1xy25
d
-2 
	81.	 14x3y2z221x3y2z2-7
	82.	
12xyz22
1x3y221xz2-1 
	83.	 5a-2bc2
a4b-3c2 
	84.	
1-322a51bc22
1-223a2b3c4 
	85.	 axy-3z-2
x2y-4z3 b
-3 
	86.	 axy-2z-1
x -5yz-8b
-1 
In Exercises 87–94, write each number in scientific notation.
	87.	 125 
	88.	 247 
	89.	 850,000 
	90.	 205,000 
	91.	 0.007 
	92.	 0.0019 
	93.	 0.00000275 
	94.	 0.0000038 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 95 and 96, use the fact that when you uniformly 
stretch or shrink a three-dimensional object in every direction 
by a factor of a, the volume of the resulting figure is scaled by 
a factor of a3. For example, when you uniformly scale (stretch 
or shrink) a three-dimensional object by a factor of 2, the  
volume of the resulting figure is scaled by a factor of 23, or 8.
	95.	 A display in the shape of a baseball bat has a volume of  
135 cubic feet. Find the volume of the display that results  
by uniformly scaling the figure by a factor of 2. 
	96.	 A display in the shape of a football has a volume of 675 
cubic inches. Find the volume of the display that results by 
	
	 uniformly scaling the figure by a factor of 1
3. 
	97.	 The area A of a square with side of length x is given by 
A = x2. Use this relationship to
a.	 verify that doubling the length of the side of a square  
floor increases the area of the floor by a factor  
of 22. 
b.	 verify that tripling the length of the side of a square  
floor increases the area of the floor by a factor  
of 32. 
	98.	 The area A of a circle with diameter d is given by
A = pad
2b
2
. Use this relationship to
a.	 verify that doubling the length of the diameter of a circular 
skating rink increases the area of the rink by a factor  
of 22. 
b.	 verify that tripling the length of the diameter of a circular 
skating rink increases the area of the rink by a factor  
of 32. 
	99.	 The cross section of one type of weight-bearing rod (the  
surface you would get if you sliced the rod perpendicular to 
its axis) used in the Olympics is a square, as shown in the   

Section P.2    ■     Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation        27
accompanying figure. The rod can handle a stress of 
25,000 pounds per square inch (psi). The relationship 
between the stress S the rod can handle, the load F the rod 
can carry, and the width w of the cross section is given by 
the equation Sw2 = F. Assuming that w = 0.25 inch, find 
the load the rod can support. 
w
w
l
w
	100.	 The cross section of one type of weight-bearing rod (the 
­surface you would get if you sliced the rod perpendicular to its 
axis) used in the Olympics is a circle, as shown in the ­figure. 
The rod can handle a stress of 10,000 pounds per square inch 
(psi). The relationship between the stress S the rod can handle, 
the load F the rod can carry, and the diameter d of the cross 
section is given by the equation Sp1d>222 = F. Assuming 
that d = 1.5 inches, find the load the rod can support. Use 
p ≈3.14 in your calculation. 
d
	101.	 Complete the following table.
 
Celestial Body
Equatorial  
Diameter 1km2
Scientific  
Notation
Earth
12,700
Moon
3.48 * 103 1km2
Sun
1,390,000
Jupiter
1.34 * 105 1km2
Mercury
4800
In Exercises 102–107, express the number in each statement 
in scientific notation.
	102.	 One gram of oxygen contains about		
37,600,000,000,000,000,000,000 atoms.
	103.	 One gram of hydrogen contains about		
602,000,000,000,000,000,000 atoms.
	104.	 One oxygen atom weighs about		
0.0000000000000000000266 kilogram.
	105.	 One hydrogen atom weighs about
0.00000000000000000000167 kilogram.
	106.	 The distance from Earth to the moon is about		
380,000,000 meters.
	107.	 The mass of Earth is about		
5,980,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms.		

28	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Leaning Tower of Pisa
S e c t i o n 
Polynomial Vocabulary
The height (in feet) of a golf ball above a driving range t seconds after being driven from the 
tee (at 70 feet per second) is given by the polynomial 70t - t2. After two seconds 1t = 22, 
the ball is 70122- 1222 = 136 feet above the ground. Polynomials such as 70t - t2 appear 
frequently in applications.
We begin by reviewing the basic vocabulary of polynomials. A monomial is the sim-
plest polynomial; it contains one term. in the variable x it has the form axk, where a is a 
constant and k is either a positive integer or zero. The constant a is called the coefficient 
of the monomial. For a ≠0, the integer k is called the degree of the monomial. If a = 0, 
Galileo and Free-Falling Objects
At one time, it was widely believed that heavy objects should fall faster than lighter ob-
jects, or, more exactly, that the speed of falling objects ought to be proportional to their 
weights. So if one object is four times as heavy as another, the heavier object should 
fall four times as fast as the lighter one. Legend has it that Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) 
disproved this theory by dropping two balls of equal size, one made of lead and the 
other of balsa wood, from the top of Italy’s Leaning Tower of Pisa. Both balls are said to 
have reached the ground at the same instant after they were released simultaneously 
from the top of the tower.
In fact, such experiments “work” properly only in a vacuum, where objects of differ-
ent mass do fall at the same rate. In the absence of a vacuum, air resistance may greatly 
affect the rate at which different objects fall. Whether Galileo’s experiment was actu-
ally performed, astronaut David R. Scott successfully performed a version of Galileo’s 
experiment (using a feather and a hammer) on the surface of the moon on August 2, 
1971. It turns out that on Earth (ignoring air resistance), regardless of the weight of the 
object we hold at rest and then drop, the expression 16t2 gives the distance in feet the 
object falls in t seconds. If we throw the object down with an initial velocity of v0 feet 
per second, the distance the object travels in t seconds is given by the expression
16t2 + v0
 t.
In Example 1, we evaluate such expressions.
Polynomials
Before Starting this  
Section, ­Review
1	 Associative, commutative, and distributive 
properties (Section P.1, pages 10–11)
2	 Properties of opposites (Section P.1,  
page 11)
3	 Definition of subtraction (Section P.1,  
page 11)
4	 rules for exponents (Section P.2, page 25)
Objectives
1	 Learn polynomial vocabulary.
2	 Add and subtract polynomials.
3	 Multiply polynomials.
4	 Use special-product formulas.
P.3
1	
Learn polynomial vocabulary.

Section P.3    ■     Polynomials        29
the monomial is 0 and has no degree. Any variable may be used in place of x to form a 
monomial in that variable.
The following are examples of monomials.
2x5	
The coefficient is 2, and the degree is 5.
-3x2	
The coefficient is -3, and the degree is 2.
-7	
-7 = -7112 = -7x0. The coefficient is -7, and the degree is 0.
8x	
The coefficient is 8, and the degree is 11x = x12.
x12	
The coefficient is 11x12 = 1 # x122, and the degree is 12.
-x4	
The coefficient is -11-x4 = 1-12 # x42, and the degree is 4.
The expression 5x -3 is not a monomial because the exponent of x is negative.
Two monomials in the same variable with the same degree can be combined 
into one monomial using the distributive property. For example, -3x5 and 9x5 can 
be added: -3x5 + 9x5 = 1-3 + 92x5 = 6x5. Or -3x5 and 9x5 can be subtracted: 
-3x5 - 9x5 = 1-3 - 92x5 = -12x5. Two monomials in the same variable with the 
same degree are called like terms.
P o ly n o m i a l s  i n  O n e  Va r i a b l e
A polynomial in x is any sum of monomials in x. By combining like terms, we can 
write any polynomial in the form
anxn + an-1xn-1 +  g + a2x2 + a1x + a0,
where n is either a positive integer or zero and an, an-1, ca1, a0 are constants, 
called the coefficients of the polynomial. If an ≠0, then n, the largest exponent  
on x, is called the degree and an is called the leading coefficient of the polynomial.  
The monomials anxn, an-1xn-1, c, a2x2, a1x, and a0 are the terms of the ­polynomial. 
The monomial anxn is the leading term of the polynomial, and a0 is the constant  
term.
The symbols a0, a1, a2, can in the general notation for a polynomial
anxn + an-1xn-1 +  g + a2x2 + a1x + a0
are just constants; the numbers to the lower right of a are called subscripts. The notation 
a2 is read “a sub 2”, a1 is read “a sub 1”, and a0 is read “a sub 0”. This type of notation is 
used when a large or indefinite number of constants are required. The terms of the polyno-
mial 5x2 + 3x + 1 are 5x2, 3x, and 1; the coefficients are 5, 3, and 1; and the degree is 2.
Note that the terms in the general form for a polynomial are connected by the addition 
symbol +. How do we handle 5x2 - 3x + 1? Because subtraction is defined in terms of 
addition, we rewrite
5x2 - 3x + 1 = 5x2 + 1-32x + 1
and see that the terms of 5x2 - 3x + 1 are 5x2, -3x, and 1 and that the coefficients are 
5, -3, and 1. (The degree is 2.) Once we recognize this fact, we no longer rewrite the 
polynomial with the + sign separating terms; we just remember that the “sign” is part of 
both the term and the coefficient. Polynomials and their properties will be discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 3.
Polynomials can be classified according to the number of terms they have. Polynomials 
with one term are called monomials, polynomials with two unlike terms are called bino-
mials, and polynomials with three unlike terms are called trinomials. Polynomials with 
more than three unlike terms do not have special names.
By agreement, the only polynomial that has no degree is the zero polynomial, which 
results when all of the coefficients are 0. It is easiest to find the degree of a polynomial 
when it is written in descending order—that is, when the exponents decrease from left to 
right. In this case, the degree is the exponent of the leftmost term. A polynomial written in 
descending order is said to be in standard form.

30	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Adding and Subtracting Polynomials
Like monomials, polynomials are added and subtracted by combining like terms. By 
­convention, we write polynomials in standard form.
In our introductory discussion about Galileo and free-falling objects, we mentioned two 
well-known polynomials.
1.	 16t2 gives the distance in feet a free-falling object falls in t seconds.
2.	 Letting v0 = 10, 16t2 + 10t gives the distance an object falls in t seconds when it is 
thrown down with an initial velocity of 10 feet per second. Use these polynomials to
a.	 Find how far a wallet dropped from the 86th-floor observatory of the Empire State 
Building will fall in 5 seconds.
b.	 Find how far a quarter thrown down with an initial velocity of 10 feet per second 
from a hot air balloon will travel after 5 seconds.
Solution
a.	 The value of 16t2 for t = 5 is 161522 = 400. The wallet falls 400 feet.
b.	 The value of 16t2 + 10t for t = 5 is 161522 + 10152 = 450. The quarter ­travels  
450 feet on its downward path after five seconds.
Practice Problem 1  If 16t2 + 15t gives the distance an object falls in t seconds when it 
is thrown down at an initial velocity of 15 feet per second, find how far a quarter thrown 
down with an initial velocity of 15 feet per second from a hot air balloon has traveled 
after 7 seconds.
Examining Free-Falling Objects
EXAMPLE 1
2	
Add and subtract polynomials.
Find the sum of the polynomials
-4x3 + 5x2 + 7x - 2  and  6x3 - 2x2 - 8x - 5.
Horizontal Method: Group like terms and then combine them.
1-4x3 + 5x2 + 7x - 22 + 16x3 - 2x2 - 8x - 52
= 1-4x3 + 6x32 + 15x2 - 2x22 + 17x - 8x2 + 1-2 - 52	
Group like terms.
= 2x3 + 3x2 - x - 7	
Combine like terms.
A second method for adding polynomials is to arrange them in columns so that like 
terms appear in the same column.
Column Method:
 -4x3 + 5x2 + 7x - 2
 1+2 6x3 - 2x2 - 8x - 5
 2x3 + 3x2 -
x - 7 1answer2
Practice Problem 2  Find the sum of
7x3 + 2x2 - 5  and  -2x3 + 3x2 + 2x + 1.
Adding Polynomials
EXAMPLE 2
Find the difference of the polynomials
9x4 - 6x3 + 4x2 - 1  and  2x4 - 11x3 + 5x + 3.
Subtracting Polynomials
EXAMPLE 3

Section P.3    ■     Polynomials        31
Horizontal Method: First, using the definition of subtraction, change the sign of 
each term in the second polynomial. Then add the resulting polynomials by grouping 
like terms and combining them.
19x4 - 6x3 + 4x2 - 12 - 12x4 - 11x3 + 5x + 32
= 19x4 - 6x3 + 4x2 - 12 + 1-2x4 + 11x3 - 5x - 32
= 19x4 - 2x42 + 1-6x3 + 11x32 + 4x2 - 5x + 1-1 - 32	
Group like terms.
= 7x4 + 5x3 + 4x2 - 5x - 4	
Combine like terms.
The second method for finding the difference of polynomials requires arranging them in 
columns so that like terms appear in the same column.
Column Method: to find the difference, we again change the sign of each term in 
the second polynomial and then add.
9x4 - 6x3 + 4x2
 
- 1
1+2-2x4 + 11x3 
 
- 5x - 3    Change signs and then add.
7x4 + 5x3 + 4x2 - 5x - 4 1answer2
Practice Problem 3  Find the difference of
3x4 - 5x3 + 2x2 + 7  and  -2x4 + 3x2 + x - 5.
Multiplying Polynomials
Previously, we multiplied two monomials, such as -3x2 and 5x3, by using the product rule 
for exponents: am # an = am+n. We multiply a monomial and a polynomial by combining 
the product rule and the distributive property.
3	
Multiply polynomials.
Multiply 4x3  and  3x2 - 5x + 7.
4x313x2 - 5x + 72
= 14x3213x22 + 14x321-5x2 + 14x32172	
Distributive property
= 14 # 32x3+2 + 41-52x3+1 + 14 # 72x3	
Multiply monomials.
= 12x5 - 20x4 + 28x3	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 4  Multiply -2x3 and 4x2 + 2x - 5.
Multiplying a Monomial and a Polynomial
EXAMPLE 4
We can use the distributive property repeatedly to multiply any two polynomials. As 
with addition, there are two methods.
Multiply 4x2 + 3x  and  x2 + 2x - 3.
Horizontal Method: We treat the second polynomial as a single term and use the 
distributive property, 1a + b2c = ac + bc, to multiply it by each of the two terms in the 
first polynomial.
14x2 + 3x21x2 + 2x - 32
= 4x21x2 + 2x - 32 + 3x1x2 + 2x - 32	
Distributive property
= 4x21x22 + 4x212x2 + 4x21-32 + 3x1x22 + 3x12x2 + 3x1-32	 Distributive ­property
= 4x4 + 8x3 - 12x2 + 3x3 + 6x2 - 9x	
Product rule
= 4x4+ 18x3 + 3x32 + 1-12x2 + 6x22 - 9x	
Group like terms.
= 4x4 + 11x3 - 6x2 - 9x	
Combine like terms.
Multiplying Polynomials
EXAMPLE 5

32	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
The column method resembles the multiplication of two positive integers written in 
­column form.
Column Method:
x2 + 2x - 3
1*2
4x2 + 3x
3x3 +
6x2 - 9x	
Multiply by 3x: 
13x21x2 + 2x - 32.
4x4 +
8x3 - 12x2
	
Multiply by 4x2: 
14x221x2 + 2x - 32.
4x4 + 11x3 -
6x2 - 9x 1answer2	
Combine like terms.
Practice Problem 5  Multiply 5x2 + 2x and -2x2 + x - 7.
M u lt i p ly i n g  P o ly n o m i a l s
To multiply two polynomials, multiply each term of one polynomial by every term of 
the other polynomial and combine like terms.
The basic multiplication rule for polynomials can be stated as follows.
Special Products
Particular polynomial products called special products occur frequently enough to deserve 
special attention. We introduce a very useful method, called FOIL, for multiplying two 
binomials. Notice that
1x + 221x - 72 = x1x - 72 + 21x - 72	
Distributive property
	
= x2 - 7x + 2x - 14	
Distributive property
	
= x2 - 5x - 14	
Combine like terms.
Now consider the relationship between the terms of the factors in 1x + 221x - 72 and the 
second line, x2 - 7x + 2x - 14, in the computation of the product.
Product of First terms
1x + 221x - 72 = x2 - 7x + 2x - 14	
F  irst terms: x # x = x2
Product of Outside terms
1x + 221x - 72 = x2 - 7x + 2x - 14	
O  utside terms: x # 1-72 = -7x
Product of Inside terms
1x + 221x - 72 = x2 - 7x + 2x - 14	
I  nside terms: 2 # x = 2x
Product of Last terms
1x + 221x - 72 = x2 - 7x + 2x - 14	
L  ast terms: 2 # 1-72 = -14
4	
Use special-product formulas.
F o i l  M e t h o d  F o r  1A + B 2 1C + D 2
1A + B21C + D2 = A # C + A # D + B # C + B # D
F
O
I
L

Section P.3    ■     Polynomials        33
A formula such as 1A + B22 = A2 + 2AB + B2 can be used two ways.
Use the FOIL method to find the following products.
a.	 12x + 321x - 12 = 12x21x2 + 12x21-12 + 1321x2 + 1321-12
= 2x2 - 2x + 3x - 3
= 2x2 + x - 3	
Combine like terms.
b.	 13x - 5214x - 62 = 13x214x2 + 13x21-62 + 1-5214x2 + 1-521-62
= 12x2 - 18x - 20x + 30
= 12x2 - 38x + 30	
Combine like terms.
c.	 1x + a21x + b2 = x # x + x # b + a # x + a # b
= x2 + bx + ax + a # b	
xb = bx (commutative property)
= x2 + 1b + a2x + ab	
Combine like terms.
Practice Problem 6  Use FOIL to find each product.
a.	 14x - 121x + 72
b.	 13x - 2212x - 52
Squaring a Binomial Sum or Difference
We can find a general formula for the square of any binomial sum 1A + B22 by using FOIL.
1A + B22 = 1A + B21A + B2 = A # A + A # B + B # A + B # B
= A2 + AB + AB + B2	
AB = BA
= A2 + 2AB + B2	
AB + AB = 2AB
Using the FOIL Method
EXAMPLE 6
S q u a r i n g  a  B i n o m i a l  S u m
1A + B22 = A2 + 2AB + B2
Find 12x + 322.
Solution
Pattern Method: In 12x + 322, the first term is 2x and the second term is 3. Rewrite the 
formula as
Square of
sum
 =  Square of
first term + 2 Product of first
and second terms +  Square of
second term
12x + 322   = 	
12x22	
+	
2 # 12x2 # 3	
+ 	
32
= 22x2 + 2 # 2 # 3 # x + 32	
Group numerical factors.
= 4x2 + 12x + 9	
Simplify.
Substitution Method: In the formula 1A + B22 = A 2 + 2AB + B2, substitute 2x = A 
and 3 = B. Then
12x + 322 = 12x22 + 2 # 12x2 # 3 + 32
= 22x2 + 2 # 2 # 3 # x + 32	
Group numerical factors.
= 4x2 + 12x + 9	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 7  Find 13x + 222.
Finding the Square of a Binomial Sum
EXAMPLE 7
F
O
O
O
I
I
I
L
L
L
F
F
O
L
F
I

34	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
The definition of subtraction allows us to write any difference A - B as the sum 
A + 1-B2. Because A - B = A + 1-B2, we can use the formula for the square of a 
binomial sum to find a formula for the square of a binomial difference 1A - B22.
1A - B22 = 3A + 1-B242	
First term = A; second term = -B
= A2 + 2A1-B2 + 1-B22
= A2 - 2AB + B2	
2A1-B2 = -2AB; 1-B22 = B2
The Product of the Sum and Difference of Terms 
P r o d u c t s  G i v i n g  a  D i f f e r e n c e  o f  S q u a r e s
1A + B21A - B2 = A2 - B2
We leave it for you to use FOIL to verify the formula for finding the product of the sum and 
difference of terms.
Find the product 13x + 4213x - 42.
Solution
We use the substitution method; substitute 3x = A and 4 = B in the formula 1A + B2
1A - B2 = A2 - B2. Then
13x + 4213x - 42 = 13x22 - 42
= 9x2 - 16	
13x22 = 32x2 = 9x2 
Practice Problem 8  Find the product 11 - 2x211 + 2x2.
Finding the Product of the Sum and Difference of Terms
EXAMPLE 8
The special-products formulas, such as the formulas for squaring a binomial sum or 
difference, are used often and should be memorized. However, you should be able to derive 
them from FOIL, if you forget them. We list several of these formulas next.
S p e c i a l - P r o d u c t  F o r m u l a s
A and B represent any algebraic expressions.
Formula
Product giving a difference of squares
1A + B21A - B2 = A2 - B2
Squaring a binomial sum or difference
1A + B22 = A2 + 2AB + B2
1A - B22 = A2 - 2AB + B2
Example
 15x + 2215x - 22 = 15x22 - 22
 = 25x2 - 4
 13x + 222 = 13x22 + 213x2122 + 22
 = 9x2 + 12x + 4
 12x - 522 = 12x22 - 212x2152 + 52
 = 4x2 - 20x + 25
Incorrect
Correct
 1x + y22 = x + y2
 1x - y22 = x2 + y2
 1x + 421x + 52 = x + 4x + 5
 1x + y22 = x2 + 2xy + y2
 1x - y22 = x2 - 2xy + y2
 1x + 421x + 52 = x2 + 9x + 20
Warning

Section P.3    ■     Polynomials        35
To this point, we have investigated polynomials only in a single variable. We next  
extend our previous vocabulary to discuss polynomials in more than one variable. Any 
product of a constant and two or more variables, each raised to whole-number powers, is a 
­monomial in those variables. The constant is called the coefficient of the monomial, and 
the degree of the monomial is the sum of all the exponents appearing on its variables. For 
example, the monomial 5x3y4 is of degree 3 + 4 = 7 with coefficient 5.
Cubing a binomial sum or difference
 1A + B23 = A3 + 3A2B + 3AB2 + B3
 1A - B23 = A3 - 3A2B + 3AB2 - B3
Products giving a sum or difference of cubes
 1A + B21A2 - AB + B22 = A3 + B3
 1A - B21A2 + AB + B22 = A3 - B3
 1x + 523 = x3 + 3x2152 + 3x1522 + 53
 = x3 + 15x2 + 75x + 125
 1x - 423 = x3 - 3x2142 + 3x1422 - 43
 = x3 - 12x2 + 48x - 64
 1x + 221x2 - 2x + 42 = x3 + 23 = x3 + 8
 1x - 321x2 + 3x + 92 = x3 - 33 = x3 - 27
Multiply.  a.  17a + 5b217a - 5b2
b.  12x + 3y22
Solution
a.	 17a + 5b217a - 5b2 = 17a22-15b22	
1A + B21A - B2 = A2 - B2
= 49a2 - 25b2	
Simplify.
b.	 12x + 3y22 = 12x22 + 212x213y2 + 13y22	
1A + B22 = A2 + 2AB + B2
= 22x2 + 2 # 2 # 3xy + 32y2	
power-of-a-product rule
= 4x2 + 12xy + 9y2	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 9  Multiply x21y + x2.
Multiplying Polynomials in Two Variables
EXAMPLE 9
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 889 ft    2. 5x3 + 5x2 + 2x - 4   
3. 5x4 - 5x3 - x2 - x + 12    4. -8x5 - 4x4 + 10x3
5. -10x4 + x3 - 33x2 - 14x   
6. a. 4x2 + 27x - 7  b. 6x2 - 19x + 10
7. 9x2 + 12x + 4    8. 1 - 4x2 
9. x2y + x3
Exercises
section P.3 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 The polynomial -3x7 + 2x2 - 9x + 4 has leading 
c­oefficient 
 and degree 
.
	2.	 When a polynomial is written so that the exponents in 
each term decrease from left to right, it is said to be in 
 form.
	3.	 When a polynomial in x of degree 3 is added to a ­polynomial 
in x of degree 4, the resulting polynomial has degree 
.
	4.	 When a polynomial in x of degree 3 is multiplied by a 
­polynomial in x of degree 4, the resulting polynomial has 
degree 
.
	5.	 True or False. When FOIL is used, the terms 7 and x are 
called the inside terms of the product 14x + 721x - 22. 
	6.	 True or False. There are values of A and B for which 
1A + B22 = A2 + B2. 

36	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
In Exercises 7–14, determine whether the given expression is 
a polynomial. If it is, write it in standard form.
	 7.	 1 + x2 + 2x
	8.	 x - 1
x 
	9.	 x -2 + 3x + 5 
	10.	 3x4 + x7 + 3x5 - 2x + 1
	11.	 x2 - 2x + 4 
	12.	 x3 + 52x + 1 
	13.	 5x3 - p - 7x + 11 
	14.	 2x2 - 23x + 4 
In Exercises 15–18, find the degree and list the terms of the 
polynomial.
	15.	 7x + 3 
	16.	 -3x2 + 7
	17.	 x2 - x4 + 2x - 9
	18.	 x + 2x3 + 9x7 - 21
In Exercises 19–28, perform the indicated operations. Write 
the resulting polynomial in standard form.
	19.	 1x3 + 2x2 - 5x + 32 + 1-x3 + 2x - 42 
	20.	 1x3 - 3x + 12 + 1x3 - x2 + x - 32 
	21.	 12x3 - x2 + x - 52 - 1x3 - 4x + 32 
	22.	 1-x3 + 2x - 42 - 1x3 + 3x2 - 7x + 22 
	23.	 1-2x4 + 3x2 - 7x2 - 18x4 + 6x3 - 9x2 - 172 
	24.	 31x2 - 2x + 22 + 215x2 - x + 42 
	25.	 -213x2 + x + 12 + 61-3x2 - 2x - 22 
	26.	 215x2 - x + 32 - 413x2 + 7x + 12 
	27.	 13y3 - 4y + 22 + 12y + 12 - 1y3 - y2 + 42 
	28.	 15y2 + 3y - 12 - 1y2 - 2y + 32 + 12y2 + y + 52 
In Exercises 29–62, perform the indicated operations.
	29.	 6x12x + 32 
	30.	 7x13x - 42 
	31.	 1x + 121x2 + 2x + 22 
	32.	 1x - 5212x2 - 3x + 12 
	33.	 13x - 221x2 - x + 12 
	34.	 12x + 121x2 - 3x + 42 
	35.	 1x + 121x + 22 
	36.	 1x + 221x + 32 
	37.	 13x + 2213x + 12 
	38.	 1x + 3212x + 52 
	39.	 1-4x + 521x + 32 
	40.	 1-2x + 121x - 52 
	41.	 13x - 2212x - 12 
	42.	 1x - 1215x - 32 
	43.	 12x - 3a212x + 5a2 
	44.	 15x - 2a21x + 5a2 
	45.	 1x + 222 - x2 
	46.	 1x - 322 - x2 
	47.	 1x + 323 - x3 
	48.	 1x - 223 - x3 
	49.	 14x + 122 
	50.	 13x + 222 
	51.	 13x + 123 
	52.	 12x + 323 
	53.	 15 - 2x215 + 2x2 
	54.	 13 - 4x213 + 4x2 
	55.	 ax + 3
4b
2 
	56.	 ax + 2
5b
2 
	57.	 12x - 321x2 - 3x + 52 
	58.	 1x - 221x2 - 4x - 32 
	59.	 11 + y211 - y + y22 
	60.	 1y + 421y2 - 4y + 162 
	61.	 1x - 621x2 + 6x + 362 
	62.	 1x - 121x2 + x + 12 
In Exercises 63–72, perform the indicated operations.
	63.	 1x + 2y213x + 5y2 
	64.	 12x + y217x + 2y2 
	65.	 12x - y213x + 7y2 
	66.	 1x - 3y212x + 5y2 
	67.	 1x - y221x + y22 
	68.	 12x + y2212x - y22 
	69.	 1x + y21x - 2y22 
	70.	 1x - y21x + 2y22 
	71.	 1x - 2y231x + 2y2 
	72.	 12x + y2312x - y2 
In Exercises 73–78, use a2 + b2 = 1a + b22 −2ab = 
1a −b22 + 2ab.
	73.	 If x + y = 4 and xy = 3, find the value of x2 + y2. 
	74.	 If x - y = 3 and xy = 2, find the value of x2 + y2. 
	75.	 If x + 1
x = 3, find the value of
a.	 x2 + 1
x2. 
b.	 x4 + 1
x4. 
	76.	 If x - 1
x = 2, find the value of
a.	 x2 + 1
x2. 
b.	 x4 + 1
x4. 
	77.	 If 3x + 2y = 12 and xy = 6, find the value of 
9x2 + 4y2. 
	78.	 If 3x - 7y = 10 and xy = -1, find the value of 
9x2 + 49y2. 
Applying the Concepts
	79.	 Ticket prices. Theater ticket prices (in dollars)  
x years after 2006 are described by the polynomial 
-0.025x2 + 0.44x + 4.28. Find the value of this polynomial 
for x = 6 and state the result as the ticket price for a specific 
year. I
	80.	 Box-office grosses. Theater box-office grosses (in billions 
of dollars) x years after 2008 are described by the polynomial 
0.035x2 + 0.15x + 5.17. Find the value of this polynomial 
for 2012 and state the result as box-office gross for a specific 
year. I
	81.	 Paper shredding. A business that shreds paper products 
finds that it costs 0.1x2 + x + 50 dollars to serve x custom-
ers. What does it cost to serve 40 customers? 
	82.	 Gift baskets. A company will produce x 1for x Ú 102 
gift baskets of wine, meat, cheese, and crackers at a cost of 
1x - 1022 + 5x dollars per basket. What is the per basket 
cost for 15 baskets? 
In Exercises 83 and 84, use the fact (from Example 1) that 
an object thrown down with an initial velocity of V0 feet per 
­second will travel 16t2 + V0
 t feet in t seconds.
	83.	 Free fall. A sandwich is thrown from a helicopter with an 
initial downward velocity of 20 feet per second. How far has 
the sandwich fallen after five seconds? 
	84.	 Free fall. A ring is thrown off the Empire State Building 
with an initial downward velocity of 10 feet per second. How 
far has the ring fallen after two seconds?     

Section P.3    ■     Polynomials        37
	85.	 Cruise ship revenue. A cruise ship decides to reduce ticket 
prices to its theater by x dollars from the current price of 
$22.50.
a.	 Write a polynomial that gives the new price after the  
x-dollar deduction. 
b.	 The revenue is the number of tickets sold times the price 
of each ticket. If 30 tickets were sold when the price was 
$22.50 and 10 additional tickets are sold for each dollar  
the price is reduced (all tickets are sold at the same  
price), write a polynomial that gives the revenue in  
terms of x when the original price is reduced by  
x dollars. 
	86.	 Used-car rentals. A dealer who rents used cars wants to 
increase the monthly rent from the current $250 in  
n increases of $10.
a.	 Write a polynomial that gives the new price after  
n increases of $10. 
b.	 The revenue is the number of cars rented times the 
monthly rent for each car. If 50 cars can be rented at $250 
per month and 2 fewer cars can be rented for each $10 
rent increase, write a polynomial that gives the monthly 
revenue in terms of n. 

38	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
The Greatest Common Monomial Factor
The process of factoring polynomials that we study in this section “reverses” the process of 
multiplying polynomials that we studied in the previous section. To factor any sum of terms 
means to write it as a product of factors. Consider the product
1x + 321x - 32 = x2 - 9.
The polynomials 1x + 32 and 1x - 32 are called factors of the polynomial x2 - 9. When 
factoring, we start with one polynomial and write it as a product of other ­polynomials. The 
polynomials in the product are the factors of the given polynomial.
The first thing to look for when factoring a polynomial is a factor that is common 
to every term. This common factor can be “factored out” by the distributive property, 
ab + ac = a1b + c2.
Factoring Out a Monomial
In this section, we are concerned only with polynomials having integer coefficients. This 
restriction is called factoring over the integers.
Profit From Research and Development
The finance department of a major drug company projects that an investment of 
x million dollars in research and development for a specific type of vaccine will return a 
profit (or loss) of 10.012x3 - 32.9282 million dollars.
The company would have a “startup” cost of $12 million and is prepared to invest 
up to $24 million at a rate of $1 million per year. You could probably stare at this poly-
nomial for a long time without getting a clear picture of what kind of return to expect 
from different investments. In Example 7, we use the methods of this section to rewrite 
this profit–loss polynomial, making it easy to explain the result of investing various 
amounts.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Exponents (Section P.2)
2	 Polynomials (Section P.3)
3	 Value of algebraic expressions  
(Section P.1, page 13)
Objectives
1	 Identify and factor out the greatest 
­common monomial factor.
2	 Factor trinomials with a leading  
coefficient of 1.
3	 Factor perfect-square trinomials.
4	 Factor the difference of squares.
5	 Factor the difference and sum of cubes.
6	 Factor by grouping.
7	 Factor trinomials.
Factoring Polynomials
P.4
S e c t i o n 
1	
Identify and factor out the 
greatest common monomial 
factor.

Section P.4    ■     Factoring Polynomials        39
Polynomial
Common Factor
Factored Form
9 + 18y
9
911 + 2y2
2y2 + 6y
2y
2y1y + 32
7x4 + 3x3 + x2
x2
x217x2 + 3x + 12
5x + 3
No common factor
5x + 3
You can verify that any factorization is correct by multiplying the factors. We factored 
these polynomials by finding the greatest common monomial factor of their terms.
F i n d i n g  t h e  G r e at e s t  C o m m o n  M o n o m i a l  Fa c t o r
The term axn is the greatest common monomial factor (GCF) of a polynomial in x 
(with integer coefficients) if
1.	 a is the greatest integer that divides each of the polynomial coefficients.
2.	 n is the least exponent on x found in every term of the polynomial.
Factor.  a.  16x3 + 24x2	
b.  5x4 + 20x2 + 25x
Solution
a.	 The greatest integer that divides both 16 and 24 is 8. The exponents on x are 3 and 2, 
so 2 is the least exponent. So the GCF of 16x3 + 24x2 is 8x2. We write
16x3 + 24x2 = 8x212x2 + 8x2132.	
Write each term as the product of  
the GCF and another factor.
= 8x212x + 32	
Use the distributive property to  
factor out the GCF.
	
We can check the results of factoring by multiplying.
	
Check:  8x212x + 32 = 8x212x2 + 8x2132 = 16x3 + 24x2.
b.	 The greatest integer that divides 5, 20, and 25 is 5. The exponents on x are 4, 2, and 
1 1x = x12, so 1 is the least exponent. So the GCF of 5x4 + 20x2 + 25x is 5x. We 
write
5x4 + 20x2 + 25x = 5x1x32 + 5x14x2 + 5x152 = 5x1x3 + 4x + 52.
	
You should check this result by multiplying.
Practice Problem 1  Factor.  a.  6x5 + 14x3	
b.  7x5 + 21x4 + 35x2
Factoring by Using the GCF
EXAMPLE 1
Polynomials that cannot be factored as a product of two polynomials (excluding the 
constant polynomials 1 and -1) are said to be irreducible. A polynomial is said to be 
factored completely when it is written as a product consisting of only irreducible factors. 
By agreement, the greatest integer common to all of the terms in the polynomial is not fac-
tored. We also allow repeated irreducible factors to be written as a power of a single factor.
Factoring Trinomials of the Form x2 + bx + c
Recall that 1x + a21x + b2 = x2 + 1a + b2x + ab.
We reverse the sides of this equation to get the form used for factoring
x2+ 1a + b2x + ab = 1x + a21x + b2.
2	
Factor trinomials with a 
leading coefficent of 1.

40	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Factor.  a.  x2 + 8x + 15        b.  x2 - 6x - 16        c.  x2 + x + 2
Solution
a.	 We want integers a and b such that ab = 15 and a + b = 8.
Factors of 15
1, 15
-1, -15
3, 5
-3, -5
Sum of factors
16
-16
8
-8
	
Because the factors 3 and 5 of 15 in the third column have a sum of 8,
x2 + 8x + 15 = 1x + 321x + 52.
	
You should check this answer by multiplying.
b.	 We must find two integers a and b with ab = -16 and a + b = -6.
Factors of −16
-1, 16
-2, 8
-4, 4
1, -16
2, -8
4, -4
Sum of factors
15
6
0
-15
-6
0
	
Because the factors 2 and -8 of -16 in the fifth column give a sum of -6,
x2 - 6x - 16 = 1x + 223x + 1-824 = 1x + 221x - 82.
	
You should check this answer by multiplying.
c.	 We must find two integers a and b with ab = 2 and a + b = 1.
Factors of 2
1, 2
-1, -2
Sum of factors
3
-3
	
The coefficient of the middle term, 1, does not appear as the sum of any of the factors 
of the constant term, 2. Therefore, x2 + x + 2 is irreducible.
Practice Problem 2  Factor.  a.  x2 + 6x + 8        b.  x2 - 3x - 10
Factoring Formulas
We investigate how other types of polynomials can be factored by reversing the product 
formulas on pages 34 and 35.
Factoring x2 + bx + c by Using the Factors of c
EXAMPLE 2
To factor a trinomial in standard 
form with a leading coefficient of 
1, we need two integers a and b 
whose product is the constant term 
and whose sum is the coefficient of 
the middle term.
Side  
Note
Fa c t o r i n g  F o r m u l a s
A and B represent any algebraic expression.
A2 - B2 = 1A + B21A - B2	
Difference of squares
A2 + 2AB + B2 = 1A + B22	
Perfect square, positive middle term
A2 - 2AB + B2 = 1A - B22	
Perfect square, negative middle term
A3 - B3 = 1A - B21A2 + AB + B22	
Difference of cubes
A3 + B3 = 1A + B21A2 - AB + B22	
Sum of cubes

Section P.4    ■     Factoring Polynomials        41
Perfect-Square Trinomials
To factor a perfect square Trinomial, we use the special products:
A2 + 2AB + B2 = 1A + B22 and A2 - 2AB + B2 = 1A - B22
Factor.  a.  x2 + 10x + 25        b.  16x2 - 8x + 1
Solution
a.	 The first term, x2, and the third term, 25 = 52, are perfect squares. Further, the  
middle term is twice the product of the terms being squared, that is, 10x = 215x2.
x2 + 10x + 25 = x2 + 2 # 5 # x + 52 = 1x + 522
b.	 The first term, 16x2 = 14x22, and the third term, 1 = 12, are perfect squares. Further, 
the middle term is the negative of twice the product of terms being squared, that is, 
-8x = -214x2112.
16x2 - 8x + 1 = 14x22 - 214x2112 + 12 = 14x - 122
Practice Problem 3  Factor.  a.  x2 + 4x + 4        b.  9x2 - 6x + 1
Factoring a Perfect-Square Trinomial
EXAMPLE 3
You should check your answer to 
any factoring problem by multiply-
ing the factors to verify that the 
result is the original expression.
Side 
Note
Difference of Squares
To factor the difference of squares, we use the reverse of the special product 
A2 - B2 = 1A + B21A - B2.
4	
Factor the difference  
of squares.
Factor.  a.  x2 - 4	
b.  25x2 - 49
Solution
a.	 We write x2 - 4 as the difference of squares.
x2 - 4 = x2 - 22 = 1x + 221x - 22
b.	 We write 25x2 - 49 as the difference of squares.
25x2 - 49 = 15x22 - 72 = 15x + 7215x - 72
Practice Problem 4  Factor.  a.  x2 - 16        b.  4x2 - 25
Factoring the Difference of Squares
EXAMPLE 4
What about the sum of two squares? Let’s try to factor x2 + 22 = x2 + 4. Notice that 
x2 + 4 = x2 + 0 # x + 4 so that the middle term is 0 = 0 # x. We need two factors, a and 
b, of 4 whose sum is zero 1a + b = 02.
Factors of 4
1, 4
-1, -4
2, 2
-2, -2
Sum of factors
5
-5
4
-4
Because no sum of factors is 0, x2 + 4 is irreducible. A similar result holds regardless of 
what integer replaces 2 in the process. Consequently, x2 + a2 is irreducible for any integer a.
S o m e  I r r e d u c i b l e  P o ly n o m i a l s
If a and c are integers having no common factors, then
ax + c is irreducible and x2 + a2 is irreducible.
3	
Factor perfect-square 
trinomials.

42	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Difference and Sum of Cubes
We can also use the reverse of the special-product formulas to factor the difference and 
sum of cubes.
A3 - B3 = 1A - B21A2 + AB + B22	
Difference of cubes
A3 + B3 = 1A + B21A2 - AB + B22	
Sum of cubes
5	
Factor the difference and sum 
of cubes.
Factor. x4 - 16.
Solution
We write x4 - 16 as the difference of squares.
x4 - 16 = 1x222 - 42 = 1x2 + 421x2 - 42
From Example 4, part a, we know that x2 - 4 = 1x + 221x - 22. Consequently,
	
 x4 - 16 = 1x2 + 421x2 - 42
 = 1x2 + 421x + 221x - 22    Replace x2 - 4 with 1x + 221x - 22.
Because x2 + 4, x + 2, and x - 2 are irreducible, x4 - 16 is completely factored.
Practice Problem 5  Factor  x4 - 81.
Using the Difference of Squares Twice
EXAMPLE 5
Factor.  a.  x3 - 64        b.  8x3 + 125
Solution
a.	 We write x3 - 64 as the difference of cubes.
x3 - 64 = x3 - 43 = 1x - 421x2 + 4x + 162
b.	 We write 8x3 + 125 as the sum of cubes.
8x3 + 125 = 12x23 + 53 = 12x + 5214x2 - 10x + 252
Practice Problem 6  Factor.  a.  x3 - 125        b.  27x3 + 8
Factoring the Difference and Sum of Cubes
EXAMPLE 6
In the beginning of this section, we introduced the polynomial 0.012x3 - 32.928 that gave the 
profit (or loss) a drug company would have after an investment of x million dollars. If the com-
pany had an initial investment of $12 million and invests an additional $1 million each year, 
determine when this investment returns a profit. What will the profit (or loss) be in six years?
Determining Profit from Research and Development
EXAMPLE 7
same sign
same sign
different sign
different sign

Section P.4    ■     Factoring Polynomials        43
Factoring by Grouping
For polynomials having four terms and a GCF of 1, when none of the preceding factoring 
techniques apply, we can sometimes group the terms in such a way that each group has a 
common factor. This technique is called factoring by grouping.
6	
Factor by grouping.
Solution
First, notice that 0.012 is a common factor of both terms of the polynomial because 
32.928 = 10.0122127442. We now factor 0.012x3 - 32.928 as follows:
 0.012x3 - 32.928 = 0.012x3 - 10.0122127442
 = 0.0121x3 - 27442
	
Factor out 0.012.
 = 0.0121x3 - 1432
	
2744 = 143
 = 0.0121x - 1421x2 + 14x + 1962	
Difference of cubes
This product has three factors, and the factor x2 + 14x + 196 is positive for positive 
­values of x because each term is positive. The sign of the factor x - 14 then determines the 
sign of the entire polynomial. The factor x - 14 is negative if x is less than 14, zero if x 
equals 14, and positive if x is greater than 14. Consequently, the company receives a profit 
when x is greater than 14. Because the initial investment is $12 million, with an additional 
$1 million invested each year, it will be two years before the company breaks even on this 
venture. Every year thereafter it will profit from the investment. In six years, the company 
will have invested the initial $12 million plus an additional $6 million ($1 million per year). 
So the total investment is $18 million. To find the profit (or loss) with $18 million invested, 
we let x = 18 in the profit–loss polynomial: 0.01211823 - 32.928 = $37.056 million.
The company will have made a profit of over $37 million in six years.
Practice Problem 7  In Example 7, what will the profit be in four years?
Factor.  a.  x3 + 2x2 + 3x + 6	
b.  6x3 - 3x2 - 4x + 2	
c.  x2 + 4x + 4 - y2
Solution
a.	  x3 + 2x2 + 3x + 6 = 1x3 + 2x22 + 13x + 62	
Group terms so that each  
group can be factored.
 = x21x + 22 + 31x + 22	
Factor the grouped binomials.
 = 1x + 221x2 + 32	
Factor out the common  
binomial factor x + 2.
b.	  6x3 - 3x2 - 4x + 2 = 16x3 - 3x22 + 1-4x + 22	
Group terms so that  
each group can be  
factored.
	
 = 3x212x - 12 + 1-2212x - 12	
Factor the grouped  
binomials.
	
 = 12x - 1213x2 - 22	
Factor out the  
common binomial  
factor 2x - 1.
c.	  x2 + 4x + 4 - y2 = 1x2 + 4x + 42 - y2
	
Group terms so that each  
group can be factored.
	
 = 1x + 222 - y2
	
Factor the trinomial.
	
 = 1x + 2 - y21x + 2 + y2	
Difference of squares.
Practice Problem 8  Factor. 
a.  x3 + 3x2 + x + 3	
b.  28x3 - 20x2 - 7x + 5	
c.  x2 - y2 - 2y - 1
Factoring by Grouping
EXAMPLE 8
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
6.564
1
2
3
Years
4
5
6
0.000
50
Profit in millions of dollars
16.224
7.572

44	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Factoring Trinomials of the Form Ax2 + Bx + C
To factor the trinomial Ax2 + Bx + C as 1ax + b21cx + d2, we use FOIL and com-
bine like terms to get Ax2 + Bx + C = acx2 + 1ad + bc2x + bd. Notice that 
AC = acbd = 1ad21bc2 and B = ad + bc. We can factor Ax2 + Bx + C if we can find 
integer factors of the product AC whose sum is B. We illustrate a procedure for doing this 
in the next example.
7	
Factor trinomials.
Factor: x4 + 3x2 + 4
Solution
Notice that a change in the middle term would give the perfect square  
1x2 + 222 = x4 + 4x2 + 4.
x4 + 3x2 + 4
 = x4 + 4x2 - x2 + 4
	
3x2 = 4x2 - x2
 = x4 + 4x2 + 4 - x2
	
Rewrite.
 = 1x2 + 222 - x2	
x4 + 4x2 + 4 = 1x2 + 222
 = 1x2 + 2 + x21x2 + 2 - x2	
Difference of two squares
 = 1x2 + x + 221x2 - x + 22	
Rewrite in standard form.
Practice Problem 9  Factor: x4 + 5x2 + 9
Factoring by Making a Perfect Square
EXAMPLE 9
Factor.  a.  6x2 + 17x + 7        b.  20x2 - 7x - 6
Solution
a.	 Ax2 + Bx + C = 6x2 + 17x + 7. We have A # C = 6 # 7 = 42. We are looking for 
two factors of 42 whose sum is 17. We have 42 = 3 # 14 and 3 + 14 = 17. So
	
 6x2 + 17x + 7 = 6x2 + 3x + 14x + 7
	
17x = 3x + 14x
	
 = 16x2 + 3x2 + 114x + 72	
Group terms.
	
 = 3x12x + 12 + 712x + 12	
Factor out the common factor.
	
 = 13x + 7212x + 12	
Distributive property
b.	 20x2 - 7x - 6. We have 12021-62 = -120. The two factors of -120 whose sum 
is -7 are -15 and 8. So
	
20x2 - 7x - 6 = 20x2 - 15x + 8x - 6	
-7x = -15x + 8x
	
= 120x2 - 15x2 + 18x - 62	
Group terms.
	
= 5x14x - 32 + 214x - 32	
Factor out the common factor.
	
= 15x + 2214x - 32	
Distributive property
Practice Problem 10  Factor.  a.  5x2 + 11x + 2	
b.  4x2 + x - 3
Factoring Using FOIL and Grouping
EXAMPLE 10

Section P.4    ■     Factoring Polynomials        45
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 2x313x2 + 72  b. 7x21x3 + 3x2 + 52
2. a. 1x + 421x + 22  b. 1x - 521x + 22
3. a. 1x + 222  b. 13x - 122    4. a. 1x + 421x - 42 
b. 12x - 5212x + 52    5. 1x2 + 921x - 321x + 32
6. a. 1x - 521x2 + 5x + 252  b. 13x + 2219x2 - 6x + 42
7. $16.224 million    8. a. 1x + 321x2 + 12
b. 17x - 5212x + 1212x - 12  c. 1x + y + 121x - y - 12
9. 1x2 + x + 321x2 - x + 32    10. a. 15x + 121x + 22 
b. 14x - 321x + 12
Exercises
section P.4 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 The polynomials x + 2 and x - 2 are called  
______________ of the polynomial x2 - 4.
	2.	 The polynomial 3y is the ______________  factor of the poly-
nomial 3y2 + 6y.
	3.	 The GCF of the polynomial 10x3 + 30x2 is ______________.
	4.	 A polynomial that cannot be factored as a product of two 
polynomials (excluding the constant polynomials {1) is said 
to be ______________.
	5.	 True or False. When factoring a polynomial whose leading 
coefficient is positive, we need to consider only its positive 
factors. 
	6.	 True or False. The polynomial x2 + 7 is irreducible. 
In Exercises 7–18, factor each polynomial by removing any 
common monomial factor.
	7.	 8x - 24 
	
8.	 5x + 25 
	9.	 -6x2 + 12x 
	
10.	 -3x2 + 21 
	11.	 7x2 + 14x3 
	
12.	 9x3 - 18x4 
	13.	 x4 + 2x3 + x2  	
14.	 x4 - 5x3 + 7x2 
	15.	 3x3 - x2 
	
16.	 2x3 + 2x2 
	17.	 8ax3 + 4ax2 
	 18.	 ax4 - 2ax2 + ax 
In Exercises 19–26, factor by grouping.
	19.	 x3 + 3x2 + x + 3  	
20.	 x3 + 5x2 + x + 5 
	21.	 x3 - 5x2 + x - 5  	
22.	 x3 - 7x2 + x - 7 
	23.	 6x3 + 4x2 + 3x + 2  	
24.	 3x3 + 6x2 + x + 2 
	25.	 12x7 + 4x5 + 3x4 + x2  	 26.	 3x7 + 3x5 + x4 + x2 
In Exercises 27–42, factor each trinomial or state that it is 
irreducible.
	27.	 x2 + 7x + 12  	
28.	 x2 + 8x + 15 
	29.	 x2 - 6x + 8  	
30.	 x2 - 9x + 14 
	31.	 x2 - 3x - 4  	
32.	 x2 - 5x - 6 
	33.	 x2 - 4x + 13 
	
34.	 x2 - 2x + 5 
	35.	 2x2 + x - 36  	
36.	 2x2 + 3x - 27 
	37.	 6x2 + 17x + 12  	
38.	 8x2 - 10x - 3 
	39.	 3x2 - 11x - 4  	
40.	 5x2 + 7x + 2 
	41.	 6x2 - 3x + 4 
	
42.	 4x2 - 4x + 3 
In Exercises 43–50, factor each polynomial as a perfect square.
	43.	 x2 + 6x + 9 
	
44.	 x2 + 8x + 16 
	45.	 9x2 + 6x + 1 
	
46.	 36x2 + 12x + 1 
	47.	 25x2 - 20x + 4 
	 48.	 64x2 + 32x + 4 
	49.	 49x2 + 42x + 9 
	 50.	 9x2 + 24x + 16 
In Exercises 51–60, factor each polynomial using the  
difference-of-squares pattern.
	51.	 x2 - 64 
	
52.	 x2 - 121 
	53.	 4x2 - 1 
	 54.	 9x2 - 1 
	55.	 16x2 - 9 
	56.	 25x2 - 49 
	57.	 x4 - 1  	
58.	 x4 - 81 
	59.	 20x4 - 5  	
60.	 12x4 - 75 
In Exercises 61–70, factor each polynomial using the sum-or-
difference-of-cubes pattern.
	61.	 x3 + 64  	
62.	 x3 + 125 
	63.	 x3 - 27  	
64.	 x3 - 216 
	65.	 8 - x3  	
66.	 27 - x3 
	67.	 8x3 - 27  	
68.	 8x3 - 125 
	69.	 40x3 + 5  	
70.	 7x3 + 56 
In Exercises 71–78, factor by making a perfect square.
	71.	 x4 + x2 + 25  	
72.	 x4 + x2 + 1 
	73.	 x4 + 15x2 + 64  	
74.	 x4 - 7x2 + 9 
	75.	 x4 - x2 + 16  	
76.	 x4 - 16x2 + 36 
	77.	 x4 + 4  	
78.	 x4 + 64 
In Exercises 79–110, factor each polynomial completely. If a 
polynomial cannot be factored, state that it is irreducible.
	79.	 1 - 16x2 
	 80.	 4 - 25x2 
	81.	 x2 - 6x + 9 
	
82.	 x2 - 8x + 16 
	83.	 4x2 + 4x + 1 
	
84.	 16x2 + 8x + 1 
	85.	 2x2 - 8x - 10  	
86.	 5x2 - 10x - 40 
	87.	2x2 + 3x - 20  	
88.	 2x2 - 7x - 30 
	89.	x2 - 24x + 36 
	 90.	 x2 - 20x + 25 

46	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
	 91.	 3x5 + 12x4 + 12x3  	
92.	2x5 + 16x4 + 32x3 
	 93.	 9x2 - 1 
	 94.	16x2 - 25
	 95.	 16x2 + 24x + 9 
	96.	4x2 + 20x + 25 
	 97.	 x2 + 15 
	
98.	x2 + 24 
	 99.	 45x3 + 8x2 - 4x  	
100.	25x3 + 40x2 - 9x 
	101.	 ax2 - 7a2x - 8a3  	
102.	ax2 - 10a2x - 24a3 
	103.	 x2 - 16a2 + 8x + 16  	 104.	x2 - 36a2 + 6x + 9 
	105.	 3x5 + 12x4y + 12x3y2  	 106.	4x5 + 24x4y + 36x3y2 
	107.	 x2 - 25a2 + 4x + 4  	
108.	x2 - 16a2 + 4x + 4 
	109.	 18x6 + 12x5y + 2x4y2	
110.	12x6 + 12x5y + 3x4y2 
Applying the Concepts
	111.	 Garden area. A rectangular garden must have a perimeter 
of 16 feet. Write a completely factored polynomial whose 
values give the area of the garden, assuming that one side is 
x feet. 
	112.	 Serving tray dimensions. A rectangular serving tray 
must have a perimeter of 42 inches. Write a completely 
factored polynomial whose values give the area of the tray, 
assuming that one side is x inches. 
	113.	 Box construction. A box with an open top is to be 
constructed from a rectangular piece of cardboard 
with length 36 inches and width 16 inches by cut-
ting out squares of equal side length x at each cor-
ner and then folding up the sides, as shown in the 
accompanying figure. Write a completely factored 
polynomial whose values give the volume of the box 
1volume = length * width * height2. 
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
36 in
16 in
	114.	 Surface area. For the box described in Exercise 113, write 
a completely factored polynomial whose value gives its 
surface area (surface area = sum of the areas of the five 
sides). 
	115.	 Area of a washer. As shown in the figure, a washer is 
made by removing a circular disk from the center of another 
circular disk of radius 2 cm. Assuming that the disk that is 
removed has radius x, write a completely factored polynomial 
whose values give the area of the washer. 
x cm
	116.	 Insulation. Insulation must be put in the space between 
two concentric cylinders. Write a completely factored poly-
nomial whose values give the volume between the inner and 
outer cylinders if the inner cylinder has radius 3 feet, the 
outer cylinder has radius x feet, and both cylinders are 8 feet 
high. 
	117.	 Grazing pens. A rancher has 2800 feet of fencing that 
will fence off a rectangular grazing pen for cattle. One 
edge of the pen borders a straight river and needs no fence. 
Assuming that the edges of the pen perpendicular to the 
river are x feet long, write a completely factored polynomial 
whose values give the area of the pen. 
x
x
	118.	 Centerpiece perimeter. A decorative glass centerpiece for 
a table has the shape of a rectangle with a semicircular sec-
tion attached at each end, as shown in the figure. The perim-
eter of the figure is 48 inches. Write a completely factored 
polynomial whose values give the area of the centerpiece.
x
x
x
2
x
2
 
 

	
Section P.5    ■    Rational Expressions
47
S e c t i o n 
Rational Expressions
Recall that the quotient of two integers, a
b 1b ≠02, is a rational number. The quotient 
of two polynomials is called a rational expression. Following are examples of rational 
expressions.
10
17, x + 2
3
, 
x + 6
1x - 321x + 42, 
7
x2 + 1, and x2 + 2x - 3
x2 + 5x
We use the same language to describe rational expressions that we use to describe rational 
numbers. For x2 + 2x - 3
x2 + 5x + 6, we call x2 + 2x - 3 the numerator and x2 + 5x + 6 the 
denominator. The domain of a rational expression is the set of all real numbers except 
those that result in a zero denominator. For example, the domain of 
2
x - 1 is all real 
Rational Expressions
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Rational numbers (Section P.1,  
page 3)
2	 Properties of fractions (Section P.1,  
page 12)
3	 Factoring polynomials (Section P.4)
4	 Irreducible polynomial (Section P.4, 
page 39)
Objectives
1	 Reduce a rational expression to lowest 
terms.
2	 Multiply and divide rational expressions.
3	 Add and subtract rational expressions.
4	 Identify and simplify complex fractions.
P.5
False Positive in Drug Testing
You are probably aware that the nonmedical use of steroids among adolescents and 
young adults is an ongoing national concern. In fact, many high schools have required 
students involved in extracurricular activities to submit to random drug testing. Many 
methods of drug testing are in use, and those who administer the tests are keenly 
aware of the possibility of what is termed a “false positive,” which occurs when some-
one who is not a drug user tests positive for using drugs. How likely is it that a student 
who tests positive actually uses drugs? For a test that is 95% accurate, an expression for 
the likelihood that a student who tests positive but is not a drug user is
10.05211 - x2
0.95x + 10.05211 - x2,
where x is the percent of the student population that uses drugs. This is an example of 
a rational expression, which we study in this section. In Example 1, we see that in a stu-
dent population among which only 5% of the students use drugs, the likelihood that a 
student who tests positive is not a drug user is 50% when the test used is 95% accurate.

48	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
x, x ≠1. We write 
x + 6
1x - 321x + 42, x ≠3, x ≠-4 to indicate that 3 and -4 are not in 
the domain of this rational expression.
With a test that is 95% accurate, an expression for the likelihood that a student who tests 
positive for drugs is a nonuser is
10.05211 - x2
0.95x + 10.05211 - x2,
where x is the percent (in decimal) of the student population that uses drugs. In a student 
population among which only 5% of the students use drugs, find the likelihood that a 
student who tests positive is a nonuser.
Solution
We convert 5% to a decimal to get x = 0.05, and we replace x with 0.05 in the given 
expression.
10.05211 - x2
0.95x + 10.05211 - x2 =
10.05211 - 0.052
0.9510.052 + 10.05211 - 0.052
	
= 0.50	
Use a calculator.
So the likelihood that a student who tests positive is a nonuser when the test used is 95% 
accurate is 50%. Because of the high rate of false positives, a more accurate test is needed.
Practice Problem 1  Rework Example 1 for a student population among which 10%  
of the students use drugs.
Calculating False Positives in Drug Testing
EXAMPLE 1
Lowest Terms for a Rational Expression
A rational expression is reduced to its lowest terms or simplified if its numerator and 
­denominator have no common factor other than 1 or -1.
1	
Reduce a rational expression 
to lowest terms.
S i m p l i f y i n g  R at i o n a l  E x p r e s s i o n
To simplify a rational expression, we
1.	 Factor its numerator and denominator.
2.	 Divide the numerator and denominator by any common factors.
Simplify each expression.
a.	 x4 + 2x3
x + 2 , x ≠-2	
b.  x2 - x - 6
x3 - 3x2 , x ≠0, x ≠3
Solution
Factor each numerator and denominator and divide out the common factors.
a.	 x4 + 2x3
x + 2
=
x31x + 22
x + 2
=
x31x + 22
1x + 22
= x3
b.	 x2 - x - 6
x3 - 3x2
= 1x + 221x - 32
x21x - 32
= 1x + 221x - 32
x21x - 32
= x + 2
x2
Reducing a Rational Expression to Lowest Terms
EXAMPLE 2

Section P.5    ■     Rational Expressions        49
Multiplication and Division of Rational Expressions
We use the same rules for multiplying and dividing rational expressions as we do for 
­rational numbers.
2	
Multiply and divide rational 
expressions.
Warning
Because x2 is a term, not a factor, in both the numerator and denominator of 
x2 - 1
x2 + 2x + 1, 
you cannot remove x2. You can remove only factors common to both the numerator and 
­denominator of a rational expression.
In working with the quotient of two 
rational expressions 
A
B
C
D
= A
B # D
C 
three polynomials appear as  
denominators: B and D from 
A
B and  C
D and C from A
B # D
C
Side  
Note
The best strategy to use when 
­multiplying and dividing rational 
expressions is to factor each numera-
tor and denominator completely and 
then divide out the common factors.
Side  
Note
M u lt i p l i c at i o n  a n d  D i v i s i o n
For rational expressions A
B and C
D,
A
B # C
D = A # C
B # D    and   
A
B
C
D
= A
B , C
D = A
B # D
C = AD
BC
	
if B ≠0, D ≠0.	
if B ≠0, C ≠0, D ≠0.
Multiply or divide as indicated. Simplify your answer and leave it in factored form.
a.	 x2 + 3x + 2
x3 + 3x
# 2x3 + 6x
x2 + x - 2,    x ≠0, x ≠1, x ≠-2
b.	
3x2 + 11x - 4
8x3 - 40x2
3x + 12
4x4 - 20x3
,  x ≠0, x ≠5, x ≠-4
Solution
Factor each numerator and denominator and divide out the common factors.
a.	  x2 + 3x + 2
x3 + 3x
# 2x3 + 6x
x2 + x - 2 = 1x + 221x + 12
x1x2 + 32
#
2x1x2 + 32
1x - 121x + 222
	
 = 1x + 221x + 1212x21x2 + 32
x1x2 + 321x - 121x + 22
=
21x + 12
x - 1
b.	  
3x2 + 11x - 4
8x3 - 40x2
3x + 12
4x4 - 20x3
= 3x2 + 11x - 4
8x3 - 40x2 # 4x4 - 20x3
3x + 12
= 1x + 4213x - 12
8x21x - 52
# 4x31x - 52
31x + 42
	
 =
 
x
1x + 4213x - 12 14x321x - 52
8x21x - 521321x + 42
2
= 13x - 12x
6
=
x13x - 12
6
Multiplying and Dividing Rational Expressions
EXAMPLE 3
Practice Problem 2  Simplify each expression.
a.	 2x3 + 8x2
3x2 + 12x	
b. 
x2 - 4
x2 + 4x + 4

50	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Addition and Subtraction of Rational Expressions
To add and subtract rational expressions, we use the same rules as for adding and subtracting 
rational numbers.
3	
Add and subtract rational 
expressions.
A d d i t i o n  a n d  S u b t r a c t i o n  o f  R at i o n a l 
E x p r e s s i o n s
For rational expressions A
D and C
D 1same denominator D ≠02,
A
D + C
D = A + C
D  and A
D - C
D = A - C
D
.
For rational expression A
B and C
D  1B ≠0, D ≠02,
A
B + C
D = AD + BC
BD  and A
B - C
D = AD - BC
BD
.
Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answer and leave both the numerator and 
denominator in factored form.
a.	
x - 6
1x + 122 +
x + 8
1x + 122,  x ≠-1
b.	
3x - 2
x2 - 5x + 6 -
2x + 1
x2 - 5x + 6,  x ≠2, x ≠3
Solution
a.	
x - 6
1x + 122 +
x + 8
1x + 122 = x - 6 + x + 8
1x + 122
=
2x + 2
1x + 122
=
21x + 12
1x + 121x + 12 =
2
x + 1
b.	
3x - 2
x2 - 5x + 6 -
2x + 1
x2 - 5x + 6 = 13x - 22-12x + 12
x2 - 5x + 6
= 3x - 2 - 2x - 1
x2 - 5x + 6
=
x - 3
1x - 221x - 32 =
x - 3
1x - 221x - 32 =
1
x - 2
Practice Problem 4  Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answers.
a.	 5x + 22
x2 - 36 + 21x + 102
x2 - 36 ,    x ≠6, x ≠-6
b.	
4x + 1
x2 + x - 12 -
3x + 4
x2 + x - 12,    x ≠-4, x ≠3
Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions  
with the Same Denominator
EXAMPLE 4
Practice Problem 3  Multiply or divide as indicated. Simplify your answer.
x2 - 2x - 3
7x3 + 28x2
4x + 4
2x4 + 8x3
  x ≠0, x ≠-4, x ≠-1

Section P.5    ■     Rational Expressions        51
When adding or subtracting rational expressions with different denominators, we proceed 
(as with fractions) by finding a common denominator. The one most convenient to use is called 
the least common denominator (LCD), and it is the polynomial of least degree that contains 
each denominator as a factor. In the simplest case, the LCD is the product of the denominators.
Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answer and leave it in factored form.
a.	
x
x + 1 + 2x - 1
x + 3 , x ≠-1, x ≠-3
b.	
2x
x + 1 -
x
x + 2, x ≠-1, x ≠-2
Solution
a.	  x
x + 1 + 2x - 1
x + 3 =
x1x + 32
1x + 121x + 32 + 12x - 121x + 12
1x + 121x + 32
 = x1x + 32+12x - 121x + 12
1x + 121x + 32
 = x2 + 3x + 2x2 + 2x - x - 1
1x + 121x + 32
 =
3x2 + 4x - 1
1x + 121x + 32
b.	  2x
x + 1 -
x
x + 2 =
2x1x + 22
1x + 121x + 22 -
x1x + 12
1x + 121x + 22
 = 2x1x + 22 - x1x + 12
1x + 121x + 22
= 2x2 + 4x - x2 - x
1x + 121x + 22
 =
x2 + 3x
1x + 121x + 22 =
x1x + 32
1x + 121x + 22
Practice Problem 5  Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answers.
a.	
2x
x + 2 +
3x
x - 5, x ≠-2, x ≠5
b.	
5x
x - 4 -
2x
x + 3, x ≠4, x ≠-3
Adding and Subtracting When Denominators Have  
No Common Factor
EXAMPLE 5
	
LCD =  
1x + 121x + 32
	
LCD =  
1x + 121x + 22
T o  F i n d  t h e  L C D  f o r  R at i o n a l  E x p r e s s i o n s
1.	 Factor each denominator polynomial completely.
2.	 Form a product of the different irreducible factors of each polynomial. (Each  
distinct factor is used once.)
3.	 Attach to each factor in this product the greatest exponent that appears on this  
factor in any of the factored denominators.
Find the LCD for each pair of rational expressions.
a.	
x + 2
x1x - 1221x + 22
 , 
3x + 7
4x21x + 223
b.	
x + 1
x2 - x - 6
 , 2x - 13
x2 - 9
Solution
a.	 Step 1 The denominators are already completely factored.
Step 2 4x1x - 121x + 22	
Product of the different factors
Step 3 LCD = 4x21x - 1221x + 223	
The greatest exponents are 2, 2, and 3.
Finding the LCD for Rational Expressions
EXAMPLE 6

52	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
b.	 Step 1  x2 - x - 6 = 1x + 221x - 32
x2 - 9 = 1x + 321x - 32
Step 2  1x + 221x - 321x + 32	
Product of the different factors
Step 3  LCD = 1x + 221x - 321x + 32  The greatest exponent on each factor is 1.
Practice Problem 6  Find the LCD for each pair of rational expressions.
a.	
x2 + 3x
x21x + 2221x - 22
 , 4x2 + 1
3x1x - 222
b.	 2x - 1
x2 - 25
 , 
3 - 7x2
1x2 + 4x - 52
When adding or subtracting rational expressions with different denominators, the first 
step is to find the LCD. Here is the general procedure.
P r o c e d u r e  f o r  A d d i n g  o r  S u b t r a c t i n g  R at i o n a l 
E x p r e s s i o n s  w i t h  D i f f e r e n t  D e n o m i n at o r s
Step 1	 Find the LCD.
Step 2	 Using A
B = AC
BC, write each rational expression as a rational expression with 
	
	
the LCD as the denominator.
Step 3	 Following the order of operations, add or subtract numerators, keeping the 
LCD as the denominator.
Step 4	 Simplify.
Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answer and leave it in factored form.
a.	
3
x2 - 1 +
x
x2 + 2x + 1,  x ≠1, x ≠-1
b.	 x + 2
x2 - x -
3x
41x - 122,  x ≠0, x ≠1
Solution
a.	 Step 1  Note that x2 - 1 = 1x - 121x + 12 and x2 + 2x + 1 = 1x + 122; the 
LCD is 1x + 1221x - 12.
Step 2 
3
x2 - 1 =
3
1x - 121x + 12 =
31x + 12
1x - 121x + 122	 
Multiply numerator and 
denominator by x + 1.
x
x2 + 2x + 1 =
x
1x + 122 =
x1x - 12
1x + 1221x - 12	

Multiply numerator and 
denominator by x - 1.
	
Steps 3–4  Add.
 
3
x2 - 1 +
x
x2 + 2x + 1 =
31x + 12
1x - 121x + 122 +
x1x - 12
1x - 121x + 122
 = 31x + 12 + x1x - 12
1x - 121x + 122
= 3x + 3 + x2 - x
1x - 121x + 122
 =
x2 + 2x + 3
1x - 121x + 122
Using the LCD to Add and Subtract Rational Expressions
EXAMPLE 7

Section P.5    ■     Rational Expressions        53
b.	 Step 1  The LCD is 4x1x - 122.	
x2 - x = x1x - 12
	
Step 2
x + 2
x2 - x =
x + 2
x1x - 12 =
1x + 22 # 41x - 12
x1x - 12 # 41x - 12 = 41x + 221x - 12
4x1x - 122
	

Multiply  
numerator and 
denominator by 
41x - 12.
3x
41x - 122 =
13x2x
41x - 122x =
3x2
4x1x - 122	
Multiply  
numerator and 
denominator 
by x.
	
Steps 3–4  Subtract.
 x + 2
x2 - x -
3x
41x - 122 =
41x + 221x - 12
4x1x - 122
-
3x2
4x1x - 122 =
41x + 221x - 12 - 3x2
4x1x - 122
 = 4x2 + 4x - 8 - 3x2
4x1x - 122
= x2 + 4x - 8
4x1x - 122
Practice Problem 7  Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answers.
a.	
4
x2 - 4x + 4 +
x
x2 - 4,	
x ≠2, x = -2
b.	
2x
31x - 522 -
6x
21x2 - 5x2,	
x ≠0, x ≠5
Complex Fractions
A rational expression that contains another rational expression in its numerator or denomi-
nator (or both) is called a complex rational expression or complex fraction. To simplify 
a complex fraction, we write it as a rational expression in lowest terms.
There are two effective methods of simplifying complex fractions.
4	
Identify and simplify complex 
fractions.
P r o c e d u r e s  f o r  S i m p l i f y i n g  C o m p l e x  F r a c t i o n s
Method 1  Perform the operations indicated in both the numerator and denominator 
of the complex fraction. Then multiply the resulting numerator by the 
reciprocal of the denominator.
Method 2  Multiply the numerator and the denominator of the complex fraction by 
the LCD of all rational expressions that appear in either the numerator or 
the denominator. Simplify the result.
Simplify 
1
2 + 1
x
x2 - 4
2x
, x ≠0, x ≠2, x ≠-2, using each of the two methods.
Simplifying a Complex Fraction
EXAMPLE 8

54	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Solution
Method 1   
1
2 + 1
x
x2 - 4
2x
=
x + 2
2x
x2 - 4
2x
= x + 2
2x #
2x
x2 - 4 = x + 2
2x #
2x
1x + 221x - 22
 =
1x + 2212x2
12x21x + 221x - 22 =
1
x - 2
Method 2   The LCD of 1
2, 1
x, and x2 - 4
2x
 is 2x.
1
2 + 1
x
x2 - 4
2x
=
a1
2 + 1
x b12x2
ax2 - 4
2x
b12x2
    Multiply numerator and  
denominator by the LCD.
=
1
212x2 + 1
x 12x2
c
1x2 - 42
2x
d 12x2
= x + 2
x2 - 4 =
x + 2
1x - 221x + 22 =
1
x - 2
Practice Problem 8  Simplify: 
5
3x + 1
3
x2 - 25
3x
, x ≠0, x ≠5, x ≠-5
Simplify: 
x
2x -
7
3 - 1
2
, x ≠7
5
Solution
We use Method 1.
Begin with 
7
3 - 1
2
= 7
5
2
= 7 # 2
5 = 14
5 .	
Replace 3 - 1
2 with 5
2.
Then 
x
2x -
7
3 - 1
2
=
x
2x - 14
5
	
Replace 
7
3 - 1
2
 with 14
5 .
=
x
10x - 14
5
= x #
5
10x - 14 =
5x
10x - 14 =
5x
215x - 72.
Practice Problem 9  Simplify: 
5x
3x -
4
2 - 1
3
, x ≠4
5
Simplifying a Complex Fraction
EXAMPLE 9
Reciprocal of the denominator
Reciprocal of the denominator
Reciprocal of the denominator

Section P.5    ■     Rational Expressions        55
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 0.32    2. a. 2x
3   b. x - 2
x + 2    3. 
x1x - 32
14
    4. a. 
7
x - 6 
b. 
1
x + 4    5. a. 
x15x - 42
1x + 221x - 52  b. 
x13x + 232
1x + 321x - 42   
6. a. 3x21x + 2221x - 222  b. 1x - 521x + 521x - 12   
7. a. 
x2 + 2x + 8
1x + 221x - 222  b. 45 - 7x
31x - 522    8. 
1
x - 5   
9. 
25x
15x - 12
Exercises
section P.5
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 The least common denominator for two rational expres-
sions is the polynomial of least degree that contains 
 as a factor.
	2.	 The first step in finding the LCD for two rational expressions 
is to 
 the denominators completely.
	3.	 If the denominators for two rational expressions are x2 - 2x 
and x2 - x - 2, the LCD is 
.
	4.	 A rational expression that contains another rational 
expression in its numerator or denominator is called a(n) 
.
	5.	 True or False. The expression 1
2 + 1
x is called a complex  
fraction. 
	 6.	 True or False. A polynomial is also a rational expression. 
In Exercises 7–22, reduce each rational expression to ­lowest 
terms. Specify the domain of the rational expression by 
identifying all real numbers that must be excluded from the 
domain.
	7.	
2x + 2
x2 + 2x + 1
	8.	
3x - 6
x2 - 4x + 4 
	9.	 3x + 3
x2 - 1 
	10.	 10 - 5x
4 - x2 
	11.	 2x - 6
9 - x2 
	12.	 15 + 3x
x2 - 25 
	13.	 2x - 1
1 - 2x 
	14.	 2 - 5x
5x - 2 
	15.	 x2 - 6x + 9
4x - 12
 
	16.	 x2 - 10x + 25
3x - 15 
	17.	
7x2 + 7x
x2 + 2x + 1
	18.	 4x2 + 12x
x2 + 6x + 9 
	19.	 x2 - 11x + 10
x2 + 6x - 7  
	20.	 x2 + 2x - 15
x2 - 7x + 12 
	21.	 6x4 + 14x3 + 4x2
6x4 - 10x3 - 4x2 
	22.	
3x3 + x2
3x4 - 11x3 - 4x2 
In Exercises 23–40, multiply or divide as indicated. Simplify 
and leave the numerator and denominator in your answer in 
factored form. Assume all denominators are nonzero.
	23.	 x - 3
2x + 4 # 10x + 20
5x - 15 
	24.	 6x + 4
2x - 8 # x - 4
9x + 6 
	25.	 2x + 6
4x - 8 # x2 + x - 6
x2 - 9 
	26.	 25x2 - 9
4 - 2x # 4 - x2
10x - 6 
	27.	
x2 - 7x
x2 - 6x - 7 # x2 - 1
x2 
	28.	
x2 - 9
x2 - 6x + 9 # 5x - 15
x + 3 
	29.	 x2 - x - 6
x2 + 3x + 2 # x2 - 1
x2 - 9 
	30.	 x2 + 2x - 8
x2 + x - 20 #
x2 - 16
x2 + 5x + 4 
	31.	 2 - x
x + 1 # x2 + 3x + 2
x2 - 4 
	32.	 3 - x
x + 5 # x2 + 8x + 15
x2 - 9 
	33.	 x + 2
6
, 4x + 8
9 
	34.	 x + 3
20
, 4x + 12
9 
	35.	 x2 - 9
x
, 2x + 6
5x2 
	36.	 x2 - 1
3x
, 7x - 7
x2 + x 
	37.	 x2 + 2x - 3
x2 + 8x + 16 ,
x - 1
3x + 12 
	38.	 x2 + 5x + 6
x2 + 6x + 9 , x2 + 3x + 2
x2 + 7x + 12 
	39.	 ax2 - 9
x3 + 8 ,
x + 3
x3 + 2x2 - x - 2b
1
x2 - 1 
	40.	 a
x2 - 25
x2 - 3x - 4 , x2 + 3x - 10
x2 - 1
bx - 2
x - 5 
In Exercises 41–58, add and subtract as indicated. Simplify 
and leave the numerator and denominator in your answer  
in factored form.
	41.	 x
5 + 3
5 
	42.	 7
4 - x
4 
	43.	
x
2x + 1 +
4
2x + 1 
	44.	
2x
7x - 3 +
x
7x - 3  

56	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
	45.	
x2
x + 1 - x2 - 1
x + 1 
	46.	 2x + 7
3x + 2 - x - 2
3x + 2 
	47.	
4
3 - x +
2x
x - 3 
	48.	
-2
1 - x + 2 - x
x - 1 
	49.	
5x
x2 + 1 +
2x
x2 + 1 
	50.	
x
21x - 122 +
3x
21x - 122 
	51.	
7x
21x - 32 +
x
21x - 32 
	52.	
4x
41x + 522 +
8x
41x + 522 
	53.	
x
x2 - 4 -
2
x2 - 4 
	54.	
5x
x2 - 1 -
5
x2 - 1 
	55.	 x - 2
2x + 1 -
x
2x - 1
	56.	 2x - 1
4x + 1 -
2x
4x - 1
	57.	
-x
x + 2 + x - 2
x
-
x
x - 2 
	58.	
3x
x - 1 + x + 1
x
-
2x
x + 1 
In Exercises 59–66, find the LCD for each pair of rational 
fractions.
	59.	
5
3x - 6
 , 
2x
4x - 8 
	60.	 5x + 1
7 + 21x
 , 1 - x
3 + 9x 
	61.	 3 - x
4x2 - 1, 
7x
12x + 122 
	62.	
14x
13x - 122, 2x + 7
9x2 - 1 
	63.	
1 - x
x2 + 3x + 2, 3x + 12
x2 - 1 
	64.	
5x + 9
x2 - x - 6, x + 5
x2 - 9 
	65.	
7 - 4x
x2 - 5x + 4, 
x2 - x
x2 + x - 2 
	66.	
13x
x2 - 2x - 3, 
2x2 - 4
x2 + 3x + 2 
In Exercises 67–82, perform the indicated operations and  
simplify the result. Leave the numerator and denominator  
in your answer in factored form.
	67.	
5
x - 3 +
2x
x2 - 9
	68.	
3x
x - 1 +
x
x2 - 1
	69.	
2x
x2 - 4 -
x
x + 2 
	70.	 3x - 1
x2 - 16 - 2x + 1
x - 4 
	71.	
x - 2
x2 + 3x - 10 +
x + 3
x2 + x - 6 
	72.	
x + 3
x2 - x - 2 +
x - 1
x2 + 2x + 1 
	73.	 2x - 3
9x2 - 1 +
4x - 1
13x - 122 
	74.	
3x + 1
12x + 122 +
x + 3
4x2 - 1 
	75.	 x - 3
x2 - 25 -
x - 3
x2 + 9x + 20 
	76.	
2x
x2 - 16 -
2x - 7
x2 - 7x + 12 
	77.	
3
x2 - 4 +
1
2 - x -
1
2 + x 
	78.	
2
5 + x +
5
x2 - 25 +
7
5 - x 
	79.	 x + 3a
x - 5a - x + 5a
x - 3a 
	80.	 3x - a
2x - a - 2x + a
3x + a 
	81.	
1
x + h - 1
x 
	82.	
1
1x + h22 - 1
x2 
In Exercises 83–96, perform the indicated operations and  
simplify the result. Leave the numerator and denominator  
in your answer in factored form.
	83.	
2
x
3
x2 
	84.	
-6
x
2
x3 
	85.	
1
x
1 - 1
x 
	86.	
1
x2
1
x2 - 1 
	87.	
1
x - 1
1
x + 1 
	88.	
2 - 2
x
1 + 2
x 
	89.	
1
x - x
1 - 1
x2
 
	90.	
x - 1
x
1
x2 - 1 
	91.	 x -
x
x + 1
2
 
	92.	 x +
x
x + 1
2 
	93.	
1
x + h - 1
x
h
 
	94.	
1
1x + h22 - 1
x2
h 
	95.	
1
x - a +
1
x + a
1
x - a -
1
x + a
 
	96.	
1
x - a +
1
x + a
x
x - a -
a
x + a 
Applying the Concepts
	97.	 Bearing length. The length (in centimeters) of a bearing 
	
	 in the shape of a cylinder is given by 125.6
pr2 , where r is the 
	
	 radius of the base of the cylinder. Find the length of a bearing 
with a diameter of 4 centimeters, using 3.14 as an approxima-
tion of p. 
	98.	 Toy box height. The height (in feet) of an open toy box 
	
	 that is twice as long as it is wide is given by 13.5 - 2x2
6x
, 
	
	 where x is the width of the box. Find the height of a toy box 
that is 1.5 feet wide.         

Section P.5    ■     Rational Expressions        57
	 99.	 Diluting a mixture. A 100-gallon mixture of citrus extract 
and water is 3% citrus extract.
a.	 Write a rational expression in x whose values give the 
percentage (in decimal form) of the mixture that is citrus 
extract when x gallons of water are added to the mixture.
b.	 Find the percentage of citrus extract in the mixture  
assuming that 50 gallons of water are added to it. 
	100.	 Acidity in a reservoir.  A half-full 400,000-gallon  
reservoir is found to be 0.75% acid.
a.	 Write a rational expression in x whose values give the 
percentage (in decimal form) of acid in the reservoir 
when x gallons of water are added to it.
b.	 Find the percentage of acid in the reservoir assuming that 
100,000 gallons of water are added to it. 
	101.	 Diet lemonade.  A company packages its powdered diet 
lemonade mix in containers in the shape of a cylinder. The 
top and bottom are made of a tin product that costs 5 cents 
per square inch. The side of the container is made of a 
cheaper material that costs 1 cent per square inch. The height 
of any cylinder can be found by dividing its volume by the 
area of its base.
a.	 Assuming that x is the radius of the base (in inches), 
write a rational expression in x whose values give the 
cost of each container, assuming that the capacity of the 
container is 120 cubic inches.
b.	 Find the cost of a container whose base is 4 inches in 
diameter, using 3.14 as an approximation of p. 
	102.	 Storage containers. A company makes storage containers  
in the shape of an open box with a square base. All five 
sides of the box are made of a plastic that costs 40 cents per 
square foot. The height of any box can be found by dividing 
its volume by the area of its base.
a.	 Assuming that x is the length of the base (in feet), write 
a rational expression in x whose values give the cost of 
each container, assuming that the capacity of the con-
tainer is 2.25 cubic feet.
b.	 Find the cost of a container whose base is 1.5 feet long. 
Volume  120 cubic inches
x 
 

P.6
Square Roots
When we raise the number 5 to the power 2, we write 52 = 25. The reverse of this squaring 
process is called finding a square root. In the case of 25, we say that 5 is a square root of 
25 and write 125 = 5. In general, we say that b is a square root of a if b2 = a. We can’t 
call 5 the square root of 25 because it is also true that 1-522 = 25, so that -5 is another 
square root of 25.
The symbol 1  , called a radical sign, is used to distinguish between 5 and -5, the 
two square roots of 25. We write 5 = 125 and -5 = - 125 and call 125 the principal 
square root of 25.
P r i n c i pa l  S q u a r e  R o o t
1a = b means  (1) b2 = a  and  (2) b Ú 0.
Friction and Tap-Water Flow
Suppose your water company had a large reservoir or water tower 80 meters or more 
above the level of your cold-water faucet. If there was no friction in the pipes and 
you turned on your faucet, the water would come pouring out of the faucet at nearly 
90 miles per hour! This fact follows from a result known as Bernoulli’s equation, which 
predicts the velocity of the water (ignoring friction and related turbulence) in this 
­situation to be equal to 12gh, where g is the acceleration due to gravity and h is the 
height of the water level above a hole from which the water escapes.
In Example 3, we use Bernoulli’s equation to find the velocity of water.
Rational Exponents and Radicals
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Absolute value (Section P.1, page 8)
2	 Integer exponents (Section P.2, page 18)
3	 Special-product formulas (Section P.3,  
pages 34 and 35)
4	 Properties of fractions (Section P.1,  
page 12)
Objectives
1	 Define and evaluate square roots.
2	 Simplify square roots.
3	 Define and evaluate nth roots.
4	 Combine like radicals.
5	 Rationalize denominators or numerators.
6	 Define and evaluate rational exponents.
S e c t i o n 
1	
Define and evaluate square 
roots.
58	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra

Section P.6    ■     Rational Exponents and Radicals        59
If 1a = b, then a = b2 Ú 0. Consequently, the symbol 1a denotes a real number 
only when a Ú 0. The number or expression under the radical sign is called the radicand, 
and the radicand together with the radical sign is called a radical.
According to the definition of the square root, two tests the number b must pass two 
tests for the statement 1a = b to be correct: (1) b2 = a and (2) b Ú 0. These tests are 
used to decide whether the statements below are true or false.
Statement  
!a = b
Test (1)  
b2 = a?
Test (2)  
b # 0?
Conclusion  
True when b passes  
both tests
14 = 2
22 = 4  ✓
2 Ú 0   ✓
True; 2 passed both tests.
14 = -2
1-222 = 4  ✓
-2 Ú 0 ✗
False; -2 failed Test (2).
21
9 = 1
3
11
322 = 1
9  ✓
1
3 Ú 0  ✓
True; 1
3 passed both tests.
272 = 7
72 = 72  ✓
7 Ú 0  ✓
True; 7 passed both tests.
21-722 = -7
1-722 = 1-722  ✓
-7 Ú 0  ✗
False; -7 failed Test (2).
The last example 1letting x represent-72 shows that 2x2 is not always equal to x. 
Now apply Test (1) and Test (2) to the statement 2x2 = 0 x0 , where x represents any real 
number.
Statement 	
Test (1)	
Test (2)	
Conclusion 
2x2 = 0 x0  	
0 x0 2 = x2  ✓	
0 x0 Ú 0  ✓	
True; 0 x0  passed both tests.
For any real number x,
2x2 =  x .
If 1x = b, then by Test (1), b2 = x and by Test (2), b is nonnegative. Replacing b 
with 1x in the equation b2 = x yields the following result.
For any nonnegative real number x,
11x22 = x. 
The square root symbol on a 
graphing calculator does not 
have a horizontal bar that goes 
completely over the number or 
expression whose square root is 
to be evaluated. You must enclose 
a rational number in parentheses 
before taking its square root 
and then use the “Frac” feature 
to have the answer appear as a 
fraction. 
Technology 
Connection
Find.  a.  2121	
b.  A
25
81	
c.  A
16
169
Solution
Write each radicand as a perfect square.
a.	 2121 = 2112 = 11	
b.  A
25
81 = B
52
92 = Ba5
9b
2
= 5
9
c.	 A
16
169 = B
42
132 = Ba 4
13b
2
= 4
13
Finding the Square Roots of Perfect Squares and Their Ratios
EXAMPLE 1
Radical
1a
Radical sign
Radicand

60	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Practice Problem 1  Find.
a.  1144        b.  A
1
49        c.  A
4
64
Simplifying Square Roots
When working with square roots, we can simplify a radical expression by removing from 
under the radical sign perfect squares that are factors of the radicand. For example, to 
­simplify 18, we write 18 = 14 # 2 = 1412 = 212 . We rely on the following rules.
P r o d u c t  a n d  Q u o t i e n t  P r o p e r t i e s  o f  S q u a r e  R o o t s
 1ab = 1a 1b  a Ú 0, b Ú 0
 A
a
b = 1a
1b   a Ú 0, b 7 0
2	
Simplify square roots.
Simplify: a.  1117	
b.  16 112	
c.  248x2
d.	 136
13 	
e.  B
25y3
9x2 , x ≠0, y Ú 0
Solution
a.	 1117 = 19 # 13 = 19113 = 3113
b.	 16112 = 16 # 12 = 16 # 6 # 2 = 262 # 2 = 26212 = 612
c.	 248x2 = 1482x2 = 116 # 3 2x2 = 116 132x2 = 4130 x0
d.	 136
13 = A
36
3 = 112 = 24 # 3 = 1413 = 213
e.	 B
25y3
9x2 = 225y3
29x2 = 225 # y2 # y
29 # x2
= 125 2y21y
192x2
=
50 y0 1y
30 x0
	 x ≠0, y Ú 0
	
	
= 5y1y
30 x0  	
0 y = y
Practice Problem 2  Simplify. 
a.  120        b.  1618        c.  212x2        d.  B
20y3
27x2, x ≠0, y Ú 0
Simplifying Square Roots
EXAMPLE 2
It is important to note that 1a + b ≠1a + 1b. For example, with a = 1 and b = 4, 
11 + 4 ≠11 + 14  because 11 + 4 = 15 , whereas 11 + 14 = 1 + 2 = 3 and 
15 ≠3. Similarly, 1a - b ≠1a - 1b .
Warning
From the introduction to this section, verify the claim that the water would come pouring 
out of the faucet at nearly 90 miles per hour.
Calculating Water Flow from a Punctured Water Tower
EXAMPLE 3

Section P.6    ■     Rational Exponents and Radicals        61
T h e  P r i n c i pa l  n t h  R o o t  o f  a  R e a l  N u m b e r
1.	 If a is positive 1a 7 02, then 2
n a = b provided that bn = a and b 7 0.
2.	 If a is negative 1a 6 02 and n is odd, then 2
n a = b provided that bn = a.
3.	 If a is negative 1a 6 02 and n is even, then 2
n a is not a real number. 
4.	 If a = 0, then 2
n a = 0.
Solution
We can use Bernoulli’s equation to find the velocity of the water from the faucet. If we 
ignore friction, the velocity of water will be 12gh, where g is the acceleration due to grav-
ity and h is the height of the water level above the faucet.
We replace h with 80 meters and roughly approximate g by 10 meters per second per 
second 1g ≈10 m>s22 in the expression 12gh.
Thus, the velocity of the water is 
 = 12gh
 ≈22110 m>s22180 m2 = 21600 m2>s2 = 40 meters per second
 = 40 * 60 * 60 meters per hour    60 * 60 seconds each hour
 = 144 * 1000 meters per hour
 ≈144 * 0.6214 mph	
1000 m ≈0.6214 miles
 = 89.4816 mph
 ≈90 miles per hour
Practice Problem 3  Repeat Example 3 if the water tower is 45 meters high.
Other Roots
If n is a positive integer, we say that b is an nth root of a if bn = a. We next define the 
principal nth root of a real number a, denoted by the symbol 2
n a.
3	
Define and evaluate nth roots.
Find each root.  a.  2
3 27    b.  2
3 -64    c.  2
4 16    d.  2
4 1-324    e.  2
8 -46
Solution
a.	 The radicand, 27, is positive; so 2
3 27 = 3 because 33 = 27 and 3 7 0.
b.	 The radicand, -64, is negative and 3 is odd; so 2
3 -64 = -4 because 1-423 = -64.
c.	 The radicand, 16, is positive; so 2
4 16 = 2 because 24 = 16 and 2 7 0.
d.	 The radicand, 1-324, is positive; so 2
4 1-324 = 3 because 34 = 1-324 and 3 7 0.
e.	 The radicand, -46, is negative and the index, 8, is even; so 2
8 -46 is not a real number.
Practice Problem 4  Find each root.
a.  2
3 -8    b.  2
5 32    c.  2
4 81    d.  2
6 -4
Finding Principal nth Roots
EXAMPLE 4
The fact that the definition of the principal nth root depends on whether n is even or odd 
results in two rules to replace the square root rule 2x2 = 0 x0 .
We use the same vocabulary for nth roots that we used for square roots. That is, 2
n a is 
called a radical expression, 1  is the radical sign, and a is the radicand. The positive 
integer n is called the index. The index 2 is not written; we write 1a rather than 2
2 a for 
the principal square root of a. It is also common practice to call 2
3 a the cube root of a.

62	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
S i m p l i f y i n g  2
n an
If n is odd, then 2
n an = a.
If n is even, then 2
n an = 0 a0 . 
Like Radicals
Radicals that have the same index and the same radicand are called like radicals. Like radicals 
can be combined with the use of the distributive property.
4	
Combine like radicals.
Simplify.  a.  2
3 135        b.  2
4 162a4
Solution
a.	 We find a factor of 135 that is a perfect cube. Here 135 = 27 # 5 and 27 is a perfect 
cube 133 = 272. Then
2
3 135 = 2
3 27 # 5 = 2
3 272
3 5 = 32
3 5.
b.	 We find a factor of 162 that is a perfect fourth power. Here 162 = 81 # 2 and 81 is a 
perfect fourth power: 34 = 81. Thus,
2
4 162a4 = 2
4 1622
4 a4 = 2
4 81 # 20 a0 = 2
4 812
4 20 a0 = 32
4 20 a0 .
Practice Problem 5  Simplify.
a.  2
3 72        b.  2
4 48a2
Simplifying nth Roots
EXAMPLE 5
Simplify:  a.  145 + 7120        b.  52
3 80x - 32
3 270x
Solution
a.	 We find perfect-square factors for both 45 and 20.
 145 + 7120 = 19 # 5 + 714 # 5	
45 = 9.5; 20 = 4.5
 = 1915 + 71415	
Product rule
 = 315 + 7 # 215	
19 = 3; 14 = 2
 = 315 + 1415	
Like radicals
 = 13 + 14215
	
Distributive property
 = 1715
Adding and Subtracting Radical Expressions
EXAMPLE 6
The product and quotient rules for square roots can be extended to apply to nth roots as well.
P r o d u c t  a n d  Q u o t i e n t  R u l e s  F o r  n t h  R o o t s
If a and b are real numbers and all indicated roots are defined, then 
2
n ab = 2
n a # 2
n b 
and	
A
n a
b = 2
n a
2
n b
.

Section P.6    ■     Rational Exponents and Radicals        63
b.	 This time we find perfect-cube factors for both 80 and 270.
 52
3 80x - 32
3 270x = 52
3 8 # 10x - 32
3 27 # 10x	
80 = 8.10; 270 = 27.10
 = 52
3 8 # 2
3 10x - 32
3 27 # 2
3 10x	
Product rule
 = 5 # 2 # 2
3 10x - 3 # 32
3 10x	
2
3 8 = 2; 2
3 27 = 3
 = 102
3 10x - 92
3 10x	
Like radicals
 = 110 - 922
3 10x	
Distributive property
 = 2
3 10x
Practice Problem 6  Simplify.
a.	 3112 + 713        b.  22
3 135x - 32
3 40x
2
n a + 2
n b cannot be added if a ≠b.
2
n a + 2
n a = 22
n a
2
n a + 2
m a cannot be added if n ≠m.
Radicals with Different Indexes
Suppose a is a positive real number and m, n, and r are positive integers. Then the property
2
n am = 2a
nr    mr
is used to multiply radicals with different indexes.
EXAMPLE 7	
Multiplying Radicals with Different Indexes
Write 222
3 5 as a single radical.
Solution
Because 12 can also be written as 2
2 2, we have
12 = 2
2 2 = 22
2#3    3 = 2
6 23,
and similarly,
2
3 5 = 25
2#3    2 = 2
6 52.
So
222
3 5 = 2
6 232
6 52 = 2
6 2352 = 2
6 200.
Practice Problem 7  Write 232
5 2 as a single radical.
Rationalizing Radical Expressions
Removing radicals in the denominator or the numerator is called rationalizing the denomi-
nator or rationalizing the numerator, respectively. The procedure for rationalizing involves 
multiplying the fraction by 1, written in a special way, so as to obtain a perfect nth power.
Warning
5	
Rationalize denominators  
or numerators.
Rationalize each denominator.
a.	 25
22
        b.  2
3 4
2
3 9
Rationalizing the Denominator
EXAMPLE 8

64	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Solution
a.	 25
22
= 25
22
# 22
22
= 210
24
= 210
2
b.	 2
3 4
2
3 9
= 2
3 4
2
3 9
# 2
3 3
2
3 3
= 2
3 12
2
3 27
= 2
3 12
3
Practice Problem 8  Rationalize each denominator.
a. 
7
28
        b.  2
3 3
2
3 4
Conjugates
Pairs of expressions of the form a2x + b2y and a2x - b2y are called conjugates. 
We form the product of these two conjugates.
1a2x + b2y21a2x - b2y2 = 1a2x22 - 1b2y22  Difference of two squares
= a2x - b2y	
1ab22 = a2b2; 12r22 = r
We see that the product contains no radicals. So the product of conjugates can be used to 
rationalize the denominator or the numerator.
Rationalize each numerator.
a.	 25 - 22
4
        b.  2x + 23
x2 - 9
Solution
a.	  25 - 22
4
= 25 - 22
4
# 25 + 22
25 + 22
 = 12522 - 12222
4125 + 222
   
1a - b21a + b2 = a2 - b2
 =
5 - 2
4125 + 222
=
3
4125 + 222
b.	 2x + 23
x2 - 9
= 2x + 23
x2 - 9
# 2x - 23
2x - 23
=
x - 3
1x2 - 9212x - 232
   
12x + 23212x - 232 = x - 3
=
x - 3
1x - 321x + 3212x - 232
  Factor: x2 - 9 = 1x - 321x + 32.
=
1
1x + 3212x - 232
    Remove common factor.
Practice Problem 9  Rationalize each denominator.
a.	
2
27 - 25
        b. 
x - 2
2x + 22
Rationalizing the Numerator
EXAMPLE 9

Section P.6    ■     Rational Exponents and Radicals        65
Rational Exponents
Previously, we defined such exponential expressions as 23, but what do you think 21>3 
means? If we want to preserve the power rule of exponents, 1an2m = an m, for rational 
exponents such as 1
3, we must have 
121>323 = 21>3 # 3 = 21 = 2.
Because 121>323 = 2, it follows that 21>3 is the cube root of 2, that is, 21>3 = 2
3 2 . 
Such considerations lead to the following definition.
6	
Define and evaluate rational 
exponents.
T h e  E x p o n e n t  1
n
For any real number a and any integer n 7 1,
a1>n = 2
n a .
When n is even and a 6 0, 2
n a and a1>n are not real numbers. 
Notice that the denominator n of the rational exponent is the index of the radical.
Evaluate:  a.  161>2    b.  1-2721>3    c.  a 1
16b
1>4
    d.  321>5    e.  1-521>4
Solution
a.	 161>2 = 116 = 4
b.	 1-2721>3 = 2
3 -27 = 2
3 1-323 = -3
c.	 a 1
16b
1>4
= A
4 1
16 = A
4 a1
2b
4
= 1
2
d.	 321>5 = 2
5 32 = 2
5 25 = 2
e.	 Because the base -5 is negative and n = 4 is even, 1-521>4 is not a real number.
Practice Problem 10  Evaluate.
a.	 a1
4b
1>2
        b.  112521>3        c.  1-3221>5
Evaluating Expressions with Rational Exponents
EXAMPLE 10
The box below shows a summary of our work.
t h e  E x p o n e n t  1
n  a n d  R a d i c a l s
If a is any real number and n is any integer greater than 1, then
n even
n odd
If a 7 0,
2
n a = a1>n is positive.
2
n a = a1>n is positive.
If a 6 0,
2
n a = a1>n is not a real number.
2
n a = a1>n is negative.
If a = 0,
2
n 0 = 01>n = 0.
2
n 0 = 01>n = 0.

66	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
We have defined the expression a1>n. How do we define am>n, where m and n are integers? 
If we insist that the power-of-a-product rule of exponents holds for rational numbers, 
then we must have
am>n = a1>n # m = 1a1>n2m = 12
n a2m
and
am>n = am # 1>n = 1am21>n = 2
n am .
From this, we arrive at the following definition.
R at i o n a l  E x p o n e n t s
am>n = 12
n a2m = 2
n am,
provided that m and n are integers with no common factors, n 7 1, and 2
n a is a real 
number. 
Note that for am>n the numerator m of the exponent m
n  is the exponent of the radical expression 
and the denominator n is the index of the radical in 12
n a2m. When n is even and a 6 0, the 
symbol am>n is not a real number.
When rational exponents with negative denominators such as 3
-5 and -2
-7  are encountered, 
we use equivalent expressions such as -3
5  and 2
7, respectively, before applying the definition. 
Similarly, we reduce the exponent m
n  to its lowest terms before applying the definition. 
Note that 1-822>6 ≠31-821>642 because 1-821>6 = 2
6 -8 is not a real number but 
1-822>6 is a real number. Writing 2
6 = 1
3, we have
1-822>6 = 1-821>3 = 2
3 -8 = -2.
Evaluate:  a.  82>3        b.  -165>2        c.  100-3>2         d.  1-2527>2
Solution
a.	 82>3 = 12
3 822 = 22 = 4
b.	 -165>2 = -111625 = -45 = -1024
c.	 100- 3/2 = 11001>22-3 = 111002-3 =
1
1110023 =
1
103 =
1
1000 
d.	 1-2527>2 = 31-2521>247 	
Not a real number
= 11-2527 	
because 2-25 is not a real number
Practice Problem 11  Evaluate.
a.	 12522>3        b.  -363>2        c.  16- 5>2        d.  1-362- 1>2
Evaluating Expressions Having Rational Exponents
EXAMPLE 11

Section P.6    ■     Rational Exponents and Radicals        67
All of the properties of exponents we learned for integer exponents hold true for rational 
exponents. For convenience, we list these properties next.
P r o p e r t i e s  o f  R at i o n a l  E x p o n e n t s
If r and s are rational numbers and a and b are real numbers, then
ar # as = ar+s  1ar2s = ars  1ab2r = arbr
ar
as = ar-s  aa
bb
r
= ar
br  a-r = 1
ar  aa
bb
-r
= ab
ab
r
provided that all of the expressions used are defined. 
Simplify. Express the answer with only positive exponents. Assume that x represents a 
positive real number.
a.	 2x1>3 # 5x1>4        b.  21x -2>3
7x1>5         c.  1x3>52-1>6
Solution
a.	 2x1>3 # 5x1>4 = 2 # 5x1>3 # x1>4            Group factors with the same base.
= 10x1>3 + 1>4                Add exponents of factors with the  
	
same base.
= 10x4>12  + 3>12 = 10x7>12
b.	 21x -2>3
7x1>5
= a21
7 bax -2>3
x1>5 b     Group factors with the same base.
= 3x -2>3 - 1>5 = 3x -10>15 - 3>15 = 3x -13>15 = 3 # ¢
1
x13>15 ≤=
3
x13>15 
c.	 1x 3>52-1>6 = x 13>521-1>62 = x -1>10 =
1
x1>10 
Practice Problem 12  Simplify. Express your answer with only positive exponents.
a.	 4x1>2 # 3x1>5        b.  25x -1>4
5x1>3 , x 7 0        c.  1x2>32-1>5, x ≠0
Simplifying Expressions Having Rational Exponents
EXAMPLE 12
Assume that x represents a positive real number. Simplify.
a.	 2
8 x2        b.  2
4 923        c.  32
3 x8
Solution
a.	 2
8 x2 = 1x221>8 = x2>8 = x1>4 = 2
4 x
b.	 2
4 923 = 91>4 # 31>2 = 13221>4 # 31>2 = 32>4 # 31>2 = 31>2 # 31>2 = 31>2+1>2 = 31 = 3
c.	 32
3 x8 = 31x821>3 = 3x8>3 = 1x8>321>2 = x8>3#1>2 = x4>3 =
	
x1+1>3 = x1 # x1>3 = x 2
3 x
Practice Problem 13  Simplify.
a.	 2
6 x4        b.  2
4 2525        c.  32
3 x12
Simplifying Radicals by Using Rational Exponents
EXAMPLE 13

68	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Simplify x1x + 12-1>2 + 21x + 121>2. Express the answer with only positive exponents 
and then rationalize the denominator. Assume that 1x + 12-1>2 is defined.
Solution
x1x + 12-1>2 + 21x + 121>2 =
x
1x + 121>2 +
21x + 121>2
1
	
1x + 12-1>2 =
1
1x + 121>2
=
x
1x + 121>2 +
21x + 121>21x + 121>2
1x + 121>2
= x + 21x + 12
1x + 121>2
=
3x + 2
1x + 121>2 
1x + 121>2 1x + 121>2 
	
= x + 1
To rationalize the denominator 1x + 121>2 = 1x + 1, multiply both numerator 
and denominator by 1x + 121>2.
3x + 2
1x + 121>2 = 13x + 221x + 121>2
1x + 121>21x + 121>2
= 13x + 221x + 121>2
x + 1
   
1x + 121>21x + 121>2 = x + 1
Practice Problem 14  Simplify x1x + 32-1>2 + 1x + 321>2.
Simplifying an Expression Involving Negative Rational 
Exponents
EXAMPLE 14
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 12  b. 1
7  c. 1
4    2. a. 215  b. 413  c. 20 x0 13
d. 2y15y
3130 x0     3. ≈67 mph    4. a. -2  b. 2  c. 3 
d. Not a real number    5. a. 22
3 9  b. 22
4 3a2  c. a2   
6. a. 1313  b. 0    7. 2
10 972    8. a. 722
4
  b. 2
3 6
2
 
9. a. 27 + 25  b. 2x - 22    10. a. 1
2  b. 5  c. -2
11. a. 52
3 5  b. -216  c. 
1
1024  d. Not a real number
12. a. 12x7>10  b. 5
x7>12  c. 1
x2>15    13. a. 2
3 x2  b. 5   c. x2
14. 
12x + 321x + 321>2
x + 3
Exercises
section P.6
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 Any positive number has 
 square roots.
	2.	 To rationalize the denominator of an expression with 
denominator 215, multiply the 
 and 
 by 
.
	3.	 Radicals that have the same index and the same radicand are 
called 
.
	4.	 The radical notation for 71>3 is 
.
	5.	 True or False. For all real x, 2x2 = x. 
	6.	 True or False. The radicals -315 and 1215 are “like 
­radicals.” 
In Exercises 7–22, evaluate each root or state that the root is 
not a real number.
	 7.	 164 
	 8.	 1100 
	 9.	 2
3 64 
	10.	 2
3 125 
	11.	 2
3 -27 
	12.	 2
3 -216 
	13.	 A
3 - 1
8 
	14.	 A
3  27
64 
	15.	 21-322 
	16.	 - 241-322 
	17.	 2
4 -16 
	18.	 2
6 -64 
	19.	 - 2
5 -1 
	20.	 2
7 -1 
	21.	 2
5 1-725 
	22.	 - 2
5 1-425 

Section P.6    ■     Rational Exponents and Radicals        69
In Exercises 23–46, simplify each expression using the 
­product and quotient properties for square roots. Assume  
that x represents a positive real number.
	23.	 132 
	24.	 1125 
	25.	 218x2 
	26.	 227x2 
	27.	 29x3 
	28.	 28x3 
	29.	 16x13x 
	30.	 15x110x 
	31.	 215x23x2 
	32.	 22x2218x 
	33.	 2
3 -8x3 
	34.	 2
3 64x3 
	35.	 2
3 -x6 
	36.	 2
3 -27x6 
	37.	 A
5
32 
	38.	 A
3
50 
	39.	 A
3  8
x3 
	40.	 A
3  7
8x3 
	41.	 A
4  2
x5 
	42.	 - A
4  5
16x5 
	43.	 32x8 
	44.	 B
4x4
25y6 
	45.	 B
9x6
y4 
	46.	 2
5 x15y5 
In Exercises 47–60, simplify each expression. Assume that all 
variables represent nonnegative real numbers.
	47.	 213 + 513 
	48.	 712 - 12 
	49.	 615 - 15 + 415 
	50.	 517 + 317 - 217 
	51.	 198x - 132x 
	52.	 145x + 120x 
	53.	 2
3 24 - 2
3 81 
	54.	 2
3 54 + 2
3 16 
	55.	 2
3 3x - 22
3 24x + 2
3 375x 
	56.	 2
3 16x + 32
3 54x - 2
3 2x 
	57.	 22x5 - 5132x + 218x3 
	58.	 2250x5 + 722x3 - 3172x 
	59.	 248x5y - 4y23x3y + y23xy3 
	60.	 x18xy + 422xy3 - 218x5y 
In Exercises 61–74, rationalize the denominator of each 
expression.
	61.	 2
13 
	62.	 10
15 
	63.	
7
115 
	64.	 -3
18 
	65.	
1
12 + x 
	66.	
1
15 + 2x 
	67.	
3
2 - 13 
	68.	
-5
1 - 12 
	69.	
1
13 + 12 
	70.	
6
15 - 13 
	71.	 15 - 12
15 + 12 
	72.	 17 + 13
17 - 13 
	 73.	 1x + h - 1x
1x + h + 1x 
	 74.	 a1x + 3
a1x - 3 
In Exercises 75–82, rationalize the numerator of each 
­expression.
	 75.	 14 + h - 2
h
 
	 76.	 1y + 9 - 3
y
 
	 77.	 2 - 14 - x
x
 
	 78.	 1x + 2 - 12
x 
	 79.	 1x - 2
x - 4  
	 80.	 1x - 15
x2 - 25 
	 81.	 2x2 + 4x - x
2 
	 82.	 2x2 + 2x + 3 - 2x2 + 3
2 
In Exercises 83–92, evaluate each expression without using  
a calculator.
	 83.	 251>2 
	 84.	 1441>2 
	 85.	 1-821>3 
	 86.	 1-2721>3 
	 87.	 82>3 
	 88.	 163>2 
	 89.	 -25-3>2 
	 90.	 -9-3>2 
	 91.	 a 9
25b
-3>2 
	 92.	 a 1
27b
-2>3 
In Exercises 93–104, simplify each expression, leaving your 
answer with only positive exponents. Assume that all ­variables 
represent positive numbers.
	 93.	 x1>2 # x2>5 
	 94.	 x3>5 # 5x2>3 
	 95.	 x3>5 # x -1>2 
	 96.	 x5>3 # x -3>4 
	 97.	 18x622>3 
	 98.	 116x321>2 
	 99.	 127x6y32-2>3 
	100.	 116x4y62-3>2 
	101.	 15x3>2
3x1>4 
	102.	 20x5>2
4x2>3 
	103.	 ax -1>4
y-2>3 b
-12 
	104.	 a27x -5>2
y-3
b
-1>3 
In Exercises 105–114, convert each radical expression to its 
rational exponent form and then simplify. Assume that all 
variables represent positive numbers.
	105.	 2
4 32 
	106.	 2
4 52 
	107.	 2
3 x9 
	108.	 2
3 x12 
	109.	 2
3 x6y9 
	110.	 2
3 8x3y12 
	111.	 2
4 913 
	112.	 2
4 4917 
	113.	 32
3 x10 
	114.	 32
3 64x6 

70	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
In Exercises 115–122, convert the given product to a single 
radical. Assume that all variables represent positive numbers.
	115.	 2
3 2 # 2
5 3 
	116.	 2
3 3 # 2
4 2 
	117.	 2
3 x2 # 2
4 x3 
	118.	 2
5 x2 # 2
7 x5 
	119.	 2
9 2m2n # 2
3 5m5n2
	120.	 23xy # 2
3 9x2y2
	121.	 2
5 x4y3 # 2
6 x3y5
	122.	 2
5 3a4b2 # 2
6 7a2b6
In Exercises 123–128, factor each expression. Use only 
­positive exponents in your answer.
	123.	 4
3 x1>312x - 32 + 2x4>3 
	124.	 4
3 x1>317x + 12 + 7x4>3 
	125.	 413x + 121>312x - 12 + 213x + 124>3 
	126.	 413x - 121>31x + 22 + 13x - 124>3 
	127.	 3x1x2 + 121>212x2 - x2 + 21x2 + 123>214x - 12
	128.	 3x1x2 + 221>21x2 - 2x2 + 1x2 + 223>212x - 22
	129.	 Show that 
1
3 - 18 -
1
18 - 17 +
1
17 - 16 -
	
	
1
16 - 15 +
1
15 - 2 = 5.
	130.	 Show that 
1
1 + 12 +
1
12 + 13 +
1
13 + 14 +
	
	
1
14 + 15 +
1
15 + 16 +
1
16 + 17 +
1
17 + 18 +
	
	
1
18 + 19 = 2.
	131.	 Let x = 2 + 13. Show that
a.	 x + 1
x = 4.	
b.  x2 + 1
x2 = 14.
	132.	 Let x = 3 - 212. Show that x2 + 1
x2 = 34.
Applying the Concepts
	133.	 Sign dimensions. A sign in the shape of an equilateral 
	
	 triangle of area A has sides of lengthA
4A
13 centimeters. 
	
	 Find the length of a side assuming that the sign has an 
area of 692 square centimeters. 1Use the approximation 
13 ≈1.73.2 
	134.	 Return on investment. For an initial investment of  
P dollars to mature to S dollars after two years when the 
interest is compounded annually, an annual ­interest rate 
	
	 of r = A
S
P - 1 is required. Find r assuming that 
	
	 P = +1,210,000 and S = +1,411,344. 
	135.	 Terminal speed. The terminal speed V of a steel ball that 
weighs w grams and is falling in a cylinder of oil is given 
	
	 by the equation V = A
w
1.5 centimeters per second. Find the 
	
	 terminal speed of a steel ball weighing 6 grams. 
 
	136.	 Model airplane speed. A spring balance scale attached  
to a wire that holds a model airplane on a circular path  
indicates the force F on the wire. The speed of the plane V, 
in m>sec, is given by V = 11rF2>m, where m is the mass 
of the plane (in kilograms) and r is the length of the wire (in 
meters). What is the top speed of a 2-kilogram plane on an 
18-meter wire if the force on the wire at top speed is  
49 newtons? 		
	137.	 Electronic game current. The current I (in amperes) in a 
circuit for an electronic game using W watts and having a 
	
	 resistance of R ohms is given by I = A
W
R . Find the current 
	
	 in a game circuit using 1058 watts and having a resistance 
of 2 ohms. 
	138.	 Radius of the moon. The radius of a sphere having ­
	
	 volume V is given by r = a3V
4pb
1>3
. Assuming that we 
	
	 treat the moon as a sphere and are told that its volume is 
2.19 * 1019 cubic meters, find its radius. Use 3.14 as an 
approximation for p. 
	139.	 Atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure P, 
­measured in pounds per square inch, at an altitude of h miles 
1h 6 502 is given by the equation P = 14.710.52h>3.25. 
Compute the atmospheric pressure at an altitude of  
16.25 miles. 
	140.	 Force from constrained water. The force F that is 
exerted on the semicircular end of a trough full of water is 
approximately F = 42r3>2 pounds, where r is the radius of 
the semicircular end. Find the force assuming that the radius 
is 3 feet.       

Summary        71
P.1	 The Real Numbers and Their Properties
i.	
Classifying numbers.
	
Natural numbers 	
1, 2, 3, c
	
Whole numbers 	
0, 1, 2, 3, c
	
Integers 	
c, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, c
	
Rational numbers 	
Numbers that can be expressed as the 
	
	
quotient a
b of two integers, where 
	
	
b ≠0; a terminating or repeating 
decimal
	
Irrational numbers	
Decimals that neither terminate nor 
repeat
	
Real numbers	
All of the rational and irrational numbers
ii.	
Coordinate line. Real numbers can be associated with 
a geometric line called a number line or coordinate line. 
Numbers associated with points to the right (left) of zero are 
called positive (negative) numbers.
iii.	 Ordering numbers. a 6 b means that b = a + c for some 
positive number c.
	
Trichotomy property. For two numbers a and b, exactly one 
of the following is true: a 6 b, a = b, or a 7 b.
	
Transitive property. If a 6 b and b 6 c, then a 6 c.
iv.	
Absolute value.
0 a0 = a if a Ú 0,  and 0 a0 = -a if a 6 0.
	
The distance between points a and b on a number line is 
0 a - b0 .
v.	
Algebraic properties.
	
Commutative 	 a + b = b + a,      ab = ba 
	
Associative 	
1a + b2 + c = a + 1b + c2 
	
	
1ab2c = a1bc2 
	
Distributive 	
a # 1b + c2 = a # b + a # c 
	
	
1a + b2 # c = a # c + b # c 
	
Identity 	
a + 0 = 0 + a = a,  a # 1 = 1 # a = a
	
Inverse 	
a + 1-a2 = 0, 	
a # 1
a = 1, 
	
properties 
	
	
where a ≠0 
	
Zero-product properties  0 # a = 0 = a # 0
	
	
If a # b = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0.
P.2	 Integer Exponents and Scientific 
Notation
i.	
If n is a positive integer, then
an = a # a ga
n factors
a0 = 1
a-n = 1
an
s a ≠0
ii.	
Rules of exponents. Denominators and exponents attached 
to a base of zero are assumed not to be zero.
	
	 Product Rule 	
am # an = am+n
	
	 Quotient Rule 	
am
an = am-n 
	
	 Power-of-a-power Rule 	
1am2n = amn 
	
	 Power-of-a-Product Rule	
1a # b2n = an # bn 
	
	 Power-of-a-Quotient Rules	
aa
bb
n
= an
bn 
	
	
aa
bb
-n
= ab
ab
n
= bn
an 
P.3	 Polynomials
	
An algebraic expression of the form
an
 xn + an-1
 xn-1
 + g + a2x2
 + a1x + a0
 ,
	
where n is a nonnegative integer, is a polynomial in x. If 
an ≠0, then n is called the degree of the polynomial. The 
term anxn is the leading term, and a0 is the constant term.
P.4	 Factoring Polynomials
	
Factoring formulas:
A2 - B2 = 1A - B21A + B2
A2 + 2AB + B2 = 1A + B22
A2 - 2AB + B2 = 1A - B22
A3 - B3 = 1A - B21A2 + AB + B22
A3 + B3 = 1A + B21A2 - AB + B22
P.5	 Rational Expressions
	
The quotient of two polynomials is called a rational ­expression.
i.	
Multiplication and division.
 A
B # C
D = A # C
B # D
 
A
B
C
D
= A
B , C
D = A
B # D
C = A # D
B # C 
	
All of the denominators are assumed not to be zero.
ii.	
Addition and subtraction.
A
B { C
D = A # D { B # C
B # D
	
The denominators are assumed not to be zero.
P.6	 Rational Exponents and Radicals
i.	
If a 7 0, then 2
n a = b means that bn = a and b 7 0.
ii.	
If a 6 0 and n is odd, then 2
n a = b means that bn = a. If 
a 6 0 and n is even, then 2
n a is not defined.
iii.	 When all expressions are defined,
am>n = 2
n am = 12
n a2m ; a- m>n =
1
am>n.
iv.	
2a2 = 0 a0
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas
(111)111*

72	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 List all of the numbers in the set
e4,17, -5, 1
2 , 0.31, 0, 0.2, 112f that are
a.	 natural numbers. 
b.	 whole numbers 
c.	 integers. 
d.	 rational numbers. 
e.	 irrational numbers. 
f.	
real numbers. 
In Exercises 2–5, state which property of the real numbers is 
being used.
	 2.	 3x + 1 = 1 + 3x 
	 3.	 p1x + y2 = px + py 
	 4.	 1x2 + 12 # 0 = 0 # 1x2 + 12 
	 5.	 1x2 + 12 # 1 = x2 + 1 
In Exercises 6 and 7, write each interval in inequality notation 
and then graph each interval.
	 6.	 3-2, 32 
	 7.	 1- ∞, 14 
In Exercises 8 and 9, write each inequality in interval notation 
and then graph the interval.
	 8.	 1 … x 6 4 
	 9.	 x 7 0 
In Exercises 10–13, rewrite each expression without absolute 
value bars.
	10.	 -12
0 20 
	11.	 0 2 - 0 -30 0 
	12.	 0 -5 - 0 -70  
	13.	 0 1 - 1150  
In Exercises 14–37, evaluate each expression.
	14.	 -50 
	15.	 1-423 
	16.	 218
217 
	17.	 24 - 5 # 32 
	18.	 12322 
	19.	 -251>2 
	20.	 a 1
16b
1>4 
	21.	 84>3 
	22.	 1-2722>3 
	23.	 a25
36b
-3>2
 
	24.	 81- 3>2 
	25.	 2 # 53 
	26.	 32 # 25 
	27.	 21 * 106
3 * 107 
	28.	 2
4 10,000 
	29.	 252 
	30.	 21-922 
	31.	 2
3 -125 
	32.	 31>2 # 271>2 
	33.	 64- 1>3 
	34.	 15 120 
	35.	 113 + 22113 - 22 
	36.	 a 1
16b
-3>2 
	37.	 3-2 # 70
18-1 
In Exercises 38–41, evaluate each expression for the given 
­values of x and y.
	38.	 41x + 72 + 2y; x = 3, y = 4 
	39.	 y - 6 1x
xy
 ; x = 4, y = 2 
	40.	
0 x0
x
+
0 y0
y  ; x = 6, y = -3 
	41.	 xy; x = 16, y = - 1
2 
In Exercises 42–49, simplify each expression. Write each 
answer with only positive exponents. Assume that all ­variables 
represent positive numbers.
	42.	 x -6
x -9 
	43.	 1x -22-5 
	44.	 x -3
y-2 
	45.	 ax -3
y-1 b
-2 
	46.	 axy3
x5yb
-2 
	47.	 116x - 2>3y- 4>323>2 
	48.	 149x - 4>3y2>32- 3>2 
	49.	 a64y- 9>2
x -3
b
- 2>3 
In Exercises 50–66, simplify each expression. Assume that all 
variables represent positive numbers.
	50.	 12x2>3215x3>42 
	51.	 17x1>4213x3>22 
	52.	 32x2>3
8x1>4 
	53.	
x512x23
4x3 
	54.	
164x4y421>2
4y2 
	55.	 ¢x2y4>3
x1>3 ≤
6 
	56.	 713 + 3275 
	57.	 164
111 
	58.	 2180x2 
	59.	 716 - 3124 
	60.	 72
3 54 + 2
3 128 
	61.	 12x 16x 
	62.	 275x2 
	63.	 2100x3
14x 
	64.	 512x - 2 18x 
	65.	 42
3 135 + 2
3 40 
	66.	 y2
3 56x - 2
3 189xy3 
In Exercises 67–70, rationalize the denominator of each 
expression.
	67.	 7
13 
	68.	
4
9 - 16 
	69.	 1 - 13
1 + 13 
	70.	 2 15 + 3
3 - 4 15 
	71.	 Write 3.7 * 16.23 * 10122 in scientific ­notation.
	72.	 Write 3.19 * 10-9
0.02 * 10-3 in decimal notation. 

Review Exercises        73
In Exercises 73–82, perform the indicated operations. Leave 
the resulting polynomial in standard form.
	 73.	 1x3 - 6x2 + 4x - 22 + 13x3 - 6x2 + 5x - 42 
	 74.	 110x3 + 8x2 - 7x - 32 - 15x3 - x2 + 4x - 92 
	 75.	 14x4 + 3x3 - 5x2 + 92 + 15x4 + 8x3 - 7x2 + 52 
	 76.	 18x4 + 4x3 + 3x2 + 52 + 17x4 + 3x3 + 8x2 - 32 
	 77.	 1x - 1221x - 32 
	 78.	 1x - 722 
	 79.	 1x5 - 221x5 + 22 
	 80.	 14x - 3214x + 32 
	 81.	 12x + 5213x - 112 
	 82.	 13x - 621x2 + 2x + 42 
In Exercises 83–104, factor each polynomial completely.
	 83.	 x2 - 3x - 10 
	 84.	 x2 + 10x + 9 
	 85.	 24x2 - 38x - 11 
	 86.	 15x2 + 33x + 18 
	 87.	 x1x + 112 + 51x + 112 
	 88.	 x3 - x2 + 2x - 2 
	 89.	 x4 - x3 + 7x - 7 
	 90.	 9x2 + 24x + 16 
	 91.	 10x2 + 23x + 12 
	 92.	 8x2 + 18x + 9 
	 93.	 12x2 + 7x - 12
	 94.	 x4 - 4x2 
	 95.	 4x2 - 49 
	 96.	 16x2 - 81
	 97.	 x2 + 12x + 36 
	 98.	 x2 - 10x + 100 
	 99.	 64x2 + 48x + 9 
	100.	 8x3 - 1 
	101.	 8x3 + 27
	102.	 7x3 - 7
	103.	 x3 + 5x2 - 16x - 80
	104.	 x3 + 6x2 - 9x - 54 
In Exercises 105–118, perform the indicated operation. 
Simplify your answer.
	105.	
4
x - 9 -
10
9 - x 
	106.	
2
x2 - 3x + 2 +
6
x2 - 1	 
	107.	
3x + 5
x2 + 14x + 48 -
3x - 2
x2 + 10x + 16 
	108.	
x + 7
x2 - 7x + 6 -
5 - 3x
x2 - 2x - 24 
	109.	 x - 1
x + 1 - x + 1
x - 1 
	110.	 x3 - 1
3x2 - 3 #
6x + 6
x2 + x + 1 
	111.	 x - 1
2x - 3 #
4x2 - 9
2x2 - x - 1 
	112.	 x2 + 2x - 8
x2 + 5x + 6 # x + 2
x + 4 
	113.	 x2 - 4
4x2 - 9 # 2x2 - 3x
2x + 4 
	114.	 3x2 - 17x + 10
x2 - 4x - 5 # x2 + 3x + 2
x2 + x - 2 
	115.	
1
x2 - x
1
x2 + x
	116.	
x
x - 2 + x
1
x2 - 4
	117.	
x
x - 3 + x
x
3 - x - x 
	118.	
x + 2 -
18
x - 5
x - 1 -
12
x - 5 
Applying the Concepts
	119.	 Assuming that a right triangle has legs a and b of lengths 20 
and 21, respectively, find the length of the hypotenuse. 
	120.	 One leg of a right triangle measures 5 inches. The 
­hypotenuse is 1 inch longer than the other leg. Find the 
length of the hypotenuse. 
	121.	 Find the area A and the perimeter P of a right ­triangle with 
hypotenuse of length 20 and a leg of length 12. 
	122.	 Find the volume V of a box of length 1
3 , width 7, and 
	
	 height 60. 
	123.	 Find the area of a rectangular rug if its width is 6 feet and 
its diagonal measures 10 feet. 
	124.	 The amount of alcohol in the body of a person who drinks  
x grams of alcohol every hour over a relatively long period 
	
	 is 4.2x
10 - x grams. How many grams of alcohol will be in the 
	
	 body of a person who drinks 2 grams of alcohol every hour 
(over a relatively long period)? 
	125.	 Because of the earth’s curvature, the maximum distance 
a person can see from a height h above the ground is 
27920h + h2, where h is given in miles. What is the 
­maximum distance an airplane pilot can see when the plane 
is 0.7 mile above the ground? 
	126.	 A contaminated reservoir contains 2% arsenic. The 
­percentage (in decimal) of arsenic in the reservoir can be 
reduced by adding water. Assuming that the reservoir con-
tains a million gallons of water, write a rational expression 
whose values give the percentage of arsenic in the reservoir 
when x ­gallons of water are added to it.
	127.	 The height (in feet) of an open fruit crate that is three times 
	
	 as long as it is wide is given by 36 - 3x2
8x
 , where x is the 
	
	 width of the box. Find the height of a fruit crate that is  
2 feet wide. 
	128.	 An object thrown down with an initial velocity of v0 feet 
per second will travel 16t2 + v0
 t feet in t seconds. How far 
has an orange that is dropped from a hot air balloon traveled 
after 9 seconds if it has an initial downward velocity of  
25 feet per second?       

74	
Chapter P      Basic Concepts of Algebra
Practice Test
Rewrite each expression without absolute value bars.
	 1.	 0 7 - 0 -30 0 
	 2.	 0 12 - 1000 
	 3.	 Evaluate x - 3y
2
+ xy for x = 5 and y = -3. 
	 4.	 Determine the domain of the variable x in the ­
	
	 expression 
2x
1x - 321x + 92 and write it in interval 
	
	 ­notation. 
Simplify each expression. Assume that all expressions 
­containing variables are defined.
	 5.	 a -3x2y
x
b
3 
	 6.	 2
3 -8x6 
	 7.	 175x - 127x 
	 8.	 -16- 3>2 
	 9.	 a x -2y4
25x3y3b
- 1>2 
	10.	 Rationalize the denominator of the expression 
5
1 - 13
 .
Perform the indicated operations. Write the resulting 
­polynomial in standard form.
	11.	 41x2 - 3x + 22 + 315x2 - 2x + 12 
	12.	 1x - 2215x - 12 
	13.	 1x2 + 3y222 
	14.	 A circular rug has a border of uniform width. The distance from 
the center of the rug to the inner and outer edges of the border 
are 5 feet and x feet respectively. Write a completely factored 
­polynomial that gives the area of the border. 
Factor each polynomial completely. 
	15.	 x2 - 5x + 6 
	16.	 9x2 + 12x + 4 
	17.	 8x3 - 27 
Perform the indicated operations and simplify the result. 
Leave your answer in factored form.
	18.	 6 - 3x
x2 - 4 -
12
2x + 4 
	19.	
1
x2
9 - 1
x2 
	20.	 Find the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle with legs 
a and b of lengths 35 and 12, respectively. 

Equations and inequalities are useful in analyzing designs 
found in the art and architecture of ancient civilizations, in 
understanding the dazzling geometric constructions that 
abound in nature, and in solving problems common to 
industry and daily life.
Equations and 
Inequalities
C h a p t e r 1 
Topics
1.1	 Linear Equations in One Variable
1.2	 Quadratic Equations
1.3	 Complex Numbers: Quadratic 
Equations with Complex 
Solutions
1.4	 Solving Other Types of Equations
1.5	 Inequalities
1.6	 Equations and Inequalities 
Involving Absolute Value

76	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Definitions
An equation is a statement that two mathematical expressions are equal. For example,
7 - 5 = 2
is an equation. In algebra, however, we are generally more interested in equations that 
contain variables.
An equation in one variable is a statement that two expressions, with at least one 
­containing the variable, are equal. For example, 2x - 3 = 7 is an equation in the variable x. 
The expressions 2x - 3 and 7 are the sides of the equation. The domain of the variable in 
an equation is the set of all real numbers for which both sides of the equation are defined.
Bungee-Jumping TV Contestants
England’s Oxford Dangerous Sports Club started the modern version of the sport of 
“bungee” (or bungy) jumping on April 1, 1978, from the Clifton Suspension Bridge in 
Bristol, England. Bungee cords consist of hundreds of continuous-length rubber strands 
encased in a nylon sheath. One end of the cord is tied to a solid structure such as a crane 
or bridge, and the other end is tied via padded ankle straps to the jumper’s ankle. The 
jumper jumps, and if things go as planned, the cord extends like a rubber band and 
the jumper bounces up and down until coming to a halt. Suppose a television adven-
ture program has its contestants bungee jump from a bridge 120 feet above the water. 
The bungee cord that is used has a 140%–150% elongation, meaning that its extended 
length will be the original length plus a maximum of an additional 150% of its original 
length. If the show’s producer wants to make sure the jumper does not get closer than 
10 feet to the water and if no contestant is more than 7 feet tall, how long can the 
bungee cord be? Using the information from this section, we learn in Example 11 that 
the cord should be about 41 feet long.
Linear Equations in One Variable
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Algebraic expressions (Section P.1,  
page 13)
2	 Like terms (Section P.3, page 29)
3	 Arithmetic of fractions, least common 
denominator (Section P.5, page 51)
	
Objectives
1	 Learn the vocabulary and concepts used  
in studying equations.
2	 Solve linear equations in one variable.
3	 Solve formulas for a specific variable.
4	 Use linear equations to solve applied 
­problems.
S e c t i o n
 1.1
1	
Learn the vocabulary and 
concepts used in studying 
equations.

	
Section 1.1    ■    Linear Equations in One Variable
77
When the variable in an equation is replaced with a specific value from its domain, the 
resulting statement may be true or false. For example, in the equation 2x - 3 = 7, if we 
let x = 1, we obtain
2112 - 3 = 7 or -1 = 7,
which is obviously false. However, if we replace x with 5, we obtain 2152 - 3 = 7, a 
true statement. Those values (if any) of the variable that result in a true statement are 
called ­solutions or roots of the equation. Thus, 5 is a solution (or root) of the equation 
2x - 3 = 7. We also say that 5 satisfies the equation 2x - 3 = 7. To solve an equation 
means to find all solutions of the equation; the set of all solutions of an equation is called 
its solution set. The process of finding the solution set of an equation is called solving the 
equation.
An equation that is satisfied by every real number in the domain of the variable is called 
an identity. The equations
21x + 32 = 2x + 6  and  x2 - 9 = 1x + 321x - 32
are examples of identities. You should recognize that these equations are examples of the 
­distributive property and the difference of squares, respectively.
An equation that is not an identity but is satisfied by at least one real number is called 
a conditional equation. To verify that an equation is a conditional equation, you must 
find at least one number that is a solution of the equation and at least one number that is 
not a ­solution of the equation. The equation 2x - 3 = 7 is an example of a conditional 
­equation: 5 satisfies the equation, but 1 does not.
An equation that no number satisfies is called an inconsistent equation. The solution 
set of an inconsistent equation is designated by the empty set symbol, ∅. The equation 
Find the domain of the variable x in each of the following equations.
a.   2 =
5
x - 1	
b.   x - 2 = 1x	
c.   2x - 3 = 7
Solution
a.	 In the equation 2 =
5
x - 1, the left side 2 does not contain x; so it is defined for all 
	
values of x. Because division by 0 is undefined, 
5
x - 1 is not defined if x = 1. The 
	
domain of x is the set of all real numbers except the number 1. Frequently, when only 
a few numbers are excluded from the domain of the variable, we write the exceptions 
on the side of the equation. In this example, if we wanted to specify the domain of the 
	
variable, we would simply write 2 =
5
x - 1, x ≠1. This domain can be written in 
	
interval notation as 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2.  
b.	 The square root of a negative number is not a real number; so 1x, the right side of 
the equation x - 2 = 1x, is defined only when x Ú 0. The left side is defined for 
all real numbers. So the domain of x in this equation is 5x x Ú 06, or in interval 
­notation, 30, ∞2.
c.	 Because both sides of the equation 2x - 3 = 7 are defined for all real numbers, the 
domain is 5x x is a real number6, or in interval notation, 1- ∞, ∞2.
Practice Problem 1  Find the domain of the variable x in each of the following 
­equations.
a.	 x
3 - 7 = 5	
b.   
3
2 - x = 4	
c.   2x - 1 = 0
Finding the Domain of the Variable
EXAMPLE 1
When finding the domain of a 
­variable, remember that
1.  Division by 0 is undefined.
2.  The square root (or any even 
root) of a negative number is not 
a real number.
Side  
Note

78	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
x = x + 5 is an example of an inconsistent equation. It is inconsistent because no number 
is 5 more than itself.
In summary, there are three types of equations: identities, conditional equations, and 
inconsistent equations.
Equivalent Equations
Equations that have the same solution set are called ­equivalent equations. For example, 
equations x = 4 and 3x = 12 are equivalent ­equations with solution set 546.
In general, to solve an equation in one variable, we replace the given equation with a 
sequence of equivalent equations until we obtain an equation whose solution is obvious, 
such as x = 4. The following operations yield equivalent equations.
Generating Equivalent Equations
Operations
Given Equation
Equivalent Equation
Simplify expressions on either 
side by eliminating parentheses, 
combining like terms, etc.
12x - 12 - 1x + 12 = 4
2x - 1 - x - 1 = 4 
or  x - 2 = 4
Add (or subtract) the same ex-
pression (with the same domain) 
on both sides of the equation.
x - 2 = 4
x - 2 + 2 = 4 + 2 
or  x = 6
Multiply (or divide) both sides  
of the equation by the same 
­nonzero number.
2x = 8
1
2 # 2x = 1
2 # 8 
or  x = 4
Interchange the two sides  
of the equation.
-3 = x
x = -3
Solving Linear Equations in One Variable
2	
Solve linear equations in  
one variable.
A conditional linear equation in one variable, such as x, is an equation that can 
be written in the standard form
ax + b = 0,
where a and b are real numbers with a ≠0.
Linear Equations
Because the highest exponent on the variable in a linear equation is 11x = x12, a ­linear equa-
tion is also called a first-degree equation. We can see that the linear equation ax + b = 0 
with a ≠0 has exactly one solution by using the following steps:
ax + b = 0	
Original equation, a ≠0
ax = -b	
Subtract b from both sides.
x = -b
a	
Divide both sides by a.
In the Procedure in Action box, we describe a step-by-step procedure for solving a 
linear equation in one variable.

	
Section 1.1    ■    Linear Equations in One Variable
79
Solve a linear equation in one variable.
Step 1  Eliminate fractions, if any. Multiply  
both sides of the equation by the least common  
denominator (LCD) of all of the fractions.
Step 2  Simplify. Simplify both sides of the  
equation by removing parentheses and other grouping 
symbols (if any) and combining like terms.
Step 3  Isolate the variable term. Add appropriate 
expressions to both sides so that when both sides are 
simplified, the terms containing the variable are on one 
side and all constant terms are on the other side.
Step 4  Combine terms. Combine terms ­containing 
the variable to obtain one term that contains the 
­variable as a factor.
Step 5  Isolate the variable. Divide both sides by 
the coefficient of the variable to obtain the solution.
Step 6  Check the solution. Substitute the  
solution into the original equation to check for  
computational errors.
Solve 
1
3 x - 2
3 = 1
2 11 - 3x2.
	
1
3 x - 2
3 = 1
2 11 - 3x2    Original equation
	 6a1
3 x - 2
3b = 6 # 1
2 11 - 3x2 
Multiply both sides by 
6 (LCD) to eliminate 
fractions.
6 # 1
3 x - 6 # 2
3 = 311 - 3x2  Distribute on the left side; 
simplify on the right.
	
2x - 4 = 3 - 9x      Simplify on the left side;  
distribute on the right.
2x - 4 + 9x + 4 = 3 - 9x + 9x + 4  Add 9x + 4 to 
both sides.
	
11x = 7  Collect like terms and combine 
constants.
	
x = 7
11  Divide both sides by 11.
Check:
Substitute 7
11 for x in both sides of the original equation.
The result should be - 5
11 = - 5
11.
Solving Conditional Linear Equations in One Variable
Objective
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 2
Example
Practice Problem 2  Solve 2
3 - 3
2 x = 1
6 - 7
3 x.
Solve 5x - 33x + 21x - 124 = 1.
Solution
Step 2   5x - 33x + 21x - 124 = 1	
Original equation
	
 5x - 33x + 2x - 24 = 1	
Remove innermost parentheses by  
distributing 21x - 12 = 2x - 2.
	
 5x - 3x - 2x + 2 = 1	
Remove square brackets and change  
the sign of each enclosed term.
	
 2 = 1	
Combine like terms.
Because 2 = 1 is false, no number satisfies this equation. It is inconsistent.
Practice Problem 3  Solve 3x - 32x - 61x + 124 = 7x - 1.
Solving a Linear Equation That Is Inconsistent
EXAMPLE 3

80	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Formulas
Solving equations that arise from everyday experiences is one of the most important uses of alge-
bra. An equation that expresses a relationship between two or more variables is called a formula.
3	
Solve formulas for a specific 
variable.
Solve 1 - 5y + 21y + 72 = 2y + 513 - y2.
Solution
Step 2   1 - 5y + 21y + 72 = 2y + 513 - y2	
Original equation
	
 1 - 5y + 2y + 14 = 2y + 15 - 5y 	
Distributive property
	
 15 - 3y = 15 - 3y
	
Collect like terms and combine  
constants on each side.
Step 3	
15 - 3y + 3y = 15 - 3y + 3y	
Add 3y to both sides.
	
15 = 15	
Simplify.
	
We have shown that 15 = 15 is equivalent to the original equation. The equa-
tion 15 = 15 is always true; its solution set is the set of all real numbers. There-
fore, the solution set of the original equation is also the set of all real numbers. 
Thus, the original equation is an identity and the solution set is 1- ∞, ∞2.
Practice Problem 4  Solve the equation 213x - 62 + 5 = 12 - 119 - 6x2.
Solving an Equation That Is an Identity
EXAMPLE 4
I d e n t i f y i n g  T y p e s  o f  E q u at i o n s
1.	 An equation that is satisfied by all values in the domain of the variable is an 
­identity. For example, 21x - 12 = 2x - 2. When you try to solve an identity,  
you get a true statement such as 3 = 3 or 0 = 0.
2.	 An equation that is not an identity but is satisfied by at least one number in the 
domain of the variable is a conditional equation. For example, 2x = 6 is a linear 
conditional equation; x = 3 is a solution, but x = 0 is not.
3.	 An equation that is not satisfied by any value of the variable is an inconsistent 
equation. For example, x = x + 2 is an inconsistent equation. Because no number 
is 2 more than itself, the solution set of the equation x = x + 2 is ∅. When you 
try to solve an inconsistent equation, you obtain a false statement such as 0 = 2.
The formula for converting the temperature in degrees Celsius 1C2 to degrees Fahrenheit 1F2 is
F = 9
5 C + 32.
While planning a trip to the United States, a London resident notes that the local ­temperature 
will be 86° Fahrenheit. What is the temperature in degrees Celsius? (Temperatures are recorded 
in Celsius degrees in England.)
Converting Temperatures
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 1.1    ■    Linear Equations in One Variable
81
In Example 5, we specified F = 86 and solved the equation for C. A more general 
result can be obtained by assuming that F is a fixed number, or constant, and solving for C. 
This process is called solving for a specified variable.
Solution
We first substitute 86 for F in the formula	
F = 9
5 C + 32 
to obtain	
86 = 9
5 C + 32.
We now solve this equation for C.
 51862 = 5 a9
5 C + 32b	
Multiply both sides by 5.
 430 = 9C + 160
	
Simplify.
 270 = 9C
	
Subtract 160 from both sides.
 270
9
= C
	
Divide both sides by 9.
 30 = C
	
Simplify.
Thus, 86° F converts to 30° C.
Practice Problem 5  Use the formula in Example 5 to find the temperature in degrees 
Celsius assuming that the temperature is 50° Fahrenheit.
a.	 Solve F = 9
5 C + 32 for C.	
b.  Solve S = 2/w + 2/h + 2wh for h.
Solution
a.	 F = 9
5
 C + 32	
Original equation
	
 F - 32 = 9
5 C
	
Subtract 32 from both sides.
	
 5
91F - 322 = C	
Multiply both sides by 5
9;  5
9 # 9
5 = 1
	
or	
C = 5
91F - 322
b.	 S = 2/w + 2/h + 2wh for h	
Original equation
	
 S - 2/w = 2/h + 2wh	
Subtract 2/w from both sides so that  
all terms with h are on one side.
	
 S - 2/w = 12/ + 2w2h	
Factor out h.
	
 S - 2/w
2/ + 2w = h	
Divide both sides by 2/ + 2w.
	
or	
h = S - 2/w
2/ + 2w
Practice Problem 6  Solve P = 2/ + 2w for w.
Solving for a Specified Variable
EXAMPLE 6

82	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Applications
Practical problems are often introduced through verbal descriptions. Frequently, they ­describe 
a situation, perhaps in a physical or financial setting, and ask for a value for some specific 
quantity that will favorably resolve the situation. The process of translating a ­practical prob-
lem into a mathematical one is called mathematical modeling. Generally, we use variables 
to represent the quantities identified in the verbal description and ­represent relationships 
between these quantities with algebraic expressions or equations. Ideally, we reduce the 
problem to an equation that, when solved, also solves the practical problem. Then we solve 
the equation and check our result against the practical situation presented in the problem.
Here is a general strategy for solving applied problems.
4	
Use linear equations to solve 
applied problems.
P r o c e d u r e  f o r  S o lv i n g  A p p l i e d  P r o b l e m s
Step 1  Read the problem as many times as needed to understand it thoroughly. Pay 
close attention to the question asked to help you identify the quantity the 
variable should represent.
Step 2  Assign a variable to represent the quantity you are seeking and when 
necessary, express all other unknown quantities in terms of this  
variable. Frequently, it is helpful to draw a diagram to illustrate the  
problem or to set up a table to organize the information.
Step 3  Write an equation that describes the situation. Look for a relationship 
between the unknown quantities in Step 2.
Step 4  Solve the equation.
Step 5  Answer the question asked in the problem.
Step 6  Check the answer against the description of the original problem (not just 
the equation solved in Step 4).
Geometry
Common geometric figures and formulas are given on the final pages of the book.
The length of a rectangular soccer field is 30 yards less than twice its width. Find the 
dimensions of the field assuming that its perimeter is 360 yards.
Solution
Step 2  Let	
x = the width of the field.
	
Then 2x - 30 = the length of the field. (See the following figure.)
x
x
2x  30
2x  30
Step 3  Perimeter = sum of the lengths of the four sides of the rectangle
	
= 12x - 302 + x + 12x - 302 + x
	
Perimeter = 360 ft	
Given
	 12x - 302 + x + 12x - 302 + x = 360	
Replace the verbal description of 
perimeter with the algebraic  
expression.
Step 4	
6x - 60 = 360	
Combine terms.
	
6x = 420	
Add 60 to both sides and simplify.
	
x = 420
6
= 70	
Divide each side by 6.
Solving a Geometry Problem
EXAMPLE 7

	
Section 1.1    ■    Linear Equations in One Variable
83
Finance 
Tyrick invests $15,000, some in stocks and the rest in bonds. If he invests twice as much 
in stocks as he does in bonds, how much does he invest in each?
Solution
Step 2  Let x = the amount invested in stocks. The rest of the $15,000 investment 
1+15,000 - x2 is invested in bonds. 
Step 3  We have one more important piece of information to use, as follows:
	
Amount invested in stocks, x	   = 
Twice the amount invested
in bonds, 2115,000 - x2
	
x = 2115,000 - x2	
Replace the verbal descriptions  
with algebraic expressions.
Step 4	
 x = 30,000 - 2x
	
Distributive property
	
 3x = 30,000
	
Add 2x to both sides.
	
 x = 10,000
	
Divide both sides by 3.
Step 5  Tyrick invests $10,000 in stocks and +15,000 - +10,000 = +5000 in bonds.
Step 6  Check in the original problem. If Tyrick invests $10,000 in stocks and $5000 
in bonds, then because 21+50002 = +10,000, he invested twice as much in 
stocks as he did in bonds. 
Practice Problem 8  Repeat Example 8, but Tyrick now invests three times as much  
in stocks as he does in bonds.
Interest is money paid for the use of borrowed money. For example, while your money 
is on deposit at a bank, the bank pays you for the right to use the money in your account. The 
money you are paid by the bank is interest on your deposit. On any loan, the money borrowed 
for use (and on which interest is paid) is called the principal. The interest rate is the percent 
of the principal charged for its use for a specific time period. The most straightforward type of 
interest computation is described next.
Analyzing Investments
EXAMPLE 8
If a principal of P dollars is borrowed for a period of t years with interest rate r 
(expressed as a decimal) computed yearly, then the total interest paid at the end of 
t years is
I = Prt.
Interest computed with this formula is called simple interest.
When interest is computed yearly, the rate r is called an annual interest rate 
(or per annum interest rate).
Simple Interest
Step 5  The width of the field = 70 yards, and  
the length of the field = 21702 - 30 = 140 - 30 = 110 yards.  
The dimensions of the soccer field are 110 by 70 yards.
Step 6  Check: The perimeter is 110 + 70 + 110 + 70 = 360 yards.
Practice Problem 7  The length of a rectangle is 5 m more than twice its width. Find the 
dimensions of the rectangle assuming that its perimeter is 28 m.

84	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Uniform Motion
If you drive 60 miles in two hours, your average speed is 60
2 = 30 miles per hour. If 
you multiply your average speed for the trip (30 miles per hour) by the time elapsed (two 
hours), you get the distance driven, 60 miles 160 = 2 # 302. When “rate” refers to the 
average speed of an object, use the following formula.
Ms. Sharpy invests a total of $10,000 in blue-chip and technology stocks. At the end of a 
year, the blue chips returned 12% and the technology stocks returned 8% on the original 
investments. How much was invested in each type of stock if the total interest earned was 
$1060?
Step 1  We are asked to find two amounts: that invested in blue-chip stocks and  
that invested in technology stocks. If we know how much was invested in 
blue-chip stocks, then we know that the rest of the $10,000 was invested  
in technology stocks.
Step 2  Let x = amount invested in blue-chip stocks. Then
10,000 - x = amount invested in technology stocks.
Step 3  We organize our information in the following table.
Investment
Principal P
Rate r
Time t
Interest I = Prt
Blue Chip
x
0.12
1
0.12x
Technology
10,000 - x
0.08
1
0.08110,000 - x2
Interest from blue chip   +  Interest from technology   =  Total interest
Step 4­   0.12x + 0.08110,000 - x2 = 1060
	
Replace descriptions with  
algebraic expressions.
 12x + 8110,000 - x2 = 106,000 	
Multiply by 100  to  
eliminate decimals.
 12x + 80,000 - 8x = 106,000
	
Distributive property
 4x = 26,000
	
Combine like terms;  
subtract 80,000 from  
both sides.
 x = 6500
	
Divide by 4 to get the 
amount in blue-chip stocks
 10,000 - x = 10,000 - 6500	
Replace x with 6500
 = 3500
	
Substitute to get the 
amount in technology 
stocks
Step 5  Ms. Sharpy invests $3500 in technology stocks and $6500 in blue-chip stocks.
Step 6  Check in the original problem. 
 12% of +6500 is 0.12165002 = +780
 and 8% of +3500 is 0.08135002 = +280.
Thus, the total interest earned is +780 + +280 = +1060.
Practice Problem 9  One-fifth of my capital is invested at 5%, one-sixth of my capital 
at 8%, and the rest at 10% per year. If the annual interest on my capital is $130, what  
is my capital?
Solving Problems Involving Simple Interest
EXAMPLE 9

	
Section 1.1    ■    Linear Equations in One Variable
85
U n i f o r m  M o t i o n
If an object moves at a rate (average speed) r per unit time, then the distance d  
traveled in time t units is
d = r t.
Care must be taken to make sure that units of measurement are consistent. If, for example, 
the rate is given in miles per hour, then the time should be given in hours. If the rate is given 
in miles per hour and the time is given as 15 minutes, change 15 minutes to 1
4 hour before 
using the uniform-motion formula.
Warning
A motorcycle police officer is chasing a car that is speeding at 70 miles per hour. The 
police officer is 1 mile behind the car and is traveling 80 miles per hour. How long will it 
be before the officer overtakes the car?
Solution
Step 2	  We are asked to find the amount of time before the officer overtakes the car. 
Draw a sketch to help visualize the problem. See Figure 1.1. 
F
i
g
u
r
e 
1.1 
x mi
1 mi
Interception point
Let t = the time it takes the officer to overtake the car. Organize the  
information in a table.
Object
r 1miles per hour2
t  1hours2
d = rt 1miles2
Car
70
t
70t
Motorcycle
80
t
80t
Step 3	  Because the distance the motorcycle travels is 1 mile more than the car  
travels, we have
80t = 70t + 1	
The motorcycle’s distance is 1 mile more than the 
car’s distance.
Step 4   80t - 70t = 1	
Subtract 70t from both sides.
 10t = 1	
Simplify.
t = 1
10	
Divide both sides by 10.
Step 5	  The time required to overtake the car is
t = 1
10 hour = 0.1 hour 1or 6 minutes2
Solving a Uniform-Motion Problem
EXAMPLE 10
Figure 1.1 

86	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
The introduction to this section described a television show on which a bungee cord with 
140%–150% elongation is used for contestants’ bungee jumping from a bridge 120 feet 
above the water. The show’s producer wants to make sure the jumper does not get closer 
than 10 feet to the water. How long can the bungee cord be given that no contestant is 
more than 7 feet tall?
Solution
Step 1	  We want the extended cord plus the length of the jumper’s body to be a 
minimum of 10 feet above the water. To be safe, we determine the maximum 
extended length of the cord, add the height of the tallest possible contestant, 
and ensure that this total length is 10 feet above the water.
Step 2  Let x = length, in feet, of the cord to be used.
Step 3	  Then x + 1.5x = 2.5x is the maximum extended length (in feet) of the cord 
(with 150% elongation). We have
Extended 
cord length   + 
Body 
length   + 
10-foot 
buffer
  = 
Height of bridge 
above the water
2.5x + 7 + 10 = 120	
Replace descriptions with  
arithmetic expressions.
Step 4	
2.5x + 17 = 120	
Combine constants.
2.5x = 103	
Subtract 17 from both sides.
x = 41.2 feet 	
Divide both sides by 2.5.
Step 5  If the length of the cord is less than 41.2 feet, all conditions are met.
Step 6	  Check: 41.2 + 1.5141.22 + 7 + 10 = 120; so any length less than 41.2 ft 
will work.
Practice Problem 11  What length of cord should be used in Example 11 if the  
elongation is 200% instead of 140%–150%?
Bungee-Jumping TV Contestants
EXAMPLE 11
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 1- ∞, ∞2  b. 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2  c. 31, ∞2
2. e -3
5 f    3. ∅    4. 1- ∞, ∞2    5. 10°C   
6. w = P - 2/
2
    7. Width: 3 m; length: 11 m
8. +3750 in bonds and +11,250 in stocks    9. +1500
10. 395 m    11. 34.3 ft
Step 6	  Check in the original problem. If the police officer travels for 0.1 of an hour 
at 80 miles per hour, he travels d = 180210.12 = 8 miles. The car traveling 
for this same 0.1 of an hour at 70 miles per hour travels 170210.12 = 7 miles. 
Because the officer travels 1 more mile during that time than the car does  
(the motorcycle started 1 mile behind the car), the officer does overtake the car.
Practice Problem 10  A train 130 meters long crosses a bridge in 21 seconds.  
The train is traveling at 25 meters per second. What is the length of the bridge?

	
Section 1.1    ■    Linear Equations in One Variable
87   
Exercises
section 1.1 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 The domain of the variable in an equation is the set of 
all real numbers for which both sides of the equation are 
.
	2.	 Standard form for a linear equation in x is 
. 
	3.	 Two equations with the same solutions set are called 
.
	4.	 A conditional equation is an equation that is not true for 
 values of the variables. 
	5.	 True or False. If $100 is invested at 5% for three years, the 
interest I = 11002152132 dollars. 
	6.	 True or False. If an object is traveling at a uniform 
rate of 60 ft>sec, the distance covered in 15 minutes is 
d = 16021152 ft. 
In Exercises 7–11, determine whether the given value of the 
variable is a solution of the equation.
	7.	 x - 2 = 5x + 6
a.	 x = 0 
b.	 x = -2 
	8.	 8x + 3 = 14x - 1
a.	 x = -1 
b.	 x = 2
3 
	9.	 2
x = 1
3 +
1
x + 2
a.	 x = 4 
b.	 x = 1 
	10.	 1x - 3212x + 12 = 0
a.	 x = 1
2 
b.	 x = 3 
	11.	 2x + 3x = 5x
a.	 x = 157 
b.	 x = -2046 
In Exercises 12–16, find the domain of the variable in each 
equation. Write the answer in interval notation.
	12.	 12 - x2 - 4x = 7 - 31x + 42 
	13.	
y
y - 1 =
3
y + 2 
	14.	 1
y = 2 + 1y 
	15.	
3x
1x - 321x - 42 = 2x + 9 
	16.	 1
1x = x2 - 1 
In Exercises 17–20, determine whether the given equation is 
an identity. If the equation is not an identity, give a value that 
demonstrates that fact.
	17.	 2x + 3 = 5x + 1 
	18.	 3x + 4 = 6x + 2 - 13x - 22 
	19.	 1
x + 1
2 = 2 + x
2x 
	20.	
1
x + 3 = 1
x + 1
3 
In Exercises 21–46, solve each equation.
	21.	 3x + 5 = 14 
	22.	 2x - 17 = 7 
	23.	 -10x + 12 = 32 
	24.	 -2x + 5 = 6 
	25.	 3 - y = -4 
	26.	 2 - 7y = 23 
	27.	 7x + 7 = 21x + 12 
	28.	 31x + 22 = 4 - x 
	29.	 312 - y2 + 5y = 3y 
	30.	 9y - 31y - 12 = 6 + y 
	31.	 4y - 3y + 7 - y = 2- 17 - y2 
	32.	 31y - 12 = 6y - 4 + 2y - 4y 
	33.	 31x - 22 + 213 - x2 = 1 
	34.	 2x - 3 - 13x - 12 = 6 
	35.	 2x + 31x - 42 = 7x + 10 
	36.	 312 - 3x2 - 4x = 3x - 10 
	37.	 43x + 213 - x24 = 2x + 1  
	38.	 3 - 3x - 31x + 224 = 4 
	39.	 314y - 32 = 43y - 14y - 324 
	40.	 5 - 16y + 92 + 2y = 21y + 12 
	41.	 2x - 312 - x2 = 1x - 32 + 2x + 1 
	42.	 51x - 32 - 61x - 42 = -5 
	43.	 2x + 1
9
- x + 4
6
= 1 
	44.	 2 - 3x
7
+ x - 1
3
= 3x
7 
	45.	 1 - x
4
+ 5x + 1
2
= 3 -
21x + 12
8 
	46.	 x + 4
3
+ 2x - 1
2 = 3x + 2
6 
In Exercises 47–58, solve each formula for the indicated  
variable.
	47.	 d = rt for r 
	48.	 F = ma for a 
	49.	 C = 2pr for r 
	50.	 A = 2prx + pr2 for x 
	51.	 I = E
R for R 
	52.	 A = P11 + rt2 for t 
	53.	 A =
1a + b2h
2
 for h 
	
54.	 T = a  + 1n - 12d for d 
	55.	 1
f = 1
u + 1
v for u 
	
56.	 1
R = 1
R1
+ 1
R2
 for R2 
	57.	 y = mx + b for m 
	58.	 ax + by = c for y 
In Exercises 59–62, write an algebraic expression for the 
specified quantity.
	59.	 Leroy buys in-line skates for +327.62, including sales tax of 61
2%. 
Let x = the price of in-line skates before tax. Write an algebraic 
expression in x for “the tax paid on the in-line skates.” 

88	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
	60.	 A lamp manufacturing company produces 1600 reading 
lamps a day when it operates in two shifts. The first shift  
produces only 5>6 as many lamps as the second shift. Let 
x = the number of lamps produced per day by the second 
shift. Write an algebraic expression in x for the number of 
lamps produced per day by the first shift. 
	61.	 Kim invests $22,000, some in stocks and the rest in 
bonds. Let x = amount invested in stocks. Write an 
algebraic expression in x for “the amount invested in 
bonds.” 
	62.	 An air-conditioning repair bill for $229.50 showed a charge 
of $72.00 dollars for parts, with the remainder of the charge 
for labor. Let x = number of hours of labor it took to repair 
the air conditioner. Write an algebraic expression in x for the 
labor charge per hour. 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 63–98, use mathematical modeling techniques to 
solve the problems.
	63.	 Swimming pool dimensions. The volume of a swimming 
pool is 2808 cubic feet. Assuming that the pool is 18 feet 
long and 12 feet deep, find its width. 
	64.	 Hole dimensions. If a box-shaped hole 7 feet long and 3 feet 
wide holds 168 cubic feet of dirt, how deep must the hole be? 
	65.	 Geometry. The perimeter of a rectangle is 80 feet. Find its 
dimensions assuming that its length is 5 feet less than twice 
its width. 
	66.	 Geometry. The width of a rectangle is 3 feet more than one-
half its length, and the perimeter of the rectangle is 36 feet. 
Find its dimensions. 
	67.	 Geometry. A circle has a circumference of 114p centime-
ters. Find the radius of the circle. 
	68.	 Geometry. A rectangle has a perimeter of 28 meters and a 
width of 5 meters. Find the length of the rectangle. 
	69.	 Storage barrel dimensions. A barrel has a surface area of 
6p square meters and a radius of 1 meter. Find the height of 
the barrel. 
Barrel top
Barrel bottom
circle
circle
r
r
cylinder
h
Barrel side
2r
rectangle
h
r
Barrel
	70.	 Can dimensions. A can has a volume of 148p cubic  
centimeters and a radius of 2 centimeters. Find the height of 
the can. 
	71.	 Geometry. A trapezoid has an area of 66 square feet and a 
height of 6 feet. If one base is 3 feet, what is the length of the 
other base? 
3 feet
Trapezoid
6 feet
	72.	 Geometry. A trapezoid has an area of 35 square centime-
ters. Assuming that one base is 9 centimeters and the other 
base is 11 centimeters, find the height of the trapezoid. 
	73.	 Chain store properties. A fast-food chain bought two 
pieces of land for new stores. The more expensive piece of 
land costs $23,000 more than the less expensive piece of 
land, and the two pieces together cost $147,000. How much 
did each piece cost? 
	74.	 Administrative salaries. The manager at a wholesale outlet 
earns $450 more per month than the assistant manager. If their 
combined salary is $3700 per month, what is the monthly sal-
ary of each? 
	75.	 Lottery ticket sales. The lottery ticket sales at Quick Mart 
for August were 10% above the sales for July. If Quick Mart 
sold a total of 1113 lottery tickets during July and August, 
how many tickets were sold each month?
	76.	 Sales commission. Jan’s commission for February was $15 
more than half her commission for March, and her total com-
mission for the two months was $633. Find her commission 
for each month. 
	77.	 Inheritance. An estate valued at $225,000 is to be divided 
between two sons so that the older son receives four times 
as much as the younger son. Find each son’s share of the 
estate. 
	78.	 TV game show. Kevin won $735,000 on a TV game show. 
He decided to keep a certain amount for himself, give one-
half the amount he kept for himself to his daughter, and give 

	
Section 1.1    ■    Linear Equations in One Variable
89
	
	 one-fourth the amount he kept for himself to his dad. How 
much did each person get? 
	79.	 Grades. Your grades in the three tests in College Algebra  
are 87, 59, and 73.
a.	 How many points do you need on the final to average 75? 
b.	 Find part (a) assuming that the final carries double weight. 
	80.	 Real estate investment. A real estate agent invested a total 
of $4200. Part was invested in a high-risk real estate venture, 
and the rest was invested in a savings and loan. At the end of a 
year, the high-risk venture returned 15% on the investment and 
the savings and loan returned 8% on the investment. Find the 
amount invested in each assuming that the agent’s total income 
from the investments was $448.
	81.	 Tax shelter. Mr. Mostafa received an inheritance of $7000. 
He put part of it in a tax shelter paying 9% interest and part 
in a bank paying 6%. If his annual interest totals $540, how 
much did he invest at each rate?
	82.	 Interest. Ms. Jordan invested $4900, part at 6% interest and 
the rest at 8%. If the yearly interest on each investment is the 
same, how much interest does she receive at the end of the 
year? 
	83.	 Interest. If $5000 is invested in a bank that pays 5% inter-
est, how much more must be invested in bonds at 8% to earn 
6% on the total investment? 
	84.	 Retail profit. A retailer’s cost for a microwave oven is $480. 
If he wants to make a profit of 20% of the selling price, at 
what price should the oven be sold? 
	85.	 Profit from sales. The Beckly Company manufactures 
shaving sets for $3 each and sells them for $5 each. How 
many shaving sets must be sold for the company to recover 
an initial investment of $40,000 and earn an additional 
$30,000 as profit? 
	86.	 Jogging. Angelina jogs 100 meters in the same time that 
Harry bicycles 150 meters. If Harry bicycles 15 meters  
per minute faster than Angelina jogs, find the rate  
of each. 
	87.	 Overtaking a lead. A car leaves New Orleans traveling  
50 kilometers per hour. An hour later a second car leaves 
New Orleans following the first car, traveling 70 kilometers 
per hour. How many hours after leaving New Orleans will  
it take the second car to overtake the first? 
	88.	 Separating planes. Two planes leave an airport traveling in 
opposite directions. One plane travels at 470 kilometers per 
hour and the other at 430 kilometers per hour. How long will 
it take them to be 2250 kilometers apart? 
	89.	 Overtaking a bike. Lucas is 1
3 of a mile from home, 
	
	 bicycling at 20 miles per hour, when his brother leaves home 
on his bike to catch up. How fast must Lucas’s brother go to 
catch Lucas a mile from home? 
	90.	 Overtaking a lead. Karen notices that her husband left for the 
airport without his briefcase. Her husband drives 40 miles per 
hour and has a 15-minute head start. If Karen (with the brief-
case) drives 60 miles per hour and the airport is 45 miles away, 
will she catch her husband before he arrives at the airport? 
	91.	 Increasing distances. Two cars start out together from the 
same place. They travel in opposite directions, with one of 
them traveling 5 miles per hour faster than the other. After 
three hours, they are 405 miles apart. How fast is each car 
traveling? 
	92.	 Travel time. Aya rode her bicycle from her house to a friend’s 
house, averaging 16 kilometers per hour. It turned dark before 
she was ready to return home, so her friend drove her home at 
a rate of 80 kilometers per hour. If Aya’s total traveling time 
was three hours, how far away did her friend live? 
	93.	 Digital cameras. The price P (in dollars) for which a manu-
facturer will sell a digital camera is related to the number q 
of cameras ordered by the formula
	
P = 200 - 0.02q, for 100 … q … 2000.
	
	 How many cameras must be ordered for a customer to pay 
$170 per camera? 
	94.	 Quick ratio. The quick ratio Q of a business is related to  
its current assets A, its current inventory I, and its current 
liabilities L, by
	
	
Q = A - I
L
.
	
	 Assuming that Q = 37,000, L = +1500, and I = +3200, 
find the current assets. 
	95.	 Numbers. The sum of two numbers is 28, and one number 
is three times the other. Find the numbers. 
	96.	 Numbers. The sum of three consecutive even integers is 42. 
Find the integers. 
	97.	 Numbers. The difference between two numbers is 14, and 
one number is twice the other. Find the numbers. 
	98.	 Numbers. One number is five more than a second number. 
The sum of the lesser number and twice the greater number is 
49. Find the numbers. 
Beyond the Basics
You can solve many problems by modeling procedures  
introduced in this section other than those presented in the 
examples in the section. Here are some types for you to try.
	99.	 Explain whether the equations in each pair are equivalent.
a.	 x2 = x,     
x = 1
b.	 x2 = 9,     
x = 3
c.	 x2 - 1 = x - 1,	
x = 0
d.	
x
x - 2 =
2
x - 2,  x = 2

90	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
	100.	 Find a value of k so that 3x - 1 = k and 7x + 2 = 16 are 
equivalent. 
	101.	 Suppose you average 75 miles per hour over the first half of 
a drive from Denver to Las Vegas, but your average speed 
for the entire trip is 60 miles per hour. What was your aver-
age speed for the second half of the drive? 
	102.	 Davinder (D) and Mikhail (M ) were 2 miles apart when 
they began walking toward each other. D walks at a constant 
rate of 3.7 miles per hour, and M walks at a constant rate of 
4.3 miles per hour. When they started, D’s dog, who runs at 
a constant rate of 6 miles per hour, ran to M and then turned 
back and ran to D. If the dog continued to run back and 
forth until D and M met and the dog lost no time turning 
around, how far did it run? 
	103.	 A mixture contains alcohol and water in the ratio 5:1. After 
the addition of 5 liters of water, the ratio of alcohol to water 
becomes 5:2. Find the quantity of alcohol in the original 
mixture. 
	104.	 An alloy contains zinc and copper in the ratio 5:8, and 
another alloy contains zinc and copper in the ratio 5:3. 
Equal amounts of both alloys are melted together. Find the 
ratio of zinc to copper in the new alloy. 
	105.	 Democritus has lived 1
6 of his life as a boy, 1
8 of his life as a 
	
	 youth, and 1
2 of his life as a man and has spent 15 years as a 
	
	 mature adult. How old is Democritus? 
	106.	 A man and a woman have the same birthday. When he 
was as old as she is now, the man was twice as old as the 
woman. When she becomes as old as he is now, the sum of 
their ages will be 119. How old is the man now? 
	107.	 How many minutes is it before 6 p.m. if, 50 minutes ago, 
four times this number was the number of minutes past  
3 p.m.? 
	108.	 Two pipes A and B can fill a tank in 24 minutes and 32 min-
utes, respectively. Initially, both pipes are opened simultane-
ously. After how many minutes should pipe B be turned off 
so that the tank is full in 18 minutes? 
	109.	 A small plane was scheduled to fly from Atlanta to 
Washington, D.C. The plane flies at a constant speed of  
150 miles per hour. However, the flight was against a head 
wind of 10 miles per hour. The threat of mechanical failure 
forced the plane to turn back, and it returned to Atlanta with 
a tail wind of 10 miles per hour, landing 1.5 hours after it 
had taken off.
a.	 How far had the plane traveled before turning  
back? 
b.	 What was the plane’s average speed? 
	110.	 Three airports A, B, and C are located on an east-west line. 
B is 705 miles west of A, and C is 652.5 miles west of B.  
A pilot flew from A to B, had a stopover at B for three 
hours, and continued to C. The wind was blowing from the 
east at 15 miles per hour during the first part of the trip, but 
the wind changed to come from the west at 20 miles per 
hour during the stopover. The flight time between A and B 
and between B and C was the same. Find the airspeed of the 
plane. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	111.	 A pawnshop owner sells two watches for $499 each. On one 
watch, he gained 10%, and on the other watch, he lost 10%. 
What is his percentage gain or loss? 
a.	 No loss, no gain
b.	 10% loss
c.	 1% loss
d.	 1% gain
	112.	 The price of gasoline increased by 20% from July to 
August, while your consumption of gas decreased by 20% 
from July to August. What is the percentage change in your 
gas bill from July to August? 
a.	 No change
b.	 5% decrease
c.	 4% increase
d.	 4% decrease
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 113–120, simplify each of the expressions.
	113.	 18 
	114.	 127 
	115.	 112 
	116.	 145 
	117.	 2 + 318
2 
	118.	 3 + 118
3 
	119.	 15 - 175
5 
	120.	 35 - 14112
7 
In Exercises 121–132, factor each of the expressions.
	121.	 x2 + x 
	122.	 2x2 - 4x 
	123.	 x2 - 4 
	124.	 x2 - 25 
	125.	 x2 + 4x + 4 
	126.	 x2 - 6x + 9 
	127.	 x2 - 8x + 7 
	128.	 x2 + 2x - 15 
	129.	 6x2 - x - 1 
	130.	 14x2 + 17x - 6 
	131.	 -5x2 + 3x + 2 
	132.	 -12x2 + 9x + 3 

	
Section 1.2    ■    Quadratic Equations
91
S E C T I O N 1.2
The Golden Rectangle
The ancient Greeks, in about the sixth century b.c., sought unifying principles of beauty  
and perfection, which they believed could be described mathematically. In their study 
of beauty, the Greeks used the term golden 
ratio. The golden ratio is frequently ­referred 
to as “phi,” after the Greek sculptor Phidias, 
and is symbolized by the Greek letter Φ (phi). 
A geometric figure that is commonly associ-
ated with phi is the golden rectangle. (See  
Example 9.) This rectangle has sides of lengths 
a and b that are in proportion to the golden 
ratio. It has been said that the golden rectan-
gle is the most pleasing rectangle to the eye. 
Numerous examples of art and architecture 
have employed the golden rectangle. Here 
are three of them:
1.	 The exterior dimensions of the ­Parthenon 
in Athens, built about 440 b.c., form a 
­perfect golden rectangle.
2.	 Leonardo Da Vinci called the golden ­ratio 
the “divine proportion” and featured it 
in many of his paintings, including the 
­famous Mona Lisa. (Try drawing a rectan-
gle around her face.)
3.	 The Great Pyramid of Giza is believed to be 4600 years old, a time long before the 
Greeks. Its dimensions are also based on the golden ratio.
In Example 9, we show that the numerical value of the golden ratio can be found 
by solving the quadratic equation x2 - x - 1 = 0.
Quadratic Equations
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Factoring (Section P.4)
2	 Square roots (Section P.6, page 58)
3	 Rationalizing (Section P.6, page 63)
4	 Linear equations (Section 1.1, page 78)
Objectives
1	 Solve a quadratic equation by factoring.
2	 Solve a quadratic equation by the square 
root method.
3	 Solve a quadratic equation by completing 
the square.
4	 Solve a quadratic equation by using the 
quadratic formula.
5	 Solve applied problems.
The Parthenon
The Pyramid of Giza
The Mona Lisa

92	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
A quadratic equation written in the form ax2 + bx + c = 0 is said to be in standard 
form. Here are some examples of quadratic equations that are not in standard form.
 2x2 - 5x + 7 = x2 + 3x - 1
 3y2 + 4y + 1 = 6y - 5
 x2 - 2x = 3
We discuss four methods for solving quadratic equations: (1) by factoring, (2) by taking 
square roots, (3) by completing the square, and (4) by using the quadratic formula.
We begin by studying real number solutions of quadratic equations.
Factoring Method
Some quadratic equations in the standard form ax2 + bx + c = 0 can be solved by 
­factoring and using the zero-product property.
1	
Solve a quadratic equation by 
factoring.
Q u a d r at i c  E q u at i o n
A quadratic equation in the variable x is an equation equivalent to the equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0,
where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠0.
The word quadratic comes from the 
Latin quadratus, meaning square.
Do You  
Know?
Z e r o – P r o d u c t  P r o p e r t y
Let A and B be two algebraic expressions. Then AB = 0 if and only if A = 0  
or B = 0.
Solve by factoring: 2x2 + 5x = 3
Solution
2x2 + 5x = 3	
Original equation
2x2 + 5x - 3 = 0	
Subtract 3 from both sides to get 0 on one side.
12x - 121x + 32 = 0	
Factor the left side.
We now set each factor equal to 0 and solve the resulting linear equations. The vertical line 
segment separates the computations leading to the two solutions.
2x - 1 = 0  x + 3 = 0	
Zero-product property
2x = 1	
x = -3	
Isolate the x term on one side.
x = 1
2	
x = -3	
Solve for x.
Check:  You should check the solutions x = 1
2 and x = -3 in the original equation.
The solution set is e 1
2, -3f.
Practice Problem 1  Solve by factoring: x2 + 25x = -84
Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring
EXAMPLE 1
To use the zero-product property to 
solve an equation, you must make 
sure that one side of the equation 
is 0.
Side  
Note
For a product of real numbers, a similar property was stated in Section P.1.

	
Section 1.2    ■    Quadratic Equations
93
Solve by factoring: 3t2 = 2t
Solution
3t2 = 2t	
Original equation
3t2 - 2t = 0	
Subtract 2t from both sides.
t13t - 22 = 0	
Factor.
t = 0  3t - 2 = 0	
Zero-product property
3t = 2	
Isolate the t terms on one side.
t = 2
3	
Solve for t.
Check:  You should check the solutions t = 0 and t = 2
3 in the original equation.
The solution set is e0, 2
3 f.
Practice Problem 2  Solve by factoring: 2m2 = 5m
Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring
EXAMPLE 2
S o lv i n g  a  Q u a d r at i c  E q u at i o n  b y  Fa c t o r i n g
Step 1	
Write the given equation in standard form (so that one side is 0).
Step 2	
Factor the nonzero side of the equation from Step 1.
Step 3	
Set each factor obtained in Step 2 equal to 0.
Step 4	
Solve the resulting equations in Step 3.
Step 5	
Check the solutions obtained in Step 4 in the original equation.
The factoring method of solving an equation works only when one of the sides of the 
equation is 0. If neither side of an equation is 0, as in 1x + 121x - 32 = 10, we cannot 
know the value of either factor. For example, we could have x + 1 = 5 and x - 3 = 2, 
or x + 1 = 0.1 and x - 3 = 100. There are countless possibilities for two factors whose 
­product is 10.
Warning
Solve by factoring: x2 + 16 = 8x
Solution
Step 1	 Write the equation in standard form.
x2 + 16 = 8x	
Original equation
x2 + 16 - 8x = 0	
Subtract 8x from both sides.
x2 - 8x + 16 = 0	
Standard form
Step  2	
Factor the left side of the equation.
1x - 421x - 42 = 0	
Perfect-square trinomial
Steps 3 and 4	
Set each factor equal to 0 and solve each resulting equation.
x - 4 = 0  x - 4 = 0	
Zero-product property
	
x = 4	
x = 4
Solving a Quadratic Equation with One Solution
EXAMPLE 3

94	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Step 5	
Check the solution in the original equation.
Check:  x = 4 because x = 4 is the only possible solution.
x2 + 16 = 8x	
Original equation
1422 + 16 ≟8142    Replace x with 4.
32 = 32 ✓
Thus, 4 is the only solution of x2 + 16 = 8x and the solution set is 546.
Practice Problem 3  Solve by factoring: x2 - 6x = -9
In Example 3, because the factor 1x - 42 appears twice in the solution, the number 4 
is called a double root, or a root of multiplicity 2, of the given equation.
The Square Root Method
The solutions of an equation of the type x2 = d are obtained by the square root ­method. 
Suppose we are interested in solving the equation x2 = 3, which is equivalent to the 
­equation x2 - 3 = 0. Applying the factoring method but removing the restriction that 
coefficients and constants represent only integers, we have
x2 - 3 = 0
x2 - 11322 = 0	
	
Because 3 = 11322
1x + 1321x - 132 = 0	
	
Factor (using real numbers).
x + 13 = 0   or x - 13 = 0	
Set each factor equal to zero.
x = - 13	
or	
x = 13	
Solve for x.
Thus, the solutions of the equation x2 = 3 are - 13 and 13. Because the solutions ­differ 
only in sign, we use the notation {13 to write the two numbers 13 and - 13. In a similar 
way, we see that for any nonnegative real number d, the solutions of the quadratic equation 
x2 = d are {1d.
2	
Solve a quadratic equation by 
the square root method.
S q u a r e  R o o t  P r o p e r t y
Suppose u is any algebraic expression and d Ú 0. If u2 = d, then u = {1d.
Solve: 1x - 322 = 5
Solution
1x - 322 = 5	
Original equation
x - 3 = {15	
Square root property
x = 3 { 15	
Add 3 to both sides.
The solution set is 53 - 15, 3 + 156.
Practice Problem 4  Solve: 1x + 222 = 5
Solving an Equation by the Square Root Method
EXAMPLE 4
Completing the Square 
We use a method called completing the square to solve quadratic equations that cannot  
be solved by factoring and are not in the correct form to use the square root method. 
The method requires two steps. First, we write a given quadratic equation in the form 
1x + k22 = d. Then we solve the equation 1x + k22 = d by the square root method.
3	
Solve a quadratic equation by 
completing the square.
If d 6 0, then the equation 
u2 = d has no real solutions.
Side 
Note

	
Section 1.2    ■    Quadratic Equations
95
Recall that
1x + k22 = x2 + 2kx + k2.
Notice that the coefficient of x on the right side is 2k, and half of this coefficient is k; that is, 
1
2 12k2 = k. Notice that the constant term, k2, in the trinomial x2 + 2kx + k2 is the square 
of one-half the coefficient of x.
P e r f e c t- S q u a r e  T r i n o m i a l
A quadratic trinomial in x with coefficient of x2 equal to 1 is a perfect-square 
­trinomial if the constant term is the square of one-half the coefficient of x.
When the constant term is not the square of half the coefficient of x, we subtract the con-
stant term from both sides and add a new constant term that will result in a perfect-square 
trinomial.
Here are some examples that show the number that should be added to x2 + bx to 
­create a perfect-square trinomial.
x2 + bx
b
b
2
	 Add ab
2b
2
	
Result is ax + b
2b
2
x2 + 6x
6
3
32 = 9
x2 + 6x + 9 = 1x + 322
x2 - 4x
-4
-2
1-222 = 4
x2 - 4x + 4 = 1x - 222
x2 + 3x
3
3
2
a3
2b
2
= 9
4
x2 + 3x + 9
4 = ax + 3
2b
2
x2 - x
-1
-1
2
a -1
2b
2
= 1
4
x2 - x + 1
4 = ax - 1
2b
2
Thus, to make x2 + bx into a perfect square, we need to add
c 1
21coefficient of x2d
2
= c 1
21b2d
2
= b2
4
so that
x2 + bx + b2
4 = ax + b
2b
2
.
We say that b2
4  was added to x2 + bx to complete the square. See Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2  Area of a square = ax + b
2b
2
Area of shaded portion
 x2  bx
b
2
 x.x  x.     x.
b
2
b
2
Area of unshaded portion

. b
2
b
2

b2
4
x
b
2
b
2

96	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
We summarize the procedure for solving a quadratic equation by completing the square.
Solve by completing the square: x2 + 10x + 8 = 0
Solution
First, isolate the constant on the right side.
x2 + 10x + 8 = 0	
Original equation
x2 + 10x = -8	
Subtract 8 from both sides.
Next, add c 1
21102d
2
= 52 = 25 to both sides to complete the square on the left side.
x2 + 10x + 25 = -8 + 25	
Add 25 to each side.
1x + 522 = 17	
x2 + 10x + 25 = 1x + 522
x + 5 = {117	
Square root property
x = -5 { 117	
Subtract 5 from each side.
Thus, x = -5 + 117 or x = -5 - 117, and the solution set is 5-5 + 117, 
-5 - 1176.
Practice Problem 5  Solve by completing the square: x2 - 6x + 7 = 0
Solving a Quadratic Equation by Completing the Square
EXAMPLE 5
M e t h o d  o f  C o m p l e t i n g  t h e  S q u a r e
Step 1	
Rearrange the quadratic equation so that the terms in x2 and x are on the 
left side of the equation and the constant term is on the right side.
Step 2	
Make the coefficient of x2 equal to 1 by dividing both sides of the equation 
by the original coefficient. (Steps 1 and 2 are interchangeable.)
Step 3	
Add the square of one-half the coefficient of x to both sides of the equation.
Step 4	
Write the equation in the form 1x + k22 = d using the fact that the left 
side is a perfect square.
Step 5	
Take the square root of each side, prefixing { to the right side.
Step 6	
Solve the two equations resulting from Step 5.
Solve by completing the square: 3x2 - 4x - 1 = 0
Solution
Step 1	
3x2 - 4x - 1 = 0	
Note that the coefficient of x2 is 3.
	
3x2 - 4x = 1	
Add 1 to both sides.
Step 2	
x2 - 4
3 x = 1
3	
Divide both sides by 3.
Step 3	
x2 - 4
3x  +  a-2
3b
2
= 1
3
  +  a-2
3b
2
	
Add c 1
2 a-4
3b d
2
= a-2
3b
2
 to both sides.
Step 4	
ax - 2
3b
2
= 7
9	
x2 - 4
3 x + a-2
3b
2
= ax - 2
3b
2
Solving a Quadratic Equation by Completing the Square
EXAMPLE 6

	
Section 1.2    ■    Quadratic Equations
97
Step 5	
x - 2
3 = { A
7
9	
Take the square root of both sides.
x - 2
3 = { 17
3 	
A
7
9 = 17
19 = 17
3
Step 6	
x = 2
3 { 17
3 	
Add 2
3 to both sides.
x = 2 { 17
3
	
Add fractions.
The solution set is e 2 - 17
3
, 2 + 17
3
f.
Practice Problem 6  Solve by completing the square: 4x2 - 24x + 25 = 0
The Quadratic Formula
We can generalize the method of completing the square to derive a formula that gives a 
solution of any quadratic equation.
We solve a quadratic equation in standard form by completing the square.
ax2 + bx + c = 0,  a ≠0
Step 1		
ax2 + bx = -c	
Isolate the constant on the right side.
Step 2		
x2 + b
a x = - c
a	
Divide both sides by a.
Step 3	 x2 + b
a x + a b
2ab
2
= - c
a + a b
2ab
2
	
Add the square of one-half the 
­coefficient of x to both sides.
Step 4		
ax + b
2ab
2
= - c
a + b2
4a2	
The left side in Step 3 is a ­perfect 
square.
ax + b
2ab
2
= b2 - 4ac
4a2
	
Rearrange and combine ­fractions on 
the right side.
Step 5		
x + b
2a = { C
b2 - 4ac
4a2
	
Take the square roots of both sides.
Step 6  Solve the equations in Step 5.
x + b
2a = { C
b2 - 4ac
4a2
	
Equations from Step 5
x = - b
2a { 2b2 - 4ac
2 a
	
Add - b
2a  to both sides; 24a2 = 142a2 = 2 a .
x = - b
2a { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
	
{2 a = {2a because  a = a or  a = -a.
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
	
Combine fractions.
The last equation in Step 6 is called the quadratic formula.
4	
Solve a quadratic equation by 
using the quadratic formula.
Q u a d r at i c  F o r m u l a
The solutions of the quadratic equation in the standard form ax2 + bx + c = 0 with 
a ≠0 are given by the formula
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
.
The quadratic formula shows that 
a quadratic equation can have, at 
most, two distinct solutions, and for 
the solutions to be real we must 
have b2 - 4ac Ú 0.
Side  
Note

98	
Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
To use the quadratic formula, write the given quadratic equation in standard form. Then 
­determine the values of a (coefficient of x2), b (coefficient of x), and c (constant term).
Warning
Solve by using the quadratic formula: 3x2 = 5x + 2
Solution
The equation 3x2 = 5x + 2 can be rewritten in the standard form by subtracting 5x + 2 
from both sides.
3x2 - 5x - 2 = 0	 Rewrite in standard form.
3x2 +
 1-52x + 1-22 = 0	 Identify values of a, b, and c to be used in the  
quadratic formula.
	
c	
c	
c
	
a	
b	
c
Then a = 3,  b = -5, and c = -2, and we have
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
	
Quadratic formula
x =
- 1-52 { 21-522 - 41321-22
2132
	
Substitute 3 for a, -5  
for b, and -2 for c.
= 5 { 125 + 24
6
	
Simplify.
= 5 { 149
6
= 5 { 7
6
	
Simplify.
Then
x = 5 + 7
6
= 12
6 = 2 or x = 5 - 7
6
= -2
6
= -1
3, and the solution set is e -1
3, 2f.
Now you should solve 3x2 = 5x + 2 by factoring to confirm that you get the same result.
Practice Problem 7  Solve 6x2 - x - 2 = 0 by using the quadratic formula.
Applications
5	
Solve applied problems.
Solving a Quadratic Equation by Using the  
Quadratic Formula
EXAMPLE 7
A rectangular building whose depth (from the front of the building) is three times its front-
age is divided into two parts by a partition that is 45 feet from and parallel to the front 
wall. Assuming that the rear portion of the building contains 2100 square feet, find the 
dimensions of the building.
Solution
In solving problems of this type, it is advisable to draw a diagram such as Figure 1.3. We let
 x = the frontage of the building, in feet.
Then
   3x = the depth of the building, in feet,
and  3x - 45 = the depth of the rear portion, in feet.
Partitioning a Building
EXAMPLE 8
Figure 1.3 
x
3x
Front
2100 ft2
Rear
45 ft
3x45

	
Section 1.2    ■    Quadratic Equations
99
The area of the rear portion of the building is x13x - 452 square feet. This area is 
2100 square feet, so
x13x - 452 = 2100
3x2 - 45x = 2100	
Distributive property
3x2 - 45x - 2100 = 0	
Subtract 2100 from both sides.
x2 - 15x - 700 = 0	
Divide both sides by 3.
1x - 3521x + 202 = 0	
Factor.
x - 35 = 0 or x + 20 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = 35	 or	
x = -20	
Solve for x.
Because the dimensions of the building are positive numbers, we reject x = -20. Thus,
x = 35	
Frontage in feet
3x = 105	
Depth in feet
Check:  3x - 45 = 31352 - 45 = 105 - 45 = 60 is the depth of the rear portion, and 
the area of the rear portion is 60 # 35 = 2100 square feet.
Practice Problem 8  In Example 8, find approximate dimensions of the building 
­assuming that its depth is five times its frontage.
Golden Rectangle
A rectangle of length p and width q, with p 7 q, is called a golden rectangle if 
you can divide the rectangle into a square with side of length q and a smaller rectan-
gle that is similar to the original one. See Figure 1.4. The ratio of the longer side to 
the shorter side of a golden rectangle is called the golden ratio. In Figure 1.4, the 
golden ratio is p
q.
Recall that two rectangles are 
­similar if the lengths of correspond-
ing sides are proportional.
Side  
Note
Figure 1.4  Golden Rectangle
Rectangle A
p
q
q
p  q
Square
S
Rectangle
B
Use Figure 1.4 of a golden rectangle to calculate the golden ratio.
Solution
The rectangle A in Figure 1.4 is a golden rectangle. This means that we can divide ­rectangle A 
into a square S and a smaller rectangle B such that
Longer side of A
Shorter side of A = Longer side of B
Shorter side of B.
Calculating the Golden Ratio
EXAMPLE 9

100	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Thus, because rectangle B is the smaller rectangle, p - q 6 q, and we have
p
q =
q
p - q
p1p - q2 = q # q	
Multiply both sides by q1p - q2; simplify.
p2 - pq = q2	
Distributive property
ap
qb
2
- p
q = 1	
Divide both sides by q2; simplify.
Φ2 - Φ = 1	
Replace p
q with Φ, the golden ratio.
Φ2 - Φ - 1 = 0	
Write in standard form, treating Φ as the variable.
Φ =
-1-12 { 21-122 - 41121-12
2112
	
Substitute 1 for a and -1 for 
both b and c.
= 1 { 15
2
	
Simplify.
Because the ratio of two positive numbers is positive, we reject the negative root 1 - 15
2
. 
Therefore, the golden ratio is
Φ = 1 + 15
2
≈1.618.
Practice Problem 9  Find the length of a golden rectangle whose width is 36 feet.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 5-21, -46    2. e0, 5
2 f    3. 536
4. 5-2 - 15, -2 + 156    5. 53 - 12, 3 + 126
6. e3 - 111
2 , 3 + 111
2
f    7. e - 1
2, 2
3 f
8. 25.48 ft by 127.41 ft    9. 18 + 1815 ≈58.25 ft
Exercises
section 1.2 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 Any equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0 with a ≠0 is 
called a(n) 
 equation.
	2.	 If P1x2, D1x2, and Q1x2 are polynomials and 
P1x2 = D1x2Q1x2, then the solutions of P1x2 = 0 are 
the solutions of Q1x2 = 0 together with the solutions of 
= 0.
	3.	 From the square root property, we know that if u2 = 5, then 
u = 
.
	4.	 If you complete the square in the quadratic equation 
ax2 + bx + c = 0, you get the quadratic formula  
for the solutions x =
.	
	5.	 True or False. Every quadratic equation has, at most, two 
distinct solutions. 
	6.	 True or False. If we are given x2 + kx, we form a perfect 
square by adding k2. 
In Exercises 7–14, show by substitution whether the number r 
is a solution of the corresponding quadratic equation.
	 7.	 x2 + 4x - 12 = 0;  r = -6 
	8.	 x2 - 8x - 9 = 0;  r = 9 
	9.	 3x2 + 7x - 6 = 0;  r = 2
3 
	10.	 2x2 - 5x - 3 = 0;  r = - 1
2 
	11.	 x2 - 4x + 1 = 0;  r = 2 - 13 
	12.	 x2 - 6x + 1 = 0;  r = 3 + 212 
	13.	 4x2 - 8x + 13 = 0;  r = 2 + 13 
	14.	 x2 - 6x + 13 = 5;  r = 5 - 12 
	15.	 Find k assuming that x = 1 is a solution of the equation 
kx2 + x - 3 = 0. 
	16.	 Find k assuming that x = 17 is a solution of the equation 
kx2 + x - 3 = 0.    

	
Section 1.2    ■    Quadratic Equations 101
In Exercises 17–22, solve each equation by factoring.
	17.	 x2 - 5x = 0 
	18.	 x2 - 5x + 4 = 0 
	19.	 x2 + 5x = 14 
	20.	 x2 - 11x = 12 
	21.	 x2 = 5x + 6 
	22.	 x = x2 - 12 
In Exercises 23–28, solve each equation by the square root 
method.
	23.	 3x2 = 48 
	24.	 2x2 = 50 
	25.	 x2 + 1 = 5 
	26.	 2x2 - 1 = 17 
	27.	 1x - 122 = 16 
	28.	 12x - 322 = 25 
In Exercises 29–38, add a constant term to the expression to 
make it a perfect square.
	29.	 x2 + 4x 
	30.	 y2 + 10y 
	31.	 x2 + 6x 
	32.	 y2 - 8y 
	33.	 x2 - 7x 
	34.	 x2 - 3x 
	35.	 x2 + 1
3 x 
	36.	 x2 - 3
2 x 
	37.	 x2 + ax 
	38.	 x2 - 2a
3  x 
In Exercises 39–44, solve each equation by completing the 
square.
	39.	 x2 + 2x - 5 = 0 
	40.	 x2 + 6x = -7 
	41.	 x2 - 3x - 1 = 0 
	42.	 x2 - x - 3 = 0 
	43.	 2r2 + 3r = 9 
	44.	 3k2 - 5k + 1 = 0 
In Exercises 45–50, solve each equation by using the  
quadratic formula.
	45.	 x2 + 2x - 4 = 0 
	46.	 m2 + 3m + 2 = 0 
	47.	 6x2 = 7x + 5 
	48.	 t2 - 7 = 4t 
	49.	 3z2 - 2z = 7 
	50.	 6y2 + 11y = 10 
In Exercises 51–76, solve each equation by any method.
	51.	 2x2 + 5x - 3 = 0 
	52.	 2x2 - 9x + 10 = 0 
	53.	 13x - 222 - 16 = 0 
	54.	 14x + 122 - 25 = 0 
	55.	 5x2 - 6x = 4x2 + 6x - 3 
	56.	 x2 + 7x - 5 = x - x2 
	57.	 3p2 + 8p + 4 = 0 
	58.	 x2 = 51x - 12 
	59.	 3y2 + 5y + 2 = 0 
	60.	 6x2 + 11x + 4 = 0 
	61.	 5x2 + 12x + 4 = 0 
	62.	 3x2 - 2x - 5 = 0 
	63.	 5y2 + 10y + 4 = 2y2 + 3y + 1 
	64.	 3x2 - 1 = 5x2 - 3x - 5 
	65.	 2x2 + x = 15 
	66.	 6x2 = 1 - x 
	67.	 12x2 - 10x = 12 
	68.	 -x2 + 10x + 1200 = 0 
	69.	 1x + 1321x + 52 = -2 
	70.	 31x2 + 12 = 2x2 + 4x + 1 
	71.	 18x2 - 45x = -7 
	72.	18x2 + 57x + 45 = 0 
	73.	 2t2 - 5 = 0 
	74.	 3k2 - 48 = 0 
	75.	 4x2 - 10x - 750 = 0 
	76.	12x2 + 43x + 36 = 0 
In Exercises 77–80, write your answer rounded to two  
decimal places.
	77.	 Find the length of the golden rectangle whose width is 14.72 in. 
	78.	 Find the length of the golden rectangle whose width is  
18.63 ft. 
	79.	 Find the width of the golden rectangle whose length is  
8.46 cm. 
	80.	 Find the width of the golden rectangle whose length is  
4.68 m. 
Applying the Concepts
	81.	 Dimensions. The length of a rectangular plot is three times 
its width. Assuming that the area of the plot is 10,800 square 
feet, find the dimensions of the plot. 
	82.	 Dimensions. The diagonal of a square tile is 4 inches longer 
than its side. Find the length of the side. 
	83.	 Finding integers. Find two numbers whose sum is 28 and 
whose product is 147. 
	84.	 Finding integers. Find an integer such that the sum of 
twice the square of the integer and the integer itself is 55. 
	85.	 The sum of two numbers is 57, and their product is 782. Find 
the numbers. 
	86.	 The perimeter of a rectangle is 82 ft, and its area is 400 ft2. 
Find dimensions of the rectangle. 
	87.	 Geometry. The length of a rectangle is 5 centimeters greater 
than its width. The area of the rectangle is 500 square centi-
meters. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. 
	88.	 Geometry. The sides of a rectangle are in the ratio 3:2. 
The area of the rectangle is 216 square centimeters. Find the 
dimensions of the rectangle. 
	89.	 Cutting a wire. A wire of length 16 inches is to be cut into 
two pieces; then each piece will be bent to form a square. 
Find the length of the two pieces assuming that the sum of 
the areas of the two squares is 10 square inches. 
x
16  x
16 in
	90.	 Cutting a wire. A piece of wire is 38 inches long. The 
wire is cut into two pieces; then each piece is bent to form a 
square. Find the length of each piece if three times the area 
of the larger square exceeds the area of the smaller square by 
95.75 square inches. 
	91.	 Manufacturing. The surface area A of a cylinder with height 
h and radius r is given by the equation A = 2prh + 2pr2. 
A company makes soup cans by using 32p square inches of 
aluminum sheet for each can. Assuming that the height of the 
can is 6 inches, find the radius of the can. 
	92.	 Concrete patio. To make a rectangular concrete patio, a 
homeowner used 70 feet of perimeter, into which she poured 
138 cubic feet of concrete to form a slab 6 inches thick. What 
were the dimensions of the patio? 

102	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
	93.	 Making a box. The volume of a box is given by the equa-
tion V = length # width # height. A topless box is to be made 
from a square sheet of tin by cutting 5-inch squares from 
each of the four corners and then shaping the tin into an  
open box by turning up the sides. Assuming that the box is  
to hold 480 cubic inches, find the size of the piece of tin to  
be used. 
5 in
x  10
x
	94.	 Making a box. A 2-inch square is cut from each corner of 
a rectangular piece of cardboard whose length exceeds the 
width by 4 inches. The sides are then turned up to form an 
open box. Assuming that the volume of the box is 64 cubic 
inches, find the dimensions of the box. 
	95.	 Bus travel. Two buses leave Atlanta at the same time, one 
traveling west at an average of 52 miles per hour and the 
other traveling north at an average of 39 miles per hour. 
When will they be 390 miles apart? 
	96.	 Plane travel. Two planes left San Francisco at 2 p.m. One 
flew east at a certain speed, and the other flew south at a 
speed that was 100 kilometers per hour more than the speed 
of the plane heading east. The planes were 2100 kilometers 
apart at 5 p.m. How fast was each plane flying?
	97.	 Gardening. You want to expand your present 25-foot by 
15-foot garden by planting a border of flowers. The border is 
to be of the same width around the entire garden. The flowers 
you bought will fill an area of 624 square feet. How wide should 
the border be? 
	98.	 Sky divers. Sky divers are in free fall from the time they 
jump out of a plane until they open their parachutes. A sky 
diver jumps from 5000 feet. The diver’s height h above the 
ground t seconds after the jump is described by the equation 
h = -16t2 + 5000. Find the time during which the diver is in 
free fall assuming that the parachute opens at 1000 feet. 
	99.	 Physics. Suppose you throw a ball straight up from the 
ground with a velocity of 112 feet per second. As the ball 
moves up, gravity slows it. Eventually, the ball begins to fall 
back to the ground. The height h of the ball after t seconds in 
the air is given by the equation h = -16t2 + 112t.
a.	 Find the height of the ball after two seconds. 
b.	 How long will it take the ball to reach a height of 96 feet?
c.	 How long after you throw the ball will it return to the 
ground? 
	100.	 Sound velocity. The speed of sound v1in ft>sec2 depends 
on the temperature T ° Celsius and is given by 
	
	 v = 10872T + 273
16.25
.
a.	 Find the speed of sound if the air temperature is T = 20°C.
b.	 Find the air temperature if the speed of sound is 1150 ft/sec.
Height of a projectile. The height, h, of a projectile thrown 
straight up from the top of a 480-foot hill t seconds after 
being thrown upward with initial velocity V0 ft>sec is given 
by h = −16t2 + V0  t + 480. In Exercises 101–104, for a 
given value of V0, find the time(s) when the projectile will (a) 
be at a height of 592 ft above the ground and (b) crash on the 
ground. Round your answers to two decimal places.
	101.	 v0 = 96 
	102.	 v0 = 112 
	103.	 v0 = 256 
	104.	 v0 = 64 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 105–110, find the values of k for which the given 
equation has equal roots.
	105.	 x2 - kx + 3 = 0 
	106.	 x2 + 3kx + 8 = 0 
	107.	 2x2 + kx + k = 0 
	108.	 kx2 + 2x + 6 = 0 
	109.	 x2 + k2 = 21k + 12x 
	110.	 kx2  +
 1k + 32x + 4 = 0
	111.	 Assuming that r and s are the roots of the quadratic  
equation ax2 + bx + c = 0, show that
r + s = - b
a and r # s = c
a.
	112.	 Find the sum and the product of the roots of the following 
equations without solving the equation.
a.	 3x2 + 5x - 5 = 0 
b.	 3x2 - 7x = 1 
c.	 13x2 = 3x + 4 
d.	 11 + 122x2 - 12x - 5 = 0 
In Exercises 113 and 114, determine k so that the sum and the 
product of the roots are equal.
	113.	 2x2 +
 1k - 32x + 3k - 5 = 0 
	114.	 5x2 +
 12k - 32x - 2k + 3 = 0 
	115.	 Suppose r and s are the roots of the quadratic  
equation ax2 + bx + c = 0. Show that you can write 
ax2 + bx + c = a1x - r21x - s2. Thus, the quadratic  
trinomial can be written in factored form. 
[Hint: From Exercise 111, b = -a1r + s2 and c = ars. 
Substitute in ax2 + bx + c and factor.]
	116.	 Use Exercise 115 to factor each trinomial.
a.	 4x2 + 4x - 5 
b.	 25x2 + 40x + 11 
c.	 25x2 - 30x + 4 
d.	 72x2 + 95x - 1000 
	117.	 If we know the roots r and s in advance, then by Exercise 115, 
a quadratic equation with roots r and s can be expressed in 
the form
a1x - r21x - s2 = 0.
	
	 Form a quadratic equation that has the listed numbers  
as roots.
a.	 -3, 4 
b.	 5, 5 
c.	 3 + 12, 3 - 12   
  

	
Section 1.2    ■    Quadratic Equations 103
	118.	 Solve the equation 3x2 - 4xy + 5 - y2 = 0
a.	 for x in terms of y.
b.	 for y in terms of x.
	119.	 How to construct a golden rectangle. Draw a square 
ABCD with side of length x, as in the accompanying  
diagram. Let M be the midpoint of DC. The segment MB 
sweeps out the arc BF so that F lies on the line through the 
segment DC. Show that the rectangle AEFD is a golden 
rectangle.
D
M
C
x
x
F
A
B
E
	120.	 If the two roots of the quadratic equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0
	 	 are reciprocals of each other, which of the following  
must be true? 
i.  b = c
ii.  a = c
iii.  a = 0
iv.  b = 0
	121.	 Use Exercise 111 to show that a quadratic equation cannot 
have three distinct roots.
	122.	 Suppose p is a positive integer greater than 1. Which 
of the following describes the roots of the equation 
x2 - 1p + 12x + p = 0? 
  i.	real and equal
ii.	 real and irrational
iii.	complex
iv.	integers and unequal
	123.	 Amar, Akbar, and Anthony attempt to solve a barely legible 
quadratic equation written on an old paper. Amar misreads 
the constant term and finds the solutions 8 and 2. Akbar 
misreads the coefficient of x and finds the roots -9 and -1. 
Anthony solves the correct equation. What are Anthony’s 
solutions of the equation? 
In Exercises 124 and 125, choose the correct answer and 
explain why it is correct.
	124.	 An equation equivalent to x2 + 4x - 5 = 0 is 
a.	 5x2 - 4x + 1
b.	 x2 - 4x + 5
c.	 x + 2 = 3
d.	 4x2 + 5x - 1 = 0
	125.	 The equation x2 + 4x + k = 0 has real roots. Then 
a.	 k 7 4
b.	 k … 4
c.	 k … 0
d.	 k Ú 0
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	126.	 If a, b, and k are real numbers, show that the solutions of 
the equation 1x - a21x - b2 = k2 are real.
	127.	 Show that for 0 6 a 6 4, the equation ax11 - x2 = 1 has 
no real solutions.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 128–143, perform the indicated operations.
	128.	 13 + 12213 - 122 
	129.	 11 - 217211 + 2172
	130.	 12 + 1522 
	131.	 112 - 1322 
	132.	 5 + 5120
5 
	133.	 6 + 127
3 
	134.	 16 - 1100
2 
	135.	 18 - 1108
12 
	136.	 13x + 22 + 1x - 72
	137.	 15x - 92 + 16 - x2
	138.	 19x + 42 - 12x + 122
	139.	 16x - 52 - 13x + 42
	140.	 13x + 221x - 92
	141.	 12x - 5213x + 42
	142.	 1x - 321x + 32 
	143.	 15x + 2215x - 22
In Exercises 144–147, solve each equation.
	144.	 x2 + 4x + 1 = 0
	145.	 x2 + 5x + 5 = 0
	146.	 5x2 + 8x + 2 = 0
	147.	 -2x2 + 5x - 1 = 0            

104	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Alternating Current Circuits
In the early days of the study of alternate current (AC) circuits, scientists concluded 
that AC circuits were somehow different from the battery-powered direct current (DC) 
circuits. However, both types of circuits obey the same physical and mathematical laws. 
In 1893, Charles Steinmetz provided the breakthrough in understanding AC circuits. He 
explained that in AC circuits, the voltage, current, and resistance (called impedance in 
AC circuits) were not scalars, but alternate in direction, and possessed frequency and 
phase shift that must be taken into account. He advocated the use of the polar form of 
complex numbers to provide a convenient method of symbolically denoting the mag-
nitude, frequency, and phase shift simultaneously for the AC circuit quantities voltage, 
current, and impedance. Steinmetz eventually became known as “the wizard who gen-
erated electricity from the square root of minus one.” In Example 8, we use complex 
numbers to compute the total impendance in an AC circuit.
Complex Numbers
Because the square of a real number is nonnegative (that is, x2 Ú 0 for any real number 
x), the equation x2 = -1 has no solution in the set of real numbers. To solve such equa-
tions, we extend the real numbers to a larger set called the set of complex numbers. We first 
introduce a new number i whose square is -1.
1	
Define complex numbers.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Properties of real numbers (Section P.1, 
pages 10 and 11)
2	 Special products (Section P.3,  
pages 34 and 35)
3	 Factoring (Section P.4)
Objectives
1	 Define complex numbers.
2	 Add and subtract complex numbers.
3	 Multiply complex numbers.
4	 Divide complex numbers.
5	 Solve quadratic equations having complex 
solutions.
Complex Numbers: Quadratic 
Equations with Complex  
Solutions
1.3
S e c t i o n 
The square root of -1 is called i.
i = 1-1 so that i2 = -1.
The number i is called the imaginary unit.
Definition of i
With the introduction of the number i, the equation x2 = -1 has two solutions, 
x = {1-1 = {i.

	
Section 1.3    ■    Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions 105
A complex number z written in the form a + bi is said to be in standard form. Where 
convenient, we use the form a + ib as equivalent to a + bi. A complex number with 
a = 0 and b ≠0, written as bi, is called a pure imaginary number. If b = 0, then the 
complex number a + bi = a is a real number. So real numbers form a subset of the com-
plex numbers (with imaginary part 0). Figure 1.5 shows how various sets of numbers are 
contained within larger sets.
C o m p l e x  N u m b e r s
A complex number is a number of the form
z = a + bi,
where a and b are real numbers and i = 1-1, 1so i2 = -12.
The number a is called the real part of z, and we write Re1z2 = a. The number b 
is called the imaginary part of z, and we write Im1z2 = b.
Most graphing calculators allow 
you to work with complex numbers 
by changing from real to a + bi 
mode. Once the a + bi mode is 
set, the 1-1 is recognized as i. 
The i key is used to enter complex 
numbers such as 2 + 3i.
Technology
Connection
The real and imaginary parts 
of a complex number can then 
be found.
We can express the square root of any negative number as a product of a real number and i.
2, 3, e, ,
2i
4i
Rational numbers
Irrational numbers
Integers:
{. . ., 3, 2, 1, 0, 1, . . .}
Natural numbers
{1, 2, 3, …}
2  3i
1  i
3  5i

 i
1
2
 , 0.75, 5.7
3
2
Complex numbers of the form a  bi, where a and b
are real numbers and i  1 
, 37
5
 3
 i2
3
5
 i3
2
5
Real numbers a  bi with b  0
Figure 1.5  Complex numbers
S q u a r e  R o o t  o f  a  N e g at i v e  N u m b e r
For any positive number b,
1-b = 11b2i = i1b.
In 1777, the great Swiss mathema-
tician Leonhard Euler introduced 
the i symbol for 1-1. However, 
electrical engineers often use the 
letter j for 1-1 because in elec-
trical engineering problems, the 
symbol i is traditionally reserved  
for the electric current.
Do You  
Know?
Identify the real and imaginary parts of each complex number.
a.   2 + 5i      b.   7 - 1
2 i      c.   3i      d.   -9      e.   0      f.   3 + 1-25
Solution
To identify the real and imaginary parts, we express each number in the standard form 
a + bi.
a.	 2 + 5i is already written as a + bi; real part 2, imaginary part 5
b.	 7 - 1
2 i = 7 + a -1
2b i; real part 7, imaginary part -1
2
Identifying the Real and Imaginary Parts of a Complex 
Number
EXAMPLE 1

106	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Addition and Subtraction
We find the sum or difference of two complex numbers by treating them as binomials in 
which i is the variable.
2	
Add and subtract complex 
numbers.
c.	 3i = 0 + 3i; real part 0, imaginary part 3
d.	 -9 = -9 + 0i; real part -9, imaginary part 0
e.	 0 = 0 + 0i; real part 0, imaginary part 0
f.	 3 + 1-25 = 3 + 11252 i = 3 + 5i; real part 3, imaginary part 5
Practice Problem 1  Identify the real and imaginary parts of each complex number.
a.	 -1 + 2i        b. 
-1
3 - 6i        c.  8
E q u a l i t y  o f  C o m p l e x  N u m b e r s
Two complex numbers z = a + bi and w = c + di are equal if and only if
a = c and b = d.
That is, z = w if and only if Re1z2 = Re1w2 and Im1z2 = Im1w2.
Find x and y assuming that 13x - 12 + 5i = 8 + 13 - 2y2i.
Solution
Let            z = 13x - 12 + 5i       and      w = 8 + 13 - 2y2i.
Then Re1z2 = Re1w2	
and	
Im1z2 = Im1w2.
So   3x - 1 = 8	
and	
5 = 3 - 2y.
Solving for x and y, we have
	
3x = 8 + 1  Isolate x.	
5 - 3 = -2y  Isolate y.
	
  x = 3	
Solve for x.	
     -1 = y	
Solve for y.
So x = 3 and y = -1.
Practice Problem 2  Find a and b assuming that 11 - 2a2 + 3i = 5 - 12b - 52i.
Equality of Complex Numbers
EXAMPLE 2
A d d i t i o n  a n d  S u b t r a c t i o n  o f  C o m p l e x  N u m b e r s
For real numbers a, b, c, and d, let z = a + bi and w = c + di.
Sum:  z + w = 1a + bi2 + 1c + di2 = 1a + c2 + 1b + d2i
To add complex numbers, add their real parts, add their imaginary parts, and express 
the sum in standard form.
Difference:  z - w = 1a + bi2 - 1c + di2 = 1a - c2 + 1b - d2i
To subtract complex numbers, subtract their real parts, subtract their imaginary parts, 
and express the difference in standard form.

	
Section 1.3    ■    Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions 107
Multiplying Complex Numbers
We multiply complex numbers by using FOIL (as we do with binomials; see page 32) and 
then replace i2 with -1. For example,
F	
O	
I	
L
12 + 5i214 + 3i2 = 2 # 4 + 2 # 3i + 5i # 4 + 5i # 3i   
= 8 + 6i + 20i + 15i2
= 8 + 26i + 151-12	
Replace i2 with -1.
= 18 - 152 + 26i
= -7 + 26i.
You should always use the FOIL method to multiply complex numbers in standard form, 
but for completeness, we state the product rule formally.
3	
Multiply complex numbers.
In a + bi mode, most graphing 
calculators perform addition and 
subtraction of complex numbers 
using the ordinary addition and 
subtraction keys.
Technology
Connection
Write the sum or difference of two complex numbers in standard form.
a.	 13 + 7i2 + 12 - 4i2                 b. 
15 + 9i2 - 16 - 8i2
c.	 12 + 1-92 - 1-2 + 1-42
Solution
a.	 13 + 7i2 + 12 - 4i2 = 13 + 22 + 37 + 1-424i = 5 + 3i
b.	 15 + 9i2 - 16 - 8i2 = 15 - 62 + 39 - 1-824i = -1 + 17i
c.	 12 + 1-92 - 1-2 + 1-42 = 12 + 3i2 - 1-2 + 2i2
1-9 = 3i, 1-4 = 2i
	
= 12 - 1-222 + 13 - 22i
	
= 4 + i
Practice Problem 3  Write the following complex numbers in standard form.
a.	 11 - 4i2 + 13 + 2i2              b.   14 + 3i2 - 15 - i2
c.	 13 - 1-92 - 15 - 1-642
Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers
EXAMPLE 3
M u lt i p ly i n g  C o m p l e x  N u m b e r s
For all real numbers a, b, c, and d,
1a + bi21c + di2 = 1ac - bd2 + 1ad + bc2i.
Write the following products in standard form.
a.	 13 - 5i212 + 7i2         b. 
-2i15 - 9i2
Solution
	
F	
O	
I	
L
a.	 13 - 5i212 + 7i2 = 6 + 21i - 10i - 35i2
	
= 6 + 11i + 35	
Because i2 = -1, -35i2 = 35.
	
= 41 + 11i	
Combine terms.
Multiplying Complex Numbers
EXAMPLE 4

108	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
When performing multiplication (or division) involving square roots of negative numbers 
1say, 1-b with b 7 02, always write 1-b = i1b before performing the operation.
b.	 -2i15 - 9i2 = -10i + 18i2	
Distributive property
	
= -10i - 18	
Because i2 = -1, 18i2 = -18.
	
= -18 - 10i
Practice Problem 4  Write the following products in standard form.
a.	 12 - 6i211 + 4i2        b.   -3i17 - 5i2
Recall from algebra that if a and b are positive real numbers, then
 1a1b = 1ab.
However, this property is not true for all complex numbers. For example,
 1-91-9 = 13i213i2 = 9i 2 = 91-12 = -9,
but    
 11-921-92 = 181 = 9.
Thus,       1-9 1-9 ≠11-921-92.
Warning
Perform the indicated operation and write the result in standard form.
a.	 1-2 1-8        b. 
1-3 12 + 1-32        c. 
1-2 + 1-322
d.	 13 + 1-2211 + 1-322
Solution
a.	 1-2 1-8 = i12 # i18 = i212 # 8 = i2116 = 1-12142 = -4
b.	 1-3 12 + 1-32 = i13 12 + i132	
1-3 = i13
	
= 2i13 + i219	
Distributive property
	
= 2i13 + 1-12132	
i2 = -1, 19 = 3
	
= -3 + 2i13	
Standard form
c.	 1-2 + 1-322 = 1-2 + i1322	
1-3 = i13
	
= 1-222 + 21-221i132 + 1i1322   1a + b22 =  a2 + 2ab + b2
	
= 4 - 4i13 + 3i2	
1i1322 = 1i1321i132 
	
	
            = 3i2
	
= 4 - 4i13 + 31-12	
i2 = -1
	
= 1 - 4i13	
Simplify.
d.	 13 + 1-2211 + 1-322
	
= 13 + i12211 + i1322	
1-2 = i12, 1-32 = i132
	
= 3 + 3i132 + i12 + 1i1221i1322	 FOIL
	
= 3 + 3i14122 + i12 + i2164	
132 = 116 # 2 = 412
	
= 3 + 12i12 + i12 + 1-12182	
i2 = -1
	
= -5 + 1312i	
Add.
Practice Problem 5  Perform the indicated operation and write the result in standard 
form.
a.	 1-3 + 1-422        b.   15 + 1-2214 + 1-82
Multiplication Involving Square Roots  
of Negative Numbers
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 1.3    ■    Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions 109
Complex Conjugates and Division
To perform the division of complex numbers, it is helpful to learn about the conjugate of 
a complex number.
4	
Divide complex numbers.
C o n j u g at e  o f  a  C o m p l e x  N u m b e r
If z = a + bi, then the conjugate (or complex conjugate) of z is denoted by z and 
defined by z = a + bi = a - bi.
In a + bi mode, most graphing  
calculators can compute the complex 
conjugate of a complex number.
Technology
Connection
Note that the conjugate z of a complex number has the same real part as z does, but the sign of 
the imaginary part is changed. For example, 2 + 7i = 2 - 7i and 5 - 3i = 5 + 1-32i
= 5 - 1-32i = 5 + 3i.
Find the product zz for each complex number z.
a.	 z = 2 + 5i        b.   z = 1 - 3i
Solution
a.	 If z = 2 + 5i, then z = 2 - 5i.
	
   zz = 12 + 5i212 - 5i2 = 22 - 15i22	
Difference of squares
	
= 4 - 25i2	
15i22 = 52i2 = 25i2
	
= 4 - 1-252	
Because i2 = -1, 25i2 = -25.
	
= 29	
Simplify.
b.	 If z = 1 - 3i, then z = 1 + 3i.
	
   zz = 11 - 3i211 + 3i2 = 12 - 13i22	
Difference of squares
	
= 1 - 9i2	
13i22 = 32i2 = 9i2
	
= 1 - 1-92	
Because i2 = -1, 9i2 = -9.
	
= 10	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 6  Find the product zz for each complex number z.
a.	 1 + 6i        b.   -2i
Multiplying a Complex Number by Its Conjugate
EXAMPLE 6
The results in Example 6 correctly suggest the following theorem.
C o m p l e x  C o n j u g at e  P r o d u c t  T h e o r e m
If z = a + bi, then
zz = a2 + b2.
D i v i d i n g  C o m p l e x  N u m b e r s
To write the quotient of two complex numbers w and z 1z ≠02, write
	
w
z = wz
zz 	
Multiply numerator and denominator by z.
and then write the right side in standard form.
To write the reciprocal of a nonzero complex number or the quotient of two complex numbers 
in the form a + bi, multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the denomina-
tor. By the Complex Conjugate Product Theorem, the resulting denominator is a real number.

110	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Write the following quotients in standard form.
a.	
1
2 + i        b. 
4 + 1-25
2 - 1-9
Solution
a.	 The denominator is 2 + i, so its conjugate is 2 - i.
1
2 + i =
112 - i2
12 + i212 - i2	
Multiply numerator and  
denominator by 2 - i.
=
2 - i
22 + 12	
12 + i212 - i2 = 22 + 12
= 2 - i
5
	
Simplify
= 2
5 + -1
5  i	
Standard form
b.	 We write 1-25 = 5i and 1-9 = 3i so that 4 + 1-25
2 - 1-9 = 4 + 5i
2 - 3i.
 4 + 5i
2 - 3i = 14 + 5i212 + 3i2
12 - 3i212 + 3i2	
Multiply numerator and  
denominator by 2 + 3i.
 = 8 + 12i + 10i + 15i2
22 + 32
	
Use FOIL in the numerator;  
12 - 3i212 + 3i2 = 22 + 32.
 = -7 + 22i
13
	
15i2 = -15, 8 - 15 = -7
 = - 7
13 + 22
13 i	
Standard form
Practice Problem 7  Write the following quotients in standard form.
a.	
2
1 - i        b. 
-3i
4 + 1-25
Dividing Complex Numbers
EXAMPLE 7
In a + bi mode, most graphing cal-
culators perform division of complex 
numbers with the ordinary division 
key. The Frac option displays results 
using rational numbers.
The reciprocal of a complex number 
can also be found using the  
reciprocal key.
Technology 
Connection
In a parallel circuit, the total impendence Zt is given by
Zt =
Z1Z2
Z1 + Z2
.
Find Zt assuming that Z1 = 2 + 3i ohms and Z2 = 3 - 4i ohms.
Solution
We first calculate Z1 + Z2 and Z1Z2.
 Z1 + Z2 = 12 + 3i2 + 13 - 4i2 = 5 - i
 Z1Z2 = 12 + 3i213 - 4i2
= 6 - 8i + 9i - 12i2    FOIL
 = 18 + i	
Set i2 = -1 and simplify.
Zt =
Z1Z2
Z1 + Z2
= 18 + i
5 - i
 = 118 + i215 + i2
15 - i215 + i2
       Multiply numerator and denominator by 
conjugate of the denominator.
Using Complex Numbers in AC Circuits
EXAMPLE 8

	
Section 1.3    ■    Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions 111
= 90 + 18i + 5i + i2
52 + 12
	
Use FOIL in the numerator;    
 15 - i215 + i2 = 52 + 12.
= 89 + 23i
26
	
Set i2 =  -1 and simplify.
= 89
26 + 23
26 i	
Standard form
Practice Problem 8  Repeat Example 8 assuming that Z1 = 1 + 2i and Z2 = 2 - 3i.
Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions
The methods of solving quadratic equations introduced in the previous section are also 
applicable to solving quadratic equations with complex solutions.
5	
Solve quadratic equations 
having complex solutions.
Solve each equation.
a.	 x2 + 4 = 0        b.  x2 + 2x + 2 = 0
Solution
a.	 Use the square root method.
 x2 + 4 = 0
	
Original equation
 x2 = -4
	
Add -4 to both sides.
 x = {1-4 = { 1142i = {2i    Solve for  x.
	
The solution set is 5-2i, 2i6. You should check these solutions.
b.	  x2 + 2x + 2 = 1 # x2 + 2x + 2 = 0
 x =
-2 { 222 - 4112122
2112
    Use the quadratic formula  
with a = 1, b = 2, and c = 2.
 = -2 { 1-4
2
	
Simplify.
 = -2 { 2i
2
= 21-1 { i2
2
 = -1 { i
	
The solution set is 5-1 - i, -1 + i6. You should check these solutions.
Practice Problem 9  Solve.
a.	 4x2 + 9 = 0        b.  x2 = 4x - 13
The Discriminant
If a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠0, we can predict the number and type of solu-
tions that the equation ax2 + bx + c = 0 will have without solving the equation. In the 
quadratic formula
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
,
the quantity b2 - 4ac under the radical sign is called the discriminant of the equation. 
The discriminant reveals the type of solutions of the equation, as shown in the table on the 
next page.
Solving Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions
EXAMPLE 9

112	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Discriminant
Description of Solutions
b2 - 4ac + 0
There are two unequal real solutions.
b2 - 4ac = 0
There is one real solution.
b2 - 4ac * 0
There are two nonreal complex solutions, 
and they are conjugates.
Use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions of each quadratic 
equation.
a.	 x2 - 4x + 2 = 0        b.  2t2 + 2t + 19 = 0        c.  4x2 + 4x + 1 = 0
Solution
Equation
b2 − 4ac
Conclusion
a. x2 - 4x + 2 = 0
1-422 - 4112122 = 8 + 0
Two unequal real solutions
b. 2t2 + 2t + 19 = 0
1222 - 41221192 = -148 * 0 Two nonreal complex solutions
c. 4x2 + 4x + 1 = 0
1422 - 4142112 = 0
Exactly one real solution
Practice Problem 10  Determine the number and type of solutions.
a.	 9x2 - 6x + 1 = 0        b.  x2 - 5x + 3 = 0        c.  2x2 - 3x + 4 = 0.
Using the Discriminant
EXAMPLE 10
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. Real = -1, imaginary = 2  b. Real = - 1
3, 
imaginary = -6  c. Real = 8, imaginary = 0
2. a = -2; b = 1    3. a. 4 - 2i  b. -1 + 4i  c. -2 + 5i
4. a. 26 + 2i  b. -15 - 21i    5. a. 5 - 12i  b. 16 + 1412i
6. a. 37  b. 4
7. a. 1 + i  b. - 15
41 - 12
41 i    8. 23
10 + 11
10 i
9. a. e-3
2 i, 3
2 if  b. 52 - 3i, 2 + 3i6
10. a. One real  b. Two unequal real  c. Two nonreal complex
Exercises
section 1.3 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 We define i =
 so that i2 =
.
	2.	 A complex number in the form a + bi is said to be in  
. 
	3.	 For b 7 0, 1-b =
.
	4.	 The conjugate of a + bi is 
, and the  
conjugate of a - bi is 
.
	5.	 True or False. The product of a complex number and its  
conjugate is a real number. 
	6.	 True or False. Division by a nonzero complex number z is 
accomplished by multiplying the numerator and denominator 
by z. 
In Exercises 7–10, use the definition of equality of complex 
numbers to find the real numbers x and y so that the  
equation is true.
	7.	 2 + xi = y + 3i
	 8.	 x - 2i = 7 + yi
	9.	 x - 1-16 = 2 + yi
	10.	 3 + yi = x - 1-25
In Exercises 11–34, perform each operation and write the 
result in the standard form a + bi.
	11.	 15 + 2i2 + 13 + i2 
	12.	 16 + i2 + 11 + 2i2 
	13.	 14 - 3i2 - 15 + 3i2	
14.	 13 - 5i2 - 13 + 2i2       

	
Section 1.3    ■    Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions 113 
	15.	 1-2 - 3i2 + 1-3 - 2i2
	16.	 1-5 - 3i2 + 12 - i2
	17.	 315 + 2i2 
	18.	 413 + 5i2 
	19.	 -412 - 3i2 
	20.	 -713 - 4i2 
	21.	 3i15 + i2 
	22.	 2i14 + 3i2 
	23.	 4i12 - 5i2 
	24.	 -3i15 - 2i2 
	25.	 13 + i212 + 3i2 
	26.	 14 + 3i212 + 5i2 
	27.	 12 - 3i212 + 3i2 
	28.	 14 - 3i214 + 3i2 
	29.	 13 + 4i214 - 3i2 
	30.	 1-2 + 3i21-3 + 10i2
	31.	 113 - 12i22
	32.	 1- 15 - 13i22
	33.	 12 - 1-16213 + 5i2
	34.	 15 - 2i213 + 1-252
In Exercises 35–40, write the conjugate z of each complex 
number z. Then find zz.
	35.	 z = 2 - 3i 
	36.	 z = 4 + 5i 
	37.	 z = 1
2 - 2i 
	38.	 z = 2
3 + 1
2 i 
	39.	 z = 12 - 3i 
	40.	 z = 15 + 13 i 
In Exercises 41–54, write each quotient in the standard form 
a + bi.
	41.	 5
-i 
	42.	 2
-3i 
	43.	
-1
1 + i 
	44.	
1
2 - i 
	45.	
5i
2 + i 
	46.	
3i
2 - i 
	47.	 2 + 3i
1 + i 
	48.	 3 + 5i
4 + i 
	49.	 2 - 5i
4 - 7i 
	50.	 3 + 5i
1 - 3i 
	51.	 2 + 1-4
1 + i 
	52.	 5 - 1-9
3 + 2i 
	53.	 -2 + 1-25
2 - 3i 
	54.	 -5 - 1-4
5 - 1-9 
In Exercises 55–64, solve each equation.
	55.	 x2 + 5 = 1 
	56.	 4x2 + 9 = 0 
	57.	 z2 - 2z + 2 = 0 
	58.	 x2 - 6x + 11 = 0 
	59.	 2x2 - 20x + 49 = -7 
	60.	 4y2 + 4y + 5 = 0 
	61.	 81x2 - x2 = x2 - 3 
	62.	 t1t + 12 = 3t2 + 1 
	63.	 9k2 + 25 = 0 
	64.	 3k2 + 4 = 0 
Applying the Concepts
	65.	 Series circuits. Assuming that the impedance of a resistor in 
a circuit is Z1 = 4 + 3i ohms and the impedance of a second 
resistor is Z2 = 5 - 2i ohms, find the total impedance of  
the two resistors when placed in series (sum of the two 
impedances). 


Series circuit
	66.	 Parallel circuits. If the two resistors in Exercise 65 are  
connected in parallel, the total impedance is given by
Z1Z2
Z1 + Z2
.
	
	 Find the total impedance assuming that the resistors in 
Exercise 65 are connected in parallel.


Parallel circuit
As with impedance, the current I and voltage V in a circuit can  
be represented by complex numbers. The three quantities  
(voltage, V; impedance, Z; and current, I) are related by the 
equation Z = V
I . Thus, if two of these values are given, the 
value of the third can be found from the equation.
In Exercises 67–72, use the equation V = ZI to find the value 
that is not specified.
	67.	 Finding impedance: I = 7 + 5i    V = 35 + 70i 
	68.	 Finding impedance: I = 7 + 4i    V = 45 + 88i 
	69.	 Finding voltage: Z = 5 - 7i    I = 2 + 5i 
	70.	 Finding voltage: Z = 7 - 8i  I = 1
3 + 1
6 i 
	71.	 Finding current: V = 12 + 10i     Z = 12 + 6i
	72.	 Finding current: V = 29 + 18i    Z = 25 + 6i
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 73–82, find each power of i and simplify the 
expression.
	73.	 i17 
	74.	 i125 
	75.	 i -7 
	76.	 i -24 
	77.	 i10 + 7 
	78.	 9 + i3        

114	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
	79.	 3i5 - 2i3 
	80.	 5i6 - 3i4 
	81.	 2i311 + i42 
	82.	 5i51i3 - i2 
	83.	 Prove that the reciprocal of a + bi, where both a and b are 
	
	 nonzero, is 
a
a2 + b2 -
b
a2 + b2 i.
In Exercises 84–87, let z = a + bi and W = c + di. Prove 
each statement.
	84.	 Re1z2 = z + z
2
	85.	 Im1z2 = z - z
2i
	86.	 Rea
z
z + wb + Rea
w
z + wb = 1
	87.	 The product zz = 0 if and only if z = 0.
In Exercises 88–91, use the definition of equality of complex 
numbers to solve for x and y.
	88.	 x
i + y = 3 + i
	89.	 x - y
i = 4i + 1
	90.	x + yi
i
= 5 - 7i
	91.	5x + yi
2 - i
= 2 + i
	92.	Show that 1 - 2i
5 - 5i = 2 - 3i
9 - 7i.
	93.	Write in standard form:
1 + i
1 - i , 2 + i
1 + 2i 
	94.	Solve for z:
11 + 3i2z + 12 + 4i2 = 7 - 3i 
	95.	Let z = 2 - 3i and w = 1 + 2i.
a.	 Show that 1zw2 = 1z21w2.
b.	 Show that a z
wb = z
w
 .
Critical Thinking/ Writing / Discussion
	 96.	 State whether each of the following is true or false.  
Explain your reasoning.
a.	 Every real number is a complex number. 
b.	 Every complex number is a real number. 
c.	 Every complex number is an imaginary number. 
d.	 A real number is a complex number whose imaginary 
part is 0. 
e.	 The product of a complex number and its conjugate is a 
real number. 
f.	 The equality z = z holds if and only if z is a real  
number. 
	 97.	 Find the least positive n for which a1 + i
1 - ib
n
= 1. 
	 98.	 Show that the set of complex numbers does not have 
the ordering properties of the set of real numbers. [Hint: 
Assume that ordering properties hold. Then by the law of 
trichotomy, i = 0 or i 6 0 or i 7 0. Show that each leads 
to a contradiction.]
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 99 and 100, factor each expression by grouping.
	 99.	 x3 - x2 - 9x + 9 
	100.	 -x3 - 2x2 + 25x + 50 
In Exercises 101–106, find the LCD for each group of rational 
expressions.
	101.	
1
x - 1, 1
x 
	102.	
3
2 - x, 
x
x - 2 
	103.	
15
x + 3, 2x + 1
x - 3
	104.	
3x
x2 - 25, 
9
5 - x
	105.	
x + 1
1x - 3212 - x2, 
12
1x - 221x + 12 
	106.	
x
4x2 - 1, 
7
2x - 1, 1
x 
In Exercises 107–114, simplify each expression.
	107.	 272>3 
	108.	 84>3 
	109.	 45>2 
	110.	 253>2 
	111.	 1 23 + x22
2 
	112.	 11 + 2x + 122
 	113.	 113x2 + 721>323 
	114.	 115x - 223>525>3        

	
Section 1.4    ■    Solving Other Types of Equations 115
S e c t i o n 1.4
Time Dilation
Do you ever feel like time moves really quickly or really slowly? For example, don’t the 
hours fly by when you are hanging out with your best friend and the seconds drag on 
endlessly when a dentist is working on your teeth? But you cannot really speed up or 
slow time down, right? It always “flows” at the same rate.
Einstein said “no.” He asserted in his “Special Theory of Relativity” that time is rela-
tive. It speeds up or slows down depending on how fast one object is moving relative 
to another. He concluded that the closer we come to traveling at the speed of light, the 
more time will slow down for us relative to someone not moving. He called this slowing 
of time due to motion time dilation. Time dilation can be quantified by the equation
t0 = t B1 - v2
c2,
where t0 = the “proper time” measured in the moving frame of reference,
 t = the time observed in the fixed frame of reference,
 v = the speed of the moving frame of reference, and
 c = the speed of light.
We investigate this effect in Example 12.
Solving Other Types of Equations
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Factoring (Section P.4)
2	 Radicals (Section P.6, page 59)
3	 Quadratic equations (Sections 1.2 and 1.3)
Objectives
1	 Solve equations by factoring.
2	 Solve rational equations.
3	 Solve equations involving radicals.
4	 Solve equations with rational exponents.
5	 Solve equations that are quadratic in form.
Albert Einstein 1879–1955
Einstein began his schooling in 
Munich, Germany. Einstein renounced 
his German citizenship in 1896 and 
entered the Swiss Federal Polytechnic 
School in Zurich to be trained as a 
teacher in physics and mathematics.  
Unable to find a teaching job, he 
accepted a position as a technical 
assistant in the Swiss patent office. In 
1905, Einstein earned his doctorate 
from the University of Zurich.
While at the patent office, he produced 
much of his remarkable work on the 
special theory of relativity. In 1909, he 
was appointed Professor ­Extraordinary 
at Zurich. In 1914, he was appointed 
professor at the University of Berlin. 
He immigrated to America to take  
the position of professor of physics  
at Princeton University. By 1949, 
Einstein was unwell. He drew up his 
will in 1950.
He left his scientific papers to the  
Hebrew University in Jerusalem. In 
1952, the Israeli government offered 
the post of second president to Ein-
stein. He politely declined the offer.
One week before his death, Einstein 
agreed to let Bertrand Russell place 
his name on a manifesto urging all 
­nations to give up nuclear weapons.

116	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Solving Equations by Factoring 
The method of factoring used in solving quadratic equations can also be used to solve 
­certain nonquadratic equations. Specifically, we use the following strategy for solving 
those equations that can be expressed in factored form with 0 on one side.
1	
Solve equations by factoring.
Use factoring techniques to solve an equation.
Step 1 Make one side zero. Move all nonzero terms 
in the equation to one side (say, the left side) so that 
the other side (the right side) is 0.
Step 2 Factor the left side.
Step 3 Use the zero-product property. Set each 
factor in Step 2 equal to 0 and then solve the ­resulting 
equations.
Step 4 Check your solutions.
Example
Solve x3 + 3x2 = 4x + 12.
x3 + 3x2 - 4x - 12 = 0	
Subtract 4x + 12  
from both sides.
x21x + 32 - 41x + 32 = 0	
Group for factoring.
1x + 321x2 - 42 = 0	
Factor out x + 3.
1x + 321x + 221x - 22 = 0	
Factor x2 - 4.
 x + 3 = 0  or  x + 2 = 0  or  x - 2 = 0
 x = -3   or 
 x = -2   or 
 x = 2
Check:
Check the solutions in the original equation.
For x = -3, 1-323 + 31-322 ≟41-32 + 12
-27 + 27 = -12 + 12 ✓
You should also verify that x = -2 and x = 2 are 
solutions of x3 + 3x2 = 4x + 12. The solution set is 
5-3, -2, 26.
Solving Equations by Factoring
Objective
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 1
Practice Problem 1  Solve: x3 + 2x2 - x - 2 = 0
Solve by factoring: x4 = 9x2
Solution
Step 1  Move all terms to the left side.
x4 = 9x2	
Original equation
x4 - 9x2 = 0	
Subtract 9x2 from both sides.
Step 2  Factor.
x21x2 - 92 = 0	
x4 - 9x2 = x21x2 - 92
x21x + 321x - 32 = 0	
x2 - 9 = 1x + 321x - 32
Step 3  Set each factor equal to zero.
x2 = 0 or x + 3 = 0   or x - 3 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = 0 or    x = -3 or    x = 3	
Solve each equation for x.
Step 4  Check:
Let x = 0
 1024 ≟91022
 0 = 0  ✓
Let  x = -3
 1-324 ≟91-322
 81 = 81 ✓
Let x = 3
 1324 ≟91322
 81 = 81 ✓
Solving an Equation by Factoring
EXAMPLE 2
A2 - B2 = 1A + B21A - B2
Difference of two squares, page 34
RecaLl

	
Section 1.4    ■    Solving Other Types of Equations 117
Thus, the solution set of the equation is 5-3, 0, 36. Note that 0 is a root of multiplicity 2.
Practice Problem 2  Solve: x4 = 4x2
A common error when solving an equation such as x4 = 9x2 in Example 2 is to divide both 
sides by x2, obtaining x2 = 9 so that {3 are the two solutions. This leads to the loss of the 
solution 0. Remember, we can divide only by quantities that are not 0.
Warning
Solve by factoring: x3 - 2x2 = -x + 2
Solution
Step 1  Move all terms to the left side.
x3 - 2x2 = -x + 2	
Original equation
x3 - 2x2 + x - 2 = -x + 2 + x - 2	
Add x - 2 to both sides.
x3 - 2x2 + x - 2 = 0	
Simplify.
Step 2  Factor. Because there are four terms, we factor by grouping.
1x3 - 2x22+1x - 22 = 0
x21x - 22 + 1 # 1x - 22 = 0 	
Factor x2 from the first two terms  
and rewrite x - 2 as 1 # 1x - 22.
1x - 221x2 + 12 = 0	
Factor out the common factor 1x - 22.
Step 3  Set each factor equal to zero.
 x - 2 = 0
 x = 2
 x2 + 1 = 0
 x2 = -1
 x = {i
Step 4  Check:
Let x = 2.
 1223 - 21222 ≟-2 + 2
 8 - 8 ≟0
 0 = 0 ✓
Let x = i.
 1i23 - 21i22 ≟-1i2 + 2
 -i + 2 = -i + 2 ✓
Let x = -i.
 1-i23 - 21-i22 ≟-1-i2 + 2
 i + 2 = i + 2 ✓
Thus, the solution set of the equation is 52, i, -i6.
Practice Problem 3  Solve by factoring: x3 - 5x2 = 4x - 20
Rational Equations
Recall that if at least one algebraic expression with the variable in the denominator ­appears 
in an equation, then the equation is a rational equation.
When we multiply a rational equation by an expression containing the variable, we 
may introduce a solution that satisfies the new equation but does not satisfy the origi-
nal ­equation. Such a solution is called an extraneous solution or extraneous root. So 
­whenever we multiply an equation by an expression containing the variable, we must check 
all possible solutions obtained to reject extraneous solutions (if any).
2	
Solve rational equations.
Solving an Equation by Factoring
EXAMPLE 3

118	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Solve: 1
6 +
1
x + 1 = 1
x
Solution
Step 1  Find the LCD. The LCD from the denominators
6, x + 1, and x is 6x1x + 12.
Step 2  Multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD and make the right side 0.
6x1x + 12c 1
6 +
1
x + 1 d = 6x1x + 12c 1
x d 	
Multiply both sides by  
the LCD.
6x1x + 12
6
+ 6x1x + 12
x + 1
= 6x1x + 12
x
	
Distributive property
x1x + 12 + 6x = 61x + 12	
Simplify.
x2 + x + 6x = 6x + 6	
Distributive property
x2 + x - 6 = 0	
Subtract 6x + 6 from both sides.
Step 3  Factor.
x2 + x - 6 = 0
1x + 321x - 22 = 0	 Factor.
Step 4  Set each factor equal to zero.
 x + 3 = 0   or   x - 2 = 0
 x = -3  or  
 x = 2
Step 5  Check:  You should check the solutions, -3 and 2, in the original equation. 
The ­solution set is 5-3, 26.
Practice Problem 4  Solve: 1
x -
12
5x + 10 = 1
5
Solving a Rational Equation
EXAMPLE 4
Solve: 
x
x - 1 -
1
x + 1 =
2x
x2 - 1
Solution
Step 1  The LCD of the denominators 1x - 12, 1x + 12, 1x2 - 12 = 1x - 121x + 12 
is 1x - 121x + 12.
Step 2  1x - 121x + 12c
x
x - 1 -
1
x + 1 d 	
Multiply both sides by  
the LCD.
= 1x - 121x + 12c
2x
x2 - 1 d
1x - 121x + 12
x
x - 1 - 1x - 121x + 12
1
x + 1	 Distributive property; 
1x - 121x + 12 = x2 - 1
= 1x2 - 12 #
2x
x2 - 1
1x + 12x - 1x - 12 = 2x	
Simplify.
x2 + x - x + 1 - 2x = 2x - 2x	
Distributive property; add 
-2x to both sides.
x2 - 2x + 1 = 0	
Simplify.
Solving a Rational Equation with an Extraneous Solution
EXAMPLE 5
(+)+*

	
Section 1.4    ■    Solving Other Types of Equations 119
Step 3      1x - 121x - 12 = 0	
	
Factor.
Step 4  x - 1 = 0 or x = 1	
	
Solve for x.
Step 5  Check: Substitute x = 1 in the original equation.
 x
x - 1 -
1
x + 1 =
2x
x2 - 1
 1
1 - 1 -
1
1 + 1
≟
2112
12 - 1
The denominator of the first term is 0, so the equation is undefined for x = 1. 
Therefore, x = 1 is not a solution of the original equation; it is extraneous. The 
original equation has no solution.
Practice Problem 5  Solve: 
x
x - 2 -
2
x + 2 =
4x
x2 - 4
Equations Involving Radicals
If an equation involves radicals or rational exponents, the method of raising both sides to a 
positive integer power is often used to remove them. When this is done, the solution set of 
the new equation always contains the solutions of the original equation. However, in some 
cases, the new equation has more solutions than the original equation. For instance, con-
sider the equation x = 4. If we square both sides, we get x2 = 16. Notice that the given 
equation, x = 4, has only one solution (namely, 4), whereas the new equation, x2 = 16, 
has two solutions: 4 and -4. Extraneous solutions may be introduced whenever both sides 
of an equation are raised to an even power, Thus, it is essential that we check all solutions 
obtained after raising both sides of an equation to any even power.
3	
Solve equations involving 
radicals.
Solve: x = 26x - x3
Solution
Because 11a22 = a, we raise both sides of the equation to the second power to eliminate 
the radical sign. The solutions of the original equation are among the solutions of the 
equation
x2 = 126x - x322	
Square both sides of the equation.
x2 = 6x - x3	
126x - x322 = 6x - x3
x3 + x2 - 6x = 0	
Add x3 - 6x to both sides.
x1x2 + x - 62 = 0	
Factor out x from each term.
x1x + 321x - 22 = 0	
Factor x2 + x - 6.
x = 0 or x + 3 = 0  or x - 2 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = 0 or 
x = -3 or 
x = 2	
Solve each equation.
Hence, the only possible solutions of x = 26x - x3 are -3, 0, and 2.
Check:
Let x = -3.
 -3 ≟261-32 - 1-323
 -3 ≟1-18 + 27
 -3 ≟19
 -3 ≠3 ✕
Let x = 0.
 0 ≟26102 - 1023
 0 ≟10
 0 ≟0 ✓
Let x = 2.
 2 ≟26122 - 1223
 2 ≟112 - 8
 2 ≟14
 2 = 2 ✓
Solving Equations Involving Radicals
EXAMPLE 6

120	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Thus, -3 is an extraneous solution; 0 and 2 are the solutions of the equation x = 26x - x3. 
The solution set is 50, 26.
Practice Problem 6  Solve: x = 2x3 - 6x
Solve: 12x + 1 + 1 = x
Solution
Step 1  We begin by isolating the radical to one side of the equation.
12x + 1 + 1 = x	
Original equation
12x + 1 = x - 1	
Subtract 1 from both sides.
Step 2  Next, we square both sides and simplify.
112x + 122 = 1x - 122	
Square both sides.
2x + 1 = x2 - 2x + 1	
11a22 = a;  
1A - B22 = A2 - 2AB + B2
2x + 1 - 12x + 12 = x2 - 2x + 1 - 12x + 12	
Subtract 2x + 1  
from both sides.
0 = x2 - 4x	
Simplify.
0 = x1x - 42	
Factor.
Step 3  Set each factor equal to zero.
x = 0 or x - 4 = 0
x = 0 or 
x = 4	
Solve for x.
Step 4  Check:
Let x = 0.
 12102 + 1 + 1 ≟0
 11 + 1 ≟0
 1 + 1 ≟0
 2 ≠0
Let x = 4.
 12142 + 1 + 1 ≟4
 19 + 1 ≟4
 3 + 1 ≟4
 4 = 4 ✓
Thus, 0 is an extraneous root; the only solution of the given equation is 4, and the 
­solution set is 546. 
Practice Problem 7  Solve: 16x + 4 + 2 = x
Solving an Equation Involving a Radical
EXAMPLE 7
Next, we illustrate a method for solving radical equations that contain two or more square 
root expressions.
Solve: 12x - 1 - 1x - 1 = 1
Solution
Step 1  We first isolate one of the radicals.
12x - 1 - 1x - 1 = 1	
Original equation
12x - 1 = 1 + 1x - 1	
Add 1x - 1 to both sides to  
isolate the radical 12x - 1.
Solving an Equation Involving Two Radicals
EXAMPLE 8

	
Section 1.4    ■    Solving Other Types of Equations 121
Step 2  Square both sides of the last equation.
112x - 122 = 11 + 1x - 122	
Square both sides.
2x - 1 = 12 + 2 # 1 # 1x - 1 + 11x - 122	
1A + B22 = A2 + 2AB + B2
2x - 1 = 1 + 21x - 1 + x - 1	
Simplify; use 11a22 = a.
2x - 1 = 21x - 1 + x	
Simplify.
Step 3  The last equation still contains a radical. We repeat the process of isolating 
the radical expression.
x - 1 = 21x - 1	
Subtract x from both sides and  
simplify to isolate 21x - 1.
1x - 122 = 121x - 122	
Square both sides.
x2 - 2x + 1 = 41x - 12	
Use 1A - B22 = A2 - 2AB + B2  
and 1AB22 = A2 B2.
x2 - 2x + 1 = 4x - 4	
Distributive property
x2 - 6x + 5 = 0	
Add -4x + 4 to both sides; simplify.
1x - 521x - 12 = 0	
Factor.
Step 4  Set each factor equal to 0.
x - 5 = 0 or x - 1 = 0
x = 5 or	
x = 1	
Solve for x.
Step 5  Check:  You should check that the solutions of the original equation are 1 and 
5. The solution set is 51, 56.
Practice Problem 8  Solve: 1x - 5 + 1x = 5
S o lv i n g  E q u at i o n s  C o n ta i n i n g  S q u a r e  R o o t s
Step 1  Isolate one radical to one side of the equation.
Step 2  Square both sides of the equation in Step 1 and simplify.
Step 3  If the equation obtained in Step 2 contains a radical, repeat Steps 1 and 2 to 
get an equation that is free of radicals.
Step 4  Solve the equation obtained in Steps 1–3.
Step 5  Check the solutions in the original equation.
Equations with Rational Exponents
If a given equation can be expressed in the form um>n = k, then we isolate u by raising both 
sides to the power n
m athe reciprocal of  m
n b.
4	
Solve equations with rational 
exponents.
S o lv i n g  E q u at i o n s  o f  t h e  F o r m  um,n = k
Let m and n be positive integers, k Ú 0 a real number, and m
n  in lowest terms. Then if
m is odd
m is even
 and um>n = k,
 u = kn>m
 and um>n = k,
 u = {kn>m

122	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Equations That Are Quadratic in Form
An equation in a variable x is quadratic in form if it can be written as
au2 + bu + c = 0  1a ≠02,
where u is an expression in the variable x. We solve the equation au2 + bu + c = 0 for 
u. Then the solutions of the original equation can be obtained by replacing u with the 
­expression in x that u represents.
5	
Solve equations that are 
quadratic in form.
Solve.
a.	 212x - 123>2 - 30 = 24	
b.	 13x - 122>3 + 5 = 9
Solution
a.	 212x - 123>2 - 30 = 24	
Original equation
212x - 123>2 = 24 + 30	
Add 30 to both sides and simplify.
= 54	
Simplify.
12x - 123>2 = 54
2 = 27	
Divide both sides by 2.
112x - 123>222>3 = 12722>3	
Raise both sides to the power 2
3 with 
	
	
odd m = 3.
2x - 1 = 9	
12722>3 = 11
3 2722 = 32 = 9
2x = 10	
Isolate x.
x = 5	
Solve for x.
	
Check:	
212x - 123>2 - 30 = 24
212 # 5 - 123>2 - 30 ≟24	
Replace x with 5.
21923>2 - 30 ≟24	
2 # 5 - 1 = 9
21272 - 30 ≟24	
1923>2 = 11923 = 1323 = 27
54 - 30 ≟24 ✓	 Yes
b.	 13x - 122>3 + 5 = 9	
Original equation
13x - 122>3 = 9 - 5	
Subtract 5 from both sides and simplify.
= 4	
Simplify
313x - 122>343>2 = {1423>2	
Because m = 2 is even, we use the { sign.
3x - 1 = {8	
1423>2 = 11423 = 1223 = 8
3x = 1{8	
Add 1 to both sides.
	
Then
or
 3x = 1 + 8
 3x = 9
 x = 3
 3x = 1 - 8
 3x = -7
 x = -7
3
	
Verify that both x = 3 and x = -7
3 satisfy the original equation.  
	
The solution set is e -7
3, 3f.
Practice Problem 9 
Solve:  a.  31x - 223>5 + 4 = 7    b.  12x + 124>3 - 7 = 9
Solving Equations with Rational Exponents
EXAMPLE 9

	
Section 1.4    ■    Solving Other Types of Equations 123
Solve: x2>3 - 5x1>3 + 6 = 0
Solution
The given equation is not a quadratic equation. However, if we let u = x1>3, then 
u2 = 1x1>322 = x2>3. The original equation becomes a quadratic equation if we replace 
x1>3 with u.
x2>3 - 5x1>3 + 6 = 0	
Original equation
u2 - 5u + 6 = 0	
Replace x1>3 with u.
1u - 221u - 32 = 0	
Factor.
u - 2 = 0 or u - 3 = 0	
Zero-product property
u = 2  or u = 3	
Solve for u.
Because u = x1>3, we find x from the equations u = 2 and u = 3.
x1>3 = 2  or x1>3 = 3	
Replace u with x1>3.
x = 23 or   x = 33	
Here m
n = 1
3, so m = 1 is odd.
x = 8  or   x = 27 are two apparent solutions.
Check:  You should check that both x = 8 and x = 27 satisfy the equation. The solution 
set is 58, 276.
Practice Problem 10  Solve: x2>3 - 7x1>3 + 6 = 0
Solving an Equation Quadratic in Form
EXAMPLE 10
When u replaces an expression in the variable x in an equation that is quadratic in form, 
you are not finished once you have found values for u. You then must replace u with the 
­expression in x and solve for x.
Warning
Solve: ax + 1
x b
2
- 6 ax + 1
x b + 8 = 0
Solution
We let u = x + 1
x. Then u2 = ax + 1
x b
2
. With this substitution, the original equation 
becomes a quadratic equation in u.
ax + 1
x b
2
- 6 ax + 1
x b + 8 = 0	
Original equation
u2 - 6u + 8 = 0	
Replace x + 1
x with u.
1u - 221u - 42 = 0	
Factor.
u - 2 = 0 or u - 4 = 0	
Zero-product property
u = 2 or    u = 4	
Solve for u.
Replacing u with x + 1
x in these equations, we have
x + 1
x = 2 or x + 1
x = 4.
Solving an Equation That Is Quadratic in Form
EXAMPLE 11

124	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Next, we solve each of these equations for x.
x + 1
x = 2
x2 + 1 = 2x	
Multiply both sides by x (the LCD).
x2 - 2x + 1 = 0	
Subtract 2x from both sides; simplify.
1x - 122 = 0	
Factor the perfect-square trinomial.
x - 1 = 0	
Square root property
x = 1	
Solve for x.
Thus, x = 1 is a possible solution of the original equation.
x + 1
x = 4
x2 + 1 = 4x	
Multiply both sides by x (the LCD).
x2 - 4x + 1 = 0	
Subtract 4x from both sides.
x =
- 1-42 { 21-422 - 4112112
2112
	
Quadratic formula: 
a = 1, b = -4, c = 1
x = 4 { 112
2
	
Simplify.
x = 4 { 213
2
	
112 = 14 # 3 = 1413 = 213
x =
212 { 132
2
	
Factor the numerator.
x = 2 { 13	
Remove the common factor.
Thus, 2 + 13 and 2 - 13 are also possible solutions of the original equation. Conse-
quently, the possible solutions of the original equation are 1, 2 + 13, and 2 - 13.
You should verify that 1, 2 + 13, and 2 - 13 are solutions of the original equation. 
The solution set is 51, 2 - 13, 2 + 136.
Practice Problem 11  Solve: a1 + 1
x b
2
- 6 a1 + 1
x b + 8 = 0
The next example illustrates the paradoxical effect of time dilation (page 115) when 
one travels at speeds that are close to the speed of light.
Your sister is five years older than you are. She decides that she has had enough of Earth 
and needs a vacation. She takes a trip to the Omega-One star system. Her trip to Omega-
One and back in a spacecraft traveling at an average speed v took 15 years according to 
the clock and calendar on the spacecraft. But upon landing back on Earth, she discovers 
that her voyage took 25 years according to the time on Earth. This means that although 
you were five years younger than your sister before her vacation, you are five years older 
than her after her vacation! Use the time-dilation equation t0 = tB
1 - v2
c2 from the 
introduction to this section to calculate the speed of the spacecraft.
Investigating Space Travel (Your Older Sister Is Younger 
Than You Are)
EXAMPLE 12

	
Section 1.4    ■    Solving Other Types of Equations 125
Solution
Substitute t0 = 15 (moving-frame time) and t = 25 (fixed-frame time) to obtain
15 = 25 B
1 - v2
c2
3
5 = B
1 - v2
c2	
Divide both sides by 25; 15
25 = 3
5.
9
25 = 1 - v2
c2	
Square both sides.
v2
c2 = 1 - 9
25	
Add v2
c2 - 9
25 to both sides.
av
c b
2
= 16
25	
Simplify.
v
c = { 4
5	
Square root property
v
c = 4
5	
Reject the negative value.
v = 4
5c = 0.8c	
Multiply both sides by c.
Thus, the spacecraft must have been traveling at 80% of the speed of light 10.8c2 when 
your sister found the “trip of youth.”
Practice Problem 12  Suppose your sister’s trip took 20 years according to the clock 
and calendar on the spacecraft, but 25 years judging by time on Earth. Find the speed  
of the spacecraft.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 5-2, -1, 16    2. 5-2, 0, 26    3. 5-2, 2, 56
4. 5-10, 16    5. ∅    6. 50, 36    7. 5106
8. 596    9. a. 536  b. e - 9
2, 7
2 f    10. 51, 2166
11. e 1
3, 1f    12. 0.6 c or 60% of the speed of light
Exercises
section 1.4 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 If an apparent solution does not satisfy the equation, it is 
called a(n) 
 solution.
	2.	 When solving a rational equation, we multiply both 
sides by the 
.
	3.	 If x3>4 = 8, then x =  
.
	4.	 If x4>3 = 16, then x =  
 or  
x =  
.
	5.	 True or False. Rational equations always have extraneous 
solutions. 
	6.	 True or False. If x2>3 = k, then x = { 2k3. 
In Exercises 7–16, find the real solutions of each equation by 
factoring.
	7.	 x3 = 2x2 
	8.	 3x4 - 27x2 = 0 
	9.	 11x23 = 1x 
	10.	 11x25 = 161x 
	11.	 x3 + x = 0 
	12.	 x3 - 1 = 0 
	13.	 x4 - x3 = x2 - x
	14.	 x3 - 36x = 161x - 62
	15.	 x4 = 27x 
	16.	 3x4 = 24x        

126	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
In Exercises 17–26, solve each equation by multiplying both 
sides by the LCD.
	17.	 x + 1
3x - 2 = 5x - 4
3x + 2 
	18.	
x
2x + 1 = 3x + 2
4x + 3 
	19.	 1
x +
2
x + 1 = 1
	20.	
x
x + 1 + x + 1
x + 2 = 1 
	21.	 6x - 7
x
- 1
x2 = 5 
	22.	 1
x +
2
x + 1 +
3
x + 2 = 0 
	23.	 1
x +
1
x - 3 =
7
3x - 5 
	24.	 x + 3
x - 1 + x + 4
x + 1 = 8x + 5
x2 - 1
	25.	
5
x + 1 -
4
2x + 2 +
2
2x - 1 = 13
18 
	26.	
6
2x - 2 -
1
x + 1 =
2
2x + 2 + 1 
In Exercises 27–34, solve each equation. Check your answers.
	27.	
x
x - 5 -
5
x + 5 =
10x
x2 - 25 
	28.	
x
x - 4 -
4
x + 4 =
8x
x2 - 16 
	29.	
x
x - 3 +
3
x + 3 =
6x
x2 - 9 
	30.	
x
x + 7 +
7
x - 7 =
14x
x2 - 49 
	31.	
1
x - 1 +
x
x + 3 =
4
x2 + 2x - 3 
	32.	
x
x - 2 +
2
x + 3 = -
10
x2 + x - 6 
	33.	
2x
x + 3 -
x
x - 1 =
14
x2 + 2x - 3 
	34.	
21x + 12
x - 2
-
x
x + 1 =
9
x2 - x - 2 
In Exercises 35–56, solve each equation. Check your answers.
	35.	 2
3 3x - 1 = 2 
	36.	 2
3 2x + 3 = 3 
	37.	 1x - 1 = -2 
	38.	 13x + 4 = -1 
	39.	 x + 1x + 6 = 0 
	40.	 x - 16x + 7 = 0 
	41.	 1y + 6 = y 
	42.	 r + 11 = 61r + 3 
	43.	 16y - 11 = 2y - 7 
	44.	 13y + 1 = y - 1 
	45.	 t - 13t + 6 = -2
	46.	 25x2 - 10x + 9 = 2x - 1
	47.	 1x - 3 = 12x - 5 - 1
	48.	 x + 1x + 1 = 5 
	49.	 12y + 9 = 2 + 1y + 1 
	50.	 1m - 1 = 1m - 5 
	51.	 17z + 1 - 15z + 4 = 1 	52.	 13q + 1 - 1q - 1 = 2
	53.	 12x + 5 + 1x + 6 = 3
	54.	 15x - 9 - 1x + 4 = 1
	55.	 12x - 5 - 1x - 3 = 1
	56.	 13x + 5 + 16x + 3 = 3
In Exercises 57–60, solve each equation. Check your answers.
	57.	 1x - 423>2 = 27 
	58.	 1x + 723>2 = 64 
	59.	 15x - 322>3 - 5 = 4
	60.	 12x - 622>3 + 9 = 13
In Exercises 61–84, solve each equation by using an appropri-
ate substitution. Check your answers.
	61.	 x - 51x + 6 = 0 
	62.	 x - 31x + 2 = 0 
	63.	 2y - 151y = -7 
	64.	 y + 44 = 151y 
	65.	 x -2 - x -1 - 42 = 0 
	66.	 x1>2 + 3 - 4x-1>2 = 0 
	67.	 x2>3 - 6x1>3 + 8 = 0 
	68.	 x2>5 + x1>5 - 2 = 0 
	69.	 2x1>2 + 3x1>4 - 2 = 0 
	70.	 2x1>2 - x1>4 - 1 = 0 
	71.	 x4 - 13x2 + 36 = 0 
	72.	 x4 - 7x2 + 12 = 0 
	73.	 2t4 + t2 - 1 = 0 
	74.	 81y4 + 1 = 18y2 
	75.	 p2 - 3 + 42p2 - 3 - 5 = 0 
	76.	 x2 - 3 - 42x2 - 3 - 12 = 0 
	77.	 13t + 122 - 313t + 12 + 2 = 0 
	78.	 17z + 522 + 217z + 52 - 15 = 0 
	79.	 11y + 522 - 911y + 52 + 20 = 0 
	80.	 121t + 122 - 2121t + 12 - 3 = 0 
	81.	 1x2 - 422 - 31x2 - 42 - 4 = 0 
	82.	 1x2 + 222 - 51x2 + 22 - 6 = 0 
	83.	 1x2 - 3x22 - 21x2 - 3x2 - 8 = 0 
	84.	 1x2 - 4x22 + 71x2 - 4x2 + 12 = 0 
Applying the Concepts
	85.	 Fractions. The numerator of a fraction is two less than the 
denominator. The sum of the fraction and its reciprocal 
	
	 is 25
12. Find the numerator and denominator assuming that 
	
	 each is a positive integer. 
	86.	 Fractions. The numerator of a fraction is five less than the 
denominator. The sum of the fraction and six times its
	
	 reciprocal is 25
2 . Find the numerator and denominator 
	
	 assuming that each is an integer. 
	87.	 Investment. Latasha bought some stock for +1800. If the 
price of each share of the stock had been +18 less, she could 
have bought five more shares for the same +1800.
a.	 How many shares of the stock did she buy? 
b.	 How much did she pay for each share? 
	88.	 Bus charter. A civic club charters a bus for one day at a 
cost of +575. When two more people join the group, each 
person’s cost decreases by +2. How many people were in the 
original group? 
	89.	 Depth of a well. A stone is dropped into a well, and the 
time it takes to hear the splash is 4 seconds. Find the depth of 
the well (to the nearest foot). Assume that the speed of sound 
is 1100 feet per second and that d = 16t2 is the distance d an 
object falls in t seconds. 
	90.	 Estimating the horizon. You are in a hot air balloon  
2 miles above the ocean. (See the accompanying diagram.)               

	
Section 1.4    ■    Solving Other Types of Equations 127
	
	 As far as you can see, there is only water. Given that the radius of 
the earth is 3960 miles, how far away is the horizon? 
3960 mi
2 mi
	 91.	 Rate of current. A motorboat is capable of traveling at a 
speed of 10 miles per hour in still water. On a particular day, 
the boat took 30 minutes longer to travel a distance of  
12 miles upstream than it took to travel the same distance 
downstream. What was the rate of the current in the stream 
on that day? 
	 92.	 Train speed. A freight train requires 2 1
2 hours longer to make
	
	 a 300-mile journey than an express train does. If the express 
train averages 20 miles per hour faster than the freight train, 
how long does it take the express train to make the trip? 
	 93.	 Washing the family car. A couple washed the family  
car in 24 minutes. Previously, when they each had washed 
the car alone, it took the husband 20 minutes longer to wash  
the car than it took the wife. How long did it take the wife  
to wash the car? 
	 94.	 Filling a swimming pool. A small swimming pool can be 
filled by two hoses together in 1 hour and 12 minutes. The larger 
hose alone fills the pool in 1 hour less than the smaller hose. 
How long does it take the smaller hose to fill the pool? 
	 95.	 The area of a rectangular plot. Together the diagonal 
and the longer side of a rectangular plot are three times the 
length of the shorter side. If the longer side exceeds the shorter 
side by 100 feet, what is the area of the plot? 
	 96.	 Emergency at sea. You are at sea in your motorboat at a 
point A located 40 km from a point B that lies 130 kilometers 
from a hospital on a long, straight road. (See the accompanying 
figure.) While at point A, your companion feels sick and has 
to be taken to the hospital. You call the hospital on your cell 
phone to send an ambulance. Your motorboat can travel at 40 
kilometers per hour, and the ambulance can travel at 80 kilome-
ters per hour. How far from point B will you be when you and 
the ambulance arrive simultaneously at point C? 
A
B
C
x
40
Hospital
130  x
	  97.	 Planning road construction. Two towns A and B are 
located 8 and 5 miles, respectively, from a long, straight 
highway. The points C and D on the highway closest to the 
two towns are 18 miles apart. (Remember that the shortest 
distance from a point to a line is the length of the perpendic-
ular segment from the point to the line.) Where should point 
E be located on the highway so that the sum of the lengths 
of the roads from A to E and E to B is 23 miles? (See the 
accompanying figure.)
[Hint: 205x2 - 4392x + 18972 = 1x - 621205x - 31622.]
B
D
18  x
E
C
5 mi
x
A
8 mi
	  98.	 Department store purchases. A department store buyer 
purchased some shirts for +540. Then she sold all but eight 
of them. On each shirt sold, a profit of +6 (over the pur-
chase price) was made. The shirts sold brought in revenue of 
+780.
a.	 How many shirts were bought initially? 
b.	 What was the purchase price of each shirt? 
c.	 What was the selling price of each shirt? 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 99–110, solve each equation by any method.
	 99.	 ax2 - 3
x
b
2
- 6 ax2 - 3
x
b + 8 = 0 
	100.	 a x + 2
3x + 1b
2
- 5 a x + 2
3x + 1b + 6 = 0 
	101.	 313x - 2 + 214x + 1 = 212 
	102.	
5
x - 1 -
3x
x + 1 =
9
x2 - 1 
	103.	 x + 2
x
+ 2x + 6
x2 + 4x = -
1
x + 4 
	104.	 ax2 + 1
x2b - 7ax - 1
x b + 8 = 0
c Hint: u = x - 1
x, u2 + 2 = x2 + 1
x2.d
	105.	 a
t
t + 2b
2
+
2t
t + 2 - 15 = 0 
	106.	 6t-2>5 - 17t-1>5 + 5 = 0 
	107.	 2x1>3 + 2x -1>3 - 5 = 0
	108.	 x4>3 - 4x2>3 + 3 = 0 
	109.	 x4>3 - 5x2>3 + 6 = 0 
	110.	 8A
x
x + 3 - A
x + 3
x
= 2 
	111.	 Solve x + 1x - 42 = 0 using these two methods. 
a.	 Rationalize the equation and then solve it.
b.	 Use the substitution method. 

128	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
	112.	 Solve a
x
x + 1b
2
-
2x
x + 1 - 8 = 0 using these two ­methods.
a.	 Use the substitution method.
b.	 Multiply by the LCD. 
In Exercises 113–116, solve for x in terms of the other 
­variables. (All letters denote positive real numbers.)
	113.	 x + b
x - b = x - 5b
2x - 5b 
	114.	
1
x + a +
1
x - 2a =
1
x - 3a 
	115.	 3x - 2a = 1a13x - 2a2 
	116.	 3a - 1ax = 1a13x + a2 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
In Exercises 117–119, find the value of x.
	117.	 x = 41 + 31 + 21 + g
3Hint: x = 11 + x.4 
	118.	 x = 420 + 320 + 220 + g 
	119.	 x = 4n + 3n + 2n + c, where n is a positive  
integer. 
	120.	 Assume that x 7 1. Solve for x. 
	
	
3x + 22x - 1 + 3x - 22x - 1 = 4
	
	 [Hint: x + 21x - 1 = 1x - 12 + 1 + 21x - 1
= 11x - 1 + 122.]
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 121–132, solve each equation.
	121.	 12x - 4 = 28 - 4x 
	122.	 21x - 32 + 17 = 4x + 1 
	123.	 2x + 31x - 42 = 7x + 10 
	124.	 2x - 3 - 13x - 12 = 6 
	125.	 -2x
3
= x + x
2 
	126.	 x - 1
3
+ 2x
5 = x + 2 
	127.	 6x2 - 102 = 0 
	128.	 1x + 522 = 27 
	129.	 25x2 + 1 = 10x 
	130.	 x2 - 10x + 25 = 0 
	131.	 3x2 + 3x - 8 = 10 
	132.	 5x2 - 6x = 4x2 + 6x - 3 
In Exercises 133–136, perform the indicated operations,  
factoring all denominators.
	133.	 5
2x + 3 
	134.	 6x +
5
x - 3 
	135.	
3
x + 1 - x - 2
x + 3 
	136.	
x
x2 + 6x + 9 -
x - 3
x2 + 5x + 6 

1.5
Inequalities
When we replace the equal sign 1=2 in an equation with any of the four inequality symbols 
6, …, 7, or Ú, the resulting expression is an inequality. Here are some examples.
Equation
Replace = with
Inequality
 x = 5
 3x + 2 = 14
 5x + 7 = 3x + 23
 x2 = 0
6
…
7
Ú
 x 6 5
 3x + 2 … 14
 5x + 7 7 3x + 23
 x2 Ú 0
1	
Learn the vocabulary for 
discussing inequalities.
The Bermuda Triangle
The Bermuda Triangle, or Devil’s Triangle, is the expanse of the Atlantic Ocean be-
tween Florida, Bermuda, and Puerto Rico covering approximately 500,000 square 
miles of sea. This mysterious stretch of sea has an unusually high occurrence of disap-
pearing ships and planes.
For example, on Halloween 1991, pilot John Verdi and his copilot were flying a 
Grumman Cougar jet over the triangle. They radioed the nearest tower to get permis-
sion to increase their altitude. The tower agreed and watched as the jet began the 
ascent and then disappeared off the radar. The jet did not fly out of range of the radar, 
did not descend, and did not radio a mayday (distress call). It just vanished, and the 
plane and crew were never recovered.
One explanation for such disappearances is based on the theory that strange 
compass readings occur in crossing the Atlantic due to confusion caused by the three 
north poles: magnetic (toward which compasses point), grid (the real North Pole, at 
90 ­degrees latitude), and true or celestial north (determined by Polaris, the North Star). 
To get data to test this theory, a plane set out from Miami to Bermuda, a distance of 
1035 miles, with the intention of setting the plane on automatic pilot once it reached a 
cruising speed of 300 miles per hour.
The plane was 150 miles along its path from Miami to Bermuda when it reached the 
300-mile-per-hour cruising speed and was set on automatic pilot. After what length of 
time would you be confident in saying that the plane had encountered trouble? The 
answer to this question is found in Example 2, which uses a linear inequality, the topic 
discussed in this section.
Inequalities
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Inequalities (Section P.1, pages 6 and 7)
2	 Intervals (Section P.1, page 7)
3	 Linear equations (Section 1.1, page 78)
Objectives
1	 Learn the vocabulary for discussing 
inequalities.
2	 Solve and graph linear inequalities.
3	 Solve and graph a compound inequality.
4	 Solve polynomial and rational inequalities 
using test points.
S e c t i o n 
	
Section 1.5    ■    Inequalities 129

130	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
In general, an inequality is a statement that one algebraic expression is either less than or is 
less than or equal to another algebraic expression. The vocabulary for discussing inequali-
ties is similar to that used for equations. The domain of a variable in an inequality is the 
set of all real numbers for which both sides of the inequality are defined. The real numbers 
that result in a true statement when those numbers are substituted for the variable in the 
inequality are called solutions of the inequality. Because replacing x with 1 in the inequal-
ity 3x + 2 … 14 results in the true statement
3112 + 2 … 14,
the number 1 is a solution of the inequality 3x + 2 … 14. We also say that 1 satisfies 
the inequality 3x + 2 … 14. To solve an inequality means to find all solutions of the 
inequality — that is, its solution set. The most elementary equations, such as x = 5, 
have only one solution. However, even the most elementary inequalities, such as x 6 5, 
have infinitely many solutions. In fact, their solution sets are intervals, and we frequently 
graph the solution sets for inequalities in one variable on a number line. The graph of the 
inequality x 6 5 is the interval 1- ∞, 52, shown in Figure 1.6.
5
x      5, or (, 5)
Figure 1.6  Graph of an inequality
Inequalities are classified the same way as equations: conditional, inconsistent, or iden-
tities. A conditional inequality such as x 6 5 has in its domain at least one solution and at 
least one number that is not a solution. An inequality that no real number satisfies is called 
an inconsistent inequality, and an inequality that is satisfied by every real number in the 
domain of the variable is called an identity.
Because x2 = x # x is the product of (1) two positive factors, (2) two negative factors, 
or (3) two zero factors, x2 is either a positive number or zero. That is, x2 is never negative, 
or is nonnegative. We call this fact the nonnegative identity.
Two inequalities that have exactly the same solution set are called equivalent ­inequalities. 
The basic method of solving inequalities is similar to the method for solving equations: 
We replace a given inequality with a series of equivalent inequalities until we arrive at an 
equivalent inequality, such as x 6 5, whose solution set we already know.
N o n n e g at i v e  I d e n t i t y
x2 Ú 0
for any real number x.
The following operations produce equivalent inequalities:
1.	 Simplifying one or both sides of an inequality by combining like terms and 
­eliminating parentheses
2.	 Adding or subtracting the same expression on both sides of the inequality
Caution is required in multiplying or dividing both sides of an inequality by a real num-
ber or an expression representing a real number. Notice what happens when we multiply 
an inequality by -1.

	
Section 1.5    ■    Inequalities 131
We know that 2 6 3, but how does -2 = 1-12122 compare with -3 = 1-12132? 
We have -2 7 -3. See Figure 1.7.
3
2
1
0
3
2
1
3 is left of 2
2 is left of 3
Figure 1.7 
If we multiply (or divide) both sides of the inequality 2 6 3 by -1, to get a correct 
result, we must exchange the 6 symbol for the 7 symbol. This exchange of symbols is 
called reversing the sense or the direction of the inequality.
The following chart describes the way multiplication and division affect inequalities.
Linear Inequalities
A linear inequality in one variable is an inequality that is equivalent to one of the forms
ax + b 6 0  or  ax + b … 0,
where a and b represent real numbers and a ≠0.
Inequalities such as 2x - 1 7 0 and 2x - 1 Ú 0 are linear inequalities because they 
are equivalent to -2x + 1 6 0 and -2x + 1 … 0, respectively.
2	
Solve and graph linear 
inequalities.
If C represents a real number, then the following inequalities are all equivalent.
Sign of C
Inequality
Sense
Example
A * B
6
3x 6 12
C positive
A # C * B # C
Unchanged
1
3 13x2 6 1
3 1122
C positive
A
C * B
C
Unchanged
3x
3 6 12
3
C negative
A # C + B # C
Reversed
-1
3 13x2 7 -1
3 1122
C negative
A
C + B
C
Reversed
3x
-3 7 12
-3
Similar results apply when 6 is replaced throughout with any of the symbols 
…, 7, or Ú.
Solve each inequality and graph its solution set.
a.	 7x - 11 6 21x - 32	
b.	 8 - 3x … 2
Solution
a.	 7x - 11 6 21x - 32
 7x - 11 6 2x - 6
	
Distributive property
 7x - 11 + 11 6 2x - 6 + 11	
Add 11 to both sides.
 7x 6 2x + 5
	
Simplify.
 7x - 2x 6 2x + 5 - 2x	
Subtract 2x from both sides.
 5x 6 5
	
Simplify.
 5x
5 6 5
5
	
Divide both sides by 5.
 x 6 1
	
Simplify.
Solving and Graphing Linear Inequalities
EXAMPLE 1
A linear inequality becomes a 
­linear equation when the inequality 
­symbol is replaced with the equal 
sign 1=2.
Side  
Note

132	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
The solution set is 5x x 6 16, or in interval notation, 1- ∞, 12. The graph of the  
solution set is shown in Figure 1.8.
b.	 8 - 3x … 2
 8 - 3x - 8 … 2 - 8	
Subtract 8 from both sides.
 -3x … -6
	
Simplify.
 -3x
-3 Ú -6
-3
	
Divide both sides by -3. (Reverse the  
direction of the inequality symbol.)
 x Ú 2
	
Simplify.
The solution set is 5x x Ú 26, or in interval notation, 32, ∞2. The graph of the  
solution set is shown in Figure 1.9.
Practice Problem 1  Solve each inequality and graph the solution set.
a.	 4x + 9 7 21x + 62 + 1	
b.	 7 - 2x Ú -3
Figure 1.8 
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
x  1, or (, 1)
Figure 1.9 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x  2, or [2, )
Plane’s distance from Miami 
Distance from Miami to Bermuda
In the introduction to this section, we discussed an experiment to test the reliability of 
compass settings and flight by automatic pilot along one edge of the Bermuda Triangle. 
The plane is 150 miles along its path from Miami to Bermuda, cruising at 300 miles per 
hour, when it notifies the tower that it is now set on automatic pilot.
The entire trip is 1035 miles, and we want to determine how much time we should let 
pass before we become concerned that the plane has encountered trouble.
Solution
Let t = time elapsed since the plane went on autopilot. Then
 300t = distance the plane has flown in t hours
 150 + 300t = plane>s distance from Miami after t hours.
Concern is not warranted unless the Bermuda tower does not see the plane, which 
means that the following is true.
Calculating the Results of the Bermuda Triangle Experiment
EXAMPLE 2
If an inequality is true for all real numbers, its solution set is 1- ∞, ∞2. If an inequality has 
no solution, its solution set is ∅.
	
Ú
 150 + 300t Ú 1035
    Replace the verbal description with 
an inequality.
 150 + 300t - 150 Ú 1035 - 150    Subtract 150 from both sides.
 300t Ú 885
    Simplify.
 300t
300 Ú 885
300
    Divide both sides by 300.
 t Ú 2.95
    Simplify.
Because 2.95 is roughly three hours, the tower will suspect trouble if the plane has not 
­arrived in Bermuda after three hours.
Practice Problem 2  How much time should pass in Example 2 if the plane was set  
on automatic pilot at 340 miles per hour when it was 185 miles from Miami?

	
Section 1.5    ■    Inequalities 133
Combining Two Inequalities
Sometimes we are interested in the solution set of two or more inequalities. The combina-
tion of two or more inequalities is called a compound inequality.
Suppose E1 is an inequality with solution set (interval) I1 and E2 is another inequality 
with solution set I2. Then the solution set of the compound inequality “E1 and E2” is I1 ¨ I2 
and the solution set of the compound inequality “E1 or E2” is I1 ´ I2.
3	
Solve and graph a compound 
inequality.
Write the solution set of each inequality.
a.	 71x + 22 - 20 - 4x 6 31x - 12	
b.	 21x + 52 + 3x 6 51x - 12 + 3
Solution
a.	  71x + 22 - 20 - 4x 6 31x - 12	
Original inequality
 7x + 14 - 20 - 4x 6 3x - 3
	
Distributive property
 3x - 6 6 3x - 3
	
Combine like terms.
 -6 6 -3
	
Add -3x to both sides and simplify.
	
The last inequality is equivalent to the original inequality and is always true. So the 
solution set of the original inequality is 1- ∞, ∞2.
b.	  21x + 52 + 3x 6 51x - 12 + 3	
Original inequality
 2x + 10 + 3x 6 5x - 5 + 3
	
Distributive property
 5x + 10 6 5x - 2
	
Combine like terms.
 
10 6 -2
	
Add -5x and simplify.
	
The resulting inequality is equivalent to the original inequality and is always false.  
So the solution set of the original inequality is ∅.
Practice Problem 3  Write the solution set of each inequality.
a.	 214 - x2 + 6x 6 41x + 12 + 7    b.	 31x - 22 + 5 Ú 71x - 12 - 41x - 22
Solving an Inequality
EXAMPLE 3
Graph and write the solution set of the compound inequality.
2x + 7 … 1 or 3x - 2 6 41x - 12
Solution
 2x + 7 … 1      or   3x - 2 6 41x - 12    Original inequalities
 2x + 7 … 1      or   3x - 2 6 4x - 4        Distributive property
 2x … -6  or    
 -x 6 -2           Isolate variable term.
 x … -3  or    
 x 7 2            Solve for x; reverse second  
inequality symbol.
Graph each inequality and select the union of the two intervals.
x … -3
	
4
5
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
x 7 2
	
4
5
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
x … -3 or x 7 2
	
4
5
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
The solution set of the compound inequality is 1- ∞, -34 ´ 12, ∞2.
Solving and Graphing a Compound OR Inequality
EXAMPLE 4

134	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Sometimes we are interested in a joint inequality such as -5 6 2x + 3 … 9. This use 
of two inequality symbols in a single expression is shorthand for -5 6 2x + 3 and 
2x + 3 … 9. Fortunately, solving such inequalities requires no new principles, as we see 
in the next example.
Practice Problem 4  Write the solution set of the compound inequality.
3x - 5 Ú 7 or 5 - 2x Ú 1
Solve the compound inequality and graph the solution set.
21x - 32 + 5 6 9 and 311 - x2 - 2 … 7
Solution
 21x - 32 + 5 6 9 and  311 - x2 - 2 … 7     Original inequalities
 2x - 6 + 5 6 9 and
  3 - 3x - 2 … 7     Distributive property
 2x 6 10 and
  -3x … 6     Isolate variable term.
 x 6 5 and
  x Ú -2    Solve for x; reverse second  
inequality symbol.
Graph each inequality and select the interval common to both inequalities.
x 6 5
	
4
5
7
6
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
6 5
7
x Ú -2
	
4
5
7
6
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
6 5
7
x 6 5 and x Ú -2
	
4
5
7
6
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
6 5
7
The solution set of the compound inequality is the interval 3-2, 52.
Practice Problem 5  Solve and graph the compound inequality.
213 - x2 - 3 6 5 and 21x - 52 + 7 … 3
Solving and Graphing a Compound AND Inequality
EXAMPLE 5
Solve the inequality -5 6 2x + 3 … 9 and graph its solution set.
Solution
We must find all real numbers that are solutions of both inequalities
-5 6 2x + 3 and 2x + 3 … 9.
We first solve these inequalities separately.
 -5 6 2x + 3   
 2x + 3 … 9
	
Original inequalities
 -5 - 3 6 2x + 3 - 3    2x + 3 - 3 … 9 - 3	
Subtract 3 from both sides.
 -8 6 2x   
 2x … 6
	
Simplify.
 -8
2
6 2x
2   
 2x
2 … 6
2
	
Divide both sides by 2.
 -4 6 x   
 x … 3
	
Simplify.
Solving and Graphing a Compound Inequality
EXAMPLE 6

	
Section 1.5    ■    Inequalities 135
The solution of the original pair of inequalities consists of all real numbers x such that 
-4 6 x and x … 3. This solution may be written more compactly as 5x -4 6 x … 36. 
In interval notation, we write 1-4, 34. The graph is shown in Figure 1.10.
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
4  x  3, or (4, 3]
Figure 1.10 
Notice that we did the same thing to both inequalities in each step of the solution process. 
We can accomplish this simultaneous solution more efficiently by working on both in-
equalities at the same time as follows.
 -5 6 2x + 3 … 9
	
Original inequality
 -5 - 3 6 2x + 3 - 3 … 9 - 3	
Subtract 3 from each part.
 -8 6 2x … 6
	
Simplify each part.
 -8
2
6 2x
2 … 6
2
	
Divide each part by 2.
 -4 6 x … 3
	
Simplify each part.
The solution set is 1-4, 34, the same solution set we found previously.
Practice Problem 6  Solve and graph -6 … 4x - 2 6 4.
If -2 6 x 6 5, find real numbers a and b so that a 6 3x - 1 6 b.
Solution
We start with the interval for x.
 -2 6 x 6 5
 31-22 6 3x 6 3152
	
Multiply each part by 3 to get 3x in the middle.
 -6 6 3x 6 15
	
Simplify.
 -6 - 1 6 3x - 1 6 15 - 1	
Subtract 1 from each part to get 3x - 1 in the middle.
 -7 6 3x - 1 6 14
	
Simplify.
We have a = -7 and b = 14.
Practice Problem 7  Assuming that -3 … x … 2, find real numbers a and b so that 
a … 3x + 5 … b.
Finding the Interval of Values for a Linear Expression
EXAMPLE 7
Our next example demonstrates a practical use of the method shown in Example 7.
The weather in London is predicted to range between 10° and 20° Celsius during the three-
week period you will be working there. To decide what kind of clothes to take, you want 
to convert the temperature range to Fahrenheit temperatures. The formula for converting
Celsius temperature C to Fahrenheit temperature F is F = 9
5 C + 32. What range of 
Fahrenheit temperatures might you find in London during your stay there?
Finding a Fahrenheit Temperature from a Celsius Range
EXAMPLE 8

136	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Using Test Points to Solve Inequalities
The test-point method, also known as the sign-chart method, involves writing an inequal-
ity (by rearranging if necessary) so that the expression on the left side of the inequality 
symbol is in factored form and the right side is 0. In Example 9, we illustrate this method 
to solve a quadratic inequality.
4	
Solve polynomial and rational 
inequalities using test points.
Solution
First, we express the Celsius temperature range as an inequality. Let C = temperature in 
Celsius degrees.
For the three weeks under consideration, 10 … C … 20.
We want to know the range of F = 9
5C + 32 when 10 … C … 20.
 10 … C … 20
 a9
5b 1102 … 9
5 C … a9
5b 1202
	
Multiply each part by 9
5.
 18 … 9
5 C … 36
	
Simplify.
 18 + 32 … 9
5 C + 32 … 36 + 32	
Add 32 to each part.
 50 … 9
5 C + 32 … 68
	
Simplify.
 50 … F … 68
	
F = 9
5 C + 32
So the temperature range from 10° to 20° Celsius corresponds to a range from 50° to 
68° Fahrenheit.
Practice Problem 8  What range in Fahrenheit degrees corresponds to the range of  
15° to 25° Celsius?
Solve an inequality by using the test-point 
method.
Step 1  Rewrite (if necessary) the inequality 
so that the right side of the inequality is 0.
Simplify the left side.
Step 2  Factor the left side.
Step 3  Draw a number line. Find and plot 
the points where each factor is 0.
The n points so obtained divide the number 
line into 1n + 12 intervals.
Solve: x2 + 4x Ú 5x + 6
1.	x2 + 4x - 5x - 6 Ú 0	
Subtract 5x + 6 from both sides.
	
x2 - x - 6 Ú 0	
Simplify.
2.	1x + 221x - 32 Ú 0	
Factor.
3.	x + 2 = 0 for x = -2, and x - 3 = 0 for x = 3.
0
3
2
1
2
3
4
1
	
The three intervals determined by the two points -2 and 3 are 
1- ∞, -22, 1-2, 32, and 13, ∞2.
Using the Test-Point Method to Solve an Inequality
Objective
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 9
Example
(continued)

	
Section 1.5    ■    Inequalities 137
Step 4  The final expression on the left side 
of the inequality in Step 1 is always positive 
or always ­negative on each of the 1n + 12 
intervals of Step 3. Select convenient “test 
points” in each interval to ­determine the sign 
of the inequality.
Step 5  Draw a sign chart. Show the 
­information from Steps 3 and 4 on a number 
line.
Step 6  From the sign chart in Step 5, write 
the ­solution set of the inequality. Graph the 
solution set.
A rational inequality is an inequality that includes one or more rational expressions. We 
use the test-point method to solve a rational inequality.
Practice Problem 9  Solve: x2 + 2 6 3x + 6
Solve: x2 + 2x - 15
x - 1
Ú 3
Step 1         
x2 + 2x - 15
x - 1
- 3 Ú 0
Rearrange so that the right side is 0.
	
x2 + 2x - 15
x - 1
- 31x - 12
x - 1
Ú 0	
Common denominator
	
1x2 + 2x - 152 - 31x - 12
x - 1
Ú 0	
a
c { b
c = a { b
c
	
x2 + 2x - 15 - 3x + 3
x - 1
Ú 0	
Distribute.
	
x2 - x - 12
x - 1
Ú 0	
Simplify.
Step 2 
1x + 321x - 42
x - 1
Ú 0	
Factor the numerator.
Step 3  x + 3 = 0 for x = -3
	
x - 4 = 0 for x = 4
	
x - 1 = 0 for x = 1	
The rational expression is undefined at x = 1.
4
5
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
The four intervals determined by the three points -3, 1, and 4 are
1- ∞, -32, 1-3, 12, 11, 42, and 14, ∞2.
Solving a Rational Inequality
EXAMPLE 10
4.	
Test Interval
Test Point
Sign of 1x + 22 1x −32
Result
1- ∞, -22
-3
1-21-2
Positive
1-2, 32
0
1+21-2
Negative
13, ∞2
4
1+21+2
Positive
5.
0
3
1
2
0
0
4
3
1
x2x6 =  (x  2)(x  3)
    





   





2
6.	To find where x2 - x - 6 Ú 0 means to find where x2 - x - 6 7 0  
(indicated by + signs) or x2 - x - 6 = 0 (indicated by 0) on 
the sign chart. The solution set of the inequality from the figure in 
step 5 is 1- ∞, -24 ´ 33, ∞2. This set is shown below.
2
3

138	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Step 4
Test Interval
Test Point
Sign of 
1x + 32 1x −42
1x −12
Result
1- ∞, -32
-4
1-21-2
1-2
Negative
1-3, 12
  0
1+21-2
1-2
Positive
11, 42
  2
1+21-2
1+2
Negative
14, ∞2
  5
1+21+2
1+2
Positive
Step 5	
Step 6  1x + 321x - 42
1x - 12
Ú 0 on the set 3-3, 12 ´ 34, ∞2, with the following graph:
4
5
6
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
Practice Problem 10  Solve: 2x + 5
x - 1 … 1
0
4
1
undefined
2
0
0
4
3
5
1
     













2
3
(x  3) (x  4)
x  1
You cannot solve a rational inequality by multiplying both sides by the LCD, as you would 
with a rational equation. Remember that you reverse the sense of an inequality when multi-
plying by a negative expression. However, when an expression contains a variable, you do not 
know whether the expression is positive or negative.
Warning
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 12, ∞2 
2
b. 1- ∞, 54 
5
2. 2.5 hours    3. a. 1- ∞, ∞2  b. ∅    4. 1- ∞, 24 ´ 34, ∞2
5. 1-1, 34 
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
6. c -1, 3
2b 
3
2
1
7. a = -4, b = 11    8. 59°F to 77°F 
9. 1-1, 42    10. 3-6, 12

	
Section 1.5    ■    Inequalities 139
Exercises
section 1.5 
Basic Concepts and Skills
In Exercises 1–10, fill in the blank with the correct inequality 
symbol using the rules for producing equivalent inequalities.
	 1.	 If x 6 8, then x - 8 
 0. 
	 2.	 If x … -3, then x + 3 
 0. 
	 3.	 If x Ú 5, then x - 5 
 0. 
	 4.	 If x 7 7, then x - 7, 
 0. 
	 5.	 If x
2 6 6, then x 
 12. 
	 6.	 If x
3 6 2, then x 
 6. 
	 7.	 If -2x … 4, then x 
 -2. 
	 8.	 If -3x 7 12, then x 
 -4. 
	 9.	 If x + 3 6 2, then x 
 -1. 
	10.	 If x - 5 … 3, then x 
 8. 
In Exercises 11–18, graph the solution set of each inequality 
and write it in interval notation.
	11.	 -2 6 x 6 5 
	12.	 -5 … x … 0 
	13.	 0 6 x … 4 
	14.	 1 … x 6 7 
	15.	 x Ú -1 
	16.	 x 7 2 
	17.	 -5x Ú 10 
	18.	 -2x 6 2 
In Exercises 19–40, solve each inequality. Write the solution 
in interval notation and graph the solution set.
	19.	 x + 3 6 6 
	20.	 x - 2 6 3 
	21.	 1 - x … 4 
	22.	 7 - x 7 3 
	23.	 2x + 5 6 9 
	24.	 3x + 2 Ú 7 
	25.	 3 - 3x 7 15 
	26.	 8 - 4x Ú 12 
	27.	 31x + 22 6 2x + 5 
	28.	 41x - 12 Ú 3x - 1 
	29.	 31x - 32 … 3 - x 
	30.	 -x - 2 Ú x - 10 
	31.	 6x + 4 7 3x + 10 
	32.	 41x - 42 7 31x - 52 
	33.	 81x - 12 - x … 7x - 12 
	34.	 31x + 22 + 2x Ú 5x + 18 
	35.	 51x + 22 … 31x + 12 + 10 
	36.	 x - 4 7 21x + 82 
	37.	 21x + 12 + 3 Ú 21x + 22 - 1 
	38.	 512 - x2 + 4x … 12 - x 
	39.	 21x + 12 - 2 … 312 - x2 + 9 
	40.	 411 - x2 + 2x 7 512 - x2 + 4x 
In Exercises 41–50, solve each rational inequality.
	41.	 9x - 6 Ú 3
2x + 9
	42.	 7x - 3
2
6 3x - 4
	43.	 x - 3
3
… 2 + x
2
	44.	 2x - 3
4
Ú 3 - x
2
	45.	 3x + 1
2
6 x - 1 + x
2
	46.	 2x - 1
3
Ú x + 1
4
+ x
12
	47.	 x - 3
2
Ú x
3 + 1
	48.	 2x + 1
3
6 x - 1
2
+ 1
6
	49.	 3x + 1
3
- x
2 … x + 2
2
	50.	 x - 1
3
+ x + 1
4
… x
2 + x
12
In Exercises 51–58, solve each compound or inequality.
	51.	 2x + 5 6 1  or  2 + x 7 4
	52.	 3x - 2 7 7  or  211 - x2 7 1
	53.	 2x - 3
4
… 2  or  4 - 3x
2
Ú 2
	54.	 5 - 3x
3
Ú 1
6  or  x - 1
3
… 1
	55.	 2x + 1
3
Ú x + 1  or  x
2 - 1 7 x
3
	56.	 x + 2
2
6 x
3 + 1  or  x - 1
3
7 x + 1
5
	57.	 x - 1
2
7 x
3 - 1  or  2x + 5
3
… x + 1
6
	58.	 2x + 1
3
… x
4 + 1  or  3 - x
2
7 x
3 - 1
In Exercises 59–66, solve each compound and inequality.
	59.	 3 - 2x … 7  and  2x - 3 … 7
	60.	 6 - x … 3x + 10  and  7x - 14 … 3x + 14
	61.	 21x + 12 + 3 Ú 1  and  212 - x2 7 -6
	62.	 31x + 12 - 2 Ú 4  and  311 - x2 + 13 7 4
	63.	 21x + 12 - 3 7 7  and  312x + 12 + 1 6 10
	64.	 51x + 22 + 7 6 2  and  215 - 3x2 + 1 6 17
	65.	 5 + 31x - 12 6 3 + 31x + 12  and  3x - 7 … 8
	66.	 2x - 3 7 11  and  512x + 12 6 314x + 12 - 21x - 12
In Exercises 67–78, solve each compound inequality.
	67.	 3 6 x + 5 6 4 
	68.	 9 … x + 7 … 12 
	69.	 -4 … x - 2 6 2 
	70.	 -3 6 x + 5 6 4 
	71.	 -9 … 2x + 3 … 5 
	72.	 -2 … 3x + 1 … 7 
	73.	 0 … 1 - x
3 6 2 
	74.	 0 6 5 - x
2 … 3 
	75.	 -1 6 2x - 3
5
… 0
	76.	 -4 … 5x - 2
3
… 0
	77.	 5x … 3x + 1 6 4x - 2 
	78.	 3x + 2 6 2x + 3 6 4x - 1                                              

140	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
In Exercises 79–84, find a and b.
	 79.	 If -2 6 x 6 1, then a 6 x + 7 6 b. 
	 80.	 If 1 6 x 6 5, then a 6 2x + 3 6 b. 
	 81.	 If -1 6 x 6 1, then a 6 2 - x 6 b. 
	 82.	 If 3 6 x 6 7, then a 6 1 - 3x 6 b. 
	 83.	 If 0 6 x 6 4, then a 6 5x - 1 6 b. 
	 84.	 If -4 6 x 6 0, then a 6 3x + 4 6 b. 
In Exercises 85–100, use the test-point method to solve each 
polynomial inequality.
	 85.	 x2 + 4x - 12 … 0 
	 86.	 x2 - 8x + 7 7 0 
	 87.	 6x2 + 7x - 3 Ú 0 
	 88.	 4x2 - 2x - 2 6 0 
	 89.	 1x + 321x + 121x - 12 Ú 0 
	 90.	 1x + 421x - 121x + 22 … 0 
	 91.	 x3 - 4x2 - 12x 7 0
	 92.	 x3 + 8x2 + 15x 7 0
	 93.	 x2 + 2x 6 -1 
	 94.	 4x2 + 12x 6 -9 
	 95.	 x3 - x2 Ú 0 
	 96.	 x3 - 9x2 Ú 0
	 97.	 x2 Ú 1 
	 98.	 x4 … 16 
	 99.	 x3 6 -8 
	100.	 x4 7 9
In Exercises 101–120, solve each rational inequality.
	101.	 x + 2
x - 5 6 0 
	102.	 x - 3
x + 1 7 0
	103.	 x + 4
x
6 0 
	104.	
x
x - 2 7 0
	105.	 x + 1
x + 2 … 3 
	106.	 x - 1
x - 2 Ú 3 
	107.	
1x - 221x + 22
x
7 0
	108.	
1x - 121x + 32
x - 2
6 0
	109.	
1x - 221x + 12
1x - 321x + 52 Ú 0 
	110.	
1x - 121x - 32
1x + 221x + 42 Ú 0 
	111.	 x2 - 1
x2 - 4 … 0
	112.	 x2 - 9
x2 - 64 … 0
	113.	 x + 4
3x - 2 Ú 1 
	114.	 2x - 3
x + 3 … 1 
	115.	 3 … 2x + 6
2x + 1 
	116.	 x - 2
2x + 1 6 -1 
	117.	 x + 2
x - 3 Ú x - 1
x + 3 
	118.	 x + 1
x - 2 Ú
x
x - 1 
	119.	 x - 1
x + 1 … x + 2
x - 3
	120.	 x + 3
x + 1 … x - 1
x - 2
Applying the Concepts
	121.	 Appliance markup. The markup over the dealer’s cost on a 
new refrigerator ranges from 15% to 20%. If the dealer’s 
cost is +1750, over what range will the selling price vary? 
	122.	 Return on investment. An investor has +5000 to invest 
for a period of one year. Find the range of per annum simple 
interest rates required to generate interest between +200 and 
+275 inclusive. 
	123.	 Hybrid car trip. Sometime after passing a truck stop  
300 miles from the start of her trip, Cora’s hybrid car ran 
out of gas. Assuming that the tank could hold 12 gallons of 
gasoline and the hybrid car averaged 40 miles per gallon, 
find the range of gasoline (in gallons) that could have been 
in the tank at the start of the trip. 
	124.	 Average grade. Sean has taken three exams and earned 
scores of 85, 72, and 77 out of a possible 100 points. He 
needs an average of at least 80 to earn a B in the course. 
What range of scores on the fourth (and last) 100-point test 
will guarantee a B in the course? 
	125.	 Butterfat content. How much cream that is 30% butterfat 
must be added to milk that is 3% butterfat to have  
270 quarts that are at least 4.5% butterfat? 
	126.	 Pedometer cost. A company produces a pedometer at a 
cost of +3 each and sells the pedometer for +5 each. If the 
company has to recover an initial expense of +4000 before 
any profit is earned, how many pedometers must be sold to 
earn a profit in excess of +3000? 
	127.	 Car sales. A car dealer has three times as many SUVs and 
twice as many convertibles as four-door sedans. How many 
four-door sedans does the dealer have if she has at least  
48 cars of these three types? 
	
	
	128.	 Temperature conversion. The formula for converting 
Fahrenheit temperature F to Celsius temperature C is 
	
	 C = 5
91F - 322. What range in Celsius degrees
	
	 corresponds to a range of 68° to 86° Fahrenheit? 
	129.	 Temperature. The number N of water mites in a water 
sample depends on the temperature t in degrees Fahrenheit 
and is given by N = 132t - t2. At what temperature will 
the number of mites exceed 3200?             

	
Section 1.5    ■    Inequalities 141
	130.	 Falling object. The height h of an object thrown from 
the top of a ski lift 1584 feet high after t seconds is 
h = -16t2 + 32t + 1584. For what times is the height of 
the object at least 1200 feet? 
   
	131.	 Blackjack. A gambler playing blackjack in a casino using 
four decks noticed that 20% of the cards that had been  
dealt were jacks, queens, kings, or aces. After x cards had 
been dealt, he knew that the likelihood that the next card 
dealt would be a jack, a queen, a king, or an ace was 
	
	 64 - 0.2x
208 - x . For what values of x is this likelihood greater 
	
	 than 50%? 
	
	
	132.	 Area of a triangle. The base of a triangle is 3 centimeters 
greater than the height. Find the possible heights h so  
that the area of such a triangle will be at least 5 square  
centimeters. 
Beyond the Basics
	133.	 Find the numbers k for which the quadratic equation  
2x2 + kx + 2 = 0 has two real solutions. 
	134.	 Find the numbers k for which the quadratic equation 
2x2 + kx + 2 = 0 has no real solutions. 
	135.	 Find the numbers k for which the quadratic equation 
x2 + kx + k = 0 has two real solutions. 
	136.	 Find the numbers k for which the quadratic equation 
x2 + kx + k = 0 has no real solutions. 
	137.	 Solve: 
x
2x + 1 Ú 1
4 and 
6x
4x - 1 6 1
2 
	138.	 Solve: 2x - 1
x - 7 7 1 and x - 10
x - 8 7 2 
	139.	 Find all values of c for which it is possible to find two numbers 
whose product is 36 and whose sum is c. 
	140.	 Find all values of c for which it is possible to find two numbers 
whose sum is 12 and the sum of whose squares is c. 
	141.	 An import firm pays a tax of +10 on each radio it imports. In 
addition to this tax, a penalty tax must be paid if more than 
1000 radios are imported. The penalty tax is computed by mul-
tiplying 5 cents by the number of radios imported in excess of 
1000. This tax must be paid on each radio imported. If 1006 
radios are imported, the penalty tax is 6 # 5 = 30 cents and 
is paid on each of the 1006 radios. If the firm wants to spend 
no more than a total of +640,000 on import taxes, how many 
radios can it import? 
	142.	 A TV quiz program pays a contestant +100 for each correct 
answer for ten questions. If all ten questions are answered 
correctly, bonus questions are asked. The reward for every 
correct answer is increased by +50 for each bonus question 
that is correctly answered. Any incorrect answer ends the 
game. If two bonus questions are answered correctly, the 
contestant receives +200 for each of the 12 questions. If a 
contestant won more than +3500, how many questions must 
have been answered correctly? 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	143.	 Give an example of a quadratic inequality with each of the 
following solution sets.
a.	 1-4, 52 
b.	 3-2, 64 
c.	 1- ∞, ∞2 
d.	 ∅ 
e.	 536 
f.	 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2 
	144.	 Give an example of an inequality with each of the following 
solution sets.
a.	 1-2, 44 
b.	 33, 52 
c.	 Is there a quadratic inequality whose solution set is 
12, 54? 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 145–150, evaluate each expression.
	145.	  -3 
	146.	 3 - 7 
	147.	 6 - 4 
	148.	  - 12 
	149.	 0 
	150.	  -15.8 
In Exercises 151–154, find the distance between the given pair 
of points on a number line.
	151.	 -2 and 5 
	152.	 -8 and -15 
	153.	 2.3 and 5.7 
	154.	 -5 and 0 
In Exercises 155–160, express each statement in algebraic 
notation using absolute values.
	155.	 The distance from x to -2 is 5. 
	156.	 x is either 3 or -3. 
	157.	 x is at most 2 units from 4. 
	158.	 x is either to the left of -5 or to the right of 5 on a  
number line. 
	159.	 x is within 3 units of 5. 
	160.	 x is closer to 2 than to 6. 

142	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
1.6
Equations Involving Absolute Value
Recall that geometrically, the absolute value of a real number a is the ­distance from the 
origin on the number line to the point with coordinate a. The definition of absolute value is
1	
Solve equations involving 
absolute value.
Rescuing a Downed Aircraft
Rescue crews arrive at an airport in Maine to conduct an air search for a missing Cessna 
with two people aboard. If the rescue crews locate the missing aircraft, they are to 
mark the global positioning system (GPS) coordinates and notify the mission base. The 
search planes normally average 110 miles per hour, but weather conditions can affect 
the average speed by as much as 15 miles per hour (either slower or faster). If a search 
plane has 30 gallons of fuel and uses 10 gallons of fuel per hour, what is its possible 
search range (in miles)? In Example 5, we use an inequality involving absolute value to 
find the plane’s possible search range.
Equations and Inequalities 
­Involving Absolute Value
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Properties of absolute value  
(Section P.1, page 9)
2	 Intervals (Section P.1, page 7)
3	 Linear inequalities (Section 1.5,  
page 131)
Objectives
1	 Solve equations involving  
absolute value.
2	 Solve inequalities involving  
absolute value.
S e c t i o n 
Figure 1.11  Distance from the 
origin
0
1
2
1
2
0 a0 = a if a Ú 0  and  0 a0 = -a if a 6 0.
A summary of the most useful properties of absolute value can be found on page 9 in 
Section P.1.
Because the only two numbers on the number line that are exactly 2 units from the 
­origin are 2 and -2, they are the only solutions of the equation 0 x0 = 2. See Figure 1.11. 
This simple observation leads to the following rule for solving equations involving ­absolute 
value.
S o l u t i o n s  o f  0 u0 = a, a # 0
If a Ú 0 and u is an algebraic expression, then
 0 u0 = a is equivalent to u = a  or  u = -a.
 0 u0 = -a has no solution when a 7 0.
Note that if a = 0, then u = 0 is the only solution of 0 u0 = 0.

	
Section 1.6    ■    Equations and Inequalities ­Involving Absolute Value 143
Solve each equation.
a.	 0 x + 30 = 0        b.	 0 2x - 30 - 5 = 8
Solution
a.	 Let u = x + 3. Then, 0 u0 = 0 has only one solution: u = 0.
 0 x + 30 = 0 	  u = 0
 x + 3 = 0 	 u = 0 
 x = -3	 Solve for x.
	
Now we check the solution in the original equation.
	
Check:
 0 x + 30 = 0	
Original equation
 0 -3 + 30 ≟0	
Replace x with -3.
 0 00 = 0  ✓ 	 Simplify.
	
We have verified that -3 is a solution of the original equation.
   The solution set is 5-36.
b.	 To use the rule for solving equations involving absolute value, we must first isolate 
the absolute value expression to one side of the equation.
 0 2x - 30 - 5 = 8
 0 2x - 30 = 13  
Add 5 to both sides and simplify.
	
0 u0 = 13 is equivalent to u = 13 or u = -13. Let u = 2x - 3; then 0 2x - 30 = 13 
is equivalent to
 2x - 3 = 13
or    2x - 3 = -13. 
u = 13 or u = -13 
 2x = 16
   
 2x = -10 
Add 3 to both sides of each equation.
 x = 8
   
 x = -5 
Divide both sides by 2.
	
We leave it to you to check these solutions.
	
   The solution set is 5-5, 86.
Practice Problem 1  Solve each equation.
a.	 0 x - 20 = 0        b.	 0 6x - 30 - 8 = 1
Solving an Equation Involving Absolute Value
EXAMPLE 1
Solve: 0 x - 10 = 0 x + 50
Solution
If 0 u0 = 0 v0 , then u is equal to 0 v0  or u is equal to - 0 v0 . Because 0 v0 = {v in every case, 
we have u = v or u = -v. Thus,
0 u0 = 0 v0  is equivalent to u = v or u = -v.
0 x - 10 = 0 x + 50  is equivalent to
 x - 1 = x + 5   or  x - 1 = - 1x + 52	
u = x - 1, v = x + 5
 -1 = 5 1False2
 x = -2	
Solve for x.
Solving an Equation of the Form 0 u0 = 0 V0
EXAMPLE 2
With a little practice, you may find that you can solve these types of equations without 
actually writing u and the expression it represents. Then you can work with just the expres-
sion itself. 

144	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Inequalities Involving Absolute Value
The equation 0 x0 = 2 has two solutions: 2 and -2. If x is any real number other than 2 
or -2, then 0 x0 6 2 or 0 x0 7 2. Geometrically, this means that x is closer than 2 units to 
the origin if 0 x0 6 2 or farther than 2 units from the origin if 0 x0 7 2. Any number x that 
is closer than 2 units from the origin is in the interval -2 6 x 6 2. See Figure 1.12 (a). 
Any number x that is farther than 2 units from the origin is in the interval 1- ∞, -22 or the 
interval 12, ∞2, that is, either x 6 -2 or x 7 2. See Figure 1.12 (b).
2	
Solve inequalities involving 
absolute value.
The only solution of 0 x - 10 = 0 x + 50  is -2, so the solution set is 5-26. We leave it to 
you to check this solution.
Practice Problem 2  Solve: 0 x + 20 = 0 x - 30
✓
✓
Solve: 0 2x - 10 = x + 5
Solution
Letting u = 2x - 1 and v = x + 5, the equation 0 u0 = v is equivalent to
	
u = v	
or	
u = -v
 2x - 1 = x + 5   2x - 1 = - 1x + 52 
 2x - 1 = x + 5   2x - 1 = -x - 5
	
Distributive property
 x = 6  
 3x = -4
	
Isolate x term.
 x = 6  
 x = -4
3
	
Solve for x.
Check:
	
 x = 6	
or	
x = -4
3
 0 2162 - 10 =
? 6 + 5     2 2  a -4
3b - 1 2 =
? -4
3 + 5
 0 110 =
? 11     
 2 -8
3 - 1 2 =
? -4 + 15
3
 0 110 =
? 11  Yes   
 2 -11
3
2 =
? 11
3
11
3 =
? 11
3      Yes
The solution set of the given equation is e -4
3, 6f.
Practice Problem 3  Solve 0 3x - 40 = 21x - 12.
Solving an Equation of the Form 0 u0 = V
EXAMPLE 3
Figure 1.12  Graphs of inequalities involving absolute value
2
1
0
1
2
2  x  2, or (2, 2)
(a)
2
1
3
0
1
3
2
(b)
x  2 or x  2
or x in (, 2) h (2, )
This discussion is equally valid when we use any positive real number a instead of the 
number 2, and it leads to the following rules for replacing inequalities involving absolute 
value with equivalent inequalities that do not involve absolute value.

	
Section 1.6    ■    Equations and Inequalities ­Involving Absolute Value 145
Note the following techniques for solving inequalities similar to Example 4.
1.	 To solve 0 4x - 10 6 9, change … to 6 throughout to obtain the solution a -2, 5
2b.
2.	 To solve 0 1 - 4x0 … 9, note that 0 1 - 4x0 = 0 4x - 10 ; so the solution is the same 
	
as that for Example 4, c -2, 5
2 d .
R u l e s  f o r  S o lv i n g  A b s o l u t e  Va l u e  I n e q u a l i t i e s
If a 7 0 and u is an algebraic expression, then
1.	 0 u0 6 a  is equivalent to 
-a 6 u 6 a, or u in 1-a, a2.
2.	 0 u0 … a  is equivalent to 
-a … u … a, or u in 3-a, a4.
3.	 0 u0 7 a  is equivalent to  u 6 -a or u 7 a, or u in 1- ∞, -a2 ´ 1a, ∞2.
4.	 0 u0 Ú a  is equivalent to  u … -a or u Ú a, or u in 1- ∞, -a4 ´ 3a, ∞2.
In the introduction to this section, we wanted to find the possible search range (in miles) 
for a search plane that has 30 gallons of fuel and uses 10 gallons of fuel per hour. We were 
told that the search plane normally averages 110 miles per hour but that weather conditions 
can affect the average speed by as much as 15 miles per hour (either slower or faster). How 
do we find the possible search range?
Solution
To find the distance a plane flies (in miles), we need to know how long (time, in hours) it 
flies and how fast (speed, in miles per hour) it flies.
Let x = actual speed of the search plane, in miles per hour. We know that the  
actual speed is within 15 miles per hour of the average speed of 110 miles per hour. That 
is, 0 actual speed - average speed0 … 15 miles per hour.
0 x - 1100 … 15  Replace the verbal description with an inequality.
Finding the Search Range of an Aircraft
EXAMPLE 5
Solve the inequality 0 4x - 10 … 9 and graph the solution set.
Solution
Rule 2 applies here with u = 4x - 1 and a = 9.
 0 4x - 10 … 9 is equivalent to
 -9 … 4x - 1 … 9	
Rule 2, -a … u … a
 1 - 9 … 4x - 1 + 1 … 9 + 1	
Add 1 to each part.
 -8 … 4x … 10	
Simplify. 
 -8
4 … 4x
4 … 10
4	
Divide by 4; the sense of the inequality  
is unchanged.
 -2 … x … 5
2	
Simplify.
The solution set is ex 2 -2 … x … 5
2 f; that is, the solution set is the closed interval 
c -2, 5
2 d . See Figure 1.13.
Practice Problem 4  Solve 0 3x + 30 … 6 and graph the solution set.
Solving an Inequality Involving Absolute Value
EXAMPLE 4
F i g u r e 
1.13 
3
2
1
0
3 2 1
5
2
5
2
5
2
2  x      , or 2,
Figure 1.13 

146	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
Solve this inequality for x.
 -15 … x - 110 … 15	
Rewrite the inequality using Rule 2.
 110 - 15 … x … 110 + 15	
Add 110 to each part.
 95 … x … 125	
Simplify.
The actual speed of the search plane is between 95 and 125 miles per hour.
Because the plane uses 10 gallons of fuel per hour and has 30 gallons of fuel, it can fly 
30
10, or 3, hours. Thus, the actual number of miles the search plane can fly is 3x.
     95 … x … 125,
    31952 … 3x … 311252	
Multiply each part by 3.
 285 … 3x … 375	
Simplify.
The search plane’s range is between 285 and 375 miles.
Practice Problem 5  Repeat Example 5, but let the average speed of the plane be 115 miles 
per hour and suppose the wind speed can affect the average speed by 25 miles per hour.
Solve each inequality.
a.	 0 3x - 20 7 -5        b.   0 5x + 30 … -2
Solution
a.	 Because the absolute value is always nonnegative, 0 3x - 20 7 -5 is true for all real 
numbers x. The solution set is the set of all real numbers; in interval notation, we 
write 1- ∞, ∞2.
b.	 There is no real number with absolute value … -2 because the absolute value of any 
number is nonnegative. The solution set for 0 5x + 30 … -2 is the empty set, ∅.
Practice Problem 7  Solve.
a.	 0 5 - 9x0 7 -3        b.   0 7x - 40 … -1
Solving Special Cases of Absolute Value Inequalities
EXAMPLE 7
From
we have
Solve the inequality 0 2x - 80 Ú 4 and graph the solution set.
Solution
Rule 4 applies here with u = 2x - 8 and a = 4.
	
0 2x - 80 Ú 4 is equivalent to
	
2x - 8 … -4	
or	
2x - 8 Ú 4	
Rule 4, u … -a or u Ú a
    2x - 8 + 8 … -4 + 8	
2x - 8 + 8 Ú 4 + 8	
Add 8 to each part.
	
2x … 4	
2x Ú 12	
Simplify.
	
2x
2 … 4
2	
2x
2 Ú 12
2	
Divide both sides of each 
part by 2.
	
x … 2	
x Ú 6	
Simplify.
The solution set is 5x x … 2 or x Ú 66; that is, the solution set is the set of all real 
numbers x in either of the intervals 1- ∞, 24 or 36, ∞2. This set can also be written as 
1- ∞, 24 ´ 36, ∞2. See Figure 1.14.
Practice Problem 6  Solve 0 2x + 30 Ú 6 and graph the solution set.
Solving an Inequality Involving Absolute Value
EXAMPLE 6
7
2
3
4
5
6
1
x  2 or x  6
(, 2] h [6, )
Figure 1.14 

	
Section 1.6    ■    Equations and Inequalities ­Involving Absolute Value 147
Solve: 0 x + 10 6 30 x - 10
Solution
	
0 x + 10 6 30 x - 10	
Original inequality
	
0 x + 10
0 x - 10 6 3	
For x ≠1, divide both sides by 0 x - 10 .
	
2 x + 1
x - 1
2 6 3	
0 a0
0 b0 = ` a
b `
	
-3 6 x + 1
x - 1 6 3	
0 u0 6 a implies -a 6 u 6 a.
We solve the two inequalities:
-3 6 x + 1
x - 1	
and	
x + 1
x - 1 6 3
0 6 x + 1
x - 1 + 3	
x + 1
x - 1 - 3 6 0
0 6 1x + 12 + 31x - 12
x - 1
	
1x + 12 - 31x - 12
x - 1
6 0	
Combine.
0 6 212x - 12
x - 1
	
-21x - 22
x - 1
6 0	
Simplify.
0 6 2x - 1
x - 1 	
- 1x - 22
x - 1
6 0	
Divide by 2.
2x - 1
x - 1 7 0	
x - 2
x - 1 7 0	
Rewrite.
The solution set of this inequality 	
The solution set of this inequality  
is S1 (Figure 1.15).	
is S2 (Figure 1.15).
Solving an Inequality of the Form 0 u0 * 0 V0
EXAMPLE 8
From Figure 1.15, we see that both inequalities are true on S1 ¨ S2. So the solution set of 
the given inequality is a - ∞, 1
2b ´ 12, ∞2.
Practice Problem 8  Solve:  x - 2 6 4 x + 4
1. a. 526  b. 5-1, 26  2. e 1
2 f  3. e 6
5, 2f
4. 3-3, 14 
1
3
  5. 3270, 4204 
6. a- ∞, - 9
2 d ´ c 3
2, ∞b 
9
2
3
2
7. a. 1- ∞, ∞2   b. ∅  8. 1- ∞, -62 ´ a- 14
5 , ∞b
Figure 1.15 
2
1
 

  




1
2
2


  
    
1
2
1
2
S1 = a - ∞, 1
2b ´ 11, ∞2
S2 = 1- ∞, 12 ´ 12, ∞2
S1 ¨ S2 = a - ∞, 1
2b ´ 12, ∞2
2x - 1
x - 1 7 0
x - 2
x - 1 7 0
Answers to Practice Problems
You can use the “test point“  
method to verify that the solution
set of 2x - 1
x - 1 7 0 is S1 and that 
of x - 2
x - 1 7 0 is S2 as shown in
Figure 1.15.
Side 
Note

148	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
In Exercises 1–6, assume that a + 0.
	1.	 The solution set of the equation 0 x0 = a is 
.
	2.	 The solution set of the inequality 0 x0 6 a is 
.
	3.	 The solution set of the inequality 0 x0 Ú a is  
. 
	4.	 The equation 0 u0 = 0 v0  is equivalent to u =    
or u =
.
	5.	 True or False. The solution set of 0 3x - 20 6 a is the  
same as the solution set of 0 2 - 3x0 6 a. 
	6.	 True or False. If a 7 0, the solution set of  
0 3x - 20 … -a is ∅. 
In Exercises 7–34, solve each equation.
	7.	 0 3x0 = 9 
	8.	 0 4x0 = 24 
	9.	 0 -2x0 = 6 
	10.	 0 -x0 = 3 
	11.	 0 x + 30 = 2 
	12.	 0 x - 40 = 1 
	13.	 0 6 - 2x0 = 8 
	14.	 0 6 - 3x0 = 9 
	15.	 0 6x - 20 = 9 
	16.	 0 6x - 30 = 9 
	17.	 0 2x + 30 - 1 = 0
	18.	 0 2x - 30 - 1 = 0 
	19.	 1
2 0 x0 = 3 
 
	20.	 3
5 0 x0 = 6 
	21.	 2 1
4x + 2 2 = 3 
	22.	 2 3
2x - 1 2 = 3 
	23.	 60 1 - 2x0 - 8 = 10 
	24.	 50 1 - 4x0 + 10 = 15 
	25.	 20 3x - 40 + 9 = 7 
	26.	 90 2x - 30 + 2 = -7 
	27.	 0 2x + 10 = -1 
	28.	 0 3x + 70 = -2 
	29.	 0 x2 - 40 = 0 
	30.	 0 9 - x20 = 0 
	31.	 0 1 - 2x0 = 3 
	32.	 0 4 - 3x0 = 5 
	33.	 2 1
3 - x 2 = 2
3 
	34.	 2 2
5 - x 2 = 1
5 
In Exercises 35–44, solve each equation.
	35.	 0 x + 30 = 0 x + 50 
	36.	 0 x + 40 = 0 x - 80 
	37.	 0 3x - 20 = 0 6x + 70 
	38.	 0 2x - 40 = 0 4x + 60 
	39.	 0 2x - 10 = x + 1 
	40.	 0 3x - 40 = 21x - 12
	41.	 0 4 - 3x0 = x - 1 
	42.	 0 2 - 3x0 = 2x - 1 
	43.	 0 3x + 20 = 21x - 12 
	44.	 0 4x + 70 = x + 1 
In Exercises 45–60, solve each inequality.
	45.	 0 3x0 6 12 
	46.	 0 2x0 … 6 
	47.	 0 4x0 7 16 
	48.	 0 3x0 7 15
	49.	 0 x + 10 6 3 
	50.	 0 x - 40 6 1 
	51.	 0 x0 + 2 Ú -1 
	52.	 0 x0 + 2 7 -7 
	53.	 0 2x - 30 6 4 
	54.	 0 4x - 60 … 6 
	55.	 0 5 - 2x0 7 3 
	56.	 0 3x - 30 Ú 15 
	57.	 0 3x + 40 … 19 
	58.	 0 9 - 7x0 6 23 
	59.	 0 2x - 150 6 0 
	60.	 0 x + 50 … -3 
In Exercises 61–70, solve each inequality.
	61.	 2 x - 2
x + 3
2 6 1 
	62.	 2 x + 3
x - 1
2 6 2 
	63.	 2 2x - 3
x + 1
2 … 3 
	64.	 2 2x - 1
3x + 2
2 … 1 
	65.	 2 x - 1
x + 2
2 Ú 2 
	66.	 2 x + 3
x - 2
2 Ú 3 
	67.	 2 2x + 1
x - 1
2 7 4 
	68.	 2 2x - 1
3x + 2
2 7 5 
	69.	 0 x - 10 … 20 2x - 50 
	70.	 20 x - 50 … 0 2x - 30 
Applying the Concepts
	71.	 Varying temperatures. The inequality 0 T - 750 … 20, 
where T is in degrees Fahrenheit, describes the daily tem-
perature in Tampa during December. Give an interpretation 
for this inequality assuming that the high and low tem-
peratures in Tampa during December satisfy the equation 
0 T - 750 = 20. 
	72.	 Scale error. A butcher’s scale is accurate to within  
{0.05 pound. A sirloin steak weighs 1.14 pounds on this 
scale. Let x = actual weight of the steak. Write an absolute 
value inequality in x whose solution is the range of possible 
values for the actual weight of the steak. 
	73.	 Company budget. A company budgets +700 for office 
supplies. The actual expense for budget supplies must be 
within {+50 of this figure. Let x = actual expense for the 
office supplies. Write an absolute value inequality in x whose 
solution is the range of possible amounts for the expense of 
the office supplies. 
	74.	 National achievement scores. Suppose 68% of the 
scores on a national achievement exam will be within {90 
points of a score of 480. Let x = a score among the 68% 
just described. Write an absolute value inequality in x whose 
solution is the range of possible scores within {90 points  
of 480. 
	75.	 Blood pressure. Suppose 60% of Americans have a sys-
tolic blood pressure reading of 120, plus or minus 6.75. Let 
x = a blood pressure reading among the 60% just described. 
Write an absolute value inequality in x whose solution set is 
Exercises
section 1.6 
Basic Concepts and Skills   

	
Section 1.6    ■    Equations and Inequalities ­Involving Absolute Value 149
	
	 the range of possible blood pressure readings within {6.75 
points of 120. 
	 76.	 Gas mileage. A mo	torcycle has approximately 4 gallons of 
	
	 gas, with an error margin of {1
4 of a gallon. If the motorcycle
	
	 gets 37 miles per gallon of gas, how many miles can the 
motorcycle travel? 
	 77.	 Event planning. An event planner expects about 120 peo-
ple at a private party. She knows that this estimate could be 
off by 15 people (more or fewer). Food for the event costs 
+48 per person. How much might the event planner’s food 
expense be? 
	 78.	 Company bonuses. Bonuses at a company are usually 
given to about 60 people each year. The bonuses are +1200 
each, and the estimate of 60 recipients may be off by 7 peo-
ple (more or fewer). How much might the company spend 
on bonuses this year? 
	 79.	 Fishing revenue. Sarah sells the fish she catches to a local 
restaurant for 60 cents a pound. She can usually estimate how 
	
	 much her catch weighs to within {1
2 pound. She estimates 
	
	 that she has 32 pounds of fish. How much might she get 
paid for her catch? 
	 80.	 	Ticket sales. Ticket sales at an amusement park average 
about 460 on a Sunday. If actual Sunday sales are never 
more than 25 above or below the average and if each ticket 
costs +29.50, how much money might the park take in on a 
Sunday? 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 81–86, solve each equation.
81.	  a.	 0 x2 - 90 = x - 3 
b.  0 x2 - 80 = -2x 
	
 c.  0 x2 - 5x0 = 6
d.  0 x2 + 3x - 20 = 2
82.	 a.  0 x2 - 70 = 0 6x0
b.  0 x2 - 2x0 = 0 5x - 100
	
c.  0 2x2 - 3x + 50 = 0 x2 - 4x + 70 
	
d.  0 x2 + x + 30 = 0 x2 + 5x + 10 
83.	 2x - 3 + x - 2 = 4 
	 	
3Consider three cases:
	 	
(i) - ∞ 6 x … 3
2,  (ii) 3
2 6 x … 2,  (iii) 2 6 x 6 ∞.4
	 84.	 22x - 3 - 3x - 2 = 5 
	 85.	 0 x0 2 - 40 x0 - 7 = 5 
	 86.	 20 x0 2 - 0 x0 + 8 = 11
	 87.	 Show that if 0 6 a 6 b and 0 6 c 6 d, then ac 6 bd.
	 88.	 Show that if 0 6 a 6 b 6 c and 0 6 e 6 f 6 g, then 
ae 6 bf 6 cg.
	 89.	 Show that if x2 6 a and a 7 0, the solution set of the 
inequality x2 6 a is 5x - 1a 6 x 6 1a6, or in interval 
notation, 1- 1a, 1a2. [Hint: a = 11a22; factor x2 - a.]
	 90.	 Show that if x2 7 a and a 7 0, then the solution set of the 
inequality x2 7 a is 1- ∞, - 1a2 ´ 11a, ∞2.
In Exercises 91–102, write an absolute value inequality with 
variable x whose solution set is in the given interval(s).
	 91.	 11, 72 
	 92.	 33, 84 
	 93.	 3-2, 104 
	 94.	 1-7, -12 
	 95.	 1- ∞, 32 ´ 111, ∞2
	 96.	 1- ∞, -12 ´ 15, ∞2
	 97.	 1- ∞, -54 ´ 310, ∞2
	 98.	 1- ∞, -34 ´ 3-1, ∞2
	 99.	 1a, b2
	100.	 3c, d4
	101.	 1- ∞, a2 ´ 1b, ∞2
	102.	 1- ∞, c4 ´ 3d, ∞2
	103.	 Varying temperatures. The weather forecast predicts 
temperatures that will be between 8° of 70° Fahrenheit. Let 
x = temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. Write an absolute 
value inequality in x whose solution is the predicted range 
of temperatures. 
In Exercises 104–109, solve each inequality for x.
	104.	 0 x - 10 … 5 and 0 x0 Ú 2 
	105.	 1 … 0 x - 20 … 3 
	106.	 0 x - 10 + 0 x - 20 … 4 
	107.	 0 x - 20 + 0 x - 40 Ú 8 
	108.	 0 x - 10 + 0 x - 20 + 0 x - 30 … 6 
	109.	
0 x - 10  - 1x + 22
x + 2
Ú 0 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	110.	 For which values of x is 21x - 322 = x - 3? 
	111.	 For which values of x is
21x2 - 6x + 822 = x2 - 6x + 8?
	112.	 Solve 0 x - 30 2 - 70 x - 30 + 10 = 0.
[Hint: Let u = 0 x - 30 .] 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 113–120, simplify each expression.
	113.	 2 + 5
2 
	114.	 -3 + 7
2       
 

150	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
	115.	 -3 - 7
2 
	116.	
1a - b2- 1a + b2
2 
	117.	 215 - 222 +
 13 - 722 
	118.	 21-8 + 322 +
 1-5 - 722 
	119.	 212 - 522 +
 18 - 622 
	120.	 2113 - 11222 +
 112 + 1822 
In Exercises 121–126, add the appropriate term to each  
binomial so that it becomes a perfect square trinomial. Write 
and factor the trinomial.
	121.	 x2 + 4x 
	122.	 x2 - 6x 
	123.	 x2 - 5x
	124.	 x2 + 7x
	125.	 x2 + 3
2x 
	126.	 x2 - 4
5x 
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas
1.1	 Linear Equations in One Variable
i.	
An equation is a statement that two mathematical  
expressions are equal.
ii.	
The solutions or roots of an equation are those values  
(if any) of the variable that satisfy the equation.
iii.	 Equivalent equations are equations that have the same  
solution set.
iv.	
You can generate equivalent equations using the operations 
given on page 78.
v.	
The standard form of a conditional linear equation in x is 
ax + b = 0, a ≠0.
vi.	
A formula is an equation that expresses a relationship  
between two or more variables.
1.2	 Quadratic Equations
i.	
The equation ax2 + bx + c = 0, a ≠0, is the standard 
form of the quadratic equation in x.
ii.	
Zero-product property: Let A and B be two algebraic 
expressions. Then AB = 0 if and only if A = 0 or B = 0.
iii.	 Square root method: If u2 = d, then u = { 1d.
iv.	
Method for completing the square: See page 95.
v.	
Quadratic formula: x = -b{ 2b2 - 4ac
2a
1.3	 Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations 
with Complex Solutions
i.		
Complex numbers are of the form a + bi, where a and b are 
real numbers and i = 1-1; i2 = -1.
ii.	
The number a - bi is called the complex conjugate of 
a + bi.
	iii.	 Operations with complex numbers can be performed as if 
they are binomials with the variable i. Set i2 = -1 to sim-
plify. Division is performed by first multiplying the numera-
tor and the denominator by the complex conjugate of the 
denominator.
iv.	
The quantity b2 - 4ac in the quadratic formula is called the 
discriminant 1= D2.
v.	
If D 7 0, the quadratic equation has two distinct real roots.
If D = 0, there is one real solution.
If D 6 0, there are two nonreal complex solutions, and they 
are conjugates.
1.4	 Solving Other Types of Equations
Many types of equations can be solved by factoring. However, it 
is possible to introduce extraneous solutions when solving rational 
equations, equations involving radicals, or equations involving 
rational exponents. Remember to check the solutions. Extraneous 
solutions may be introduced when you
i.	
Multiply both sides by an LCD that contains a variable.
ii.	
Raise both sides to an even power.
1.5	 Inequalities
i.	
An inequality is a statement that one algebraic expression  
is less than or is less than or equal to another algebraic 
expression.
ii.	
The real numbers that result in a true statement when those 
numbers are substituted for the variable in the inequality are 
called solutions of the inequality.
iii.	 A linear inequality is an inequality that can be written in 
the form ax + b 6 0. The symbol 6 can be replaced with 
…, 7, or Ú.
iv.	
Test numbers can be used to solve polynomial or rational 
inequalities. See page 136.
1.6	 Equations and Inequalities Involving  
Absolute Value
i.	
Definition. a = a if a Ú 0 and a = -a if a 6 0.
ii.	
Let u be a variable or an algebraic expression and let a 7 0. 
Then
a.	 u 6 a if and only if -a 6 u 6 a.
b.	 u 7 a if and only if u 6 -a or u 7 a.
	
The properties in (a) and (b) are valid if 6 and 7 are  
replaced with … and Ú, respectively.  

Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills
In Exercises 1–18, solve each equation.
	 1.	 5x - 4 = 11 
	 2.	 12x + 7 = 31 
	 3.	 312x - 42 = 9 - 1x + 72 
	 4.	 41x + 72 = 40 + 2x 
	 5.	 3x + 8 = 31x + 22 + 2	 
	 6.	 3x + 8 = 31x + 12 + 4 
	 7.	 x - 15x - 22 = 71x - 12 - 2 
	 8.	 7 + 413 + y2 = 813y - 12 + 3 
	 9.	
2
x + 3 =
5
11x - 1 
	10.	
7
x + 2 =
3
x - 2 
	11.	 y + 5
2
+ y - 1
3
= 7y + 3
8
+ 4
3	 
	12.	 y - 3
6
- y - 4
5
= - 1
6
	13.	 2x - 3 = 4x + 5 
	14.	 5x - 3 = x + 4 
	15.	 2x - 1 = 2x + 7
	16.	 x - 1 = 2 - x 
	17.	 3x - 2 = 2x + 1
	18.	 1 - 2x = x + 5 
In Exercises 19–22, solve each equation for the indicated  
variable.
	19.	 p = k + gt for g 
	20.	 RK = 4 + 3K for K 
	21.	 T =
2B
B - 1 for B 
	22.	 S =
a
1 - r for r 
In Exercises 23–46, solve each equation. (Include all complex 
solutions.)
	23.	 x2 - 7x = 0 
	24.	 x2 - 32x = 0 
	25.	 x2 - 3x - 10 = 0
	26.	 2x2 - 9x - 18 = 0
	27.	 1x - 122 = 2x2 + 3x - 5
28.	 1x + 222 = x13x + 22 
	29.	 x2
4 + x = 5
4 
	30.	 x2
4 + 7
16 = x 
	31.	 3x1x + 12 = 2x + 2 
	32.	 x2 - x = 315 - x2
	33.	 x2 - 3x - 1 = 0 
	34.	 x2 + 6x + 2 = 0 
	35.	 2x2 + x - 1 = 0 
	36.	 x2 + 4x + 1 = 0 
	37.	 3x2 - 12x - 24 = 0 
	38.	 2x2 + 4x - 3 = 0 
	39.	 2x2 - x - 2 = 0 
	40.	 3x2 - 5x + 1 = 0 
	41.	 x2 - x + 1 = 0 
	42.	 3x2 + 4x + 3 = 0 
	43.	 x2 - 6x + 13 = 0 
	44.	 x2 - 8x + 20 = 0 
	45.	 4x2 - 8x + 13 = 0 
	46.	 3x2 - 4x + 2 = 0 
In Exercises 47–50, find the discriminant and determine the 
number and type of roots.
	47.	 3x2 - 11x + 6 = 0 
	48.	 x2 - 14x + 49 = 0 
	49.	 5x2 + 2x + 1 = 0 
	50.	 9x2 = 25 
In Exercises 51–70, solve each equation.
	51.	 2x2 - 16 = 0 
	52.	 1x + 6 = x 
	53.	 14 - 7x = 12x 
	54.	 t - 21t + 1 = 0 
	55.	 y - 21y - 3 = 0 
	56.	 13x + 4 - 1x - 3 = 3
	57.	 1x - 1 = 25 + 1x
	58.	
1
11 - x22 -
7
1 - x = -10
	59.	 17x + 522 + 217x + 52 - 15 = 0 
	60.	 1x2 - 122 - 111x2 - 12 + 24 = 0 
	61.	 x2>3 + 3x1>3 - 4 = 0 
	62.	 x -2>3 + x -1>3 - 6 = 0
	63.	 11t + 522 - 911t + 52 + 20 = 0 
	64.	 3ay - 1
6
b
2
- 7ay - 1
6
b = 0 
	65.	 4x4 - 37x2 + 9 = 0 
	66.	 1
x +
1
x - 1 = 5
6 
	67.	 2x + 1
2x - 1 = x - 1
x + 1 
	68.	 6 - 2
x =
4
x - 1 
	69.	 a
7x
x + 1b
2
- 3a
7x
x + 1b = 18 
	70.	 a4x2 - 3
x
b
2
= 1 
In Exercises 71–74, solve each equation for x in terms of other 
variables.
	71.	 x2 + 2yx - 3y2 = 0 
	72.	 x2   +
 1y - 2z2x - 2yz = 0 
	73.	 x2   +
 13 - 2y2x + y2 - 3y + 2 = 0 
	74.	 x2   +
 11 - 2y2x + y2 - y - 2 = 0 
In Exercises 75–90, solve each inequality. Write the solution 
in interval notation.
	75.	 x + 5 6 3 
	76.	 2x + 1 6 9 
	77.	 31x - 32 … 8 
	78.	 x + 5 … 19 + 3x 
	79.	 x + 2 Ú 2
3 x - 2x 
	80.	 2x + 1 Ú 5x - 6
3 
	81.	 1
6 7 4 - 3x
3 
	82.	 2
5 7 3 - 2x
2 
	83.	 x - 3
3
- 2 … x
6 + 1
2 
	84.	 x + 1
2
- 3 … x
4 + 1
2 
	85.	 3 - 2x
4
+ 1 7 x - 5
3 
	86.	 5 - 3x
5
- 2 7 2 - x
3 
In Exercises 87–98, solve each compound inequality. Write 
the solution in interval notation.
	87.	 3x - 1 6 2 or 11 - 2x 6 5 
	88.	 3 - 2x 7 5 or 15 - 3x 6 6 
	89.	 4x - 5 6 7 and 7 - 3x 6 1 
	90.	 2x - 1 6 3 and 4 - 3x 7 1 
	91.	 -3 … 2x + 1 6 7
	92.	 1
6 … 3x - 4
3
… 4 
	93.	 -3 6 3 - 2x … 97
	94.	 - 1
2 6 4 - 3x
3
… 1
2
	95.	 x2 + x - 6 Ú 0
	96.	 x3 - 9x … 0
	97.	
1x - 121x + 32
1x + 221x + 52 Ú 0
	98.	 x2 + 4x + 3
x2 + 6x + 8 … 0	 	  	    
	
Review Exercises 151

152	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
In Exercises 99–108, solve each inequality. Write the solution 
set in interval notation.
	 99.	 3x + 2 … 7 
	100.	 x - 4 Ú 2 
	101.	 4x - 2 + 8 7 12 
	102.	 3x - 1 + 4 6 10 
	103.	 2 4 - x
5
2 Ú 1 
	104.	 2 1 - x
6
2 6 1 
	105.	 2 x - 1
x + 2
2 … 3
	106.	 2 x + 3
x - 5
2 6 4
	107.	 2 2x - 3
x + 2
2 Ú 2
	108.	 2 x + 1
2x - 5
2 7 3
Applying the Concepts
	109.	 A circular lens has a circumference of 22 centimeters.  
Find the radius of the lens. 
 
	110.	 A rectangle has a perimeter of 18 inches and a length of  
5 inches. Find the width of the rectangle. 
	111.	 A trapezoid has an area of 32 square meters and a height of 
8 meters. If one base is 5 meters, what is the length of the 
other base? 
	112.	 What principal must be deposited for four years at 7% 
annual simple interest to earn +354.20 in interest? 
	113.	 The volume of a box is 4212 cubic centimeters. If the box is 
27 centimeters long and 12 centimeters wide, how high  
is it? 
x
12
27
Box
	114.	 The ratio of the current assets of a business to its current  
liabilities is called the current ratio of the business. 
Assuming that the current ratio is 2.7 and the current  
assets total +256,500, find the current liabilities of the  
business. 
	115.	 A cylindrical shaft has a volume of 8750p cubic centime-
ters. If the radius is 5 centimeters, how long is the shaft?
	116.	 A car dealer deducted 15% of the selling price of a car he 
had sold on consignment and gave the balance, +2210, to 
the owner. What was the selling price of the car? 
	117.	 The third angle in an isosceles triangle measures 40 degrees 
more than twice either base angle. Find the number of 
degrees in each angle of the triangle. 
	118.	 A 600-mile trip took 12 hours. Half of the time was spent 
traveling across flat terrain, and half was through hilly ter-
rain. Assuming that the average rate over the hilly section 
was 20 miles per hour slower than the average rate over the 
flat section, find the two rates and the distance traveled at 
each rate. 
	119.	 A total of +30,000 is invested in two stocks. At the end of 
the year, one returned 6% and the other returned 8% on the 
original investment. How much was invested in each stock if 
the total profit was +2160? 	
	120.	 The monthly note on a car that was leased for two years was 
+250 less than the monthly note on a car that was leased for 
a year and a half. The total income from the two leases was 
+21,300. Find the monthly note on each. 
	121.	 Two solutions, one containing 4 1
2% iodine and the other 
	
	 containing 12% iodine, are to be mixed to produce  
10 liters of a 6% iodine solution. How many liters of each 
are required?	 
	122.	 Two cars leave from the same place at the same time traveling 
in opposite directions. One travels 5 kilometers per hour faster 
than the other. After three hours, they are 495 kilometers apart. 
How fast is each car traveling? 
	123.	 A total of 28 handshakes were exchanged at the end of a 
party. Assuming that everyone shook hands with everyone 
else, how many people were at the party? 
	124.	 Find two positive numbers that differ by 7 and whose  
product is 408. 
	125.	 Lavina bought some shares of stock for +18,040. Later 
when the price had gone up +18 per share, she sold all 
but 20 of them for +20,000. How many shares had she 
bought? 
	126.	 Joann drives her car for 15 miles at a certain speed. She then 
increases her speed by 10 mph and drives for another 20 miles. 
If the total trip takes one hour, find her original speed. 
	127.	 One-fourth of a herd of wild horses is in a forest. Twice the 
square root of the number of horses in the herd has gone to 
the mountains, and the remaining 15 are on the bank of the 
river. What is the total number of horses in the herd? 
	128.	 A path of uniform width surrounds a rectangular swimming 
pool that is 30 ft long and 16 ft wide. Find the width of the 
path assuming that its area is 312 ft2. 
	129.	 The Botany Club chartered a bus for +324 to go on a field 
trip, the cost to be divided equally among those attending. 
At the last minute, four more members decided to go, which 
reduced the cost by +0.90 per person. How many members 
went on the trip?    		 

Practice Test A
	 1.	 Solve the equation 5x - 9 = 3x - 5. 
	 2.	 Solve the equation 7
24 = x
8 + 1
6. 
	 3.	 Solve the equation 
1
x - 2 - 5 =
1
x + 2. 
	 4.	 The width of a rectangle is 3 centimeters less than the length, 
and the area is 54 square centimeters. Find the dimensions of 
the rectangle. 
	 5.	 Solve the equation x2 + 36 = -13x. 
	 6.	 If Fran invests +8200 at 6% per year, how much additional 
money must she invest at 8% to ensure that the interest she 
receives each year is 7% of the total investment? 
	 7.	 A frame of uniform width borders a painting that is 25 inches 
long and 11 inches high. If the area of the framed picture is 
351 square inches, find the width of the border. 
	 8.	 Solve -6x - 15 = 12x + 522.	 
	 9.	 Determine the constant that should be added to the binomial
x2 + 2
3 x
	
	 so that it becomes a perfect-square trinomial. Then write and 
factor the trinomial.
	10.	 Solve 3x2 - 5x - 1 = 0.	 
	11.	 A box with a square base and no top is made from a square 
piece of cardboard by cutting 2-inch squares from each cor-
ner and folding up the sides. What length of side must the 
original cardboard square have if the volume of the box is  
50 cubic inches? 
	12.	 Solve x2 + 12x + 33 = 0.	 
	13.	 Solve the polynomial equation
3x4 - 75x2 = 0
	
	 by factoring and then using the zero-product property.
	14.	 Solve the equation
3x - 2 - 51x = 0
	
	 by making an appropriate substitution. 
	15.	 Solve the absolute value equation
2 1
3 x + 5 2 = 2 2
3x + 7 2 . 
In Problems 16 and 17, solve the inequality. Express the  
solution set in interval notation.
	16.	 x
2 - 5 Ú 4x
9 
	17.	 -4 6 2x - 3 6 4
	18.	 Solve the inequality
2 2
3 x - 1 2 - 2 7 1
3
	
	 by first rewriting it as an equivalent inequality without abso-
lute value bars. Express the solution set in interval notation.
	19.	 Solve the linear inequality 2
5 y - 13 … - a7 + 13
5 yb.
	20.	 Solve the inequality 0 … 5x - 2 … 8.		  	 
Practice Test B
	 1.	 Solve the equation 2x - 2 = 5x + 34. 
a.	 e 17
4 f
b.	 5-186
c.	 e 15
2 f
d.	 5-126
	 2.	 Solve the equation z
2 = 2z + 35. 
a.	 e 47
2 f
b.	 e -47
2 f
c.	 5236
d.	 e - 70
3 f
	 3.	 Solve the equation 
1
t - 2 - 1
2 =
-2t
4t - 1. 
a.	 e 4
9 f
b.	 e 1
2 f
c.	 e 2
3 f
d.	 5- 26
	 4.	 The length of a rectangle is 4 centimeters greater than  
the width, and the area is 77 square centimeters. Find the 
dimensions of the rectangle. 
a.	 11 centimeters by 15 centimeters
b.	 5 centimeters by 9 centimeters
c.	 7 centimeters by 11 centimeters
d.	 9 centimeters by 13 centimeters
	 5.	 Solve the equation x2 + 12 = -7x. 
a.	 53, 46
b.	 5-4, -36
c.	 5-3, 3, 46
d.	 54, 36
	 6.	 If Rena invests +7500 at 7% per year, how much additional 
money must she invest at 12% to ensure that the interest she 
receives each year is 10% of the total investment? 
a.	 +11,250
b.	 +12,375
c.	 +18,000
d.	 +21,000
	 7.	 A frame of uniform width borders a painting that is 20 inches 
long and 13 inches high. Assuming that the area of the framed 
picture is 368 square inches, find the width of the border. 
a.	 3.5 in.
b.	 3 in.
c.	 4 in.
d.	 1.5 in.
	 8.	 Solve -6x - 2 = 13x + 122. 
a.	 ∅
b.	 e - 1
3 f
c.	 e 1
3, 1f
d.	 e -1, - 1
3 f
	
Practice Test B 153

154	 Chapter 1      Equations and Inequalities
	 9.	 Determine the constant that should be added to the binomial 
x2 + 1
6 x 
	
	 so that it becomes a perfect-square trinomial. Then write and 
factor the trinomial. 
a.	 1
12; x2 + 1
6x + 1
12 = ax + 1
6b
2
b.	
1
144; x2 + 1
6x +
1
144 = ax + 1
12b
2
c.	 1
36; x2 + 1
6x + 1
36 = ax + 1
6b
2
d.	 144; x2 + 1
6x + 144 = 1x + 1222
	10.	 Solve 7x2 + 10x + 2 = 0.	
a.	 e -5 - 111
7
, -5 + 111
7
f
b.	 e -5 - 139
7
, -5 + 139
7
f
c.	 e -5 - 111
14
, -5 + 111
14
f
d.	 e -10 - 111
7
, -10 + 111
7
f
	11.	 A box with a square base and no top is made from a square 
piece of cardboard by cutting 3-inch squares from each cor-
ner and folding up the sides. What length of side must the 
original cardboard square have if the volume of the box is 
675 cubic inches? 
a.	 18 inches
b.	 21 inches
c.	 15 inches
d.	 14 inches
	12.	 Solve x2 + 14x + 38 = 0. 
a.	 57 - 138, 7 + 1386
b.	 514 + 1386
c.	 57 + 2116
d.	 5-7 - 111, -7 + 1116
	13.	 Solve the polynomial equation 
5x4 - 45x2 = 0 
	
	 by factoring and then using the zero-product property. 
a.	 5-3, 0, 36
b.	 5-3, 36
c.	 506
d.	 5-315, 0, 3156
	14.	 Solve the equation
x - 2048 - 321x = 0
	
	 by making an appropriate substitution. 
a.	 540966
b.	 530726
c.	 581926
d.	 520486
	15.	 Solve the absolute value equation
2 1
2x + 2 2 = 2 3
4x - 2 2 . 
a.	 512, 166    b.  ∅    c.  5106    d.  50, 166
In Problems 16 and 17, solve the inequality. Express the  
solution set in interval notation.
	16.	 x
6 - 1
3 … x
3 + 1 
a.	 1- ∞, -82
b.	 1- ∞, -82
c.	 1-8, ∞2
d.	 3-8, ∞2
	17.	 -13 … -3x + 2 6 -4 
a.	 3-5, -22
b.	 12, 54
c.	 1-5, -24
d.	 32, 52
	18.	 Solve the inequality
8 + 2 1 - x
2
2 Ú 10
	
	 by first rewriting it as an equivalent inequality without absolute 
value bars. Express the solution set in interval notation. 
a.	 1- ∞, -64 ´ 32, ∞2
b.	 3-2, 64
c.	 1- ∞, -24 ´ 36, ∞2
d.	 3-6, 24
	19.	 Solve the linear inequality 2
3 x - 2 6 5
3 x. 
a.	 1-2, ∞2
b.	 1∞, 22
c.	 1- ∞, -22
d.	 5-26
e.	 12, ∞2
	20.	 Solve the inequality 0 … 7x - 1 … 13. 
a.	 c 1
7, 2d
b.	 1-1, 24
c.	 1
7
d.	 3-1, 24
e.	 a- ∞, 1
7 d

Graphs and Functions
2
C h a p t e r 
Hurricanes are tracked with the use of coordinate grids, and 
data from fields as diverse as medicine and sports are related 
and analyzed by means of functions. The material in this 
chapter introduces you to the versatile concepts that are the 
everyday tools of all dynamic industries.
Topics
2.1	 The Coordinate Plane
2.2	 Graphs of Equations
2.3	 Lines
2.4	 Functions
2.5	 Properties of Functions
2.6	 A Library of Functions
2.7	 Transformations of Functions
2.8	 Combining Functions;  
Composite Functions
2.9	 Inverse Functions

156	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
S e c t i o n
The Coordinate Plane
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	
The number line (Section P.1, page 5)
2	
Equivalent equations (Section 1.1, 
page 78)
3	
Completing squares (Section 1.2, page 94)
4	 Interval notation (Section P.1, page 7)
Objectives
1	 Plot points in the Cartesian  
coordinate plane.
2	 Find the distance between two points.
3	 Find the midpoint of a line segment.
2.1
1	
Plot points in the Cartesian 
coordinate plane.
The Coordinate Plane
A visually powerful device for exploring relationships between numbers is the Cartesian plane. 
A pair of real numbers in which the order is specified is called an ordered pair of real numbers. 
The ordered pair 1a, b2 has first component a and second component b. Two ordered pairs 
1x, y2 and 1a, b2 are equal, and we write 1x, y2 = 1a, b2 if and only if x = a and y = b.
Just as the real numbers are identified with points on a line, called the number line or 
the coordinate line, the sets of ordered pairs of real numbers are identified with points on 
a plane called the coordinate plane or the Cartesian plane.
We begin with two coordinate lines, one horizontal and one vertical, that intersect at 
their zero points. The horizontal line (with positive numbers to the right) is usually called 
the x@axis, and the vertical line (with positive numbers up) is usually called the y@axis. 
Their point of intersection is called the origin. The x@axis and y@axis are called coordinate 
axes, and the plane they form is sometimes called the xy@plane. The axes divide the plane 
into four regions called quadrants, which are numbered as shown in Figure 2.1. The points 
on the axes themselves do not belong to any of the quadrants.
The notation P1a, b2, or P = 1a, b2, designates the point P whose first component 
is a and whose second component is b. In an xy@plane, the first component, a, is called 
the x@coordinate of P1a, b2 and the second component, b, is called the y@coordinate of 
P1a, b2. The signs of the x@ and y@coordinates for each quadrant are shown in Figure 2.1. 
A Fly on the Ceiling
One day the French mathematician René Descartes noticed a fly buzzing around on a 
ceiling made of square tiles. He watched the fly and wondered how he could math-
ematically describe its location. Finally, he realized that he could describe the fly's  
position by its distance from the walls of the room. Descartes had just discovered the 
coordinate plane! In fact, the coordinate plane is sometimes called the Cartesian plane 
in his honor. The discovery led to the development of analytic geometry, the first  
blending of algebra and geometry.
Although the basic idea of graphing with coordinate axes dates all the way back to 
Apollonius in the second century b.c., Descartes, who lived in the 1600s, gets the credit 
for coming up with the two-axis system we use today. In Example 2, we will see how the 
Cartesian plane helps visualize data on smoking.
Although it is common to label the 
axes as x and y, other letters are 
also used, especially in applications. 
In a uv-plane or an st-plane, the 
first letter in the name refers to the 
horizontal axis; the second, to the 
vertical axis.
Side 
Note

	
Section 2.1    ■    The Coordinate Plane 157
The point corresponding to the ordered pair 1a, b2 is called the graph of the ordered 
pair 1a, b2. However, we frequently ignore the distinction between an ordered pair and 
its graph.
b
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
21
24
22
23
23
22
24
21
0
a
P(a, b)
(3, 4)
.
...
. .
Quadrant II
(2, 1)
Quadrant I
(1, 1)
Quadrant IV
(1, 2)
Quadrant III
(2, 2)
y-axis
x-axis
Origin
y
x
Figure 2.1  Quadrants in a plane 
D e s c a r t e s 
was born at 
La Haye, near 
Tours in south-
ern France. He 
is often called the father of modern 
science. Descartes established a new, 
clear way of thinking about philoso-
phy and science by accepting only 
those ideas that could be proved by 
or deduced from first principles. He 
took as his philosophical starting point 
the statement Cogito ergo sum: 
“I think; therefore, I am.” Descartes 
made major contributions to modern 
mathematics, including the Cartesian 
coordinate system and the theory of 
equations.
René Descartes 
(1596–1650)
Graph the following points in the xy-plane:
A13, 12, B1-2, 42, C1-3, -42, D12, -32, and E1-3, 02.
Solution
Figure 2.2 shows a coordinate plane along with the graph of the given points. These points 
are located by moving left, right, up, or down starting from the origin 10, 02.
A13, 12	
3 units right, 1 unit up
B1-2, 42	
2 units left, 4 units up
C1-3, -42	
3 units left, 4 units down
D12, -32	
2 units right, 3 units down
E1-3, 02	
3 units left
Practice Problem 1  Graph the following points in the xy-plane
P1-2, 22, Q14, 02, R15, -32, S10, -32, and T a -2,  1
2b.
Graphing Points
EXAMPLE 1
Figure 2.2  Graphing points
B
E
C
D
A
5
1
y
x
21
25
5
1
25
21
The data in Table 2.1 show the prevalence of smoking among adults 18 years and older 
in the United States over the years 2005–2012.
Graphing Data on Adult Smokers in the United States
EXAMPLE 2
Table 2.1 
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Percent of Adult Smokers
20.9
20.8
20.8
20.6
20.6
19.3
19.0
21.0
                  Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Health Interview Survey.

158	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The display in Figure 2.3 is called a scatter diagram of the data. There are numer-
ous other ways of displaying the data. Two such ways are shown in Figure 2.4(a) and  
Figure 2.4(b).
Graph the ordered pairs 1year, percent of adult smokers2, where the first coordinate  
represents a year and the second coordinate represents the percent of adult smokers in  
that year.
Solution
We let t represent the years 2005 through 2012 and % represent the percent of adult smokers  
in each year. Because the data start from the year 2005, we show a break in the t-axis. 
Alternatively, one could declare a year—say, 2004—as 0. Similar comments apply to the 
percentage-axis. The graph of the points 12005, 20.92, 12006, 20.82, c, 12012, 21.02 
is shown in Figure 2.3. The figure depicts the percentage of adult smokers every year 
since 2005.
Practice Problem 2  In Example 2, suppose the percent of adult smokers shown  
in Table 2.1 is decreased by 3 in each year. Write the corresponding ordered pairs  
(year, percent of adult smokers).
Figure 2.3  Percentage of adult smokers 2005–2012
t
Percentage of Adult Smokers
Year
18.5
19
19.5
20
21
21.5
20.5
2005
2004
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
19
19.5
20
20.5
21
21.5
20.9 20.8 20.8 20.6 20.6
19.3
19.0
21.0
Bar Graph
(a)
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
2012
2011
18.5
Line Graph
(b)
2005
2004
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
2012
2011
x
y
19
19.5
20
20.5
21
21.5
18.5
Figure 2.4  Two methods for displaying data
Scales on a Graphing Utility
When drawing a graph, you can use different scales for the x- and y-axes. Similarly, the 
scale can be set separately for each coordinate axis on a graphing utility. Once scales 
are set, you get a viewing rectangle, where your graphs are displayed. For example, in 
Figure 2.5, the scale for the x-axis (the distance between each tick mark) is 1, whereas 
the scale for the y-axis is 2. Read more about viewing rectangles in your graphing 
calculator manual.
Figure 2.5  Viewing rectangle
10
10
210
210

	
Section 2.1    ■    The Coordinate Plane 159
Distance Formula
If a Cartesian coordinate system has the same unit of measurement, such as inches or cen-
timeters, on both axes, we can then calculate the distance between any two points in the 
coordinate plane in the given unit.
Recall that the Pythagorean theorem states that in a right triangle with hypotenuse of 
length c and the other two sides of lengths a and b,
a2 + b2 = c2,    Pythagorean theorem
as shown in Figure 2.6.
Suppose we want to compute the distance d1P, Q2 between the two points P1x1, y12 
and Q1x2, y22. We draw a horizontal line through the point Q and a vertical line through 
the point P to form the right triangle PQS, as shown in Figure 2.7.
The length of the horizontal side of the triangle is 0 x2 - x10 , and the length of the verti-
cal side is 0 y2 - y10 . By the Pythagorean theorem, we have
3d1P, Q242 = 0 x2 - x10 2 + 0 y2 - y10 2
	
d1P, Q2 = 20 x2 - x10 2 + 0 y2 - y10 2	
Take the square root of both sides.
	
d1P, Q2 = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122	
0 a - b 2 = 1a - b22
2	
Find the distance between 
two points.
Figure 2.7  Visualizing the  
distance formula
y
P(x1, y1)
S(x1, y2)
Q(x2, y2)
d(P, Q)
|x2 
 x1|
|y2 
 y1|
x
D i s ta n c e  F o r m u l a  i n  t h e  C o o r d i n at e  P l a n e
Let P = 1x1, y12 and Q = 1x2, y22 be any two points in the coordinate plane. Then 
the distance between P and Q, denoted d1P, Q2, is given by the distance formula
d1P, Q2 = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122
Find the distance between the points P1-2, 52 and Q13, -42.
Solution
Let 1x1, y1) = 1-2, 52 and 1x2, y22 = 13, -42. Then
	
x1 = -2, y1 = 5, x2 = 3, and y2 = -4.
d1P, Q2 = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122	
Distance formula
	
= 233 - 1-2242 + 1-4 - 522	
Substitute the values for x1, x2, y1, y2.
	
= 252 + 1-922	
Simplify.
	
= 225 + 81 = 2106 ≈10.3	
Simplify; use a calculator.
Practice Problem 3  Find the distance between the points 1-5, 22 and 1-4, 12.
Finding the Distance Between Two Points
EXAMPLE 3
In the next example, we use the distance formula and the converse of the Pythagorean 
theorem to show that the given triangle is a right triangle.
Figure 2.6  Pythagorean theorem
a2
 b2
c2
a
c
b
Let A14, 32, B11, 42, and C1-2, -52 be three points in the plane.
a.	 Sketch triangle ABC.
b.	 Find the length of each side of the triangle.
c.	 Show that ABC is a right triangle.
Identifying a Right Triangle
EXAMPLE 4
Remember that in general 
2a2 + b2 ≠a + b
Side  
Note
The converse of the Pythagorean 
Theorem states that: If in a triangle 
with side lengths a, b, and c, we have 
a2 + b2 = c2, then the triangle is a 
right triangle.
Recall

160	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The baseball diamond is in fact a square with a distance of 90 feet between each of the 
consecutive bases. Use an appropriate coordinate system to calculate the distance the ball 
travels when the third baseman throws it from third base to first base.
Solution
We can conveniently choose home plate as the origin and place the x-axis along the line 
from home plate to first base and the y-axis along the line from home plate to third base as 
shown in Figure 2.9. The coordinates of home plate (O), first base (A), second base (C), 
and third base (B) are shown in the figure.
Applying the Distance Formula to Baseball
EXAMPLE 5
We are asked to find the distance between the points A190, 02 and B10, 902.
	
d1A, B2 = 2190 - 022 + 10 - 9022    Distance formula
	
= 219022 + 1-9022
	
= 2219022	
Simplify.
	
= 9012 ≈127.28 feet	
Simplify; use a calculator.
Practice Problem 5  Young players might play baseball in a square “diamond” with  
a distance of 60 feet between consecutive bases. Repeat Example 5 for a diamond  
with these dimensions.
Figure 2.8 
A(4, 3)
B(1, 4)
C(
2, 
5)
2
2
5
4
3
1
1
0
3
5
4
y
1 2 3 4 5
1
2
3
4
5
x
Figure 2.9 
O(0, 0)
A(90, 0)
C(90, 90)
B(0, 90)
y
x
Home plate
3rd base
1st base
2nd base
Solution
a.	 A sketch of the triangle formed by the three points A, B, and C is shown in Figure 2.8.
b.	 Using the distance formula, we have
 d1A, B2 = 214 - 122 + 13 - 422 = 29 + 1 = 210,
 d1B, C2 = 231 - 1-2242 + 34 - 1-5242 = 29 + 81 = 290 = 3210
 d1A, C2 = 234 - 1-2242 + 33 - 1-5242 = 236 + 64 = 2100 = 10.
c.	 We check whether the relationship a2 + b2 = c2 holds in this triangle, where a, b, 
and c denote the lengths of its sides. The longest side, AC, has length 10 units.
	
3d1A, B242 + 3d1B, C242 = 10 + 90    Replace 3d1A, B242 with 10  
and 3d1B, C242 with 90.
	
= 11022
	
= 3d1A, C242
	
It follows from the converse of the Pythagorean theorem that the triangle ABC is a 
right triangle.
Practice Problem 4  Is the triangle with vertices 16, 22, 1-2, 02, and 11, 52 an  
isosceles right triangle—that is, a right triangle with two sides of equal length?

	
Section 2.1    ■    The Coordinate Plane 161
Midpoint Formula
Recall that a point M on the line segment PQ is its midpoint if d1P, M2 = d1M, Q2. See 
Figure 2.10. We provide the midpoint formula in the xy-plane.
3	
Find the midpoint of a line 
segment.
We ask you to prove the midpoint formula in Exercise 68.
M i d p o i n t  F o r m u l a
The coordinates of the midpoint M = 1x, y2 on the line segment joining P = 1x1, y12 
and Q = 1x2, y22 are given by
M = 1x, y2 = ax1 + x2
2
, y1 + y2
2
b.
x
y
O
M 5 (x, y)
P 5 (x1, y1)
Q 5 (x2, y2)
Figure 2.10  Midpoint of a 
segment
The coordinates of the midpoint of 
a line segment are found by taking 
the average of the x-coordinates 
and the average of the y-coordinates 
of the endpoints.
Side  
Note
Find the midpoint of the line segment joining the points P1-3, 62 and Q11, 42.
Solution
Let 1x1, y12 = 1-3, 62 and 1x2, y22 = 11, 42. Then
x1 =  -3, y1 = 6, x2 = 1, and y2 = 4.
	
Midpoint = ax1 + x2
2
 , y1 + y2
2
b	
Midpoint formula
	
= a -3 + 1
2
 , 6 + 4
2
b	
Substitute values for x1, x2, y1, y2.
	
= 1-1, 52	
Simplify.
The midpoint of the line segment joining the points P1-3, 62 and Q11, 42 is M1-1, 52.
Practice Problem 6  Find the midpoint of the line segment whose endpoints  
are 15, -22 and 16, -12.
Finding the Midpoint of a Line Segment
EXAMPLE 6
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 
2. 12005, 17.92, 12006, 17.82, 12007, 17.82 12008, 17.62, 
12009, 17.62, 12010, 16.32, 12011, 16.02, and 12012, 18.02.
3. 12 ≈1.4    4. Yes     5. 6012 ≈84.85 feet 
6. a11
2 , - 3
2b 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
T(2, 1
2
P(2, 2)
Q(4, 0)
S(0, 3)
R(5, 3)
)
1
2
3
4
5
6
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
2005
2007
Years
2009
2011
2013
15.5
16
17
18
16.5
17.5
18.5
t
%

162	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Exercises
section 2.1 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 A point with a negative first coordinate and a positive second 
coordinate lies in the 
 quadrant.
	 2.	 Any point on the x-axis has second coordinate 
.
	 3.	 The distance between the points P =  1x1, y12 and 
Q =  1x2, y22 is given by the formula  
d1P, Q2 =  
.  
	 4.	 The coordinates of the midpoint M = 1x, y2 of the line  
segment joining P = 1x1, y12 and Q = 1x2, y22 are given 
	
	 by 1x, y2 =  
. 
	 5.	 True or False. For any points 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 
21x1 - x222 +  1y1 - y222 = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122.
	 6.	 True or False. The point 17, -42 is 4 units to the right and  
2 units below the point 13, 22. 
	 7.	 Plot and label each of the given points in a Cartesian  
coordinate plane and state the quadrant, if any, in which each 
point is located. 12, 22, 13, -12, 1-1, 02, 1-2, -52, 10, 02, 
1-7, 42, 10, 32, 1-4, 22 
	 8.	 a.  Write the coordinates of any five points on the x-axis. 
What do these points have in common? 
b.	 Plot the points 1-2, 12, 10, 12, 10.5, 12, 11, 12, and 12, 12. 
Describe the set of all points of the form 1x, 12, where x is 
a real number. 
	 9.	 a.  If the x-coordinate of a point is 0, where does that point 
lie? 
b.	 Plot the points 1-1, 12, 1-1, 1.52, 1-1, 22, 1-1, 32, and 
1-1, 42. Describe the set of all points of the form 1-1, y2, 
where y is a real number. 
	10.	 What figure is formed by the set of all points in a Cartesian 
coordinate plane that have
a.	 x-coordinate equal to -3? 
b.	 y-coordinate equal to 4? 
	11.	 Let P1x, y2 be a point in a coordinate plane.
a.	 If the point P1x, y2 lies above the x-axis, what must be true 
of y? 
b.	 If the point P1x, y2 lies below the x-axis, what must be 
true of y? 
c.	 If the point P1x, y2 lies to the left of the y-axis, what must 
be true of x? 
d.	 If the point P1x, y2 lies to the right of the y-axis, what 
must be true of x? 
	12.	 Let P1x, y2 be a point in a coordinate plane. In which  
quadrant does P lie
a.	 if x and y are both negative? 
b.	 if x and y are both positive? 
c.	 if x is positive and y is negative? 
d.	 if x is negative and y is positive? 
In Exercises 13–22, find (a) the distance between P and Q and 
(b) the coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment PQ.
	13.	 P12, 12, Q12, 52 
	14.	 P13, 52, Q1-2, 52 
	15.	 P1-1, -52, Q12, -32 
	16.	 P1-4, 12, Q1-7, -92 
	17.	 P1-1, 1.52, Q13, -6.52 
	18.	 P10.5, 0.52, Q11, -1)
	19.	 P112, 42, Q112, 52 
	20.	 P1v - w, t2, Q1v + w, t2 
	21.	 P1t, k2, Q1k, t2 
	22.	 P1m, n2, Q1-n, -m2 
In Exercises 23–30, determine whether the given points are 
collinear. Points are collinear if they can be labeled P, Q, and 
R so that d1P, Q2 + d1Q, R2 = d1P, R2.
	23.	 10, 02, 11, 22, 1-1, -22 
	24.	 13, 42, 10, 02, 1-3, -42 
	25.	 14, -22, 1-2, 82, 11, 32 
	26.	 19, 62, 10, -32, 13, 12 
	27.	 1-1, 42, 13, 02, 111, -82 
	28.	 1-2, 32, 13, 12, 12, -12 
	29.	 14, -42, 115, 12, 11, 22 
	30.	 11, 72, 1-7, 82, 1-3, 7.52 
	31.	 Find the coordinates of the points that divide the line segment 
joining the points P = 1-4, 02 and Q = 10, 82 into four 
equal parts. 
	32.	 Repeat Exercise 31 with P = 1-8, 42 and Q = 116, -122.
In Exercises 33–40, identify the triangle PQR as isosceles (two 
sides of equal length), equilateral (three sides of equal length), 
or a scalene triangle (three sides of different lengths).
	33.	 P1-5, 52, Q1-1, 42, R1-4, 12 
	34.	 P13, 22, Q16, 62, R1-1, 52 
	35.	 P1-4, 82, Q10, 72, R1-3, 52 
	36.	 P16, 62, Q1-1, -12, R1-5, 32 
	37.	 P10, -12, Q19, -92, R15, 12 
	38.	 P1-4, 42, Q14, 52, R10, -22 
	39.	 P11, -12, Q1-1, 12, R1- 13, - 13) 
	40.	 P1-0.5, -12, Q1-1.5, 12, Ra13 - 1, 13
2 b 
	41.	 Show that the points P17, -122, Q1-1, 32, R114, 112, and 
S122, -42 are the vertices of a square. Find the length of the 
diagonals. 
    

	
Section 2.1    ■    The Coordinate Plane 163
10 feet
24 feet
	42.	 Repeat Exercise 41 for the points 
P18, -102, Q19, -112, R18, -122, and 
S17, -112.  
	43.	 Find x such that the point 1x, 22 is 5 units from 
12, -12. 
	44.	 Find y such that the point 12, y2 is 13 units from 
1-10, -32. 
	45.	 Find the point on the x-axis that is equidistant from the 
	
	 points 1-5, 22 and 12, 32. 
	46.	 Find the point on the y-axis that is equidistant from the 
	
	 points 17, -42 and 18, 32.  
Applying the Concepts
	47.	 Population. The table shows the total population of the 
United States in millions. (205 represents 205,000,000.) The 
population is rounded to the nearest million. Plot the data in a 
Cartesian coordinate system. 
Year 
Total Population (millions)
1970 
205
1975 
216 
1980 
228 
1985 
238 
1990 
250 
1995 
267 
2000 
282 
2005 
296 
2010
308
2012
314
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 
	48.	 Use the midpoint formula for the years 2000 and 2012 to  
estimate the total population for 2006. What does this say 
about the line segment through the points (2000, 282) and 
(2012, 314)? 
In Exercises 49–52, use the following vital statistics table.
Rate per 1000 Population
Year 
Births 
Deaths 
Marriages 
Divorces
1955
25.0
9.3
  9.3
2.3
1960
23.7
9.5
  8.5
2.2
1965
19.4
9.4
  9.3
2.5
1970
18.4
9.5
10.6
3.5
1975
14.6
8.6
10.0
4.8
1980
15.9
8.8
10.6
5.2
1985
15.8
8.8
10.1
5.0
1990
16.7
8.6
  9.4
4.7
1995
14.8
8.8
  8.9
4.4
2000
14.4
8.7
  8.5
4.2
2005
14.2
8.1
  7.6
3.6
2008
14.0
8.1
  7.1
3.5
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
The table shows the rate per 1000 population of live births, deaths, 
marriages, and divorces from 1955 to 2008 at five-year intervals. 
Plot the data in a Cartesian coordinate system and connect the 
points with line segments.
	49.	 Plot (year, births). 
	50.	 Plot (year, deaths). 
	51.	 Plot (year, marriages). 
	52.	 Plot (year, divorces). 
In Exercises 53–55, assume that the graph through all of the 
data points is a line segment. Use the midpoint formula to 
find the estimate.
	53.	 Murders in the United States. In the United States, 
16,929 murders were committed in 2007 and 14,612 in 2011. 
Estimate the number of murders committed in 2009.  
(Source: www.disastercenter.com.) 
	54.	 Spending on prescription drugs. Americans spent  
+228 billion on prescription drugs in 2007 and +320 billion 
in 2011. Estimate the amount spent on prescription drugs dur-
ing 2008, 2009, and 2010. (Source: www.cdc.gov) 
	55.	 Defense spending. The government of the United States 
spent +548 billion on national defense in 2004 and +925 billion 
in 2012. Estimate the amount spent on defense in each of the 
years 2005–2011.
(Source: www.usgovernmentspending.com) 
	56.	 Length of a diagonal. The application of the Pythagorean 
theorem in three dimensions involves the relationship 
between the perpendicular edges of a rectangular block and 
the solid diagonal of the same block.
In the figure, show that h2 = a2 + b2 + c2.
h
c
b
a
	57.	 Distance. A pilot is flying from Dullsville to Middale to 
Pleasantville. With reference to an origin, Dullsville is located 
at 12, 42, Middale at 18, 122, and Pleasantville at 120, 32, all 
numbers being in 100-mile units.
a.	 Locate the positions of the three cities on a Cartesian  
coordinate plane. 
b.	 Compute the distance traveled by the pilot. 
c.	 Compute the direct distance between Dullsville and  
Pleasantville. 
	58.	 Docking distance. A rope is attached to the bow of a sail-
boat that is 24 feet from the dock. The rope is drawn in over 
a pulley 10 feet higher than the bow at the rate of 3 feet per 
second. Find the distance from the boat to the dock after  
t seconds.   

164	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Beyond the Basics
	59.	 Use coordinates to prove that the diagonals of a parallelogram 
bisect each other.
[Hint: Choose 10, 02 1a, 02, 1b, c2, and 1a + b, c2 as the  
vertices of a parallelogram.]
	60.	 Let A12, 32, B15, 42, and C13, 82 be three points in a coordi-
nate plane. Find the coordinates of the point D such that the 
points A, B, C, and D form a parallelogram with
a.	 AB as one of the diagonals. 
b.	 AC as one of the diagonals. 
c.	 BC as one of the diagonals. 
	
	 [Hint: Use Exercise 59.]
	61.	 Prove that if the diagonals of a quadrilateral bisect each other, 
then the quadrilateral is a parallelogram. [Hint: Choose 10, 02, 
1a, 02, 1b, c2, and 1x, y2 as the vertices of a quadrilateral and 
show that x = b - a, y = c.]
	62.	 a.  Show that 11, 22, 1-2, 62, 15, 82, and 18, 42 are the  
vertices of a parallelogram. [Hint: Use Exercise 61.]
b.	 Find 1x, y2 assuming that 13, 22, 16, 32, 1x, y2, and 16, 52 
are the vertices of a parallelogram.  
	63.	 Show that the sum of the squares of the lengths of the sides 
of a parallelogram is equal to the sum of the squares of the 
lengths of the diagonals. [Hint: Choose 10, 02, 1a, 02, 1b, c2, 
and 1a + b, c2 as the vertices of the parallelogram.]
	64.	 Prove that in a right triangle, the midpoint of the hypotenuse 
is the same distance from each of the vertices.  
[Hint: Let the vertices be 10, 02, 1a, 02, and 10, b2.]
	65.	 Isosceles triangle. An isosceles triangle ABC has right 
angle at C and hypotenuse of length c. Find the length of 
each leg of the triangle. 
	66.	 Equilateral triangles. Two equilateral triangles ABC and 
ABD have a common side AB of length 2a. The side AB lies on 
the x-axis with B = 1a, 02 and midpoint at the origin O. (See 
the figure.) Find the coordinates of the vertices A, C, and D.
y
x
O
D
C
A
B = (a, 0)
	67.	 Trisecting a line segment. Let A1x1, y12 and B1x2, y22 be 
two points in a coordinate plane.
a.	 Show that the point Ca2x1 + x2
3
 , 2y1 + y2
3
b is one-third 
	
of the way from A to B.
	
[Hint: Show that d1A, C2 + d1C, B2 = d1A, B2 and that 
	
d1A, C2 = 1
3 d1A, B2.]
b.	 Show that the point Dax1 + 2x2
3
 , y1 + 2y2
3
b is two-thirds 
	
of the way from A to B.
	
The points C and D in parts a and b are called the points 
of trisection of segment AB.
c.	 Find the points of trisection of the line segment joining 
1-1, 22 and 14, 12. 
	68.	 Midpoint formula. Use the notation in the accompanying  
figure to prove the midpoint formula
M1x, y2 = ax1 + x2
2
, y1 + y2
2
b.
O
y
x
T(x2, y)
ux2 2 xu
uy2 2 yu
uy 2 y1u
ux 2 x1u
S(x, y1)
Q(x2, y2)
M(x, y)
P(x1, y1)
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
In Exercises 69–73, describe the set of points P1x, y2 in the 
xy-plane that satisfies the given condition.
	69.	 a.  x = 0 
	
b.	y = 0 
	70.	 a.  xy = 0 	
b.	xy ≠0  
	71.	 a.  xy 7 0 	
b.	xy 6 0 
	72.	 a.  x2 + y2 = 0 
	
b.	x2 + y2 ≠0 
	73.	 a.  x Ú 0 
	
b.	y Ú 0 
	74.	 Describe how to determine the quadrant in which a point lies 
from the signs of its coordinates. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 75–78, evaluate each expression for the given  
values of x and y.
	75.	 x2 + y2
a.	 x = 1
2, y = 1
2 
b.	 x = 22
2 , y = 22
2 
	76.	 1x - 122 + 1y + 222
a.	 x = -1, y = 1 
b.	 x = 4, y = 2 
	77.	 x
x +
y
y
a.	 x = 2, y = -3 
b.	 x = -4, y = 3 
	78.	
x
x
+
y
y
a.	 x = -1, y = -2 
b.	 x = 3, y = 2 
In Exercises 79–84, find the appropriate term that should  
be added so that the binomial becomes a perfect square  
trinomial.
	79.	 x2 - 6x 
	80.	 x2 - 8x 
	81.	 y2 + 3y 
	82.	 y2 + 5y 
	83.	 x2 - ax  
	84.	 x2 + xy  
      

S E C T I O N 2.2
Graph of an Equation
We say that a relation exists between the two quantities when one quantity changes with 
­respect to the other quantity. The two changing (or varying) quantities in a relation are ­often 
represented by variables. A relation may sometimes be described by an equation, which 
may be a formula. Following are examples of equations showing relationships ­between 
two variables.
y = 2x + 1, x2 + y2 = 4, y = x2, x = y2, F = 9
5 C + 32, q = -3p2 + 30
An ordered pair 1a, b2 is said to satisfy an equation with variables x and y if, when a is 
substituted for x and b is substituted for y in the equation, the resulting statement is true. 
For example, the ordered pair 12, 52 satisfies the equation y = 2x + 1 because replacing 
x with 2 and y with 5 yields 5 = 2122 + 1, a true statement. The ordered pair 15, -22 
does not satisfy the equation y = 2x + 1 because replacing x with 5 and y with -2 yields 
-2 = 2152 + 1, which is false. An ordered pair that satisfies an equation is called a 
­solution of the equation.
In an equation involving x and y, if the value of y can be found given the value of x, then 
we say that y is the dependent variable and x is the independent variable. In the equa-
tion y = 2x + 1, there are infinitely many choices for x, each resulting in a corresponding 
value of y. Hence, we have infinitely many solutions of the equation y = 2x + 1. When 
these solutions are plotted as points in the coordinate plane, they constitute the graph of the 
equation. The graph of an equation is thus a geometric picture of its solution set.
1	
Sketch a graph by plotting 
points.
Doomsans Discover Deer
A herd of 400 deer was introduced onto a small island called Dooms. The natives both 
liked and admired these beautiful creatures. However, the Doomsans soon discovered 
that deer meat is excellent food. Also, a rumor spread throughout Dooms that eating 
deer meat prolonged one’s life. The natives then began to hunt the deer. The number 
of deer, y, after t years from the initial introduction of deer into Dooms is described 
by the equation y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400. When does the population of deer become 
extinct in Dooms? (See Example 5.)
Graphs of Equations
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 How to plot points (Section 2.1, page 156)
2	 Equivalent equations (Section 1.1, page 78)
3	 Completing squares (Section 1.2, page 94)
Objectives
1	 Sketch a graph by plotting points.
2	 Find the intercepts of a graph.
3	 Find the symmetries in a graph.
4	 Find the equation of a circle.
	
Section 2.2    ■    Graphs of Equations 165

166	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Calculator graph of y = x2 - 3 
24
4
24
6
Technology
Connection
Sketch the graph of y = x2 - 3.
Solution
There are infinitely many solutions of the equation y = x2 - 3. To find a few, we choose 
integer values of x between -3 and 3. Then we find the corresponding values of y as shown 
in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2 
x
y = x2 −3
1x, y2
-3
y = 1-322 - 3 = 9 - 3 = 6
1-3, 62
-2
y = 1-222 - 3 = 4 - 3 = 1
1-2, 12
-1
y = 1-122 - 3 = 1 - 3 = -2
1-1, -22
0
y = 02 - 3 = 0 - 3 = -3
10, -32
1
y = 12 - 3 = 1 - 3 = -2
11, -22
2
y = 22 - 3 = 4 - 3 = 1
12, 12
3
y = 32 - 3 = 9 - 3 = 6
13, 62
We plot the seven solutions 1x, y2 and join them with a smooth curve as shown in 
Figure 2.11.
Practice Problem 1  Sketch the graph of y = -x2 + 1.
Sketching a Graph by Plotting Points
EXAMPLE 1
Figure 2.11  Graph of a parabola
21
24
1
7
21
24
1
4
(0, 23)
(21, 22)
(22, 1)
(23, 6)
(3, 6)
(2, 1)
(1, 22)
y = x2 2 3
y
x
The bowl-shaped curve sketched in Figure 2.11 is called a parabola. It is easy to find 
parabolas in everyday settings. For example, when you throw a ball, the path it travels is a 
parabola. Also, the reflector behind a car’s headlight is parabolic in shape.
Example 1 suggests the following three steps for sketching the graph of an equation by 
plotting points.
S k e t c h i n g  a  G r a p h  b y  P l o t t i n g  P o i n t s
Step 1  Make a representative table of solutions of the equation.
Step 2  Plot the solutions as ordered pairs in the coordinate plane.
Step 3  Connect the solutions in Step 2 with a smooth curve.
Comment  This point-plotting technique has obvious pitfalls. For instance, many 
­different curves pass through the four points. See Figure 2.12. Assume that these points are 
solutions of a given equation. There is no way to guarantee that any curve we pass through 
the plotted points is the actual graph of the equation. However, in general, more plotted 
solutions, result in a more accurate graph of the equation.
G r a p h  o f  a n  E q u at i o n
The graph of an equation in two variables, such as x and y, is the set of all ordered 
pairs 1a, b2 in the coordinate plane that satisfy the equation.

	
Section 2.2    ■    Graphs of Equations 167
We now discuss some special features of the graph of an equation.
Intercepts 
We examine the points where a graph intersects (crosses or touches) the coordinate axes.  
Because all points on the x-axis have a y-coordinate of 0, any point where a graph intersects 
the x-axis has the form 1a, 02. See Figure 2.13. The number a is called an x-intercept of the 
graph. Similarly, any point where a graph intersects the y-axis has the form 10, b2, and the 
number b is called a y-intercept of the graph.
2	
Find the intercepts of a graph.
0
2
4
y
2
4
22
22
24
x
24
0
2
4
y
2
4
22
22
24
x
6
6
6
24
0
2
4
y
2
4
22
22
24
x
24
Figure 2.12  Several graphs through four points
Figure 2.13  Intercepts of a graph
y
x
(0, b)
(a, 0)
0
y-intercept is b
x-intercept is a
F i n d i n g  t h e  I n t e r c e p t s  o f  t h e  G r a p h  o f  a n 
E q u at i o n
Step 1  To find the x@intercepts of the graph of an equation, set y = 0 in the 
­equation and solve for x.
Step 2  To find the y@intercepts of the graph of an equation, set x = 0 in the 
­equation and solve for y.
Note that only real number solutions in Steps 1 and 2 correspond to the intercepts.
Do not try to calculate the  
x-intercept by setting x = 0. The 
term x-intercept denotes the  
x-coordinate of the point where the 
graph touches or crosses the x-axis; 
so the y-coordinate must be 0.
Side  
Note
Finding Intercepts
Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the equation y = x2 - x - 2.
Solution
Step 1  Set y = 0 in the equation and solve for x.
y = x2 - x - 2	
Original equation
0 = x2 - x - 2	
Set y = 0.
0 = 1x + 121x - 22	
Factor.
x + 1 = 0  or x - 2 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = -1   or   x = 2	
Solve each equation for x.
The x@intercepts are -1 and 2.
Step 2  Set x = 0 in the equation and solve for y.
y = x2 - x - 2	
Original equation
y = 02 - 0 - 2	
Set x = 0.
y = -2	
Solve for y.
The y@intercept is -2.
The graph of the equation y = x2 - x - 2 is shown in Figure 2.14.
Practice Problem 2  Find the intercepts of the graph of y = 2x2 + 3x - 2.
EXAMPLE 2
Figure 2.14  Intercepts of a graph
1
0
y
y = x2x2
1
5
1
2
5
x
7
4
y-intercept
x-intercept
x-intercept

168	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Symmetry
The concept of symmetry helps us sketch graphs of equations. A graph has symmetry if 
one portion of the graph is a mirror image of another portion. As shown in Figure 2.15(a), 
if a line / is an axis of symmetry, or line of symmetry, we can construct the mirror image 
of any point P not on / by first drawing the perpendicular line segment from P to /. Then 
we extend this segment an equal distance on the other side to a point P′ so that the line / 
perpendicularly bisects the line segment PP′. In Figure 2.15(a), we say that the point P′ is 
the symmetric image of the point P about the line /. 
Two points M and M′ are symmetric about a point Q if Q is the midpoint of the line 
segment MM′. Figure 2.15(b) illustrates the symmetry about the origin O. Symmetry lets 
us use information about part of the graph to draw the remainder of the graph.
The following three types of symmetries are frequently used.
3	
Find the symmetries in a 
graph.
Figure 2.16  Three types of symmetry
(a)
(x, y)
(x, y)
y
x
O
y
x
(x, y)
(b)
(x, y)
O
(x, y)
(x, y)
y
x
O
(c)
T e s t s  f o r  S y m m e t r y
1.	 The graph of an equation is symmetric about the y-axis if replacing x with -x 
results in an equivalent equation.
2.	 The graph of an equation is symmetric about the x-axis if replacing y with -y 
results in an equivalent equation.
3.	 The graph of an equation is symmetric about the origin if replacing x with -x and 
y with -y results in an equivalent equation.
1.	 A graph is symmetric with respect to (or about) the y-axis if for every point 
1x, y2 on the graph, the point 1-x, y2 is also on the graph. See Figure 2.16(a).
2.	 A graph is symmetric with respect to (or about) the x-axis if for every point 
1x, y2 on the graph, the point 1x, -y2 is also on the graph. See Figure 2.16(b).
3.	 A graph is symmetric with respect to (or about) the origin if for every point 
1x, y2 on the graph, the point 1-x, -y2 is also on the graph. See Figure 2.16(c).
Symmetries
Figure 2.15 
y
x
P
O
(a)
M
M
y
x
O
(b)
(a) Symmetric points about a line 
(b) Symmetric points about the origin

	
Section 2.2    ■    Graphs of Equations 169
Determine whether the graph of the equation y =
1
x2 + 5 is symmetric about the y-axis.
Solution
Replace x with -x to see if 1-x, y2 also satisfies the equation.
y =
1
x2 + 5	
Original equation
y =
1
1-x22 + 5	
Replace x with -x.
y =
1
x2 + 5	
Simplify: 1-x22 = x2.
Because replacing x with -x gives us the original equation, the graph of y =
1
x2 + 5 is 
symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
Practice Problem 3  Check whether the graph of x2 - y2 = 1 is symmetric about the  
y-axis.
Checking for Symmetry
EXAMPLE 3
Note that if only even powers of 
x appear in an equation, then the 
graph is symmetric with respect to 
the y-axis because for any integer 
n, 1-x22n = x2n.
Side  
Note
Use symmetry to sketch the graph of an equation.
Step 1 Test for all three symmetries.
About the x-axis: Replace y with -y. 
About the y-axis: Replace x with -x. 
About the origin: Replace x with -x  
and y with -y.
Step 2 Make a table of values using any 
­symmetries found in Step 1.
Step 3 Plot the points from the table and draw 
a smooth curve through them.
Use symmetry to sketch the graph of y = 4x - x3.
1.	
Sketching a Graph Using Symmetry
Objective
procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 4
Example
x-axis
y-axis
origin
Replace y with -y
Replace x with -x
Replace x with -x 
and y with -y
-y = 4x - x3
y = 41-x2 - 1-x23
-y = 41-x2 - 1-x23 
y = -4x + x3
y = -4x + x3
-y = -4x + x3
y = 4x - x3
No
No
Yes
2.	 Origin symmetry: If 1x, y2 is on the graph, so is 1-x, -y2. Use 
only positive x values in the table.
x
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
y = 4x - x3
0
1.875
3
2.625
0
-5.625
3.	
3
5
1
3
1
5
0
3
1
x
y
Graph of y = 4x - x3, x Ú 0
The calculator graph of y = 1> 1x2 + 52 
reinforces the result of Example 3.
0.5
5
5
0.1
Technology
Connection
(continued)

170	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Practice Problem 4  Check whether the graph of x2 = y3 is symmetric about the  
x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
Step 4 Extend the portion of the graph found in Step 3,  
using symmetries.
4.	
4
5
2
4
5
1
3
3
1
x
y
(x, y)
(x, y)
Graph of y = 4x - x3
Initially, 400 deer are on Dooms island. The number y of deer on the island after t years 
is described by the equation
y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400.
a.	 Sketch the graph of the equation y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400.
b.	 Adjust the graph in part a to account for only the physical aspects of the problem.
c.	 When do deer become extinct on Dooms?
Solution
a.	 (i)  We find all intercepts. If we set t = 0 in the equation y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400, 
we obtain y = 400. Thus, the y-intercept is 400.
To find the t-intercepts, we set y = 0 in the given equation.
y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400	
Original equation
0 = -t4 + 96t2 + 400	
Set y = 0.
t4 - 96t2 - 400 = 0	
Multiply both sides by -1  
and interchange sides.
1t2 + 421t2 - 1002 = 0	
Factor.
1t2 + 421t + 1021t - 102 = 0	
Factor t2 - 100.
t2 + 4 = 0 or t + 10 = 0   or t - 10 = 0	
Zero-product property
t = -10 or      t = 10	
Solve for t; there is no real 
solution of t2 + 4 = 0.
The t-intercepts are -10 and 10.
	
(ii)  We check for symmetry. Note that t replaces x as the independent variable.
Symmetry about the t-axis:
Replacing y with -y gives -y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400. The pair 10, 4002 is on  
the graph of y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400 but not of -y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400.  
Consequently, the graph is not symmetric about the t-axis.
Symmetry about the y-axis:
Replacing t with -t in the equation y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400, we obtain 
y = - 1-t24 + 961-t22 + 400 = -t4 + 96t2 + 400, which is the original 
equation. Thus, 1-t, y2 also satisfies the equation and the graph is symmetric 
about the y-axis.
Sketching a Graph by Using Intercepts and Symmetry
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 2.2    ■    Graphs of Equations 171
Symmetry about the origin:
Replacing t with -t and y with -y in the equation y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400, we 
obtain -y = - 1-t24 + 961-t22 + 400, or -y = -t4 + 96t2 + 400. As we 
saw when we discussed symmetry in the t-axis, 10, 4002 is a solution but   
 10, -4002 is not a solution of this equation; so the graph is not symmetric with 
respect to the origin.
	 (iii)  We sketch the graph by plotting points for t Ú 0 (see Table 2.3) and then using 
symmetry about the y-axis (see Figure 2.17).
Table 2.3 
t
y = −t4 + 96 t2 + 400
1t, y2
0 
400 
10, 4002
1 
495 
11, 4952
5 
2175 
15, 21752
7 
2703 
17, 27032
9 
1615 
19, 16152
10 
0 
110, 02
11 
-2625 
111, -26252
b.	 The graph pertaining to the physical aspects of the problem is the blue portion of the 
graph in Figure 2.17.
c.	 The positive t-intercept, 10, gives the time in years when the deer population of 
Dooms is 0; so deer are extinct after 10 years.
Practice Problem 5  Repeat Example 5 assuming that the initial deer ­population 
is 324 and the number of deer on the island after t years is given by the equation 
y = -t4 + 77t2 + 324.
Circles
Sometimes a curve that is described geometrically can also be described by an algebraic 
equation. We illustrate this situation in the case of a circle.
4	
Find the equation of a circle.
A circle is a set of points in a Cartesian coordinate plane that are at a fixed distance 
r from a specified point 1h, k2. The fixed distance r is called the radius of the circle, 
and the specified point 1h, k2 is called the center of the circle.
Circle
Standard Form
A point P1x, y2 is on the circle if and only if its distance from the center C1h, k2 is r. Using 
the notation for the distance between the points P and C, we have
d1P, C2 = r
21x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r	
Distance formula
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2	
Square both sides.
The equation 1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2 is an equation of a circle with radius r and center 
1h, k2. A point 1x, y2 is on the circle of radius r and center C1h, k2 if and only if it satisfies 
this equation. Figure 2.18 is the graph of a circle with center C1h, k2 and radius r.
Figure 2.18 
y
x
h
k
r
P(x, y)
C(h, k)
(x  h)2  (y  k)2  r2
O
Figure 2.17 
10
6
8
2
2
4
6
8 10
4
0
500
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
y
t
(9, 1615)
(7, 2703)
(5, 2175)
(1, 495)
(0, 400)

172	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
If an equation in two variables can be written in standard form (1), then its graph is a circle 
with center 1h, k2 and radius r.
Find the standard form of the equation of the circle with center 17, -32 and that passes 
through the point P = 15, -22.
Solution
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2	
Standard form
1x - 722 + 1y - 1-3222 = r2	
Replace h with 7 and k with -3.
	
1x - 722 + 1y + 322 = r2	
-1-32 = 3
Because the point P = 15, -22 lies on the circle, its coordinates satisfy equation (2). So
15 - 722 + 1-2 + 322 = r2	
Replace x with 5 and y with -2.
5 = r2	
Simplify.
Replacing r2 with 5 in equation (2) gives the required standard form
1x - 722 + 1y + 322 = 5.
Practice Problem 6  Find the standard form of the equation of the circle with center 
13, -62 and radius 10.
Finding the Equation of a Circle
EXAMPLE 6
Specify the center and radius and graph each circle.
a.	 x2 + y2 = 1
b.	 1x + 222 + 1y - 322 = 25
Solution
a.	 The equation x2 + y2 = 1 can be rewritten as
1x - 022 + 1y - 022 = 12.
	
Comparing this equation with equation (1), we conclude that the given equation is an 
equation of a circle with center (0, 0) and radius 1. The graph is shown in Figure 2.19. 
This circle is called the unit circle.
b.	 Rewriting the equation 1x + 222 + 1y - 322 = 25 as
3x - 1-2242 + 1y - 322 = 52,	
x + 2 = x - 1-22
	
we see that the graph of this equation is a circle with center 1-2, 32 and radius 5. The 
graph is shown in Figure 2.20.
Practice Problem 7  Graph the equation 1x - 222 + 1y + 122 = 36.
Graphing a Circle
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 2.19  The unit circle 
1
1
y
1
1
x
0
x2  y2  1
Figure 2.20  Circle with radius 5 
and center at 1-2, 32
y
x
(2, 3)
3
7
(x  2)2 + (y  3)2  25
6
2
0
The equation of a circle with center 1h, k2 and radius r is
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2
and is called the standard form of an equation of a circle. 
The Standard Form for the Equation of a Circle
(1)
(2)

	
Section 2.2    ■    Graphs of Equations 173
Semicircles
Letting h = 0 and k = 0 in equation (1), we have
(3)	
x2 + y2 = r2
Equation (3) is the standard form for a circle with center at the origin and radius r.
We solve equation (3) for y:
y2 = r2 - x2	
Subtract x2 from both sides.
y = { 2r2 - x2	
Square root property (page 58).
or	
y = 2r2 - x2 and y = - 2r2 - x2.
Similarly, solving equation (3) for x, we have two equations,
x = 2r2 - y2 and x = - 2r2 - y2.
The graphs of these four equations are semicircles (half circles), shown in Figure 2.21.
y
y     r2  x2
(a) upper half

(0, r)
(r, 0)
(r, 0)
x
0
y
y     r2  x2
(b) lower half

(r, 0)
(r, 0)
(0, r)
x
0
x     r2  y2
(c) right half

(0, r)
(r, 0)
(0, r)
y
x
0
x
(d) left half
(0, r)
(r, 0)
(0, r)
y
0
x     r2  y2

Figure 2.21  Semicircles
General Form
If we expand the squared expressions in the standard equation of a circle,
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2,
and then simplify, we obtain an equation of the form
(4)	
x2 + y2 + ax + by + c = 0.
Equation (4) is called the general form of the equation of a circle. An equation 
Ax2 + By2 + Cx + Dy + E = 0 with A ≠0 and A = B can be converted to the general  
form of the equation of a circle by dividing both sides by A. See Exercise 83.
To graph the equation 
x2 + y2 = 1 on a graphing 
calculator, we graph the two 
equations of the upper and lower 
semicircles:
 Y1 = 21 - x2  and
 Y2 = - 21 - x2
in the same window. The calcula-
tor graph does not look quite 
like a circle. We use the ZSquare 
option to make the display look 
like a circle.
3
3
2
2
Technology
Connection
The general form of the equation of a circle is
x2 + y2 + ax + by + c = 0.
General Form of the Equation of a Circle
On the other hand, if we are given an equation in general form, we can convert it to stan-
dard form by completing the squares on the x@ and y@terms. This gives 
(5)	
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = d.
If d 7 0, the graph of equation (5) is a circle with center 1h, k2 and radius 1d. If d = 0, 
the graph of equation (5) is the point 1h, k2. If d 6 0, there is no graph.

174	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Find the center and radius of the circle with equation
x2 + y2 - 6x + 8y + 10 = 0.
Solution
Complete the squares on both the x-terms and y-terms to get standard form.
x2 + y2 - 6x + 8y + 10 = 0	
Original equation
1x2 - 6x2 + 1y2 + 8y2 = -10	
Group the x-terms  
and y-terms.
1x2 - 6x + 92 + 1y2 + 8y + 162 = -10 + 9 + 16	
Complete the squares  
by adding 9 and 16 to 
both sides.
1x - 322 + 1y + 422 = 15	
Factor and simplify.
1x - 322 + 3y - 1-4242 = 111522
The last equation tells us that we have h = 3, k = -4, and r = 115. Therefore, the circle 
has center 13, -42 and radius 115 ≈3.9.
Practice Problem 8  Find the center and radius of the circle with equation 
x2 + y2 + 4x - 6y - 12 = 0.
Converting the General Form to Standard Form
EXAMPLE 8
To convert x2 + bx to a perfect 
square, add a1
2bb
2
 to get
x2 + bx + a1
2bb
2
= ax + b
2b
2
.
This completes the square.
Recall
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 
2
4
2
4
2
2
4
x
y
0
2. x-intercepts: -2, 1
2; y-intercept: -2    3. Symmetric about the y-axis
4. Not symmetric about the x-axis, symmetric about the y-axis, not 
­symmetric about the origin 
5. a. 
0
2
4
6
8
2
4
6
8
1000
1000
2000
2000
t
y
  b. 
0
2 3
5
7
9
1
4
6
8
10
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
t
y
c. After 9 years     6. 1x - 322 + 1y + 622 = 100
7. 
0
6
8
4
(2, 1)
10
2
4
86
8
4
6
2
4
2
6
8
x
y
8. 1x + 222 + 1y - 322 = 25: C = 1-2, 32, r = 5

	
Section 2.2    ■    Graphs of Equations 175
Exercises
section 2.2
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The graph of an equation in two variables such as x and y is 
the set of all ordered pairs 1a, b2 
.
	 2.	 If 1-2, 42 is a point on a graph that is symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis, then the point 
 is also 
on the graph.
	 3.	 If 10, -52 is a point of a graph, then -5 is a(n) 
 intercept of the graph.
	 4.	 An equation in standard form of a circle with center 11, 02 
and radius 2 is 
.
	 5.	 True or False. The graph of the equation 
3x2 - 2x + y + 3 = 0 is a circle. 
	 6.	 True or False. If a graph is symmetric about the x-axis, then 
it must have at least one x-intercept. 
In Exercises 7–12, determine whether the given points are on 
the graph of the equation.
	
	 Equation	
Points
	 7.	 y = x - 1	
1-3, -42, 11, 02, 14, 32, 12, 32 
	 8.	2y = 3x + 5	
1-1, 12, 10, 22, a- 5
3, 0b, 11, 42 
	 9.	 y = 1x + 1	
13, 22, 10, 12, 18, -32, 18, 32 
	10.	 y = 1
x	
a-3, 1
3b, 11, 12, 10, 02, a2, 1
2b 
	11.	 x2 - y2 = 1	
11, 02, 10, -12, 12, 132, 12, - 132 
	12.	 y2 = x	
11, -12, 11, 12 10, 02, 12, - 122 
In Exercises 13–24, find
a.  the intercepts.
b.  symmetries, about the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
	13.	
x
y
0
1
2121
1
4
24
25
5
	 14.	
x
y
0
25
21
21
25
5
1
1
5
	15.	
x
y
0
24
21
21
24
4
1
1
4
	 16.	
x
y
0
25
5
25
5
	17.	
x
y
0
23
24
4
4
	18.	
x
y
0
2p
p
	19.	
x
y
0
25
23
5
4
	20.	
x
y
3p
2
p
2
p
2
3
2
2
2
	21.	
x
y
0
25
23
5
5
	22.	
x
y
0
23
25
5
4
	23.	
x
y
0
25
25
5
5
	24.	
x
y
0
25
25
5
5
In Exercises 25–46, graph each equation by plotting points. 
Let x = −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, and 3 where applicable.
	25.	 y = x + 1 
	26.	 y = x - 1 
	27.	 y = 2x 
	28.	 y = 1
2 x 
	29.	 y = x2 
	30.	 y = -x2 
	31.	 y = 0 x0 
	32.	 y = 0 x + 10 
	33.	 y = 0 x0 + 1 
	34.	 y = - 0 x0 + 1 
	35.	 y = 4 - x2 
	36.	 y = x2 - 4 
	37.	 y = 29 - x2 
	38.	 y = - 29 - x2 
	39.	 y = x3 
	40.	 y = -x3 
	41.	 y3 = x 
	42.	 y3 = -x 

176	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	43.	 x = 0 y0  
	44.	 0 x0 = 0 y0 
	45.	 y = 0 2 - x0  
	46.	 0 x0 + 0 y0 = 1 
In Exercises 47–56, find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph 
of the equation.
	47.	 3x + 4y = 12 
	48.	 x
5 + y
3 = 1 
	49.	 y = x2 - 6x + 8 
	50.	 x = y2 - 5y + 6 
	51.	 x2 + y2 = 4 
	52.	 y = 29 - x2 
	53.	 y = 2x2 - 1 
	54.	 xy = 1 
	55.	 y = x2 + x + 1 
	56.	 x3 + 3xy2 + y3 = 1 
In Exercises 57–66, test each equation for symmetry with 
respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
	57.	 y = x2 + 1 
	58.	 x = y2 + 1 
	59.	 y = x3 + x 
	60.	 y = 2x3 - x 
	61.	 y = 5x4 + 2x2 
	62.	 y = -3x6 + 2x4 + x2 
	63.	 y = -3x5 + 2x3 
	64.	 y = 2x2 - 0 x0 
	65.	 x2y2 + 2xy = 1 
	66.	 x2 + y2 = 16 
In Exercises 67–70, specify the center and the radius of each 
circle.
	67.	 1x - 222 + 1y - 322 = 36 
	68.	 1x + 122 + 1y - 322 = 16 
	69.	 1x + 222 + 1y + 322 = 11 
	70.	 ax - 1
2b
2
+ ay + 3
2b
2
= 3
4 
In Exercises 71–80, find the standard form of the equation of a 
circle that satisfies the given conditions. Graph each equation.
	71.	 Center 10, 12; radius 2 
	72.	 Center 11, 02; radius 1 
	73.	 Center 1-1, 22; radius 12 
	74.	 Center 1-2, -32; radius 17 
	75.	 Center 13, -42; passing through the point 1-1, 52 
	76.	 Center 1-1, 12; passing through the point 12, 52 
	77.	 Center 11, 22; touching the x-axis 
	78.	 Center 11, 22; touching the y-axis 
	79.	 Diameter with endpoints 17, 42 and 1-3, 62 
	80.	 Diameter with endpoints 12, -32 and 18, 52 
In Exercises 81–86, find
a.  the center and radius of each circle.
b.  the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of each circle.
	81.	 x2 + y2 - 2x - 2y - 4 = 0 
	82.	 x2 + y2 - 4x - 2y - 15 = 0 
	83.	 2x2 + 2y2 + 4y = 0 
	84.	 3x2 + 3y2 + 6x = 0 
	85.	 x2 + y2 - x = 0 
	86.	 x2 + y2 + 1 = 0
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 87–89, a graph is described geometrically as the 
path of a point P1x, y2 on the graph. Find an equation for the 
graph described.
	87.	 Geometry. P1x, y2 is on the graph if and only if the dis-
tance from P1x, y2 to the x-axis is equal to its distance to the 
y-axis. 
	88.	 Geometry. P1x, y2 is the same distance from the two points 
11, 22 and 13, -42. 
	89.	 Geometry. P1x, y2 is the same distance from the point 
12, 02 and the y-axis. 
	90.	 Spending on prescription drugs. Americans spent 
$136 billion on prescription drugs in 2000 and $234 billion 
in 2008. Assuming that this trend continued, estimate the 
amount spent on prescription drugs during 2002, 2004, and 
2006. (Source: U.S. Census Bureau.) 
	91.	 Corporate profits. The equation P = -0.5t2 - 3t + 8 
describes the monthly profits (in millions of dollars) of ABCD 
Corp. for the year 2012, with t = 0 representing  
July 2012.
a.	 How much profit did the corporation make in  
March 2012? 
b.	 How much profit did the corporation make in  
October 2012? 
c.	 Sketch the graph of the equation. 
d.	 Find the t@intercepts. What do they represent? 
e.	 Find the P@intercept. What does it represent? 
	92.	 Female students in colleges. The equation
P = -0.002t2 + 0.51t + 17.5
	
	 models the approximate number (in millions) of female  
college students in the United States for the academic years 
2005–2009, with t = 0 representing 2005.
a.	 Sketch the graph of the equation. 
b.	 Find the P@intercept. What does it represent?  
(Source: Statistical Abstracts of the United States.) 
	93.	 Motion. An object is thrown up from the top of a building 
that is 320 feet high. The equation y = -16t2 + 128t + 320 
gives the object’s height (in feet) above the ground at any time 
t (in seconds) after the object is thrown.
a.	 What is the height of the object after 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 
seconds? 
b.	 Sketch the graph of the equation 
y = -16t2 + 128t + 320.  
c.	 What part of the graph represents the physical aspects of 
the problem? 
d.	 What are the intercepts of this graph, and what do they 
mean? 
	94.	 Diving for treasure. A treasure-hunting team of divers is 
placed in a computer-controlled diving cage. The equation 
	 	 d = 40
3  t - 2
9 t2 describes the depth d (in feet) that the cage 
	 	 will descend in t minutes.
a.	 Sketch the graph of the equation d = 40
3  t - 2
9 t2. 
b.	 What part of the graph represents the physical aspects of 
the problem? 
c.	 What is the total time of the entire diving experiment?      

	
Section 2.2    ■    Graphs of Equations 177
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 95–98, sketch the complete graph by using the 
given symmetry.
	 95.	
O
y
x
y-axis symmetry
	96.	
x-axis symmetry
O
y
x
	 97.	
origin symmetry
O
y
x
	 98.	
x-axis symmetry
O
x
y
	 99.	 In the same coordinate system, sketch the graphs of the 
two circles with equations x2 + y2 - 4x + 2y - 20 = 0 
and x2 + y2 - 4x + 2y - 31 = 0 and find the area of the 
region bounded by the two circles. 
	100.	 Find the equation of a circle with radius 5 and x-intercepts 
-4 and 4.
(Hint: Center must be on the y-axis; there are two such 
circles.) 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	101.	 Sketch the graph of y2 = 2x and explain how this graph is 
related to the graphs of y = 12x and y = - 12x. 
	102.	 Show that a graph that is symmetric with respect to the  
x-axis and y-axis must be symmetric with respect to the 
origin. Give an example to show that the converse is not 
true.  
	103.	 a.	 Show that a circle with diameter having endpoints 
A10, 12 and B16, 82 intersects the x-axis at the roots of 
the equation x2 - 6x + 8 = 0.
b.	 Show that a circle with diameter having endpoints 
A10, 12 and B1a, b2 intersects the x-axis at the roots of 
the equation x2 - ax + b = 0.
c.	 Use graph paper, ruler, and compass to approximate  
the roots of the equation x2 - 3x + 1 = 0. 
	104.	 The figure shows two circles each with radius r.
a.	Write the coordinates of the center of each circle.
b.	Find the area of the shaded region.	
y
x
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 105–110, perform the indicated operations.
	105.	 5 - 3
6 - 2 
	106.	 1 - 2
-2 - 2 
	107.	
2 - 1-32
3 - 13 
	108.	
3 - 1
-2 - 1-62 
	109.	
1
2 - 1
4
3
8 - a- 1
4b 
	110.	
3
4 - 1
1
2 - 1
6 
In Exercises 111–116, solve each equation for the specified 
variable.
	111.	 A = P + Prt for P
	112.	 2x + 3y = 6 for y
	113.	 x
2 - y
5 = 3 for y 
	114.	 y - 2 - 2
31x + 12 = 0 for y 
	115.	 ax + by + c = 0 for y 1b ≠02 
	116.	 0.1x + 0.2y - 1 = 0 for y 
In Exercises 117–122, write the negative reciprocal of each 
number.
	117.	 2 
	118.	 -3 
	119.	 - 2
3 
	120.	 4
3 
	121.	
1 - 1
2
2 + 3
4 
	122.	
2
3 - 1
4
5
6 - a-3
4b 

178	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Planetary nebula NGC 40, shown on 
logarithmic scale (photo credit)
S e c t i o n 
Lines
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 Evaluating algebraic expressions  
(Section P.1, page 13)
2	 Graphs of equations (Section 2.2,  
page 165)
Objectives
1	 Find the slope of a line.
2	 Write the point–slope form of the  
equation of a line.
3	 Write the slope–intercept form of the 
equation of a line.
4	 Recognize the equations of horizontal  
and vertical lines.
5	 Recognize the general form of the  
equation of a line.
6	 Find equations of parallel and  
perpendicular lines.
2.3
1	
Find the slope of a line.
Slope of a Line
In this section, we study various forms of first-degree equations in two variables. Because 
the graphs of these equations are straight lines, they are called linear equations. Just as 
we measure weight or temperature by a number, we measure the “steepness” of a line by a 
number called its slope.
Consider two points P1x1, y12 and Q1x2, y22 on a line, as shown in Figure 2.22. We say 
that the rise is the change in y-coordinates between the points 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 and that 
the run is the corresponding change in the x-coordinates. A positive run indicates change 
to the right, as shown in Figure 2.22; a negative run indicates change to the left. Similarly, 
a positive rise indicates upward change; a negative rise indicates downward change. A zero 
run or rise means no change in the corresponding coordinate.
A Texan’s Tall Tale
Gunslinger Wild Bill Longley’s first burial took place on October 11, 1878, after he was 
hanged before a crowd of thousands in Giddings, Texas.
Rumors persisted that Longley’s hanging had been a hoax and that he had some-
how faked his death and escaped execution. In 2001, Longley’s descendants had his 
grave opened to determine whether the remains matched Wild Bill’s description: a tall 
white male, age 27. Both the skeleton and some personal effects suggested that this 
was indeed Wild Bill. Modern science lent a hand too: The DNA of Wild Bill’s sister’s 
descendant Helen Chapman was a perfect match.
Now the notorious gunman could be buried back in the Giddings cemetery—for the 
second time. How did the scientists conclude from the skeletal remains that Wild Bill 
was approximately 6 feet tall? (See Example 8.)

	
Section 2.3    ■    Lines 179
Because m = rise
run = change in y@coordinates
change in x@coordinates, if the change in x is 1 unit to the right 
(x increases by 1 unit), then the change in y equals the slope of the line. The slope of a 
line is therefore the change in y per unit change in x. In other words, the slope of a line 
measures the rate of change of y with respect to x. Roofs, staircases, graded landscapes, 
and mountainous roads all have slopes. For example, if the pitch (slope) of a section of 
the roof is 0.4, then for every horizontal distance of 10 feet in that section, the roof as-
cends 4 feet.
y
x
Run
Positive
Rise
Q(x2, y2)
P(x1, y1)
(a)
O
Figure 2.22  Slope of a line
y
x
Q(x2, y2)
P(x1, y1)
Negative
Rise
Run
O
(b)
y
x
Rise  0
Q(x2, y1)
P(x1, y1)
(c)
Run
y
x
Q(x1, y2)
P(x1, y1)
(d)
O
Run  0
Rise
4 feet
10 feet
Sketch the graph of the line that passes through P11, -12 and Q13, 32. Find and interpret 
the slope of the line.
Solution
The graph of the line is sketched in Figure 2.23. The slope m of this line is given by
	
 m = rise
run = change in y@coordinates
change in x@coordinates
	
 = 1y@coordinate of Q2 - 1y@coordinate of P2
1x@coordinate of Q2 - 1x@coordinate of P2
	
 = 132 - 1-12
132 - 112
= 3 + 1
3 - 1 = 4
2 = 2.
Interpretation
A slope of 2 means that the value of y increases 2 units for every 1 unit increase in the 
value of x.
Practice Problem 1  Find and interpret the slope of the line containing the points 
1-7, 52 and 16, -32.
Finding and Interpreting the Slope of a Line
EXAMPLE 1
Rise  4
O
x
y
Q(3, 3)
Run  2
P(1, 1)
Figure 2.23  Interpreting slope 
The slope of a nonvertical line that passes through the points P1x1, y12 and 
Q1x2, y22 is denoted by m and is defined by
m = rise
run = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
, x1 ≠x2.
The slope of a vertical line is undefined. 
Slope of a Line

180	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Equation of a Line
We now find an equation of the line / that passes through the point A1x1, y12 and has slope m. 
Let P1x, y2, with x ≠x1, be any point in the plane. Then P1x, y2 is on the line / if and only 
if the slope of the line passing through P1x, y2 and A1x1, y12 is m. This is true if and only if
y - y1
x - x1
= m.
See Figure 2.25.
Multiplying both sides by x - x1 gives y - y1 = m1x - x12, which is also satisfied 
when x = x1 and y = y1.
M a i n  Fa c t s  A b o u t  S l o p e s  o f  L i n e s
1.	 Scanning graphs from left to right, lines with positive slopes rise and lines with 
negative slopes fall.
2.	 The greater the absolute value of the slope, the steeper the line.
3.	 The slope of a vertical line is undefined.
4.	 The slope of a horizontal line is zero.
Figure 2.24 shows several lines passing through the origin. The slope of each line is 
labeled.
m  5
m  5 m  2
m  2 m  1
m  1
m 
m  0
1
2
1
2
m  
m is
undefined
x
y
Figure 2.24  Slopes of lines
2	
Write the point–slope form of 
the equation of a line.
y
x
A(x1, y1)
P(x, y)

m  x  x1
y  y1
y  y1  m(x  x1) 
O
Figure 2.25  Point–slope form
Be careful when using the formula for finding the slope of a line joining the points 1x1, y12. 
and 1x2, y22. Be sure to subtract coordinates in the same order.
You can use either
m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1  or m = y1 - y2
x1 - x2
,
but it is incorrect to use
m = y1 - y2
x2 - x1   or  m = y2 - y1
x1 - x2
.
Warning
If a line has slope m and passes through the point 1x1, y12, then the point–slope 
form of an equation of the line is
y - y1 = m1x - x12. 
The Point–Slope Form of the Equation of a Line

	
Section 2.3    ■    Lines 181
Slope–Intercept Form
If we know the slope m of a line and that a given point is the y-intercept, then we can use 
the point–slope form to create another form of an equation of this line.
Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line passing through the point 11, -22 
with slope m = 3. Then solve for y.
Solution
	
y - y1 = m1x - x12	
Point–slope form
	
y - 1-22 = 31x - 12	
Substitute x1 = 1, y1 = -2, and m = 3.
	
y + 2 = 3x - 3	
Simplify.
	
y = 3x - 5	
Solve for y.
Practice Problem 2  Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line passing 
through the point 1-2, -32 and with slope -2
3. Then solve for y.
Finding an Equation of a Line with Given Point  
and Slope
EXAMPLE 2
Find the point–slope form of an equation of the line / passing through the points 1-2, 12 
and 13, 72. Then solve for y.
Solution
We first find the slope m of the line /.
m =
7 - 1
3 - 1-22 =
6
3 + 2 = 6
5    m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
We use m = 6
5 and either of the two given points when substituting into the point–slope 
form:
y - y1 = m1x - x12
With 1x1, y12 = 13, 72 	
With 1x1, y12 = 1-2, 12
	
y - 7 = 6
5 1x - 32	
y - 1 = 6
51x - 1-222
	
y = 6
5 x + 17
5 	
Simplify.	
y = 6
5 x + 17
5 	
Simplify.
	
Same result
Practice Problem 3  Find the point–slope form of an equation of the line passing 
through the points 1-3, -42 and 1-1, 62. Then solve for y.
Finding an Equation of a Line Passing  
Through Two Given Points
EXAMPLE 3
3	
Write the slope–intercept 
form of the equation  
of a line.

182	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The linear equation in the form y = mx + b displays the slope m (the coefficient of x) 
and the y-intercept b (the constant term). The number m tells which way and how much the 
line is tilted; the number b tells where the line intersects the y-axis.
Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line with slope m and y-intercept b. Then 
solve for y.
Solution
Because the line has y-intercept b, the line passes through the point 10, b2. See Figure 2.26.
	
y - y1 = m1x - x12	
Point–slope form
	
y - b = m1x - 02	
Substitute x1 = 0 and y1 = b.
	
y - b = mx	
Simplify.
	
y = mx + b	
Solve for y.
Practice Problem 4  Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line with  
slope 2 and y-intercept -3. Then solve for y.
Finding an Equation of a Line with a Given Slope  
and y-intercept
EXAMPLE 4
x
y
b
O
(0, b)
slope m
Figure 2.26  Slope–intercept  
form
The slope–intercept form of an equation of the line with slope m and y-intercept  
b is
y = mx + b.
Slope–Intercept Form of the Equation of a Line
No one is sure why the letter m is used 
for slope. Many people suggest that m 
comes from the French monter (to 
climb), but Descartes, who was French, 
did not use m. Professor John Conway 
of Princeton University has suggested 
that m could stand for “modulus of 
slope.”
Historical Note
Graph the line whose equation is y = 2
3 x + 2.
Solution
The equation
y = 2
3 x + 2
is in the slope–intercept form with slope 2
3 and y-intercept 2. To sketch the graph, find two 
points on the line and draw a line through these two points. We use the y-intercept as one of 
the points and then use the slope to locate a second point. Because m = 2
3, let 2 be the rise
so that 3 is the run. From the point 10, 22, move 3 units to the right (run) and 2 units up 
(rise). This gives 10 + run, 2 + rise2 = 10 + 3, 2 + 22 = 13, 42 as the second point.
The line we want joins the points 10, 22 and 13, 42. See Figure 2.27.
Practice Problem 5  Graph the line with slope -2
3 that contains the point 10, 42.
Graph Using the Slope and y-intercept
EXAMPLE 5
Figure 2.27  Locating a second  
point on a line
Run  3
Rise  2
x
y
(3, 4)
(0, 2)
O
y     x  2
2
3
Equations of Horizontal and Vertical Lines
Consider the horizontal line through the point 1h, k2. The y-coordinate of every point on 
this line is k. So we can write its equation as y = k. This line has slope m = 0 and 
y-intercept k. Similarly, an equation of the vertical line through the point 1h, k2 is x = h. 
This line has undefined slope and x-intercept h. See Figure 2.28.
4	
Recognize the equations of 
horizontal and vertical lines.

	
Section 2.3    ■    Lines 183
General Form of the Equation of a Line
An equation of the form
ax + by + c = 0,
where a, b, and c are constants and a and b are not both zero, is called the general form of 
a linear equation. Consider two possible cases: b ≠0 and b = 0.
Suppose b ≠0: We can isolate y on one side and rewrite the equation in slope–intercept 
form.
	
ax + by + c = 0	
Original equation
	
by = -ax - c	
Subtract ax + c from both sides.
	
y = -a
b x - c
b.    Divide by b.
O
x
h
k
(h, k)
y
y  k
x  h
Figure 2.28  Horizontal 
and vertical lines
Students sometimes find it easy to 
remember that if a linear equation
(1)  does not have y in it, the graph 
is parallel to the y-axis or
(2)  does not have x in it, the graph 
is parallel to the x-axis.
Side  
Note
You cannot graph x = 4 using the 
Y = key on your calculator. 
Technology
Connection
Calculator graph of y = 2
Technology
Connection
10
7
3
8
H o r i z o n ta l  a n d  V e r t i c a l  L i n e s
An equation of a horizontal line through 1h, k2 is y = k.
An equation of a vertical line through 1h, k2 is x = h. 
Discuss the graph of each equation in the xy-plane.
a.	 y = 2        b.   x = 4
Solution
a.	 The equation y = 2 may be considered as an equation in two variables x and y by 
writing
0 # x + y = 2.
	
Any ordered pair of the form 1x, 22 is a solution of this equation. Some solutions are 
1-1, 22, 10, 22, 12, 22, and 17, 22. It follows that the graph is a line parallel to the  
x-axis and 2 units above it, as shown in Figure 2.29. Its slope is 0.
Recognizing Horizontal and Vertical Lines
EXAMPLE 6
b.	 The equation x = 4 may be written as
x + 0 # y = 4.
	
Any ordered pair of the form 14, y2 is a solution of this equation. Some solutions are 
14, -52, 14, 02, 14, 22, and 14, 62. The graph is a line parallel to the y-axis and 4 
units to the right of it, as shown in Figure 2.30. Its slope is undefined.
Practice Problem 6  Sketch the graphs of the lines x = -3 and y = 7.
Figure 2.29  Horizontal line
1
4
y
8
1
0
x
(2, 2)
(0, 2)
(7, 2)
8
2
8
y
2
x
0
(4, 0)
(4, 2)
(4, 6)
Figure 2.30  Vertical line
5	
Recognize the general form 
of the equation of a line.

184	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The result is an equation of a line in slope–intercept form with slope -a
b and 
y-intercept - c
b.
Suppose b = 0: We know that a ≠0 because not both a and b are zero, and we can 
solve for x.
	
ax + 0 # y + c = 0        Replace b with 0.
	
ax + c = 0        Simplify.
	
 x = - c
a    Solve for x.
The graph of the equation x = - c
a is a vertical line.
The graph of every linear equation
ax + by + c = 0,
where a, b, and c are constants and a and b are not both zero, is a line. The equation 
ax + by + c = 0 is called the general form of the equation of a line.
General Form of the Equation of a Line
Find the slope, y-intercept, and x-intercept of the line with equation
3x - 4y + 12 = 0.
Then sketch the graph.
Solution
First, solve for y to write the equation in slope–intercept form.
	
3x - 4y + 12 = 0          Original equation
	
4y = 3x + 12     Add 4y to both sides; interchange sides.
	
y = 3
4 x + 3     Divide by 4.
This equation tells us that the slope m is  3
4 and the y-intercept is 3. To find the x-intercept, 
set y = 0 in the original equation and obtain 3x + 12 = 0, or x = -4. So the x-intercept 
is -4.
We can sketch the graph of the equation if we can find two points on the graph. So we 
use the intercepts and sketch the line joining the points 1-4, 02 and 10, 32. The graph is 
shown in Figure 2.31.
Graphing a Linear Equation Using Intercepts
EXAMPLE 7
Calculator graph of y = 3
4 x + 3 
Technology
Connection
7
8
Practice Problem 7  Sketch the graph of the equation 3x + 4y = 24.
Figure 2.31  Graphing a line using intercepts
3
1
7
y
1
5 x
0
1
5
(0,3)
(4,0)
3x  4y  12  0

	
Section 2.3    ■    Lines 185
Forensic scientists use various clues to determine the identity of deceased individuals. 
Scientists know that certain bones serve as excellent sources of information about a per-
son’s height. The length of the femur, the long bone that stretches from the hip (pelvis) 
socket to the kneecap (patella), can be used to estimate a person’s height. Knowing both 
the gender and race of the individual increases the accuracy of this relationship between the 
length of the bone and the height of the person.
Femur
The height H of a human male is related to the length x of his femur by the formula
H = 2.6x + 65,
where all measurements are in centimeters. The femur of Wild Bill Longley measured 
between 45 and 46 centimeters. Estimate the height of Wild Bill (in feet).
Solution
Substituting x = 45 and x = 46 into the preceding formula, we have possible heights
	
 H1 = 12.621452 + 65 = 182
 and H2 = 12.621462 + 65 = 184.6.
Therefore, Wild Bill’s height was between 182 and 184.6 centimeters.
Converting to feet, we conclude that his height was between 182
30.48 ≈5.97 ft and 
184.6
30.48 ≈6.06 ft. So, he was approximately 6 feet tall.
Practice Problem 8  Suppose the femur of a person (male) measures between 43 and  
44 centimeters. Estimate the height of the person in meters.	
Inferring Height from the Femur
EXAMPLE 8
1 foot ≈30.48 cm
Recall
Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
We can use slope to decide whether two lines are parallel, perpendicular, or neither.
6	
Find equations of parallel and 
perpendicular lines.
Let /1 and /2 be two distinct lines with slopes m1 and m2, respectively. Then
/1 is parallel to /2 if and only if m1 = m2. 
/1 is perpendicular to /2 if and only if m1 # m2 = -1.
Any two vertical lines are parallel, as are any two horizontal lines. Any horizontal 
line is perpendicular to any vertical line. 
Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
In Exercises 113 and 114, you are asked to prove these assertions. Figure 2.32 shows 
examples of the slopes of a pair of parallel and a pair of perpendicular lines.
O
1
2
m1  3
4
m2  3
4
x
y
O
4
3
3
4
x
y
Figure 2.32  Parallel lines: m1 = m2	
Perpendicular lines: m1m2 = -1

186	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Let / : ax + by + c = 0. Find an equation of each 
line through the point 1x1, y12:
EXAMPLE
Finding Equations of Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
OBJECTIVE
Procedure 
in Action
EXAMPLE 9
a.	 /1 parallel to /
b.	 /2 perpendicular to /
Step 1   Find the slope m of O. 
Let / : 2x - 3y + 6 = 0. Find a general form of the 
equation of each line through the point 12, 82:
(a)	 /1 parallel to /
(b)	 /2 perpendicular to /
1.	/ : 2x - 3y + 6 = 0	
Original equation
	
-3y = -2x - 6	
Subtract 2x + 6.
	
y = 2
3 x + 2	
Divide by -3.
	
The slope of / is m = 2
3.
Step 2   Write slope of O1 and O2.
The slope m1 of /1 is m.
The slope m2 of /2 is - 1
m.
Step 3   Write equations of O1 and O2.
Use point–slope form to write equations of 
/1 and /2.
Simplify to write equations in the requested 
form.
2.	m1 = 2
3	
/1 parallel to /
	
m2 = -3
2	
/2 perpendicular to /
Practice Problem 9  Find the general form of the equation of the line
a.	 Through 1-2, 52 and parallel to the line containing 12, 32 and 15, 72.
b.	 Through 13, -42 and perpendicular to the line 4x + 5y + 1 = 0.	
3.	
/1 : y - 8 = 2
31x - 22	
Point–slope form
	
2x - 3y + 20 = 0	
Simplify.
	
/2 : y - 8 = -3
21x - 22    Point–slope form
	
3x + 2y - 22 = 0	
Simplify.
Summary of Main Facts
Form	
Equation	
Slope	
Other Information
General	
ax + by + c = 0	
-a
b if b ≠0	
y-intercept is - c
b, b ≠0.
	
a ≠0 or b ≠0
	
	
Undefined if b = 0	 x-intercept is - c
a, a ≠0.
Point–slope	
y - y1 = m1x - x12	 m	
Line passes through 1x1, y12.
Slope–intercept	
y = mx + b	
m	
x-intercept is - b
m if m ≠0; y-intercept is b.
Vertical line through 1h, k2	
x = h	
Undefined	
When h ≠0, no y-intercept; x-intercept is h.
	
	
	
When h = 0, the graph is the y-axis.
Horizontal line through 1h, k2	 y = k	
0	
When k ≠0, no x-intercept; y-intercept is k.
	
	
	
When k = 0, the graph is the x-axis.
	
Parallel and perpendicular lines: Two lines with slopes m1 and m2 are  
(a) parallel if m1 = m2 and (b) perpendicular if m1 # m2 = -1.

	
Section 2.3    ■    Lines 187
Modeling Data Using Linear Regression
In many applications, the way in which one quantity depends on another can be modeled by 
a linear function. One technique for finding this linear function is called linear regression. 
To illustrate the method, we use Table 2.4, which gives the data for the number of registered 
motorcycles in the United States for the years 2006–2012.
7	
Use linear regression.
Table 2.4 
Year 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012
Registered motorcycles 
(millions) 
6.7 
7.1 
7.8 
7.9 
8.4 
8.8 
9.5
The line is called the regression line or the least-squares line. The slope–intercept form 
of the equation for the line in Figure 2.33(b) is y = 0.44x + 6.70, where x is the number 
of years after 2006, and the slope and intercept values are rounded to the nearest hundredth. 
The equation is found by using either a graphing calculator or statistical formulas.
Years since 2006
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
7
x
y
6
7
8
9
10
11
5
Years since 2006
(b)
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
7
x
y
6
7
8
9
10
11
5
Figure 2.33 
The scatter diagram for the motorcycle data is shown in Figure 2.33(a), and the line used to 
model the data is added to the scatter diagram in Figure 2.33(b). The years 2006–2012 are 
represented by the numbers 0–6, respectively.
Use the equation y = 0.44x + 6.70 to predict the number of registered motorcycles in the 
United States for 2013.
Solution
Because 2013 is seven years after 2006, we set x = 7; then y = 0.44172 + 6.70 ≈9.78.
So according to the regression prediction, 9.78 million motorcycles will be regis-
tered in the United States for 2013. The quality of a prediction based on linear regression  
depends on how close the relationship between the data quantities is to being linear.
Practice Problem 10  Repeat Example 10 to predict the number of registered  
motorcycles in the United States for 2014.
Predictions Using Linear Regression
EXAMPLE 10
The following Technology Connection shows how a graphing calculator displays the 
scatter diagram, regression line, and regression line equation.

188	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Answers to Practice Problems
1. - 8
13; for every 13 units increase in x, the y-value decreases 
by 8 units.
2. y + 3 = - 2
3 1x + 22; y = - 2
3 x - 13
3
3. y + 4 = 51x + 32; y = 5x + 11
4. y + 3 = 2x; y = 2x - 3
5. 	
6. 
You can use a graphing utility to investigate the linear regression model for data points that lie on or near a 
straight line. On the TI-84, the data for Example 10 are entered in five steps.
Step 1	 Enter the data.
Press  STAT  1 for STAT Edit. Enter the values of the independent 
variable x in L1 and the corresponding values of the dependent 
variable y in L2.
Step 2	 Turn on STAT Plot
Press  2nd   Y = 1 for Plot 1. Select On; then  
choose Type.
Choose X List: L1; Y list: L2; and mark: #  .
Step 3	 Graph the scatterplot. Press  Graph .
Step 4	 Find the equation of the regression line. 
Press  STAT  and highlight  CALC. Press 4 for  
LinReg 1ax + b2. Press  ENTER  .  
Step 5	 Graph the regression line with the scatterplot.
	
Press  Y =  .
	
Press  VARS  5 for statistics. Highlight EQ and 
	
press  ENTER . (You should see the regression 
	
equation in the Y = window.)
	
Press  ZOOM  9 for ZoomStat. (You should see  
the data graphed along with the regression line.)
Technology
Connection
0
10
2
2
2
10
10
2
10
x
y
(3, 2)
(0, 4)
0
2
4
6
8
24
26
28
22
4
6
8
10
2
22
24
26
28
210
x
y
y57
x523

	
Section 2.3    ■    Lines 189
7. 
8. Between 1.77 and 1.79 meters
9. a. 4x - 3y + 23 = 0
    b. 5x - 4y - 31 = 0
10. 10.22 million
2
4
6
8 10
2
64
8
10
4
6
8
2
2
4
8
6
10
x
y
(8, 0)
(0, 6)
0
Exercises
section 2.3 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 The number that measures the “steepness” of a line is called 
the 
.
	2.	 In the slope formula m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
, the number y2 - y1 is 
called the 
.
	3.	 If two lines have the same slope, they are 
. 
	4.	 The y-intercept of the line with equation y = 3x - 5 is 
.
	5.	 A line perpendicular to a line with slope -1
5 has slope 
.
	6.	 True or False. A line with undefined slope is perpendicular 
to every line with slope 0. 
	7.	 True or False. If 11, 22 is a point on a line with slope 4, 
then so is the point 12, 42. 
	8.	 True or False. If the points 11, 32 and 12, y2 are on a line 
with negative slope, then y 7 3. 
In Exercises 9–16, find the slope of the line through the given 
pair of points. Without plotting any points, state whether the 
line is rising, falling, horizontal, or vertical.
	9.	 11, 32, 14, 72 
	10.	 10, 42, 12, 02 
	11.	 13, -22, 16, -22 
	12.	 1-3, 72, 1-3, -42 
	13.	 10.5, 22, 13, -3.52 
	14.	 13, -22, 12, -32 
	15.	 112, 12, 11 + 12, 52 
	16.	 11 - 13, 02, 11 + 13, 3132 
	17.	 In the figure, identify the line with the given slope m.
a.	 m = 1 
b.	 m = -1 
c.	 m = 0 
d.	 m is undefined. 
	18.	 Find the slope of each line. (The scale is the same on both 
axes.) 
y
x
1
7
8
8
1
7
1
1
3
4
2
2
In Exercises 19 and 20, write an equation whose graph is 
described.
	19.	 a.   Graph is the x-axis. 
b.	 Graph is the y-axis. 
	20.	 a.   Graph consists of all points with a y-coordinate  
of -4. 
b.	 Graph consists of all points with an x-coordinate  
of 5. 
In Exercises 21–26, find an equation in slope–intercept form 
of the line that passes through the given point and has slope m. 
Also sketch the graph of the line by locating the second point 
with the rise-and-run method.
	21.	 10, 42; m = 1
2 
	22.	 10, 42; m = - 1
2 
	23.	 12, 12; m = - 3
2 
	24.	 1-1, 02; m = 2
5 
	25.	 15, -42; m = 0 
	26.	 15, -42; m is undefined.  
x
y
O

190	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
In Exercises 27–48, use the given conditions to find an equa-
tion in slope–intercept form of each nonvertical line. Write 
vertical lines in the form x = h.
	27.	 Passing through 10, 12 and 11, 02 
	28.	 Passing through 10, 12 and 11, 32 
	29.	 Passing through 1-1, 32 and 13, 32 
	30.	 Passing through 1-5, 12 and 12, 72 
	31.	 Passing through 1-2, -12 and 11, 12
	32.	 Passing through 1-1, -32 and 16, -92 
	33.	 Passing through a1
2, 1
4b and 10, 22 
	34.	 Passing through 14, -72 and 14, 32 
	35.	 A vertical line through 15, 1.72 
	36.	 A horizontal line through 11.4, 1.52 
	37.	 A horizontal line through 10, 02 
	38.	 A vertical line through 10, 02 
	39.	 m = 0; y@intercept = 14 
	40.	 m = 2; y@intercept = 5 
	41.	 m = - 2
3; y@intercept = -4 
	42.	 m = -6; y@intercept = -3 
	43.	 x@intercept = -3; y@intercept = 4 
	44.	 x@intercept = -5; y@intercept = -2 
	45.	 Parallel to y = 5; passing through 14, 72 
	46.	 Parallel to x = 5; passing through 14, 72 
	47.	 Perpendicular to x = -4; passing through  
1-3, -52 
	48.	 Perpendicular to y = -4; passing through  
1-3, -52 
	49.	 Let /1 be a line with slope m = -2. Determine whether the 
given line /2 is parallel to /1, perpendicular to /1, or neither.
a.	 /2 is the line through the points 11, 52 and 13, 12. 
b.	 /2 is the line through the points 17, 32 and 15, 42. 
c.	 /2 is the line through the points 12, 32 and 14, 42.
	50.	 Find equations of the lines /1, /2, /3 and /4 of Exercise 18. 
In Exercises 51–58, find the slope and intercepts from the 
equation of the line. Sketch the graph of each equation.
	51.	 x + 2y - 4 = 0 
	52.	 x = 3y - 9 
	53.	 3x - 2y + 6 = 0 
	54.	 2x = -4y + 15 
	55.	 x - 5 = 0 
	56.	 2y + 5 = 0 
	57.	 x = 0 
	58.	 y = 0 
	59.	 Show that an equation of a line through the points 1a, 02  
and 10, b2, with a and b nonzero, can be written in the form
	
	
x
a + y
b = 1.
	
	This form is called the two-intercept form of the equation  
of a line.
In Exercises 60–64, use the two-intercept form of the equation 
of a line given in Exercise 59.
	60.	 Find an equation of the line whose x-intercept is 4 and  
y-intercept is 3. 
	61.	Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the equation 
2x + 3y = 6. 
 
 
	62.	 Repeat Exercise 61 for the equation 3x - 4y + 12 = 0.
	63.	 Find an equation of the line that has equal intercepts and 
passes through the point 13, -52. 
	64.	 Find an equation of the line making intercepts on the axes 
equal in magnitude but opposite in sign and passing through 
the point 1-5, -82. 
	65.	 Find an equation of the line passing through the points  
12, 42 and 17, 92. Use the equation to show that the three 
points 12, 42, 17, 92, and 1-1, 12 are on the same line. 
	66.	 Use the technique of Exercise 65 to check whether the  
points 17, 22, 12, -32, and 15, 12 are on the same line.
	67.	 Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of the blue line 
shown in the figure that is perpendicular to the red line with 
x-intercept -4.
	
	
2
0
4
6
x
4
4
8
12
y
2
, 9
1
2
4
6
	68.	 Write the point–slope form of the equation of the red line  
shown in the figure parallel to the blue line through the  
origin. 
	
	
2
0
4
6
x
2
2
4
6
y
2
4
6
(2, 4)
In Exercises 69–76, determine whether each pair of lines are 
parallel, perpendicular, or neither.
	69.	 x = -1 and 2x + 7 = 9 
	70.	 x = 0 and y = 0 
	71.	 2x + 3y = 7 and y = 2 
	72.	 y = 3x + 1 and 6y + 2x = 0 
	73.	 x = 4y + 8 and y = -4x + 1        
    

	
Section 2.3    ■    Lines 191
	74.	 4x + 3y = 1 and 3 + y = 2x 
	75.	 3x + 8y = 7 and 5x - 7y = 0 
	76.	 10x + 2y = 3 and y + 1 = -5x 
In Exercises 77–86, find the equation of the line in slope–
intercept form satisfying the given conditions.
	77.	 a.  Passing through 12, -32 and parallel to a line with slope 3
b.  Passing through 1-1, 22 and perpendicular to a line with 
	
slope - 1
2 
	78.	 a.  Passing through 1-2, -52 and parallel to the line joining 
the points 11, -22 and 1-3, 22 
b.  Passing through 11, -22 and perpendicular to the line  
joining the points 1-3, 22 and 1-4, -12  
	79.	 Parallel to x + y = 1; passing through 11, 12 
	80.	 Parallel to y = 6x + 5; y@intercept of -2 
	81.	 Perpendicular to 3x - 9y = 18; passing through 1-2, 42
	82.	 Perpendicular to -2x + y = 14; passing through 
	
	 10, 02 
	83.	 Perpendicular to y = 6x + 5; y-intercept of 4 
	84.	 Parallel to -2x + 3y - 7 = 0; passing through 11, 02
	85.	 Perpendicular bisector of the line segment with endpoints 
A = 12, 32 and B1-1, 52
	86.	 Show that y = x is the perpendicular bisector of the line 
­segment with endpoints A1a, b2 and B1b, a2.
Applying the Concepts
	87.	 Jet takeoff. Upon takeoff, a jet climbs to 4 miles as it  
passes over 40 miles of land below it. Find the slope of the 
jet’s climb.
	88.	 Road gradient. Driving down the Smoky Mountains 
in Tennessee, Samantha descends 2000 feet in elevation 
while moving 4 miles horizontally away from a high point 
on the straight road. Find the slope (gradient) of the road 
11 mile = 5280 feet2.
In Exercises 89–94, write an equation of a line in slope–
intercept form. To describe this situation, interpret (a) the 
variables x and y and (b) the meaning of the slope and the 
y-intercept.
	89.	 Christmas savings account. You currently have $130 in  
a Christmas savings account. You deposit $7 per week into 
this account. (Ignore interest.) 
	90.	 Golf club charges. Your golf club charges a yearly member-
ship fee of $1000 and $35 per session of golf. 
	91.	 Wages. Judy’s job at a warehouse pays $11 per hour up  
to 40 hours per week. If she works more than 40 hours in  
a week, she is paid 1.5 times her usual wage for each hour 
after 40. [Hint: You will need two equations.] 
	92.	 Paying off a refrigerator. You bought a new refrigerator 
for $700. You made a down payment of $100 and promised  
to pay $15 per month. (Ignore interest.) 
	93.	 Converting currency. In February 2013, according to  
the International Monetary Fund, 1 U.S. dollar equaled  
53.87 Indian rupees. Convert currency from rupees to  
dollars. 
	94.	 Life expectancy. In 2010, the life expectancy of a female 
born in the United States was 80.8 years and was increas-
ing at a rate of 0.17 years per year. (Assume that this rate of 
increase remains constant.) 
	95.	 Machine Value. The graph represents the value of a piece 
of factory machinery over a ten-year period. Each point  
1t, y2 gives the machine’s value y after t years.
a.	 What does the y-intercept represent? 
b.	 What is the value of the machine after ten years? 
c.	 How much does the machine depreciate in value each 
year? 
d.	 Write a linear equation for the value of the machine after  
t years, for 0 … t … 10. 
e.	 What does the slope found in part d represent?
2
0
4
6
8
Years
10
Value (thousands of dollars)
t
y
(10, 1)
9
6
12
3
	96.	Depreciating a tractor. The value v of a tractor pur-
chased for +14,000 and depreciated linearly at the rate of 
+1400 per year is given by v = -1400t + 14,000, where 
t represents the number of years since the purchase. Find 
the value of the tractor after (a) two years and (b) six years. 
When will the tractor have no value?
	97.	 Playing for a concert. A famous band is considering  
playing a concert and charging +40,000 plus +5 per person 
attending the concert. Write an equation relating the income y 
of the band to the number x of people attending the concert.
	98.	 Car rental. The U Drive car rental agency charges +30.00 
per day and +0.25 per mile.
a.	 Find an equation relating the cost C of renting a car from 
U Drive for a one-day trip covering x miles.
b.	 Draw the graph of the equation in part (a). 
c.	 How much does it cost to rent the car for one day covering 
60 miles? 
d.	 How many miles were driven if the one-day rental cost 
was +47.75? 
	99.	 Female prisoners. The number of females in a state’s  
prisons rose from 2425 in 2005 to 4026 in 2011.
a.	 Find a linear equation relating the number y of women 
prisoners to the year t. (Take t = 0 to represent 2005.)
b.	 Draw the graph of the equation from part (a). 
c.	 How many women prisoners were there in 2008? 
d.	 Predict the number of women prisoners in 2017.                

192	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	100.	 Fahrenheit and Celsius. In the Fahrenheit temperature 
scale, water boils at 212°F and freezes at 32°F. In the 
Celsius scale, water boils at 100°C and freezes at 0°C. 
Assume that the Fahrenheit temperature F and Celsius tem-
perature C are linearly related.
a.	 Find the equation in the slope–intercept form relating F 
and C, with C as the independent variable.
b.	 What is the meaning of slope in part (a)?
c.	 Find the Fahrenheit temperatures, to the nearest degree, 
corresponding to 40°C, 25°C, -5°C, and -10°C.
d.	 Find the Celsius temperatures, to the nearest degree, cor-
responding to 100°F, 90°F, 75°F, -10°F, and -20°F.
e.	 The normal body temperature in humans ranges from 
97.6°F to 99.6°F. Convert this temperature range to degrees 
Celsius. 
f.	 When is the Celsius temperature the same numerical 
value as the Fahrenheit temperature? 
	101.	 Cost. The cost of producing four modems is $210.20, and 
the cost of producing ten modems is $348.80.
a.	 Write a linear equation in slope–intercept form relating 
cost to the number of modems produced. Sketch a graph 
of the equation. 
b.	 What is the practical meaning of the slope and the inter-
cepts of the equation in part (a)? 
c.	 Predict the cost of producing 12 modems. 
	102.	 Viewers of a TV show. After five months, the number of 
viewers of The Weekly Show on TV was 5.73 million. After 
eight months, the number of viewers of the show rose to 
6.27 million. Assume that the linear model applies.
a.	 Write an equation expressing the number of viewers V 
after x months. 
b.	 Interpret the slope and the intercepts of the line in part (a). 
c.	 Predict the number of viewers of the show after 11 months.
	103.	 Health insurance coverage. In Michigan, 12.70% of the 
population was not covered by health insurance in 2005. 
In 2008, the percentage of uninsured people dropped to 
11.68%. Use the linear model to predict the percentage of 
people in Michigan that were not covered in 2013. (Source: 
Michigan Department of Community Health.) 
	104.	 Oil consumption. The total world consumption of oil 
increased from 82.7 million barrels per day in 2004 to 
84.2 million barrels per day in 2009. Create a linear model 
involving a relation between the year and the daily oil con-
sumption in that year. Let t = 0 represent the year 2004. 
(Source: www.cia.gov) 
	105.	 Newspaper sales. The table shows the number of newspa-
pers (in thousands) that sell at a given price (in nickels) per copy 
for the college newspaper Midstate Oracle at Midstate College.
Price (nickels) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Numbers of newspapers sold 
(thousands) 
11 
8 
6 
4 
3
a.	 Use a graphing utility to find the equation of the line of 
regression relating the variables x (price in nickels) and y 
(number sold in thousands). 
b.	 Use a graphing utility to plot the points and graph the 
regression line. 
c.	 Approximately how many papers will be sold if the price 
per copy is 35.? 
	106.	 Sales and advertising. Bildwell Computers keeps a care-
ful record of its weekly advertising expenses (in thousands 
of dollars) and the number of computers (in thousands) it 
sells the following week. The table shows the data the com-
pany collected.
Weekly advertising  
expenses (in thousands  
of dollars)
100
200
300
400
500
600
Sales the following  
week (in thousands)
21
29
36
49
58
67
a.	 Use a graphing utility to find the equation of the line 
of regression equation relating the variables x (weekly 
­advertising expenses in thousands of dollars) and y (num-
ber of computers sold, in thousands). 
b.	 Use a graphing utility to plot the points and graph the 
regression line. 
c.	 Approximately how many thousands of computers will 
be sold if the company spends +700,000 on advertising?
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 107 and 108, show that the three given points are 
collinear by using (a) slopes and (b) the distance formula.
	107.	 10, 12, 11, 32, and 1-1, -12
	108.	 11, 0.52, 12, 02, and 10.5, 0.752
In Exercises 109 and 110, find c so that the given three points 
are collinear.
	109.	 1-5, 12, 11, c2, and 14, -22 
	110.	 12, 52, ac, 11
2 b, and 14, 62 
	111.	 Show that the triangle with vertices A11, 12, B1-1, 42, and 
C15, 82 is a right triangle by using (a) slopes and (b) the 
converse of Pythagorean Theorem. See page 159.
	112.	 Show that the four points, A1-4, -12, B11, 22, C13, 12, 
and D1-2, -22 are the vertices of a parallelogram.
[Hint: Opposite sides of a parallelogram are parallel.]
	113.	 Show that if two nonvertical lines are parallel, their 
slopes are equal. Start by letting the two lines be show 
/1: y = m1x + b1 and /2: y = m2x + b2 1b1 7 b22.  
that if 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 are on /1, then  
1x1, y1 - 1b1 - b222 and 11x2, y2 - 1b1 - b222 must be 
on /2. Then by computing m1 and m2, show that m1 = m2. 
(See the accompanying figure.)
y
x
(x2, y2)
b2
b1
O
(x1, y1)           

	
Section 2.3    ■    Lines 193
	114.	 In the accompanying figure, note that lines /1 and /2 have 
slopes m1 and m2. Assume that /1 and /2 are perpendicular. 
Use the distance formula and the Pythagorean theorem to 
show that m1 # m2 = -1.
y
O
x-axis
B(x, m2 x)
A(x, m1 x)
x
	115.	 Geometry. Find the coordinates of the point B of a line 
segment AB, given that A = 12, 22, d1A, B2 = 12.5, and 
	
	 the slope of the line segment AB is 4
3. 
	116.	 Geometry. Show that an equation of a circle with 1x1, y12 and 
1x2, y22 as endpoints of a diameter can be written in the form
1x - x121x - x22 + 1y - y121y - y22 = 0.
	
	 [Hint: Use the fact that when the two endpoints of a diam-
eter and any other point on the circle are used as vertices for 
a triangle, the angle opposite the diameter is a right angle.]
(x1, y1)
(x2, y2)
(x, y)
	117.	 Find an equation of the circle the endpoints of whose 
diameter are the centers of the circles: x2 + y2 +
6x - 14y - 1 = 0 and x2 + y2 - 4x + 10y - 2 = 0. 
(Hint: Use Exercise 116.) 
	118.	 Geometry. Find an equation of the tangent line to the 
­circle x2 + y2 = 169 at the point 1-5, 122. (See the 
accompanying figure.)
8
16
16
8
0
16
8
16
8
x
24
y
(0, 0)
(5, 12)
	119.	 Find an equation of the tangent line to the circle x2 + y2 = 25 
at the point 14, -32.
	120.	 Find an equation of the tangent line to the circle 
x2 + y2 + 4x - 6y - 12 = 0 at the point 11, 72.
In Exercises 121–124, use a graphing device to graph the 
given lines on the same screen. Interpret your observations 
about the family of lines.
	121.	 y = 2x + b for b = 0,{2,{4 
	122.	 y = mx + 2 for m = 0,{2,{4 
	123.	 y = m1x - 12 for m = 0,{3,{5 
	124.	 y = m1x + 12 - 2 for m = 0,{3,{5 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	125.	 a.  The equation y + 2x + k = 0 describes a family of 
lines for each value of k. Sketch the graphs of the mem-
bers of this family for k = -3, 0, and 2. What is the 
common characteristic of the family? 
b.	 Repeat part (a) for the family of lines y + kx + 4 = 0. 
	126.	 Explain how you can determine the sign of the x-coordinate 
of the point of intersection of the lines y = m1x + b1 and 
y = m2x + b2, if
a.	 m1 7 m2 7 0  and  b1 7 b2.
b.	 m1 7 m2 7 0  and  b1 6 b2.
c.	 m1 6 m2 6 0  and  b1 7 b2.
d.	 m1 6 m2 6 0  and  b1 6 b2.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 127–132, solve each equation or inequality for x.
	127.	 x2 - x - 2 = 0 
	
128.  x2 + 2x - 3 = 0
	129.	 x2 + 5x + 6
x - 1
= 0 
	
130. 
6x2 - x - 1
x2 - x - 12 = 0
	131.	 x2 - 5x + 6 Ú 0 
	132.	 x - 1
x + 2 + 1 Ú 0 
In Exercises 133 and 134, simplify each expression.
	133.	 1
hc
1
x + h - 1
x d 
	 134. 
-1x + h22 + x2
h
In Exercises 135 and 136, rationalize the numerator.
	135.	 15 - 12
3 
	
136. 
1x + 2 - 1x
2       

194	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Functions
There are many ways of expressing a relationship between two quantities. For example, if 
you are paid $10 per hour, then the relation between the number of hours, x, that you work 
and the amount of money, y, that you earn may be expressed by the equation y = 10x. 
Replacing x with 40 yields y = 400 and indicates that 40 hours of work corresponds to a 
$400 paycheck. A special relationship such as y = 10x in which to each element x in one 
set there corresponds a unique element y in another set is called a function. We say that your 
pay is a function of the number of hours you work. Because the value of y depends on the 
value of x, y is called the dependent variable and x is called the independent variable. 
Any symbol may be used for the dependent and independent variable.
1	
Use functional notation and 
find function values.
The Ups and Downs of Drug Levels
Medicines in the form of a pill have a much harder time getting to work than you do. 
First, they are swallowed and dumped into a pool of acid in your stomach. Then they 
dissolve; leave the stomach; and begin to be absorbed, mostly through the lining of 
the small intestine. Next, the blood around the intestine carries the medicines to the 
liver, an organ designed to metabolize (break down) and remove foreign material from 
the blood. Because of this property of the liver, most drugs have a tough time getting 
past it. The amount of drug that makes it into your bloodstream, compared with the 
amount that you put in your mouth, is called the drug’s bioavailability. If a drug has low 
bioavailability, then much of the drug is destroyed before it reaches the bloodstream. 
The amount of drug you take in a pill is calculated to correct for this deficiency so that 
the amount you need actually ends up in your blood.
Once the drugs are past the liver, the bloodstream carries them throughout the 
rest of the body in about one minute. The study of the ways drugs are absorbed and 
move through the body is called pharmacokinetics, or PK for short. PK measures the ups 
and downs of drug levels in your body. In Example 10, we consider an application of 
­functions to the levels of drugs in the bloodstream.
(Adapted from The Ups and Downs of Drug Levels, by Bob Munk, www.thebody 
.com/content/treat/art1062.html)
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 Graph of an equation (Section 2.2,  
page 165)
2	 Equation of a circle (Section 2.2,  
page 172)
Objectives
1	 Use functional notation and  
find function values.
2	 Find the domain and range of a function.
3	 Identify the graph of a function.
4	 Get information about a function  
from its graph.
5	 Solve applied problems by using functions.
Functions
2.4
S E C T I O N

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 195
Function Notation
We usually use single letters such as f, F, g, G, h, and H as the name of a function. Some 
special function names use more than one letter, such as sin (the sine function) and log 
(the logarithm function). If we choose f  as the name of a function, then for each x in the 
domain of f , there corresponds a unique y in its range. The number y is denoted by f 1x2, 
read as “ f  of x” or as “ f  at x.” We call f 1x2 the value of f at the number x and say that 
f  assigns the value f 1x2 to x. If the function shown in Figure 2.34(a) is named f, then the 
correspondence diagram may be described by:
f 1a2 = 1,  f 1b2 = 3,  f 1c2 = 3, and f 1d2 = 4.
A rule of assignment may be described by a correspondence diagram, in which an arrow 
points from each domain element to the corresponding element or elements in the range.
To decide whether a correspondence diagram defines a function, we must check ­whether 
any domain element is paired with more than one range element. If this ­happens, that ­domain 
element does not have a unique corresponding element of Y and the ­correspondence is not 
a function. See the correspondence diagrams in Figure 2.34.
Figure 2.34  Correspondence diagrams
1
2
3
4
a
b
c
d
X
A function
(a)
Domain: {a, b, c, d}
Range: {1, 3, 4}
Y
1
2
3
4
a
b
c
d
X
Not a function
(b)
Y
The functional notation y = f1x2 
was first used by the great Swiss 
mathematician Leonhard Euler 
in the Commentarii Academia 
Petropolitanae, published in 1735.
Do You  
Know?
A function from a set X to a set Y is a rule that assigns to each element of X 
exactly one element of Y. The set X is the domain of the function. The set of those 
elements of Y that correspond (are assigned) to the elements of X is the range of the 
function. 
Function
Main Facts From the Definition of a Function
Let f  be a function from a set X to a set Y.
1.	 The domain of f  is the entire set X. That is, each element of X must be assigned to some element of Y.
2.	 The range of f  is the set of those elements in Y that are assigned to some element of X. So the range of f  may not be 
the entire set Y.
3.	 It is permissible to assign the same element of Y to two or more elements of X. See Figure 2.34(a).
4.	 It is not permissible to assign an element of X to two or more elements of Y. See Figure 2.34(b).

196	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Yet another way to illustrate the concept of a function is by a “machine,” as shown in 
Figure 2.35. If x is in the domain of a function, then the machine accepts it as an “input” 
and produces the value f1x2 as the “output.” In other words, output is a function of the 
input. A calculator is an example of a function machine. If an input number (say, 9) is  
entered and some key (such as 1   ) is pressed, the display shows the function value (in 
this case, the output number 3).
Figure 2.35  The function f,  
as a machine
Input
x
Output
In writing y = f 1x2, do not confuse f, which is the name of the function, with f1x2, which is 
a number in the range of f that the function assigns to x.
The symbol f 1x2 does not mean “f  times x.”
Warning
Representations of Functions
We have seen that the rule used in describing a function may be expressed in the form of a 
correspondence diagram. Here are some additional forms.
Functions Defined by Ordered Pairs  Any set of ordered pairs is called a 
­relation. The set of first components is the domain of the relation, and the set of ­second 
components is the range of the relation. In the ordered pair 1x, y2, we say that y ­corresponds 
to x. Then a function is a relation in which each element of the domain ­corresponds to 
exactly one element of the range. In other words, a function is a relation in which no two 
distinct ordered pairs have the same first component.
Determine whether each relation defines a function.
a.	 r = 51-1, 22, 11, 32, 15, 22, 1-1, -326
b.	 s = 51-2, 12, 10, 22, 12, 12, 1-1, -326
Solution
a.	 The domain of the relation r is 5-1, 1, 56, and its range is 52, 3, -36. It is not 
a function because the ordered pairs 1-1, 22 and 1-1, -32 have the same first 
­component but the second components are different. See the correspondence diagram 
for the relation r in Figure 2.36.
b.	 The domain of the relation s is 5-2, -1, 0, 26, and its range is 5-3, 1, 26.  
The ­relation s is a function because no two ordered pairs of s have the same first 
­component. Figure 2.37 shows the correspondence diagram for the function s.
Functions Defined by Ordered Pairs
EXAMPLE 1
Figure 2.36 
1
1
5
 r 
Not a function
2
3
3
Figure 2.37 
1
2
0
2
3
1
2
s 
A function
Practice Problem 1  Repeat Example 1 for each set of ordered pairs.
a.	 R = 512, 12, 1-2, 12, 13, 226
b.	 S = 512, 52, 13, -22, 13, 526

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 197
Functions Defined by Tables and Graphs  Tables and graphs can be used 
to describe relations and functions. We can display in tabular form the list of ordered pairs 
1x, y2 of a relation, where x is in the domain and the corresponding y is in the range.  
For example, the relations r and s of Example 1 described in tabular form are shown in 
Tables 2.5 and 2.6, respectively.
Alternatively, we can display geometrically the list of ordered pairs 1x, y2 in a relation 
by plotting each pair 1x, y2 as a point in the coordinate plane. The geometric display is the 
graph of the relation. Graphs of the relations r and s are given in Figure 2.38.
Table 2.5 
x
y
-1
2
1
3
5
2
-1
-3
Relation r
Table 2.6 
x
y
-2
1
-1
-3
0
2
2
1
Relation s
Figure 2.38  Graphs of relations
1
y
1
2
3
4
5 x
0
 Relation r 
2
3
(a)
1
2
0
1
3
1
2
2
y
1
2
3 x
0
3 2
  Relation s
(b)
The graph of the discrete data points of a relation or function is called a scatterplot.
Functions Defined by Equations  When the relation defined by an equation 
in two variables is a function, we can often solve the equation for the dependent variable 
in terms of the independent variable. For example, the equation y - x2 = 0 can be solved 
for y in terms of x:
y = x2.
Now we can replace the dependent variable, in this case, y, with functional notation f 1x2 
and express the function as
f 1x2 = x2 1read “ f of x equals x2”2.
Here f 1x2 plays the role of y and is the value of the function f  at x. For example, if x = 3 
is an element (input value) in the domain of f , the corresponding element (output value) in 
the range is found by replacing x with 3 in the equation
	
f 1x2 = x2
so that	
f 132 = 32 = 9.    Replace x with 3.
We say that the value of the function f  at 3 is 9, or 9 is the evaluated function value f 132. 
See Figure 2.39. In other words, the number 9 in the range corresponds to the number 3 in 
the domain and 13, 92 is an ordered pair of the function f .
If a function g is defined by an equation such as y = x2 - 6x + 8, the notations
y = x2 - 6x + 8 and g1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8
define the same function.
The definition of a function is 
independent of the letters used 
to denote the function and the 
­variables. For example,
s1x2 = x2, g1y2 = y2,
and h1t2 = t2
represent the same function.
Side  
Note
Figure 2.39  The function f, as a 
machine
Input
3
Output
Determine whether y is a function of x for each equation.
a.	 6x2 - 3y = 12	
b.	 y2 - x2 = 4
Determining Whether an Equation Defines a Function
EXAMPLE 2

198	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Figure 2.40 
2
2
y
x
y  f1(x)     x2  4

y  f2(x)     x2  4

Let g be the function defined by the equation
y = x2 - 6x + 8.
Final each function value.
a.	 g132	
b.	 g1-22	
c.	 g a1
2b	
d.	 g1a + 22	
e.	 g1x + h2
Solution
Because the function is named g, we replace y with g1x2 and write
g1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8	
Replace y with g1x2.
In this notation, the independent variable x is a placeholder. We can write 
g1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8 as
g1 2 = 1 22 - 61 2 + 8.
a.	 g1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8	
Given equation
	
g132 = 32 - 6132 + 8	
Replace x with 3 at each occurrence of x.
= 9 - 18 + 8 = -1	
Simplify.
	
The statement g132 = -1 means that the value of the function g at 3 is -1.
Just as in part a, we can evaluate g at any value x in its domain.
	
g1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8	
Original equation
b.	 g1-22 = 1-222 - 61-22 + 8 = 24	
Replace x with -2 and simplify.
c.	 ga1
2b = a1
2b
2
- 6a1
2b + 8 = 21
4 	
Replace x with 1
2 and simplify.
Evaluating a Function
EXAMPLE 3
Solution
Solve each equation for y in terms of x. If more than one value of y corresponds to the same 
value of x, then y is not a function of x.
a.	 	
6x2 - 3y = 12	
Original equation
	
6x2 - 3y + 3y - 12 = 12 + 3y - 12	
Add 3y - 12 to both sides.
6x2 - 12 = 3y	
Simplify.
2x2 - 4 = y	
Divide by 3.
	
The last equation shows that only one value of y corresponds to each value of x. For 
example, if x = 0, then y = 0 - 4 = -4. So y is a function of x.
b.	 	
y2 - x2 = 4	
Original equation
	
y2 - x2 + x2 = 4 + x2	
Add x2 to both sides.
y2 = x2 + 4	
Simplify.
y = { 2x2 + 4	
Square root property
	
The last equation shows that two values of y correspond to each value of x. For 
	
example, if x = 0, then y = {202 + 4 = {14 = {2. Both y = 2 and y = -2 
correspond to x = 0. Therefore, y is not a function of x. See Figure 2.40. However, 
the equation y2 - x2 = 4 defines two functions:
 f11x2 = 2x2 + 4; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 32, ∞2 and
 f21x2 = - 2x2 + 4; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range 1- ∞, -24.
Practice Problem 2  Determine whether y is a function of x for each equation.
a.	 2x2 - y2 = 1	
b.	 x - 2y = 5

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 199
d.	 g1a + 22 = 1a + 222 - 61a + 22 + 8	
Replace x with 1a + 22 in g1x2.
= a2 + 4a + 4 - 6a - 12 + 8	
Recall: 1x + y22 = x2 + 2xy + y2.
= a2 - 2a	
Simplify.
e.	 g1x + h2 = 1x + h22 - 61x + h2 + 8	
Replace x with 1x + h2 in g1x2.
= x2 + 2xh + h2 - 6x - 6h + 8	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 3  Let g be the function defined by the equation y = -2x2 + 5x. 
Find each function value.	
a.	 g102	
b.	 g1-12	
c.	 g1x + h2
Problems like Examples 31d2  
and 31e2 will arise frequently. 
We emphasize that you must 
take whatever appears in the 
­parentheses and substitute for  
the independent variable.
Side  
Note
In Figure 2.41, find the area of the rectangle PLMN.
Finding the Area of a Rectangle
EXAMPLE 4
Figure 2.41 
y
1
2
3
x
0
T
P
L
S
f (x)  x3  3x  4
N
M
Solution
Area of the rectangle PLMN = 1length21height2
= 13 - 121 f 1122	
P = 11, f 1122
= 122122	
f 112 = 13 - 3112 + 4 = 2
= 4 sq. units
Practice Problem 4  In Figure 2.41, find the area of the rectangle TLMS.
The Domain of a Function
Sometimes a function does not have a specified domain.
2	
Find the domain and range  
of a function.
A g r e e m e n t  o n  D o m a i n
If the domain of a function that is defined by an equation is not specified, then we 
agree that the domain of the function is the largest set of real number inputs that result 
in real number outputs.
The word domain comes from the 
Latin word dominus, or master, 
which in turn is related to domus, 
meaning “home.” Domus is also 
the root for the words domestic  
and domicile.
Do You  
Know?
When we use our agreement to find the domain of a function, we usually find the real 
values of the independent variable that do not result in real values of the dependent variable.  
Then we exclude those numbers from the domain. Remember that:
1.	 Division by zero is undefined.
2.	 The square root (or any even root) of a negative number is not a real number.

200	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Find the domain of each function.
a.	 f 1x2 =
1
1 - x2	
b.	 g1x2 = 1x
c.	 h1x2 =
1
1x - 1	
d.	 P1x2 = 2x2 - x - 6
Solution
a.	 The function f  is not defined when the denominator 1 - x2 is 0. Because 
1 - x2 = 0 if x = 1 or x = -1, the domain of f  is the set 5x0 x ≠-1 and 
x ≠16, which in interval notation is written 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 12 ´ 11, ∞2.
b.	 Because the square root of a negative number is not a real number, ­negative 
numbers are excluded from the domain of g. The domain of g1x2 = 1x is 
5x0 x Ú 06, or 30, ∞2 in interval notation.
c.	 The function h1x2 =
1
1x - 1 has two restrictions. The square root of a negative 
	
number is not a real number, so 1x - 1 is a real number only if x - 1 Ú 0. However, 
we cannot allow x - 1 = 0 because 1x - 1 is in the denominator and 10 = 0.  
Therefore, we must have x - 1 7 0, or x 7 1. The domain of h must be 5x0 x 7 16,  
or 11, ∞2 in interval notation.
d.	 The function P1x2 is defined when the expression under the radical sign is nonnegative. 
You can use the test-point method to see that x2 - x - 6 = 1x + 221x - 32 Ú 0 
on the two intervals 1- ∞, -24 and 33, ∞2. So the domain of the function P1x2 in 
interval notation is 1- ∞, -24 ´ 33, ∞2.
  
 



3
0
2
23
4
0
0
sign of (x  2)(x  3):
Test points:
Practice Problem 5  Find the domain of each function.
a.	 f1x2 =
1
11 - x.	
b.	 g1x2 = A
x + 2
x - 3
The Range of a Function
Suppose a function f  is defined by an equation. A number y is in the range of f  if the equa-
tion f1x2 = y has at least one solution.
Finding the Domain of a Function
EXAMPLE 5
Let f1x2 = x2 with domain X = 33, 54.
a.	 Is 10 in the range of f ?
b.	 Is 4 in the range of f ?
c.	 Find the range of f.
Finding the Range of a Function
EXAMPLE 6

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 201
Solution
a.	 We find possible solutions of the equation
f1x2 = 10.
x2 = 10	
Replace f1x2 with x2.
x = { 110	
Square root property
	
Because 3 6 110 6 5, the number x = 110 is in the interval X = 33, 54. So the 
equation f 1x2 = 10 has at least one solution in the domain of f . Therefore, 10 is in 
the range of f .
b.	 The solutions of the equation x2 = 4 are x = {2. Neither of these numbers is in the 
domain X = 33, 54. So 4 is not in the range of f .
c.	 The range of f is the interval 39, 254 because for each number y in the ­interval 39, 254,  
the number x = 1y is in the interval 33, 54 so that f 1x2 = f 11y2 = 11y22 = y.
Practice Problem 6  Repeat Example 6 for f 1x2 = x2 with domain X = 3-3, 34.
Finding the range of a function such as f 1x2 = x + 1
x - 2 is a little more complicated. We 
discuss this problem in Section 2.9.
Graphs of Functions
The graph of a function f is the set of plots of ordered pairs 1x, f 1x22 such that x is in the 
domain of f. That is, the graph of f is the graph of the equation y = f 1x2. We can sketch the 
graph of y = f 1x2 by plotting a sufficiently large number of points and joining them with a 
smooth curve. The graph of a function provides valuable visual information about the function.
Figure 2.42 shows that not every curve in the plane is the graph of a function. In  
Figure 2.42, a vertical line x = a intersects the curve at two distinct points 1a, b2 and 
1a, c2. This curve cannot be the graph of y = f 1x2 for any function f because having 
f 1a2 = b and f 1a2 = c means that f assigns two different range values to the same domain  
element a. We can ­express this statement, called the vertical-line test, as follows:
3	
Identify the graph of a 
function.
Figure 2.42  Graph does not 
represent a function
y
x
(a, b)
(a, c)
a
O
V e r t i c a l - L i n e  T e s t
If no vertical line intersects the graph of a relation at more than one point, then the 
graph of the relation is the graph of a function. 
Determine which graphs in Figure 2.43 are graphs of functions.
Identifying the Graph of a Function
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 2.43  The vertical-line test 
(a)
y
x
0
(b)
y
x
O
y
x
(c)
O
(d)
O
x
y

202	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Solution
The graphs in Figures 2.43(a) and 2.43(b) are not graphs of functions because a verti-
cal line can be drawn through the two points farthest to the left in Figure 2.43(a) and the  
y-axis is one of many vertical lines that contain more than one point on the graph in  
Figure 2.43(b). The graphs in Figures 2.43(c) and 2.43(d) are the graphs of functions  
because no vertical line intersects either graph at more than one point.
Practice Problem 7  Decide whether the graph in Figure 2.44 is the graph of a function.
Figure 2.44 
y
x
0
Let f 1x2 = x2 - 2x - 3.
a.	 Is the point 11, -32 on the graph of f ?
b.	 Find all values of x so that 1x, 52 is on the graph of f .
c.	 Find the y-intercept of the graph of f  (if any).
d.	 Find all x-intercepts of the graph of f .
Solution
a.	 We check whether 11, -32 satisfies the equation y = x2 - 2x - 3.
-3 ≟1122 - 2112 - 3	
Replace x with 1 and y with -3.
-3 ≟-4 No!
	
Note that f112 = 12 - 2112 - 3 = -4 so 11, -42 is on the graph of f. But 11, -32 
is not on the graph of f . See Figure 2.45.
b.	 Substitute 5 for y in y = x2 - 2x - 3 and solve for x.
5 = x2 - 2x - 3
0 = x2 - 2x - 8	
Subtract 5 from both sides.
0 = 1x - 421x + 22	
Factor.
x - 4 = 0 or x + 2 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = 4 or   x = -2	
Solve for x.
	
The point 1x, 52 is on the graph of f  only when x = -2 or x = 4. Both points 
	
1-2, 52 and 14, 52 are on the graph of f . See Figure 2.45.
Examining the Graph of a Function
EXAMPLE 8
c.	 Find all points 1x, y2 with x = 0 in y = x2 - 2x - 3.
y = 02 - 2102 - 3	
Replace x with 0 to find the y@intercept.
y = -3	
Simplify.
	
So the y-intercept is -3. See Figure 2.45.
Figure 2.45 
(0, 3)
(1, 0)
1
5
0
3
5
6
1
2
5
x
y
(4, 5)
(2, 5)
(3, 0)
(1, 4)
(1, 3)
y-intercept
y = x2  2x  3
x-intercept
x-intercept

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 203
2.	 Domain and range from a graph 
	
To determine the domain of a function, we look for the portion on the x-axis that is 
used in graphing f. We can find this portion by projecting (collapsing) the graph on 
the x-axis. This projection is the domain of f.
The range of f  is the projection of its graph on the y-axis. See Figure 2.47.
Figure 2.46 
c
d
a
(a, b) is on the graph
Not on the graph because
f(c)  d
(c, d)
(c, f(c))
y  f(x)
b  f(a)
y
x
f(a)  b
f(c)
Figure 2.47  Domain and range of f
(a, b)
a
b
d
c
(c, d)
x
y
Domain of f
Range of f
d.	 Find all points 1x, y2 with y = 0 in y = x2 - 2x - 3.
0 = x2 - 2x - 3
0 = 1x + 121x - 32	
Factor.
x + 1 = 0 or x - 3 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = -1 or  x = 3	
Solve for x.
	
The x-intercepts of the graph of f  are -1 and 3. See Figure 2.45.
Practice Problem 8  Let f 1x2 = x2 + 4x - 5.
a.	 Is the point 12, 72 on the graph of f ?
b.	 Find all values of x so that 1x, -82 is on the graph of f .
c.	 Find the y-intercept of the graph of f .
d.	 Find any x-intercepts of the graph of f .
Function Information from Its Graph
Given a graph in the xy-plane, we use the vertical line test to determine whether the graph is 
that of a function. We can also obtain the following additional information from the graph 
of a function.
1.	 Point on a graph
	
A point 1a, b2 is on the graph of f  means that a is in the domain of f  and the value of 
f  at a is b; that is, f1a2 = b. We can visually determine whether a given point is on 
the graph of a function. In Figure 2.46, the point 1a, b2 is on the graph of f  and the 
point 1c, d2 is not on the graph of f .
4	
Get information about a 
function from its graph.

204	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Use the graphs in Figure 2.48 to find the domain and the range of each function.
Finding the Domain and Range from a Graph
EXAMPLE 9
Figure 2.48  Domain and range from a graph
4
2
0
4
2
(a)
x
y
(2, 2)
(3, 3)
(1, 4)
4
2
0
4
2
(b)
x
y
(1, 1)
(3, 4)
Solution
a.	 In Figure 2.48(a), the open circle at 1-2, 12 indicates that the point 1-2, 12 does not 
belong to the graph of f  and the full circle at the point 13, 32 indicates that the point 
13, 32 is part of the graph. When we project the graph of y = f 1x2 onto the x-axis, we 
obtain the interval 1-2, 34. The domain of f  in interval notation is 1-2, 34. ­Similarly, 
the projection of the graph of f  onto the y-axis gives the interval 11, 44, which is the 
range of f.
b.	 The projection of the graph of g in Figure 2.48(b) onto the x-axis is made up of  
two intervals 3-3, 14 and 33, ∞2. So the domain of g is 3-3, 14 ´ 33, ∞2.
To find the range of g, we project its graph onto the y-axis. The projection of the 
line segment joining 1-3, -12 and 11, 12 onto the y-axis is the interval 3-1, 14. The 
projection of the horizontal ray starting at the point 13, 42 onto the y-axis is just a 
single point at y = 4. Therefore, the range of g is 3-1, 14 ´ 546.
Practice Problem 9  Find the domain and the range of y = h1x2 in Figure 2.49.
Figure 2.49 
0
x
2
4
6
y
2
4
6
(1, 3)
3.	 Evaluations
a.	 Finding f 1c2  Given a number c in the domain of f, we find f1c2 from the graph of f.
	
First, locate the number c on the x-axis. Draw a vertical line through c. It 
­intersects the graph at the point 1c, f1c22. Through this point, draw a horizontal 
line to intersect the y-axis. Read the value f1c2 on the y-axis. See Figure 2.50.
b.	 Solving f 1x2 = d  Given d in the range of f, find values of x for which f1x2 = d. 
Locate the number d on the y-axis. Draw a horizontal line through d. This line intersects 
the graph at point(s) 1x, d2. Through each of these points, draw vertical lines to intersect 
the x-axis. Read the values on the x-axis. These are the values of x for which f1x2 = d. 
Figure 2.51 shows three solutions x1, x2, and x3 of the equation f1x2 = d.
Figure 2.50  Locating f 1c2 
graphically
x
y
c
(c,  f(c))
f(c)
x
y
d
x1 x2
x3
y 
 f(x)
Figure 2.51  Graphically solving 
f1x2 = d

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 205
Summary of Main Facts
A function is usually described in one or more of the following six ways:
• A correspondence diagram
• A set of ordered pairs
• A table of values
• An equation or a formula
• A scatterplot or a graph
• In the words y is a function of x
Input
Output
x
y or f 1x2 
First coordinate
Second coordinate
Independent variable
Dependent variable
Domain is the set of all inputs.
Range is the set of all outputs.
Building Functions
Level of Drugs in Bloodstream  When you take a dose of medication, the drug 
level in the blood goes up quickly and soon reaches its peak, called Cmax (the maximum 
concentration). As your liver or kidneys remove the drug, your blood’s drug levels drop 
until the next dose enters your bloodstream. The lowest drug level is called the trough, or 
Cmin (the minimum concentration). The ideal dose should be strong enough to be effective 
without causing too many side effects. We start by setting upper and lower limits on the 
drug’s blood levels, shown by the two horizontal lines on a pharmacokinetics (PK) graph. 
See Figure 2.52. The upper line represents the drug level at which people start to develop 
serious side effects. The lower line represents the minimum drug level that provides the 
desired effect.
5	
Solve applied problems by 
using functions.
Figure 2.52  Drug levels 
y
t
Unacceptable Upper Limit
Unacceptable Lower Limit
Time
Dose 1
Dose 2
Cmin
Cmax
Drug concentration
0
Many drugs used to lower high blood cholesterol levels are called statins. These drugs, 
along with proper diet and exercise, help prevent heart attacks and strokes. Recall from the 
introduction to this section that bioavailability is the amount of a drug you have ingested 
that makes it into your bloodstream. A statin with a bioavailability of 30% has been pre-
scribed for Boris to treat his cholesterol levels. He is to take 20 milligrams daily. Every 
day his body filters out half the statin. Find the maximum concentration of the statin in the 
bloodstream on each of the first ten days of using the drug and graph the result.
Solution
Because the statin has 30% bioavailability and Boris takes 20 milligrams per day, the 
­maximum concentration in the bloodstream is 30% of 20 milligrams, or 2010.32 = 6 mil-
ligrams from each day’s prescription. Because half the statin is filtered out of the body each 
day, the daily maximum concentration is
1
2 1previous days maximum concentration2 + 6.
So if C1n2 denotes the maximum concentration on the nth day, then
(1)	
C1n2 = 1
2 C1n - 12 + 6, C102 = 0.
Equation (1) is an example of a recursive definition of a function.
Cholesterol-Reducing Drugs
EXAMPLE 10

206	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Table 2.7 
Day
Maximum Concentration
1
6.000
2
9.000
3
10.500
4
11.250
5
11.625
6
11.813
7
11.907
8
11.954
9
11.977
10
11.989
Figure 2.53  Maximum drug concentration
y
t
1
0
2 3 4 5 6
6
8
10
7 8 9 10
Day
y = C(t)
Maximum concentration
12
The graph shows that the maximum concentration of the statin in the bloodstream 
­approaches 12 milligrams if Boris continues to take one pill every day.
Practice Problem 10  In Example 10, use Table 2.7 to find the range of the  
function C1t2. Also compute C1112.
Two points A and B are opposite each other on the banks of a straight river that is 500 feet 
wide. The point D is on the same side as B but is 1200 feet up the river from B. The local 
Internet cable company wants to lay a fiber-optic cable from A to D. The cost per foot of 
cable is $5 per foot under water and $3 per foot on land. To save money, the company lays 
the cable under water from A to P and then on land from P to D. In Figure 2.54, write the 
total cost C as a function of x.
Cost of a Fiber-Optic Cable
EXAMPLE 11
Figure 2.54 
B
A
P
500
1200  x
x
D
Solution
In Figure 2.54, we have
d1A, P2 = AP = 2150022 + x2  feet	
Pythagorean theorem
d1P, D2 = PD = 1200 - x feet
So the total cost C is given by
 C = 51AP2 + 31PD2
 = 52150022 + x2 + 311200 - x2.
Practice Problem 11  Repeat Example 11 assuming that the cost is 30% more  
under water than it is on land.
Table 2.7 shows the maximum concentration of the drug for each of the first ten days. 
After the first day, each number in the second column is computed (to three decimal places) 
by adding 6 to one-half the number above it. The graph of C1t2 is shown in Figure 2.53.

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 207
Functions in Economics
The important concepts of breaking even, earning a profit, or taking a loss in economics 
will be discussed throughout this book. Here we define some of the elementary functions 
in economics.
Let x represent the number of units of an item manufactured, and each item is sold at 
a price of p dollars. Then the cost C1x2 of producing x items includes the fixed cost (such 
as rent, insurance, product design, setup, promotion, and overhead) and the variable cost 
(which depends on the number of items produced at a certain cost per item).
Linear Cost Function  A linear cost function C1x2 is given by
 C1x2 = 1variable cost2 + 1fixed cost2
 = ax + b,
where the fixed cost is b and the marginal cost (cost of producing each item) is a dollars 
per item.
Average cost, denoted by C1x2, is defined by C1x2 = C1x2
x
.
Linear Price–Demand Function  Suppose x items can be sold (demanded) at a 
price of p dollars per item. Then a linear demand function usually has the form
p1x2 = -mx + d	
Expressing p as a function of x
or
x1p2 = -np + k	
Expressing x as a function of p
Both expressions indicate that a higher price will result in fewer items sold. The constants 
m, d, n, and k depend on the given situation, with m 7 0 and n 7 0. A price–supply 
­function has the form p = S1x2 or x = G1p2, where a higher price results in a greater 
supply of items.
Revenue Function R1x2 
Revenue = 1Price per item21Number of items sold2
R1x2 = p # x = 1-mx + d2x	
p = p1x2 = -mx + d
Profit Function P1x2
 Profit = Revenue - Cost
 P1x2 = R1x2 - C1x2
A manufacturing company will
	(i)	
Have a profit if P1x2 7 0.
(ii)	 Break even if P1x2 = 0.
(iii)	 Suffer a loss if P1x2 6 0.
Metro Entertainment Co. spent $100,000 on production costs for its off-Broadway play 
Bride and Prejudice. Once the play runs, each performance costs $1000 per show and the 
revenue from each show is $2400. Using x to represent the number of shows,
a.	 Write the cost function C1x2.
b.	 Write the revenue function R1x2.
c.	 Write the profit function P1x2.
d.	 Determine how many showings of Bride and Prejudice must be held for Metro to 
break even.
Breaking Even
EXAMPLE 12

208	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Solution
a.	  C1x2 = 1Variable cost2 + 1Fixed cost2
 = 1000x + 100,000
b.	  R1x2 = 1Revenue per show21Number of shows2
 = 2400x
c.	  P1x2 = R1x2 - C1x2
 = 2400x - 11000x + 100,0002
 = 2400x - 1000x - 100,000 = 1400x - 100,000
d.	 Metro will break even when P1x2 = 0.
 1400x - 100,000 = 0
 1400x = 100,000
 x = 100,000
1400
≈71	
Divide both sides by 1400.
	
Only a whole number of shows is possible, so Metro needs 71 shows to break even.
Practice Problem 12  Suppose in Example 12 that once the play runs, each performance 
costs $1200 and the revenue from each show is $2500. How do the results in Example 12 
change?
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. Yes  b. No    2. a. No  b. Yes    3. a. 0  b. -7
c. -2x2 - 4hx + 5x - 2h2 + 5h    4. 44 sq. units
5. a. 1- ∞, 12  b. 1- ∞, -24 ´ 13, ∞2    6. a. No  b. Yes
c. 30, 94    7. No    8. a. Yes  b. -3, -1  c. -5  d. -5, 1
9. Domain: 1-3, ∞2; range: 1-2, 24 ´ 536    10. Range: 
36, 122; C1112 = 11.994    11. If c = cost per foot on land, 
then C = c31.32150022 + x2 + 1200 - x4.
12. a. C = 1200x + 100,000  b. R = 2500x
c. P = 1300x - 100,000  d. 77
Exercises
section 2.4 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 In the functional notation y = f1x2, x is the 
 
variable.
	 2.	 If f1-22 = 7, then -2 is in the 
 of the  
function f and 7 is in the 
 of f.
	 3.	 If the point 19, -142 is on the graph of a function f, then 
f192 =
.
	 4.	 If 13, 72 and 13, 02 are points on a graph, then the graph 
­cannot be the graph of a(n) 
.
	 5.	 To find the x-intercepts of the graph of an equation in x and y, 
we solve the equation 
.
	 6.	 True or False. If a and b are in the domain of f1x2 = 1
x, 
	
	 then a + b is also in the domain of f. 
	 7.	 True or False. If x = -7, then -x is in the domain of 
f1x2 = 1x. 
	 8.	 True or False. The domain of f1x2 =
1
1x + 2 is all real 
	
	 x, x ≠-2. 
In Exercises 9–14, determine the domain and range of each 
relation. Explain why each nonfunction is not a function.
	 9.	
a
b
c
d
e
f
  ­
	10.	
a
b
c
d
e
f 
	11.	
a
b
c
d
1
2
3
4
  

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 209
	12.	
1
2
3
a
b
c
d 
	13.	
x
  0
  3
  8
0
3
8
y
-1
-2
-3
1
2
2
	14.	
x
-3
-1
0
1
  2
   3
y
-8
   0
1
0
-3
-8
In Exercises 15–28, determine whether each equation defines 
y as a function of x.
	15.	 x + y = 2 
	16.	 x = y - 1 
	17.	 y = 1
x 
	18.	 xy = -1 
	19.	 y2 = x2 
	20.	 x = 0 y0 
	21.	 y =
1
12x - 5 
	22.	 y =
1
2x2 - 1 
	23.	 2 - y = 3x 
	24.	 3x - 5y = 15 
	25.	 x + y2 = 8 
	26.	 x = y2 
	27.	 x2 + y3 = 5 
	28.	 x + y3 = 8 
In Exercises 29–32, let f1x2 = x2 −3x + 1, g1x2 =
2
1x, 
and h1x2 = 12 −x.
	29.	 Find f102, g102, h102, f1a2, and f1-x2.
	30.	 Find f112, g112, h112, g1a2, and g1x22. 
	31.	 Find f1-12, g1-12, h1-12, h1c2, and h1-x2. 
	32.	 Find f142, g142, h142, g12 + k2, and f1a + k2. 
	33.	 Let f1x2 =
2x
24 - x2. Find each function value.
a.	 f102 
b.	 f112 
c.	 f122 
d.	 f1-22 
e.	 f1-x2 
	34.	 Let g1x2 = 2x + 2x2 - 4. Find each function value.
a.	 g102 
b.	 g112 
c.	 g122 
d.	 g1-32 
e.	 g1-x2 
	35.	 In the figure for Exercise 35, find the sum of the areas of the 
shaded rectangles. 
y
1
2
x
0
f (x)  x2  2 
	36.	 Repeat Exercise 35 in the figure for Exercise 36. 
y
1
2
x
0
f (x)  x2  2
In Exercises 37–48, find the domain of each function.
	37.	 f1x2 = -8x + 7
	38.  f1x2 = 2x2 - 11
	39.	 f1x2 =
1
x - 9
	40.	 f1x2 =
1
x + 9
	41.	 h1x2 =
2x
x2 - 1
	42.	 h1x2 = x - 3
x2 - 4
	43.	 G1x2 = 1x - 3
x + 2 
	44.	 f1x2 =
3
14 - x 
	45.	 F1x2 =
x + 4
x2 + 3x + 2
	46.	 F1x2 =
1 - x
x2 + 5x + 6
	47.	 g1x2 = 2x2 + 1
x
	48.	 g1x2 =
1
x2 + 1 
In Exercises 49–54, use the vertical-line test to determine 
whether the given graph represents a function.
	49.	
x
y
(3, 2)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(2, 2)
(2, 2)
0
1
1
 
	50.	
(3, 2)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(2, 2)
(4, 4)
(4, 4)
x
y
0
1
1 

210	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	51.	
x
y
0 
	52.	
x
y
0 
	53.	
y
x
0 
	54.	
y
x
0
 
In Exercises 55–58, the graph of a function is given. Find the 
indicated function values.
	55.	 f1-42,  f1-12,  f132,  f152
1
y
0
1
x
(5, 7)
(3, 5)
	56.	 g1-22, g112, g132, g142
1
0
1
x
y
(4, 5)
(3, 0)
	57.	 h1-22, h1-12, h102, h112
1
0
1
x
y
(1, 4)
(0, 3)
	58.	 f1-12,  f102,  f112
1
0
1
x
y
(0, 0)
	59.	 Let h1x2 = x2 - x + 1. Find x such that 1x, 72 is on the 
graph of h. 
	60.	 Let H1x2 = x2 + x + 8. Find x such that 1x, 72 is on the 
graph of H. 
	61.	 Let f1x2 = -21x + 122 + 7.
a.	 Is 11, 12 a point of the graph of f ? 
b.	 Find all x such that 1x, 12 is on the graph of f. 
c.	 Find all y-intercepts of the graph of f. 
d.	 Find all x-intercepts of the graph of f. 
	62.	 Let f1x2 = -3x2 - 12x.
a.	 Is 1-2, 102 a point of the graph of f ? 
b.	 Find x such that 1x, 122 is on the graph of g. 
c.	 Find the y-intercept of the graph of f. 
d.	 Find all x-intercepts of the graph of f. 
In Exercises 63–70, find the domain and the range of each func-
tion from its graph. The axes are marked in one-unit intervals.
	63.	
y
x
  
	64.	
y
x
  
	65.	
y
x 
	66.	
y
x
  

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 211
	67.	
y
x
  
	68.	
y
x
  
	69.	
y
x
  
	70.	
y
x
  
For Exercises 71–78, refer to the graph of y = f 1x2 in the 
­figure. The axes are marked off in one-unit intervals.
y
x
y 
 f(x)
	71.	 Find the domain of f. 
	72.	 Find the range of f. 
	73.	 Find the x-intercepts of f. 
	74.	 Find the y-intercepts of f. 
	75.	 Find f1-72,  f112, and f152. 
	76.	 Find f1-42,  f1-12, and f132.
	77.	 Solve the equation f1x2 = 3. 
	78.	 Solve the equation f1x2 = -2. 
In Exercises 79–84, refer to the graph of y = g1x2 in the 
­figure. The axes are marked off in one-unit intervals.
y
x
	79.	 Find the domain of g. 
	80.	 Find the range of g. 
	81.	 Find g1-42, g112, and g132.
	82.	 Find 0 g1-52-g1520 . 
	83.	 Solve g1x2 = -4. 
	84.	 Solve g1x2 = 6. 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 85–88, state whether the given relation is a 
­function and explain why.
	85.	 To each day of the year there corresponds the high tempera-
ture in your hometown on that day.
	86.	 To each year since 1950 there corresponds the cost of a first-class 
postage stamp on January 1 of that year.
	87.	 To each letter of the word NUTS there corresponds the states 
whose names start with that letter.
	88.	 To each day of the week there corresponds the first names of 
people currently living in the United States born on that day 
of the week.
	89.	 Square tiles. The area A1x2 of a square tile is a function of 
the length x of the square’s side. Write a function rule for the 
area of a square tile. Find and interpret A142.
	90.	 Cube. The volume V1x2 of a cube is a function of the length 
x of the cube’s edge. Write a function rule for the volume of 
a cube. Evaluate the function for a cube with sides of length 
3 inches.      

212	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	 91.	 Surface area. Is the total surface area S of a cube a func-
tion of the edge length x of the cube? If it is not a function, 
explain why not. If it is a function, write the function rule 
S1x2 and evaluate S132.
	 92.	 Measurement. One meter equals about 39.37 inches. 
Write a function rule for converting inches to meters. 
Evaluate the function for 59 inches.
	 93.	 Motion of a projectile. A stone thrown upward with an 
initial velocity of 128 feet per second will attain a height of 
h feet in t seconds, where
h1t2 = 128t - 16t2, 0 … t … 8.
a.	 What is the domain of h? 
b.	 Find h122, h142, and h162.
c.	 How long will it take the stone to hit the ground? 
d.	 Sketch a graph of y = h1t2. 
	 94.	 Drug prescription. A certain drug has been prescribed to 
treat an infection. The patient receives an injection of 16 milli-
liters of the drug every four hours. During this same four-hour 
period, the kidneys filter out one-fourth of the drug. Find the 
concentration of the drug after 4 hours, 8 hours, 12 hours,  
16 hours, and 20 hours. Sketch the graph of the concentration 
of the drug in the bloodstream as a function of time. 
	 95.	 Numbers. The sum of two numbers x and y is 28. Write 
the product P of these numbers as a function of x. 
	 96.	 Area of a rectangle. The dimensions of a rectangle are  
x and y and its perimeter is 60 meters. Write the area A of 
the rectangle as a function of x. 
	 97.	 Box volume. A closed box with a square base of side  
x inches is to hold 64 in3. Write the surface area S of the 
box as a function of x. 
	 98.	 Inscribed rectangle. In the figure, a rectangle is inscribed 
in a semicircle of diameter 2r. 
a.	 Write the perimeter P of the rectangle as a function of x.
b.	 Write the area A of the rectangle as a function of x.
y
x
(x, y)
x2  y2  r2, y  0
	 99.	 Piece of wire. A piece of wire 20 inches long is to be cut 
into two pieces. (See the figure.) The piece of length x is to 
form a circle, and the other is to form a square. Write A, the 
sum of the areas of the two figures, as a function of x. 
20
20  x
x
	100.	 Area of metal. An open cylindrical tank with circular base 
of radius r is to be constructed of metal to contain a volume of 
64  in3. Write the surface area A of the metal as a function of r. 
h
r
	101.	 Cost of pool. A 288-ft3 pool is to be built with a square 
bottom of side length x. The sides are built with tiles and 
the bottom with cement. The cost per unit of tiles is +6>ft2, 
and cost of the bottom is +2>ft2. Write the total cost C as a 
function of x. 
	102.	 Distance between cars. Two cars are traveling along two 
roads that cross each other at right angles at point A. Both 
cars are traveling toward A for t seconds at 30 ft/sec. Initially, 
their distances from A are 1500 ft and 2100 ft, respectively. 
Write the distance d between the cars as a function of t. 
y
x
A
d
1500
2100
	103.	 Distance. Write the distance d from the point 12, 12 to the 
point 1x, y2 on the graph of f1x2 = x3 - 3x + 6 as a func-
tion of x. 
(2, 1)
d
0
x
y
f (x)  x3  3x  6
(x, y)
	104.	 Time of travel. An island is at point A, 5 mi from the near-
est point B on a straight beach. A store is at point C, 8 mi up 
the beach from point B. Julio can row at 4 mi>hr and walk 
5 mi>hr. He rows to the point P, x mi up the beach from 
point B and walks from P to C. Write the total time T of 
travel from A to C as a function of x. 
5 mi
A
B
P
C
x mi
(8  x) mi
	105.	 Price–demand. Analysts for an electronics company  
determined that the price–demand function for its 60-inch 
LED televisions is
p1x2 = 1275 - 25x, 1 … x … 30,
where p is the wholesale price per TV in dollars and x, in 
thousands, is the number of TVs that can be sold.
a.	 Find and interpret p152, p1152, and p1302.
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = p1x2. 
c.	 Solve the equation p1x2 = 650 and interpret your result.      

	
Section 2.4    ■    Functions 213
	106.	 Revenue. 
a.	 Using the price–demand function p1x2 = 1275 - 25x,
1 … x … 30, of Exercise 105, write the company’s revenue 
function R1x2 and state its domain.
b.	 Find and interpret R112, R152, R1102, R1152, R1202, 
R1252, and R1302. 
c.	 Using the data from part (b), sketch the graph of 
y = R1x2. 
d.	 Solve the equation R1x2 = 4700 and interpret your result. 
	107.	 Breaking even. Peerless Publishing Company intends to pub-
lish Harriet Henrita’s next novel. The estimated cost is +75,000 
plus +5.50 for each copy printed. The selling price per copy is 
+15. The bookstores retain 40, of the selling price as com-
mission. Let x represent the number of copies printed and sold.
a.	 Find the cost function C1x2. 
b.	 Find the revenue function R1x2. 
c.	 Find the profit function P1x2. 
d.	 How many copies of the novel must be sold for Peerless 
to break even? 
e.	 What is the company profit if 46,000 copies are sold?
	108.	 Breaking even. Capital Records Company plans to  
produce a CD by the popular rapper Rapit. The fixed  
cost is +500,000, and the variable cost is +0.50 per CD.  
The company sells each CD to record stores for +5. Let x 
represent the number of CDs produced and sold.
a.	 How many disks must be sold for the company to break even?
b.	 How many CDs must be sold for the company to make a 
profit of +750,000? 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 109–112, find an expression for f1x2 by solving 
for y and replacing y with f1x2. Then find the domain of f 
and compute f142.
	109.	 x =
2
y - 4	
110.	 xy - 3 = 2y
	111.	 1x2 + 12y + x = 2	
112.	 yx2 - 1x = -2y
In Exercises 113–118, state whether f and g represent the 
same function. Explain your reasons.
	113.	 f1x2 = 3x - 4, 0 … x … 8, g1x2 = 3x - 4
	114.	 f1x2 = 3x2,  g1x2 = 3x2, -5 … x … 5
	115.	 f1x2 = x - 1,  g1x2 = x2 - 1
x + 1
	116.	 f1x2 =
x + 2
x2 - x - 6,  g1x2 =
1
x - 3
	117.	 f1x2 = x2 + 1, g1x2 = 8x - 14, both with domain 53, 56
	118.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 8, g1x2 = 3x + 7, both with domain 51, 26
	119.	 Let f1x2 = ax2 + ax - 3. If f122 = 15, find a. 
	120.	 Let g1x2 = x2 + bx + b2. If g162 = 28, find b.
	121.	 Let h1x2 = 3x + 2a
2x - b . If h162 = 0 and h132 is undefined, 
	
	 find a and b.
	122.	 Let f1x2 = 2x - 3. Find f1x22 and 3f1x242.
	123.	 If g1x2 = x2 - 1
x2, show that g1x2 + g a1
x b = 0.
	124.	 If f1x2 = x - 1
x + 1, show that f ax - 1
x + 1b = -1
x.
	125.	 If f1x2 = x + 3
4x - 5 and t = 3 + 5x
4x - 1, show that f1t2 = x.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	126.	 Write an equation of a function with each domain. Answers 
will vary.
a.	 32, ∞2 
	
b.	 12, ∞2
c.	 1- ∞, 24 
	
d.	 1- ∞, 22
	127.	 Consider the graph of the function
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0.
a.	 Write an equation whose solution yields the  
x-­intercepts. 
b.	 Write an equation whose solution is the y-intercept. 
c.	 Write (if possible) a condition under which the graph of 
y = f1x2 has no x-intercepts. 
d.	 Write (if possible) a condition under which the graph of 
y = f1x2 has no y-intercepts. 
	128.	 Give an example (if possible) of a function matching each 
description. Some have many different correct answers.
a.	 Its graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis. 
b.	 Its graph is symmetric with respect to the x-axis. 
c.	 Its graph is symmetric with respect to the origin. 
d.	 Its graph consists of a single point. 
e.	 Its graph is a horizontal line. 
f.	 Its graph is a vertical line. 
	129.	 Let X = 5a, b6 and Y = 51, 2, 36
a.	 How many functions are there from X to Y? 
b.	 How many functions are there from Y to X? 
	130.	 If a set X has m elements and a set Y has n elements, how 
many functions can be defined from X to Y? Justify. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 131–134, find the equation of the line passing 
through the given points in slope–intercept form.
	131.	 10, 02 and 12, -22 
	132.	 1-1, 32 and 14, -22 
	133.	 1-3, 22 and 11, 42 
	134.	 13, -52 and 18, -32 
In Exercises 135–138, find
a.	f1 −x2.        b.  −f1x2.
	135.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x 
 
 
 
	136.	 f1x2 = 3x4 - 7x2 + 5 
 
 
 
	137.	 f1x2 = x3 - 2x 
 
 
 
	138.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 5x2 + x 
 
 
                            
  

214	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Increasing and Decreasing Functions
Classifying functions according to how one variable changes with respect to the other vari-
able can be very useful. Imagine a particle moving from left to right along the graph of 
a function. This means that the x-coordinate of the point on the graph is getting larger. If 
the corresponding y-coordinate of the point is getting larger, getting smaller, or staying the 
same, then the function is called increasing, decreasing, or constant, respectively.
1	
Determine whether a function 
is increasing or decreasing on 
an interval.
Algebra in Coughing
Coughing is the body’s way of removing foreign material or mucus from the lungs and 
upper airway passages or reacting to an irritated airway. When you cough, the wind-
pipe contracts to increase the velocity of the outgoing air.
The average flow velocity, v, can be modeled by the equation
v = c1r0 - r2r2 mm/sec,
where r0 is the rest radius of the windpipe in millimeters, r is its contracted radius, and 
c is a positive constant. In Example 3, we find the value of r that maximizes the ­velocity 
of the air going out. The diameter of the windpipe of a normal adult male ­varies 
between 25 mm and 27 mm, while that of a normal adult female varies between  
21 mm and 23 mm.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Graph of a function (Section 2.4, page 201)
2	 Evaluating a function (Section 2.4, page 198)
Objectives
1	 Determine whether a function is 
­increasing or decreasing on an interval.
2	 Use a graph to locate relative maximum 
and minimum values.
3	 Identify even and odd functions.
4	 Find the average rate of change of a function.
Properties of Functions
2.5
S e c t i o n
Let f  be a function and let x1 and x2 be any two numbers in an open interval 1a, b2 
contained in the domain of f. See Figure 2.55. The symbols a and b may represent 
real numbers, - ∞, or ∞. Then
  (i)  f is called an increasing function on 1a, b2 if x1 6 x2 implies f1x12 6 f1x22.
 (ii)  f is called a decreasing function on 1a, b2 if x1 6 x2 implies f1x12 7 f1x22.
(iii)  f  is constant on 1a, b2 if x1 6 x2 implies f1x12 = f1x22. 
Increasing, Decreasing, and Constant Functions

	
Section 2.5    ■    Properties of Functions 215
Geometrically, the graph of an increasing function on an open interval 1a, b2 rises as 
x-values increase on 1a, b2. This is because, by definition, as x-values increase from x1 to 
x2, the y-values also increase, from f1x12 to f1x22. Similarly, the graph of a decreasing 
function on 1a, b2 falls as x-values increase. The graph of a constant function is horizontal, 
or flat, over the interval 1a, b2.
Not every function always increases or always decreases. The function that assigns the 
height of a ball tossed in the air to the length of time it is in the air is an example of a function 
that increases, but also decreases, over different intervals of its domain. See Figure 2.56.
Figure 2.55  Increasing, decreasing, and constant functions
x
y
a
b
Increasing function on (a, b)
(a)
x1
x2
f(x1)
f(x2)
b
x
y
a
Decreasing function on (a, b)
(b)
x1
x2
f(x1)
f(x2)
b
x
y
a
x1
f(x1)
f(x2)
x2
Constant function on (a, b)
(c)
Figure 2.56  The function f1t2 
increases on 10, 32 and decreases  
on 13, 62.
t
6
4
Time in air (in seconds)
2 3
0
h
y  h(t)
8
12
Height of ball (in feet)
16
(3, h(3))
4
When specifying the intervals over 
which a function f is increasing, 
decreasing, or constant, you need to 
use the intervals in the domain of f, 
not in the range of f.
Side  
Note
From the graph of the function g in Figure 2.57(a), find the intervals over which g is increasing, 
is decreasing, or is constant.
y g(x)
2
4
0
4
y
2
4
2
4
x
(2, 2)
(3, 2)
(a)
 
2
0
4
y
2
4
x
(b)
Figure 2.57 
Solution
The function g is increasing on the interval 1- ∞, -22. It is constant on the interval 1-2, 32. 
It is decreasing on the interval 13, ∞2.
Practice Problem 1  Using the graph in Figure 2.57(b), find the intervals over which  
f  is increasing, is decreasing, or is constant.
Tracking the Behavior of a Function
EXAMPLE 1
Relative Maximum and Minimum Values
The y-coordinate of a point that is not lower than any nearby point on a graph is called a 
relative maximum value of the function. Such points are called the relative maximum points 
of the graph. Similarly, the y-coordinate of a point that is not higher than any nearby points 
on a graph is called a relative minimum value of the function. Such points are called relative 
minimum points of the graph. Relative maximum and minimum values are the y-coordinates 
of points corresponding to the peaks and troughs, respectively, of the graph.
2	
Use a graph to locate relative 
maximum and minimum 
values.

216	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The value f1a2 is called an extreme value of f  if it is either a relative maximum 
value or a relative minimum value.
The graph of a function can help you find or approximate maximum or minimum values 
(if any) of the function. For example, the graph of a function f  in Figure 2.58 shows that
•  f  has two relative maxima:
 (i)  at x = 1 with relative maximum value f112 = 3
(ii)  at x = 4 with relative maximum value f142 = 7
•  f  has two relative minima:
 (i)  at x = 2 with relative minimum value f122 = 1
(ii)  at x = 6 with relative minimum value f162 = -2
In Figure 2.58, each of the points 11, 32, 12, 12, 14, 72, and 16, -22 is called a turn-
ing point. At a turning point, a graph changes direction from increasing to decreasing or  
from decreasing to increasing. In calculus, you study techniques for finding the exact  
points at which a function has a relative maximum or a relative minimum value (if any). 
For the present, however, we settle for approximations of these points by using a graphing 
utility.
If a is in the domain of a function f, we say that the value f1a2 is a relative ­maximum 
of f if there is an interval 1x1, x22 containing a such that
f 1a2 Ú f 1x2 for every x in the interval 1x1, x22.
We say that the value f 1a2 is a relative minimum of f if there is an interval 1x1, x22 
containing a such that
f 1a2 … f1x2 for every x in the interval 1x1, x22.
Relative Maximum and Relative Minimum
Figure 2.58  Relative maximum 
and minimum values
Points whose y-coordinates are
relative minimum values
Points whose y-coordinates are
relative maximum values
y
x
(6, 2)
(2, 1)
(1, 3)
(4, 7)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Use a graphing utility to approximate the relative maximum and the relative minimum 
point on the graph of the function f1x2 = x3 - x2.
Solution
The graph of f  is shown in Figure 2.59. By using the TRACE and ZOOM features of a 
graphing utility, we see that the function f  has a
 Relative minimum point estimated to be 10.67, -0.152.
 Relative maximum point estimated to be 10, 02.
Practice Problem 2  Repeat Example 2 for g1x2 = -2x3 + 3x2.
Approximating Relative Extrema
EXAMPLE 2
The average flow velocity, v, of outgoing air through the windpipe is modeled by (see 
introduction to this section)
v = c1r0 - r2r2 mm/sec  r0
2 … r … r0,
where r0 is the rest radius of the windpipe, r is its contracted radius, and c is a positive 
constant. For Mr. Osborn, assume that c = 1 and r0 = 13 mm. Use a graphing utility to 
estimate the value of r that will maximize the airflow v when Mr. Osborn coughs.
Algebra in Coughing
EXAMPLE 3
Figure 2.59 

	
Section 2.5    ■    Properties of Functions 217
Even–Odd Functions and Symmetry
This topic, even–odd functions, uses ideas of symmetry discussed in Section 2.2.
3	
Identify even and odd 
functions.
Solution
The graph of v for 0 … r … 13 is shown in Figure 2.60. By using the TRACE and ZOOM 
features, we see that the maximum point on the graph is estimated at 18.67, 3252. So 
Mr. Osborn’s windpipe contracts to a radius of 8.67 mm to maximize the airflow velocity.
Practice Problem 3  Repeat Example 3 for Mrs. Osborn. Again, let c = 1 but  
r0 = 11.
0
400
13
(8.67, 325)
Figure 2.60  Flow velocity
Show that the squaring function f1x2 = x2 is an even function and sketch its graph.
Solution
The function f 1x2 = x2 is even because
 f1-x2 = 1-x22	
Replace x with -x.
 = x2
	
1-x22 = x2
 = f1x2
	
Replace x2 with f 1x2.
To sketch the graph of f1x2 = x2, we make a table of values. See Table 2.8(a). We then plot 
the points that are in the first quadrant and join them with a smooth curve. Next, we use  
y-axis symmetry to find additional points on the graph of f  in the second quadrant, which 
are listed in Table 2.8(b). See Figure 2.61. Note that the scales on the x- and y -axes are 
different.
Graphing the Squaring Function
EXAMPLE 4
Table 2.8(a) 
x
0
1
2
1
3
2
2
5
2
3
f1x2 = x2
0
1
4
1
9
4
4
25
4
9
A function f  is called an even function if for each x in the domain of f, -x is also 
in the domain of f  and
f1-x2 = f1x2.
The graph of an even function is symmetric about the y-axis.
Even Function
Figure 2.61  Graph of f1x2 = x2
1
3
(x, f(x))
1
10
y
2
(3, 9)
(
3, 9)
x
0

218	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The graph of a nonzero function 
cannot by symmetric with respect to 
the x-axis because the two ordered 
pairs 1x, y2 and 1x, -y2 would 
then be points of the graph on the 
same vertical line.
Side  
Note
Show that the cubing function defined by g1x2 = x3 is an odd function and sketch its graph.
Solution
The function g1x2 = x3 is an odd function because
 g1-x2 = 1-x23	
Replace x with -x.
 = -x3
	
1-x23 = -x3
 = -g1x2	
Replace x3 with g1x2.
To sketch the graph of g1x2 = x3, we plot points in the first quadrant and then use symmetry 
about the origin to extend the graph to the third quadrant. The graph is shown in Figure 2.62.
(x, g(x))
x
0
y
x
Figure 2.62  Graph of g1x2 = x3
Practice Problem 5  Show that the function f1x2 = -x3 is an odd function and  
sketch its graph.
Graphing the Cubing Function
EXAMPLE 5
Table 2.8(b) 
x 
0
-1
2
-1
-3
2
-2
-5
2
-3
f1x2 = x2
0
1
4
1
9
4
4
25
4
9
Practice Problem 4  Show that the function f1x2 = -x2 is an even function and  
sketch its graph.
A function f  is an odd function if for each x in the domain of f, -x is also in the 
domain of f  and
f1-x2 = -f1x2.
The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin.
Odd Function
The function h1x2 = 2x + 3, whose graph is sketched in Figure 2.63, is neither even 
nor odd, and its graph is neither symmetric with respect to the y-axis nor symmetric with re-
spect to the origin. To see this algebraically, notice that h1-x2 = 21-x2 + 3 = -2x + 3, 
which is not equivalent to h1x2 or -h1x2 1because -h1x2 = -2x - 32.
Figure 2.63  Graph of  
h1x2 = 2x + 3
5
2
1
2
1
2
5
2
1
2
8
0
y
x

	
Section 2.5    ■    Properties of Functions 219
Average Rate of Change
Suppose your salary increases from +25,000 a year to +40,000 a year over a five-year period. 
You then have the following:
Change in salary: +40,000 - +25,000 = +15,000
Average rate of change in salary:
+40,000 - +25,000
5
= +15,000
5
= +3000 per year
Regardless of when you actually received the raises during the five-year period, the final 
salary is the same as if you received your average annual increase of +3000 each year.
The average rate of change can be defined in a more general setting.
4	
Find the average rate of 
change of a function.
Determine whether each function is even, odd, or neither.
a.   g1x2 = x3 - 4x	
b.   f 1x2 = x2 + 5	
c.   h1x2 = 2x3 + x2
Solution
a.	 g1x2 is an odd function because
 g1-x2 = 1-x23 - 41-x2	
Replace x with -x.
 = -x3 + 4x
	
Simplify.
 = - 1x3 - 4x2
	
Distributive property
 = -g1x2
b.	 f 1x2 is an even function because
 f 1-x2 = 1-x22 + 5	
Replace x with -x.
 = x2 + 5
	
Simplify.
 = f 1x2
c.	  h1-x2 = 21-x23 + 1-x22	
Replace x with -x.
 = -2x3 + x2
	
Simplify.
Comparing h1x2 = 2x3 + x2, h1-x2 = -2x3 + x2, and -h1x2 = -2x3 - x2, we 
note that h1-x2 ≠h1x2 and h1-x2 ≠-h1x2. Hence, h1x2 is neither even nor odd.
Practice Problem 6  Repeat Example 6 for each function.
a.   g1x2 = 3x4 - 5x2	
b.   f 1x2 = 4x5 + 2x3	
c.   h1x2 = 2x + 1
Testing for Evenness and Oddness
EXAMPLE 6
Note that the average rate of change of f  as x changes from a to b is the slope of the 
secant line passing through the two points 1a, f 1a22 and 1b, f 1b22 on the graph of f. See 
Figure 2.64.
Figure 2.64 
x
y
O
y  f(x)
(b, f(b))
(a, f(a))
Secant line
Let 1a, f 1a22 and 1b, f 1b22 be two points on the graph of a function f. Then the 
average rate of change of f 1x2 as x changes from a to b is defined by
f 1b2 - f 1a2
b - a
, a ≠b.
Average Rate of Change of a Function

220	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The average rate of change calculated in Example 8 is a difference quotient at 5. The 
difference quotient is an important concept in calculus.
Find the average rate of change of f 1t2 = 2t2 - 3 as t changes from t = 5 to t = x, x ≠5.
Solution
 Average rate of change = f 1b2 - f 1a2
b - a
	
Definition
 = f 1x2 - f 152
x - 5
	
b = x, a = 5
 Average rate of change = 12x2 - 32 - 12 # 52 - 32
x - 5
	
Substitute for f 1x2 and f 152.
 = 2x2 - 3 - 2 # 52 + 3
x - 5
 =
21x2 - 522
x - 5
	
Simplify.
 = 21x + 521x - 52
x - 5
	
Difference of squares
 = 2x + 10
	
Simplify: x - 5 ≠0.
Practice Problem 8  Find the average rate of change of f 1t2 = 1 - t as t changes  
from t = 2 to t = x, x ≠2.
Finding the Average Rate of Change
EXAMPLE 8
Find the average rate of change of a function  
f as x changes from a to b.
Step 1  Find f 1a2 and f 1b2.
Step 2  Use the values from Step 1 in the definition 
of average rate of change.
Find the average rate of change of f 1x2 = 2 - 3x2 as 
x changes from x = 1 to x = 3.
1.   f 112 = 2 - 31122 = -1  a = 1
 f 132 = 2 - 31322 = -25   b = 3
2.  f 1b2 - f 1a2
b - a
= -25 - 1-12
3 - 1
= -24
2
	
 = -12
Finding the Average Rate of Change
OBJECTIVE
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 7
EXAMPLE
Practice Problem 7  Find the average rate of change of f 1x2 = 1 - x2 as x  
changes from 2 to 4.
For a function f, the difference quotient is
f 1x + h2 - f 1x2
h
, h ≠0.
Equivalently, the difference quotient can be written in the form f1x2 - f1a2
x - a
, x ≠a.
Difference Quotient

	
Section 2.5    ■    Properties of Functions 221
Let f 1x2 = 2x2 - 3x + 5. Find and simplify f 1x + h2 - f 1x2
h
, h ≠0.
Solution
First, we find f 1x + h2.
 f 1x2 = 2x2 - 3x + 5
	
Original equation
  f 1x + h2 = 21x + h22 - 31x + h2 + 5
	
Replace x with 1x + h2.
 = 21x2 + 2xh + h22 - 31x + h2 + 5	
1x + h22 = x2 + 2xh + h2
 = 2x2 + 4xh + 2h2 - 3x - 3h + 5
	
Use the distributive property.
Then we substitute into the difference quotient.
	
f 1x + h2	
f 1x2
$+1++++++%+++++1++&	
 $+1+%++1&
 
f 1x + h2 - f 1x2
h
= 12x2 + 4xh + 2h2 - 3x - 3h + 52 - 12x2 - 3x + 52
h
 = 2x2 + 4xh + 2h2 - 3x - 3h + 5 - 2x2 + 3x - 5
h
	
Subtract.
 = 4xh - 3h + 2h2
h
	
Simplify.
 = h14x - 3 + 2h2
h
	
Factor out h.
 = 4x - 3 + 2h
	
Divide out the common factor h.
Practice Problem 9  Repeat Example 9 for f 1x2 = -x2 + x - 3.
Evaluating and Simplifying a Difference Quotient
EXAMPLE 9
Answers to Practice Problems
1. Increasing on 12, ∞2,  decreasing on 1- ∞, -32, and constant on 1-3, 22    2. Relative minimum at 10, 02; relative maximum at 11, 12 
3. Mrs. Osborn’s windpipe should be contracted to a radius of 7.33 mm for maximizing the airflow velocity.
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 A function f is decreasing if x1 6 x2 implies that f1x12 
 f1x22.
	 2.	 f1a2 is a relative maximum of f if there is an interval 
1x1, x22 containing a such that 
 for every x 
in the interval 1x1, x22.
	 3.	 A function f is even if 
.
	 4.	 The average rate of change of f as x changes from x = a  
to x = b is 
, a ≠b.
	 5.	 True or False. The average rate of change of f as x changes 
from a to b is the slope of the line through the points 
1a, f1a22 and 1b, f1b22. 
	 6.	 True or False. A relative maximum or a relative mini-
mum point on a graph is a turning point on the graph of a 
­function. 
Exercises
section 2.5 
O
x
y
y  x3
O
x
y
y  x2
4. f1-x2 = - 1-x22 = -x2 = f1x2;  
therefore, f is even; 
5. f1-x2 = - 1-x32 = x3 = -f1x2;  
therefore, f is odd;
6. a. Even  b. Odd  c. Neither     
7. -6    8. -1    9. -2x + 1 - h

222	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	 7. 
x
y
	
	
	 8.	
y
x
	
	
	19.	 The graph of Exercise 11 
	20.	 The graph of Exercise 12 
	21.	 The graph of Exercise 13 
	22.	 The graph of Exercise 14 
In Exercises 23–32, the graph of a function is given. State 
whether the function is odd, even, or neither.
In Exercises 7–14, the graph of a function is given. For each func-
tion, determine the intervals over which the function is increasing, 
decreasing, or constant.
	 9.	
(2, 10)
y
x
	10.	
(3, 2)
y
x
	11.	
2
0
4
x
2
2
4
y
2
4
(
2, 2)
(2, 2)
	12.	
0
2
x
2
2
4
y
4
2
6
(
1, 3)
(4, 3)
	13.	
2
0
4
x
2
2
4
6
y
2
4
(
3, 4)
(2, 5)
(
    , 
2)
2
1
	14.	
1 0
3
x
3
1
1
3
y
1
3
(1, 2)
(
1, 1)
(2, 
3)
(
3, 
2)
In Exercises 15–22, locate relative maximum and relative 
minimum points on the graph. State whether each relative 
extremum point is a turning point.
	15.	 The graph of Exercise 7 
	16.	 The graph of Exercise 8 
	17.	 The graph of Exercise 9
	18.	 The graph of Exercise 10
   
	23.	
y
x
	24.	
x
y
	25.	
x
y
	26.	
y
x
	27.	
(1, 0)
(
1, 0)
y
x
	28.	
(2, 0)
(
2, 0)
y
x
	29.	
(
3, 0)
(
2, 
1)
(
1, 0)
(0, 2)
(1, 0)
(3, 0)
(2, 
1)
y
x
	30.	
x
y
(
1, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 0)

	
Section 2.5    ■    Properties of Functions 223
	49.	
y
x    
	
50.	
y
x
     
	
51.	
y
x
     
	 52.	
(0, 3)
(3, 0)
y
x
7
1
0
1
8
      
	 53.	
(0, 1)
1
0
3
5
y
1
1
3
5
3
5
3
5 x
     
	31.	
1
O
1
x
1
y
1
(0, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 
1)
(
1, 
1)
 
	32.	
2
1
2
1
x
2
1
y
2
1
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(2, 1)
(
1, 
1)
(
2, 
1)
In Exercises 33–46, determine algebraically whether the given 
function is odd, even, or neither.
	33.	 f1x2 = 2x4 + 4 
	
34.	 g1x2 = 3x4 - 5 
	35.	 f1x2 = 5x3 - 3x 
	
36.	 g1x2 = 2x3 + 4x 
	37.	 f1x2 = 2x + 4 
	
38.	 g1x2 = 3x + 7 
	39.	 f1x2 =
1
x2 + 4 
	
40.	 g1x2 = x2 + 2
x4 + 1 
	41.	 f1x2 =
x3
x2 + 1 
	
42.	 g1x2 =
x4 + 3
2x3 - 3x 
	43.	 f1x2 =
x
x5 - 3x3 
	
44.	 g1x2 = x3 + 2x
2x5 - 3x 
	45.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2x
5x4 + 7 
	
46.	 g1x2 = 3x2 + 7
x - 3 
In Exercises 47–54, the graph of a function is given; each  
grid line represents 1 unit. Use the graph to find each of  
the following.
a.  The domain and the range of the function
b.  The intercepts, if any
c.  The intervals on which the function is increasing, decreasing, 
or constant
d.  The relative extrema points, if any
e.  Whether the function is odd, even, or neither
	47.	
y
x
   
	48.	
y
x
     

224	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	54.	
2
x
y
(1.5, 0)
(
1.5, 0)
0
1
3
5
2
4
2
6
   
In Exercises 55–66, find the average rate of change of the 
function as x changes from a to b.
	55.	 f1x2 = -2x + 7; a = -1, b = 3 
	56.	 f1x2 = 4x - 9; a = -2, b = 2 
	57.	 f1x2 = 3x + c; a = 1, b = 5 
	58.	 f1x2 = mx + c; a = -1, b = 7 
	59.	 h1x2 = x2 - 1; a = -2, b = 0 
	60.	 h1x2 = 2 - x2; a = 3, b = 4 
	61.	 f1x2 = 13 - x22; a = 1, b = 3 
	62.	 f1x2 = 1x - 222; a = -1, b = 5 
	63.	 g1x2 = x3; a = -1, b = 3 
	64.	 g1x2 = -x3; a = -1, b = 3 
	65.	 h1x2 = 1
x; a = 2, b = 6 
	66.	 h1x2 =
4
x + 3; a = -2, b = 4 
In Exercises 67–74, find and simplify the difference 
quotient of the form 
f1x2 −f1a2
x −a
, x 3 a.
	67.	 f1x2 = 2x, a = 3 
	68.	 f1x2 = 3x + 2, a = 2 
	69.	 f1x2 = -x2, a = 1
	70.	 f1x2 = 2x2, a = -1
	71.	 f1x2 = 3x2 + x, a = 2
	72.	 f1x2 = -2x2 + x, a = 3
	73.	 f1x2 = 4
x, a = 1 
	74.	 f1x2 = - 4
x, a = 1 
In Exercises 75–88, find and simplify the difference 
quotient of the form 
f1x + h2 −f1x2
h
, h 3 0.
	75.	 f1x2 = x 
	
76.	 f1x2 = 3x + 2 
	77.	 f1x2 = -2x + 3 
	
78.	 f1x2 = -5x - 6 
	79.	 f1x2 = mx + b 
	
80.	 f1x2 = -2ax + c 
	81.	 f1x2 = x2 
	
82.	 f1x2 = x2 - x 
	83.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 3x	
84.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 2x + 5
	85.	 f1x2 = 4 
	
86.	 f1x2 = -3 
	87.	 f1x2 = 1
x 
	
88.	 f1x2 = - 1
x 
Applying the Concepts
Motion From a Graph. For Exercises 89–98, use the accompa-
nying graph of a particle moving on a coordinate line with veloc-
ity V = f1t2 in ft/sec at time t seconds. The axes are marked off 
at 1-unit intervals. Use these terms to describe the motion state: 
moving forward/backward, increasing/decreasing speed, and 
resting. Recall that speed = ∣velocity∣.
y
t
	89.	Find the domain of v = f1t2. Interpret.
	90.	Find the range of v = f1t2. Interpret.
	91.	Find the intervals over which the graph is above the t-axis. 
Interpret.
	92.	Find the intervals over which the graph is below the t-axis. 
Interpret.
	93.	Find the intervals over which v  = f1t2 is increasing. 
Interpret for v 7 0 and for v 6 0. 
	94.	Find the intervals over which v  = f1t2 is decreasing. 
Interpret for v 7 0 and for v 6 0. 
	95.	When does the particle have maximum speed?
	96.	When does the particle have minimum speed?
	97.	Describe the motion of the particle between t = 5 and 
t = 6. 
	98.	Describe the motion of the particle between t = 16 and 
t = 19. 
	99.	Maximizing volume. An open cardboard box is to be  
made from a piece of 12-inch square cardboard by cutting 
equal squares from the four corners and turning up the  
sides. Let x be the length of the side of the square to be  
cut out.
a.	 Show that the volume, V, of the box is given by
V = 4x3 - 48x2 + 144x.
b.	 Find the domain of V. 
c.	 Use a graphing utility to graph the volume function and 
determine the range of V from its graph. 
d.	 Find the value of x for which V has a maximum 
­value.          

	
Section 2.5    ■    Properties of Functions 225
	100.	 Minimizing the sum. Find two positive numbers whose 
product is 32 and whose sum is as small as possible.
a.	 Let one of the numbers be x, show that the sum
	
S = x + 32
x .
b.	 Use a graphing utility to graph the sum function and 
estimate the value of x for which S has a minimum 
value. 
	101.	 Cost. A computer notebook manufacturer has a daily fixed 
cost of +10,500 and a marginal cost of +210 per notebook.
a.	 Find the daily cost C1x2 of manufacturing x notebooks 
per day. 
b.	 Find the cost of producing 50 notebooks per day. 
c.	 Find the average cost of a computer notebook assuming 
that 50 notebooks are manufactured each day. 
d.	 How many notebooks should be manufactured each day 
so that the average cost per notebook is +315? 
	102.	 Geometry. Find an equation of the secant line to the graph 
of f1x2 = -2x2 + 3x + 4 passing through the points on 
the graph with x-coordinates 1 and 3. 
	103.	 Average velocity. A particle is moving in a straight line so 
that its position at time t in seconds is f1t2 = t2 + 3t + 4 
feet to the right of a reference point for t Ú 0.
a.	 Find and interpret f102. 
b.	 Find the distance traveled by the particle in four seconds.
c.	 Find the average velocity of the particle during the first 
three seconds. 
d.	 Find its average velocity between the second and fifth 
seconds. 
	104.	 Population. The population of Sardonia (in millions)  
t years after 2000 is given by P1t2 = 0.01t2 + 0.2t + 50.
a.	 Find and interpret (i) P102, (ii) P142.
b.	 What was the average rate of growth of Sardonia’s popu-
lation between 2000 and 2010? 
Beyond the Basics
	105.	 Let f1x2 = x - 1
x + 1. Show that f12x2 =
3f1x2 + 1
f1x2 + 3 .
	106.	 What function is both odd and even? 
	107.	 Find algebraically the relative maximum point on the graph 
of f1x2 = - 1x + 122 + 5. Does its graph have a relative 
minimum point? 
	108.	 Give an example to illustrate that a relative maximum point 
on a graph need not be a turning point on the graph.
In Exercises 109–112, find the difference quotient 
f1x + h2 −f1x2
h
, h 3 0. Simplify with a rational numerator.
	109.	 f1x2 = 1x
	110.	 f1x2 = 1x - 1
	111.	 f1x2 = - 1
1x 
	112.	 f1x2 = 1
x2 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
Let f be a function with domain 3a, b4 so that a and b are 
endpoints of this domain.
	113.	 Define relative maximum (minimum) at a.
	114.	 Define relative maximum (minimum) at b.
	115.	 Give an example (if possible) of a function f matching each 
description.
a.	 f has endpoint maximum and endpoint minimum.
b.	 f has endpoint minimum but no endpoint maximum.
c.	 f has endpoint maximum but no endpoint minimum.
d.	 f has neither endpoint maximum nor endpoint minimum
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 116–118, find slope–intercept form of the equa-
tion of the line that passes through the given points P and Q.
	116.	 P = 1-1, 32 and Q = 14, -22 
	117.	 P = 16, 22 and Q = 17, -12 
	118.	 P = 13, -52 and Q = 16, -32 
	119.	 Let f1x2 = x3>2. Find (i) f122, (ii) f142, and (iii) f1-42.
	120.	 Let f1x2 = x2>3. Find (i) f122, (ii) f182, and (iii) f1-82.      
 
    

226	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Linear Functions
We know from Section 2.3 that the graph of a linear equation y = mx + b is a straight line 
with slope m and y-intercept b. A linear function has a similar definition. 
The Megatooth Shark
The giant “Megatooth” shark (Carcharodon megalodon), once estimated to be 100 to 
120 feet in length, is the largest meat-eating fish that ever lived. Its actual length has 
been the subject of scientific controversy. Sharks first appeared in the oceans more than 
400 million years ago, almost 200 million years before the dinosaurs. A shark’s skeleton 
is made of cartilage, which decomposes rather quickly, making complete shark fossils 
rare. Consequently, scientists rely on calcified vertebrae, fossilized teeth, and small skin 
scales to reconstruct the evolutionary record of sharks.
The great white shark is the closest living relative to the giant “Megatooth” shark 
and has been used as a model to reconstruct the “Megatooth.” John Maisey, curator at 
the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, used a partial set of “Mega-
tooth” teeth to make a comparison with the jaws of the great white shark. In Example 2, 
we use a formula to calculate the length of the “Megatooth” on the basis of the height 
of the tooth of the largest known “Megatooth” specimen.
A Library of Functions
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Equation of a line (Section 2.3)
2	 Absolute value (Section P.1, page 8)
3	 Graph of an equation (Section 2.2,  
page 165)
Objectives
1	 Relate linear functions to linear equations.
2	 Graph square root and cube root  
functions.
3	 Evaluate and graph piecewise functions.
4	 Graph additional basic functions.
1	
Relate linear functions  
to linear equations.
The domain of a linear function is the interval 1- ∞, ∞2 because the expression mx + b 
is defined for any real number x. Figure 2.65 shows that the graph extends indefinitely to 
the left and right. The range of a nonconstant linear function also is the interval 1- ∞, ∞2 
because the graph extends indefinitely upward and downward. The range of a constant 
function f1x2 = b is the single real number b. See Figure 2.65(c).
Let m and b be real numbers. The function f1x2 = mx + b is called a linear function. 
If m = 0, the function f1x2 = b is called a constant function. If m = 1 and b = 0, 
the resulting function f1x2 = x is called the identity function. See Figure 2.65.
Linear Functions
2.6
S e c t i o n

	
Section 2.6    ■    A Library of Functions 227
G r a p h s  o f  f (x) = mx + b
Figure 2.65  The graph of a linear function is a nonvertical line with slope m and y-intercept b.
x
y
m  0
(a)
O
x
y
m  0
(b)
O
x
y
(c)
m  0
f (x)  b
b
O
x
y
(d)
m  1, b  0
f (x)  x
O
Write a linear function g for which g112 = 4 and g1-32 = -2.
Solution
We need to find the equation of the line passing through the two points
1x1, y12 = 11, 42 and 1x2, y22 = 1-3, -22.
The slope of the line is given by
m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
= -2 - 4
-3 - 1 = -6
-4 = 3
2.
Next, we use the point–slope form of a line.
 y - y1 = m1x - x12	 Point–slope form of a line
 y - 4 = 3
21x - 12 	 Substitute x1 = 1, y1 = 4, and m = 3
2.
 y - 4 = 3
2
 x - 3
2	
Distributive property
 y = 3
2
 x + 5
2	
Add 4 = 8
2 to both sides and simplify.
 g1x2 = 3
2
 x + 5
2	
Function notation
The graph of the function y = g1x2 is shown in Figure 2.66.
Practice Problem 1  Write a linear function g for which g1-22 = 2 and g112 = 8.
Writing a Linear Function
EXAMPLE 1
Figure 2.66  Point–slope form
1
1
1
0
y
x
(1, 4)
(3, 2)
5
2
3
2
g(x)
x 

The largest known “Megatooth” specimen is a tooth that has a total height of 15.6 centi-
meters. Calculate the length of the “Megatooth” shark from which it came by using the 
formula
shark length = 10.9621height of tooth2 - 0.22,
where shark length is measured in meters and tooth height is measured in centimeters.
Determining the Length of the “Megatooth” Shark
EXAMPLE 2

228	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Solution
 Shark length = 10.9621height of tooth2 - 0.22  Formula
 Shark length = 10.962115.62 - 0.22
  Replace height of  
tooth with 15.6.
 = 14.756
  Simplify.
The shark’s length is approximately 14.8 meters 1≈48.6 feet2.
Practice Problem 2  If the “Megatooth” specimen was a tooth measuring  
16.4 centimeters, what was the length of the “Megatooth” shark from which it came?
Square Root and Cube Root Functions
So far, we have learned to graph linear functions: y = mx + b; the squaring function: 
y = x2; and the cubing function: y = x3. We now add some common functions to this list.
Square Root Function  Recall (page 58) that for every nonnegative real number 
x, there is only one principal square root denoted by 1x. Therefore, the equation y = 1x 
defines a function, called the square root function. The domain and range of the square 
root function is 30, ∞2.
2	
Graph square root and  
cube root functions.
Graph f1x2 = 1x.
Solution
To sketch the graph of f1x2 = 1x, we make a table of values. For convenience, we have 
selected the values of x that are perfect squares. See Table 2.9. We then plot the ordered 
pairs 1x, y2 and draw a smooth curve through the plotted points. See Figure 2.67.
Table 2.9 
x
y = f1x2
1x, y2
  0
10 = 0 
10, 02
  1
11 = 1 
11, 12
  4
14 = 2 
14, 22
  9
19 = 3 
19, 32
16
116 = 4 
116, 42
The domain of f1x2 = 1x is 30, ∞2, and its range also is 30, ∞2.
Practice Problem 3  Graph g1x2 = 1-x and find its domain and range.
Cube Root Function  There is only one cube root for each real number x. There-
fore, the equation y = 1
3 x defines a function called the cube root function. The domain 
and range of the cube root function is 1- ∞, ∞2.
Graphing the Square Root Function
EXAMPLE 3
x
12
14
16
10
8
6
4
2
2
0
y
2
3
4
6
5
1
1
Range
Domain
f(x)  x
Figure 2.67  Graph of y = 1x

	
Section 2.6    ■    A Library of Functions 229
Graph f1x2 = 2
3 x.
Solution
We use the point plotting method to graph f1x2 = 1
3 x. For convenience, we select  
values of x that are perfect cubes. See Table 2.10. The graph of f1x2 = 1
3 x is shown in 
Figure 2.68.
Table 2.10 
x
y = f 1x2
1x, y2
-8 
2
3 -8 = -2 1-8, -22
-1 
2
3 -1 = -1 1-1, -12
0
2
3 0 = 0 
10, 02
1
2
3 1 = 1 
11, 12
8
2
3 8 = 2 
18, 22
The domain of f1x2 = 2
3 x is 1- ∞, ∞2, and its range also is 1- ∞, ∞2.
Practice Problem 4  Graph g1x2 = 2
3 -x and find its domain and range.
Piecewise Functions
In the definition of some functions, different rules for assigning output values are used on 
different parts of the domain. Such functions are called piecewise functions; we illustrate 
the procedure for evaluating such functions next.
Graphing the Cube Root Function
EXAMPLE 4
Figure 2.68  Graph of y = 2
3 x
2
4
4
2
0
4
6
8
2
4
6
8
2
x
y
f(x)  3
3	
Evaluate and graph piecewise 
functions.
Evaluate F1a2 for a piecewise function F.
Step 1 Determine which line of the function  
applies to the number a. 
Step 2 Evaluate F1a2 using the line chosen in 
Step 1.
Evaluating a Piecewise Function
Objective
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 5
EXAMPLE
Let
F1x2 = ex2 
if x 6 1
2x + 1
if x Ú 2
Find F102, F112 and F122.
1.	Let a = 0. Because 0 6 1, use the first line, 
F1x2 = x2.
	
Let a = 1, then since a is neither 61 nor Ú2 
a = 1 is not in the domain of the F.
	
Let a = 2. Because 2 Ú 2, use the second line, 
F1x2 = 2x + 1.
2.	F102 = 1022 = 0,	
From F1x2 = x2 
F112 is not defined.
	
F122 = 2122 + 1 = 5	
From F1x2 = 2x + 1
Practice Problem 5
Let f 1x2 = e x2
if x … -1
2x
if x 7 -1. Find f 1-22 and f 132.

230	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Graphing Piecewise Functions
Let’s consider how to graph a piecewise function. The absolute value function, f 1x2 = 0 x0 , 
can be expressed as a piecewise function by using the definition of absolute value:
f 1x2 = 0 x0 = e -x  if  x 6 0
x  if  x Ú 0
The first line in the function means that if x 6 0, we use the equation y = f 1x2 = -x. So 
if x = -3, then
 y = f 1-32 = - 1-32  Substitute -3 for x in f 1x2 = -x
 = 3
  Simplify.
Thus, 1-3, 32 is a point on the graph of y = 0 x0 . However, if x Ú 0, we use the second 
line in the function, which is y = f 1x2 = x. So if x = 2, then
y = f 122 = 2	
Substitute 2 for x in f 1x2 = x
In Peach County, Georgia, a section of the interstate highway has a speed limit of 55 miles 
per hour (mph). If you are caught speeding between 56 and 74 mph, your fine is $50 plus 
$3 for every mile per hour over 55 mph. For 75 mph and higher, your fine is $150 plus $5 
for every mile per hour over 75 mph.
a.	 Find a piecewise function that gives your fine.
b.	 What is the fine for driving 60 mph?
c.	 What is the fine for driving 90 mph?
Solution
a.	 Let f 1x2 be the piecewise function that represents your fine for speeding at x miles 
per hour. We express f 1x2 as a piecewise function:
	
f 1x2 = e50 + 31x - 552,
56 … x 6 75
150 + 51x - 752,
x Ú 75
b.	 The first line of the function means that if 56 … x 6 75, your fine is
	
f 1x2 = 50 + 31x - 552.
	
Suppose you are caught driving 60 mph. Then we have
 f 1x2 = 50 + 31x - 552   Expression used for 56 … x 6 75
 f 1602 = 50 + 3160 - 552  Substitute 60 for x.
 = 65
  Simplify.
	
Your fine for speeding at 60 mph is $65.
c.	 The second line of the function means that if x Ú 75, your fine is 
f 1x2 = 150 + 51x - 752. Suppose you are caught driving 90 mph. Then we have
	
 f 1x2 = 150 + 51x - 752   Expression used for x Ú 75
	
 f 1902 = 150 + 5190 - 752  Substitute 90 for x.
	
 = 225
  Simplify.
	
Your fine for speeding at 90 mph is $225.
Practice Problem 6  Repeat Example 6 if the speeding penalities are changed to  
$50 plus $4 for every mile per hour over 55 mph and $200 plus $5 for every mile  
per hour over 75 mph.
Finding and Evaluating a Piecewise Function
EXAMPLE 6

	
Section 2.6    ■    A Library of Functions 231
So 12, 22 is a point on the graph of y =  x . The two pieces y = -x and y = x are linear 
functions. We graph the appropriate parts of these lines 1y = -x for x 6 0 and y = x for 
x Ú 02 to form the graph of y = 0 x0 . See Figure 2.69.
Figure 2.69  Graph of y = 0 x0
0
(2, 2)
y
x
1
1
Let
F 1x2 = e -2x + 1 if  x 6 1
3x + 1 if  x Ú 1.
Sketch the graph of y = F 1x2.
Solution
In the definition of F, the formula changes at x = 1. We call such numbers the transition 
points of the formula. For the function F, the only transition point is 1. Generally, to graph 
a piecewise function, we graph the function separately over the open intervals determined 
by the transition points and then graph the function at the transition points themselves. For 
the function y = F 1x2, we graph the equation y = -2x + 1 on the interval 1- ∞, 12. See 
Figure 2.70(a). Next, we graph the equation y = 3x + 1 on the interval 11, ∞2 and at the 
transition point 1, where y = F 112 = 3112 + 1 = 4. See Figure 2.70(b).
Graphing a Piecewise Function
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 2.70  Steps for graphing a piecewise function
1
0
y
1
1
x
y  2x 1
y  F(x),  x  1  
(a)
(1, 1)
0
1
y
1
x
(1, 4)
(b)
(1, 4)
(1, 1)
0
y
1
1
x
(c)
Graph of y  F(x)
Combining these portions, we obtain the graph of y = F 1x2, shown in Figure 2.70(c). 
When we come to the end of the part of the graph we are working with, we draw
(i)	
A closed circle if that point is included.
(ii)	 An open circle if the point is excluded.
You may find it helpful to think of this procedure as following the graph of y = -2x + 1 
when x is less than 1 and then jumping to the graph of y = 3x + 1 when x is equal to or 
greater than 1.
Practice Problem 7  Let F 1x2 = e -3x if x … -1
2x if x 7 -1. Sketch the graph of y = F 1x2.
To graph F1x2 on a TI-84 calculator: 
Y1 = 1x 6 121-2x + 12
+ 1x Ú 1213x + 12
Technology
Connection
For the graph to appear correctly,  
change from connected to dot mode.

232	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The graph of a piecewise function g is given in Figure 2.71(a). Write the function  
algebraically.
Writing a Piecewise Function from Its Graph
EXAMPLE 8
Figure 2.71 
y g(x)
0
y
x
(2, 1)
(2, 4)
(3, 0)
(1, 4)
(2, 0)
(a)
y f(x)
0
y
x
(4, 0)
(2, 2)
(3, 2)
(4, 0)
(b)
Solution
The domain of g is 1- ∞, ∞2 with transition points at x = -2 and x = 1. The graph of g 
is made up of three parts.
(i)	
A half-line passing through the points 1-3, 02 and 1-2, 12 on the interval 1- ∞, -24. 
The slope of this line is:
m =
1 - 0
-2 - 1-32 =
1
-2 + 3 = 1.
	
Then	
 y = mx + b	
Slope–intercept form
	
	
 y = x + b
	
m = 1
	
	
 1 = -2 + b	
The point 1x, y2 = 1-2, 12 is on the line.
	
	
 3 = b	
Solve for b.
	
	
 y = x + 3	
Substitute b = 3 in y = x + b.
	
So	
g1x2 = x + 3 for x … -2.  	 Replace y with g1x2.
	
a closed circle at 1-2, 12 shows that 1-2, 12 is a graph point.
(ii)	 A horizontal line segment passing through 1-2, 42 and (1, 4); an open circle  
at 1-2, 42 shows that 1-2, 42 is not a graph point. We have
g1x2 = 4 for -2 6 x … 1.
	
A closed circle at 11, 42 shows that 11, 42 is a graph point.
(iii)	 A half-line passing through 11, 42 and 12, 02. As in (i), we find m = -4 and b = 8. 
Because 11, 42 is a graph point of the segment discussed in (ii) we need only define 
g for x 7 1. We have
g1x2 = -4x + 8 for x 7 1.
	
Combining (i), (ii), and (iii), we have
g1x2 = •
x + 3
if x … -2
4
if -2 6 x … 1
-4x + 8
if x 7 1.
Practice Problem 8  Repeat Example 8 for the graph of y = f1x2 in Figure 2.71(b).

	
Section 2.6    ■    A Library of Functions 233
because 2 is the greatest integer less than or equal to 2, 2.3, 2.7, and 2.99. Similarly,
Œ -2œ = -2, Œ -1.9œ = -2, Œ -1.1œ = -2, Œ -1.001œ = -2
because -2 is the greatest integer less than or equal to -2, -1.9, -1.1, and -1.001.
In general, if m is an integer such that m … x 6 m + 1, then Œxœ = m. In other words, if 
x is between two consecutive integers m and m + 1, then Œxœ is assigned the smaller integer m.
Some piecewise functions are called step functions. Their graphs look like the steps 
of a staircase.
The greatest integer function is denoted by Œxœ, or int1x2, and is defined as the 
greatest integer less than or equal to x. For example,
Œ2œ = 2, Œ2.3œ = 2, Œ2.7œ = 2, Œ2.99œ = 2
Graph the greatest integer function f 1x2 = Œxœ.
Solution
Choose a typical closed interval between two consecutive integers—say, the interval 
32, 34. We know that between 2 and 3, the greatest integer function’s value is 2. In sym-
bols, if 2 … x 6 3, then Œxœ = 2. Similarly, if 1 … x 6 2, then Œxœ = 1. Therefore, the 
values of Œxœ are constant between each pair of consecutive integers and jump by 1 unit at 
each integer. The graph of f 1x2 = Œxœ is shown in Figure 2.72.
Graphing a Step Function
EXAMPLE 9
Figure 2.72  Graph of y = Œxœ
1
3
0
y
1
3
x
4	
Graph additional basic 
functions.
To graph the greatest integer func-
tion, enter Y1 = int1x2. If you 
have your calculator set to graph in 
connected mode, you will get the 
following incorrect graph:
Technology
Connection
For the graph to appear correctly,  
change from connected to dot mode:
5
5
5
5
5
5
Note that the step from 0 … x … 1 
is obscured by the x-axis. 
The greatest integer function f  can be interpreted as a piecewise function:
f 1x2 = Œxœ = f
f
-2 if -2 … x 6 -1
-1 if -1 … x 6 0
0 if 0 … x 6 1
1 if 1 … x 6 2
f
Practice Problem 9  Find the values of f 1x2 = Œxœ for x = -3.4 and x = 4.7.
Basic Functions
As you progress through this course and future mathematics courses, you will repeatedly 
come across a small list of basic functions. The following box lists some of these common 
algebraic functions, along with their properties. You should try to produce these graphs by 
plotting points and using symmetries. The unit length in all of the graphs shown is the same 
on both axes.

234	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
A  L I B R A R Y  O F  B A S I C  F U N C T I O N S
f(x)  c
Constant Function
y
x
O
(0, c)
O
x
y
Identity Function
Squaring Function
O
y
x
O
y
x
Cubing Function
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
Range: 5c6
Constant on 1- ∞, ∞2
Even function (y-axis  
  symmetry)
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
Range: 1- ∞, ∞2
Increasing on 1- ∞, ∞2
Odd function (origin  
  symmetry)
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
Range: 30, ∞2
Decreasing on 1- ∞, 02
Increasing on 10, ∞2
Even function (y-axis  
  symmetry)
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
Range: 1- ∞, ∞2
Increasing on 1- ∞, ∞2
Odd function (origin  
  symmetry)
O
y
x
Absolute Value Function
Square Root Function
O
y
x
O
y
x
Cube Root Function
3
Reciprocal Function
O
y
x
1
x
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
Range: 30, ∞2
Decreasing on 1- ∞, 02
Increasing on 10, ∞2
Even function (y-axis  
  symmetry)
Domain: 30, ∞2
Range: 30, ∞2
Increasing on 10, ∞2
Neither even nor odd (no  
  symmetry)
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
Range: 1- ∞, ∞2
Increasing on 1- ∞, ∞2
Odd function (origin  
  symmetry)
Domain: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2
Range: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2
Decreasing on  
 
1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2
Odd function (origin  
  symmetry)
Reciprocal Square Function
O
y
x
f(x)  1
x2
1
O
1
x
y
Rational Power Function
3
2
f(x)  x  x  
3
1
2
1
O
1
x
y
2
3
f(x)  x  x  
2
1
3
Rational Power Function
Greatest–Integer Function
O
y
x
f(x)    x
Domain: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2
Range: 10, ∞2
Increasing on 1- ∞, 02
Decreasing on 10, ∞2
Even function (y-axis  
  symmetry)
Domain: 30, ∞2
Range: 30, ∞2
Increasing on 10, ∞2
Neither even nor odd (no  
  symmetry)
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
Range: 30, ∞2
Decreasing on 1- ∞, 02
Increasing on 10, ∞2
Even function (y-axis  
  symmetry)
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
Range: 5c, -3, -2, -1
0, 1, 2, 3, c 6
Neither even nor odd (no  
  symmetry)

	
Section 2.6    ■    A Library of Functions 235
Answers to Practice Problems
1. g1x2 = 2x + 6    2. 15.524 m
3. 
x
28
24
212
216
0
y
2
3
4
Domain: 1- ∞, 04;  
range: 30, ∞2
4. 
22
24
4
2
0
24
26
28
22
4
6
8
2
x
y
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2;  
range: 1- ∞, ∞2
5. f1-22 = 4, f132 = 6
6. a.  f 1x2 = b50 + 41x - 552, 56 … x 6 75
200 + 51x - 752, x Ú 75
  b. $70
c. $275  7. f 1x2 = -3x, x … -1 
f 1x2 = 2x, x 7 -1
0
3
1
(21, 22)
(21, 3)
5
23
25
21
5
3
1
21
23
x
y
8.  f1x2 = µ
-x - 4
if x … -2
4
5x - 2
5
if -2 6 x 6 3
-2x + 8
if x Ú 3
9.  Œ -3.4œ = -4; Œ4.7œ = 4
Exercises
section 2.6
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The graph of the linear function f1x2 = b is a(n) 
 line.
	 2.	 The absolute value function can be expressed as a piecewise 
function by writing f1x2 = x =  
.
	 3.	 The graph of the function f1x2 = ex2 + 2 if x … 1
ax 
if x 7 1  will 
	
	 have a break at x = 1 unless a =  
.
	 4.	 True or False. The function f1x2 = Œxœ is increasing on the 
interval 10, 32. 
In Exercises 5–14, write a linear function f that has the  
indicated values. Sketch the graph of f.
	 5.	 f102 = 1, f1-12 = 0 
	 6.	 f112 = 0, f122 = 1 
	 7.	 f1-12 = 1, f122 = 7 
	 8.	 f1-12 = -5, f122 = 4 
	 9.	 f112 = 1, f122 = -2 
	10.	 f112 = -1, f132 = 5 
	11.	 f1-22 = 2, f122 = 4 
	12.	 f122 = 2, f142 = 5 
	13.	 f102 = -1, f132 = -3 
	14.	 f112 = 1
4, f142 = -2 
	15.	 Let
f1x2 = bx if x Ú 2
2 if x 6 2.
a.	 Find f112, f122, and f132. 
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = f1x2. 
	16.	 Let
g1x2 = e2x if x 6 0
x  if x Ú 0.
a.	 Find g1-12, g102, and g112.
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = g1x2. 
	17.	 Let
f1x2 = b
1 if x 7 0
-1 if x 6 0.
a.	 Find f1-152 and f1122. 
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = f1x2. 
c.	 Find the domain and the range of f.
	18.	 Let
g1x2 = b2x + 4 if x 7 1
x + 2 if x … 1.
a.	 Find g1-32, g112, and g132.
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = g1x2. 
c.	 Find the domain and the range of g.  

236	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
In Exercises 19–32, sketch the graph of each function and 
from the graph, find its domain and its range.
	19.	 f1x2 = e -2x
if x 6 0
x2
if x Ú 0
	20.	 g1x2 = e x
if x 6 1
x2
if x Ú 1 
	21.	 g1x2 = c
1
x
if x 6 0
1x
if x Ú 0 
	22.	 h1x2 = b 2
3 x
if x 6 1
1x
if x Ú 1
	23.	 f1x2 = e Œxœ
if x 6 1
2
3 x
if x Ú 1
	24.	 g1x2 = e x3
if x 6 0
1x
if x Ú 0 
	25.	 g1x2 = b x
if x 6 1
x3
if x Ú 1 
	26.	 f1x2 = c
1
x
if x 6 0
Œxœ
if x Ú 0 
	27.	 f1x2 = b x
if -2 … x 6 1
1x
if x Ú 1 
	28.	 g1x2 = b 2
3 x
if -8 … x 6 1
2x
if x Ú 1 
	29.	 g1x2 = e Œxœ
if x 6 1
-2x
if 1 … x … 4 
	30.	 h1x2 = b x
if x 6 0
1x
if 0 … x … 4 
	31.	 f1x2 = •
2x + 3
if x 6 -2
x + 1
if -2 … x 6 1
-x + 3
if x Ú 1
	32.	 g1x2 = •
-2x + 1
if x … -1
2x + 1
if -1 6 x 6 2
x + 2
if x Ú 2 
In Exercises 33–36, write a piecewise function for the given 
graph.
	33.	
	34.	
y 5f(x)
0
y
x
(2, 21)
(0, 3)
(4, 0)
	35.	
	36.	
y 5g(x)
(22, 0)
(2, 0)
(24, 3)
(4, 3)
(0, 3)
0
y
x
y 5f(x)
0
y
x
(21, 0)
(2, 3)
(3, 0)
y 5g(x)
(23, 0)
(22, 4)
(22, 2)
(2, 4)
(2, 1)
(3, 0)
0
y
x     
Applying the Concepts
	37.	 Converting volume. To convert the volume of a liquid 
measured in ounces to a volume measured in liters, we use 
the fact that 1 liter ≈33.81 ounces. Let x denote the vol-
ume measured in ounces and y denote the volume measured 
in liters.
a.	 Write an equation for the linear function y = f1x2. What 
are the domain and range of f ?
b.	 Compute f132. What does it mean?
c.	 How many liters of liquid are in a typical soda can con-
taining 12 ounces of liquid? 
	38.	 Boiling point and elevation. The boiling point B of 
water (in degrees Fahrenheit) at elevation h (in thousands 
of feet) above sea level is given by the linear function 
B1h2 = -1.8h + 212.
a.	 Find and interpret the intercepts of the graph of the func-
tion y = B1h2. 
b.	 Find the domain of this function.
c.	 Find the elevation at which water boils at 98.6°F. Why is 
this height dangerous to humans?
	39.	 Pressure at sea depth. The pressure P in atmospheres 
(atm) at a depth d feet is given by the linear function
P1d2 = 1
33d + 1.
a.	 Find and interpret the intercepts of y = P1d2. 
b.	 Find P102, P1102, P1332, and P11002.
c.	 Find the depth at which the pressure is  
5 atmospheres. 
	40.	 Speed of sound. The speed V of sound (in feet per second) 
in air at temperature T (in degrees Fahrenheit) is given by the 
linear function V1T2 = 1055 + 1.1T.
a.	 Find the speed of sound at 90°F. 
b.	 Find the temperature at which the speed of sound is  
1100 feet per second. 
	41.	 Manufacturer’s cost. A manufacturer of printers has a 
total cost per day consisting of a fixed overhead of +6000 
plus product costs of +50 per printer.
a.	 Express the total cost C as a function of the number x of 
printers produced. 
b.	 Draw the graph of y = C1x2. Interpret the y-intercept. 
c.	 How many printers were manufactured on a day when the 
total cost was $11,500? 
	42.	 Supply function. When the price p of a commodity is +10 
per unit, 750 units of it are sold. For every +1 increase in the 
unit price, the supply q increases by 100 units.
a.	 Write the linear function q = f1p2. 
b.	 Find the supply when the price is +15 per unit. 
c.	 What is the price at which 1750 units can be  
supplied?  

	
Section 2.6    ■    A Library of Functions 237
	43.	 Apartment rental. Suppose a two-bedroom apartment in a 
neighborhood near your school rents for +900 per month. If 
you move in after the first of the month, the rent is prorated; 
that is, it is reduced linearly.
a.	 Suppose you move into the apartment x days after the 
first of the month. (Assume that the month has 30 days.) 
Express the rent R as a function of x. 
b.	 Compute the rent if you move in six days after the first of 
the month. 
c.	 When did you move into the apartment if the landlord 
charged you rent of +600? 
	44.	 College admissions. The average SAT scores (mathemat-
ics and critical reading) of college-bound seniors in the state 
of Florida was 995 in 2009; in 2011, it was 976. Assume that 
the scores have been changing linearly.
a.	 Express the average SAT score in Florida as a function of 
time since 2009. 
 
b.	 If the trend continues, what will be the average SAT score 
of incoming students in Florida in 2013? 
c.	 If the trend continues, when will the average SAT score  
be 900? 
	45.	 Breathing capacity. Suppose the average maximum  
breathing capacity for humans drops linearly from 100, 
at age 20 to 40, at age 80. What age corresponds to 50, 
capacity? 
	46.	 Drug dosage for children. If a is the adult dosage  
of a medicine and t is the child’s age, then the Friend’s rule 
	
	 for the child’s dosage y is given by the formula y = 2
25 ta.
a.	 Suppose the adult dosage is 60 milligrams. Find the  
dosage for a 5-year-old child. 
b.	 How old would a child have to be in order to be prescribed 
an adult dosage? 
	47.	 Air pollution. In Ballerenia, the average number y of deaths 
per month was observed to be linearly related to the concen-
tration x of sulfur dioxide in the air. Suppose there are 30 
deaths when x = 150 milligrams per cubic meter and  
50 deaths when x = 420 milligrams per cubic meter.
a.	 Write y as a function of x. 
b.	 Find the number of deaths when x = 350 milligrams per 
cubic meter. 
c.	 If the number of deaths per month is 70, what is the con-
centration of sulfur dioxide in the air? 
	48.	 Child shoe sizes. Children’s shoe sizes start with size 0, 
having an insole length L of 311
12 inches and each full size 
being 1
3 inch longer.
a.	 Write the equation y = L1S2, where S is the shoe size.
b.	 Find the length of the insole of a child’s shoe of size 4. 
c.	 What size (to the nearest half size) shoe will fit a child 
whose insole length is 6.1 inches? 
	49.	 State income tax. Suppose a state’s income tax code states that 
the tax liability T on x dollars of taxable income is as follows:
	
T1x2 = b0.04x                   if 0 … x 6 20,000
800 + 0.061x - 20,0002 if x Ú 20,000
a.	 Graph the function y = T1x2. 
b.	 Find the tax liability on each taxable income.
  (i)	 +12,000 
 (ii)	 +20,000 
(iii)	 +50,000 
c.	 Find your taxable income if you had each tax liability.
  (i)	 +600 
 (ii)	 +1200 
(iii)	 +2300 
	50.	 Federal income tax. The tax table for the 2009 U.S. 
income tax for a single taxpayer is as follows.
If taxable  
income is over
 
But not over
 
The tax is
$0
+8350
10% of the amount over $0. 
+8350 
+33,950
+835 plus 15% of the 
amount over +8350.
+33,950
+82,250
+4675 plus 25% of the 
amount over +33,950.
+82,250 
+171,550
+16,750 plus 28% of the 
amount over +82,250. 
+171,550
+372,950
+41,754 plus 33% of the 
amount over +171,550.
+372,950
No limit 
+108,216 plus 35% of the 
amount over +372,950.
Source: Internal Revenue Service.
a.	 Express the information given in the table as a six-part 
piecewise function f, using x as a variable representing 
taxable income. 
b.	 Find the tax liability on each taxable income.
  (i)	 +35,000 
 (ii)	 +100,000 
(iii)	 +500,000 
c.	 Find your taxable income if you had each tax liability.
  (i)	 +3500 
 (ii)	 +12,700 
(iii)	 +35,000 
Beyond the Basics
	51.	 Let f1x2 = c
3x + 5, -3 … x 6 -1
2x + 1, -1 … x 6 2
2 - x,
2 … x … 4
.
a.	 Find the following.
  (i)	 f1-22 
 (ii)	 f1-12 
(iii)	 f132 
b.	 Find x when f1x2 = 2. 
c.	 Sketch a graph of y = f1x2. 
	52.	 Let g1x2 = c
3,
-3 … x 6 -1
-6x - 3, -1 … x 6 0
3x - 3,
0 … x … 1
.
a.	 Find the following.
  (i)	 g1-22 
 (ii)	 g a1
2b 
(iii)	 g102 
 (iv)	 g1-12 
b.	 Find x when (i) g1x2 = 0 and (ii) 2g1x2 + 3 = 0.
c.	 Sketch a graph of y = g1x2.  

238	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
In Exercises 53 and 54, a function is given. For each function,
a.	   Find the domain and range.
b.	   Find the intervals over which the function is increasing, 
decreasing, or constant.
c.	   State whether the function is odd, even, or neither.
	53.	 f1x2 = x - Œxœ
	54.	 f1x2 =
1
Œxœ  
	55.	 Let f1x2 =
x
x , x ≠0. Find f1x2 - f1-x2. 
	56.	 Windchill Index (WCI). Suppose the outside air temperature 
is T degrees Fahrenheit and the wind speed is v miles per hour. 
A formula for the WCI based on observations is as follows:
WCI = c
T,
0 … v … 4
91.4 + 191.4 - T210.0203v - 0.3042v - 0.4742, 4 6 v 6 45
1.6T - 55,
v Ú 45
a.	 Find the WCI to the nearest degree if the outside air  
temperature is 40°F and
  (i)	 v = 2 miles per hour. 
 (ii)	 v = 16 miles per hour. 
(iii)	 v = 50 miles per hour. 
b.	 Find the air temperature to the nearest degree if
  (i)	 The WCI is -58°F and v = 36 miles per hour. 
 (ii)	 The WCI is -10°F and v = 49 miles per hour. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	57.	 Postage rate function. The U.S. Postal Service uses the 
function f1x2 = - Œ -xœ, called the ceiling integer func-
tion, to determine postal charges. For instance, if you have an 
envelope that weighs 3.2 ounces, you will be charged the rate 
for f13.22 = - Œ -3.2œ = - 1-42 =  4 ounces. In 2009, it 
cost 44. for the first ounce (or a fraction of it) and 17. for 
each additional ounce (or a fraction of it) to mail a first-class 
letter in the United States.
a.	 Express the cost C (in cents) of mailing a letter weighing  
x ounces. 
b.	 Graph the function y = C1x2. 
c.	 What are the domain and range of y = C1x2?
	58.	 The cost C of parking a car at the metropolitan airport is +4 
for the first hour and +2 for each additional hour or fraction 
thereof. Write the cost function C1x2, where x is the  
number of parking hours, in terms of the greatest integer 
function. 
	59.	 Car rentals. The weekly cost of renting a compact car from 
U-Rent is +150. There is no charge for driving the first  
100 miles, but there is a 20. charge for each mile (or fraction 
thereof) driven over 100 miles.
a.	 Express the cost C of renting a car for a week and driving 
it for x miles. 
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = C1x2. 
c.	 How many miles were driven if the weekly rental cost was 
+190? 
	60.	 Write as a piecewise function.
a.	 f1x2 = Œxœ + Œ -xœ 
b.	 g1x2 = Œxœ - Œ -xœ
c.	 h1x2 = x - x 
d.	 F1x2 = xx
e.	 G1x2 = 0 x - 10 + 0 x - 20
Maintaining Skills
For Exercises 61–64, recall that the graph of a function f is 
the graph of the set of ordered pairs 1x, f1x2 2.
	61.	 If we add 3 to each y-coordinate of the graph of f, we will 
obtain the graph of y =
.
	62.	 If we subtract 2 from each x-coordinate of the graph of f, we 
will obtain the graph of y =
.
	63.	 If we replace each x-coordinate with its opposite in the graph 
of f, we will obtain the graph of y =
.
	64.	 If we replace each y-coordinate with its opposite in the graph 
of f, we will obtain the graph of y =
.
In Exercises 65–68, sketch the graphs of f and g on the same 
coordinate axes.
	65.	 f1x2 = x2 and g1x2 = x2 + 1 
	66.	 f1x2 = x and g1x2 = x + 2 
	67.	 f1x2 = 2x and g1x2 = 2-x 
	68.	 f1x2 = x2 and g1x2 = -x2  
  

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 239
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 Graphs of basic functions (Section 2.6, 
page 234)
2	 Symmetry (Section 2.2, page 165)
3	 Completing the square (Section 1.2,  
page 94)
Objectives
1	 Define transformations of functions.
2	 Use vertical or horizontal shifts to  
graph functions.
3	 Use reflections to graph functions.
4	 Use stretching or compressing to  
graph functions.
5	 Use a sequence of transformations  
to graph functions.
2.7
Transformations
If a new function is formed by performing certain operations on a given function f, then the 
graph of the new function is called a transformation of the graph of f. For example, the 
graphs of y = 0 x0 + 2 and y = 0 x0 - 3 are transformations of the graph of y = 0 x0 ; that 
is, the graph of each is a special modification of the graph of y = 0 x0 .
Vertical and Horizontal Shifts
A transformation that changes only the position of a graph but not its shape is called a 
rigid transformation. We first consider rigid transformations involving vertical shifts and 
horizontal shifts of a graph.
1	
Define transformations of 
functions.
2	
Use vertical or horizontal 
shifts to graph functions.
Measuring Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is the force of blood per unit area against the walls of the arteries. Blood 
pressure is recorded as two numbers: the systolic pressure (as the heart beats) and the 
diastolic pressure (as the heart relaxes between beats). If your blood pressure is “120 
over 80,” it is rising to a maximum of 120 millimeters of mercury as the heart beats and 
is falling to a minimum of 80 millimeters of mercury as the heart relaxes.
The most precise way to measure blood pressure is to place a small glass tube in an ar-
tery and let the blood flow out and up as high as the heart can pump it. That was the way 
Stephen Hales (1677–1761), the first investigator of blood pressure, learned that a horse’s 
heart could pump blood 8 feet 3 inches, up a tall tube. Such a test, however, consumed a 
great deal of blood. Jean Louis Marie Poiseuille (1797–1869) greatly improved the process 
by using a mercury-filled manometer, which allowed a smaller, narrower tube.
In Exercise 104, we investigate Poiseuille’s Law for arterial blood flow.
Transformations of Functions
S e c t i o n

240	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Let f1x2 = 0 x0 , g1x2 = 0 x0 + 2, and h1x2 = 0 x0 - 3. Sketch the graphs of these ­functions 
on the same coordinate plane. Describe how the graphs of g and h relate to the graph of f.
Solution
Make a table of values and graph the equations y = f1x2, y = g1x2, and y = h1x2.
Graphing Vertical Shifts
EXAMPLE 1
Many graphing calculators use 
abs1x2 for 0 x0 . The graphs of 
y = 0 x0 , y = 0 x0 - 3, and 
y = 0 x0 + 2 illustrate that these 
graphs are identical in shape. They 
differ only in vertical placement.
Technology
Connection
5
6
Table 2.11 
x
y = ∣
 x∣
g1x2 = ∣
 x∣+ 2
h1x2 = ∣
 x∣−3
-5
5
7
2
-3
3
5
0
-1
1
3
-2
0
0
2
-3
1
1
3
-2
3
3
5
0
5
5
7
2
Notice that in Table 2.11 and Figure 2.73, each point 1x,  x2 on the graph of f has a 
­corresponding point 1x,  x + 22 on the graph of g and 1x,  x - 32 on the graph of h. So 
the graph of g1x2 = 0 x0 + 2 is the graph of y = 0 x0  shifted 2 units up, and the graph of 
y = 0 x - 3 is the graph of y = 0 x0  shifted 3 units down.
Practice Problem 1  Let
f1x2 = x3, g1x2 = x3 + 1, and h1x2 = x3 - 2.
Sketch the graphs of all three functions on the same coordinate plane. Describe how  
the graphs of g and h relate to the graph of f. 
Example 1 illustrates the concept of the vertical (up or down) shift of a graph.
Figure 2.73  Vertical shifts of y = ∣x∣
0
1
(x, |x|  2)
(x, |x|)
(x, |x|  3)
y  |x|
h(x)  |x|  3
g(x)  |x|  2
y
1
x
V e r t i c a l  S h i f t
Let d 7 0. The graph of g1x2 = f1x2 + d is the graph of y = f1x2 shifted d units 
up, and the graph of h1x2 = f1x2 - d is the graph of y = f1x2 shifted d units down. 
See Figure 2.74. If 1x, y2 is a point on the graph of y = f1x2, then the corresponding 
point 1x, y + d2 is on the graph of g1x2 = f1x2 + d and the point 1x, y - d2 is on 
the graph of h1x2 = f1x2 - d.
Figure 2.74  Vertical shifts
y
x
O
d
y  f (x)
(x, y  d)
(x, y)
g(x)  f(x)  d
Shift up, d  0
y
x
d
h(x)  f(x)  d
y  f (x)
Shift down, d  0
(x, y  d)
(x, y)
O

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 241
Next, we consider the operation that shifts a graph horizontally.
Let f1x2 = x2, g1x2 = 1x - 222, and h1x2 = 1x + 322. A table of values for f, g, and h 
is given in Table 2.12. The three functions f, g, and h are graphed on the same coordinate 
plane in Figure 2.75. Describe how the graphs of g and h relate to the graph of f.
Writing Functions for Horizontal Shifts
EXAMPLE 2
Solution
First, notice that all three functions are squaring functions.
a.	 Each point 1x, x22 on the graph of f  has a corresponding point 1x + 2, x22 
on the graph of g because g1x + 22 = 1x + 2 - 222 = x2. So the graph of 
g1x2 = 1x - 222 is just the graph of f1x2 = x2 shifted 2 units to the right. Noticing 
that f102 = 0 and g122 = 0 will help you remember which way to shift the graph. 
Table 2.12(a) and Figure 2.75 illustrate these ideas.
b.	 Each point 1x, x22 on the graph of f  has a corresponding point 1x - 3, x22 
on the graph of h because h1x - 32 = 1x - 3 + 322 = x2. So the graph of 
h1x2 = 1x + 322 is just the graph of f1x2 = x2 shifted 3 units to the left. ­Noticing 
that f102 = 0 and h1-32 = 0 will help you remember which way to shift the graph. 
Table 2.12(b) and Figure 2.75 confirm these considerations.
Practice Problem 2  Let
f1x2 = x3, g1x2 = 1x - 123, and h1x2 = 1x + 223.
Sketch the graphs of all three functions on the same coordinate plane. Describe how  
the graphs of g and h relate to the graph of f.
Figure 2.75  Horizontal shifts
0
1
y
1
2
x
(x, x2)
, x2)
x2
Table 2.12 
x
y = x2
y = 1x −222
x
y = x2
y = 1x + 322
-4
16
36
-4
16 
1
-3
9
25
-3
9
0
-2
4 
16
-2
4
1
-1
1 
9
-1
1
4
0
0
4
0
0
9
1
1
1
1
1
16
2
4
0
2
4 
25
3
9
1
3
9 
36
4
16
4
4
16
49
(a)
(b)

242	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
H o r i z o n ta l  S h i f t s
Let c 7 0. The graph of y = f1x - c2 is the graph of y = f1x2 shifted c units to the 
right. The graph of y = f1x + c2 is the graph of y = f1x2 shifted c units to the left. See 
Figure 2.76. If 1x, y2 is a point on the graph of f, then the corresponding point 1x + c, y2 is 
on the graph of y = f 1x - c2 and the point 1x - c, y2 is on the graph of y = f 1x + c2.
Sketch the graph of g1x2 = f 1x { c2 { d, where f is 
a function whose graph is known, c 7 0, d 7 0.
Step 1 Identify and graph the known function f.
Step 2 Identify the positive constants c and d.
Step 3 
(i)  Graph y = f1x - c2 by shifting the graph  
of f ­horizontally c units to the right. Add c to the  
x-­coordinate of each point.
(ii)  Graph y = f1x + c2 by shifting the graph of f  
horizontally c units to the left. Subtract c from the  
x-coordinate of each point.
Step 4 
(i)  Graph y = f1x { c2 + d by shifting the graph 
of y = f 1x { c2 vertically up d units. Add d to the 
­y-coordinate of each point.
(ii)  Graph y = f1x { c2 - d by shifting the graph of 
y = f1x { c2 vertically down d units. Subtract d from 
the y-coordinate of each point.
Example
Sketch the graph of g1x2 = 1x + 2 - 3. 
1.	Choose f1x2 = 1x. Domain: 30, ∞2; range: 30, ∞2
	
The graph of y = 1x is shown in Step 4.
2.	g1x2 = 1x + 2 - 3, so c = 2 and d = 3.
3.	Because c = 2 7 0, the graph of y = 1x + 2 is 
the graph of f shifted horizontally 2 units to the left. 
See the blue graph in Step 4. 
4.	Graph y = 1x + 2 - 3 by shifting the graph of 
y = 1x + 2 down 3 units. Domain: 3-2, ∞2; 
range: 3-3, ∞2.
Graphing Combined Vertical and Horizontal Shifts
OBJECTIVE
procedure 
in Action
EXAMPLE 3
Figure 2.76  Horizontal shifts
y
x
O
c
y  f(x  c)
y  f(x)
Shift right, c  0
(x  c,  y)
(x, y)
y
x
O
c
y  f(x  c)
y  f(x)
Shift left, c  0
(x  c,  y)
(x, y)
Horizontal and vertical shifts
3
1
2
3 x
2
1
y
0
x

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 243
Reflections
We now consider rigid transformations that reflect a graph about a coordinate axis.
Comparing the Graphs of y = f 1x2 and y = −f 1x2 
Consider the graph of f1x2 = x2, shown in Figure 2.77. Table 2.13 gives some values 
for f1x2 and g1x2 = -f1x2. Note that the y-coordinate of each point in the graph of 
g1x2 = -f1x2 is the opposite of the y-coordinate of the corresponding point on the graph 
of f1x2. So the graph of y = -x2 is the reflection of the graph of y = x2 about the x-axis. 
This means that the points 1x, x22 and 1x, -x22 are the same distance from, but on opposite 
sides of, the x-axis. See Figure 2.77.
3	
Use reflections to graph 
functions.
Practice Problem 3  Sketch the graph of
	
f1x2 = 1x - 2 + 3.
Figure 2.77  Reflection about the 
x-axis
y
x
(x, x2)
O
Table 2.13 
x
f 1x2 = x2
g1x2 = −f 1x2 = −x2
-3
9
-9
-2
4
-4
-1
1
-1
0
0
0
1
1
-1
2
4
-4
3
9
-9
R e f l e c t i o n  A b o u t  t h e  x - A x i s
The graph of g1x2 = -f1x2 is a reflection of the graph of y = f1x2 about the x-axis. 
If a point 1x, y2 is on the graph of f, then the point 1x, -y2 is on the graph of g. See 
Figure 2.78.
Figure 2.78  Reflection about 
the x-axis
y
x
O
(x, y)
Comparing the Graphs of y = f 1x2 and y = f 1 −x2
To compare the graphs of f1x2 and g1x2 = f1-x2, consider the graph of f1x2 = 1x. 
Then f1-x2 = 1-x. See Figure 2.79. Table 2.14 gives some values for f1x2 and 
g1x2 = f1-x2. The domain of f  is 30, ∞2, and the domain of g is 1- ∞, 04. Each point 
1x, y2 on the graph of f has a ­corresponding point 1-x, y2 on the graph of g. So the graph 
of y = f1-x2 is the reflection of the graph of y = f1x2 about the y-axis. This means that 
the points 1x, 1x2 and 1-x, 1x2 are the same distance from, but on opposite sides of, the 
y-axis. See Figure 2.79.

244	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Figure 2.79  Graphing y = 1−x
1
4
4
x
1
y
0
(1, 1)
(4, 2)
x
Figure 2.80  Reflection about  
the y-axis
y
x
(x,  y)
O
R e f l e c t i o n  A b o u t  t h e  y - A x i s
The graph of g1x2 = f1-x2 is a reflection of the graph of y = f1x2 about the y-axis. 
If a point 1x, y2 is on the graph of f, then the point 1-x, y2 is on the graph of g. See 
Figure 2.80.
Table 2.14 
x
f1x2 = !x
−x
g1x2 = !−x
-4
Undefined
4
2
-1
Undefined
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
-1
Undefined
4
2
-4
Undefined
Explain how the graph of y = - 0 x - 20 + 3 can be obtained from the graph of y = 0 x0 .
Solution
Start with the graph of y = 0 x0 . Follow the point 10, 02 on y =  x. See Figure 2.81(a).
Step 1  Shift the graph of y = 0 x0  to the right 2 units to obtain the graph of y = 0 x - 20 . 
Add 2 to the x-coordinate of each point. The point 10, 02 moves to 12, 02. See 
Figure 2.81(b).
Step 2  Reflect the graph of y = 0 x - 20  about the x-axis to obtain the graph of 
y = - 0 x - 20 . Change the y-coordinate of each point to its opposite. The 
point 12, 02 remains 12, 02. See Figure 2.81(c).
Step 3  Finally, shift the graph of y = - 0 x - 20  up 3 units to obtain the graph of 
y = - 0 x - 20 + 3. Add 3 to the y-coordinate of each point. The point 12, 02 
moves to 12, 32. See Figure 2.81(d).
Combining Transformations
EXAMPLE 4
Figure 2.81  Transformations of y = ∣x ∣
2
4
0
y
2
22
24
4
x
(a)
6
0
4
6
8 x
6
2
4
y
(b)
2
4
6
y  x 2
0
2
4
4
6
x
y
(c)
0
(2, 3)
(0, 0)
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
2
4
x
4
2
y
(d)
2
2
4
Horizontal shift
Vertical shift
Reflection about x-axis
Practice Problem 4  Explain how the graph of y = -1x - 122 + 2 can be obtained 
from the graph of y = x2. 
Use the graph of f1x2 = 1x + 122 - 4 to sketch the graph of y =  f1x2.
Graphing y = ∣ƒ1x2 ∣
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 245
Practice Problem 5  Use the graph of f1x2 = 2x - 4 to sketch the graph of 
y =  f 1x2.
Stretching or Compressing
We now look at transformations that distort the shape of a graph, called nonrigid 
­transformations. We consider the relationship of the graphs of y = af1x2 and y = f1bx2 
to the graph of y = f1x2.
Comparing the Graphs of y = f 1x2 and y = af 1x2 
4	
Use stretching or compressing 
to graph functions.
Figure 2.82  Graphing y = f  1x2 
1
1
2
3
4
2
y
1
2
3 x
0
3 2 1
(a)
f (x)  (x  1)2  4
(1, 4)
1
1
2
2
3
4
y
1
2
3 x
0
3 2 1
(b)
(1, 4)
f (x)  (x  1)2  4
Let f1x2 = 0 x0 , g1x2 = 20 x0 , and h1x2 = 1
2 0 x0 . Sketch the graphs of f, g, and h on the 
same coordinate plane and describe how the graphs of g and h are related to the graph of f.
Solution
The graphs of y = 0 x0 , y = 20 x0 , and y = 1
2 0 x0  are sketched in Figure 2.83. Table 2.15 
gives some typical function values.
The graph of y = 20 x0  is the graph of y = 0 x0  vertically stretched (expanded) by mul-
tiplying each of its y-coordinates by 2. It is twice as high as the graph of 0 x0  at every real 
number x. The result is a taller V-shaped curve. See Figure 2.83.
The graph y = 1
2 0 x0  is the graph of y = 0 x0  vertically compressed (shrunk) by 
multiplying each of its y-coordinates by 1
2. It is half as high as the graph of 0 x0  at every 
real number x. The result is a flatter V-shaped curve. See Figure 2.83.
Stretching or Compressing a Graph Vertically
EXAMPLE 6
Solution
The graph of f1x2 = 1x + 122 - 4 is obtained by shifting the graph of y = x2 left by 1 unit  
and then shifting the resulting graph down by 4 units. See Figure 2.82(a). The function f has 
domain 1- ∞, ∞2 and range 3-4, ∞2. 
We know that
 y = e
y
if y Ú 0
-y
if y 6 0.
This means that the portion of the graph on or above the x-axis 1y Ú 02 is unchanged  
and the portion of the graph below the x-axis 1y 6 02 is reflected above the x-axis. See 
Figure 2.82(b). The function 0  f 0  has domain 1- ∞, ∞2 and range 30, ∞2. 

246	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Practice Problem 6  Let f1x2 = 1x and g1x2 = 21x. Sketch the graphs of f and  
g on the same coordinate plane and describe how the graph of g is related to the  
graph of f.
Table 2.15 
x
f 1x2 = ∣x∣
g 1x2 = 2∣x∣
h1x2 = 1
2∣x∣
-2
2
4
1
-1
1
2
1
2
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
4
1
Figure 2.83  Vertical stretch and 
compression
y
x
0
x, 1
2
1
2
V e r t i c a l  S t r e t c h i n g  o r  C o m p r e s s i n g
The graph of g1x2 = af1x2 is obtained from the graph of y = f1x2 by multiplying the 
y-coordinate of each point on the graph of y = f1x2 by a and leaving the x-coordinate 
unchanged. The result (see Figure 2.84) is as follows:
1.	 A vertical stretch away from the x-axis if a 7 1
2.	 A vertical compression toward the x-axis if 0 6 a 6 1
If a 6 0, first graph y =  a f1x2 by stretching or compressing the graph of y = f 1x2 
vertically. Then reflect the resulting graph about the x-axis.
So if 1x, y2 is a point on the graph of f, then the point 1x, ay2 is on the graph of g.
Comparing the Graphs of y = f 1x2  and y = f 1bx2  
Given a function y = f1x2, we explore the effect of the constant b in graphing the function 
y = f1bx2. Consider the graphs of y = f1x2 and y = f12x2 in Figure 2.85(a). Multiplying 
the independent variable x by 2 compresses the graph y = f1x2 horizontally toward the y-
axis. Because the value 2x is twice the value of x, a point on the x-axis will be only half as 
far from the origin when y = f12x2 has the same y value as y = f1x2. See Figure 2.85(a).
Figure 2.84  Vertical stretch  
or compression
x
y
y  f(x)
a  1 : stretch vertically
O
y  af(x)
x
y
y  af(x)
y  f(x)
0  a  1 : compress vertically
O
Figure 2.85  Horizontal stretch or compression
x
y
O
(a) f  2 
(x, y)
1
2 x, y
1
2
= f (x)
x
C
C
x
(x, y)
y
1
2 x
O
(2x, y)
(b) f    [
1
2
] = f (x)
2x
Now consider the graphs of y = f1x2 and y = f a1
2 xb in Figure 2.85(b). Multiplying 
the independent variable x by 1
2 stretches the graph of y = f1x2 horizontally away from the 
Notice that replacing the variable 
x with x { c, or bx in y = f1x2 
results in a horizontal change in the 
graphs. However, replacing the y 
value in y = f1x2 by f1x2 { d, 
or af1x2, results in a vertical 
change in the graph of y = f1x2.
Side 
Note

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 247
y-axis. The value 1
2 x is half the value of x so that a point on the x-axis will be twice as far
from the origin for y = f a1
2 xb to have the same y value as in y = f1x2. See Figure 2.85(b).
H o r i z o n ta l  S t r e t c h i n g  o r  C o m p r e s s i n g
Let b 7 0. The graph of g1x2 = f1bx2 is obtained from the graph of y = f1x2 by 
multiplying the x-coordinate of each point on the graph of y = f1x2 by 1
b and leaving 
the y-coordinate unchanged. The result (see Figure 2.86) is as follows:
1.	 A horizontal stretch away from the y-axis if 0 6 b 6 1
2.	 A horizontal compression toward the y-axis if b 7 1
If b 6 0, first graph f10 b0 x2 by stretching or compressing the graph of y = f1x2  
horizontally. Then reflect the graph of y = f10 b0 x2 about the y-axis.
If 1x, y2 is a point on the graph of y = f1x2, then the point a1
b x, yb is on the 
graph of g1x2 = f1bx2.
The graph of the function y = f1x2 whose equation is not given is shown in Figure 2.87. 
Sketch the following graphs.
a.	 f
 a1
2
 xb        b.  f12x2        c.  f1-2x2
Solution
Note that the domain of f is 3-2, 24 and its range is 3-1, 34
a.	 To graph y = f   a1
2 xb, we stretch the graph of y = f1x2 horizontally by a factor of 2. 
	
In other words, we transform each point 1x, y2 in Figure 2.87 to the point 12x, y2. See 
Figure 2.88(a).
b.	 To graph y = f 12x2, we compress the graph of y = f 1x2 horizontally by a factor of 1
2.
	
Therefore, we transform each point 1x, y2 in Figure 2.87 to a1
2 x, yb. See Figure 2.88(b).
Stretching or Compressing a Function Horizontally
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 2.86  Horizontal stretch 
and compression
x
y
y  f (bx)
y  f (x)
0  b  1 : stretch horizontally
O
1
bx, y
(x, y)
x
y
y  f(bx)
y  f(x)
b  1 : compress horizontally
O
1
bx, y
(x, y)
Figure 2.87 
y
1
O
1
x
(1, 3)
(2, 0)
Figure 2.88 
y
1
O
1
x
(2, 3)
(4, 0)
(a)
Domain: [4, 4]; range: [1, 3]
1
2x
y
1
O
x
(b)
, 3
1
2
(1, 0)
Domain: [1, 1]; range: [1, 3]
x
y
1
O
1
2
3
4
x
(c)
, 3
1
2
(1, 0)
Domain: [1, 1]; range: [1, 3]

248	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Multiple Transformations in Sequence
When graphing requires more than one transformation of a basic function, we perform 
transformations in the following order:
1.  Horizontal shift  2. Stretch or compression  3.  Reflection  4.  Vertical shift
To graph y = af1bx - c2 + d from the graph of y = f1x2, here is one possible order of 
transformations:
Graph
Change each graph point 
1x, y2 on the graph in the 
previous step to
Step 0
Given Graph
y = f1x2
1x, y2
Step 1
Horizontal  
Shift
y = f1x - c2
1x + c, y2
Step 2
Stretch/­
Compression
1i2 y = f1 bx - c2
a x
 b , yb
1ii2 y =  af1 bx - c2
1x,  ay2
Step 3
Reflections
1i2 y =  a f1bx - c2 for b 6 0
1-x, y2
1ii2 y = af1bx - c2 for a 6 0
1x, -y2
Step 4
Vertical Shift
y = af1bx - c2 + d
1x, y + d2
y
x
1
2
1
2
0
2
1
3
(2, 0)
(0, 3)
(1, 0)
(2, 3)
5	
Use a sequence of 
transformations to graph 
functions.
Sketch the graph of the function f 1x2 = -21x - 122 + 3.
Solution
Begin with the basic function y = x2. Then apply the necessary transformations in a 
­sequence of steps. The result of each step is shown in Figure 2.89. We follow the point 
12, 42 from the graph of y = x2.
Step 0 	 y = x2	
Identify a related function whose graph is familiar. 
	
	
In this case, use y = x2. See Figure 2.89(a).
Step 1	 y = 1x - 122	
Replace x with x - 1; shift the graph of y = x2,  
1 unit to the right. See Figure 2.89(b).
Step 2	 y = 21x - 122	
Multiply by 2; stretch the graph of y = 1x - 122 
­vertically by a factor of 2. See Figure 2.89(c).
Step 3	 y = -21x - 122	
Multiply by -1. Reflect the graph of y = 21x - 122 
about the x@axis. See Figure 2.89(d).
Step 4	 y = -21x - 122 + 3	 Add 3. Shift the graph of y = -21x - 122,  
up 3 units. See Figure 2.89(e).
Using Multiple Transformations to Graph a Function
EXAMPLE 8
c.	 To graph y = f1-2x2, we reflect the graph of y = f 12x2 in Figure 2.88(b) about the 
y-axis. So we transform each point 1x, y2 in Figure 2.88(b) to the point 1-x, y2. See  
Figure 2.88(c).
Practice Problem 7  The graph of a function y = f 1x2 is given in the margin. Sketch 
the graphs of the following functions. 
a.	 f   a1
2
  xb    b.  f 12x2 

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 249
Practice Problem 8  Sketch the graph of the function 
	
f1x2 = 31x + 1 - 2.
y  x2
y
1
0
1
2
3
(2, 4)
2 1
3
4
4
x
(a)
2
3
4
5
6
y
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
2 1
3
4
x
y  (x  1)2
(b)
(3, 4)
y
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
0
1
2
3
4
2 1
3
4
x
y  2(x  1)2
(c)
(3, 8)
y
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
2 1
x
y  2(x  1)2
(d)
(3, 28)
y
1
2
2
5
6
3
1
2
3
4
5
2 1
x
y  2(x  1)2  3
(e)
(3, 25)
1
0
3
4
Horizontal shift
Vertical shift
Stretch
vertically
Reflection about x-axis
Figure 2.89  Multiple transformations
To Graph
Incorrect Sequence
Correct Sequence
y = f12x - 12
y = f1x2 S y = f12x2
y = f1x2 S y = f1x - 12
S y = f12x - 12
S y = f12x - 12
y = f12 - x2
y = f1x2 S y = f1-x2
y = f1x2 S y = f12 + x2
S y = f12 - x2
S y = f12 - x2
y = -f1x - 12 + 3
y = f1x2 S y = f1x - 12
y = f1x2 S y = f1x - 12
S y = f1x - 12 + 3
S y = -f1x - 12
S y = -f1x - 12 + 3
S y = -f1x - 12 + 3
Warning

250	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Summary of Transformations of y = f 1x2
To graph
Draw the graph of f and
Make these changes  
to the equation 
 y = f 1x2
Change the graph  
point 1x, y2 to
Vertical shift 
1for d 7 02
Shift the graph of f 
y = f1x2 + d
up d units.
Add d to f1x2.
1x, y + d2 
y = f1x2 - d
down d units.
Subtract d from f1x2.
1x, y - d2 
Horizontal shift  
1for c 7 02
Shift the graph of f
y = f1x - c2
to the right c units.
Replace x with x - c.
1x + c, y2
y = f1x + c2 
to the left c units.
Replace x with x + c.
1x - c, y2
(continued)
Practice Problem 9  Use the graph of y = f1x2 in Figure 2.91 to graph 
y = 1
2
 f12x - 12 + 3.
Figure 2.91 
y
x
(3, 2)
(1, 0)
(5, 0)
(3, 4)
Figure 2.90  Graph of y = -1
3 f14 - 2x2 + 5
y
(4, 0)
(6, 6)
(2, 3)
x
y  (x)
(i)
O
y
(ii)
(0, 0)
(2, 3)
(2, 6)
x
O
(1, 3)
(1, 6)
(0, 0)
y
(iii)
x
O
(1, 1)
(1, 2)
(0, 0)
y
(iv)
x
O
Graph y = f14 + x2
Shift 4 units left. 
Subtract 4 from 
each x-coordinate.
Graph y = f14 + 2x2
Compress horizontally 
by a factor of 2. Multiply 
each x-coordinate by 1
2.
Graph y = 1
3
  f14 + 2x2
Compress vertically by 
a factor of 1
3. Multiply 
each y-coordinate by 1
3.
(1, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
y
(v)
x
O
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 2)
y
(vi)
x
O
(1, 3)
(1, 4)
(0, 5)
y
(vii)
x
O
Graph y = 1
3
  f14 - 2x2
Reflect about the y-axis. 
Replace each x-coordinate  
with its opposite.
Graph y = -1
3
  f14 - 2x2
Reflect about the x-axis. 
Replace each y-coordinate  
with its opposite.
Graph y = -1
3
  f14 - 2x2 + 5
Shift 5 units up. Add 5 to each 
y-coordinate.
Solution
Use the graph of y = f1x2 in Figure 2.90(i) to graph y = -1
3 f 14 - 2x2 + 5.
Using a Sequence of Transformations
EXAMPLE 9
Summary of Main Facts

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 251
Summary for Combining Transformations in Sequence
To graph y = a f 1bx + c2 + d, with b 7 0 and c 7 0
•  	Starting with the graph of y = f 1x2, perform the indicated sequence of transformations. Here is one possible sequence:
x
y
x
y
x
y
O
x
y  f(x)
y
Vertical shift
Reflect
Horizontal stretch
or compress
Vertical stretch or compress
O
x
y
y  f (xc)
O
y  |a| f(bx  c)
O
y  af(bx  c)
O
y  af(bx  c)  d
O
x
y
y  f(bx  c)
Horizontal shift to the left (c > 0)
Here b > 1; graph
compresses horizontally
toward the y-axis.
Here |a| > 1; graph
stretches vertically.
Here a < 0; graph reflects
about the x-axis.
Here d > 0; graph shifts up.
Note:  If c < 0, then the horizontal shift should be |c| units to the right, if b < 0, graph y  af(|b|x  c)  d, 
but reflect this graph about the y-axis before completing the last step, the vertical shift, d.       
To graph
Draw the graph of f and
Make these changes  
to the equation 
 y = f 1x2
Change the graph  
point 1x, y2 to
Reflection about  
the x-axis
y = -f1x2
Reflect the graph of f about the x-axis.
Multiply f1x2 by -1.
1x, -y2
Reflection about  
the y-axis
y = f1-x2
Reflect the graph of f about the y-axis.
Replace x with -x.
1-x, y2
Vertical 
­stretching or 
compressing: 
y = af1x2
Multiply each y-coordinate of y = f1x2 by a. The graph of 
y = f1x2 is stretched vertically away from the x-axis if a 7 1 
and is compressed vertically ­toward the x-axis if 0 6 a 6 1.
If a 6 0, sketch the graph of y = 0 a0
 f1x2, then ­reflect it 
about the x-axis.
Multiply f1x2 by a.
1x, ay2
Horizontal 
stretching or 
compressing: 
y = f1bx2
Multiply each x-coordinate of y = f1x2 by 1
b.
The graph of y = f1x2 is stretched away from the y-axis if 
0 6 b 6 1 and is compressed toward the y-axis if b 7 1.
If b 6 0, sketch the graph of y = f10 b0 x2, then ­reflect it 
about the y-axis.
Replace x with bx.
ax
b, yb

252	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Exercises
section 2.7 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 The graph of y = f1x2 - 3 is found by vertically shifting the 
graph of y = f1x2 3 units 
.
	2.	 The graph of y = f1x + 52 is found by horizontally shifting 
the graph of y = f1x2 5 units to the 
.
	3.	 The graph of y = f1bx2 is a horizontal compression of the 
graph of y = f1x2 if b 
.
	4.	 The graph of y = f1-x2 is found by reflecting the graph of 
y = f1x2 about the 
.
	5.	 True or False. The graph of y = f1x2 and y = f1-x2 
­cannot be the same. 
	6.	 True or False. You get the same graph by shifting the graph 
of y = x2 2 units up, reflecting the shifted graph about the 
x-axis or reflecting the graph of y = x2 about  
the x-axis, and then shifting the reflected graph up  
2 units. 
3. 
4
2
3
6
5
1
0
4
2
3
6
5
1
x
y
(2, 3)
4. Shift the graph of y = x2 to the right 1 unit, reflect the resulting 
graph about the x-axis, and shift it up 2 units.
5. 
0
3
1
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
3
5
x
y
f(x)  2x  4
 
0
3
1
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
3
5
x
y
6. The graph of g is the graph of f vertically stretched by multiply-
ing each of its y-coordinates by 2.
4
2
3
6
5
1
0
4
2
3
6
5
1
x
y
g(x)
f(x)
7. a. 
0
3
4
2
1
(0, 3) (4, 3)
(2, 0)
2
3
1
x
y
  b. 
0
3
4
2
1
(0, 3)
(1, 3)
2
3
1
x
y
(
)
, 0
1
2
8. 
0
3
1
5
2
4
1
2
(1, 2)
5
3
1
4
2
1
2
x
y
  9. y = f1x2 S f1x - 12 S f12x - 12
	
S 1
2
 f12x - 12 S 1
2
 f12x - 12 + 3
0
x
y
(2, 2)
(0, 3)
(22, 3)
(21, 5)
Answers to Practice Problems
1. The graph of g is the graph of f shifted 1 unit up; the graph of h 
is the graph of f shifted 2 units down.
0
3
g(x)
h(x)
f(x)
1
5
5
3
1
x
y
2. The graph of g is the graph of f shifted 1 unit to the right; the 
graph of h is the graph of f shifted 2 units to the left.
0
3
g(x)
h(x)
f(x)
1
5
5
3
1
x
y

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 253
In Exercises 7–20, describe the transformations that produce 
the graphs of g and h from the graph of f.
	7.	 f1x2 = 1x
a.	 g1x2 = 1x + 2 
b.	 h1x2 = 1x - 1 
	8.	 f1x2 = 0 x0
a.	 g1x2 = 0 x0 + 1 
b.	 h1x2 = 0 x0 - 2 
	9.	 f1x2 = x2
a.	 g1x2 = 1x + 122 
b.	 h1x2 = 1x - 222 
	10.	 f1x2 = 1
x
a.	 g1x2 =
1
x + 2 
b.	 h1x2 =
1
x - 3 
	11.	 f1x2 = 1x
a.	 g1x2 = 1x + 1 - 2 
b.	 h1x2 = 1x - 1 + 3 
	12.	 f1x2 = x2
a.	 g1x2 = -x2 
b.	 h1x2 = 1-x22 
	13.	 f1x2 = 0 x0
a.	 g1x2 = - 0 x0 
b.	 h1x2 = 0 -x0 
	14.	 f1x2 = 1x
a.	 g1x2 = 21x 
b.	 h1x2 = 12x 
	15.	 f1x2 = 1
x
a.	 g1x2 = 2
x 
b.	 h1x2 = 1
2x 
	16.	 f1x2 = x3
a.	 g1x2 = 1x - 223 + 1 
b.	 h1x2 = - 1x + 123 + 2
	17.	 f1x2 = 1x
a.	 g1x2 = - 1x + 1 
b.	 h1x2 = 1-x + 1 
	18.	 f1x2 = Œxœ
a.	 g1x2 = Œx - 1œ + 2 
b.	 h1x2 = 3Œxœ - 1 
	19.	 f1x2 = 1
3 x
a.	 g1x2 = 1
3 x + 1 
b.	 h1x2 = 1
3 x + 1 
	20.	 f1x2 = 1
3 x
a.	 g1x2 = 21
3 1 - x + 4
b.	 h1x2 = - 1
3 x - 1 + 3 
In Exercises 21–32, match each function with its  
graph (a)–(l).
	21.	 y = - 0 x0 + 1 
	
22.	 y = - 1-x 
	23.	 y = 2x2 
	
24.	 y = 1
2x 
	25.	 y = 1x + 1  	
26.	 y = 2x - 3 
	27.	 y = 1 - 21x 
	
28.	 y = - x - 1 + 1 
	29.	 y = 1x - 122  	
30.	 y = -x2 + 3 
	31.	 y = -21x - 322 - 1  	
32.	 y = 3 - 11 - x 
	
	
1
y
x
1
2
(a)
0
	
	
(b)
y
x
1
2
3
0
1
	
	
(c)
y
x
1
0
1
	
	
(d)
y
x
1
3
5
7
9
1 0
3
7
1
3
	
	
(e)
y
x
2
1
0
1
	
	
(f)
y
x
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
	
	
(g)
y
x
2
1
0
1
2
	
	
(h)
y
x
2
1
0
1
2
1
2
	
	
(i)
y
x
3
2
1
0
1
2
	
	
(j)
y
x
1
0
1
2
3
4     

254	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	
	
(k)
y
x
2
1
3
1
	 	
In Exercises 33–62, graph each function by starting with a func-
tion from the library of functions and then using the techniques 
of shifting, compressing, stretching, and/or reflecting.
	33.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2 
	
34.	 f1x2 = x2 + 3 
	35.	 g1x2 = 1x + 1 
	
36.	 g1x2 = 1x - 4 
	37.	 h1x2 = 0 x + 10 
	
38.	 h1x2 = 0 x - 20 
	39.	 f1x2 = 1x - 323 
	
40.	 f1x2 = 1x + 223 
	41.	 g1x2 = 1x - 222 + 1 
	
42.	 g1x2 = 1x + 322 - 5 
	43.	 h1x2 = - 1x 
	
44.	 h1x2 = 1-x 
	45.	 f1x2 = - 1
x 
	
46.	 f1x2 = - 1
2x 
	47.	 g1x2 = 1
2x 
	
48.	 g1x2 = 4x 
	49.	 h1x2 = -x3 + 1 
	
50.	 h1x2 = - 1x + 123 
	51.	 f1x2 = 21x + 122 - 1 
	 52.	 f1x2 = - 1x - 122 
	53.	 g1x2 = 5 - x2 
	
54.	 g1x2 = 2 - 1x + 322 
	55.	 h1x2 = 0 1 - x0 
	
56.	 h1x2 = -21x - 1 
	57.	 f1x2 = - 0 x + 30 + 1 
	
58.	 f1x2 = 2 - 1x 
	59.	 g1x2 = - 1-x + 2 
	
60.	 g1x2 = 312 - x 
	61.	 h1x2 = 2Œx + 1œ 
	
62.	 h1x2 = Œ -xœ + 1 
In Exercises 63–74, write an equation for a function whose 
graph fits the given description.
	63.	 The graph of f1x2 = x3 is shifted 2 units up. 
	64.	 The graph of f1x2 = 1x is shifted 3 units left.
	65.	 The graph of f1x2 = 0 x0  is reflected about the x-axis.
	66.	 f1x2 = 1x is reflected about the y-axis. 
	67.	 The graph of f1x2 = x2 is shifted 3 units right and  
2 units up. 
	68.	 The graph of f1x2 = x2 is shifted 2 units left and reflected 
about the x-axis. 
	69.	 The graph of f1x2 = 1x is shifted 3 units left, reflected 
about the x-axis, and shifted 2 units down. 
	70.	 The graph of f1x2 = 1x is shifted 2 units down, reflected 
about the x-axis, and compressed vertically by a factor 
	
	 of 1
2. 
	71.	 The graph of f1x2 = x3 is shifted 4 units left, stretched  
vertically by a factor of 3, reflected about the y-axis, and 
shifted 2 units up. 
	72.	 The graph of f1x2 = x3 is reflected about the x-axis,  
shifted 1 unit up, shifted 1 unit left, and reflected about  
the y-axis. 
	73.	 The graph of f1x2 = x is shifted 4 units right, compressed 
horizontally by a factor of 2, reflected about the x-axis, and 
shifted 3 units down. 
	74.	 The graph of f1x2 = x is shifted two units right, reflected 
about the y-axis, stretched horizontally by a factor of 2 and 
shifted three units down. 
In Exercises 75–88, graph the function y = g1x2 given the 
following graph of y = f 1x2.
0
x
2
4
6
y
2
4
(4, 5)
	75.	 g1x2 = f1x2 - 1 
	
76.	 g1x2 = f1x2 + 3 
	77.	 g1x2 = -f1x2 
	
78.	 g1x2 = f1-x2 
	79.	 g1x2 = f12x2 
	
80.	 g1x2 = f  a1
2 xb 
	81.	 g1x2 = f1x + 12 
	
82.	 g1x2 = f1x - 22 
	83.	 g1x2 = 2f1x2 
	
84.	 g1x2 = 1
2  f1x2 
	85.	 g1x2 = f1x - 12 + 2 
	
86.	 g1x2 = -f1-2x2 - 1 
	87.	 g1x2 = f11 - 2x2 
	
88.	 g1x2 = f13 - 2x2 
In Exercises 89–96, graph (a) y = g1x2 and (b) y = ∣g1x2 ∣, 
given the following graph of y = f 1x2.
y
x
1
6
0
2
(5, 4)
(1, 2)
6
	89.	 g1x2 = f1x2 + 1 
	
90.	 g1x2 = -2f1x2 
	91.	 g1x2 = f  a1
2 xb 
	
92.	 g1x2 = f1-2x2 
	93.	 g1x2 = f1x - 12 
	
94.	 g1x2 = f12 - x2 
	95.	 g1x2 = -2 f1x + 12 + 3  	 96.	 g1x2 = -f1-x + 12 - 2 
	97.	 g1x2 = 2f11 - 2x2 - 3  	 98.	 g1x2 = -f1-2 - 2x2 + 1 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 99–102, let f be the function that ­associates 
the employee number x of each employee of the ABC 
Corporation with his or her annual salary f 1x2 in dollars.
	99.	 Across-the-board raise. Each employee was awarded an 
across-the-board raise of +800 per year. Write a function 
g1x2 to describe the new salary. 
(l)
y
x
3
2
1
0
1
2

	
Section 2.7    ■    Transformations of Functions 255
100.	 Percentage raise. Suppose each employee was awarded 
a 5% raise. Write a function h1x2 to describe the new 
­salary. 
101.	 Across-the-board and percentage raises. Suppose each 
employee was awarded a +500 across-the-board raise and an 
additional 2% of his or her increased ­salary. Write a function 
p1x2 to describe the new ­salary. 
102.	 Across-the-board percentage raise. Suppose the 
employees making +30,000 or more received a 2% raise, 
while those making less than +30,000 received a 10% raise. 
Write a piecewise function to describe these new salaries. 
103.	 Health plan. The ABC Corporation pays for its employees’ 
health insurance at an annual cost (in dollars) given by
C1x2 = 5,000 + 10 1x - 1,
where x is the number of employees covered.
a.	 Use transformations of the graph of y = 1x to sketch 
the graph of y = C1x2. 
b.	 Assuming that the company has 400 employees, find its 
annual outlay for the health coverage. 
104.	 Poiseuille’s Law. For an artery of radius R, the velocity v 
(in mm/min) of blood flow at a distance r from the center of 
the artery is given by
v = c1R2 - r22, 0 … r … R,
	
	 where c is a constant.
In an artery for Angie, c = 1000 and R = 3 mm. Find the 
velocity of blood flow in this artery at
a.	 The center of the artery. 
b.	 The inner linings of the artery. 
c.	 Midway between the center and the inner linings.
105.	 Demand. The weekly demand for paper hats produced by 
Mythical Manufacturers is given by
x1p2 = 109,561 - 1p + 122,
	
	 where x represents the number of hats that can be sold at a 
price of p cents each.
a.	 Use transformations on the graph of y = p2 to sketch the 
graph of y = x1p2. 
b.	 Find the price at which 69,160 hats can be sold. 
c.	 Find the price at which no hats can be sold. 
106.	 Revenue. The weekly demand for cashmere sweaters 
­produced by Wool Shop, Inc., is x1p2 = -3p + 600. The 
revenue is given by R1p2 = -3p2 + 600p. Describe how to 
sketch the graph of y = R1p2 by applying transformations 
to the graph of y = p2. [Hint: First, write R1p2 in the form 
-31p - h22 + k.4 
107.	 Daylight. At 60° north latitude, the graph of y = f1t2 
gives the number of hours of daylight. (On the t-axis, note 
that 1 = January and 12 = December.)
Daylight
0
Month
10
15
3
6
9
12
(1, 10.3)
(12, 10)
(3, 12)
(6, 14)
(9, 12)
y
t
	
	 Sketch the graph of y = f1t2 - 12. 
108.	 Use the graph of y = f1t2 of Exercise 107 to sketch the 
graph of y = 24 - f1t2. Interpret the result. 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 109 and 110, the graphs of y = f1x2 and 
y = g1x2 are given. Find an equation for g1x2 if the graph  
of g is obtained from the graph of f by a sequence of  
transformations.
109.	
x
y
x
y
(1, 0)
(3, 2)
(0, 0)
(4, 2)
f(x) 5 œx
y 5 g(x)
	
	
	110.	
In Exercises 111–118, by completing the square on each 
­quadratic expression, use transformations on y = x2 to 
sketch the graph of y = f 1x2.
	111.	 f1x2 = x2 + 4x
	
	 [Hint: x2 + 4x = 1x2 + 4x + 42 - 4 = 1x + 222 - 4.] 
	112.	 f1x2 = x2 - 6x 
	113.	 f1x2 = -x2 + 2x 
	114.	 f1x2 = -x2 - 2x 
	115.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 4x 
	116.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 6x + 3.5 
	117.	 f1x2 = -2x2 - 8x + 3 
	118.	 f1x2 = -2x2 + 2x - 1 
In Exercises 119–124, sketch the graph of each function.
	119.	 y = 0 2x + 30 
	
120.	 y =  Œxœ  
	121.	 y = 0 4 - x20 
	
122.	 y = ` 1
x ` 
	123.	 y = 2x 
	
124.	 y = Œ x œ 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	125.	 If f is a function with x-intercept -2 and y-intercept 3, find 
the corresponding x-intercept and y-intercept, if possible, for
a.	 y = f1x - 32. 
b.	 y = 5f1x2. 
c.	 y = -f1x2. 
d.	 y = f1-x2. 
x
y
y 5 f(x)
(3, 4)
(1, 0)
(1, 2)
(3, 0)
x
y
y 5 g(x)
(5, 4)
(1, 0)
(1, 2)
(3, 0) 

256	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	126.	 If f is a function with x-intercept 4 and y-intercept -1, find 
the corresponding x-intercept and y-intercept, if possible, for
a.	 y = f1x + 22. 
b.	 y = 2f1x2. 
c.	 y = -f1x2. 
d.	 y = f1-x2. 
	127.	 Suppose the graph of y = f1x2 is given. Using transforma-
tions, explain how the graph of y = g1x2 differs from the 
graph of y = h1x2.
a.	 g1x2 = f1x2 + 3,	 h1x2 = f1x + 32
b.	 g1x2 = f1x2 - 1,	 h1x2 = f1x - 12
c.	 g1x2 = 2 f1x2,	
h1x2 = f12x2
d.	 g1x2 = -3 f1x2,	
h1x2 = f1-3x2
	128.	 Suppose the graph of y = f1-4x2 is given. Explain how to 
obtain the graph of y = f1x2.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 129–134, perform the indicated operations.
	129.	 15x2 + 5x + 72 + 1x2 + 9x - 42 
	130.	 1x2 + 2x2 + 16x3 - 2x + 52 
	131.	 15x2 + 6x - 22 - 13x2 - 9x + 12 
	132.	 1x3 + 22 - 12x3 + 5x - 32 
	133.	 1x - 221x2 + 2x + 42 
	134.	 1x2 + x + 121x2 - x + 12 
In Exercises 135–138, find the domain of each function.
	135.	 f1x2 =
2x - 3
x2 - 5x + 6 
	136.	 f1x2 = x - 2
x2 - 4 
	137.	 f1x2 = 22x - 3 
	138.	 f1x2 =
1
25 - 2x 
          

	
Section 2.8    ■    Combining Functions; Composite Functions 257
1	
Define basic operations  
on functions.
S e c t i o n 2.8
Combining Functions
Just as numbers can be added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided to produce new numbers, 
so functions can be added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided to produce other functions. 
To add, subtract, multiply, or divide functions, we simply add, subtract, multiply, or divide 
their output values.
For example, if f1x2 = x2 - 2x + 4 and g1x2 = x + 2, then
f1x2 + g1x2 = 1x2 - 2x + 42 + 1x + 22 = x2 - x + 6.
This new function y = x2 - x + 6 is called the sum function f + g.
BP Oil Spill
The Deepwater Horizon was a floating drilling rig that could operate in waters up to 
10,000 feet deep. British Petroleum (BP) was the operator and principal developer of 
the exploratory well situated in the Gulf of Mexico about 41 miles off the Louisiana 
coast. On April 20, 2010 at approximately 9:45 pm, high-pressure methane gas from the 
well ignited and exploded, engulfing the platform of the rig. At the time, 126 crew 
members were on board. Of these, 11 workers were never found despite extensive 
search operations and are believed to have died in the explosion.
The total estimated volume of oil leaked was approximately 5 million barrels, mak-
ing it the largest accidental oil spill in history. The spill directly impacted 68,000 square 
miles (about size of Oklahoma). By June 2010, oil had washed up on 1074 miles of the 
coasts of Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida.
On June 16, 2010, BP announced a $20 billion fund to settle claims arising from the 
disaster. The fund was to be used only for natural resource restoration and compensa-
tion for individual and business claimants. As of July, 2013, BP and its partners in the oil 
well, Transocean and Halliburton, are on trial to determine payouts and fines under the 
Clean Water Act and the Natural Resources Damages Assessment.
In Example 8, we calculate the area covered by an oil spill.
Combining Functions;  
Composite Functions
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 Domain of a function (Section 2.4,  
page 199)
2	 Rational inequalities (Section 1.5,  
page 137)
Objectives
1	 Define basic operations on functions.
2	 Form composite functions.
3	 Find the domain of a composite function.
4	 Decompose a function.
5	 Apply composition to practical problems.

258	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Let f and g be two functions. The sum f + g, the difference f - g, the product fg, 
and the quotient f
g are functions defined as follows:
• 
Sum 
1 f + g21x2 = f1x2 + g1x2
• 
Difference 
1 f - g21x2 = f1x2 - g1x2
• 
Product 
fg1x2 = f1x2 # g1x2; also written as 1 fg21x2 
• 
Quotient 
f
g
 1x2 = f1x2
g1x2, provided that g1x2 ≠0; also written as a f
gb1x2
The domain of each of the new functions consists of those values of x that are com-
mon to the domains of f and g, except that for f
g, all x for which g1x2 = 0 must also 
be excluded.
Sum, Difference, Product, and Quotient of Functions
Let f1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8 and g1x2 = x - 2. Find each of the following functions or 
function values.
a.	 1 f - g2142	
b.	 a f
gb132
c.	 1 f + g21x2	
d.	 1 f - g21x2
e.	 1 f g21x2	
f.	 a f
gb1x2
Solution
a.	  
 f142 = 42 - 6142 + 8 = 0	
Replace x with 4 in f1x2.
	
 g142 = 4 - 2 = 2
	
Replace x with 4 in g1x2.
	
 1 f - g2142 = f142 - g142	
Definition of difference
	
 = 0 - 2 = -2
	
Replace f142 with 0, g142 with 2.
b.	  
 f132 = 32 - 6132 + 8 = -1	
Replace x with 3 in f1x2.
	
 g132 = 3 - 2 = 1
	
Replace x with 3 in g1x2.
	
 a f
gb 132 = f132
g132 = -1
1
= -1	
Replace f132 with -1, g132 with 1.
c.	  1 f + g21x2 = f1x2 + g1x2 
Definition of sum
	
 = 1x2 - 6x + 82 + 1x - 22	
Add f1x2 and g1x2.
	
 = x2 - 5x + 6
	
Combine like terms.
d.	  1 f - g21x2 = f1x2 - g1x2 
Definition of difference
	
 = 1x2 - 6x + 82 - 1x - 22 
Subtract g1x2 from f1x2.
	
 = x2 - 7x + 10
	
Combine like terms.
e.	  1 fg21x2 = f1x2 # g1x2 
Definition of product
	
 = 1x2 - 6x + 821x - 22	
Multiply f1x2 and g1x2.
	
 = x21x - 22 - 6x1x - 22 + 81x - 22 
Distributive property
	
 = x3 - 2x2 - 6x2 + 12x + 8x - 16
 
Distributive property
	
 = x3 - 8x2 + 20x - 16
	
Combine like terms.
Combining Functions
EXAMPLE 1

	
Section 2.8    ■    Combining Functions; Composite Functions 259
f.	  a f
gb 1x2 = f1x2
g1x2, g1x2 ≠0 
Definition of quotient
	
 = x2 - 6x + 8
x - 2
, x - 2 ≠0	
Replace f1x2 with x2 - 6x + 8, g1x2 
with x - 2.
	
 = 1x - 221x - 42
x - 2
, x ≠2 	
Factor the numerator.
	
 = x - 4, x ≠2
Because f  and g are polynomials, the domain of both f  and g is the set of all real num-
bers, or in interval notation, 1- ∞, ∞2. So the domain for f + g, f - g, and fg is 1- ∞, ∞2. 
However, for f
g, we must exclude 2 because g122 = 0. The domain for f
g is the set of all 
real numbers x, x ≠2, or in interval notation, 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2.
Practice Problem 1  Let f1x2 = 3x - 1 and g1x2 = x2 + 2. Find 1 f + g21x2, 
1 f - g21x2, 1 fg21x2, and a f
gb 1x2.
When rewriting a function such as
a f
gb 1x2 =
1x - 221x - 42
x - 2
, x ≠2,
by dividing out the common factor, remember to specify “x ≠2.”
We identify the domain before we simplify and write
a f
gb 1x2 = x - 4, x ≠2.
Warning
Let f1x2 = 1x + 2 and g1x2 = 15 - x. Find the domain of f + g, f - g, fg, and f
g.
Solution
Recall (see page 59) that 1u is defined only if u Ú 0.
So f1x2 = 1x + 2 is defined if x + 2 Ú 0 or x Ú -2. 
Sovle for x.
The domain of f = D1 = 3-2, ∞2	
Interval notation
Similarly, g1x2 = 15 - x is defined only if 5 - x Ú 0
or    5 Ú x 
Sovle for x.
or    x … 5	
Rewrite.
The domain of g = D2 = 1- ∞, 54	
Interval notation
To find the required domains, we first find D1 ¨ D2 from the graphs of D1 and D2. See 
Figure 2.92.
Finding the Domain
EXAMPLE 2
Figure 2.92 
D1 ˘ D2 : 
D2 :
22
D1 :
22
5
5

260	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
The domain of f + g, f - g, and fg is D1 ¨ D2 = 3-2, 54. For the domain of f
g, we 
must exclude from D1 ¨ D2 those numbers where g1x2 = 15 - x = 0. Solving this 
equation for x, we have x = 5.
So the domain of f
g is 3-2, 52.
Practice Problem 2  Let f1x2 = 1x - 1 and g1x2 = 13 - x. Find the domain of 
fg, f
g, and g
f .
Composition of Functions
There is yet another way to construct a new function from two functions. Figure 2.93 shows 
what happens when you apply one function g1x2 = x2 - 1 to an input (domain) value, x, 
and then apply a second function f1x2 = 1x to the output value, g1x2, from the first func-
tion. In this case, the output from the first function becomes the input for the second function.
2	
Form composite functions.
Figure 2.93  Composition of functions
First
input
First
output
x2  1
Second
input
x2  1
g(x)  x2  1
x
f(x) 
x

Second
output
x2  1

If f and g are two functions, the composition of the function f with the function g is 
written as f ∘g and is defined by the equation
1 f ∘g21x2 = f1g1x22
We read 1 f ∘g21x2 as “ f  composed with g of x” and f1g1x22 as “ f  of g of x.” The 
domain of f ∘g consists of those values x in the domain of g for which g1x2 is in the 
domain of f.
Composition of Functions
Evaluating 1 f ∘g2 1x2  By definition,
1 f ∘g21x2 = f1g1x22
Thus, to evaluate 1 f ∘g21x2, we must
 (i)  Evaluate the inner function g at x.
(ii)  Use the result g1x2 as the input for the outer function f.
Figure 2.94  Composition of the function f with g
g
g(x) must be in the
domain of f
x
g(x)
f
f(g(x))
Domain
of f   g

 f   g

Figure 2.94 may help clarify the definition of f ∘g.
inner function
outer function

	
Section 2.8    ■    Combining Functions; Composite Functions 261
Let f1x2 = x3 and g1x2 = x + 1. Find each composite function value.
a.	 1 f ∘g2112        b.  1g ∘f 2112        c.  1 f ∘f 21-12
Solution
a.	  1 f ∘g2112 = f1g1122 
Definition of f ∘g
 = 3g11243	
Replace x with g112 in f1x2 = x3.
 = 23 = 8 	
g112 = 1 + 1 = 2; simplify.
b.	 1g ∘f 2112 = g1 f1122 
Definition of g ∘f
 = f112 + 1	
Replace x with f112 in g1x2 = x + 1.
 = 1 + 1 = 2	
f112 = 13 = 1; simplify.
c.	  1 f ∘f 21-12 = f1 f1-122 
Definition of f ∘f
 = 3 f1-1243	
Replace x with f1-12 in f1x2 = x3.
 = 1-123 = -1	
f1-12 = 1-123 = -1; simplify.
Practice Problem 3  Let f 1x2 = -5x and g1x2 = x2 + 1. Find each composite  
function value.
a.	 1 f ∘g2102        b.  1g ∘f 2102
Evaluating a Composite Function
EXAMPLE 3
When computing 
1f ∘g21x2 = f1g1x22, you must 
replace every x in f1x2 with g1x2.
Side  
Note
Let f1x2 = 2x + 1 and g1x2 = x2 - 3. Find each composite function.
a.	 1 f ∘g21x2        b.  1g ∘f 21x2        c.  1 f ∘f 21x2
Solution
a.	 1 f ∘g21x2 = f1g1x22 
Definition of f ∘g
= 2g1x2 + 1	
Replace x with g1x2 in f1x2 = 2x + 1.
= 21x2 - 32 + 1	
Replace g1x2 with x2 - 3.
= 2x2 - 5 
Simplify.
b.	 1g ∘f 21x2 = g1 f1x22 
Definition of g ∘f
= 3 f1x242 - 3	
Replace x with f1x2 in g1x2 = x2 - 3.
= 12x + 122 - 3	
Replace f1x2 with 2x + 1.
= 4x2 + 4x + 1 - 3	
1A + B22 = A2 + 2AB + B2
= 4x2 + 4x - 2 
Simplify.
c.	 1 f ∘f 21x2 = f 1 f1x22 
Definition of f ∘f
= 2f1x2 + 1	
Replace x with f1x2 in f1x2 = 2x + 1.
= 212x + 12 + 1	
Replace f1x2 with 2x + 1.
= 4x + 3 
Simplify.
Practice Problem 4  Let f1x2 = 2 - x and g1x2 = 2x2 + 1. Find each composite 
function.
a.	 1g ∘f 21x2        b.  1 f ∘g21x2        c.  1g ∘g21x2
Parts a and b of Example 3 illustrate that in general, f ∘g ≠g ∘f. In other words, the com-
position of functions is not commutative.
Finding Composite Functions
EXAMPLE 4

262	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Domain of Composite Functions
Let f  and g be two functions. The domain of the composite function f ∘g consists of those 
values of x in the domain of g for which g1x2 is in the domain of f. So to find the domain 
of f ∘g, we first find the domain of g. Then from the domain of g, we exclude those values 
of x for which g1x2 is not in the domain of f.
Note that f1g1x22 is not f1x2 # g1x2. In f1g1x22, the output of g is used as an input for f; in 
contrast, in f1x2 # g1x2, the output f1x2 is multiplied by the output g1x2.
Warning
3	
Find the domain of a 
composite function.
Find the domain of f ∘g from the defining equations 
for f  and g.
Step 1  Let A be the domain of the inner  
function g. We may find A by first finding  
the values of x for which g is not defined.
Step 2  Let B be the set of values of x for which 
g1x2 is in  the domain of f. As before, we may do this 
by finding the values of x for which g1x2  is not in the 
domain of f.
Step 3  The domain of f ∘g is A ¨ B. The set A ¨ B 
is the values of x that are in the domain of g and for 
which g1x2 is in the domain of f.
Find the domain of f ∘g if 
f1x2 =
2
x - 3 and g1x2 =
5
x + 1.
1.	g1x2 =
5
x + 1 is not defined if the denominator 
	
x + 1 = 0, or x = -1. So A = 5x x ≠-16, or  
A = 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2.
2.	 f1g1x22 =
2
g1x2 - 3, so f1g1x22 is not defined if 
	
the denominator
	
 g1x2 - 3 = 0.
	
 5
x + 1 - 3 = 0 	
Replace g1x2 with 
5
x + 1.
	
 5 - 31x + 12 = 0 	
Multiply by 1x + 12.
	
 5 - 3x - 3 = 0  
Simplify.
	
 x = 2
3 
Solve for x.
	
B = ex x ≠2
3 f, or B = a - ∞, 2
3b ´ a2
3, ∞b
3.	
21
 A ˘ B:
B:
21
A:
2
3
2
3
	
A ¨ B = 1- ∞, -12 ´ a -1, 2
3b ´ a2
3, ∞b is the 
	
domain of f ∘g.
Finding the Domain of a Composite Function
Objective
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 5
Practice Problem 5  Let f1x2 = 1x + 1 and g1x2 =
2
x - 3. Find the domain of f ∘g.
Example

	
Section 2.8    ■    Combining Functions; Composite Functions 263
Let f1x2 = 1x - 2 and g1x2 = 14 - x. Find the following functions and their 
domains using the procedure given in Example 5.
a.	 f ∘g        b.  g ∘f
Solution
a.	 1.  g1x2 = 14 - x is defined if 4 - x Ú 0 or x … 4. So A = 1- ∞, 44.
      2.  f1g1x22 = 1g1x2 - 2    Replace x with g1x2 in f 1x2 = 1x - 2.
So, g1x2 is in the domine of f if:
 g1x2 - 2 Ú 0
 g1x2 Ú 2    Add 2 to both sides.
 14 - x Ú 2    Replace g1x2 with 14 - x.
 4 - x Ú 4    Square both sides.
 -x Ú 0    Subtract 4 from both sides.
 x … 0    Solve for x.
So  B = 1- ∞, 04.
	
3.   A ¨ B = 1- ∞, 44 ¨ 1- ∞, 04
	
   
 = 1- ∞, 04      See Figure.
 
   So, the domain of f ∘g is 1- ∞, 04
b.	 To find the domain of g ∘f , we interchange the role of g and f.
	
1.  f 1x2 = 1x - 2 is defined if x - 2 Ú 0 or x Ú 2. So A = 32, ∞2.
      2.  g1f 1x22 = 14 - f 1x2    Replace x with f 1x2 in g1x2 = 14 - x.
So, f 1x2 is in the domine of g if:
 4 - f 1x2 Ú 0
 4 Ú f 1x2    Add f 1x2 to both sides.
 f 1x2 … 4
    Rewrite
 1x - 2 … 4
    Replace f1x2 with 1x - 2.
 x - 2 … 16     Square both sides 1if 0 6 a … b then a2 … b22.
 x … 18
     Solve for x.
So  B = 1- ∞, 184.
	
3.   A ¨ B = 32, - ∞2 ¨ 1- ∞, 184
	
   
 = 32, 184       See Figure.
 
   So, the domain of g ∘f = 32, 184.
Practice Problem 6  Let f1x2 = 1x - 1 and g1x2 = 24 - x2. Find each of the  
following domains.
a.	 f ∘g        b.  g ∘f
Finding the Domain of Composite Functions
EXAMPLE 6
A ˘ B 5 (, 0]
 A ˘ B:
B:
A:
4
0
0
A ˘ B 5 [2, 18]
 A ˘ B:
B:
A:
2
18
2
18
If the function f ∘g can be  
simplified, determine the domain 
before simplifying. For example, if  
f1x2 = x2 and g1x2 = 1x, 
1f ∘g21x2 = f1g1x22 = f11x2.
Before simplifying:
1f ∘g21x2 = 11x22, x Ú 0
The domain of f is 1- ∞, ∞2, and 
1f ∘g21x2 is defined on 30, ∞2.
After simplifying:
1f ∘g21x2 = x
Here it appears that the domain of 
f ∘g is 1- ∞, ∞2. However this is 
not correct, it is 30, ∞2.
Side  
Note

264	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Decomposition of a Function
In the composition of two functions, we combine two functions and create a new function. 
However, sometimes it is more useful to use the concept of composition to decompose 
a function into simpler functions. For example, consider the function H1x2 = 2x2 - 2. 
A way to write H1x2 as the composition of two functions is to let f1x2 = 1x and 
g1x2 = x2 - 2 so that f1g1x22 = f1x2 - 22 = 2x2 - 2 = H1x2.
A function may be decomposed into simpler functions in several different ways by 
choosing various “inner” functions.
4	
Decompose a function.
Write a function H as a composite of simpler  
functions f  and g so that H = f ∘g.
Step 1  Define g1x2 as any expression in the defining 
equation for H.
Step 2  To get f 1x2 from the defining equation for 
H, (a) replace the letter H with f  and (b) replace the 
expression chosen for g1x2 with x.
Step 3  Now we have
 H1x2 = f1g1x22
 = 1 f ∘g21x2.
Write
H1x2 =
1
22x2 + 1
as f ∘g for some functions f and g.
1.  Let g1x2 = 2x2 + 1.
2.  H1x2 =
1
22x2 + 1
	
becomes
	
f 1x2 =
1
1x
    Replace the expression  
2x2 + 1 from Step 1 with  
x and replace H with f.
3.  f1g1x22 = f12x2 + 12   
f 1x2 =
1
1x
 , g1x2 = 2x2 + 1
 =
1
22x2 + 1
 = H1x2
Note: Other choices include g1x2 = 2x2 and f 1x2 =
1
1x + 1
OBJECTIVE
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE
Practice Problem 7  Repeat Example 7, letting g1x2 = 22x2 + 1. Find f1x2  
and write H1x2 = 1 f ∘g21x2.
Applications of Composite Functions
5	
Apply composition to practical 
problems.
Suppose oil spills from a tanker into the Pacific Ocean and the area of the spill is a per-
fect circle. The radius of this oil slick increases at the rate of 2 miles per hour.
a.	 Express the area of the oil slick as a function of time.
b.	 Calculate the area covered by the oil slick in six hours.
Calculating the Area of an Oil Spill from a Tanker
EXAMPLE 8
Decomposing a Function
EXAMPLE 7

	
Section 2.8    ■    Combining Functions; Composite Functions 265
Solution
The area A of the oil slick is a function of its radius r.
A = f1r2 = pr2
The radius is a function of time. We know that r increases at the rate of 2 miles per hour. 
So in t hours, the radius r of the oil slick is given by the function
r = g1t2 = 2t    Distance = Rate * Time
a.	 Therefore, the area A of the oil slick is a function of the radius, which is itself a function 
of time. It is a composite function given by
 A = f1g1t22 = f12t2 = p12t22
 = 4pt2.
b.	 Substitute t = 6 into A to find the area covered by the oil in six hours.
 A = 4p1622 = 4p1362
 = 144p ≈452 square miles
Practice Problem 8  What would the result of Example 8 be if the radius of the  
oil slick increased at a rate of 3 miles per hour?
A car dealer offers an 8% discount off the manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP) 
of x dollars for any new car on his lot. At the same time, the manufacturer offers a $4000 
rebate for each purchase of a new car.
a.	 Write a function r1x2 that represents the price after only the rebate.
b.	 Write a function d1x2 that represents the price after only the dealer’s discount.
c.	 Write the functions 1r ∘d21x2 and 1d ∘r21x2. What do they represent?
d.	 Calculate 1d ∘r21x2 - 1r ∘d21x2. Interpret this expression.
Solution
a.	 The MSRP is x dollars, and the manufacturer’s rebate is $4000 for each car; so
r1x2 = x - 4000
	
represents the price of a car after the rebate.
b.	 The dealer’s discount is 8% of x, or 0.08x; therefore,
d1x2 = x - 0.08x = 0.92x
	
represents the price of the car after the dealer’s discount.
c.	 (i) 1r ∘d21x2 = r 1d1x22	
Apply the dealer’s discount first.
	
 = r 10.92x2
	
d1x2 = 0.92x
 = 0.92x - 4000	
Evaluate r10.92x2 using r1x2 = x - 4000.
Then 1r ∘d21x2 = 0.92x - 4000 represents the price of a car when the dealer’s 
discount is applied first and then the ­manufacturer’s rebate is applied.
	
(ii)  1d ∘r21x2 = d1r1x22	
Apply the manufacturer’s rebate first.
= d1x - 40002	
r1x2 = x - 4000
= 0.921x - 40002	
Evaluate d1x - 40002 using d1x2 = 0.92x.
= 0.92x - 3680
Thus, 1d ∘r21x2 = 0.92x - 3680 represents the price of a car when the manufac-
turer’s rebate is applied first and then the dealer’s discount is applied.
Applying Composition to Sales
EXAMPLE 9

266	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
d.	  1d ∘r21x2 - 1r ∘d21x2 = 10.92x - 36802 - 10.92x - 40002    Subtract function  
values.
	
 = +320
 
This equation shows that any car, regardless of its price, will cost $320 more if you ap-
ply the rebate first and then the discount.
Practice Problem 9  Repeat Example 9 if the dealer offers a 6% discount and the  
manufacturer offers a $4500 rebate.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 1 f + g21x2 = x2 + 3x + 1
1 f - g21x2 = -x2 + 3x - 3
1 fg21x2 = 3x3 - x2 + 6x - 2
a f
gb 1x2 = 3x - 1
x2 + 2
2. Domains: fg = 31, 34; f
g = 31, 32; g
f = 11, 34
3. a. 1 f ∘g2102 = -5  b. 1g ∘f 2102 = 1
4. a. 1g ∘f 21x2 = 2x2 - 8x + 9
b. 1 f ∘g21x2 = 1 - 2x2
c. 1g ∘g21x2 = 8x4 + 8x2 + 3
5. 1- ∞, 14 ´ 13, ∞2    6. a. 3- 13, 134  b. 31, 54   
7. f1x2 = 1
x    8. a. A = 9pt2  b. A = 324p square miles
≈ 1018 square miles
9. a. r1x2 = x - 4500  b. d1x2 = 0.94x
c.  (i) 1r ∘d21x2 = 0.94x - 4500
 (ii) 1d ∘r21x2 = 0.94x - 4230
d. 1d ∘r21x2 - 1r ∘d21x2 = 270
Exercises
section 2.8 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 If f122 = 12 and g122 = 4, then 1g - f 2122 =   
.
	2.	 If f1x2 = 2x - 1 and f1x2 + g1x2 = 0, then g1x2 =   
.
	3.	 If f1x2 = x and g1x2 = 1, then 1 f ∘g21x2 =   
.
	4.	 If f112 = 4 and g142 = 7, then 1g ∘f 2112 =  
.
	5.	 True or False. If f1x2 = 2x and g1x2 = 1
2x, then 
	
	 1 f ∘g21x2 = x. 
	6.	 True or False. It cannot happen that f ∘g = g ∘f. 
In Exercises 7–10, functions f and g are given. Find each of 
the given values.
a.  1 f + g21-12
b.  1 f - g2102
c.  1 f # g2122
d.  a f
gb 112
	7.	 f1x2 = 2x; g1x2 = -x 
	8.	 f1x2 = 1 - x2; g1x2 = x + 1 
	9.	 f1x2 =
1
1x + 2; g1x2 = 2x + 1 
	10.	 f1x2 =
x
x2 - 6x + 8
; g1x2 = 3 - x 
In Exercises 11–22, functions f and g are given. Find each of 
the following functions and state its domain.
a.  f + g
b.  f - g
c.  f # g
d.  f
g
e.  g
f
	11.	 f1x2 = x - 3; g1x2 = x2 
	12.	 f1x2 = 2x - 1; g1x2 = x2 
	13.	 f1x2 = x3 - 1; g1x2 = 2x2 + 5 
	14.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4; g1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8 
	15.	 f1x2 = 2x - 1; g1x2 = 1x 
	16.	 f1x2 = 1 - 1
x; g1x2 = 1
x 
	17.	 f1x2 =
2
x + 1; g1x2 =
x
x + 1 
	18.	 f1x2 = 5x - 1
x + 1 ; g1x2 = 4x + 10
x + 1 
	19.	 f1x2 =
x2
x + 1; g1x2 =
2x
x2 - 1 
	20.	 f1x2 =
x - 3
x2 - 25; g1x2 =
x - 3
x2 + 9x + 20 
	21.	 f1x2 =
2x
x2 - 16; g1x2 =
2x - 7
x2 - 7x + 12 
	22.	 f1x2 = x2 + 3x + 2
x3 + 4x
; g1x2 =
2x3 + 8x
x2 + x - 2                                

	
Section 2.8    ■    Combining Functions; Composite Functions 267
In Exercises 23–26, find the domain of each function.
a.  f # g
b.  f
g
	23.	 f1x2 = 1x - 1;	  g1x2 = 15 - x  
	24.	 f1x2 = 1x - 2;  	g1x2 = 1x + 2  
	25.	 f1x2 = 1x + 2;	  g1x2 = 29 - x2  
	26.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 4;	  g1x2 = 225 - x2
In Exercises 27 and 28, use each diagram to evaluate 
1g ∘f 2 1x2. Then evaluate 1g ∘f 2 122 and 1g ∘f 2 1 −32.
	27.	
x
	28.	
x
In Exercises 29–36, let f 1x2 = 2x + 1 and g1x2 = 2x2 −3. 
Evaluate each expression.
	29.	 1 f ∘g2122 
	30.	 1g ∘f 2122 
	31.	 1 f ∘g21-32 
	32.	 1g ∘f 21-52 
	33.	 1g ∘f 21a2 
	34.	 1g ∘f 21-a2 
	35.	 1 f ∘f 2112 
	36.	 1g ∘g21-12 
In Exercises 37–42, the functions f and g are given. Find f ∘g 
and its domain.
	37.	 f1x2 =
2
x + 1; g1x2 = 1
x 
	38.	 f1x2 =
1
x - 1; g1x2 =
2
x + 3
	39.	 f1x2 = 1x - 3; g1x2 = 2 - 3x 
	40.	 f1x2 =
x
x - 1; g1x2 = 2 + 5x
	41.	 f1x2 = 0 x0 ; g1x2 = x2 - 1 
	42.	 f1x2 = 3x - 2; g1x2 = 0 x - 10 
In Exercises 43–56, the functions f and g are given. Find each 
composite function and describe its domain.
a.  f ∘g
b.  g ∘f
c.  f ∘f
d.  g ∘g
	43.	 f1x2 = 2x - 3; g1x2 = x + 4 
	44.	 f1x2 = x - 3; g1x2 = 3x - 5 
	45.	 f1x2 = 1 - 2x; g1x2 = 1 + x2 
	46.	 f1x2 = 2x - 3; g1x2 = 2x2 
	47.	 f1x2 = x2; g1x2 = 1x 
	48.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x; g1x2 = 1x + 2 
	49.	 f1x2 =
1
2x - 1; g1x2 = 1
x2 
	50.	 f1x2 = x - 1; g1x2 =
x
x + 1 
	51.	 f1x2 = 1x - 1; g1x2 = 14 - x 
	52.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4; g1x2 = 24 - x2 
	53.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 1; g1x2 = 24 - x2 
	54.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 9; g1x2 = 29 - x2 
	55.	 f1x2 = 1 + 1
x; g1x2 = 1 + x
1 - x 
	56.	 f1x2 = 1 
3 x + 1; g1x2 = x3 + 1 
In Exercises 57–66, express the given function H as a compo-
sition of two functions f and g such that H1x2 = 1 f ∘g2 1x2.
	57.	 H1x2 = 1x + 2
	58.	 H1x2 = 0 3x + 20
	59.	 H1x2 = 1x2 - 3210
	60.	 H1x2 = 23x2 + 5
	61.	 H1x2 =
1
3x - 5
	62.	 H1x2 =
5
2x + 3
	63.	 H1x2 = 2
3 x2 - 7 
	64.	 H1x2 = 2
4 x2 + x + 1 
	65.	 H1x2 =
1
0 x3 - 10  
	66.	 H1x2 = 2
3 1 + 1x
Applying the Concepts
	67.	 Cost, revenue, and profit. A retailer purchases x shirts 
from a wholesaler at a price of $12 per shirt. Her selling price 
for each shirt is $22. The state has 7% sales tax. Interpret 
each of the following functions.
a.	 f1x2 = 12x 
b.	 g1x2 = 22x 
c.	 h1x2 = g1x2 + 0.07g1x2    
d.	 P1x2 = g1x2 - f1x2  
	68.	 Cost, revenue, and profit. The demand equation for a 
product is given by x = 5000 - 5p, where x is the num-
ber of units produced and sold at price p (in dollars) per 
unit. The cost (in dollars) of producing x units is given by 
C1x2 = 4x + 12,000. Express each of the following as a 
function of price.
a.	 Cost 
b.	 Revenue 
c. Profit 
	69.	 Cost and revenue. A manufacturer of radios estimates that 
his daily cost of producing x radios is given by the equation 
C = 350 + 5x. The equation R = 25x represents the  
revenue in dollars from selling x radios.
a.	 Write and simplify the profit function
	
	
P1x2 = R1x2 - C1x2. 
b.	 Find P1202. What does the number P1202 represent? 
c.	 How many radios should the manufacturer produce and 
sell to have a daily profit of $500? 
d.	 Find the composite function 1R ∘x21C2. What does this 
function represent? 
	
[Hint: To find x1C2, solve C = 350 + 5x for x.]
	70.	 Mail order. You order merchandise worth x dollars from 
D-Bay Manufacturers. The company charges you sales tax of 
4% of the purchase price plus shipping and handling fees of 
$3 plus 2% of the after-tax purchase price.
a.	 Write a function g1x2 that represents the sales tax. 
b.	 What does the function h1x2 = x + g1x2 represent? 
c.	 Write a function f1x2 that represents the shipping and 
handling fees. 
d.	 What does the function T1x2 = h1x2 + f1x2 represent?             

268	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	71.	 Consumer issues. You work in a department store in which 
employees are entitled to a 30% discount on their purchases. 
You also have a coupon worth $5 off any item.
a.	 Write a function f1x2 that models discounting an item  
by 30%. 
b.	 Write a function g1x2 that models applying the  
coupon. 
c.	 Use a composition of your two functions from  
(a) and (b) to model your cost for an item assuming  
that the clerk applies the discount first and then the  
coupon. 
d.	 Use a composition of your two functions from  
(a) and (b) to model your cost for an item assuming  
that the clerk applies the coupon first and then the  
discount. 
e.	 Use the composite functions from (c) and (d) to find how 
much more an item costs assuming that the clerk applies 
the coupon first. 
	72.	 Consumer issues. You work in a department store in which 
employees are entitled to a 20% discount on their purchases. 
In addition, the store is offering a 10% discount on all items.
a.	 Write a function f1x2 that models discounting an item  
by 20%. 
b.	 Write a function g1x2 that models discounting an item  
by 10%. 
c.	 Use a composition of your two functions from (a) and  
(b) to model taking the 20% discount first. 
d.	 Use a composition of your two functions from (a) and  
(b) to model taking the 10% discount first. 
e.	 Use the composite functions from (c) and (d) to decide 
which discount you would prefer to take first.
	73.	 Test grades. Professor Harsh gave a test to his college alge-
bra class, and nobody got more than 80 points (out of 100) 
on the test. One problem worth 8 points had insufficient data, 
so nobody could solve that problem. The professor adjusted 
the grades for the class by (a) increasing everyone’s score by 
10% and (b) giving everyone 8 bonus points. Let x represent 
the original score of a student.
a.	 Write statements (a) and (b) as functions f1x2 and g1x2, 
respectively. 
b.	 Find 1f ∘g21x2 and explain what it means. 
c.	 Find 1g ∘f 21x2 and explain what it means. 
d.	 Evaluate 1 f ∘g21702 and 1g ∘f 21702. 
e. Does 1 f ∘g21x2 = 1g ∘f 21x2? 
f. Suppose a score of 90 or better results in an A. What is  
the lowest original score that will result in an A if the 
professor uses
 (i)  1 f ∘g21x2? 
(ii)  1g ∘f 21x2? 
	74.	 Sales commissions. Henrita works as a salesperson in a 
department store. Her weekly salary is $200 plus a 3% bonus 
on weekly sales over $8000. Suppose her sales in a week are 
x dollars.
a.	 Let f1x2 = 0.03x. What does this mean? 
b.	 Let g1x2 = x - 8000. What does this mean? 
c.	 Which composite function, 1 f ∘g21x2 or 1g ∘f 21x2,  
represents Henrita’s bonus? 
 
d.	 What was Henrita’s salary for the week in which her sales 
were $17,500? 
e.	 What were Henrita’s sales for the week in which her salary 
was $521? 
	75.	 Enhancing a fountain. A circular fountain has a radius of 
x feet. A circular fence is installed around the fountain at a 
distance of 30 feet from its edge.
a.	 Write the function f1x2 that represents the area of the 
fountain. 
b.	 Write the function g1x2 that represents the entire area 
enclosed by the fence. 
c.	 What area does the function g1x2 - f1x2 represent? 
d.	 The cost of the fence was $4200, installed at the rate of 
$10.50 per running foot (per perimeter foot). You are to 
prepare an estimate for paving the area between the fence 
and the fountain at $1.75 per square foot. To the nearest 
dollar, what should your estimate be? 
30
x
	76.	 Running track design. An outdoor running track with 
semicircular ends and parallel sides is constructed. The  
length of each straight portion of the sides is 180 meters.  
The track has a uniform width of 4 meters throughout.  
The inner radius of each semicircular end is x meters.
a.	 Write the function f1x2 that represents the area enclosed 
within the outer edge of the running track. 
b.	 Write the function g1x2 that represents the area of the field 
enclosed within the inner edge of the running track. 
c.	 What does the function f1x2 - g1x2 represent? 
d. Suppose the inner perimeter of the track is 900 meters.
(i)  Find the area of the track. 
(ii)  Find the outer perimeter of the track. 
180
4
x
	77.	 Area of a disk. The area A of a circular disk of radius r 
units is given by A = f1r2 = pr2. Suppose a metal disk is 
being heated and its radius r is increasing according to the 
equation r = g1t2 = 2t + 1, where t is time in hours.
a.	 Find 1 f ∘g21t2. 
 
b. Determine A as a function of time. 
c.	 Compare parts (a) and (b). 
	78.	 Volume of a balloon. The volume V of a spherical balloon 
	
	 of radius r inches is given by the formula V = f1r2 = 4
3 pr3.
Suppose the balloon is being inflated and its radius is increas-
ing at the rate of 2 inches per second. That is, r = g1t2 = 2t, 
where t is time in seconds.
a.	 Find 1 f ∘g21t2.
b. Determine V as a function of time. 
c.	 Compare parts (a) and (b). 
 

	
Section 2.8    ■    Combining Functions; Composite Functions 269
Beyond the Basics
	79.	 Let f = 51-2, 32, 11, 22, 12, 12, 13, 026; 
g = 51-2, 02, 10, 22, 11, -22, 13, 226. Find each function.
a.	 f + g 
b.	 f g 
c.	 f
g 
d.	 f ∘g 
	80.	 Let
f1x2 = e2x
if -2 … x … 1
x + 1
if    1 6 x … 3;
g1x2 = ex + 1
if -3 … x 6 2.
2x - 1
if    2 … x … 3
	
	 Find f + g and its domain. 
	81.	 Let h1x2 be any function whose domain contains -x when-
ever it contains x. Show that
a.	 f1x2 = h1x2 + h1-x2 is an even function.
b.	 g1x2 = h1x2 - h1-x2 is an odd function.
c.	 h1x2 can always be expressed as the sum of an even func-
tion and an odd function.
	82.	 Use Exercise 81 to write each of the following functions as 
the sum of an even function and an odd function.
a.	 h1x2 = x2 - 2x + 3
b.	 h1x2 = Œxœ + x
	83.	 Find the domain of f1x2 = A
1 - x
2 - x
.
	84.	 Let f1x2 = b -1
if -2 … x … 0.
x - 1
if 0 6 x … 2  
	
	 Find g1x2 = f1x2 + 
 f 1x2 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	85.	 Let f1x2 =
1
Œxœ  and g1x2 = 1x12 - x2. Find the domain 
	
	 of each of the following functions.
a.	 f1x2
b.	 g1x2  
c.	 f1x2 + g1x2 
d.	
f1x2
g1x2  
	86.	 For each of the following functions, find the domain of f ∘f.
a.	 f1x2 =
1
1-x
b.	 f1x2 =
1
11 - x
	87.	 Even and odd functions. State whether each of the  
following functions is an odd function, an even function, or 
neither. Justify your statement.
a.	 The sum of two even functions 
b.	 The sum of two odd functions 
c.	 The sum of an even function and an odd function 
d.	 The product of two even functions 
e.	 The product of two odd functions 
f.	 The product of an even function and an odd function 
	88.	 Even and odd functions. State whether the composite 
function f ∘g is an odd function, an even function, or neither 
in the following situations.
a.	 f and g are odd functions. 
b.	 f and g are even functions. 
c.	 f is odd, and g is even. 
d.	 f is even, and g is odd. 
Maintaining Skills
	89.	 a.   Does the relation R = 51-3, 22, 1-1, 12, 11, 32, 12, 126  
define a function? 
b.	 Construct a relation S by reversing the components of each 
ordered pair R. Does the relation S define a function?
	90.	 Show that the line y = x is perpendicular bisector of the line 
segment joining the points P = 12, 52 and P′ = 15, 22.  
(This shows that the points P and P′ are reflections of each 
other about the line y = x.)
	91.	 Solve the equation x = 2y + 3 for y. 
	92.	 Solve the equation x = y2 + 1, y Ú 0 for y. 
	93.	 Solve the equation x2 + y2 = 4, x … 0 for x.
	94.	 Solve the equation 2x - 1
y = 3 for y. 
              

270	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
2.9
Water Pressure on Underwater Devices
The pressure at any depth in the ocean is the pressure at sea level (1 atm) plus the 
pressure due to the weight of the overlying water: The deeper you go, the greater 
the pressure. Pressure is a vital consideration in the design of all tools and vehicles 
that work beneath the water’s surface. Every 11 feet of depth increases the pressure 
by approximately 5 pounds per square inch 11 atmosphere ≈15 psi2. Computing the 
pressure precisely requires a somewhat complicated equation that takes into account 
the water’s salinity, temperature, and slight compressibility. However, a basic formula is 
given by “pressure equals depth times 5, divided by 11 plus 15.” Thus, we have pressure 
1psi2 = depth 1 ft2 * 51psi per atm2>111 ft per atm2 + 15, where psi means “pounds 
per square inch” and atm abbreviates “atmosphere.”
For example, at 99 feet below the surface, the pressure is 60 psi. At 1 mile (5280 feet) 
below the surface, the pressure is 5280 * 5
11
+ 15 = 2415 psi. Suppose the pressure gauge
on a diving bell breaks and shows a reading of 1800 psi. We can determine the bell’s 
depth when the gauge failed by using an inverse function. We will return to this prob-
lem in Example 9.
S e c t i o n 
A function is a one-to-one function if each y-value in its range corresponds to only 
one x-value in its domain.
One-to-One Function
1	
Define an inverse function.
Inverses
Before we define inverse functions, we need to look at a special type of function called a 
one-to-one function.
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 Vertical-line test (Section 2.4, page 201)
2	 Domain and range of a function  
(Section 2.4, pages 199 and 200)
3	 Composition of functions  
(Section 2.8, page 260)
4	 Line of symmetry (Section 2.2, page 168)
5	 Solving linear and quadratic equations 
(Sections 1.1–1.3)
Objectives
1	 Define an inverse function.
2	 Find the inverse function.
3	 Use inverse functions to find the range  
of a function.
4	 Apply inverse functions in the real world.
Inverse Functions
Let f be a one-to-one function. Then the preceding definition says that for any two 
numbers x1 and x2 in the domain of f, if x1 ≠x2, then f 1x12 ≠f 1x22, or equivalently, 
if f 1x12 = f 1x22 then x1 = x2. That is, f is a one-to-one function if different x-values 
­correspond to different y-values.

	
Section 2.9    ■    Inverse Functions 271
Figure 2.95(a) represents a one-to-one function, and Figure 2.95(b) represents a func-
tion that is not one-to-one. The relation shown in Figure 2.95(c) is not a function.
Recall that with a one-to-one function, different x-values correspond to different 
­y-values. Consequently, if a function f  is not one-to-one, then there are at least two num-
bers x1 and x2 in the domain of f  such that x1 ≠x2 and f 1x12 = f 1x22. Geometrically, this 
means that the horizontal line passing through the two points 1x1, f 1x122 and 1x2, f 1x222 
contains these two points on the graph of f. See Figure 2.96. The geometric interpretation 
of a one-to-one function is called the horizontal-line test.
x1
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
x2
x3
x4
x5
Domain
(a)
(b)
(c)
Range
x1
y1
y2
y3
y4
x2
x3
x4
x5
Domain
Range
Not a one-to-one function: One
y-value, y2, corresponds to two
different x-values.
x1
y1
y2
y4
y5
x2
x3
x4
Domain
Range
Not a function: One x-value, x2,
corresponds to two different
y-values.
One-to-one function: Each
y-value corresponds to only
one x-value.
y3
A function f  is one-to-one if no horizontal line intersects the graph of f  in more 
than one point.
Horizontal-Line Test
Determine which of the following functions are one-to-one.
a.	 f 1x2 = 2x + 5        b.   g1x2 = x2 - 1        c.   h1x2 = 21x
Solution
Algebraic Approach  Let x1 and x2 be two numbers in the domain of each function.
a.	 Suppose f 1x12 = f 1x22. Then 2x1 + 5 = 2x2 + 5
	
2x1 = 2x2	
Subtract 5 from each side.
	
x1 = x2	
Divide both sides by 2.
So f 1x12 = f 1x22 implies x1 = x2; the function f is one-to-one.
b.	 Suppose g1x12 = g1x22. Then x1 2 - 1 = x2 2 - 1
	
x1 2 = x2 2	
Add 1 to both sides.
	
x1 = {x2	
Square-root property
	
This means that for two distinct numbers, x1 and x2 = -x1, g1x12 = g1x22; so g is 
not a one-to-one function.
c.	 Suppose h1x12 = h1x22. Then 21x1 = 21x2
	
1x1 = 1x2	
Divide both sides by 2.
	
x1 = x2	
Square both sides
	
So h1x12 = h1x22 implies x1 = x2; the function h is one-to-one.
Test for the One-to-One Property of a Function
EXAMPLE 1
Figure 2.95  Deciding whether a diagram respresents a function, a one-to-one function, or neither
x
y
O
y  f(x)
f(x1)  f(x2)
x1
x2
Figure 2.96  The function f is not 
one-to-one

272	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
From this definition we have the following:
Geometric Approach (Horizontal-line test)  Figure 2.97 shows the graphs of functions 
f, g, and h. We see that no horizontal line intersects the graphs of f  (Figure 2.97(a)) or 
h (Figure 2.97(c)) in more than one point; therefore, the functions f  and h are one-to-
one. The function g is not one-to-one because the horizontal line y = 3 (among others) in 
­Figure 2.97(b) intersects the graph of g at more than one point.
Practice Problem 1  Determine wh1ether f 1x2 = 1x - 122 is a one-to-one function.
Figure 2.97  Horizontal-line test
1
0
3
5
7
1
3
5 x
1
y
(a)
1
0
5
7
y
1
3
5 x
9
(b)
3
1
0
3
5
7
y
3
5
7
1
x
x
(c)
Domain of  f = Range of  f -1  and  Range of  f = Domain of  f -1
Let f  represent a one-to-one function. Then if y is in the range of f, there is only one 
value of x in the domain of f  such that f 1x2 = y. We define the inverse of f, called 
the inverse function of f, denoted f -1, by f -11y2 = x if and only if y = f 1x2.
Inverse Function
The reason only a one-to-one 
­function can have an inverse ­function 
is that if x1 ≠x2 but f 1x12 = y 
and f 1x22 = y, then f  -11y2 
must be x1 as well as x2. This is not 
­possible because x1 ≠x2.
Side 
Note
The notation f -11x2 does not mean 1
f 1x2. The expression 1
f 1x2 represents the reciprocal of f 1x2 
and is sometimes written as 3f 1x24 -1.
Warning
Assume that f  is a one-to-one function.
a.	 If f 132 = 5, find f -1152.        b.   If f -11-12 = 7, find f 172.
Solution
By definition, f -11y2 = x if and only if y = f 1x2.
a.	 Let x = 3 and y = 5. Now reading the definition from right to left, 5 = f 132 if and 
only if f -1152 = 3. So f -1152 = 3.
b.	 Let y = -1 and x = 7. Now f -11-12 = 7 if and only if f 172 = -1. So f 172 = -1.
Practice Problem 2  Assume that f  is a one-to-one function.
a.	 If f 1-32 = 12, find f -11122.        b.   If f -1142 = 9, find f 192.
Relating the Values of a Function and Its Inverse
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 2.9    ■    Inverse Functions 273
Consider the following input–output diagram and Figure 2.98 for f -1 ∘f.
I n v e r s e  F u n c t i o n  P r o p e r t y
Let f denote a one-to-one function. Then
1.	 f -11 f 1x22 = x for every x in the domain of f.
2.	 f 1 f -11x22 = x for every x in the domain of f -1.
Further, if g is any function such that (for all values of x in the domain of the inner 
function)
f 1g1x22 = x and g1 f 1x22 = x, then g = f -1.
One interpretation of the equation 1 f -1 ∘f 21x2 = x is that f -1 neutralizes the effect f 
on x. For example, let
f 1x2 = x + 2	
f  adds 2 to any input x.
To undo what f does to x, we should subtract 2 from x. That is, the inverse of f should be
g1x2 = x - 2	
g subtracts 2 from x.
Let’s verify that g1x2 = x - 2 is indeed the inverse function of x.
	
1 f ∘g21x2 = f 1g1x22	
Definition of f ∘g
	
= f 1x - 22	
Replace g1x2 with x - 2.
	
= 1x - 22 + 2	
Replace x with x - 2 in f 1x2 = x + 2.
	
= x	
Simplify.
We leave it for you to check that 1g ∘f 21x2 = x.
For the graphical interpretation of the input–output diagram, see Figure 2.98
Figure 2.98 suggests the following properties of inverse functions.
Figure 2.98  f -11 f 1x22 = x
x
f 1
f
y  f(x)
I n p u t – O u t p u t  D i a g r a m
	
y = f 1x2	
f -11y2 = x
input
x
output
y
f
input
y
output
x
f -1
input
x
output
x
 f -1 ∘f 

274	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
In Example 3, notice how the functions f and g neutralize (undo) the effect of each other. 
The function f takes an input x, multiplies it by 2, and adds 3; g neutralizes (or undoes) this 
effect by subtracting 3 and dividing by 2. This process is illustrated in Figure 2.99. Notice 
that g reverses the operations performed by f and the order in which they are done.
f
x
2x
x  3
x  3
2
2x  3
x
Multiply by 2 
Divide by 2 
Subtract 3
Add 3
g
Figure 2.99  Function g undoes f
Finding the Inverse Function
Let y = f 1x2 be a one-to-one function; then f has an inverse function. Suppose 1a, b2 is a 
point on the graph of f. Then b = f 1a2. This means that a = f -11b2; so 1b, a2 is a point on 
the graph of f -1. The points 1a, b2 and 1b, a2 are symmetric about the line y = x, as shown 
in Figure 2.100. (See Exercises 85 and 86.) That is, if the graph paper is folded along the line 
y = x, the points 1a, b2 and 1b, a2 will coincide. Therefore, we have the following property.
2	
Find the inverse function.
Verify that the following pairs of functions are inverses of each other:
f 1x2 = 2x + 3 and g1x2 = x - 3
2
Verifying Inverse Functions
EXAMPLE 3
Solution
	
1 f ∘g21x2 = f 1g1x22	
Definition of f ∘g
	
= f  ax - 3
2
b	
Replace g1x2 with x - 3
2
.
	
= 2ax - 3
2
b + 3	
Replace x with x - 3
2
 in f 1x2 = 2x + 3.
	
= x	
Simplify.
Thus, f 1g1x22 = x.
	
g1x2 = x - 3
2
	
Given function g
	
1g ∘f 21x2 = g1 f 1x22	
Definition of g of f
	
= g12x + 32	
Replace f 1x2 with 2x + 3.
	
= 12x + 32 - 3
2
	
Replace x with 2x + 3 in g1x2 = x - 3
2
.
	
= x	
Simplify.
Thus, g1  f 1x22 = x. Because f 1g1x22 = g1  f 1x22 = x,  f and g are inverses of each other.
Practice Problem 3  Verify that f 1x2 = 3x - 1 and g1x2 = x + 1
3
 are inverses of 
2each other.

	
Section 2.9    ■    Inverse Functions 275
The symmetry between the graphs of f  and f -1 about the line y = x tells us that we 
can find an equation for the inverse function y = f -11x2 from the equation of a one-to-one 
function y = f 1x2 by interchanging the roles of x and y in the equation y = f 1x2. This 
results in the equation x = f 1y2. Then we solve the equation x = f 1y2 for y in terms of x 
to get y = f -11x2.
The graph of a function f  is shown in Figure 2.101. Sketch the graph of f -1.
Solution
By the horizontal-line test, f  is a one-to-one function; so it has an inverse function.
The graph of f  consists of two line segments: one joining the points 1-3, -52 and 
1-1, 22 and the other joining the points 1-1, 22 and 14, 32.
The graph of f -1 is the reflection of the graph of f  about the line y = x. The reflections 
of the points 1-3, -52, 1-1, 22, and 14, 32 about the line y = x are 1-5, -32, 12, -12, 
and 13, 42, respectively.
Finding the Graph of f −1 from the Graph of f
EXAMPLE 4
It is helpful to notice that points on 
the x-axis, 1a, 02, reflect to points 
on the y-axis, 10, a2, and con-
versely. Also notice that points on 
the line y = x are unaffected by 
reflection about the line y = x.
Side  
Note
x
y
2
1
1
1 0
(4, 3)
(1, 2)
(3, 5)
y  f(x)
Figure 2.101  Graph of f
x
y
1
1
0
(4, 3)
(3, 4)
Figure 2.102  Graph of f −1
The graph of f -1 consists of two line segments: one joining the points 1-5, -32 and 
12, -12 and the other joining the points 12, -12 and 13, 42. See Figure 2.102.
Practice Problem 4  Use the graph of a function f  in Figure 2.103 to sketch the graph 
of f -1.
Figure 2.103  Graphing f -1 from the graph of f
1
y
x
1
(3, 4)
0
S y m m e t r y  P r o p e r t y  o f  t h e  G r a p h s  o f  f  a n d  f -1
The graph of a one-to-one function f  and the graph of f -1 are symmetric about the 
line y = x.
O
y
x
(a, b)
(b, a)
a
a
b
b
y  x
Figure 2.100  Relationship  
between points 1a, b2 and 1b, a2

276	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Find the inverse of a one-to-one function f.
Example
Finding an Equation for f −1
OBJECTIVE
Procedure 
in Action
EXAMPLE 5
Step 1  Replace f 1x2 with y in the equation  
defining f 1x2.
Step 2  Interchange x and y.
Step 3  Solve the equation in Step 2 for y.
Step 4  Write f -11x2 for y.
Find the inverse of f 1x2 = 3x - 4.
1.	y = 3x - 4	
Replace f 1x2 with y.
2.	x = 3y - 4	
Interchange x and y.
3.	x + 4 = 3y	
Add 4 to both sides.
	
x + 4
3
= y	
Divide both sides by 3.
4.	 f -11x2 = x + 4
3
	
We usually end with f -11x2 
on the left.
Find the inverse of the one-to-one function
f 1x2 = x + 1
x - 2, x ≠2.
Solution
Step 1	
y = x + 1
x - 2	
Replace f 1x2 with y.
Step 2	
x = y + 1
y - 2	
Interchange x and y.
Step 3	
Solve x = y + 1
y - 2 for y. 	
This is the most challenging step.
	
x1y - 22 = y + 1	
Multiply both sides by y - 2.
	
xy - 2x = y + 1	
Distributive property
	 xy - 2x + 2x - y = y + 1 + 2x - y	
Add 2x - y to both sides.
	
xy - y = 2x + 1	
Simplify.
	
y1x - 12 = 2x + 1	
Factor out y.
	
y = 2x + 1
x - 1 	
Divide both sides by x - 1 assuming  
that x ≠1.
Step 4	
f -11x2 = 2x + 1
x - 1 , x ≠1	
Replace y with f -11x2.
To see if our calculations are accurate, we compute f 1  f -11x22 and f -11 
 f 1x22.
f -11f 1x22 = f -1ax + 1
x - 2b =
2 ax + 1
x - 2b + 1
x + 1
x - 2 - 1
= 2x + 2 + x - 2
x + 1 - x + 2 = 3x
3 = x
You should also check that f 1  f -11x22 = x.
Finding the Inverse Function
EXAMPLE 6
Interchanging x and y in Step 2 
is done so that we can write f-1 
in the usual format with x as the 
independent variable and y as the 
dependent variable.
Side 
Note
Practice Problem 5  Find the inverse of f 1x2 = -2x + 3.
Multiply numerator and 
­denominator by x - 2 and simplify.

	
Section 2.9    ■    Inverse Functions 277
Finding the Range of a One-to-One Function
It is not always easy to determine the range of a function that is defined by an equation. How-
ever, for a one-to-one function we can find the range of f by finding the domain of f -1.
3	
Use inverse functions to find 
the range of a function.
Find the domain and the range of the function f 1x2 = x + 1
x - 2 of Example 6.
Solution
The domain of f 1x2 = x + 1
x - 2 is the set of all real numbers x such that x ≠2.
In interval notation, the domain of f  is 1- ∞, 22 ∪12, ∞2.
From Example 6, f -11x2 = 2x + 1
x - 1 , x ≠1; therefore,
Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 5x x ≠16.
In interval notation, the range of f  is 1- ∞, 12 ∪11, ∞2.
Practice Problem 7  Find the domain and the range of the function f 1x2 =
x
x + 3.
Finding the Domain and Range of a One-to-One  
Function
EXAMPLE 7
Remember that the domain of a 
function given by a formula is the 
largest set of real numbers for which 
the outputs are real numbers.
Recall
If a function f  is not one-to-one, then it does not have an inverse function. Some-
times by changing its domain, we can produce an interesting function that does have an 
inverse. (This technique is frequently used in trigonometry.) We saw in Example 1(b) that 
g1x2 = x2 - 1 is not a one-to-one function; so g does not have an inverse function. How-
ever, the horizontal-line test shows that the function
G1x2 = x2 - 1, x Ú 0
with domain 30, ∞2 is one-to-one. See Figure 2.104. Therefore, G has an inverse func-
tion G-1.
With a graphing calculator, you 
can also see that the graphs of 
g1x2 = x2 - 1, x Ú 0 and 
g-11x2 = 1x + 1 are symmet-
ric about the line y = x.
Enter Y1, Y2, and Y3 as 
g1x2, g-11x2, and f 1x2 = x, 
respectively.
Technology
Connection
8
8
G(x)  x2  1, x  0
1
0
y
1
1
x
2
Figure 2.104  The function G has an inverse
Practice Problem 6  Find the inverse of the one-to-one function 
f 1x2 =
x
x + 3, x ≠-3.

278	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
Applications
Functions that model real-life situations are frequently expressed as formulas with letters 
that remind you of the variable they represent. In finding the inverse of a function expressed 
by a formula, interchanging the letters could be confusing. Accordingly, we omit Step 2, 
keep the same letters, and just solve the formula for the other variable.
Find the inverse of G1x2 = x2 - 1, x Ú 0.
Solution
Step 1	
y = x2 - 1, x Ú 0	
Replace G1x2 with y.
Step 2	
x = y2 - 1, y Ú 0	
Interchange x and y.
Step 3	
x + 1 = y2, y Ú 0	
Add 1 to both sides.
	
y = 1x + 1, because y Ú 0	
Solve for y.
Step 4	
G-11x2 = 1x + 1	
Replace y with G-11x2.
The graphs of G and G-1 are shown in Figure 2.105.
Practice Problem 8  Find the inverse of G1x2 = x2 - 1, x … 0.
Finding an Inverse Function
EXAMPLE 8
Figure 2.105  Graphs of G and G-1
0
x
y
4	
Apply inverse functions in the 
real world.
At the beginning of this section, we gave the formula for finding the pressure p (in pounds 
per square inch) at a depth d (in feet) below the surface of water. This formula can be
written as p = 5d
11 + 15. Suppose the pressure gauge on a diving bell breaks and shows a
reading of 1800 psi. How far below the surface was the bell when the gauge failed?
Solution
We want to find the unknown depth in terms of the known pressure. This depth is given by 
the inverse of the function p = 5d
11 + 15. To find the inverse, we solve the given equation 
for d.
	
p = 5d
11 + 15	
Original equation
	
11p = 5d + 165	
Multiply both sides by 11.
	
d = 11p
5
- 33	
Solve for d.
Now we can use this formula to find the depth when the gauge read 1800 psi. We let 
p = 1800.
	
d = 11p
5
- 33	
Depth from pressure equation
	
d = 11118002
5
- 33	
Replace p with 1800.
	
d = 3927
The device was 3927 feet below the surface when the gauge failed.
Practice Problem 9  In Example 9, suppose the pressure gauge showed a reading of 
1650 psi. Determine the depth of the bell when the gauge failed.
Water Pressure on Underwater Devices
EXAMPLE 9

	
Section 2.9    ■    Inverse Functions 279
Answers to Practice Problems
1. Not one-to-one; the horizontal line y = 1 intersects the graph 
at two different points.
 
0
2
1
3
1
4
3
2
1
x
y
	
2. a. -3    b. 4
3. 1 f ∘g21x2 = 3ax + 1
3
b - 1 = x + 1 - 1 = x and 
1g ∘f 21x2 = 3x - 1 + 1
3
= 3x
3 = x; therefore, f and g are 
inverses of each other.
4. 
0
3
1
5
4
3
2
1
x
y
(4, 3)
y 5 f 1(x)
	 5. f -11x2 = 3 - x
2
6. f -11x2 =
3x
1 - x, x ≠1  7. Domain: 1- ∞, -32 h 1-3, ∞2; 
range: 1- ∞, 12 h 11, ∞2  8. G-11x2 = - 2x + 1  9. 3597 ft
Exercises
section 2.9 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 If no horizontal line intersects the graph of a function f in 
more than one point, then f is a(n) 
 function.
	2.	 A function f is one-to-one when different x-values corre-
spond to 
. 
	3.	 If f1x2 = 3x, then f -11x2 =  
.
	4.	 The graphs of a function f and its inverse f -1 are symmetric 
about the line 
.
	5.	 True or False. If a function f has an inverse, then the 
domain of the inverse function is the range of f. 
	6.	 True or False. It is possible for a function to be its own 
inverse, that is, for f = f -1. 
In Exercises 7–14, the graph of a function is given. Use the 
horizontal-line test to determine whether the function is  
one-to-one.
	7.	 	
	 8.	
	9.	 	
	 10.	
	11.	 	
	 12.	
 
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
x
y
0
y
x
0
y
x
0

280	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
In Exercises 35–40, the graph of a function f is given. Sketch 
the graph of f −1.
	35.	 	
	 36. 
	37.	 	
	 38. 
	39.	 	
	 40. 
In Exercises 41–52,
a.	 Determine algebraically whether the given function is a one-to-
one function.
b.	 If the function is one-to-one, find its inverse.
c.	 Sketch the graph of the function and its inverse on the same 
coordinate axes.
d.	 Give the domain and intercepts of each one-to-one function 
and its inverse function.
	41.	 f1x2 = 15 - 3x 
	42.	 g1x2 = 2x + 5 
	43.	 f1x2 = 24 - x2
	44.	 f1x2 = - 29 - x2
	45.	 f1x2 = 1x + 3 
	46.	 f1x2 = 4 - 1x 
	47.	 g1x2 = 2
3 x + 1 
	48.	 h1x2 = 2
3 1 - x 
	49.	 f1x2 =
1
x - 1, x ≠1 
	50.	 g1x2 = 1 - 1
x, x ≠0 
	51.	 f1x2 = 2 + 1x + 1 
	52.	 f1x2 = -1 + 1x + 2 
	53.	 Find the domain and range of the function f of Exercise 33.
	54.	 Find the domain and range of the function f of Exercise 34.
x
y
0
x
y
0
0
2
2
x
y
4
4
x
y
0
(4, 3)
2
4
2
4
0
x
y
x
y
4
(6, 5)
(2, 3)
4
2
0
	13.	 	
	 14.	
In Exercises 15–28, assume that the function f is one-to-one 
with domain: 1 −H,H 2.
	15.	 If f122 = 7, find f -1172. 
	16.	 If f -1142 = -7, find f1-72. 
	17.	 If f1-12 = 2, find f -1122. 
	18.	 If f -11-32 = 5, find f152. 
	19.	 If f1a2 = b, find f -11b2. 
	20.	 If f -11c2 = d, find f1d2. 
	21.	 Find 1 f -1 ∘f 213372. 
	22.	 Find 1 f ∘f -12125p2. 
	23.	 Find 1 f ∘f -121-15802. 
	24.	 Find 1 f -1 ∘f 2197282. 
	25.	 For f1x2 = 2x - 3, find each of the following.
a.	 f132 
b.	 f -1132 
c.	 1 f ∘f -121192 
d.	 1 f ∘f -12152 
	26.	 For f1x2 = x3, find each of the following.
a.	 f122 
b.	 f -1182 
c.	 1 f ∘f -121152 
d.	 1 f -1 ∘f 21272 
	27.	 For f1x2 = x3 + 1, find each of the following.
a.	 f112 
b.	 f -1122 
c.	 1 f ∘f -1212692 
	28.	 For g1x2 = 2
3 2x3 - 1, find each of the following.
a.	 g112 
b.	 g-1112 
c.	 1g-1 ∘g211352 
In Exercises 29–34, show that f and g are inverses of each 
other by verifying that f1g1x2 2 = x = g1f1x2 2.
	29.	 f1x2 = 3x + 1; g1x2 = x - 1
3
	30.	 f1x2 = 2 - 3x; g1x2 = 2 - x
3
	31.	 f1x2 = x3; g1x2 = 2
3 x
	32.	 f1x2 = 1
x ; g1x2 = 1
x
	33.	 f1x2 = x - 1
x + 2 ; g1x2 = 1 + 2x
1 - x
	34.	 f1x2 = 3x + 2
x - 1  ; g1x2 = x + 2
x - 3
y
x
0
y
x
0 
    

	
Section 2.9    ■    Inverse Functions 281
In Exercises 55–58, assume that the given function is one-to-
one. Find the inverse of the function. Also find the domain 
and the range of the given function.
	55.	 f1x2 = x + 1
x - 2, x ≠2 
	56.	 g1x2 = x + 2
x + 1, x ≠-1 
	57.	 f1x2 = 1 - 2x
1 + x , x ≠-1 
	58.	 h1x2 = x - 1
x - 3, x ≠3 
In Exercises 59–66, find the inverse of each function and 
sketch the graph of the function and its inverse on the same 
coordinate axes.
	59.	 f1x2 = -x2, x Ú 0 
	60.	 g1x2 = -x2, x … 0 
	61.	 f1x2 = x, x Ú 0 
	62.	 g1x2 = x, x … 0 
	63.	 f1x2 = x2 + 1, x … 0 
	64.	 g1x2 = x2 + 5, x Ú 0 
	65.	 f1x2 = -x2 + 2, x … 0 
	66.	 g1x2 = -x2 - 1, x Ú 0 
Applying the Concepts
	67.	 Temperature scales. Scientists use the Kelvin ­temperature 
scale, in which the lowest possible temperature (called 
­absolute zero) is 0 K. (K denotes degrees Kelvin.)
The function K1C2 = C + 273 gives the relationship 
between the Kelvin temperature (K) and Celsius temperature (C).
a.	 Find the inverse function of K1C2 = C + 273. What does 
it represent? 
b.	 Use the inverse function from (a) to find the Celsius tem-
perature corresponding to 300 K. 
c.	 A comfortable room temperature is 22°C. What is the cor-
responding Kelvin temperature? 
	68.	 Temperature scales. The boiling point of water is 373 K, 
or 212°F; the freezing point of water is 273 K, or 32°F. The 
relationship between Kelvin and Fahrenheit temperatures is 
linear.
a.	 Write a linear function expressing K1 F 2 in terms of F. 
b.	 Find the inverse of the function in part (a). What does it 
mean? 
c.	 A normal human body temperature is 98.6°F. What is the 
corresponding Kelvin temperature? 
	69.	 Composition of functions. Use Exercises 67 and 68 and 
the composition of functions to
a.	 Write a function that expresses F in terms of C. 
b.	 Write a function that expresses C in terms of F. 
	70.	 Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatures. Show that the 
functions in (a) and (b) of Exercise 69 are inverse functions.
	71.	 Currency exchange. Alisha went to Europe last summer. 
She discovered that when she exchanged her U.S. dollars 
for euros, she received 25% fewer euros than the number of 
­dollars she exchanged. (She got 75 euros for every 100 U.S. 
dollars.) When she returned to the United States, she got 25% 
more dollars than the number of euros she exchanged.
a.	 Write each conversion function. 
b.	 Show that in part (a), the two functions are not inverse 
functions.
c.	 Does Alisha gain or lose money after converting both 
ways? 
	72.	 Hourly wages. Anwar is a short-order cook in a diner. He is 
paid +4 per hour plus 5, of all food sales per hour. His aver-
age hourly wage w in terms of the food sales of x dollars is 
w = 4 + 0.05x.
a.	 Write the inverse function. What does it mean? 
b.	 Use the inverse function to estimate the hourly sales at the 
diner if Anwar averages +12 per hour. 
	73.	 Hourly wages. In Exercise 72, suppose in addition that 
Anwar is guaranteed a minimum wage of +7 per hour.
a.	 Write a function expressing his hourly wage w in terms of 
food sales per hour. [Hint: Use a piecewise function.] 
b.	 Does the function in part (a) have an inverse? Explain. 
c.	 If the answer in part (b) is yes, find the inverse function. If 
the answer is no, restrict the domain so that the new func-
tion has an inverse. 
	74.	 Simple pendulum. If a pendulum is released at a certain 
point, the period is the time the pendulum takes to swing 
along its path and return to the point from which it was 
released. The period T (in seconds) of a simple pendulum is a 
function of its length l (in feet) and is given by T = 1.111l.
a.	 Find the inverse function. What does it mean?
b.	 Use the inverse function to calculate the length of the 
pendulum assuming that its period is two seconds. 
c.	 The convention center in Portland, Oregon, has the longest 
pendulum in the United States. The pendulum’s length is 
70 feet. Find the period. 
	
l
	75.	 Water supply. Suppose x is the height of the water above 
the opening at the base of a water tank. The velocity V of 
water that flows from the opening at the base is a function of 
x and is given by V1x2 = 81x.
a.	 Find the inverse function. What does it mean?
b.	 Use the inverse function to calculate the height of the wa-
ter in the tank when the flow is (i) 30 feet per second and 
(ii) 20 feet per second. 
	76.	 Physics. A projectile is fired from the origin over horizontal 
ground. Its altitude y (in feet) is a function of its horizontal 
distance x (in feet) and is given by
y = 64x - 2x2.
a.	 Find the inverse function where the function is increasing.

282	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
b.	 Use the inverse function to compute the horizontal 
­distance when the altitude of the projectile is (i) 32 feet, 
(ii) 256 feet, and (iii) 512 feet. 
	77.	 Loan repayment. Chris purchased a car at 0% interest for 
five years. After making a down payment, she agreed to pay 
the remaining +36,000 in monthly payments of +600 per 
month for 60 months.
a.	 What does the function f1x2 = 36,000 - 600x 
­represent? 
b.	 Find the inverse of the function in part (a). What does the 
inverse function represent?
c.	 Use the inverse function to find the number of months 
remaining to make payments if the balance due is 
+22,000. 
	78.	 Demand function. A marketing survey finds that the 
­number x (in millions) of computer chips the market will 
­purchase is a function of its price p (in dollars) and is 
­estimated by x = 8p2 - 32p + 1200, 0 6 p … 2.
a.	 Find the inverse function. What does it mean?
b.	 Use the inverse function to estimate the price of a chip if 
the demand is 1180.5 million chips. 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 79 and 80, show that f and g are inverses of each 
other by verifying that f1g1x2 2 = x = g1    f1x2 2.
	79.	
	83.	 Let f1x2 =
x
x + 1 = 1 -
1
x + 1.
a.	 Show that f is one-to-one. 
b.	 Find the inverse of f. 
c.	 Find the domain and the range of f.
	84.	 Let g1x2 = 21 - x2, 0 … x … 1.
a.	 Show that g is one-to-one. 
b.	 Find the inverse of g. 
c.	 Find the domain and the range of g.  
	85.	 Let P13, 72 and Q17, 32 be two points in the plane.
a.	 Show that the midpoint M of the line segment PQ lies on 
the line y = x.
b.	 Show that the line y = x is the perpendicular bisector 
of the line segment PQ; that is, show that the line y = x 
contains the midpoint found in part (a) and makes a right 
angle with PQ. You will have shown that P and Q are sym-
metric about the line y = x.
	86.	 Use the procedure outlined in Exercise 85 to show that the 
points 1a, b2 and 1b, a2 are symmetric about the line y = x.
(See figure 2.100 on page 275.)
	87.	 The graph of f1x2 = x3 is given in Section 2.5.
a.	 Sketch the graph of g1x2 = 1x - 123 + 2 by using trans-
formations of the graph of f. 
b.	 Find g-11x2. 
c.	 Sketch the graph of g-11x2 by reflecting the graph of g in 
part (a) about the line y = x. 
	88.	 Inverse of composition of functions. We show that if f 
and g have inverses, then
1 f ∘g2-1 = g-1 ∘f -1. 1Note the order.2
	
	 Let f1x2 = 2x - 1 and g1x2 = 3x + 4.
a.	 Find the following:
	
(i)	 f -11x2	
(ii)	 g-11x2
	 (iii)	 1 f ∘g21x2	
(iv)	 1g ∘f 21x2
	 (v)	 1 f ∘g2-11x2	
(vi)	 1g ∘f 2-11x2
	(vii)	 1 f -1 ∘g-121x2	
(viii)	 1g-1 ∘f -121x2
b.	 From part (a), conclude that
	
(i)	 1 f ∘g2-1 = g-1 ∘f -1.	
(ii)	 1g ∘f 2-1 = f -1 ∘g-1.
	89.	 Repeat Exercise 88 for f1x2 = 2x + 3 and g1x2 = x3 - 1. 
	90.	 Show that f1x2 = x2>3, x … 0 is a one-to-one function. Find 
f -11x2 and verify that f -11 f1x22 = x for every x in the 
domain of f.   
x
1
3
4
f 1x2
3
5
2
x
3
5
2
g1x2
1
3
4
	80.	
x
   1
2
   3
4
f 1x2
-2
0
-3
1
x
-2
0
-3
1
g1x2
   1
2
   3
4
	81.	 Let f1x2 = 24 - x2.
a.	 Sketch the graph of y = f1x2. 
b.	 Is f one-to-one? 
c.	 Find the domain and the range of f.
	82.	 Let f1x2 =
Œxœ + 2
Œxœ - 2, where Œxœ is the greatest integer function.
a.	 Find the domain of f. 
b.	 Is f one-to-one?             

	
Summary 283
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	91.	 Does every odd function have an inverse? Explain.
	92.	 Is there an even function that has an inverse? Explain.
	93.	 Does every increasing or decreasing function have an 
inverse? Explain.
	94.	 A relation R is a set of ordered pairs 1x, y2. The inverse of R 
is the set of ordered pairs 1y, x2.
a.	 Give an example of a function whose inverse relation is 
not a function. 
b.	 Give an example of a relation R whose inverse is a 
­function. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 95–98, solve each quadratic equation.
	95.	 x2 - 7x + 12 = 0 
	96.	 6x2 + x - 2 = 0 
	97.	 12 - 31x - 122 = 0 
	98.	 x2 - 4x + 1 = 0 
In Exercises 99 and 100, use transformations on the graph of 
y = x2 to sketch graph.
	99.	 y = 1x + 222 - 3  	
100.	 y = - 1x - 122 + 2   ­
2.1	 The Coordinate Plane
i.	 Ordered pair. A pair of numbers in which the order is speci-
fied is called an ordered pair of numbers.
ii.	 Distance formula. The distance between two points P1x1, y12 
and Q1x2, y22, denoted by d1P, Q2, is given by
d(P, Q) = 2(x2 - x1)2 + (y2 - y1)2.
iii.	Midpoint formula. The coordinates of the midpoint M1x, y2 
on the line segment joining P1x1, y12 and Q1x2, y22 are given 
by
1x, y2 = ax1 + x2
2
, y1 + y2
2
b.
2.2	 Graphs of Equations
i.	 The graph of an equation in two variables, such as, x and y, is 
the set of all ordered pairs 1a, b2 in the coordinate plane that 
satisfies the equation. A graph of an equation, then, is a pic-
ture of its solution set.
ii.	 Sketching the graph of an equation by plotting points
Step 1  Make a representative table of solutions of the equa-
tion.
Step 2  Plot the solutions as ordered pairs in the ­coordinate 
plane.
Step 3  Connect the solutions in Step 2 with a smooth curve.
iii.	Intercepts
1.	 The x-intercept is the x-coordinate of a point on the graph 
where the graph touches or crosses the x-axis. To find the 
x-intercepts, set y = 0 in the equation and solve for x.
2.	 The y-intercept is the y-coordinate of a point on the graph 
where the graph touches or crosses the y-axis. To find the 
y-intercepts, set x = 0 in the equation and solve for y.
iv.	 Symmetry A graph is symmetric with respect to
a.	 the y-axis if for every point 1x, y2 on the graph, the point 
1-x, y2 is also on the graph. That is, replacing x with -x in 
the equation produces an equivalent equation.
b.	 the x-axis if for every point 1x, y2 on the graph, the point 
1x, -y2 is also on the graph. That is, replacing y with -y in 
the equation produces an equivalent equation.
c.	 the origin if for every point 1x, y2 on the graph, the point 
1-x, -y2 is also on the graph. That is, replacing x with -x 
and y with -y in the equation produces an equivalent equa-
tion.
v.	 Circle A circle is the set of points in a Cartesian coordinate 
plane that are at a fixed distance r from a specified point 
1h, k2. The fixed distance r is called the radius of the circle, 
and the fixed point 1h, k2 is called the center of the circle. The 
equation
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2
	
is called the standard form of an equation of a circle.
2.3	 Lines
i.	 The slope m of a nonvertical line through the points P1x1, y12 
and Q1x2, y22 is
 m = rise
run =
1y@coordinate of Q2 - 1y@coordinate of P2
1x@coordinate of Q2 - 1x@coordinate of P2
 = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
.
	
The slope of a vertical line is undefined. The slope of a hori-
zontal line is zero.
ii.	 Equation of a line
 y - y1 = m1x - x12	
Point–slope form
 y = mx + b	
Slope–intercept form
 y = k	
Horizontal line
 x = h	
Vertical line
 ax + by + c = 0	
General form
iii.	Parallel and perpendicular lines
	
Two distinct lines with respective slopes m1 and m2 are
1.	 Parallel if m1 = m2.
2.	 Perpendicular if m1m2 = -1.
iv.	 Linear regression  A method for modeling data using linear 
functions.
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

284	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
2.4	 Functions
i.	 Any set of ordered pairs is a relation. The set of all first com-
ponents is the domain, and the set of all second components 
is the range. The graph of all of the ordered pairs is the graph 
of the relation.
ii.	 A function is a relation in which each element of the domain 
corresponds to exactly one element in the range.
iii.	 If a function f is defined by an equation, then its domain is the 
largest set of real numbers for which f1x2 is a real number.
iv.	 Vertical-line test. If each vertical line intersects a graph at no 
more than one point, the graph is the graph of a function.
2.5	 Properties of Functions
i.	 Let x1 and x2 be any two numbers in the interval 1a, b2.
a.	 f is increasing on 1a, b2 if x1 6 x2 implies 
f1x12 6 f1x22.
b.	 f is decreasing on 1a, b2 if x1 6 x2 implies 
f1x12 7 f1x22.
c.	 f is constant on 1a, b2 if x1 6 x2 implies f1x12 = f1x22.
ii.	 Assume 1x1, x22 is an interval in the domain of f  containing a 
number a.
a.	 f1a2 is relative minimum of f if f1a2 … f1x2 for every x 
in 1x1, x22.
b.	 f1a2 is relative maximum of f if f1a2 Ú f1x2 for every x 
in 1x1, x22.
c.	 A point 1a, b2 on the graph of f is a turning point if the 
graph of f changes direction at 1a, b2 from increasing to 
decreasing or from decreasing to increasing.
iii.	Suppose that for each x in the domain of f, -x is also in the 
domain of f.
a.	 f is called an even function if f1-x2 = f1x2. The graph of 
an even function is symmetric about the y-axis.
b.	 f is called an odd function if f1-x2 = -f1x2. The graph 
of an odd function is symmetric about the origin.
iv.	 The average rate of change of f1x2 as x changes from a to 
	
b is defined by 
f1b2 - f1a2
b - a
, b ≠a.
v.	 The expression 
f1x2 - f1a2
x - a
, x ≠a is called a difference 
	
	quotient at a.
	
The expression 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
, h ≠0 is also called a 
	
difference quotient.
2.6	 A Library of Functions
i.	 Basic Functions
Identity function	
f1x2 = x
Constant function	
f1x2 = c
Squaring function	
f1x2 = x2
Cubing function	
f1x2 = x3
Absolute value function	
f1x2 = x
Square root function	
f1x2 = 1x
Cube root function	
f1x2 = 1
3 x
Reciprocal function	
f1x2 = 1
x
Reciprocal square function	
f1x2 = 1
x2
Greatest integer function	
f1x2 = Œxœ
ii.	 For piecewise functions, different rules are used in different 
parts of the domain.
2.7	 Transformations of Functions
i.	 Vertical and horizontal shifts. Let f be a function and c and 
d be positive numbers.
To Graph 
Shift the graph of f
f1x2 + d 
up d units
f1x2 - d 
down d units
f1x - c2 
right c units
f1x + c2 
left c units
ii.	 Reflections:
To Graph 
Reflect the graph of f in the
-f1x2
x-axis
f1-x2
y-axis
iii.	Stretching and compressing. The graph of g1x2 = af1x2 for 
a 7 0 has the same shape as the graph of f1x2 and is stretched 
vertically away from the x-axis if a 7 1 and compressed 
vertically towards the x-axis if 0 6 a 6 1. If a is negative, the 
graph of af1x2 is reflected about the x-axis.
	
	
The graph of g1x2 = f1bx2 for b 7 0 is obtained from 
the graph of f by stretching away from the y-axis if 0 6 b 6 1 
and compressing horizontally toward the y-axis if b 7 1. If b is 
negative, the graph of f1bx2 is reflected about the y-axis.
2.8	 Combining Functions;  
Composite Functions
i.	 Given two functions f and g, for all values of x for which both 
f1x2 and g1x2 are defined, the functions can be combined to 
form sum, difference, product, and quotient functions.
ii.	 The composition of f and g is defined by 1f ∘g21x2 =
f1g1x22.
	
	
The input of f is the output of g. The domain of f ∘g 
is the set of all x in the domain of g such that g1x2 is in the 
domain of f.
	
	
In general f ∘g ≠g ∘f.
2.9	 Inverse Functions
i.	 A function f is one-to-one if for any x1 and x2 in the domain 
of f, f1x12 = f1x22 implies x1 = x2.
ii.	 Horizontal-line test. If each horizontal line intersects the 
graph of a function f  in at most one point, then f  is a one-to-
one function.
iii.	Inverse function. Let f be a one-to-one function. Then g is 
the inverse of f, and we write g = f -1 if 1f ∘g21x2 = x for 
every x in the domain of g and 1g ∘f21x2 = x for every x in 
the domain of f. The graph of f -1 is the reflection of the graph 
of f in the line y = x.

	
Review Exercises 285
	23.	 	
24.	
In Exercises 25–34, sketch the graph of the given equation. 
List all intercepts and describe any symmetry of the graph.
	25.	 x + 2y = 4 
	
26.	 3x - 4y = 12 
	27.	 y = -2x2 
	
28.	 x = -y2 
	29.	 y = x3 
	
30.	 x = -y3 
	31.	 y = x2 + 2 
	
32.	 y = 1 - x2 
	33.	 x2 + y2 = 16 
	
34.	 y = x4 - 4 
In Exercises 35–37, find the standard form of the equation of 
the circle that satisfies the given conditions.
	35.	 Center 12, -32, radius 5 	
	36.	 Diameter with endpoints 15, 22 and 1-5, 42 
	37.	 Center 1-2, -52, touching the y-axis
In Exercises 38–42, describe and sketch the graph of the given 
equation.
	38.	 2x - 5y = 10 
	
39.	 x
2 - y
5 = 1 
	40.	 1x + 122 + 1y - 322 = 16 
	41.	 x2 + y2 - 2x + 4y - 4 = 0	 
	42.	 3x2 + 3y2 - 6x - 6 = 0 
In Exercises 43–47, find the slope–intercept form of the 
­equation of the line that satisfies the given conditions.
	43.	 Passing through 11, 22 with slope -2 
	44.	 x-intercept 2, y-intercept 5 	
	45.	 Passing through 11, 32 and 1-1, 72 
	46.	 Passing through 11, 32, perpendicular to the x-axis 
	47.	 Determine whether the lines in each pair are parallel, 
­perpendicular, or neither.
a.	 y = 3x - 2 and y = 3x + 2 
b.	 3x - 5y + 7 = 0 and 5x - 3y + 2 = 0 
c.	 ax + by + c = 0 and bx - ay + d = 0 
d.	 y + 2 = 1
31x - 32 and y - 5 = 31x - 32 
In Exercises 1–8, state whether the given statement is true or false.
	1.	 10, 52 is the midpoint of the line segment joining 1-3, 12 
and 13, 112. 
	2.	 The equation 1x + 222 + 1y + 322 = 5 is the equation of a 
circle with center 12, 32 and radius 5. 
	 3.	 If a graph is symmetric with respect to the x-axis and the y-axis, 
then it must be symmetric with respect to the origin. 
	 4.	 If a graph is symmetric with respect to the origin, then it must 
be symmetric with respect to the x-axis and the y-axis.	
	5.	 In the graph of the equation of the line 3y = 4x + 9, the 
slope is 4 and the y-intercept is 9. 
	 6.	 If the slope of a line is 2, then the slope of any line perpendicular 
	
	 to it is 1
2. 
	7.	 The slope of a vertical line is undefined. 
	8.	 The equation 1x - 222 + 1y + 322 = -25 is the equation 
of a circle with center 12, -32 and radius 5.  
In Exercises 9–14, find
a.  The distance between the point P and Q.
b.  The coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment PQ.
c.  The slope of the line containing the points P and Q.
	9.	 P13, 52, Q1-1, 32 
	
10.	 P1-3, 52, Q13, -12 
	11.	 P14, -32, Q19, -82 
	
12.	 P12, 32, Q1-7, -82 
	13.	 P12, -72, Q15, -22 
	
14.	 P1-5, 42, Q110, -32 
	15.	 Show that the points A10, 52, B1-2, -32, and C13, 02 are 
the vertices of a right triangle.
	16.	 Show that the points A11, 22, B14, 82, C17, -12, and 
D110, 52 are the vertices of a rhombus. 
	17.	 Which of the points 1-6, 32 and 14, 52 is closer to the 
­origin? 
	18.	 Which of the points 1-6, 42 and 15, 102 is closer to the point 
12, 32? 
	19.	 Find a point on the x-axis that is equidistant from the points 
1-5, 32 and 14, 72. 
	20.	 Find a point on the y-axis that is equidistant from the points 
1-3, -22 and 12, -12.	 
In Exercises 21–24, specify whether the given graph has axis 
or origin symmetry (or neither).
	21.	 	 
Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills	    
	
.
	
x
O
y  
x
O
y
x
O
y
y
x
O
	 22.		

286	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	 85.	 f1x2 = 1
x, g1x2 = -
1
x - 2 
	 86.	 f1x2 = x2, g1x2 = 1x + 122 - 2 
In Exercises 87–92, state whether each function is odd, even, 
or neither. Discuss the symmetry of each graph.
	 87.	 f1x2 = x2 - x4 
	
88.	 f1x2 = x3 + x 
	 89.	 f1x2 = 0 x0 + 3 
	
90.	 f1x2 = 3x + 5 
	 91.	 f1x2 = 1x 
	
92.	 f1x2 = 2
x 
In Exercises 93–96, express each function as a composition of 
two functions.
	 93.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 4 
	
94.	 g1x2 = 1x2 - x + 2250 
	 95.	 h1x2 = A
x - 3
2x + 5 
	
96.	 H1x2 = 12x - 123 + 5 
In Exercises 97–100, determine whether the given function is 
one-to-one. If the function is one-to-one, find its inverse and 
sketch the graph of the function and its inverse on the same 
coordinate axes.
	 97.	 f1x2 = x + 2 
	
98.	 f1x2 = -2x + 3 
	 99.	 f1x2 = 1
3 x - 2 
	
100.	 f1x2 = 8x3 - 1 
In Exercises 101 and 102, assume that f is a one-to-one 
­function. Find f −1 and find the domain and range of f.
	101.	 f1x2 = x - 1
x + 2, x ≠-2 
	102.	 f1x2 = 2x + 3
x - 1 , x ≠1 
	103.	 For the graph of a function f shown in the figure,
a.	 Write a formula for f as a piecewise function. 
b.	 Find the domain and range of f. 
c.	 Find the intercepts of the graph of f. 
d.	 Draw the graph of y = f1-x2.	 
e.	 Draw the graph of y = -f1x2.	 
f.	 Draw the graph of y = f1x2 + 1. 
g.	 Draw the graph of y = f1x + 12. 
h.	 Draw the graph of y = 2f1x2. 
i.	 Draw the graph of y = f12x2. 
j.	 Draw the graph of y = f a1
2xb. 
k.	 Explain why f is one-to-one. 
l.	 Draw the graph of y = f -11x2. 
(0, 1)
(3, 4)
y 5 f(x)
0
4
2
4
x
y
	 48.	 Write the point–slope form of the equation of the line 
shown in the figure that is
a.	 Parallel to the line in the figure with x-intercept 4.
b.	 Perpendicular to the line in the figure with y-intercept 1.
1
x
1
1
2
3
y
1
2
3
4
In Exercises 49–58, graph each relation. State the domain and 
range of each. Determine which relation determines y as a 
function of x.
	 49.	 510, 12, 1-1, 22, 11, 02, 12, -126 
	 50.	 510, 12, 10, -12, 13, 22, 13, -226 
	 51.	 x - y = 1 
	
52.	 y = 1x - 2 
	 53.	 x2 + y2 = 0.04 
	
54.	 x = - 1y 
	 55.	 x = 1 
	
56.	 y = 2 
	 57.	 y = x + 1 
	
58.	 x = y2 + 1 
In Exercises 59–76, let f1x2 = 3x + 1 and g1x2 = x2 −2. 
Find each of the following.
	 59.	 f1-22 
	
60.	 g1-22 
	 61.	 x if f1x2 = 4 
	
62.	 x if g1x2 = 2 
	 63.	 1f + g2112 
	
64.	 1f - g21-12 
	 65.	 1f # g21-22 
	
66.	 1g # f2102 
	 67.	 1f ∘g2132 
	
68.	 1g ∘f21-22 
	 69.	 1f ∘g21x2 
	
70.	 1g ∘f21x2 
	 71.	 1f ∘f21x2 
	
72.	 1g ∘g21x2 
	 73.	 f1a + h2 
	
74.	 g1a - h2
	 75.	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h 
	
76.	
g1x + h2 - g1x2
h 
In Exercises 77–82, graph each function and state its domain 
and range. Determine the intervals over which the function is 
increasing, decreasing, or constant.
	 77.	 f1x2 = -3 
	 78.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2 
	 79.	 g1x2 = 13x - 2 
	 80.	 h1x2 = 236 - x2 
	 81.	 f1x2 = ex + 1
if
x Ú 0
-x + 1
if
x 6 0 
	 82.	 g1x2 = ex
if x Ú 0
x2
if x 6 0 
In Exercises 83–86, use transformations to graph each pair of 
functions on the same coordinate axes.
	 83.	 f1x2 = 1x, g1x2 = 1x + 1 
	 84.	 f1x2 = 0 x0 , g1x2 = 20 x - 10 + 3 		 

	
Review Exercises 287
	108.	 Volume discounting. Major cola distributors sell a case 
(containing 24 cans) of cola to a retailer at a price of +4. 
They offer a discount of 20, for purchases over 100 cases 
and a discount of 25, for purchases over 500 cases. Write 
a piecewise function that describes this pricing scheme. 
Use x as the number of cases purchased and f1x2 as the 
price paid. 
	109.	 Air pollution. The daily level L of carbon monoxide in a 
city is a function of the number of automobiles in the city. 
Suppose L1x2 = 0.52x2 + 4, where x is the number 
of automobiles (in hundred thousands). Suppose further 
that the number of automobiles in a given city is growing 
according to the formula x1t2 = 1 + 0.002t2, where t is 
time in years measured from now.
a.	 Form a composite function describing the daily pollution 
level as a function of time.  
b.	 What pollution level is expected in five years? 
	110.	 Toy manufacturing. After being in business for t years, 
a toy manufacturer is making x = 5000 + 50t + 10t2 GI 
Jimmy toys per year. The sale price p in dollars per toy has 
risen according to the formula p = 10 + 0.5t. Write a for-
mula for the manufacturer’s yearly revenue as
a.	 A function of time t.	 
b.	 A function of price p. 	
	111.	 Height and weight of NBA players The table shows 
the roster for the National Basketball Association (NBA) 
team Boston Celtics for 2012.
Name
Height  
(in inches)
Weight  
(in pounds)
Leandro Barbosa
75
194
Brandon Bass
80
250
Avery Bradley
74
180
Jason Collins
84
255
Kevin Garnett
83
253
Jeff Green
81
235
Courtney Lee
77
200
Fab Melo
84
255
Paul Pierce
79
235
Rajon Rondo
73
186
Jared Sullinger
81
260
Jason Terry
74
180
Chris Wilcox
82
235
Source: http://www.nba.com/celtics/roster/2012–2013-roster.html
a.	 Use a graphing utility to find the line of regression relat-
ing the variables x (height in inches) and y (weight in 
pounds). 
b.	 Use a graphing utility to plot the points and graph the 
regression line. 
c.	 Use the line in part (a) to predict the weight of an NBA 
player whose height is 76 inches. 
Applying the Concepts
	104.	 Scuba diving. The pressure P on the body of a scuba diver 
increases linearly as she descends to greater depths d in sea-
water. The pressure at a depth of 10 feet is 19.2 pounds per 
square inch, and the pressure at a depth of 25 feet is  
25.95 pounds per square inch.
a.	 Write the equation relating P and d (with d as indepen-
dent variable) in slope–intercept form. 
b.	 What is the meaning of the slope and the y-intercept in 
part (a)?
c.	 Determine the pressure on a scuba diver who is at a depth 
of 160 feet. 
d.	 Find the depth at which the pressure on the body of the 
scuba diver is 104.7 pounds per square inch. 
	105.	 Waste disposal. The Sioux Falls, South Dakota, council 
considered the following data regarding the cost of disposing 
of waste material.
Year
1996
2000
Waste (in pounds)
  87,000
  223,000
Cost
+54,000
+173,000
Source: Sioux Falls Health Department.
	
	 Assume that the cost C (in dollars) is linearly related to the 
waste w (in pounds).
a.	 Write the linear equation relating C and w in slope–­
intercept form. 	
b.	 Explain the meaning of the slope and the intercepts of the 
equation in part (a). 
c.	 Suppose the city has projected 609,000 pounds of waste 
for the year 2008. Calculate the projected cost of dispos-
ing of the waste for 2008.	 
d.	 Suppose the city’s projected budget for waste collection 
in 2012 is +1 million. How many pounds of waste can be 
handled? 
	106.	 Checking your speedometer. A common way to check 
the accuracy of your speedometer is to drive one or more 
measured (not odometer) miles, holding the speedometer at 
a constant 60 miles per hour and checking your watch at the 
start and end of the measured distance.
a.	 How does your watch show you whether the speedometer 
is accurate? What mathematics is involved? 
b.	 Why shouldn’t you use your odometer to measure the 
number of miles? 
	107.	 Playing blackjack. Chloe, a bright mathematician, read 
a book on counting cards in blackjack and went to Las 
Vegas to try her luck. She started with +100 and discov-
ered that the amount of money she had at time t hours after 
the start of the game could be expressed by the function 
f1t2 = 100 + 55t - 3t2.
a.	 What amount of money had Chloe won or lost in the first 
two hours? 
b.	 What was the average rate at which Chloe was winning 
or losing money during the first two hours? 
c.	 Did she lose all of her money? If so, when?  
d.	 If she played until she lost all of her money, what was the 
average rate at which she was losing her money?        

288	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	16.	 A ball is thrown upward from the ground. After t ­seconds, 
the height h (in feet) above the ground is given by 
h = 25 - 12t - 522. How many seconds does the ball take 
to reach a height of 25 feet? 	
0
x
y
	17.	 Assuming that f is a one-to-one function and f122 = 7, find 
f -1172. 
	18.	 Find the inverse function f -11x2 of the one-to-one function 
	
	 f1x2 =
2x
x - 1. 
	19.	 Now that Jo has saved +1000 for a car, her dad takes over 
and deposits +100 in her account each month. Write an equa-
tion that relates the total amount of money, A, in Jo’s account 
to the number of months, x, that Jo’s dad has been putting 
money in her account. 
	20.	 The cost C in dollars for renting a car for one day is a func-
tion of the number of miles traveled, m. For a car renting for 
+30.00 per day and +0.25 per mile, this function is given by
C1m2 = 0.25m + 30.
a.	 Find the cost of renting the car for one day and driving 230 
miles. 
b.	 If the charge for renting the car for one day is +57.50, how 
many miles were driven? 
	1.	 Find the equation of a circle (in standard form) having a 
diameter with endpoints 1-2, 32 and 1-4, 52.
	2.	 Determine which symmetries the graph of the equation 
3x + 2xy2 = 1 has.	 
	3.	 Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of 
y = x21x - 321x + 12. 
	4.	 Graph the equation x2 + y2 - 2x - 2y = 2. 
	5.	 Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of the line 
with slope -1 passing through the point 12, 72. 
	6.	 Write an equation of the line parallel to the line 8x - 2y = 7 
passing through 12, -12. 
	7.	 Use f1x2 = -2x + 1 and g1x2 = x2 + 3x + 2 to find 
1fg2 122. 
	8.	 Use f1x2 = 2x - 3 and g1x2 = 1 - 2x2 to evaluate 
g1f1222. 
	9.	 Use f1x2 = x2 - 2x to find 1f ∘f21x2. 
	10.	 If f1x2 = bx3 - 2  if x … 0
1 - 2x2 if 7 0 , find (a) f1-12, (b) f102, 
	
	 and (c) f112. 	  
	11.	 Find the domain of the function f1x2 =
1x
11 - x. 
	12.	 Determine the average rate of change of the function 
f1x2 = 2x + 7 between x = 1 and x = 4. 
	13.	 Determine whether the function f1x2 = 2x4 - 3
x2 is even, 
	
	 odd, or neither. 
	14.	 Find the intervals where the function whose graph is shown 
in the second column is increasing or decreasing.
	15.	 Starting with the graph of y = 1x, describe the sequence 
of transformations (in order) required to sketch the graph of 
f1x2 = 21x - 3 + 4.
Practice Test A 
Practice Test B
	1.	 The graph of the equation 0 x0 + 20 y0 = 2 is symmetric with 
respect to which of the following? 
I.  the origin  II.  the x-axis  III.  the y-axis
a.	 I only	
b.	 II only
c.	 III only	
d.	 I, II, and III
	2.	 Which are the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of 
y = x2 - 9? 
a.	 x-intercept 3, y-intercept -9
b.	 x-intercepts {3, y-intercept -9
c.	 x-intercept 3, y-intercept 9
d.	 x-intercepts {3, y-intercepts {9
	3.	 The slope of a line is undefined if the line is parallel to 
a.	 The x-axis	
b.	 The line x - y = 0
c.	 The line x + y = 0	
d.	 The y-axis
	4.	 Which is an equation of the circle with center 10, -52 and 
radius 7? 
a.	 x2 + y2 - 10y = 0	
b.	 x2 + 1y - 522 = 7
c.	 x2 + 1y - 522 = 49	
d.	 x2 + y2 + 10y = 24
	5.	 Which is an equation of the line passing through 12, -32 and 
having slope -1? 
a.	 y + 3 = - 1x + 22	
b.	 y - 3 = - 1x - 22
c.	 y + 3 = - 1x - 22	
d.	 y + 3 = - 1x + 22  

	
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–2 289
	14.	 Suppose the graph of f is given. Describe how the graph of 
y = f1x + 42 can be obtained from the graph of f. 
a.	 By shifting the graph of f 4 units to the left
b.	 By shifting the graph of f 4 units down
c.	 By shifting the graph of f 4 units up
d.	 By shifting the graph of f 4 units to the right
e.	 By shifting the graph of f in the x-axis
	15.	 Suppose the graph of f is given. Describe how the graph of 
y = -2f1x - 42 can be obtained from the graph of f. 
a.	 By shifting the graph of f 4 units to the left, shrinking 
	
vertically by a factor of 1
2, and reflecting in the x-axis
b.	 By shifting the graph of f 4 units to the right, stretching 
vertically by a factor of 2, and reflecting in the x-axis
c.	 By shifting the graph of f 4 units to the left, shrinking 
	
vertically by a factor of 1
2, and reflecting in the x-axis
d.	 By shifting the graph of f 4 units to the right, stretching 
vertically by a factor of 2, and reflecting in the y-axis
	16.	 Which of the following is a one-to-one function? 
a.	 f1x2 = 0 x + 30 	
b.	 f1x2 = x2
c.	 f1x2 =  2x2 + 9	
d.	 f1x2 = x3 + 2
	17.	If f is a one-to-one function and f132 = 5, then f -1152 
equals 
a.	 1
5	
b.	 1
3
c.	 3	
d.	 -5
	18.	 Find the inverse function f -11x2 of f1x2 =
x
3x + 2.	
a.	
3x
x - 2	
b.	
2x
3x - 1
c.	
2x
1 - 3x	
d.	
x
x - 3
	19.	 The ideal weight w (in pounds) for a man of height x inches 
is found by subtracting 190 from five times his height. Write 
a linear equation that gives the ideal weight of a man of 
height x inches. Then find the ideal weight of a man whose 
height is 70 inches. 
a.	 w = x + 190
5
, 160 lb	
b.	 w = 5x - 190, 160 lb
c.	 w = 190 - x
5, 176 lb	
d.	 w = x + 190
5
, 52 lb
	20.	 Cassie rented an intermediate sedan at +25.00 per day plus 
+0.20 per mile. How many miles can Cassie travel in one day 
for +50.00? 
a.	 125	
b.	 1025
c.	 250	
d.	 175
	6.	 What is a second point on the line through 13, 22 having 
	
	slope - 1
2? 
a.	 12, 42	
b.	 15, 12
c.	 17, 02	
d.	 14, 42
	7.	 Which is an equation of the line parallel to the line 
6x - 3y = 5 passing through 1-1, 22? 
a.	 y - 2 = -21x + 12	
b.	 y - 2 = 61x + 12
c.	 y - 2 = -61x + 12	
d.	 y - 2 = 21x + 12
	 8.	 Use f1x2 = 3x - 5 and g1x2 = 2 - x2 to find 1f ∘g21x2. 
a.	 -9x2 + 30x - 23	
b.	 -3x2 + 1
c.	 3x2 + 1	
d.	 9x2 - 30x + 23
	9.	 Use f1x2 = 2x2 - x to find 1f ∘f21x2. 
a.	 8x4 - 8x3 + x	
b.	 8x4 + x
c.	 4x4 - 4x3 + x2 - x	
d.	 4x4 - x3 + x2
e.	 -x4 + 6x2 - x
	10.	 Assuming that g1t2 = 1 - t
1 + t, find g1a - 12. 
a.	 2 - a
2 + a	
b.	 1 - a
1 + a
c.	 2 - a
a
	
d.	 -1
	11.	 The domain of the function f1x2 = 1x + 11 - x is 
a.	 30, 14	
b.	 1- ∞, -14 ´ 30, + ∞2
c.	 1- ∞, 14	
d.	 30, + ∞2
	12.	 Let f1x2 = x2 + 3x - 4. Find all values of x for which 
1x, 62 is on the graph of f.	
a.	 -5, 1	
b.	 -2, 5
c.	 2, -4	
d.	 2, -5
	13.	 Find the intervals where the function whose graph is shown 
here is increasing or decreasing.	
a.	 Increasing on 10, 32, decreasing on 1-3, 02 ´ 13, 42
b.	 Increasing on 1-1, 32, decreasing on 12, -12 ´ 13, 12
c.	 Increasing on 1-3, 32, decreasing on 12, -12 ´ 13, 12
d.	 Increasing on 11.2, 42, decreasing on 1-3, -1.42
1
2
4
6
7
0
3
5
y
2
1
3 4 5 x
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–2
	1.	 Simplify.
a.	 ax3
y2 b
2
 ay2
x3b
3 
	
b.	
x -1y-1
x -1 + y-1 
	2.	 Factor.
a.	 2x2 + x - 15  	
b.	 x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
	3.	 Combine and simplify.
a.	 175 + 1108 - 1192	 
b.	 x - 1
x + 1 - x - 2
x + 2 	
	4.	 Rationalize the denominator.
a.	
1
2 + 13 
	
b.	
1
15 - 2 		

290	 Chapter 2      Graphs and Functions
	22.	 The line is parallel to x = -2 and passes through 15, 72. 
	23.	 Find x assuming that the line through 1x, 52 and 15, 112 is 
parallel to a line with slope 2.	 
	24.	 Find x assuming that the line through 1x, 32 and 13, 72 is 
	
	perpendicular to a line with slope 1
2. 
In Exercise 25–28, graph each equation.
	25.	 12x = 4y - 6 
	26.	 x2 - 2x + y2 - 4y - 4 = 0	 
	27.	 f1x2 = 1x + 2 + 3 
	28.	 f1x2 = - 1x - 122 + 4 
	29.	 Ms. Gutiérrez bought some used books for +1650. She kept 
16 of the books and sold the rest at a profit of +10 each. If 
she recovered her original +1650 from this sale, how many 
books did she purchase initially? 
	30.	 The monthly note on a car that was leased for two years was 
+250 less than the monthly note on a car that was leased for 
a year and a half. The total expense for the two leases was 
+21,000. Find the monthly note for each lease.
	31.	 Let f1x2 = 1x + 1 - 3.
a.	 Find the domain of f.	 
b.	 Find the intercepts. 
c.	 Find f1-12. 
d.	 Solve f1x2 7 0. 
	32.	 Let f1x2 = e -x
if x 6 0
x2
if x Ú 0.
a.	 Find f1-22, f102, and f122.	 
b.	 Find the intervals on which f is increasing, decreasing, or 
constant. 	
	33.	 Let f1x2 =
1
x - 2 and g1x2 = 2
x.
a.	 Find 1f ∘g21x2 and state its domain.
b.	 Find 1g ∘f21x2 and state its domain. 
In Exercises 5–9, solve each equation for x.
	5.	 a.  3x - 7 = 5 
	
b.	
1
x - 1 =
3
x - 1 
	6.	 a.  x2 - 3x = 0 
	
b.	 x2 + 3x - 10 = 0
	7.	 a.  2x2 - x + 3 = 0	
b.	 4x2 - 12x + 9 = 0 
	8.	 a.  x - 61x + 8 = 0	
	
	b.  ax - 1
x b
2
- 10 ax - 1
x b + 21 = 0
	9.	 a.  13x - 1 = 2x - 1	
b.	 11 - x = 2 - 12x + 1 
In Exercises 10–12, solve each inequality for x and write the 
solution in interval notation.
	10.	 a.  2x - 5 6 11 
	
b.	 -3x + 4 7 -5 
	11.	 a.  -3 6 2x - 3 6 5 
	 b.	 5 … 1 - 2x … 7 
	12.	 a.  2x - 1 … 7 
	
b.	 2x - 3 Ú 5 
	13.	 Show that the triangle with vertices A15, -22, B16, 52, and 
C12, 22 is isosceles. 
	14.	 Sketch the graph of 4x2 - 9y2 = 0. [Hint: 4x2 - 9y2 =
12x + 3y212x - 3y2.] 
	15.	 Show that the points 1-3, -12, 12, 42, 15, 32, and 16, 22 lie 
on a circle with center 12, -12. 
	16.	 Find the center and radius of the circle with equation 
x2 + y2 - 6x + 4y + 9 = 0. 
In Exercises 17–22, find the slope–intercept form of the  
equation of the line satisfying the given condition.
	17.	 Slope = -3; y-intercept 5 	
	18.	 Slope = 2; x-intercept 4 	
	19.	 The line is perpendicular to y = 2x + 3 and passes through 
12, -12. 
	20.	 The line is parallel to y = 2x + 3 and passes through 
12, -12. 
	21.	 The line is the perpendicular bisector of the line segment 
joining 13, -12 and 15, 72. 	 		   
 	 
      	          

Polynomials and rational functions are used in navigation, 
in computer-aided geometric design, in the study of supply 
and demand in business, in the design of suspension bridges, 
in computations determining the force of gravity on planets, 
and in virtually every area of inquiry requiring numerical 
approximations. Their applicability is so widespread that  
it is hard to imagine an area in which they have not made  
an impact.
Polynomial and  
Rational Functions
C h a p t e r 3
Topics
3.1	 Quadratic Functions
3.2	 Polynomial Functions
3.3	 Dividing Polynomials
3.4	 The Real Zeros of a  
Polynomial Function
3.5	 The Complex Zeros of a 
Polynomial Function
3.6	 Rational Functions
3.7	 Variation

292	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
The Gateway Arch
The Gateway Arch, at 630-feet, is the world’s tallest arch. Located on the west bank 
of the Mississippi River in St. Louis, Missouri, it stands as a monument to the westward 
expansion of the United States, begun 200 years ago by Lewis and Clark. Built in the 
form of a flattened catenary arch, it is the tallest man-made monument in the United 
States, and the hallmark of the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial. The arch was 
designed by Finnish-American architect Eero Saarinen and German-American structural 
engineer Hannskarl Bendel in 1947, and has become an internationally famous symbol 
of St. Louis. In Exercise 100 we investigate the dimensions of this famous structure.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Linear functions (Section 2.6, page 226)
2	 Completing the square (Section 1.2,  
page 96)
3	 Quadratic formula (Section 1.2, page 97)
4	 Transformations (Section 2.7, page 250)
Objectives
1	 Graph a quadratic function in standard 
form.
2	 Graph any quadratic function.
3	 Solve problems modeled by quadratic 
functions.
Quadratic Functions
3.1
S e c t i o n
Quadratic Functions
A function of the form
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c,
where a, b, and c, are real numbers with a ≠0, is called a quadratic function.
Quadratic Function
1	
Graph a quadratic function in 
standard form.
Note that the squaring function s1x2 = x2 (whose graph is a parabola, see page 234) is the 
quadratic function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c with a = 1,  b = 0,  and  c = 0. We will show 
that we can graph any quadratic function by transforming the graph of s1x2 = x2. Because 
the graph of y = x2 is a parabola, the graph of any quadratic function is also a parabola.
First, we compare the graphs of f1x2 = ax2 for a 7 0 and g1x2 = ax2 for a 6 0. 
These are quadratic functions with b = 0 and c = 0.

	
Section 3.1    ■    Quadratic Functions 293
f1x2 = ax2, a + 0
g1x2 = ax2, a * 0
The graph of f1x2 = ax2 is obtained from 
the graph of the squaring function s1x2 = x2 
by multiplying the y-values by a, vertically 
stretching or compressing it. Here are three 
such graphs on the same axes for
a = 2, a = 1, and a = 1
2.
x
y
1
3
3
1
1
3
5
0
a  1
2
a  2
a  1
The graph of g1x2 = ax2 is the reflection 
of the graph of f1x2 = 0 a0 x2 about the 
x-axis. Here are three graphs for 
a = -2, a = -1, and a = -1
2.
x
y
2
3
2
3
2
4
6
0
a 2
a 1
2
a 1
Standard Form of a Quadratic Function
Any quadratic function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c can be rewritten in the form
f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k, called the standard form of the quadratic function f. By using 
transformations (see Section 2.7), we can obtain the graph of f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k from 
the graph of the squaring function s1x2 = x2 as follows:
 s1x2 = x2
	
The squaring function
T
 g1x2 = 1x - h22
	
Horizontal translation to the right if h 7 0 and to the 
left if h 6 0
 G1x2 = a1x - h22
	
Vertical stretching or compressing. If a 6 0, the graph 
is also reflected about the x-axis.
 f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k	
Vertical translation, up if k 7 0 and down if k 6 0
These transformations show that the graph of a quadratic function
f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k is a parabola that opens up if a 7 0 and down if a 6 0. Its do-
main is 1- ∞, ∞2. The parabola is symmetric about the vertical line x = h. The line of 
symmetry x = h is called the axis (or axis of symmetry) of the parabola. The point 1h, k2 
where the axis meets the parabola is called the vertex of the parabola. The vertex of any 
parabola that opens up is the lowest point of the graph, and the vertex of any parabola that 
opens down is the highest point of the graph. Therefore, k is the minimum value for any 
parabola that opens up and k is the maximum value for any parabola that opens down. The 
standard form is particularly useful because it immediately identifies the vertex 1h, k2.
T
T
The quadratic function
f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k, a ≠0
is in standard form. The graph of f is a parabola with vertex 1h, k2. See Figure 3.1.  
The parabola is symmetric about the line x = h, called the axis of the parabola.  
If a 7 0, the parabola opens up, and if a 6 0, the parabola opens down. If a 7 0, k 
is the minimum value of f, and if a 6 0, k is the maximum value of f.
The Standard Form of a Quadratic Function
Figure 3.1  Quadratic functions
O
x
(h, k)
x  h
y
y  ax2
f(x)  a(x  h)2  k
Vertex

294	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Find the standard form of the quadratic function f  whose graph has vertex 1-3, 42 and 
passes through the point 1-4, 72. Does f  have a maximum or minimum value?
Solution
 f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k	
Standard form of a quadratic function
 f1x2 = a3x - 1-3242 + 4	
Replace h with -3 and k with 4.
 y = a1x + 322 + 4	
Replace f 1x2 with y, and simplify.
 7 = a1-4 + 322 + 4	
Replace x with -4 and y with 7 because 1-4, 72  
lies on the graph of y = f 1x2.
 7 = a + 4	
Simplify.
 a = 3	
Solve for a.
The standard form is
f1x2 = 31x + 322 + 4    a = 3, h = -3, k = 4
Because a = 3 7 0, f  has a minimum value of 4 at x = -3.
Practice Problem 1  Find the standard form of the quadratic function f  whose graph 
has vertex 11, -52 and passes through the point 13, 72. Does f  have a maximum or  
minimum value?
Writing the Equation of a Quadratic Function
EXAMPLE 1
Graphing a Quadratic Function in Standard Form
Objective
  EXAMPLE 2
Example
Sketch the graph of f1x2 = -31x + 222 + 12.
1.	The graph of f1x2 = -31x + 222 + 12
= -33x - 1-2242 + 12
c	
c	
c
a	
h	
k
	
is a parabola; a = -3, h = -2, and k = 12.
2.	Because a = -3 6 0, the parabola opens down.
3.	The vertex 1h, k2 = 1-2, 122. Because the parabola opens  
down, the function f  has a maximum value of 12 at x = -2.
4.	
 0 = -31x + 222 + 12	
Set f 1x2 = 0.
	
 31x + 222 = 12
	
Add 31x + 222 to both sides.
	
 1x + 222 = 4
	
Divide both sides by 3.
	
 x + 2 = {2
	
Square root property
	
 x = -2 { 2
	
Subtract 2 from both sides.
x = 0 or x = -4	
Solve for x.
The x-intercepts are 0 and -4. The parabola passes through the  
points 10, 02 and 1-4, 02.
Sketch the graph of f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k.
Step 1 The graph is a parabola because 
it has the form f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k.   
Identify a, h, and k.
Step 2 Determine how the parabola 
opens. If a 7 0, the parabola opens up. If 
a 6 0, it opens down.
Step 3 Find the vertex 1h, k2. If a 7 0 (or 
a 6 0), the function f  has a minimum (or a 
maximum) value k at x = h.
Step 4 Find the x-intercepts (if any). 
Set f1x2 = 0 and solve the equation 
a1x - h22 + k = 0 for x. If the solutions are 
real numbers, they are the x-intercepts. If not, 
the parabola lies above the x-axis (when a 7 0) 
or below the x-axis (when a 6 0).
(continued)
Procedure  
in Action

	
Section 3.1    ■    Quadratic Functions 295
Practice Problem 2  Graph the quadratic function f1x2 = -21x + 122 + 3.  
Find the vertex, maximum or minimum value, and x- and y-intercepts.
Graphing a Quadratic Function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c
A quadratic function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c can be changed to the standard form 
f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k by completing the square.
To write x2 -4x + 3 in standard form, we use a -4
2 b
2
= 1-222 = 4, the square of 
one half the coefficient of the term -4x.
 x2 - 4x + 3 = x2 - 4x + 4 - 4 + 3
	 Add and subtract 4; 4 = a -4
2 b
2
 = 1x2 - 4x + 42 - 4 + 3	 Group the first three terms.
 = 1x - 222 - 1
	 x2 - 4x + 4 = 1x - 222; -4 + 3 = -1
To write 5x2 - 20x + 8 in standard form, we first group 5x2 - 20x.
 5x2 - 20x + 8 = 15x2 - 20x2 + 8	
Group 5x2 - 20x.
 = 51x2 - 4x2 + 8	
Factor out 5 from 5x2 - 20x.
 = 51x2 - 4x + 4 - 42 + 8	
Add and subtract 4 within the 
	
parentheses; 4 = a -4
2 b
2
 = 51x2 - 4x + 42 + 51-42 + 8	 Distributive property
 = 51x - 222 - 12	
x2 - 4x + 4 = 1x - 222; simplify.
The general procedure for completing the square is given next.
Converting f1x2 =  ax2 + bx + c to Standard Form 
 f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c	
Original function
= aax2 + b
a xb + c	
Factor out a from ax2 + bx.
 = aax2 + b
a x + b2
4a2 - b2
4a2b + c	
To complete the square, add and subtract 
	
a1
2 # b
ab
2
= b2
4a2 within the parentheses.
 = aax2 + b
a x + b2
4a2 b - a # b2
4a2 + c	
Distribute a to - b2
4a2; regroup terms.
 = aax + b
2ab
2
+ ac - b2
4ab	
ax + b
2ab
2
= x2 + b
a x + b2
4a2
Step 5 Find the y-intercept. Replace x with 
0. Then f102 = ah2 + k is the y-intercept.
Step 6 Sketch the graph. Plot the points 
found in Steps 3–5 and join them to form a  
parabola. Show the axis x = h of the  
parabola by drawing a dashed vertical line.
If there are no x-intercepts, draw the half of  
the parabola that passes through the vertex  
and a second point, such as the y-intercept. 
Then use the axis of symmetry to draw the 
other half.
5.	 f102 = -310 + 222 + 12 = -3142 + 12 = 0.  
The y-intercept is 0. As already shown, the parabola  
passes through the origin 10, 02.
6.	The axis of the parabola  
is the vertical line x = -2.
	
The graph of the parabola  
is shown in the figure.
3
5
1
6
3
6
12
y
x  2
(2, 12)
f(x) = 3(x + 2)2 + 12
0
x
2	
Graph any quadratic function.

296	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Comparing this form with the standard form f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k, we have
	
h = - b
2a	
x-coordinate of the vertex
and k = c - b2
4a	
y-coordinate of the vertex
Notice that f 1h2 = a1h - h22 + k = k	
Replace x with h; a1h - h22 = 0.
To find the vertex 1h, k2 of f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c,
1.	 Find the x-coordinate h = - b
2a of the vertex.
2.	 Calculate k = f  a - b
2ab to find its y-coordinate.
Finding the Vertex of f 1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a 3 0
EXAMPLE 3
Graphing a Quadratic Function
Objective
Example
Sketch the graph of f1x2 = 2x2 + 8x - 10.
1.	In the equation y = f 1x2 = 2x2 + 8x - 10, 
a = 2, b = 8, and c = -10.
2.	Because a = 2 7 0, the parabola opens up.
3.	h = - b
2a = -
8
2122 = -2	
a = 2, b = 8
k = f 1h2 = f 1-22
= 21-222 + 81-22 - 10	
Replace h with -2.
= -18	
Simplify.
The vertex is 1-2, -182.
The function f  has a minimum value of -18 at x = -2.
4.		
2x2 + 8x - 10 = 0	
Set f1x2 = 0.
	
21x2 + 4x - 52 = 0	
Factor out 2.
	
21x + 521x - 12 = 0	
Factor.
	x + 5 = 0 or x - 1 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = -5 or x = 1	
Solve for x.
The x-intercepts are at x = -5 and x = 1; the graph of f passes 
through the points 1-5, 02 and 11, 02.
Graph f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0.
Step 1 Identify a, b, and c. 
Step 2 Determine how the parabola opens.
If a 7 0, the parabola opens up; 
if a 6 0, the parabola opens down. 
Step 3 Find the vertex 1h, k2. Use the  
following formulas:
 h = - b
2a
 k = f  a - b
2ab
k is a minimum if a 7 0.
k is a maximum if a 6 0.
Step 4 Find the x-intercepts (if any). Let 
f1x2 = 0 and solve ax2 + bx + c = 0.  
If the solutions are real numbers, they are the 
x-intercepts. If not, the parabola lies entirely 
above the x-axis (when a 7 0) or entirely  
below the x-axis (when a 6 0).
(continued)
Procedure  
in Action

	
Section 3.1    ■    Quadratic Functions 297
Practice Problem 3  Graph the quadratic function f1x2 = 3x2 - 3x - 6.  
Find the vertex, maximum or minimum value, and x- and y-intercepts.
As the graph suggests, when a 7 0, every value of y, with y Ú k, is the second coordinate 
for some point on the graph of f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c. So when a 7 0, the interval 3k, ∞2 
is the range of f. Similarly, when a 6 0, the range of f is the interval 1- ∞, k4.
Step 5 Find the y-intercept. Let x = 0. 
The result, f102 = c, is the y-intercept.
Step 6 The parabola is symmetric about 
its axis, x = - b
2a. Use this symmetry to
find additional points.
Step 7 Draw a parabola through the points 
found in Steps 3–6.
If there are no x-intercepts, draw the half of the 
parabola that passes through the vertex and a 
second point, such as the y-intercept. Then use 
the axis of symmetry to draw the other half.
5.	Set x = 0 to obtain f102 = 21022 + 8102 - 10 = -10. The  
y-intercept is -10 and the graph passes through the point 10, -102.
6.	The axis of symmetry is  
x = -2. The symmetric  
image of 10, -102 about  
the axis x = -2 is  
1-4, -102.
7.	The parabola passing  
through the points in  
Steps 3–6 is sketched  
in the figure.
x
1 0
3
7
2
4
2
8
18
y
x  2
(4, 10)
(2, 18)
(5, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 10)
f(x) = 2x2 + 8x 10
The graph of the function f1x2 = -2x2 + 8x - 5 is shown in Figure 3.2.
a.	 Find the domain and range of f.
b.	 Solve the inequality -2x2 + 8x - 5 7 0.
Solution
The graph in Figure 3.2 is a parabola that opens down and whose vertex is 12, 32.
a.	 The domain of f  is 1- ∞, ∞2. Because the parabola opens down, the maximum value 
of f  is the y-coordinate, 3, of its vertex 12, 32. So the range of f  is 1- ∞, 34.
b.	 The x-intercepts of f  are 4 - 16
2
  ≈  0.775 and 4 + 16
2
 ≈ 3.225. The graph of 
	
f is above the x-axis between these intercepts. So y = -2x2 + 8x - 5 7 0 for the 
	
x-values in the interval a4 - 16
2
, 4 + 16
2
b. The solution set of the inequality 
	
-2x2 + 8x - 5 7 0 is the interval a4 - 16
2
, 4 + 16
2
b.
Practice Problem 4  Graph the function f1x2 = 3x2 - 6x - 1 and solve the  
inequality 3x2 - 6x - 1 … 0.
Identifying the Characteristics of a Quadratic Function 
from Its Graph
EXAMPLE 4
Figure 3.2 
x
5
3
1
2
1
3
1
y
0
(2, 3)
(1, 1)
(3, 1)
(4, 5)
(0, 5)
4 
2
6
4 
2
6
1 unit
2 units
f(x) = 2x 2 + 8x  5
f(x) = 2x 2 + 8x  5
1.	 If a 7 0, the range is 3k,∞2.
2.	 If a 6 0, the range is 1- ∞, k4.
Finding the Range of f 1x2 = ax2 + bx + c having Vertex 1h, k2

298	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
x
y
V(h, k)
Figure 3.4 
3	
Solve problems modeled by 
quadratic functions.
The height h, in feet, of a ball thrown upward at an initial speed of v0 ft>s from a point 
h0 ft above the ground is given by the function
h1t2 = -1
2 gE
 t2 + v0t + h0,
where t is the time in seconds after the ball was released and gE = 32 ft>s2 is the accel-
eration due to gravity on Earth. If you have thrown the ball upward from a cliff 50 ft 
high and the maximum height that it reached was 99 ft,
a.	 Find the height of the ball as a function of t.
b.	 How long did it take the ball to reach its highest point?
Solution
a.	 With gE = 32 and h0 = 50, the height of the ball is given by the equation
	
(1)	
 h1t2 = -16t2 + v0t + 50.   
-1
2
 gE = -1
2
 1322 = -16
Tracking a Moving Object
EXAMPLE 6
For a quadratic function 
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, the vertex 
is 1h, k2 = a- b
2a,  f  a- b
2ab b. 
The function f has minimum value k 
if a 7 0 and f has maximum value 
k if a 6 0.
Recall
The graph of y = ax2 + bx + c is given in Figure 3.3. Find the signs of a, b, and c and 
state which (if any) are zero.
Solution
The graph of the parabola opens down, so a 6 0. The vertex V(h, k) is in Q I, so h 7 0.
Because h = - b
2a and a 6 0, we must have b 7 0. Otherwise, if b is negative, then -b 
is positive and -b
2a = +
-   is negative. The y-intercept is positive, and the y-intercept is 
a1022 + b102 + c = c; so c 7 0. So a 6 0, b 7 0, and c 7 0. 
Practice Problem 5  Repeat Example 5 for the graph in Figure 3.4.
Finding the Signs of a, b, and c from the Graph of 
y = ax2 + bx + c
EXAMPLE 5
Figure 3.3 
x
y
V(h, k)
Applications
Many applications of quadratic functions involve finding the maximum or minimum value 
of the function.

	
Section 3.1    ■    Quadratic Functions 299
	
To find y0, we observe that this function is a quadratic function with a = -16 6 0. It 
attains its maximum value at the point where
t = -
v0
21-162 = v0
32    Use the formula t = - b
2a for the first  
coordinate of the vertex of a parabola.
	
Given that the maximum height of the ball was 99 ft and h1t2 = -16t2 + v0
 t + 50,
	
99 = h av0
32b = -16 a v0
32b
2
+ v0 a v0
32b + 50  Replace t with v0
32 in h1t2.
	
Solving for v0 yields
	
 v0
2
64 + 50 = 99	
-16 av0
32b
2
+ v0 av0
32b = v0
2
64
	
 v2
0
64 = 99 - 50 = 49	
Subtract 50 from both sides.
	
 v2
0 = 64 # 49	
Multiply both sides by 64.
	
 v0 = 264 # 49 = 8 # 7 = 56	
v0 is positive because the ball was thrown 
upward.
	
 h1t2 = -16t2 + 56t + 50
	
Replace v0 in equation (1) with 56.
b.	 We again use the formula for the first coordinate of the vertex of a parabola to con-
clude that the ball reached its highest point
	
t = -
56
21-162 = 56
32 = 1.75 seconds
	
after it was released.
Practice Problem 6  Repeat Example 6 assuming that the height of the cliff was  
100 ft and the ball went up to the maximum height of 244 ft above the ground.
A farmer wants to build a rectangular grazing pen using a straight stone wall for one 
side. He has 100 feet of fence to use for the other three sides. What is the maximum area 
that can be enclosed? What are the dimensions of the pen?
Solution
Let x =  length of the side perpendicular to the wall (see Figure 3.5) and y = length of 
the side parallel to the wall.
Finding a Maximum Area
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 3.5 
x
y  100  2x
x
 Then 2x + y = 100
	
The three sides use 100 feet of fence.
 y = 100 - 2x
	
Subtract 2x from both sides.
 A1x2 = area of the pen = xy	
Area = (length)(width)
 A1x2 = x1100 - 2x2	
Replace y with 100 - 2x.

300	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
The function A1x2 = x1100 - 2x2 = -2x2 + 100x gives the area of the pen, so we want 
to find the maximum value for A1x2. The vertex for the parabola is 1h, k2, where
h = - b
2a =
-100
21-22 = 100
4
= 25    A1x2 = -2x2 + 100x, so a = -2, b = 100
k = A1252 = -212522 + 1001252 = 1250.    k =  maximum value
The maximum area is 1250 square feet, which occurs when x = h = 25.
The length of the side perpendicular to the wall is 25 feet.
The length of the side parallel to the wall is 100 - 21252 = 50 feet.
Practice Problem 7  A children’s center receives a donation of 1000 ft of fence to  
enclose a rectangular playground. What is the maximum area that can be enclosed?  
What are the playground’s dimensions?
Answers to Practice Problems
1. y = 31x - 122 - 5; f has minimum value -5.
2. The graph is a parabola. a = -2, h = -1, k = 3.  
It opens downward. Vertex 1-1, 32. It has maximum 
value 3; x-intercepts: {A
3
2 - 1; y-intercept: 1
1
2
2
3
4
1
0
x
y
(1, 3)
3. The graph is a parabola. It opens upward. Vertex a1
2, -27
4 b; 
It has a minimum value - 27
4 ; x-intercepts: -1, 2; y-intercept: -6
1
4
2
3
1
4
3
2
0
x
y
(
)
, 
1
2
27
4
 
4. 
0
2
1
3
4
2 1
4
6
2
4
2
x
y
	
c 3 - 223
3
, 3 + 223
3
d
5. a 6 0, b 6 0, c 7 0  6. a. h1t2 = -16t2 + 96t + 100 (feet)
b. 3 seconds  7. Maximum area is 62,500 sq ft. The playground  
is a square of side length 250 feet on each side.
Exercises
section 3.1 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 A point where the axis of the parabola meets the parabola is 
called the 
.
	2.	 The vertex of the graph of f1x2 = -21x + 322 - 5 is 
.
	3.	 True or False. The graph of the function in Exercise 2 
opens down. 
	4.	 True or False. The graph of f1x2 = -2 - x + x2 opens 
down. 
	5.	 The x-coordinate of the vertex of the parabola of Exercise 4 
is 
.
	6.	 True or False. The y-coordinate of the vertex of the  
parabola f1x2 = x2 - 2x + 5 is f112. 
	7.	 True or False. If a 7 0, then the minimum value of 
	
	 f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c is f a- b
2ab. 
	8.	 True or False. If a 6 0, then f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c has no 
minimum value. 

	
Section 3.1    ■    Quadratic Functions 301
In Exercises 9–16, match each quadratic function with its graph.
  9.	 y = - 1
3 x2 
	10.	 y = -3x2 
11.	 y = -31x + 122 
	12.	 y = 21x + 122 
13.	 y = 1x - 122 + 2 
	14.	 y = 1x - 122 - 3 
15.	 y = 21x + 122 - 3 
	16. y = -31x + 122 + 2 
In Exercises 17–20, find a quadratic function of the form 
y = ax2 that passes through the given point.
17.	 12, -82 
	18.	1-3, 32 
19.	 12, 202 
	20.	1-3, -62 
In Exercises 21–30, find the quadratic function y = f1x2 that 
has the given vertex and whose graph passes through the 
given point. Write the function in standard form.
	21.	 Vertex 10, 02; passing through 1-2, 82 
	22.	 Vertex 12, 02; passing through 11, 32 
	23.	 Vertex 1-3, 02; passing through 1-5, -42 
	24.	 Vertex 10, 12; passing through 1-1, 02 
	25.	 Vertex 12, 52; passing through 13, 72 
	26.	 Vertex 1-3, 42; passing through 10, 02 
	27.	 Vertex 12, -32; passing through 1-5, 82 
	28.	 Vertex 1-3, -22; passing through 10, -82 
29.	 Vertex a1
2, 1
2b; passing through a3
4, - 1
4b 
30.	 Vertex a- 3
2, - 5
2b; passing through a1, 55
8 b 
In Exercises 31–34, the graph of a quadratic function 
y = f1x2 is given. Find the standard form of the function.
31.	
0
1
3
1
5
x
1
3
5
y
(0, 3)
(2, 0)
 
32.	
0
x
1
4
y
1
(3, 0)
(0, 2)
1
5
7
 
33.	
0
x
1
3
5
y
1
(3, 1)
(5, 2)
1
5
7
 
5
3
2
3
0
x
y
(a)
1
3
(b)
x
3
2
1
1
0
2
3
1
3
y
1
3
x
1
3
2
1
3
0
y
(c)
x
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
3
y
(d)
2
4
6
(e)
0
1
3
x
y
1
3
1
3
2
3
2
3
1
(f)
0
x
y
1
3
1
3
1
1
0
2
x
y
(g)
x
1
3
1
1
3
5
0
y
(h)

302	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
	34.	
0
x
1
3
5
y
1
(0, 3)
1
5
7
(3, 1)
 
In Exercises 35–40, the graphs of y = ax2 + bx + c are given. 
Find the signs of a, b, and c and state which (if any) are zero. 
	35.	
	36.	
	37.	
	38.	
	39.	
	40.	
In Exercises 41–50, graph each function by starting with the 
graph of y = x2 and using transformations.
	41.	 f1x2 = 3x2 
	42.	 f1x2 = 1
3 x2 
	43.	g1x2 = 1x - 422 
	44.	g1x2 = 1x + 322 
	45.	 f1x2 = -2x2 - 4   
	46.	 f1x2 = -x2 + 3 
	47.	g1x2 = 1x - 322 + 2 
	48.	g1x2 = 1x + 122 - 3 
	49.	 f1x2 = -31x - 222 + 4
	50.	 f1x2 = -21x + 122 + 3
In Exercises 51–58, graph the given function by writing it in 
the standard form y = a1x −h22 + k and then using trans-
formations on y = x2. Find the vertex, the axis of symmetry, 
and the x- and y-intercepts.
	51.	y = x2 + 4x 
	52.	y = x2 - 2x + 2 
	53.	y = 6x - 10 - x2 
	54.	y = 8 + 3x - x2 
	55.	y = 2x2 - 8x + 9 
	56.	y = 3x2 + 12x - 7 
	57.	y = -3x2 + 18x - 11 
	58.	y = -5x2 - 20x + 13 
In Exercises 59–66, (a) determine whether the graph of the 
given quadratic function opens up or down, (b) find the vertex 
1h, k2 = a−b
2a,  f a−b
2ab b, (c) find the axis of symmetry, 
(d) find the x- and y-intercepts, and (e) sketch the graph of 
the function.
	59.	y = x2 - 8x + 15 
	60.	y = x2 + 8x + 13 
	61.	y = x2 - x - 6 
	62.	y = x2 + x - 2 
	63.	y = x2 - 2x + 4 
	64.	y = x2 - 4x + 5 
	65.	y = 6 - 2x - x2 
	66.	y = 2 + 5x - 3x2 
In Exercises 67–74, a quadratic function f is given.  
(a) Determine whether the given quadratic function has  
a maximum value or a minimum value. Then find this value. 
(b) Find the range of f.
	67.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4x + 3 
	68.	 f1x2 = -x2 + 6x - 8 
	69.	 f1x2 = -4 + 4x - x2 
	70.	 f1x2 = x2 - 6x + 9 
	71.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 8x + 3 
	72.	 f1x2 = 3x2 + 12x - 5 
	73.	 f1x2 = -4x2 + 12x + 7
	74.	 f1x2 = 8x - 5 - 2x2 
In Exercises 75–80, solve the given quadratic inequality by 
sketching the graph of the corresponding quadratic function.
	75.	x2 - 4 … 0 
	76.	x2 + 4x + 5 6 0 
	77.	x2 - 4x + 3 7 0 
	78.	x2 + x - 2 7 0 
	79.	-6x2 + x + 7 7 0 
	80.	-5x2 + 9x - 4 … 0 
Applying the Concepts
Note: The domain of a function that models a real-life problem 
may consist of only integer values. However, in solving these 
problems, we frequently find it convenient to extend the domain 
to a suitable interval of real numbers containing the relevant 
integers.
	81.	 Height of a baseball. Ignoring air resistance, the height  
of a baseball that is hit 3 feet above the ground at an angle  
of 45° with an initial velocity of 132 ft>sec is given by the 
equation
h1x2 = -
32
113222 x2 + x + 3,
	
	where x is the horizontal distance (in feet) the ball traveled 
after being hit. Baseball fans will notice that air resistance 
x
y
V(h, k)
x
y
V(h, k)
x
y
V(h, k)
x
y
V(h, k)
x
y
V(h, k)
x
y
V(h, k)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

	
Section 3.1    ■    Quadratic Functions 303
	
	severely distorts the actual distance a baseball travels. Use the 
graph to answer the following questions.
a.	 Approximately how many feet did the ball travel horizon-
tally before hitting the ground? 
b.	 Approximately how high did the ball go? 
c.	 Use the function h to find answers to (a) and (b) rounded 
to the nearest integer. 	
200
100
25
50
75
100
125
150
400
300
500
y
x
	82.	 Apartment rentals. The number of apartments that can 
be rented in a 100-unit apartment complex decreases by 
one for each increase of $25 in rent. The revenue generated 
from rent after x increases of $25 is given by the equation 
R1x2 = -25x2 + 1700x + 80,000. Use the graph to answer 
the following questions.
a.	 Approximately what was the maximum revenue from the 
apartments? 
b.	 Approximately how many $25 increases generated the 
maximum revenue? 
c.	 Use the function R to find answers to (a) and (b). 	
40
20
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
80
60
100
y
x
	83.	 Maximizing revenue. A revenue function is given by 
R1x2 = 15 + 114x - 3x2, where x is the number of units 
produced and sold. Find the value of x for which the  
revenue is maximum. 
	84.	 Maximizing revenue. A demand function is given by 
p = 200 - 4x, where p is the price per unit and x is the num-
ber of units produced and sold (the demand). Find x for which 
the revenue is maximum. 3Recall that R1x2 = x # p.4 
	85.	 Minimizing cost. The total cost of a product is 
C = 200 - 50x + x2, where x is the number of units  
produced. Find the value of x for which the total cost is  
minimum. 
	86.	 Maximizing profit. A manufacturer produces x items of a 
product at a total cost of 150 + 2x2 dollars. The demand  
function for the product is p = 100 - x. Find the value of  
	x for which the profit is maximum. How much is the maximum 
profit? 1Recall that Profit = Revenue - Cost.2
	87.	 Geometry. Find the dimensions of a rectangle of maximum 
area if the perimeter of the rectangle is 80 units. What is the 
maximum area?
	88.	 Enclosing area. A rancher with 120 meters of fence intends 
to enclose a rectangular region along a river (which serves as 
a natural boundary requiring no fence). Find the maximum 
area that can be enclosed. 
	89.	 Enclosing playing fields. You have 600 meters of fenc-
ing, and you plan to lay out two identical playing fields. The 
fields can be side-by-side and separated by a fence, as shown 
in the figure. Find the dimensions and the maximum area of 
each field. 
	
	
	90.	 Enclosing area on a budget. You budget $2400  
for constructing a rectangular enclosure that consists  
of a high surrounding fence and a lower inside fence that  
divides the enclosure in half. The high fence costs  
$8 per foot, and the low fence costs $4 per foot. Find  
the dimensions and the maximum area of each half of  
the enclosure. 
	
	
	91.	 Maximizing apple yield. From past surveys and records, 
an orchard owner in northern Michigan has determined that 
if 26 apple trees per acre are planted, each tree yields 500 
apples, on average. The yield decreases by ten apples per tree 
for each additional tree planted. How many trees should be 
planted per acre to achieve the maximum total yield? 
	92.	 Buying and selling beef. A steer weighing 300 pounds gains 
8 pounds per day and costs $1 a day to keep. You bought this 
steer today at a market price of $1.50 per pound. However, the 
market price is falling 2¢ per pound per day. When should you 
sell the steer to maximize your profit? 
	93.	 Going on a tour. A group of students plans a tour. The 
charge per student is $72 if 20 students go on the trip. If more 
than 20 students participate, the charge per student is reduced 
by $2 times the number of students over 20. Find the number 
of students that will furnish the maximum revenue. What is the 
maximum revenue? 

304	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
	 94.	 Computer disks. A 5-inch- 
radius computer disk contains  
information in units called  
bytes that are arranged in  
concentric tracks on the  
disk. Assume that m bytes  
per inch can be put on each  
track. The tracks are  
uniformly spread (that is,  
there is a fixed number, say,  
p, of tracks per inch, measured  
radially across the disk). If the number of bytes on each 
track must be the same, where should the innermost  
track be located to get the maximum number of bytes  
on the disk? 
	 95.	 Motion on moon. On the Moon, the acceleration due to 
gravity is gM = 1.6 m>s2. If an astronaut threw a stone from 
the 5 m high platform on his spacecraft directly upward and 
the stone went up to the maximum height of 25 m,
a.	 Find the height of the stone as a function of time t with 
t = 0 corresponding to the moment of releasing the 
stone. 
b.	 How long did it take the stone to reach its highest 
point? 
	 96.	 Repeat Exercise 95 assuming that the platform was  
7 m high and the stone went up to the maximum height  
of 52 m. 
	 97.	 Motion of a projectile. A projectile is fired straight up 
with a velocity of 64 ft>s. Its altitude (height) h after  
t seconds is given by
h1t2 = -16t2 + 64t.
a.	 What is the maximum height of the projectile? 
b.	 When does the projectile hit the ground? 
	 98.	 Motion of a projectile. A projectile is shot upward with 
a velocity of 64 feet per second. Its altitude (height) h after  
t seconds is given by
h1t2 = -16t2 + 64t + 336.
a.	 What is the maximum height of the projectile? 
b.	 When does the projectile hit the ground? 
	 99.	 Architecture. A window is to be constructed in the shape of 
a rectangle surmounted by a semicircle. If the perimeter of the 
window is 18 feet, find its dimensions for the maximum area.
	100.	 Architecture. The shape of the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, 
Missouri, is a catenary curve, which closely resembles a 
parabola. The function
y = f1x2 = -0.00635x2 + 4x
	
	 models the shape of the arch, where y is the height in feet 
and x is the horizontal distance from the base of the left side 
of the arch in feet.
a.	 Graph the function y = f1x2. 
b.	 What is the width of the arch at the base? 
c.	 What is the maximum height of the arch? 	
	101.	 Football. The altitude or height h (in feet) of a punted foot-
ball can be modeled by the quadratic function
h = -0.01x2 + 1.18x + 2,
	
	 where x (in feet) is the horizontal distance from the point of 
impact with the punter’s foot. (See accompanying figure.)
2
a.	 Find the vertex of the parabola. 
b.	 If the opposing team fails to catch the ball, how far away 
from the punter does the ball hit the ground (to the near-
est foot)? 
c.	 What is the maximum height of the punted ball (to the 
nearest foot)? 
d.	 The nearest defensive player is 6 feet from the point of 
impact. How high must the player reach to block the punt 
(to the nearest foot)? 
e.	 How far downfield has the ball traveled when it reaches a 
height of 7 feet for the second time? 
	102.	 Field hockey. A scoop in field hockey is a pass that  
propels the ball from the ground into the air. Suppose a 
player makes a scoop with an upward velocity of 30 feet  
per second. The function
	
	
h = -16t2 + 30t
	
	 models the altitude or height h in feet at time t in seconds. 
Will the ball ever reach a height of 16 feet? 
5 in.
x

	
Section 3.1    ■    Quadratic Functions 305
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 103–108, find a quadratic function of the form 
f 1x2 = ax2 + bx + c that satisfies the given conditions.
	103.	 The graph of f is obtained by shifting the graph of  
y = 3x2 two units horizontally to the left and three units 
vertically up. 
	104.	 The graph of f passes through the point 11, 52 and has  
vertex 1-3, -22.   
	105.	 The graph of f has vertex 11, -22 and y-intercept 4.
	106.	 The graph of f has x-intercepts 2 and 6 and  
y-intercept 24. 
	107.	 The graph of f has x-intercept 7 and y-intercept 14, and 
x = 3 is the axis of symmetry. 
	108.	 The graph of f is obtained by shifting the graph of 
y = x2 + 2x + 2 three units horizontally to the right and 
two units vertically down. 
In Exercises 109–114, find two quadratic functions, one  
opening up and the other down, whose graphs have the  
given x-intercepts.
	109.	 -2, 6 
	110.	 -3, 5 
	111.	 -7, -1 
	112.	 2, 10
	113.	 Let f1x2 = 4x - x2. Solve f1a + 12 - f 1a - 12 = 0  
for a. 
	114.	 Let f1x2 = x2 + 1. Find 1 f ∘f 21x2.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	115.	 Symmetry about the line x = h. The graph of a 
polynomial function y = f1x2 is symmetric about the line 
x = h if f1h + p2 = f 1h - p2 for every number p. For 
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0, set f1h + p2 = f 1h - p2 
	
	 and show that h = - b
2a. This exercise proves that the 
	
	 graph of a quadratic function is symmetric about its axis: 
	
	 x = - b
2a.
	116.	 In the graph of y = 2x2 - 8x + 9, find the coordinates of 
the point symmetric to the point 1-1, 192 about the axis of 
symmetry. 
	117.	 Explain how to solve the inequality ax2 + bx + c 7 0 
with a ≠0 using only the sign of a and the x-intercepts of 
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c.
	118.	 Let f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k, a ≠0 and g1x2 = mx + b, 
m ≠0.
a.	 Show that the graph of y = 1 f ∘g21x2 is a parabola and 
find its vertex.
b.	 Show that the graph of y = 1g ∘f 21x2 is a parabola and 
find its vertex. 
	119.	 Let f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0 with discriminant 
b2 - 4ac of the equation f1x2 = 0. Discuss the relation-
ship between the location of the vertex of y = f1x2 and the 
sign of the discriminant.
	120.	 Show that a horizontal translation of the graph of a  
quadratic function is the composition of the quardratic  
function and a linear function.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 121–128, simplify each expression. Write your 
answers without negative exponents.
	121.	 -50 
	122.	 1-42-2 
	123.	 -4-2 
	124.	 12x221-3x42 
	125.	 x7 # x -7 
	126.	 12x2213x21-x32 
	127.	 x2a3 - 3
4b 
	128.	 x4 a1 + 3
x2 - 5
x3b
In Exercises 129–136, factor each expression.
	129.	 4x2 - 9 
	130.	 x2 + 6x + 9 
	131.	 15x2 + 11x - 12
	132.	 14x2 - 3x - 2
	133.	 x21x - 12 - 41x - 12
	134.	 9x212x + 72 - 2512x + 72
	135.	 x3 + 4x2 + 3x + 12
	136.	 2x3 - 3x2 + 2x - 3  
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
  

306	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Johannes Kepler (1571–1630)
Kepler was born in Weil in southern Germany 
and studied at the University of Tübingen. 
He studied with Michael Mastlin (professor 
of mathematics), who privately taught him 
the Copernican theory of the sun-centered 
universe while hardly daring to recognize it 
openly in his lectures. Kepler knew that to 
work out a detailed version of Copernicus’s 
theory, he had to have access to the observa-
tions of the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe 
(1546–1601). Kepler’s correspondence with 
Brahe resulted in his appointment as Brahe’s 
assistant. Brahe died about 18 months after 
Kepler’s arrival. During those 18 months, 
Kepler learned enough about Brahe’s work to 
create his own major project. He produced the 
famous three laws of planetary motion pub-
lished in 1609 in his book Astronomia Nova.
3.2
Polynomial Functions
We review some basic terminology. A polynomial function of degree n is a function of  
the form
f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a2x2 + a1x + a0,
where n is a nonnegative integer and the coefficients an, an-1, c, a2, a1, a0 are real num-
bers with an ≠0. The term anxn is called the leading term, the number an (the coefficient 
of xn) is called the leading coefficient, and a0 is the constant term. A constant function 
f1x2 = a1a ≠02, which may be written as f1x2 = ax0, for x ≠0 is a polynomial of 
degree 0. Because the zero function f1x2 = 0 has no nonzero coefficients, no degree is 
assigned to it.
1	
Learn properties of the graphs 
of polynomial functions.
Kepler’s Wedding Reception
Kepler is best known as an astronomer who discovered the three laws of planetary mo-
tion. However, Kepler’s primary field was not astronomy, but mathematics. Legend has 
it that at his own wedding reception, Kepler observed that the Austrian vintners could 
quickly and mysteriously compute the volumes of a variety of wine barrels. Each barrel 
had a hole, called a bunghole, in the middle of its side. The vintner would insert a rod, 
called the bungrod, into the hole until it hit the far corner. Then he would announce 
the volume. During the reception, Kepler occupied his mind with the problem of find-
ing the volume of a wine barrel with a bungrod.
In Example 10, we show how he solved the problem for barrels that are perfect cyl-
inders. But barrels are not perfect cylinders; they are wider in the middle and narrower 
at the ends and in between, the sides make a graceful curve that appears to be an arc 
of a circle. What could be the formula for the volume of such a shape? Kepler tackled 
this problem in his important book Nova Stereometria Doliorum Vinariorum (1615) and 
developed a related mathematical theory.
Polynomial Functions
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Graphs of equations (Section 2.2,  
page 66)
2	 Solving linear equations (Section 1.1,  
page 78)
3	 Solving quadratic equations (Section 1.2, 
page 52)
4	 Transformations (Section 2.7, page 250)
5	 Relative maximum and minimum values 
(Section 2.5, page 215)
Objectives
1	 Learn properties of the graphs of 
­polynomial functions.
2	 Determine the end behavior of polynomial 
functions.
3	 Find the zeros of a polynomial  
function by factoring.
4	 Identify the relationship between degrees, 
real zeros, and turning points.
5	 Graph polynomial functions.
S e c t i o n  

	
Section 3.2    ■    Polynomial Functions 307
In Section 2.6, we discussed linear functions, which are polynomial functions of degree 
0 and 1. In Section 3.1, we studied quadratic functions, which are polynomial functions 
of degree 2. Polynomials of degree 3, 4, and 5 are also called cubic, quartic, and quintic 
polynomials, respectively. In this section, we concentrate on graphing polynomial func-
tions of degree 3 or more.
Here are some common properties shared by all polynomial functions.
1.	 The domain of a polynomial function is the set of all real numbers.
2.	 The graph of a polynomial function is a continuous curve. This means that the 
graph has no holes or gaps and can be drawn on a sheet of paper without lifting 
the pencil. See Figure 3.6.
y
x
O
O
y
x
(a)
A continuous curve;
can be the graph of
a polynomial function
(b)
A discontinuous curve;
cannot be the graph of
a polynomial function
Figure 3.6 
3.	 The graph of a polynomial function is a smooth curve. This means that the 
graph does not contain any sharp corners. See Figure 3.7.
y
x
y
x
(a)
A smooth and continuous curve;
can be the graph of
a polynomial function
(b)
A continuous but not a smooth
curve; cannot be the graph of a
polynomial function
sharp corner
sharp corner
sharp corner
O
O
Figure 3.7 
Common Properties of Polynomial Functions
State which functions are polynomial functions. For each polynomial function, find its 
degree, the leading term, and the leading coefficient.
a.	 f1x2 = 5x4 - 2x + 7	
b.	 g1x2 = 7x2 - x + 1, 1 … x … 5
Polynomial Functions
EXAMPLE 1

308	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
A function of the form
f1x2 = axn
is called a power function of degree n, where a is a nonzero real number and n is a 
positive integer.
Power Function
Power Functions
A function of the form f1x2 = axn is the simplest nth-degree polynomial function and is 
called a power function.
Solution
a.	 f1x2 = 5x4 - 2x + 7 is a polynomial function. Its degree is 4, the leading term is 5x4, 
and the leading coefficient is 5.
b.	 g1x2 = 7x2 - x + 1, 1 … x … 5 is not a polynomial function because its domain is 
not 1- ∞, ∞2. However, h1x2 = 7x2 - x + 1 with no restrictions on the domain is a 
polynomial function of degree 2 with leading term 7x2 and leading coefficient 7.
Practice Problem 1  Repeat Example 1 for each function.
a.	 f1x2 = x2 + 1
x - 1 	
b.	 g1x2 = 2x7 + 5x2 - 17
The graph of a power function can be obtained by stretching or shrinking the graph of 
y = xn (and reflecting it about the x-axis if a 6 0). So the basic shape of the graph of a 
power function f1x2 = axn is similar to the shape of the graphs of the equations y = {xn.
Power Functions of Even Degree  Let f1x2 = axn. If n is even, then 1-x2n = xn. 
So in this case, f1-x2 = a1-x2n = axn = f1x2. Therefore, a power function is an 
even function when n is even; so its graph is symmetric about the y-axis.
The graph of y = xn (when n is even) is similar to the graph of y = x2; the graphs of 
y = x2, y = x4, and y = x6 are shown in Figure 3.8.
Notice that each of these graphs passes through the points 1-1, 12, 10, 02, and 11, 12. 
On the interval -1 6 x 6 1, the larger the exponent, the flatter the graph. See Exercise 
91. However, on the intervals 1- ∞, -12 and 11, ∞2, the larger the exponent is, the more 
rapidly the graph rises. See Exercise 92.
Power Functions of Odd Degree  Again, let f1x2 = axn. If n is odd, then 
1-x2n = -xn. In this case, we have f1-x2 = a1-x2n = -axn = -f1x2. So the power  
function f 1x2 = axn is an odd function when n is odd; its graph is symmetric about  
the origin. When n is odd and n Ú 3, the graph of f1x2 = xn is similar to the graph  
of y = x3. The graphs of y = x, y = x3, y = x5, and y = x7 are shown in Figure 3.9.  
If n is an odd positive integer, then the graph of y = xn passes through the points 
1-1, -12, 10, 02, and 11, 12. The larger the value of n is, the flatter the graph is near the 
origin (in the interval -1 6 x 6 1) and the more rapidly it rises (or falls) on the intervals 
1- ∞, -12 and 11, ∞2.
End Behavior of Polynomial Functions
We investigate the behavior of the polynomial function y = f1x2 when the independent 
variable x is large in absolute value. The notation x S ∞ (read “x approaches infinity”) 
means that x gets larger and larger without bound: x can assume values greater than 
2	
Determine the end behavior 
of polynomial functions.
Figure 3.8  Power functions of 
even degree
x
1
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
3
3
1
2
4
6
0
y
y  x2
y  x4
y  x6
Figure 3.9  Power functions of 
odd degree
x
y
2
2
1
1
3
3
0
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
y  x3
y  x7
y  x5
y  x

	
Section 3.2    ■    Polynomial Functions 309
1, 10, 100, 1000, c, without end. Similarly, x S - ∞ (read “x approaches negative infin-
ity”) means that x can assume values less than -1, -10, -100, -1000, c, without end. 
Of course, x may be replaced by any other independent variable.
The behavior of a function y = f1x2 as x S ∞ or x S - ∞ is called the end behavior 
of the function. In the accompanying box, we describe the behavior of the power function 
y = f1x2 = axn as x S ∞ or as x S - ∞. Every polynomial function exhibits end be-
havior similar to one of the four functions y = x2, y = −x2, y = x3, or y = −x3.
Here is a scheme for remembering 
the axis directions associated with 
the symbols - ∞ and ∞.
 x S - ∞ left
 x S
∞ right
 y S - ∞ down
 y S
∞ up
Side  
Note
E n d  B e h a v i o r  F o r  t h e  G r a p h  o f  y = f1x2 = axn
n Even
n Odd
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
a 7 0
a 6 0
a 7 0
a 6 0
y
(a)
x
O
y  f(x)      as x      or x     
y
(b)
x
O
y  f(x)      as x      or x     
y
x
(c)
O
y  f(x)       as x      
y       as x      
y
(d)
x
O
y  f(x)       as x      
y       as x     
The graph rises to the left and 
right, similar to y = x2.
The graph falls to the left and 
right, similar to y = −x2.
The graph rises to the right 
and falls to the left, similar to 
y = x3.
The graph rises to the left and 
falls to the right, similar to 
y = −x3.
Calculator graph of 
P1x2 = 2x3 + 5x2 - 7x + 11
8
40
8
60
Technology
Connection
In the next example, we show that the end behavior of the given polynomial function is 
determined by its leading term. If a polynomial P1x2 has approximately the same values as 
f1x2 = axn  when  x  is very large, we write P1x2 ? axn when 0 x0  is very large.
Let P1x2 = 2x3 + 5x2 - 7x + 11 be a polynomial function of degree 3. Show that 
P1x2 ≈2x3 when 0 x0  is very large.
Solution
 P1x2 = 2x3 + 5x2 - 7x + 11 	
Given polynomial
 = x3 a2 + 5
x - 7
x2 + 11
x3 b	
Distributive property
Understanding the End Behavior of a Polynomial Function
EXAMPLE 2

310	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
It is possible to use the technique of Example 2 to show that the end behavior of any 
polynomial function is determined by its leading term.
The end behaviors of polynomial functions are shown in the following graphs.
When 0 x0  is very large, the terms 5
x, 7
x2, and 11
x3 are close to 0. Table 3.1 shows some values 
of 5
x as x increases. (You should compute the values of 7
x2 and 11
x3 for x = 10, 102, 103, and
104.) When 0 x0  is very large, we have
 P1x2 = x3 a2 + 5
x - 7
x2 + 11
x3 b ≈x312 + 0 - 0 + 02 = 2x3
So the polynomial P1x2 ≈2x3 when 0 x0  is very large.
Practice Problem 2  Let P1x2 = 4x3 + 2x2 + 5x - 17. Show that P1x2 ≈4x3  
when 0 x0  is very large.
Table 3.1 
x
5
x
10
0.5
102
0.05
103
0.005
104
0.0005
T h e  L e a d i n g - T e r m  T e s t
Let f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0 1an ≠02 be a polynomial function. Its leading term is anxn. The 
behavior of the graph of f  as x S ∞ or x S - ∞ is similar to one of the following four graphs and is described as shown 
in each case.
n Even
n Odd
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
an 7 0
an 6 0
an 7 0
an 6 0
y
(a)
x
O
O
y
(b)
x
y
(c)
x
O
O
y
x
(d)
This test does not describe the middle portion of each graph, shown by the dashed lines.
Use the leading-term test to determine the end behavior of the graph of
y = f1x2 = -2x3 + 3x + 4.
Solution
Here the degree n = 3 (odd) and the leading coefficient an = -2 6 0. Case 4 applies. 
The graph of f  rises to the left and falls to the right. See Figure 3.10. This end behavior is 
described as y S ∞ as x S - ∞ and y S - ∞ as x S ∞.
Practice Problem 3  What is the end behavior of f1x2 = -2x4 + 5x2 + 3?
Using the Leading-Term Test
EXAMPLE 3
Figure 3.10  End behavior of 
f1x2 = -2x3 + 3x + 4
x
y
0
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
4
7
f(x)  2x3 + 3x + 4

	
Section 3.2    ■    Polynomial Functions 311
Zeros of a Function
Let f  be a function. An input c in the domain of f  that produces output 0 is called a 
zero of the function f. For example, if f1x2 = 1x - 322, then 3 is a zero of f because 
f132 = 13 - 322 = 0. In other words, a number c is a zero of f  if f1c2 = 0. The zeros 
of a function f  can be obtained by solving the equation f1x2 = 0. One way to solve a 
polynomial equation f1x2 = 0 is to factor f1x2 and then use the zero-product property.
If c is a real number and f1c2 = 0, then c is called a real zero of f. Geometrically, this 
means that the graph of f  has an x-intercept at x = c.
3	
Find the zeros of a polynomial 
function by factoring.
Figure 3.11  A zero at c of f
O
c
x
y
(c, 0)
y  f(x)
R e a l  Z e r o s  o f  P o ly n o m i a l  F u n c t i o n s
If f  is a polynomial function and c is a real number, then the following statements are 
equivalent:
1.	 c is a zero of f.
2.	 c is a solution (or root) of the equation f1x2 = 0.
3.	 c is an x-intercept of the graph of f. The point 1c, 02 is on the graph of f.  
See Figure 3.11.
Finding the zeros of a polynomial of degree 3 or more is one of the most important 
problems of mathematics. You will learn more about this topic in Sections 3.3 and 3.4. 
For now, we will approximate the zeros by using an Intermediate Value Theorem. Recall 
that the graph of a polynomial function f1x2 is a continuous curve. Suppose you locate 
two numbers a and b such that the function values f1a2 and f1b2 have opposite signs (one 
positive and the other negative). Then the continuous graph of f  connecting the points 
Find all real zeros of each polynomial function.
a.	 f1x2 = x4 - 2x3 - 3x2	
b.	 g1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + x - 2
Solution
a.	 We factor f1x2 and then solve the equation f1x2 = 0.
 f1x2 = x4 - 2x3 - 3x2
	
Given function
 = x21x2 - 2x - 32
	
Factor out the common factor, x2.
 = x21x + 121x - 32 	
Factor 1x2 - 2x - 32.
 x21x + 121x - 32 = 0
	
Set f1x2 = 0.
 x2 = 0, x + 1 = 0, or x - 3 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = 0,   x = -1,  or  x = 3	
Solve each equation.
	
The zeros of f1x2 are 0, -1, and 3. (See the calculator graph of f  in the margin.)
b.	 By grouping terms, we factor g1x2 to obtain
 g1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + x - 2
 = x21x - 22 + 1 # 1x - 22	
Group terms.
 = 1x - 221x2 + 12
	
Factor out x - 2.
 0 = 1x - 221x2 + 12
	
Set g1x2 = 0.
 x - 2 = 0, or x2 + 1 = 0
	
Zero-product property
	
Solving for x, we obtain 2 as the only real zero of g1x2 because x2 + 1 7 0 for all 
real numbers x. The calculator graph of g in the margin supports our conclusion.
Practice Problem 4  Find all real zeros of f1x2 = 2x3 - 3x2 + 4x - 6.
Finding the Zeros of a Polynomial Function
EXAMPLE 4
f1x2 = x4 - 2x3 - 3x2
We can verify that the zeros of f 
are 0, -1, and 3 using the TRACE 
function.
g1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + x - 2 
has a real zero, 2.
Technology
Connection
2
5
15
4
Y1  x4  2x3  3x2
y  0
x  1
1
5
4
8
Y1  x3  2x2  x  2
y  0
x  2

312	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
1a, f1a22 and 1b, f1b22 must cross the x-axis (at least once) somewhere between a and b. 
In other words, the function f  has a zero between a and b. See Figure 3.12.
Notice that Figure 3.12(c) shows more than one zero of f. That is why this Intermediate 
Value Theorem says that f  has at least one zero between a and b.
Figure 3.12  Each function has at least one zero between a and b
(a)
x
O
y
(a, f(a))
(b, f(b))
f(c)  0
c
a
b
(b)
x
y
(b, f(b))
f(c)  0
c
a
b
(a, f(a))
O
(c)
x
y
f(c2)  0
f has more than one zero
between a and b.
f(c3)  0
f(c1)  0
c1
a
c2
c3
b
(a, f(a))
(b, f(b))
O
A n  I n t e r m e d i at e  Va l u e  T h e o r e m
Let a and b be two numbers with a 6 b. If f  is a polynomial function such that f1a2 
and f1b2 have opposite signs, then there is at least one number c, with a 6 c 6 b, for 
which f1c2 = 0.
Show that the function f1x2 = -2x3 + 4x + 5 has a real zero between 1 and 2.
Solution
 f112 = -21123 + 4112 + 5
	
Replace x with1 in f1x2.
 = -2 + 4 + 5 = 7
	
Simplify.
 f122 = -21223 + 4122 + 5
	
Replace x with 2.
 = -2182 + 8 + 5 = -3	
Simplify.
Because f112 is positive and f122 is negative, they have opposite signs. So by this  
Intermediate Value Theorem, the polynomial function f1x2 = -2x3 + 4x + 5 has a real 
zero between 1 and 2. See Figure 3.13.
Practice Problem 5  Show that f1x2 = 2x3 - 3x - 6 has a real zero between  
1 and 2.
Using an Intermediate Value Theorem
EXAMPLE 5
Figure 3.13  A zero lies between 
1 and 2
2
1
1
0
2
1
3
f(2) 
1
5
7
f(1) 
(1, f(1))
(2, f(2))
x
y
In Example 5, if you want to find the zero between 1 and 2 more accurately, you can 
divide the interval 31, 24 into tenths and find the value of the function at each of the points 
1, 1.1, 1.2, c, 1.9, and 2. You will find that
f11.82 = 0.536 and f11.92 = -1.118.
So by this Intermediate Value Theorem, f  has a zero between 1.8 and 1.9. If you divide the 
interval 31.8, 1.94 into tenths, you will find that f11.832 7 0 and f11.842 6 0; so f has a 
zero between 1.83 and 1.84. By continuing this process, you can find the zero of f  between 
1.8 and 1.9 to any desired degree of accuracy.

	
Section 3.2    ■    Polynomial Functions 313
Zeros and Turning Points
In Section 3.5, you will learn the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. One of its conse-
quences is the following fact:
4	
Identify the relationship 
between degrees, real zeros, 
and turning points.
R e a l  Z e r o s  o f  a  P o ly n o m i a l  F u n c t i o n
A polynomial function of degree n with real coefficients has, at most, n real zeros.
In Example 6c, the factor 1x - 32 appears twice in h1x2. We say that 3 is a zero repeated 
twice, or that 3 is a zero of multiplicity 2. Notice that the graph of y = h1x2 in Figure 3.14 
touches the x-axis at x = 3, where h has a zero of multiplicity 2 (an even number). In con-
trast, the graph of h crosses the x-axis at x = -1, where it has a zero of multiplicity 1 (an odd 
number). We next consider the geometric significance of the multiplicity of a zero.
A polynomial of degree n can 
have no more than n real zeros. In 
Example 6, parts b and c, we see 
two polynomials of degree 3 each 
having fewer than 3 zeros.
Side  
Note
Find the number of distinct real zeros of the following polynomial functions of degree 3.
a.	 f1x2 = 1x - 121x + 221x - 32        b.   g1x2 = 1x + 121x2 + 12
c.	 h1x2 = 1x - 3221x + 12
Solution
a.	
 f1x2 = 1x - 121x + 221x - 32 = 0
	
Set f1x2 = 0.
	
 x - 1 = 0, or x + 2 = 0, or x - 3 = 0	
Zero-product property
	
 x = 1 or x = -2 or  x = 3
	
Solve for x.
	
So f1x2 has three real zeros: 1, -2, and 3.
b.	
 g1x2 = 1x + 121x2 + 12 = 0	
Set g1x2 = 0.
	
 x + 1 = 0 or x2 + 1 = 0
	
Zero-product property
	
 x = -1
	
Solve for x.
	
Because x2 + 1 7 0 for all real x, the equation x2 + 1 = 0 has no real solution. So 
-1 is the only real zero of g1x2.
c.	
 h1x2 = 1x - 3221x + 12 = 0	
Set h1x2 = 0.
	
 1x - 322 = 0, or x + 1 = 0
	
Zero-product property
	
 x = 3, or x = -1
	
Solve for x.
	
The real zeros of h1x2 are 3 and -1. Thus, h1x2 has two distinct real zeros.
Practice Problem 6  Find the distinct real zeros of
f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 321x + 52.
Finding the Number of Real Zeros
EXAMPLE 6
Figure 3.14  Graph of 
h1x2 = 1x - 3221x + 12
9
12
3
0
3
1
3
5
1
3
x
y

314	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Turning Points  The graph of f1x2 = 2x3 - 3x2 - 12x + 5 is shown in Figure 3.16. 
The value f1-12 = 12 is a local (or relative) maximum value of f. Similarly, the value 
f122 = -15 is a local (or relative) minimum value of f. (See Section 2.5 for definitions.) 
The graph points corresponding to the local maximum and local minimum values of a poly-
nomial function are the turning points. At each turning point, the graph changes direction 
from increasing to decreasing or from decreasing to increasing. One of the successes of 
calculus is finding the maximum and minimum values for many functions.
Find the zeros of the polynomial function f1x2 = x21x + 121x - 22 and give the mul-
tiplicity of each zero.
Solution
The polynomial f1x2 is already in factored form.
 f1x2 = x21x + 121x - 22 = 0
	
Set f1x2 = 0.
 x2 = 0 or x + 1 = 0  or x - 2 = 0	
Zero-product property
 x = 0 or x = -1
  or x = 2
	
Solve for x.
The function has three distinct zeros: 0, -1, and 2. The zero x = 0 has multiplicity 2, and 
each of the zeros -1 and 2 has multiplicity 1. The graph of f is given in Figure 3.15. Notice 
that the graph of f in Figure 3.15 crosses the x-axis at -1 and 2 (the zeros of odd multiplicity), 
while it touches but does not cross the x-axis at x = 0 (the zero of even multiplicity).
Practice Problem 7  Write the zeros of f1x2 = 1x - 1221x + 321x + 52 and give  
the multiplicity of each.
Finding the Zeros and Their Multiplicities
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 3.15 
1
0
x
y
1
2
f(x)  x2(x  1)(x  2)
Figure 3.16  Turning points
3
1
1
2
4
12
6
3
0
6
x
y
(2, 15)
(1, 12)
The graph of f(x)  2x3  3x2  12x  5
has turning points at (1, 12) and (2, 15).
N u m b e r  o f  T u r n i n g  P o i n t s
If f1x2 is a polynomial of degree n, then the graph of f has, at most, 1n - 12  
turning points.
If c is a zero of a polynomial function f1x2 and the corresponding factor 1x - c2 occurs exactly m times when f1x2 is 
factored as f1x2 = 1x - c2mq1x2, with q1c2 ≠0, then c is called a zero of multiplicity m.
1. If m is odd, the graph of f crosses the x-axis at x = c.
2. If m is even, the graph of f touches but does not cross 
the x-axis at x = c.
O
x
c
c
or
m is odd.
Graph crosses the x-axis.
y
O
x
y
or
m is even.
Graph touches but does not cross the x-axis.
O
c
c
x
y
O
x
y
Multiplicity of a Zero

	
Section 3.2    ■    Polynomial Functions 315
Graphing a Polynomial Function
You can graph a polynomial function by constructing a table of values for a large number of 
points, plotting the points, and connecting the points with a smooth curve. (In fact, a graph-
ing calculator uses this method.) Generally, however, this process is a poor way to graph 
a function by hand because it is tedious, is error-prone, and may give misleading results. 
Similarly, a graphing calculator may give misleading results if the viewing window is not 
chosen appropriately. Next, we discuss a better strategy for graphing a polynomial function.
5	
Graph polynomial functions.
Notice that in Figure 3.17(c), the 
graph seems to “turn” but the 
graph is always increasing. There 
is no change from increasing to 
decreasing, so it has no turning 
points.
Side 
Note
Use a graphing calculator and the window -10 … x … 10; -30 … y … 30 to find the 
number of turning points of the graph of each polynomial function.
a.	 f1x2 = x4 - 7x2 - 18	
b.	 g1x2 = x3 + x2 - 12x
c.	 h1x2 = x3 - 3x2 + 3x - 1
Solution
The graphs of f, g, and h are shown in Figure 3.17.
Finding the Number of Turning Points
EXAMPLE 8
Figure 3.17  Turning points on a calculator graph
10
10
30
30
10
10
30
30
(a)
(b)
(c)
10
10
30
30
y  f (x)
y  g (x)
y  h (x)
a.	 Function f  has three turning points: two local minima and one local maximum.
b.	 Function g has two turning points: one local maximum and one local minimum.
c.	 Function h has no turning points: It is increasing on the interval 1- ∞, ∞2.
Practice Problem 8  Find the number of turning points of the graph of  
f1x2 = -x4 + 3x2 - 2.
Sketch the graph of a polynomial function.
Step 1 Determine the end behavior. Apply the 
leading-term test.
Sketch the graph of f1x2 = -x3 - 4x2 + 4x + 16.
1.	Because the degree, 3, of  
f  is odd and the leading  
coefficient, -1, is negative,  
the end behavior (Case 4,  
page 309) is similar to that  
of y = -x3 as shown  
in this sketch.
Graphing a Polynomial Function
Objective
EXAMPLE 9
Example
y
x
O
(continued)
Procedure  
in Action

316	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Practice Problem 9  Graph f1x2 = -x4 + 5x2 - 4.
Step 2 Find the real zeros of the polynomial 
­function. Set f1x2 = 0. Solve the equation f1x2 = 0 
by factoring. The real zeros with their multiplicities 
will give you the x-intercepts of the graph and deter-
mine whether the graph crosses the x-axis there.
Step 3 Find the y-intercept by computing f102.
Step 4 Determine the sign of f1x2 by using arbi-
trarily chosen “test numbers” in the intervals defined 
by the x-intercepts. Find on which of these intervals the 
graph lies above or below the x-axis.
Step 5 Draw the graph using points from Steps 1–4. 
To check whether the graph is drawn correctly, use the 
fact that the number of turning points is less than the 
degree of the polynomial.
2.	
 -x3 - 4x2 + 4x + 16 = 0
	
 - 1x + 421x + 221x - 22 = 0
	
 x = -4, x = -2, or x = 2
	
There are three zeros, each  
of multiplicity 1; so the  
graph crosses the x-axis at  
each zero.
3.	The y-intercept is f102 = 16. The graph passes 
through the point 10, 162.
4.	The three zeros -4, -2, and 2 divide the  
x-axis into four intervals: 1- ∞, -42, 1-4, -22,
1-2, 22, and 12, ∞2. We choose -5, -3, 0, and 3 
as test numbers.
5
4
2
2
3
5
3
3
3
Test number




Sign graph
(5, 21)
(3, 5)
(3, 35)
(0, 16)
Graph point
21
0
0
16
35
5
Value of f
Above
x-axis
Below
x-axis
Below
x-axis
Above
x-axis
Graph of f
5.	The graph connects  
the points we have  
found with a smooth  
curve.
	
The number of turning  
points is 2, which is  
less than 3, the  
degree of f.
y
x
0
2
4
4
2
2
4
4
2
x
3
1
5
3
1
5
20
5
0
y
(5, 21)
(0, 16)
(4, 0)
(2, 0)
(3, 5)
(2, 0)
y  x3  4x2  4x  16
Volume of a Wine Barrel  Kepler first analyzed the problem of finding the volume 
of a cylindrical wine barrel. (Review the introduction to this section and see Figure 3.18.) 
The volume V of a cylinder with radius r and height h is given by the formula V = pr2h. 
In Figure 3.18, h = 2z; so V = 2pr2z. Let x represent the value measured by the rod. 
Then by the Pythagorean theorem,
x2 = 4r2 + z2.	
12r22 = 4r2
Kepler’s challenge was to calculate V, given only x—in other words, to express V as a 
function of x. To solve this problem, Kepler observed the key fact that Austrian wine 
barrels were all made with the same height-to-diameter ratio. Kepler assumed that the 
winemakers would have made a smart choice for this ratio, one that would maximize the 
volume for a fixed value of r. He calculated the height-to-diameter ratio to be 12.
Figure 3.18  A wine barrel
Rod
x
z
z
2r
h

	
Section 3.2    ■    Polynomial Functions 317
Express the volume V of the wine barrel in Figure 3.18 as a function of x. Assume that 
height
diameter = 2z
2r = z
r = 12.
Solution
We have the following relationships:
 V = 2pr2z
	
Volume with radius r and height 2z
 z
r = 12
	
Given ratio
 x2 = 4r2 + z2
	
Pythagorean theorem
 x2
r2 = 4 + z2
r2
	
Divide both sides by r2.
 x2
r2 = 4 + 2 = 6	
Because z
r = 12, z2
r2 = az
rb
2
= 11222 = 2.
From x2
r2 = 6, we have r2 = x2
6 ; so r =
x
16 1r 7 02. Using z
r = 12, we obtain
 z = 12 r = 12 x
16	
Replace r with x
16
 =
x
13
	
12
16 =
12
12 # 13 =
1
13
Now
 V = 2pr2z
 = 2pax2
6 ba x
13b	
Replace z with x
13 and r2 with x2
6 .
 =
p
313 x3
	
Simplify.
 ≈0.6046x3
	
Use a calculator.
Consequently, Austrian vintners could easily approximate the volume of a wine barrel by 
using the formula V = 0.6046x3, where x was the length measured by the rod. For a quick 
estimate, use V ≈0.6x3.
Practice Problem 10  Use Kepler’s formula to compute the volume of wine (in liters)  
in a barrel with x = 70 cm. Note: 1 decimeter 1dm2 = 10 cm and 1 liter = 11 dm23.
Volume of a Wine Barrel
EXAMPLE 10
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. Not a polynomial function  b. A polynomial function; the 
degree is 7, the leading term is 2x7, and the leading coefficient is 2.
2. P1x2 = 4x3 + 2x2 + 5x - 17 = x3 a4 + 2
x + 5
x2 - 17
x3 b
 When x  is large, the terms 2
x, 5
x2, and 17
x3 are close to 0. 
Therefore, P1x2 ≈x314 + 0 + 0 - 02 = 4x3.    3. y S - ∞ 
as x S - ∞ and y S - ∞ as x S ∞    4. 3
2
5. f112 = -7, f122 = 4. Because f112 and f122 have opposite 
signs, by the Intermediate Value Theorem, f has a real zero 
­between 1 and 2.    6. -5, -1, and 3    7. -5 and -3 with 
multiplicity 1 and 1 with multiplicity 2    8. 3
9. 
0
1
2
3
2
3
1
4
2
4
6
2
x
y
    10. 207.378 liters

318	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Exercises
section 3.2 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 Consider the polynomial 2x5 - 3x4 + x - 6. The degree 
of this polynomial is 
, its leading term is 
, its leading coefficient is 
, 
and its constant term is 
.
	 2.	 The domain of a polynomial function is the  
.
	 3.	 The behavior of the function y = f1x2 as x S ∞ or x S - ∞ 
is called the 
 of the function.
	 4.	 The end behavior of any polynomial function is determined 
by its 
 term.
	 5.	 A number c for which f1c2 = 0 is called a(n) 
 
of the function f.
	 6.	 If c is a zero of even multiplicity for a function f, then the 
graph of f 
 the x-axis at c.
	 7.	 The graph of a polynomial function of degree n has, at most, 
 turning points.
	 8.	 The zeros of a polynomial function y = f1x2 are determined 
by solving the equation 
.
In Exercises 9–14, for each polynomial function, find the 
degree, the leading term, and the leading coefficient.
	 9.	 f1x2 = 2x5 - 5x2 
	10.	 f1x2 = 3 - 5x - 7x4 
	11.	 f1x2 = 2x3 + 7x
3 
	12.	 f1x2 = -7x + 11 + 12x3 
	13.	 f1x2 = px4 + 1 - x2 
	14.	 f1x2 = 5 
In Exercises 15–22, explain why the given function is not a 
polynomial function.
	15.	 f1x2 = x2 + 30 x0 - 7 
	16.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 5x, 0 … x … 2 
	17.	 f1x2 = x2 - 1
x + 5 
	18.	 f1x2 = b2x + 3,
x ≠0
1,
x = 0 
	19.	 f1x2 = 5x2 - 71x 
	20.	 f1x2 = x4.5 - 3x2 + 7 
	21.	 f1x2 = x2 - 1
x - 1 , x ≠1 
	22.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 4x + 7x -2                   
In Exercises 23–28, explain why the given graph cannot be the 
graph of a polynomial function.
23.	
y
x
O
24.	
y
O
x
27.	
y
x
O
 
28.	
O
y
x
 
25.	
y
x
O
26.	
y
x
O

	
Section 3.2    ■    Polynomial Functions 319
In Exercises 29–34, match the polynomial function with its 
graph. Use the leading-term test and the y-intercept.
	29.	 f1x2 = -x4 + 3x2 + 4 
	30.	 f1x2 = x6 - 7x4 + 7x2 + 15 
	31.	 f1x2 = x4 - 10x2 + 9 
	32.	 f1x2 = x3 + x2 - 17x + 15 
	33.	 f1x2 = x3 + 6x2 + 12x + 8 
	34.	 f1x2 = -x3 - 2x2 + 11x + 12 
y
x
0
16
4
2
2
4
1
2
4
(a)
y
0
x
4
1
2
2
5
15
3
5
15
25
5
(b)
1
1
3
6
3
1
3
5
5
y
0
(c)
x
 
2
1
2
1
2
4
8
y
5
0
x
8
(d)
1
3
y
0
x
10
40
1
10
3
(e)
 
3
y
0
(f)
4
2
12
x
1
1
3
In Exercises 35–42, (a) find the real zeros of each polynomial 
function and state the multiplicity for each zero and (b) state 
whether the graph crosses or touches but does not cross the 
x-axis at each x-intercept. (c) What is the maximum possible 
number of turning points?
	35.	 f1x2 = 51x - 121x + 52 
	36.	 f1x2 = 31x + 2221x - 32 
	37.	 f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 123 
	38.	 f1x2 = 21x + 3221x + 121x - 62 
	39.	 f1x2 = -5ax + 2
3bax - 1
2b
2 
	40.	 f1x2 = x3 - 6x2 + 8x 
	41.	 f1x2 = -x4 + 6x3 - 9x2 
	42.	 f1x2 = x4 - 5x2 - 36 
In Exercises 43–46, use the Intermediate Value Theorem to 
show that each polynomial P1x2 has a real zero in the speci-
fied interval. Approximate this zero to two decimal places.
	43.	 P1x2 = x4 - x3 - 10; 32, 34 
	44.	 P1x2 = x4 - x2 - 2x - 5; 31, 24 
	45.	 P1x2 = x5 - 9x2 - 15; 32, 34 
	46.	 P1x2 = x5 + 5x4 + 8x3 + 4x2 - x - 5; 30, 14 
In Exercises 47–60, for each polynomial function f,
a.	 Describe the end behavior of f.
b.	 Find the real zeros of f. Determine whether the graph of f 
crosses or touches but does not cross the x-axis at each  
x-intercept.
c.	 Use the zeros of f and test numbers to find the intervals over 
which the graph of f is above or below the x@axis.
d.	 Determine the y-intercept.
e.	 Find any symmetries of the graph of the function.
f.	
Determine the maximum possible number of turning points.
g.	 Sketch the graph of f.
	47.	 f1x2 = x2 + 3 
	48.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4x + 4 
	49.	 f1x2 = x2 + 4x - 21 
	50.	 f1x2 = -x2 + 4x + 12 
	51.	 f1x2 = -2x21x + 12 
	52.	 f1x2 = x - x3 
	53.	 f1x2 = x21x - 122 
	54.	 f1x2 = x21x + 121x - 22 
	55.	 f1x2 = 1x - 1221x + 321x - 42 
	56.	 f1x2 = 1x + 1221x2 + 12 
	57.	 f1x2 = -x21x2 - 121x + 12 
	58.	 f1x2 = -x21x2 - 421x + 22 
	59.	 f1x2 = x1x + 121x - 121x + 22 
	60.	 f1x2 = x21x2 + 121x - 22 

320	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Applying the Concepts
	61.	 Drug reaction. Let f1x2 = 3x214 - x2.
a.	 Find the zeros of f and their multiplicities. 
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = f1x2. 
c.	 How many turning points are in the graph of f? 
d.	 A patient’s reaction R1x21R1x2 Ú 02 to a certain 
drug, the size of whose dose is x, is observed to be 
R1x2 = 3x214 - x2. What is the domain of the function 
R1x2? What portion of the graph of f1x2 constitutes the 
graph of R1x2? 
	62.	 In Exercise 61, use a graphing calculator to estimate the value 
of x for which R1x2 is a maximum. 
	63.	 Cough and air velocity. The normal radius of the wind-
pipe of a human adult at rest is approximately 1 cm. When 
you cough, your windpipe contracts to, say, a radius r. The 
velocity y at which the air is expelled depends on the radius 
r and is given by the formula y = a11 - r2r2, where a is a 
positive constant.
a.	 What is the domain of y? 
b.	 Sketch the graph of y1r2. 
	64.	 In Exercise 63, use a graphing calculator to estimate the value 
of r for which y is a maximum. 
	65.	 Maximizing revenue. A manufacturer of slacks has 
­discovered that the number x of khakis sold to retailers per 
week at a price p dollars per pair is given by the formula
p = 27 - a x
300b
2
.
a.	 Write the weekly revenue R1x2 as a function of x.
b.	 What is the domain of R1x2? 
c.	 Graph y = R1x2. 
	66.	 a.  In Exercise 65, use a graphing calculator to estimate the 
number of slacks sold to maximize the revenue. 
b.	 What is the maximum revenue from part (a)? 
	67.	 Maximizing production. An orange grower in California 
hires migrant workers to pick oranges during the season. He 
has 12 employees, and each can pick 400 oranges per hour. 
He has discovered that if he adds more workers, the produc-
tion per worker decreases due to lack of supervision. When 
x new workers (above the 12) are hired, each worker picks 
400 - 2x2 oranges per hour.
a.	 Write the number N1x2 of oranges picked per hour as a 
function of x. 
b.	 Find the domain of N1x2. 
c.	 Graph the function y = N1x2. 
	68.	 a.  In Exercise 67, use a graphing calculator to estimate  
the maximum number of oranges that can be picked  
per hour. 
b.	 Find the number of employees involved in part (a). 
	69.	 Making a box. From a rectangular 8 * 15 piece of card-
board, four congruent squares with sides of length x are cut 
out, one at each corner. (See the accompanying figure.) The 
resulting crosslike piece is then folded to form a box.
a.	 Find the volume V of the box as a function of x. 
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = V1x2. 
x
x
x
x
	70.	 In Exercise 69, use a graphing calculator to estimate the larg-
est possible value of the volume of the box. 
	71.	 Mailing a box. According to Postal Service regulations, the 
girth plus the length of a parcel sent by Priority Mail may not 
exceed 108 inches. 
a.	 Express, as a function of x, the volume V of a rectangular 
parcel with two square faces (with sides of length x inches) 
that can be sent by mail. 
b.	 Sketch a graph of V1x2. 
x
y
x
Girth is 4x
	72.	 In Exercise 71, use a graphing calculator to estimate the larg-
est possible volume of the box that can be sent by Priority 
Mail. 
	73.	 Luggage design. AAA Airlines requires that the total out-
side dimensions 1length + width + height2 of a piece of 
checked-in luggage not exceed 62 inches. You have designed 
a suitcase in the shape of a box whose height (x inches) 
equals its width. Your suitcase meets AAA’s requirements.
a.	 Write the volume V of your suitcase as a function  
of x. 
b.	 Graph the function y = V1x2. 
	74.	 In Exercise 73, use a graphing calculator to find the 
approximate dimensions of the piece of luggage 
with the largest volume that you can check in on this 
­airline.  
	75.	 Luggage dimensions. American Airlines requires that the 
total dimensions 1length + width + height2 of a carry-on 
bag not exceed 45 inches. You have designed a rectangular 
boxlike bag whose length is twice its width x. Your bag meets 
American’s requirements.
a.	 Write the volume V of your bag as a function of x, where x 
is measured in inches. 
b.	 Graph the function y = V1x2.   

	
Section 3.2    ■    Polynomial Functions 321
	 76.	 In Exercise 75, use a graphing calculator to estimate the 
dimensions of the bag with the largest volume that you can 
carry on an American flight. (Source: www.aa.com) 
	 77.	 Worker productivity. An efficiency study of the morn-
ing shift at an assembly plant indicates that the number y 
of units produced by an average worker t hours after 6 a.m. 
may be modeled by the formula y = -t3 + 6t2 + 16t. 
Sketch the graph of y = f1t2. 
	 78.	 In Exercise 77, estimate the time in the morning when a 
worker is most efficient. 
	 79.	 Deaths from FDA-approved drugs. The following table 
illustrates deaths (in thousands) that occurred in the United 
States during the 11 years from 2000 to 2010 as tabulated 
from the FDA’s Adverse Event Reporting System for pre-
scription drugs.
Year
Deaths
2000
19.445
2001
23.988
2002
28.181
2003
35.173
2004
34.928
2005
40.238
2006
37.465
2007
36.834
2008
49.958
2009
63.846
2010
82.724
Source: fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Surveillance/
AdverseDrugEffects/ucm070461.htm
One of the simplest models that gives an approximation to 
these data is described by a cubic polynomial
D1t2 = 0.205996t3 - 2.526415t2 + 11.156629t + 17.337104,
where t = 0 represents the year 2000.
Sketch the graph y = D1t2 and the actual data points 
on the same coordinate system and analyze the result. 
	 80.	 Use your result in Exercise 79, to estimate the number of 
deaths in the United States from FDA-approved drugs in 2011. 
Explain your answer.
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 81–90, use transformations of the graph of 
y = x4 or y = x5 to graph each function f1x2. Find the zeros 
of f1x2 and their multiplicity.
	 81.	 f1x2 = 1x - 124 
	 82.	 f1x2 = - 1x + 124 
	 83.	 f1x2 = x4 + 2 
	 84.	 f1x2 = x4 + 81 
	 85.	 f1x2 = - 1x - 124 
	 86.	 f1x2 = 1
21x - 124 - 8 
	 87.	 f1x2 = x5 + 1 
	 88.	 f1x2 = 1x - 125 
	 89.	 f1x2 = 8 -
1x + 125
4 
	 90.	 f1x2 = 81 +
1x + 125
3 
	 91.	 Prove that if 0 6 x 6 1, then 0 6 x4 6 x2. This shows 
that the graph of y = x4 is flatter than the graph of y = x2 
on the interval 10, 12.
	 92.	 Prove that if x 7 1, then x4 7 x2. This shows that the 
graph of y = x4 is higher than the graph of y = x2 on the 
interval 11, ∞2.
	 93.	 Sketch the graph of y = x2 - x4. Use a graphing calculator 
to estimate the maximum vertical distance between the graphs 
y = x2 and y = x4 on the interval 10, 12. Also estimate the 
value of x at which this maximum distance occurs. 
	 94.	 Repeat Exercise 93 by sketching the graph of y = x3 - x5. 
In Exercises 95–98, write a polynomial with the given 
­characteristics.
	 95.	 A polynomial of degree 3 that has exactly two 
­x-intercepts 
	 96.	 A polynomial of degree 3 that has three distinct  
­x-intercepts and whose graph rises to the left and falls  
to the right 
	 97.	 A polynomial of degree 4 that has exactly two  
distinct x-intercepts and whose graph falls to the left and 
right 
	 98.	 A polynomial of degree 4 that has exactly three ­distinct 
x-intercepts and whose graph rises to the left and 
right 
In Exercises 99–102, find the smallest possible degree of a 
polynomial with the given graph. Explain your reasoning.
	 99.	
x
O
y
  
	100.	
x
O
y
    

322	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
	101.	
x
O
y
  
	102.	
x
O
y
  
Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
	103.	 Is it possible for the graph of a polynomial function to have 
no y-intercepts? Explain.
	104.	 Is it possible for the graph of a polynomial function to have 
no x-intercepts? Explain.
	105.	 Is it possible for the graph of a polynomial function of 
degree 3 to have exactly one local maximum and no local 
minimum? Explain.
	106.	 Is it possible for the graph of a polynomial function of 
degree 4 to have exactly one local maximum and exactly 
one local minimum? Explain.
	107.	 Let P and Q be polynomial functions of degree m and n, 
respectively. Is the composition P ∘Q a polynomial func-
tion? If so, what is the degree of P ∘Q. If not, provide an 
example where the composition fails to be a polynomial.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 108–112, simplify each expression. (Do not use 
negative exponents.)
	108.	 12x5
-3x3 
	109.	 x5
x7 
	110.	 3x4
2x2 
	111.	 x5 - 3x2
x2 
	112.	 5x3 + 2x2 - x
x 
In Exercises 113–115, recall that an integer a is a factor of an 
integer b is there is an integer c so that b = ac.
	113.	 a.  Show that 1 is a factor of 7. 
b.	 Show that 7 is a factor of 7. 
c.	 Show that -1 is a factor of 7. 
d.	 Show that -7 is a factor of 7. 
	114.	 Find all integer factors of 7. 
	115.	 Find all integer factors of 120.
In Exercises 116–119, evaluate each function at the indicated 
values of x.
	116.	 f1x2 = x3 - 3x2 + 2x - 9; x = -2 
	117.	 g1x2 = x4 + 2x3 - 20x - 5; x = 3 
	118.	 g1x2 = 1-7x5 + 2x21x - 132; x = 13 
	119.	 f1x2 = 1x8 - 15x7 + 5x321x + 122; x = -12
In Exercises 120–123, factor each expression.
	120.	 x2 - 3x - 10 
	121. -2x2 + x + 1 
	122. 12x + 321x2 + 6x - 72 
	123. 1x - 9216x2 - 7x - 32        

	
Section 3.3    ■    Dividing Polynomials 323
S E C T I O N 3.3
The Division Algorithm
Dividing polynomials is similar to dividing integers. Both division processes are closely 
connected to multiplication. The fact that 10 = 5 # 2 is also expressed as 10
5 = 2. By 
comparison, in equation
(1)	
x3 - 1 = 1x - 121x2 + x + 12,    Factor using difference of cubes.
dividing both sides by x - 1, we obtain
x3 - 1
x - 1 = x2 + x + 1, x ≠1.
Greenhouse Effect and Global Warming
The greenhouse effect refers to the fact that Earth is surrounded by an atmosphere 
that acts like the transparent cover of a greenhouse, allowing sunlight to filter through 
while trapping heat. It is becoming increasingly clear that we are experiencing global 
warming. This means that Earth’s atmosphere is becoming warmer near its surface. 
Scientists who study climate agree that global warming is due largely to the emission 
of “greenhouse gases” such as carbon dioxide (CO2), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), meth-
ane (CH4), ozone (O3), and nitrous oxide (N2O). The temperature of Earth’s surface 
increased by 1°F over the 20th century. The late 1990s and early 2000s were some of the 
hottest years ever recorded. Projections of future warming suggest a global tempera-
ture increase of between 2.5°F and 10.4°F by 2100.
Global warming will result in long-term changes in climate, including a rise in aver-
age temperatures, unusual rainfalls, and more storms and floods. The sea level may rise 
so much that people will have to move away from coastal areas. Some regions of the 
world may become too dry for farming.
The production and consumption of energy is one of the major causes of green-
house gas emissions. In Example 8, we look at the pattern for the consumption of 
petroleum in the United States.
Dividing Polynomials
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Multiplying polynomials (Section P.3,  
page 31) 
2	 Evaluating a function (Section 2.4, page 197)
3	 Factoring trinomials (Section P.4, page 39)
Objectives
1	 Learn the division algorithm.
2	 Use synthetic division.
3	 Use the Remainder and Factor Theorems.
1	
Learn the division algorithm.
A polynomial P1x2 is an expression 
of the form
anxn + g + a1x + a0.
Recall
A polynomial D1x2 is a factor of a polynomial F1x2 if there is a polynomial Q1x2 
such that F1x2 = D1x2 # Q1x2. 
Polynomial Factor

324	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Next, consider the equation
(2)	
x3 - 2 = 1x - 121x2 + x + 12 - 1    Subtract 1 from both sides  
of equation (1).
Dividing both sides by 1x - 12, we can rewrite equation (2) in the form
x3 - 2
x - 1 = x2 + x + 1 -
1
x - 1, x ≠1.
Here we say that when the dividend x3 - 2 is divided by the divisor x - 1, the quotient is 
x2 + x + 1 and the remainder is -1. This result is an example of the division algorithm.
It is helpful to compare the division 
process for integers with that of 
polynomials. Notice that 
2
3)7
6
1
can also be written as
7
3 = 2 + 1
3
or
7 = 3 # 2 + 1
Side 
Note
T h e  D i v i s i o n  A l g o r i t h m
If a polynomial F1x2 is divided by a polynomial D1x2 and D1x2 is not the zero poly-
nomial, then there are unique polynomials Q1x2 and R1x2 such that
F1x2
D1x2
=
Q1x2
+
R1x2
D1x2
or
F1x2
=
D1x2
 #  
Q1x2
+
R1x2
c
c
c
c
Dividend
Divisor
Quotient
Remainder
Either R1x2 is the zero polynomial or the degree of R1x2 is less than the degree of D1x2. 
The division algorithm says that the dividend is equal to the divisor times the quotient plus 
the remainder. 
The expression F1x2
D1x2 is improper if degree of F1x2 Ú degree of D1x2. However, 
the expression R1x2
D1x2 is always proper because by the division algorithm, 
degree of R1x2 6 degree of D1x2.
For an improper expression F1x2
D1x2, you may use the long division and the synthetic 
division processes reviewed in the next few examples.
An algorithm is a finite sequence  
of precise steps that leads to a 
solution of a problem.
Do You 
know?
Find the quotient and remainder when one poly-
nomial is divided by another.
Step 1 Write the terms in the dividend and 
the divisor in descending powers of the variable.
Find the quotient and remainder when 2x2 + x5 + 7 + 4x3 is 
divided by x2 + 1 - x.
Long Division
Objective
Procedure 
in Action
EXAMPLE 1
1.	Dividend: x5 + 4x3 + 2x2 + 7        Divisor: x2 - x + 1
(continued)
Example

	
Section 3.3    ■    Dividing Polynomials 325
Practice Problem 1  Find the quotient and remainder when 3x3 + 4x2 + x + 7 is 
divided by x2 + 1.
Step 2 Insert terms with zero coef-
ficients in the dividend for any missing 
powers of the variable.
Step 3 Divide the first term in the dividend  
by the first term in the divisor to obtain the 
first term in the quotient.
Step 4 Multiply the divisor by the first 
term in the quotient and subtract the product 
from the dividend.
Step 5 Treat the remainder obtained in 
Step 4 as a new dividend and repeat Steps 3 
and 4. Continue this process until a remain-
der is obtained that is of lower degree than 
the divisor.
Step 6 Write the quotient and the remainder.
Quotient = x3 + x2 + 4x + 5	
Remainder = x + 2
5x2
x2 = 5
(+++++)+++++*
Divide x4 - 13x2 + x + 35 by x2 - x - 6.
Solution
Because the dividend does not contain an x3 term, we use a zero coefficient for the missing 
term.
x2 + x - 6
x2 - x - 6) x4 + 0x3 - 13x2 +
x + 35
x4 -
x3 -
6x2
x3 -
7x2 +
x + 35
x3 -
x2 - 6x
-6x2 + 7x + 35
-6x2 + 6x + 36
x - 1
	
Using Long Division
EXAMPLE 2
d  Quotient
d  Remainder
The quotient is x2 + x - 6, and the remainder is x - 1.
New dividend
x21x2 - x + 12
Remainder
4x1x2 - x + 12
Remainder
51x2 - x + 12
Remainder
x5 + 0x4 + 4x3 + 2x2 + 0x + 7
x5
x2 = x3  Divide first terms.
x3
x2 - x + 1) x5 + 0x4 + 4x3 + 2x2 + 0x + 7
x3
x2 - x + 1) x5 + 0x4 + 4x3 + 2x2 + 0x + 7
1-21x5 -  x4 +  x32
x4 + 3x3 + 2x2 + 0x + 7
	
Subtract.
x4
x2 = x2            4x3
x2 = 4x 
x3 + x2 + 4x + 5 
x2 - x + 1) x5 + 0x4 + 4x3 + 2x2 + 0x + 7
1-21x5 -  x4 +  x32
 
x4 + 3x3 + 2x2 + 0x + 7
1-21x4 -  x3 +  x22
4x3 +  x2 + 0x + 7
1-214x3 - 4x2 + 4x2
5x2 - 4x + 7
 1-215x2 - 5x + 52
x + 2
	
x31x2 - x + 12	  
  Remainder
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

326	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
2	
Use synthetic division.
Synthetic division can be done on a 
graphing calculator. In this problem, 
enter the first coefficient, 2. Then 
repeatedly multiply the answer by 3 
and add the next coefficient. 
Technology
Connection
The first three terms, namely, 2, 1, and 6, are the coefficients of the quotient, 2x2 + x + 6, 
and the last number, 4, is the remainder. The procedure for synthetic division is given next.
We can write this result in the form
x4 - 13x2 + x + 35
x2 - x - 6
= x2 + x - 6 +
x - 1
x2 - x - 6.
Practice Problem 2  Divide x4 + 5x2 + 2x + 6 by x2 - x + 3.
Synthetic Division
You can decrease the work involved in finding the quotient and remainder when the divisor 
D1x2 is of the form x - a by using the process known as synthetic division. The procedure 
is best explained by considering an example.
Long Division 
Synthetic Division
2x2 + 1x + 6
x - 3) 2x3 - 5x2 + 3x - 14
2x3 - 6x2
1x2 + 3x - 14
1x2 - 3x
6x - 14
6x - 18
4
3  2 -5  3 -14
   6  3 18
2 1  6   0 4
 
d  Remainder
Each circled term in the long division process is the same as the term above it. Furthermore, 
the boxed terms are terms in the dividend written in a new position. If these two sets of 
terms are eliminated in the synthetic division process, a more efficient format results.
The essential steps in the process can be carried out as follows:
  (i)	 Bring down 2 from the first line to the third line. 
 (ii)	 Multiply 2 in the third line by the 3 in the  
divisor position and place the product, 6,  
under -5; then add vertically to obtain 1.
(iii)	 Multiply 1 by 3 and place the product 3  
under 3; then add vertically to obtain 6.
(iv)	 Finally, multiply 6 by 3 and place the  
product, 18, under -14; then add to obtain 4.
3  2 -5  3 -14
T  
 2  
 
3  2 -5  3 -14
    6  
       2    1 
 
3  2 -5  3 -14
    6  
3
 2 1 
6
 
3  2 -5  3 -14
   6  3 18
2 1  6      0 4

	
Section 3.3    ■    Dividing Polynomials 327
Practice Problem 3  Divide 2x3 - 7x2 + 5 by x - 3.
Divide a polynomial F1x2 by x - a.
Step 1 Arrange the coefficients of F1x2 in  
order of descending powers of x, supplying zero 
as the coefficient of each missing power.
Step 2 Replace the divisor x - a with a. Place 
a in the position to the left of the coefficients.
Step 3 Bring the first (leftmost) coefficient 
down below the line. Multiply it by a and write 
the resulting product one column to the right and 
above the line.
Step 4 Add the product obtained in the previ-
ous step to the coefficient directly above it and 
write the resulting sum directly below it and 
below the line. This sum is the “newest” number 
below the line.
Step 5 Multiply the newest number below the 
line by a, write the resulting product one column 
to the right and above the line, and repeat Step 4.
Step 6 Repeat Step 5 until a product is added 
to the constant term. Separate the last number 
below the line with a short vertical line.
Step 7 The last number below the line is the 
remainder, and the other numbers, reading from 
left to right, are the coefficients of the quotient, 
which has degree one less than the dividend 
F1x2.
Rewrite x + 3 = x - 1-32; a = -3
-3   2 0 -3 
5 -63
-3   2 0 -3 
5 -63
-6
⊗
2 
	 ⊗ means “multiply by -3.”
-3   2 0 -3 
5 -63
-6
+
2 -6
-3   2 0   -3 
5 -63
-6
  18
⊗
+
2 -6
  15
-3   2 0   -3 
5 -63
-6
  18
-45
 120
⊗+ ⊗+
2 -6
  15
-40
57
-3   2
  0
-3 
5 -63
-6
18
-45
 120
2
-6
15
-40  0  57
c   c   c  c   
c
2x3 - 6x2 + 15x - 40  
    
Dividend: degree 4
 
Quotient: degree 3 
Remainder
(++++)++++*
Quotient
Synthetic Division
Objective
procedure 
in Action
EXAMPLE 3
Example
Divide 2x4 - 3x2 + 5x - 63 by x + 3.
    2 0 -3 5 -63
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

328	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
3	
Use the Remainder and  
Factor Theorems.
R e m a i n d e r  T h e o r e m
If a polynomial F1x2 is divided by x - a, then the remainder R is given by
R = F1a2.
Note that in the statement of the Remainder Theorem, F1x2 plays the dual role of repre-
senting a polynomial and a function defined by the same polynomial.
The Remainder Theorem has a very simple proof: The division algorithm says that if a 
polynomial F1x2 is divided by a polynomial D1x2 ≠0, then
F1x2 = D1x2 # Q1x2 + R1x2,
where Q1x2 is the quotient and R1x2 is the remainder. Suppose D1x2 is a linear polynomial 
of the form x - a. Because the degree of R1x2 is less than the degree of D1x2, R1x2 is a 
constant. Call this constant R. In this case, by the division algorithm, we have
F1x2 = 1x - a2Q1x2 + R.
Replacing x with a in F1x2, we obtain
F1a2 = 1a - a2Q1a2 + R = 0 + R = R.
This proves the Remainder Theorem.
A quick way to see if you remem-
bered to put 0 coefficients in place 
of missing terms when dividing a 
polynomial of degree n by x - a 
is to check that there are n + 1 
numbers in the row next to a .
Side  
Note
Use synthetic division to divide 2x4 + x3 - 16x2 + 18 by x + 2.
Solution
Because x - a = x + 2 = x - 1-22, we have a = -2. Write the coefficients of the 
dividend in a line, supplying 0 as the coefficient of the missing x-term. Then carry out the 
steps of synthetic division.
-2  2 1 -16 0
18
-4 
6 20 -40
2 -3 -10 20  -22
The quotient is 2x3 - 3x2 - 10x + 20, and the remainder is -22; so the result is
 2x4 + x3 - 16x2 + 18
x + 2
= 2x3 - 3x2 - 10x + 20 +
-22
x + 2
 = 2x3 - 3x2 - 10x + 20 -
22
x + 2.
Practice Problem 4  Use synthetic division to divide 2x3 + x2 - 18x - 7  
by x + 3.
The Remainder and Factor Theorems
In Example 4, we discovered that when the polynomial
F1x2 = 2x4 + x3 - 16x2 + 18 is divided by x + 2,
the remainder is -22, a constant.
Now evaluate F at -2. We have
 F1-22 = 21-224 + 1-223 - 161-222 + 18    Replace x with -2 in F1x2.
 = 21162 - 8 - 16142 + 18 = -22     Simplify.
We see that F1-22 = -22, the remainder we found when we divided F1x2 by x + 2. Is 
this result a coincidence? No, the following theorem asserts that such a result is always true.
Using Synthetic Division
EXAMPLE 4

	
Section 3.3    ■    Dividing Polynomials 329
Find the remainder when the polynomial
F1x2 = 2x5 - 4x3 + 5x2 - 7x + 2
is divided by x - 1.
Solution
We could find the remainder by using long division or synthetic division, but a quicker way 
is to evaluate F1x2 when x = 1. By the Remainder Theorem, F112 is the remainder.
 F112 = 21125 - 41123 + 51122 - 7112 + 2    Replace x with 1 in F1x2.
 = 2 - 4 + 5 - 7 + 2 = -2
The remainder is -2.
Practice Problem 5  Use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder when
F1x2 = x110 - 2x57 + 5 is divided by x - 1.
Sometimes the Remainder Theorem is used in the other direction: to evaluate a polyno-
mial at a specific value of x. This use is illustrated in the next example.
Using the Remainder Theorem
EXAMPLE 5
Let f1x2 = x4 + 3x3 - 5x2 + 8x + 75. Find f1-32.
Solution
One way of solving this problem is to evaluate f1x2 when x = -3.
 f1-32 = 1-324 + 31-323 - 51-322 + 81-32 + 75    Replace x with -3.
 = 6
    Simplify.
Another way is to use synthetic division to find the remainder when the polynomial f1x2 
is divided by 1x + 32.
-3 1 3 -5 8 75
-3 0 15 -69
1 0 -5 23  6
The remainder is 6. By the Remainder Theorem, f1-32 = 6.
Practice Problem 6  Use synthetic division to find f1-22, where
f1x2 = x4 + 10x2 + 2x - 20.
Note that if we divide any polynomial F1x2 by x - a, we have
 F1x2 = 1x - a2Q1x2 + R
    Division algorithm
 F1x2 = 1x - a2Q1x2 + F1a2    R = F1a2, by the Remainder Theorem
The last equation says that if F1a2 = 0, then
F1x2 = 1x - a2Q1x2
and 1x - a2 is a factor of F1x2. Conversely, if 1x - a2 is a factor of F1x2, then dividing 
F1x2 by 1x - a2 gives a remainder of 0. Therefore, by the Remainder Theorem, F1a2 = 0. 
This argument proves the Factor Theorem.
Using the Remainder Theorem
EXAMPLE 6

330	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
The Factor Theorem shows that if F1x2 is a polynomial, then the following problems are 
equivalent:
1.	 Factoring F1x2.
2.	 Finding the zeros of the function F1x2 defined by the polynomial expression.
3.	 Solving (or finding the roots of) the polynomial equation F1x2 = 0.
Note that if a is a zero of the polynomial function F1x2, then F1x2 = 1x - a2Q1x2. Any 
solution of the equation Q1x2 = 0 is also a zero of F1x2. Because the degree of Q1x2 is 
less than the degree of F1x2, it is simpler to solve the equation Q1x2 = 0 to find other 
possible zeros of F1x2. The equation Q1x2 = 0 is called the depressed equation of F1x2.
The next example illustrates how to use the Factor Theorem and the depressed equation 
to solve a polynomial equation.
Fa c t o r  T h e o r e m
A polynomial F1x2 has 1x - a2 as a factor if and only if F1a2 = 0. 
Given that 2 is a zero of the function f1x2 = 3x3 + 2x2 - 19x + 6, solve the polyno-
mial equation 3x3 + 2x2 - 19x + 6 = 0.
Solution
Because 2 is a zero of f1x2, we have f122 = 0. The Factor Theorem tells us that 1x - 22 
is a factor of f1x2. Next, we use synthetic division to divide f1x2 by 1x - 22.
 2 
3  2  -19  6
  6  16  -6
3  8  -3  0  0 d Remainder
c  c     c
(+++++)+++++*
Coefficients of the quotient
We now have the coefficients of the quotient Q1x2, with f1x2 = 1x - 22Q1x2.
f1x2 = 3x3 + 2x2 - 19x + 6 = 1x - 2213x2 + 8x - 32
	
c
	
Quotient
Any solution of the depressed equation 3x2 + 8x - 3 = 0 is a zero of f. Because this 
equation is of degree 2, any method of solving a quadratic equation may be used to solve it.
3x2 + 8x - 3 = 0          Depressed equation
13x - 121x + 32 = 0          Factor
3x - 1 = 0 or x + 3 = 0    Zero-product property
x = 1
3 or x = -3       Solve each equation.
The solution set is e -3, 1
3, 2f.
Practice Problem 7  Solve the equation 3x3 - x2 - 20x - 12 = 0 given that one 
solution is -2.
Using the Factor Theorem
EXAMPLE 7
(+++)+++*

	
Section 3.3    ■    Dividing Polynomials 331
Application  Energy is measured in British thermal units (BTU). One BTU is the 
amount of energy required to raise the temperature of 1 pound of water 1°F at or near 
39.2°F; 1 million BTU is equivalent to the energy in 8 gallons of gasoline. Fuels such as 
coal, petroleum, and natural gas are measured in quadrillion BTU 11 quadrillion = 10152, 
abbreviated “quads.”
The total crude oil and petroleum products consumption C (in billion barrels) in the United 
States during 1993–2011 is given in the following table. (Data are rounded to the nearest 
tenth.)
Year
Consumption
Year
Consumption
1993
6.3
2003
7.3
1995
6.5
2005
7.6
1997
6.8
2007
7.6
1999
7.1
2009
6.9
2001
7.2
2011
6.9
Source: www.eia.gov
These data can be modeled by the function
C1t2 = -0.0006t3 + 0.00576t2 + 0.10284t + 6.33488,
where t = 0 represents 1993.
The model indicates that C142 = 6.8 billion barrels were consumed in 1997 1t = 42. 
Find another year between 1997 and 2011 when the model estimates consumption of 
6.8 billion barrels.
Solution
We are given that
 C142 = 6.8
   
 C1t2 = 1t - 42Q1t2 + 6.8    Division Algorithm and Remainder Theorem
 C1t2 - 6.8 = 1t - 42Q1t2
    Subtract 6.8 from both sides.
Therefore, 4 is zero of
F1t2 = C1t2 - 6.8 = -0.0006t3 + 0.00576t2 + 0.10284t - 0.46512.
Finding another year between 1997 and 2011 when the crude oil and petroleum consump-
tion was 6.8 billion barrels requires us to find another zero of F1t2 that is between 4 and 18. 
Because 4 is a zero of F1t2, we use synthetic division to find the quotient Q1t2. This yields
Q1t2 = -0.0006t2 + 0.00336t + 0.11628.
We now solve the depressed (quadratic) equation Q1t2 = 0 using the quadratic formula.
 Q1t2 = -0.0006 t2 + 0.00336 t + 0.11628 = 0
 t =
-0.00336 { 210.0033622 - 41-0.0006210.116282
21-0.00062
    Quadratic formula
 t = -11.4 or t = 17
    Use a calculator.
Because t needs to be between 41=1997 - 19932 and 181=2011 - 19932, this model 
tells us that in 2010 1t = 172, the crude oil and petroleum products consumption in the 
United States was also 6.8 billion barrels.
Practice Problem 8  The value of C1x2 = 0.23x3 - 4.255x2 + 0.345x + 41.05 is  
10 when x = 3. Find another positive number x for which C1x2 = 10.
Crude Oil and Petroleum Consumption
EXAMPLE 8

332	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Answers to Practice Problems
1. Quotient: 3x + 4; remainder = -2x + 3   
2. x2 + x + 3 +
2x - 3
x2 - x + 3   
3. 2x2 - x - 3 +
-4
x - 3   
4. 2x2 - 5x - 3 +
2
x + 3    5. 4    6. 32   
7. e -2, -2
3, 3f    8. 18
Exercises
section 3.3
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 In the division x4 - 2x3 + 5x2 - 2x + 1
x2 - 2x + 3
= x2 + 2 +  
	 	
2x - 5
x2 - 2x + 3, the dividend is ______________, the divisor
	 	 is ______________, the quotient is ______________, and the 
	 	 remainder is ______________.
	 2.	 If P1x2, Q1x2, and F1x2 are polynomials and 
F1x2 = P1x2 # Q1x2, then the factors of F1x2 are 
______________ and ______________.
	 3.	 The Remainder Theorem states that if a polynomial F1x2 is 
divided by 1x - a2, then the remainder R = ______________.
	 4.	 The Factor Theorem states that 1x - a2 is a factor of a poly-
nomial F1x2 if and only if ______________ = 0.
	 5.	 True or False.You cannot use synthetic division to divide a 
polynomial by x2 - 1. 
	 6.	 True or False. When a polynomial of degree n + 1 is  
divided by a polynomial of degree n, the remainder is a  
constant polynomial. 
In Exercises 7–14, use long division to find the quotient and 
the remainder.
	 7.	 6x2 - x - 2
2x + 1 
	 8.	 4x3 - 2x2 + x - 3
2x - 3
	 9.	 3x4 - 6x2 + 3x - 7
x + 1 
	10.	 x6 + 5x3 + 7x + 3
x2 + 2
	11.	 4x3 - 4x2 - 9x + 5
2x2 - x - 5 
	12.	 y5 + 3y4 - 6y2 + 2y - 7
y2 + 2y - 3
	13.	 z4 - 2z2 + 1
z2 - 2z + 1 
	14.	 6x4 + 13x - 11x3 - 10 - x2
3x2 - 5 - x 
In Exercises 15–30, use synthetic division to find the quotient 
and the remainder when the first polynomial is divided by the 
second polynomial.
	15.	 x3 - x2 - 7x + 2; x - 1 
	16.	 2x3 - 3x2 - x + 2; x + 2 
	17.	 x3 + 4x2 - 7x - 10; x + 2 
	18.	 x3 + x2 - 13x + 2; x - 3 
	19.	 x4 - 3x3 + 2x2 + 4x + 5; x - 2 
	20.	 x4 - 5x3 - 3x2 + 10; x - 1 
	21.	 2x3 + 4x2 - 3x + 1; x - 1
2 
	22.	 3x3 + 8x2 + x + 1; x - 1
3 
	23.	 2x3 - 5x2 + 3x + 2; x + 1
2 
	24.	 3x3 - 2x2 + 8x + 2; x + 1
3 
	25.	 x5 + x4 - 7x3 + 2x2 + x - 1; x - 1 
	26.	 2x5 + 4x4 - 3x3 - 7x2 + 3x - 2; x + 2 
	27.	 x5 + 1; x + 1 
	28.	 x5 + 1; x - 1 
	29.	 x6 + 2x4 - x3 + 5; x + 1 
	30.	 3x5; x - 1 
In Exercises 31–34, use synthetic division and the Remainder 
Theorem to find each function value. Check your answer by 
evaluating the function at the given x-value.
	31.	 f1x2 = x3 + 3x2 + 1
a.	 f112 
b.	 f1-12 
c.	 f  a1
2b 
d.	 f1102 
	32.	 g1x2 = 2x3 - 3x2 + 1
a.	 g1-22 
b.	 g1-12 
c.	 g a- 1
2b 
d.	 g172 
	33.	 h1x2 = x4 + 5x3 - 3x2 - 20
a.	 h112 
b.	 h1-12 
c.	 h1-22 
d.	 h122 
	34.	 f1x2 = x4 + 0.5x3 - 0.3x2 - 20
a.	 f10.12 
b.	 f10.52 
c.	 f11.72 
d.	 f1-2.32      

	
Section 3.3    ■    Dividing Polynomials 333
In Exercises 35–42, use the Factor Theorem to show that the 
linear polynomial is a factor of the second polynomial. Check 
your answer by synthetic division.
	35.	 x - 1; 2x3 + 3x2 - 6x + 1 
	36.	 x - 3; 3x3 - 9x2 - 4x + 12 
	37.	 x + 1; 5x4 + 8x3 + x2 + 2x + 4 
	38.	 x + 3; 3x4 + 9x3 - 4x2 - 9x + 9 
	39.	 x - 2; x4 + x3 - x2 - x - 18 
	40.	 x + 3; x5 + 3x4 + x2 + 8x + 15 
	41.	 x + 2; x6 - x5 - 7x4 + x3 + 8x2 + 5x + 2 
	42.	 x - 2; 2x6 - 5x5 + 4x4 + x3 - 7x2 - 7x + 2 
In Exercises 43–46, find the value of k for which the first poly-
nomial is a factor of the second polynomial.
	43.	 x + 1; x3 + 3x2 + x + k [Hint: Let 
f1x2 = x3 + 3x2 + x + k. Then f1-12 = 0.] 
	44.	 x - 1; -x3 + 4x2 + kx - 2 
	45.	 x - 2; 2x3 + kx2 - kx - 2 
	46.	 x - 1; k2 - 3kx2 - 2kx + 6 
In Exercises 47–50, use the Factor Theorem to show that 
the first polynomial is not a factor of the second polynomial. 
(Hint: Show that the remainder is not zero.)
	47.	 x - 2; -2x3 + 4x2 - 4x + 9 
	48.	 x + 3; -3x3 - 9x2 + 5x + 12 
	49.	 x + 2; 4x4 + 9x3 + 3x2 + x + 4 
	50.	 x - 3; 3x4 - 8x3 + 5x2 + 7x - 3 
Applying the Concepts
	51.	 Geometry. The area of a rectangle is 
12x4 - 2x3 + 5x2 - x + 22 square centimeters. Its length is 
1x2 - x + 22 cm. Find its width. 
	52.	 Geometry. The volume of a rectangular solid is 
1x4 + 3x3 + x + 32 cubic inches. Its length and width 
are 1x + 32 and 1x + 12 inches, respectively. Find its 
height. 
	53.	 Cell phone sales. The weekly revenue from one type of 
cell phone sold at a mall outlet is a quadratic function, R, of 
its price, x, in dollars. The weekly revenue is $3000 if the 
phone is priced at $40 or $60 (fewer phones are sold at $60) 
and is $2400 if the phone is priced at $30.
a.	 Find an equation for R1x2 - 3000.
b.	 Find an equation for R1x2. 
c.	 Find the maximum weekly revenue and the price that 
generates this revenue.
	54.	 Ticket sales. The evening revenue from a theater is a qua-
dratic function, R, of its ticket price, x, in dollars. The eve-
ning revenue is $4725 if the tickets are priced at $8 or $12 
(fewer tickets are sold at $12) and is $4125 if the tickets are 
priced at $6.
a.	 Find an equation for R1x2 - 4725. 
b.	 Find an equation for R1x2. 
c.	 Find the maximum weekly revenue and the price that 
generates this revenue.
	55.	 Total energy consumption. The total energy consump-
tion (in quads) in the United States from 1991–2011 can be 
approximated by the function
C1t2 = -0.0006t3 - 0.0613t2 + 2.0829t + 82.904,
	 	 where t = 0 represents 1991. The model indicates that 
97.6 quads of energy were consumed in 2002. Find another 
year after 2002 when the model estimates 97.6 quads of total 
energy consumption in the United States. Round your answer 
to the nearest year. (The model was modified from the data 
obtained from www.eia.gov.) 
	56.	 Lottery sales. In the lottery game called Florida Lotto,  
players should select 6 numbers out of 53. Various prizes are 
offered for matching three through six numbers drawn by the 
lottery. Florida Lotto sales (in millions of dollars) from 1998 
through 2011 can be approximated by the function
s1t2 = -0.1779t3 - 2.8292t2 + 42.0240t + 698.6831,
	 	 where t = 0 represents 1998. The model indicated that 
$737.7 million in Florida Lotto sales occurred in 1999. Find 
another year after 1999 when the model indicates that $737.7 
million in Florida Lotto sales occurred. (The model was 
slightly modified from the data obtained from www.floridafis-
calportal.state.fl.us.) 
	57.	 Marine Corps. The total number of U.S. Marine Corps,  
M (in thousands), during 1990–2010 can be modeled by the 
function
M1t2 = -0.0027t3 + 0.3681t2 - 5.8645t + 195.2782,
	 	 where t = 0 represents 1990, t = 1 represents 1991, and 
so on. The model estimates the total number of U.S. Marine 
Corps in 1992 as 185,000. Find another year between 1992 
and 2010 when the model indicates that U.S. Marine Corps 
were approximately 185,000. Round your answer to the near-
est year. (The model was generated using slightly modified 
data from www.census.gov.) 
	58.	 Unemployment. U.S. unemployment, U (in percent), from 
2002–2012 can be modeled by the function
U1t2 = -0.0374t3 + 0.5934t2 - 2.0553t + 6.7478,
	 	 where t = 0 represents 2002, t = 1 represents 2003, and so 
on. The model indicates a 7.7% level of unemployment in 
2008 (t = 6). Find another year after 2008 with about the 
same unemployment level. Round your answer to the nearest 
year. (The model was slightly modified from data obtained 
from www.multipl.com.)    

334	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Beyond the Basics
	59.	 Show that 1
2 is a root of multiplicity 2 of the equation 
4x3 + 8x2 - 11x + 3 = 0.
	60.	 Show that -2
3 is a root of multiplicity 2 of the equation 
9x3 + 3x2 - 8x - 4 = 0.
	61.	 Assuming that n is a positive integer, find the values of n for 
which each of the following is true.
a.	 x + a is a factor of xn + an. 
b.	 x + a is a factor of xn - an. 
c.	 x - a is a factor of xn + an. 
d.	 x - a is a factor of xn - an. 
	62.	 Use Exercise 61 to prove the following:
a.	 711 - 211 is divisible by 5.
b.	 119220 - 110220 is divisible by 261. 
	63.	 Synthetic division is a process of dividing a polynomial F1x2 
by x - a. Modify the process to use synthetic division so that 
it finds the remainder when the first polynomial is divided by 
the second.
a.	 2x3 + 3x2 + 6x - 2; 2x - 1
	
c Hint: 2x - 1 = 2ax - 1
2b.d 
b.	 2x3 - x2 - 4x + 1; 2x + 3 
	64.	 Let g1x2 = 3x3 - 5cx2 - 3c2x + 3c3. Use synthetic divi-
sion to find each function value.
a.	 g1-c2 
b.	 g12c2 
In Exercises 65–69, let f1x2 = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d, a 3 0 
and g1x2 = kx4 + lx3 + mx2 + nx + p, k 3 0. (Hint: Use 
the end behavior of polynomials and the Intermediate Value 
Theorem.)
	65.	 Show that f has exactly one real zero or three real zeros 
counting multiplicities. 
	66.	 Show that if kp 6 0, then g has exactly two real zeros or 
exactly four real zeros counting multiplicities. 
	67.	 Suppose dp 6 0 and kp 6 0. Show that the graphs of f and g 
must intersect. 
	68.	 Give an example to show that the results of Exercise 67 may 
not hold if dp 6 0 and kp 7 0.
	69.	 Give an example of a fourth-degree polynomial that has no 
real zeros. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	70.	  a.  Use the fact that 
f1x2
2x - 6 = 1
2
 a
f1x2
x - 3b to explain how to 
	 	
use synthetic division by x - 3 to find the quotient and 
remainder when f (x) is divided by 2x - 6. 
b.	 Repeat part (a), replacing 2x - 6 with ax + b, a ≠0. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 71–74, use synthetic division to find each quotient 
and remainder.
	71.	 x4 - x3 + 2x2 + x - 3 is divided by x - 1. 
	72.	 x3 + x2 - x + 2 is divided by x + 2. 
	73.	 -x6 + 5x5 + 2x2 - 10x + 3 is divided by x - 5. 
	74.	 x4 + 3x3 + 3x2 + 2x + 7 is divided by x + 1. 
In Exercises 75–78, find all of the factors of each integer.
	75.	 11 
	76.	 18 
	77.	 51 
	78.	 72 
In Exercises 79–82, identify the degree, leading coefficient, 
and constant term for each polynomial.
	79.	 x2 + 2x - 1 
	80.	 -x3 + x + 7 
	81.	 -7x10 + 3x3 - 2x + 4
	82.	 13x9 + 2x15 + 3x - 11       

	
Section 3.4    ■    The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function 335
S e c t i o n 3.4
Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
We first review what we have learned about the real zeros of a polynomial function.
1.	 Definition If c is a real number in the domain of a function f  and f1c2 = 0, then c is 
called a real zero of f .
a.	 Geometrically, this means that the graph of f has an x-intercept at c.
b.	 Algebraically, this means that 1x - c2 is a factor of f1x2. In other words,  
we can write f1x2 = 1x - c2g1x2 for some polynomial function g1x2.
Dow Jones Industrial Average
The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) reflects the average cost per share of stock 
from 30 companies chosen by the board of the New York Stock Exchange as the most 
outstanding companies to provide a quantitative view of the stock market and, by ex-
tension, the U.S. economy. To calculate the DJIA on any day, we do not simply add the 
prices of the component stocks and divide by 30. The reason is that during the last 100-
plus years, there have been many stock splits, spinoffs, and stock substitutions. Without 
making an adjustment to the divisor 1302, the value of the DJIA would be distorted.
To understand this, consider a stock split. Suppose two stocks are trading at +10 
and +40; the average of the two is +25. If the company with +40 stock has a two-for-
one split, its shares are now priced at +20 each. The average of the two stocks falls 
to +15 a10 + 20
2
= 15b. But due to the two-for-one split, the value of investment is 
unchanged. The +40 stock simply sells for +20 with twice as many shares available. So 
to keep the DJIA at +25, we use the divisor x so that 10 + 20
x
= 25. Solving for x, we 
have x = 30
25 = 1.2.
Over time, the divisor 30 for the DJIA has been adjusted several times, mostly down-
ward. It stood at 0.001960784 in September 2013. This explains why the DJIA can be 
reported as 15,300 even though the sum of the prices of all of its component stocks is 
a fraction of this number. In Exercise 83, we model an investment between 2004–2013 
by a polynomial function.
The Real Zeros of a Polynomial 
Function
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Synthetic division (Section 3.3, page 326)
2	 Zero-product property (Section 1.2,  
page 92)
3	 Multiplicity of a zero (Section 3.2,  
page 314)
Objectives
1	 Review real zeros of polynomials.
2	 Use the Rational Zeros Theorem.
3	 Find the possible number of positive  
and negative zeros of polynomials.
4	 Find the bounds on the real zeros of  
polynomials.
5	 Learn a procedure for finding the real 
zeros of a polynomial function.
1	
Review real zeros of 
polynomials.

336	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
2.	 Number of real zeros A polynomial function of degree n has, at most, n real zeros.
3.	 Polynomial in factored form If a polynomial F1x2 can be written in factored form, we 
find its zeros by solving F1x2 = 0 using the zero product property of real numbers.
4.	 Intermediate Value Theorem If a polynomial F1x2 cannot be factored, we find  
approximate values of the real zeros (if any) of F1x2 by using the Intermediate Value 
Theorem. See page 312.
In this section, we investigate other useful tools for finding the real zeros of a polyno-
mial function.
Rational Zeros Theorem
We use the following test (see Exercise 101 for a proof) to find possible rational zeros of 
a polynomial function with integer coefficients. We then use the Factor Theorem to deter-
mine whether any of these numbers is, in fact, a zero of a polynomial function F1x2.
2	
Use the Rational Zeros 
Theorem.
R at i o n a l  Z e r o s  T h e o r e m
If F1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a2x2 + a1x + a0 is a polynomial function 
with integer coefficients 1an ≠0, a0 ≠02 and p
q is a rational number in lowest terms 
that is a zero of F1x2, then
1.	 p is a factor of the constant term a0.
2.	 q is a factor of the leading coefficient an. 
Find all rational zeros of F1x2 = 2x3 + 5x2 - 4x - 3.
Solution
First, we list all possible rational zeros of F1x2.
Possible rational zeros = p
q =
Factors of the constant term, -3
Factors of the leading coefficient, 2
Factors of -3: {1, {3
Factors of 2: {1, {2
All combinations for the rational zeros can be found by using just the positive factors of the 
leading coefficient. The possible rational zeros are
{1
1 , {1
2 , {3
1 , {3
2
or
{1, {1
2, {3
2, {3.
We use synthetic division to determine whether a rational zero exists among these eight 
candidates. We start by testing 1. If 1 is not a rational zero, we will test other possibilities.
 1
2 5 -4 -3
2 7 3
2 7 3   0 ✓ Yes
Using the Rational Zeros Theorem
EXAMPLE 1
The ratio 
p
q of integers p and q is 
in lowest terms if p and q have no 
common factor other than {1.
Recall

	
Section 3.4    ■    The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function 337
 The zero remainder tells us that 1x - 12 is a factor of F1x2, with the other factor being 
2x2 + 7x + 3. So
 F1x2 = 1x - 1212x2 + 7x + 32
	
	
	
 = 1x - 1212x + 121x + 32    Factor 2x2 + 7x + 3.
We find the zeros of F1x2 by solving the equation 1x - 1212x + 121x + 32 = 0.
	
 x - 1 = 0 or 2x + 1 = 0 or x + 3 = 0	
Zero-product property
	
 x = 1 or x = -1
2 or x = -3
	
Solve each equation.
The solution set is e1, -1
2, -3f. The rational zeros of F are -3, -1
2, and 1.
Practice Problem 1  Find all rational zeros of F1x2 = 2x3 + 3x2 - 6x - 8.
Recall that the zeros of a polynomial function y = F1x2 are also the roots or the solutions 
of the polynomial equation F1x2 = 0.
Solve 3x3 - 8x2 - 8x + 8 = 0.
Solution
 Possible rational roots =
Factors of the constant term, 8
Factors of the leading coefficient, 3
 = {1, {2, {4, {8
{1, {3
 = {1, {2, {4, {8, {1
3, {2
3, {4
3, {8
3
The graph of y = 3x3 - 8x2 - 8x + 8 is shown in Figure 3.19. The calculator graph is 
shown in the margin.
Solving a Polynomial Equation
EXAMPLE 2
Figure 3.19  Graph of y = 3x3 −8x2 −8x + 8
25
20
15
10
5
5
10
15
20
25
0
2
1
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
y
x
The calculator graph is helpful in 
anticipating where the rational zeros 
of y = 3x3 - 8x2 - 8x + 8 
might be found.
Technology
Connection
4
4
25
25

338	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
From the graph in Figure 3.19, it appears that an x-intercept is between 0.5 and 1. 
We check whether x = 2
3 is a root by synthetic division.
3 -8 -8 8
2 -4 -8
3 -6 -12   0
 
Because the remainder in the synthetic division is 0, ax - 2
3b is a factor of the original 
equation with the depressed equation 3x2 - 6x - 12 = 0.
So	
 3x3 - 8x2 - 8x + 8 = 0	
Original equation
	
 ax - 2
3b 13x2 - 6x - 122 = 0	
Synthetic division
	
 ax - 2
3b = 0 or 3x2 - 6x - 12 = 0	
Zero-product property
	
x = 2
3  x =
- 1-62 { 21-622 - 41-122132
2132
	

Solve for x using the  
quadratic formula
 = 6 { 136 + 144
6
 = 6 { 1180
6
=
6 { 11362152
6
 = 6 { 615
6
= 1 { 15
You can see from the graph in Figure 3.19 that 1 { 15 are also the x-intercepts of  
the graph.
The three real roots of the given equation are
2
3, 1 + 15,  and 1 - 15.
Practice Problem 2  Solve 2x3 - 9x2 + 6x - 1 = 0.
Example 2 illustrates the following Theorem.
2
3
✓Yes
3	
Find the possible number of 
positive and negative zeros of 
polynomials.
c o n j u g at e  pa i r s  t h e o r e m  f o r  i r r at i o n a l  z e r o s
If P1x2 is a polynomial with integer coefficients and a + b1c (where a, b, and c are 
integers with c 7 0) is an irrational zero of P1x2, then a - b1c is also an irrational 
zero of P1x2.
Descartes’s Rule of Signs
Descartes’s Rule of Signs is used to find the possible number of positive and negative zeros 
of a polynomial function.
If the terms of a polynomial are written in descending order, we say that a variation of 
sign occurs when the signs of two consecutive terms differ. For example, in the polynomial 
2x5 - 5x3 - 6x2 + 7x + 3, the signs of the terms are + -
-
+  +. Therefore, there 
are two variations of sign, as follows:
+
-
-  +
+
There are three variations of sign in
x5 - 3x3 + 2x2 + 5x - 7.

	
Section 3.4    ■    The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function 339
D e s c a r t e s ’ s  R u l e  o f  S i g n s
Let F1x2 be a polynomial function with real coefficients and with terms written in 
descending order.
1.	 The number of positive zeros of F is equal to the number of variations of sign of 
F1x2 or is less than that number by an even integer.
2.	 The number of negative zeros of F is equal to the number of variations of sign of 
F1-x2 or is less than that number by an even integer.
When using Descartes’s Rule, a zero of multiplicity m should be counted as m zeros. 
Find the possible number of positive and negative zeros of
f1x2 = x5 - 3x3 - 5x2 + 9x - 7.
Solution
There are three variations of sign in f1x2.
f1x2 = x5 - 3x3 - 5x2 + 9x - 7
The number of positive zeros of f1x2 must be 3 or 3 - 2 = 1. Furthermore,
 f1-x2 = 1-x25 - 31-x23 - 51-x22 + 91-x2 - 7
 = -x5 + 3x3 - 5x2 - 9x - 7.
The polynomial f1-x2 has two variations of sign; therefore, the number of negative zeros 
of f1x2 is 2 or 2 - 2 = 0.
Practice Problem 3  Find the possible number of positive and negative zeros of
f1x2 = 2x5 + 3x2 + 5x - 1.
Bounds on the Real Zeros
If a polynomial function F1x2 has no zeros greater than a number k, then k is called an  
upper bound on the zeros of F1x2. Similarly, if F1x2 has no zeros less than a number k, 
then k is called a lower bound on the zeros of F1x2. These bounds have the following rules.
Using Descartes’s Rule of Signs
EXAMPLE 3
4	
Find the bounds on the real 
zeros of polynomials.
R u l e s  F o r  B o u n d s
Let F1x2 be a polynomial function with real coefficients and a positive leading coef-
ficient. Suppose F1x2 is synthetically divided by x - k.
1.	 If k 7 0 and each number in the last row is zero or positive, then k is an upper 
bound on the zeros of F1x2.
2.	 If k 6 0 and numbers in the last row alternate in sign, then k is a lower bound on 
the zeros of F1x2.
Zeros in the last row can be regarded as positive or negative. 

340	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Find upper and lower bounds on the zeros of
F1x2 = x4 - x3 - 5x2 - x - 6.
Solution
By the Rational Zeros Theorem, the possible rational zeros of F1x2 are {1, {2, {3, 
and {6. There is only one variation of sign in F1x2 = x4 - x3 - 5x2 - x - 6, so 
F1x2 has only one positive zero. First, we try synthetic division by x - k with 
k = 1, 2, 3, . c The first integer that makes each number in the last row a 0 or a positive 
number is an upper bound on the zeros of F1x2.
	
    1 -1 -5 -1 -6
1 0 -5 -6  
    1 0 -5   -6   -12
	
Synthetic division with k = 1
	
    1 -1 -5 -1 -6
2 2 -6 -14
    1 1 -3   -7   -20
	
Synthetic division with k = 2
	
    1 -1 -5 -1 -6
3 6 3 6
    1 2 1   2   0
	
Synthetic division with k = 3
	
	
All numbers are 0 or positive.
By the rule for bounds, 3 is an upper bound on the zeros of F1x2.
We now try synthetic division by x - k with k = -1, -2, -3, c. The first negative 
integer for which the numbers in the last row alternate in sign is a lower bound on the zeros 
of F1x2.
	
    1 -1 -5 -1 -6
-1 2 3 -2
    1 -2 -3   2   -8
	
Synthetic division with k = -1
	
    1 -1 -5 -1 -6
-2 6 -2 6
    1 -3 1   -3   0
	
Synthetic division with k = -2
By the rule of bounds, -2 is a lower bound on the zeros of F1x2.
Practice Problem 4  Find upper and lower bounds on the zeros of
f1x2 = 2x3 + 5x2 + x - 2.
An upper bound or a lower bound on the zeros of a polynomial function is not unique. For 
example, the zeros of P1x2 = x3 + 2x2 - x - 2 are -2, -1, and 1. Any number greater 
than or equal to 1 is an upper bound on these zeros, and any number less than or equal to 
-2 is a lower bound on these zeros.
Find the Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
We outline steps for gathering information and locating the real zeros of a polynomial 
function.
Step 1  Find the maximum number of real zeros by using the degree of the polynomial 
function.
Step 2  Find the possible number of positive and negative zeros by using Descartes’s 
Rule of Signs.
Step 3  Write the set of possible rational zeros.
1
2
3
-1
-2
Finding the Bounds on the Zeros
EXAMPLE 4
These numbers alternate in sign
5	
Learn a procedure for finding 
the real zeros of a polynomial 
function.
if we count 0 as positive.
d
d
When checking the positive inte­
gers 1k = 1, 2, 3, c2 for an  
upper bound on the zeros of a  
function, also check the last row  
for alternating signs indicating  
a lower bound. For example, for 
  f1x2 = x3 - 9x2 + 26x - 24, 
when checking k = 1, we have 
1 -9 26 -24
1 -8 18
1 -8 18    -6
so 1 is a lower bound.
1
Side  
Note

	
Section 3.4    ■    The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function 341
Step 4  Test the smallest positive integer in the set in Step 3, the next larger, and so on, 
until an integer zero or an upper bound of the zeros is found.
a.	 If a zero is found, use the function represented by the depressed equation in 
further calculations.
b.	 If an upper bound is found, discard all larger numbers in the set of possible 
rational zeros.
Step 5  Test the positive fractions that remain in the set in Step 3 after considering any 
bound that has been found.
Step 6  Use modified Steps 4 and 5 for negative numbers in the set in Step 3.
Step 7  If a depressed equation is quadratic, use any method (including the quadratic 
formula) to solve this equation.
A graphing calculator may be used 
to obtain the approximate location 
of the real zeros. For a rational zero, 
verify by synthetic division.
Side  
Note
Find the real zeros of f1x2 = 2x5 - x4 - 14x3 + 7x2 + 24x - 12.
Solution
Step 1	
The degree of f is 5; so f has, at most, 5 real zeros.
Step 2	
f1x2 = 2x5 - x4 - 14x3 + 7x2 + 24x - 12
	
	
There are three variations of sign in f1x2. So f has 3 or 1 positive zeros.
	
f1-x2 = -2x5 - x4 + 14x3 + 7x2 - 24x - 12
	
	
There are two variations of signs in f1-x2. So f has 2 or 0 negative zeros.
Step 3  Possible rational zeros are
	
	
e {1, {2, {3, {4, {6, {12, {1
2, {3
2 f.
Step 4  We test for zeros, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 12 until a zero or an upper bound is found.
2 -1 -14 
7   24 -12
2 
1 -13 -6 18
2 1 -13 -6 18     6
       
2 -1 -14 
7  24 -12
4 
6 -16 -18 12
2 3 -8 -9 
6     0
	
	
Because 2 is a zero, 1x - 22 is a factor of f. We have 
f1x2 = 1x - 2212x4 + 3x3 - 8x2 - 9x + 62    Synthetic division
	
	
We consider the zeros of Q11x2 = 2x4 + 3x3 - 8x2 - 9x + 6.
	
	
   The possible positive rational zeros of Q11x2 are e1, 2, 3, 6, 1
2, 3
2 f. We 
	
	
discard 1 because 1 is not a zero of the original function. We test 2 because it 
	
	
may be a repeated zero of f.
 2
2 3 -8  -9  6
4  14    12  6
2 7  6  3  12   d  Remainder ≠0
	
	
The last row shows that 2 is not a zero of Q11x2 but is an upper bound (all en-
tries in the last row are positive) for the zeros of Q11x2, hence, also on the zeros 
of f.
1
✕
2
✓
Finding the Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
EXAMPLE 5

342	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Step 5  We test the remaining positive entries 1
2 and 3
2 in the list.
2 3 -8   -9 6
1    2    -3 -6
2 4  -6  -12    0          
2  3 -8  -9    6
3 9  
3
2  -45
 4
2  6 1 -15
2   -21
4
	
	
Note that 1
2 is a zero of Q11x2. Using the last row in synthetic division, 
	
	
we have
	
	
f1x2 = 1x - 22 ax - 1
2b 12x3 + 4x2 - 6x - 122 = 0
	
	
or 1x - 2212x - 121x3 + 2x2 - 3x - 62 = 0    Simplify.
Step 6  We now find the negative zeros of Q21x2 = x3 + 2x2 - 3x - 6. We test 
-1, -2, -3,  and -6.
-1 
1 2 -3 -6
-1 -1 4
1 1 -4   -2
     
 -2
1 2 -3 -6
-2 0 6
1 0 -3     0
Step 7  We can solve the depressed equation x2 - 3 = 0 to obtain x = {13. The real 
	
	
zeros of f are -2, - 13, 1
2, 13, and 2. Because f1x2 has, at most, five real 
	
	
zeros, we have found all of them.
Practice Problem 5  Find the real zeros of f1x2 = 3x4 - 11x3 + 22x - 12.
1
2
✓
3
2
✕
✕
✓
Sketch the graph of f1x2 = 3x3 - 2x2 - 6x + 4.
Solution
We use the procedure given in Section 3.2 on page 315.
Step 1  Because the degree, 3, is odd and the leading coefficient, 3, is positive, the end 
behavior is similar to that of y = x3.
Step 2  Solve 3x3 - 2x2 - 6x + 4 = 0 to find the real zeros. By the Rational Zeros 
	
	
Theorem, the possible rational roots are {1
3, {2
3, {1. Trying each 
	
	
value, we find that 2
3 is a real zero, as shown below. We solve the 
	
	
depressed equation 3x2 - 6 = 0 to find the remaining zeros, x = {12.  
	
The y-intercept is f102 = 31023 - 21022 - 6102 + 4 = 4.
3 -2 -6   4
2 0   -4
3 0 -6   0 
Step 3  The three zeros, - 12, 2
3, 12 divide the x-axis into four intervals.
2⁄3
Graphing a Polynomial Function
EXAMPLE 6

	
Section 3.4    ■    The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function 343
Step 4  1- ∞, - 122, a - 12, 2
3b, a2
3, 12b, and, 112, ∞2
	
	
Noting that 12 ≈1.4, we choose -2, 0, 1, and 2 as test numbers.
2
2
2
2
0
0
Test number




sign graph
16
1
1
1
8
4
value of f
Below
x-axis
Above
x-axis
Above
x-axis
Below
x-axis
Graph of f
2
2
2
3
Step 5  The graph is shown in Figure 3.20.
y  3x3  2x2  6x + 4
x
y
1
2
1
2
2

2
10
10
0
2
3
Practice Problem 6  Sketch the graph of f1x2 = 3x3 - x2 - 9x + 3.
Figure 3.20 
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 5-26    2. 1
2, 2 + 13, 2 - 13
3. Number of positive zeros: 1; number of negative zeros: 0 or 2
4. Upper bound: 1; lower bound: -3
5. - 12, 2
3, 12, 3
6. 
1
2
4
6
0
4
6
2
8
y
2
1
1
3
2 x
3

3
y = 3x3 - x2 - 9x + 3

344	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Exercises
section 3.4
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 Let P1x2 = anxn + g + a0 with integer 
	 	 coefficients. If 
p
q is 	a rational zero of P1x2, then 
	 	
p
q =
possible factors of              
possible factors of               .
	 2.	 If the terms of a polynomial are written in descending  
order, then a variation of sign occurs when the signs of  
two 
 terms differ.
	 3.	 The number of positive zeros of a polynomial function P1x2 
is equal to the number of 
 of sign of P1x2 or 
is less than that number by 1a2n 
.
	 4.	 If a polynomial P1x2 has no zero greater than a number k, 
then k is called a1n2 
 on the zeros of P1x2. If 
P1x2 has no zero less than a number m, then m is called a1n2 
 on the zeros of P1x2.
	 5.	 True or False. Possible rational zeros of 
P1x2 = 9x3 - 9x2 - x + 1 are {1, {3, {9. 
	 6.	 True or False. The polynomial function 
P1x2 = x3 + x + 1 has exactly one real zero. 
In Exercises 7–10, find the set of possible rational zeros of the 
given function.
	 7.	 f1x2 = 3x3 - 4x2 + 5  
	 8.	 g1x2 = 2x4 - 5x2 - 2x + 1  
	 9.	 h1x2 = 4x4 - 9x2 + x + 6 
	10.	 F1x2 = 6x6 + 5x5 + x - 35 
In Exercises 11–26, find all rational zeros of the given  
polynomial function.
	11.	 f1x2 = x3 - x2 - 4x + 4 
	12.	 f1x2 = x3 - 4x2 + x + 6 
	13.	 f1x2 = x3 + x2 + 2x + 2 
	14.	 f1x2 = x3 + 3x2 + 2x + 6 
	15.	 g1x2 = 2x3 + x2 - 13x + 6  
	16.	 g1x2 = 6x3 + 13x2 + x - 2 
	17.	 g1x2 = 3x3 - 2x2 + 3x - 2  
	18.	 g1x2 = 2x3 + 3x2 + 4x + 6 
	19.	 h1x2 = 3x3 + 7x2 + 8x + 2  
	20.	 h1x2 = 2x3 + x2 + 8x + 4 
	21.	 h1x2 = x4 - x3 - x2 - x - 2 
	22.	 h1x2 = 2x4 + 3x3 + 8x2 + 3x - 4 
	23.	 F1x2 = x4 - x3 - 13x2 + x + 12 
	24.	 G1x2 = 3x4 + 5x3 + x2 + 5x - 2  
	25.	 F1x2 = x4 - 2x3 + 10x2 - x + 1 
	26.	 G1x2 = x6 + 2x4 + x2 + 2 
In Exercises 27–32, graph each polynomial function.
	27.	 f1x2 = 6x3 + 13x2 + x - 2 
	28.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - x2 - 4x + 2 
	29.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 3x2 - 14x + 21 
	30.	 f1x2 = 6x3 + 17x2 + x - 10 
	31.	 f1x2 = 4x4 + 4x3 - 3x2 - 2x + 1 
	32.	 f1x2 = 9x4 + 30x3 + 13x2 - 20x + 4 
In Exercises 33–46, determine the possible number of positive 
and negative zeros of the given function by using Descartes’s 
Rule of Signs.
	33.	 f1x2 = 5x3 - 2x2 - 3x + 4 
	34.	 g1x2 = 3x3 + x2 - 9x - 3 
	35.	 f1x2 = 2x3 + 5x2 - x + 2 
	36.	 g1x2 = 3x4 + 8x3 - 5x2 + 2x - 3 
	37.	 h1x2 = 2x5 - 5x3 + 3x2 + 2x - 1 
	38.	 F1x2 = 5x6 - 7x4 + 2x3 - 1 
	39.	 G1x2 = -3x4 - 4x3 + 5x2 - 3x + 7 
	40.	 H1x2 = -5x5 + 3x3 - 2x2 - 7x + 4 
	41.	 f1x2 = x4 + 2x2 + 4 
	42.	 f1x2 = 3x4 + 5x2 + 6 
	43.	 g1x2 = 2x5 + x3 + 3x 
	44.	 g1x2 = 2x5 + 4x3 + 5x
	45.	 h1x2 = -x5 - 2x3 + 4
	46.	h1x2 = 2x5 + 3x3 + 1 
In Exercises 47–54, determine integer upper and lower 
bounds on the zeros of the given function.
	47.	 f1x2 = 3x3 - x2 + 9x - 3  
	48.	 g1x2 = 2x3 - 3x2 - 14x + 21 
	49.	 F1x2 = 3x3 + 2x2 + 5x + 7 
	50.	 G1x2 = x3 + 3x2 + x - 4 
	51.	 h1x2 = x4 + 3x3 - 15x2 - 9x + 31
	52.	 H1x2 = 3x4 - 20x3 + 28x2 + 19x - 13
	53.	 f1x2 = 6x4 + x3 - 43x2 - 7x + 7
	54.	 g1x2 = 6x4 + 23x3 + 25x2 - 9x - 5
In Exercises 55–74, find all rational zeros of f. Then (if  
necessary) use the depressed equation to find all roots of the 
equation f1x2 = 0.
	55.	 f1x) = x3 + 5x2 - 8x + 2 
	56.	 f1x2 = x3 - 7x2 - 5x + 3 
	57.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - x2 - 6x + 3 
	58.	 f1x2 = 3x3 + 2x2 - 15x - 10 
	59.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 9x2 + 6x - 1
	60.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 3x2 - 4x - 1 
	61.	 f1x2 = x4 + x3 - 5x2 - 3x + 6                

	
Section 3.4    ■    The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function 345
	62.	 f1x2 = x4 - 2x3 - 5x2 + 4x + 6 
	63.	 f1x2 = x4 - 3x3 + 3x - 1 
	64.	 f1x2 = x4 - 6x3 - 7x2 + 54x - 18
	65.	 f1x2 = 2x4 - 5x3 - 4x2 + 15x - 6 
	66.	 f1x2 = 3x4 - 8x3 - 18x2 + 40x + 15 
	67.	 f1x2 = 6x4 - x3 - 13x2 + 2x + 2 
	68.	 f1x2 = 6x4 + x3 - 19x2 - 3x + 3 
	69.	 f1x2 = x5 - 2x4 - 4x3 + 8x2 + 3x - 6
	70.	 f1x2 = x5 + x4 - 6x3 - 6x2 + 8x + 8
	71.	 f1x2 = 2x5 + x4 - 11x3 - x2 + 15x - 6
	72.	 f1x2 = 2x5 - x4 - 9x3 + 10x + 4 
	73.	 f1x2 = 2x5 - 13x4 + 27x3 - 17x2 - 5x + 6 
	74.	 f1x2 = 3x5 + x4 - 9x3 - 3x2 + 6x + 2 
Applying the Concepts
	75.	 Geometry. The length of a rectangle is x2 - 2x + 3, and 
its width is x - 2. Find its dimensions assuming that its area 
is 306 square units. 
	76.	 Making a box. A square piece of tin 18 inches on each side 
is to be made into a box without a top by cutting a square 
from each corner and folding up the flaps to form the sides. 
What size corners should be cut so that the volume of the box 
is 432 cubic inches? 
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
18
18
	77.	 Cost function. The total cost of a product (in dollars) is 
given by C1x2 = 3x3 - 6x2 + 108x + 100, where x is the 
demand for the product. Find the value of x that gives a total 
cost of $628. 
	78.	 Profit. For the product in Exercise 77, the demand function 
is p1x2 = 330 + 10x - x2. Find the value of x that gives 
the profit of $910. 
	79.	 Production cost. The total cost per month, in thousands of 
dollars, of producing x printers (with x measured in  
hundreds) is given by C1x2 = x3 - 15x2 + 5x + 50. How 
many units must be produced so that the total monthly cost is 
$125,000? 
	80.	 Break even. If the demand function for the printers in 
	
	 Exercise 79 is p1x2 = -3x + 3 + 74
x , find the number of 
	
	 printers that must be produced and sold to break even. 
	81.	 Oil import-export. A country maintains its normal oil 
needs by importing the deficit and exporting its surplus oil. 
The accompanying graph shows the country’s balance of 
import and export (in million barrels) for 2004–2013, where 
x = 0 represents 2004.
a.  How many years did the country export oil? 
b.  Construct a polynomial function of minimum degree that 
models this graph. 
c.  	Use part (b) to estimate the oil import or export in 2009.
1
0
3
5
y
5
1
3
3
1
5
7
9 x
(9, 3)
	82.	 Number of tourists. The accompanying graph shows the 
number of tourists (in thousands) above or below normal dur-
ing 2013, where x = 1 represents January.
a.  Construct a polynomial function of minimum degree that 
models this graph.
b.  	Use part (a) to estimate the level of tourism in September 
2013.
200
0
300
400
y
2
4
100
8
10
12 x
6
(1, 350)
	83.	Investment. The accompanying graph shows the profit>loss 
(in thousand dollars) of Ms. Sharpy’s investment in the stock 
market during 2004–2013, where x = 0 represents 2004.
a.  	Construct a polynomial of minimum degree that models 
the graph.
b.  	Use part (a) to estimate the profit>loss in 2008.
0
0.5
0.5
1
1
y
5
1
3
7
9 x
(9, 0.5)
c.  Use part (a) to determine the year(s) when Ms. Sharpy 
realized a profit of $600. 
d.  Use part (a) to determine the maximum profit and the year 
it occurred. 
	84.	County government. The accompanying graph shows the 
surplus>deficit (in million dollars) for a certain county gov-
ernment during 2004–2013, where x = 0 represents 2004.
a.  	Construct a polynomial function of minimum degree that 
models the graph.
b.  	Use part (a) to estimate the surplus>deficit in 2007 and 
2011.      

346	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
c.  	Use part (a) to determine the maximum amount of deficit.
0
50
50
100
100
y
5
1
3
7
9 x
(0, 96)
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 85–88, show that the given number is irrational.  
[Hint: To show that x = 1 + 13 is irrational, form the 
equivalent equations x −1 = 13, 1x −122 = 3, and 
x2 −2x −2 = 0 and show that the last equation has no 
rational roots.]
	 85.	 13
	 86.	 2
3 4
	 87.	 3 - 12
	 88.	 192
2
3
In Exercises 89–100, find a polynomial equation of least 
possible degree with integer coefficient whose roots include 
the given numbers. Use the result: If an equation with integer 
coefficients has a root 1a + 1b2 where a and b are rational 
but 1b is irrational, then the equation also has the root 
1a −1b2.
	 89.	 1, -1, 0 
	 90.	 2, 1, -2
	 91.	 - 1
2, 2, 7
3
	 92.	 - 1
3, - 1
2, 1
6
	 93.	 1 + 12, 3
	 94.	 3 - 15, 2
	 95.	 1 + 13, 3 - 12
	 96.	 2 - 15, 2 + 13
	 97.	 12 + 13
	 98.	 2 + 13 + 15
	 99.	 3 - 12 + 15
	100.	 12 + 13 + 15 
	101.	To prove the rational zeros test, we assume the Fundamental 
Theorem of Arithmetic, which states that every integer has 
a unique prime factorization. Supply reasons for each step in 
the following proof.
	
(i)	 F ap
qb = 0, and p
q is in lowest terms.
	 (ii)	 an ap
qb
n
+ an-1ap
qb
n-1
+ g + a1ap
qb + a0 = 0
	 (iii)	 anpn + an-1pn-1q + g + a1pqn-1 + a0qn = 0
	 (iv)	 anpn + an-1pn-1q + g + a1pqn-1 = -a0qn
	 (v)	 p is a factor of the left side of (iv).
	 (vi)	 p is a factor of -a0qn.
	(vii)	 p is a factor of a0.
	(viii)	 an-1pn-1q + g + a1pqn-1 + a0qn = -anpn
	 (ix)	 q is a factor of the left side of the equation in (viii).
	 (x)	 q is a factor of -anpn.
	 (xi)	 q is a factor of an.
	102.	Find all rational roots of the equation
2x4 + 2x3 + 1
2 x2 + 2x - 3
2 = 0.
	
	 [Hint: Multiply both sides of the equation by the lowest 
common denominator of the coefficients.]
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	103.	True or False. 
a.  	1
3 is a possible zero of P1x2 = x5 - 3x2 + x + 3. 
b.  2
5 is a possible zero of P1x2 = 2x7 - 5x4 - 17x + 25.
	104.	Find all the zeros of f1x2 = x4 - 2x3 - 4x2 + 4x + 4, if 
one of its zeros is 12.
	
	 (Hint: f1x2 has integer coefficients, so - 12 is also a zero.)
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 105–114, simplify each expression.
	105.	 1-2i25 
	106.	 1x + i21x - i2 
	107.	 12x + i21-2x + i2
	108.	 1x + 3i21x - 3i2 
	109.	 15x + 2i215x - 2i2
	110.	 12x + 8i21x - 4i2
	111.	 1x - 1 + 2i21x - 1 - 2i2 
	112.	 3x - 13 - i24 3x - 13 + i24 
	113.	 3x - 12 + 3i24 3x - 12 - 3i24 
	114.	 3x - 11 + 13i24 3x - 11 - 13i24 
                

	
Section 3.5    ■    The Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function 347
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Long division (Section 3.3, page 324)
2	 Synthetic division (Section 3.3, page 326)
3	 Rational zeros theorem  
(Section 3.4, page 336)
4	 Complex numbers (Section 1.3, page 104)
5	 Conjugate of a complex number  
(Section 1.3, page 109)
Objectives
1	 Learn basic facts about the complex zeros 
of polynomials.
2	 Use the Conjugate Pairs Theorem to find 
zeros of polynomials.
The Factor Theorem connects the concept of factors and zeros of a polynomial, and we 
continue to investigate this connection.
Because the equation x2 + 1 = 0 has no real roots, the polynomial function 
P1x2 = x2 + 1 has no real zeros. However, if we replace x with the complex number i, 
we have
P1i2 = i2 + 1 = 1-12 + 1 = 0.
Consequently, i is a complex number for which P1i2 = 0; that is, i is a complex zero of 
P1x2. In Section 3.2, we stated that a polynomial of degree n can have, at most, n real zeros. 
1	
Learn basic facts about the 
complex zeros of polynomials.
Cardano Accused of Stealing Formula
In 16th-century Italy, getting and keeping a teaching job at a university was difficult. 
University appointments were, for the most part, temporary. One way a professor could 
convince the administration that he was worthy of continuing in his position was by 
winning public challenges. Two contenders for a position would present each other 
with a list of problems, and later in a public forum, each person would present his solu-
tions to the other’s problems. As a result, scholars often kept secret their new methods 
of solving problems.
In 1535, in a public contest primarily about solving the cubic equation, Nicolo  
Tartaglia (1499–1557) won over his opponent Antonio Maria Fiore. Gerolamo Cardano  
(1501–1576), in the hope of learning the secret of solving a cubic equation, invited  
Tartaglia to visit him. After many promises and much flattery, Tartaglia revealed his 
method on the promise, probably given under oath, that Cardano would keep it con-
fidential. When Cardano’s book Ars Magna (The Great Art) appeared in 1545, the formula 
and the method of proof were fully disclosed. Angered at this apparent breach of a solemn  
oath and feeling cheated out of the rewards of his monumental work, Tartaglia  
accused Cardano of being a liar and a thief for stealing his formula. Thus began the 
bitterest feud in the history of mathematics, carried on with name-calling and mud-
slinging of the lowest order.  As Tartaglia feared, the formula (see Group Project 1) has 
forever since been known as Cardano’s formula for the solution of the cubic equation.
The Complex Zeros of a 
Polynomial Function
Gerolamo Cardano (1501–1576)
Cardano was trained as a physician, 
but his range of interests included 
philosophy, music, gambling, 
mathematics, astrology, and the occult 
sciences. Cardano was a colorful man, 
full of contradictions. His lifestyle was 
deplorable even by the standards of 
the times, and his personal life was 
filled with tragedies. His wife died in 
1546. He saw one son executed for 
wife poisoning. He cropped the ears of 
a second son who attempted the same 
crime. In 1570, he was imprisoned for six 
months for heresy when he published 
the horoscope of Jesus. Cardano spent 
the last few years in Rome, where 
he wrote his autobiography, De Vita 
Propria, in which he did not spare the 
most shameful revelations. 
3.5
S e c t i o n 
A number z of the form z = a + bi 
is a complex number, where a and 
b are real numbers and i = 1-1.
Recall

348	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
We now extend our number system to allow the variables and coefficients of polynomials 
to represent complex numbers. When we want to emphasize that complex numbers may 
be used in this way, we call the polynomial P1x2 a complex polynomial. If P1z2 = 0 
for a complex number z, we say that z is a zero or a complex zero of P1x2. In the com-
plex ­number system, every nth-degree polynomial equation has exactly n roots and every 
­nth-degree polynomial can be factored into exactly n linear factors. This fact follows from 
the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
If b = 0, the complex number  
a + bi is a real number. So the set 
of real numbers is a subset of the 
set of complex numbers.
Recall
F u n d a m e n ta l  T h e o r e m  o f  A l g e b r a
Every polynomial function
P1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0 1n Ú 1, an ≠02
with complex coefficients an, an-1, c, a1, a0 has at least one complex zero. 
This theorem was proved by the mathematician Karl Friedrich Gauss at age 20. The proof 
is beyond the scope of this book, but if we are allowed to use complex numbers, we can use 
the theorem to prove that every polynomial has a complete factorization.
Fa c t o r i z at i o n  T h e o r e m  f o r  P o ly n o m i a l s
If P1x2 is a complex polynomial of degree n Ú 1 with leading coefficient a, it can be 
factored into n (not necessarily distinct) linear factors of the form
P1x2 = a1x - r121x - r22 g1x - rn2,
where a, r1, r2, c, rn are complex numbers. 
To prove the Factorization Theorem for Polynomials, we notice that if P1x2 is a poly-
nomial of degree 1 or higher with leading coefficient a, then the Fundamental Theorem 
of Algebra states that there is a zero r1 for which P1r12 = 0. By the Factor Theorem, 
1x - r12 is a factor of P1x2 and
P1x2 = 1x - r12Q11x2,
where the degree of Q11x2 is n - 1 and its leading coefficient is a. If n - 1 is positive, 
then we apply the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra to Q11x2; this gives us a zero, say, r2, 
of Q11x2. By the Factor Theorem, 1x - r22 is a factor of Q11x2 and
Q11x2 = 1x - r22Q21x2,
where the degree of Q21x2 is n - 2 and its leading coefficient is a. Then
P1x2 = 1x - r121x - r22Q21x2.
This process can be continued until P1x2 is completely factored as
P1x2 = a1x - r121x - r22 g1x - rn2,
where a is the leading coefficient and r1, r2, c, rn are zeros of P1x2. The proof is now 
complete.
In general, the numbers r1, r2, c, rn may not be distinct. As with the polynomials  
we encountered previously, if the factor 1x - r2 appears m times in the complete fac-
torization of P1x2, then we say that r is a zero of multiplicity m. The polynomial 
P1x2 = 1x - 2231x - i22 has zeros
2 1of multiplicity 32 and i 1of multiplicity 22.
Note that the polynomial P1x2 = 1x - 2231x - i22 has only 2 and i as its distinct zeros, 
although it is of degree 5.
The Factor Theorem in the real 
number setting was proved in 
Section 3.3. It can be verified for 
the complex numbers by the same 
reasonings.
Side 
Note

	
Section 3.5    ■    The Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function 349
We have the following theorem.
N u m b e r  o f  Z e r o s  T h e o r e m
Any polynomial of degree n has exactly n zeros, provided a zero of multiplicity m is 
counted m times. 
Conjugate Pairs Theorem
In Example 1, we constructed a polynomial that had both i and its conjugate, -i, among 
its zeros. Our next result says that for all polynomials with real coefficients, nonreal zeros 
occur in conjugate pairs.
2	
Use the Conjugate Pairs 
Theorem to find zeros of 
polynomials.
Find a polynomial P1x2 of degree 4 with a leading coefficient of 2 and zeros -1, 3, i, 
and -i. Write P1x2
a.	 In completely factored form.	
b.	 By expanding the product found in part a.
Solution
a.	 Because P1x2 has degree 4, we write
P1x2 = a1x - r121x - r221x - r321x - r42.	
Completely factored form
	
Now replace the leading coefficient a with 2 and the zeros r1, r2, r3,  and r4 with 
-1, 3, i, and -i (in any order). Then
 P1x2 = 23x - 1-124 1x - 321x - i23x - 1-i24
 = 21x + 121x - 321x - i21x + i2
	
Simplify.
b.	  P1x2 = 21x + 121x - 321x - i21x + i2	
From part a
	
 = 21x + 121x - 321x2 + 12
	
Expand 1x - i21x + i2.
	
 = 21x + 121x3 - 3x2 + x - 32
	
Expand 1x - 321x2 + 12.
	
 = 21x4 - 2x3 - 2x2 - 2x - 32
	
Expand 1x + 121x3 - 3x2 + x - 32.
	
 = 2x4 - 4x3 - 4x2 - 4x - 6
	
Distributive property
Practice Problem 1  Find a polynomial P1x2 of degree 4 with a leading coefficient of  
3 and zeros -2, 1, 1 + i, 1 - i. Write P1x2
a.	 In completely factored form.	
b.	 By expanding the product found in part a.
Constructing a Polynomial Whose Zeros Are Given
EXAMPLE 1
C o n j u g at e  Pa i r s  T h e o r e m
If P1x2 is a polynomial function whose coefficients are real numbers and if 
z = a + bi is a zero of P, then its conjugate, z = a - bi, is also a zero of P. 
The conjugate of a complex number 
z = a + bi is z = a - bi. For 
two complex numbers z1 and z2, 
we have (Section 1.3)
 z1 + z2 = z1 + z2
 z1z2 = z1 z2.
Recall
To prove the Conjugate Pairs Theorem, let
P1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0,
where an, an-1, c , a1, a0 are real numbers. Now suppose that P1z2 = 0. Then we must 
show that P1z2 = 0 also. We will use the fact that the conjugate of a real number a is 
identical to the real number a 1because a = a - 0i = a2 and then use the conjugate sum 
and product properties z1 + z2 = z1 + z2 and z1z2 = z1 z2.

350	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
 P1z2 = anzn + an-1zn-1 + g + a1z + a0	
	
Replace x with z.
 P1z2 = an1z2n + an-11z2n-1 + g + a1z + a0	
Replace z with z.
 = anzn + an-1zn-1 + g + a1 z + a0	
	
1z2k = zk, ak = ak
 = anzn + an-1zn-1 + g + a1z + a0	
	
z1 z2 = z1z2
 = anzn + an-1zn-1 + g + a1z + a0	
	
z1 + z2 = z1 + z2
 = P1z2 = 0 = 0
	
P1z2 = 0
We see that if P1z2 = 0, then P1z2 = 0, and the theorem is proved.
This theorem has several uses. If, for example, we know that 2 - 5i is a zero of a polynomi-
al with real coefficients, then we know that 2 + 5i is also a zero. Because nonreal zeros occur in 
conjugate pairs, we know that there will always be an even number of nonreal zeros. Therefore, 
any polynomial of odd degree with real coefficients has at least one zero that is a real number.
O d d - D e g r e e  P o ly n o m i a l s  h a v e  a  R e a l  Z e r o
Any polynomial P1x2 of odd degree with real coefficients must have at least one real zero. 
For example, the polynomial P1x2 = 5x7 + 2x4 + 9x - 12 has at least one zero that is a 
real number because P1x2 has degree 7 (odd degree) and has real numbers as coefficients.
A polynomial P1x2 of degree 9 with real coefficients has the following zeros: 2, of multi-
plicity 3; 4 + 5i, of multiplicity 2; and 3 - 7i. Write all nine zeros of P1x2.
Solution
Because complex zeros occur in conjugate pairs, the conjugate 4 - 5i of 4 + 5i is a zero 
of multiplicity 2 and the conjugate 3 + 7i of 3 - 7i is a zero of P1x2. The nine zeros of 
P1x2, including the repetitions, are
2, 2, 2, 4 + 5i, 4 + 5i, 4 - 5i, 4 - 5i, 3 + 7i, and 3 - 7i.
Practice Problem 2  A polynomial P1x2 of degree 8 with real coefficients has the follow-
ing zeros: -3 and 2 - 3i, each of multiplicity 2, and i. Write all eight zeros of P1x2.
Every polynomial of degree n has exactly n zeros and can be factored into a product 
of n linear factors. If the polynomial has real coefficients, then, by the Conjugate Pairs 
Theorem, its nonreal zeros occur as conjugate pairs. Consequently, if r = a + bi is a 
zero, then so is r = a - bi, and both x - r and x - r are linear factors of the polynomial. 
Multiplying these factors, we have
 1x - r21x - r2 = x2 - 1r + r2x + rr
    Use FOIL.
 = x2 - 2ax + 1a2 + b22    r + r = 2a; rr = a2 + b2
The quadratic polynomial x2 - 2ax + 1a2 + b22 has real coefficients and is irreducible 
(cannot be factored any further) over the real numbers. This result shows that each pair of 
nonreal conjugate zeros can be combined into one irreducible quadratic factor.
Using the Conjugate Pairs Theorem
EXAMPLE 2
In problems such as Example 2, 
once you determine all of the 
zeros, you can use the Factorization 
Theorem to write a polynomial with 
those zeros.
Side  
Note
Fa c t o r i z at i o n  T h e o r e m  f o r  a  P o ly n o m i a l  
W i t h  R e a l  C o e f f i c i e n t s
Every polynomial with real coefficients can be uniquely factored over the real num-
bers as a product of linear factors and/or irreducible quadratic factors. 

	
Section 3.5    ■    The Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function 351
Given that 2 - i is a zero of P1x2 = x4 - 6x3 + 14x2 - 14x + 5, find the remaining zeros.
Solution
Because P1x2 has real coefficients, the conjugate 2 - i = 2 + i is also a zero. By the 
Factorization Theorem, the linear factors 3x - 12 - i24 and 3x - 12 + i24 appear in the 
factorization of P1x2. Consequently, their product
 3x - 12 - i24 3x - 12 + i24 = 1x - 2 + i21x - 2 - i2
 = 31x - 22 + i4 31x - 22 - i4    Regroup.
 = 1x - 222 - i2	
1A + B21A - B2 = A2 - B2
 = x2 - 4x + 4 + 1	
Expand 1x - 222, i2 = -1.
 = x2 - 4x + 5	
Simplify.
is also a factor of P1x2. We divide P1x2 by x2 - 4x + 5 to find the other factor.
x2 -
2x + 1
Divisor S x2 - 4x + 5)x4 - 6x3 + 14x2 - 14x + 5
x4 - 4x3 +
5x2
-2x3 + 9x2 - 14x
-2x3 + 8x2 - 10x
x2 -
4x + 5
x2 -
4x + 5
0
	
d  Quotient
	
d  Dividend
	
d  Remainder
 P1x2 = 1x2 - 2x + 121x2 - 4x + 52
	
P1x2 = Quotient ~ Divisor
 = 1x - 121x - 121x2 - 4x + 52
	
Factor x2 - 2x + 1.
 = 1x - 121x - 123x - 12 - i24 3x - 12 + i24	
Factor x2 - 4x + 5.
The zeros of P1x2 are 1 (of multiplicity 2), 2 - i, and 2 + i.
Practice Problem 3  Given that 2i is a zero of P1x2 = x4 - 3x3 + 6x2 - 12x + 8, 
find the remaining zeros.
In Example 3, because x2 - 4x + 5 is irreducible over the real number system, the 
form P1x2 = 1x - 121x - 121x2 - 4x + 52 is a factorization of P1x2 into linear and 
irreducible quadratic factors. However, the form 
P1x2 = 1x - 121x - 123x - 12 - i24 3x - 12 + i24
is a factorization of P1x2 into linear factors over the complex numbers.
Finding the Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function
EXAMPLE 3
dividend =
Quotient # divisor + Remainder
Recall
Find all zeros of the polynomial function P1x2 = x4 - x3 + 7x2 - 9x - 18.
Solution
Because the degree of P1x2 is 4, P1x2 has four zeros. The Rational Zeros Theorem tells us 
that the possible rational zeros are
{1, {2, {3, {6, {9, {18.
Finding the Zeros of a Polynomial Function
EXAMPLE 4

352	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Testing these possible zeros by synthetic division, we find that 2 is a zero.
2  1 -1 7 -9 -18
2 2 18 18
1 1 9 
9 
0
Because P122 = 0, 1x - 22 is a factor of P1x2 and the quotient is x3 + x2 + 9x + 9.
We can solve the depressed equation x3 + x2 + 9x + 9 = 0 by factoring by grouping.
 x21x + 12 + 91x + 12 = 0   Group terms, distributive property
 1x2 + 921x + 12 = 0   Distributive property
 x2 + 9 = 0  or x + 1 = 0   Zero-product property
 
x2 = -9 or 
x = -1  Solve each equation.
x = { 1-9 = {3i	
Solve x2 = -9 for x.
The four zeros of P1x2 are -1, 2, 3i, and -3i. The complete factorization of P1x2 is
P1x2 = x4 - x3 + 7x2 - 9x - 18 = 1x + 121x - 221x - 3i21x + 3i2.
Practice Problem 4  Find all zeros of the polynomial
	
P1x2 = x4 - 8x3 + 22x2 - 28x + 16.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. P1x2 = 31x + 221x - 121x - 1 - i21x - 1 + i2 
b. P1x2 = 3x4 - 3x3 - 6x2 + 18x - 12
2. -3, -3, 2 + 3i, 2 + 3i, 2 - 3i, 2 - 3i, i, -i
3. The zeros are 1, 2, 2i, and -2i.
4. The zeros are 2, 4, 1 + i, and 1 - i.
Exercises
section 3.5
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra states that a  
polynomial function of degree n Ú 1 has at least one 
 zero.
	 2.	 The Number of Zeros Theorem states that a polynomial func-
tion of degree n has exactly 
 zeros, provided 
a zero of multiplicity k is counted 
 times.
	 3.	 If P is a polynomial function with real coefficients and if 
z = a + bi is a zero of P, then 
 is also a 
zero of P.
	 4.	 If 2 - 3i is a zero of a polynomial function with real  
coefficients, then so is 
.
	 5.	 True or False. A polynomial function of degree n Ú 1 with 
real coefficients has at least one real zero and, at most, n real 
zeros. 
	 6.	 True or False. A polynomial function P1x2 of degree n Ú 1 
with real coefficients can be factored into n factors (not  
necessarily distinct) as
P1x2 = a1x - r121x - r22 c1x - rn2,
	
	 where a, r1, r2, crn are real numbers. 
In Exercises 7–12, find all solutions of the equation in the 
complex number system.
	 7.	 x2 + 25 = 0 
	 8.	 1x - 222 + 9 = 0 
	 9.	 x2 + 4x + 4 = -9 
	10.	 x3 - 8 = 0 
	11.	 1x - 221x - 3i21x + 3i2 = 0 
	12.	 1x - 121x - 2i212x - 6i212x + 6i2 = 0 
In Exercises 13–18, find the remaining zeros of a polynomial P1x2 
with real coefficients and with the specified degree and zeros.
	13.	 Degree 3; zeros: 2, 3 + i 
	14.	 Degree 3; zeros: 2, 2 - i 
	15.	 Degree 4; zeros: 0, 1, -5 + i 
	16.	 Degree 4; zeros: -i, 1 - i 
	17.	 Degree 6; zeros: 0, 5, i, 3i 
	18.	 Degree 6; zeros: 2i, 4 + i, i - 1           

	
Section 3.5    ■    The Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function 353  
In Exercises 19–22, find the polynomial P1x2 with real coeffi-
cients having the specified degree, leading coefficient, and zeros.
	19.	 Degree 4; leading coefficient 2; zeros: 5 - i,  3i 
	20.	 Degree 4; leading coefficient -3; zeros: 2 + 3i,  1 - 4i
	21.	 Degree 5; leading coefficient 7; zeros: 5 (multiplicity 2),  
1, 3 - i
	22.	 Degree 6; leading coefficient 4; zeros: 3, 0 (multiplicity 3), 
2 - 3i 
In Exercises 23–26, use the given zero to write P1x2 as a  
product of linear and irreducible quadratic factors.
	23.	 P1x2 = x4 + x3 + 9x2 + 9x, zero: 3i 
	24.	 P1x2 = x4 - 2x3 + x2 + 2x - 2, zero: 1 - i 
	25.	 P1x2 = x5 - 5x4 + 2x3 + 22x2 - 20x, zero: 3 - i 
	26.	 P1x2 = 2x5 - 11x4 + 19x3 - 17x2 + 17x - 6, zero: i 
In Exercises 27–36, find all zeros of each polynomial function.
	27.	 P1x2 = x3 - 9x2 + 25x - 17 
	28.	 P1x2 = x3 - 5x2 + 7x + 13 
	29.	 P1x2 = 3x3 - 2x2 + 22x + 40 
	30.	 P1x2 = 3x3 - x2 + 12x - 4  
	31.	 P1x2 = 2x4 - 10x3 + 23x2 - 24x + 9 
	32.	 P1x2 = 9x4 + 30x3 + 14x2 - 16x + 8 
	33.	 P1x2 = x4 - 4x3 - 5x2 + 38x - 30 
	34.	 P1x2 = x4 + x3 + 7x2 + 9x - 18 
	35.	 P1x2 = 2x5 - 11x4 + 19x3 - 17x2 + 17x - 6  
	36.	 P1x2 = x5 - 2x4 - x3 + 8x2 - 10x + 4 
In Exercises 37–40, find an equation of a polynomial function of 
least degree having the given complex zeros, intercepts, and graph.
	37.	 f has complex zero 3i  
2
2
2
3
4
6
8
10
12
4
y
x
0
4
	38.	 f has complex zero -i
2
2
4
3
6
8
10
2
3
2
4
6
4
6
y
x
0
4
	39.	 f has complex zeros i and 2i 
2
1
5
10
1
5
4
10
3
4
y
x
0
2
	40.	 f has complex zero -2i
2
1
5
10
1
5
y
x
0
2
Beyond the Basics
	41.	 The solutions -1 and 1 of the equation x2 = 1 are called 
the square roots of 1. The solutions of the equation x3 = 1 
are called the cube roots of 1. Find the cube roots of 1. How 
many are there? 
	42.	 The solutions of the equation xn = 1, where n is a posi-
tive integer, are called the nth roots of 1 or “nth roots of 
unity.” Explain the relationship between the solutions of the 
equation xn = 1 and the zeros of the complex polynomial 
P1x2 = xn - 1. How many nth roots of 1 are there? 
In Exercises 43–46, use the given zero and synthetic division to 
determine all of the zeros of P1x2. Then factor the depressed 
equation to write P1x2 as a product of linear factors.
	43.	 P1x2 = x2 + 1i - 22x - 2i, x = -i
	44.	 P1x2 = x2 + 3ix - 2, x = -2i 
	45.	 P1x2 = x3 - 13 + i2x2 - 14 - 3i2x + 4i, x = i 
	46.	 P1x2 = x3 - 14 + 2i2x2 + 17 + 8i2x - 14i, x = 2i 
In Exercises 47–50, find an equation with real coefficients of a 
polynomial function f that has the given characteristics. Then 
write the end behavior of the graph of y = f1x2.
	47.	 Degree: 3; zeros: 2, 1 + 2i; y-intercept: 40 
	48.	 Degree: 3; zeros: 1, 2 - 3i; y-intercept: -26 
	49.	 Degree: 4; zeros: 1, -1, 3 + i; y-intercept: 20 
	50.	 Degree: 4; zeros: 1-2i, 3 - 2i; y-intercept: 130 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	51.	 Show that if r1, r2, c, rn are the roots of the equation
anxn + an-1xn-1 + g+ a1x + a0 = 0 1an ≠02,
	
	 then the sum of the roots satisfies
r1 + r2 + g + rn = - an-1
an
	
	 and the product of the roots satisfies
r1 # r2 # g # rn = 1-12n a0
an
.
	
	 (Hint: Factor the polynomial; then multiply it out using 
r1, r2, c, rn and compare coefficients with those of the 
original polynomial.) 
	52.	 In his book Ars Magna, Cardano explained how to solve 
cubic equations. He considered the following example:
x3 + 6x = 20
a.	 Explain why this equation has exactly one real solution.
b.	 Cardano explained the method as follows: “I take two 
cubes v3 and u3 whose difference is 20 and whose product 
is 2, that is, a third of the coefficient of x. Then, I say that 
x = v - u is a solution of the equation. ” Show that if 
v3 - u3 = 20 and vu = 2, then x = v - u is indeed the 
solution of the equation x3 + 6x = 20.   

354	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
c.	 Solve the system
 v3 - u3 = 20
 uv = 2
	
to find u and v.
d.	 Consider the equation x3 + px = q, where p is a positive 
number. Using your work in parts (a), (b), and (c) as a 
guide, show that the unique solution of this equation is
x = C
3  q
2 + Baq
2b
2
+ ap
3b
3
- C
3 -q
2 + Baq
2b
2
+ ap
3b
3
.
e.	 Consider an arbitrary cubic equation
x3 + ax2 + bx + c = 0.
Show that the substitution x = y - a
3 allows you to write 
the cubic equation as
y3 + py = q.
	53.	 Use Cardano’s method to solve the equation  
x3 + 6x2 + 10x + 8 = 0. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 54–57, solve each equation.
	54.	 x2 + 2x = 0 
	55.	 2x2 + x - 3 = 0 
	56.	 x3 + 3x2 - 10x = 0
	57.	 x4 - x3 - 12x2 = 0
In Exercises 58–61, find the quotient Q(x) and remainder R(x).
	58.	 x3 - 3x + 1
x
 
	59.	 x2 - x - 4
x - 2
 
	60.	 x3 + 5
x2 + 3 
	61.	 8x4 + 6x3 - 5
2x3 + x
 
In Exercises 62–65, evaluate each expression for the given 
value of the variable.
	62.	
-3
2x + 1; x = 2 
	63.	
7 - x
2x2 + 3x; x = -1 
	64.	 2x + 3
5 - 2x2; x = -3 
	65.	 x2 + 4x - 1
9 - x3
; x = 2 
   
 
 
  

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 355
S e c t i o n 3.6
Rational Functions
Recall that a sum, difference, or product of two polynomial functions is also a polynomial 
function. However, the quotient of two polynomial functions is generally not a polynomial 
function. In this case, we call the quotient of two polynomial functions a rational function.
Federal Taxes and Revenues
Federal governments levy income taxes on their citizens and corporations to pay for 
defense, infrastructure, and social services. The relationship between tax rates and tax 
revenues shown in Figure 3.21 is a “revenue curve.”
All economists agree that a zero tax rate produces no tax revenues and that no 
one would bother to work with a 100% tax rate, so tax revenue would be zero. It then 
follows that in a given economy, there is some optimal tax rate T between zero and 
100% at which people are willing to maximize their output and still pay their taxes. This 
optimal rate brings in the most revenue for the government. However, because no one 
knows the actual shape of the revenue curve, it is impossible to find the exact value of T.
Notice in Figure 3.21 that between the two extreme rates are two rates (such as a 
and b in the figure) that will collect the same amount of revenue. In a democracy, poli-
ticians can argue that taxes are currently too high (at some point b in Figure 3.21) and 
should therefore be reduced to encourage incentives and harder work (this is supply-
side economics); at the same time, the government will generate more revenue. Others 
can argue that we are well to the left of T (at some point a in Figure 3.21), so the tax 
rate should be raised (for the rich) to generate more revenue. In Example 10, we sketch 
the graph of a revenue curve for a hypothetical economy.
Rational Functions
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Domain of a function (Section 2.4, 199)
2	 Zeros of a function (Section 3.2, 311)
3	 Quadratic formula (Section 1.2, 97)
Objectives
1	 Define a rational function.
2	 Define vertical and horizontal asymptotes.
3	 Graph translations of f1x2 = 1
x.
4	 Find vertical and horizontal asymptotes  
(if any).
5	 Graph rational functions.
6	 Graph rational functions with oblique 
asymptotes.
7	 Graph a revenue curve.
Figure 3.21  A revenue curve
a
T
b
100
5
15
25
35
45
55
y
x
O
Tax Rate (percent)
Tax Revenue (in billions of dollars)
1	
Define a rational function.

356	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Examples of rational functions are
f 1x2 = x - 1
2x + 1, g1y2 =
5y
y2 + 1, h1t2 = 3t2 - 4t + 1
t - 2
, and F 1z2 = 3z4 - 5z2 + 1.
1F 1z2 has the constant polynomial function D1z2 = 1 as its denominator.2 By contrast, 
S1x2 = 21 - x2
x + 1
 and G1x2 = 0 x0
x  are not rational functions.
A function f that can be expressed in the form
f 1x2 = N1x2
D1x2
where the numerator N1x2 and the denominator D1x2 are polynomials and D1x2 is 
not the zero polynomial, is called a rational function. The domain of f  consists of 
all real numbers for which D1x2 ≠0.
Rational Function
Find the domain of each rational function.
a.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 12
x - 1
b.	 g1x2 =
x
x2 - 6x + 8
c.	 h1x2 = x2 - 4
x - 2
Solution
We eliminate all x for which D1x2 = 0.
a.	 D1x2 = x - 1 = 0, if x = 1. The domain of f1x2 = 3x2 - 12
x - 1  is the set of all real 
	
numbers x except x = 1, or in interval notation, 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2.
b.	 The domain of g is the set of all real numbers x for which the denominator D1x2 is 
nonzero.
 D1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8 = 0	
Set D1x2 = 0.
 1x - 221x - 42 = 0	
Factor D1x2.
 x - 2 = 0 or x - 4 = 0	
Zero-product property
x = 2 or x = 4	
Solve for x.
	
The domain of g is the set of all real numbers x except 2 and 4, or in interval notation, 
1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, 42 ´ 14, ∞2.
c.	 The domain of h1x2 = x2 - 4
x - 2  is the set of all real numbers x except 2, or in interval 
	
notation, 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2.
Practice Problem 1  Find the domain of the rational function f1x2 =
x - 3
x2 - 4x - 5.
In Example 1, part c, note that the functions h1x2 = x2 - 4
x - 2 = 1x - 221x + 22
x - 2
 and 
H1x2 = x + 2 are not equal: The domain of H1x2 is the set of all real numbers, but the 
domain of h1x2 is the set of all real numbers x except 2. The graph of y = H1x2 is a line 
Finding the Domain of a Rational Function
EXAMPLE 1
The graph of a polynomial function 
has no holes, gaps, or sharp corners.
Recall

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 357
As with the quotient of integers, if the polynomials N1x2 and D1x2 have no common 
factors, then the rational function f1x2 = N1x2
D1x2 is said to be in lowest terms. The zeros of 
N1x2 and D1x2 will play an important role in graphing the rational function f.
Vertical and Horizontal Asymptotes
Consider the function f1x2 = 1
x, introduced in Section 2.6. We know that f102 is undefined, 
meaning that f  does not assign any value to x = 0. We examine more closely the behavior 
of f1x2 “near” the excluded value x = 0. Consider the following table.
x
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001
10-9
10-50
f1x2 = 1
x
1
10
100
1000
10,000
109
1050
We see that as x approaches 0 (with x 7 0), f1x2 increases without bound. In symbols, we 
write “as x S 0+, f1x2 S ∞.” This statement is read “As x approaches 0 from the right, 
f1x2 approaches infinity.”
The symbol x S a+, read “x approaches a from the right,” refers only to values of x 
near a that are greater than a. The symbol x S a- is read “x approaches a from the left” 
and refers only to values of x near a that are less than a.
For the function f1x2 = 1
x, we can make another table of values that includes negative 
values of x near zero, such as x = -1, -0.1, -0.001, c, -10-9. We can conclude that 
as x S 0-,  f1x2 S - ∞ and say that “as x approaches 0 from the left, f1x2 approaches nega-
tive infinity.”
The graph of f1x2 = 1
x is the reciprocal function from Chapter 2. (See Figure 3.23). 
The vertical line x = 0 (the y@axis) is a vertical asymptote.
3
1
1
2
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
y  h(x)  x2  4
x  2
3
1
1
2
4
2
0
0
2
4
6
x
y
y  H(x) = x + 2
Figure 3.22  Functions H1x2 and h1x2 have different graphs
2	
Define vertical and horizontal 
asymptotes.
1
“Small number” = “large number”
Side  
Note
Figure 3.23  Reciprocal function, 
f1x2 = 1
x
O
x
y
f(x)  1
x
The line x = a is called a vertical asymptote of the graph of a function f  if 
f1x2 S ∞ as x S a+ or as x S a- or if f1x2 S - ∞ as x S a + or as x S a -.
Vertical Asymptote
with slope 1 and y-intercept 2. The graph of y = h1x2 is the same line as y = H1x2,  
except that the point 12, 42 is missing. See Figure 3.22.

358	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
This definition says that if the line x = a is a vertical asymptote of the graph of a func-
tion f, then the graph of f  near x = a behaves like one of the graphs in Figure 3.24.
Figure 3.24  Behavior of a function near a vertical asymptote
y
x
a
O
As x      a, f(x)      
x  a
y
x
a
O
As x      a, f(x)     
x  a
O
a
y
x
x  a
O
a
y
x
x  a
If x = a is a vertical asymptote for the graph of a rational function f, then a is not in its 
domain. So the graph of f  does not cross the line x = a.
Consider again the function f1x2 = 1
x. The larger we make x, the closer 1
x is to 0. So as 
x S ∞, f1x2 = 1
x S 0. Similarly, as x S - ∞, f1x2 = 1
x S 0. The x-axis, with equation 
y = 0, is a horizontal asymptote of the graph of f1x2 = 1
x. (See Figure 3.23).
The line y = k is a horizontal asymptote of the graph of a function f  if f1x2 S k 
as x S ∞ or if f1x2 S k as x S - ∞.
Horizontal Asymptote
This definition says that if the line y = k is a horizontal asymptote of the graph of a 
function f, then the end behavior of the graph of f is similar to that of one of the graphs in 
Figure 3.25.
The graph of a function y = f1x2 can cross its horizontal asymptote (in contrast to a 
vertical asymptote). See Example 7, page 364.
y
x
y
x
k
k
y  k
y  k
Figure 3.25  End behavior of a function near a horizontal asymptote
1
“large number” = “Small number”
Side  
Note

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 359
Translations of f 1x2 = 1
x
We can graph any function of the form
g1x2 = ax + b
cx + d
starting with the graph of f1x2 = 1
x and using the techniques of vertical stretching and 
compressing, shifting, and/or reflecting.
3	
Graph translations of 
	
f1x2 = 1
x.
Graph each rational function, identify the vertical and horizontal asymptotes, and state 
the domain and range.
a.	 g1x2 =
-2
x + 1      b.	 h1x2 = 3x - 2
x - 1
Solution
a.	 Let f1x2 = 1
x. We can write g1x2 in terms of f1x2.
 g1x2 =
-2
x + 1
 = -2 a
1
x + 1b
 = -2 f1x + 12  Replace x with x + 1 in f1x2 = 1
x.
	
The graph of y = f1x + 12 is the graph of y = f1x2 shifted 1 unit to the left. This 
moves the vertical asymptote 1 unit to the left. The graph of y = -2 f1x + 12 is the 
graph of y = f1x + 12 stretched vertically 2 units and then reflected about the x-axis. 
The graph is shown in Figure 3.26. The domain of g is 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2, and 
the range is 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2. The graph has vertical asymptote x = -1 and  
horizontal asymptote y = 0 (the x-axis).
b.	 Using long division, we have
x - 1
3
)3x - 2
3x - 3
1
    h1x2 = 3 +
1
x - 1 =
1
x - 1 + 3
	
Then h1x2 = f1x - 12 + 3  Replace x with x - 1 in f1x2 = 1
x.
	
We see that the graph of y = h1x2 is the graph of f1x2 = 1
x shifted horizontally 
1 unit to the right and then vertically up 3 units. The graph is shown in Figure 3.27. The 
domain of h is 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2, and the range is 1- ∞, 32 ´ 13, ∞2. The graph of h 
has vertical asymptote x = 1 and horizontal asymptote y = 3.
Practice Problem 2  Repeat Example 2 with
a.	 g1x2 =
3
x - 2.      b.	 h1x2 = 2x + 5
x + 1 .
Graphing Rational Functions Using Translations
EXAMPLE 2
Figure 3.26  Graph of 
g1x2 =
-2
x + 1
2
4
1
2
3
4
2
1
4
2
3
1
(0, 2)
(2, 2)
4
y
x
0
x  1
Figure 3.27  Graph of 
h1x2 = 3x - 2
x - 1
4
8
2
4
6
8
4
2
8
6
4
6
2
8
y
x
0
x  1
y  3

360	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
This means that the vertical asymptotes (if any) are found by locating the real zeros of the 
denominator.
L o c at i n g  V e r t i c a l  A s y m p t o t e s  
o f  R at i o n a l  F u n c t i o n s
If f1x2 = N1x2
D1x2 is a rational function, where N1x2 and D1x2 do not have a common 
factor and a is a real zero of D1x2, then the line with equation x = a is a vertical 
asymptote of the graph of f.
4	
Find vertical and horizontal 
asymptotes (if any).
Calculator graph for
h1x2 = x2 - 9
x - 3
Technology
Connection
A calculator graph does not show 
the hole in the graph, but a calcula-
tor table explains the situation.
5
4
5
8
Find all vertical asymptotes of the graph of each rational function.
a.	 f1x2 =
1
x - 1      b.	 g1x2 =
1
x2 - 9      c.	 h1x2 =
1
x2 + 1
Solution
a.	 There are no common factors in the numerator and denominator of f1x2 =
1
x - 1, 
	
and the only zero of the denominator is 1. Therefore, x = 1 is a vertical asymptote  
of f1x2.
b.	 The rational function g1x2 is in lowest terms. Factoring x2 - 9 = 1x + 321x - 32, 
we see that the zeros of the denominator are -3 and 3. Therefore, the lines x = -3 
and x = 3 are the two vertical asymptotes of g1x2.
c.	 Because the denominator x2 + 1 has no real zeros, the graph of h1x2 has no vertical 
asymptotes.
Practice Problem 3  Find the vertical asymptotes of the graph of:
f1x2 =
x + 1
x2 + 3x - 10.
The next example illustrates that the graph of a rational function may have gaps (miss-
ing points) with or without vertical asymptotes.
Finding Vertical Asymptotes
EXAMPLE 3
Find all vertical asymptotes of the graph of each rational function.
a.	 h1x2 = x2 - 9
x - 3       b.	 g1x2 = x + 2
x2 - 4
Solution
a.	 h1x2 = x2 - 9
x - 3 	
Given function
= 1x + 321x - 32
x - 3
	
Factor the numerator: x2 - 9 = 1x + 321x - 32.
= x + 3, if x ≠3	
Simplify.
	
The graph of h1x2 is the line y = x + 3 with a gap (or hole) at x = 3. See  
Figure 3.28.
Rational Functions Whose Graphs Have a Hole
EXAMPLE 4
2
7
5
3
1
0
1
5
5
1
x
y
(3, 6)
y  h(x)
Figure 3.28  Graph with a hole

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 361
	
	
The graph of h1x2 has no vertical asymptote at x = 3, the zero of the denomina-
tor, because the numerator and the denominator have the common factor 1x - 32, 
both with multiplicity 1.
b.	 g1x2 = x + 2
x2 - 4	
Given function
=
x + 2
1x + 221x - 22	
Factor the denominator.
=
1
x - 2, x ≠-2	
Simplify.
The graph of g1x2 has a hole at x = -2 and a vertical asymptote x = 2. See Figure 3.29.
Practice Problem 4  Find all vertical asymptotes of the graph of f1x2 = 3 - x
x2 - 9.
The graph of g1x2 = x + 2
x2 - 4, shown in Figure 3.29, has a horizontal asymptote: 
y = 0. This can be verified algebraically. Divide the numerator and the denominator of g 
by x2, the highest power of x in the denominator.
 g1x2 = x + 2
x2 - 4 =
x + 2
x2
x2 - 4
x2
 =
x
x2 + 2
x2
x2
x2 - 4
x2
	
a { b
c
= a
c { b
c
 =
1
x + 2
x2
1 - 4
x2
	
Simplify each expression.
As x S { ∞, the expressions 1
x, 2
x2, and 4
x2 all approach 0; so
g1x2 S 0 + 0
1 - 0 = 0
1 = 0.
Because g1x2 S 0 as x S { ∞, the line y = 0 (the x-axis) is a horizontal asymptote.
Figure 3.29  Graph with a hole 
and an asymptote
1
0
3
5
3
1
1
3
y
y  g(x)
x
(2, 1/4)
Graphing calculators give very different graphs for
g1x2 =
1
x2 - 9
depending on whether the mode is set to connected or dot.
In connected mode, the calculator connects the dots between 
plotted points, producing vertical lines at x = -3 and x = 3. 
Dot mode avoids graphing these vertical lines by plotting the 
same points but not connecting them. However, dot mode fails 
to display continuous sections of the graph.
Technology
Connection
Dot mode
Connected mode
4
4
3
3
3
4
4
3

362	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Note that although a rational function can have more than one vertical asymptote (see 
Example 6), it can have, at most, one horizontal asymptote. We can find the horizontal 
asymptote (if any) of a rational function by dividing the numerator and denomina-
tor by the highest power of x that appears in the denominator and investigating the 
resulting expression as x u t H.
Alternatively, one may use the following rules.
Find the horizontal asymptote (if any) of the graph of each rational function.
a.	 f1x2 = 5x + 2
1 - 3x        b.  g1x2 =
2x
x2 + 1        c.  h1x2 = 3x2 - 1
x + 2
Solution
a.	 The numerator and denominator of f1x2 = 5x + 2
1 - 3x are both of degree 1. The leading 
	
coefficient of the numerator is 5, and that of the denominator is -3. By Rule 2, the 
	
line y =
5
-3 = -5
3 is the horizontal asymptote of the graph of f.
b.	 For the function g1x2 =
2x
x2 + 1, the degree of the numerator is 1 and that of the 
	
denominator is 2. By Rule 1, the line y = 0 (the x-axis) is the horizontal asymptote.
c.	 The degree of the numerator, 2, of h1x2 is greater than the degree of its denominator, 1. 
By Rule 3, the graph of h has no horizontal asymptote.
Practice Problem 5  Find the horizontal asymptote (if any) of the graph of each function.
a.	 f1x2 = 2x - 5
3x + 4      b.  g1x2 = x2 + 3
x - 1       c.  h1x2 =
100x + 57
0.01x3 + 8x - 9
Finding the Horizontal Asymptote
EXAMPLE 5
R u l e s  F o r  L o c at i n g  H o r i z o n ta l  A s y m p t o t e s
Let f  be a rational function given by
f1x2 =
N1x2
D1x2 = an xn + an-1xn-1 + g + a2x2 + a1x + a0
bm xm + bm-1xm-1 + g + b2x2 + b1x + b0
, an ≠0, bm ≠0.
To find whether the graph of f has one horizontal asymptote or no horizontal asymptote, 
we compare the degree of the numerator, n, with that of the denominator, m:
1.	 If n 6 m, then the x-axis 1y = 02 is the horizontal asymptote.
2.	 If n = m, then the line with equation y = an
bm
 is the horizontal asymptote.
3.	 If n 7 m, then the graph of f  has no horizontal asymptote.

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 363
Graphing Rational Functions
In the next procedure, we assume the rational function is in lowest terms. When this is 
not the case, reduce the function to the lowest terms, and plot the “hole” for the factor (or 
­factors) that are divided out.
5	
Graph rational functions.
Graph f1x2 = N1x2
D1x2.
Step 0  Plot a hole. Remove any common factor(s) 
such as x - a of N1x2 and D1x2.
Step 1  Find the intercepts. Because f is in lowest 
terms, the x-intercepts are found by solving the equa-
tion N1x2 = 0. The y-intercept, if there is one, is f102.
Step 2  Find the vertical asymptotes (if any). 
Solve D1x2 = 0 to find the vertical asymptotes of the 
graph. Sketch the vertical asymptotes.
Step 3  Find the horizontal asymptote (if any). 
Use the rules on page 362 for finding the horizontal  
asymptote.
Sketch the graph of f1x2 = 2x2 - 2
x2 - 9 .
0.	There is no common factor of the form x - a  
for 2x2 - 2 and x2 - 9.
1.  		
2x2 - 2 = 0	
Set N1x2 = 0.
	
 21x - 121x + 12 = 0 	
Factor.
	
 x - 1 = 0 or x + 1 = 0 	
Zero-product 
property
	
 x = 1 or   x = -1	
Solve for x.
The x-intercepts are -1 and 1, so the graph passes 
through the points 1-1, 02 and 11, 02.
 f102 =
21022 - 2
1022 - 9     Replace x with 0 in f1x2.
 = 2
9
    Simplify.
The y-intercept is 2
9, so the graph of f passes through 
the point a0, 2
9b.
2.	
x2 - 9 = 0	
Set D1x2 = 0.
	
 1x - 321x + 32 = 0 	
Factor.
	
 x - 3 = 0 or x + 3 = 0 	
Zero-product 
property
 x = 3 or 
x = -3	
Solve for x.
The vertical asymptotes of the graph of f  are the 
lines x = -3 and x = 3.
3.	Because n = m = 2, by Rule 2, the horizontal  
asymptote is
y = Leading coefficient of N1x2
Leading coefficient of D1x2 = 2
1 = 2.
Graphing a Rational Function
Objective
EXAMPLE 6
Example
(continued)
Procedure  
in Action

364	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Practice Problem 6  Sketch the graph of f1x2 =
2x
x2 - 1.
Notice that the rational function g1x2 = 2x3 - 2x
x3 - 9x  reduces to f1x2 of Example 6. The 
graph of g is identical to the graph of f with one exception: The graph of g has a “hole” at 
10, 2>92, because 0 is not in the domain of g.
Sketch the graph of f1x2 =
x2 + 2
1x + 221x - 12.
Solution
Step 0 
f1x2 is in lowest terms.
Step 1  Because x2 + 2 7 0, the graph has no x@intercepts.
 f102 =
02 + 2
10 + 2210 - 12    Replace x with 0 in f1x2.
 = -1
    Simplify.
	
The y-intercept is -1.
Step 2  Set 1x + 221x - 12 = 0. Solving for x, we have x = -2 or x = 1. The 
vertical asymptotes are the lines x = -2 and x = 1.
Graphing a Rational Function
EXAMPLE 7
4.	 So f1x2 = 2x2 - 2
x2 - 9     Using long division: 
2
 
x2 - 9)2x2 - 2
2x2 - 18
16
= 2 +
16
x2 - 9; R1x2 = 16 has no zeros, and D1x2 
has zeros -3 and 3. These zeros divide the x-axis into three 
intervals. See the figure. We choose test points 
-4, 0, and 4 to determine the sign of 
16
x2 - 9.
5.	
0
3
3
6
6
2
2
y
x
(2, 6/5)
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
(4, 30/7)
(4, 30/7)
(2, 6/5)
(0, 2/9)


 

3
4
0
3
(,3)
(3, )
(3, 3)
4
Above  y  2
Above  y  2
Below  y  2
undefined
undefined
Graph
of f
sign of
16
x2 – 9
Step 4  Locate the graph relative to the  
horizontal asymptote (if any). If y = k is a  
horizontal asymptote, divide N1x2 by D1x2 and 
write f1x2 = N1x2
D1x2 = k + R1x2
D1x2. Use a sign graph 
for f1x2 - k = R1x2
D1x2 and test numbers associated 
with the zeros of R1x2 and D1x2 to determine  
intervals where the graph of f is above the asymptote 
y = k, 1 f1x2 - k is positive2 and where it is below 
y = k, 1 f1x2 - k is negative2. The graph of f  
intersects the line y = k if f1x2 - k = 0.
Step 5  Sketch the graph. Plot some points and 
graph the asymptotes found in Steps 1–4. Plot “holes” 
in the graph at x = a from Step 0.

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 365
Step 3  We have (x + 2)(x - 1) = x2 + x - 2, so f1x2 =
x2 + 2
x2 + x - 2. By Rule 2, 
page 362 , the horizontal asymptote is y = 1
1 = 1, because the leading coefficient 
for both the numerator and the denominator is 1.
Step 4  By long division (see margin), 
f1x2 =
x2 + 2
1x + 221x - 12 = 1 +
4 - x
1x + 221x - 12; R1x2 = 4 - x has one 
zero, 4, and D1x2 = 1x + 221x - 12 has two zeros, -2 and 1. These three 
zeros divide the x-axis into four intervals. See the figure. We choose test points 
-3, 0, 2, and 5 to determine the sign of f 1x2 - 1 =
4 - x
1x + 221x - 12.
1 
x2 + x - 2)x2 + 0x + 2
x2 +  x - 2
       -x + 4
         

1
0
0
2
3
1
(,2)
(2, 1)
(1, 4)
(4, )
Above  y  1
f(x)1 
undefined
undefined
intersects
y  1
Graph
of f
Sign of
Above  y  1
Below  y  1
Below  y  1
4  x
Sx  2DSx  1D
2
1
4
5
Step 5  The graph of f  is shown in Figure 3.30.
Practice Problem 7  Sketch the graph of f1x2 =
2x2 - 1
2x2 + x - 3.
Graphing a rational function is more complicated than graphing a polynomial function. Plotting 
a larger number of points and checking to see if the function crosses its horizontal asymptote 
(if any) gives additional detail. Notice that in Figure 3.30 the graph of f crosses the horizontal 
asymptote y = 1. To find this point of intersection, set f1x2 = 1 and solve for x.
 
x2 + 2
x2 + x - 2 = 1	
Set f1x2 = 1; 1x + 221x - 12 = x2 + x - 2
 x2 + 2 = x2 + x - 2	
Multiply both sides by x2 + x - 2.
 x = 4
	
Solve for x.
The graph of f  crosses the horizontal asymptote at the point 14, 12.
We know that the graphs of polynomial functions are continuous (all in one piece). The 
next example shows that the graph of a rational function (other than a polynomial function) 
can also be continuous.
Figure 3.30  Graph crossing horizontal 
asymptote
6
4
2
2
0
4
(4, 1)
(0, 1)
(2, 3/2)
(3, 11/4)
6
6
4
2
2
4
6
y
x
f(x)  
x2 + 2
(x + 2)(x  1)
Sketch a graph of f1x2 =
x2
x2 + 1.
Solution
Step 0 
f1x2 is in lowest terms.
Step 1  Now f102 = 0 and solving f1x2 = 0 gives x = 0. Therefore, 0 is both the 
x-intercept and the y-intercept for the graph of f.
Step 2  Because x2 + 1 7 0 for all x, there are no real zeros for the denominator, so 
there are no vertical asymptotes.
Graphing a Rational Function
EXAMPLE 8

366	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Oblique Asymptotes
Suppose
f1x2 = N1x2
D1x2
and the degree of N1x2 is greater than the degree of D1x2. We know from Rule 3 on page 362  
that the graph of f has no horizontal asymptote. Use either long division or synthetic divi-
sion to obtain
f1x2 = N1x2
D1x2 = Q1x2 + R1x2
D1x2,
where the degree of R1x2 is less than the degree of D1x2. Rule 1 on page 362 tells us 
that as x S ∞ or as x S - ∞, the expression R1x2
D1x2 S 0.
Therefore, as x S { ∞,
f1x2 S Q1x2 + 0 = Q1x2.
This means that as 0 x0  gets very large, the graph of f  behaves like the graph of the polyno-
mial Q1x2. If the degree of N1x2 is exactly one more than the degree of D1x2, then Q1x2 
will have the linear form mx + b. In this case, the graph of f is said to have an oblique (or 
slant) asymptote. Consider, for example, the function
f1x2 = x2 + x
x - 1 = x + 2 +
2
x - 1.    Use long division; see margin.
Now as x S {∞, the expression 
2
x - 1 S 0 so that the graph of f  approaches the graph 
of the oblique asymptote—the line y = x + 2, as shown in Figure 3.32. The graph of f is 
above the line y = x + 2 on 11, ∞2 and below it on 1- ∞, 12.
6	
Graph rational functions with 
oblique asymptotes.
x + 2 
x - 1)x2 + x 
x2 - x 
     2x
2x - 2 
        2
Figure 3.32  Graph with vertical and 
oblique asymptotes
3
3
5
7
2
2
0
4
6
8
y
x
Vertical asymptote
Oblique asymptote
y  x  2
x  1
f(x)  x2 + x
x  1
Sketch the graph of f1x2 = x2 - 4
x + 1 .
Solution
Step 0 
f1x2 is in lowest terms.
Step 1  Intercepts: f102 = 0 - 4
0 + 1 = -4, so the y-intercept is -4. Set x2 - 4 = 0. 
We have x = -2 and x = 2, so the x-intercepts are -2 and 2.
Graphing a Rational Function with an Oblique Asymptote
EXAMPLE 9
Figure 3.31  A continuous rational 
function
1
2
3
1
0
2
y
x
Horizontal
asymptote
y = 1
Step 3  By Rule 2 for locating horizontal asymptotes, the horizontal asymptote is y = 1.
Step 4  By long division (see margin), f1x2 =
x2
x2 + 1 = 1 +
-1
x2 + 1. Neither 
R1x2 = -1 nor D1x2 = x2 + 1 have real zeros. Because 
-1
x2 + 1 is negative 
for all values of x, the graph of f is always below the line y = 1.
Step 5  The graph of y = f1x2 is shown in Figure 3.31.
Practice Problem 8  Sketch the graph of f1x2 = x2 + 1
x2 + 2.
  1
x2 + 1 )x2   
x2 + 1
     -1

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 367
Step 4  Location: Use the intervals determined by the zeros of the numerator and of
the denominator of f 1x2 - 1x - 12 = x2 - 4
x + 1 - 1x - 12 =
-3
x + 1 to create
a sign graph. The numerator, -3, has no zero, and the denominator, x + 1, has one 
zero, -1. The zero, -1, divides the x-axis into two intervals. See the figure. We 
choose test points  -3 and 0 to determine the sign of f 1x2 - 1x - 12 =
-3
x + 1.
       
       
0
1
(,1)
(1, )
3
Above  y  x1
Below  y  x1
Graph
of f
3
x  1
Sign of
The graph is above the line y = x - 1 on 1- ∞, 12 and below it on 1-1, ∞2.
Step 5  The graph of f  is shown in Figure 3.33.
Practice Problem 9  Sketch the graph of f1x2 = x2 + 2
x - 1 .
Graph of a Revenue Curve
x - 1 
x + 1)x2 + 0x - 4
x2 +
x
-x - 4
-x - 1
      - 3
Figure 3.33 
6 4
2
4
y  x 1
x  1
6
4
2
0
4
6
y
x
Vertical
asymptote
Oblique
asymptote
f(x)  x2  4
x + 1
(1.5, 3.5)
(3, 2.5)
(3, 1.25)
7	
Graph a revenue curve.
The revenue curve for an economy of a country is given by
R1x2 = x1100 - x2
x + 10
,
where x is the tax rate in percent and R1x2 is the tax revenue in billions of dollars.
a.	 Find and interpret R1102, R1202, R1302, R1402, R1502, and R1602.
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = R1x2 for 0 … x … 100.
c.	 Use a graphing calculator to estimate the tax rate that yields the maximum revenue.
Solution
a.	 R1102 = 101100 - 102
10 + 10
= +45 billion. This means that if the income is taxed at the 
	
rate of 10%, the total revenue for the government will be $45 billion.
 Similarly, R1202 ≈+53.3 billion,
 R1302 = +52.5 billion,
 R1402 = +48  billion,
 R1502 ≈+41.7 billion, and
 R1602 ≈+34.3 billion.
Graphing a Revenue Curve
EXAMPLE 10
Step 2  Vertical asymptotes: Set x + 1 = 0. We get x = -1, so the line x = -1 is 
a vertical asymptote.
Step 3  Asymptotes: Since the degree of the numerator is greater than the degree of the de-
nominator, f1x2 has no horizontal asymptote. However, by long division see margin,
f1x2 = x2 - 4
x + 1 = x - 1 +
-3
x + 1 = x - 1 -
3
x + 1.
As x S { ∞, the expression 
3
x + 1 S 0; so the line y = x - 1 is an oblique 
asymptote: The graph gets close to the line y = x - 1 as x S ∞ and as x S - ∞. 

368	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
b.	 The graph of the function y = R1x2 for 0 … x … 100 is shown in Figure 3.34.
Figure 3.34 
23
50
0
100
5
15
25
35
45
55
y
x
Tax rate (percent)
Tax revenue (in billions of dollars)
R(x)  x (100  x)
x + 10
c.	 From the calculator graph of
Y = 100x - x2
x + 10 ,
using the TRACE feature, you can see that the tax rate of about 23% produces the maxi-
mum tax revenue of about $53.7 billion for the government.
Practice Problem 10  Repeat Example 10 for R1x2 = x1100 - x2
x + 20
.
TRACE
y = 100x - x2
x + 10
to approximate the maximum 
revenue.
Technology
Connection
0
0
100
65
Answers to Practice Problems
1. Domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 52 ´ 15, ∞2
2. a. Domain: 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2; range: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2;  
Vertical asymptote: x = 2; horizontal asymptote: y = 0
0
1
3
5
1
3
5
x
y
b. Domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2; range: 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2; 
vertical asymptote: x = -1; horizontal asymptote: y = 2
0
1
3
5
1
3
5
x
y
3. x = -5 and x = 2    4. x = -3    5. a. y = 2
3
b. No horizontal asymptote  c. y = 0
6. x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; vertical asymptotes: x = -1 
and x = 1; horizontal asymptote: x-axis. The graph is above 
the x-axis on 1-1, 02 ´ 11, ∞2 and below the x-axis on 
1- ∞, -12 ´ 10, 12.
3
1
5
0
3
11
3
5
1
3
5
5
x
y
7. x-intercepts: { 12
2 ; y-intercept: 1
3; vertical asymptotes: x = - 3
2 
and x = 1; horizontal asymptote: y = 1; The graph is above the 
line y = 1 on a- ∞, - 3
2b ´ 11, ∞2 and below it on a- 3
2, 1b. 
The graph crosses the horizontal 12, 12.
0
1
3
(2, 1)
5
1
3
5
x
y

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 369
8. No x-intercept; y-intercept: 1
2; no vertical asymptote; horizontal 
asymptote: y = 1. The graph is below the line y = 1 on 
1- ∞, ∞2.
x
0
1
1
3
5
3
5
0.5
1
1.5
y
9. No x-intercept; y-intercept:-2; vertical asymptote: x = 1; no 
horizontal asymptote; y = x + 1 is an oblique asymptote. The 
graph is above the line y = x + 1 on 11, ∞2 and below it on 
1- ∞, 12.
4
8
2
6
10
4
8
2
6
10
0
1
3
5
7
1
3
5
y
x
10. a. R1102 = +30 billion
R1202 = +40 billion
R1302 = +42 billion
R1402 = +40 billion
R1502 = +35.7 billion
R1602 = +30 billion
b. 
20
40
60
80 100
10
0
20
30
40
x
y
c. 29%
Exercises
section 3.6 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 A rational function can be expressed in the form 
.
	2.	 The line x = a is a vertical asymptote of f if 0 f1x20 S ∞ as 
x S  
 or as x S  
.
	3.	 The line y = k is a horizontal asymptote of f if f1x2 S k as 
x S  
 or as x S  
.
	4.	 If an asymptote is neither horizontal nor vertical, then it is 
called a(n) 
.
	5.	 True or False. Every rational function has at least one  
vertical asymptote. 
	6.	 True or False. Every rational function has, at most, one 
horizontal asymptote. 
In Exercises 7–14, find the domain of each rational function.
	7.	 f1x2 = x - 3
x + 4
	8.	 f1x2 = x + 1
x - 1
	9.	 g1x2 = x - 1
x2 + 1
	10.	 g1x2 = x + 2
x2 + 4 
	11.	 h1x2 =
x - 3
x2 - x - 6
	12.	 h1x2 =
x - 7
x2 - 6x - 7
	13.	 F1x2 =
2x + 3
x2 - 6x + 8
	14.	 F1x2 =
3x - 2
x2 - 3x + 2
In Exercises 15–24, use the graph of the rational function 
f 1x2 to complete each statement.
2
2
4
4
4
y
y  f(x)
x
0
4
	15.	 As x S 1+,  f1x2 S  
. 
	16.	 As x S 1-,  f1x2 S  
.                  

370	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
	17.	 As x S -2+, f1x2 S  
. 
	18.	 As x S -2-, f1x2 S  
. 
	19.	 As x S ∞, f1x2 S  
. 
	20.	 As x S - ∞, f1x2 S  
. 
	21.	 The domain of f1x2 is 
.
	22.	 There are 
 vertical asymptotes. 
	23.	 The equations of the vertical asymptotes of the graph are  
 and 
.
	24.	 The equation of the horizontal asymptote of the graph  
is 
.
In Exercises 25–32, graph each rational function as a 
translation of f 1x2 = 1
x. Identify the vertical and horizontal 
asymptotes and state the domain and rage.
	25.	 f1x2 =
3
x - 4 
	26.	 g1x2 =
-4
x + 3 
	27.	 f1x2 =
-x
3x + 1 
	28.	 g1x2 =
2x
4x - 2 
	29.	 g1x2 = -3x + 2
x + 2 
	30.	 f1x2 = -x + 1
x - 3 
	31.	 g1x2 = 5x - 3
x - 4 
	32.	 f1x2 = 2x + 12
x + 5 
In Exercises 33–42, find the vertical asymptotes, if any, of the 
graph of each rational function.
	33.	 f1x2 =
x
x - 1 
	34.	 f1x2 = x + 3
x - 2 
	35.	 g1x2 =
1x + 1212x - 22
1x - 321x + 42 
	36.	 g1x2 =
12x - 121x + 22
12x + 3213x - 42 
	37.	 h1x2 =
x2 - 1
x2 + x - 6
	38.	 h1x2 =
x2 - 4
3x2 + x - 4
	39.	 f1x2 = x2 - 6x + 8
x2 - x - 12
	40.	 f1x2 = x2 - 9
x3 - 4x
	41.	 g1x2 =
2x + 1
x2 + x + 1
	42.	 g1x2 =
x2 - 36
x2 + 5x + 9
In Exercises 43–50, find the horizontal asymptote, if any, of 
the graph of each rational function.
	43.	 f1x2 = x + 1
x2 + 5 
	44.	 f1x2 = 2x - 1
x2 - 4 
	45.	 g1x2 = 2x - 3
3x + 5 
	46.	 g1x2 =
3x + 4
-4x + 5 
	47.	 h1x2 = x2 - 49
x + 7
	48.	 h1x2 = x + 3
x2 - 9 
	49.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x + 7
3x3 + 5x + 11
	50.	 f1x2 =
3x3 + 2
x2 + 5x + 11
In Exercises 51–56, match the rational function with its graph.
	51.	 f1x2 =
2
x - 3 
	52.	 f1x2 = x - 2
x + 3 
	53.	 f1x2 =
1
x2 - 2x 
	54.	 f1x2 =
x
x2 + 1 
	55.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x
x - 3 
	56.	 f1x2 =
x2
x2 - 4 
a.	
10
2
y
10
0
20
30
x
(a)
b.	
y
1
2
x
1
2
3
(b)
c.	
2
4
2
4
y
0
x
(c)
d.	
4
6
8
1
3
5
2
x
y
(d)
e.	
2
0
3
1
5
4
x
y
(e)
f.	
2
4
6
4
6
y
0
x
2
2
4
6
8
(f)
In Exercises 57–72, use the six-step procedure on pages 363–364 
to graph each rational function.
	57.	 f1x2 =
2x
x - 3 
	58.	 f1x2 =
-x
x - 1 
	59.	 f1x2 =
x
x2 - 4 
	60.	 f1x2 =
x
1 - x2 
	61.	 h1x2 =
-2x2
x2 - 9 
	62.	 h1x2 = 4 - x2
x2                  

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 371
	63.	 f1x2 =
2
x2 - 2 
	64.	 f1x2 =
-2
x2 - 3 
	65.	 g1x2 =
x + 1
1x - 221x + 32
	66.	 g1x2 =
x - 1
1x + 121x - 22
	67.	 h1x2 =
x2
x2 + 1 
	68.	 h1x2 =
2x2
x2 + 4 
	69.	 f1x2 = x3 - 4x
x3 - 9x 
	70.	 f1x2 = x3 + 32x
x3 + 8x 
	71.	 g1x2 =
1x - 222
x - 2 
	72.	 g1x2 =
1x - 122
x - 1 
In Exercises 73–76, find an equation of a rational function 
having the given asymptotes, intercepts, and graph.
73.	
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
4
6
2
4
y
x
0
74.	
2
4
1
2
3
4
2
1
4
2
4
y
x
0
1
2
75.	
2
4
1
2
3
4
2
4
2
4
6
y
x
0
76.	
2
4
2
3
4
2
4
2
3
4
6
y
x
0
In Exercises 77–84, find the oblique asymptote and sketch the 
graph of each rational function.
	77.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 1
x 
	78.	 f1x2 = x2 - 1
x 
	79.	 g1x2 = x3 - 1
x2 
	80.	 g1x2 = 2x3 + x2 + 1
x2 
	81.	 h1x2 = x2 - x + 1
x + 1 
	82.	 h1x2 = 2x2 - 3x + 2
x - 1 
	83.	 f1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + 1
x2 - 1 
	84.	 h1x2 = x3 - 1
x2 - 4 
Applying the Concepts
For Exercises 85 and 86, use the following definition: Given a 
cost function C, the average cost of producing the first x items is 
found by the formula:
C1x2 =
C1x2
x
, x 7 0.
	85.	 Average cost. The Genuine Trinket Co. manufactures 
“authentic” trinkets for gullible tourists. Fixed daily costs are 
$2000, and it costs $0.50 to produce each trinket.
a.	 Write the cost function C for producing x trinkets.
b.	 Write the average cost C of producing x trinkets.
c.	 Find and interpret C11002, C15002, and C110002. 
d.	 Find and interpret the horizontal asymptote of the rational 
function C1x2. 
	86.	 Average cost. The monthly cost C of producing  
x portable CD players is given by
C1x2 = -0.002x2 + 6x + 7000.
a.	 Write the average cost function C1x2. 
b.	 Find and interpret C11002, C15002, and C110002. 
c.	 Find and interpret the oblique asymptote of C1x2. 
	87.	 	Biology: birds collecting seeds. A bird is collecting seed 
from a field that contains 100 grams of seed. The bird  
collects x grams of seed in t minutes, where
t = f1x2 = 4x + 1
100 - x, 0 6 x 6 100.
a.	 Sketch the graph of t = f1x2. 
b.	 How long does it take the bird to collect
	 (i)  50 grams? 
	(ii)  75 grams? 
	(iii)  95 grams? 
	(iv)  99 grams? 
c.	 Complete the following statements if applicable:
	 (i)  As x S 100-,  f1x2 S  
.
	(ii)  As x S 100+,  f1x2 S  
. 
d.	 Does the bird ever collect all of the seed from the field? 
	88.	 Criminology. Suppose Las Vegas decides to be crime-free. 
The estimated cost of catching and convicting x% of the 
criminals is given by
C1x2 =
1000
100 - x million dollars.
a.	 Find and interpret C1502, C1752, C1902, and C1992. 
b.	 Sketch a graph of C1x2, 0 … x 6 100. 
c.	 What happens to C1x2 as x S 100-? 
d.	 What percentage of the criminals can be caught and  
convicted for $30 million? 
	89.	 Environment. Suppose an environmental agency decides to 
get rid of the impurities from the water of a polluted river. The 
estimated cost of removing x% of the impurities is given by
C1x2 =
3x2 + 50
x1100 - x2 billion dollars.
a.	 How much will it cost to remove 50% of the impurities?
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = C1x2. 
c.	 Estimate the percentage of the impurities that can be 
removed at a cost of $30 billion.      	 

372	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
	 90.	 Biology. The growth function g1x2 describes the  
growth rate of organisms as a function of some nutrient  
concentration x. Suppose
g1x2 = a 
x
k + x, x Ú 0,
	
	 where a and k are positive constants.
a.	 Find the horizontal asymptote of the graph of g1x2. Use 
the asymptote to explain why a is called the saturation 
level of the nutrient. 
b.	 Show that k is the half-saturation constant; that is, show 
	
that if x = k, then g1x2 = a
2.
	 91.	 Population of bacteria. The population P (in thousands) 
of a colony of bacteria at time t (in hours) is given by
P1t2 = 8t + 16
2t + 1 , t Ú 0.
a.	 Find the initial population of the colony. (Find the  
population at t = 0 hours.) 
b.	 What is the long-term behavior of the population? (What 
happens when t S ∞?) 
	 92.	 Drug concentration. The concentration c (in milligrams 
per liter) of a drug in the bloodstream of a patient at time 
t Ú 0 (in hours since the drug was injected) is given by
c1t2 =
5t
t2 + 1, t Ú 0.
a.	 By plotting points or by using a graphing calculator, 
sketch the graph of y = c1t2. 
b.	 Find and interpret the horizontal asymptote of the graph 
of y = c1t2. 
c.	 Find the approximate time when the concentration of 
drug in the bloodstream is maximal. 
d.	 At what time is the concentration level equal to 2 mil-
ligrams per liter? 
	 93.	 Book publishing. The printing and binding cost for a  
college algebra book is $10. The editorial cost is $200,000. 
The first 2500 books are samples and are given free to  
professors. Let x be the number of college algebra books 
produced.
a.	 Write a function f describing the average cost of saleable 
books. 
b.	 Find the average cost of a saleable book if 10,000 books 
are produced. 
c.	 How many books must be produced to bring the average 
cost of a saleable book under $20? 
d.	 Find the vertical and horizontal asymptotes of the  
graph of y = f1x2. How are they related to this  
situation? 
	 94.	 A “phony” sale. A jewelry merchant at a local mall  
wants to have a “p percent off” sale. She marks up the  
stock by q percent to break even with respect to the prices 
before the sale.
a.	 Show that q =
p
1 - p, 0 6 p 6 1.
b.	 Sketch the graph of q in part (a). 
c.	 How much should she mark up the stock to break even if 
she wants to have a “25% off” sale? 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 95–104, use transformations of the graph of 
y = 1
x or y = 1
x2 to graph each rational function f 1x2.
	 95.	 f1x2 = - 2
x 
	 96.	 f1x2 =
1
2 - x 
	 97.	 f1x2 =
1
1x - 222 
	 98.	 f1x2 =
1
x2 + 2x + 1 
	 99.	 f1x2 =
1
1x - 122 - 2 
	100.	 f1x2 =
1
1x + 222 + 3 
	101.	 f1x2 =
1
x2 + 12x + 36 
	102.	 f1x2 = 3x2 + 18x + 28
x2 + 6x + 9
	103.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2x + 2
x2 - 2x + 1 
	104.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 4x - 3
x2 + 2x + 1 
	105.	 Sketch and discuss the graphs of the rational functions of 
	
	 the form y = a
xn, where a is a nonzero real number and  
	
	 n is a positive integer, in the following cases:
a.	 a 7 0 and n is odd. 
b.	 a 6 0 and n is odd. 
c.	 a 7 0 and n is even. 
d.	 a 6 0 and n is even. 
	106.	 Graphing the reciprocal of a polynomial function. 
	
	 Let f1x2 be a polynomial function and g1x2 =
1
f1x2. Justify 
	
	 the following statements about the graphs of f1x2 and g1x2.
a.	 If c is a zero of f1x2, then x = c is a vertical asymptote 
of the graph of g1x2. 
b.	 If f1x2 7 0, then g1x2 7 0, and if f1x2 6 0, then 
g1x2 6 0. 
c.	 The graphs of f and g intersect for those values (and only 
those values) of x for which f1x2 =  g1x2 = {1. 
d.	 When f is increasing (decreasing, constant) on an inter-
val of its domain, g is decreasing (increasing, constant) 
on that interval. 
	107.	 Use Exercise 106 to sketch the graphs of f1x2 = x2 - 4 
	
	 and g1x2 =
1
x2 - 4 on the same coordinate axes. 
	108.	 Use Exercise 106 to sketch the graphs of f1x2 = x2 + 1 
	
	 and g1x2 =
1
x2 + 1 on the same coordinate axes. 
	109.	 Recall that the inverse of a function f1x2 is written as 
f -11x2, while the reciprocal of f1x2 can be written as either 
	
	
1
f1x2 or 3f1x24 -1. The point of this exercise is to make clear 
	
	 that the reciprocal of a function has nothing to do with 
the inverse of a function. Let f1x2 = 2x + 3. Find both 
3f1x24 -1 and f -11x2. Compare the two functions. Graph all 
three functions on the same coordinate axes. 
	110.	 Let f1x2 = x - 1
x + 2. Find 3f1x24 -1 and f -11x2. Graph all 
	
	 three functions on the same coordinate axes.  

	
Section 3.6    ■    Rational Functions 373
	111.	 Sketch the graph of g1x2 = 2x3 + 3x2 + 2x - 4
x2 - 1
. Discuss 
	
	 the end behavior of g1x2. 
	112.	 Sketch the graph of f1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + 1
x - 2
. Discuss the end 
	
	 behavior of f1x2. 
In Exercises 113 and 114, the graph of the rational function 
f 1x2 crosses the horizontal asymptote. Graph f 1x2 and 
find the point of intersection of the curve with its horizontal 
asymptote.
	113.	 f1x2 = x2 + x - 2
x2 - 2x - 3 
	114.	 f1x2 =
4 - x2
2x2 - 5x - 3 
In Exercises 115–118, find an equation of a rational function 
f satisfying the given conditions.
	115.	 Vertical asymptote: x = 3
	
	 Horizontal asymptote: y = -1 
	
	 x@intercept: 2
	116.	 Vertical asymptote: x = -1, x = 1
	
	 Horizontal asymptote: y = 1 x@intercept: 0 
	117.	 Vertical asymptote: x = 0
	
	 Oblique asymptote: y = -x 
	
	 x@intercepts: -1, 1
	118.	 Vertical asymptote: x = 3
	
	 Oblique asymptote: y = x + 4 
	
	 y@intercept: 2;  f142 = 14
In Exercises 119–124, make up a rational function f 1x2 that 
has all of the characteristics given in the exercise.
	119.	 Has a vertical asymptote at x = 2, a horizontal asymptote at 
y = 1, and a y-intercept at 10, -22 
	120.	 Has vertical asymptotes at x = 2 and x = -1, a  
horizontal asymptote at y = 0, a y-intercept at 10, 22, and 
an x-intercept at 4 
	121.	 Has f   a1
2b = 0;  f1x2 S 4 as x S {∞, 
	
	 f1x2 S ∞ as x S 1-, and f1x2 S ∞ as x S 1+
	122.	 Has f102 = 0;  f1x2 S 2 as x S { ∞; has no vertical 
asymptotes and is symmetric about the y-axis 
	123.	 Has y = 3x + 2 as an oblique asymptote; has a vertical 
asymptote at x = 1 
	124.	 Is it possible for the graph of a rational function to have 
both a horizontal and oblique asymptote? Explain.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	125.	 Give an example of a rational function that intersects its 
horizontal asymptote at
a.	 No points.  
b.	 One point.	 
c.	 Two points.  
	126.	 Give an example of a rational function that intersects its 
oblique asymptote at
a.	 No points. 
b.	 One point.	
c.	 Two points. 
	127.	 Construct a rational function R1x2 that has y = x + 1 as 
its oblique asymptote and the graph of R1x2 intersects the 
asymptote at the points 12, R1222 and 15, R1522.
	128.	 Describe a rational function R1x2 =
N1x2
D1x2 that has 
	
	 asymptote y = ax + b and R1x2 intersects the asymptote at 
n points whose x-coordinates are c1, c2, c, cn. Discuss the 
relationship between the degree of D1x2 and the number of 
points of intersection of R1x2 and y = ax + b.
Maintaining Skills
	129.	 a.	 Find the equation of the line in slope–intercept form that 
	
	 	
passes through the point 1-5, 32 and has slope - 2
3.
b.	 From the equation in part (a), find y when x = 1. 
	130.	 a.	 Find the equation of the line in slope–intercept form that 
passes through the point 1-2, -32 and is perpendicular  
to the line 4x + 5y = 6.
b.	 From the equation in part (a), find y when x = 10.  
	131.	 Find c if the line 3x + cy = 11 passes through the point  
11, 22. 
	132.	 Find k if the graph of the equation y = kx2 + 1  
passes through the point 1-2, 72. Then find y when 
x = 2.  
	133.	 Find k if the graph of the equation y = k
x2 passes through 
	
	 the point a1
2, 12b. Then find y when x = 2.     

374	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Planetary nebula NGC 40, shown on 
logarithmic scale (photo credit)
3.7
Newton and the Apple
According to legend, Isaac Newton was sitting under an apple tree, and when an apple 
fell on his head, he suddenly thought of the Law of Universal Gravitation. As in many 
such legends, the story may not be true in detail, but it contains elements of the truth.
Before we tell you a more realistic version of this story, let’s recall some terminology 
associated with the motion of objects.
Recall that speed = distance
time
.
  (i)	 The velocity of an object is the speed of an object in a specific direction.
 (ii)	 Acceleration: If the velocity of an object is changing, we say that the object  
	
is accelerating. Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity.
(iii)	 Force = Mass * Acceleration
What really happened with the apple? Perhaps the correct version of the story is that 
upon observing an apple falling from a tree, Newton concluded that the apple acceler-
ated because the velocity of the apple changed from when it began hanging on the 
tree (zero velocity) and then moved to the ground. He decided that a force must act on 
the apple to cause this acceleration. He called this force “gravity” and the associated 
acceleration 1Force = Mass * Acceleration2 the “acceleration due to gravity.” He con-
jectured further that if the force of gravity reaches the top of the apple tree, it might 
reach even farther; might it reach all the way to the Moon? In that case, to keep the 
Moon moving in a circular orbit, rather than wandering into outer space, Earth must 
exert a gravitational force on the Moon. Newton realized that the force that brought 
the apple to the ground and the force that holds the Moon in orbit were the same. He 
concluded that any two objects in the universe exert gravitational attraction on each 
other, whereupon he gave us the Law of Universal Gravitation. See Example 6.
Some scientists believe that it was Kepler’s Third Law of Planetary Motion (see 
Exercise 53), not an apple, that led Newton to his Law of Universal Gravitation.
Variation
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Equation of a line (Section 2.3, page 186)
2	 Solving linear equations (Section 1.1,  
page 78)
Objectives
1	 Solve direct variation problems.
2	 Solve inverse variation problems.
3	 Solve joint and combined variation  
problems.
S e c t i o n
Sir Isaac Newton 1642–1727
Isaac Newton was a mathematician and 
physicist, one of the foremost scientific 
intellects of all time. He entered Cambridge 
University in 1661 and was elected a Fellow of 
Trinity College in 1667 and Lucasian Professor 
of Mathematics in 1669. He remained at the 
university, lecturing most years, until 1696.
As a firm opponent of the attempt by 
King James II to make the universities into 
Catholic institutions, Newton was elected 
Member of Parliament for the University of 
Cambridge to the Convention Parliament of 
1689, and he sat again in 1701–1702.
Meanwhile, in 1696, he moved to 
London as warden of the Royal Mint. He 
became master of the Mint in 1699, an office 
he retained until his death. He was elected a 
Fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1671, 
and in 1703, he became president, being annu-
ally reelected for the rest of his life. One of his 
major works, Opticks, appeared the next year; 
he was knighted in Cambridge in 1705.

	
Section 3.7    ■    Variation 375
Direct Variation
Two types of relationships between quantities (variables) occur so frequently in mathemat-
ics that they are given special names: direct variation and inverse variation.
Direct variation describes any relationship between two quantities in which any in-
crease (or decrease) in one causes a proportional increase (or decrease) in the other. For 
example, the sales tax in Hillsborough County, Florida, in 2012 was 7%, so that the sales 
tax on a $1000 purchase was $70. If we double the purchase to $2000, the sales tax also 
doubles, to $140. If we reduce the purchase by half to $500, the sales tax is also reduced 
by half, to $35. We say that the sales tax varies directly as the purchase price. The equation
Sales tax = 10.0721Purchase price2
expresses the fact that the sales tax was a constant (0.07) multiple of the purchase price.
1	
Solve direct variation 
problems.
The statements
“y varies directly as x,”
“y varies as x,”
“y is directly proportional to x,”
“y is proportional to x,”
and “y = kx, k ≠0”
have the same meaning.
Side 
Note
Solve variation problems.
Suppose y varies as x and y = 20 when x = 4
3. Find y 
when x = 8.
Solving the Variation Problems
OBJECTIVE
procedure 
in action
EXAMPLE 1
Step 1 Write the equation with the constant 
of variation, k.
Step 2 Substitute the given values of the 
variables into the equation in Step 1 to find 
the value of the constant k.
Step 3 Rewrite the equation in Step 1 with 
the value of k from Step 2.
Step 4 Use the equation from Step 3 to  
answer the question posed in the problem.
1.   y = kx	
y varies as x.
2.   20 = k a4
3b	
Replace y with 20 and x with 4
3.
20 a3
4b = k a4
3ba3
4b	
Multiply both sides by 3
4.
        15 = k	
Simplify to solve for k.
3.    y = 15x	
Replace k with 15.
4.   y = 15182	
Replace x with 8.
          y = 120	
Simplify.
So y = 120 when x = 8.
Example
Practice Problem 1  Suppose y varies directly as x. If y is 6 when x is 30, find y  
when x = 120.
The current in a circuit connected to a 220-volt battery is 50 amperes. If the current is 
directly proportional to the voltage of the attached battery, what voltage battery is needed 
to produce a current of 75 amperes?
Direct Variation in Electrical Circuits
EXAMPLE 2
A quantity y is said to vary directly as the quantity x, or y is directly proportional 
to x, if there is a constant k such that y = kx. This constant k is called the constant 
of variation or the constant of proportionality.
Direct Variation

376	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
We can generalize the concept of direct variation to variation with powers.
Solution
Let I = current in amperes and V = voltage in volts of the battery.
Step 1	
 I = kV
	
I varies directly as V.
Step 2	
 50 = k12202	
Substitute I = 50, V = 220.
	
 50
220 = k
	
Solve for k.
	
 5
22 = k
	
Simplify.
Step 3	
 I = 5
22V
	
Replace k with 5
22 in I = kV.
Step 4	
 75 = 5
22V
	
Substitute I = 75 in Step 3.
	
 22
5 # 75 = V
	
Solve for V.
	
	
 330 = V
	
Simplify.
A battery of 330 volts is needed to produce 75 amperes of current.
Practice Problem 2  In Example 2, if the current in the circuit is 60 amperes, what 
­voltage battery is needed to produce a current of 75 amperes?
“A quantity y varies directly as the nth power of x” means
y = kxn,
where k is a nonzero constant and n 7 0.
Direct Variation with Powers
Note that when n = 1, y varies directly as x. In the formula for the area of a circle, 
A = pr2, A varies directly as the square (or second power) of the radius r, with p as the 
constant of variation.
Suppose you had forgotten the formula for the volume of a sphere but were told that the 
volume V of a sphere varies directly as the cube of its radius r. In addition, you are given 
that V = 972p when r = 9. Find V when r = 6.
Solution
Step 1	
 V = kr3
    V varies directly as r3.
Step 2	
 972p = k1923
    Replace V with 972p and r with 9.
	
 972p = k17292
    93 = 729
	
 k = 972 p
729
    Solve for k.
	
 = 4
3 p
    Simplify.
Step 3	
 V = 4
3pr3
    Substitute k = 4
3 p in Step 1.
Solving a Problem Involving Direct Variation with Powers
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 3.7    ■    Variation 377
Inverse Variation
2	
Solve inverse variation 
problems.
Step 4	
 V = 4
3 p1623
	
Replace r with 6.
	
 = 288 p cubic units
Practice Problem 3  If y varies directly as the square of x and y = 48 when x = 2,  
find y when x = 5.
A quantity y varies inversely as the quantity x, or y is inversely proportional to x, if
y = k
x
where k is a nonzero constant.
Inverse Variation
Suppose a plane takes four hours to fly from Atlanta to Denver at an average speed of 
300 miles per hour. If we increase the average speed to 600 miles per hour (twice the previ-
ous speed), the flight time decreases to two hours (half the previous time). For the Atlanta–
Denver trip, the time of flight varies inversely as the speed of the plane.
 time = distance
speed
 =
k
speed, where k = distance between Atlanta and Denver
We see that the distance is the constant of variation when time and speed are the variables.
Suppose y varies inversely as x and y = 35 when x = 11. Find y if x = 55.
Solution
Step 1	
 y = k
x
	
y varies inversely as x.
Step 2	
 35 = k
11 	
Substitute y = 35, x = 11.
	
 35 # 11 = k
	
Solve for k.
	
 385 = k
	
Simplify.
Step 3	
 y = 385
x 	
Replace k with 385 in y = k
x.
Step 4	
 y = 385
55 	
Replace x with 55.
	
 y = 7
	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 4  A varies inversely as B, and A = 12 when B = 5. Find A  
when B = 3.
Solving an Inverse Variation Problem
EXAMPLE 4

378	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
A quantity y varies inversely as the nth power of x means that y = k
xn, where k is a 
nonzero constant and n 7 0.
Inverse Variation with Powers
Light travels at a speed of 
299,792,458 meters per second. 
The distance that light travels in a 
year is called a “light year” and is 
so large that it is a useful unit of 
distance in astronomy.
1.	 One light year is approximately 
9.46 * 1015 m.
2.	 The nearest star (other than the 
Sun) is 4.3 light years away.
3.	 The Milky Way (our galaxy) is 
about 100,000 light years in 
diameter.
4.	 The most distant objects that 
astronomers can see are about 
13 billion light years away. Thus, 
the light that we presently see 
from these objects began its 
journey to us about 13 billion 
years ago. Because this is close 
to the estimated age of the 
universe, that light is a kind of 
fossil record of the universe not 
long after its birth.
Do You  
Know?
The intensity of light varies inversely as the square of the distance from the light source. 
If Rita doubles her distance from a lamp, what happens to the intensity of light at her new 
location?
Solution
Let I be the intensity of light at a distance d from the light source. Because I is inversely 
proportional to the square of d, we have
I = k
d2.
If we replace d with 2d, the intensity I1 at the new location is given by
 I1 =
k
12d22	
Replace d with 2d in I = k
d2.
 I1 =
k
4d2
	
12d22 = 22d2 = 4d2
Therefore,
 I1 = I
4
	
Replace k
d2 with I.
This equation tells us that if Rita doubles her distance from the light source, the intensity of 
light at the new location will be one-fourth the intensity at the original location.
Practice Problem 5  If y varies inversely as the square root of x and y = 3
4 when 
x = 16, find x when y = 2.
Solving a Problem Involving Inverse Variation with Powers
EXAMPLE 5
Joint and Combined Variation
Sometimes different types of variations occur in a problem that has more than one independent 
variable.
3	
Solve joint and combined 
variation problems.
The expression z varies jointly as x and y means that z = kxy for some nonzero constant 
k. Similarly, if n and m are positive numbers, then the expression z varies jointly as the 
nth power of x and mth power of y means that z = kxnym for some nonzero constant k.
Joint and Combined Variation
For example, the volume V of a right circular cylinder with radius r and height h is given by
V = pr2h.
Using the vocabulary of variation, we say, “The volume V of a right circular cylinder 
varies jointly as its height h and the square of its radius r.” The constant of variation is p.
We can combine joint variation and inverse variation. For example, the relationship
w = kx2y3
1z

	
Section 3.7    ■    Variation 379
can be described as “w varies jointly as the square of x and cube of y and inversely as the 
square root of z.” The same relationship also can be stated as “w varies directly as x2y3 
and inversely as 1z.”
Figure 3.36  Finding g on Earth
RE
m
Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation says that every object in the universe attracts every 
other object with a force acting along the line of the centers of the two objects. Also, this 
attracting force is directly proportional to the product of the two masses and inversely 
proportional to the square of the distance between the two objects.
a.	 Write the law symbolically.
b.	 Estimate the value of g (the acceleration due to gravity) near the surface of Earth. Use 
the following estimates: radius of Earth RE = 6.38 * 106 meters, and mass of Earth 
ME = 5.98 * 1024 kilograms.
Solution
a.	 Let m1 and m2 be the masses of the two objects and r be the distance between their 
centers. See Figure 3.35. Let F denote the gravitational force between the objects.
r
m1
m2
Figure 3.35  Gravitational attraction
	
Then according to Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation,
F = G # m1m2
r2 .
	
The constant of proportionality G is called the universal gravitational constant. It 
is “universal” because it is thought to be the same at all places and all times. If the 
masses m1 and m2 are measured in kilograms, r is measured in meters, and the force 
F is measured in newtons, then the value of G is approximately 6.67 * 10-11 meters 
cubed per kilogram per second squared. This value was experimentally verified by 
Henry Cavendish in 1795.
b.	 Estimating the value of g (acceleration due to gravity) near the surface of Earth.
	
We use Newton’s laws: Force = Mass * Acceleration = m # g
Force = G # m1m2
r2
	
For an object of mass m near the surface of Earth (see Figure 3.36):
 Force = G # m1m2
r2
	
Law of Universal  
Gravitation
 m # g = G # mME
RE
2
	
Force = m # g; replace m1  
with m, m2 with ME,  
and r with RE.
 g = G # ME
RE
2
	
Divide both sides by m.
 =
16.67 * 10-11 m3>kg>sec22 # 15.98 * 1024 kg2
16.38 * 106 m22
	
Substitute appropriate  
values for G, ME, and RE.
 ≈9.8 m>sec2
	
Use a calculator.
Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
EXAMPLE 6

380	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
We summarize the steps involved in solving most variation problems.
Practice Problem 6  The mass of Mars is about 6.42 * 1023 kilograms, and its radius  
is about 3397 kilometers. What is the acceleration due to gravity near the surface  
of Mars?
S o lv i n g  Va r i at i o n  P r o b l e m s
Step 1  Write the equation that models the problem.
a.  y varies directly with x.	
y = kx
b.  y varies with the nth power of x.	
y = kxn
c.  y varies inversely with x.	
y = k
x
d.  y varies inversely with the nth power of x.	
y = k
xn
e.  z varies jointly with the nth power of x and  
the mth power of y.	
z = kxnym
f.  z varies directly with the nth power of x and  
inversely with the mth power of y.	
z = kxn
ym
Step 2  Substitute the given values in the equation in Step 1 and solve for k.
Step 3  Rewrite the equation in Step 1 with the value of k from Step 2.
Step 4  Use the equation from Step 3 to answer the question posed in the problem.
Answers to Practice Problems
1.  y = 24  2.  275  3.  y = 300
4.  A = 20  5.  x = 9
4  6. ≈3.7 m>sec2
If a variation problem uses a more complicated relationship than those listed in Step 1, 
simply write the appropriate equation involving k and the variables and then proceed with 
Steps 2–4.
Exercises
section 3.7 
Basic Concepts and Skills
In Exercises 1–8, write each statement as an equation.
	1.	 P varies directly as T. 
	2.	 P varies inversely as V. 
	3.	 y varies as the square root of x. 
	4.	 F varies jointly as m1 and m2. 
	5.	 V varies jointly as the cube of x and fourth power of y.
	6.	 w varies directly as the square root of x and inversely as y.
	7.	 z varies jointly as x and u and inversely as square of v.
	8.	 S varies jointly as the square root of x, the square of y, and 
the cube of z and inversely as the square of u.
In Exercises 9–24, use the four-step procedure to solve for the 
variable requested.
	 9.	 x varies directly as y, and x = 15 when y = 30. Find x if 
y = 28. 
	10.	 y varies directly as x, and y = 3 when x = 2. Find y when 
x = 7. 
	11.	 s varies directly as the square of t, and s = 64 when t = 2. 
Find s when t = 5. 
	12.	 y varies directly as the cube of x, and y = 270 when x = 3. 
Find x when y = 80.            

	
Section 3.7    ■    Variation 381
	13.	 r varies inversely as u, and r = 3 when u = 11. Find r if 
	
	 u = 1
3. 
	14.	 y varies inversely as z, and y = 24 when z = 1
6. Find y if 
	
	 z = 1. 
	15.	 B varies inversely with the cube of A. If B = 1 when A = 2, 
find B when A = 4. 
	16.	 y varies inversely with the cube root of x, and y = 10 when 
x = 2. Find x if y = 40. 
	17.	 z varies jointly as x and y, and z = 42 when x = 2 and 
y = 3. Find y if z = 56 and x = 2. 
	18.	 m varies directly as q and inversely as p, and m = 1
2 
	
	 when p = 26 and q = 13. Find m when p = 14 and 
q = 7. 
	19.	 z varies directly as the square of x, and z = 32 when x = 4. 
Find z if x = 5. 
	20.	 u varies inversely as the cube of t, and u = 9 when t = 2. 
Find u if t = 6. 
	21.	 P varies jointly as T and the square of Q, and P = 36 when 
T = 17 and Q = 6. Find P when T = 4 and Q = 9. 
	22.	 a varies jointly as b and the square root of c, and a = 9 
when b = 13 and c = 81. Find a when b = 5 and c = 9. 
	23.	 z varies directly as the square root of x and inversely as the 
square of y, and z = 24 when x = 16 and y = 3. Find x 
when z = 27 and y = 2. 
	24.	 z varies jointly as u and the cube of v and inversely as the 
square of w; z = 9 when u = 4, v = 3, and w = 2. Find w 
when u = 27, v = 2, and z = 8. 
 
In Exercises 25–28, solve for the variable requested without 
determining the constant of variation, k. Use the fact that if 
x1 = ky1 and x2 = ky2, then x1
y1
= k = x2
y2
 so that x1
y1
= x2
y2
.
	25.	 If y is proportional to x and if y = 12 when x = 16, find y 
when x = 8. 
	26.	 If z varies directly as w and if z = 17 when w = 22, find z 
when w = 110. 
	27.	 If y is directly proportional to x and if y = 100 for the 
value x0 of x, find y when x0 is doubled—that is, when 
x = 2x0. 
	28.	 If x varies directly as the square root of y and if x = 2 when 
y = 9, find y when x = 3. 
Applying the Concepts
	29.	 Hubble constant. The American astronomer Edwin Powell 
Hubble (1889–1953) is renowned for having determined that 
there are other galaxies in the universe beyond the Milky 
Way. In 1929, he stated that the galaxies observed at a par-
ticular time recede from each other at a speed that is directly 
proportional to the distance between them. The constant of 
proportionality is denoted by the letter H. Write Hubble’s 
statement in the form of an equation. 
	30.	 Malthusian doctrine. The British scientist Thomas Robert 
Malthus (1766–1834) was a pioneer of population science and 
economics. In 1798, he stated that populations grow faster than 
the means that can sustain them. One of his arguments was that 
the rate of change, R, of a given population is directly propor-
tional to the size P of the population. Write the equation that 
describes Malthus’s argument. 
	31.	 Converting units of length. Use the fact that 
1 foot ≈30.5 centimeters.
a.	 Write an equation that expresses the fact that a length  
measured in centimeters is directly proportional to the 
length measured in feet. 
b.	 Convert the following measurements into centimeters.
 (i)  8 feet 
(ii)  5 feet 4 inches 
c.	 Convert the following measurements into feet.
 (i)  57 centimeters 
(ii)  1 meter 24 centimeters 
	32.	 Converting weight. Use the fact that 
1 kilogram ≈2.20 pounds.
a.	 Write an equation that expresses the fact that a weight 
measured in pounds is directly proportional to the weight 
measured in kilograms. 
b.	 Convert the following measurements to pounds.
  (i)  125 grams 
 (ii)  4 kilograms 
(iii)  2.4 kilograms 
c.	 Convert the following measurements to kilograms.
 (i)  27 pounds 
(ii)  160 pounds 
	33.	 Protein from soybeans. The quantity P of protein 
obtained from dried soybeans is directly proportional to the 
quantity Q of dried soybeans used. If 20 grams of dried soy-
beans produces 7 grams of protein, how much protein can be 
produced from 100 grams of soybeans? 
	34.	Wages. A person’s weekly wages W are directly pro-
portional to the number of hours h worked per week. If 
Samantha earned $600 for a 40-hour week, how much 
would she earn if she worked only 25 hours in a particu-
lar week? What does the constant of proportionality mean 
here? 
	35.	 Physics. The distance d that an object falls varies directly as 
the square of the time t during which it is falling. If an object 
falls 64 feet in 2 seconds, how long will it take the object to 
fall 9 feet? 
 
	36.	 Physics. Hooke’s Law states that the force F required to 
stretch a spring by x units is directly proportional to x. If a 
force of 10 pounds stretches a spring by 4 inches, find the 
force required to stretch a spring by 6 inches. 
4 in.
10 lb

382	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
	37.	 Chemistry. Boyle’s Law states that at a constant temperature, 
the pressure P of a compressed gas is inversely proportional to 
its volume V. If the pressure is 20 pounds per square inch when 
the volume of the gas is 300 cubic inches, what is the pressure 
when the gas is compressed to 100 cubic inches? 
	38.	 Chemistry. In the Kelvin temperature scale, the lowest pos-
sible temperature (called absolute zero) is 0 K, where K denotes 
degrees Kelvin. The relationship between Kelvin temperature 
1TK2 and Celsius temperature 1TC2 is given by TK = TC + 273.
The pressure P exerted by a gas varies directly as its 
temperature TK and inversely as its volume V. Assume that at 
a temperature of 260 K, a gas occupies 13 cubic inches at a 
pressure of 36 pounds per square inch.
a.	 Find the volume of the gas when the temperature is 300 K 
and the pressure is 40 pounds per square inch. 
b.	 Find the pressure when the temperature is 280 K and the 
volume is 39 cubic inches. 
	39.	 Weight. The weight of an object varies inversely as the 
square of the object’s distance from the center of Earth. The 
radius of Earth is 3960 miles.
a.	 If an astronaut weighs 120 pounds on the surface of Earth, 
how much does she weigh 6000 miles above the surface of 
Earth? 
b.	 If a miner weighs 200 pounds on the surface of Earth, 
how much does he weigh 10 miles below the surface of 
Earth? 
	40.	 Making a profit. Suppose you wanted to make a profit by 
buying gold by weight at one altitude and selling at another alti-
tude for the same price per unit weight. Should you buy or sell at 
the higher altitude? (Use the information from Exercise 39.) 
In Exercises 41 and 42, use Newton’s Law of Universal 
Gravitation. (See Example 6.)
	41.	 Gravity on the Moon. The mass of the Moon is about 
7.4 * 1022 kilograms, and its radius is about 1740 kilometers. 
How much is the acceleration due to gravity on the surface of 
the Moon? 
	42.	 Gravity on the Sun. The mass of the Sun is about  
2 * 1030 kilograms, and its radius is 696,000 kilometers. 
How much is the acceleration due to gravity on the surface  
of the Sun? 
	43.	 Illumination. The intensity I of illumination from a light 
source is inversely proportional to the square of the distance 
d from the source. Suppose the intensity is 320 candela at a 
distance of 10 feet from a light source.
a.	 What is the intensity at 5 feet from the source? 
b.	 How far away from the source will the intensity be  
400 candela? 
	44.	 Speed and skid marks. Police estimate that the speed s  
of a car in miles per hour varies directly as the square root  
of d, where d in feet is the length of the skid marks left by  
a car traveling on a dry concrete pavement. A car traveling  
48 miles per hour leaves skid marks of 96 feet.
a.	 Write an equation relating s and d. 
b.	 Use the equation in part (a) to estimate the speed of a car 
whose skid marks stretched (i) 60 feet, (ii) 150 feet, and 
(iii) 200 feet. 
c.	 Suppose you are driving 70 miles per hour and slam on 
your brakes. How long will your skid marks be? 
	45.	 Simple pendulum. Periodic motion is motion that repeats 
itself over successive equal intervals of time. The time 
required for one complete repetition of the motion is called 
the period. The period of a simple pendulum varies directly 
as the square root of its length. What is the effect on the 
length if the period is doubled?
l 
 length
amplitude
	
	 (Note: The amplitude of a pendulum has no effect on its 
period. This is what makes pendulums such good time-
keepers. Because they invariably lose energy due to fric-
tion, their amplitude decreases but their period remains 
constant.) 
	46.	 Biology. The volume V of a lung is directly proportional 
to its internal surface area A. A lung with volume 400 cubic 
centimeters from a certain species has an average internal 
surface area of 100 square centimeters. Find the volume of a 
lung of a member of this species if the lung’s internal surface 
area is 120 square centimeters. 
	47.	 Horsepower. The horsepower H of an automobile engine 
varies directly as the square of the piston radius R and the 
number N of pistons.
a.	 Write the given information in equation form. 
b.	 What is the effect on the horsepower if the piston radius is 
doubled? 
c.	 What is the effect on the horsepower if the number of 
pistons is doubled? 
d.	 What is the effect on the horsepower if the radius of 
the pistons is cut in half and the number of pistons is 
doubled? 
	48.	 Safe load. The safe load that a rectangular beam can support 
varies jointly as the width and square of the depth of the beam 
and inversely as its length. A beam 4 inches wide, 6 inches 
deep, and 25 feet long can support a safe load of 576 pounds. 
Find the safe load for a beam that is of the same material but 
is 6 inches wide, 10 inches deep, and 20 feet long. 
Beyond the Basics
	49.	 Energy from a windmill. The energy E from a windmill 
varies jointly as the square of the length l of the blades and 
the cube of the wind velocity v.
a.	 Express the given information as an equation with k as the 
constant of variation. 
b.	 If blades of length 10 feet and wind velocity 8 miles per 
hour generate 1920 watts of electric power, find k. 
c.	 How much electric power would be generated if the blades 
were 8 feet long and the wind velocity was 25 miles per 
hour? 
d.	 If the velocity of the wind doubles, what happens to E? 
e.	 If the length of blades doubles, what happens to E? 
f.	 What happens to E if both the length of the blades and the 
wind velocity are doubled? 

	
Section 3.7    ■    Variation 383
	50.	 Intensity of light. The intensity of light, Id, at a distance 
d from the source of light varies directly as the intensity I of 
the source and inversely as d2. It is known that at a distance 
of 2 meters, a 100-watt bulb produces an intensity of approxi-
mately 2 watts per square meter.
a.	 Find the constant of variation, k. 
b.	 Suppose a 200-watt bulb is located on a wall 2 meters 
above the floor. What is the intensity of light at a point A 
that is 3 meters from the wall? 
2 m
200-watt bulb
3 m
A
c.	 What is the intensity of illumination at the point A in the 
figure if the bulb is raised by 1 meter? 
	51.	 Metabolic rate. Metabolism is the sum total of all physi-
cal and chemical changes that take place within an organism. 
According to the laws of thermodynamics, all of these changes 
will ultimately release heat, so the metabolic rate is a measure of 
heat production by an animal. Biologists have found that the nor-
mal resting metabolic rate of a mammal is directly proportional 
	
	 to the 3
4 power of its body weight. 
	
	    The resting metabolic rate of a person weighing 75 kilograms 
is 75 watts.
a.	 Find the constant of proportionality, k. 
b.	 Estimate the resting metabolic rate of a brown bear weigh-
ing 450 kilograms. 
c.	 What is the effect on metabolic rate if the body weight is 
multiplied by 4? 
d.	 What is the approximate weight of an animal with a  
metabolic rate of 250 watts? 
	52.	 Comparing gravitational forces. The masses of the Sun, 
Earth, and Moon are 2 * 1030 kilograms, 6 * 1024 kilo-
grams, and 7.4 * 1022 kilograms, respectively. The Earth–
Sun distance is about 400 times the Earth–Moon distance. 
Use Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation to compare the 
gravitational attraction between the Sun and Earth with that 
between Earth and the Moon. 
	53.	 Kepler’s Third Law. Suppose an object of mass M1 orbits 
around an object of mass M2. Let r be the average distance  
in meters between the centers of the two objects and let T be 
the orbital period (the time in seconds the object completes 
one orbit). Kepler’s Third Law states that T2 is directly pro-
portional to r3 and inversely proportional to M1 + M2. The 
	
	 constant of proportionality is 4p2
G .
a.	 Write the equation that expresses Kepler’s Third Law. 
b.	 Earth orbits the Sun once each year at a distance of about 
1.5 * 108 kilometers. Find the mass of the sun. Use these 
estimates: 
Mass of Earth + Mass of Sun ≈Mass of Sun,
G = 6.67 * 10-11, 1 year = 3.15 * 107 seconds
	54.	 Use Kepler’s Third Law. The Moon orbits Earth in about 
27.3 days at an average distance of about 384,000 kilometers. 
Find the mass of Earth. [Hint: Convert the orbital period, 
defined in Exercise 53, to seconds; also use Mass of Earth +
Mass of Moon ≈Mass of Earth.]  
	55.	 Spreading a rumor. Let P be the population of a com-
munity. The rate R (per day) at which a rumor spreads in the 
community is jointly proportional to the number N of people 
who have already heard the rumor and the number 1P - N2 
of people who have not yet heard the rumor.
A rumor about the president of a college is spread in 
his college community of 10,000 people. Five days after the 
rumor started, 1000 people had heard it, and it was spreading 
at the rate of 45 additional people per day.
a.	 Write an equation relating R, P, and N. 
b.	 Find the constant k of variation. 
c.	 Find the rate at which the rumor was spreading when one-
half the college community had heard it.  
d.	 How many people had heard the rumor when it was 
spreading at the rate of 100 people per day? 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	56.	 Electricity. The current I in an electric circuit varies directly 
as the voltage V and inversely as the resistance R. If the resis-
tance is increased by 20%, what percent increase must occur 
in the voltage to increase the current by 30%? 
	57.	 Precious stones. The value of a precious stone is propor-
tional to the square of its weight.
a.	 Calculate the loss incurred by cutting a diamond worth $1000 
into two pieces whose weights are in the ratio 2:3. 
b.	 A precious stone worth $25,000 is accidentally dropped and 
broken into three pieces, the weights of which are in the ratio 
5:9:11. Calculate the loss incurred due to breakage. 
c.	 A diamond breaks into five pieces, the weights of which are 
in the ratio 1:2:3:4:5. If the resulting loss is $85,000, find the 
value of the original diamond. Also calculate the value of a 
diamond whose weight is twice that of the original diamond.
	58.	 Bus service. The profit earned in running a bus service is 
jointly proportional to the distance and the number of passen-
gers over a certain fixed number. The profit is $80 when 30 
passengers are carried a distance of 40 km and is $180 when 
35 passengers are carried 60 km. What is the minimum num-
ber of passengers that results in no loss? 
	59.	 Weight of a sphere. The weight of a sphere is directly pro-
portional to the cube of its radius. A metal sphere has a hollow 
space about its center in the form of a concentric sphere, and 
	
	 its weight is 7
8 times the weight of a solid sphere of the same 
	
	 radius and material. Find the ratio of the inner to the outer 
radius of the hollow sphere. 
	60.	 Train speed. A locomotive engine can go 24 miles per hour, 
and its speed is reduced by a quantity that varies directly as 
the square root of the number of cars it pulls. Pulling four 
cars, its speed is 20 miles per hour. Find the greatest number 
of cars the engine can pull.     

384	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
3.1	 Quadratic Functions
	
i.	 A quadratic function f is a function of the form
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0.
	 ii.	 The standard form of a quadratic function is
f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k, a ≠0.
	 iii.	 The graph of a quadratic function is a transformation of the 
graph of y = x2.
	 iv.	 The graph of a quadratic function is a parabola with vertex
1h, k2 = a- b
2a, f a- b
2ab b.
	 v.	 The maximum 1if a 6 02 or minimum 1if a 7 02 value 
of a quadratic function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c occurs at the 
y-coordinate of the vertex of the parabola.
3.2	 Polynomial Functions
	
i.	 A function f of the form 
	
	
f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + ga2x2 + a1x + a0, an ≠0 
	
	 is a polynomial function of degree n.
	 ii.	 The graph of a polynomial function is smooth and continuous.
	 iii.	 The end behavior of the graph of a polynomial function 
depends on the sign of the leading coefficient and the degree 
(even-odd) of the polynomial.
	 iv.	 A real number c is a zero of a function f  if f1c2 = 0. 
Geometrically, c is an x-intercept of the graph of y = f1x2.
	 v.	 If in the factorization of a polynomial function f1x2 the factor 
1x - a2 occurs exactly m times, then a is a zero of multiplicity 
m. If m is odd, the graph of y = f1x2 crosses the x-axis at a; if 
m is even, the graph touches but does not cross the x-axis at a.
	 vi.	 If the degree of a polynomial function f1x2 is n, then f1x2 
has, at most, n real zeros and the graph of f1x2 has, at most, 
1n - 12 turning points.
	vii.	 Intermediate Value Theorem: Let f1x2 be a polynomial 
function and a and b be two numbers such that a 6 b. If 
f1a2 and f1b2 have opposite signs, then there is at least one 
number c, with a 6 c 6 b, for which f1c2 = 0.
	viii.	 See page 315 for graphing a polynomial function.
3.3	 Dividing Polynomials
	
i.	 Division algorithm: If a polynomial F1x2 is divided by a 
polynomial D1x2 ≠0, there are unique polynomials Q1x2 
and R1x2 such that F1x2 = D1x2Q1x2 + R1x2, where 
either R1x2 = 0 or deg R1x2 6 deg D1x2. In words, “The 
dividend equals the product of the divisor and the quotient 
plus the remainder.”
	 ii.	 Synthetic division is a shortcut for dividing a polynomial 
F1x2 by x - a.
	 iii.	 Remainder Theorem: If a polynomial F1x2 is divided by 
1x - a2, the remainder is F1a2.
	 iv.	 Factor Theorem: A polynomial function F1x2 has 1x - a2 
as a factor if and only if F1a2 = 0.
3.4	 The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
	
i.	 Rational Zeros Theorem: If p
q is a rational zero in lowest 
	
	 terms for a polynomial function with integer coefficients, 
then p is a factor of the constant term and q is a factor of 
the leading coefficient.
	 ii.	 Descartes’s Rule of Signs. Let F1x2 be a polynomial func-
tion with real coefficients.
a.	 The number of positive zeros of F is equal to the number 
of variations of signs of F1x2 or is less than that number 
by an even integer.
b.	 The number of negative zeros of F is equal to the number 
of variations of sign of F1-x2 or is less than that number 
by an even integer.
	 iii.	 Rules for Bounds on the Zeros. Suppose a polynomial 
F1x2 is synthetically divided by x - k.
a.	 If k 7 0 and each number in the last row is zero or  
positive, then k is an upper bound on the zeros of F1x2.
b.	 If k 6 0 and the numbers in the last row alternate in sign, 
then k is a lower bound on the zeros of F1x2.
3.5	 The Complex Zeros of a Polynomial 
Function
	
i.	 Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. An nth-degree  
polynomial equation has at least one complex zero.
	 ii.	 Factorization Theorem for Polynomials. If P1x2 is 
a polynomial of degree n Ú 1, it can be factored into 
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 61–70, simplify each expression.
	61.	 50 
	
	 62.  23 
	63.	 3-2 
	
	 64.  a1
2b
3 
	65.	 a1
2b
-4 
	
	 66.  2x-1 # 23-x 
	67.	 52x-3 # 53-x 
	
	 68.  23x-2
2x-5 
	69.	 (2x-1)x 
	
	 70.  2
3 1
4 2 
In Exercises 71–76, solve each equation for the requested 
variable.
	71.	 y = mx + b for m	
	 72.  ax + by = 3 for x
	73.	 A = B(1 + C) for C	
	 74.  A = B(1 + C)3 for C
	75.	 A = B # 10-n for B	
	 76.  A = B # 10m + C for B          

	
Review Exercises 385
n (not necessarily distinct) linear factors of the form 
P1x2 = a1x - r12 1x - r22 g 1x - rn2, where a,
r1, r2, c , rn are complex numbers.
	 iii.	 Number of Zeros Theorem. A polynomial of degree n has 
exactly n complex zeros, provided a zero of multiplicity k is 
counted k times.
	 iv.	 Conjugate Pairs Theorem. If a + bi is a zero of the poly-
nomial function P (with real coefficients), then a - bi is 
also a zero of P.
3.6	 Rational Functions
	 i.	 A function f1x2 =
N1x2
D1x2, where N1x2 and D1x2 are 
	
	 polynomials and D1x2 ≠0, is called a rational function. 
The domain of f  is the set of all real numbers except the 
real zeros of D1x2.
	 ii.	 The line x = a is a vertical asymptote of the graph of f  if 
 f1x2  S ∞ as x S a+ or as x S a-.
	 iii.	 If 
N1x2
D1x2  is in lowest terms, then the graph of F1x2 has 
	
	 vertical asymptotes at the real zeros of D1x2.
	 iv.	 The line y = k is a horizontal asymptote of the graph of f  if 
f1x2 S k as x S ∞ or as x S - ∞.
	 v.	 A procedure for graphing rational functions is given on page 363.
3.7	 Variation
k is a nonzero constant called the constant of variation. 
	
Variation
Equation
y varies directly with x.
y = kx
y varies with the nth power of x.
y = kxn
y varies inversely with x.
y = k
x
y varies inversely with the nth power of x.
y = k
xn
z varies jointly with the nth power of x and  
the mth power of y.
z = kxnym
z varies directly with the nth power of x and 
inversely with the mth power of y.
z = kxn
ym
Review Exercises
Basic Skills and Concepts
In Exercises 1–10, graph each quadratic function by finding 
(i) whether the parabola opens up or down and by finding  
(ii) its vertex, (iii) its axis, (iv) its x-intercepts, (v) its y-intercept, 
and (vi) the intervals over which the function is increasing and 
decreasing.
	 1.	 y = 1x - 122 + 2 	
2.	 y = 1x + 222 - 3 
	 3.	 y = -21x - 322 + 4 	
4.	 y = - 1
21x + 122 + 2 
	 5.	 y = -2x2 + 3 	
6.	 y = 2x2 + 4x - 1 
	 7.	 y = 2x2 - 4x + 3 	
8.	 y = -2x2 - x + 3 
	 9.	 y = 3x2 - 2x + 1 	
10.	 y = 3x2 - 5x + 4 
In Exercises 11–14, determine whether the given quadratic 
function has a maximum or a minimum value and then find 
that value.
	11.	 f1x2 = 3 - 4x + x2	
12.	 f1x2 = 8x - 4x2 - 3
	13.	 f1x2 = -2x2 - 3x + 2	
14.	 f1x2 = 1
2 x2 - 3
4 x + 2
In Exercises 15–18, graph each polynomial function by using 
transformations on the appropriate function y = xn.
	15.	 f1x2 = 1x + 123 - 2 
	
16.	 f1x2 = 1x + 124 + 2 
	17.	 f1x2 = 11 - x23 + 1 
	
18.	 f1x2 = x4 + 3 
In Exercises 19–24, for each polynomial function f,
  (i)  Determine the end behavior of f.
 (ii)  Determine the zeros of f. State the multiplicity of each zero. 
Determine whether the graph of f crosses or only touches the 
axis at each x-intercept.
(iii)  Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of f.
 (iv)  Use test numbers to find the intervals over which the graph of 
f is above or below the x-axis.
 (v)  Sketch the graph of y = f1x2.
	19.	 f1x2 = x1x - 121x + 22
	20.	 f1x2 = x3 - x 
	21.	 f1x2 = -x21x - 122 
	22.	 f1x2 = -x31x - 222 
	23.	 f1x2 = -x21x2 - 12 
	24.	 f1x2 = - 1x - 1221x2 + 12 
In Exercises 25–28, divide by using long division.
	25.	 6x2 + 5x - 13
3x - 2
	26.	 8x2 - 14x + 15
2x - 3
	27.	 8x4 - 4x3 + 2x2 - 7x + 165
x + 1
	28.	 x3 - 3x2 + 4x + 7
x2 - 2x + 6 	 	
  
 	 
 	 	  	 

386	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
	55.	 f1x2 = x4 + 2x3 + 9x2 + 8x + 20; one zero is  
-1 + 2i.	 
	56.	 f1x2 = x5 - 7x4 + 24x3 - 32x2 + 64; 2 + 2i is a zero of 
multiplicity 2. 	
In Exercises 57–68, solve each equation in the complex 
­number system.
	57.	 x3 - x2 - 4x + 4 = 0	 
	58.	 2x3 + x2 - 12x - 6 = 0	 
	59.	 4x3 - 7x - 3 = 0 
	60.	 x3 + x2 - 8x - 6 = 0	 
	61.	 x3 - 8x2 + 23x - 22 = 0	 
	62.	 x3 - 3x2 + 8x + 12 = 0	 
	63.	 3x3 - 5x2 + 16x + 6 = 0	 
	64.	 2x3 - 9x2 + 18x - 7 = 0 
	65.	 x4 - x3 - x2 - x - 2 = 0	 
	66.	 x4 - x3 - 13x2 + x + 12 = 0 
	67.	 2x4 - x3 - 2x2 + 13x - 6 = 0 
	68.	 3x4 - 14x3 + 28x2 - 10x - 7 = 0 
In Exercises 69 and 70, show that the given equation has no 
rational roots.
	69.	 x3 + 13x2 - 6x - 2 = 0
	70.	 3x4 - 9x3 - 2x2 - 15x - 5 = 0 
In Exercises 71 and 72, use the Intermediate Value Theorem 
to find the value of the real root between 1 and 2 of each 
equation to two decimal places.
	71.	 x3 + 6x2 - 28 = 0 
	
72.	 x3 + 3x2 - 3x - 7 = 0
In Exercises 73–80, graph each rational function by following 
the five-step procedure outlined in Section 3.6.
	73.	 f1x2 = 1 + 1
x 
	
74.	 f1x2 = 2 - x
x 
	75.	 f1x2 =
x
x2 - 1 
	
76.	 f1x2 = x2 - 9
x2 - 4 
	77.	 f1x2 =
x3
x2 - 9 
	
78.	 f1x2 =
x + 1
x2 - 2x - 8 
	79.	 f1x2 =
x4 
x2 - 4 
	
80.	 f1x2 = x2 + x - 6
x2 - x - 12 
Applying the Concepts
	81.	 Variation. Assuming that y varies directly as x and y = 12 
when x = 4, find y when x = 5. 
	82.	 Variation. Assuming that p varies inversely as q and p = 4 
when q = 3, find p when q = 4. 
	83.	 Variation. Assuming that s varies directly as the square of t 
and s = 20 when t = 2, find s when t = 3. 
	84.	 Variation. Assuming that y varies inversely as x2 and y = 3 
when x = 8, find x when y = 12. 
In Exercises 29–32, divide by using synthetic division.
	29.	 x3 - 12x + 3
x - 3
	30.	 -4x3 + 3x2 - 5x
x - 6
	31.	2x4 - 3x3 + 5x2 - 7x + 165
x + 1
	32.	3x5 - 2x4 + x2 - 16x - 132
x + 2
In Exercises 33–36, a polynomial function f1x2 and a constant c 
are given. Find f1c2 by (i) evaluating the function and (ii) using 
synthetic division and the Remainder Theorem.
	33.	 f1x2 = x3 - 3x2 + 11x - 29; c = 2 
	34.	 f1x2 = 2x3 + x2 - 15x - 2; c = -2 
	35.	 f1x2 = x4 - 2x2 - 5x + 10; c = -3 
	36.	 f1x2 = x5 + 2; c = 1 
In Exercises 37–40, a polynomial function f1x2 and a constant 
c are given. Use synthetic division to show that c is a zero of 
f1x2. Use the result to final all zeros of f1x2.
	37.	 f1x2 = x3 - 7x2 + 14x - 8; c = 2 
	38.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 3x2 - 12x + 4; c = -2
	39.	 f1x2 = 3x3 + 14x2 + 13x - 6; c = 1
3 
	40.	 f1x2 = 4x3 + 19x2 - 13x + 2; c = 1
4
In Exercises 41 and 42, use the Rational Zeros Theorem to list 
all possible rational zeros of f1x2.
	41.	 f1x2 = x4 + 3x3 - x2 - 9x - 6
	42.	 f1x2 = 9x3 - 36x2 - 4x + 16	
In Exercises 43–50, use Descartes’s Rule of Signs and the 
Rational Zeros Theorem to find all real zeros of each  
polynomial function.
	43.	 f1x2 = 5x3 + 11x2 + 2x 	
	44.	 f1x2 = x3 + 2x2 - 5x - 6	 
	45.	 f1x2 = x3 + 3x2 - 4x - 12	 
	46.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 9x2 + 12x - 5 
	47.	 x3 - 4x2 - 5x + 14	 
	48.	 x3 - 5x2 + 3x + 1	 
	49.	 2x3 - 5x2 - 2x + 2	 
	50.	 3x3 - 29x2 + 29x + 13 	
In Exercises 51–56, find all of the zeros of f1x2, real and nonreal.
	51.	 f1x2 = x3 - 7x + 6; one zero is 2. 
	52.	 f1x2 = x4 + x3 - 3x2 - x + 2; 1 is a zero of  
multiplicity 2. 
	53.	 f1x2 = x4 - 2x3 + 6x2 - 18x - 27; two zeros are -1  
and 3. 
	54.	 f1x2 = 4x3 - 19x2 + 32x - 15; one zero is 2 - i.    	  	 	  	  	 
 	

	
Review Exercises 387
	 92.	 Meteorology. The function p =
69.1
a + 2.3 relates the 
	
	 atmospheric pressure p in inches of mercury to the altitude 
a in miles from the surface of Earth.
a.	 Find the pressure on Mount Kilimanjaro at an altitude of 
19,340 feet. 
b.	 Is there an altitude at which the pressure is 0? 
	 93.	 Wages. An employee’s wages are directly proportional to the 
time he or she has worked. Sam earned +280 for 40 hours. 
How much would Sam earn if he worked 35 hours? 
	 94.	 Car’s stopping distance. The distance required for a car to 
come to a stop after its brakes are applied is directly propor-
tional to the square of its speed. If the stopping distance for a 
car traveling 30 miles per hour is 25 feet, what is the stopping 
distance for a car traveling 66 miles per hour? 
	 95.	 Illumination. The amount of illumination from a source 
of light varies directly as the intensity of the source and 
inversely as the square of the distance from the source. At 
what distance from a light source of intensity 300 candle-
power will the illumination be one-half the illumination  
6 inches from the source? 
	 96.	 Chemistry. Charles’s Law states that at a constant pressure, 
the volume V of a gas is directly proportional to its tempera-
ture T (in Kelvin degrees). If a bicycle tube is filled with  
1.2 cubic feet of air at a temperature of 295 K, what will  
the volume of the air in the tube be if the temperature rises  
to 310 K while the pressure stays the same? 
	 97.	 Electric circuits. The current I (measured in amperes) in an 
electric circuit varies inversely as the resistance R (measured 
in ohms) when the voltage is held constant. The current in a 
certain circuit is 30 amperes when the resistance is 300 ohms.
a.	 Find the current in the circuit if the resistance is de-
creased to 250 ohms. 
b.	 What resistance will yield a current of 60 amperes? 
	 98.	 Safe load. The safe load that a circular column can support 
varies directly as the square root of its radius and inversely 
as the square of its length. A pillar with radius 4 inches and 
length 12 feet can safely support a 20-ton load. Find the load 
that a pillar of the same material with diameter 6 inches and 
length 10 feet can safely support. 
	 99.	 Spread of disease. An infectious cold virus spreads in a 
community at a rate R (per day) that is jointly proportional to the 
number of people who are infected with the virus and the num-
ber of people in the community who are not infected yet. After 
the tenth day of the start of a certain infection, 15% of the total 
population of 20,000 people of Pollutville had been infected and 
the virus was spreading at the rate of 255 people per day.
a.	 Find the constant of proportionality, k. 
b.	 At what rate is the disease spreading when  
one-half of the population is infected? 
c.	 Find the number of people infected when the rate of 
infection reached 95 people per day. 
	100.	 Coulomb’s Law. The electric charge is measured in  
coulombs. (The charges on an electron and a proton,  
which are equal and opposite, are approximately 
1.602 * 10-19 coulomb.) Coulomb’s Law states that the 
force F between two particles is jointly proportional to their 
charges q1 and q2 and inversely proportional to the square 
of the distance between the two particles. Two charges are 
acted upon by a repulsive force of 96 units. What is the force 
if the distance between the particles is quadrupled? 
	85.	 Missile path. A missile fired from the origin of a coordi-
nate system follows a path described by the equation 
	 	
y = - 1
10 x2 + 20x, where x is in yards and the x-axis is on 
	 	
the  ground. Sketch the missile’s path and determine what 
its maximum altitude is and where it hits the ground. 
	86.	 Minimizing area. Suppose a wire 20 centimeters long is 
to be cut into two pieces, each of which will be formed into 
a square. Find the size of each piece that minimizes the  
total area.	 
	87.	 A farmer wants to fence off three identical adjoining rect-
angular pens, each 400 square feet in area. See the figure. 
What should the width and length of each pen be so that the 
least amount of fence is used? 			
x
y
	 88.	 Suppose the outer boundary of the pens in Exercise 87 
requires heavy fence that costs +5 per foot and two internal 
partitions cost +3 per foot. What dimensions x and y will 
minimize the cost? 	
	 89.	 Electric circuit. In the circuit shown in the figure, the  
voltage V = 100 volts and the resistance R = 50 ohms.  
We want to determine the size of the remaining resistor  
(x ohms). The power absorbed by the circuit is given by
p1x2 =
V2 x
1R + x22.
	
	
100 V
R  x 
R  50 
a.	 Graph the function y = p1x2.	
b.	 Use a graphing calculator to find the value of x that maxi-
mizes the power absorbed. 	
	 90.	 Maximizing area. A sheet of paper for a poster is  
18 square feet in area. The margins at the top and bottom 
are 9 inches each, and the margin on each side is 6 inches. 
What should the dimensions of the paper be if the printed 
area is to be a maximum? 	
	 91.	 Maximizing profit. A manufacturer makes and sells 
printers to retailers at +24 per unit. The total daily cost C in 
dollars of producing x printers is given by
C1x2 = 150 + 3.9x +
3
1000x2.
a.	 Write the profit P as a function of x.
b.	 Find the number of printers the manufacturer should 
produce and sell to achieve maximum profit. 
c.	 Find the average cost C1x2 =
C1x2
x
. Graph y = C1x2. 

388	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
Practice Test A
	 1.	 Find the x-intercepts of the graph of 
f1x2 = x2 - 6x + 2. 
	 2.	 Graph f 1x2 = 3 - 1x + 222. 
	 3.	 Find the vertex of the parabola described by  
y = -7x2 + 14x + 3. 
	 4.	 Find the domain of the function
	
	 f 1x2 =
x2 - 1
x2 + 3x - 4. 
	 5.	 Find the quotient and remainder of
	
	 x3 - 2x2 - 5x + 6
x + 2
.	 
	 6.	 Graph the polynomial function P1x2 = x5 - 4x3. 
	 7.	 Find all of the zeros of f 1x2 = 2x3 - 2x2 - 8x + 8, given 
that 2 is one of the zeros. 
	 8.	 Find the quotient of -6x3 + x2 + 17x + 3
2x + 3
.
	 9.	 Use the Remainder Theorem to find the value P1-22 of the  
polynomial P1x2 = x4 + 5x3 - 7x2 + 9x + 17.
	10.	 Find all rational roots of the equation x3 - 5x2 - 4x +
20 = 0 and then find the irrational roots if there are any. 
	11.	 Find the zeros of the polynomial function 
f 1x2 = x4 + x3 - 15x2.
	12.	 For P1x2 = 2x18 - 5x13 + 6x3 - 5x + 9, list all possible 
rational zeros found by the Rational Zeros Test, but do not 
check to see which values are actually zeros.
	13.	 Describe the end behavior of f 1x2 = 1x + 3231x - 522.
	14.	 Find the zeros and the multiplicity of each zero for 
f 1x2 = 1x2 - 421x + 222.
	15.	 Determine how many positive and how many  
negative real zeros the polynomial function 
P1x2 = 3x6 + 2x3 -  7x2 + 8x can have.
	16.	 Find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the graph of
f 1x2 =
2x2 + 3
x2 - x - 20.
	17.	 Write an equation that expresses the statement “y is directly  
proportional to x and inversely proportional to the square of t.”
	18.	 In Problem 17, suppose y = 6 when x = 8 and t = 2. Find 
y if x = 12 and t = 3.	
	19.	 The cost C of producing x thousand units of a product is 
given by
C = x2 - 30x + 335 1dollars2.
	
	 Find the value of x for which the cost is minimum. 
	20.	 From a rectangular 8 * 17 piece of cardboard, four congru-
ent squares with sides of length x are cut out, one at each 
corner. The sides can then be folded to form a box. Find the 
volume V of the box as a function of x.         	 
Practice Test B
	 1.	 Find the x-intercepts of the graph of f 1x2 = x2 + 5x + 3. 
a.	 -5 { i213
2
b.	 -5 { 213
2
c.	 -5 { i237
2
d.	 -5 { 237
2
	 2.	 Which is the graph of f 1x2 = 4 - 1x - 222? 
	 3.	 Find the vertex of the parabola described by 
y = 6x2 + 12x - 5. 
a.	 1-1, -112
b.	 11, -52
c.	 1-1, 132
d.	 11, 132
1
5
10
5
0
5
1
5
1
x
y
(c)
1
5
10
5
0
5
1
5
1
x
y
(d)
1
5
10
5
0
5
1
5
1
x
y
(b)
1
5
10
5
0
5
1
5
1
x
y
(a)

	
Practice Test B 389
	 4.	 Which of the following is not in the domain of the function 
	
	 f 1x2 =
x2
x2 + x - 6? 
	
   I.	 -3
	
  II.	 0
	
III.	 2
a.	 I and II
b.	 I and III
c.	 II and III
d.	 I only
	 5.	 Find the quotient and remainder when x3 - 8x + 6 is  
divided by x + 3. 
a.	 x2 - 8; 2
b.	 x2 - 8; 0
c.	 x2 - 3x + 1; x + 3
d.	 x2 - 3x + 1; 3
	 6.	 Which is the graph of the polynomial P1x2 = x4 + 2x3? 
	 7.	 Find all of the zeros of f 1x2 = 3x3 - 26x2 + 61x - 30 
given that 3 is one of the zeros (that is, f 132 = 0). 
a.	 3, -5, - 2
3
b.	 3, 2, 5
3
c.	 3, 5, 2
3
d.	 3, -2, 5
3
	 8.	 Find the quotient -10x3 + 21x2 - 17x + 12
2x - 3
. 
a.	 x2 - 3x + 4
b.	 -5x2 + 3x - 4
c.	 x2 + 3x - 4
d.	 -5x2 - 4
	 9.	 Use the Remainder Theorem to find the value P1-32 of the 
polynomial P1x2 = x4 + 4x3 + 7x2 + 10x + 15. 
a.	 13
b.	 15
c.	 21
d.	 6
	10.	 Find all rational roots of the equation 
-x3 + x2 + 8x - 12 = 0 and then find the irrational roots 
if there are any. 
a.	 -3 and 2
b.	 -3 and 12
c.	 -1, -2, and 3
d.	 -3 and 13
	11.	 Find the zeros of the polynomial function 
f 1x2 = x3 + x2 - 30x. 
a.	 x = -6, x = 5, x = 0
b.	 x = 0, x = -6
c.	 x = 4, x = 5
d.	 x = 0, x = 4, x = 5
	12.	 For P1x2 = x30 - 4x25 + 6x2 + 60, list all possible rational 
zeros found by the Rational Zeros Test, but do not check to 
see which values are actually zeros. 
a.	 {2, {3, {4, {5, {6, {8, {10, {12, {15, {20, 
{30, and {60
b.	 {1, {2, {3, {4, {5, {6, {10, {12, {15, {18, 
{20, {24, {30, and {60
c.	 {1, {3, {4, {5, {6, {12, {15, {20, {30, and {60
d.	 {1, {2, {3, {4, {5, {6, {10, {12, {15, {20, 
{30, and {60
	13.	 Which of the following correctly describes the end behavior 
of f 1x2 = 1x + 122 1x - 222? 
a.	 by S ∞ as x S - ∞
y S - ∞ as x S ∞
b.	 by S - ∞ as x S - ∞
y S - ∞ as x S ∞
c.	 by S ∞ as x S - ∞
y S ∞ as x S ∞
d.	 by S - ∞ as x S - ∞
y S ∞ as x S ∞
	14.	 Find the zeros and the multiplicity of each zero for 
f 1x2 = 1x2 - 121x + 122. 
a.	 bzero  1,
multiplicity 1
zero -1,
multiplicity 2
b.	 bzero  1,
multiplicity 1
zero -1,
multiplicity 3
c.	 bzero  1,
multiplicity 2
zero -1,
multiplicity 2
d.	 bzero  i,
multiplicity 2
zero -1,
multiplicity 2
	15.	 Determine how many positive and how many negative real 
zeros the polynomial P1x2 = x5 - 4x3 - x2 + 6x - 3 can 
have. 
a.	 positive 3, negative 2
b.	 positive 2 or 0, negative 2 or 0
c.	 positive 3 or 1, negative 2 or 0
d.	 positive 2 or 0, negative 3 or 1
	16.	 The horizontal and the vertical asymptotes of the graph of 
	
	 f 1x2 = x2 + x - 2
x2 + x - 12 are 
a.	 x = -2, y = 3, y = -4.
b.	 x = 1, y = 3, y = -4.
c.	 y = 1, x = 3, x = -4.
d.	 y = -2, x = 3, x = -4.
	17.	 Write an equation that expresses the statement that S is 
directly proportional to the square of t and inversely propor-
tional to the cube of x. 
a.	 S = kt3
2
3 x
b.	 S = kt2x3
c.	 S = kt3
x2
d.	 S = kt2
x3
	18.	 In Problem 17, suppose S = 27 if t = 3 and x = 1. If t = 6 
and x = 3, then what is S? 
a.	 54
b.	 4
c.	 4
3
d.	 9
0
1
2
3
x
y
(a)
0
1
2
3 x
y
(b)
1
2
3
0
x
y
(c)
1
2
3
0
x
y
(d)

390	 Chapter 3      Polynomial and Rational Functions
	19.	 The cost C of producing x thousand units of a product is 
given by 
	
C = x2 - 24x + 319 1dollars2.
	
	 Find the value of x for which the cost is minimum.
a.	 319
b.	 12
c.	 175
d.	 24
	20.	 From a rectangular 10 * 12 piece of cardboard, four congru-
ent squares with sides of length x are cut out, one at each 
corner. The sides can then be folded to form a box. Find the 
volume V of the box as a function of x. 
a.	 V = 2x110 - x2112 - x2
b.	 V = 2x110 - 2x2112 - 2x2
c.	 V = x110 - x2112 - x2
d.	 V = x110 - 2x2112 - 2x2
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–3
	 1.	 Find the distance between the points P1-1, 32 and 
Q12, 52. 
	 2.	 Find the midpoint of the line segment joining P12, -52 and 
Q1-8, -32. 
	 3.	 Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the equation 
y = x2 - 2x - 8 and sketch the graph. 
In Exercises 4 and 5, find the slope and intercepts of the line 
and sketch the graph.
	 4.	 x + 3y - 6 = 0 
	 5.	 x = 2y - 6 
	 6.	 Find an equation in standard form of the circle with center 
12, -32 and radius 4. 
	 7.	 Find the center and radius of the circle with equation
x2 + y2 + 2x - 4y - 4 = 0.
In Exercises 8 and 9, find the slope–intercept form of the line 
satisfying the given condition.
	 8.	 The line has slope 3 and passes through 11, -22. 
	 9.	 The line is parallel to 2x + 3y = 5 and passes through  
11, 32. 
In Exercises 10 and 11, find the domain of each function.
	10.	 f 1x2 =
1
2x + 3
	11.	 p1x2 =
1
14 - 2x
	12.	 Let f 1x2 = x2 - 2x + 3. Find f 1-22, f 132, f 1x + h2,
	
	 and 
f 1x + h2 - f 1x2
h
.
	13.	 Let f 1x2 = 1x and g1x2 = x2 + 1. Find each of the  
following.
a.	 f 1g1x22
b.	 g1f 1x22
c.	 f 1f 1x22
d.	 g1g1x22
	14.	 Let f 1x2 = c
3x + 2
if
x … 2
4x - 1
if
2 6 x … 3
6
if
x 7 3
.
a.	 Find f 112, f 132, and f 142. 
b.	 Sketch the graph of y = f 1x2.	
	15.	 Let f 1x2 = 2x - 3. Find f -11x2. 
	16.	 Use transformations on y = 1x to sketch the graph of each 
function.
a.	 f 1x2 = 1x + 2 
b.	 g1x2 = -21x + 1 + 3 
	17.	 Use the Rational Zeros Test to list all possible rational zeros 
of f 1x2 = 2x4 - 3x2 + 5x - 6.
In Exercises 18–21, graph each function.
	18.	 f 1x2 = 2x2 - 4x + 1 
	19.	 f 1x2 = -x2 + 2x + 3 
	20.	 f 1x2 = 1x - 1221x + 22 
	21.	 f 1x2 = x2 - 1
x2 - 4 
	22.	 Let f 1x2 = x4 - 3x3 + 2x2 + 2x - 4. Given that 1 + i is 
a zero of f, find all zeros of f.	
	23.	 Suppose that y varies as the square root of x and that y = 6 
when x = 4. Find y if x = 9. 
	24.	 A drug manufactured by a pharmaceutical company is sold in 
bulk at a price of $150 per unit. The total production cost (in 
dollars) for x units in one week is
C1x2 = 0.02x2 + 100x + 3000.
	
	 How many units of the drug must be manufactured and sold 
in a week to maximize the profit? What is the maximum 
profit? 
	25.	 The profit (in dollars) for a product is given by
P1x2 = 0.02x3 + 48.8x2 - 2990x + 25,000,
	
	 where x is the number of units produced and sold. One break-
even point occurs when x = 10. Use synthetic division to find 
another break-even point for the product. 			 

C h a p t e r
Exponential and  
Logarithmic Functions
4
The world of finance, the growth of many populations, 
musical pitch, the molecular activity that results in an atomic 
explosion, and countless everyday events are modeled with 
exponential and logarithmic functions.
Topics
4.1	 Exponential Functions
4.2	 Logarithmic Functions
4.3	 Rules of Logarithms
4.4	 Exponential and Logarithmic 
Equations and Inequalities
4.5	 Logarithmic Scales

392	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Fooling a King
One night in northwest India, a wise man named Shashi invented a new game called 
“Shatranj” (chess). The next morning he took it to King Rai Bhalit, who was so im-
pressed that he said to Shashi, “Name your reward.” Shashi merely requested that  
1 grain of wheat be placed on the first square of the chessboard, 2 grains on the second, 
4 on the third, 8 on the fourth, and so on, for all 64 squares. The king agreed to his  
request, thinking the man was an eccentric fool for asking for only a few grains of 
wheat when he could have had gold, jewels, or even his daughter’s hand in marriage.
You may know the end of this story. Much more wheat was needed to satisfy 
Shashi’s request. The king could never fulfill his promise to Shashi; instead, he had him 
beheaded.
The details of this rapidly growing wheat phenomenon are given in the margin. 
Table 4.1 shows the number of grains of wheat that need to be stacked on each square 
of the chessboard.
These data can be modeled by the function
g1n2 = 2n-1,
where g1n2 is the number of grains of wheat and n is the number of the square (or 
the nth square) on the chessboard. Each square has twice the number of grains as the 
previous square. The function g is an example of an exponential function with base 2, 
with n restricted to 1, 2, 3, c, 64—the number of the chessboard squares. The name 
exponential function comes from the fact that the variable n occurs in the exponent. 
The base 2 is the growth factor.
When the growth rate of a quantity is directly proportional to the existing amount, 
the growth can be modeled by an exponential function. For example, exponential func-
tions are often used to model the growth of investments and populations, the cell divi-
sion of living organisms, and the decay of radioactive material. Example 12 discusses the 
growth of the world population.
Exponential Functions
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Integer exponents (Section P.2, page 18)
2	 Rational exponents (Section P.6, page 66)
3	 Graphing and transformations  
(Section 2.7, page 250)
4	 One-to-one functions (Section 2.9,  
page 270)
5	 Increasing and decreasing functions 
(Section 2.5, page 214)
Objectives
1	 Define an exponential function.
2	 Graph exponential functions.
3	 Develop formulas for simple and  
compound interest.
4	 Understand the number e.
5	 Graph the natural exponential function.
6	 Model using exponential functions.
S e c t i o n 4.1
Table 4.1 Grains of Wheat  
on a Chessboard
Square  
Number
Grains Placed  
on this Square
	
1
	
1 1=202
	
2
	
2 1=212
	
3
	
4 1=222
	
4
	
8 1=232
	
5
	
16 1=242
	
6
	
32 1=252
	
#
	
#
	
#
	
#
	
#
	
#
	
63
	
262
	
64
	
263

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 393
Exponential Functions
1	
Define an exponential  
function.
In the definition of the exponential function, we rule out the base a = 1 because in this 
case, the function is simply the constant function f 1x2 = 1x, or f 1x2 = 1. We exclude 
negative bases so that the domain includes all real numbers. For example, a cannot be -2  
because 1-221>2 = 1-2 is not a real number. Other functions with constant base and 
variables in the exponent, such as f 1x2 = 4 # 3x, g1x2 = -5 # 43x-2, and h1x2 = c # ax 
1a 7 0 and a ≠12, are also called exponential functions.
Evaluate Exponential Functions
We can evaluate exponential functions by using the laws of exponents and/or calculators, 
as in the next example. (See Section P.2 for the definitions and the laws of exponents  
involving ax when x is a rational number.)
A function f  of the form
f 1x2 = ax, a 7 0, and a ≠1,
is called an exponential function with base a and exponent x. Its domain is 1- ∞, ∞2.
Exponential Function
a.	 Let f 1x2 = 3x-2. Find f 142.
b.	 Let g1x2 = -2 # 10x. Find g1-22.
c.	 Let h1x2 = a1
9b
x
. Find h a -3
2b.
d.	 Let F1x2 = 4x. Find F13.22.
Solution
a.	 f 142 = 34-2 = 32 = 9
b.	 g1-22 = -2 # 10-2 = -2 # 1
102 = -2 #
1
100 = -0.02
c.	 h a -3
2b = a1
9b
-3
2
= 19-12- 3
2 = 9
3
2 = 11923 = 27
d.	 F 13.22 = 43.2 ≈84.44850629    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 1  Let f 1x2 = a1
4b
x
. Find f 122, f 102, f 1-12, f  a5
2b, and f  a -3
2b.
Evaluating Exponential Functions
EXAMPLE 1
The domain of an exponential function is 1- ∞, ∞2. In Example 1, we evaluated ex-
ponential functions at some rational numbers. But what is the meaning of ax when x is an 
irrational number? For example, what do expressions such as 312 and 2p mean? It turns out 
that the definition of ax (with a 7 0 and x irrational) requires methods discussed in calcu-
lus. However, we can understand the basis for the definition from the following discussion. 
Suppose we want to define the number 2p. We use several numbers that approximate p. A 
calculator shows that p ≈3.14159265c. We successively approximate 2p by using the 
rational powers shown in Table 4.2.
You can use either the ^  or  xy  
key on your calculator to evaluate 
exponential functions. For example, 
to evaluate 43.2, press
4 ^  3.2 ENTER
or
4  xy  3.2 = . You will see the 
­following display:
Here the displayed number is an  
approximate value, so we should 
write 43.2 ≈84.44850629.
Technology
Connection

394	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
It can be shown that the powers 23, 23.1, 23.14, 23.141, 23.1415, c approach exactly one 
number. We define 2p as that number. Table 4.2 shows that 2p ≈8.82 (correct to two 
decimal places).
For our work with exponential functions, we need the following facts:
1.	 Exponential functions f 1x2 = ax are defined for all real numbers x.
2.	 The graph of an exponential function is a continuous (unbroken) curve.
3.	 The rules of exponents hold for all real number exponents and positive bases.
Table 4.2 Values of f 1x2 = 2x for rational values of x that approach P
x
3
3.1
3.14
3.141
3.1415
2x
23 = 8 23.1 = 8.5 c 23.14 = 8.81 c 23.141 = 8.821 c 23.1415 = 8.8244 c
Graphing Exponential Functions
Let’s see how to sketch the graph of an exponential function. Although the domain is the 
set of all real numbers, we usually evaluate the functions only for the integer values of x 
(for ease of computation). To evaluate ax for noninteger values of x, use your calculator. 
Recall that the graph of a function f  is the graph of the equation y = f 1x2. We can use 
either f 1x2 = ax or y = ax to represent a given function.
Use the rules of exponents to simplify each expression.
a.	 6127 # 6112         b.  1613213
Solution
a.	  6127 # 6112 = 6127+ 112	
ax # ay = ax+y
	
 = 6313+213	
127 = 19.3 = 313; 112 = 14 # 3 = 213
	
 = 6513
	
313 + 213 = 13 + 2213 = 513
	
 = 165213
	
 = 777613
b.	 1613213 = 613 # 13	
1ax2y = ax#y
	
 = 63	
13 # 13 = 13 # 3 = 19 = 3
	
 = 216
Practice Problem 2  Simplify each expression.
a.	 318 # 312          b.  1a18212
Using Rules of Exponents
EXAMPLE 2
2	
Graph exponential functions.
R u l e s  o f  E x p o n e n t s
Let a, b, x, and y be real numbers with a 7 0 and b 7 0.
 ax # ay = ax+y    1ax2y = axy
 ax
ay = ax-y   
 a0 = 1
 1ab2x = axbx   
 a-x = 1
ax = a1
ab
x

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 395
We now sketch the graph of an exponential function f 1x2 = ax when 0 6 a 6 1.
Graph the exponential function f 1x2 = 3x.
Solution
First, make a table of a few values of x and the corresponding values of y.
Graphing an Exponential Function with Base a + 1
EXAMPLE 3
Next, plot the points and draw a smooth curve through them. See Figure 4.1.
Note that the x-axis is the horizontal asymptote of the graph of y = ax.
Practice Problem 3  Sketch the graph of 
f 1x2 = 2x.
x
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
y = 3x
1
27
1
9
1
3
1
3
9
27
0
y
30
x
24
27
21
18
15
9
6
12
3
2
3
1
1
2
3
y  3x
Figure 4.1  The graph of y = ax 
with a 7 1
Sketch the graph of y = a1
2b
x
 by making a table of values.
Solution
Make a table similar to the one in Example 3.
Graphing an Exponential Function f1x2 = ax, with 0 * a * 1
EXAMPLE 4
Plotting these points and drawing a smooth curve through them, we get the graph of 
y = a1
2b
x
, shown in Figure 4.2. In this graph, as x increases in the positive direction, 
y = a1
2b
x
 decreases toward 0. The x-axis is its horizontal asymptote.
Practice Problem 4  Sketch the graph of
f 1x2 = a1
3b
x
.
x
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
y = a1
2b
x
8
4
2
1
1
2
1
4
1
8
Figure 4.2  An exponential  
function y = ax with 0 6 a 6 1
y 
x
1
2
0
y
x
20
10
2
2
3
1
1
2
3
4
In general, graphs of exponential functions have two basic shapes determined by the  
base a. If a 7 1, the graph of y = ax is rising as in Figure 4.1. If 0 6 a 6 1, the graph is 
falling as in Figure 4.2. To get the correct shape for the graph of f1x2 = ax, it is helpful to 
graph the three points:
a -1, 1
ab, 10, 12, and 11, a2.

396	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Because y = a1
2b
x
= 12-12x = 2-x, the graph of y = a1
2b
x
 can also be obtained by 
reflecting the graph of y = 2x about the y-axis. See Figure 4.3.
In Figure 4.3, we sketch the graphs of four exponential functions whose bases are pair-
wise reciprocals on the same set of axes. These graphs illustrate some general properties 
of exponential functions.
Figure 4.3  Graphs of exponential 
functions with reciprocal bases.
0
y
4
x
3
2
1
y  3x
y  2x
y 
x
1
3
y 
x
1
2
2
1
1
2
The graph of y = f1-x2 is the 
reflection of the graph of y = f1x2 
about the y-axis.
Recall
P r o p e r t i e s  o f  E x p o n e n t i a l  F u n c t i o n s
Let y = f1x2 = ax, a 7 0, a ≠1.
	 1.	 The domain of f is 1- ∞, ∞2.
	 2.	 The range of f is 10, ∞2: The entire graph lies above the x-axis.
	 3.	 Note that f1x + 12 = ax+1 = a # ax = a f1x2. This means that the y-values 
change by a factor of a for each unit increase in x.
	 4.	 For a 7 1, the growth factor is a. Because the y-values increase by a factor of a 
for each unit increase in x,
	
(i)	 f  is a increasing function. That is, if x1 6 x2 then ax1 6 ax2; so the graph 
rises to the right.
	
(ii)	  y = ax is •
61
if
x 6 0
=1
if
x = 0
71
if
x 7 0
	 (iii)	 As x S ∞, y S ∞.
	 (iv)	 As x S - ∞, y S 0.
	 5.	 For 0 6 a 6 1, the decay factor is a. Because the y-values decrease by a factor 
of a for each unit increase in x,
	
(i)	 f  is a decreasing function. That is, if x1 6 x2 then ax1 7 ax2; so the graph 
falls to the right.
	
(ii)	 y = ax is •
71
if
x 6 0
=1
if
x = 0
61
if
x 7 0
	 (iii)	 As x S - ∞, y S ∞.
	 (iv)	 As x S ∞, y S 0.
	 6.	 Each exponential function f  is one-to-one. So
	
(i)	 If am = an, then m = n.
	
(ii)	 f  has an inverse.
	 7.	 The graph of f  has no x-intercepts, so it never crosses the x-axis. No value of x 
will cause f1x2 = ax to equal 0.
	 8.	 The graph of f  is a smooth and continuous curve, and it passes through the 
points a -1, 1
ab, 10, 12, and 11, a2.
	 9.	 The x-axis is a horizontal asymptote for the graph of every exponential function 
of the form f1x2 = ax.
	10.	 The graph of y = a-x = a1
ab
x
 is the reflection about the y-axis of the graph of 
	 	 y = ax.
	11.	 Let 1 6 a 6 b.
	
(i)	 The graph of f1x2 = ax lies below the graph of g1x2 = bx on the interval 
10, ∞2. This means that
2x 6 3x 6 4x6 cfor all x 7 0.
	
(ii)	 The graph of f1x2 = ax lies above the graph of g1x2 = bx on the interval 
1- ∞, 02. This means that
2x 7 3x 7 4x7 cfor all x 6 0.
	 (iii)	 The graphs of f and g intersect at 10, 12 because f102 = g102 = 1.
A function f is one-to-one if 
f1x12 = f1x22 implies x1 = x2.
Recall
A line y = k is a horizontal asymp-
tote for the graph of f if f1x2 S k 
as x S ∞ or as x S - ∞.
Recall

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 397
Find the exponential function of the form f1x2 = cax that satisfies the given conditions.
a.	 f102 = 3 and f122 = 75.
b.	 The graph of f contains the points 1-1, 182 and a4, 2
27b.
Solution
a.	 Because f102 = 3, we have 3 = c # a0 = c # 1 = c. We now write
 f1x2 = 3ax     c = 3
 75 = 3a2     Given f122 = 75
 25 = a2
    Divide both sides by 3.
 {5 = a
    Solve for a.
 a = 5
    Reject a = -5, because the base a is positive.
  So  f1x2 = 3 # 5x    Replace c with 3 and a with 5 in f1x2 = cax.
b.	 The given condition means that f1-12 = 18 and f142 = 27.
 18 = ca-1
    1-1, 182 is on the graph of y = cax.
 18a = c
    Multiply both sides by a; simplify.
 2
27 = ca4
    a4, 2
27b is on the graph of y = cax.
 2
27 = 18aa4
    Replace c with 18a in the previous equation.
 2
27 = 18a5
    a # a4 = a5
 a5 =
1
243
    Divide both sides by 18. Simplify.
 a = A
5
1
243 = 1
3    Solve for a.
To find c, we substitute a = 1
3 in the equation 18a = c. So
18 a1
3b = c  or  c = 6.
Substituting c = 6 and a = 1
3 in f1x2 = cax, we have
f1x2 = 6 a1
3b
x
.
Practice Problem 5  Repeat Example 5b with the graph points:
a.	 10, 12 and 12, 492	
b.  1-2, 162 and a3, 1
2b
Finding Exponential Functions
EXAMPLE 5

398	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Simple Interest
We first review some terminology concerning interest.
S i m p l e  I n t e r e s t  F o r m u l a
The simple interest I on a principal P at an annual rate of r (expressed as a decimal) 
per year for t years is
I = Prt. (1)
3	
Develop formulas for simple 
and compound interest.
A fee charged for borrowing a lender’s money is the interest, denoted by I.
The original, or initial, amount of money borrowed is the principal, denoted by P.
The period of time during which the borrower pays back the principal plus the inter-
est is the time, denoted by t.
The interest rate is the percent charged for the use of the principal for the given 
period. The interest rate, denoted by r, is expressed as a decimal. Unless stated oth-
erwise, the period is assumed to be one year; that is, r is an annual rate.
The amount of interest computed only on the principal is called simple interest.
Simple Interest
When money is deposited with a bank, the bank becomes the borrower. For example, 
depositing $1000 in an account at 8% interest means that the principal P is $1000 and the 
interest rate r is 0.08 for the bank as the borrower.
 8% = 8 percent
 = 8 per hundred
 =
8
100 = 0.08
Recall
Juanita has deposited $8000 in a bank for five years at a simple interest rate of 6%.
a.	 How much interest will she receive?
b.	 How much money will be in her account at the end of five years?
Solution
a.	 	
 P = +8000, r = 0.06, and t = 5.
	
	
 I = Prt
  Equation (1)
	
	
 = +8000 10.062152  Substitute values.
	
	
 = +2400
  Simplify.
b.	 In five years, the amount A she will receive is the principal plus the interest earned:
 A = P + I
 = +8000 + +2400
 = +10,400
Practice Problem 6  Find the amount that will be in a bank account if $10,000 is  
deposited at a simple interest rate of 7.5% for two years.
Calculating Simple Interest
EXAMPLE 6
Given P and r, the amount A1t2 due in t years and calculated at simple interest is found by 
using the formula
A1t2 = P + Prt. (2)
Equation (2) is a linear function of t. Simple interest problems are examples of linear 
growth, which take place when the growth of a quantity occurs at a constant rate and so 
can be modeled by a linear function.

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 399
Compound Interest
In the real world, simple interest is rarely used for periods of more than one year. Instead, 
we use compound interest—the interest paid on both the principal and the accrued (previ-
ously earned) interest.
To illustrate compound interest, suppose $1000 is deposited in a bank account paying 
4% annual interest. At the end of one year, the account will contain the original $1000 plus 
the 4% interest earned on the $1000:
+1000 + 10.0421+10002 = +1040
Similarly, if P represents the initial amount deposited at an interest rate r (expressed as a 
decimal) per year, then the amount A1 in the account after one year is
 A1 = P + rP
    Principal P plus interest earned on P
 = P11 + r2    Factor out P.
During the second year, the account earns interest on the new principal A1. The amount A2 
in the account after the second year will be equal to A1 plus the interest on A1.
 A2 = A1 + rA1
   
A1 plus interest earned on A1
 = A111 + r2
    Factor out A1.
 = P11 + r211 + r2   
A1 = P11 + r2
 = P11 + r22
The amount A3 in the account after the third year is
 A3 = A2 + rA2
   
A2 plus interest earned on A2
 = A211 + r2
    Factor out A2.
 = P11 + r2211 + r2   
A2 = P11 + r22
 = P11 + r23
     11 + r2211 + r2 = 11 + r23
In general, the amount A in the account after t years is given by
A = P11 + r2t. (3)
We say that this type of interest is compounded annually because it is paid once a year.
Juanita deposits $8000 in a bank at the interest rate of 6% compounded annually for five 
years.
a.	 How much money will she have in her account after five years?
b.	 How much interest will she receive?
Solution
a.	 Here P = +8000, r = 0.06, and t = 5; so
 A = P11 + r2t
 = +800011 + 0.0625    P = +8000, r = 0.06, t = 5
 = +800011.0625
 = +10,705.80
    Use a calculator.
b.	 Interest = A - P = +10,705.80 - +8000 = +2705.80
Practice Problem 7  Repeat Example 7 assuming that the bank pays 7.5% interest  
compounded annually.
Calculating Compound Interest
EXAMPLE 7

400	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Comparing Examples 6 and 7, we see that compounding Juanita’s interest made her 
money grow faster. We expect this because the function A1t2 = P11 + r2t is an exponen-
tial function with base 11 + r2.
Banks and other financial institutions usually pay savings account interest more than 
once a year. They pay a smaller amount of interest more frequently. Suppose the quoted an-
nual interest rate r (also called the nominal rate) is compounded n times per year (at equal 
intervals) instead of annually. Then for each period, the interest rate is r
n , and there are n # t 
periods in t years. Accordingly, we can restate the formula A1t2 = P11 + r2t as follows:
C o m p o u n d  I n t e r e s t  F o r m u l a
A = Pa1 + r
nb
nt
    (4)
 A = amount after t years
 P = principal
 r = annual interest rate (expressed as a decimal number)
 n = number of times interest is compounded each year
 t = number of years
The total amount accumulated after t years, denoted by A, is also called the future value 
of the investment.
Compounding that occurs 1, 2, 4, 
12, and 365 times a year is known 
as compounding annually, semian-
nually, quarterly, monthly, and daily, 
respectively.
DO You  
Know?
If $100 is deposited in a bank that pays 5% annual interest, find the future value A after 
one year if the interest is compounded
  (i)	 Annually.
 (ii)	 Semiannually.
(iii)	 Quarterly.
(iv)	 Monthly.
   (v)	 Daily.
Solution
In the following computations, P = +100, r = 0.05, and t = 1. Only n, the number of 
times interest is compounded each year, changes. Because t = 1, nt = n112 = n.
	 (i)	 Annual Compounding:	
A = P a1 + r
nb
nt
	
n = 1; t = 1
A = +10011 + 0.052 = +105.00
	(ii)	 Semiannual Compounding:	
A = P a1 + r
2b
2
	
n = 2; t = 1
A = +100 a1 + 0.05
2 b
2
≈+105.06	
Use a calculator.
	(iii)	 Quarterly Compounding:	
 A = P a1 + r
4b
4
	
n = 4; t = 1
 A = +100 a1 + 0.05
4 b
4
≈+105.09	
Use a calculator.
Using Different Compounding Periods  
to Compare Future Values
EXAMPLE 8

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 401
The next example shows that we can solve equation (4) for the interest rate r.
	(iv)	 Monthly Compounding:	
 A = Pa1 +
r
12b
12
	
n = 12; t = 1
 A = +100a1 + 0.05
12 b
12
 ≈+105.12
	
Use a calculator.
	 (v)	 Daily Compounding:	
 A = Pa1 +
r
365b
365
	
n = 365; t = 1
 A = +100a1 + 0.05
365 b
365
 ≈+105.13
	
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 8  Repeat Example 8 assuming that $5000 is deposited at a 6.5%  
annual rate.
You may make errors such as for-
getting parentheses when entering 
complicated expressions in your 
calculator. Look at the answer to 
see whether it is reasonable and 
makes sense.
Side 
Note
Carmen has $9000 to invest. She needs $20,000 at the end of 8 years. If the interest is 
compounded quarterly, find the rate r needed.
Solution
Have P = +9000, A = +20,000,  t = 8, and n = 4. Substituting these values in equation 
(4), we have
+20,000 = +9000 a1 + r
4b
4#8
or
 a1 + r
4b
32
= 20,000
9000     Rewrite, with 4 # 8 = 32 and divide both sides by 9000.
 = 20
9
    Simplify the right side.
Taking the 32nd root or 1
32 power of both sides, we have
 1 + r
4 = a20
9 b
1>32
 r
4 = a20
9 b
1>32
- 1
    Subtract 1 from both sides.
 r = 4c a20
9 b
1>32
- 1d     Multiply both sides by 4.
 ≈0.1010692264
    Use a calculator.
 ≈10.107%
Carmen needs an interest rate of about 10.107%.
Check:    9000 a1 + 0.10107
4
b
32
= 20,000.12073 ≈20,000.
Practice Problem 9  Repeat Example 9 if the interest is compounded monthly.
Computing Interest Rate
EXAMPLE 9

402	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Continuous Compound Interest Formula
Notice that in Example 8 the future value A increases with n, the number of compounding 
periods. (Of course P, r, and t are fixed.) The question is: If n increases indefinitely (100, 
1000, 10,000 times, and so on), does the amount A also increase indefinitely? Let’s see why 
the answer is “no”. Let h = n
r . Then we have
 A = P a1 + r
nb
nt
    Equation (4)
 = Pc a1 + r
nb
n>r
d
rt
    nt = n
r # rt
 = Pc a1 + 1
hb
h
d
rt
    h = n
r, so 1
h = r
n
Table 4.3 shows the expression a1 + 1
hb
h
 as h takes on increasingly larger values.
4	
Understand the number e.
Table 4.3 
h
a1 + 1
h b
h
1
2
2
2.25
10
2.59374
100
2.70481
1000
2.71692
10,000
2.71815
100,000
2.71827
1,000,000
2.71828
Table 4.3 suggests that as h gets larger and larger, a1 + 1
hb
h
 gets closer and closer to a 
fixed number. This observation can be proven, and the fixed number is denoted by e in 
honor of the famous mathematician Leonhard Euler (pronounced “oiler”). The number e, 
an irrational number, is sometimes called the Euler number.
The value of e to 15 decimal places is
e ≈2.718281828459045.
We sometimes write
e = lim
hS ∞a1 + 1
hb
h
,
which means that when h is very large, a1 + 1
hb
h
 has a value very close to e. Note that as 
n gets very large, the quantity h = n
r also gets very large because r is fixed. Therefore, the 
compounded amount A = P a1 + r
nb
nt
= Pc a1 + r
nb
n>r
d
rt
 approaches Pert.
Graphs of y1 = e and 
y2 = a1 + 1
x b
x
 
3
20
0
y1e
y2 1      
1
x
x
As x S ∞, a1 + 1
x b
x
S e.
Technology
Connection
Leonhard Euler 
(1707–1783)
Leonhard Euler was 
the son of a Calvin-
ist minister from 
Switzerland. At 13, 
Euler entered the 
University of Basel,  
pursuing a career in theology. At the  
university, Euler was tutored by Johann 
Bernoulli, of the famous Bernoulli fam-
ily of mathematicians. Euler’s interest 
and skills led him to abandon his theo-
logical studies and take up mathemat-
ics. In 1741, Euler moved to the Berlin 
­Academy, where he stayed until 1766. 
He then returned to St. Petersburg, 
where he remained for the rest of his life.
Euler contributed to many areas 
of mathematics, including number 
theory, combinatorics, and analysis, as 
well as applications to areas such as 
music and naval architecture. He wrote 
over 1100 books and papers and left 
so much unpublished work that it took 
47 years after he died for all of his work 
to be published. During Euler’s life, his 
papers accumulated so quickly that he 
kept a large pile of articles awaiting 
publication. The Berlin Academy pub-
lished the papers on top of this pile, 
so later results often were published 
before results they depended on or 
superseded. The project of publishing 
his collected works, undertaken by the 
Swiss Society of Natural Science, is still 
going on and will require more than 75 
volumes.

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 403
Continuous Compounding  When interest is compounded continuously, the 
amount A after t years is given by the following formula:
C o n t i n u o u s  C o m p o u n d  I n t e r e s t  F o r m u l a
A = Pert (5)
 A = amount after t years
 P = principal
 r = annual interest rate (expressed as a decimal number)
 t = number of years
The Natural Exponential Function
The exponential function
f1x2 = ex
with base e is so prevalent in the sciences that it is often referred to as the exponential func-
tion or the natural exponential function. We use a calculator to find ex to two decimal 
places for x = -2, -1, 0, 1, and 2 in Table 4.4.
Most calculators have the ex  or 
EXP  key for calculating ex for a 
given value of x.
On a TI-83 calculator, to evalu-
ate a number such as e5 , you press  
 ex 5 ENTER  and read the display 
148.4131591.
Technology
Connection
Find the amount when a principal of $8300 is invested at a 7.5% annual rate of interest 
compounded continuously for eight years and three months.
Solution
We use formula (5), with P = +8300 and r = 0.075. We convert eight years and three 
months to 8.25 years.
 A = +8300e10.075218.252    Use the formula A = Pert.
 ≈+15,409.83
    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 10  Repeat Example 10 assuming that $9000 is invested at a 6%  
annual rate.
Calculating Continuous Compound Interest
EXAMPLE 10
5	
Graph the natural  
exponential functions.
Because 2 6 e 6 3, the graph of y = ex lies between the graphs y = 2x and y = 3x. 
The function f1x2 = ex has all the properties of exponential functions with base a 7 1 
listed on page 396.
We can apply the transformations from Section 2.7 to the natural exponential function.
Table 4.4 
x
ex
-2
0.14
-1
0.37
   0
1
   1
2.72
   2
7.39
The graph of f1x2 = ex is sketched  
in Figure 4.4 by using the ordered  
pairs in Table 4.4.
0
y
x
1
2
3
2
1
1
2
y  3x
y  2x
y  ex
Figure 4.4  The graph of y = ex 
is between the graphs y = 2x and 
y = 3x
Transcendental numbers and 
transcendental functions.
Numbers that are solutions of 
polynomial equations with rational 
coefficients are called algebraic: 
-2 is algebraic because it satisfies 
the equation x + 2 = 0, and 
13 is algebraic because it satis-
fies the equation x2 - 3 = 0. 
Numbers that are not algebraic are 
called transcendental, a term 
coined by Euler to describe numbers 
such as e and p that appear to 
“transcend the power of algebraic 
methods.”
There is a somewhat similar 
distinction between functions. The 
exponential and logarithmic func-
tions, which are the main subject 
of this chapter, are transcendental 
functions.
Do You  
know?

404	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Use transformations to sketch the graph of
g1x2 = ex-1 + 2.
Solution
We start with the natural exponential function f1x2 = ex and shift its graph 1 unit right to 
obtain the graph of y = ex-1.
We then shift the graph of y = ex-1 up 2 units to obtain the graph of g1x2 = ex-1 + 2. 
See Figure 4.5.
Using Transformations on f 1x2 = ex
EXAMPLE 11
Practice Problem 11  Sketch the graph of g1x2 = -ex-1 - 2.
0
y
5
x
6
4
3
2
1
2
3
1
0
y
5
x
6
4
3
2
1
2
3
1
0
y
5
x
6
4
3
2
1
2
1
(0, 1)
(1, 1)
(1, 3)
y  2
Horizontal shift
Vertical shift
Figure 4.5  Graphing g1x2 = ex-1 + 2
Natural Exponential Growth and Decay
Numerous applications of the exponential function are based on the fact that many different 
quantities have a growth (or decay) rate proportional to their size. Using calculus, we can 
show that in such cases, we obtain the following mathematical models:
6	
Model using exponential 
functions.
M o d e l s  f o r  N at u r a l  E x p o n e n t i a l  G r o w t h  
a n d  D e c ay
For k 7 0,
Exponential growth: A1t2 = A0 ekt, and
Exponential decay:   A1t2 = A0 e-kt, where
 A1t2 = the amount at time t
 A0 = A102, the initial amount (the amount at t = 0)
 k = relative rate of growth or decay
 t = time
Alternatively, we can rewrite g1x2 as:
g1x2 = 1
e
  ex + 2
so that the horizontal shift can be 
replaced by shrinking vertically by
a factor of 1
e.
Side 
Note

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 405
In the year 2000, the human population of the world was approximately 6.08 billion. 
Assume the annual rate of growth from 1990 onwards at 1.5%. Using the exponential 
growth model, estimate the population of the world in the following years.
a.	 2030        b.  1990
Solution
a.	 The year 2000 corresponds to t = 0. So A0 = 6.08 billion, k = 0.015, and 2030  
corresponds to t = 30.
 A1302 = 6.08 e10.01521302   
A1t2 = A0 ekt
 A1302 ≈9.54           
Use a calculator.
	
Thus, the model predicts that if the rate of growth is 1.5% per year, over 9.54 billion 
people will be in the world in 2030.
b.	 The year 1990 corresponds to t = -10 (because 1990 is ten years prior to 2000).
	
We have
 A1-102 = 6.08 e10.01521-102   
A1t2 = A0 ekt
 ≈5.23              Use a calculator.
	
Thus, the model estimates that the world had over 5.23 billion people in 1990  
assuming the growth rate had been 1.5% per year. (The actual population in 1990  
was 5.28 billion.)
Practice Problem 12  Repeat Example 12 assuming that the annual rate of growth  
at 1.6%.
Exponential Growth
You buy a fishing boat for $22,000. Your boat depreciates (exponentially) at the annual rate 
of 15% of its value. Find the depreciated value of your boat at the end of 5 years.
Solution
We use the exponential decay model: A1t2 = A0 e -kt, where A1t2 represents the value of 
the boat after t years.
Here A0 = 22,000, k = 0.15, and t = 5. So
 A1t2 = 22,000 e-kt
 A152 = 22,000 e-10.152152    Replace k with 0.15 and t with 5.
 ≈10,392.06416
    Use a calculator.
So to the nearest cent, the value of your boat at the end of 5 years will be $10,392.06.
Practice Problem 13  Repeat Example 13 with k = 18% and t = 6 years.
Exponential Decay
EXAMPLE 13
EXAMPLE 12

406	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Answers to Practice Problems
1. f122 = 1
16
f102 = 1
f1-12 = 4
f a5
2b = 1
32
f a- 3
2b = 8
2. a. 3312 = 2712  b. a4
3. 
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
3
2
1
3 2 1
  4. 
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
3
2
1
3 2 1
5. a. 7x  b. 4 a1
2b
x
    6. $11,500    7. a. A = +11,485.03 
b. I = +3,485.03    8. (i) $5325.00  (ii) $5330.28
(iii) $5333.01  (iv) $5334.86  (v) $5335.76    9. 10.023% 
10. $14,764.48 
11. y = -ex-1 - 2  
0
1
3
4
5
6
y
x
2
3
1
3 2 1
2
12. a. 9.82  b. 5.18    13. $7471.10
Exercises
section 4.1 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 For the exponential function f1x2 = cax, a 7 0, a ≠1, 
the domain is  
 and for c 7 0, the range is  
.
	2.	 The graph of f1x2 = 3x has y-intercept  
  
and has  
  x-intercept.
	3.	 The horizontal asymptote of the graph of y = a1
3b
x
 is the 
	
	
.
	4.	 The exponential function f1x2 = ax is increasing if  
 and is decreasing if  
.
	5.	 The formula for compound interest at rate r compounded  
n times per year is A =
.
	6.	 The formula for continuous compound interest  
is A =
.
	7.	 True or False. The graphs of y = 2x and y = a1
2b
x
 are 
	
	 symmetric with respect to the x-axis. 
	8.	 True or False. For the equation y = ax 1a 7 0, a ≠12, 
y S ∞ as x S ∞. 
	9.	 True or False. Let y = e -x, then y S 0 as x S ∞. 
	10.	 True or False. The graph of y = ex + 1 is obtained by 
shifting the graph of y = ex horizontally 1 unit to  
the left. 
In Exercises 11–18, explain whether the given equation 
defines an exponential function. Give reasons for your 
answers. Write the base for each exponential function.
	11.	 y = x3 
	12.	 y = 4x 
	13.	 y = 2-x 
	14.	 y = 1-52x 
	15.	 y = xx 
	16.	 y = 42 
	17.	 y = 0x 
	18.	 y = 11.82x 
In Exercises 19–24, evaluate each exponential function for the 
given value(s). (Use a calculator if necessary.)
	19.	 f1x2 = 5x-1, f102 
	20.	 f1x2 = -2x+1, f1-22 
	21.	 g1x2 = 31-x; g13.22, g1-1.22 
	22.	 g1x2 = a1
2b
x+1
; g12.82, g1-3.52 
	23.	 h1x2 = a2
3b
2x-1
; h11.52, h1-2.52 
 
	24.	 f1x2 = 3 - 5x; f122, f1-12 
In Exercises 25–32, simplify each expression. Write the 
answer in the form ax.
	25.	 312 # 312 
	
26.	 713 # 49112 
	27.	 8p , 4p 
	
28.	 915 , 2715 
	29.	1312213 
	
30.	1213215 
	31.	1a132112 
	
32.	 a12 # 1a2218   

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 407
In Exercises 33–36, find the function of the form f 1x2 = cax 
that contains the two given graph points.
	33.	 a.  10, 12 and 12, 162 
	
b.	 10, 12 and a-2, 1
9b 
	34.	 a.  10, 32 and 12, 122 
	
b.	 10, 52 and 11, 152 
	35.	 a.  11, 12 and 12, 52 
	
b.	 11, 12 and a2, 1
5b 
	36.	 a.  11, 52 and 12, 1252 	
b.	 1-1, 42 and 11, 162 
In Exercises 37–44, sketch the graph of the given function by 
making a table of values. (Use a calculator if necessary.)
	37.	 f1x2 = 4x 
	
38.	 g1x2 = 10x 
	39.	 g1x2 = a3
2b
-x 
	
40.	 h1x2 = 7-x 
	41.	 h1x2 = a1
4b
x 
	
42.	 f1x2 = a 1
10b
x 
	43.	 f1x2 = 11.32-x 
	
44.	 g1x2 = 10.72-x 
Match each exponential function given in Exercises 45–48 
with one of the graphs labeled (a), (b), (c), and (d).
	45.	 f1x2 = 5x 
	
46.	 f1x2 = -5x 
	47.	 f1x2 = 5-x  	
48.	 f1x2 = 5-x + 1  
0
(a)
y
x
6
1
1  
0
(b)
y
x
1 
0
(c)
y
x
6
1
1  
0
y
x
(d)
1
6
1
In Exercises 49–56, start with the graph of the appropriate 
basic exponential function f and use transformations to 
sketch the graph of the function g. State the domain and 
range of g and the horizontal asymptote of its graph.
	49.	 g1x2 = 3x-1 
	
50.	 g1x2 = 3x - 1 
	51.	 g1x2 = 4-x 
	
52.	 g1x2 = -4x 
	53.	 g1x2 = -2 # 5x-1 + 4 
	
54.	 g1x2 = 1
2 # 51-x - 2 
	55.	 g1x2 = -ex-2 + 3 
	
56.	 g1x2 = 3 + e2-x 
In Exercises 57–60, write an equation of the form 
f 1x2 = ax + b from the given graph. Then compute f 122.
	57.	
y
x
0
1
2
3
4
2
1
3
1
(0, 3)
(1, 3.5)
  
 
	58.	
y
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
3
2
2
1
(0, 3)
(2, 6)
  
	
	 	
	59.	
y
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
3
2
2
1
1
2
(2, 7)
(1, 1)
 			
	60.	
y
x
0
1
3
2
1
3
2
2
1
(1, 2.5)
(1, 1)
 			
In Exercises 61–64, write an equation of each graph in the 
final position.
	61.	 The graph of y = 2x is shifted 2 units left and then 5 units up.
	62.	 The graph of y = 3x is shifted 3 units right and then is 
reflected about the y-axis. 
	63.	 The graph of y = a1
2b
x
 is stretched vertically by a factor of 
	
	 2 and then is shifted 5 units down. 
	64.	 The graph of y = 2-x is reflected about the x-axis and then is 
shifted 3 units up.  

408	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
In Exercises 65–68, find the simple interest for each value of 
principal P, rate r per year, and time t.
	65.	 P = +5000, r = 10%, t = 5 years 
	66.	 P = +10,000, r = 5%, t = 10 years 
	67.	 P = +7800, r = 6 7
8 %, t = 10 years and 9 months
	68.	 P = +8670, r = 4 1
8 %, t = 6 years and 8 months
In Exercises 69–72, find (a) the future value of the given 
­principal P and (b) the interest earned in the given period.
	69.	 P = +3500 at 6.5% compounded annually for 13 years
	70.	 P = +6240 at 7.5% compounded monthly for 12 years
	71.	 P = +7500 at 5% compounded continuously for 10 years
	72.	 P = +8000 at 6.5% compounded daily for 15 years
In Exercises 73–76, find the principal P that will generate the 
given future value A.
	73.	 A = +10,000 at 8% compounded annually for 10 years
	74.	 A = +10,000 at 8% compounded quarterly for 10 years 
	75.	 A = +10,000 at 8% compounded daily for 10 years
	76.	 A = +10,000 at 8% compounded continuously for 10 years
In Exercises 77–84, starting with the graph of y = ex, use 
transformations to sketch the graph of each function and 
state its horizontal asymptote.
	77.	 f1x2 = e-x 
	
78.	 f1x2 = -ex 
	79.	 f1x2 = ex-2 
	
80.	 f1x2 = e2-x 
	81.	 f1x2 = 1 + ex 
	
82.	 f1x2 = 2 - e-x 
	83.	 f1x2 = -ex-2 + 3 
	
84.	 g1x2 = 3 + e2-x 
Applying the Concepts
	85.	 Metal cooling. Suppose a metal block is cooling so that 
its temperature T (in °C) is given by T = 200 # 4-0.1t + 25, 
where t is in hours.
a.	 Find the temperature after 
(i)  2 hours.	(ii)  3.5 hours.
b.	 How long has the cooling been taking place if the block 
now has a temperature of 125°C? 
c.	 Find the eventual temperature 1t S ∞2. 
	86.	 Ethnic population. The population (in thousands) of  
people of East Indian origin in the United States is  
approximated by the function
p1t2 = 16001220.1047t,
	
	where t is the number of years since 2010.
a.	 Find the population of this group in 
(i)  2010.	
	
(ii)  2018.
b.	 Predict the population in 2025. 
	87.	 Price appreciation. In 2010, the median price of a house in 
Miami was $190,000. Assuming a rate of increase of 3% per 
year, what can we expect the price of such a house to be in 
2015? 
	88.	 Investment. How much should a mother invest at the time 
her son is born to provide him with $80,000 at age 21? Assume 
that the interest is 7% compounded quarterly. 
	89.	 Depreciation. Trans Trucking Co. purchased a truck for 
$80,000. The company depreciated the truck at the end of 
each year at the rate of 15% of its current value. What is the 
value of the truck at the end of the fifth year? 
	90.	 Manhattan Island purchase. In 1626, Peter Du Minuit 
purchased Manhattan Island from the Native Americans for 
60 Dutch guilders (about $24). Suppose the $24 was invested 
in 1626 at a 6% rate. How much money would that invest-
ment be worth in 2006 if the interest was
a.	 Simple interest. 
b.	 Compounded annually. 
c.	 Compounded monthly. 
d.	 Compounded continuously. 
	91.	 Investment. Ms. Ann Scheiber retired from government 
service in 1941 with a monthly pension of $83 and $5000 in 
savings. At the time of her death in January 1995 at the age 
of 101, Ms. Scheiber had turned the $5000 into $22 ­million 
through shrewd investments in the stock market. She 
bequeathed all of it to Yeshiva University in New York City. 
What annual rate of return compounded annually would turn 
$5000 to a whopping $22 million in 54 years? 
	92.	 Population. The population of Sometown, USA, was 12,000 
in 2000 and grew to 15,000 in 2010. Assume that the popula-
tion will continue to grow exponentially at the same constant 
rate. What will be the population of Sometown in 
	
	 2020? c Hint: Show that ek = a5
4b
1>10
.d 
	93.	 Medicine. Tests show that a new ointment X helps heal 
wounds. If A0 square millimeters is the area of the original 
wound, then the area A of the wound after n days of applica-
tion of the ointment X is given by A = A0e-0.43n. If the area 
of the original wound was 10 square millimeters, find the 
area of the wound after ten days of application of the new 
ointment. 
	94.	 Cooling. The temperature T (in °C) of coffee at time  
t ­minutes after its removal from the microwave is given  
by the equation
T = 25 + 73e-0.28t.
	
	Find the temperature of the coffee at each time listed.
a.	 t = 0 
	b.  t = 10 
c.	 t = 20 
	
d.  after a long time 
	95.	 Interest rate. Mary purchases a 12-year bond for 
$60,000.00. At the end of 12 years, she will redeem the bond 
for approximately $95,600.00. If the interest is compounded 
quarterly, what was the interest rate on  
the bond? 
	96.	 Best deal. Fidelity Federal offers three types of investments: 
(i) 9.7% compounded annually, (ii) 9.6% compounded  
monthly, and (iii) 9.5% compounded continuously. Which 
investment is the best deal? 
	97.	 Paper stacking. Suppose we have a large sheet of paper 
0.015 centimeter thick and we tear the paper in half and put 
the pieces on top of each other. We keep tearing and stacking 
in this manner, always tearing each piece in half. How high 
will the resulting pile of paper be if we continue the process 
of tearing and stacking
a.	 30 times? 
b.	 40 times? 
c.	 50 times? [Hint: Use a calculator.]                

	
Section 4.1    ■    Exponential Functions 409
	 98.	 Doubling. A jar with a volume of 1000 cubic centimeters 
contains bacteria that doubles in number every minute. If 
the jar is full in 60 minutes, how long did it take for the 
container to be half full? 
Beyond the Basics
	 99.	 Let f1x2 = ex. Show that
a.	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
= ex aeh - 1
h
b.
b.	 f1x + y2 = f1x2f1y2.
c.	 f1-x2 =
1
f1x2.
	100.	 Let f1x2 = 3x + 3-x and g1x2 = 3x - 3-x. Find each of 
the following:
a.	 f1x2 + g1x2 
b.	 f1x2 - g1x2 
c.	 3f1x242 - 3g1x242 
d.	 3f1x242 + 3g1x242 
	101.	 You need the following definition for this exercise:  
Let 0! = 1; 1! = 1; 2! = 2 # 1; and, in general, 
n! = n1n - 121n - 22 g  3 # 2 # 1. The symbol n! is read 
“n factorial.” Now let
Sn = 2 + 1
2! + 1
3! + 1
4! + c + 1
n! .
	
	 Compute Sn for n = 5, 10, and 15. Compare the resulting 
values with the value of e on page 402. 
	102.	 The hyperbolic cosine function (abbreviated as cosh x) and 
hyperbolic sine function (abbreviated as sinh x) are defined 
	
	 by cosh x = ex + e-x
2
 and sinh x = ex - e -x
2
.
a.	 Is cosh x odd, even, or neither? 
b.	 Is sinh x odd, even, or neither? 
c.	 Show that cosh x + sinh x = ex.
d.	 Show that 1cosh x22 - 1sinh x22 = 1.
	103.	 If an investment of P dollars returns A dollars after one 
year, the effective annual interest rate or annual yield y is 
defined by the equation
A = P11 + y2.
	
	 Show that if the sum of P dollars is invested at a nominal 
rate r per year, compounded m times per year, the effective 
annual yield y is given by the equation
y = a1 + r
m b
m
- 1.
	104.	 The relative rate of growth of A1t2 = Pekt in the interval 
	
	 3t, t + h4 is defined by 
A1t + h2 - A1t2
A1t2
.
a.	 Show that 
A1t + 12 - A1t2
A1t2
= ek - 1.
b.	 Show that 
A1t + h2 - A1t2
A1t2
= ekh - 1.
In Exercises 105–108, describe an order in which a sequence 
of transformations is applied to the graph of y = ex to obtain 
the graph of the given equation.
	105.	 y = 3e2x-1	
106.	 y = -2e3x+2
	107.	 y = 5e2-3x + 4	
108.	 y = -2e3-4x - 1
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	109.	 Discuss why we do not allow a to be 1, 0, or a negative 
number in the definition of an exponential function of the 
form f1x2 = ax.
	110.	 Consider the function g1x2 = 1-32x, which is not an  
exponential function. What are the possible rational  
numbers x for which g1x2 is defined.
	111.	 Discuss the end behavior of the graph of y =
b
1 + cax, 
	
	 where a, b, c 7 0 and a ≠1. (Consider the cases a 6 1 
and a 7 1.)
	112.	 Write a summary of the types of graphs (with 
sketches) for the exponential functions of the form 
y = cax, c ≠0, a 7 0, and a ≠1.
	113.	 Give a convincing argument to show that the equation 
2x = k has exactly one solution for every k 7 0. Support 
your argument with graphs.
	114.	 Find all solutions of the equation 2x = 2x. How do you 
know you found all solutions? 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 115–122, simplify each expression.
	115.	 100 
	
116.	 10-1 
	117.	 1-821>3 
	
118.	 12521>2 
	119.	 a1
7b
-2 
	
120.	 a1
9b
-1>2 
	121.	 11821>2 
	
122.	 a 1
12b
-1>2 
In Exercises 123–128, find the inverse of each function. Then 
find the domain and the range of f -1.
	123.	 f1x2 = 3x + 4	
124.	 f1x2 = 1
2x - 5
	125.	 f1x2 = 1x, x Ú 0	
126.	 f1x2 = x2 + 1, x Ú 0
	127.	 f1x2 =
1
x - 1	
128.	 f1x2 = 2
3 x          

Detecting Possible Fraud
Listed below is the size (in square kilometers) of the first 50 countries of the world in 
two columns. One of the columns contains the real data, and the other column contains 
fictitious data. Can you guess which column contains the real data? In Example 8, we 
show how to detect the real data.
Country
Size I
Size II
Country
Size I
Size II
Afghanistan
608,239
645,807
Bermuda
54
53
Albania
29,562
28,748
Bhutan
47,560
46,650
Algeria
2,481,743
2,381,741
Bolivia
998,582
1,098,581
American Samoa
201
197
Bosnia and Herzegovina
49,857
51,129
Andorra
465
464
Botswana
601,780
581,730
Angola
997,852
1,246,700
Bouvet Island
48
49
Anguilla
98
96
Brazil
8,645,521
8,544,418
Antarctica
15,207,012
13,209,000
British Virgin Islands
201
151
Antigua & Barbuda
445
442
Brunei Darussalam
6,123
5,765
Antilles, Netherlands
801
800
Bulgaria
99,949
110,994
Arabia, Saudi
2,250,790
2,149,690
Burkina Faso
269,013
267,950
Argentina
2,875,510
2,777,409
Burundi
27,735
27,834
Armenia
29,851
29,743
Cambodia
201,137
181,035
Aruba
201
193
Cameroon
485,447
475,442
Australia
7,801,663
7,682,557
Canada
9,976,231
9,976,137
Austria
83,760
83,858
Cape Verde
4,121
4,033
Azerbaijan
86,640
86,530
Cayman Islands
260
259
Bahamas
20,112
13,962
Central African Republic
623,541
622,436
Bahrain
695
694
Chad
999,494
1,284,000
Bangladesh
99,763
142,615
Chile
756,589
755,482
Barbados
423
431
China
9,806,441
9,806,391
Belarus
207,599
207,600
Christmas Island
241
135
Belgium
31,618
30,518
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
21
14
Belize
23,105
22,966
Colombia
986,779
1,141,748
Benin
99,879
112,622
Comoros
2,001
1,862
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Finding the inverse of a one-to-one  
function (Section 2.9, page 276)
2	 Polynomial and rational inequalities 
(Section 1.5)
3	 Graphing and transformations  
(Section 2.7)
Objectives
1	 Define logarithmic functions.
2	 Evaluate logarithms.
3	 Derive basic properties of logarithmic 
functions.
4	 Find the domains of logarithmic functions.
5	 Graph logarithmic functions.
6	 Use natural logarithms in applications.
Logarithmic Functions
4.2
S e c t i o n
Logarithmic Functions
Recall from Section 4.1 that every exponential function
f1x2 = ax, a 7 0, a ≠1,
is a one-to-one function and therefore has an inverse function. Let’s find the inverse of the 
function f 1x2 = 3x. If we think of an exponential function f  as “putting an exponent on” a 
1	
Define logarithmic functions.
410	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

	
Section 4.2    ■    Logarithmic Functions 411
particular base, then the inverse function f -1 must “lift the exponent off” to undo the effect 
of f, as illustrated below:
x 
  3x 
  x 
Let’s try to find the inverse of f1x2 = 3x by the procedure outlined in Section 2.9.
Step 1  Replace f1x2 in the equation f1x2 = 3x with y: y = 3x.
Step 2  Interchange x and y in the equation in Step 1: x = 3y.
Step 3  Solve the equation for y in Step 2.
In Step 3, we need to solve the equation x = 3y for y. Finding y is easy when 3 = 3y or 
27 = 3y, but what if 5 = 3y? There actually is a real number y that solves the equation, 
5 = 3y, but we have not introduced the name for this number yet. (We were in a similar 
position concerning the solution of y3 = 7 before we introduced the name for the solution, 
namely, 2
3 7.) We can say that y is “the exponent on 3 that gives 5.” Instead, we use the 
word logarithm (or log for short) to describe this exponent. We use the notation log3 5 (read 
as “log of 5 with base 3”) to express the solution of the equation 5 = 3y. This log notation 
is a new way to write information about exponents: y = log3 x means x = 3y. In other 
words, log3 x is the exponent to which 3 must be raised to obtain x. The inverse function of 
the exponential function f1x2 = 3x is the logarithmic function with base 3. So
f -11x2 = log3 x or y = log3 x, where y = f -11x2.
The previous discussion could be repeated for any base a instead of 3 provided that a 7 0 
and a ≠1.
For x 7 0, a 7 0, and a ≠1,
y = loga x if and only if x = ay.
The function f1x2 = loga x is called the logarithmic function with base a.
Logarithmic Function
The definition of the logarithmic function says that the two equations
 y = loga x 1logarithmic form2 and
 x = ay   1exponential form2
are equivalent. For instance, log3 81 = 4 because 3 must be raised to the fourth power to 
obtain 81.
Write each exponential equation in logarithmic form.
a.	 43 = 64        b.	 a1
2b
4
= 1
16        c.	 a-2 = 7
Solution
a.	 43 = 64 is equivalent to log4 64 = 3.
b.	 a1
2b
4
= 1
16 is equivalent to log1>2 1
16 = 4.
c.	 a-2 = 7 is equivalent to loga 7 = -2.
Practice Problem 1  Write each exponential equation in logarithmic form.
a.	 210 = 1024        b.	 9-1>2 = 1
3        c.	 p = aq
Converting from Exponential to Logarithmic Form
EXAMPLE 1
To change from exponential form to 
logarithmic form, use the pattern
au = v means loga v = u.
The exponent u is the logarithm.
Side  
Note
f
f -1

412	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Write each logarithmic equation in exponential form.
a.	 log3 243 = 5        b.	 log2 5 = x        c.	 loga N = x
Solution
a.	 log3 243 = 5 is equivalent to 243 = 35.
b.	 log2 5 = x is equivalent to 5 = 2x.
c.	 loga N = x is equivalent to N = ax.
Practice Problem 2  Write each logarithmic equation in exponential form.
a.	 log2 64 = 6        b.	 logy u = w
Evaluating Logarithms
The technique of converting from logarithmic form to exponential form can be used to 
evaluate some logarithms by inspection.
Converting from Logarithmic Form to Exponential Form
EXAMPLE 2
To change from logarithmic form to 
exponential form, use
loga v = u means v = au.
Side  
Note
2	
Evaluate logarithms.
Find the value of each of the following logarithms.
a.	 log5 25        b.	 log2 16        c.	 log1>3 9
d.	 log7 7          e.	 log6 1          f.	 log4 1
2
Solution
Logarithmic Form
Exponential Form
Value
a.	 log5 25 = y
25 = 5y   or  52 = 5y
y = 2
b.	 log2 16 = y
16 = 2y   or  24 = 2y
y = 4
c.	 log1/3 9 = y
9 = ¢ 1
3≤
y
 or  32 = 3-y
y = -2
d.	 log7 7 = y
7 = 7y   or  71 = 7y
y = 1
e.	 log6 1 = y
1 = 6y   or  60 = 6y
y = 0
f.	 log4 1
2 = y
1
2 = 4y   or  2-1 = 22y
y = -1
2
Practice Problem 3  Evaluate.
a.	 log3 9        b.	 log9 1
3        c.	 log1>2 32
Basic Properties of Logarithms
We use the definition of the logarithm as an exponent to derive two basic properties for 
a 7 0 and a ≠1,
1.	 Because a1 = a, we have loga a = 1.
2.	 Because a0 = 1, we have loga 1 = 0.
The next two properties follow from the fact that a logarithmic function is the inverse of the 
appropriate exponential function.
Evaluating Logarithms
EXAMPLE 3
3	
Derive basic properties of 
logarithmic functions.

	
Section 4.2    ■    Logarithmic Functions 413
If f-1 is the inverse of f, then
f-11f1x22 = x
and
f1f-11x22 = x.
Recall
	
Let f1x2 = ax and f -11x2 = loga x; then
3.	 x = f -11 f1x22 = f -11ax2 = loga ax
	
and
4.	 x = f1 f -11x22 = f1loga x2 = aloga x.
We summarize these basic properties of logarithms.
For any base a 7 0, with a ≠1,
1.	 loga a = 1.
2.	 loga 1 = 0.
3.	 loga ax = x for any real number x.
4.	 aloga x = x for any x 7 0.
Basic Properties of Logarithms
Evaluate.
a.	 log3 3        b.	 5log57
Solution
a.	 Because loga a = 1 (property (1)), we have log3 3 = 1.
b.	 Because aloga  x = x (property (4)), we have 5log5 7 = 7.
Practice Problem 4  Evaluate.  a.	 log5 1        b.	 log3 35        c.	 7log7 5
Domains of Logarithmic Functions
Because the exponential function f1x2 = ax has domain 1- ∞, ∞2 and range 10, ∞2, its 
inverse function y = loga x has domain 10, H 2 and range 1 −H, H 2. Therefore, the 
logarithms of 0 and of negative numbers are not defined; so expressions such as loga 1-22 
and loga 102 are meaningless.
Using Basic Properties of Logarithms
EXAMPLE 4
4	
Find the domains of 
logarithmic functions.
Find the domain.
a.	 f1x2 = log3 12 - x2.        b.	 g1x2 = log2 ax + 1
x - 3b
Solution
a.	 Because the domain of a logarithmic function is 10, ∞2, the expression 12 - x2 must 
be positive. The domain of f is the set of all real numbers x, where
	
 2 - x 7 0
	
 2 7 x    Solve for x.
	
So, the domain of f  is 1- ∞, 22.
Finding the Domain
EXAMPLE 5

414	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
b.	 The domain of g consists of all real numbers x for which x + 1
x - 3 7 0. We can solve 
this inequality using the test-point method (page 136).
5	
Graph logarithmic functions.
Sketch the graph of y = log3 x.
Plotting points (Method 1) To find selected ordered pairs on the graph of y = log3 x, 
we choose the x-values to be powers of 3. We can easily compute the logarithms of these 
values by using Property 3, namely, log3 3x = x. We compute the y values in Table 4.5.
Sketching a Graph
EXAMPLE 6
Remember that “log3 x” means the 
exponent on 3 that gives x.
Recall
0
y
x
2
1
1
2
1
3
5
7
9
3
(3, 1)
(9, 2)
(1, 0)
, 1
1
3
, 2
1
9
, 3
1
27
y  log3 x
Figure 4.7  Graph y = log3 x by 
plotting points
Plotting these ordered pairs and connecting them with a smooth curve gives  
us the graph of y = log3 x, shown in Figure 4.7.
Using the inverse function (Method 2)  Because y = log3 x is the inverse of the function 
y = 3x, we first graph the exponential function y = 3x, then reflect the graph of y = 3x 
about the line y = x. Both graphs are shown in Figure 4.8. Note that the horizontal asymp-
tote y = 0 of the graph of y = 3x is reflected as the vertical asymptote x = 0 for the graph 
of y = log3 x.
Practice Problem 6  Sketch the graph of
y = log2 x.
y
3
x
2
1
1
3
2
1
1
y  3x
y  log3 x
y  x
(1, 3)
(3, 1)
Figure 4.8  Graph y = log3 x by 
using the inverse function y = 3x
Table 4.5 
x
y = log3 x
1x, y2
1
27 = 3-3
y = log3 1
27 = log33-3 = -3
¢ 1
27, -3≤
1
9 = 3-2
y = log3 1
9 = log33-2 = -2
¢ 1
9, -2≤
1
3 = 3-1
y = log3 1
3 = log33-1 = -1
¢ 1
3, -1≤
1 = 30
y = log3 1 = 0
11, 02
3 = 31
y = log3 3 = 1
13, 12
9 = 32
y = log3 9 = log332 = 2
19, 22
Property (2)
Property (3)
Sign of x + 1
x - 3
 
4
3
0
2
2
1
0
 
 

  



 
 ()
 ()
 
 ()
 ()
 
 ()
 ()
Figure 4.6  Solving x + 1
x - 3 7 0 by the test-point method.
	
From Figure 4.6, we see that x + 1
x - 3 7 0 on 1- ∞, -12 ´ 13, ∞2. So the domain of g
	
is 1- ∞, -12 ´ 13, ∞2.
Practice Problem 5  Find the domain of f1x2 = log1011 - x.
Graphs of Logarithmic Functions
We now look at other properties of logarithmic functions and begin with an example show-
ing how to graph a logarithmic function.

	
Section 4.2    ■    Logarithmic Functions 415
We can graph y = log1>3 x either by plotting points or by using the graph of its  
inverse. See Figure 4.9. The graph of y = log3 x shown in Figure 4.8 is rising. The graph 
of y = log1>3 x shown in Figure 4.9, on the other hand, is falling.
In general, graphs of logarithmic functions have two basic shapes, determined by the 
base a. See Figure 4.10.
0
1
4
4
1
y
x
1
3
1/3x
y 
y  x
log
1
1
2
2
x
y 
Figure 4.9  Graph of 
y = log1>3 x by using its inverse 
y = a1
3 b
x
(1, 0)
(a, 1)
a
a
(a, 1)
(1, 0)
f(x)  loga x (a  1)
f(x)  loga x (0  a  1)
(a)
(b)
y
x
y
x
Q   , 1R
1
a
Q   , 1R
1
a
Figure 4.10  Basic shapes of y = loga x
1.	 For a 7 1:
	 (i)	 Figure 4.10(a) represents a typical shape for the graph of y = loga x.
	(ii)	 f1x2 = loga x is an increasing function. That is, if 0 6 x1 6 x2, then 
loga x1 6 loga x2.
	(iii)	 The values of y = loga x are •
6 0
for
0 6 x 6 1
= 0
for
x = 1
7 0
for
x 7 1
.
2.	 For 0 6 a 6 1:
	
	 (i)	 Figure 4.10(b) represents a typical shape for the graph of y = loga x.
	
	(ii)	 f1x2 = loga x is a decreasing function. That is, if 0 6 x1 6 x2, then  
loga x1 7 loga x2.
	
(iii)	 The values of y = loga x are •
7 0
for
0 6 x 6 1
= 0
for
x = 1
6 0
for
x 7 1
.
Next, we summarize important properties of the exponential and logarithmic functions.
Exponential Function y = ax
Logarithmic Function y = loga x
1.  The domain is 1- ∞, ∞2, and the 
range is 10, ∞2.
The domain is 10, ∞2, and the range  
is 1- ∞, ∞2.
2.  The y-intercept is 1, and there is no 
x-intercept.
The x-intercept is 1, and there is no  
y-intercept.
3.  The x-axis 1y = 02 is the horizontal 
asymptote.
The y-axis 1x = 02 is the vertical 
asymptote.
4.  The function is one-to-one; that is, 
au = ay if and only if u = y.
The function is one-to-one; that is, 
loga u = loga y if and only if u = y.
5.  The function is increasing if a 7 1 
and decreasing if 0 6 a 6 1.
The function is increasing if a 7 1 and 
decreasing if 0 6 a 6 1.
Properties of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
To get the correct shape for the 
graph of a logarithmic function 
y = loga x, it is helpful to graph 
the three points
1a, 12,11, 02, and a1
a, -1b.
Side  
Note
Once we know the shape of a logarithmic graph, we can shift it vertically or horizon-
tally, stretch it, compress it, check answers with it, and interpret the graph.

416	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Start with the graph of f1x2 = log3 x and use transformations to sketch the graph of each 
function.
a.	 f1x2 = log3 x + 2        b.  f1x2 = log3 1x - 12
c.	 f1x2 = -log3 x           d.  f1x2 = log3 1-x2
State the domain and range and the vertical asymptote for the graph of each function.
Solution
We start with the graph of f1x2 = log3 x and use the transformations shown in Figure 4.11.
y
x
3
2
1
1
4
3
2
1
(1, 2)
(3, 3)
(3, 1)
(1, 0)
(a)
y  log3 x  2
y  log3 x
a.	 f1x2 = log3 x + 2
Adding 2 to log3 x shifts the graph  
2 units up. Domain: 10, ∞2; range: 
1- ∞, ∞2; vertical asymptote:  
x = 0 (y-axis)
y
x
4
3
2
2
1
1
2
y  log3(x  1)
y  log3 x
(2, 0)
(b)
(1, 0)
1
b.	 f1x2 = log31x - 12
Replacing x with x - 1 in log3 x shifts the 
graph 1 unit right. 
Domain: 11, ∞2; range 1- ∞, ∞2; vertical 
asymptote: x = 1
y
x
2
1
2
1
1
2
y  log3 x
y  log3 x
(1, 0)
(3, 1)
(3, 1)
4
(c)
3
c.	 f1x2 = -log31x2
Multiplying log3 x by -1 reflects  
the graph about the x-axis. 
Domain: 10, ∞2; range: 1- ∞, ∞2;  
vertical asymptote: x = 0
1
y 
 log3(
x)
y 
 log3 x
(d)
y
x
3
2
1
1
2
3
2
1
2
3
4
(1, 0)
(3, 1)
(3, 1)
(
1, 0)
d.	 f1x2 = log31-x2
Replacing x with -x in log3 x  
reflects the graph about the y@axis. 
Domain: 1- ∞, 02; range: 1- ∞, ∞2;  
vertical asymptote: x = 0
Using Transformations on f1x2 = log3 x
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 4.11  Transformations on y = log3 x
Practice Problem 7  Use transformations of the graph f1x2 = log2 x to sketch the  
graph of
y = -log2 1x - 32.

	
Section 4.2    ■    Logarithmic Functions 417
Common Logarithm
The logarithm with base 10 is called the common logarithm and is denoted by omitting 
the base, so
log x = log10 x.
y = log x 1x 7 02  if and only if  x = 10y.
Applying the basic properties of logarithms (see page 413) to common logarithms, we have 
the following:
1.	 log 10 = 1
2.	 log 1 = 0
3.	 log 10x = x, x any real number
4.	 10log x = x, x 7 0
We use property (3) to evaluate the common logarithms of numbers that are powers of 10. 
For example,
 log 1000 = log 103 = 3
 and  log 0.01 = log 10-2 = -2.
We use a calculator to find the common logarithms of numbers that are not powers of 10 
by pressing the LOG key.
The graph of y = log x is similar to the graph in Figure 4.10(a) because the base for 
log x is 10 7 1.
You can find the common loga-
rithms of any positive number with 
the LOG  key on your calculator. 
The exact key sequence will vary 
with different calculators. On most 
calculators, if you want to find  
log 3.7, press
3.7 LOG  ENTER
or
LOG  3.7 ENTER
and see the display 0.5682017.
Although the display reads 
0.5682017, this number really is an 
approximate value; so you should 
write log10 3.7≈0.5682017
Technology
Connection
Benford’s Law states that the chances of the digit m occurring as the first decimal digit 
(from 1 to 9) from many real-life data sources is
Pm = log1m + 12 - log m.
This means that about 100Pm% of the data can be expected to have m as the first digit.
a.	 Find P1. Interpret your result.
b.	 Use part a to decide which column (size I or size II) represents the actual data for the 
size of countries listed on page 410.
Solution
a.	 Pm = log1m + 12 - log m	
Benford’s law
	
P1 = log 2 - log 1
	
m = 1
	
= log 2
	
log 1 = log10 1 = 0
	
≈0.301
	
Use a calculator.
	
This means that about 30.1% of the data is expected to have 1 as the first digit.
b.	 We count the number of countries having 1 as the first digit in the columns with ­headings 
Size I and Size II. We find the following:
	
Number of countries with 1 as the first digit:
 Size I column = 1
 Size II column = 16
	
30% of 50 countries = 10.3021502 = 15. So according to Benford’s Law, size II 
column represents the actual data.
Practice Problem 8  Find P2 and interpret your result.
Benford’s Law
EXAMPLE 8
Frank Benford  
(1883–1948)
Frank Benford was an electrical 
­engineer and a physicist who is best 
known for the probability distribution 
­(Benford’s Law) about the occurrence 
of digits in lists of real data sets. Au-
ditors often use the law to check for 
fraudulent data. Benford graduated 
from the University of Michigan in 1910 
and worked for General Electric until he 
retired in July 1948. He died suddenly 
at his home on December 4, 1948.

418	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Natural Logarithm
In most applications in calculus and the sciences, the convenient base for logarithms is the 
number e. The logarithm with base e is called the natural logarithm and is denoted by ln x 
(read “ell en x”) so that
ln x = loge x.
y = ln x 1x 7 02  if and only if  x = ey.
Applying the basic properties of logarithms (see page 413) to natural logarithms, we have 
the following:
1.	 ln e = 1
2.	 ln 1 = 0
3.	 ln ex = x, x any real number
4.	 eln x = x, x 7 0
We can use property (3) to evaluate the natural logarithms of powers of e.
Evaluate each expression.
a.	 ln e4        b.  ln 1
e2.5        c.  ln 3
Solution
a.	 ln e4 = 4	
Property (3)
b.	 ln 1
e2.5 = ln e-2.5 = -2.5	
Property (3)
c.	 ln 3 ≈1.0986123	
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 9  Evaluate each expression.
a.	 ln 1
e        b.  ln 2
Evaluating the Natural Logarithm Function
EXAMPLE 9
Base a + 0, a 3 1
Base 10
Base e
1.  loga a = 1
log 10 = 1
ln e = 1
2.  loga 1 = 0
log 1 = 0
ln 1 = 0
3.  loga ax = x
log 10x = x
ln ex = x
4.  aloga  x = x
10log x = x
eln x = x
Summary of Basic Properties of Logarithms
To evaluate natural logarithms, we 
use the LN  key on a calculator. To 
find ln 12.32 on most calculators, 
press
2.3 LN  ENTER
or
LN  2.3 ENTER
and see the display 0.832909123.
Technology
Connection

	
Section 4.2    ■    Logarithmic Functions 419
We express equation (5) in logarithmic form:
 A
P = ert    Divide both sides of (5) by P.
 ln A
P = rt     Logarithmic form
Investments
We recall (page 403), the continuous compound interest formula:
A = Pert	
(5)
6	
Use natural logarithms in 
applications.
C o n t i n u o u s  C o m p o u n d  I n t e r e s t
Exponential Form
Logarithmic Form
A = Pert
lnA
P = rt
The exponential form is used when we need to find A or P; logarithmic form is useful in 
calculating r or t.
a.	 How long will it take to double your money if it earns 6.5% compounded continuously?
b.	 At what rate of return, compounded continuously, would your money double in  
5 years?
Solution
If P dollars is invested and you want to double it, then the final amount A = 2P.
a.	
 ln aA
Pb = rt	
Continuous compounding formula, logarithmic form
	
 ln a2P
P b = 0.065t	
A = 2P, r = 0.065
	
 ln 2 = 0.065t	
2P
P = 2
	
 ln 2
0.065 = t	
Divide both sides by 0.065.
	
 t ≈10.66	
Use a calculator.
	
It will take approximately 11 years to double your money.
b.	 ln aA
Pb = rt	
Continuous compounding formula, logarithmic form
ln a2P
P b = r152	
A = 2P, t = 5
ln 2 = 5r	
2P
P = 2
ln 2
5
= r	
Divide both sides by 5.
r ≈0.1386	
Use a calculator.
Your investment will double in 5 years at the approximate rate of 13.86%.
Practice Problem 10  Repeat Example 10 for tripling 1A = 3P2 your money.
Doubling Your Money
EXAMPLE 10

420	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Newton’s Law of Cooling
When a cool drink is removed from a refrigerator, the drink warms to the temperature of 
the room. When removed from the oven, a pizza baked at a high temperature cools to the 
temperature of the room.
In situations such as these, the rate at which an object’s temperature changes at any 
given time is proportional to the difference between its temperature and the temperature of 
the surrounding medium. This observation is called Newton’s Law of Cooling, although, as 
in the case of a cool drink, it applies to warming as well.
Newton’s Law of Cooling states that
T1t2 = Ts + 1T0 - Ts2e-kt    (6)
where T1t2 is the temperature of the object at time t, Ts is the surrounding temperature, T0 
is the value of T1t2 at t = 0, and k is a positive constant that depends on the object.
We can express equation (6) in logarithmic form:
 T1t2 - Ts = 1T0 - Ts2e -kt	
Subtract Ts from both sides of equation (6).
 T1t2 - Ts
T0 - Ts
= e -kt
	
Divide both sides by T0 - Ts.
 ln a
T1t2 - Ts
T0 - Ts
b = -kt
	
Logarithmic form
The local McDonald’s franchise has discovered that when coffee is poured from a coffee-
maker whose contents are 180°F into a noninsulated pot, after 1 minute the coffee cools 
to 165°F if the room temperature is 72°F. How long should the employees wait before 
pouring the coffee from this noninsulated pot into cups to deliver it to customers at 125°F?
Solution
From the given data, we have T = 165 when t = 1, T0 = 180, and Ts = 72.
 ln a165 - 72
180 - 72b = ln a 93
108b = -k # 1	
Substitute given data in the logarithmic 
form.
 k = -ln a 93
108b	
Solve for k.
With this value of k, we find t when T = 125.
ln  a125 - 72
180 - 72b = ln a 53
108b = -a -ln a 93
108b b # t	
Substitute data in logarithmic form.
£
1
ln a 93
108b
 § ln a 53
108b = t	
Solve for t.
t ≈4.76	
Use a calculator.
The employees should wait approximately 4.76 minutes (realistically, about 5 minutes) to 
deliver the coffee at 125°F to the customers.
Practice Problem 11  Repeat Example 11 assuming that the coffee is to be  
delivered to the customers at 120°F.
McDonald’s Hot Coffee
EXAMPLE 11
N e w t o n ’ s  L a w  o f  C o o l i n g
Exponential Form
Logarithmic Form
T1t2 = Ts + 1T0 - Ts2e -kt
ln a
T1t2 - Ts
T0 - Ts
b = -kt

	
Section 4.2    ■    Logarithmic Functions 421
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. log2 1024 = 10  b. log9 a1
3b = -1
2  c. loga  p = q
2. a. 26 = 64  b. yw = u  3. a. 2  b. -1>2  c. -5
4. a. 0  b. 5  c. 5  5. 1- ∞, 12
6. 
0
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
y
x
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
y  log2 x
7. Shift the graph of y = log2 x 
3 units right and reflect the 
graph about the x-axis.
0
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
y
x
8
7
6
5
4
2
1
3
y  log2(x  3)
8. P2 = log 3 - log 2 ≈ 0.176.
About 17.6% of the data is 
expected to have 2 as the first 
digit.  9. a. -1  b. ≈0.693 
10. a. ≈17 years  b. 21.97% 
11. ≈5.4 min
Exercises
section 4.2 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The domain of the function y = loga x is 
, 
and its range is 
.
	 2.	 The logarithmic form y = loga x is equivalent to the  
exponential form 
.
	 3.	 The logarithm with base 10 is called the 
 
logarithm, and the logarithm with base e is called the 
 logarithm.
	 4.	 aloga x =
, and loga ax =
.
	 5.	 True or False. The graph of y = loga x, a 7 0, a ≠1, is 
the graph of an increasing function. 
	 6.	 True or False. The graph of y = loga x, a 7 0, and a ≠1, 
has no horizontal asymptote. 
In Exercises 7–18, write each exponential equation in  
logarithmic form.
	 7.	 52 = 25 
	 8.	 1492-1>2 = 1
7
	 9.	 ¢ 1
16≤
-1>2
= 4
	10.	 1a222 = a4 
	11.	 100 = 1 
	12.	 104 = 10,000
	13.	 1102-1 = 0.1
	14.	 3x = 5 
	15.	 a2 + 2 = 7 
	16.	 ae = p 
	17.	 2a3 - 3 = 10
	18.	 5 # 2ct = 11
In Exercises 19–30, write each logarithmic equation in  
exponential form.
	19.	 log2 32 = 5 
	20.	 log7 49 = 2 
	21.	 log10 100 = 2 
	22.	 log10 10 = 1 
	23.	 log10 1 = 0 
	24.	 loga 1 = 0 
	25.	 log10 0.01 = -2
	26.	 log1>5 5 = -1 
	27.	 3 log8 2 = 1 
	28.	 1 + log 1000 = 4
	29.	 ln 2 = x 
	30.	 ln p = a 
In Exercises 31–40, evaluate each expression without using a 
calculator.
	31.	 log5 125 
	32.	 log9 81 
	33.	 log 10,000 
	34.	 log3 1
3 
	35.	 log2 1
8 
	36.	 log4 1
64 
	37.	 log3 127 
	38.	 log27 3 
	39.	 log16 2 
	40.	 log5 1125 
In Exercises 41–52, evaluate each expression.
	41.	 log3 1 
	42.	 log1>2 1 
	43.	 log77 
	44.	 log1>9 1
9 
	45.	 log667 
	46.	 log1>2  a1
2b
5 
	47.	 3log35 
	48.	 7log7 1
2 
	49.	 2log2 7 + log55-3 
	50.	 3log35 - log22-3 
	51.	 4log4 6 - log44-2 
	52.	 10log x - eln y 
In Exercises 53–60, find the domain of each function.
	53.	 f1x2 = log2 1x + 12 
	54.	 g1x2 = log3 1x - 82 
	55.	 f1x2 = log31x - 1 
	56.	 g1x2 = log413 - x 
	57.	 f1x2 = log1x - 22 + log12x - 12 
	58.	 g1x2 = ln1x + 5 - ln1x + 12                  

422	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	59.	 h1x2 = ln1x - 12>ln12 - x2 
	60.	 f1x2 = ln1x - 32 + ln12 - x2 
	61.	 Match each logarithmic function with one of the graphs 
labeled a–f.
a.	 f1x2 = log x 
b.	 f1x2 = -logx 
c.	 f1x2 = -log1-x2 
d.	 f1x2 = log1x - 12 
e.	 y = 1log x2 - 1 
f.	 f1x2 = log1-1 - x2 
(a)
x
1
1
1
2
1
2
0
y
(b)
x
1
1
2
3
4
0
y
1
(c)
x
1
1
3
4
2
0
y
1
(d)
x
1
1
3
4
2 1
0
y
y
x
1
2
1
2
3
4
(e)
y
x
1
1
1
2
3
4
(f)
	62.	 For each given graph, find a function of the form 
f1x2 = loga x that represents the graph.
y
2
x
1
1
2
4
3
2
1
(a)
(2, 1)
1
2
(b)
, 2
1
9
y
x
1
1
2
1
2
3
4
(c)
, 1
1
2
y
x
2
1
1
2
4
8
12
16
(d)
(16, 2)
y
x
2
1
In Exercises 63–70, graph the given function by using  
transformations on the appropriate basic graph of the form 
y = loga x. State the domain and range of the function and 
the vertical asymptote of the graph.
	63.	 f1x2 = log4 1x + 32 
	64.	 g1x2 = log1>2 1x - 12 
	65.	 y = -log5 x 
	66.	 y = 2 log7 x 
	67.	 y = log1>5 1-x2 
	68.	 y = 1 + log1>5 1-x2 
	69.	 y = log3 x 
	70.	 y = log3 x 
In Exercises 71–78, begin with the graph of f1x2 = log2 x 
and use transformations to sketch the graph of each function. 
Find the domain and range of the function and the vertical 
asymptote of the graph.
	71.	 y = log21x - 12 
	72.	 y = log2 1-x2 
	73.	 y = log213 - x2 
	74.	 y = log2 x 
	75.	 y = 2 + log213 - x2 
	76.	 y = 4 - log2 13 - x2 
	77.	 y = log2 x 
	78.	 y = log2 x2 
In Exercises 79–84, evaluate each expression.
	79.	 log4 1log3 812 
	80.	 log4 3log3 1log2 824 
	81.	 log12 2 
	82.	 log212 8 
	83.	 log12 4 
	84.	 log13 27 
In Exercises 85–88, find the value of x in each equation.
	85.	 log x = 2 
	86.	 log 1x - 12 = 1 
	87.	 ln x = 1 
	88.	 ln x = 0 
In Exercises 89–94, begin with the graph of y = ln x and  
use transformations to sketch the graph of each of the given 
functions.
	89.	 y = ln 1x + 22 
	90.	 y = ln 12 - x2 
	91.	 y = -ln 12 - x2 
	92.	 y = 2 ln x 
	93.	 y = 3 - 2 ln x 
	94.	 y = 1 - ln 11 - x2 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 95–108, use the model A = A0ekt or ln A
A0
= kt.
	95.	 Doubling your money. How long would it take to double 
your money if you invested P dollars at the rate of 8%  
compounded continuously? 
	96.	 Investment goal. How long would it take to grow your 
investment from $10,000 to $120,000 at the rate of 10%  
compounded continuously? 

	
Section 4.2    ■    Logarithmic Functions 423
	 97.	 Rate for doubling your money. At what annual rate of 
return, compounded continuously, would your investment 
double in six years? 
	 98.	 Rate-of-investment goal. At what annual rate of return, 
compounded continuously, would your investment grow 
from $8000 to $50,000 in 25 years? 
	 99.	 Population of the United States. The U.S. population 
in 2010 was 308 million. The U.S. Census Bureau reported 
that the population grew 9.7% since 2000 (the slowest 
growth rate since the depression).
a.	 What was the population of the United States in 2000?
b.	 What was the annual rate of growth between 2000 and 
2010? 
c.	 Assuming the same rate of growth, determine the  
year when the population of the United States will be  
400 million. 
	100.	 Population of Canada. The population of Canada in 
2010 was 35 million, and it grew 12.33% since 2000.
a.	 What was the population of Canada in 2000? 
b.	 What was the annual rate of growth between 2000 and 
2010? 
c.	 Assuming the same rate of growth, determine the time 
from 2010 until Canada’s population doubles.
d.	 Find the time from 2010 until Canada’s population 
reaches 50 million. 
	101.	 Newton’s Law of Cooling. A thermometer is taken from 
a room at 75°F to the outdoors, where the temperature is 
20°F. The reading on the thermometer drops to 50°F after 
one minute.
a.	 Find the reading on the thermometer after
(i)  Five minutes. 
(ii)  Ten minutes. 
(iii)  One hour. 
b.	 How long will it take for the reading to drop to 22°F?
	102.	 Newton’s Law of Cooling. The last bit of ice in a picnic 
cooler has melted 1T0 = 32°F2. The temperature in the park 
is 85°F. After 30 minutes, the temperature in the cooler is 
40°F. How long will it take for the temperature inside the 
cooler to reach 50°F? 
	103.	 Cooking salmon. A salmon filet initially at 50°F is 
cooked in an oven at a constant temperature of 400°F. After 
ten minutes, the temperature of the filet rises to 160°F. 
How long does it take until the salmon is medium rare at 
220°F? 
	104.	 The time of murder. A forensic specialist took the tem-
perature of a victim’s body lying in a street at 2:10 a.m. and 
found it to be 85.7°F. At 2:40 a.m., the temperature of the 
body was 84.8°F. When was the murder committed if the air 
temperature during the night was 55°F? [Remember, normal 
body temperature is 98.6°F.]
	105.	 Water contamination. A chemical is spilled into a res-
ervoir of pure water. The concentration of chemical in the 
contaminated water is 4%. In one month, 20% of the water 
in the reservoir is replaced with clean water.
a.	 What will be the concentration of the contaminant one 
year from now? 
b.	 For water to be safe for drinking, the concentration of 
this contaminant cannot exceed 0.01%. How long will it 
be before the water is safe for drinking? 
	106.	 Toxic chemicals in a lake. In a lake, one-fourth of the 
water is replaced by clean water every year. Sixteen thou-
sand cubic meters of soluble toxic chemical spill takes place 
in the lake. Let T1n2 represent the amount of toxin left after 
n years.
a.	 Find a formula for T1n2. 
b.	 How much toxin will be left after 12 years? 
c.	 When will 80% of the toxin be eliminated? 
	107.	 Sheep population. A herd of sheep doubles in size every 
three years. There are now 1500 sheep in the herd.
a.	 Find an exponential function of the form P = P0ert to 
model the herd’s growth. 
b.	 How many sheep will be in the herd seven years from 
now (round your answer)? 
c.	 In how many years will the herd have 15,000 sheep? 
	108.	 Shark population. A school of sharks is losing one-ninth 
of its population every two years. The colony currently has 
150 sharks.
a.	 Find an exponential function of the form P = P0e-rt to 
model the school’s decline. 
b.	 How many sharks will be in the school 4 years from 
now? 
c.	 In how many years (to the nearest tenth) will the colony 
have 35 sharks? 
	109.	 Benford’s Law. The law states that the probability that the 
first decimal-digit of a raw data sample (from 1 to 9) is given 
by Pm = log1m + 12 - log m. That is, about 1100Pm2% of 
the data can be expected to have m as the first digit.
a.	 What percent of the data can be expected to have 3 as the 
first digit? 
b.	 Find P1 + P2 + g + P9. Interpret your result.
	110.	 Prime Number Theorem. A natural number p Ú 2 is 
prime if the only positive divisors of p are 1 and p. An 
important topic in number theory involves counting prime 
numbers 52, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, c6. For any natural number 
n Ú 2, the quantity of prime numbers less than or equal 
to n is denoted by p1n2 (read “pie of n”). For example, 
p122 = 1, p132 = 2, p142 = 2, p152 = 3, and 
p162 = 3. The Prime Number Theorem states that for 
	
	 large n, p1n2 can be approximated by 
n
ln1n2.
a.	 Find p1202 by listing the primes that are less than or 
equal to 20.
b.	 Find p1502 by listing primes and compare your answer 
	
with 
50
ln1502.
c.	 Estimate p11,000,0002 by using the Prime Number 
Theorem. 
Beyond the Basics
	111.	 Find the domain of f1x2 = log3 ax - 2
x + 1b.
	112.	 Find the domain of g1x2 = log2 ax + 3
x - 2b.      

424	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	113.	 Finding the domain. Find the domain of each function.
a.	 f1x2 = log2 1log3 x2 
b.	 f1x2 = log 1ln 1x - 122 
c.	 f1x2 = ln 1log 1x - 122 
d.	 f1x2 = log 1log 1log 1x - 1222 
	114.	 Finding the inverse. Find the inverse of each function in 
Exercise 113.
In Exercises 115 and 116, describe an order for the sequence 
of transformations on the graph of y = log x to produce the 
graph of the given equation.
	115.	 y = -3 log a1
2x - 2b + 4
	116.	 y = -4 log12 - 3x2 + 1
	117.	 Present value of an investment. Recall that if P dollars 
is invested in an account at an interest rate r compounded 
continuously, then the amount A (called the future value 
of P) in the account t years from now will be A = Pert. 
Solving the equation for P, we get P = Ae-rt. In this for-
mulation, P is called the present value of the investment.
a.	 Find the present value of $100,000 at 7% compounded 
continuously for 20 years. 
b.	 Find the interest rate r compounded continuously that is 
needed to have $50,000 be the present value of $75,000 
in ten years. 
	118.	 Your uncle is 40 years old, and he wants to have an annual 
pension of $50,000 each year at age 65. What is the pres-
ent value of his pension if the money can be invested at all 
times at a continuously compounded interest rate of
a.	 5%? 
b.	 8%? 
c.	 10%? 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
In Exercises 119 and 120 evaluate each expression without 
using a calculator.
	119.	 2log2 3 - 3log3 2 
	120.	 1log3 4 + log2 922 - 1log3 4 - log2 922 
	121.	 Solve for x: log33log41log2 x24 = 0 
	122.	 Write as a piecewise function.
a.	 f1x2 = 0 log x0
b.	 g1x2 = 0 ln1x - 120 + 0 ln1x - 220
	123.	 Inequalities involving logarithms. 
a.	 If a is positive, is the statement “a 6 b if and only if 
log a 6 log b” always true? 
b.	 What property of logarithmic functions is used whenever 
the statement in part (a) is true? 
	124.	 Write a summary of the types of graphs (with 
sketches) for the logarithmic functions of the form 
y = c loga x, c ≠0, a 7 0, and a ≠1.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 125–130 write each expression in the form an 
where n is a positive integer.
	125.	 a2 # a7 
	126.	 1a223 
	127.	 2a8 
	128.	 2
3 a6 
	129.	 a243
32 b
4>5 
	130.	 2
5 1322-3 
In Exercises 131 and 132, perform the indicated operations 
and write the answer in scientific notation.
	131.	 14.7 * 107218.1 * 1052
	132.	 7.2 * 106
2.4 * 10-3 
In Exercises 133–136, verify that each equation is true by 
evaluating each side without using a calculator.
	133.	 log3 81 = log3 3 + log3 27
	134.	 log2 8 = log2 128 - log2 16
	135.	 log2 16 = 2log2 4 
	136.	 log4 64 = log2 64
log2 4
 
  

	
Section 4.3    ■    Rules of Logarithms 425
Rules of Logarithms
Recall the basic properties of logarithms from Section 4.2 for a 7 0, a ≠1:
 loga a = 1
     (7)
 loga 1 = 0
     (8)
 loga ax = x, x real      (9)
 aloga x = x, x 7 0    (10)
In this section, we will discuss some important rules of logarithms that are helpful in 
calculations, simplifications, and applications.
1	
Learn the rules of logarithms.
The Boy King Tut
Today the most famous pharaoh of Ancient Egypt is King Nebkheperure Tutankhamun, 
popularly called “King Tut.” He was only 9 years old when he became a pharaoh. In 
2005, a team of Egyptian scientists headed by Dr. Zahi Hawass determined that the 
pharaoh was 19 years old when he died (around 1346 b.c.).
Tutankhamun was a short-lived boy king who, unlike the great Egyptian kings Khufu 
(builder of the Great Pyramid), Amenhotep III (builder of temples throughout Egypt), 
and Ramesses II (prolific builder and usurper), accomplished nothing significant during 
his reign. In fact, little was known about him prior to Howard Carter’s discovery of his 
tomb (and the amazing treasures it held) in the Valley of the Kings on November 4, 
1922. Carter, with his benefactor Lord Carnarvon at his side, entered the tomb’s burial 
chamber on November 26, 1922. Lord Carnarvon died seven weeks after entering the 
burial chamber, giving rise to the theory of the “curse” of King Tut.
Work on the tomb continued until 1933. The tomb contained a pristine mummy of 
an Egyptian king, lying intact in his original burial furniture. He was accompanied by 
a small slice of the royal world of the pharaohs: golden chariots, statues of gold and 
ebony, a fleet of miniature ships to accommodate his trip to the hereafter, his throne of 
gold, bottles of perfume, precious jewelry, and more. The “Treasures of Tutankhamun” 
exhibition, first shown at the British Museum in London in 1972, traveled to many coun-
tries, including the United States. 
In Example 8, we discuss the age of a work of art found in King Tut’s tomb.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Definition of logarithm  
(Section 4.2, page 411)
2	 Basic properties of logarithms  
(Section 4.2, page 413)
3	 Rules of exponents (Section 4.1, page 394)
Objectives
1	 Learn the rules of logarithms.
2	 Estimate a large number.
3	 Change the base of a logarithm.
4	 Apply logarithms to growth and decay.
Rules of Logarithms
4.3
S e c t i o n 
King Tut’s Golden Mask

426	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Rules 1, 2, and 3 follow from the corresponding rules of the exponents:
 ax # ay = ax+y	
Product rule
 ax
ay = ax-y	
Quotient rule
 1ax2r = axr	
Power rule
For example, to prove the product rule for logarithms, we let
loga M = x  and  loga N = y.
The corresponding exponential forms of these equations are
M = ax  and  N = ay.
Then
 MN = ax # ay
 MN = ax+y
	
Product rule of exponents
 loga MN = x + y
	
Logarithmic form
 loga MN = loga M + loga N	
Replace x with loga M and y with loga N.
This proves the product rule of logarithms. In Exercise 114, you are asked to prove the 
quotient rule and the power rule similarly by using the corresponding rules for exponents.
The following table compares the rules of exponents and logarithms.
R u l e s  o f  L o g a r i t h m s
Let M, N, and a be positive real numbers with a ≠1 and let r be any real number.
Rule
Description
Examples
1. Product Rule:
loga 1MN2 = loga M + loga N
The logarithm of the product 
of two (or more) numbers is 
the sum of the logarithms of 
the numbers.
ln 15 # 72 = ln 5 + ln 7
log 13x2 = log 3 + log x
log2 15 # 172 = log2 5 + log2 17
2. Quotient Rule:
loga aM
N b = loga M - loga N
The logarithm of the  
quotient of two numbers  
is the difference of the  
logarithms of the numbers.
ln 5
7 = ln 5 - ln 7
log 5
x = log 5 - log x
3. Power Rule:
loga Mr = r loga M
The logarithm of a number 
to the power r is r times the 
logarithm of the number.
ln 57 = 7 ln 5
log 53>2 = 3
2 log 5
log2 7-3 = -3 log2 7
C o m pa r e  t h e  r u l e s  o f  e x p o n e n t s  a n d  l o g a r i t h m s
Exponents
Logarithms
1.  ax # ay = ax+y
loga xy = loga x + loga y
2. 
ax
ay = ax-y
loga x
y = loga x - loga y
3. 
1ax2y = axy
loga xy = y loga x

	
Section 4.3    ■    Rules of Logarithms 427
In many applications in more advanced mathematics courses, the rules of logarithms 
are used in both directions; that is, the rules are read from left to right and from right to left. 
For example, by the product rule of logarithms, we have
log2 3x = log2 3 + log2 x.
The expression log2 3 + log2 x is the expanded form of log2 3x, while log2 3x is the 
condensed form, or the single logarithmic form of log2 3 + log2 x.
Radicals can also be written as 
exponents. Recall that
	
1x = x1>2
and	
2
3 x = x1>3.
In general,
2
m xn = xn>m.
Recall
Given that log5 z = 3 and log5 y = 2, evaluate each expression.
a.	 log5 1yz2	
b.	 log5 1125y72	
c.	 log5 A
z
y	
d.	 log5 1z1>30y52
Solution
a.	  log5 1yz2 = log5 y + log5 z	
Product rule
	
 = 2 + 3 = 5
	
Use the given values and simplify.
b.	  log5 1125y72 = log5 125 + log5 y7	
Product rule
	
 = log5 53 + log5 y7 	
125 = 53
	
 = 3 + 7 log5 y
	
Power rule and loga a = 1
	
 = 3 + 7122 = 17
	
Use the given values and simplify.
c.	  log5 A
z
y = log5  az
yb
1>2
	
Rewrite radical as exponent.
	
 = 1
2 log5  z
y	
Power rule
	
 = 1
2
 1log5 z - log5 y2	
Quotient rule
	
 = 1
2
 13 - 22 = 1
2	
Use the given values and simplify.
d.	  log5 1z1>30y52 = log5 z1>30 + log5 y5 	
Product rule
	
 = 1
30 log5 z + 5 log5 y	
Power rule
	
 = 1
30132 + 5122
	
Use the given values.
	
 = 0.1 + 10 = 10.1
	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 1  Evaluate each expression for the given values of logarithms in 
Example 1.
a.	 log5 1y>z2	
b.	 log5 1y2z32
Using Rules of Logarithms to Evaluate Expressions
EXAMPLE 1
Write each expression in expanded form. 
a.	 log2 x21x - 123
12x + 124 	
b.	 logc2x3y2z5
Writing Expressions in Expanded Form
EXAMPLE 2

428	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Solution
a.	  log2 x21x - 123
12x + 124 = log2 x21x - 123 - log2 12x + 124
	
Quotient rule
	
 = log2 x2 + log2 1x - 123 - log2 12x + 124
	
Product rule
	
 = 2 log2 x + 3 log2 1x - 12 - 4 log2 12x + 12	
Power rule
b.	  logc 2x3y2z5 = logc 1x3y2z521>2
	
1a = a1>2
	
 = 1
2 logc 1x3y2z52
	
Power rule
	
 = 1
23logc x3 + logc y2 + logc z54
	
Product rule
	
 = 1
2 33 logc x + 2 logc y + 5 logc z4	
Power rule
	
 = 3
2 logc x + logc y + 5
2 logc z
	
Distributive property
Practice Problem 2  Write each expression in expanded form.
a.	 ln 2x - 1
x + 4 	
b.	 log A
4xy
z
Write each expression in condensed form.
a.	 log 3x - log 4y	
b.	 2 ln x + 1
2 ln 1x2 + 12
c.	 2 log2 5 + log2 9 - log2 75	
d.	 1
3 3ln x + ln 1x + 12 - ln 1x2 + 124
Solution
a.	 log 3x - log 4y = log a3x
4yb	
Quotient rule
b.	  2 ln x + 1
2 ln 1x2 + 12 = ln x2 + ln 1x2 + 121>2	
Power rule
	
 = ln 1x22x2 + 12
	
Product rule; 1a = a1>2
c.	  2 log2 5 + log2 9 - log2 75 = log2 52 + log2 9 - log2 75	
Power rule
	
 = log2 125 # 92 - log2 75
	
52 = 25; Product rule
	
 = log2 25 # 9
75
	
Quotient rule
	
 = log2 3
	
25 # 9
75
= 9
3 = 3
d.	  1
3 3ln x + ln 1x + 12 - ln 1x2 + 124 = 1
3 3ln x1x + 12 - ln 1x2 + 124	
Product  
rule
 = 1
3 ln c
x1x + 12
x2 + 1 d 	
Quotient rule
 = ln C
3  
x1x + 12
x2 + 1
	
Power rule; a1>3 = 2
3 a
Practice Problem 3  Write the expression in condensed form: 
1
2 3log 1x + 12 + log 1x - 124.
Writing Expressions in Condensed Form
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 4.3    ■    Rules of Logarithms 429
Be careful when using the rules of logarithms to simplify expressions. For example, there 
is no property that allows you to rewrite loga 1x + y2.
In general,
loga 1x + y2 ≠loga x + loga y. (11)
To illustrate this statement, let x = 100, y = 10, and a = 10. Then the value of the left 
side of (11) is
log 1100 + 102 = log 11102 ≈2.0414.	
Use a calculator.
The value of the right side of (11) is
 log 100 + log 10 = log 102 + log 10
 = 2 log 10 + log 10	
Power rule
 = 2 112 + 1 = 3.
Therefore, log 1100 + 102 ≠log 100 + log 10.
To avoid common errors, be aware that in general,
 loga 1M + N2 ≠loga M + loga N.
 loga 1M - N2 ≠loga M - loga N.
 1loga M21loga N2 ≠loga MN.
 loga aM
N b ≠loga M
loga N .
 loga M
loga N ≠loga M - loga N.
 1loga M2r ≠r loga M.
Warning
Number of Digits
In estimating the magnitude of a positive number K, we look for the number of digits 
needed to express K. If K has a fractional part, then “number of digits” means the number 
of digits to the left of the decimal point. For example, 357.29 and 231.4796 are viewed as 
3-digit numbers in this context.
A number K written in the form K = s * 10n, where 1 … s 6 10 and n is an integer, is 
said to be in scientific notation. For example, 432.1 = 4.321 * 102 and 0.56 = 5.6 * 10-1 
are both in scientific notation.
The exponent n represents the magnitude of K and is closely related to the common 
logarithm. In fact, we have
 log K = log1s * 10n2
	
Take log of both sides of K = s * 10n.
 = log s + log10n 	
Product rule
 = log s + n log 10	
Power rule
 = log s + n
	
log 10 = log10 10 = 1
Because 1 …
s 6 10, we have
 log 1 … log s 6 log 10	
y = log10 x is an increasing function.
 0 … log s 6 1
	
log 1 = 0 and log 10 = 1
This says that the exponent n in K = s * 10n is the largest integer less than or equal to log K.
We note that a number m is a 3-digit number if
 100 = 102 … m
 6 103 = 1000
 or  log 102
 … log m 6 log 103
    y = log10 x is an increasing function.
 2
 … log m 6 3
    log 10x = log10 10x = x
Similarly, a number K has 1n + 12 digits if n … log K 6 n + 1.
2	
Estimate a large number.

430	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
For example, the number 8765.43, which is a 4 digit number, has its common logarithm 
between 3 and 4. Conversely, if log N is approximately 57.3 then N is a 58-digit number.
D i g i t s  a n d  C o m m o n  L o g a r i t h m s
A positive number K has 1n + 12 digits if and only if log K is in the interval 
3n, n + 12.
Write an estimate of the number K = e700 in scientific notation.
Solution
 K = e700
 log K = log1e7002
 = 700 log e
 ≈304.0061373	
Use a calculator.
Because log K lies between the integers 304 and 305, the number K requires 305 digits to 
the left of the decimal point. Also, by definition of the common logarithm, we have
 K ≈10304.0061373
	
Exponential form
 = 100.0061373 * 10304	
am+n = am * an
 ≈1.014232 * 10304 	
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 4  Repeat Example 4 for K = 12342567.
Estimating a Large Number
EXAMPLE 4
Change of Base
Calculators usually come with two types of log keys: a key for natural logarithms (base e, 
LN ) and a key for common logarithms (base 10, LOG  ). These two types of logarithms are 
frequently used in applications. Sometimes, however, we need to evaluate logarithms for 
bases other than e and 10. The change-of-base formula helps us evaluate these logarithms.
Suppose we are given logb x and we want to find an equivalent expression in terms of 
logarithms with base a. We let
u = logb x.    (12)
In exponential form, we have
x = bu.    (13)
Then
 loga x = loga bu
    Take loga of each side of (13).
 loga x = u loga b
    Power rule
 u = loga x
loga b
    Solve for u.
 logb x = loga x
loga b  (14)    Substitute for u from (12).
3	
Change the base of a 
logarithm.

	
Section 4.3    ■    Rules of Logarithms 431
Equation (14) is the change-of-base formula. By choosing a = 10 and a = e, we can state 
the change-of-base formula as follows:
C h a n g e - o f - B a s e  F o r m u l a
Let a, b, and x be positive real numbers with a ≠1 and b ≠1. Then logb x can be 
converted to a different base as follows:
logb x = loga x
loga b =  log x
log b =  ln x
ln b
	
1base a2	
1base 102	
1base e2
To graph a logarithmic function 
whose base is not e or 10, use 
the change-of-base formula. For 
example, graph y = log5 x by 
entering Y1 = ln1X2>ln152 or 
Y1 = log1X2>log152.
5
0
2
3
Technology
Connection
Using a Change of Base to Compute Logarithms
EXAMPLE 5
Compute log5 13 by changing to a. common logarithms and b. natural logarithms.
Solution
a.	  log5 13 = log 13
log 5
	
Change to base 10.
	
 ≈1.59369	
Use a calculator.
b.	  log5 13 = ln 13
ln 5
	
Change to base e.
	
 ≈1.59369	
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 5  Find log3 15.
Find the following.
a.	 An equation of the form y = c + b log x whose graph contains the points 12, 32 and 
14, -52.
b.	 An equation of the form y = c + b loga x whose graph contains the points 12, 32 and 
14, -52 where a, b, and c are integers.
Solution
Substitute 12, 32 and 14, -52 in the equation y = c + b log x to obtain:
 3 = c + b log 2  (15)
 -5 = c + b log 4  (16)
a.	 Find b: Subtract equation (16) from equation (15) to obtain 
 8 = b log 2 - b log 4 = b1log 2 - log 42 = b alog 2
4b = b log a1
2b
 8 = b log a1
2b = b log 2-1 = -b log 2
 b = -
8
log 2                     Solve for b.
	
Find c:	
 c = 3 - b log 2
	
From equation (15)
 = 3 - a -
8
log 2blog 2	
Replace b with -
8
log 2
 = 3 + 8
	
Simplify.
So, y = 11 -
8
log 2
 log x	
Substitute for b and c.
Modeling with Logarithmic Functions
EXAMPLE 6

432	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Growth and Decay
We express the exponential growth (or decay) formula (page 404) in an equivalent loga-
rithmic form.
4	
Apply logarithms to growth 
and decay.
b.	 Use the change-of-base formula to find a, b, and c with integer values.
 y = 11 -
8
log 21log x2 = 11 - 8 alog x
log 2b	
Answer to Part a
 y = 11 - 8 log2 x
	
log2 x = log x
log 2
	
Then a = 2, b = -8, and c = 11.
Practice Problem 6  Repeat Example 6 for the graph that contains the points 13, 32  
and 19, 12.
G r o w t h  a n d  D e c ay  F o r m u l a
Exponential Form
Logarithmic Form
A1t2 = A0ekt
ln a
A1t2
A0
b = kt
 where A1t2 = the amount of substance (or population) at time t,
 A0 = A102 is the initial amount, and
 t = time.
Growth occurs when k 7 0 and decay occurs when k 6 0.
Half-Life
The half-life of any quantity whose value decreases with time is the time required for the 
quantity to decay to half its initial value.
Radioactive substances undergo exponential decay. Krypton-85, for example, has a 
half-life of about ten years; this means that any initial quantity of krypton-85 will dissipate 
or decay to half that amount in about ten years.
If h is the half-life of a substance undergoing exponential decay at the rate k, then any 
mass A0 decays to 1
2 A0 in time h. See Figure 4.12. This fact leads to a half-life formula.
 ln a
1
2A0
A0
b = kh
	
t = h and A1h2 = 1
2 A0 in the logarithmic form
 ln a1
2b = kh	
Simplify by dividing out A0.
 -ln 2 = kh
	
ln a1
2b = ln 12-12 = -ln 2
 h = -ln 2
k 	
Solve for h.
Figure 4.12  Time h is the half-life 
for the substance with this decay curve
A
t
Time
Amount remaining
h
(0, A0)
1
2
A(t)  A0ekt
A0
H a l f - L i f e  F o r m u l a
The half-life h of a substance undergoing exponential decay at a rate k 1k 6 02 is 
given by the formula
h = -ln 2
k .

	
Section 4.3    ■    Rules of Logarithms 433
In an experiment, 18 grams of the radioactive element sodium-24 decayed to 6 grams in 
24 hours. Find its half-life to the nearest hour.
Solution
 ln a
A1t2
A0
b = kt
    Logarithmic growth and decay model
 ln a 6
18b = k1242   
A0 = 18, A1242 = 6
 ln a1
3b = 24 k     Simplify.
 -ln 3 = 24k
    ln a1
3b = ln 13-12 = -ln 3
 k = -ln 3
24     Solve for k.
To find the half-life of sodium-24, we use the formula
 h = -ln 2
k
    Half-life formula
 h = -
ln 2
a -ln 3
24 b
    Replace k with -ln 3
24 .
 h = 24 ln 2
ln 3
≈15 hours    Simplify; use a calculator.
Practice Problem 7  In an experiment, 100 grams of the radioactive element  
strontium-90 decayed to 66 grams in 15 years. Find its half-life to the nearest year.
Radiocarbon Dating
Ordinary carbon, called carbon-12 112C2, is stable and does not decay. However, carbon-14 
114C2, is a form of carbon that decays radioactively with a half-life of 5700 years. Sunlight 
constantly produces carbon-14 in Earth’s atmosphere. When a living organism breathes or 
eats, it absorbs carbon-12 and carbon-14. After the organism dies, no more carbon-14 is 
absorbed; so the age of its remains can be calculated by determining how much carbon-14 
has decayed. The method of radiocarbon dating was developed by the American scientist 
W. F. Libby.
Finding the Half-Life of a Substance
EXAMPLE 7
Libby 
was 
born 
in 
Grand 
Valley, 
­Colorado. In 1927, 
he entered the Uni-
versity of California 
at Berkeley, where he earned his BSc 
and PhD degrees in 1931 and 1933, 
respectively. He then became an in-
structor in the Department of Chem-
istry at the University of California 
(Berkeley) in 1933. He was awarded 
a Guggenheim Memorial Foundation 
Fellowship in 1941, but the fellowship 
was interrupted when Libby went to 
Columbia University on the Manhat-
tan District Project upon America’s 
entry into World War II.
  Libby was a physical chemist and a 
specialist in radiochemistry, particularly 
in hot-atom chemistry, tracer tech-
niques, and isotope tracer work. He 
became well known at the ­University 
of Chicago for his work on natural 
carbon-14 (a radiocarbon) and its use 
in dating archaeological artifacts and 
on natural tritium and its use in hydrol-
ogy and geophysics. He was awarded 
the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1960.
Willard Frank Libby 
(1908–1980)
In 1960, a group of specialists from the British Museum in London investigated whether 
a piece of art containing organic material found in Tutankhamun’s tomb had been made 
during his reign or (as some historians claimed) whether it belonged to an earlier period. 
We know that King Tut died in 1346 b.c. and ruled Egypt for ten years. What percent of 
the amount of carbon-14 originally contained in the object should be present in 1960 if the 
object was made during Tutankhamun’s reign?
King Tut’s Treasure
EXAMPLE 8

434	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Solution
Because the half-life h of carbon-14 is approximately 5700 years, we have
 5700 = -ln 2
k
  Half-life formula with 
 k = - ln 2
5700
  Solve for k.
 ≈-0.0001216  Use a calculator.
Substituting this value of k in the exponential form, we obtain
A1t2 = A0e-0.0001216t  (17)
The time t that elapsed between King Tut’s death and 1960 is
 t = 1960 + 1346
    1346 b.c. to a.d. 1960 
 = 3306.
 A133062 = A0e-0.0001216133062    Replace t with 3306 in (17).
 ≈0.66897A0.
Therefore, the percent of the original amount of carbon-14 remaining in the object (after 
3306 years) is 66.897%.
Because King Tut began ruling Egypt ten years before he died, the time t1 that elapsed 
from the beginning of his reign to 1960 is 3316 years.
 A133162 = A0e-0.0001216133162    Replace t with 3316 in (17).
 ≈0.66816A0.
Therefore, a piece of art made during King Tut’s reign would have between 66.816% and 
66.897% of carbon-14 remaining in 1960.
Practice Problem 8  Repeat Example 8 assuming that the art object was made  
194 years before King Tut’s death.
S u m m a r y  o f  P r o p e r t i e s  a n d  R u l e s  o f  L o g a r i t h m s
loga 1 = 0
loga a = 1
loga ax = x
aloga x = x
loga1MN2 = loga M + loga N
loga aM
N b = loga M - loga N
loga Mr = r loga M
logb M = loga M
loga b
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. -1  b. 13
2. a. ln 12x - 12 - ln 1x + 42 
b. log 2 + 1
2 log x + 1
2 log y - 1
2 log z
3. log2x2 - 1
4. 2.215088 * 101343
5. log 15
log 3 = ln 15
ln 3 ≈2.46497
6. a. y = 5 -
2
log 3 log x  b. y = 5 - 2 log3 x
7. ≈25 years  8. ≈65.34%

	
Section 4.3    ■    Rules of Logarithms 435
Exercises
section 4.3
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 loga MN =  
 + 
	 2.	
 = loga M - loga N
	 3.	 loga Mr =  
	 4.	 The change-of-base formula using base e is  
loga  M =  
.
	 5.	 True or False. loga 1u + y2 = loga u + loga y 
	 6.	 True or False. log x
10 = log x - 1 
In Exercises 7–18, given that log x = 2, log y = 3, log 2 ? 0.3, 
and log 3 ? 0.48, evaluate each expression without using a 
calculator.
	 7.	 log 6 
	 8.	 log 4 
	 9.	 log 5 c Hint: 5 = 10
2 d 
	10.	 log 13x2 
	11.	 log a2
x b 
	12.	 log x2 
	13.	 log 12x2y2 
	14.	 log xy3 
	15.	 log2
3 x2y4 
	16.	 log 1log x22 
	17.	 log 2
3 48 
	18.	 log2 3 
In Exercises 19–32, write each expression in expanded form. 
Assume that all expressions containing variables represent 
positive numbers.
	19.	 ln 3x1x - 124
	20.	 ln 
x1x + 12
1x - 122
	21.	 loga2xy3
	22.	 loga
3x2
1y
	23.	 logaA
3 x
y 
	24.	 logaB
3 x2
y5
	25.	 log2B
4 xy2
8
	26.	 logB
3 x2y
100
	27.	 log 2x2 + 1
x + 3
	28.	 log4 a
x2 - 9
x2 - 6x + 8b
2>3 
	29.	 logb x2y3z
	30.	 logb 1xyz
	31.	 ln c x1x - 1
x2 + 2 d 
	32.	 ln c 2x - 2 2
3 x + 1
x2 + 3
d 
	33.	 ln c
1x + 122
1x - 321x + 4 d 
	34.	 ln c
2x + 3
1x + 4221x - 324 d 
	35.	 ln c 1x + 12B
x2 + 2
x2 + 5 d 
	36.	 ln c
2
3 2x + 1 1x + 12
1x - 12213x + 22 d
	37.	 ln c
x313x + 124
2x2 + 11x + 22-51x - 322 d 
	38.	 ln c
1x + 121>21x2 - 222>5
12x - 123>21x2 + 22-4>5 d 
In Exercises 39–48, write each expression in condensed form.
	39.	 log2 x + log2 7 
	40.	 log2 x - log2 3 
	41.	 1
2 log x - log y + log z 
	42.	 1
21log x + log y2 
	43.	 1
5 1log2 z + 2 log2 y2 
	44.	 1
3 1log x - 2 log y + 3 log z2 
	45.	 ln x + 2 ln y + 3 ln z 
	46.	 2 ln x - 3 ln y + 4 ln z 
	47.	 2 ln x - 1
2 ln 1x2 + 12 
	48.	 2 ln x + 1
2 ln 1x2 - 12 - 1
2 ln 1x2 + 12 
In Exercises 49–52, write an estimate of each number in  
scientific notation.
	49.	 e500 
	50.	 p650 
	51.	 324756 
	52.	 723416 
	53.	 Which is larger, 234567 or 567234? 
	54.	 Which is larger, 43218765 or 87654321? 
	55.	 Find the number of digits in 17200 # 5367. 
	56.	 Find the number of digits in 67200 , 23150. 
In Exercises 57–64, use the change-of-base formula and a  
calculator to evaluate each logarithm.
	57.	 log2 5 
	58.	 log4 11 
	59.	 log1>2 3 
	60.	 log13 12.5 
	61.	 log15 117 
	62.	 log15 123 
	63.	 log2 7 + log4 3 
	64.	 log2 9 - log12 5 
In Exercises 65–72, find the value of each expression without 
using a calculator.
	65.	 log313 
	66.	 log1>4 4 
	67.	 log31log2 82 
	68.	 2log2 2 
	69.	 52 log5 3+log5 2 
	70.	 e3 ln 2-2 ln 3 
	71.	 log 4 + 2 log 5 
	72.	 log2 160 - log2 5 
      

436	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
In Exercises 73–80, find an equation of the form y = c + b loga x 
(a, b, and c integers) whose graph contains the two given points.
	 73.	 110, 12 and 11, 22
	 74.	 14, 102 and 12, 122
	 75.	 1e, 12 and 11, 22
	 76.	 13, 12 and 19, 22
	 77.	 15, 42 and 125, 72
	 78.	 14, 32 and 18, 52
	 79.	 12, 42 and 14, 92
	 80.	 11, 12 and 15, 72
In Exercises 81–84, determine the half-life of each substance 
that decays from A0 to A in time t.
	 81.	 A0 = 50,	
A = 23,	
t = 12 years 
	 82.	 A0 = 200,	
A = 65,	
t = 10 years 
	 83.	 A0 = 10.3,	
A = 3.8,	
t = 15 hours 
	 84.	 A0 = 20.8,	
A = 12.3,	
t = 40 minutes 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 85–88, assume the exponential growth model 
A1t2 = A0ekt or ln a
A1t2
A0
b = kt and a world population of 
7 billion in 2011.
	 85.	 Rate of population growth. If the world adds about  
90 million people in 2012, what is the rate of growth?
	 86.	 Population. Use the rate of growth from Exercise 85 to 
estimate the year in which the world population will be
a.	 12 billion. 
b.	 20 billion. 
	 87.	 Population growth. If the population must stay below 
20 billion during the next 100 years, what is the maximum 
acceptable annual rate of growth? (Round your answer to 
six decimal places.) 
	 88.	 Population decline. If the world population must decline 
below 5 billion during the next 25 years, what must be the 
annual rate of decline? (Round your answer to six decimal 
places.) 
	 89.	 Continuous compounding. If $1000 is deposited in a 
bank at 10% interest compounded continuously, how many 
years will it take for the money to grow to $3500? 
	 90.	 Continuous compounding. At what rate of interest 
compounded continuously will an investment double in six 
years? 
	 91.	 Half-life. Iodine-131, a radioactive substance that is effec-
tive in locating brain tumors, has a half-life of only eight 
days. A hospital purchased 20 grams of the substance but 
had to wait five days before it could be used. How much of 
the substance was left after five days? 
	 92.	 Half-life. Plutonium-241 has a half-life of 13 years. A lab-
oratory purchased 10 grams of the substance but did not use 
it for two years. How much of the substance was left after 
two years? 
	 93.	 Half-life. Tritium is used in nuclear weapons to increase 
their power. It decays at the rate of 5.5% per year. Calculate 
the half-life of tritium. 
	 94.	 Half-life. Sixty grams of magnesium-28 decayed into 7.5 grams 
after 63 hours. What is the half-life of magnesium-28? 
Effective medicine dosage. Use the following model in 
Exercises 95–98: The concentration C1t2 of a drug admin-
istered to a patient intravenously jumps to its highest level 
almost immediately. The concentration subsequently decays 
exponentially according to the law
C1t2 = C0e−kt, or equivalently,  ln a
C1t2
C0
b = −kt,
where C102 = C0. The physician administering the drug 
would like to have
m * C1t2 * M,
where m is the concentration below which the drug is ineffective 
and M is the concentration above which the drug is dangerous.
	 95.	 Drug concentration. Suppose that immediately after a 
certain drug is administered, the concentration is 5 milli-
grams per milliliter. Ten hours later the concentration drops 
to 1.5 milligrams per milliliter. Determine the value of k for 
this drug. 
	 96.	 Drug concentration. For the drug of Exercise 95, sup-
pose the maximum safe level is M = 12 milligrams per 
milliliter and the minimum effective level is m = 3 milli-
grams per milliliter. If the initial concentration is M, find the 
maximum possible time between doses of this drug. 
	 97.	 Half-life. The half-life of Valium is 36 hours. Suppose a 
patient receives 16 milligrams of the drug at 8 a.m. How much 
Valium is in the patient’s blood at 4 p.m. the same day? 
	 98.	 Half-life. The half-life of aspirin in the blood is 12 hours. 
Estimate the time required for the aspirin to decay to 90% 
of the original amount ingested. 
In Exercises 99–102, use the following amortization formula:
P =
r ~ M
1 −a1 + r
nb
−nt ÷ n
where P = the payment, r = the annual interest rate, 
M = the mortgage amount, t = the number of years, and 
n = the number of payments per year.
	 99.	 Finding P. What is the monthly payment on a mortgage of 
$120,000 with a 6% interest rate for 20 years? How much 
interest will be paid over 20 years?
	100.	 Finding t. The Garcia family wanted to take out a mort-
gage for $150,000 at 8% interest with monthly payments. 
The family can afford monthly payments of $1200. How 
long would they have to make payments to pay off their 
mortgage, and how much interest would they be paying?
	101.	 Finding M. The First National Bank offers Andy an 
8.5% interest rate on a 30-year mortgage to be paid back 
in monthly payments. The most Andy can afford to pay 
in monthly payments is $850. What mortgage amount can 
Andy afford?  

	
Section 4.3    ■    Rules of Logarithms 437
	102.	 Finding r. Lisa is 40 years old and needs to take out a 
mortgage of $120,000. She can afford monthly payments up 
to $850. She wants her mortgage paid off when she retires 
at age 65. What interest rate on the mortgage will satisfy all 
her requirements? [Hint: Start with r = 7% and compute 
the monthly payment, increasing r by 0.001 each time.]
Beyond the Basics
	103.	 Show that 
logb 12x2 + 1 - x2 + logb 12x2 + 1 + x2 = 0.
	104.	 Show that 
logb 11x + 1 + 1x2 = -logb 11x + 1 - 1x2.
	105.	 Show that 1logb  a21loga  b2 = 1.
	106.	 Show that log a
b + log b
a = 0.
	107.	 Write log2 x = ln x
ln 2 by the change-of-base formula.
	
	 Then use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph of 
y = log2 x. 
	108.	 Sketch the graph of y = log5 1x + 32. 
	109.	 Simplify each expression.
a.	 log aa
bb + log ab
ab + log ac
ab + log aa
c b 
b.	 log aa2
bcb + log ab2
cab + log a c2
abb 
c.	 log2 3 # log3 4 
d.	 loga b # logb c # logc a 
	110.	 Find the number of digits in N if log2 1log2 N2 = 4. 
	111.	 Find the domain of 
f1x2 = log41log51log3118x - x2 - 77222 
	112.	 Let f1x2 = loga x. Show that
a.	 f a1
x b = -f1x2 = log1>a x.
b.	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
= loga a1 + h
x b
1>h
, h ≠0.
	113.	 State whether each of the following is true or false for all 
permissible values of the variable.
a.	 log1x + 22 = log x + log 2 
b.	 log 2x = log x + log 2 
c.	 log2 3x = 3 log2 x 
d.	 1log3 2x24 = 4 log3 2x 
e.	 log5 x2 = 2 log5 x 
f.	 log x
3 = log x - log 3 
g.	 log x
4 = log x
log 4 
h.	 lna1
x b = -ln x 
i.	 log2 x2 = 1log2 x21log2 x2 
j.	 log 10x = 1 + log x 
	114.	 a.	 Prove the quotient rule for logarithms:
	
	 	
loga M
N = loga M - loga N.
b.	 Prove the power rule for logarithms: loga Mr = r loga M.
	115.	 If log aa + b
3
b = 1
2 1log a + log b2, show that 
	
	 a2 + b2 - 7ab = 0.
	116.	 Evaluate 
1
1 + logc ab +
1
1 + loga bc +
1
1 + logb ca.
	
	 [Hint: Convert to common logarithms and then simplify.] 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	117.	 What went wrong? Find the error in the following  
argument:
 3 6 4
3 log 1
2 6 4 log 1
2
 log a1
2b
3
6 log a1
2b
4
log 1
8 6 log 1
16
1
8 6 1
16
2 6 1
	118.	 By the power rule for logarithms, log x2 = 2 log x. 
However, the graphs of f1x2 = log x2 and g1x2 = 2 log x 
are not identical. Explain why.
	119.	 Prime Number. As of 2008, the largest known prime 
number was 243112609 - 1. How many digits does this prime 
number have? 
	
	 [Hint: First, argue that if p = 2m - 1 is a prime number, 
then p and 2m have the same number of digits.]
	120.	 Find the domain of g1x2 =
1
log11 - x2 +
1
ln1x + 22.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 121–124, simplify each expression and write your 
result without exponents.
	121.	 11 # 30 
	122.	 -4 # 5x # 5-x 
	123.	 4x # 2-2x+1 
	124.	 17x2
2 # 1722-x 
In Exercises 125–128, let t = 5x and write each expression  
in the form at2 + bt + c = 0, where a, b, and c are real 
numbers.
	125.	 52x - 5x = -1
	126.	 3 # 52x - 2 # 5x = 7
	127.	 5x + 3 # 5-x
5x
= 1
4
	128.	 5-x + 5x
5-x - 5x = 1
2
In Exercises 129–132, solve for x.
	129.	 2x - 111 + x2 = 8x + 17 + 2x2 
	130.	 4x - 1 + 16x - 22 = 3 - 15x + 12 
	131.	 x2 + 3x - 1 = 3 
	132.	 2x2 - 7x = 3x + 48 
In Exercises 133–136, solve for x.
	133.	 2x 6 7 + x 
	134.	 5x - 2 … 19 - 11 - x2 
	135.	 12x 7 30 - 3x 
	136.	 4x - 17 Ú 6 - 15 + 2x2  

438	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
4.4
Logistic Growth Model
In Sections 4.1 and 4.3, we discussed the population growth formula
A1t2 = A0ekt.    (18)
Equation (18) is a realistic model for a biological population that has plenty of food, 
enough space to grow, and no threat from predators.
However, most populations are constrained by limitations on resources such as the 
plants that populations eat. In the 1830s, the Belgian scientist P. F. Verhulst added an-
other constraint to the population growth model: There is a limited sustainable maxi-
mum population M of a species that the habitat can support. In population biology, 
M is called the carrying capacity.
Verhulst replaced equation (18) with
P1t2 =
M
1 + ae-kt ,    (19)
where k is the rate of growth and a is a positive constant. In 1840, using the data from 
the first five U.S. censuses, he made a prediction of the U.S. population for the year 
1940. As things turned out, it was off by less than 1%.
The mathematical model represented by equation (19) is called the logistic growth 
model or the Verhulst model. Verhulst introduced the term logistique to refer to the 
“loglike” qualities of the S-shaped graph of equation (19). See Figure 4.13.
To sketch the graph of equation (19), we notice that the y-intercept is
P102 =
M
1 + ae0 =
M
1 + a .
As t S ∞, the quantity ae-kt S 0 (because k is positive). Consequently, the denomi-
nator 1 + ae-kt S 1; therefore, P1t2 S M and the line y = M is a horizontal asymptote.
Similarly, as t S - ∞, e-kt S ∞. In this case, the denominator 1 + ae-kt S ∞ and 
P1t2 S 0. The x-axis, or y = 0, is another horizontal asymptote. See the graph of 
y =
6
1 + 2e-1.5t in Figure 4.13.
In Example 9 we use the logistic function defined by equation (19).
Exponential and Logarithmic 
Equations and Inequalities
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 One-to-one property of exponential  
functions (Section 4.1, page 396)
2	 One-to-one property of logarithmic  
functions (Section 4.2, page 415)
3	 Rules of logarithms (Section 4.3,  
page 426)
Objectives
1	 Solve exponential equations.
2	 Solve applied problems involving  
exponential equations.
3	 Solve logarithmic equations.
4	 Use the logistic growth model.
5	 Use logarithmic and exponential  
inequalities.
S e c t i o n 
7
y
t
5
3
1
3
1
1
3
(0, 2)
y  6
y  
6
12e1.5t
y  0
Figure 4.13  A logistic curve

	
Section 4.4    ■    Exponential and Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities 439
Solving Exponential Equations
An equation containing terms of the form ax1a 7 0, a ≠12 is called an exponential 
equation. Here are some examples of simple exponential equations:
 2x = 15
 9x = 3x+1
 7x = 132x
 5 # 2x-3 = 17
If both sides of an equation can be expressed as a power of the same base, then we can use 
the one-to-one property of exponential functions to solve the equation. 
1	
Solve exponential equations.
The one-to-one property of  
exponential and logarithmic  
functions states that
• 
if au = av, then u = v.
• 
if loga u = loga v, then 
u = v.
Recall
Solve each equation.
a.	 25x = 125        b.  9x = 3x+1
Solution
a.	 	
 1522x = 53
    Rewrite 25 as 52 and 125 as 53.
	
	
 52x = 53
    Power rule for exponents
	
	
 2x = 3
    One-to-one property
	
	
 x = 3
2
    Solve for x.
b.	 	
 1322x = 3x+1     Rewrite 9 as 32.
	
	
 32x = 3x+1     Power rule of exponents
	
	
 2x = x + 1    One-to-one property
	
	
 x = 1
    Solve for x.
Practice Problem 1  Solve each equation.
a.	 3x = 243        b.  8x = 4
Solving an Exponential Equation
EXAMPLE 1
We can use logarithms to solve those equations for which both sides cannot be read-
ily expressed with the same base. For example, the fact that log 2x = x log 2 allows us to 
solve the equation 2x = 9 by first taking the log of both sides.
 2x = 9
 log 2x = log 9    Take the log of both sides.
 x log 2 = log 9    Power rule for logarithms.
 x = log 9
log 2    Solve for x.
 An approximation x ≈3.1699 is found by using a calculator.
The general procedure for solving exponential equations using logarithms is given next.

440	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Solve exponential equations when both sides are not 
expressed with the same base.
Example
Solving Exponential Equations Using Logarithms
Objective
procedure 
in action
Example 2 
Solve for x: 5 # 2x-3 = 17
1.	2x-3 = 17
5 = 3.4	
Solve for 2x-3.
2.	ln 2x-3 = ln 13.42	
Take ln of 
both sides.
Step 1 Isolate the exponential expression on one 
side of the equation.
Step 2 Take the common or natural logarithm of 
both sides.
Step 3 Use the power rule, loga Mr = r loga M.
Step 4 Solve for the variable.
3.	1x - 32 ln 2 = ln 13.42	
Power Rule of 
logarithms
4.	 x - 3 = ln 13.42
ln 2
	
Divide both 
sides by ln 2.
	
     x = ln 13.42
ln 2
+ 3
	
       ≈4.766
Solve for x; 
Exact answer: 
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 2  Solve for x: 7 # 3x+1 = 11.
Solve the equation 52x-3 = 3x+1 and approximate the answer to three decimal places.
Solution
When different bases are involved, we begin with Step 2 of the procedure above.
 ln 52x-3 = ln 3x+1
    Take the natural log of both sides.
 12x - 32 ln 5 = 1x + 12 ln 3     Power rule of logarithms
 2x ln 5 - 3 ln 5 = x ln 3 + ln 3     Distributive property
 2x ln 5 - x ln 3 = ln 3 + 3 ln 5    Collect terms containing x on one side.
 x12 ln 5 - ln 32 = ln 3 + 3 ln 5    Factor out x on the left side.
 x = ln 3 + 3 ln 5
2 ln 5 - ln 3    Solve for x to obtain an exact solution.
 ≈2.795
    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 3  Solve the equation 3x+1 = 22x.
Solving an Exponential Equation with Different Bases
EXAMPLE 3
When using a calculator to evaluate 
such expressions, make sure you 
enclose the numerator and denomi-
nator in parentheses.
Side 
Note
Solve the equation 3x - 8 # 3-x = 2.
Solution
 3x13x - 8 # 3-x2 = 213x2    Multiply both sides by 3x.
 32x - 8 # 30 = 2 # 3x     Distributive property; 3x # 3-x = 30
 32x - 8 = 2 # 3x     30 = 1
 32x - 2 # 3x - 8 = 0
    Subtract 2 # 3x from both sides.
An Exponential Equation of Quadratic Form
EXAMPLE 4

	
Section 4.4    ■    Exponential and Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities 441
Applications of Exponential Equations
The last equation is quadratic in form. To see this, we let y = 3x; then y2 = 13x22 = 32x. 
So
 32x - 2 # 3x - 8 = 0
 y2 - 2y - 8 = 0    Substitute: y = 3x, y2 = 32x.
 1y + 221y - 42 = 0    Factor.
 y + 2 = 0  or  y - 4 = 0    Zero-product property
 y = -2  or 
 y = 4    Solve for y.
 3x = -2  or 
 3x = 4    Replace y with 3x.
But 3x = -2 is not possible because 3x 7 0 for all real numbers x. Solve 3x = 4.
 ln 3x = ln 4
    Take the natural log of both sides.
 x ln 3 = ln 4
    Power rule of logarithms
 x = ln 4
ln 3     An exact solution
 ≈1.262    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 4  Solve the equation e2x - 4ex - 5 = 0.
2	
Solve applied problems 
involving exponential 
equations.
The following table shows the approximate population and annual growth rate of the 
United States and Pakistan in 2010.
Solving a Population Growth Problem
EXAMPLE 5
Use the alternate population model P1t2 = P011 + r2t, where P0 is the initial population 
and t is the time in years since 2010. Assume that the growth rate for each country stays 
the same.
a.	 Estimate the population of each country in 2020.
b.	 In what year will the population of the United States be 350 million?
c.	 In what year will the population of Pakistan be the same as the population of the 
United States?
Solution
The given model is
P1t2 = P011 + r2t.
a.	 In 2010, the initial year, the U.S. population was P0 = 308. In ten years, 2020, the 
population of the United States will be
30811 + 0.009210 ≈336.87 million  P0 = 308, r = 0.009, t = 10
	
In the same way, the population of Pakistan in 2020 will be
18511 + 0.021210 ≈227.73 million  P0 = 185, r = 0.021, t = 10
 
Country
 
Population
Annual Population 
Growth Rate
United States
308 million
	
0.9%
Pakistan
185 million
	
2.1%
Source: www.cia.gov

442	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Solving Logarithmic Equations
Equations that contain terms of the form loga x are called logarithmic equations. Here are 
some examples of logarithmic equations.
 log2 x = 4
 log3 12x - 12 = log3 1x + 22
 log2 1x - 32 + log2 1x - 42 = 1
If a logarithmic equation can be expressed in the form loga N = c, we can solve it by writ-
ing in the equivalent exponential form N = ac.
For example, to solve an equation such as log2 x = 4, we rewrite it in the equivalent 
exponential form:
log2 x = 4 means x = 24 = 16
So x = 16 is a solution of the equation log2 x = 4. Because the domain of logarithmic 
functions consists of positive numbers, we must check apparent solutions of logarithmic 
equations in the original equation.
b.	 To find the year when the population of the United States will be 350 million, we 
solve for t in the equation
 350 = 30811 + 0.0092t
    P1t2 = 350, P0 = 308, r = 0.009
 350
308 = 11.0092t
    Divide both sides by 308.
 ln a350
308b = ln 11.0092t
    Take natural logs of both sides.
 ln a350
308b = t ln 11.0092
    Power rule for logarithms
 t =
ln a350
308b
ln 11.0092 ≈14.27    Solve for t and use a calculator.
	
The population of the United States will be 350 million approximately 14.27 years 
after 2010—that is, sometime in 2025.
c.	 To find when the population of the two countries will be the same, we solve for t in 
the equation
 30811.0092t = 18511.0212t     Equate populations for both countries.
 308
185 = a1.021
1.009b
t
    Divide both sides by 18511.0092t and rewrite.
 ln a308
185b = ln a1.021
1.009b
t
    Take natural logs of both sides.
 ln a308
185b = t ln a1.021
1.009b    Power rule for logarithms
 t =
ln a308
185b
ln a1.021
1.009b
    Solve for t to get exact solution.
 ≈43.12 years     Use a calculator.
Therefore, the two populations will be equal in about 43.12 years, that is, during 2054.
Practice Problem 5  Repeat Example 5 assuming that the rates of growth for the  
United States and Pakistan are 1.1% and 3.3%, respectively.
3	
Solve logarithmic equations.

	
Section 4.4    ■    Exponential and Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities 443
Solve 4 + 3 log2 x = 1.
Solution
 4 + 3 log2 x = 1
    Original equation
 3 log2 x = 1 - 4    Subtract 4 from both sides.
 3 log2 x = -3
    Simplify.
 log2 x = -1
    Divide both sides by 3.
 x = 2-1
    Exponential form
 x = 1
2
    a-n = 1
an
Check    Substitute x = 1
2 = 2-1 into 4 + 3 log2 x = 1.
 4 + 3 log2 2-1 ≟1
 4 + 31-12 log2 2 ≟1    Power rule for logarithms
 4 - 3 ≟1    log2 2 = 1
 1 ≟1    Yes
This check shows that the solution set is e 1
2 f.
Practice Problem 6  Solve 1 + 2 ln x = 4.
Solving a Logarithmic Equation
EXAMPLE 6
Solve the following equations.
a.	 log2 1x - 32 + log2 1x - 42 = 1
b.	 log2 1x + 42 - log2 1x + 32 = 1
Solution
a.	  log2 1x - 32 + log2 1x - 42 = 1     Original equation
 log2 31x - 321x - 424 = 1     Product rule for logarithms
 1x - 321x - 42 = 21    Exponential form
 x2 - 7x + 10 = 0     Write in standard form.
 1x - 221x - 52 = 0     Factor.
 x - 2 = 0 or x - 5 = 0     Zero-product property
	
 x = 2  or      x = 5     Solve for x.
We check the possible solutions in the original equation.
Using the Product and Quotient Rules
EXAMPLE 7
Check x = 2
 log2 12 - 32 + log2 12 - 42 ≟1
 log2 1-12 + log2 1-22 ≟1  No
Because logarithms are not defined for 
negative numbers, x = 2 is an extra- 
neous solution of the original equation.
Check x = 5
 log2 15 - 32 + log2 15 - 42 ≟1
 log2 2 + log2 1 ≟1
 1 + 0 ≟1
 1 ≟1  Yes
The solution set is 556.
Remember that log2x  
means “the exponent on 2  
that gives x.”
Recall

444	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
If each side of an equation can be expressed as a single logarithm with the same base, 
then we can use the one-to-one property of logarithms to solve the equation.
b.	  log2 1x + 42 - log2 1x + 32 = 1
    Original equation
 log2 
x + 4
x + 3 = 1
    Quotient rule
 x + 4
x + 3 = 21
    Exponential form
 x + 4 = 2 1x + 32    Multiply both sides by x + 3.
 1x + 22 = 0
    Simplify.
 x = -2
    Solve for x.
	
We check the possible solution in the original equation.
Check x = −2
 log2 1-2 + 42 - log2 1-2 + 32 ≟1
 log2 2 - log2 1 ≟1
 1 - 0 ≟1    Yes
The solution set is 5-26.
Practice Problem 7  Solve log3 1x - 82 + log3 x = 2.
The product rule says that 
loga M + loga N = loga MN.
Recall
Solve log4 x + log4 1x + 12 = log4 1x - 12 + log4 6.
Solution
 log4 x + log4 1x + 12 = log4 1x - 12 + log4 6	
Original equation
 log4 3x1x + 124 = log4 361x - 124
	
Product rule for logarithms
 x 1x + 12 = 61x - 12
	
One-to-one property
 x2 + x = 6x - 6
	
Distributive property
 x2 - 5x + 6 = 0
	
Add -6x + 6 to both sides.
 1x - 221x - 32 = 0
	
Factor.
 x - 2 = 0 or  x - 3 = 0	
Zero-product property
 x = 2 or 
 x = 3	
Solve for x.
Now we check these possible solutions in the original equation.
Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms
EXAMPLE 8
Check x = 2
 log4 2 + log4 12 + 12 ≟log4 12 - 12 + log4 6
 log4 2 + log4 3 ≟log4 1 + log4 6
 log4 12 # 32 ≟log4 11 # 62    Yes
Check x = 3
 log4 3 + log4 13 + 12 ≟log4 13 - 12 + log4 6
 log4 3 + log4 4 ≟log4 2 + log4 6
 log4 13 # 42 ≟log4 12 # 62    Yes
The solution set is 52, 36.
Practice Problem 8  Solve ln 1x + 52 +  ln 1x + 12 =  ln 1x - 12.

	
Section 4.4    ■    Exponential and Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities 445
Logarithmic and Exponential Inequalities
The properties of logarithms and exponents, together with the same techniques we used to 
solve polynomial inequalities, can be used to solve inequalities involving logarithmic and 
exponential expressions.
The exponential and logarithmic functions with base a 7 1 are increasing func-
tions. That is, if x1 6 x2, then ax1 6 ax2, and if 0 6 x1 6 x2, then loga x1 6 loga x2. As 
their graphs suggest, it is also true for base a 7 1 that if ax1 6 ax2, then x1 6 x2 and if 
loga x1 6 loga x2, then x1 6 x2. See Figures 4.14 and 4.15.
4	
Use the logistic growth model.
Suppose the carrying capacity M of the human population on Earth is 35 billion. In 1987, 
the world population was about 5 billion. Use the logistic growth model of P. F. Verhulst 
to calculate the average rate, k, of growth of the population given that the population was 
about 6 billion in 2003.
P1t2 =
M
1 + ae-kt (19)  From the section introduction
Solution
If 1987 represents t = 0, then P102 = 5 and M = 35; so equation (19) becomes
 5 =
35
1 + ae-k102
 5 =
35
1 + a
 511 + a2 = 35
    Multiply both sides by 1 + a.
 a = 6
    Solve for a.
Equation (19), with M = 35 and a = 6, becomes
P1t2 =
35
1 + 6e-kt (20)
We now solve equation (20) for k given that t = 16 (for 2003) and P1162 = 6.
 6 =
35
1 + 6e-16k
 6 + 36e-16k = 35
    Multiply both sides by 1 + 6e-16k  
and distribute.
 e-16k = 29
36
    Isolate e-16k.
 -16k = ln a29
36b
    Logarithmic form
 k = - 1
16 ln a29
36b
    Solve for k.
 k ≈0.0135 = 1.35%    Use a calculator.
The average growth rate of the world population was approximately 1.35%.
Practice Problem 9  Repeat Example 9 assuming that the world population  
in 2005 was about 6.5 billion.
Using Logarithms in the Logistic Growth Model
EXAMPLE 9
Pierre François Verhulst 
(1804–1849)
Pierre Verhulst was 
born and educated in 
Brussels, Belgium. He 
received his PhD from 
the University of Ghent in 1825. Influ-
enced by Lambert Quetelet, he became 
interested in social statistics. Verhulst's 
research on the law of population 
growth is important. Before Quetelet 
and Verhulst, scientists believed that 
an increasing population as a function 
of time was given by
 P1t2 = P011 + k2t or
 P1t2 = P0ekt.
Verhulst showed that forces tend to 
prevent the population growth according 
to these laws. He discovered the model 
given by equation (2).
5	
Use logarithmic and 
exponential inequalities.

446	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
When working with inequalities, it is important to remember that y = loga x, a 7 1, is 
negative for 0 6 x 6 1.
y
x
x1
(x1, ax1)
(x2, ax2)
x2
x1
a
x2
a
y  0
Figure 4.14 
y = ax; a 7 1
y
x
x1
1
x2
loga x2
loga x1
x  0
(x1, loga x1)
(x2, loga x2)
Figure 4.15 
y = loga x; a 7 1
Solve  510.72x + 3 6 18.
Solution
 510.72x + 3 6 18
    Given inequality
 10.72x 6 3
    Isolate 10.72x on one side.
 ln10.72x 6 ln 3	
Take the natural log of both sides.
 x ln10.72 6 ln 3	
Power rule for logarithms
 x 7
ln 3
ln10.72 ≈-3.080	
Divide both sides by ln (0.7);  
reverse the sense of the inequality  
because ln10.72 6 0.
Practice Problem 10  Solve 310.52x + 7 7 19.
Solving an Inequality Involving an Exponential Expression
EXAMPLE 10
If A 6 B and C 6 0, then  
AC 7 BC.
Recall
Solve  log 12x - 52 … 1.
Solution
We first identify the domain for log 12x - 52. Because 2x - 5 must be positive, we solve 
2x - 5 7 0; so 2x 7 5 or x 7 5
2.
Then     log 12x - 52 … 1
    Given inequality
 10log 12x-52 … 101    If u 6 y, then 10u 6 10y.
 2x - 5 … 10     aloga x = x
 x … 15
2     Solve for x.
For log12x - 52 to be a real number, we must have x 7 5
2 . Combining this with the fact 
that x … 15
2  , we find that the solution set for log12x - 52 … 1 is the interval a5
2 , 15
2 d .
Practice Problem 11  Solve ln 11 - 3x2 7 2.
Solving an Inequality Involving a Logarithmic Expression
EXAMPLE 11

	
Section 4.4    ■    Exponential and Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities 447
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. x = 5  b. x = 2
3    2. x =
ln a11
7 b
ln 3
- 1 ≈-0.589
3. x =
ln 3
2 ln 2 - ln 3 ≈3.819    4. x = ln 5 ≈1.609
5. a. United States: 343.61 million; Pakistan: 255.96 million 
b. Sometime in 2022 (after 11.69 yr)  c. In 23.68 yrs  
(sometime in 2033)    6. x = e3>2    7. x = 9    8. ∅
9. The average growth rate was approximately 1.74%. 
10. x 6 -2    11. x 6 1 - e2
3
Exercises
section 4.4
Basic Concepts and Skills
	1.	 An equation that contains terms of the form ax is called a1n2  
  equation.
	2.	 An equation that contains terms of the form loga x is called 
a1n2  
  equation.
	3.	 The equation y =
M
1 + ae-bx represents a1n2 
	
	
  model.
	4.	 True or False. A logistic curve always has two horizontal 
asymptotes. 
	5.	 True or False. Because the domain of f1x2 = loga x is the 
interval 10, ∞2, a logarithmic equation cannot have a nega-
tive solution. 
	6.	 True or False. The equation 82x = 43x is true for all real 
values of x. 
In Exercises 7–22, solve each equation.
	7.	 2x = 16 
	8.	 3x = 243 
	9.	 8x = 32 
	10.	 5x-1 = 1 
	11.	 4x = 128 
	12.	 9x = 243 
	13.	 5-x = 625 
	14.	 3-x = 81 
	15.	 ln x = 0 
	16.	 ln 1x - 12 = 1 
	17.	 log2 x = -1 
	18.	 log2 1x + 12 = 3 
	19.	 log3 x = 2 
	20.	 log2 x + 1 = 3 
	21.	 1
2 log x - 2 = 0 
	22.	 1
3 log 1x + 12 - 1 = 0
In Exercises 23–52, solve each exponential equation. Write the 
exact answer with natural logarithms and then approximate 
the result correct to three decimal places.
	23.	 2x = 3 
	24.	 3x = 5 
	25.	 22x+3 = 15 
	26.	 32x+5 = 17 
	27.	 5 # 2x - 7 = 10 
	28.	 3 # 5x + 4 = 11 
	29.	 3 # 42x-1 + 4 = 14 
	30.	 2 # 34x-5 - 7 = 10 
	31.	 51-x = 2x 
	32.	 32x-1 = 2x+1 
	33.	 21-x = 34x+6 
	34.	 52x+1 = 3x-1 
	35.	 2 # 3x-1 = 5x+1 
	36.	 5 # 22x+1 = 7 # 3x-1 
	37.	 11.0652t = 2 
	38.	 11.07252t = 2 
	39.	 22x - 4 # 2x = 21 
	40.	 4x - 4-x = 2 
	41.	 9x - 6 # 3x + 8 = 0 
	42.	 3x + 5 # 3-x
3
= 2 
	43.	 33x - 4 # 32x + 2 # 3x = 8 
	44.	 23x + 3 # 22x - 2x = 3 
	45.	 3x - 3-x
3x + 3-x = 1
4 
	46.	 ex - e-x
ex + e-x = 1
3 
	47.	
4
2 + 3x = 1 
	48.	
7
2x - 1 = 3 
	49.	
17
5 - 3x = 7 
	50.	
15
3 + 2 # 5x = 4 
	51.	
5
2 + 3x = 4 
	52.	
7
3 + 5 # 2x = 4 
In Exercises 53–70, solve each logarithmic equation.
	53.	 3 + log 12x + 52 = 2 
	54.	 1 + log 13x - 42 = 0 
	55.	 log 1x2 - x - 52 = 0 
	56.	 log 1x2 - 6x + 92 = 0 
	57.	 log4 1x2 - 7x + 142 = 1 
	58.	 log4 1x2 + 5x + 102 = 1 
	59.	 ln 12x - 32 - ln 1x + 52 = 0 
	60.	 log 1x + 82 + log 1x - 12 = 1 
	61.	 log x + log 1x + 92 = 1 
	62.	 log5 13x - 12 - log5 12x + 72 = 0 
	63.	 loga 15x - 22 - loga 13x + 42 = 0 
	64.	 log 1x - 12 + log 1x + 22 = 1 
	65.	 log6 1x + 22 + log6 1x - 32 = 1 
	66.	 log2 13x - 22 - log2 15x + 12 = 3 
	67.	 log3 12x - 72 - log3 14x - 12 = 2 
	68.	 log4 1x + 3 - log4 12x - 1 = 1
4 
	69.	 log7 3x + log7 12x - 12 = log7 116x - 102 
	70.	 log3 1x + 12 + log3 2x = log3 13x + 12 

448	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
a.	 The interest rate is r compounded annually.
b.	 The interest rate is r (per year) compounded  
continuously. 
	93.	 Light absorption in physics. The light intensity I (in 
lumens) at a depth of x feet in Lake Elizabeth is given by
log a I
12b = -0.025x.
a.	 Find the light intensity at a depth of 30 feet. 
b.	 At what depth is the light intensity 4 lumens? 
	94.	 Rule of 70. Bankers use the rule of 70 to estimate the dou-
bling time for money invested at different rates. The rule of 
70 states that
Doubling time ≈
70
100r years,
	
	 where r is the annual interest rate (expressed as a decimal 
number). Explain why this formula works. 
	95.	 Epidemic outbreak. The number of people in a community 
who became infected during an epidemic t weeks after its 
outbreak is given by the function
f1t2 =
20,000
1 + ae-kt,
	
	 where 20,000 people of the community are susceptible to the 
disease. Assuming that 1000 people were infected initially and 
8999 had been infected by the end of the fourth week,
a.	 Find the number of people infected after 8 weeks. 
b.	 After how many weeks will 12,400 people be infected? 
	96.	 Spreading a rumor. A jealous student started a malicious 
rumor on an isolated college campus of 5000 students. The 
number of people who know of the rumor within t days after 
it was started is given by the function
R1t2 =
5000
1 + ae-kt.
	
	 Half the students had known of the rumor within ten days.
a.	 Find a and k and graph the function y = R1t2. 
b.	 How many students would have known of the rumor 
within 15 days after it started? 
c.	 How many students altogether will know the rumor? 
	97.	 Biological growth. In his laboratory experiment in 1934, 
G. F. Gause placed paramecia (unicellular microorganisms) in 
5 cubic centimeters of a saline (salt) solution with a constant 
amount of food and measured their growth on a daily basis. 
He found that the population P1t2 after t days was approxi-
mated by
P1t2 =
4490
1 + e5.4094-1.0255t, t Ú 0.
a.	 What was the initial population of the paramecia? 
b.	 What was the carrying capacity of the medium? 
c.	 Graph the equation y = P1t2. 
In Exercises 71–78, find a and k and then evaluate the  
function. Round your answer to three decimal places.
	71.	 Let f1x2 = 20 + a12kx2 with f102 = 50 and f112 = 140. 
Find f122. 
	72.	 f1x2 = 40 + a14kx2 with f102 = -216 and f122 = 39. 
Find f112. 
	73.	 f1x2 = 16 + a13kx2 with f102 = 21 and f142 = 61.  
Find f122. 
	74.	 f1x2 = 50 + a12kx2 with f102 = 34 and f142 = 46.  
Find f122. 
	75.	 Let f1x2 =
10
3 + aekx with f102 = 2 and f112 = 1
2. 
	
	 Find f122. 
	76.	 Let f1x2 =
6
a + 2ekx with f102 = 1 and f112 = 0.8. 
	
	 Find f122. 
	77.	 Let f1x2 =
4
a + 4ekx with f102 = 2 and f112 = 9. 
	
	 Find f122. 
	78.	 Let f1x2 =
a
1 + 3ekx with f102 = -1 and f122 = -2. 
	
	 Find f112. 
In Exercises 79–88, solve each inequality.
	79.	 510.32x + 1 … 11 
	80.	 10.12x - 4 7 15 
	81.	 -311.22x + 11 Ú 8 
	82.	 -710.42x + 19 6 5 
	83.	 log 15x + 152 6 2 
	84.	 log 12x + 0.92 7 -1 
	85.	 ln 1x - 52 Ú 1 
	86.	 ln 14x + 102 … 2 
	87.	 log2 13x - 72 6 3 
	88.	 log2 15x - 42 7 4 
Applying the Concepts
	89.	 Investment. Find the time required for an investment of 
$10,000 to grow to $18,000 at an annual interest rate of 6% if 
the interest is compounded
a.	 Yearly. 
b.	 Quarterly. 
c.	 Monthly. 
d.	 Daily. 
e.	 Continuously. 
	90.	 Investment. How long will it take for an investment of 
$100 to double in value if the annual rate of interest is 7.2% 
compounded
a.	 Yearly. 
b.	 Quarterly. 
c.	 Monthly. 
d.	 Continuously. 
	91.	 Inflation. In the fictional land of Sardonia, the price of a car 
costing $20,000 in U.S. currency will double in eight years. 
What will the car cost in five years? What is the annual rate 
of inflation? 
	92.	 Doubling time. An amount P dollars is deposited in a regu-
lar bank account. How long does it take to double the initial 
investment (called the doubling time) if          

	
Section 4.4    ■    Exponential and Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities 449
In Exercises 119–122, find the smallest integer n for which the 
given property holds.
	119.	7n 7 4367 
	120.	9n 7 e321 
	121.	81>n 6 1.01 
	122.	121>n 6 1.001 
	123.	Find an integer n so that 31n has 567 digits. 
[Hint: 566 …  log 31n 6 567.] 
	124.	 Find an integer n so that n123 has 456 digits. 
	125.	Evaluate xlog y
xlog z # ylog z
ylog x # zlog x
zlog y. 
	126.	Evaluate 
1
logxy xyz +
1
logyz xyz +
1
logzx xyz. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	127.	Logistic function. For f1t2 =
P
1 + ae-kt, it can be shown 
that the maximum rate of growth occurs when f1t2 = P
2. 
	
	 Find the time when the rate of growth is maximum. 
	128.	Solve each of the following equations for x.
a.	 log41x - 122 = 3 
b.	 2 log4 1x - 12 = 3 
c.	 2 log4 x - 1 = 3 
	
	 Explain why these three equations do not have identical solutions.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 129–132, convert each equation from exponential 
to logarithmic form.
	129.	92 = 81 
	130.	3-2 = 1
9 
	131.	2 # 10x + 1 = 7 
	132.	3e2x + 5 = 17 
In Exercises 133–136, convert each equation from logarithmic 
to exponential form.
	133.	log2 64 = 6 
	134.	log1
2 16 = -4 
	135.	log aA
2 b = 3 
	136.	ln aA
P b = kt 
In Exercises 137–144, solve each equation for x.
	137.	log5 x = -3 
	138.	log3 1
27 = x - 1 
	139.	logx 1000 = 3 
	140.	log21x2 - 6x + 102 = 1 
	141.	2x+1 = 32 
	142.	32x-1 = 7 
	143.	3x+1 = 52x-3 
	144.	log1x2 + x2 = log13x + 32 
	  98.	Facebook users. In 2004, there were 1 million Facebook 
users, and in 2012, there were 845 million users. Use the
	
	 model f1t2 =
20,000
20 + ae-kt, where t is the number of years 
	
	 since 2004 and f1t2 is the number of users in millions, to:
a.	 Find a and k. 
b.	 Estimate the number of users in 2015. 
c.	 Estimate the year in which the number of users will be  
2 billion. 
	
	 (Source: www.benposter.com/facebook-user-growth-
chart-2004-2010)
Beyond the Basics
	  99.	Solve for t: P =
M
1 + e-kt. 
	100.	Find k so that
a.	 2x = ekx. 
b.	 ex = 2kx. 
	101.	If log x
2
= log y
3
= log z
5
1=k2, show that
a.	 xy = z.
b.	 y2z2 = x8.
[Hint: First, express x, y, and z in terms of k.]
	102.	The present value P of an annuity with payment size R, peri-
odic rate i, and term of n payments is given by the formula
P11 + i2n = R
11 + i2n - 1
i
.
	
	 Solve this equation for n.        
In Exercises 103–110, solve each equation for x.
	103.	 1log x22 = log x 
	104.	 1log2 x21log2 8x2 = 10
	105.	 1log3 x21log3 3x2 = 2
	106.	log2 x + log4 x = 6 
	107.	log4 x21x - 122 - log21x - 12 = 1 
	108.	
log17x - 122
log x
= 2 
	109.	
log13x - 52
2
= log x 
	110.	log1x - 42 - log x = log a
1
10 - xb 
In Exercises 111–118, use the four-step procedure (page 276) 
to find f −11x2 for the given function f1x2.
	111.	 f1x2 = 3x + 5 
	112.	 f1x2 = 2-x + 4 
	113.	 f1x2 = 3 # 4x + 7 
	114.	 f1x2 = 2 # 3x-1 - 5 
	115.	 f1x2 = 1 + log21x - 12 
	116.	 f1x2 = 7 + 2 log6 13x - 12 
	117.	 f1x2 = 1
2 lnax - 1
x + 1b 
	118.	 f1x2 = 1
2 log a1 + x
1 - xb    

450	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
4.5
pH Scale
In chemistry, acidity of a substance is related to the presence of positively charged hydro-
gen ions. pH represents the effective concentration (activity) of hydrogen ions H+ in water. 
Because H+ concentrations are much smaller than other dissolved species in water, the 
activity of hydrogen ions is expressed most conveniently in logarithmic units.
A logarithmic scale is a scale in which logarithms are used in the measurement 
of quantities. Suppose we have a quantity that has a small positive range of variation 
(for example, from 0.00001 = 10-5 to 0.0001 = 10-4); then the common logarithms of 
such numbers would be between -5 and -4. Similarly, if a quantity has a large positive 
range of variation from 10,000 = 104 to 100,000 = 105, the common logarithms of 
these numbers would be between 4 and 5. So a logarithmic scale serves to make data 
more manageable by expanding small variations and compressing large ones.
In Example 2 we will see how a small difference on a logarithmic scale results in an 
impressive increase in the acidity of acid rain compared to an ordinary rain.
Logarithmic Scales
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Exponential form for logarithms  
(Section 4.2, page 411)
2	 Properties of logarithms (Section 4.2,  
 page 413)
3	 Rules for logarithms (Section 4.3, page 426)
Objectives
1	 Define pH.
2	 Define the Richter scale for measuring 
earthquake intensity.
3	 Define scales for measuring sound.
4	 Define magnitude of star brightness.
S E C T I O N
1	
Define pH.
p H  S c a l e  F o r m u l a
We define the pH scale of a solution by the formula
pH = -log 3H+4,
where 3H+4 is the concentration of H+ ions in moles per liter. (A mole is a unit of 
measurement, equal to 6.023 * 1023 atoms.)
The pH value is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution. The pH value for pure 
water at 25°C 177°F2 is 7.

	
Section 4.5    ■    Logarithmic Scales 451
Because pH is defined as -log3H+4, pH decreases as 3H+4 increases (which will hap-
pen if acid is added to water). Acidic solutions have pH values less than 7, and alkaline 
(also called basic) solutions have pH values greater than 7. The smaller the number on the 
pH scale, the more acidic the substance is.
The term pH was origi-
nally derived from the 
French term pouvoir 
hydrogène. In English, 
this means “hydrogen power.” The term 
pH is always written with a lowercase 
p and an uppercase H. The pH scale 
was defined by the Danish biochemist 
Sören Sörensen in 1909.
Søren Sørensen 
(1868–1939)
a.	 Calculate to the nearest tenth the pH value of grapefruit juice if 3H +4 of grapefruit 
juice is 6.32 * 10-4.
b.	 Find the hydrogen concentration 3H +4 in beer if its pH value is 4.82.
Solution
a.	 pH = -log3H+4	
Definition of pH
	
	
= -log16.32 * 10-42	
Given 3H+4 = 6.32 * 10-4
	
	
= -1log 6.32 + log 10-42    Product rule
	
	
= -log 6.32 + 4	
-log 10-4 = -1-42log 10 = 4
	
	
≈-0.8007 + 4	
Use a calculator.
	
	
= 3.1993 ≈3.2	
Simplify.
b.	 	
4.82 = -log3H+4	
Replace pH with 4.82.
	
log3H+4 = -4.82	
Rewrite equation.
	
	
3H+4 = 10-4.82	
Exponential form
	
	
= 100.18 * 10-5   
-4.82 = -5 + 0.18
	
	
≈1.51 * 10-5	
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 1 
a.	 The 3H+4 of a solution is 2.68 * 10-6. Find its pH value.
b.	 Find 3H+4 of seawater if its pH is 8.47.
Calculating pH and 3H+4
Example 1 
How much more acidic is acid rain with a pH value of 3 than an ordinary rain with a pH 
value of 6?
Solution
We have
3 = pHacid rain = -log3H+4acid rain    Definition of pH
so that
3H+4acid rain = 10-3    Exponential form of log 3H+4 = -3
Similarly,
3H+4ordinary rain = 10-6.
Therefore,
3H +4acid rain
3H +4ordinary rain
= 10-3
10-6 = 10-3+6 = 103 = 1000.
So the hydrogen ion concentration in this acid rain is 1000 times greater than that in ordi-
nary rain. That is, this acid rain is 1000 times more acidic than the ordinary rain.
Practice Problem 2  How much more acidic is an acid rain with a pH value of 2.8  
than an ordinary rain with a pH value of 6.2?
Acid Rain
EXAMPLE 2
Acid rain is rain, snow, or fog that is 
polluted by acid in the atmosphere 
and damages the environment. Two 
culprits that acidify rain are sulfur 
dioxide 1SO22 and nitrogen oxide 
N2O. Rain measuring between 0 
and 5 on the pH scale is acidic and 
therefore called “acid rain.”
DO You 
Know?
Notice that each one point increase 
in pH value corresponds to a factor 
of 10 increase in h+ concentration.
Side 
Note

452	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Table 4.6 lists a few typical pH values.
An acid is a substance with sour 
taste, and it reacts with a base to 
form a salt. Acids turn blue litmus 
paper (also called pH paper) red. 
Strong acids can burn your skin. 
Common antacid tablets (for indi-
gestion) are basic and work by 
neutralizing stomach acid.
DO You 
Know?
 0 = Maximum acidity
 7 = Neutral point
 14 = Maximum alkalinity 1opposite of acidity2
Earthquake Intensity
An earthquake is the vibration, sometimes violent, of Earth’s surface that follows a 
release of energy in Earth’s crust. Earth’s crust is composed of about 20 huge plates 
that float on the molten material beneath the crust. These plates slowly move over, 
under, and past each other. Sometimes the movement is gradual. At other times, the 
plates are locked together, unable to release the accumulating energy. When this energy 
grows strong enough, the plates break free and vibrations called “seismic waves” or 
earthquakes are generated.
The Richter scale was invented in the 1930s by the American scientist Dr. Charles 
Richter to measure the magnitude of an earthquake. It is based on the idea of compar-
ing the intensity of an earthquake with that of a zero-level earthquake. He defined the 
zero-level earthquake as an earthquake whose seismographic reading measures 1 micron 
(1000 microns = 1 millimeter, or 1,000,000 microns = 1 meter) at a distance of 100 kilo-
meters (about 62 miles) from the epicenter of the earthquake.
Let us denote the intensity of a zero-level earthquake by I0. A zero-level earthquake 
is just noticeable and is the threshold level below which we would not be aware of 
a quake.
7
14
x
0
Maximum
acidity
Neutral
Maximum
alkalinity
2	
Define the Richter scale 
for measuring earthquake 
intensity.
Table 4.6 
Solution
pH Value
Battery Acid
1
Lemon Juice
2
Stomach Acid
2–3
Vinegar
3
Milk
6–7
Baking Soda, Seawater
8–9
Milk of Magnesia
9–10
Ammonia
10–11
Drain opener
10–12
Lye
13
Charles Richter was  
born in Hamilton, 
Ohio, and received 
his 
PhD 
from 
­California Institute of 
Technology in 1928. 
He developed his scale to measure 
the strength of earthquakes in 1935. 
­Earlier scales had been developed by 
de Rossi in the 1880s and by Giuseppe 
Mercalli in 1902, but both used a de-
scriptive scale defined in terms of dam-
age to buildings and the behavior and 
response of the population. Richter’s 
scale is an absolute one, based on the 
amplitude of the waves produced by 
the earthquake. He defined the mag-
nitude of an earthquake as the loga-
rithm to the base 10 of the maximum 
amplitude of the waves, measured in 
microns. This means that waves whose 
amplitudes differ by a factor of 100 will 
differ by 2 points on the Richter scale.
Charles Francis Richter 
(1900–1985)
R i c h t e r  S c a l e
The magnitude M of an earthquake is a function of its intensity I and is defined by
M = log a I
I0
b,
where I0 is the intensity of the zero-level earthquake.

	
Section 4.5    ■    Logarithmic Scales 453
Solution
 M = log a I
I0
b
    Definition of magnitude
 4 = log a I
I0
b
    Replace M with 4.
 I
I0
= 104
    Exponential form
 I = 104 I0 = 10,000 I0    Multiply both sides by I0.
The intensity of this earthquake is 10,000 times the intensity of I0 (the zero-level earth-
quake). Notice that a 1 point increase on the Richter scale corresponds to a factor of 10 
increase in intensity.
Practice Problem 3  The magnitude of an earthquake is 6.5 on the Richter scale.  
What is the intensity of this earthquake? 
The magnitude of an earthquake is 4.0 on the Richter scale. What is the intensity of this 
earthquake?
Intensity of an Earthquake
EXAMPLE 3
Source: US Geological Survey (USGS).
To get some idea of the destructive 
power of an earthquake, the energy 
released at the epicenter of a zero-
level earthquake is equivalent to more 
than 10,000 atomic bombs of the 
kind that leveled Hiroshima, Japan, in 
1945 exploding simultaneously.
DO You 
Know?
Compare the intensity of the Mexico City earthquake of 1985, which registered 8.1 on the 
Richter scale, to that of the San Francisco area earthquake of 1989, which measured 6.9 
on the Richter scale.
Solution
Let IM and IS denote the intensities of the Mexico City and the San Francisco earthquakes, 
respectively. We have
 8.1 = log aIM
I0
b     6.9 = log aIS
I0
b    Definition of magnitude
 IM
I0
= 108.1
   
 IS
I0
= 106.9
    Exponential form
 IM = 108.1 I0    
 IS = 106.9 I0.     Multiply both sides by I0.
Comparing Two Earthquakes
EXAMPLE 4

454	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Divide IM by IS and simplify to get
 IM
IS
= 108.1
106.9
I0
I0
= 108.1
106.9 = 108.1-6.9 = 101.2
 IM = 101.2 IS ≈16 IS.
This equation shows that the intensity of the Mexico City earthquake was about 16 times 
that of the San Francisco area earthquake.
Practice Problem 4  The magnitudes of the earthquakes of Mozambique (2006) and 
Southern California (2005) were 7.0 and 5.2, respectively. Compare their intensities.
Energy of an Earthquake  The magnitude M of an earthquake is related to its 
released energy E (measured in joules) and is approximated by the equation
log E = 4.4 + 1.5 M.
We can rewrite this equation in the exponential form as
E = 104.4+1.5M = 100.4 * 104 * 101.5M
or
E ≈12.5 * 1042 * 101.5M    100.4 ≈2.5.
A joule is a unit of energy. 100 joules 
of energy could light up a 100-watt 
lightbulb for a second.
By the 
Way
E n e r g y  o f  a n  E a r t h q u a k e
The energy E (in joules) released by an earthquake of magnitude M (Richter scale) is 
given by
log E = 4.4 + 1.5M
or
E ≈12.5 * 1042 * 101.5M.
The energy E0 released by a zero-level earthquake can be calculated by substituting M = 0 
in the formula. We have
E0 = 2.5 * 104 joules.
Table 4.7 Major Earthquakes 1M # 7.52  of the 20th & 21st Century
Date
Location
Magnitude
April 1906
San Francisco
7.8
December 1908
Messina, Italy
7.5
December 1920
Gansu, China
8.6
September 1923
Sagami Bay, Japan
8.3
February 1931
New Zealand
7.9
August 1950
Assam, India
8.7
July 1976
Tangshan, China
8.0
September 1985
Mexico City
8.1
June 1990
Iran
7.7
May 1997
Iran 
7.5
December 2004
Sumatra, Indonesia
9.0
March 2005
Sumatra, Indonesia
8.6
February 2010
Maule, Chile
8.8
March 2011
Tohoku, Japan
9.0
Source: National Earthquake Information Center, U.S. Geological Survey.

	
Section 4.5    ■    Logarithmic Scales 455
If two earthquakes have magnitude M1 and M2, we can compute the ratio of their corre-
sponding energies E1 and E2 as follows:
E1
E2
= 12.5 * 1042 * 101.5M1
12.5 * 1042 * 101.5M2 = 101.5M1
101.5M2 = 101.5M1-1.5M2 = 101.51M1-M22.
Compare the estimated energies released by the San Francisco earthquake of 1906 and the 
Northridge earthquake of 1994 with magnitude of 6.7.
Solution
Let M1906 and E1906 represent the magnitude and energy released by the 1906 quake of San 
Francisco. Attach similar meaning to M1994 and E1994.
With M1906 = 7.8 (Table 4.7) and M1994 = 6.7 and the equation E1
E2
= 101.51M1-M22, 
we have
E1906
E1994
= 101.517.8-6.72 = 101.511.12 ≈45    Use a calculator.
The 1906 earthquake released more than 45 times as much energy as the 1994 earthquake.
Practice Problem 5  Compare the energies released by the Japan earthquake of  
2011 and Iran earthquake of 1997 (see Table 4.7). 
Loudness of Sound
The intensity of a sound wave is defined as the amount of power the wave transmits through 
a given area. The intensity of a sound is measured in watts per square meters (abbreviated 
W>m2). The faintest sound that the human ear can detect has an intensity of 10-12 W>m2. 
This faintest sound is known as the threshold of hearing (TOH). The most intense sound 
that the human ear can safely detect without suffering any physical damage is more than 
one billion times the TOH.
Because the range of intensities that the human ear can detect is so large, a logarithmic 
scale called decibels (abbreviated dB) is used to measure the loudness of a sound. A deci-
bel (as the name suggests), is one-tenth of a bel, a unit named after the telephone inventor 
Alexander Graham Bell.
Comparing Two Earthquakes
EXAMPLE 5
3	
Define scales for measuring 
sound.
L o u d n e s s  o f  S o u n d  a n d  D e c i b e l s
The loudness (or relative intensity) L of a sound measured in decibels is related to its 
intensity I by the formula
L = 10 log a I
I0
b    (logarithmic form)
or
I = I0 * 10L>10    (exponential form)
where I0 = 10-12 W>m2 is the intensity of TOH.

456	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
If we substitute I = I0 in the formula for loudness, we obtain
Loudness of TOH = 10 log I0
I0
= 10 log 1 = 10102 = 0.
So the threshold of hearing has 0 dB loudness.
Table 4.8 lists approximate loudness of some common sounds.
Table 4.8 Approximate loudness of common sounds
Source
Intensity in W/m2
Loudness in dB
Threshold of hearing
10-12
    0
Rustling leaves
10-11
  10
Whisper
10-10
  20
Background noise in average home
10-8
  40
Normal conversation
10-6
  60
Busy street traffic
10-5
  70
Vacuum cleaner
10-4
  80
Portable audio player at  
maximum level
10-2
100
Front rows of rock concert
10-1
110
Threshold of pain
10  
130
Jet aircraft 50 m away
102
140
Find the decibel level of a TV that has an intensity of 250 * 10-7 W>m2.
Solution
We are given I = 250 * 10-7 W>m2, and we know that I0 = 10-12 W>m2. We have
L = 10 log a I
I0
b               Formula for loudness
= 10 log a250 * 10-7
10-12
b       I = 250 # 10-7 and I0 = 10-12
= 10 log1250 * 1052       
10-7
10-12 = 10-7+12 = 105
= 103log 250 + log 1054     Product rule for logarithms
= 103log 250 + 5 log 104    Power rule for logarithms
= 103log 250 + 54           log 10 = log10 10 = 1
≈74                      Use a calculator, rounding.
So the decibel level of this TV is approximately 74 dB.
Practice Problem 6  Find the decibel level of a TV that has intensity of 
200 * 10-7 W>m2.
Computing Loudness
EXAMPLE 6

	
Section 4.5    ■    Logarithmic Scales 457
Musical Pitch
Pitch of a sound is determined by its frequency. For example, on a piano, the pitch of the note 
A above middle C may be denoted by A440. This means that A vibrates at 440 Hertz (cycles 
per second). In music, an interval whose higher note frequency is twice that of its lower note is 
an octave. Two notes that are an octave apart sound essentially “the same,” but one has a higher 
pitch. For this reason, notes an octave apart are given the same name. An octave jump is usually 
divided into 12 approximately equal semitones on a log scale. In an equal tempered scale, a 
semitone is further divided into 100 cents. So there are 1200 cents in an octave.
How much more intense is a 65 dB sound than a 42 dB sound?
Solution
 I = I0 * 10
L
10     Formula for intensity, exponential form
 I65 = I0 * 10
65
10     I65 is the intensity of a 65 dB sound.
 I42 = I0 * 10
42
10     I42 is the intensity of a 42 dB sound.
 I65
I42
= I0 * 10
65
10
I0 * 10
42
10     Divide I65 by I42.
 = I0 * 106.5
I0 * 104.2   
 = 106.5-4.2     Remove I0 and use the quotient rule for exponents.
 = 102.3
    Simplify.
 ≈199.53
    Use a calculator.
 ≈200
   
So a sound of 65 dB is about 200 times more intense than a sound of 42 dB.
Practice Problem 7  How much more intense is a 75 dB sound than a 55 dB sound?
Comparing Intensities
EXAMPLE 7
Calculate the intensity in watts per square meter of a sound of 73 dB.
Solution
 I = I0 * 10
L
10
    Formula for intensity, exponential form
 I = 10-12 * 10
73
10
    Replace I0 with 10-12 and L with 73.
 = 10-12 * 107.3
 = 10-4.7
    Simplify.
 = 100.3 * 10-5
   
-4.7 = 0.3 - 5
 ≈1.995 * 10-5
    Use a calculator.
 ≈2 * 10-5 W>m2.
Practice Problem 8  What is the intensity of a 48 dB sound?
Computing Sound Intensity
EXAMPLE 8
C h a n g e  i n  P i t c h
If f is a frequency measured in Hertz (Hz) and f0 is a reference frequency, then the 
change in pitch P1f2 in cents from f0 to f is given by:
P1  f2 = 1200 log2 a f
  f0
b.

458	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
We note that the pitch difference of 1 octave means f = 2f0, so
P12f02 = 1200 log2 a2f0
f0
b = 1200 log2 2 = 1200 cents,
which agrees with our previous assertion. 
Most people are not sensitive to pitch differences of less than about 2 cents.
In an “equal tempered” scale for a given reference frequency f0 of a note, find the fre-
quency of the next higher-pitched semitone.
Solution
For the given reference frequency f0, let f  be the frequency of the next higher-pitched 
semitone. Because in an equal tempered scale every semitone is 100 cents, we have 
P1 f 2 = 100.
 P1  f2 = 1200 log2 a f
f0
b     Change in pitch formula
 100 = 1200 log2 a f
f0
b    Replace P1 f 2 with 100.
 1
12 = log2 a f
f0
b
    Divide by 1200 and simplify.
 f
f0
= 2
1
12 = 1
12 2
    Exponential form
 f = 1
12 2  f0
    Multiply by f0.
Practice Problem 9  In an equal tempered scale, the notes are denoted as follows:
A A# B C C# D D# E F F# G G# A
If the frequency of A is 440 Hz, estimate the frequency of B.
Equal Tempered Scale
EXAMPLE 9
The next example shows that an equal tempered scale does not always produce the best 
harmonics.
A jump of one perfect fifth gives a frequency increase of 50%. An equal tempered fifth 
is 700 cents. Find the difference in cents (rounded to the nearest cent). Is the difference 
noticeable?
Solution
If the reference frequency is f0 and it increases by 50%, then 
f = f0 + 0.5 f0 = 11 + 0.52f0 = 1.5 f0. So
 P1  f 2 = 1200 log211.5 f0>f02    Replace f with 1.5 f0
 = 1200 log211.52
    Simplify.
 = 1200 log11.52
log 2
    Change to base 10.
 ≈701.955
    Use a calculator.
 ≈702
Harmony in Music
EXAMPLE 10

	
Section 4.5    ■    Logarithmic Scales 459
Because a fifth on an equal tempered scale is 700 cents, the difference is a little less 
than 2 cents. This difference is barely noticeable to most listeners.
Practice Problem 10  Repeat Example 10 if a perfect major third gives a frequency 
increase of 25% and an equal tempered major third is 400 cents.
Star Brightness
Two thousand years ago Greek astronomers Hipparchus and Ptolemy created a system to 
quantify the apparent brightness (wattage received on the surface of the Earth) of stars. 
They classified star brightness on a scale from magnitude 1 for the brightest visible star to 
magnitude 6 for the dimmest visible star. Other stars were assigned magnitudes based on 
their brightness compared with those of magnitude 1 or 6. This system was refined consid-
erably, leading to a much larger range of magnitude values and the following definition.
4	
Define magnitude of star 
brightness.
A p pa r e n t  M a g n i t u d e
If two stars of magnitudes m1 and m2 have apparent brightness b1 and b2, respec-
tively, then
m2 - m1 = 2.5 log ab1
b2
b.
Although this definition of apparent magnitude was originally intended for comparing 
the brightness of stars, it can also be used for objects such as planets and their moons. The 
Hubble telescope can detect stars with apparent magnitude 30.
a.	 Compare the brightness of a magnitude 1 star with that of a magnitude 6 star.
b.	 Find the magnitude m of a star that is 650 times as bright as one of magnitude 7.25.
Solution
a.	 m2 - m1 = 2.5 log ab1
b2
b	
Apparent magnitude formula
	
6 - 1 = 5
2 log ab1
b2
b	
m2 = 6, m1 = 1, and 2.5 = 5
2
	
2 = log ab1
b2
b	
Multiply both sides by 2
5 and simplify.
	
b1
b2
= 102	
Exponential form
	
b1 = 102b2 = 100b2    Multiply both sides by b2.
So a star of magnitude 1 is 100 times brighter than a star of magnitude 6.
b.	 Letting m2 = m,  m1 = 7.25 and b2 = 650b1 in the formula, we have
 m - 7.25 = 2.5 log a
b1
650b1
b
 m - 7.25 = 2.5 log a 1
650b = 2.5 log16502-1
 m - 7.25 = -2.5 log16502
    Power rule for logs
 m = 7.25 - 2.5 log16502
    Add 7.25 to both sides.
 m ≈0.2177
    Use a calculator.
Comparing Star Brightness
EXAMPLE 11

460	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Practice Problem 11 
a.	 Compare the brightness of a magnitude 0 star with that of a magnitude 2 star.
b.	 Find the magnitude m of a star that is 50% brighter than a star of magnitude 4.6.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 5.57  b. 3.39 # 10-9  2. ≈2512   
3. 3,162,278I0  4. IMoz ≈63ICal  5. 178 times   
6. 73 dB  7. 100 times more 
8. 6.3 # 10-8 W>m2  9. ≈494 hertz 
10. ≈400 - 386 = 14 (cents) 
11. a. 100.8 ≈6.3 times brighter  b. ≈4.1598
Exercises
section 4.5
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 If the pH value of a solution is less than 7, the solution is 
.
	 2.	 As 3H+4 increases, the pH value of a substance 
.
	 3.	 On the Richter scale, the magnitude of an earthquake 
M =
.
	 4.	 The energy E released by an earthquake of magnitude M is 
given by log E =
.
	 5.	 The loudness L of a sound of intensity I is given by  
L =
, and I0 = 10-12 W>m2.
	 6.	 If f0 is a reference frequency and f is the frequency of a note, 
then the change in pitch P1f2 =
.
	 7.	 If two stars have magnitudes m1 and m2 with apparent  
brightness b1 and b2, respectively, then m2 - m1 =
.
	 8.	 True or False. The acidity of a solution increases as its pH 
value increases.  
	 9.	 True or False. For a 1-unit increase in the magnitude of an 
earthquake, its intensity increases tenfold. 
	10.	 True or False. The apparent brightness of a star increases if 
its magnitude decreases. 
In Exercises 11–14, the concentration 3H+4 of a substance is 
given. Calculate the pH value of each substance and classify 
each substance as an acid or a base.
	11.	 3H+4 = 10-8 
	12.	 3H+4 = 10-4 
	13.	 3H+4 = 2.3 * 10-5 
	14.	 3H+4 = 4.7 * 10-9 
In Exercises 15–18, use the following information. Negative 
ions, designated by the notation 3OH−4, are always present 
in any acid or base. The concentration, 3OH−4, of these ions 
is related to 3H+4 by the equation 3OH−4 # 3H+4 = 10−14 
moles per liter. Find the concentrations of 3OH−4 and 3H+4 
in moles per liter for the substances with the following pH 
values.
	15.	 pH = 6 
	16.	 pH = 8 
	17.	 pH = 9.5 
	18.	 pH = 3.7 
In Exercises 19–22, the magnitude M of an earthquake  
is given.
a.  Find the earthquake intensity I in terms of the zero-level earth-
quake intensity I0.
b.  Find the energy released by the earthquake.
	19.	 M = 5  
	20.	 M = 2  
	21.	 M = 7.8  
	22.	 M = 3.7  
In Exercises 23–26, the energy E released by an earthquake is 
given.
a.  Find the earthquake’s magnitude.
b.  Find the earthquake’s intensity.
	23.	 E = 1013.4 joules  
	24.	 E = 1010.4 joules  
	25.	 E = 1012 joules  
	26.	 E = 109 joules  
In Exercises 27–30, the intensity I of a sound is given. Find 
the loudness L of the sound 1I0 = 10-12 W>m22.
	27.	 I = 10-8 W>m2 
	28.	 I = 10-10 W>m2 
	29.	 I = 3.5 * 10-7 W>m2 
	30.	 I = 2.37 * 10-5 W>m2 
In Exercises 31–34, a loudness L is given. Find the intensity of 
the sound.
	31.	 L = 80 dB 
	32.	 L = 90 dB 
	33.	 L = 64.7 dB 
 
	34.	 L = 37.4 dB  
 
 
  
 
 

	
Section 4.5    ■    Logarithmic Scales 461
In Exercises 35–38, use the equal tempered scale with the 
twelve semitones A, A#, B, C, C#, D, D#, E, F, F#, G, and G# 
with the frequency of A440 Hz. On a piano keyboard, the dis-
tance between two white keys that are side-by-side is a whole 
note if there is a black key between them and is a semitone 
if there is no black key between them. A black key (such as 
the one between C and D) is called a sharp. The black key 
between C and D is denoted by C#.
Remember that the change in frequency P1f2 between 
any two consecutive semitones is 100 cents.
	35.	 Find the frequencies of A# and C. 
	36.	 Find the frequencies of D and E. 
	37.	 A whole tone is a frequency ratio of 10:9. That is, f
f0
= 10
9 .
An equal tempered whole tone is 200 cents. Find the difference 
in cents between a whole tone and an equal tempered whole 
tone. Is the difference noticeable? 
	38.	 Repeat Exercise 37 if a whole tone is a frequency ratio  
of 9 : 8. 
	39.	 The magnitudes of two stars, A and B, are 4 and 20, respec-
tively. Compare the brightness of these stars.
	40.	 Repeat Exercise 39 for two stars with magnitudes -2  
and 5. 
	41.	 The magnitude of star A is 2 more than that of star B. How is 
their corresponding brightness related?
	42.	 The magnitude of star A is 1 more than that of star B. How is 
their corresponding brightness related?
Applying the Concepts
	43.	 pH of human blood. The hydrogen ion concentration 
3H+4 of blood is approximately 3.98 * 10-8 moles per liter. 
Find the pH value of human blood to the nearest tenth. Is 
human blood acidic or basic? 
	44.	 pH of milk. The hydrogen ion concentration 3H+4 of milk 
is approximately 3.16 * 10-7 moles per liter. Find the pH 
value of milk to the nearest tenth. Is milk acidic or basic?
	45.	 pH of some common substances. The pH value of a sam-
ple of each substance is given. Find 3H+4 of the substance.
a.	 Wine grapes:	
pH = 3.15 
b.	 Water:	
pH = 7.2 
c.	 Eggs:	
pH = 7.78 
d.	 Vinegar:	
pH = 3 
	46.	 pH of some common substances. The pH value of a 
sample of each substance is given. Find 3H+4 of the  
substance.
a.	 Battery acid:	
pH = 1.0 
b.	 Baking soda:	
pH = 8.7 
c.	 Ammonia:	
pH = 10.6 
d.	 Stomach acid:	 pH = 2.3 
	47.	 Acid rain. In the Netherlands, the average pH value of the 
rainfall is 3.8. Find the average concentration of hydrogen 
ions 3H+4 in the rainfall. How much more acidic is this rain 
than ordinary rain with a pH value of 6?
	48.	 pH of a solution. Suppose the pH value of a solution A is 
1.0 more than the pH value of a solution B. How are the con-
centrations of hydrogen ions in the two solutions related?
	49.	 Comparing pH of solutions. Suppose the hydrogen ion 
concentration in a solution A is 100 times that in solution B. 
How are the pH values of the two solutions related?
	50.	 pH of a solution. Suppose the pH value of a solution is 
increased by 1.5. How much change does this represent in 
the hydrogen ion concentration of this solution? Does the 
increase in pH make the solution more acidic or more basic?
	51.	 pH of a solution. Suppose the hydrogen ion concentra-
tion of a solution is increased 50 times. How much change 
does this represent in the pH value of this solution? Does 
this increase in 3H +4 make the solution more acidic or more 
basic? 
	52.	 China earthquake. The Great China Earthquake of 1920 
registered 8.6 on the Richter scale.
a.	 What was the intensity of this earthquake? 
b.	 How many joules of energy were released? 
	53.	 San Francisco earthquake. Repeat Exercise 52 for the 
Great San Francisco Earthquake of 1906, which registered 
7.8 on the Richter scale.  
	54.	 Comparing earthquakes. Table 4.7 lists two earthquakes 
in Japan.
a.	 Compare the intensities of these earthquakes.
b.	 Compare the energies released by these quakes.
	55.	 Comparing earthquakes. Suppose earthquake A registers 
1 more point on the Richter scale than earthquake B.
a.	 How are their corresponding intensities related? 
b.	 How are their released energies related? 
	56.	 Comparing earthquakes. Repeat Exercise 55, if earth-
quake A registers 1.5 more points on the Richter scale than 
earthquake B. 
	57.	 Comparing magnitudes. If one earthquake is 150 times 
as intense as another, what is the difference in the Richter 
scale readings of the two earthquakes? 
	58.	 Comparing magnitudes. If the energy released by one 
earthquake is 150 times that of another, what is the differ-
ence in the Richter scale readings of the two earthquakes?
In Exercises 59–66, use Table 4.8 as necessary.
	59.	 dB and intensity. What is the loudness, in decibels, of a 
radio with intensity 5.2 * 10-5 W>m2? 
	60.	 dB of a jet. What is the loudness of a jet aircraft with 
intensity 2.5 * 102 W>m2? 
	61.	 Comparing two sounds. How much more intense is a 
sound of the threshold of pain (130 dB) than a conversation 
at 65 dB? 
	62.	 Comparing two sounds. How much more intense is a  
75 dB sound than a 62 dB sound? 
	63.	 Comparing two sounds. Suppose a sound is 1000 times 
as intense as one at the threshold of pain for the human ear. 
Find the loudness of this sound in decibels. 
	64.	 Comparing intensities. Show that if two sounds of inten-
sity I1 and I2 register decibel levels of L1 and L2, respectively, 
	
	 then I2
I1
= 100.11L2-L12.
	65.	 Comparing intensities. Suppose one sound registers 1 
decibel more than another. How are the intensities of the two 
sounds related? 
	66.	 Comparing sounds. The noise level of a street sound out-
side a new office building in downtown Chicago is measured 
to be approximately 70 dB. With special insulation material, 
the noise level inside the office building is reduced to 29 dB. 
Compare the intensities of sounds outside and inside the  
building.    

462	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	67.	 Violin tuning. A violinist is tuning her A-string to match 
concert pitch. The concert’s A is a frequency of 440 Hz. Her 
A-string is improperly tuned to 441 Hz. Find the difference in 
cents. 
	68.	 Violin tuning. Repeat Exercise 67 if her A-string is improp-
erly tuned to 438 Hz. 
In Exercises 69–74, use the following table of approximate 
apparent magnitudes of some celestial objects.
	77.	 Nuclear bomb. Compare the energy released by a 1 mega-
ton nuclear bomb (about 5 * 1015 joules) to the energy 
released by a great earthquake of magnitude 8.
	78.	 Adrian was calculating the pitch of a sound and mistakenly 
transposed the frequency f of the sound with the reference 
frequency f0. The correct answer is 40 cents. What was her 
answer? 
	79.	 If the A-string of a violin is tuned to 880 Hz with an error of 
{10 cents, what is the frequency range of the A-string?
	80.	 Show that the formula for star brightness can be written as 
	
	 b1
b2
= 100.41m2-m12.
	81.	 A star of magnitude m is 176 times brighter than a star of 
magnitude 3.42. Find m. 
	82.	 Star luminosity. The luminosity L of a star is the power 
output at a star’s surface (measured in watts). The star’s 
apparent brightness b is the wattage received on Earth’s  
surface. The apparent magnitude m of a star depends on its 
absolute magnitude M (related to L) and its distance D in  
parsecs (1 parsec ≈3.26 light years) by the formula
m - M = 2.5 log L
b = 5 log D
10.
a.	 Given m and M for a star, show that its distance D from 
Earth is D = 101+ 1m-M2>5 parsecs.
b.	 For the star Alpha Centauri, m = 0 and M = 4.39. How 
far is it from Earth? 
c.	 Compare the luminosity and brightness of Alpha  
Centauri. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 83–86, find the slope and the y-intercept of the 
equation of each line.
	83.	 3x - 2y = 12 
	84.	 3x + 5y = 15
	85.	 e1.3x + e2.5y = e4.7 
	86.	 x log 2 - y log 4 = log 8 
In Exercises 87–94, find the center and radius of each circle.
	87.	 x2 + 1y - 222 = 9
	88.	 1x + 122 + y2 = 5
	89.	 1x - 322 + 1y + 122 = 7 
	90.	 1x + 222 + 1y - 322 = 16 
	91.	 x2 + y2 - 2x - 3 = 0 
	92.	 x2 + y2 + 4y = 0 
	93.	 x2 + y2 - 2x + 4y - 4 = 0 
	94.	 x2 + y2 + 4x - 6y - 3 = 0    
Object
The  
Sun
Full  
Moon
Venus
Sirius
Vega
Saturn
Neptune
Magnitude
-27
-13
-4
-1
0.03
1.47
7.8
	69.	 How many times brighter is the sun than the full Moon?
	70.	 Moon-Vega. How many times brighter is the full Moon 
than Vega? 
	71.	 Sun-Venus. How many times brighter is the Sun than 
Venus? 
	72.	 Venus-Neptune. How many times brighter is Venus than 
Neptune? 
	73.	 Saturn-Star. What is the magnitude of a star that is 560 
times brighter than Saturn? 
	74.	 Neptune-Star. What is the magnitude of a star that is  
1 billion times brighter than Neptune? 
Beyond the Basics
	75.	 Decibel levels. The decibel level of Professor Stout’s voice 
decreases with the distance from the professor according to 
the formula
L = 10 log  a4 * 104
r2
b,
	
	 where L is the decibel level and r is the distance in feet from 
the professor to the listener.
a.	 Find the decibel levels at distances of 10, 25, 50, and  
100 feet. 
b.	 How far must a listener be from the professor so that the 
decibel level drops to 0? 
c.	 Express L in the form L = a + b log r, for suitable con-
stants a and b. 
d.	 Express r as a function of L. 
	76.	 Sound intensity. The intensity of sound is inversely 
	
	 proportional to the square of the distance. That is, I = K
r2, 
	
	 where I is the intensity at a distance r from the source and K 
is a constant.
a.	 Show that if L1 and L2 are decibel readings of a sound at 
distances r1 and r2 (in meters), respectively, then 
	
L1 - L2 = 20 log ar2
r1
b.
b.	 A military jet at 30 meters has 140 decibel level of loud-
ness. How loud will you hear this jet sound at a distance of 
100 meters? 300 meters? 
c.	 Express r2
r1
 in the exponential form.  

4.1	 Exponential Functions
i.	
A function f 1x2 = ax, with a 7 0 and a ≠1, is called an 
exponential function with base a and exponent x.
	
Rules of exponents: axay = ax+y,  ax
ay = ax-y,
1ax2y = axy, a0 = 1,  a-x = 1
ax
ii.	
Exponential functions are one-to-one: If au = ay, then u = y.
iii.	 If a 7 1, then f 1x2 = ax is an increasing function; 
f 1x2 S ∞ as x S ∞ and f 1x2 S 0 as x S - ∞.
iv.	
If 0 6 a 6 1, then f 1x2 = ax is a decreasing function; 
f 1x2 S 0 as x S ∞ and f 1x2 S ∞ as x S - ∞.
v.	
The graph of f 1x2 = ax has y-intercept 1, and the x-axis is a 
horizontal asymptote.
vi.	
Simple interest formula. If P dollars is invested at an 
interest rate r per year for t years, then the simple inter-
est is given by the formula I = Prt. The future value 
A1t2 = P + Prt.
vii.	 Compound interest. P dollars invested at an annual rate r 
compounded n times per year for t years amounts to
A1t2 = P a1 + r
nb
nt
.
viii.	 The Euler constant e = lim
hS∞a1 + 1
h b
h
≈2.718.
ix.	
Continuous compounding. P dollars invested at an annual 
rate r compounded continuously for t years amounts to 
A = Pert.
x.	
The function f 1x2 = ex is the natural exponential function.
4.2	 Logarithmic Functions
i.	
For x 7 0, a 7 0, and a ≠ 1, y = loga x if and only if 
x = ay.
ii.	
Basic properties: loga a = 1, loga 1 = 0,
loga ax = x, aloga x = x  
Inverse properties
iii.	 The domain of loga x is 10, ∞2, the range is 1- ∞, ∞2, and 
the y-axis is a vertical asymptote. The x-intercept is 1.
iv.	
Logarithmic functions are one-to-one: If loga x = loga y,
then x = y.
v.	
If a 7 1, then f 1x2 = loga x is an increasing function; 
f 1x2 S ∞ as x S ∞ and f 1x2 S - ∞ as x S 0+.
vi.	
If 0 6 a 6 1, then f 1x2 = loga x is a decreasing function; 
f 1x2 S - ∞ as x S ∞ and f 1x2 S ∞ as x S 0+.
vii.	 The common logarithmic function is y = log x (base 10); 
the natural logarithmic function is y = ln x (base e).
4.3	 Rules of Logarithms
i.	
Rules of logarithms:
 loga 1MN2 = loga M + loga N 
Product rule
 loga aM
N b = loga M - loga N 
Quotient rule
 loga Mr = r loga M 
Power rule
ii.	
Change-of-base formula:
logb x = loga x
loga b = log x
log b = ln x
ln b
                      1base a2  1base 102 
1base e2
4.4	 Exponential and Logarithmic  
Equations and Inequalities
An exponential equation is an equation in which a variable 
occurs in one or more exponents.
A logarithmic equation is an equation that involves the loga-
rithm of a function of the variable.
Exponential and logarithmic equations are solved by using 
some or all of the following techniques:
i.	
Using the one-to-one property of exponential and logarith-
mic functions
ii.	
Converting from exponential to logarithmic form or vice 
versa
iii.	 Using the product, quotient, and power rules for exponents 
and logarithms
We use similar techniques to solve logarithmic and exponential 
inequalities
4.5	 Logarithmic Scales
A logarithmic scale is a scale in which logarithms are used in the 
measurement of quantities.
i.	
pH = -log3H+4, where 3H+4 is the concentration of H+ 
ions in moles per liter.
ii.	
The Richter scale is used to measure the magnitude M of an 
earthquake.
iii.	
M = log a I
I0
b, where I is the intensity of the earthquake 
	
and I0 is the zero-level earthquake.
iv.	
The energy E released by an earthquake of magnitude M is 
given by log E = 4.4 + 1.5M.
v.	
The intensity of a sound wave is defined as the amount of 
power the wave transmits through a given area. The loudness 
L of a sound of intensity I is given by L = 10 log a I
I0
b, 
	
	 where I0 = 10-12 W>m2 is the intensity of the threshold of 
hearing. Equivalently, I = 10L>10 I0.
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas
	
Summary 463

464	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
vi.	
If f is a frequency and f0 is a reference frequency,  
then the change in pitch P1 f2 in cents is given by 
	
	 P1 f2 = 1200 log2 a f
 f0
b.
vii.	 If two stars of magnitudes m1 and m2 have apparent brightness 
b1 and b2, respectively, then m2 - m1 = 2.5 log ab1
b2
b.
Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills
In Exercises 1–10, state whether the given statement is true  
or false.
	 1.	 The function f 1x2 = ax is exponential if a 7 0. 
	 2.	 The graph of f 1x2 = 4x approaches the x-axis as  
x S - ∞. 
	 3.	 The domain of f 1x2 = log 12 - x2 is 1- ∞, 24. 
	 4.	 The equation u = 10y means that log u = y. 
	 5.	 The inverse of f 1x2 =  ln x is g1x2 = ex. 
	 6.	 The graph of y = ax 1a 7 0, a ≠12 always contains the 
points 10, 12 and 11, a2. 
	 7.	 ln 1M + N2 = ln M + ln N	 
	 8.	 log 1300 = 1 + 1
2 log 3 
	 9.	 The functions f 1x2 = 2-x and g1x2 = a1
2b
x
 have the same 
graph. 
	10.	 ln u = log u
log e 
In Exercises 11–18, match the function with its graph in  
(a)–(h).
	11.	 f11x2 = log2 x 
	12.	 f21x2 = 2x 
	13.	 f31x2 = log2 13 - x2 
	14.	 f41x2 = log1>2 1x - 12 
	15.	 f51x2 = -log2 x 
	16.	 f61x2 = a1
2b
x 
	17.	 f71x2 = 3 - 2-x 
	18.	 f81x2 =
6
1 + 2e-x 
0
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
0
y
x
1
1
0
1
y
x
1
In Exercises 19–30, graph each function using transforma-
tions on an appropriate graph. Determine the domain, range, 
and asymptotes (if any).
	19.	 f 1x2 = 2-x 
	20.	 g1x2 = 2-0.5x 
	21.	 h1x2 = 3 + 2-x 
	22.	 f 1x2 = 5x 
	23.	 g1x2 = 5-x 
	24.	 h1x2 = e-x+1 
	25.	 f 1x2 = ln 1-x2 
	26.	 g1x2 = 2 ln x 
	27.	 h1x2 = 2 ln 1x - 12 
	28.	 f 1x2 = 2 - a1
2b
x 
	29.	 g1x2 = 2 - ln 1-x2 
	30.	 h1x2 = 3 + 2 ln 15 + x2 
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(a)
(b)

	43.	 Start with the graph of y = 2x. Find an equation of the graph 
that results when you
a.	 Shift the graph right 1 unit, shift up 3 units, and reflect 
about the x-axis.	
b.	 Shift the graph right 1 unit, reflect about the x-axis, and 
shift up 3 units.	
	44.	 Start with the graph of y = ln x. Find an equation of the 
graph that results when you
a.	 Shift the graph left 1 unit, stretch horizontally by a factor 
of 2, and compress vertically by a factor of 3.
b.	 Compress horizontally to 1
3, shift left by 1 unit, and reflect 
about the y-axis. 	
In Exercises 45–48, write each logarithm in expanded form.
	45.	 ln 1xy2z32
	46.	 log 1x31y - 12
	47.	 ln c x2x2 + 1
1x2 + 322 d
	48.	 ln A
x3 + 5
x3 - 7
In Exercises 49–54, write y as a function of x.
	49.	 ln y = ln x +  ln 3 
	50.	 ln y = ln 1C2 + kx; C and k are constants. 
	51.	 ln y = ln 1x - 32 -  ln 1y + 22 
	52.	 ln y = ln x - ln 1x2y2 - 2 ln y
	53.	 ln y = 1
2 ln 1x - 12 + 1
2 ln 1x + 12 -  ln 1x2 + 12
	54.	 ln 1y - 12 = 1
x + ln 1y2 	
In Exercises  55–78, solve each equation.
	55.	 3x = 81 
	56.	 5x-1 = 625 
	57.	 2x2+2x = 16 
	58.	 3x2-6x+8 = 1 
	59.	 3x = 23
	60.	 2x-1 = 5.2
	61.	 273x = 19 
	62.	 27 = 9x # 3x2 
	63.	 32x = 7x 
	64.	 2x+4 = 3x+1 
	65.	 11.723x = 32x-1 
	66.	 312x+52 = 5172x-32 
	67.	 log3 1x + 22 - log3 1x - 12 = 1
	68.	 log3 1x + 122 - log3 1x + 42 = 2 
	69.	 log2 1x + 22 + log2 1x + 42 = 3 
	70.	 log5 13x + 72 + log5 1x - 52 = 2 
	71.	 log5 1x2 - 5x + 62 - log5 1x - 22 = 1 
	72.	 log3 1x2 - x - 62 - log3 1x - 32 = 1 
	73.	 log6 1x - 22 + log6 1x + 12 =  
log6 1x + 42  +  log6 1x - 32 
	74.	 ln 1x - 22 - ln 1x + 22 = ln 1x - 12 - ln 12x + 12 
	75.	 2 ln 3x = 3 ln x 
	76.	 2 log x = ln e 
	77.	 2x - 8 # 2-x - 7 = 0 
	78.	 3x - 24 # 3-x = 10
In Exercises 79–82, solve each inequality.
	79.	 310.22x + 5 … 20 
	80.	 -410.22x + 15 6 6 
	81.	 log 12x + 72 6 2
	82.	 ln 13x + 52 … 1
In Exercises 31–34, sketch the graph of the given function 
using these two steps:
a.  Find the intercepts.	
b.	 Find the end behavior of f.
	31.	 f 1x2 = 3 - 2e-x 
	32.	 f 1x2 =
5
2 + 3e-x 
	33.	 f 1x2 = e-x2 
	34.	 f 1x2 = 3 -
6
1 + 2e-x 
In Exercises 35–38, find a and k and then evaluate the  
function.
	35.	 Let f 1x2 = a12kx2 with f 102 = 10 and f 132 = 640.  
Find f 122.	 
	36.	 Let f 1x2 = 50 - a15kx2 with f 102 = 10 and f 122 = 0. 
Find f 112.	 
	37.	 Let f 1x2 =
4
1 + ae-kx with f 102 = 1 and f 132 = 1
2.
	
	 Find f 142.	 
	38.	 Let f 1x2 = 6 -
3
1 + ae-kx with f 102 = 5 and f 142 = 4.
	
	 Find f 1102.	 
In Exercises 39 and 40, find an exponential function of the 
form f 1x2 = cax with the given graph.
	
39.	
0
2
4
2
4
2
6
12
10
8
y
4
2
x
6
(2, 12)
(0, 3)
	40.	
0
2
2
4
2
6
y
6
4
2
x
(4, 1)
(0, 4)	
In Exercises 41 and 42, find a logarithmic function of the 
form y = loga 1x −c2 with the given graph.
	41.	
0
2
6
2
4
2
y
6
4
2
x
(6, 1)
x  1
	42.	
0
2
1
3
3
1
2
1
3
2
y
1
x
2
(3, 1)
x  2	  	  	
	
Review Exercises 465	 

466	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 93.	Cooling tea. Chai (tea) is made by adding boiling  
water 1212°F2 to the chai mix. Suppose you make chai  
in a room with the air temperature at 75°F. According to  
Newton’s Law of Cooling, the temperature of the chai  
t minutes after it is boiled is given by a function of the form 
f 1t2 = 75 + ae-kt. After one minute, the temperature of the 
chai falls to 200°F. How long will it take for the chai to be 
drinkable at 150°F? 	
	 94.	Spread of influenza. Approximately P1t2 =
6
1 + 5e-0.7t 
	
	thousand people caught a new form of influenza within  
t weeks of its outbreak.
a.	 Sketch the graph of y = P1t2. 
b.	 How many people had the disease initially? 
c.	 How many people contracted the disease within four weeks?
d.	 If the trend continues, how many people in all will con-
tract the disease? 
	 95.	Population density. The population density x miles from 
the center of a town called Greenville is approximated by 
the equation D1x2 = 5e0.08x, in thousands of people per 
square mile.
a.	 What is the population density at the center of Greenville?
b.	 What is the population density 5 miles from the center of 
Greenville? 
c.	 Approximately how far from the center of Greenville 
would the density be 15,000 people per square mile?
	 96.	Population. In 2000, the population of the United States 
was 280 million and the number of vehicles was 200 mil-
lion. If the population of the United States is growing at the 
rate of 1% per year while the number of vehicles is growing 
at the rate of 3%, in what year will there be an average of 
one vehicle per person? 	
	 97.	Light intensity. The Bouguer–Lambert Law states that 
the intensity I of sunlight filtering down through water at a 
depth x (in meters) decreases according to the exponential 
decay function I = I0e-kx, where I0 is the intensity at the 
surface and k 7 0 is an absorption constant that depends on 
the murkiness of the water. Suppose the absorption constant 
of Carrollwood Lake was experimentally determined to be 
k = 0.73. How much light has been absorbed by the water 
at a depth of 2 meters? 
	 98.	Signal strength. The strength of a TV signal usually fades 
due to a damping effect of cable lines. If I0 is the initial 
strength of the signal, then its strength I at a distance x 
miles is measured by the formula I = I0e-kx, where k 7 0 
is a damping constant that depends on the type of wire used. 
Suppose the damping constant has been measured experi-
mentally to be k = 0.003. What percent of the signal is lost 
at a distance of 10 miles? 20 miles? 
	 99.	Walking speed in a city. In 1976, Marc and Helen 
Bernstein discovered that in a city with population p, the 
average speed s (in feet per second) that a person walks on 
main streets can be approximated by the formula
s1p2 = 0.04 + 0.86 ln p.
a.	 What is the average walking speed of pedestrians in 
Tampa (population 470,000)?	
b.	 What is the average walking speed of pedestrians in  
Bowman, Georgia (population 450)?	
c.	 What is the estimated population of a town in which the 
estimated average walking speed is 4.6 feet per second? 
Applying the Concepts
	 83.	Doubling your money. How much time is required for a 
+1000 investment to double in value if interest is earned at 
the rate of 6.25% compounded annually? 
	 84.	Tripling your money. How much time (to the nearest 
month) is required to triple your money if the interest rate is 
100% compounded continuously? 
	 85.	Half-life. The half-life of a certain radioactive substance is 
20 hours. How long does it take for this substance to fall to 
25% of its original value?	 
	 86.	Plutonium-210. Find the half-life of plutonium-210 
assuming that its decay equation is Q = Q0e-5#10-3t, where t 
is in days. 
	 87.	Comparing rates. You have +7000 to invest for seven 
years. Which investment will provide the greater return, 5% 
compounded yearly or 4.75% compounded monthly?
	 88.	Investment growth. How long will it take +8000 to  
grow to +20,000 if the rate of interest is 7% compounded 
continuously? 
	 89.	Population. The formula P1t2 = 33e0.003t models the 
population of Canada, in millions, t years after 2007.
a.	 Estimate the population of Canada in 2017. 
b.	 According to this model, when will the population of 
Canada be 60 million?	 
	 90.	House appreciation. The formula C1t2 = 100 + 25e0.03t 
models the average cost of a house in Sometown, USA,  
t years after 2000. The cost is expressed in thousands  
of dollars.
a.	 Sketch the graph of y = C1t2. 
b.	 Estimate the average cost in 2010. 
c.	 According to this model, when will the average cost of a 
house in Sometown be +250,000? 
	 91.	Drug concentration. An experimental drug was injected 
into the bloodstream of a rat. The concentration C1t2 of the 
drug (in micrograms per milliliter of blood) after t hours 
was modeled by the function
C1t2 = 0.3e-0.47t, 0.5 … t … 10.
a.	 Graph the function y = C1t2 for 0.5 … t … 10. 
b.	 When will the concentration of the drug be 0.029 micro-
gram per milliliter? 11 microgram = 10-6 gram2 
	 92.	X-ray intensity. X-ray technicians are shielded by a wall 
insulated with lead. The equation x =
1
152 log aI0
I b 
	
	measures the thickness x (in centimeters) of the lead insula-
tion required to reduce the initial intensity I0 of X-rays to 
the desired intensity I.
a.	 What thickness of lead is required to reduce the intensity 
of X-rays to one-tenth their initial intensity?
b.	 What thickness of lead is required to reduce the intensity 
of X-rays to 1
40 their initial intensity? 
c.	 How much is the intensity reduced if the lead insulation 
is 0.2 millimeters thick?    

	103.	Music.  A jump of one perfect minor third gives a frequency 
increase of 20%. A perfect minor third is 300 cents. Find the 
difference in cents. Is the difference noticeable? 
	104.	Star brightness. The magnitude of star A is 3 more than 
that of the star B. How is their corresponding brightness 
related? 	
	105.	Acid rain. In Scotland, the lowest recorded pH level of 
rainfall was 2.4. What was the concentration of hydrogen 
ions 3H+4 in that rainfall? How much more acidic was this 
rain than a rain with a pH value of 5.6?
	106.	Comparing earthquakes. The 1997 earthquake in Iran 
registered 7.5 on the Richter scale, and the 2010 earthquake 
in Chile registered 8.8 on the Richter scale.
a.	 Compare the intensities of these earthquakes. 
b.	 Compare the energies released by these quakes.
	107.	Comparing two sounds. How much more intense is a 
115 dB sound than a 95 dB sound? 
	108.	Comparing intensities. If the intensity of one sound is 
5000 times another, what is the difference in the decibel lev-
els of the two sounds? 	
	109.	Sirius-Saturn. How many times brighter is Sirius than 
Saturn? 
	110.	Nuclear bomb. What magnitude of earthquake releases 
energy equivalent to that of a 1 megaton nuclear bomb 
(5 * 1015 joules)? 
	100.	Drinking and driving. Just after Eric had his last drink, 
the alcohol level in his bloodstream was 0.26 (milligram 
of alcohol per milliliter of blood). After one-half hour, his 
alcohol level was 0.18. The alcohol level A1t2 in a person 
follows the exponential decay law
A1t2 = A0e-kt, 1t in hours2,
	
	   where k 7 0 depends on the individual.
a.	 What is the value of A0 for Eric? 
b.	 What is the value of k for Eric? 
c.	 If the legal driving limit for alcohol level is 0.08, how 
long should Eric wait (after his last drink) before he will 
be able to drive legally? 	
	101.	Bacteria culture. The mass m1t2, in grams, of a bacteria 
culture grows according to the logistic growth model
m1t2 =
6
1 + 5e-0.7t,
	
	   where t is time measured in days.
a.	 What is the initial mass of the culture? 
b.	 What happens to the mass in the long run? 
c.	 When will the mass reach 5 grams? 
	102.	A learning model.  The number of units n1t2 produced 
per day after t days of training is given by
n1t2 = 6011 - e-kt2,
	
	   where k 7 0 is a constant that depends on the individual.
a.	 Estimate k for Rita, who produced 20 units after one day 
of training. 
b.	 How many units will Rita produce per day after ten days 
of training? 
c.	 How many days should Rita train if she is expected to 
produce 40 units per day? 		 
Practice Test A
	 1.	 Solve the equation 5-x = 125.	 
	 2.	 Solve the equation log2 x = 5.	 
	 3.	 State the range of y = -ex + 1 and find the asymptote of its 
graph. 	
	 4.	 Evaluate log2 1
8. 
	 5.	 Solve the exponential equation a1
4b
2-x
= 4. 
	 6.	 Evaluate log 0.001 without using a calculator. 
	 7.	 Rewrite the expression ln 3 + 5 ln x in condensed form.
	 8.	 Solve the equation 2x+1 = 5. 
	 9.	 Solve the equation e2x + ex - 6 = 0. 
	10.	 Rewrite the expression ln 
2x3
1x + 125 in expanded logarithmic 
form.	 
	11.	 Evaluate ln e-5. 
	12.	 Give the equation for the graph obtained by shifting the graph 
of y = ln x 3 units up and 1 unit right.
	13.	 Sketch the graph of y = 3x-1 + 2.	
	14.	 State the domain of the function f 1x2 = ln 1-x2 + 4.
	15.	 Write 3 ln x + ln 1x3 + 22 - 1
2 ln 13x2 + 22 in condensed 
	
	 form. 
	16.	 Solve the equation log x = log 6 - log 1x - 12. 
	17.	 Find x if logx 9 = 2. 
	18.	 Suppose $15,000 is invested in a savings account paying  
7% interest per year. Write the formula for the amount in the 
account after t years if the interest is compounded quarterly.
	19.	 Suppose the number of Hispanic people living in the United 
States is approximated by H = 15,000e0.2t, where t = 0  
represents 1960. According to this model, in which year  
did the Hispanic population in the United States reach  
1.5 million?	 
	20.	 Compare the intensity of the earthquake in 1960 in Morocco 
of magnitude 5.8 to that of the 6.2 magnitude earthquake in 
1972 in Nicaragua.	 			 	
	
Practice Test A 467

468	 Chapter 4      Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Practice Test B
	 1.	 Solve the equation 3-x = 9. 
a. 526
b.  5-26
c.  e 1
2 f
d. e- 1
2 f
e. 5ln 26
	 2.	 Solve the equation log5 x = 2.	 
a.  5106
b.  5256
c.  e 5
2 f
d.  e 2
5 f
e.  526
	 3.	 State the range and asymptote of y = e-x - 1. 
a.	 10, ∞2; y = -1
b.	 1-1, ∞2; y = -1
c.	 1- ∞, ∞2; y = -1
d.	 1-1, ∞2; y = 1
e.	 1∞, 12; y = 1
	 4.	 Evaluate log4 64. 
a.	 16
b.	 8
c.	 2
d.	 3
e.	 4
	 5.	 Find the solution of the exponential equation a1
3b
1-x
= 3. 
a.	 e - 1
3 f
b.	 e 1
3 f
c.	 516
d.	 526
	 6.	 Evaluate log 0.01. 
a.	 -1.99999999      b.  -2      c.  2      d.  100
	 7.	 Which of the following expressions is equivalent to 
ln 7 + 2 ln x? 
a.	 ln 17 + 2x2        b.  ln 17x22  c.  ln 19x2  d.  ln 114x2
	 8.	 Solve the equation 2x2 = 3x.	
a.	 506
b.	 e ln 3
ln 2 f
c.	 e0, ln 3
ln 2 f
d.	 50, ln 3 - ln 26
	 9.	 Solve the equation e2x - ex - 6 = 0. 
a.  5-ln 26
b.  5- ln 36
c.  5ln 66
d.  5ln 36
	10.	 Rewrite the expression ln 
3x2
1x + 1210 in expanded logarithmic 
form. 
a.	 ln 6x - 10 ln x + 1
b.	 2 ln 3x - 10 ln 1x + 12
c.	 2 ln 3 + 2 ln x - 10 ln 1x + 12
d.	 ln 3 + 2 ln x - 10 ln 1x + 12
	11.	 Find ln e3x. 
a.	 3
b.	 3x
c.	 3 + x
d.	 x
	12.	 The equation for the graph obtained by shifting the graph of 
y = log3 x 2 units up and 3 units left is 
a.	 y = log3 1x - 32 + 2.
b.	 y = log3 1x + 32 - 2.
c.	 y = log3 1x - 32 - 2.
d.	 y = log3 1x + 32 + 2.
	13.	 Which of the following graphs is the graph of y = 5x+1 - 4? 
(a)
y
x
y  4
(b)
y  4
y
x
(c)
y
x
y  4
(d)
y  4
y
x
	14.	 Find the domain of the function f 1x2 =  ln 11 - x2 + 3. 
a.	 1- ∞, 12
b.	 11, ∞2
c.	 1- ∞, -12
d.	 1- ∞, 32
e.	 13, ∞2
	15.	 Write ln x - 2 ln 1x2 + 12 + 1
2 ln 1x4 + 12 in condensed 
	
	 form. 
a.	 ln x2x4 + 1
1x2 + 122
b.	 ln 
x
x2 + 1
c.	 ln 1x - 1x2 + 122 + 1x4 + 121>22
d.	 2 ln 
x11 + x42
x2 + 1
	16.	 Solve the equation log x = log 12 - log 1x + 12. 
a.	 e 11
2 f
b.	 e 13
2 f
c.	 53, -46
d.	 536
e.	 e 2
12 f
	17.	 Find x if logx 16 = 4. 
a.	 4
b.	 2
c.	 64
d.	 1
4
e.	 16
	18.	 Suppose +12,000 is invested in a savings account paying 
10.5% interest per year. Write the formula for the amount in 
the account after t years assuming that the interest is com-
pounded monthly. 
a.	 A = 12,00011.1052t
b.	 A = 12,00011.52522t
c.	 A = 12,00011.262524t
d.	 A = 12,00011.00875212t
	19.	 The population of a certain city is growing according to the 
model P = 10,000 log5 1t + 52, where t is time in years. If 
t = 0 corresponds to the year 2000, what will the population 
of the city be in 2020? 
a.	 30,000
b.	 20,000
c.	 50,000
d.	 10,000
	20.	 Compare the intensity of the earthquake in 1994 in 
Northridge, California, of magnitude 6.7 to that of the 7.0 
earthquake in 1988 in Armenia. 	
a.	 The Northridge earthquake was about twice as intense.
b.	 The Armenia earthquake was about twice as intense.
c.	 The Northridge earthquake was about a thousand times as 
intense.
d.	 The Armenia earthquake was about a thousand times as 
intense.

Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–4
	 1.	 Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the equation 
x2 + 1y - 122 = 1. Check for symmetry with respect to 
both axes and the origin.
	 2.	 Graph the equation y = x3. 
	 3.	 Find the center and radius of the circle 
x2 + 2x + y2 - 4y - 20 = 0. Graph the circle. 
	 4.	 Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of the line  
that passes through 1-2, 42 and is perpendicular to the line 
	
	 2x + 3y = 17.
	 5.	 Find the domain of f 1x2 = log x - 2
x + 3. 
	 6.	 Evaluate the function f 1x2 = e2x - 3,
x 6 1
2x2 + 1,
x Ú 1 at each 
value specified.
a.	 f 1-22 
b.	 f 102 
c.	 f 132. 
	 7.	 Identify the basic function and use transformations to sketch 
the graph of the function f 1x2 = 31x + 1 - 2. 
	 8.	 Let f 1x2 = 31x and g1x2 = - 1
x.
	
	 Find and write the domain of 1 f ∘g21x2 in interval notation.
	 9.	 Determine whether the function has an inverse function; if so, 
find the inverse function.
a.	 f 1x2 = 2x3 + 1
b.	 f 1x2 = x 
c.	 f 1x2 =  ln x.	
	10.	 Divide
a.	 2x3 + 3x + 1
x2 + 1
 using long division.
b.	 2x4 + 7x3 - 2x + 3
x + 3
 using synthetic division.
	11.	 Find a polynomial function of least degree with integer coef-
ficients that has the given zeros.
a.	 1, 2, -3 	
b.	 1, -1, i, -i 
	12.	 Use rules of logarithms to rewrite the following expressions 
in expanded form.
a.	 log2 5x3 
b.	 logaB
3 xy2
z	 
c.	 ln 31x
5y	 
	13.	 Use rules of logarithms to rewrite the following expressions 
in condensed form.
a.	 1
21log x + log y2 
b.	 3 ln x - 2 ln y
	14.	 Use a calculator to evaluate the expression. Round your 
answer to three decimal places.
a.	 log9 17 
b.	 log3 25 
c.	 log1>2 0.3 
	15.	 Solve each equation.
a.	 log6 1x + 32 + log6 1x - 22 = 1 
b.	 5x2-4x+5 = 25 
c.	 3.1x-1 = 23 
	16.	 Find all possible rational zeros of
f 1x2 = x4 - x3 - 2x2 - 2x + 4.
	
	 Also find upper and lower bounds for the zeros of f.
	17.	 Let f 1x2 = 1x - 1231x + 2221x - 32.
a.	 Find the zeros of f along with their multiplicities.
b.	 What is the behavior of f near each zero?
c.	 What is the end behavior of f ?
d.	 Sketch the graph of f. 
	18.	 Let f 1x2 =
1x - 121x + 22
1x - 321x + 42.
a.	 Find the vertical asymptotes of f (if any).
b.	 Find the horizontal asymptotes of f (if any).
c.	 Find the intervals over which f 1x2 - 1 7 0 or 
f 1x2 - 1 6 0.
d.	 Sketch the graph of f. 		    	 	  	 	  
	
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–4 469 

C h a p t e r
Trigonometric Functions
5
Angles are vital for activities ranging from taking 
photographs to designing layouts for city streets. Scientists  
use angles and basic trigonometry to measure remote  
distances such as the distance between mountain peaks and 
the distances between planets. Angles are universally used  
to specify locations on Earth via longitude and latitude.  
In this chapter, we begin the study of trigonometry and its 
many uses.
 
Topics
5.1	 Angles and Their Measure
5.2	 Right-Triangle Trigonometry
5.3	 Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; 
The Unit Circle
5.4	 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine 
Functions
5.5	 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric 
Functions
5.6	 Inverse Trigonometric Functions

	
Section 5.1    ■    Angles and Their Measure 471
S e c t i o n 5.1
Angles
A ray is a part of a line made up of a point, called the endpoint, and all of the points on one 
side of the endpoint. An angle is formed by rotating a ray about its endpoint. The angle’s 
initial side is the ray’s original position, and the angle’s terminal side is the ray’s position 
after the rotation. The endpoint is called the vertex of the angle. A curved arrow drawn near 
the angle’s vertex indicates both the direction and amount of rotation from the initial side 
to the terminal side. See Figure 5.1.
The Greek letters a (alpha), b (beta), g (gamma), and u (theta) are often used to name 
angles. If the rotation is counterclockwise, the result is a positive angle; if the rotation 
Latitude and Longitude
Any location on Earth can be described by two numbers, its latitude and its longitude. 
To understand how these two location numbers are assigned, we think of Earth as  
being a perfect sphere.
Lines of latitude are parallel circles of different size around the sphere represent-
ing Earth. The longest circle is the equator, with latitude 0, and at the poles, the circles 
shrink to a point. Lines of longitude (also called meridians) are circles of identical size 
that pass through the North Pole and the South Pole as they circle the globe. Each of 
these circles crosses the equator. The equator is divided into 360 degrees, and the longi-
tude of a location is the number of degrees assigned to the location where the meridian 
meets the equator. For historical reasons, the meridian near the old Royal Astronomical 
Observatory in Greenwich, England, is chosen as 0 longitude. Today this prime meridian 
is marked with a band of brass that stretches across the yard of the Observatory.
Longitude is measured from the prime meridian, with positive values going east 
(0 to 180) and negative values going west (0 to -180). Both {180-degree longitudes 
share the same line, in the middle of the Pacific Ocean. At the equator, the distance on 
Earth’s surface for each one degree of latitude or longitude is just over 69 miles.
Every location on Earth is then identified by the meridian and the latitude lines 
that pass through it. In Example 7, we explain how latitude values are assigned and 
how they can be used to compute distances between cities having the same longitude.
Angles and Their Measure
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Circumference and area of a circle  
(Page 662)
Objectives
1	 Learn vocabulary associated with angles.
2	 Use degree and radian measure of an 
angle.
3	 Convert between degree and radian  
measure.
4	 Find complements and supplements.
5	 Find the length of an arc of a circle.
6	 Find the area of a sector.
7	 Compute linear and angular speed.
1	
Learn vocabulary associated 
with angles.
Figure 5.1  An angle
Initial side
Terminal side
Vertex

472	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
is clockwise, the result is a negative angle. See Figure 5.2(a) and (b). Rotation in both 
directions is unrestricted. Angles that have the same initial and terminal sides are called 
coterminal angles. In Figure 5.2(c), a and b are different angles but are coterminal.
u
is positive.
u
(a)
u
is negative.
u
(b)
Initial side
Terminal side
Terminal side
Initial side
Initial side
Terminal side
a
and     are coterminal.
a
b
b
(c)
Angle
Angle
Angles
Figure 5.2  Positive, negative, and coterminal angles
An angle in a rectangular coordinate system is in standard position if its vertex is at 
the origin and its initial side lies on the positive x-axis. All of the angles in Figure 5.3 are 
in standard position. An angle in standard position is quadrantal if its terminal side lies 
on a coordinate axis; it is said to lie in a quadrant if its terminal side lies in that quadrant. 
See Figure 5.3.
x
y
(a)
u
and lies in quadrant II.
(b)
u
and is a quadrantal angle.
(c)
u
and lies in quadrant III.
y
y
x
x
is negative
u
is positive
u
Angle
is positive
u
Angle
Angle
Figure 5.3  Angles in standard position
Angle Measure
We measure angles by determining the amount of rotation from the initial side to the termi-
nal side, indicated by a curved arrow that also shows direction. Two units of measurement 
for angles are degrees and radians.
Degree Measure
A measure of one degree (denoted by 1°) is assigned to an angle resulting from a rotation 
1
360 of a complete revolution counterclockwise about the vertex. An angle formed by rotating 
the initial side counterclockwise one full rotation so that the terminal and initial sides coin-
cide has measure 360 degrees, written as 360°.
Angles are classified according to their measures. As illustrated in Figure 5.4, an acute 
angle has measure between 0° and 90°, a right angle has measure 90° (or one-fourth of a 
revolution), an obtuse angle has measure between 90° and 180°, and a straight angle has 
measure 180° (or half of a revolution). Figure 5.4 also shows several angles measured in 
degrees.
2	
Use degree and radian 
measure of an angle.

	
Section 5.1    ■    Angles and Their Measure 473
The measure of an angle has no numerical limit because the terminal side can be rotated 
without limitation.
Acute angle, 408
Right angle, 908
Straight angle, 1808
Obtuse angle, 1358
x
y
−3008
5408
6758
x
x
y
y
Figure 5.4  Degree measure of various angles
Draw each angle in standard position.
a.	 60°        b.	 135°        c.	 -240°        d.	 405°
Solution
a.	 Because 60 = 2
3 1902, a 60° angle is 2
3 of a 90° counterclockwise rotation. See Figure 5.5.
b.	 Because 135 = 90 + 45, a 135° angle is a counterclockwise rotation of 90°,  
followed by half of a 90° counterclockwise rotation. See Figure 5.6.
c.	 Because -240 = -180 + 1-602, a -240° angle is a clockwise rotation of 180°,  
followed by a clockwise rotation of 60°. See Figure 5.7.
d.	 Because 405 = 360 + 45, a 405° angle is one complete counterclockwise rotation, 
followed by half of a 90° counterclockwise rotation. See Figure 5.8.
Practice Problem 1  Draw a 225° angle in standard position.
Today, it is common to divide degrees into fractional parts using decimal degree notation 
such as 30.5°. Traditionally, however, degrees were expressed in terms of minutes and 
seconds.  One minute, denoted 1′, is defined as 1
6011°2, and one second, denoted 1″, is 
defined as 1
60 11′2. An angle measuring 27 degrees, 14 minutes, and 39 seconds is written 
as 27°14′39″. Because 1
60 # 1
60 =
1
3600, we have
 1″ = 1
60 11′2 = 1
60 c 1
60 11°2 d = 1
3600 11°2.
Drawing an Angle in Standard Position
EXAMPLE 1
Relationship Between Degrees, Minutes, and seconds
 1′ = 1
60 11°2 = a 1
60b°    
 1° = 60′    
 1° = 3600″
 1″ =
1
3600 11°2 = a
1
3600b°     1″ = 1
60 11′2     1′ = 60″
Figure 5.5 
608
x
y
Figure 5.6 
1358
x
y
Figure 5.7 
22408
x
y
Figure 5.8 
4058
x
y

474	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
We use these relationships to convert between degree, minute, second (DMS) notation 
and decimal degree (DD) notation. For example,
 30′ = 30 # 1′ = 30 # 1
6011°2 = 0.511°2 = 0.5°.
So	
 18°30′ = 18° + 30′ = 18° + 0.5° = 18.5°.
Similarly,	
 0.2° = 2
10 11°2 = 2
10 160′2 = 12′,
 39.2° = 39° + 0.2° = 39° + 12′ = 39°12′.
Many calculators can perform con-
versions between angle measure-
ments in decimal degree form and 
in degrees, minutes, and seconds 
(DMS) form. From the ANGLE menu, 
you get the following:
Technology
Connection
a.	 Convert 24°8′15″ to decimal degree notation, rounded to two decimal places.
b.	 Convert 67.526° to DMS notation, rounded to the nearest second.
Solution
a.	 24°8′15″ = 24° + 8 # 1′ + 15 # 1″	
Rewrite.
= 24° + 8 a 1
60b° + 15 a
1
3600b°	
1′ = a 1
60b°, 1″ = a
1
3600b°
≈24.14°
	
Use a calculator.
b.	 67.526° = 67° + 0.526 # 1°	
Rewrite.
= 67° + 0.526160′2	
Replace 1° with 60′.
= 67° + 31.56′	
Use a calculator.
= 67° + 31′ + 0.56 # 1′	
Rewrite.
= 67° + 31′ + 0.56160″2	
Replace 1′ with 60″.
= 67° + 31′ + 33.6″ ≈67°31′34″	
Use a calculator and round to the 
nearest second.
Practice Problem 2 
a.	 Convert 13°9′22″ to decimal degree notation, rounded to two decimal places.
b.	 Convert 41.275° to DMS notation, rounded to the nearest second.
Radian Measure
An angle whose vertex is at the center of a circle is called a central angle. A central angle 
intercepts the arc of the circle from the initial side to the terminal side. A positive central 
angle that intercepts an arc of the circle of length equal to the radius of the circle is said to 
have measure 1 radian. See Figure 5.9.
Because the circumference of a circle of radius r is 2pr ≈6.28r, six arcs of length r 
can be consecutively marked off on a circle of radius r, leaving only a small portion of the 
circumference uncovered. See Figure 5.10.
Converting Between DMS and DD Notation
EXAMPLE 2
Figure 5.9  One Radian
u
r
r
Central
angle
Initial side
u = 1 radian
Terminal side
Intercepted
arc
Figure 5.10 
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
Circumference 5 2   r ≈ 6.28r
p
Initial side

	
Section 5.1    ■    Angles and Their Measure 475
Each of the positive central angles in Figure 5.10 that intercepts an arc of length r has 
measure 1 radian; so the measure of one complete revolution is a little more than 6 radians. 
In this book, we assume (unless otherwise specified) that all central angles are positive. 
From geometry, we know that the measure of a central angle u 10 … u … 2p2 is propor-
tional to the length, s, of the arc it intercepts. This fact leads to the following relation.
R a d i a n  M e a s u r e  o f  a  C e n t r a l  A n g l e
The radian measure u of a central angle that intercepts an arc of length s on a circle of 
radius r is given by
u = s
r radians.
Because both s and r are in units of 
length, the units “cancel“ in
u = s
r
 units
 units = s
r
making radians a unitless measure 
and consequently a real number.
Side  
Note
Notice that when s = r, we have u = r
r = 1 radian.
Relationship Between Degrees and Radians
To see the relationship between degrees and radians, consider the central angle in  
Figure 5.11 with degree measure u = 180° in a circle of radius r. The length of the arc, s, 
that is intercepted by this angle is half the circumference of the circle. So
 s = 1
2 1circumference2
 s = 1
2 12pr2 = pr    Circumference = 2pr
We can now find the radian measure for u = 180°.
180° = u = s
r radians    Radian measure of a central angle
180° = pr
r  radians
    Replace s with pr.
180° = p radians
    Simplify.
3	
Convert between degree and 
radian measure.
Figure 5.11 
r
s
5 1808
u
5 1808
u
5    radians
u
p
C o n v e r t i n g  B e t w e e n  D e g r e e s  a n d  R a d i a n s
The relationship
180° = P radians
allows us to convert between the degree and the radian measure of an angle.
Degrees to Radians:
180° = p radians      Note that 180° = 11802 # 1°.
1° =
p
180 radians    Divide both sides by 180.
u° = up
180 radians    Multiply both sides by u.
Radians to Degrees:
 p radians = 180°
 1 radian = a180
p b°       Divide both sides by p.
 u radians = a180 u
p
b°    Multiply both sides by u.

476	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Convert each angle from degrees to radians.
a.	 30°        b.   90°        c.   -225°        d.   55°
Solution
To convert degrees to radians, multiply degrees by P
180°.
a.	 30° = 30° #
p
180° = 30p
180 = p
6  radians
b.	 90° = 90° #
p
180° = 90p
180 = p
2  radians
c.	 -225° = -225° #
p
180° = -225p
180
= -5p
4  radians
d.	 55° = 55° #
p
180° = 55p
180 ≈0.96 radians    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 3  Convert -45° to radians.
If an angle is a fraction of a complete revolution, we frequently write it in radian measure as 
a fractional multiple of p rather than as a decimal. For example, we write 30° as p
6  radians, 
which is the exact value, instead of writing the approximation 30°≈0.52 radians.
Converting from Degrees to Radians
EXAMPLE 3
A graphing calculator can convert 
degrees to radians from the ANGLE 
menu. The calculator should be set 
in radian mode.
Technology
Connection
Convert each angle in radians to degrees.
a.	 p
3  radians        b.   - 3p
4  radians        c.   1 radian
Solution
To convert radians to degrees, multiply radians by 180°
P .
a.	 p
3  radians = p
3 # 180°
p
= a180
3 b
5
= 60°
b.	 - 3p
4  radians = - 3p
4 # 180°
p
= a - 3
4b180° = -135°
c.	 1 radian = 1 # 180°
p
≈57.3°    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 4  Convert 3p
2  radians to degrees.
Figure 5.12 includes the degree and radian measures of some commonly used angles. 
With practice, you should be able to make these conversions without using the figure.
Converting from Radians to Degrees
EXAMPLE 4
A graphing calculator can convert 
radians to degrees from the ANGLE 
menu. The calculator should be set 
in degree mode.
Technology 
Connection

	
Section 5.1    ■    Angles and Their Measure 477
Complements and Supplements
Two positive angles are complements (or complementary angles) if the sum of their 
measures is 90°. So two angles with measures 50° and 40° are complements because 
50° + 40° = 90°. Each angle is the complement of the other. Two positive angles are 
supplements (or supplementary angles) if the sum of their measures is 180°. So two 
angles with measures 120° and 60° are supplements because 120° + 60° = 180°. Each 
angle is the supplement of the other.
Figure 5.12  Frequently used angles
08
3608
0
308
458
608
908
1208
1358
1508
1808
2108
2258
2408
2708
3008
3158
3308
2
11
6
7
4
5
3
3
2
4
3
5
4
5
6
3
4
2
3
2
3
4
6
7
6
p
p
2p
11
6
7
4
5
3
3
2
4
3
5
4
5
6
3
4
2
3
7
6
23608
08
0
23308
23158
23008
22708
22408
22258
22108
21808
21508
21358
21208
2908
2608
2458
2308
2
6
2
2
4
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
(a)
(b)
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
A positive angle with  
measure Ú 90° does not have  
a complement. A positive angle 
with measure Ú 180° does not 
have a supplement.
Side  
Note
4	
Find complements and 
supplements.
Find the complement and the supplement of the given angle or explain why the angle has 
no complement or supplement.
a.	 73°        b.   110°
Solution
a.	 If u represents the complement of 73°, then u + 73° = 90°;  
so u = 90° - 73° = 17°. The complement of 73° is 17°. 
If a represents the supplement of 73°, then a + 73° = 180°;  
so a = 180° - 73° = 107°. The supplement of 73° is 107°.
b.	 There is no complement of a 110° angle because 110° 7 90°. 
If b represents the supplement of 110°, then b = 180° - 110° = 70°.  
The supplement of 110° is 70°.
Practice Problem 5  Find the complement and the supplement of 67° or explain why 
67° does not have a complement or a supplement.
With radian measure, two positive angles are complements when the sum of their 
measures is p
2  radians and are supplements when that sum is p radians.
Finding Complements and Supplements
EXAMPLE 5

478	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Length of an Arc of a Circle
Recall that the formula for the radian measure u of a central angle that intercepts an arc of
length s is u = s
r. See Figure 5.13. Multiplying both sides of this equation by r yields s = r u.
5	
Find the length of an arc  
of a circle.
s
r
Figure 5.13 
A r c  L e n g t h  F o r m u l a
The length s of an arc intercepted by a central angle with radian measure u in a circle 
of radius r is given by
s = r u.
A circle has a radius of 18 inches. Find the length of the arc intercepted by a central angle 
with measure 210°.
Solution
We must first convert the central angle measure from degrees to radians.
s = r u
	
Arc length formula, u in radians
s = 18 a7p
6 b	
r = 18; u = 210° = 210° a p
180°b = 7p
6  radians
= 21p ≈65.97 inches	
Simplify and use a calculator.
Practice Problem 6  A circle has a radius of 2 meters. Find the length of the arc  
intercepted by a central angle with measure 225°.
Finding Arc Length of a Circle
EXAMPLE 6
We discussed longitude and latitude in the introduction to this section. We determine the 
latitude of a location L by first finding the point of intersection, P, of the meridian through 
L and the equator. The latitude of L is the angle formed by rays drawn from the center of 
Earth to points L and P, with the ray through P being the initial ray. See Figure 5.14(a).
Billings, Montana, is due north of Grand Junction, Colorado. Find the distance between 
Billings (latitude 45°48′ N) and Grand Junction (latitude 39° 7′ N). Use 3960 miles as the 
radius of Earth. The N in 45°48′ N means that the location is north of the equator.
Solution
Because Billings is due north of Grand Junction, the same meridian passes through both 
cities. The distance between the cities is the length of the arc, s, on this meridian inter-
cepted by the central angle, u, that is the difference in their latitudes. See Figure 5.14(b).
The measure of angle u is 45°48′ - 39°7′ = 6°41′. To use the arc length formula, we 
must convert this angle to radians.
u = 6°41′ ≈6.6833° = 6.6833 a p
180b radian ≈0.117 radian
We use this value of u and r = 3960 miles in the arc length formula:
s ≈13960210.1172 miles ≈463 miles    s = ru
The distance between Billings and Grand Junction is about 463 miles.
Practice Problem 7  Chicago, Illinois, is due north of Pensacola, Florida. Find the  
distance between Chicago (latitude 41°51′ N) and Pensacola (latitude 30°25′ N).  
Use r = 3960 miles.
Finding the Distance Between Cities
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 5.14  Distance between 
cities
Equator
(a)
The latitude of L
P
L
L1  Billings
Distance on a meridian
(b)
P
s
L2  Grand
      Junction

	
Section 5.1    ■    Angles and Their Measure 479
Area of a Sector
A sector of a disk is a region bounded by the two sides of a central angle and the intercepted 
arc. Suppose u is the radian measure of a central angle of a circle of radius r. See Figure 5.15. 
To find a formula for the area A of the sector formed by u, we use the proportion
 area of a sector
area of a circle = length of the intercepted arc
circumference of the circle      Fact from geometry
 A
pr2 =
ru
2pr 	
Area of a circle = pr2, 
circumference = 2pr  
Arc length formula s = ru
A = pr2 a ru
2pr b
	
Multiply both sides by pr2.
 = 1
2 r2u	
Simplify.
6	
Find the area of a sector.
Figure 5.15  A sector of a circle
r
A
r
u
A r e a  o f  a  S e c t o r
The area A of a sector of a circle of radius r formed by a central angle with radian 
measure u is
A = 1
2 r2u.
How many square inches of pizza have you eaten (rounded to the nearest square inch) if you eat 
a sector of an 18-inch-diameter pizza whose edges form a central angle of 30°? See Figure 5.16.
Solution
We must convert 30° to radians to use the sector area formula. The pizza’s radius is half its 
diameter, or 9 inches, and 30° = p
6  radians.
 A = 1
2r2u
    Area of a sector formula
 = 1
2 92 ap
6 b
    Replace r with 9 and u with p
6.
 ≈21 square inches    Use a calculator.
You have eaten about 21 square inches of pizza.
Practice Problem 8  Find the area of a sector of a circle of radius 10 inches formed  
by an angle of 60°. Round the answer to two decimal places.
Linear and Angular Speed
If a skater skates 100 feet in 5 seconds, then her average speed, v, is given by
v = distance
time
=
100 feet
5 seconds = 20 feet per second.
Finding the Area of a Sector of a Circle
EXAMPLE 8
Figure 5.16  A slice of pizza
18 inches
308
7	
Compute linear and angular 
speed.

480	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Suppose now that the skater is skating around the circumference of a circular skating  
rink with radius 40 feet. See Figure 5.17. In five seconds, the skater travels an arc of length 
100 feet and moves through an angle u, where
u = s
r = 100
40 = 2.5 radians.
We say that the skater is traveling at an (average) angular speed v (omega), given by 
v = u
t = 2.5
5
= 0.5 radians per second. We call the average speed, 20 feet per second, the 
(average) linear speed to distinguish it from the (average) angular speed, 0.5 radians per second. 
Notice that v = 20 = 4010.52 = rv. We define these ideas more generally as follows.
Figure 5.17 
s
r 5 40 ft
u
s 5 100 ft
5 2.5 radians
u 
L i n e a r  a n d  A n g u l a r  S p e e d
Suppose an object travels around a circle of radius r. If the object travels through a 
central angle of u radians and an arc of length s, in time t, then
1.	 v = s
t    is the (average) linear speed of the object.
2.	 v = u
t     is the (average) angular speed of the object.
Further, because s = r u, by replacing s with r u in 1 and then using 2 to replace u
t  
with v, we have
3.	 v = rv.
A model plane is attached to a swivel so that it flies in a circular path at the end of a 12-foot wire 
at the rate of 15 revolutions per minute. Find the angular speed and the linear speed of the plane.
Finding Angular and Linear Speed  
from Revolutions per Minute
EXAMPLE 9
Solution
Because angular speed is measured in radians per unit of time, we first convert revolutions 
per minute into radians per minute. Recall that
1 revolution = 2p radians.
Then 15 revolutions = 15 # 2p = 30p radians. So the angular speed v is 30p radians per 
minute. Linear speed is given by
v = rv
= 12 # 30p feet per minute    Replace r with 12 feet and v with  
30p radians per minute.
≈1131 feet per minute	
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 9  Find the angular speed and the linear speed of the plane in  
Example 9 assuming that the wire is 10 feet long and the plane flies at a rate of  
18 revolutions per minute.
12 ft

	
Section 5.1    ■    Angles and Their Measure 481
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 
x
y
2258
	
2. a. 13.16° 
b. 41°16′30″
	
3. - p
4  radians  4. 270°
5. Complement = 23°; supplement = 113°
6. 5p
2
≈7.85 meters
7. ≈790 miles
8. 50p
3
≈52.36 square inches
9. v = 36p radians per minute; v = 360p ≈ 1131 feet per minute
Exercises
section 5.1 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 A negative angle is formed by rotating the initial side in a(n) 
 direction.
	 2.	 An angle is in standard position if its vertex is at the  
origin of a coordinate system and its initial side lies on  
the 
.
	 3.	 One second 11″2 is 
 of a minute.
	 4.	 True or False. One radian is smaller than one degree. 
	 5.	 True or False. The circumference of a circle with radius  
1 meter is approximately 6.28 meters. 
	 6.	 True or False. Every acute angle has a complement and a 
supplement. 
In Exercises 7–14, draw each angle in standard position.
	 7.	 30° 
	 8.	 150° 
	 9.	 -120° 
	10.	 -330° 
	11.	 5p
3 
	12.	 11p
6 
	13.	 - 4p
3 
	14.	 - 13p
4 
In Exercises 15–20, convert each angle to decimal degree 
notation. Round your answers to two decimal places.
	15.	 70°45′ 
	16.	 38°38′ 
	17.	 23°42′30″ 
	18.	 45°50′50″ 
	19.	 -15°42′57″ 
	20.	 -70°18′13″ 
In Exercises 21–26, convert each angle to DMS notation. 
Round your answers to the nearest second.
	21.	 27.32° 
	22.	 120.64° 
	23.	 13.347° 
	24.	 110.433° 
	25.	 19.0511° 
	26.	 82.7272° 
In Exercises 27–36, convert each angle from degrees to  
radians. Express each answer as a multiple of P.
	27.	 20° 
	28.	 40° 
	29.	 -180° 
	30.	 -210°
	31.	 315°
	32.	 330°
	33.	 480° 
	34.	 450° 
	35.	 -510° 
	36.	 -420° 
In Exercises 37–46, convert each angle from radians to 
degrees.
	37.	 p
12 
	38.	 3p
8 
	39.	 -  5p
9 
	40.	 -  3p
10 
	41.	 5p
3 
	42.	 11p
6 
	43.	 5p
2 
	44.	 17p
6 
	45.	 -11p
4 
	46.	 -7p
3 
In Exercises 47–50, convert each angle from degrees to  
radians. Round your answers to two decimal places.
	47.	 12° 
	48.	 127° 
	49.	 -84° 
	50.	 -175° 
In Exercises 51–54, convert each angle from radians to 
degrees. Round your answers to two decimal places.
	51.	 0.94 
	52.	 5 
	53.	 -8.21 
	54.	 -6.28° 
In Exercises 55–60, find the complement and the supplement 
of the given angle or explain why the angle has no comple-
ment or supplement.
	55.	 47°
	56.	 75°
	57.	 120°
	58.	 160° 
	59.	 210° 
	60.	 -50°    

482	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
In Exercises 61–76, use the following notations: U = central 
angle of a circle, r = radius of a circle, s = length of the 
intercepted arc, V = linear velocity, V = angular velocity, 
A = area of the sector of a circle, and t = time.
In each case, find the missing quantity. Find the exact answer.
	61.	 r = 25 in, s = 7 in, u = ? 
	62.	 r = 5 ft, s = 6 ft, u = ?
	63.	 r = 10.5 cm, s = 22 cm, u = ?
	64.	 r = 60 m, s = 120 m, u = ? 
	65.	 r = 3 m, u = 25°, s = ?
	66.	 r = 0.7 m, u = 357°, s = ?
	67.	 r = 6.5 m, u = 12 radians, s = ? 
	68.	 r = 6 m, u = p
6  radians, s = ? 
	69.	 r = 6 m, v = 10 rad>min, v = ? 
	70.	 r = 3.2 ft, v = 5 rad>sec, v = ? 
	71.	 v = 20 ft>sec, r = 10 ft, v = ? 
	72.	 v = 10 m>min, r = 6 m, v = ? 
 
	73.	 r = 10 in, u = 4 rad, A = ? 
	74.	 r = 1.5 ft, u = 60°, A = ?
	75.	 A = 20 ft2, u = 60°, r = ?
	76.	 A = 60 m2, u = 2 rad, r = ? 
Applying the Concepts
	77.	 Wheel ratios. An automobile is pushed so that its  
wheels turn three-quarters of a revolution. If the tires 
have a radius of 15 inches, how many inches does the car 
move? 
	78.	 Nautical miles. A nautical mile is the length of an arc of the 
equator intercepted by a central angle of 1′. Using 3960 miles 
for the value of the radius of Earth, express 1 nautical mile in 
terms of standard (statute) miles. 
	79.	 Angles on a clock. What is the radian measure of the 
smaller central angle made by the hands of a clock at 4:00? 
Express your answer as a rational multiple of p. 
	80.	 Angles on a clock. What is the radian measure of the larger 
central angle made by the hands of a clock at 7:00? Express 
your answer as a rational multiple of p. 
	81.	 Diameter of a pizza. You are told that a slice of pizza 
whose edges form a 25° angle with an outer crust edge  
4 inches long was found in a gym locker. What was the  
diameter of the original pizza? Round your answer to the 
nearest inch. 
	82.	 Arc of a pendulum. How far does the tip of a 5-foot  
pendulum travel as it swings through an angle of 30°? Round 
your answer to two decimal places. 
	83.	 Lifting a shark. A shark is suspended by a wire wound 
around a pulley of radius 4 inches. The shark must be raised 
6 inches more to be completely off the ground. Through how 
many degrees must the pulley be rotated counterclockwise to 
	
	 accomplish the 6-inch lift? Round your answer to the nearest 
degree. 
	
	
4
	84.	 Security cameras. A security camera rotates through an 
angle of 120°. To the nearest foot, what is the arc width of the 
field of view 40 feet from the camera? 
	85.	 Pulley wheels. Two pulleys are connected by a belt so that 
when one pulley rotates, the linear speeds of the belt and  
both pulleys are the same. See the figure. The radius of the 
smaller pulley is 2 inches, and the radius of the larger pulley 
is 5 inches. A point on the belt travels at a rate of 600 inches 
per minute.
a.	 Find the angular speed of the larger pulley.
b.	 Find the angular speed of the smaller pulley.
	
	 	
2
5
	86.	 Ferris wheel speed. A Ferris wheel in Vienna, Austria, has 
a diameter of approximately 61 meters. Assume that it takes 
90 seconds for the Ferris wheel to make one complete revolution.
a.	 Find the angular speed of the Ferris wheel. Round your 
answer to two decimal places. 
b.	 Find the linear speed of the Ferris wheel in meters  
per second. Round your answer to two decimal  
places. 
	87.	 Bicycle speed. A bicycle’s wheels are 24 inches in diam-
eter. If the bike is traveling at a rate of 25 miles per hour, find 
the angular speed of the wheels. Round your answer to two 
decimal places. 
	88.	 Bicycle speed. A bicycle’s wheels are 30 inches in diameter. 
If the angular speed of the wheels is 11 radians per ­second, 
find the speed of the bicycle in inches per second. 		      

	
Section 5.1    ■    Angles and Their Measure 483
	 89.	 Hard disk speed. Hard disks are circular disks that store 
data in your computer. Suppose a circular hard disk is 
3.75 inches in diameter. If the disk rotates 7200 revolutions 
per minute, what is the linear speed of a point on the edge 
of the disk (in inches per minute)? 
	 90.	 Linear speed at the equator. Earth rotates on an axis 
that goes through both the North and South Poles. It makes 
one complete revolution in 24 hours. Find the linear speed 
(in miles per hour) of a location on the equator. (Use 3960 
miles as the radius of Earth) 
In Exercises 91–96, the latitude of any location on Earth is the 
angle formed by the two rays drawn from the center of Earth 
to the location and to the point of intersection of the meridian 
for the location with the equator. The ray through the location 
is the initial ray. Use 3960 miles as the radius of Earth.
	 91.	 Distance between cities. Indianapolis, Indiana, is due 
north of Montgomery, Alabama. Find the distance between 
Indianapolis (latitude 39°44′ N) and Montgomery (latitude 
32°23′ N). 
	 92.	 Distance between cities. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, is 
due north of Charleston, South Carolina. Find the distance 
between Pittsburgh (latitude 40°30′ N) and Charleston  
(latitude 32°54′ N). 
	 93.	 Distance between cities. Amsterdam, Netherlands, is due 
north of Lyon, France. Find the distance between Amsterdam 
(latitude 52°23′ N) and Lyon (latitude 45°42′ N). 
	 94.	 Distance between cities. Adana, Turkey (north  
latitude 36°59′ N), is due north of Jerusalem, Israel  
(latitude 31°47′ N). Find the distance between Adana  
and Jerusalem. 
	 95.	 Difference in latitudes. Miles City, Montana, is  
440 miles due north of Boulder, Colorado. Find the differ-
ence in the latitudes of these two cities. 
	 96.	 Difference in latitudes. Lincoln, Nebraska, is 554 miles 
due north of Dallas, Texas. Find the difference in the  
latitudes of these two cities. 
Beyond the Basics
	 97.	 Use the fact that u + p and u - p are coterminal angles to 
	
	 prove that 5p
3  and - p
3  are coterminal.
	 98.	 Show that if a is the complement of u, then a + u
2 is the 
	
	 complement of u
2.
	 99.	 Find the smallest positive integer n so that u and u - np
2  
	
	 are coterminal. 
	100.	 Find the smallest positive integer n so that u and u + np
3  
	
	 are coterminal. 
	101.	 Show that if A is the area of a sector of a circle of radius r 
formed by a central angle with radian measure u, then 4A  
is the area of a sector of a circle of radius 2r formed by a 
central angle with radian measure u.
	102.	 Show that if A is the area of a sector of a circle of radius r 
	
	 formed by a central angle with radian measure u, then 1
2 A 
	
	 is the area of a circle of radius r formed by a central angle 
	
	 of radian measure 1
2 u.
In Exercises 103–108, use the approximation P ? 22
7 .
	103.	 A racetrack is in the form of a ring with inner circumfer-
ence 352 meters and outer circumference 396 meters. Find 
the width of the track. 
	104.	 The diameter of a wheel is 84 cm. How many complete 
revolutions must it take to cover 792 meters? 
	105.	 The diameter of a tire is 140 cm. How many revolutions per 
minute will achieve a speed of 66 kilometers per hour? 
	106.	 A car has two wipers that do not overlap. Each wiper has a 
blade length 14 inches that sweeps through an angle of 110°. 
Find the total area of the windshield cleaned at each sweep 
of the blades. 
	107.	 An umbrella top is made from a material in the shape  
of a circle of diameter 3 feet. It has eight equally spaced 
ribs. Find the area between two consecutive ribs of the 
umbrella.
	
	
	108.	 A conical drinking cup is made from a circular piece of 
paper of radius r = 7 cm by cutting out a sector of central 
	
	 angle p
4  and joining the edges OA and OB. Find the volume 
	
	 of the cup. (Hint: Volume of a cone = 1
3p R2h.) 
	
	
B
7 cm
7 cm
A
O
4
p
   
7 cm
R
h 

484	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	109.	 Arrange the following radian measures from smallest to 
	
	 largest: p, 3p
2 , 3, 4. 
	110.	 Which line of latitude has a smaller radius, the line of  
latitude through a city of latitude 30°40′13″ or the line of 
latitude through a city of latitude 40°30′13″.
	111.	 Assume that u is a central angle in a circle of radius r that 
intercepts an arc of length s. Show that if u has radian 
	
	 measure less than p
2, then the central angles that intercept 
	
	 an arc of length pr
2 - s and u are complementary angles.
	112.	 In about 250 b.c., the philosopher Eratosthenes estimated 
the radius of Earth based on what might appear to be scant 
information. He knew that the city of Syene (modern 
Aswan) is directly south of the city of Alexandria and that 
Syene and Alexandria are (in modern units) about 500 miles 
apart. He also knew that in Syene at noon on a midsummer 
day, an upright rod casts no shadow but the noon sun makes 
a 7°12′ angle with a vertical rod at Alexandria and that then 
the sun’s rays at Syene are effectively parallel to the sun’s 
rays at Alexandria. Explain how Eratosthenes could measure 
the circumference of Earth by measuring the length of the 
shadow in Alexandria at noon on the summer solstice when 
there was no shadow in Syene.
	
	
Alexandria
78 129
78 129
Syene
500 mi
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 113–118, consider triangle ABC shown in the 
adjoining figure. Use the Pythagorean theorem to find the 
third side from the given two sides.
	113.	 a = 5, b = 12 
	114.	 a = 12, c = 20 
	115.	 b = 6, c = 10 
	116.	 a = 20, b = 21 
	117.	 b = 3, c = 6 
	118.	 a = 5, b = 10 
a
c
b
A
C
B
In Exercises 119 and 120, find A
B from the given values of A 
and B. Then rationalize the denominator of the quotient.
	119.	 A = 1
2, B = 13
2 
	120.	 A = 13
2 , B = A
3
2 

S e c t i o n 5.2
Trigonometric Ratios and Functions
Consider a right triangle with one of its acute angles labeled u. In Figure 5.18, the capital 
letters A, B, and C designate the vertices of the triangle and the lowercase letters a, b, and 
c, respectively, represent the lengths of the sides opposite these angles.
Measuring Mount Kilimanjaro
Trigonometry developed as a result of attempts to solve practical problems in astron-
omy, navigation, and land measurement. The word trigonometry, coined by Pitiscus in 
1594, is derived from two Greek words, trigonon (triangle) and metron (measure), and 
means “triangle measurement.”
Measuring objects that are generally inaccessible is one of the many successes of 
trigonometry. In Example 8, we use trigonometry to approximate the height of Mount 
Kilimanjaro, Tanzania. Mount Kilimanjaro is the highest mountain in Africa.
Right-Triangle Trigonometry
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Rationalizing the denominator  
(Section P.6, page 63)
2	 Acute angle definition (Section 5.1,  
page 472)
3	 Functions (Section 2.4)
Objectives
1	 Define trigonometric functions of acute 
angles.
2	 Evaluate trigonometric functions of acute 
angles.
3	 Evaluate trigonometric functions for the 
special angles 30°, 45°, and 60°.
4	 Use right-triangle trigonometry in  
applications.
Mount Kilimanjaro
1	
Define trigonometric 
functions of acute angles.
A
b
a
C
c
B
u
u
08 <    < 908
u
a 5 length of the side opposite
u
b 5 length of the side adjacent to
c 5 length of the hypotenuse
Figure 5.18  A right triangle
Six ratios can be formed with the lengths of these sides: a
c, b
c, a
b, b
a, c
b, and c
a. These 
ratios are used to define the six trigonometric functions of the acute angle u. Later we 
extend the domains of these functions to include larger sets of angles and then to in-
clude sets of real numbers. We use the words opposite for the length of the leg opposite 
to u, adjacent for the length of the leg adjacent to u, and hypotenuse for the length of 
the hypotenuse. See Figure 5.18.
In a right triangle, the side opposite 
the right angle is called the hypot-
enuse and the other two sides are 
called the legs.
Recall
	
Section 5.2    ■    Right-Triangle Trigonometry 485

486	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
The full names for these six trigonometric functions are sine, cosine, tangent, cose-
cant, secant, and cotangent. The customary abbreviations for the values of these functions 
of an angle u are sin U, cos U, tan U, csc U, sec U, and cot U, respectively, as shown in 
the box.
Because any two right triangles having acute angle u are similar, the ratios of cor-
responding sides depend only on the angle u, not on the size of the triangle. Three right 
triangles with acute angle u are shown in Figure 5.19.
The mnemonic SOHCAHTOA is  
helpful in remembering that Sine  
is Opposite over Hypotenuse (SOH), 
Cosine is Adjacent over Hypotenuse 
(CAH), and Tangent is Opposite 
over Adjacent (TOA).
Side 
Note
T r i g o n o m e t r i c  F u n c t i o n s  o f  a n  A n g l e  U  i n  
a  R i g h t  T r i a n g l e
 sin U =
opposite
hypotenuse = a
c   csc U = hypotenuse
opposite
= c
a
 cos U =
adjacent
hypotenuse = b
c   sec U = hypotenuse
adjacent
= c
b
 tan U = opposite
adjacent = a
b  
 cot U = adjacent
opposite = b
a
Two triangles are similar if their 
corresponding angles are congruent 
and their corresponding sides are 
proportional. Two similar triangles 
have the same shape but not  
necessarily the same size.
Recall
4
3
5
u
u
12
9
15
u
40
30
50
u
(not drawn to scale)
sin    5 3
5
u
sin    5      5
9
15
3
5
u
sin    5      5
30
50
3
5
u
cos    5 4
5
u
cos    5     5
12
15
4
5
u
cos    5     5 
40
50
4
5
u
tan    5 3
4
u
tan    5      5 
9
12
3
4
u
tan    5      5 
30
40
3
4
Figure 5.19  Similar right triangles
Also, for any of the triangles in Figure 5.19, we have csc u = 5
3, sec u = 5
4, and cot u = 4
3. 
So for each triangle, the six trigonometric values are identical.
We must write the variable (such as u) of each trigonometric function. So sin u = 1
2 is a 
correct statement, but sin = 1
2 is incorrect.
Warning

	
Section 5.2    ■    Right-Triangle Trigonometry 487
Relations between Trigonometric Functions
In the definitions of the trigonometric functions (page 486), we note that the functions in 
the second column are reciprocals of those in the first column. In other words, for any acute 
angle u,
csc u =
1
sin u sec u =
1
cos u    and cot u =
1
tan u
 .
We derive the following identity that connects sin u, cos u, and tan u.
 sin u
cos u =
a
c
b
c
    Definition of sin u and cos u
 = a
b
    Simplify.
 = tan u    Definition of tan u
So for any acute angle u, we have
tan u = sin u
cos u  and  cot =
1
tan u = cos u
sin u.
We next summarize these identities.
2	
Evaluate trigonometric 
functions of acute angles.
Find the exact values for the six trigonometric functions of the angle u in Figure 5.20.
Solution
To find the values for the six trigonometric functions of u, we must first find the value of c, 
the length of the hypotenuse.
 a2 + b2 = c2    Pythagorean theorem
 1322 + 11722 = c2    Replace a with 3 and b with 17.
 9 + 7 = c2
 16 = c2
 4 = c     c is a positive number.
With c = 4, a = 3, and b = 17, we have the following:
 sin u =
opposite
hypotenuse = 3
4  
 csc u = hypotenuse
opposite
= 4
3
 cos u =
adjacent
hypotenuse = 17
4   
 sec u = hypotenuse
adjacent
=
4
17 = 417
7
 tan u = opposite
adjacent =
3
17 = 317
7    cot u = adjacent
opposite = 17
3
These are exact values; using a calculator would yield approximate values.
Practice Problem 1  Find the exact values for the six trigonometric functions of the 
acute angle u in a right triangle, assuming that the length of the side opposite u is 4 and 
the length of the hypotenuse is 5.
Finding the Values of Trigonometric Functions
EXAMPLE 1
c
3
B
A
C
7
Figure 5.20 

488	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
R e c i p r o c a l  a n d  Q u o t i e n t  I d e n t i t i t e s
Reciprocal Identities
 csc u =
1
sin u,   sin u =
1
csc u,   sin u csc u = 1
 sec u =
1
cos u,  cos u =
1
sec u,  cos u sec u = 1
 cot u =
1
tan u,   tan u =
1
cot u,   tan u cot u = 1
Quotient Identities
tan u = sin u
cos u    cot u = cos u
sin u
Let sin u = 5
13  and  cos u = 12
13. Find tan u, csc u, sec u, and cot u.
Solution
We have
 tan u = sin u
cos u    Quotient identity
 =
5
13
12
13
    Given sin u = 5
13 and cos u = 12
13
 = 5
12
    Simplify.
We now use the reciprocal identities to get
 csc u =
1
sin u = 1
5
13
= 13
5 ,
 sec u =
1
cos u = 1
12
13
= 13
12, and
 cot u =
1
tan u = 1
5
12
= 12
5 .
Practice Problem 2  Let sin u = 3
5  and  cos u = 4
5. Find tan u, csc u, sec u, and cot u.
The next example shows that we can find the values of the remaining five trigonometric 
functions if we are given the value of one of them.
Using Reciprocal and Quotient Identities
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 5.2    ■    Right-Triangle Trigonometry 489
Find the other five trigonometric function values of u, given that u is an angle of a right
triangle with sin u = 2
5.
Solution
Because
sin u = 2
5 =
opposite
hypotenuse,
we draw a right triangle with hypotenuse of length 5 and the side opposite u of length 2. 
See Figure 5.21. Then
 52 = 22 + b2    Pythagorean theorem
 b2 = 52 - 22    Subtract 22 from both sides; interchange sides.
 b2 = 21
    Simplify.
 b = 121
    b is a positive number.
For this right triangle with acute angle u, we have the following:
 c = length of the hypotenuse = 5
 a = length of the opposite side = 2
 b = length of the adjacent side = 121
So
 sin u =
opposite
hypotenuse = 2
5 1given2    csc u = hypotenuse
opposite
= 5
2
 cos u =
adjacent
hypotenuse = 121
5     
 sec u = hypotenuse
adjacent
=
5
121 = 5121
21
 tan u = opposite
adjacent =
2
121 = 2121
21     cot u = adjacent
opposite = 121
2
Practice Problem 3  Find the other five trigonometric function values of u given 
that u is an angle of a right triangle with cos u = 1
3.
Function Values for Some Special Angles
We can use the Pythagorean theorem to find the exact values of the trigonometric functions 
for the angles with measure 30°, 45°, and 60° by examining the relationships between the 
side lengths in two “special” right triangles.
Consider an isosceles right triangle in which the length of each of the two legs of equal 
length is 1. Because the triangle has two sides of equal length, the two acute angles have 
equal measure, a. See Figure 5.22.
Because the sum of the measures of the angles in a triangle is 180°, we have 
a + a = 90°; so 2a = 90° and a = 45°. As is customary, we let c = length of the 
hypotenuse; then
 12 + 12 = c2     Pythagorean theorem
 2 = c2
 c = 12    c is a positive number.
So a right triangle in which both legs have length 1 has a hypotenuse of length 12 and 
contains two 45°  angles. See Figure 5.23. We call this an isosceles right triangle, or a 
45°– 45°– 90° triangle.
Finding Remaining Trigonometric Function Values from a 
Given Value
EXAMPLE 3
u
b
5
2
Figure 5.21 
3	
Evaluate trigonometric 
functions for the special 
angles 30°, 45°, and 60°.
a
a
c
1
1
Figure 5.22  An isosceles right 
triangle

490	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Use Figure 5.23 to find sin 45°, cos 45°, and tan 45°.
Solution
Referring to Figure 5.23, we have the following:
 sin 45° =
opposite
hypotenuse =
1
12 = 12
2
 cos 45° =
adjacent
hypotenuse =
1
12 = 12
2
 tan 45° = opposite
adjacent = 1
1 = 1
Practice Problem 4  Use Figure 5.23 to find csc 45°, sec 45°, and cot 45°.
Now consider an equilateral triangle with side length 2, as shown in Figure 5.24(a). The 
segment perpendicular to the base (dashed) in Figure 5.24(b) divides this triangle into two 
congruent right triangles.
We find the length of the perpendicular segment by applying the Pythagorean Theorem 
to one of the triangles. Let h denote the length of the perpendicular segment, which is a leg 
of both congruent right triangles. See Figure 5.24(b).
We can use either triangle to find the exact values of all six trigonometric functions for 
both 30° and 60° angles. We have
 22 = h2 + 12    Pythagorean theorem applied to Figure 5.24(c)
 h2 = 22 - 12    Subtract 12 from both sides and interchange sides.
 h2 = 3
    Simplify.
 h = 13
    h is positive.
The resulting right triangle whose acute angles measure 30° and 60° is given in Figure 5.24(c). 
We call this a 30°– 60°– 90° triangle.
Finding the Trigonometric Functions Values for 45°
EXAMPLE 4
1
458
458
1
2
Figure 5.23  A 45°– 45°– 90° 
triangle
An equilateral triangle is a triangle 
with all three sides of equal length. 
The measure of each angle of an 
equilateral triangle is 60°.
Recall
608
608
608
2
2
2
(a)
608
608
308
1
h
h 5
1
2
2
(b)
608
308
1
2
(c)
3
Figure 5.24  A 30°– 60°– 90° triangle
Finding the Trigonometric Functions Values for 30°
Use Figure 5.24(c) to find the values of the six trigonometric functions of 30°.
Solution
Referring to Figure 5.24(c), we have the following:
 sin 30° =
opposite
hypotenuse = 1
2   
 csc 30° = hypotenuse
opposite
= 2
1 = 2
 cos 30° =
adjacent
hypotenuse = 13
2    
 sec 30° = hypotenuse
adjacent
=
2
13 = 213
3
 tan 30° = opposite
adjacent =
1
13 = 13
3     cot 30° = adjacent
opposite = 13
1
= 13
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 5.2    ■    Right-Triangle Trigonometry 491
Practice Problem 5  Use Figure 5.24(c) to find the values of the six trigonometric  
functions of 60°.
You should be able to reconstruct the triangles used to find the values for the six trigo-
nometric functions for 30°, 45°, and 60°, as these values occur frequently. Remember that 
the values depend only on the acute angle itself, not on the size of the triangle. We sum-
marize the values obtained so far in Table 5.1 using both degree and radian measures.
Table 5.1 Trigonometric Function Values of Some Common Angles
U (degrees)
U (radians)
sin U
cos U
tan U
csc U
sec U
cot U
30°
p
6
1
2
13
2
13
3
2
213
3
13
45°
p
4
12
2
12
2
1
12
12
1
60°
p
3
13
2
1
2
13
213
3
2
13
3
The first screen shows how sin 71° 
is displayed on a graphing calcula-
tor in degree mode.
This screen shows how tan 5p
7  and 
sec 1.3 are displayed on a graphing 
calculator in radian mode.
Technology
Connection
Evaluating Trigonometric Functions Using a Calculator
Table 5.1 gives the exact trigonometric function values of 30°, 45°, and 60°. However, we 
are unable to find the exact trigonometric function values of most angles. In such cases, we 
settle for an approximate value by using a calculator.
When you are using a calculator to find the values of the trigonometric functions, the 
first step is to set the mode of measurement. If you are working with an angle given in 
degrees, set the mode to degrees; otherwise, set the mode to radians.
Your calculator has keys labeled  SIN , COS , and TAN  for computing the values of the 
sine, cosine, and tangent functions; but no keys for directly evaluating the cosecant, secant, or 
cotangent functions. However, these functions are the reciprocal functions of sine, cosine, 
and tangent functions, respectively. Therefore, to evaluate these functions, take the recip-
rocal of the appropriate function value.
For example, we use a calculator to find the approximate value of
a.	 sin 71°. Set the MODE to degrees, sin 71° ≈0.9455185756
b.	 tan 5p
7 . Set the MODE to radians, tan 5p
7
≈-1.253960338
c.	 sec 1.3. Set the MODE to radians, sec 1.3 =
1
cos 1.3 ≈3.738334127
Complements
Because 30° and 60° are acute angles in the same right triangle, the same six possible 
ratios of the lengths of the sides of the triangle are used to compute the values of the 
trigonometric functions for both angles. Notice that cos 30° = sin 60°, sin 30° = cos 60°, 
and tan 30° = cot 60°. Taking reciprocals of these values extends this relationship to the 
remaining three trigonometric functions.
The prefix co- (in cosine, cotangent, and cosecant) stands for complement. The cosine, 
cotangent, and cosecant functions are called the cofunctions of the sine, tangent, and secant 
functions, respectively. In general, for any acute angle u in a right triangle, the other acute 
angle is its complement, 90° - u. See Figure 5.25.
b
a
c
u
u
908 2 
Figure 5.25  Side a is opposite 
u and adjacent to 90° - u Side b is 
adjacent to u and opposite 90° - u.
The calculator keys Sin-1, coS-1, and TAn-1 do not represent the reciprocal functions for  
the sine, cosine, and tangent functions, respectively. The functions sin-1, cos-1, and tan-1  
are inverse functions and are discussed in Section 5.6.
Warning

492	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Computations similar to those in Example 5 lead to the relationships, or identities, 
given next.
Here is a scheme for remembering 
the cofunction identities for acute 
angles A and B with
A + B = 90°, or A + B = p
2,
complementary angles 
sin A  =  cos B
cofunctions
The sine and cosine may be 
replaced with any other  
cofunction pairs.
Side 
Note
C o f u n c t i o n  I d e n t i t i e s
The value of any trigonometric function of an angle u is equal to the cofunction of the 
complement of u. This is true whether u is measured in degrees or in radians.
U in radians
 sin u = cos ap
2 - ub   cos u = sin ap
2 - ub
 tan u = cot ap
2 - ub 
 cot u = tan ap
2 - ub
 sec u = csc ap
2 - ub   csc u = sec ap
2 - ub
If u is measured in degrees, replace p
2  with 90° in the equations above.
a.	 Given that cot 68° ≈0.4040, find tan 22°.
b.	 Given that cos 72° ≈0.3090, find sin 18°.
Solution
a.	 Note that	
22° = 90° - 68°. So
tan 22° = tan 190° - 68°2 = cot 68° ≈0.4040.
b.	 Here	
18° = 90° - 72°. So
sin 18° = sin 190° - 72°2 = cos 72° ≈0.3090.
Practice Problem 6 
a.	 Given that csc 21° ≈2.7904, find sec 69°.
b.	 Given that tan 75° ≈3.7321, find cot 15°.
Applications
Angles that are measured between a line of sight and a horizontal line occur in many appli-
cations and are called angles of elevation or angles of depression. If the line of sight from  
an observer to an object is above the horizontal line, the angle between these two lines 
is called the angle of elevation. If the line of sight is below the horizontal line, the angle 
between the two lines is called the angle of depression.
For example, suppose you are taking a picture of a friend who has climbed to the top 
of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. See Figure 5.26. The angle your eyes rotate through as 
your gaze changes from straight ahead to looking at your friend is the angle of elevation.
The angle your friend’s eyes rotate through as she changes from looking straight ahead 
to looking down at you (no pun intended) is the angle of depression.
Finding Trigonometric Function Values  
of a Complementary Angle
EXAMPLE 6
4	
Use right-triangle trigonometry 
in applications.
Remember that an angle of eleva-
tion or an angle of depression is 
the angle between the line of sight 
and a horizontal line.
Side  
Note

	
Section 5.2    ■    Right-Triangle Trigonometry 493
Angle of
elevation
Angle of
depression
Figure 5.26  Angles of elevation and depression
To determine the height of a cloud at night, a farmer shines a spotlight straight upward 
to a spot on the cloud. The angle of elevation to this same spot on the cloud from a point 
located 150 feet horizontally from the spotlight is 68.2°. Find the height of the cloud.
Solution
In Figure 5.27, h represents the height of the cloud, in feet. We have
 tan 68.2° =
h
150
    Definition of tangent
 h = 150 tan 68.2°    Multiply both sides by 150.
 h ≈375
    Use a calculator.
The height of the cloud is approximately 375 feet.
Practice Problem 7  From an observation deck 425 feet high on the top of a lighthouse, 
the angle of depression to a ship at sea is 4.2°. How many miles is the ship from a point  
at sea level directly below the observation deck?
Finding the Height of a Cloud
EXAMPLE 7
Figure 5.27  Height of a cloud
150 ft
68.28
h
A surveyor wants to measure the height of Mount Kilimanjaro by using the known height of 
a nearby mountain. The nearby location is at an altitude of 8720 feet, the distance between 
that location and Mount Kilimanjaro’s peak is 4.9941 miles, and the angle of elevation from 
the lower location is 23.75°. See Figure 5.28. Use this information to find the approximate 
height of Mount Kilimanjaro.
Measuring the Height of Mount Kilimanjaro
EXAMPLE 8
8720 ft
4.9941 mi
23.758
h
Figure 5.28  Height of Mount Kilimanjaro

494	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Solution
The sum of the side length h and the location height of 8720 feet gives the approximate 
height of Mount Kilimanjaro. Let h be measured in miles. Using the definition of sin u, for 
u = 23.75°, we have
 sin u =
opposite
hypotenuse =
h
4.9941    From Figure 5.28
 h = 14.99412 sin u
    Multiply both sides by 4.9941.
 = 14.99412 sin 23.75°
    Replace u with 23.75°.
 h ≈2.0114
    Use a calculator.
Because 1 mile = 5280 feet,
 2.0114 miles = 12.01142152802
 ≈10,620 feet.
Thus, the height of Mount Kilimanjaro is
h + 8720 ≈10,620 + 8720 = 19,340 feet.
Practice Problem 8  The height of a nearby location to Mount McKinley, Alaska, is 
12,870 feet, its distance to Mount McKinley’s peak is 3.3387 miles, and the angle of  
elevation u is 25°. What is the approximate height of Mount McKinley?
To find the width of a river, a surveyor sights straight across the river from a point A on her 
side to a point B on the opposite side. See Figure 5.29. She then walks 200 feet upstream to 
a point C. The angle u that the line of sight from point C to point B makes with the riverbank 
is 58°. How wide is the river, to the nearest foot?
Solution
The points A, B, and C are the vertices of a right triangle with acute angle u = 58°.
Let w represent the width of the river. From Figure 5.29, we have
 w
200 = tan 58°         tan u = opposite
adjacent
w = 200 tan 58°    Multiply both sides by 200.
w ≈ 320.07 feet    Use a calculator.
The river is about 320 feet wide at the point A.
Finding the Width of a River
EXAMPLE 9
Figure 5.29  Width of a river
200 ft
u 5 588
A
w
B
C
Practice Problem 9  From a point on the edge of one of two parallel rooftop sides of two 
building, a point directly opposite is identified on the other rooftop. From a second point 
25 feet from the first point along the rooftop edge, a second sighting to the point on the 
­opposite rooftop is made, and the angle u that this line of sight makes with the rooftop is  
found to be 60°. How far apart are the two buildings? Round your answer to the nearest foot.

	
Section 5.2    ■    Right-Triangle Trigonometry 495
Answers to Practice Problems
1.   sin u = 4
5  csc u = 5
4
      cos u = 3
5  sec u = 5
3
      tan u = 4
3  cot u = 3
4
2.  tan u = 3
4, csc u = 5
3, sec u = 5
4, cot u = 4
3
3.  sin u = 212
3   
 csc u = 312
4
    cos u = 1
3
 1given2   sec u = 3
    tan u = 212  
 cot u = 12
4
4. csc 45° = 12, sec 45° = 12, cot 45° = 1
5.  sin 60° = 13
2 , cos 60° = 1
2, tan 60° = 13
     csc 60° = 213
3 , sec 60° = 2, cot 60° = 13
3
6. a. sec 69° ≈2.7904  b. cot 15° ≈3.7321
7. ≈1.096 miles    8. ≈20,320 feet    9. ≈43 feet
Exercises
section 5.2 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 If u is an acute angle and sin u = 212
3 , then 
	
	 cos u =
 .
	 2.	 In a right triangle with sides of lengths 1, 5, and 126, the 
tangent of the angle opposite the side of length 5 is  
 .
	 3.	 If u is an acute angle (measured in degrees) in a right triangle 
and cos u = 0.7, then sin 190° - u2 =
 .
	 4.	 True or False. If u is an acute angle in a right triangle and 
	
	 tan u = 2
5, then the length of the leg opposite u is always 2. 
	 5.	 True or False. The leg adjacent to angle u in a right triangle 
is the leg opposite the angle 90° - u. 
	 6.	 True or False. The length of the hypotenuse of a right tri-
angle having a leg of length 1 must be greater than 1. 
In Exercises 7–12, find the exact values for the six trigono-
metric functions of the angle U in each figure. Rationalize the 
denominator where necessary.
	 7.	
u
11
2
5  5
	 8.	
u
7  2
7
7
 

	 9.	
u
6
8
	10.	
u
17
15
	11.	
u
7
1
	12.	
u
4
12   

496	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
In Exercises 13–18, use reciprocal and quotient identities to 
find tan U, csc U, sec U, and cot U.
	13.	 sin u = 12
13 and cos u = 5
13 	14.	 sin u = 8
17 and cos u = 15
17
	15.	 sin u = 21
29 and cos u = 20
29 	16.	 sin u = 40
41 and cos u = 9
41
	17.	 sin u = 2
5 and cos u = 121
5
	18.	 sin u = 216
5
 and cos u = 1
5
In Exercises 19–24, use each given trigonometric function 
value of U to find the five other trigonometric function values 
of the acute angle U. Rationalize the denominators where  
necessary.
	19.	 cos u = 2
3 
	20.	 sin u = 3
4 
	21.	 tan u = 5
3 
	22.	 cot u = 6
11 
	23.	 sec u = 13
12 
	24.	 csc u = 4 
In Exercises 25–30, find the trigonometric function values of 
each corresponding complementary angle.
	25.	 Given that sin 58° ≈0.8480, find cos 32°. 
	26.	 Given that cos 37° ≈0.7986, find sin 53°. 
	27.	 Given that tan 27° ≈0.5095, find cot 63°. 
	28.	 Given that cot 49° ≈0.8693, find tan 41°. 
	29.	 Given that sec 65° ≈2.3662, find csc 25°. 
	30.	 Given that csc 78° ≈1.0223, find sec 12°. 
In Exercises 31–38, use Table 5.1 and simplify the resulting 
expression.
	31.	 sin 60° cos 30° + cos 60° sin 30° 
	32.	 sin 60° cos 45° + cos 60° sin 45°
	33.	 cos 60° cos 30° + sin 60° sin 30°
	34.	 cos 60° cos 45° - sin 60° sin 45°
	35.	 cot 45° + csc 30° 
	36.	 tan 30° sec 45° + tan 60° sec 30°
	37.	 cos 45° cos 30° - sin 45° sin 30°
	38.	 sin 30° cos 45° + cos 30° sin 45°
In Exercises 39–48, use the figure below and the given values 
to find each specified side length and trigonometric function 
value. Round your answer to three decimal places.
	39.	 a = 8, b = 10	
Find c, sin u, and tan u. 
	40.	 a = 18, b = 3	
Find c, sin u, and cos u. 
	41.	 a = 23, b = 7	
Find cos u and tan u. 
	42.	 a = 19, b = 27	
Find c, cos u, and tan u. 
	43.	 u = 30°, a = 9	
Find sin u, b, and c. 
	44.	 u = 30°, a = 5	
Find b and c. 
	45.	 a = 12.5, b = 6.2	
Find c, sin u, cos u. 
	46.	 a = 4.3, b = 8.1	
Find c, cos u, tan u. 
	47.	 b = 9.4, c = 14.5	
Find a, sin u, tan u. 
	48.	 a = 6.2, c = 18.7	
Find b, sec u, cot u. 
a
b
c
u
a
In Exercises 49–54, use the given function value of acute  
angle U to find the indicated trigonometric function values.
	49.	 sin u = 1
3
a.	 csc u 
	
b.  cos u	
c.  tan u	
d.  cot 190° - u2
	50.	 cos u = 1
4
a.	 sec u 
	
b.  sin u	
c.  tan u	
d.  cot 190° - u2
	51.	 sec u = 5
a.	 cos u	
b.  sin u	
c.  tan u	
d.  tan 190° - u2
	52.	 csc u = 2
a.	 sin u	
b.  cos u	
c.  tan u	
d.  tan 190° - u2
	53.	 tan u = 5
2
a.	 cot u	
b.  sec u	
c.  cos u	
d.  cos 190° - u2
	54.	 cot u = 3
2
a.	 tan u	
b.  csc u	
c.  sin u	
d.  sin 190° - u2
Applying the Concepts
	55.	 Positioning a ladder. An 18-foot ladder is resting against 
a wall of a building in such a way that the top of the ladder 
is 14 feet above the ground. How far is the foot of the ladder 
from the base of the building? 
	56.	 Positioning a ladder. The ladder from Exercise 55 is 
placed against a wall so that the foot of the ladder is 7 feet 
from the base of the wall. How high up the wall will the  
ladder reach? 
In Exercises 57 and 58, use the following definitions: The 
vertical rise of a ski lift is the vertical distance traveled when 
a lift car goes from the bottom terminal to the top terminal. 
The slope length is the linear distance a lift car travels as it 
moves from the bottom terminal to the top terminal. We treat 
the slope length as the hypotenuse and the vertical rise as the 
side opposite the angle formed by the horizontal line at the 
top terminal and the lift cables. (See figure on page 497)
	57.	 Ski lift dimensions. Find the horizontal distance a lift car 
passes over assuming that the vertical rise is 295 meters and 
the slope length is 1070 meters.                             

	
Section 5.2    ■    Right-Triangle Trigonometry 497
	58.	 Ski lift dimensions. Find the vertical rise (to the nearest 
foot) for a ski lift with slope length 2050 feet assuming that 
the angle formed by a horizontal line at the top terminal and 
the lift cable is 16°. 
Slope
length
Vertical
rise
	59.	 Ski lift height. If a skier travels 5000 feet up a ski lift 
whose angle of inclination is 30°, how high above his starting 
level is he? 
	60.	 Shadow length. At a time when the sun’s rays make a  
60° angle with the horizontal, how long is the shadow cast  
by a 6-foot man standing on flat ground? 
	61.	 Height of a tree. The angle relative to the horizontal 
from the top of a tree to a point 12 feet from its base (on flat 
ground) is 30°. Find the height of the tree. 
	62.	 Height of a cliff. The angle of elevation from a rowboat 
moored 75 feet from a cliff is 60°. Find the height of the cliff.
	63.	 Height of a flagpole. A flagpole is supported by a 30-foot 
tension wire attached to the flagpole and to a stake in the 
ground. If the ground is flat and the angle the wire makes 
with the ground is 30°, how high up the flagpole is the wire 
attached?  
	64.	 Flying a kite. A girl is holding a kite string at a height of  
5 feet while flying the kite. How long must the string be for 
her to raise the kite 200 feet above the ground if the string 
makes a 30° angle with the ground? 
	65.	 Height of a tree. Find the height of a pine tree that casts a 
93-foot shadow on the ground if the angle of elevation of the 
sun is 24°35′. 
	66.	 Width of a river. Sal and his friend are on opposite sides of 
a river. To find the width of the river, each of them hammers 
a stake on his bank of the river in such a way that the dis-
tance between the two stakes approximates the width of the 
river. Sal walks 10 feet away from his stake along the river 
and finds that the line of sight from his new position to his 
friend’s stake across the river and the line of sight to his own 
stake form a 73°34′ angle. How wide is the river? 
738349
10 ft
Friend
Sal
	67.	 Measuring the Empire State Building. From a neighbor-
ing building’s 13th-floor window that is 128 meters above the 
ground, the angle of elevation of the top of the Empire State 
Building is 59°20′, and the angle of depression of the base is 
40°29′. How far away from the neighboring building and how 
tall is the Empire State Building? 
	68.	 Sighting a mortar station. The angle of depression from 
a helicopter 3000 feet directly above an allied mortar station 
to an enemy supply depot is 13°. How far is the depot from 
the mortar station? 
	69.	 Distance between Earth and the moon. Assuming that 
the radius of Earth is 3960 miles and angle A (the latitude of 
A) is 89°3′, find the distance between the center of Earth and 
the center of the moon. 
898 39
C
B
A
	70.	 Placing a spotlight. A spotlight will be set in the ground 
so that its beam makes a 40° angle with the ground. If the 
light is to hit a spot 7 feet above the ground on a vertical 
wall, how far from the wall should the light be placed? 
	71.	 Traffic sign. A “warning” traffic sign in the shape of a dia-
mond rhombus (rhombus) is 1.8 meters wide. The angle at 
the top of the sign is 50°. Find the length of each side. 
	72.	 Mooring a boat. A boat is attached at water level by a taut 
line to a dock that is 4 feet above the water level. The angle 
of depression from the dock to the boat is 14°. How long is 
the rope? Round your answer to the nearest foot. 
	73.	 Wire length. A horizontal wire between two houses is  
100 feet long. The wire is replaced and lowered on one end 
so that it is now inclined at an angle of 10°. How long is the  
new wire? 
In Exercises 74 and 75, use the figure to find the radius r for 
the given latitudes (values of U). Use 3960 miles for the radius 
of Earth.
	74.	 Latitude. Find the radius of the 50th parallel (of latitude).
	75.	 Latitude. Find the radius of the 53rd parallel (of latitude).
C
B
r
A
u   

498	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Beyond the Basics
	76.	 In a triangle ABC with right angle at C, if tan A = 1
2, find the 
	
	 value of sec A + csc B. 
	77.	 If a is an acute angle and sin a = 1
3, find the value of 
	
	 cos a csc a + tan a sec a.
	78.	 If sin u = m2 - n2
m2 + n2, find the value of tan u + sec u. 
	79.	 If tan u = 4
5, find the value of cos u - sin u
cos u + sin u. 
	80.	 Height of an airplane. From a tower 150 feet high with 
the sun directly overhead, an airplane and its shadow have an 
angle of elevation of 67.4° and an angle of depression of 8.1°, 
respectively. Find the height of the airplane. 
150 ft
A
B
C
D
8.18
67.48
	81.	 Camera angle. Raphael stands 12 feet from a large painting 
on a wall. He sets his camera 5 feet 6 inches above the floor. 
If the bottom edge of the painting is 4 feet above the floor 
and the angle of elevation from the camera to the top of the 
painting is 50°, find the height of the painting to the nearest 
tenth of a foot. 
	82.	 Height of a building. The WCNC-TV Tower in Dallas, 
North Carolina, is 600 meters high. Suppose a building is 
erected such that the base of the building is on the same plane 
as the base of the tower, the angle of elevation from the top 
of the building to the top of the tower is 75.24°, and the angle 
of depression from the top of the building to the foot of the 
tower is 60.05°. How high would the building have to be? 
(Source: http://en.wikipedia.org) 
	83.	 Height of a building. Suppose from the top of the Empire 
State Building (which is about 1250 feet high), the angle of 
depression to the top of a second building is 55.8° and the 
angle of depression to the bottom of the second building is 
67.7°. Find the height of the second building. 
	84.	 In the figure, show that 
	
	 h =
d
cot a - cot b.
	85.	 Height of a plane. A plane flies directly over two tracking 
stations that are 500 meters apart on a level plain. The plane 
flies in the direction from Station A to Station B. After the 
plane has passed Station B, an observer at Station B records 
the angle of elevation as 38.9°. At the same time, an observer 
at Station A records the angle of elevation as 36.9°. What is 
the plane’s altitude?
[Hint: Use Exercise 84.] 
	86.	 Measuring the Statue of Liberty. While sailing toward 
the Statue of Liberty, a sailor in a boat observed that at a 
certain point, the angle of elevation of the tip of the torch was 
25°. After sailing another 100 meters toward the statue, the 
angle of elevation became 41°50′. How tall is the Statue of 
Liberty? 
	87.	 Speed of a plane. A plane flying at an altitude of 12,000 feet 
finds the angle of depression for a building ahead of the plane 
to be 10.4°. With the building still straight ahead, two minutes 
later the angle of depression is 25.6°. Find the speed of the 
plane relative to the ground (in feet per minute).
12,000 ft
d
10.48
25.68
	88.	 In the figure, show that 
	
	 h =
d
cot a + cot b.
	89.	 Find the area of triangle ABC in the figure. 
A
B
C
758
10 
a
b
d
x
h 
d
h
a
b

	
Section 5.2    ■    Right-Triangle Trigonometry 499
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	90.	 Draw a right triangle ABC with right angle at C.
	
	 (a)  Use the definitions of sine and cosine together with the 
Pythagorean theorem to show that sin2 A + cos2 A = 1.
	
	 (b)  Use the result in (a) and the cofunction identities (see page 
492) to find the value of sin A cos B + cos A sin B. 
	91.	 In a right triangle with acute angle u, what value must the 
adjacent side have for the length of the opposite side to  
represent tan u? 
	92.	 Use the result of Exercise 91 to compare tan a and tan b 
assuming that a and b are acute angles and the measure of 
a is less than the measure of b. 
	93.	 All references are to the figure.
b
A
E
F
B
C
D
2
1
458
608
	
(i)	 Find b and ∠CAB.
	
(ii)	 Find AD, DC, and ∠ACD.
	
(iii)	 Find ∠BCF and ∠CBF.
	
(iv)	 Find CF and BF.
	
(v)	 Find AE and BE.
	
(vi)	 Find ∠BAE and ∠ABE.
	
(vii)	 Find sin 15° and cos 15°.
	
(viii)	 Find sin 75° and cos 75°.
	94.	 From the foot F, of a mountain, the angle of elevation to its 
summit is 45°. After a climber has gone 1 kilometer toward 
the mountain up an incline of 30°, the angle of elevation to 
the summit is 60°. Find the height of the mountain. (See the 
figure.)
c Hint: Let FB = BS = x. Show SC = x - 1
2 and 
DC = x - 13
2 . d 
A
B
C
D
S
F
1 km
308
608
458
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 95–98, rationalize the denominator of each 
expression and simplify.
	 95.	 13 - 1
13 + 1 
	 96.	 3 + 17
3 - 17 
	 97.	 5 + 213
7 + 413 
	 98.	
3
5 - 13 +
2
5 + 13
In Exercises 99–102, convert each angle from degrees to 
­radians.
	 99.	 75° 
	100.	 70° 
	101.	 -510°
	102.	 435° 
In Exercises 103–106, use the division algorithm to write each 
number x in the form x = 360n + r, where n is an integer 
and 0 " r * 360.
	103.	 x = 1220 
	104.	 x = 2670 
	105.	 x = -480
	106.	 x = -2025 
  
        

500	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
S e c t i o n 
Trigonometric Functions of Angles
Consider an angle u in standard position, as shown in Figure 5.30. Let P = 1x, y2 be any point 
(other than the origin) on the terminal ray of u. The distance between the origin O = 10, 02 
and the point P is r = 21x - 022 + 1y - 022 = 2x2 + y2. Note that r 7 0.
We define the six trigonometric functions, sine, cosine, tangent, cosecant, secant, 
and cotangent, for any angle u by using the same abbreviations we used in the previous 
section.
Trigonometric Functions  
of Any Angle; The Unit Circle
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Rationalizing a denominator  
(Section P.6, page 63)
2	 Distance between two points  
(Section 2.1, page 159)
3	 The unit circle (Section 2.2, page 172)
4	 Trigonometric function values of  
some common angles (Section 5.2,  
page 491)
Objectives
1	 Evaluate trigonometric functions of  
any angle.
2	 Determine the signs of the trigonometric 
functions in each quadrant.
3	 Find a reference angle.
4	 Use reference angles to find trigonometric 
function values.
5	 Define the trigonometric functions using 
the unit circle.
5.3
1	
Evaluate trigonometric 
functions of any angle.
Figure 5.30  Angle u in standard 
position
u
P 5 (x, y)
r
O
x
y
Let P = 1x, y2 be any point on the terminal ray of an angle u in standard position (other 
than the origin) and let r = 2x2 + y2. We define the following functions values:
sin u = y
r
  csc u = r
y 1y ≠02
cos u = x
r
  sec u = r
x 1x ≠02
tan u = y
x 1x ≠02    cot u = x
y 1y ≠02
The Trigonometric Functions of any Angle U
The London Eye
The London Eye, also known as the Millennium Wheel, was constructed in 1999 and is 
located on the bank of the River Thames in London, England. It is 135 meters high and is 
the tallest wheel in Europe. The wheel carries 32 sealed and air-conditioned passenger 
capsules attached to its external circumference. It rotates at a slow rate to complete one 
revolution in 30 minutes. This slow rotation speed allows passengers to walk on or off 
the moving capsules at ground level without any need to stop the wheel. Over 3 million 
people visit the wheel each year, making it the most popular paid tourist attraction in 
the United Kingdom. In Example 9, we discuss the height of a passenger capsule.

	
Section 5.3    ■    Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle 501
Now consider a right triangle with acute angle u and vertices A, B, and C. Place the 
triangle so that u is in standard position, as shown in Figure 5.31. If the vertex B has coor-
dinates 1x, y2, then r2 = x2 + y2; so r = 2x2 + y2 and
sin u =
opposite
hypotenuse = y
r
csc u = hypotenuse
opposite
= r
y
cos u =
adjacent
hypotenuse = x
r
sec u = hypotenuse
adjacent
= r
x
tan u = opposite
adjacent = y
x
cot u = adjacent
opposite = x
y
Notice that for acute angles, the definitions from Section 5.2 give the same values for all 
six trigonometric functions, as do the definitions in this section. Consequently, the trigonomet-
ric function values we computed in Section 5.2, such as those for 30°, 45°, and 60°, are the 
same values that we would obtain by using the more general definitions given in this section. 
If an angle u is measured in degrees, we use the degree symbol when indicating a trigo-
nometric function value, such as cos 60° and tan 1-1282°. If u is measured in radians, then 
no symbol is used when indicating a trigonometric function value such as sin p
4, sec p, 
and cos1-162.
In Figure 5.32, right triangles POQ and P1OQ1 are similar by angle–angle similarity; so 
the ratios of corresponding sides are equal. Thus, letting r  = 2x2  +  y2 and r1  = 2x1
2   + y1
2, 
we have sin u = y
r = y1
r1
, cos u = x
r = x1
r1
, and so on. This shows that the values of the 
trigonometric functions do not depend on the choice of the point P1x, y2 on the terminal 
side of u. Throughout assume that the stated angles are in standard position.
Figure 5.31
u
r
A
x
y
C
x
y
Figure 5.32 
u
P(x, y)
P1(x1, y1)
O
Q
Q1
x
y
Suppose u is an angle whose terminal side contains the point P1-1, 32. Find the exact 
values of the six trigonometric functions of u.
Solution
Because x = - 1 and y = 3 (see Figure 5.33), we have
 r = 2x2 + y2
    Definition of r
 = 21-122 + 32    Replace x with -1 and y with 3.
 = 110
    Simplify.
Replacing x with -1, y with 3, and r with 110 in the definition of the trigonometric func-
tions, we have the following:
sin u = y
r =
3
110 = 3110
10
csc u = r
y = 110
3
cos u = x
r =
-1
110 = - 110
10
sec u = r
x = 110
-1
= - 110
tan u = y
x =
3
-1 = -3
cot u = x
y = -1
3
= -1
3
Practice Problem 1  Suppose u is an angle whose terminal side contains the point 
P12, -52. Find the exact values of the six trigonometric functions of u.
Finding Trigonometric Function Values
EXAMPLE 1
u
P(−1, 3)
O
x
y
r
Figure 5.33 

502	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Quadrantal Angles
Because the denominator r in sin u = y
r  and cos u = x
r  is positive, the sine and cosine functions 
are defined for any angle u. Note that for a quadrantal angle, one of the coordinates of a 
point on the terminal side is 0; so this coordinate cannot appear in a denominator. If the 
terminal side is on the x-axis, then the y-coordinate is 0; so the cotangent acot u = x
yb and 
the cosecant acsc u = r
yb functions are undefined. If the terminal side is on the y-axis, 
then the x-coordinate is 0 and the tangent atan u = y
xb and the secant asec u = r
xb functions 
are undefined.
Find the values (if any) of the six trigonometric functions of each angle.
a.	 u = 0° = 0 radians        b.   u = 90° = p
2  radians
Solution
First, choose a point on the terminal side of each angle, as shown in Figure 5.34. Then use 
the definitions of the trigonometric functions.
a.	 u = 0° = 0 radians; choose the point P11, 02, so x = 1, y = 0, and 
	
r = 212 + 02 = 1,
	
sin 0° = sin 0 = y
r = 0
1 = 0      cos 0° = cos 0 = x
r = 1
1 = 1
tan 0° = tan 0 = y
x = 0
1 = 0      sec 0° = sec 0 = r
x = 1
1 = 1
	
Because the y-coordinate of P is 0, csc 0° = csc 0 and cot 0° = cot 0 are undefined.
b.	 u = 90° = p
2  radians; choose the point Q10, 12, so x = 0, y = 1, and 
	
r = 202 + 12 = 1,
	
sin 90° = sin p
2 = y
r = 1
1 = 1     cos 90° = cos p
2 = x
r = 0
1 = 0
csc 90° = csc p
2 = r
y = 1
1 = 1     cot 90° = cot p
2 = x
y = 0
1 = 0
	
Because the x-coordinate of Q is 0, sec 90° = sec p
2  and tan 90° = tan p
2  are  
undefined.
Practice Problem 2  Find the values (if any) of the six trigonometric functions of  
each angle.
a.	 u = 180° = p        b.   u = 270° = 3p
2
Table 5.2 summarizes these facts about quadrantal angles.
Finding the Values of the Trigonometric Functions of  
Quadrantal Angles
EXAMPLE 2
Figure 5.34 
P(1, 0)
Q(0, 1)
0
x
y

	
Section 5.3    ■    Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle 503
Table 5.2 Trigonometric Function Values of Quadrantal Angles
U (degrees)
U (radians)
sin U
cos U
tan U
cot U
sec U
csc U
0°
0
  0
   1
0
undefined
   1
undefined
90°
p
2
   1
   0
undefined
0
undefined
   1
180°
p
  0
-1
0
undefined
-1
undefined
270°
3p
2
-1
   0
undefined
0
undefined
-1
360°
2p
  0
   1
0
undefined
   1
undefined
Coterminal Angles
Because the value of each trigonometric function of an angle in standard position is com-
pletely determined by the position of the terminal side, the following statements are true:
1.	 Coterminal angles are assigned identical values by the six trigonometric functions.
2.	 The signs of the values of the trigonometric functions are determined by the quadrant 
containing the terminal side.
3.	 For any integer n, u and u + n360° (in degree measure) are coterminal angles and u 
and u + 2pn (in radian measure) are coterminal angles.
Some frequently used consequences of these observations are given next.
Trigonometric Function Values of Coterminal Angles
U in degrees
 sin u = sin 1u + n360°2
 cos u = cos 1u + n360°2
U in radians
 sin u =  sin 1u + 2pn2
 cos u =  cos 1u + 2pn2
These equations hold for any integer n.
Find the exact values for the following.
a.	 sin 2580°        b.  cos 17p
4
Solution
a.	 2580° = 60° + 2520° = 60° + 71360°2, so sin 2580° = sin 60° = 13
2
b.	 17p
4
= p
4 + 16p
4
= p
4 + 212p2, so cos 17p
4
= cos p
4 = 12
2
Practice Problem 3  Find the exact values for the following
a.	 cos 1830°        b.   sin 31p
3
Signs of the Trigonometric Functions
Suppose the angle u is not quadrantal and its terminal side contains the point 1x, y2. We 
know that the only value other than x and y used in defining the trigonometric functions, 
r = 2x2 + y2, is always positive. Therefore, the signs of x and y determine the signs of 
the trigonometric functions.
Trigonometric Function Values of Coterminal Angles
EXAMPLE 3
2	
Determine the signs of the 
trigonometric functions in 
each quadrant.

504	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
If u lies in quadrant I, then both x and y are positive; so all six trigonometric function 
values are positive. However, if u lies in quadrant II, then x is negative and y is positive; so 
only sin u = y
r and csc u = r
y are positive. If u lies in quadrant III, then x and y are both 
negative; so only tan u = y
x and cot u = x
y are positive. If u lies in quadrant IV, then x is 
positive and y is negative; so only cos u = x
r and sec u = r
x are positive. Figure 5.35 
summarizes the signs of the trigonometric functions.
I
II
(1, 1)
(2, 1)
All positive
sin    > 0, 
csc    > 0
Others < 0
Others < 0
Others < 0
IV
III
(1, 2)
(2, 2)
tan    > 0, 
cot    > 0
cos    > 0, 
sec    > 0
u
u
x
y
Figure 5.35  Signs of the  
trigonometric functions
If tan u 7 0 and cos u 6 0, in which quadrant does u lie?
Solution
Because tan u 7 0, u lies in either quadrant I or quadrant III. However, cos u 7 0 for u in 
quadrant I; so u must lie in quadrant III.
Practice Problem 4  If sin u 7 0 and cos u 6 0, in which quadrant does u lie?
Determining the Quadrant in Which an Angle Lies
EXAMPLE 4
The phrase All Students Take 
Calculus can be useful in remem-
bering which trigonometric func-
tions are positive in quadrants I–IV. 
Use the first letter of each word in 
the phrase
A ll functions (I)
S  ine (II)
T  angent (III)
C  osine (IV)
and recall that a and 1
a have the 
same sign.
Side  
Note
Given that tan u = 3
2 and cos u 6 0, find the exact values of sin u and sec u.
Solution
Because tan u 7 0 and cos u 6 0, u lies in quadrant III. We want to identify a point 1x, y2 
in quadrant III that is on the terminal side of u. We have
tan u = y
x = 3
2,
and because the point 1x, y2 is in quadrant III, both x and y must be negative. See Figure 5.36. 
If we choose x = -2 and y = -3, then
tan u = y
x = -3
-2 = 3
2
and r = 2x2 + y2 = 21-222 + 1-322 = 14 + 9 = 113.
Using x = -2, y = -3, and r = 113, we can find sin u and sec u.
sin u = y
r =
-3
113 = -  3113
13    sec u = r
x = 113
-2
= -  113
2
Practice Problem 5  Given that tan u = -  4
5 and cos u 7 0, find the exact values of 
sin u and sec u.
Reference Angle
For any angle u, there is a corresponding acute angle called its reference angle whose trigo-
nometric function values are identical to those of u, except possibly for the sign.
Evaluating Trigonometric Functions
EXAMPLE 5
Figure 5.36 
u
(−2, −3)
r 5   13
x
y
3	
Find a reference angle.
Let u be an angle in standard position that is not a quadrantal angle. The reference 
angle for u is the acute angle u′ (“theta prime”) formed by the terminal side of u 
and the x-axis.
Reference Angle

	
Section 5.3    ■    Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle 505
If u lies in quadrant I, then u = u′. The reference angle u′ for an angle u10° 6 u 6 360°2 
in each of the four quadrants is shown in Figure 5.37.
If u is measured in radians and 0 6 u 6 2p, we have the following:
 u′ = u  
 for u in quadrant I
 u′ = p - u   for u in quadrant II
 u′ = u - p   for u in quadrant III
 u′ = 2p - u  for u in quadrant IV
u
u
9 5 36082
u
u
9
u
u
5
x
y
Quadrant I
u
u9
u
x
y
Quadrant III
u
u9
u
x
y
Quadrant IV
u
u9
x
y
Quadrant II
Figure 5.37  Reference angles for an angle u, with 0° 6 u 6 360°
Find the reference angle u′ for each angle u.
a.	 u = 250°        b.   u = 3p
5         c.   u = 5.75
Solution
a.	 Because 250° lies in quadrant III, the reference angle is u′ = u - 180°. So 
u′ = 250° - 180° = 70°. See Figure 5.38.
b.	 Because 3p
5  lies in quadrant II, the reference angle is u′ = p - u. So 
	
u′ = p - 3p
5
= 5p
5
- 3p
5
= 2p
5 . See Figure 5.39.
c.	 Because no degree symbol appears in u = 5.75, u has radian measure. Now 
	
3p
2
≈4.71 and 2p ≈6.28. So u lies in quadrant IV and u′ = 2p - u. So 
	
u′ = 2p - 5.75 ≈6.28 - 5.75 = 0.53. See Figure 5.40.
Practice Problem 6  Find the reference angle u′ for each angle u.
a.	 u = 175°        b.   u = 5p
3         c.   u = 8.22
You will learn later that there are convenient methods for finding the values of the 
trigonometric functions for -u from the values of the function for u. Consequently, we do 
not need to find reference angles for negative angles.
Using Reference Angles
A reference angle is used to find the values of trigonometric functions of any angle u. For 
example, consider the reference angle u′ of the angle u in Figure 5.41. Let P1x, y2 be a 
point on the terminal side of u in quadrant III. Then Q1 x,  y2 is in quadrant I. From the 
definition of trigonometric functions, we have
cos u = x
r = -  x
r
     Because x is negative, x = -  x.
Identifying Reference Angles
EXAMPLE 6
4	
Use reference angles to find 
trigonometric function values.
Figure 5.38 
708
2508
x
y
Figure 5.39 
5
3p
5
2p
x
y
Figure 5.40 
0.53
5.75
x
y

506	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
The right triangles POM and QON in Figure 5.41 are congruent by Side-Angle-Side.  
We have
cos u′ =  x
r .
Therefore, cos u = -   x
r
= -cos u′.
In general, cos u and cos u′ have the same absolute value, although their signs can 
be opposite; that is, cos u = {cos u′. The same is true for the other five trigonometric 
functions.
Find the value of any trigonometric function of a non-
quadrantal angle u.
Example
Using Reference Angles to Find Trigonometric Function Values
Objective
Example 7 
Find sin 1320°.
Because 1320° = 31360°2 + 240°, the angle 240° is 
coterminal with the angle 1320°.
Because 240° is in quadrant III, its reference angle u′ is
u′ = 240° - 180° = 60°,
and
 sin u′ = sin 60°
 = 13
2   See page 491.
Step 1 If u 7 360° or u 6 0°, find a coterminal 
angle for u with degree measure between 0° and 360°. 
Otherwise, go to Step 2.
Step 2 Find the reference angle u′ for the angle  
resulting from Step 1. Write the trigonometric function 
of u′.
Step 3 Choose the correct sign for the trigonometric 
function value of u based on the quadrant in which 
it lies. Write the given trigonometric function of u in 
terms of the same trigonometric function of u′ with the 
appropriate sign.
The angle 1320° and its coterminal angle, 240°, lie in 
quadrant III, where the sine is negative. So
sin 1320° = sin 240° = -sin 60° = -  13
2 .
coterminal angles    reference angle
Practice Problem 7  Find cos 1020°.
x
y
u 5 2408
u9 5 608
Find the exact value of each expression.
a.	 tan 330°        b.  sec 59p
6
Solution
a.	 Step 1      Because 330° is between 0° and 360°, we find its reference angle.
Step 2      Because 330° is in quadrant IV, its reference angle u′ is as follows:
 u′ = 360° - 330° = 30°
 tan u′ = tan 30° = 13
3
    See page 491.
Using the Reference Angle to Find Values of  
Trigonometric Functions
EXAMPLE 8
Figure 5.41  Reference angle
y
uyu
uxu
M
x
P(x, y)
N
Q (uxu,uyu)
O
r
r
9
9
procedure 
in Action

	
Section 5.3    ■    Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle 507
Step 3      In quadrant IV, tan u is negative; so
tan 330° = -tan 30° = -  13
3 .
b.	 Step 1      Because the radian measure of 59p
6  is greater than 2p, its degree measure 
	
	
      is greater than 360°.
59p
6
= 11p + 48p
6
= 11p
6
+ 8p;
	
	
      so 11p
6  is an angle between 0 and 2p that is coterminal with 59p
6 .
Step 2      Because 11p
6  is in quadrant IV, its reference angle u′ is as follows:
 u′ = 2p - 11p
6
= p
6
 sec u′ = sec p
6 = 213
3
    See page 491.
Step 3      In quadrant IV, sec u 7 0; so
sec 59p
6
= sec 11p
6
= sec p
6 = 213
3 .
Practice Problem 8  Find the exact value of each expression.
a.	 csc 1035°      b.  cot 17p
6
The height above the base, h (in meters), of a passenger capsule on the Millennium Wheel 
is given by h = 67.8 - 67.2 cos u, where u is the angle the capsule arm makes with a 
vertical ray downward from the wheel’s center. See Figure 5.42. How high is the capsule 
when
a.	 u = 135°?	
b.  u = 300°?	
c.  u = 870°?
Solution
a.	 h = 67.8 - 67.2 cos 135°	
Replace u with 135°.
	
= 67.8 - 67.21{cos 45°2    Because 135° is in Q II, u′ = 180 - 135 = 45°.
	
= 67.8 - 67.21- cos 45°2	
cos u = - cos u′ for u in Q II
	
= 67.8 + 67.2 a 12
2 b	
Replace cos 45° with 12
2 .
	
= 67.8 + 133.6212 ≈115.32 meters
b.	 u = 300° is in Q IV; so u′ = 360 - 300 = 60° and cos u = cos u′.
	
h = 67.8 - 67.2 cos 300°    u = 300°
	
= 67.8 - 67.2 cos 60°	
u′ = 60° and cos 300° = cos 60°
	
= 67.8 - 67.2 a1
2b	
cos 60° = 1
2
	
= 34.2 meters
c.	 u = 870° = 21360°2 + 150°; so 870° and 150° are coterminal angles in Q II. 
	
u′ = 180° - 150° = 30° and cos 870° = cos 150° = -cos 30° = -  13
2
The Millennium Wheel
EXAMPLE 9
h
Figure 5.42 

508	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
 h = 67.8 - 67.2 cos 870°
 = 67.8 - 67.2 a - 13
2 b
 = 67.8 + 33.613 ≈126.0 meters
Practice Problem 9  In Example 9, find the height of the capsule when u = 600°.
Circular Functions
The relationship s = ru between the radian measure of a central angle and the length of 
the arc it intercepts allows us to define the trigonometric functions so that their domains 
are sets of numbers rather than angles. In many applications and in advanced mathemat-
ics, this is a more useful approach. We begin with a unit circle, a circle of radius 1 unit 
centered at the origin. See Figure 5.43. Recall (Section 2.2) that the equation for this circle 
is x2 + y2 = 1.
If s is any positive real number, we measure off an arc of length s (counterclockwise) 
beginning on the unit circle at 11, 02 and ending at the point 1x, y2 on the unit circle. Then 
the point P1x, y2 is on the terminal ray of the central angle with radian measure u that in-
tercepts this arc. See Figure 5.44. Because the distance from the origin to 1x, y2 is r = 1, 
we have
cos u = x
r = x
1 = x and sin u = y
r = y
1 = y.
Because s = 1 # u = u, we can write cos s = x and sin s = y and think of these func-
tions as functions of the arc length, s, a real number. If s is a negative real number, we 
measure off an arc of length  s  in a clockwise direction. Again, u = s, and we proceed 
as before. If s = 0, we let 1x, y2 = 11, 02. All six trigonometric functions can now be 
defined as functions of numbers associated with arc length on a unit circle. When this is 
done, they are called circular functions or trigonometric functions of real numbers.
5	
Define the trigonometric 
functions using the unit circle.
x
y
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
s
1
(0, 1)
(x, y)

Figure 5.43  The unit circle
x
y
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
1
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
(x, y)
s

Figure 5.44  Circular functions
C i r c u l a r  F u n c t i o n s
If s is a real number and P1x, y2 is the related point on the unit circle described previ-
ously, then
cos s = x
sin s = y
tan s = y
x
 1x ≠02
sec s = 1
x
 1x ≠02
csc s = 1
y
 1y ≠02
cot s = x
y
 1y ≠02
A point P1x, y2 on the unit circle associated with a real number s has coordinates 
1cos s, sin s2 because x = cos s and y = sin s. See Figure 5.45.
s
s
(1, 0)
P(cos s, sin s)
s
s
s
O
O
P(x, y)
1
1
y
s
x
(1, 0) x
x
y
y
Figure 5.45  Unit circle definitions of sins and coss

	
Section 5.3    ■    Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle 509
In a unit circle 1r = 12, the length of an arc is numerically equal to the measure in 
radians of the central angle subtended by the arc. Therefore, we view the value of a trigo-
nometric function at a real number s as its value at an angle of u = s radians. Thus, we 
have, for example,
sin s = sin u = sin a180
p  ub°.
So if s is any real number, we can evaluate the trigonometric function values at s in any of 
these three ways:
1.	 Find the endpoint 1x, y2 of the arc of directed length s units measured from the point 
11, 02 on the unit circle and use the circular function definitions.
2.	 Use the earlier methods for finding the trigonometric function values for a central 
angle of s = u radians.
3.	 Convert s = u from radian measure to degree measure and then find trigonometric 
function values.
Figure 5.46 shows ordered pairs on the unit circle associated with commonly used angles 
in degree and radian measure.
x
y
0
60 
3
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
1
2
Œ3
2
,
_
_
1
2
Œ3
2
,
_
_
 2
1
2
,
Œ3
_
_
 2
Œ3
_
1
2
,
_
2
Œ3
_
1
2
,
_
2
Œ3
_
1
2
,
_
1
2,
_
_
 2
Œ3
1
2,
_
_
 2
Œ3

Œ2
2
,
Œ2
2
_
_
Œ2
2 Œ2
2
_
_
,
Œ2
2 Œ2
2
_
_
,
Œ2
2
Œ2
2
_
_
,
2
0
30
45
60
90
120
135
150
210
225
240
300
315
330
360
270
180
0

6

4

3

2
2
3
4
3
3
2
5
3
7
4
11
6
3
4
5

6
5
4
7
6
Unit circle: degrees, radians, ordered pairs
Figure 5.46 
Find sin 5p
6 , cos 5p
6 , and tan 5p
6  by
a.	 Using Figure 5.46 to find the endpoint of the arc intercepted by s = 5p
6 .
b.	 Using reference angles and Table 5.1 from Section 5.2.
c.	 Repeat part b. converting 5p
6  to degrees first.
Finding Exact Circular Function Values in Three Ways
EXAMPLE 10

510	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Solution
a.	 From Figure 5.46, we see that the endpoint of the arc of length t = 5p
6  is a - 13
2 , 1
2b.
	
So cos 5p
6
= -  13
2 , sin 5p
6
= 1
2, and tan 5p
6 =
sin 5p
6
cos 5p
6
=
1
2
- 13
2
= -  1
13 = -  13
3 .
b.	 Either by comparing 5p
6  to 6p
6  or by referring to Figure 5.46, we see that t = u = 5p
6  
	
	radians is in Q II. So its cosine is negative and its sine is positive. The reference angle 
(see Figure 5.47) is
p - 5p
6
= 6p
6
- 5p
6
= p
6.
	
Then cos 5p
6
= -cos p
6 = -  13
2 , sin 5p
6
= sin p
6 = 1
2, and 
	
tan 5p
6
=
sin 5p
6
cos 5p
6
=
1
2
-  13
2
= -  1
13 = -  13
3 .
c.	 Converting 5p
6  to degrees, we have 5p
6 # 180
p
= 150°. Notice that Figure 5.46
	
also gives this information. Because 150° is in Q II, its reference angle is 
180° - 150° = 30°.
	
Then  cos 5p
6
= cos 150° = -cos 30° = -  13
2 ,
	
 sin 5p
6
= sin 150° = sin 30° = 1
2, and
	
 tan 5p
6
= tan 150° =  sin 150°
cos 150° =
1
2
-  13
2
= -  1
13 = -  13
3 .
Practice Problem 10  Repeat Example 10 for t = 7p
6 .
x
y
6

5
6

 

5
6

Figure 5.47 
Answers to Practice Problems
1. sin u = -  5129
29  csc u = -  129
5
cos u = 2129
29  sec u = 129
2
tan u = -  5
2 cot u = -  2
5
2. a.  sin 180° = sin p = 0 csc 180° = csc p is undefined.
 cos 180° = cos p = -1 sec 180° = sec p = -1
 tan 180° = tan p = 0 cot 180° = cot p is undefined.
b.  sin 270° = sin 3p>2 = -1 csc 270° = csc 3p>2 = -1
 cos 270° = cos 3p>2 = 0 sec 270° = sec 3p>2 is undefined.
 tan 270° = tan 3p>2 is undefined  cot 270° = cot 3p>2 = 0
3. a. cos 1830° = 13
2   b. sin 31p
3
= 13
2   4. Quadrant II
5. sin u = -  4141
41 , sec u = 141
5
  6. a. 5°  b. p
3  
c. 3p - 8.22 ≈1.20  7. cos 60° = 0.5
8. a. csc 1035° = - 12  b. cot 17p
6
= - 13  9. 101.4 m
10. sin t = -  1
2, cos t = -  13
2 , tan t = 13
3

	
Section 5.3    ■    Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle 511
Exercises
section 5.3 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 For a point P1x, y2 on the terminal side of an angle u  
in standard position, we let r = 
. Then  
sin u =  
, cos u =  
, and 
tan u = 
. 
	 2.	 If P = 1x, y2 is on the terminal side of a quadrantal angle, 
then either x or y equals 
.
	 3.	 The reference angle u′ for a nonquadrantal angle u in stan-
dard position is the acute angle formed by the terminal side 
of u and the 
.
	 4.	 If u1 and u2 are coterminal angles, then sin u1 
 sin u2.
	 5.	 True or False. The value of a trigonometric function depends 
on the choice of the point P1x, y2 on the terminal side of 
u. 
	 6.	 True or False. In each quadrant, cosine and cosecant are 
both positive or both negative. 
In Exercises 7–22, the terminal side of U in standard  
position contains the given point. Find the values of the  
six trigonometric functions of U.
	 7.	 1-3, 42 
	 8.	 14, -32 
	 9.	 15, 122 
	10.	 1-12, 52 
	11.	 17, 242 
	12.	 1-24, 72 
	13.	 1-24, -72 
	14.	 1-7, 242 
	15.	 11, 12 
	16.	 1-3, -32 
	17.	 112, 122 
	18.	 1-3, 132 
	19.	 113, -12 
	20.	 1113, 132 
	21.	 15, -22 
	22.	 1-3, 52 
In Exercises 23–44, find the exact value of each quadrantal 
angle. If any are not defined, write undefined.
	23.	 sin 450° 
	24.	 cos 450° 
	25.	 cos1-90°2 
	26.	 sin1-90°2 
	27.	 tan 450° 
	28.	 cot 540° 
	29.	 tan1-540°2 
	30.	 sec 1080° 
	31.	 csc 900° 
	32.	 csc 1080° 
	33.	 sin1-1530°2 
	34.	 cos1-2610°2 
	35.	 cos15p2 
	36.	 sin13p2 
	37.	 tan14p2 
	38.	 cot a7p
2 b 
	39.	 csc 5p
2 
	40.	 sec17p2 
	41.	 sin1-2p2 
	42.	 cos1-5p2 
	43.	 cos a- 3p
2 b 
	44.	 sin a- p
2 b 
In Exercises 45–52, use the given information to find the 
quadrant in which U lies.
	45.	 sin u 6 0 and cos u 6 0
	46.	 sin u 6 0 and tan u 7 0
	47.	 sin u 7 0 and cos u 6 0
	48.	 tan u 7 0 and csc u 6 0
	49.	 cos u 7 0 and csc u 6 0
	50.	 cos u 6 0 and cot u 7 0
	51.	 sec u 6 0 and csc u 7 0
	52.	 sec u 6 0 and tan u 7 0
	53.	 Find the value of x assuming that the point 1x, -52 is on the 
	
	 terminal side of u in quadrant III and sin u = - 5
13. 
	54.	 Repeat Exercise 53 assuming that u lies in quadrant IV. 
	55.	 Find the value of y assuming that the point 17, y2 is on the
	
	 terminal side of u in quadrant I and cos u = 7
25. 
	56.	 Repeat Exercise 55 assuming that u lies in quadrant IV. 
In Exercises 57–64, find the exact values of the remaining 
trigonometric functions of U from the given information.
	57.	 cos u = -  5
13, u in quadrant III 
	58.	 tan u = -  3
4, u in quadrant IV 
	59.	 cot u = -  3
4, u in quadrant II 
	60.	 sec u =
4
27
, u in quadrant IV 
	61.	 sin u = 3
5, tan u 6 0 
	62.	 cot u = 3
2, sec u 7 0 
	63.	 sec u = 3, sin u 6 0 
	64.	 tan u = -2, sin u 7 0 
In Exercises 65–80, find the exact values of each expression.
	65.	 sin 1470° 
	66.	 cos 1860° 
	67.	 tan 1125° 
	68.	 sec 2190°  
	69.	 csc12130°2 
	70.	 sec11410°2    
	71.	 tan1690°2 
	72.	 cot12100°2 
	73.	 sin a13p
3 b 
	74.	 cos a19p
3 b 
	75.	 cos a29p
6 b 
	76.	 sin a31p
6 b 
	77.	 tan a37p
4 b 
	78.	 cot a35p
4 b 
	79.	 sec a29p
3 b 
	80.	 csc a43p
6 b         

512	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
In Exercises 81–86, find the value of sine, cosine, and tangent 
at each real number s in three ways (see Example 10).
	81.	 s = 2p
3 
	82.	 s = 3p
4 
	83.	 s = 11p
6 
	84.	 s = 4p
3 
	85.	 s = 5p
4 
	86.	 s = 5p
3 
Applying the Concepts
	87.	 A safety chain. A piece of heavy equipment has two  
8-foot metal arms that make a V with the horizontal plane 
and form an angle of 120° at their base. A contractor wants  
to put a chain from the top of one arm to the top of the  
other for safety. See the figure. How long must the  
chain be? 
8
8
Safety chain
120
	88.	 Removing a buoy. A crane is situated on the edge of a 
sheer cliff. It has a 12-foot arm that makes an angle of 120° 
with the horizontal and drops a hook straight down to a metal 
buoy that must be pulled from the water. See the figure. How 
far is the center of the buoy from the cliff? 
12 ft
120
In Exercises 89–96, use the following discussion.
Projectile Motion
Suppose a projectile is launched from the origin into the first 
quadrant with an initial velocity V0 feet per second at an 
angle U with the horizontal (see figure). If the only force act-
ing on the projectile is the force of gravity (with acceleration, 
gE = 32 ft,sec2), then the equation of motion is given by the 
following:
 y = x tan u - 16 sec2 u
v0
2
 x2
 Maximum height H = 1
64 1v0 sin u22
 Time of flight t = v0 sin u
16
 Horizontal range R = v0
2 sin u cos u
16
θ
P(x, y)
R
H
	89.	 Golf. A golf ball is hit with an initial velocity of 44 ft>sec 
with an angle u = 30°. Find H, t, and R. 
	90.	 Repeat Exercise 89 assuming that u = 45°. 
	91.	 Repeat Exercise 89 assuming that u = 60°. 
	92.	 Repeat Exercise 89 assuming that u = 90°. 
	93.	 Football. A football is kicked with an initial velocity of 
80 ft>sec with an angle u = 45°.
a.	 Write the equation of motion of the ball. 
b.	 What is the height of the ball at the point 100 feet from the 
origin? 
	94.	 Find the maximum height attained by the football in 
Exercise 93. 
	95.	 Find the time of flight for the ball in Exercise 93. 
	96.	 Find the range of the ball in Exercise 93. 
	97.	 Light refraction. A fish swimming d feet below the sur-
face is viewed from a line of sight that makes an angle of u 
degrees from the vertical. Because the light is refracted by the 
water, the fish appears to be A feet below the surface, where
A =
3d cos u
27 + 9 cos2 u
.
	
	 What is the apparent depth of a fish swimming 2 feet below the 
surface when viewed at an angle of 60° from the vertical? 
	98.	 Sound levels. The decibel level, D, of a sound directed 
eastward is measured 3 yards 
from the source. If the ray from 
the sound source through a point 
3 yards away makes an angle u 
with an eastward ray from the 
source point, then
D = 25 + 15 cos u.
3

Source
East
North

	
Section 5.3    ■    Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle 513
	
	 Find the decibel level at a point 3 yards from the sound 
source assuming that
a.	 The point is due east of the sound source. 
b.	 The point is due west of the sound source. 
c.	 The point is due south of the sound source. 
	 99.	 Height of a kite. A kite is flying at the end of 100 feet of 
string that is in a taut straight line. The height, h, of the kite 
is given by h = 100 sin u, where u is the angle the string 
makes with the ground. Find the kite’s height assuming that
a.	 u = 30°. 
b.	 u = 60°.
	100.	 Household voltage. The voltage in a common household 
electrical outlet is given by V = 166 cos1120pt2, where V 
is measured in volts ({ indicates direction) and t in sec-
onds. Find the voltage when t is
a.	
1
120 sec.
b.	 1
60 sec.
c.	 1
72 sec.
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 101–104, use the figure to find a triangle con-
gruent to triangle POM that justifies the statements in each 
exercise.
x
y
y
1
1
1
1
S(x, y)
P(x, y)
R(x, y)
N(x, 0)
M(x, 0)
Q(x, y)

O
	101.	 sin1-u2 = -sin u, cos1-u2 = cos u, and tan1-u2 = -tan u
	102.	 sin 1180° - u2 = sin u, cos 1180° - u2 = -cos u, 
and tan 1180° - u2 = -tan u 
	103.	 sin 1180° + u2 = -sin u, cos 1180° + u2 = -cos u, 
and tan 1180° + u2 =  tan u 
	104.	 sin 1360° - u2 = -sin u, cos 1360° - u2 = cos u, 
and tan 1360° - u2 = -tan u 
In Exercises 105–108, use the results of Exercises 101–104.
	105.	 Find sin 1-45°2 and tan 1-60°2.
	106.	 Find sin 135°, cos 135°, and tan 120°.
	107.	 Find sin 225°, cos 240°, and tan 210°.
	108.	 Find sin 315°, cos 300°, and tan 330° 
	109.	 Show that for any angle u, -1 … sin u … 1 and 
-1 … cos u … 1.
	110.	 In the figure, show that triangles POM and QON are congruent.
a.	 Find coordinates of the point Q. 
b.	 Show that sin 1u + 90°2 = cos u, 
cos 1u + 90°2 = -sin u, and tan 1u + 90°2 = -cot  u.
r
P(x, y)
M
N 
Q
O

90  
x2  y2  r2
	111.	 In triangle ABC, find the value of tan 1A + B2 + tan C. 
	112.	 What is the smallest positive value for sec u? 
In Exercises 113–116, without evaluating the functions, 
explain why each statement is false.
	113.	 cos 105° = cos 60° + cos 45°
	114.	 sin 260° = 2 sin 130°
	115.	 tan 123° = tan 61° + tan 62°
	116.	 sec 380° = sec 185° + sec 195°
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	117.	 True or False. cos 1sin u°2° = sin 1cos u°2°. Explain.
	118.	 True or False. sec u° 7 tan u° for every angle u in the 
domain. Explain.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 119–122, find the zeros of each function.
	119.	 f1x2 = 3x - 4 
	120.	 g1x2 = 2x + 3 
	121.	 g1x2 = x2 + 3x - 10
	122.	 g1x2 = x2 - 2x - 3
x - 4
In Exercises 123–128, determine whether each function is 
even, odd, or neither.
	123.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 4x 
	124.	 g1x2 = 21 - x2 
	125.	 h1x2 = x3 - x2 
	126.	 p1x2 = 2
3 x5 
	127.	 g1x2 = 3x4 + 2x2 - 17
	128.	 f1x2 = 5x + 3 
           

514	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Properties of Sine and Cosine
We first discuss some properties of the sine and cosine functions that will be useful in 
sketching the graphs of these functions.
Domain and Range of Sine and Cosine
Each real number t determines a terminal point P1t2 = 1x, y2 on the unit circle.  
Because x = cos t and y = sin t, both functions are defined for each real number t. So the  
domain of both the cosine and sine functions in interval notation is the set of real numbers 
1- ∞, ∞2.
For each real number t, the point P1t2 = 1cos t, sin t2 lies on the unit circle x2 + y2 = 1. 
Substituting x = cos t and y = sin t in the equation, we have the Pythagorean identity:
1cos t22 + 1sin t22 = 1 for every real number t.
Biorhythms
Biorhythm means “rhythm of life.” The theory of biorhythms, a pseudoscience, was 
developed from the data of several patients in the early twentieth century by Professor 
Hermann Swoboda (University of Vienna) and Dr. Wilhelm Fliess, a friend of Sigmund 
Freud. According to the theory, every person has three fundamental biorhythm cycles. 
All cycles start on a person’s day of birth, and each cycle has a fixed period.
1.	 Physical cycle 1P2 has a period of 23 days. It governs the condition of one’s body.
2.	 Emotional cycle 1E2 has a period of 28 days. It describes one’s temperament.
3.	 Intellectual cycle 1I2 has a period of 33 days. It influences one’s thinking capacity.
The periodic functions P, E, and I can each be represented in the form y = sin1Bt2; they 
are said to determine our biorhythm state on any day, t, since our birth. We experience 
a “high” or “low” in the corresponding cycle (physical, emotional, or intellectual) on 
the day if the curve is above or below the midline. We discuss this in Example 5.
Graphs of the Sine  
and Cosine Functions
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Equation of a circle (Section 2.2,  
page 171)
2	 Transformations of functions  
(Section 2.7, page 251)
3	 Unit circle definitions of the sine and 
cosine (Section 5.3, page 508)
Objectives
1	 Discuss properties of the sine and  
cosine functions.
2	 Graph the sine and cosine functions.
3	 Find the amplitude and period of  
sinusoidal functions.
4	 Find the phase shifts and graph  
sinusoidal functions of the forms 
 y = a sin3b1x - c24 and 
 y = a cos3b1x - c24.
S e c t i o n 5.4
1	
Discuss properties of the sine 
and cosine functions.
Physical biorhythms
Emotional biorhythms
Intellectual biorhythms

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 515
Because 1cos t22 and 1sin t22 are both nonnegative, we have
1cos t22 … 1 and 1sin t22 … 1.
These equations imply that the values of both cos t and sin t lie between -1 and 1. That is,
 cos t … 1 and  sin t … 1, or
-1 … cos t … 1 and -1 … sin t … 1 for every number t.
Furthermore, let c be a real number in the interval 3-1, 14. Then c is the x-coordinate of 
some terminal point P1t2 = 1cos t, sin t2 on the unit circle. See Figure 5.48. So c = cos t. 
This shows that the interval 3-1, 14 is the range of the cosine function. A similar argument 
shows that the interval 3-1, 14 is also the range of the sine function.
D o m a i n  a n d  R a n g e  o f  S i n e  a n d  C o s i n e
The domain of both the sine and cosine functions is 1- ∞, ∞2.
The range of both the sine and cosine functions is 3-1, 14.
Zeros of Sine and Cosine Functions
We know that cos t = 0 precisely when the terminal point P1t2 = 1cos t, sin t2 lies on the 
y-axis. This happens when t = p
2, -p
2, 3p
2 , -3p
2 , c; in other words, when t is an odd 
integer multiple of p
2. That is, the zeros of cos t are given by
t = 12n + 12 p
2 = p
2 + np for any integer n.
Similarly, sin t = 0 only if the terminal point P1t2 = 1cos t, sin t2 lies on the x-axis. This 
occurs when t = 0, p, -p, 2p, -2p, c; that is, when t is an integer multiple of p. So 
the zeros of sin t are given by
t = np for any integer n.
Even-Odd Properties
Let P1x, y2 be the terminal point on the unit circle associated with a real number t. Then 
from Figure 5.49 we see that the point Q1x, -y2 is the terminal point associated with the 
number -t. Then
 cos1-t2 = x = cos t and
 sin1-t2 = -y = -sin t.
Because sin1-t2 = -sin t, the sine function is an odd function; so its graph is symmetric 
about the origin. Similarly, because cos1-t2 = cos t, the cosine function is an even 
function; so its graph is symmetric about the y-axis.
See Exercise 101 in Section 5.3.
Periodic Functions
A function f  is said to be periodic if there is a positive number p such that
f 1x + p2 = f 1x2
for every x in the domain of f.
The smallest value of p (if there is one) for which f1x + p2 = f1x2 is called the  
period of f. The graph of f over any interval of length p is called one cycle of the graph.
Periodic Functions
Figure 5.48 
(1, 0)
y
x
0
t
c
P(t)  (cos t, sin t)
Figure 5.49 
1
y
x
0
t
t
P (x, y)
Q (x, y)

516	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
We note that the values of a periodic function f of period p repeat themselves every p units. 
This means that to graph f, we may draw only one cycle of the graph of f, because the rest 
of the graph is generated by repeated copies of it.
Figure 5.50 shows examples of periodic functions.
Figure 5.50  Periodic functions
0
x
y
1
Period  2
(a)
Period  p
(b)
Period  4
(c)
3
3 2 1
0
y

2

2
0
x
y
2
4
6
6 4
8
x
2
Let P1x, y2 be a point on the unit circle that corresponds to an angle t, measured in  
radians. If we add 2p to t, we obtain the same point P on the unit circle. See Figure 5.51. 
Then sin1t + 2p2 = sin t = y and cos1t + 2p2 = cos t = x. Therefore, sin t and cos t  
are periodic functions. The period for each of the sine and cosine functions is 2p. See 
Exercise 86.
Figure 5.51 
x
y
P(x, y)
(1, 0)
t  2
t
P e r i o d  o f  t h e  S i n e  a n d  C o s i n e  F u n c t i o n s
For every real number t,
sin1t + 2p2 = sin t and cos1t + 2p2 = cos t.
The sine and cosine functions are periodic with period 2P.
2	
Graph the sine and cosine 
functions.
We summarize the properties of the sine and cosine functions.
P r o p e r t i e s  o f  S i n e  a n d  C o s i n e
	
y = sin t
1.	 Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
2.	 Range: 3-1, 14
3.	 Zeros at t = np, n is any integer
4.	 Odd function: sin1-t2 = -sin t
5.	 Period: 2p
	
	
y = cos t
1.	 Domain: 1- ∞,  ∞2
2.	 Range: 3-1, 14
3.	 Zeros at t = p
2 + np, n is any integer
4.	 Even function: cos1-t2 = cos t
5.	 Period: 2p
Graphs of Sine and Cosine Functions
To graph the sine and cosine functions on an xy-coordinate plane, we use x as the indepen-
dent variable and y as the dependent variable. So we write y = sin x and y = cos x rather 
than y = sin t and y = cos t, respectively.
In calculus, it can be shown that the trigonometric functions are continuous on their 
domains. That is, they are continuous wherever they are defined.

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 517
Graph of the Sine Function
To sketch the graph of one cycle of y = sin x on the interval 30, 2p4, we use Table 5.3. 
This table consists of values of y = sin x for common values of x. In other words, x is a 
real number that is the radian measure of a common angle. Because the common angles 
x (in radians) are expressed in multiples of p, we mark off the x-axis in multiples of p. 
However, the range of y = sin x is between -1 (minimum value) and 1 (maximum value). 
We mark off the y-axis in integers.
Table 5.3 
x
0
p
6
p
4
p
3
p
2
2p
3
3p
4
5p
6
p
7p
6
5p
4
4p
3
3p
2
5p
3
7p
4
11p
6
2p
sin x
0
1
2
1
12
13
2
1
13
2
1
12
1
2
0
-1
2
- 1
12
- 13
2
-1
- 13
2
- 1
12
-1
2
0
Connecting the points 1x, sin x2 in Table 5.3 with a smooth curve gives us the graph in 
Figure 5.52.We have used the points 1x, sin x2 where x is a multiple of p
4  or p
6. In 
Figure 5.52 note that for the arc length p
6, shown on the unit circle, the y-value for the 
corresponding terminal point P ap
6 b is 1
2; so the point ap
6, 1
2b is on the graph of y = sin x.
Figure 5.52  y 5 sin x, 0 " x " 2P
y
x
y
0
y  sin x
x
6

6

4

3

2
4

3

2

4
3p
4
3p
4
5p
2
3p
2p
2
(     , 0)

(  , 0)

4
7p
2
3p

(0, 0)
(1, 0)
Unit Circle
           
4 ,
5p
1
2
         
4 ,
3p
1
2
       
6 ,

1
2
1
2
         
4 ,

1
2
         
3 ,

2
3
      
2 ,

1
           
4 ,
7p
1
2
        
2 ,
3p
1

1
1
p
p
Because the sine function is periodic with period 2p, we can sketch the complete graph 
of y = sin x by extending the graph in Figure 5.52 indefinitely to the left and to the right 
in every successive interval of length 2p. See Figure 5.53.
Figure 5.53  The sine curve
y  sin x
1
y
1
2



x
2
3
 2
3
2
5
2

2


518	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Graph of the Cosine Function
We can use the same method for graphing y = cos x that we used for y = sin x.
Table 5.4 gives the values for y = cos x, where x has the same values as in Table 5.3.
Table 5.4 
x
0
p
6
p
4
p
3
p
2
2p
3
3p
4
5p
6
p
7p
6
5p
4
4p
3
3p
2
5p
3
7p
4
11p
6
2p
cos x
1
13
2
1
12
1
2
0
-1
2
- 1
12
- 13
2
-1
- 13
2
- 1
12
-1
2
0
1
2
1
12
13
2
1
Connecting the points 1x, cos x2 in Table 5.4 with a smooth curve gives the graph of 
 y = cos x, 0 … x … 2p, shown in Figure 5.54. In Figure 5.54 note that for the arc length p
6, 
shown on the unit circle, the x-value for the corresponding terminal point P ap
6 b is 13
2 ; so 
the point ap
6, 13
2 b is on the graph of y = cos x.
Figure 5.54  y 5 cos x, 0 " x " 2P
y
x
(1, 0)
4
3
2
4
3p
2
(     , 1)

(  , 1)
2
3p
4
5p
4
7p
2p
(0, 1)
           
4 ,
3p
1
2
           
4 ,
5p
1
2
       
3
2
, 1
         
6 ,
2
3
2
3
         
4 ,
1
2
      
2 , 0
y
y  cos x
x
6 4 3
2
4
3p
4
5p
2
3p
2p
4
7p
          
4 ,
7p
1
2
       
2 ,
3p
0
1
p
p
p
p
6
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
Unit Circle
As with the sine function, the values of x for y = cos x are not restricted because the 
domain of the cosine function is 1- ∞, ∞2. We can draw the complete graph of y = cos x 
by extending the graph in Figure 5.54 indefinitely to the left and right in every successive 
interval of length 2p. See Figure 5.55.
Figure 5.55  The cosine curve
y  cos x
2
1
y
1
2



x
2
3
 2
3
2

2

Five Key Points
There are five key points in every cycle of the graphs of the sine and cosine functions. The 
key points consist of the x-intercepts, high points, and low points. See Figure 5.56. The key 
points are very helpful for graphing the sine and cosine functions and their transformations. 
Note that the x-coordinates of the five key points divide the period into four equal intervals.

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 519
Amplitude and Period
The graphs of the sine and cosine functions and their transformations are called sinusoi-
dal graphs or sinusoidal curves. In this section, we study sinusoidal curves of the form 
y = af 3b1x - c24 + d, where f  is a sine or cosine function. We first consider transfor-
mations of the form y = af 1bx2.
We start with the effect of the multiplier a in y = af 1bx2. If the maximum (or mini-
mum) value of f 1x2 is M and a 7 0, then the maximum (or minimum) value of af 1x2is 
aM. For example, the maximum value of y = 3 sin x is 3112 = 3 and its minimum value 
is 31-12 = -3. If the graph of y = f 1x2 is “centered” about the x-axis, then the maxi-
mum value of f 1x2 is the amplitude of f 1x2. In general, we have the following definition 
of the amplitude of a periodic function.
Figure 5.56  Key points of the sine and cosine graphs
1
1
(0, 0)
x
y
(  , 0)

(2  , 0)

2
1
,

2
3 ,
 1
high point
ysin x, 0  x  2
low point
x-intercepts
x-intercept
1
(0, 1)
x
y
(  , 1)

(2  , 1)

2
0
,

2
3 ,
 0
high point
ycos x, 0  x  2
low point
x-intercepts
3	
Find the amplitude and period 
of sinusoidal functions.
If a function f does not have both 
a maximum and a minimum value, 
we say that f has no amplitude or 
that its amplitude is undefined.
Side  
Note
Let f be a periodic function. Suppose M is the maximum value of f and m is the 
minimum value of f. The amplitude of f is defined by
Amplitude = 1
2
 1M - m2.
Amplitude
Because the maximum value of both functions y = a sin x and y = a cos x is  a and their 
minimum value is -  a, the amplitude of both functions is 1
23 a - 1-  a24 =  a.
A m p l i t u d e s  o f  S i n e  a n d  C o s i n e
The functions y = a sin x and y = a cos x have amplitude =  a and  
range = 3-  a,  a4.
Graph y = sin x, y = 3 sin x, and y = 1
3 sin x on the same coordinate system over the 
interval 3-2p, 2p4.
Solution
We begin with the graph of y = sin x and multiply the y-coordinate of each point (includ-
ing the key points) on this graph by 3 to get the graph of y = 3 sin x. This results in stretch-
ing the graph of y = sin x vertically by a factor of 3. Because 3102 = 0, the x-intercepts 
Graphing y = a sin x
EXAMPLE 1

520	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
are unchanged. However, the maximum y value is 3112 = 3 and the minimum y value is 
31-12 = -3. See Figure 5.57. Similarly, we multiply the y-coordinate on the graph by 1
3 
to get the graph of y = 1
3 sin x. This results in compressing the graph of y = sin x vertically 
by a factor of 1
3. As before, the x-intercepts are unchanged, but here the maximum y value 
is 1
3 and the minimum y value is -1
3. See Figure 5.57.
Figure 5.57  Varying a in y = a sin x
y     sin x
1
3

2

−2

2

−


3
–3
–2
–1
1
2
3
y  sin x
y  3sin x
2
2

2

−
x
y
3
Practice Problem 1  Graph y = sin x, y = 5 sin x, and y = 1
5 sin x on the same 
coordinate system over the interval 3-2p, 2p4.
Graph y = -2 cos x over the interval 3-2p, 2p4. Find the amplitude and range of the 
function.
Solution
Begin with the graph of y = cos x. Multiply the y-coordinate of each point on that graph 
by 2 to stretch the graph vertically by a factor of 2 to get the graph of y = 2 cos x. Pay 
particular attention to the key points. Notice that the x-intercepts are unchanged. Next,  
reflect the graph of y = 2 cos x about the x-axis to produce the graph of y = -2 cos x.  
See Figure 5.58. The amplitude is  -2 = 2, the maximum value attained by y = -2 cos x. 
the minimum function value attained is -2. Therefore, the range of y = -2 cos x is 3-2, 24.
Graphing y = a cos x
EXAMPLE 2
y  2 cos x
y  2 cos x
2
1
2
y
1
2
(0, 2)
(, 2)
2

x
2
3
 2
3
2
2




Figure 5.58  Graph of y = -2 cos x

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 521
Practice Problem 2  Graph y = 5 cos x over the interval 3-2p, 2p4. Find the  
amplitude and range of the function.
Both the sine and cosine functions have period 2p. For b 7 0, 0 … bx … 2p is 
equivalent to 0 … x … 2p
b . Therefore, as x takes on the values from 0 to 2p
b , the expression 
bx takes on the values from 0 to 2p.
The graphs of y = sin bx and y = cos bx have similar shapes to those of y = sin x 
and y = cos x, respectively, but they are compressed or expanded horizontally so that 
they complete one cycle over any interval of length 2p
b . Consequently, the functions 
y = sin bx and y = cos bx both have period 2p
b . When b 6 0, we can use the facts that 
sin1-x2 = -sin x and cos1-x2 = cos x to rewrite the given function with b 7 0. For 
example, y = sin1-3x2 = -sin 3x.
Sketch one cycle of the graphs of y = sin x, y = sin 3x, and y = sin 1
3 x on the same 
coordinate system.
Solution
We begin with the graph of y = sin x and adjust its period, 2p, by dividing 2p by 3 to 
find the period 2p
3  of y = sin 3x. We then compress the graph of y = sin x horizontally 
so that one cycle of y = sin 3x is completed on the interval c 0, 2p
3 d . Divide the interval 
0 … x … 2p
3  into four equal parts to find the x-coordinates for the key points: 0, p
6, p
3, p
2  
and 2p
3 . Because the amplitude is 1, the y values of the key points are unchanged. 
See Figure 5.59.
Similarly, to find the period of y = sin 1
3 x, we divide 2p by 1
3, resulting in 2p
1
3
= 6p. 
Therefore, one cycle for y = sin 1
3 x is completed on the interval 30, 6p4. Divide the 
interval 0 … x … 6p into four equal parts to get the x-coordinates for the key points: 
0, 3p
2 , 3p, 9p
2 , and 6p. Again, the y values of the key points are unchanged. See Figure 5.59.
Graphing y = sin bx
EXAMPLE 3
Figure 5.59  Horizontally compressing or expanding the graph of y = sin x
3
y
x
1
1
y  sin    x
1
3
y  sin 3x
y  sin x

2
3
2
9
6
2
3
2
2

3

6

2
9
(   , 1)
2
3
(   , 1)
2
(  , 1)
6
(  , 1)

522	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Practice Problem 3  Sketch one cycle of the graphs of y = sin x and y = sin 1
2 x 
on the same coordinate system.
The next box summarizes information used to graph y = a sin bx and y = a cos bx.
C h a n g i n g  t h e  A m p l i t u d e  a n d  P e r i o d  
o f  t h e  S i n e  a n d  C o s i n e  F u n c t i o n s
The functions y = a sin bx and y = a cos bx 1b 7 02 have amplitude  a and period 
2p
b . If a 7 0, the graphs of y = a sin bx and y = a cos bx are similar to the graphs of 
y = sin x and y = cos x, respectively, with three changes.
1.	 The range is 3-a, a4.
2.	 One cycle is completed over the interval c 0, 2p
b d .
3.	 The x-coordinates for the key points are 0, p
2b, p
b, 3p
2b, and 2p
b . The y-values at each 
	
of these numbers is one of -a, 0, or a.
a
a
a
a
b
2
b

b
3
2

b
2

b

b
3
2

b
2

b
2
x
y
b
2
period  
b
2
period  
amplitude  a
amplitude  a
x
y
0
0
y = a sin bx 1a 7 02	
y = a cos bx 1a 7 02
If a 6 0, the graphs are the reflections of the graph of y =  asin bx and 
y =  acos bx, respectively, about the x-axis.
If b 6 0, first use even–odd properties to rewrite the equation and then graph the 
function. See page 515.
Graph y = 3 cos 1
2 x over a one-period interval.
Solution
We begin with the graph of y = cos x and find the period of y = cos 1
2 x by dividing
2p by 1
2 to get
2p , 1
2 = 4p    Replace b with 1
2 in 2p
b .
The period of y = cos 1
2 x is 4p. So the graph of y = cos 1
2 x is obtained by horizontally 
stretching the graph of y = cos x by a factor of 2.
Next, we multiply the y-coordinate of each point on the graph of y = cos 1
2 x by 3 to 
stretch this graph vertically by a factor of 3. To help sketch the graphs, divide the period, 
Graphing y = a cos bx
EXAMPLE 4
To graph y = 3 cos 1
2 x with a 
graphing calculator, choose radian 
mode and these WINDOW settings:
	
X min = 0
	
X max = 4p
	
X scl = p/2
	
Y min = -4
	
Y max = 4
	
Y scl = 1
4
0
4
4

Technology 
Connection

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 523
4p, into four equal parts, starting at 0, to find the x-coordinates for the key points. These 
x-coordinates—0, p, 2p, 3p, and 4p—correspond to the highest points, the lowest point, 
and the x-intercepts of the graph. The key points on the graph are 10, 32, 1p, 02, 12p, -32,   
 13p, 02 and 14p, 32. See Figure 5.60. The graph can then be extended indefinitely to the 
left and right. The amplitude is 3, so the maximum value of y is 3. The range is 3-3, 34.
Figure 5.60  One cycle of y = 3 cos 1
2 x 
3

3
2
1
1
2
3
1
4 period
high point
high point
low point
x-intercepts
1
4 period
1
4 period
1
4 period
y  3 cos    x
1
2
2
4
2
3
2

x
y
Practice Problem 4  Graph y = 2 cos 2x over a one-period interval.
Biorhythm States
The periods for physical 1P2, emotional 1E2, and intellectual 1I2 states are 23, 28, and 33 
days, respectively. So your biorhythm states on the tth day since birth are given by
P = sin a2p
23  tb, E = sin a2p
28  tb, and I = sin a2p
33  tb.
To calculate t on a given day, use the formula:
t = 1your age213652 + 1number of leap years since your birth year2
+ 1number of days since your last birthday2.
Find the biorhythm states of Lisa on May 22, 2012, assuming that she was born on March 13, 
1993.
Solution
We first calculate t.
Number of years from March 13, 1993 to March 13, 2012 = 2012 - 1993 = 19.
Number of leap years = 511996, 2000, 2004, 2008, 20122
Number of days from = 181March2 + 301April2 + 221May2 = 70
March 13 to May 22
So t = 119213652 + 5 + 70 = 7010
P = sin a2p
23  tb = sin a
2p170102
23
b ≈-0.98
E = sin a2p
28  tb = sin a
2p170102
28
b ≈0.78
I = sin a2p
33  tb = sin a
2p170102
33
b ≈0.46
Lisa’s physical state is way down, her emotional state is excellent, and her intellectual state 
is good.
Practice Problem 5  Find your biorhythm states today.
Finding Biorhythm States
EXAMPLE 5
    Substitute t = 7010 in each  
equation; use a calculator in  
radian mode.

524	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Phase Shift
We now consider sinusoidal graphs with horizontal shifts.
4	
Find the phase shifts and 
graph sinusoidal functions of 
the forms y = a sin3b1x - c24 
and y = a cos3b1x - c24.
Graph y = sin ax - p
2 b over a one-period interval.
Solution
Recall that for any function f, the graph of y = f 1x - c2 is the graph of y = f 1x2 shifted 
right c units if c 7 0 and left  c units if c 6 0. Comparing the equation y = sin ax - p
2 b 
with y = sin x, we see that y = sin ax - p
2 b has the form y = sin1x - c2, where c = p
2. 
Therefore, the graph of y = sin ax - p
2 b is the graph of y = sin x shifted right p
2  units. 
See Figure 5.61.
Practice Problem 6  Graph y = cos ax - p
4 b over a one-period interval.
Before describing the general procedure for graphing the sinusoidal functions 
y = a sin3b1x - c24 and y = a cos3b1x - c24, with b 7 0, we find the value of x for 
which b1x - c2 = 0. This number is called the phase shift. Let
 b1x - c2 = 0
 x - c = 0    Divide both sides by b.
 x = c    Add c to both sides.
The phase shift gives the amount by which the graphs of y = a sin bx or y = a cos bx are 
shifted horizontally. These graphs are shifted right if c 7 0 and left if c 6 0. To graph a 
cycle of either function, we start the cycle at x = c and then divide the period into four 
equal parts. We describe this procedure next.
Graphing y = a sin1x −c2
EXAMPLE 6
Figure 5.61  Graph of 
y = sin ax - p
2 b
5
2

1
1
0
y  sin (x  
2)
y  sin x
2
2
3
2




x
y
Graph a function of the form y = a sin 3b1x −c2 4 
or y = a cos 3b1x −c2 4, with b 7 0, by finding the 
amplitude, period, and phase shift.
Step 1 Find the amplitude, period, and phase shift.
amplitude =  a
period = 2p
b
phase shift = c
If c 7 0, shift to the right.
If c 6 0, shift to the left.
Find the amplitude, period, and phase shift and 
sketch the graph of y = 3 sin c 2 ax - p
4 b d  over 
a one-period interval.
1.	y = 3 sin c 2 ax - p
4 b d
c	 	
c	
c
a = 3, b = 2,	
p
4 = c
amplitude =  3 = 3
period = 2p
2
= p
phase shift = p
4	
Shift right because p
4 7 0.
Graphing y = a sin3b 1x −c2 4 and y = a cos3b 1x −c2 4 with b + 0
Objective
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 7
Example
(continued)

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 525
Step 2 The cycle begins at x = c. One complete 
cycle occurs over the interval c c, c + 2p
b d .
Step 3 Divide the interval c c, c + 2p
b d  into 
four equal parts, each of length 
1
41period2 = 1
4
 a2p
b b = p
2b. This gives the 
x-coordinates for the five key points:
c, c + p
2b, c + 2 a p
2bb = c + p
b,
c + 3 a p
2bb, and c + 4 a p
2bb = c + 2p
b .
Step 4 If a 7 0, for y = a sin 3b1x −c2 4, sketch  
one cycle of the sine curve through the key points
1c, 02, ac + p
2b, ab, ac + p
b, 0b, 
ac + 3p
2b, -ab, and ac + 2p
b , 0b.
For y = a cos 3b1x −c2 4, sketch one cycle of the 
cosine curve through the key points
1c, a2, ac + p
2b, 0b, ac + p
b, -ab, 
ac + 3p
2b, 0b, and ac + 2p
b , ab.
If a 6 0, reflect the graph of 
y =  a sin3b1x - c24 or 
y =  a cos3b1x - c24 about the x-axis.
2.	Begin the cycle at x = p
4 and graph one cycle over
	
c p
4, p
4 + pd = c p
4, 5p
4 d .
3.	Divide the interval c p
4, 5p
4 d  into four equal parts 
	
each having length 1
4 1period2 = 1
41p2 = p
4.
	
The x-coordinates of the five key points are
	
p
4, p
4 + p
4 = p
2, p
4 + 2 ap
4 b = 3p
4 ,
	
p
4 + 3 ap
4 b = p, and p
4 + 4 ap
4 b = 5p
4 .
4.	Sketch one cycle of the sine curve through the five 
	
key points: ap
4, 0b, ap
2, 3b, a3p
4 , 0b, 1p, -32, 
	
and a5p
4 , 0b.
5
4
4
1
3
3
4
3
(   , 3)
(   , 0)
2
4
(     , 0)
4
5(     , 0)
2
4
x
y
4

y  3 sin[2(x     )]
Practice Problem 7  Find the amplitude, period, and phase shift and sketch the graph  
of the function
y = 1
3 cosc 2
5 ax + p
6 b d .
Graphing when b * 0 The equations sin1-x2 = -sin x and cos1-x2 = cos x  
allow us to graph y = a sin3b1x - c24 and y = a cos3b1x - c24 when b 6 0. For 
example, to graph y = 3 sinc 1-22ax - p
2 b d , we rewrite and graph the equation 
y = -3 sinc 2 ax - p
2 b d .
Graph y = -cosc 2 ax + p
2 b d  over a one-period interval.
Graphing y = a cos3b1x −c2 4
EXAMPLE 8

526	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Solution
Use the steps in Example 7 for the procedure for graphing y = a cos3b1x - c24.
Step 1  Here y = -cos c 2 ax + p
2 b d = 1-12 cos c 2 ax - a -p
2 b b d
	
	
	
c	
c	
c
	
	
	
a = -1 b = 2      -p
2 = c
	
	
amplitude =  a =  -1 = 1  period = 2p
b
= 2p
2
= p
	
	
phase shift = c = -p
2    Shift left because c 6 0.
Step 2  The cycle begins at x = -p
2.
	
	
One cycle is graphed over the interval c -p
2, -p
2 + pd = c -p
2, p
2 d .
Step 3  1
41period2 = 1
41p2 = p
4
	
	
The x-coordinates of the five key points are
	
	
starting point = -p
2,  -p
2 + p
4 = -p
4,  -p
2 + 2 ap
4 b = 0, 
	
	
-p
2 + 3p
4
= p
4,  and  -p
2 + 4 ap
4 b = p
2.
Step 4  Because a = -1 6 0, we first graph y =  -1 cosc 2 ax + p
2 b d  by 
	
	
sketching one cycle, beginning at a -p
2, 1b and going through the points 
	
	
a -p
4, 0b, 10, -12, ap
4, 0b, and ap
2, 1b. We then reflect this graph about 
	
	
the x-axis to obtain the graph of y = -cosc 2 ax + p
2 b d . See Figure 5.62.
Practice Problem 8  Graph y = -2 cos331x + p24 over a one-period interval.
To graph the function of the form y = a sin 1bx −k2 or y = a cos 1bx −k2, with 
b 7 0, we first note that
bx - k = b ax - k
bb    Factor out b.
Consequently, to graph these functions, we rewrite their equations.
 y = a sin1bx - k2 = a sinc b ax - k
bb d
 y = a cos1bx - k2 = a cosc b ax - k
bb d
We can then use the procedures for graphing the functions of the form y = a sin3b1x - c24 
and y = a cos3b1x - c24 by letting k
b = c.
To graph y = -cosc 2 ax + p
2 b d  
with a graphing calculator, choose 
radian mode and enter these  
WINDOW settings:
	
X min = -p/2
	
X max = p/2
	
X scl = p/4
	
Y min = -2
	
Y max = 2
	
Y scl = 1
Technology 
Connection
2
2
2
1
, 1
2
2 )
(
2
)
(
2
)
)
(
(
, 1
2 )
)
(
(
2
4
4
2
2
]
]
x
y
Figure 5.62 

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 527
Find the period and the phase shift of each function.
a.	 y = 2 cos a3x - p
2 b
b.	 y = 3 sin1px + 22
Solution
a.	 y = 2 cos a3x - p
2 b	
	
The given function
 = 2 cosc 3ax - p
6 b d 	
Rewrite using the distributive property.
	
c	
c	
c
	
	
a	
b	
c	
Compare with y = a cos3b1x - c24.
	
Period = 2p
b
= 2p
3     Phase shift = c = p
6
b.	 y = 3 sin1px + 22	
	
The given function
	
y = 3 sinc pax - a - 2
pb b d 	
Rewrite using the distributive property.
	
	
c	
c	
c
	
	
a	
b	
c
	
Period = 2p
b
= 2p
p = 2	
Phase shift = c = - 2
p
Practice Problem 9  Find the period and the phase shift of each function.
a.	 y = 3 sin a2x + p
4 b        b.   y = cos1px -12
Finding the Period and Phase Shift
EXAMPLE 9
Graph y = 3 sin a2x - p
2 b over a one-period interval.
Solution
Because 2x - p
2 = 2 ax - p
4 b, we can write y = 3 sin a2x - p
2 b = 3 sinc 2 ax - p
4 b d . 
This is the sinusoidal curve we graphed in Example 7 to show the procedure for graphing 
the functions y = a sin3b1x - c24 and y = a cos3b1x - c24. The graph is shown again 
in Figure 5.63.
Practice Problem 10  Graph y = 2 cos13x - p2 over a one-period interval.
Vertical Shifts
Recall that the graph of y = f 1x2 + d results from shifting the graph of y = f 1x2 verti-
cally d units up if d 7 0 and  d units down if d 6 0. The next example shows this effect 
on a sinusoidal graph.
Graphing y = a sin1bx −k2
EXAMPLE 10
Figure 5.63 
5
1
3
2)
2
4
3
4
4
x
y

528	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Graph y = cos c 2 ax + p
2 b d + 3 over a one-period interval.
Solution
In Example 8, we graphed the function y = cos c 2 ax + p
2 b d  in order to graph 
y = -cos c 2 ax + p
2 b d . To graph y = cos c 2 ax + p
2 b d + 3, shift the graph of 
y = cos c 2 ax + p
2 b d , up 3 units. See Figure 5.64.
Graphing y = a cos 3b1x −c24 + d
EXAMPLE 11
Figure 5.64  Graph of y = cosc 2 ax + p
2 b d + 3
1
2

1
3
4
y  cos[2(x  
2)]
2

4

4

2

x
y
y  cos[2(x  
 3

2)]
Practice Problem 11  Graph y = 4 sin a3x - p
3 b - 2 over a one-period interval.
Table 5.5 gives the average number of daylight hours in Paris each month. Let y rep-
resent the number of daylight hours in Paris in month x to find a function of the form 
y = a sin3b1x - c24 + d that models the hours of daylight throughout the year.
Solution
Plot the values given in Table 5.5, representing the months by the integers 1 through 12 
(Jan. = 1, c, Dec. = 12). Then sketch a function of the form y = a sin3b1x - c24 + d 
that models the points just graphed. See Figure 5.65.
Modeling the Number of Daylight Hours in Paris
EXAMPLE 12
Table 5.5 
Daylight hours in Paris
January
  8.8
February
10.2
March
11.9
April
13.7
May
15.3
June
16.1
July
15.7
August
14.3
September
12.6
October
10.8
November
  9.2
December
  8.3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
8.3
12.2
16.1
Month
Daylight hours
x
y
Figure 5.65  Hours of daylight in Paris each month

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 529
We want to find the values for the constants a, b, c, and d that will produce the graph shown 
in Figure 5.65. From Table 5.5, the range of the function is 38.3, 16.14; so
Amplitude = a = highest value - lowest value
2
= 116.1 - 8.32
2
= 3.9.
The sine graph has been shifted vertically up by 1
2 (highest value + lowest value), the 
average of the highest and lowest values. Thus, this average value gives
d = 1
2 116.1 + 8.32 = 12.2.
The weather repeats every 12 months, so the period is 12. Because the period = 2p
b , we write
12 = 2p
b 	
Replace “period” with 12.
b = 2p
12 = p
6     Solve for b.
So far, we can write y = 3.9 sinc ap
6 b 1x - c2 d + 12.2. The horizontally “unshifted” 
graph of y = 3.9 sin ap
6 xb + 12.2 is superimposed on Figure 5.65 in Figure 5.65A. This 
graph must be shifted to the right to fit the plotted data. To determine the phase shift, find 
the value of c when y has the maximum value. This value is y = 16.1 when x = 6 (in 
June), so we now have
16.1 = 3.9 sin c ap
6 b 16 - c2d + 12.2    Replace x with 6 and y with 16.1.
1 = sin c ap
6 b 16 - c2 d 	
Subtract 12.2 from both sides and 
divide by 3.9.
Now sin c ap
6 b 16 - c2d  will first equal 1 when the argument of sine is p
2. So
p
6 16 - c2 = p
2     sin t = 1 when t = p
2.
c = 3	
Solve for c.
The equation describing the hours of daylight in Paris in month x is
y = 3.9 sinc p
6  1x - 32d + 12.2.
Practice Problem 12  Rework Example 12 for the city of Fargo, North Dakota,  
using the values given in Table 5.6
Simple Harmonic Motion
Trigonometric functions can often describe or model motion caused by vibration, rotation, 
or oscillation. The motions associated with sound waves, radio waves, alternating electric 
current, a vibrating guitar string, or the swing of a pendulum are examples of such motion. 
Another example is the movement of a ball suspended by a spring. If the ball is pulled 
y  3.9 sin
 12.2
x

6
2
4
6
8
10 12
8.3
12.2
16.1
Month
Daylight Hours
x
y
Figure 5.65A 
Table 5.6 
Daylight hours in Fargo
January
  9
February
10.3
March
11.9
April
13.6
May
15.1
June
15.8
July
15.4
August
14.2
September
12.5
October
10.9
November
  9.4
December
  8.6

530	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
downward and then released (ignoring the effects of friction and air resistance), the ball 
will repeatedly move up and down past its rest, or equilibrium, position. See Figure 5.66.
Rest position
Rest position
Distance
above
the rest
position
Distance below
the rest position
time
Figure 5.66  Simple harmonic motion
If the distance above and below the rest position of the ball is graphed as a function of 
time, a sine or a cosine curve results. The amplitude of the curve is the maximum distance 
above the rest position the ball travels, and one cycle is completed as the ball travels from 
its highest position to its lowest position and back to its highest position.
An object whose position relative to an equilibrium position at time t can be described 
by either
y = a sin vt or y = a cos vt 1v 7 02
is in simple harmonic motion.
The amplitude,  a, is the maximum distance the object travels from its 
equilibrium position. The period of the motion, 2p
v , is the time it takes the object 
to complete one full cycle. The frequency of the motion is v
2p and gives the 
number of cycles completed per unit of time.
Simple Harmonic Motion
Suppose a ball attached to a spring is pulled down 6 inches and released and the resulting 
simple harmonic motion has a period of eight seconds. Write an equation for the ball’s 
simple harmonic motion.
Solution
We must first choose between an equation of the form y = a sin vt or y = a cos vt. We 
start tracking the motion of the ball when t = 0. Note that for t = 0,
Simple Harmonic Motion of a Ball Attached to a Spring
EXAMPLE 13
y = a sin1v # 02 = a # sin 0 = a # 0 = 0
and
y = a cos1v # 02 = a # cos 0 = a # 1 = a.

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 531
If we choose to start tracking the ball’s motion when we release it after pulling it down  
6 inches, we should choose a = -6 and y = -6 cos vt. Because we pulled the ball down 
in order to start, a is negative. We now have the form of the equation of motion.
 y = -6 cos vt    When t = 0, y = -6.
 period = 2p
v = 8     The period is given as eight seconds.
 v = 2p
8
= p
4     Solve for v.
Replacing v with p
4  in y = -6 cos vt yields the equation of the ball’s simple harmonic 
motion:
y = -6 cos p
4 t
Practice Problem 13  Rework Example 13 with a period of three seconds and the  
ball pulled down 4 inches and released.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 
5
1
3
5
2

2

y  5 sin x
y  sin x
y     sin x
1
5
x
y
2. 
5
3
1
3
1
5
2

2

y  5 cos x
x
y
Amplitude = 5; range = 3-5, 54
3. 
1
0.5
0.5
1
y  sin x
y  sin     x
1
2
2
3
4

x
y
4. 
2
2

y  2 cos 2x
x
y
4

2

3
4

5. Answers will vary.
6. 
1
1
4
4
3
5
4



7
4

9
4

y  cos (x     )
4

x
y
7. Amplitude = 1
3; period = 5p; phase shift = - p
6
y      cos      x 
3
1
3
1
5
2
6

0.5
,
3
5



4
2
2
3
4
5
 x
y

3
1
, 
3
1
,
0
,
6

        
3
7
         
6

         
12
13
29

        
0
,
12
43
        
8. 
2
2
y  2 cos    3(x  )
3
2
3

x
y

532	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
9. a. Period = p; phase shift = - p
8
b. Period = 2; phase shift = 1
p
10. 
2
2
y  2 cos (3x     )
 
3
2
3


x
y
11. 
6
2
2
9
4
9


9
7
3

y  4 sin (3x     )  2
x
y
12. 
2
4
6
8
10 12
8
10
12
14
16
18
x
y
y  3.6 sin       (x  3)   12.2

6
13. y = -4 cos 2p
3  t
Exercises
section 5.4
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The lowest point on the graph of y = cos x, 0 … x … 2p, 
occurs when x =
.
	 2.	 The highest point on the graph of y = sin x, 0 … x … 2p, 
occurs when x =
. 
	 3.	 The range of the cosine function is 
.
	 4.	 The maximum value of y = -2 sin x is 
.
	 5.	 True or False. The amplitude of y = -3 cos x is -3. 
	 6.	 True or False. The range of y = sin 3x is 3-3, 34. 
	 7.	 True or False. The period of y = 7 cos 2x is p. 
	 8.	 True or False. The x-coordinate of the first key point for 
	
	 y = sin ax + p
2 b is - p
2. 
In Exercises 9–28, sketch the graph of each given equation 
over the interval 3−2P, 2P4.
	 9.	 y = 2 sin x 
	10.	 y = 4 cos x 
	11.	 y = - 1
2 sin x 
	12.	 y = -2 sin x 
	13.	 y = 3
2 cos x 
	14.	 y = 5
4 sin x 
	15.	 y = cos 2x 
	16.	 y = sin 4x 
	17.	 y = cos 2
3 x 
	18.	 y = sin 4
3 x 
	19.	 y = cos ax + p
2 b 
	20.	 y = sin ax + p
4 b 
	21.	 y = cos ax - p
3 b 
	22.	 y = sin1x - p2 
	23.	 y = 2 cos ax - p
2 b 
	24.	 y = 2 sin ax + p
3 b 
	25.	 y = sin x + 1 
	26.	 y = cos x - 2 
	27.	 y = -cos x + 1 
	28.	 y = sin x - 3 
In Exercises 29–36, find the amplitude, period, and phase 
shift of each given function.
	29.	 y = 5 cos1x - p2 
	30.	 y = 3 sin ax - p
8 b 
	31.	 y = 7 cosc 9 ax + p
6 b d 
	32.	 y = 11 sinc 8 ax + p
3 b d 
	33.	 y = -6 cosc 1
2 1x + 22d 
	34.	 y = -8 sinc 1
51x + 92d 
	35.	 y = 0.9 sinc 0.25 ax - p
4 b d 
	36.	 y = 15 cos3p1x + 124 

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 533
In Exercises 37–44, write an equation of the form 
y = a sin3b1x − c2 4 with the given amplitude, period, and 
phase shift.
Amplitude
Period
Phase shift
37.
1
4
p
8
p
16
38.
2
p
6
p
10
39.
6
3p
- p
4
40.
1
2
6p
- p
2
41.
2.4
6
3
42.
0.8
10
2
43.
p
2
5
8
- 1
4
44.
2
p
2
3
- 1
6
In Exercises 45–52, graph each function over a one-period 
interval.
	45.	 y = -4 cos ax + p
6 b 
	46.	 y = -3 sin ax - p
6 b 
	47.	 y = 5
2 sinc 2 ax - p
4 b d 
	48.	 y = 3
2 cosc 2 ax + p
3 b d 
	49.	 y = -5 cosc 4 ax - p
6 b d 
	50.	 y = -3 sinc 4 ax + p
6 b d 
	51.	 y = 1
2 sinc 4 ax + p
4 b d + 2 
	52.	 y = - 1
2 cosc 2 ax - p
2 b d - 3 
In Exercises 53–62, write each function in the form 
y = a sin3b1x −c2 4 or y = a cos3b1x −c2 4. Find each 
period and phase shift.
	53.	 y = 4 cos a2x + p
3 b 
	54.	 y = 5 sin a3x + p
2 b 
	55.	 y = - 3
2 sin12x - p2 
	56.	 y = -2 cos a5x - p
4 b 
	57.	 y = 3 cos px 
	58.	 y = sin px
3 
	59.	 y = 1
2 cos apx
4
+ p
4 b 
	60.	 y = -sin apx
6
+ p
6 b 
	61.	 y = 2 sin1px + 32 
	62.	 y = -cos apx - 1
4b 
Applying the Concepts
	63.	 Biorhythm. Find the biorhythm states of Tina on April 1,  
2011, assuming that she was born on July 22, 1990. 
	64.	 Biorhythm. Find the biorhythm states of Dave on  
August 12, 2012, assuming that he was born on  
March 31, 1991. 
	65.	 Pulse and blood pressure. Blood pressure is given by 
	
	 two numbers written as a fraction: systolic
diastolic. The systolic 
	
	 reading is the maximum pressure in an artery, and the  
diastolic reading is the minimum pressure in an artery.  
As the heart beats, the systolic measurement is taken;  
when the heart rests, the diastolic measurement is taken. 
	
	 A reading of 120
80  is considered normal. Your pulse is the 
	
	 number of heartbeats per minute. Suppose Desmond’s blood 
pressure after t minutes is given by
p1t2 = 20 sin1140pt2 + 122,
	
	 where p1t2 is the pressure in millimeters of mercury.
a.	 Find the period and explain how it relates to pulse. 
b.	 Graph the function p over one period. 
c.	 What is Desmond’s blood pressure? 
	66.	 Electrical circuit voltage. The voltage V1t2 in an electrical 
circuit is given by V1t2 = 4.5 cos1160pt2, where t is  
measured in seconds.
a.	 Find the amplitude and the period for V1t2. 
b.	 Find the frequency of V1t2, that is, the number of cycles 
completed in one second. 
c.	 Graph V1t2 over the interval c 0, 1
40 d . 
d.	 Use a graphing calculator to verify your graph.
	67.	 Voltage of an electrical outlet. The voltage across the 
terminals of a typical electrical outlet is approximated by 
V1t2 = 156 sin1120pt2, where t is measured in seconds.
a.	 Find the amplitude and the period for V1t2. 
b.	 Find the frequency of V1t2, that is, the number of cycles 
completed in one second. 
c.	 Graph V1t2 over the interval c 0, 1
30 d . 
d.	 Use a graphing calculator to verify your graph.
	68.	 Oscillating ball. Suppose a ball attached to a spring is 
pulled down 5 inches and released and the resulting simple 
harmonic motion has a period of ten seconds. Write an equa-
tion of the ball’s simple harmonic motion. 
	69.	 Kangaroo population. The kangaroo population in a  
certain region is given by the function
N1t2 = 650 + 150 sin 2t,
	
	 where the time t is measured in years.
a.	 What is the largest number of kangaroos present in the 
region at any time? 
b.	 What is the smallest number of kangaroos present in the 
region at any time? 
c.	 How much time elapses between occurrences of the maximum 
and the minimum kangaroo population? 

534	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
	70.	 Lion and deer populations. The number of deer in a 
	
	 region is given by D1t2 = 450 sin a3t
5 b + 1200, where t is 
	
	 in years and the number of lions in that same region is given 
	
	 by L1t2 = 225 sinc 2
5 1t - 22d + 500, where t is in years.
a.	 Graph both functions on the same coordinate plane for 
0 … t … 10. 
b.	 What can you say about the relationship between these 
populations based on the graphs obtained in (a)? 
c.	 Use a graphing calculator to verify your graph.
	71.	 Daylight hours in London. The table gives the average 
number of daylight hours in London each month, where 
x = 1 represents January. Let y represent the number of day-
light hours in London in month x. Find a function of the form 
y = a sin3b1x - c24 + d that models the hours of daylight 
throughout the year. 
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
8.4
10
11.9
13.9
15.6
16.6
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
16.1
14.6
12.6
10.7
8.9
7.9
	72.	 Daylight hours in Washington, D.C. The table gives the 
average number of daylight hours in Washington, D.C., each 
month, where x = 1 represents January. Let y represent the 
number of daylight hours in Washington, D.C., in month x. 
Find a function of the form y = a sin3b1x - c24 + d that 
models the hours of daylight throughout the year.
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
9.8
10.8
12
13.2
14.3
14.8
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
14.6
13.6
12.4
11.2
10.1
9.5
In Exercises 73 and 74, use the table of average monthly 
temperatures (where Jan = 1, N , Dec = 12) to find a 
function of the form y = a sin 3b1x −c2 4 + d that models 
the temperature in the given city. The four seasons of the year 
match remarkably well with the quarter periods of the sine 
function. Because the temperatures repeat each year, the 
period is 12 months; so b = 2P
12 = P
6 . The amplitude 
a = 1
2 1high temperature −low temperature2, and the 
vertical shift d = 1
2 1high temperature + low temperature2. 
Because the maximum value a of an unshifted sine curve 
with period 12 occurs at 1
41122 = 3 units from the start 
of the cycle, you can find c by solving the equation 
c = hottest month −3.
	73.	 Average temperatures. The monthly average temperatures 
for Augusta, Maine, are given in the table.
Month
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
°F
19
22
31
43
54
63
70
67
59
48
37
24
Source: www.weatherbase.com
a.	 Find a function of the form y = a sin3b1x - c24 + d that 
models these temperatures. 
b.	 Graph the ordered pairs and the function on the same 
coordinate system. 
c.	 Compute the function values for January, April, July, and 
October and compare them with the table values for these 
months. 
d.	 Use a graphing calculator to verify your graph.
	74.	 Average temperatures. The monthly average tempera-
tures for Nashville, Tennessee, are given in the table.
Month
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
°F
40
45
53
63
71
79
83
81
74
63
52
44
Source: www.weatherbase.com
a.	 Find a function of the form y = a sin3b1x - c24 + d that 
models these temperatures. 
b.	 Graph the ordered pairs and the function on the same 
coordinate system. 
c.	 Compute the function values for January, April, July, and 
October and compare them to the table values for these 
months. 
d.	 Use a graphing calculator to verify your graph.
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 75–84, graph each equation over the interval 
30, 2P4.
	75.	 y = 3 sin a-x + p
4 b 
	76.	 y = -2 sin a-2x + p
3 b 
	77.	 y = 2 cos a-3x + p
2 b + 2 
	78.	 y = -3 cos a- x
p + 1
2b + 3 
	79.	 y = sin x 
	80.	 y = cos x 
	81.	 y = x sin x 
	82.	 y = x cos x 
	83.	 y = 1x sin x 
	84.	 y = x sin x 
	85.	 Graph the equations y = x2, y = -x2, and y = x2 sin x on 
the same coordinate plane. 
	86.	 We know that sin1x + 2p2 = sin x for all real numbers x.  
Consequently, if 2p is not the period for the sine function, 
then sin1x + p2 = sin x for some real number p, with 
0 6 p 6 2p, and all real numbers x.
a.	 By evaluating sin1x + p2 = sin x for x = 0, show that if 
the period is not 2p, then p = p.
b.	 Find a value of x for which sin1x + p2 ≠sin x and  
conclude that the period of the sine function is 2p.
In Exercises 87–94, write an equation for each sinusoidal graph.
	87.	
x
O
y
(, 3)
(0, 3)
4
, 0
4
3, 0
2
,3
  

	
Section 5.4    ■    Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 535
	 88.	
2
x
O
y
2
3
4 , 2
2 , 0
4 , 2
(0, 0)



(   , 0)

 
	 89.	
2
x
O
y
2
3
8 , 2
4 , 0
2 , 0
8 , 2




 
	 90.	
2
x
O
y
2
2
3 , 2
6 , 0
2 , 0
3 , 2
(0, 2 )




 
	 91.	
3
3
x
O
y
(   , 3)

4
, 0
4
3, 0
4
5, 0
2
, 3
 
	 92.	
2
x
O
y
2
3
4 , 2
2 , 0
4 , 2
(0, 0)

4 , 2




 
	 93.	
x
O
, 2
8

, 0
8

5
8 , 2

7
8 , 0

3
8 , 0

2
y
2

	
	
	 94. 
3
3
x
O
y
2
, 0
4
5, 3
4
 , 3
4
3, 3
(   , 0)

Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	 95.	 Suppose a function of the form y = a sin3b1x - c24 + d, 
with a 7 0, has period = 20.
a.	 In a one-period interval, how many units are between the 
value of x at which the maximum value is attained and the 
value of x at which the minimum value is attained? 
b.	 In a one-period interval, how many units are between the 
value of x at which y has value d and the value of x at 
which the maximum value is attained? 
	 96.	 Suppose the minimum value of a function of the form 
y = a cos3b1x - c24 + d,  with a 7 0, occurs at a value of 
x that is 5 units from the value of x at which the function has 
the maximum value. What is the period of the function? 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 97–100, find the equation of each line in  
slope–intercept form.
	 97.	 Passing through the point 12, -32 with slope 5 
	 98.	 Passing through the points 1-3, 22 and (1, 4) 
	 99.	 Passing through the point 1-3, 42 and parallel to the line 
2x + 4y = 5  
	100.	 Passing through the point 13, -12 and perpendicular to the 
line 3x + 6y = 7 
In Exercises 101–104, find the x-intercepts and the vertical 
asymptotes of the graph of each function.
	101.	 f1x2 =
1x + 121x - 22
1x + 221x - 32 
	102.	 f1x2 = x2 - 3x - 10
x2 - 2x - 3 
	103.	 f1x2 = x2 + 6x + 8
x2 + 1 
	104.	 f1x2 =
1
x2 - 5x - 14 
In Exercises 105–112, let f1x2 = x3 −2x and 
g1x2 = 3x2 + 1. State whether each function is even,  
odd, or neither.
	105.	 f1x2 
	106.	 g1x2 
	107.	 f1x2 + g1x2 
	108.	 f1x2g1x2 
	109.	
f1x2
g1x2 
	110.	
g1x2
f1x2 
	111.	
1
f1x2 
	112.	
1
g1x2 
 

536	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
S E C T I O N
The U.S.S. Enterprise and Mach Numbers
Star Trek fans probably know quite a bit about the warp speeds attainable by the 
Starfleet's USS Enterprise. Near Earth, Mach numbers provide a more relevant measure 
of speed.
The Mach number (named after the Austrian physicist Ernst Mach) is the 
ratio of the speed of the aircraft to the speed of sound. For example, an aircraft travel-
ing at Mach 2 is traveling at twice the speed of sound. An airplane flying at less than the 
speed of sound is traveling at subsonic speed; at the speed of sound (Mach 1), the plane 
is traveling at transonic speed; at speeds greater than the speed of sound, it is traveling at 
supersonic speeds; and at speeds greater than 5 times the speed of sound, it is traveling at 
hypersonic speeds. In Example 5, we see how at supersonic and hypersonic speeds Mach 
numbers are given as values of the cosecant function and we graph a range of Mach num-
bers that are attainable by various military aircraft.
Graphs of the Other  
Trigonometric Functions
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Vertical asymptotes (Section 3.6, page 357)
2	 Transformations of functions (Section 2.7, 
page 251)
Objectives
1	 Discuss properties of the tangent function.
2	 Graph the tangent function.
3	 Graph the cosecant, secant, and cotangent 
functions.
5.5
1	
Discuss properties of the 
tangent function.
Tangent Function
Recall that if P1x, y2 is a point on the terminal side of an angle u in standard position, then 
(see Figure 5.67)
tan u = y
x
 .
Because the point 10, 02 is on the line OP, the slope of the line OP is y - 0
x - 0 = y
x = tan u. 
Because parallel lines have equal slopes (see page 185), we have the following geometric 
interpretation of the tangent of an angle:
y
x
O
u
P(x, y)
Figure 5.67   
Ta n g e n t  a s  S l o p e
If a nonvertical line makes an angle u with the positive x-axis, then the slope m of the 
line is given by m = tan u.

	
Section 5.5    ■    Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 537
A line / makes an angle u = 60° with positive x-axis and passes through the point 
P = 17, 52. Find the equation of / in slope–intercept form.
Solution
The slope of the line / is m = tan 60° = 13 (page 491). Then
 y - 5 = 131x - 72
    Point–slope form: y - y1 = m1x - x12 
 y - 5 = 13x - 713
    Distributive property
 y = 13 x + 15 - 7132    Slope–intercept form: y = mx + b
Practice Problem 1  Repeat Example 1 with u = 30° and P = 12, 32.
Domain of tan x  From the quotient identity (page 488), we have
tan x = sin x
cos x
 .
The function y = tan x is defined for all real numbers x except where cos x = 0. Because 
cos x = 0 for x = p
2 + np for any integer n, the domain of tan x is all real numbers x with
x ≠p
2 + np or x ≠12n + 12p
2. In other words, tan x is undefined at x = {p
2 , {3p
2 , 
{5p
2 , c. The graph of y = tan x has a vertical asymptote at x = 12n + 12p
2  for every 
integer n.
Range of tan x  We note that the tangent of an angle u in standard position is the 
slope of the line containing the corresponding terminal side. Because every real number 
is the slope of some line through the origin, every number is the tangent of some angle in 
standard position. This means that the range of the tangent function is 1- ∞, ∞2.
Zeros of tan x  From tan x = sin x
cos x, we have tan x = 0 whenever sin x = 0. 
Because sin x = 0 for x = np for any integer n, the zeros of y = tan x are at x = np.
Period of tan x  The tangent function has period p. Figure 5.68 illustrates that 
tan 1t + p2 = tan t. Therefore, the values of the tangent function repeat every p units.
Even–Odd Property 
 We have  tan 1-x2 = sin 1-x2
cos1-x2    Quotient identity
 = -sin x
cos x
    Sine is odd, and cosine is even.
 = -tan x
    Quotient identity
So tan1-x2 = -tan x. Therefore, y = tan x is an odd function and its graph is symmetric 
about the origin.
Equation of a Line
EXAMPLE 1
t
t
t  
P(x, y)
Q(x, y)
0
tan (t     )                tan t

y
x
y
x


x
y
Figure 5.68  tan 1t + p2 = tan t

538	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Main Facts About the Tangent Function
Graph of y = tan x
We first summarize the main facts about y = tan x.
2	
Graph the tangent function.
As x approaches p
2, the values of tan x continue to increase; in fact, they increase in-
definitely. The decimal value of p
2  is approximately 1.5707963. When x = 89p
180 ≈1.55, 
tan x 7 57; when x = 1.57, tan x 7 1255; and when x = 1.5707, tan x 7 10,000. The
graph of y = tan x has a vertical asymptote at x = p
2. See Figure 5.69(a).
To graph the tangent, cotangent, 
secant, or cosecant function on a 
graphing calculator, use dot mode 
and appropriate window settings.
Technology
Connection
2
2
3
2
3
2

Y1 = tan x, dot mode
2
2
3
2
3
2

Y1 = tan x, connected mode
1
0
1
1
y  tan x
y  tan x
2

3

4

6

3

3

4

6

6

(a)


(b)
x
y
x
y
2



2

Figure 5.69  Graphing y = tan x
We can extend the graph of y = tan x to the interval a -p
2, p
2 b by using the fact that 
the graph is symmetric about the origin. See Figure 5.69(b).
Because the period of the tangent function is p and we have graphed y = tan x over an 
interval of length p, we can draw the complete graph of y = tan x by repeating the graph 
in Figure 5.69(b) indefinitely to the left and right, over intervals of length p. Figure 5.70 
shows three cycles of the graph of y = tan x.
y  tan x


x
y
 
2

2


2
3
2
3
Figure 5.70   
Table 5.7 
x
0
p
6
p
4
p
3
7p
18
4p
9
17p
36
y = tan x
0
0.6
1
1.7
2.7
5.7
11.4
To graph y = tan x, we use the approximate values of tan x for x in the interval c 0, p
2 b. 
See Table 5.7.
1.	 Domain: All real numbers except odd multiples of p
2
2.	 Range: 1- ∞, ∞2
3.	 Zeros or x-intercepts: All integer multiples of p or x = np
4.	 Period: p
5.	 Vertical Asymptotes: At x = odd integer multiples of p
2, or x = 12n + 12p
2
6.	 Symmetry: Odd function, so the graph is symmetric about the origin.

	
Section 5.5    ■    Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 539
Graphing y = a tan3b1x −c2 4  The procedure for graphing y = a tan3b1x - c24 
is based on the essential features of the graph of y = tan x.
Graphing y = a tan 1bx −k2
Objective
procedure 
in action
EXAMPLE 2
3.	The interval a0, p
2 b has length p
2, and 1
4
 ap
2 b = p
8. 
	
The division points of the interval a0, p
2 b are 
	
0 + p
8 = p
8, 0 + 2 ap
8 b = p
4, and 0 + 3 ap
8 b = 3p
8 .
4.	
Example
x
y = 3 tan 321x −P
4 2 4
p
8
-3
p
4
   0
3p
8
   3
3
2

4

4

(  , 3)
     )
8
3
( , 3)
0
8


2


x
2


2

y  3 tan(2x
5.	
Graph a function of the form y = a tan 1bx −k2, 
where b 7 0, by finding the period and phase shift.
Step 1 If necessary, rewrite the equation in the form
y = a tan3b1x - c24, c = k
b.
Find the following: 
vertical stretch factor =  a
period = p
b
phase shift = c
Step 2 Locate two adjacent vertical asymptotes by 
solving the following equations for x:
b1x - c2 = -p
2 and b1x - c2 = p
2.
Step 3 Divide the interval on the x-axis between the 
two vertical asymptotes from Step 2 into four equal
parts, each of length 1
4
 ap
b b.
Step 4 Evaluate the function at the three x values found 
in Step 3 that are the division points of the interval.
Step 5 Sketch the vertical asymptotes using the val-
ues found in Step 2. Connect the points in Step 4 with 
a smooth curve in the standard shape of a cycle for the 
tangent function. Repeat the graph to the left and right 
over intervals of length p
b.
Graph y = 3 tan a2x - p
2 b.
1.	y = 3 tan c 2 ax - p
4 b d     Rewrite.
	
	
c	
c	
c
	
a = 3	
b = 2	 c = p
4
	
vertical stretch factor =  a =  3 = 3
	
period = p
b = p
2  phase shift = c = p
4
2.	 2 ax - p
4 b = -p
2    2 ax - p
4 b = p
2
	
 x - p
4 = -p
4  
 x - p
4 = p
4
	
 x = -p
4 + p
4  
 x = p
4 + p
4
	
 x = 0  
 x = p
2

540	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
The fact that the tangent function is an odd function allows us to graph y = a tan3b1x - c24 
when b 6 0. For example, to graph y = 3 tanc 1-22ax - p
2 b d , we rewrite the equation as
y = -3 tanc 2 ax - p
2 b d . Graph y = 3 tan c 2 ax - p
2 b d  and reflect it about the x-axis.
Graphs of the Reciprocal Functions
The cosecant, secant, and cotangent functions are reciprocals of the sine, cosine, and tan-
gent functions, respectively. We first consider some relationships between the properties of 
any pair of these reciprocal functions. We use these relationships to sketch the graph of the 
reciprocal function of a trigonometric function g1x2.
Practice Problem 2  Graph y = -3 tan ax + p
4 b.
3	
Graph the cosecant, secant, 
and cotangent functions.
T h e  G r a p h  o f  t h e  R e c i p r o c a l  
o f  a  T r i g o n o m e t r i c  F u n c t i o n
Let f 1x2 be the reciprocal of g1x2: f 1x2 =
1
g1x2, where g is any trigonometric function.
•  Periodicity If g1x2 has period p, then f 1x2 also has period p.
•  Zeros If g1c2 = 0, then f 1c2 is undefined. So if c is an x-intercept of the graph of 
g, then the line x = c is a vertical asymptote of the graph of f. Conversely, if 
g1d2 is undefined, then f 1d2 = 0.
•  Even–Odd
a.  If g1x2 is odd, then f 1x2 is odd.
b.  If g1x2 is even, then f 1x2 is even.
•  Special Values
a.  If g1x12 = 1, then f 1x12 = 1. Both graphs pass through the point 1x1, 12.
b.  If g1x22 = -1, then f 1x22 = -1. Both graphs pass through the point 1x2, -12.
•  Sign
a.  If g1x2 7 0 on an interval 1a, b2, then f 1x2 7 0 on the interval 1a, b2. Both 
graphs are above the x-axis on the interval 1a, b2.
b.  If g1x2 6 0 on an interval 1c, d2, then f 1x2 6 0 on the interval 1c, d2. Both 
graphs are below the x-axis on the interval 1c, d2.
•  Increasing–Decreasing
a.  If g1x2 is increasing on an interval 1a, b2, then f 1x2 is decreasing on the  
interval 1a, b2.
b.  If g1x2 is decreasing on an interval 1c, d2, then f 1x2 is increasing on the  
interval 1c, d2.
•  Magnitude
a.  If  g1x2  is small, then  f 1x2  is large.
b.  If  g1x2  is large, then  f 1x2  is small. If c is in the domain of f  and  g1x2  is 
large as x approaches c, then f 1c2 = 0.
We use the properties of the reciprocal functions to sketch the graphs of the cosecant, 
secant, and cotangent functions from the graphs of the sine, cosine, and tangent func-
tions. Two or more cycles of these graphs along with their reciprocals are shown in the 
box on the next page.

	
Section 5.5    ■    Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 541
To sketch the graph of y = a cot1bx - k2, we use the steps that are similar to those 
used in Example 2.
P r o p e r t i e s  o f  t h e  C o s e c a n t,  S e c a n t,  a n d  C o ta n g e n t  F u n c t i o n s
y = csc x =
1
sin x
y = sec x =
1
cos x
y = cot x =
1
tan x
For any integer n:
Domain
All real numbers x ≠np
All real numbers x ≠p
2 + np
All real numbers x ≠np
Range
1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2
1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2
1- ∞, ∞2
Period
2p
2p
p
x-intercepts
No x-intercepts
No x-intercepts
x = p
2 + np
Even–Odd
Odd
Even
Odd
Vertical  
Asymptotes
x = np
x = p
2 + np
x = np
Graph y = -4 cot ax - p
2 b over the interval 3-p, 2p4.
Solution
Step 1	
For y = -4 cot ax - p
2 b, we have a = -4, b = 1, and c = k
b = p
2.
	
Therefore, the vertical stretch factor =  -4 = 4, the period = p
1 = p, and 
	
the phase shift = p
2.
Step 2	
Locate two adjacent asymptotes for a cotangent function. Solve the equations:
 x - p
2 = 0   and    x - p
2 = p.
 x = p
2  
 x = 3p
2
Graphing y = a cot 1bx −k2
EXAMPLE 3
y = csc x
y = sec x
y  cos x
2
2

x
y
1

1
y = cot x
y  tan x
2
4
6
8
x
2
2
y


2
6
4
8
1
1
y  sin x
x
y
2
2




Graph

542	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Graph y = 3 csc12x2 over a two-period interval.
Solution
Because csc 2x =
1
sin 2x, 3 csc 2x = 3 sin 2x when sin 2x = {1. So we first graph the
function y = 3 sin 2x.
We follow the steps for graphing a function of this type given in Section 5.4.
Step 1	
y = 3 sin 2x
	
amplitude = 3, period = 2p
2
= p; no phase shift because
	
c = k
b = 0
2 = 0
Step 2	
The starting point for the cycle is x = 0. One cycle is graphed over 30, p4.
Step 3	
1
4 (period) = 1
4 p = p
4
	
The x-coordinates of the five key points are
x = 0, x = p
4, x = 2 ap
4 b = p
2, x = 3 ap
4 b = 3p
4 , x = 4 ap
4 b = p.
Step 4	
Sketch the graph of y = 3 sin 2x through the key points 10, 02, ap
4, 3b, 
	
ap
2, 0b, a3p
4 , -3b, and 1p, 02. See the blue graph in Figure 5.72.
Graphing y = a csc 1bx −k2
EXAMPLE 4
Step 3	
The interval ap
2, 3p
2 b has length p, the period of the cotangent function. 
	
We have 1
41p2 = p
4; so the division points of the interval ap
2, 3p
2 b are
	
p
2 + p
4 = 3p
4 , p
2 + 2 ap
4 b = p, and p
2 + 3 ap
4 b = 5p
4 .
Step 4	
Evaluate the function at 3p
4 , p, and 5p
4 .
Step 5	
Sketch the vertical asymptotes at x = p
2  and x = 3p
2 . Draw the cycle for the
	
cotangent function through the three graph points found in Step 4. Repeat 
the graph to the left and right over intervals of length p. See Figure 5.71.
Practice Problem 3  Graph y = -3 cot ax + p
4 b over the interval a -3p
4 , 5p
4 b.
The procedures for graphing the functions
y = a csc 1bx −k2 and y = a sec 1bx −k2
rely on those steps previously described for the related sine and cosine functions (see 
Section 5.4).
x
y = −4  cot ax −P
2 b
3p
4
-4
p
   0
5p
4
   4
Figure 5.71  Graph of 
y = -4 cot  ax - p
2 b
x
y
4
3
(    , 4)
(    ,4)
4
5


2
3

2
0

2

2

y  4 cot (x     )
2


	
Section 5.5    ■    Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 543
(  , 3)
4
(  , 0)
2
x
y
4
3
0
(0, 0)
(   , 0)
3
4
5
4
3
4
4
2
2
2
3
Figure 5.72  Graph of y = 3 csc 2x
Step 5	
Use the graph from Step 4 to extend the graph to the interval a -p
2, 3p
2 b.
Now use the technique that generated the graph of y = csc x from that of y = sin x to 
graph y = 3 csc 2x. Start at the common graph points ap
4, 3b and a3p
4 , -3b; then use the 
reciprocal relationship y = 3 csc 2x = 3 a
1
sin 2xb. See the red graph in Figure 5.72.
Practice Problem 4  Graph y = 2 sec 3x over a two-period interval.
When a plane travels at supersonic and hypersonic speeds, small disturbances in the 
atmosphere are transmitted downstream within a cone. The cone intersects the ground. 
Figure 5.73 shows the edge of the cone’s intersection with the ground. The sound 
waves strike the edge of the cone at a right angle. The speed of the sound wave is 
represented by leg s of the right triangle in Figure 5.73. The plane is moving at speed 
v, which is represented by the hypotenuse of the right triangle in this figure.
The Mach number, M, is given by
M = M1x2 = speed of the aircraft
speed of sound
= v
s = csc ax
2b,
where x is the angle at the vertex of the cone. Graph the Mach number function, M1x2, as 
the angle at the vertex of the cone varies. What is the range of Mach numbers associated 
with the interval c p
4, pb?
Solution
Because csc x
2 =
1
sin x
2
, first graph y = sin x
2. For convenience, we have sketched the
graph of y = sin x
2 over the interval 30, 2p4 in Figure 5.74. The graph of y = csc x
2 is
sketched over the interval 10, 2p2 using the reciprocal relationship between the sine graph 
and the cosecant graph.
 For x = p
4,  y = csc x
2 = csc p
8 ≈2.6.
 For x = p,  y = csc x
2 = csc p
2 = 1.
Graphing a Range of Mach Numbers
EXAMPLE 5
Vertex
angle x
Direction
of motion
s
v
Figure 5.73  Sonic cone
1
2.6
x
2
x
2
(  , 2.6)
4
x
y
2
4
Figure 5.74  Mach numbers

544	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
The range of Mach numbers associated with the interval c p
4, pb is 11, 2.64.
Practice Problem 5  In Example 5, what is the range of Mach numbers associated 
with the interval c p
8, p
4 d ?
Answers to Practice Problems
1. y = 13
3  x + 3 - 213
3
2. 
0
10
10
x
y
2

2



3
2



3. 
0
10
10
y
2

2


5
4

3
4



    4. 
y  2 sec 3x
y  2 cos 3x
2
4
2
2
4
3

4
3


3

x
y
5. ≈32.6, 5.14
Exercises
section 5.5 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The tangent function has period 
.
	 2.	 The value of x with 0 … x … p for which the tangent  
function is undefined is 
.
	 3.	 If 0 … x … p and cot x = 0, then x =
.
	 4.	 The maximum value of y = csc x for p … x … 2p is 
.
In Exercises 5–8, find the slope–intercept form of the equation 
of each line that passes through the point P and makes angle 
U with the positive x-axis.
	 5.	 P = 1-2, 32, u = 45° 
	 6.	 P = 13, -12, u = 60° 
	 7.	 P = 1-3, -22, u = 120° 
	 8.	 P = 12, 52, u = 135° 
In Exercises 9–26, graph each function over a one-period 
interval.
	 9.	 y = tan ax - p
4 b 
	10.	 y = tan ax + p
4 b 
	11.	 y = cot ax + p
4 b 
	12.	 y = cot ax - p
4 b 
	13.	 y = tan 2x 
	14.	 y = tan x
2 
	15.	 y = cot x
2 
	16.	 y = cot 2x 
	17.	 y = -tan x 
	18.	 y = -cot x 
	19.	 y = 3 tan x 
	20.	 y = 3 cot x 
	21.	 y = sec 2x 
	22.	 y = sec x
2 
	23.	 y = csc 3x 
	24.	 y = csc x
3 
	25.	 y = sec1x -  p2 
	26.	 y = csc1x -  p2 
In Exercises 27–44, graph each function over a two-period 
interval.
	27.	 y = tan c 2 ax + p
2 b d 
	28.	 y = tan c 2 ax - p
2 b d 
	29.	 y = cot c 2 ax - p
2 b d 
	30.	 y = cot c 2 ax + p
2 b d 
	31.	 y = tan c 1
21x + 2p2d 
	32.	 y = tan c 1
21x - 2p2d 
	33.	 y = cot c 1
21x - 2p2d 
	34.	 y = cot c 1
21x + 2p2d 

	
Section 5.5    ■    Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 545
	35.	 y = sec c 4 ax - p
4 b d 
	36.	 y = sec c 1
2
 ax - p
2 b d 
	37.	 y = 3 csc ax + p
2 b 
	38.	 y = 3 sec c2 ax - p
6 bd 
	39.	 y = tan c 2
3
 ax - p
2 b d 
	40.	 y = 2 cot c2 ax - p
6 bd 
	41.	 y = -5 tan c 2 ax + p
3 b d
	42.	 y = -3 cot c 1
2
 ax - p
3 b d
43.	 y = 1
3 cot 321x - p24 
	44.	 y = 1
2 tan c 4 ax - p
6 b d 
Applying the Concepts
	45.	 Prison searchlight. A dual-beam rotating light on a movie 
set is positioned as a spotlight shining on a prison wall. The 
light is 20 feet from the wall and rotates clockwise. The light 
shines on point P on the wall when first turned on 1t = 02. 
After t seconds, the distance (in feet) from the beam on the 
wall to the point P is given by the function
d1t2 = 20 tan pt
5 .
20 ft
5
pt
P
d
	
	 When the light beam is to the right of P, the value of d is 
positive, and when the beam is to the left of P, the value of d 
is negative.
a.	 Graph d over the interval 0 … t … 5. 
b.	 Because d1t2 is undefined for t = 2.5, where is the rotating 
light pointing when t = 2.5?
	46.	 Prison searchlight. In Exercise 45, find the value for b 
assuming that the light beam is to sweep the entire wall in  
10 seconds and d1t2 = 20 tan bt. 
Modeling with Tangent Function. In Exercises 47 
and 48, model the given data by using the function 
y = a tan 3b1x −c2 4. Use your equation to find y when 
x = −1.5 and x = 1.5. Round your answers to two decimal 
places.
	47.	 	
	48.	 	
Modeling with Cotangent Function. In Exercises 49 
and 50, model the given data by using the function 
y = a cot 3b1x −c2 4.
	49.	 	
	50.	 	
	51.	 Modeling with Secant Function. Model the data by 
using the function y = a sec 3b1x - c24. Use your equation 
	
	 to find y when x = 1
3.
	52.	 Modeling with Cosecant Function. Model the data in 
Exercise 51 by using the function y = a csc 3b1x - c24.
Beyond the Basics
	53.	 Show that if f is a periodic function with period p, then the 
	
	 reciprocal function 1
f  is also a periodic function with period p.
	54.	 Show that if f is an odd function, then the reciprocal function 
	
	 1
f  is also an odd function.
	55.	 Show that if f is an even function, then the reciprocal function 1
f  
is also an even function.
In Exercises 56–65, graph each function over a two-period 
interval.
	56.	 y = 3 tan1-2x2 
	57.	 y = 2 cot1-3x2 
	58.	 y = -2 sec a- x
2b 
	59.	 y = -1
2 csc a- x
5b 
	60.	 y = cot1p - x2 
	61.	 y = -tan ap
2 - xb 
x
y
-5
undef. 1- ∞2
-3
-7
-1
  0
   1
  7
   3
undef. 1+ ∞2
x
y
  -3
undef. 1+ ∞2
-0.5
   6
2
   0
4.5
-6
7
undef. 1- ∞2
x
y
1
undef. 1+ ∞2
2
  2
3
  0
4
-2
5
undef. 1- ∞2
x
y
2
undef.1- ∞2
3.5
-3
5
   0
6.5
   3
8
undef. 1+ ∞2
x
y
-3
   2
-2
undef.
-1
-2
   0
undef.
   1
   2     

546	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
	62.	 y = -sec1p - 4x2 
	63.	 y = 2 sec1p - 2x2 
	64.	 y = 2 tan ap
2 - 2xb + 1 
	65.	 y = 4 cot1p - 4x2 + 3 
In Exercises 66–69, write an equation for each graph.
	66.	
(   , 5)
2
3
(   , 5)
2
5
x
y
2


3
 
	67.	
(   , 2)
4
3
(  , 2)
4

2

x
y

	68.	
2

1
2
3
4
5
x
y
4

	69.	
1
3
2
3
x
y
 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	70.	 For what number k, with -2p 6 k 6 0, is x = k a vertical 
	
	 asymptote for the graph of y = cot c 1
2 ax - p
4 b d ? 
	71.	 For what number b does y = sec bx have period p
3 ? 
	72.	 Write an equation in the form y = a csc 3b1x - c24 that has 
the same graph as y = -2 sec x.
Maintaining Skills
	73.	 Show that f1x2 = 3x + 7 is a one-to-one function.  
Find its inverse.
	74.	 Show that f1x2 = -2x + 5 is a one-to-one function.  
Find its inverse.
	75.	 True or false. Every increasing function on an interval 
1a, b2 is a one-to-one function. 
	76.	 True or false. Every decreasing function on an interval 
1a, b2 is a one-to-one function. 
	77.	 True or false. If f is a one-to-one function, then it has an 
inverse function. 
	78.	 True or false. For a one-to-one function, the graph of f -1 is 
the reflection of the graph of f about the line y = x. 
	79.	 Show that f1x2 = x2 is not one-to-one on its domain 
1- ∞, ∞2. Write a subinterval of the domain of f on which f 
is one-to-one. 
	80.	 Is f1x2 = sin x a one-to-one function on the interval 
3-p, p4? If your answer is no, find a subinterval on  
which f is one-to-one.
	81.	 Repeat Exercise 80 for f1x2 = cos x. 
	82.	 Repeat Exercise 80 for f1x2 = tan x.      

	
Section 5.6    ■    Inverse Trigonometric Functions 547
S e c t i o n 5.6
The Inverse Sine Function
Recall that a function f  has an inverse function if no horizontal line intersects the graph of 
f in more than one point. Because every horizontal line y = b, where -1 … b … 1, inter-
sects the graph of y = sin x at more than one point, the sine function fails the horizontal 
line test; so it is not one-to-one and consequently has no inverse.
The solid portion of the sine graph shown in Figure 5.75 is the graph of y = sin x for 
-p
2 … x … p
2. If we restrict the domain of y = sin x to the interval c -p
2, p
2 d , the 
resulting function
y = sin x, -p
2 … x … p
2
is one-to-one (it passes the horizontal line test); so it has an inverse. Notice that the restrict-
ed function takes on all values in the range of y = sin x, which is 3-1, 14, and that each 
of these y-values corresponds to exactly one x-value in the restricted domain c -p
2, p
2 d . 
The inverse function for y = sin x, -p
2 … x … p
2, is called the inverse sine, or arcsine, 
function and is denoted by sin−1 x, or by arcsin x.
Retail Theft
In 2005, security cameras at Filene’s Basement store in Boston filmed a theft coordinat-
ed by a thief and an accomplice. The accomplice distracted the salesperson so that the 
thief could steal a $16,000 necklace. Retail theft is a major concern for all retail outlets, 
from Tiffany & Co. to Walmart.
The National Retail Federation, the industry’s largest trade group, and the Retail 
Industry Leaders Association have instituted password-protected national crime data-
bases online. These databases allow retailers to share information about thefts and 
determine whether they have been a target of individual shoplifters who steal for 
themselves or a target of organized crime. In addition to participating in the shared da-
tabases, many large retailers have their own organized anticrime squads. One estimate 
puts loss to organized theft at over $30 billion annually. In Example 12, we see how 
methods in this section can be used in an attempt to prevent loss from theft.
Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Inverse functions (Section 2.9)
2	 Composition of functions (Section 2.8, 
page 260)
3	 Exact values of the trigonometric functions 
(Section 5.2, page 491)
Objectives
1	 Graph the inverse sine function.
2	 Graph the inverse cosine function.
3	 Graph the inverse tangent function.
4	 Evaluate inverse trigonometric functions.
5	 Find exact values of composite functions 
involving the inverse trigonometric  
functions.
1	
Graph the inverse sine 
function.
Figure 5.75   y = sin x, 
- p
2 … x … p
2



2
1
1

2

2
3

2


2
(   , 1)

2(   , 1)
(0, 0)
y  sin x
x
y

548	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Table 5.8 shows some exact values of y  a -p
2 … y … p
2 b that satisfy the equation 
sin y = x.
y = sin-1 x means sin y = x, where -1 … x … 1 and -p
2 … y … p
2.
Read y = sin-1 x as “y equals inverse sine at x.”
Inverse Sine Function
The range of y = sin x is 3-1, 14; so the domain of y = sin-1 x is 3-1, 14. The 
domain of the restricted sine function is c -p
2, p
2 d ; so the range of y = sin-1 x is c -p
2, p
2 d . 
Figure 5.76  Graph of y = sin-1 x
1
1
1
1



2

2

2

2
x
y
y  sin1 x
y  sin x
y  x

2
(1,   )

2(   , 1)

2
(1,    )


2
(    , 1)

Table 5.8 
y
x: sin y = x
-p
2
-1
-p
3
- 23
2
-p
4
- 22
2
-p
6
-1
2
0
0
p
6
1
2
p
4
22
2
p
3
23
2
p
2
1
The graphs of a function and its  
inverse function are symmetric 
about the line y = x.
Recall
Find the exact values of y.
a.	 y = sin-1 13
2         b.   y = arcsin a -1
2b        c.   y = sin-1 3
Solution
a.	 The equation y = sin-1 13
2  means sin y = 13
2  and -p
2 … y … p
2.
	
From Table 5.8, sin p
3 = 13
2   and 
-p
2 … p
3 … p
2; so y = sin-1 13
2
= p
3.
b.	 The equation y = arcsin a -1
2b means sin y = -1
2 and -p
2 … y … p
2.
	
From Table 5.8, sin a -p
6 b = -1
2 and -p
2 … -p
6 … p
2; so 
	
y = arcsin a -1
2b = -p
6.
c.	 Because 3 is not in the domain, 3-1, 14, of the inverse sine function, sin-1 3 does  
not exist.
Practice Problem 1  Find the exact values of y.
a.	 y = sin-1 a - 13
2 b        b.	 y = sin-1 1-12
Finding the Exact Value for y = sin−1 x
EXAMPLE 1
You can also read y = sin-11x2 
as “y is the number in the interval
 c -p
2, p
2 d  whose sine is x.”
Side  
Note
We can graph y = sin-1 x by reflecting the graph of y = sin x, for -p
2 … x … p
2, about 
the line y = x. See Figure 5.76.

	
Section 5.6    ■    Inverse Trigonometric Functions 549
The Inverse Cosine Function
When we restrict the domain of y = cos x to the interval 30, p4, the resulting function, 
y = cos x (with 0 … x … p), is one-to-one. No horizontal line intersects the graph of 
y = cos x, with 0 … x … p, in more than one point. See Figure 5.77. Consequently, the 
restricted cosine function has an inverse function.
The inverse function for y = cos x, 0 … x … p, is called the inverse cosine, or arc-
cosine, function and is denoted by cos−1 x, or by arccos x.
2	
Graph the inverse cosine 
function.
y = cos-1 x means cos y = x where -1 … x … 1 and 0 … y … p. Read 
y = cos-1 x as “y equals inverse cosine at x.”
Inverse Cosine Function
Figure 5.77   y = cos x, 0 … x … p

2
3

2
1
1




2

2


2(  , 0)
(0, 1)
(   , 1)
y  cos x
x
y
Reflecting the graph of y = cos x, for 0 … x … p, about the line y = x produces the 
graph of y = cos-1 x, shown in Figure 5.78.
1
1

2



2
x
y
y  cos1 x
y  cos x
y  x

(1,    )

(  , 1)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
Figure 5.78  Graph of y = cos-1 x 
Table 5.9 shows some exact values of y 10 … y … p2 that satisfy the equation cos y = x.
Table 5.9 
y
x: cos y = x
0
1
p
6
13
2
p
4
12
2
p
3
1
2
p
2
0
2p
3
-1
2
3p
4
- 12
2
5p
6
- 13
2
p
-1
Find the exact value of y.
a.	 y = cos-1 12
2         b.   y = arccos a -1
2b
Solution
a.	 The equation y = cos-1 12
2  means cos y = 12
2  and 0 … y … p.
	
Because cos p
4 = 12
2  and 0 … p
4 … p, we have y = p
4.
b.	 The equation y = arccos
 a -1
2b means cos y = -1
2 and 0 … y … p.
	
Because cos 2p
3
= -1
2  and  0 … 2p
3
… p, we have y = 2p
3 .
Practice Problem 2  Find the exact value of y.
a.	 y = cos-1 a - 12
2 b        b.   y = arccos a1
2b
Finding the Exact Value for y = cos−1 x
EXAMPLE 2
You can also read y = cos-1 x as 
“y is the number in the interval 
30, p4 whose cosine is x.”
Side  
Note

550	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
The Inverse Tangent Function
The inverse tangent function results from restricting the domain of the tangent function to 
the interval a -p
2, p
2 b to obtain a one-to-one function. The inverse of this restricted tangent
function is the inverse tangent, or arctangent, function and is denoted by tan−1 x, or 
arctan x.
3	
Graph the inverse tangent 
function.
The equation y = tan-1 x means tan y = x , where -∞6 x 6 ∞ and -p
2 6 y 6 p
2.
Read y = tan-1 x as “y equals the inverse tangent at x.”
Inverse Tangent Function
The graph of y = tan-1 x is obtained by reflecting the graph of y = tan x, with 
-p
2 6 x 6 p
2, about the line y = x. Figure 5.79 shows the graph of the restricted tangent 
function. Figure 5.80 shows the graph of y = tan-1 x.
Figure 5.79  y = tan x,-p
2 6 x 6 p
2
(  , 1)

4
y  tan x
(   , 1)

4

x
y

2

2
Figure 5.80  Graph of y = tan-1 x
x
y

2
y  

2
x  

2
y  
y  tan1 x
y  tan x
y  x
1


2
x  
1

2

2

2

2
Table 5.10 shows some exact values of y  a -p
2 6 y 6 p
2 b that satisfy the equation tan y = x.
Table 5.10 
y
x: tan y = x
-p
3
- 13
-p
4
-1
-p
6
- 23
3
0
0
p
6
23
3
p
4
1
p
3
23
You can also read y = tan-1(x) as 
“y is the number in the interval 
a- p
2, p
2 b whose tangent is x.”
Side  
Note
Find the exact value of y.
a.	 y = tan-1 0        b.   y = arctan1- 132
Solution
a.	 Because  tan 0 = 0 and -p
2 6 0 6 p
2, we have y = 0.
b.	 Because  tan a -p
3 b = - 13 and -p
2 6 -p
3 6 p
2, we have y = -p
3.
Practice Problem 3  Find the exact value of y = tan-1 13
3 .
Finding the Exact Value for y = tan−1 x
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 5.6    ■    Inverse Trigonometric Functions 551
Other Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Sometimes the ranges of the inverse secant and inverse cosecant functions given in other 
texts differ from those used in this text. Always check the definitions of the domains of 
these two functions when they are used outside this course.
Inverse cotangent
y = cot-1 x means cot y = x, 
where - ∞6 x 6 ∞ and 0 6 y 6 p.
Inverse cosecant
y = csc-1 x means csc y = x, 
where  x Ú 1 and -p
2 … y … p
2, y ≠0.
Inverse secant
y = sec-1 x means sec y = x,
where  x Ú 1 and 0 … y … p, y ≠p
2.
Inverse Cotangent, Cosecant, Secant Functions
Find the exact value for y = csc-1 2.
Solution
Because  csc p
6 = 2 and -p
2 … p
6 … p
2, we have y = csc-1 2 = p
6.
Practice Problem 4  Find the exact value of y = sec-1 2.
Finding the Exact Value for y = csc−1 x
EXAMPLE 4
The secondary functions on your 
calculator, labeled SIN-1, COS-1, 
and TaN-1, are associated with the 
keys labeled SIN , COS , and TAN , 
respectively. Consult your manual to 
learn how to access these secondary 
functions. The screen shows several 
values for the trigonometric inverse 
functions on a calculator set to 
radian mode.
Technology 
Connection
Summary of Main Facts
Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Inverse Function
Equivalent to
	
Domain
	
Range
y = sin-1 x
sin y = x
3-1, 14
c -p
2, p
2 d
y = cos-1 x
cos y = x
3-1, 14
30, p4
y = tan-1 x
tan y = x
1- ∞, ∞2
a -p
2, p
2 b
y = cot-1 x
cot y = x
1- ∞, ∞2
10, p2
y = csc-1 x
csc y = x
1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2
c -p
2, 0b ´ a0, p
2 d
y = sec-1 x
sec y = x
1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2
c 0, p
2 b ´ ap
2, pd
Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric Functions
In Section 5.3, we defined the six trigonometric functions of real numbers, and in this sec-
tion, we have defined the corresponding six inverse trigonometric functions of real numbers. 
For example,
if sin p
4 = 12
2 , then sin-1 12
2
= p
4.
4	
Evaluate inverse trigonometric 
functions.

552	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
However, because we also defined the trigonometric functions of angles in Section 5.3, it 
is meaningful when working with angles in degree measure to write a statement such as
sin-1 12
2
= 45°.
We state some useful identities involving the values of inverse trigonometric functions 
of 1
x and -x in terms of the values of inverse trigonometric functions of x.
I n v e r s e  T r i g o n o m e t r i c  I d e n t i t i e s
For 1
x
For −x
sin-1a1
x b = csc-1 x,  x Ú 1
sin-11-x2 = -sin-1 x,  x … 1
csc-1a1
x b = sin-1 x,  x … 1
csc-11-x2 = -csc-1 x,  x Ú 1
cos-1a1
x b = sec-1 x,  x Ú 1
cos-11-x2 = p - cos-1 x,  x … 1
sec-1a1
x b = cos-1 x,  x … 1
sec-11-x2 = p - sec-1 x,  x Ú 1
tan-1a1
x b = bcot-1 x,
x 7 0
-p + cot-1 x,
x 6 0
tan-11-x2 = -tan-1 x, - ∞6 x 6 ∞
cot-1a1
x b = btan-1 x,
x 7 0
p + tan-1 x,
x 6 0
cot-11-x2 = p - cot-1 x, - ∞6 x 6 ∞
Note that the equation tan-1 a1
x b = cot-1 x is true for x 7 0, because the values of both 
sides are in the interval a0, p
2 b. But when x 6 0, tan-1 a1
x b is negative and lies in the 
interval a -p
2, 0b and cot-1 x is positive and lies in the interval ap
2, pb. So for x 6 0, 
the correct equation is tan-1 a1
x b = -p + cot-1 x. In other words, for x 6 0, we have 
cot-1 x = p + tan-1 a1
x b.
a.	 Show that cos-11-x2 = p - cos-1 x for  x … 1.
b.	 Use part (a) to evaluate sin c cos-1 a -1
2b d .
Verifying an Inverse Trigonometric Identity
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 5.6    ■    Inverse Trigonometric Functions 553
Solution
a.	 For  x … 1, let u = cos-1 x with u in the interval 30, p4. Then cos u = x.
	
For u in 30, p4, 1p - u2 is also in 30, p4 and
 cos1p - u2 = -cos u
    See page 513.
 cos1p - u2 = -x
    Replace cos u  with x.
 p - u = cos-11-x2    Definition of cos-1 x
 p - cos-1 x = cos-11-x2    Replace u with cos-1 x.
b.	  sin c cos-1  a -1
2b d = sin c p - cos-1  a1
2b d     By part a
 = sin c p - p
3 d 	
cos-1 a1
2b = p
3
 = sin ap
3 b	
sin1p - u2 = sin u (page 513).
= 13
2 	
See page 491.
Practice Problem 5  a.	 Show that sin-11-x2 = -sin-1 x for  x … 1.
b.	 Use part a to evaluate sin c p
3 - sin-1 a -1
2b d .
Using a Calculator with Inverse Functions  When using the inverse trigono-
metric functions on a calculator to find a real number (or equivalently, an angle measured 
in radians), make sure you set your calculator to radian mode.
When using a calculator to find csc-1 x or sec-1 x, find sin-11
x and cos-11
x, 
respectively. For example, if csc-1 5 = u, then csc u = 5, or 
1
sin u = 5. So sin u = 1
5 
and u = sin-1 a1
5b. However, to find cot-1 x, begin by finding tan-11
x; this gives 
you a value in the interval a -p
2, p
2 b. If x 7 0, this is the correct value, but 
for x * 0, cot−11x2 = P + tan−1 1
x, so that cot-11x2 is in the interval ap
2, pb.
When using a calculator to find an unknown angle measure in degrees, make sure you 
set your calculator to degree measure.

554	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Use a calculator to find the value of y in radians rounded to four decimal places.
a.	 y = sin-1 0.75        b.   y = cot-1 2.8        c.   y = cot-1 1-2.32
Solution
Set your calculator to radian mode.
a.	 y = sin-1 0.75 ≈0.8481
b.	 y = cot-1 2.8 = tan-1 a 1
2.8b ≈0.3430
c.	 y = cot-1 1-2.32 = p + tan-1 a - 1
2.3b ≈2.7315
Practice Problem 6  Use a calculator to find the value of y in radians rounded to four 
decimal places.
a.	 y = cos-1 0.22        b.   y = csc-1 3.5        c.   y = cot-1 1-4.72
Using a Calculator to Find the Values of Inverse Functions
EXAMPLE 6
Use a calculator to find the value of y in degrees rounded to four decimal places.
a.	 y = tan-1 0.99        b.   y = sec-1 25        c.   y = cot-11-1.32
Solution
Set your calculator to degree mode.
a.	 y = tan-1 0.99 ≈44.7121°
b.	 y = sec-1 25 = cos-1 1
25 ≈87.7076°
c.	 y = cot-11-1.32 = 180° + tan-1 a - 1
1.3b ≈142.4314°
Practice Problem 7  Repeat Example 7 for each expression.
a.	 y = cot-1 0.75        b.   y = csc-1 13        c.   y = tan-11-122
Composition of Trigonometric and Inverse 
Trigonometric Functions
Recall that if f  is a one-to-one function with inverse f -1, then f -13 f 1x24 = x for every x 
in the domain of f  and f 3f -11x24 = x for every x in the domain of f -1. This leads to the 
following formulas for the inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions.
Using a Calculator to Find the Values of Inverse Functions
EXAMPLE 7
5	
Find exact values of composite 
functions involving the inverse 
trigonometric functions.
I n v e r s e  F u n c t i o n  P r o p e r t i e s 
Inverse Sine
Inverse Cosine
Inverse Tangent
sin-11sin x2 = x,
-p
2 … x … p
2
cos-11cos x2 = x, 
0 … x … p
tan-11tan x2 = x, 
-p
2 6 x 6 p
2
sin1sin-1 x2 = x, 
-1 … x … 1
cos1cos-1 x2 = x, 
-1 … x … 1
tan1tan-1 x2 = x, 
- ∞6 x 6 ∞

	
Section 5.6    ■    Inverse Trigonometric Functions 555
Find the exact value of
a.	 sin-1c sin a -p
8 b d .        b.  cos-1 acos 5p
4 b.
Solution
a.	 Because -p
2 … -p
8 … p
2, we have sin-1c sin a -p
8 b d = -p
8.
b.	 We cannot use the formula cos-11cos x2 = x for x = 5p
4  because 5p
4  is not in the 
	
interval 30, p4. However, cos 5p
4
= cos a2p - 5p
4 b = cos 3p
4  and 3p
4  is in the 
	
interval 30, p4. Therefore,
cos-1 acos 5p
4 b = cos-1 acos 3p
4 b = 3p
4 .
Practice Problem 8  Find the exact value of sin-1 asin 3p
2 b.
To find the exact values of expressions involving the composition of a trigonometric 
function and the inverse of a different trigonometric function, we use points on the terminal 
side of an angle in standard position.
Finding the Exact Value of sin−11sin x2 and cos−11cos x2
EXAMPLE 8
Find the exact value of
a.	 cos atan-1 2
3b.        b.  sinc cos-1 a -1
4b d .
Solution
a.	 Let u represent the radian measure of the angle in the interval a -p
2, p
2 b, with 
	
tan u = 2
3. Then because tan u is positive, u must be positive. We have
u = tan-1 2
3 and 0 6 u 6 p
2.
	
Figure 5.81 shows u in standard position. If 1x, y2 is any point on the terminal side of u, 
	
then tan u = y
x.
Consequently, we can choose the point with coordinates 13, 22 to determine the terminal 
side of u. Then x = 3, y = 2 and we have
tan u = 2
3 and cos u = x
r = 3
r, where
r = 2x2 + y2 = 232 + 22 = 19 + 4 = 113. So
cos atan-1 2
3b = cos u = 3
r =
3
113 = 3113
13 .
Finding the Exact Value of a Composite  
Trigonometric Expression
EXAMPLE 9
Figure 5.81   
r
(3, 2)


 tan1 2
3
x
y

556	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
b.	 Let u represent the radian measure of the angle in 30, p4, with cos u = -1
4.
	
Then because cos u is negative, u is in quadrant II; so
u = cos-1 a -1
4b and p
2 6 u 6 p.
	
Figure 5.82 shows u in standard position. If 1x, y2 is a point on the terminal side of u 
	
and r is the distance between 1x, y2 and the origin, then sin u = y
r. We choose the point 
	
with coordinates 1-1, y2, a distance of r = 4 units from the origin, on the terminal 
side of u. Then
cos u = -1
4 and sin u = y
4, where
r = 2x2 + y2 = 21-122 + y2  or r2 = 1 + y2
42 = 1 + y2    Replace r with 4.
15 = y2        Simplify.
115 = y          y is positive.
Thus,
sinc cos-1 a -1
4b d = sin u = y
r = 115
4 .
Practice Problem 9  Find the exact value of cosc sin-1 a -1
3b d .
Figure 5.82   

r 4
(1, y)
  cos1 (   )
1
4
x
y
Write an algebraic expression for y = tan asin-1 t
4b for  t 6 4.
Solution
Let u = sin-1 t
4. Then sin u = t
4, and u is in the interval a -p
2, p
2 b.
Figure 5.83 shows angle u in standard position with a point P1x, t2 on the terminal side of u. 
Then by the Pythagorean theorem, we have
 x2 + t2 = 42
 x2 = 16 - t2
 x = 216 - t2
The expression y = tan asin-1 t
4b becomes
 y = tan u
    u = sin-1 t
4
 y = t
x
    Definition of tan u
 y =
t
216 - t2    Replace x with 216 - t2.
Practice Problem 10  Write an algebraic expression for
y = tan acos-1 x
3b for 0 6 x 6 3.
Converting Composite Trigonometric Expressions  
to Algebraic Expressions
EXAMPLE 10
y
x
O
4
u
P(x, t)
t
Figure 5.83   
For u in a -p
2, p
2 b, x 7 0.

	
Section 5.6    ■    Inverse Trigonometric Functions 557
In many applications of calculus, we use trigonometric substitutions to simplify alge-
braic expressions.
Simplify y = 25 - x2
x
 using the substitution x = 15 sin u for 0 6 u 6 p
2.
Solution
y = 25 - 115 sin u22
15 sin u
    Substitute for x.
= 25 - 5 sin2 u
15 sin u
       
115  sin u22 = 5 sin2 u
= 2511 - sin2 u2
15 sin u
       Factor.
= 25 cos2 u
15 sin u              1 - sin2 u = cos2 u
= 15 cos u
15 sin u             25 cos2 u = 152cos2 u = 15 cos u  for 0 6 u 6 p
2
= cot u                 Quotient identity
Practice Problem 11  Simplify y =
x
27 - x2 using the substitution x = 27 cos u 
for 0 6 u 6 p
2.
Using Trigonometry to Simplify Algebraic Expressions
EXAMPLE 11
A security camera is to be installed 20 feet from the center of a jewelry counter. The coun-
ter is 30 feet long. What angle, to the nearest degree, should the camera rotate through so 
that it scans the entire counter? See Figure 5.84.
Solution
The counter center C, the camera A, and a counter end B form a right triangle. The angle at 
vertex A is u
2, where u is the angle through which the camera rotates. Note that
 tan u
2 = 15
20 = 3
4
 u
2 = tan-13
4 ≈36.87°    Use a calculator in degree mode.
 u ≈73.74°
    Multiply both sides by 2.
The camera should rotate through 74° to scan the entire counter.
Practice Problem 12  Rework Example 12 for a counter that is 20 feet long and a  
camera set 12 feet from the center of the counter.
Finding the Rotation Angle for a Security Camera
EXAMPLE 12
Figure 5.84   
A
C
B
30 feet
15 feet
20 feet

558	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. - p
3   b. - p
2     2. a. 3p
4   b. p
3     3. p
6     4. p
3
5. b. 1    6. a. 1.3490  b. 0.2898  c. 2.932   
7. a. 53.1301°  b. 4.4117°  c. -85.2364°    8.  - p
2    
9. 222
3
    10. 29 - x2
x
    11. cot u    12. 80°
Exercises
section 5.6
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The domain of f1x2 = sin-1 x is 
.
	 2.	 The range of f1x2 = tan-1 x is 
. 
	 3.	 The exact value of y = cos-1 1
2 is 
.
	 4.	 sin-11sin p2 =
.
	 5.	 True or False. If -1 … x … 0, then sin-1 x … 0. 
	 6.	 True or False. If -1 … x … 0, then cos-1 x … 0. 
	 7.	 True or False. The domain of f1x2 = cos-1x is 
0 … x … p. 
	 8.	 True or False. The value of tan-1a 1
13b is p
3. 
In Exercises 9–26, find each exact value of y or state that y is 
undefined.
	 9.	 y = arcsin 0 
	10.	 y = cos-1 0 
	11.	 y = sin-1a- 1
2b 
	12.	 y = arccos a- 13
2 b 
	13.	 y = cos-11-12 
	14.	 y = sin-1 1
2 
	15.	 y = arccos p
2  
	16.	 y = sin-1 p 
	17.	 y = tan-1 13 
	18.	 y = arctan 1 
	19.	 y = tan-11-12 
	20.	 y = tan-1 a- 13
3 b 
	21.	 y = cot-11-12 
	22.	 y = arcsin a- 12
2 b 
	23.	 y = arccos1-22 
	24.	 y = sin-1 13 
	25.	 y = sec-11-22 
	26.	 y = csc-11-22 
In Exercises 27–36, find each exact value of y or state that y is 
undefined.
	27.	 y = sin asin-1 1
8b 
	28.	 y = cos acos-1 1
5b 
	29.	 y = arctan atan p
7 b 
	30.	 y = arctan atan p
4 b 
	31.	 y = tan1tan-1 2472 
	32.	 y = tan1tan-1 72 
	33.	 y = arcsin asin 4p
3 b 
	34.	 y = arccos acos 5p
3 b 
	35.	 y = tan-1 atan 2p
3 b 
	36.	 y = tan atan-1 2p
3 b 
In Exercise 37–52, use the identities on page 552 to find the 
exact value of each expression.
	37.	 cot-1 a 1
13b 
	38.	 sec-11122 
	39.	 csc-1122 
	40.	 csc-1 a213
3
b 
	41.	 arccot a- 1
13b 
	42.	 cot-11- 132 
	43.	 arcsin a- 13
2 b 
	44.	 csc-1 a- 2
13b 
	45.	 cos-1 a- 1
2b 
	46.	 arcsec a- 2
13b 
	47.	 sin c p
3 - sin-1 a- 1
2b d  
	48.	 cos c p
6 + cos-1 a- 13
2 b d
	49.	 sin c p
2 - cos-1 1-12d  
	50.	 tan c p
6 + cot-1 a- 1
13b d
	51.	 sin c tan-1 1- 132 + cos-1 a- 13
2 b d 
	52.	 cos c cot-1 1- 132 + sin-1 a-1
2b d 
In Exercises 53–62, use a calculator to find each value of y in 
degrees rounded to two decimal places.
	53.	 y = cos-1 0.6 
	54.	 y = sin-1 0.23 
	55.	 y = sin-11-0.692 
	56.	 y = cos-11-0.572 
	57.	 y = sec-113.52 
	58.	 y = csc-116.82 
	59.	 y = tan-1 14 
	60.	 y = tan-1 50 
	61.	 y = tan-11-42.1472 
	62.	 y = tan-11-0.38632 
In Exercises 63–74, use a sketch to find each exact value of y.
	63.	 y = cos asin-1 2
3b 
	64.	 y = sin acos-1 3
4b 
	65.	 y = sin c cos-1 a- 4
5b d 
	66.	 y = cos asin-1 3
5b 
	67.	 y = cos atan-1 5
2b 
	68.	 y = sin atan-1 13
5 b   

	
Section 5.6    ■    Inverse Trigonometric Functions 559
	69.	 y = tan acos-1 4
5b 
	70.	 y = tan c sin-1 a- 3
4b d
	71.	 y = sin1tan-1 42 
	72.	 y = cos1tan-1 32 
	73.	 y = tan1sec-1 22 
	74.	 y = tan3csc-1 1-224
In Exercises 75–80, write an algebraic expression for each 
composite trigonometric expression.
	75.	 y = sin atan-1 x
2b;  x 7 0 
	76.	 y = sin acot-1 2x
3 b;  x 7 0 
	77.	 y = cot asin-1 3x
5 b;  0 6 x 6 5
3 
	78.	 y = sin asec-1 x
3b;  x 7 3 
	79.	 y = cot acos-1 x
2b;  -2 6 x 6 0 
	80.	 y = sin acot-1 x
5b;  x 6 0 
In Exercises 81–86, simplify the algebraic expression by using 
the given trigonometric substitution. Assume 0 * U * P
2 .
	81.	 y =
x
29 - x2;  x = 3 cos u 
	82.	 y = 216 - x2
x
;  x = 4 sin u 
	83.	 y =
x
24 + x2;  x = 2 tan u 
	84.	 y = 29 + x2
x
;  x = 3 cot u 
	85.	 y =
x
2x2 - 25
;  x = 5 sec u 
	86.	 y = 2x2 - 36
x
;  x = 6 csc u 
Applying the Concepts
	87.	 Sprinkler rotation. A sprinkler rotates back and forth 
through an angle u, as shown in the figure. At a distance of  
5 feet from the sprinkler, the rays that form the sides of  
angle u are 6 feet apart. Find u. 
	
	
6 ft
5 ft
u
	88.	 Irradiating flowers. A tray of flowers is being irradiated 
by a beam from a rotating lamp, as shown in the figure. If the 
tray is 8 feet long and the lamp is 2 feet from the center of 
the tray, through what angle should the lamp rotate to irradi-
ate the full length of the tray? 
	
	
8 ft
2 ft
u
	89.	 Motorcycle racing. A video camera is set up 110 feet away 
from and at a right angle to a straight quarter-mile racetrack, 
as shown in the figure. The starting line is to the left, and the 
finish is to the right. Through what angle must the camera 
rotate to film the entire race? 
110 ft
u
440 ft
Finish
line
Starting
line
880 ft
	90.	 Camera’s viewing angle. The viewing angle for the 
	
	 35-millimeter camera is given (in degrees) by u = 2 tan-1 18
x , 
	
	 where x is the focal length of the lens. The focal length on 
most adjustable cameras is marked in millimeters on the  
lens mount.
a.	 Find the viewing angle, in degrees, if the focal length is  
50 millimeters. 
b.	 Find the viewing angle, in degrees, if the focal length is 
200 millimeters. 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 91–93, determine whether each function is 
increasing or decreasing on its domain.
	91.	 y = sin-1 x 
	92.	 y = cos-1 x 
	93.	 y = tan-1 x 
	94.	 Show that
a.	 sec-1 x ≠ 
1
cos-1 x.
b.	 sec-1 x = cos-1 1
x.
	95.	 Graph the function y = cot-1 x. 
	96.	 Graph the function y = csc-1 x. 
	97.	 Graph the function y = sec-1 x.   

560	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
	 98.	 For what values of x is cot-11cot x2 = x true? 
	 99.	 For what values of x is sec-11sec x2 = x true?
	100.	 For what values of x is csc-1 1csc x2 = x true?
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	101.	 Show that sin-1 x = bcos-1121 - x22;
0 … x … 1
-cos-1121 - x22;
-1 … x 6 0
	102.	 Show that sin-1 x + cos-1 x = p
2; x … 1.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 103–114, state whether the given equation is an 
identity, a conditional equation, or neither.
(Recall that an equation is an identity that is true for all permis-
sible values of the variable and a conditional equation is a non-
identity that is true for at least one value of the variable.)
	103.	  51x + 32 = 8x - 24 
	104.	  x120 - 32 - 1 = 10x12 - 12 + 7x - 1 
	105.	  3x + 1 = 51x + 12 - 2x 
	106.	  x2 - 4 = 2x2 + 3x - 2 
	107.	  
1
x2 - 9 =
1
1x + 321x - 32 
	108.	  x2 - 5x + 6 = 0 
	109.	  x2 + 5x = 8x - 2x2 + 1 
	110.	  
1
x2 - 3x + 2 =
1
1x - 121x - 22 
	111.	  1x - 221x + 22 + 5x - 2 = x2 + 5x - 5 
	112.	  x1x - 22 + 3 = x11 - x2 + 4 
	113.	  x2 + 2x + 9 = 1x - 121x - 22 + 5x + 7 
	114.	  3x1x + 22 = x - 1 
In Exercises 115–118, perform the indicated operations and 
simplify.
	115.	  
1
x - 1 -
1
x + 1 
	116.	  
1
2 - x +
1
2 + x 
	117.	  
1
x - 1 -
1
x2 - 1 
	118.	  
1
x + 2 -
1
x + 3
In Exercises 119 and 120, rationalize the denominator and 
simplify.
	119.	  
1
12 + 1 +
1
13 + 12 
	120.	  
x
1x + 2 - 12 
	121.	  If x2 + y2 = 1, simplify 
x
1 + y - 1 - y
x
. 
	122.	  If xy = 1, simplify ax + 1
y bay + 1
x b. 
5.1	 Angles and Their Measure
i.	 	 An angle is formed by rotating a ray about its endpoint.
ii.	 	 Angles that have the same initial and terminal sides are 
coterminal angles.
iii.	 	 An angle in a rectangular coordinate system is in standard 
position if its vertex is at the origin and its initial side coin-
cides with the positive x-axis. (See page 472 for definitions 
of positive and negative angles.)
iv.	 	 If the terminal side of an angle in standard position lies on 
the x-axis or the y-axis, the angle is a quadrantal angle.
v.	 	 Angles can be measured in degrees, where 1° =
1
360 of a 
	
	 complete revolution.
vi.	 	 An acute angle is an angle with measure between 0° and 
90°, a right angle is an angle with measure 90°, an obtuse 
angle is an angle with measure between 90° and 180°, and a 
straight angle is an angle with measure 180°.
vii.		 Angles can also be measured in radians. The radian measure 
of a central angle u that intercepts an arc of length s on a 
	
	 circle of radius r is u = s
r radians.
	viii.	 To convert from degrees to radians, multiply degrees by 
	
	
p
180°. To convert from radians to degrees, multiply radians 
	
	 by 180°
p .
ix.	 	 Two positive angles are complements if their sum is 90°. 
Two positive angles are supplements if their sum is 180°.
x.	 	 The formula for the length s of an arc intercepted by a cen-
tral angle u in a circle of radius r is s = ru.
xi.	 	 If an object travels at a constant speed v on a circle of radius 
r through an angle of u radians and an arc of length s, in 
	
	 time t, then the (average) linear speed of the object is 
	
	 v = s
t and the (average) angular speed of the object is 
	
	 w = u
t . Further, v = rv.
xii.		 The area of a sector = 1
2 r2u, where r is the radius of the 
	
	 circle and u is in radians.
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

	
Summary 561
5.2	 Right-Triangle Trigonometry
i.	 	 The right-triangle definitions for trigonometric functions of 
an acute angle u are given by
 sin U =
opposite
hypotenuse = a
c;  csc U = hypotenuse
opposite
= c
a
 cos U =
adjacent
hypotenuse = b
c;  sec U = hypotenuse
adjacent
= c
b
 tan U = opposite
adjacent = a
b;   cot U = adjacent
opposite = b
a
b
a
c
A
B
C
ii.	 	 Two acute angles are complements if their sum is 90° or p
2. 
	
	 The value of any trigonometric function of an acute angle u 
is equal to the cofunction of the complement of u.
iii.		 To solve a right triangle means to find the measurements of 
the missing angles and sides.
iv.		 Fundamental trigonometric identities
	
Reciprocal and Quotient Identities
	
Reciprocal Identities
sin u =
1
csc u  cos u =
1
sec u  tan u =
1
cot u
csc u =
1
sin u  sec u =
1
cos u  cot u =
1
tan u
	
Quotient Identities
tan u = sin u
cos u  cot u = cos u
sin u
	
Cofunction Identities
 sin u = cos 190° - u2  cos u = sin 190° - u2
 tan u = cot 190° - u2  cot u = tan 190° - u2
 sec u = csc 190° - u2  csc u = sec 190° - u2
	
If u is measured in radians, replace 90° with p
2.
Trigonometric Function Values of Some Common Angles
U°
U radians sin U
cos U
tan U
csc U
sec U
cot U
30°
p
6
1
2
13
2
13
3
2
213
3
13
45°
p
4
12
2
12
2
1
12
12
1
60°
p
3
13
2
1
2
13
213
3
2
13
3
5.3	 Trigonometric Functions of any Angle; 
The Unit Circle
i.	 	 Definitions of the Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle U
	
Let P = 1x, y2 be any point on the terminal ray of an 
angle u in standard position (other than the origin) and let 
r = 2x2 + y2. Then r 7 0 and
sin u = y
r, cos u = x
r, tan u = y
x 1x ≠02,
csc u = r
y 1y ≠02, sec u = r
x 1x ≠02, cot u = x
y 1y ≠02
ii.	 	 Trigonometric function values of coterminal angles
U in degrees
U in radians
sin u = sin 1u + n360°2
sin u = sin 1u + 2pn2
cos u = cos 1u + n360°2
cos u = cos 1u + 2pn2
	
These equations hold for any integer n.
iii.			 Signs of the trigonometric functions
I
II
(, )
(, )
All positive
sin    > 0, 
csc    > 0
Others < 0
Others < 0
Others < 0
IV
III
(, )
(, )


tan    > 0, 
cot    > 0


cos    > 0, 
sec    > 0


x
y
iv.		 The reference angle for u in standard position is the positive 
acute angle u′ formed by the terminal side of u and the x-axis. 
Reference angles are used to find the values of trigonometric 
functions for any angle u. See Figure 5.37 on page 504.
v.	 	 The unit circle If the terminal side of an angle s in standard 
position intersects the unit circle at the point 1x, y2, then 
	
	 sin t = y, cos t = x, tan t = y
x, cot t = x
y, sec t = 1
x, and 
	
	 csc t = 1
y. The domain of the sine and cosine functions is
	
	 1- ∞, ∞2, and their range is 3-1, 14.
5.4	 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions
i.	 	 Sine and cosine function graphs and properties
2
x
y
3
2




2
1
1
y  sin x
3

1
1
x
y
2

2

2
y  cos x
Sine Function	
Cosine Function
1.  Period: 2p	
1.  Period: 2p
2.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2	
2.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
3.  Range: 3-1, 14	
3.  Range: 3-1, 14
4.  Odd: sin 1-t2 = -sin t	
4.  Even: cos 1-t2 = cos t

562	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
ii.	 	 Pythagorean identity 1cos t22 + 1sin t22 = 1
iii.		 The functions y = a sin3b1x - c24 + d and 
y = a cos3b1x - c24 + d, b 7 0, have amplitude a, 
	
	 period 2p
b , phase shift c, and vertical shift d.
5.5	 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric 
Functions
	 i.	 Tangent and cotangent function graphs and properties
x
y
1
1

2

2

y  tan x
x
y

2
1
1

y  cot x
Tangent Function	
Cotangent Function
1.  Period: p	
1.  Period: p
2.  Domain: All real numbers	
2.  Domain: All real numbers 
   except odd multiples of p
2 	
   except integer multiples of p
3.  Range: 1- ∞, ∞2	
3.  Range: 1- ∞, ∞2
4.  Odd: tan 1-x2 = -tan x	
4.  Odd: cot 1-x2 = -cot x
ii.	 	 Secant and cosecant function graphs and properties
1
y
x

1
2



2

y  sec x
2
1
1
2

y
x




y  csc x
Secant Function	
Cosecant Function
1.  Period: 2p	
1.  Period: 2p
2.  Domain: All real numbers 	
2.  Domain: All real numbers  
   except odd multiples of p
2 	
   except integer multiples of p
3.  Range: 1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2	
3.  Range: 1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2
4.  Even: sec 1-x2 = sec x	
4.  Odd: csc 1-x2 = -csc x
Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Inverse Function
Equivalent to
Domain
Range
y = sin-1 x
sin y = x
3-1, 14
c - p
2, p
2 d
y = cos-1 x
cos y = x
3-1, 14
30, p4
y = tan-1 x
tan y = x
1- ∞, ∞2
a- p
2, p
2 b
y = cot-1 x
cot y = x
1- ∞, ∞2
10, p2
y = csc-1 x
csc y = x
1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2
c - p
2, 0b ´ a0, p
2 d
y = sec-1 x
sec y = x
1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2
c 0, p
2 b ´ ap
2, pd   
5.6	 Inverse Trigonometric Functions
i.	
ii.		 Points on the terminal sides of angles in the standard 
position are used to find exact values of the composi-
tion of a trigonometric function and a different inverse 
trigonometric function.
iii.  (a)  sin-11sin x2 = x for -p
2 … x … p
2  and 
	
sin1sin-1 x2 = x for -1 … x … 1
	
(b)  cos-11cos x2 = x for 0 … x … p and 
	
     cos1cos-1 x2 = x for -1 … x … 1
	
(c)  tan-11tan x2 = x for -p
2 6 x 6 p
2  and 
	
     tan1tan-1 x2 = x for - ∞6 x 6 ∞

	
Review Exercises 563
In Exercises 1–4, draw each angle in standard position.
	 1.	 240° 
	 2.	 -150° 
	 3.	 - 2p
3 
	 4.	 7p
3 
In Exercises 5–7, convert each angle from degrees to radians. 
Express each answer as a multiple of P.
	 5.	 20° 
	 6.	 36° 
	 7.	 -60° 
In Exercises 8–10, convert each angle from radians to degrees.
	 8.	 7p
10 
	 9.	 5p
18 
	10.	 -4p
9 
In Exercises 11 and 12, find the radian measure of a central 
angle of a circle of radius r that intercepts each arc of length s. 
Round your answers to three decimal places.
	11.	 r = 15 inches, s = 40 inches 
	12.	 r = 9 inches, s = 17 inches 
In Exercises 13 and 14, find the length of the arc on each 
circle of radius r intercepted by a central angle U. Round your 
answers to three decimal places.
	13.	 r = 2 meters, u = 36°
	14.	 r = 0.9 meter, u = 12° 
In Exercises 15 and 16, find the area of the sector of a circle 
of radius r formed by the central angle U. Round your 
answers to three decimal places.
	15.	 r = 3 feet, u = 32°
	16.	 r = 4 meters, u = 47° 
In Exercises 17–20, use each given trigonometric function 
value of U to find the five other trigonometric function values 
of an acute angle U. Rationalize the denominators where  
necessary.
	17.	 cos u = 2
9 
	18.	 sin u = 1
5 
	19.	 tan u = 5
3 
	20.	 cot u = 5
4 
In Exercises 21–24, a point on the terminal side of an angle 
U is given. For each angle, find the exact values of the six 
trigonometric functions. Rationalize the denominators where 
necessary.
	21.	 12, 82 
	22.	 1-3, 72 
	23.	 1- 15, 22 
	24.	 1- 13, - 162 
In Exercises 25–28, use the given information to find the 
quadrant in which U lies.
	25.	 sin u 6 0 and cos u 7 0
	26.	 sin u 7 0 and tan u 7 0 
	27.	 sin u 6 0 and cot u 7 0
	28.	 cos u 6 0 and csc u 7 0 
In Exercises 29–32, find the exact values of the remaining 
trigonometric functions of U from the given  
information.
	29.	 cos u = - 4
5, u in quadrant III
	30.	 tan u = - 5
12, u in quadrant IV 
	31.	 sin u = 3
5, u in quadrant II
	32.	 csc u = - 5
4, u in quadrant III
In Exercises 33–36, find the exact value of each trigonometric 
function by using reference angles. Do not use a calculator.
	33.	 cos 150° 
	34.	 sin 1-300°2 
	35.	 tan 390° 
	36.	 cot -405° 
In Exercises 37–40, sketch the graph of each given equation 
over the interval 3 −2P, 2P4.
	37.	 y = - 3
2
 cos x 
	38.	 y = 5
2 sin x 
	39.	 y = 3 sin ax - p
3 b 
	40.	 y = 4 cos ax + 3p
2 b 
In Exercises 41–44, find the amplitude or vertical stretch  
factor, period, and phase shift of each given function.
	41.	 y = 14 sin a2x + p
7 b 
	42.	 y = 21 cos a8x + p
9 b 
	43.	 y = 6 tan a2x + p
5 b 
	44.	 y = -11 cot a6x + p
12b 
In Exercises 45–50, graph each function over a two-period 
interval.
	45.	 y = -2 cos ax + 2p
3 b 
	46.	 y = 3 cos 1x - p2 
	47.	 y = 5 tan c 2 ax - p
4 b d 
	48.	 y = -cot c 2 ax + p
4 b d 
	49.	 y = 1
2 sec x
2 
	50.	 y = -3 csc x
2 
In Exercises 51–58, find the exact value of y or state that y is 
undefined.
	51.	 y = cos-1 acos 5p
8 b 
	52.	 y = sin-1 asin 7p
6 b 
	53.	 y = tan-1 c tan a- 2p
3 b d 
	54.	 y = sin acos-1 1
2b 
	55.	 y = cos asin-1 12
2 b 
	56.	 y = cos atan-1 3
4b 
	57.	 y = tan c cos-1 a- 1
2b d
	58.	 y = tan c sin-1 a- 13
2 b d
	59.	 A tractor rolls backward so that its wheels turn a quarter of a 
revolution. If the tires have a radius of 28 inches, how many 
inches has the tractor moved? 
	
Review Exercises       
 
  
 
 
 

564	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
	60.	 What is the radian measure of the smaller central angle made 
by the hands of a clock at 5:00? Express your answer as a 
rational multiple of p. 
	61.	 New Orleans, Louisiana, is due south of Dubuque, Iowa. Find 
the distance between New Orleans (north latitude 29°59′ N)  
and Dubuque (north latitude 42°31′ N). Use 3960 miles as 
the value of the radius of Earth. 
	62.	 A horse on the outside row of a merry-go-round is 20 feet 
from the center, and its linear speed is 314 feet per minute. 
Find its angular speed. 
	63.	 A point on the rim of a pottery wheel with a 28-inch diameter 
has a linear speed of 21 inches per second. Find its angular 
speed. 
	64.	 A NASA spacecraft has a circular orbit around Mars about 
400 km above its surface. Assuming that it takes two hours to 
complete one orbit and the radius of Mars is 6780 km, find 
the linear speed of the spacecraft. 
	65.	 A geostationary satellite has a circular orbit 36,000 km above 
Earth’s surface. It takes 24 hours for the satellite to complete 
its orbit, appearing to be stationary above a fixed location on 
Earth. Assuming that the radius of Earth is 6400 km, find the 
linear speed of the satellite. 
	66.	 A surveyor wants to measure the width of a river. She stands 
at a point A, with point B opposite her on the other side of the 
river. From A, she walks 320 feet along the bank to a point C. 
The line CA makes an angle of 40° with the line CB. What is 
the width of the river? 
	67.	 The table gives the average number of daylight hours in Santa 
Fe, New Mexico, each month. Let y represent the number 
of daylight hours in Santa Fe in month x and find a function 
of the form y = a sin b1x - c2 + d that models the hours 
of daylight throughout the year, where x = 1 represents 
January. 
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
10.1
9.9
12.0
12.7
14.1
14.1
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
14.3
13.5
12.0
11.3
10.0
9.8
	68.	 Suppose a ball attached to a spring is pulled down 11 inches 
and released and the resulting simple harmonic motion has a 
period of five seconds. Write an equation of the ball’s simple 
harmonic motion. 
Practice Test A
	 1.	 Convert 140° to radians. 
	 2.	 Convert 7p
5  to degrees. 
	 3.	 If 12, -52 is a point on the terminal side of an angle u, find 
cos u. 
	 4.	 Find the radian measure of a central angle of a circle of 
radius 10 centimeters that intercepts an arc of length  
15 centimeters. 
	 5.	 Find the area of a sector of a circle of radius 15 centimeters 
that intersects an arc of length 10 centimeters. 
	 6.	 Assuming that cos u = 2
7 for an acute angle u, find sin u. 
	 7.	 Assuming that tan u 6 0 and csc u 7 0, find the quadrant in 
which u lies. 
	 8.	 Assuming that cot u = - 5
12 and u is in quadrant IV, 
	
	 find sec u. 
	 9.	 What is the reference angle for 217°? 
	10.	 Assuming that cos 3p
7
= 0.223, find sin p
14. 
	11.	 From a seat 65 meters high on a Ferris wheel, the angle of 
depression to a hot dog stand is 42°. How many meters, to 
the nearest meter, is the hot dog stand from a point directly 
below the seat? 
	12.	 Give the amplitude and range for y = -7 sin x. 
	13.	 Find the amplitude, period, and phase shift for 
y = 19 sin 3121x + 3p24. 
	14.	 Suppose a ball attached to a spring is pulled down 7 inches 
and released and the resulting simple harmonic motion has 
a period of four seconds. Write an equation for the ball’s 
simple harmonic motion. 
	15.	 Graph y = -cos x
2 over a one-period interval. 
	16.	 Graph y = sin 321x - p24 over a one-period interval. 
	17.	 Graph y = tan ax + p
4 b over a one-period interval. 
	18.	 Find the exact value of y = sin-1 a- 13
2 b. 
	19.	 Find the exact value of y = cos-1 c cos 4p
3 d . 
	20.	 Find the exact value of y = tan c sin-1 a- 1
3b d . 

	
Practice Test B 565
	 1.	 Convert 160° to radians. 
a.	 7p
9
b.	 8p
9
c.	 4p
3
d.	 7p
3
	 2.	 Convert 13p
5  to degrees. 
a.	 36°
b.	 72°
c.	 108°
d.	 468°
	 3.	 Assuming that 1-3, 12 is a point on the terminal side of an 
angle u, find cos u. 
a.	 - 3110
10
b.	 - 110
10
c.	 110
10
d.	 3110
10
	 4.	 Find the radian measure of a central angle of a circle of 
radius 8 that intercepts an arc of length 4. 
a.	 1
2
b.	 2
c.	 32
d.	 128
	 5.	 Find the area of a sector of a circle of radius 6 centimeters 
that intercepts an arc of length 3 centimeters. 
a.	 9
2 cm2
b.	 27
2  cm2
c.	 6 cm2
d.	 9 cm2
	 6.	 Assuming that cos u = 3
4 for an acute angle u, find sin u. 
a.	
3
17
b.	 17
4
c.	 17
3
d.	 4
3
	 7.	 Assuming that sin u 6 0 and sec u 7 0, find the quadrant in 
which u lies. 
a.	 I
b.	 II
c.	 III
d.	 IV
	 8.	 Assuming that tan u = 12
5  and u is in quadrant III, find csc u. 
a.	 - 5
12
b.	 - 13
12
c.	 5
13
d.	 5
12
	 9.	 What is the reference angle for 640°? 
a.	 10°
b.	 60°
c.	 80°
d.	 280°
	10.	 In which quadrant is it true that cos u 7 0 and csc u 7 0? 
a.	 I
b.	 II
c.	 III
d.	 IV
	11.	 A point on the rim of a wheel with a radius of 50 centimeters 
has an angular speed of 0.8 radian per second. What is the 
linear speed of the point? 
a.	 4 centimeters per second
b.	 6.25 centimeters per second
c.	 40 centimeters per second
d.	 62.5 centimeters per second
	12.	 If y = a cos bx has an amplitude of 1
2 and a period of 4p, 
	
	 which are possible values of a and b? 
a.	 a = 1
2, b = 1
2
b.	 a = 2, b = 1
2
c.	 a = 1
2, b = 2
d.	 a = 2, b = 2
	13.	 Which of the following statements is false? 
a.	 sin 1-x2 = -sin x
b.	 cos 1-x2 = -sin x
c.	 tan 1-x2 = -tan x
d.	 cot 1-x2 = -cot x
	14.	 The equation y = -5 cos p
4t describes the harmonic of a ball 
	
	 attached to a spring. What is the period of the motion? 
a.	 p
4
b.	 -5
c.	 5
d.	 8
	15.	 Find the amplitude a, period b, and phase shift c for 
	
	 y = -7 cos c 1
6
 ax - p
12b d . 
a.	 a = 7, b = 1
6 p, c = p
12
b.	 a = 7, b = 1
6 p, c = - p
12
c.	 a = 7, b = 12p, c = - p
12
d.	 a = 7, b = 12p, c = p
12
	16.	 This is the graph of which function? 		
−2
−1
2
1


2

2
3

2

2
−
x
y
a.	 y = -2 sin ax + p
2 b
b.	 y = 2 sin ax + p
2 b
c.	 y = -2 cos ax + p
4 b
d.	 y = 2 cos ax + p
4 b
	17.	 Find the exact value of y = cos-1 acos 11p
3 b. 
a.	 11p
3
b.	 5p
3
c.	 p
3
d.	 - p
3
	18.	 Find the exact value of y = cos c sin-1 a-4
5b d . 
a.	 3
5
b.	 - 3
5
c.	 3
4
d.	 - 4
3
	19.	 Find the exact value of y = cos-1 acos 7p
4 b. 
a.	 2p
3
b.	 -2p
3
c.	 7p
4
d.	 p
4
	20.	 Find the exact value of y = cos c tan-1 a5
3b d . 
a.	 3
5
b.	 5
34
c.	 5134
34
d.	 3134
34
Practice Test B

566	 Chapter 5      Trigonometric Functions
	 1.	 Solve the equation 3x2 - 30x + 50 = -24.
	 2.	 Find all real number solutions of the equation 
11t + 122 + 211t + 12 = 3. 
	 3.	 Solve the inequality 4 - x
2x - 4 7 0 and write the answer in 
	
	 interval notation. 
	 4.	 Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of the line 
containing the points 13, -12 and 1-6, 52. 
	 5.	 Find the domain of the function f1x2 = ln a
x
2 - xb. 
	 6.	 Identify the basic function and then use transformations to 
sketch the graph of the function f1x2 = 21x - 322 - 5. 
	 7.	 Use transformations to sketch the graph of the function 
f1x2 = 4ex + 1. 
	 8.	 Find and write the domain of 1f ∘g21x2 in interval notation 
	
	 assuming that f1x2 = ln x and g1x2 = - 1
x. 
	 9.	 Determine whether each function has an inverse function. If 
so, find an equation for f -11x2.
a.	 f1x2 = 3x + 7 
b.	 f1x2 = x 
	10.	 Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder. 
	
	 2x4 + 4x3 + x2 + x - 2
x + 2 
	11.	 Find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the graph of 
	
	 f1x2 =
10 - 3x2
x2 + 4x - 5. 
	12.	 Use rules of logarithms to rewrite each expression in the 
expanded form.
a.	 log B
3  x2y
z 
b.	 ln a 7x4
51yb 
	13.	 Sketch the graph of f1x2 = e -ln x if x 7 0
lnx if x 6 0. 
	14.	 Solve the equation log 1x2 + 9x2 = 1. 
	15.	 Find all possible rational zeros of the function 
f1x2 = 2x4 + 5x3 + x2 + 10x - 6. 
	16.	 Use the given trigonometric function value of u to find the 
five other trigonometric function values of an acute angle u. 
Rationalize the denominators where necessary.
a.	 cos u = 3
7 
b.	 sin u = 2
11 
	17.	 Find the exact values of the remaining trigonometric func-
tions of u from the given information.
a.	 cos u = - 4
5, u in quadrant II 
b.	 cot u = 5
12, u in quadrant III 
	18.	 Sketch the graph of each equation over the interval 3-2p, 2p4.
a.	 y = - 1
2 cos 1x + p2 
b.	 y = -5 sin ax + 5p
3 b 
	19.	 Find the exact value of y or state that y is undefined.
a.	 y = cos c sin-1 a- 1
5b d 
b.	 y = sin atan-1 7
2b 
	20.	 Find the exact value of y = cos-1 acos 5p
3 b. 
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–5 

Such varied phenomena as sonic booms from aircraft, musical 
tones, hours of daylight in a given location, current in an 
electric circuit, tides, and rainfall can be described using 
trigonometric functions. Solutions of trigonometric equations 
often provide answers to questions about the conditions 
under which specific characteristics of these phenomena occur. 
In this chapter, we study techniques for solving trigonometric 
equations.
Trigonometric Identities 
and Equations
C h a p t e r 6
Topics
6.1	 Verifying Identities
6.2	 Sum and Difference Formulas
6.3	 Double-Angle and  
Half-Angle Formulas
6.4	 Product-to-Sum and  
Sum-to-Product Formulas
6.5	 Trigonometric Equations I
6.6	 Trigonometric Equations II

568	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Visualizing Trigonometric Functions
Trigonometric functions are commonly defined as the ratios of two sides correspond-
ing to an angle in a right triangle. The Greek mathematician Hipparchus was the first 
person to relate trigonometric functions to a circle. His work allows us to visualize the 
trigonometric functions of an acute angle u as the length of various segments associ-
ated with a unit circle. See Figure 6.1. The figure shows several similar triangles. For 
example, triangles PCT and OCP are similar; so
CT
PC = PC
OC    Sides are proportional.
From Figure 6.1, we use the definitions of trigonometric functions to get
PC = sin u, OC = cos u, and CT = OT - OC = sec u - cos u.
Substituting these values into the equation CT
PC = PC
OC , we obtain
sec u - cos u
sin u
= sin u
cos u.
In Example 6, we verify that this equation is an identity. Recall that an identity is an 
equation that is true for all numbers for which both sides are defined.
In Section 5.3, the six trigonometric functions were defined in terms of the coordinates 
of a point P1x, y2 on a unit circle. Consequently, these functions are related to each other 
and any expression containing these functions can be written in several equivalent ways.
Verifying Identities
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Signs of the trigonometric functions 
(Section 5.3, page 504)
2	 LCD and adding fractions (Section P.5, 
page 50)
3	 Factoring and special products  
(Section P.4, page 40)
4	 Reciprocal, quotient, and Pythagorean 
identities (Sections 5.2 and 5.4)
Objectives
1	 Use fundamental trigonometric identities 
to evaluate trigonometric functions.
2	 Simplify a complicated trigonometric 
expression.
3	 Prove that a given equation is not an 
identity.
4	 Verify a trigonometric identity.
S e c t i o n 6.1
Hipparchus of Rhodes (190–120 b.c.)
Hipparchus was born in Nicaea (now 
called Iznik) in Bithynia (northwest 
Turkey) but spent much of his life in 
Rhodes (Greece). Many historians con-
sider him the founder of trigonometry. 
He introduced trigonometric functions 
in the form of a chord table—the 
ancestor of the sine table found in an-
cient Indian astronomical works. With 
his chord table, Hipparchus could solve 
the height–distance problems of plane 
trigonometry. In his time, there was no 
Greek term for trigonometry because it 
was not counted as a branch of math-
ematics. Rather, trigonometry was just 
an aid to solve problems in astronomy.
Figure 6.1  The unit circle 
and trigonometric functions
O
C
P
T
θ
θ
sin
θ
cos
θ
csc
θ
cot
θ
tan
θ
sec
D
1

	
Section 6.1    ■    Verifying Identities 569
Fundamental Trigonometric Identities
In Chapter 5, we used the definitions of the trigonometric functions to establish reciprocal, 
quotient, and even–odd identities. We also introduced the identity
sin2 x + cos2 x = 1.
This is one of the Pythagorean identities. The name comes from its connection to the 
Pythagorean theorem. (See Figure 6.2.) From
 sin2 x + cos2 x = 1,
 sin2 x
sin2 x + cos2 x
sin2 x =
1
sin2 x    Divide both sides by sin2 x.
 1 + cot2 x = csc2 x    a2
b2 = aa
bb
2
; simplify.
This is also a Pythagorean identity. Next, from
 sin2 x + cos2 x = 1,
 sin2 x
cos2 x + cos2 x
cos2 x =
1
cos2 x    Divide both sides by cos2 x.
 tan2 x + 1 = sec2 x    a2
b2 = aa
bb
2
; simplify.
These three Pythagorean identities, together with the reciprocal, quotient, and even–odd 
identities, are called the fundamental trigonometric identities.
F u n d a m e n ta l  T r i g o n o m e t r i c  I d e n t i t i e s
1.	 Reciprocal Identities
 csc x =
1
sin x   sec x =
1
cos x   cot x =
1
tan x
 sin x =
1
csc x   cos x =
1
sec x   tan x =
1
cot x
2.	 Quotient Identities
tan x = sin x
cos x  cot x = cos x
sin x
3.	 Pythagorean Identities
sin2 x + cos2 x = 1  1 + tan2 x = sec2 x  1 + cot2 x = csc2 x
4.	 Even–Odd Identities
 sin1-x2 = -sin x   cos1-x2 = cos x   tan1-x2 = -tan x
 csc1-x2 = -csc x   sec1-x2 = sec x   cot1-x2 = -cot x
Figure 6.2 
b
1
a
x
a2 + b2 = 1
cos x = a
1 = a
sin x = b
1 = b
sin2 x + cos2 x = 1

570	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Evaluating Trigonometric Functions  
Using the Fundamental Identities
It is frequently helpful to express the Pythagorean identities in equivalent forms.
Pythagorean Identity
Equivalent Forms
sin2 x + cos2 x = 1
e sin2 x = 1 - cos2 x
cos2 x = 1 - sin2 x
1 + cot2 x = csc2 x
e1 = csc2 x - cot2 x
cot2 x = csc2 x - 1
1 + tan2 x = sec2 x
e1 = sec2 x - tan2 x
tan2 x = sec2 x - 1
1	
Use fundamental 
trigonometric identities 
to evaluate trigonometric 
functions.
If cos u = - 5
13 and p 6 u 6 3p
2 , find tan u.
Solution
Because cos u = - 5
13, the reciprocal identity says that sec u = -13
5 .
 tan2 u =  sec2 u - 1
    Equivalent form of 1 + tan2 u = sec2 u,
 tan u = 2sec2 u - 1
    Because u is in quadrant III, tan u is positive.
 = B
a -13
5 b
2
- 1
    Replace sec u with -13
5 .
 = A
169
25 - 1 = A
144
25 = 12
5
Practice Problem 1  If sin u = 4
5 and p
2 6 u 6 p, find cot u.
The next example shows how fundamental trigonometric identities are used to evaluate 
the remaining trigonometric functions from one specified trigonometric function value and 
the quadrant in which the angle lies.
Using Pythagorean and Reciprocal Identities
EXAMPLE 1
Remember that the terminal side of 
an angle determines the quadrant in 
which the angle lies.
Recall
If cot x = 3
4 and p 6 x 6 3p
2 , find the values of the remaining trigonometric functions.
Solution
When given cot x, we can find csc x by using the identity:
 csc2 x = 1 + cot2 x
    Pythagorean identity
 = 1 + a3
4b
2
    Replace cot x with 3
4.
 csc2 x = 1 + 9
16 = 25
16    Simplify.
Using the Fundamental Trigonometric Identities
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 6.1    ■    Verifying Identities 571
 csc x = -5
4
    Square root property: Because x  
is in quadrant III, csc x is negative.
 sin x = -4
5
    sin x =
1
csc x
Multiplying both sides of the quotient identity cos x
sin x = cot x by sin x, we have
 cos x = cot x sin x
 = a3
4ba -4
5b    Substitute values of cot x and sin x.
 = -3
5
    Simplify.
We have the following values of the trigonometric functions:
 sin x = -4
5   cos x = -3
5   tan x = 4
3
 csc x = -5
4   sec x = -5
3   cot x = 3
4    Use the reciprocal identities.
Practice Problem 2  If tan x = -1
2 and p
2 6 x 6 p, find the values of the remaining 
trigonometric functions.
Simplifying a Trigonometric Expression
Recall that when simplifying algebraic expressions, we can use properties of real numbers, 
factoring techniques, and special product formulas. We can also rationalize the denomina-
tor or find the least common denominator. To simplify trigonometric expressions, we use 
these same techniques together with the fundamental trigonometric identities.
2	
Simplify a complicated 
trigonometric expression.
Rewrite the given expression in terms of sines and cosines and then simplify the resulting 
expression.
cot x + tan x + csc x sec x
Solution
cot x + tan x + csc x sec x
 = cos x
sin x + sin x
cos x +
1
sin x #
1
cos x
    Quotient and Reciprocal identities
 = 
cos2 x
sin x cos x +
sin2 x
sin x cos x +
1
sin x cos x    Write each fraction with common  
denominator sin x cos x.
 = cos2 x + sin2 x + 1
sin x cos x
    Add numerators.
 = 
1 + 1
sin x cos x =
2
sin x cos x
    sin2 x + cos2 x = 1
Practice Problem 3  Rewrite the expression in terms of sines and cosines and then 
simplify the resulting expression.
tan x
sec x + 1 +
tan x
sec x - 1
Expressing All Trigonometric Functions in Terms of  
Sines and Cosines to Simplify an Expression
EXAMPLE 3

572	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Trigonometric Equations and Identities
To verify that an equation is a trigonometric identity, you must verify that both sides of the 
equation are equal for all values of the variable for which both sides are defined.
Consider the following equation:
	
cos x = 21 - sin2 x	
(1)
Equation (1) is true for all values of x in the interval c -p
2, p
2 d . See Figure 6.3(a).
3	
Prove that a given equation is 
not an identity.
1.5
1.5


1.5

2

2

1.5
Figure 6.3 
	
x in c -p
2, p
2 d 	
x in 3-p, p4
(a) Graphs of both Y1 and Y2	
(b) The thicker graph is Y2
Y1 = cos x
Y2 = 21 - sin2 x
Because the domain of the sine and cosine functions is the interval 1- ∞, ∞2 and 
the range of the sine function is 3-1, 14, both sides of equation (1) are defined for all 
real numbers. But for any value of x in the interval ap
2, pd , the left side of equation (1) has 
a negative value (because cos x is negative in quadrant II) and the right side of equation (1) 
has a positive value. Therefore, equation (1) is not an identity. Figure 6.3(b) illustrates that 
a graphing calculator can help verify that a given equation is not an identity. Figure 6.3(a), 
however, shows that a graphing calculator cannot prove that a given equation is an identity 
because you might happen to use a viewing window where the graphs coincide.
Prove that the following equation is not an identity.
1sin x - cos x22 = sin2 x - cos2 x
Solution
To prove that the equation is not an identity, we look for a counterexample. That is, we find 
at least one value of x that results in both sides being defined but not equal.
Let x = 0. We know that sin 0 = 0 and cos 0 = 1.
 The left side = 1sin x - cos x22 = 10 - 122 = 1
    Replace x with 0.
 The right side = sin2 x - cos2 x = 1022 - 1122 = -1    Replace x with 0.
For x = 0, the two sides of the equation are not equal; so it is not an identity.
Practice Problem 4  Prove that the equation cos x = 1 - sin x is not an identity.
Process of Verifying Trigonometric Identities
Verifying a trigonometric identity differs from solving an equation. In verifying an identity, 
we are given an equation and want to show that it is true for all values of the variable for 
which both sides of the equation are defined. We will use the following approach.
Proving That an Equation Is Not an Identity
EXAMPLE 4
A counterexample is an example 
that disproves a statement.
Side 
Note
4	
Verify a trigonometric 
identity.

	
Section 6.1    ■    Verifying Identities 573
Methods of Verifying Trigonometric Identities
Verifying trigonometric identities requires practice and experience; there is no set proce-
dure. In the following examples, we suggest five guidelines for verifying trigonometric 
identities, with the first two guidelines being more widely used.
1.	 Start with the more complicated side and transform it to the simpler side.
V e r i f y i n g  T r i g o n o m e t r i c  I d e n t i t i e s
To verify that an equation is an identity, transform one side of the equation into the 
other side by a sequence of steps, each of which produces an identity. The steps 
involved can be algebraic manipulations or can use fundamental identities. Note that 
in verifying an identity, we do not just perform the same operation on both sides of the 
equation; see Exercise 125.
In Example 5, we use a graphing 
calculator to graph
Y1 = csc2 x - 1
cot x
 and Y2 = cot x.
Although not a definitive method of 
proof, the graphs appear identical;  
so the equation in Example 5  
appears to be an identity.
4
4


Graph of Y1
4
4


Graph of Y2
Technology
Connection
Verify the identity:
csc2 x - 1
cot x
= cot x
Solution
We start with the left side of the equation because it appears more complicated than the 
right side.
 csc2 x - 1
cot x
= cot2 x
cot x     csc2 x = 1 + cot2 x, so csc2 x - 1 = cot2 x
 = cot x     Divide out the common factor, cot x.
We have shown that the left side of the equation is equal to the right side, which verifies 
the identity.
Practice Problem 5  Verify the identity:
1 - sin2 x
cos x
= cos x
2.	 Stay focused on the final expression.
While working on one side of the equation, stay focused on your goal of converting it to the 
form on the other side. This often helps in deciding what your next step should be.
Verifying an Identity
EXAMPLE 5
Verify the following identity proposed in the introduction to this section:
sec u - cos u
sin u
= sin u
cos u
Verifying an Identity
EXAMPLE 6

574	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Solution
We start with the more complicated left side; note the other side involves only sin u and 
cos u.
 sec u - cos u
sin u
=
1
cos u - cos u
sin u
    sec u =
1
cos u
 =
a
1
cos u - cos ub cos u
sin u cos u
    Multiply numerator and  
denominator by cos u.
 =
1
cos u # cos u - cos2 u
sin u cos u
    Distributive property
 = 1 - cos2 u
sin u cos u
    Simplify.
 =
sin2 u
sin u cos u
    sin2 u + cos2 u = 1,  
so sin2 u = 1 - cos2 u
 = sin u
cos u
    Divide out the common factor sin u.
The left side is identical to the right side; the given equation is an identity.
Practice Problem 6  In Figure 6.1 on page 568, triangles OPD and TCP are similar.
So OD
OP = PT
CT leads to
csc u
1
=
tan u
sec u - cos u.
Verify that this equation is an identity.
3.	 Convert to sines and cosines.
It may be helpful to rewrite all trigonometric functions in the equation in terms of sines 
and cosines and then simplify.
In Example 6, we use the “Table” 
feature of a graphing calculator in 
radian mode to create a table of 
values for Y1 = sec x - cos x
sin x
 
and Y2 = sin x
cos x for different 
values of x.
Note that Y2 equals 0 when x = 0 
but that Y1 is undefined when 
x = 0. While not a definitive 
method of proof, the table shows 
that the equation in Example 6  
appears to be an identity because 
the table values are identical for 
values of x for which both Y1 and 
Y2 are defined.
Technology
Connection
Verify the identity cot4 x + cot2 x = cot2 x csc2 x.
Solution
We start with the more complicated left side.
 cot4 x + cot2 x = cos4 x
sin4 x + cos2 x
sin2 x
    cot x = cos x
sin x
 = cos4 x
sin4 x + cos2 x
sin2 x # sin2 x
sin2 x     The LCD is sin4 x.
 = cos4 x + cos2 x sin2 x
sin4 x
    Add rational expressions.
 =
cos2 x1cos2 x + sin2 x2
sin4 x
    Factor out cos2 x.
Verifying by Rewriting with Sines and Cosines
EXAMPLE 7

	
Section 6.1    ■    Verifying Identities 575
 =
cos2 x112
sin4 x
    cos2 x + sin2 x = 1
 = cos2 x
sin2 x #
1
sin2 x
    Factor to obtain the form on the  
right side.
 = cot2 x csc2 x
    cot x = cos x
sin x, csc x =
1
sin x
Because the left side is identical to the right side, the given equation is an identity.
Practice Problem 7  Verify the identity tan4 x + tan2 x = tan2 x sec2 x.
You could also verify the identity in Example 7 as follows:
 cot4 x + cot2 x = cot2 x1cot2 x + 12    Distributive property
 = cot2 x csc2 x
    Pythagorean identity
This approach shows that rewriting the expression using only sines and cosines is not 
always the quickest way to verify an identity. It is a useful approach when you are stuck, 
however.
4.	 Work on both sides.
Sometimes it is helpful to work separately on both sides of the equation. To verify the 
identity P1x2 = Q1x2, for example, we transform the left side P1x2 into R1x2 by using 
algebraic manipulations and known identities. Then P1x2 = R1x2 is an identity. Next, we 
transform the right side, Q1x2, into R1x2 so that the equation Q1x2 = R1x2 is an identity. 
It then follows that P1x2 = Q1x2 is an identity. See the next example.
Verify the identity:
1
1 - sin x -
1
1 + sin x = tan2 x + sec2 x + 1
csc x
Solution
We start with the left side of the equation.
1
1 - sin x -
1
1 + sin x	
Begin with the left side.
=
1
1 - sin x # 1 + sin x
1 + sin x -
1
1 + sin x # 1 - sin x
1 - sin x    Rewrite using the LCD, 
11 - sin x211 + sin x2.
= 11 + sin x2 - 11 - sin x2
11 - sin x211 + sin x2
	
Subtract fractions.
= 1 + sin x - 1 + sin x
1 - sin2 x
	
Rewrite the numerator;  
multiply in the denominator.
= 2 sin x
cos2 x 	
Simplify; 1 - sin2 x = cos2 x
Verifying an Identity by Transforming  
Both Sides Separately
EXAMPLE 8

576	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
We now try to convert the right side to the form 2 sin x
cos2 x .
tan2 x + sec2 x + 1
csc x
 = 1tan2 x + 12 + sec2 x
csc x
    Regroup terms.
 = sec2 x + sec2 x
csc x
    tan2 x + 1 = sec2 x
 = 2 sec2 x
csc x
    Simplify.
 = 2 a 1
csc xb sec2 x
    Rewrite.
 = 2 sin x a
1
cos2 xb
    Reciprocal identities
 = 2 sin x
cos2 x
    Multiply.
From the original equation, we see that
Left-Hand Side
Third Expression
Right-Hand Side
1
1 - sin x -
1
1 + sin x  =  2 sin x
cos2 x  =  tan2 x + sec2 x + 1
csc x
.
Because both sides of the original equation are equal to 2 sin x
cos2 x , the identity is verified.
Practice Problem 8  Verify the identity:
tan u + sec u = csc u + 1
cot u
5.	 Use conjugates.
It may be helpful to multiply both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same 
factor. Recall that the sum a + b and the difference a - b are the conjugates of each other 
and that 1a + b21a - b2 = a2 - b2.
Verify the identity:
cos x
1 + sin x = 1 - sin x
cos x
Verifying an Identity by Using a Conjugate
EXAMPLE 9
You cannot verify a trigonometric 
identity that involves rational 
expressions by using cross multipli-
cation because you do NOT know 
the expressions are equal. Equality 
is what you are trying to verify.
Side 
Note

	
Section 6.1    ■    Verifying Identities 577
Solution
We start with the left side of the equation.
 cos x
1 + sin x =
cos x11 - sin x2
11 + sin x211 - sin x2   
Multiply the numerator and the  
denominator by 1 - sin x, the  
conjugate of 1 + sin x.
 = cos x11 - sin x2
1 - sin2 x
   
1a + b21a - b2 = a2 - b2
 = cos x11 - sin x2
cos2 x
    1 - sin2 x = cos2 x
 = 1 - sin x
cos x
    Remove the common factor cos x.
Because the left side is identical to the right side, the given equation is an identity.
Practice Problem 9  Verify the identity:
tan x
sec x + 1 = sec x - 1
tan x
Summary of Main Facts
Guidelines for Verifying Trigonometric Identities
Algebra Operations
Review the procedure for combining fractions by finding the least common denominator.
Fundamental Trigonometric Identities
Review the fundamental trigonometric identities summarized on page 569. Look for an opportunity to apply the  
fundamental trigonometric identities when working on either side of the identity to be verified. Become thoroughly  
familiar with alternative forms of fundamental identities. For example, sin2 x = 1 - cos2 x and sec2 x - tan2 x = 1  
are alternative forms of the fundamental identities sin2 x + cos2 x = 1 and sec2 x = 1 + tan2 x, respectively.
1.	 Start with the more complicated side and transform it to the simpler side.
It is generally helpful to start with the more complicated side of an identity and simplify it until it becomes identical 
to the other side. See Example 5.
2.	 Stay focused on the final expression.
While working on one side of the identity, stay focused on your goal of converting it to the form on the other side. 
See Example 6.
The following three techniques are sometimes helpful.
3.	 Option: Convert to sines and cosines.
Rewrite one side of the identity in terms of sines and cosines. See Example 7.
4.	 Option: Work on both sides.
Transform each side separately to the same equivalent expression. See Example 8.
5.	 Option: Use conjugates.
In expressions containing 1 + sin x, 1 - sin x, 1 + cos x, 1 - cos x, sec x + tan x, and so on, multiply the numera-
tor and the denominator by its conjugate and then use the appropriate Pythagorean identity. See Example 9.

578	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
In calculus, it is sometimes helpful to convert algebraic expressions to trigonomet-
ric ones. This technique is called trigonometric substitution and is illustrated in the next 
example.
Replace x with cos u in the expression 21 - x2 and simplify. Assume 0 ⩽u ⩽p>2.
Solution
 21 - x2 = 21 - cos2 u    Replace x with cos u.
 = 2sin2 u
    Pythagorean identity
 = sin u
    sin u ⩾0 because 0 ⩽u ⩽p
2
Practice Problem 10  Replace x with 3 sin u in the expression 29 - x2 and simplify. 
Assume 0 … u … p
2.
Trigonometric Substitution
EXAMPLE 10
Exercises
section 6.1
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 An equation that is true for all values of the variable in its 
domain is called a(n) 
.
	 2.	 To show that an equation is not an identity, we must find at 
least 
 value(s) of the variable that results in 
both sides being defined but 
.
	 3.	 sin2 x +  
 = 1; 1 +  
 
= sec2 x; csc2 x - cot2 x =  
.
	 4.	 True or False. tan2 x cot x = tan x is not an identity because 
tan2 x cot x is not defined for x = 0 but tan x is defined for 
x = 0. 
	 5.	 True or False. The value of x = 3p
2  can be used to show 
	
	 that sin x = 21 - cos2 x is not an identity. 
	 6.	 True or False. If cos u 6 0 and p 6 u 6 3p
2 , 
	
	 then tan u 6 0. 
	 7.	 If sin u = - 12
13  and p 6 u 6 3p
2 , find  cos u. 
	 8.	 If sec u = 5
4  and  3p
2
6 u 6 2p,  find tan u.  
	 9.	 If cot u = 1
2 and p 6 u 6 3p
2 , find csc u. 
	10.	 If cos u = - 1
3 and p
2 6 u 6 p, find  tan u. 
	11.	 If sin x = - 2
3 and p 6 x 6 3p
2 , find  cot x. 
	12.	 If tan x = 1
2 and p 6 x 6 3p
2 , find  cos x.  
In Exercises 13–24, use the fundamental identities and the 
given information to find the exact values of the remaining 
trigonometric functions of x.
	13.	 cos x = - 3
5 and sin x = 4
5 
	14.	 cos x = 3
5 and sin x = - 4
5 
	15.	 sin x =
1
13
 and cos x = A
2
3 
	16.	 sin x =
1
13
 and cos x = - A
2
3 
Answers to Practice Problems
1. - 3
4  2. sin x = 15
5 , cos x = - 215
5 , sec x = - 15
2 , 
csc x = 15, cot x = -2
3. 2
sin x  4. At x = 3p
2 , 0 ≠2.  10. 3 cos u

	
Section 6.1    ■    Verifying Identities 579
	17.	 tan x = 1
2 and sec x = - 15
2 
	18.	 tan x = 1
2 and sec x = 15
2   
	19.	 csc x = 3 and cot x = 212 
	20.	 csc x = 3 and cot x = -212 
	21.	 cot x = 12
5  and sin x = - 5
13 
	22.	 cot x = - 12
5  and sin x = - 5
13 
	23.	 sec x = 3 and 3p
2
6 x 6 2p 
	24.	 tan x = -2 and p
2 6 x 6 p 
In Exercises 25–30, for each expression in Column I, find the 
expression in Column II that results in an identity when the 
expressions are equated.
	
I	
II
	25.	 cos2 x + sin2 x
sin x cos x 
	26.	
1
1 + tan2 x 
	27.	 -cot x sin 1-x2 
	28.	 1 + 2 cos x + cos2 x 
	29.	 1 - 2 cos2 x + cos4 x 
	30.	 sin2 x11 + cot2 x2 
a.	 cos x
b.	 11 + cos x22
c.	
1
sin x cos x
d.	 sin4 x
e.	 1
f.	 cos2 x
In Exercises 31–40, use the fundamental identities and appro-
priate algebraic operations to simplify each expression.
	31.	 11 + tan x211 - tan x2 + sec2 x 
	32.	 1sec x - 121sec x + 12 - tan2 x 
	33.	 1sec x + tan x21sec x - tan x2 
	34.	 sec2 x - 4
sec x - 2 
	35.	 csc4 x - cot4 x 
	36.	 sin x cos x1tan x + cot x2 
	37.	
sec x csc x1sin x + cos x2
sec x + csc x 
	38.	
1
csc x + 1 -
1
csc x - 1 
	39.	 tan2 x - 2 tan x - 3
tan x + 1 
	40.	 tan2 x + sec x - 1
sec x - 1 
In Exercises 41–46, prove that the given equation is not an 
identity by finding a value of x for which the two sides have 
different values. The answers may vary.
	41.	 sin x = 1 - cos x 
	42.	 tan x = sec x - 1 
	43.	 cos x = 21 - sin2 x 
	44.	 sec x = 21 + tan2 x 
	45.	 sin2 x = 11 - cos x22 
	46.	 cot2 x = 1csc x + 122 
In Exercises 47–52, use a graphing calculator to determine 
whether the equation could be an identity by graphing each 
side of the equation on the same screen. Then prove or dis-
prove the statement algebraically.
	47.	 cos2 x - sin2 x = 2 cos2 x - 1 
	48.	 1sin x + cos x22 - 1 = 2 sin x cos x 
	49.	 sin x + cos x = 1 
	50.	 sin 2x
2
= sin x 
	51.	
sin2 x
1 + cos x = 1 - cos x 
	52.	 sin x = cos x tan x 
In Exercises 53–58, use the “Table” feature of a graphing 
calculator in radian mode to calculate each side of the equa-
tion for different values of x. Determine whether the equation 
could be an identity. Then prove or disprove the statement 
algebraically.
	53.	 sin x cot x = cos x 
	54.	 sec x cot x = csc x 
	55.	 tan x - 1
tan x + 1 = 1 - cot x
1 + cot x 
	56.	 sin2 x sec2 x + 1 = sec2 x 
	57.	 tan 2x = 2 tan x 
	58.	 11 - sin x22 = cos x 
In Exercises 59–94, verify each identity.
	59.	 sin x tan x + cos x = sec x
	60.	 cos x cot x + sin x = csc x
	61.	 1 - 4 cos2 x
1 - 2 cos x = 1 + 2 cos x
	62.	 9 - 16 sin2 x
3 + 4 sin x
= 3 - 4 sin x
	63.	 1cos x - sin x21cos x + sin x2 = 1 - 2 sin2 x
	64.	 1sin x - cos x21sin x + cos x2 = 1 - 2 cos2 x
	65.	 sin2 x cot2 x + sin2 x = 1
	66.	 tan2 x - sin2 x = sin4 x sec2 x
	67.	 sin3 x - cos3 x = 1sin x - cos x211 + sin x cos x2
	68.	 sin3 x + cos3 x = 1sin x + cos x211 - sin x cos x2
	69.	 cos4 x - sin4 x = 1 - 2 sin2 x
	70.	 cos4 x - sin4 x = 2 cos2 x - 1
	71.	
1
1 - sin x +
1
1 + sin x = 2 sec2 x
	72.	
1
1 - cos x +
1
1 + cos x = 2 csc2 x
	73.	
1
csc x - 1 -
1
csc x + 1 = 2 tan2 x
	74.	
1
sec x - 1 +
1
sec x + 1 = 2 sec x cot2 x

580	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
	 75.	 sec2 x + csc2 x = sec2 x csc2 x
	 76.	 cot2 x + tan2 x = sec2 x csc2 x - 2
	 77.	
1
sec x - tan x +
1
sec x + tan x =
2
cos x
	 78.	
1
csc x + cot x +
1
csc x - cot x =
2
sin x
	 79.	
sin x
1 + cos x = csc x - cot x
	 80.	
sin x
1 - cos x = csc x + cot x
	 81.	 1sin x + cos x22 = 1 + 2 sin x cos x
	 82.	 1sin x - cos x22 = 1 - 2 sin x cos x
	 83.	 11 + tan x22 = sec2 x + 2 tan x
	 84.	 11 - cot x22 = csc2 x - 2 cot x
	 85.	
tan x sin x
tan x + sin x = tan x - sin x
tan x sin x
	 86.	
cot x cos x
cot x + cos x = cot x - cos x
cot x cos x
	 87.	 1tan x + cot x22 = sec2 x + csc2 x
	 88.	 11 + cot2 x211 + tan2 x2 =
1
sin2 x cos2 x
	 89.	 sin2 x - cos2 x
sec2 x - csc2 x = sin2 x cos2 x
	 90.	 atan x +
1
cot xbacot x +
1
tan xb = 4
	 91.	
tan x
1 + sec x + 1 + sec x
tan x
= 2 csc x
	 92.	
cot x
1 + csc x + 1 + csc x
cot x
= 2 sec x
	 93.	 sin x + tan x
cos x + 1
= tan x
	 94.	
sin x
1 + tan x =
cos x
1 + cot x
In Exercises 95–100, make the indicated trigonometric  
substitution in the given algebraic expression and simplify.
Assume 0 * U * P
2 .
	 95.	 21 + x2, x = tan u 
	 96.	 24 - x2, x = 2 cos u 
	 97.	 2x2 - 1, x = sec u 
	 98.	 2x2 - 4, x = 2 sec u 
	 99.	
x
21 - x2, x = cos u 
	100.	
x
2x2 - 1
, x = sec u 
Applying the Concepts
	101.	 Length of a ladder. A ladder x feet long makes an angle 
u with the horizontal and reaches a height of 20 feet. 
	
	 Then x =
20
 sin u. Use a reciprocal identity to rewrite this 
	
	 formula. 
	102.	 Distance from a building. From a distance of x feet to a 
60-foot-high building, the angle of elevation is u degrees. 
	
	 Then x =
60
 tan u. Use a reciprocal identity to rewrite this 
	
	 formula. 
	103.	 Intersecting lines. If two nonvertical and nonperpendicu-
lar lines with slopes m1 and m21m1 7 m22 intersect, then 
the acute angle u between the lines satisfies the  
equation m1 cos u - sin u = m2 cos u + m1m2 sin u. 
Rewrite this equation in terms of a single trigonometric 
function. 
	104.	 Tower height. The angles to the top of a tower measured 
from two locations d units apart are a and b as shown in the 
figure. The height h of the tower satisfies the equation 
	
	 h =
d sin a sin b
cos a sin b - sin a cos b. Rewrite this equation in 
	
	 terms of cotange	nts.   
	
	
h
d


Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 105–109, verify each identity.
	105.	 1 - sin x
1 - sec x - 1 + sin x
1 + sec x = 2 cot x1cos x - csc x2
	106.	 sec x + tan x
csc x + cot x - sec x - tan x
csc x - cot x = 21sec x - csc x2
	107.	 11 - tan x22 + 11 - cot x22 = 1sec x - csc x22
	108.	 sec6 x - tan6 x = 1 + 3 tan2 x + 3 tan4 x
	109.	 cot x + csc x - 1
cot x + csc x + 1 = 1 - sin x
cos x
	110.	 tan x + sec x - 1
tan x - sec x + 1 = 1 + sin x
cos x
In Exercises 111–120, simplify each expression. Answer may 
vary.
	111.	 1sin u cos v + cos u sin v22 + 1cos u cos v - sin u sin v22
	112.	 1sin u cos v - cos u sin v22 + 1cos u cos v + sin u sin v22
	113.	 31sin4 x + cos4 x2 - 21sin6 x + cos6 x2   

	
Section 6.1    ■    Verifying Identities 581
	114.	 sin6 x + cos6 x - 3 cos4 x 
	115.	 1 - cos u
1 + cos u + 1 + cos u
1 - cos u 
	116.	 cos3 u + sin3 u
cos u + sin u
+ cos3 u - sin3 u
cos u - sin u 
	117.	 sec2 u + 2 tan2 u
1 + 3 tan2 u 
	118.	 csc2 a + sec2 a
csc2 a - sec2 a - 1 + tan2 a
1 - tan2 a 
	119.	 cos2 x13 - 4 cos2 x22 + sin2 x13 - 4 sin2 x22 
	120.	 1sin u + csc u22 + 1cos u + sec u22 - cot2 u 
	121.	 If x = r cos u cos v, y = r cos u sin v, and z = r sin u, 
verify that x2 + y2 + z2 = r2.
	122.	 If tan x + cot x = 2, show that
a.	 tan2 x + cot2 x = 2.
b.	 tan3 x + cot3 x = 2.
	123.	 If sec x + cos x = 2, show that
a.	 sec2 x + cos2 x = sec4 x + cos4 x = 2
b.	 sec3 x + cos3 x = 2.
	124.	 If sin x + sin2 x = 1, show that cos2 x + cos4 x = 1.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	125.	 Consider the equation x = -x, which is not an identity.  
If you square both sides, you get x2 = 1-x22, which is an 
identity. This shows that performing the same operation on 
both sides of an equation (a nonidentity) may lead to an 
identity.
	
	 	
Consider the equation 2sin2 x = sin x.
a.	 Find a value of x that shows that this equation is not an 
identity. 
b.	 Show that squaring both sides of this equation results in 
an identity.
	126.	 If x and y are real numbers, explain why sec u cannot be 
	
	 equal to 
xy
x2 + y2.
	127.	 Find values of t for which sin u = 1 + t2
1 - t2 is possible. 
	128.	 Find values of a and b for which cos2 u = a2 + b2
2ab
 is 
	
	 possible. 
	129.	 Find values of a and b for which csc2 u =
2ab
a2 + b2 is 
	
	 possible. 
	130.	 Prove that the following inequalities are true for 0 6 u 6 p
2.
a.	 sin2 u + csc2 u Ú 2
b.	 cos2 u + sec2 u Ú 2
c.	 sec2 u + csc2 u Ú 4
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 131 and 132, expand each expression.
	131.	 12x - y22 
	132.	 13x - 5y22
In Exercises 133–135, find the exact value.
	133.	 sin a- p
6 b 
	134.	 cos a- p
6 b 
	135.	 tan a- p
6 b
In Exercises 136–138, identify the Pythagorean identity for 
which each expression is an equivalent form.
	136.	 cos2 x = 1 - sin2 x 
	137.	 sec2 x - tan2 x = 1 
	138.	 cot2x = csc2 x - 1 
	139.	 Find sin t, given that cos t = - 13
4  and sin t 7 0.
	140.	 Find cos t, given that tan t = 4
3 and t is in quadrant III.    

582	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine
In this section, we develop identities involving the sum and difference of two variables,  
u and v. The variables represent any two real numbers, or angles (in radian or degree  
measure).
Sum and Difference Formulas
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Distance formula (Section 2.1, page 159)
2	 Fundamental trigonometric identities 
(Section 6.1, page 569)
3	 Trigonometric functions of common  
angles (Section 5.2, page 491)
Objectives
1	 Use the sum and difference formulas  
for cosine.
2	 Use the cofunction identities.
3	 Use the sum and difference formulas  
for sine.
4	 Use the sum and difference formulas  
for tangent.
S e c t i o n 6.2
Pure Tones in Music
A vibrating part of an instrument transmits its vibrations to the air, and they travel 
away as sound waves. The number of complete cycles per second traveled by a wave 
is called its frequency and is denoted by f. The unit of frequency, cycles per second, is 
also called hertz (abbreviated Hz) after Gustav Hertz, the discoverer of radio waves. 
The note A in the octave above middle C has a frequency of 440 Hz, or 440 cycles per 
second. Therefore, the time between waves is 
1
440 second. We define this time 
between waves as the period T : T = 1
f. You hear the sound produced by note A when 
the vibration from the source travels to your ear and puts pressure on your eardrum.
A pure tone is a tone in which the vibration is a simple harmonic of just one fre-
quency. The simple harmonic of a pure tone with frequency f can be described by the 
equation
y = a sin12pft2,
where a  is the amplitude (indicating loudness), t is the time in seconds, and y is the 
pressure of a pure tone on an eardrum (in pounds per square foot). In Example 10,  
we consider the pressure due to two pure tones of the same frequency.
1	
Use the sum and difference 
formulas for cosine.
S u m  a n d  D i f f e r e n c e  F o r m u l a s  f o r  C o s i n e
 cos1u + v2 = cos u cos v - sin u sin v
 cos1u - v2 = cos u cos v + sin u sin v

	
Section 6.2    ■    Sum and Difference Formulas 583
To prove the second formula, we assume that 0 6 v 6 u 6 2p, although this identity is 
true for all real numbers u and v. Figure 6.4(a) shows points P and Q on the unit circle on 
the terminal sides of angles u and v. The definition of the circular functions tells us that 
P = 1cos u, sin u2 and Q = 1cos v, sin v2. In Figure 6.4(b), we rotated angle 1u - v2 
to standard position and labeled point B on the unit circle and the terminal side of the 
angle 1u - v2.
We know that triangle POQ in Figure 6.4(a) is congruent to triangle BOA in Figure 6.4(b) 
by SAS (side-angle-side) congruence; so
 d1P, Q2 = d1A, B2
 3d1P, Q242 = 3d1A, B242 (1)    Square both sides.
Now use the distance formula to simplify the left side of equation (1).
 3d1P, Q242 = 1cos u - cos v22 + 1sin u - sin v22	
Distance formula
 = cos2 u - 2 cos u cos v + cos2 v	
1a - b22 = a2 - 2ab + b2
+ sin2 u - 2 sin u sin v + sin2 v
 = 1cos2 u + sin2 u2 + 1cos2 v + sin2 v2	
Combine terms.
- 21cos u cos v + sin u sin v2
 = 1 + 1 - 21cos u cos v + sin u sin v2	
Pythagorean identity
 3d1P, Q242 = 2 - 21cos u cos v + sin u sin v2	
Simplify.
Now simplify the right side of equation (1).
x
y
A(1, 0)
O
O
Q(cos u, sin u)
P(cos u, sin u)
u
u
u  u
(a)
x
y
A(1, 0)
B(cos(u  u), sin(u  u))
u  u
(b)
Figure 6.4 
 3d1A, B242 = 3cos1u - v2 - 142 + 3sin1u - v2 - 042	
Distance formula
 = cos21u - v2 - 2 cos1u - v2 + 1 + sin21u - v2	
Expand binomial.
 = 3cos21u - v2 + sin21u - v24 + 1 - 2 cos1u - v2	
Combine terms.
 = 1 + 1 - 2 cos1u - v2	
Pythagorean identity
 3d1A, B242 = 2 - 2 cos1u - v2	
Simplify.
Because 3d1A, B242 = 3d1P, Q242,
We have proved the formula for the cosine of the difference of two angles or two real 
numbers.
The distance d1P, Q2 between two 
points P1x1, y12 and Q1x2, y22 is 
given by
d1P, Q2 =
21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122.
Recall
 2 - 2 cos1u - v2 = 2 - 21cos u cos v + sin u sin v2	
Substitute in each side.
 cos 1u −V2 = cos u cos V + sin u sin V	
Simplify.

584	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Find the exact value of cos p
12 by using p
12 = p
3 - p
4.
Solution
We use the exact values of the trigonometric functions of p
3  and p
4  as well as the difference 
formula for cosine.
 cos p
12 = cos ap
3 - p
4 b	
p
3 - p
4 = 4p
12 - 3p
12 = p
12
 = cos p
3  cos p
4 + sin p
3  sin p
4 	
Formula for cos1u - v2
 = 1
2 # 12
2
+ 13
2 # 12
2 	
Use exact values. See page 491.
 = 12 + 16
4
	
Multiply and add.
Practice Problem 1  Find the exact value of  cos 15° by using 15° = 45° - 30°.
The difference formula for cos1u - v2 is true for all real numbers and angles u and v. 
We can use this formula and the even–odd identities to prove the formula for cos1u + v2.
 cos1u + v2 = cos3u - 1-v24	
u + v = u - 1-v2
 = cos u cos1-v2 + sin u sin1-v2	
Difference formula for cosine
 = cos u cos v + sin u1-sin v2	
cos1-v2 = cos v; sin1-v2 = -sin v
 cos 1u + V2 = cos u cos V −sin u sin V	
Simplify.
We have proved the formula for the cosine of the sum of two angles or two real numbers.
Using the Difference Formula for Cosine
EXAMPLE 1
Find the exact value of cos 75° by using 75° = 45° + 30°.
Solution
cos 75° = cos145° + 30°2	
75° = 45° + 30°
= cos 45° cos 30° - sin 45° sin 30°	
Sum formula for cosine
= 12
2 # 13
2
- 12
2 # 1
2	
Use exact values.
= 16
4
- 12
4 	
Multiply.
= 16 - 12
4
	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 2  Find the exact value of cos 7p
12  by using 7p
12 = p
3 + p
4.
Cofunction Identities
Two trigonometric functions f  and g are called cofunctions if
f  ap
2 - xb = g1x2 and g ap
2 - xb = f 1x2.
Using the Sum Formula for Cosine
EXAMPLE 2
2	
Use the cofunction identities.
The cosine function is even:
cos1-x2 = cos1x2.
The sine function is odd:
sin1-x2 = -sin1x2.
Recall
Although a calculator will give 
only a decimal approximation for 
irrational numbers, you can use one 
to check your work. Remember to 
use radian mode.
Technology 
Connection

	
Section 6.2    ■    Sum and Difference Formulas 585
We derive two cofunction identities.
 cos1u - v2 = cos u cos v + sin u sin v	
Difference formula for cosine
 cos ap
2 - vb = cos p
2 cos v + sin p
2 sin v
	
Replace u with p
2.
 = 0 # cos v + 1 # sin v = sin v	
cos p
2 = 0; sin p
2 = 1
The result is a cofunction identity that holds for any real number v or angle v in radian 
measure:
cos aP
2 −Vb = sin V
If we replace v with p
2 - v in the identity cos ap
2 - vb = sin v, we have
 cosc p
2 - ap
2 - vb d = sin ap
2 - vb	
Replace v with p
2 - v.
 cos v = sin ap
2 - vb	
Simplify.
So	
sin aP
2 −Vb = cos V.
B a s i c  C o f u n c t i o n  I d e n t i t i e s
If v is any real number or angle measured in radians, then
 cos ap
2 - vb = sin v
 sin ap
2 - vb = cos v
If angle v is measured in degrees, then replace p
2  with 90° in these identities.
Prove that for any real number x, tan ap
2 - xb = cot x.
Solution
 tan ap
2 - xb =
sin ap
2 - xb
cos ap
2 - xb
   
Quotient identity
 = cos x
sin x
    Use cofunction identities.
 = cot x
    Quotient identity
Practice Problem 3  Prove that for any real number x, sec ap
2 - xb = csc x.
Using Cofunction Identities
EXAMPLE 3
For an acute angle v, these  
cofunction identities were  
established in Section 5.2.
Side 
Note

586	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine
To prove the difference formula for the sine function, we start with a cofunction identity.
 sin1u - v2 = cos c p
2 - 1u - v2 d 	
Cofunction identity
 = cos c ap
2 - ub + vd 	
p
2 - 1u - v2 =
	
ap
2 - ub + v
 = cos ap
2 - ub cos v - sin ap
2 - ub sin v	
Sum formula for cosine
 = sin u cos v - cos u sin v	
Cofunction identities
We have the difference formula for sine:
sin 1u −V2 = sin u cos V −cos u sin V,
which holds for all real numbers u and v. If we replace v with -v, we derive the sum 
formula for sine.
 sin1u + v2 = sin3u - 1-v24	
u + v = u - 1-v2
 = sin u cos1-v2 - cos u sin1-v2	
Difference formula for sine
 = sin u cos v - cos u1-sin v2	
cos1-v2 = cos v; 
	
sin1-v2 = -sin v
 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v	
Simplify.
This proves the sum formula for sine:
sin 1u + V2 = sin u cos V + cos u sin V
3	
Use the sum and difference 
formulas for sine.
S u m  a n d  D i f f e r e n c e  F o r m u l a s  f o r  S i n e
 sin1u + v2 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v
 sin1u - v2 = sin u cos v - cos u sin v
In general,
 sin1u { v2 ≠sin u {  sin v
 cos1u { v2 ≠cos u { cos v
Warning
Prove the identity sin1p - x2 = sin x.
Solution
sin1p - x2 = sin p cos x - cos p sin x    Difference formula for sine
= 102 cos x - 1-12 sin x	
sin p = 0; cos p = -1
= sin x	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 4  Prove the identity sin1p + x2 = -sin x.
Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine
EXAMPLE 4

	
Section 6.2    ■    Sum and Difference Formulas 587
Find the exact value of sin 63° cos 27° + cos 63° sin 27° without using a calculator.
Solution
The given expression is the right side of the sum formula for sine:
 sin1u + v2 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v
 sin 63° cos 27° + cos 63° sin 27° = sin163° + 27°2
    u = 63°, v = 27°
 = sin 90° = 1
Practice Problem 5  Find the exact value of sin 43° cos 13° - cos 43° sin 13°  
without using a calculator.
Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine
EXAMPLE 5
Let sin u = -3
5 and cos v = 12
13, with p 6 u 6 3p
2  and 3p
2
6 v 6 2p. Find the exact 
value of sin1u + v2.
Solution
Given sin u = -3
5 with u in quadrant III, we find the exact value of cos u.
cos2 u = 1 - sin2 u	
Pythagorean identity
cos u = - 21 - sin2 u	
In quadrant III, cos u is negative.
= - B
1 - a -3
5b
2
	
Replace sin u with -3
5.
= - A1 - 9
25	
a -3
5b
2
= 9
25
= - A
16
25	
1 - 9
25 = 25
25 - 9
25 = 16
25
cos u = -4
5
Similarly, given cos v = 12
13 with v in quadrant IV, we find the exact value of sin v.
 sin v = - 21 - cos2 v	
In quadrant IV, sin v is negative.
 = -B
1 - a12
13b
2
	
Replace cos v with 12
13.
 = - A
25
169	
1 - a12
13b
2
= 1 - 144
169 = 169 - 144
169
 sin v = - 5
13
 sin1u + v2 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v	
Sum formula for sine
 = a -3
5ba12
13b + a -4
5ba - 5
13b    Replace values of sin u, sin v,  
	
cos u, and cos v.
 = -36
65 + 20
65 = -16
65	
Multiply and add.
The exact value of sin1u + v2 is -16
65.
Finding the Exact Value of a Sum
EXAMPLE 6
Because 
sec1u { v2 =
1
cos1u { v2 
and 
csc1u { v2 =
1
sin1u { v2 
the sum and difference formulas 
for the sine and cosine can be used 
to find secant and cosecant values 
as well.
Side  
Note

588	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Practice Problem 6  For the angles u and v in Example 6, find the exact value of 
cos1u + v2.
Verify the identity sin1x - y2
cos x cos y = tan x - tan y.
Solution
We start with the more complicated left side.
sin1x - y2
cos x cos y = sin x cos y - cos x sin y
cos x cos y
	
Formula for sin1u - v2
= sin x cos y
cos x cos y - cos x sin y
cos x cos y	
a - b
c
= a
c - b
c
= sin x
cos x - sin y
cos y	
Remove common factors.
= tan x - tan y	
Quotient identity
Because the left side is identical to the right side, the given equation is an identity.
Practice Problem 7  Verify the following identity: 
cos1x + y2
sin x sin y
= cot x cot y - 1
Reduction Formula
Figure 6.5 suggests that a point 1a, b2 is on the terminal side of an angle u in standard 
position if and only if
cos u =
a
2a2 + b2 and sin u =
b
2a2 + b2.
Using these values for cos u and sin u in the sum formula for the sine, we obtain
sin1x + u2 = sin x cos u + cos x sin u	
Sum formula for sine
sin1x + u2 = sin x 
a
2a2 + b2 + cos x 
b
2a2 + b2
Multiplying both sides of this equation by 2a2 + b2, we have the reduction formula:
2a2 + b2 sin1x + u2 = a sin x + b cos x
Verifying an Identity by Using a Sum or Difference Formula
EXAMPLE 7
R e d u c t i o n  F o r m u l a
If 1a, b2 is any point on the terminal side of an angle u (radians) in standard position, then
a sin x + b cos x = 2a2 + b2 sin1x + u2
for any real number x, where cos u =
a
2a2 + b2 and sin u =
b
2a2 + b2.
x
y
(a, b)
r
r  √a2  b2
θ
a = r cos u b = r sin u
Figure 6.5 

	
Section 6.2    ■    Sum and Difference Formulas 589
Find an angle u, in radians, and a real number A such that
sin x - 13 cos x = A sin 1x + u2.
Solution
Note that by the reduction formula,
 sin x - 13 cos x = a sin x + b cos x    a = 1 and b = - 13
 = A sin 1x + u2,
where A = 2a2 + b2 = 212 + 1- 1322 = 14 = 2 and u is any angle in standard 
position that has the point 1a, b2 = 11, - 132 on its terminal side. One such angle is 
u = tan-1ab
ab = tan-11- 132 = -p
3. Then with A = 2 and u = -p
3, we have
sin x - 13 cos x = 2 sin c x + a -p
3 b d = 2 sin ax - p
3 b. 
Practice Problem 8  Find an angle u, in radians, and a real number A such that 
sin x + 13 cos x = A sin1x + u2.
Using the Reduction Formula
EXAMPLE 8
Sketch two cycles of the graph of the equation y = sin x - 13 cos x.
Solution
Example 8 shows that sin x - 13 cos x = 2 sin ax - p
3 b. Therefore, the graphs 
of y = sin x - 13 cos x and y = 2 sin ax - p
3 b are the same. The graph of 
y = 2 sin ax - p
3 b is a sine wave with amplitude 2, period 2p, and phase shift 
p
3  units to the right. Two cycles of the graph of y = 2 sin ax - p
3 b = sin x - 13 cos x 
are shown in Figure 6.6.
Practice Problem 9  Sketch two cycles of the graph of y = sin x + 13 cos x.
Using the Reduction Formula to Sketch a Graph
EXAMPLE 9
1
1
2
2
π
3
5

π

π
π
3
7
π
3
y
x
y = sin  x  √3 cos x
Figure 6.6 
Suppose the pressure exerted by two pure tones (in pounds per square foot) after t seconds 
is given by
y1 = 0.3 sin1800pt2 and y2 = 0.4 cos1800pt2.
Find the amplitude, period, frequency, and phase shift for the total pressure y = y1 + y2.
Solution
We have y = 0.3 sin1800pt2 + 0.4 cos1800pt2. We use the reduction formula with 
a = 0.3 and b = 0.4 to rewrite this equation in the form
y = A sin1800pt + u2 = A sin c 800p at +
u
800pb d ,
Combining Two Pure Tones
EXAMPLE 10

590	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
where
A = 2a2 + b2 = 210.322 + 10.422 = 0.5
and 10.3, 0.42 is a point on the terminal side of u. One such angle is u = tan-1 a0.4
0.3b.
For the total pressure,
 y = A sin c 800p at +
u
800pb d
 = 0.5 sin c 800p at +
u
800pb d    
A = 0.5
 amplitude = 0.5
 period =
2p
800p =
1
400
 frequency = 400
    Frequency =
1
Period
 phase shift = -
u
800p ≈-0.00037
    Use a calculator in radian mode 
	
with u = tan-1 a0.4
0.3b.
Practice Problem 10  Find the amplitude, period, frequency, and phase shift of the total 
pressure due to the pressure from the two pure tones
y1 = 0.1 sin1400t2 and y2 = 0.2 cos1400t2.
Sum and Difference Formulas for Tangent
We use the quotient identity tan x = sin x
cos x and the formulas for sin 1u - v2 and cos 1u - v2 
to derive a difference formula for tangent.
 tan1u - v2 = sin1u - v2
cos1u - v2	
Quotient identity
 = sin u cos v - cos u sin v 
cos u cos v + sin u sin v 	
Formulas for sin1u - v2 and cos1u - v2
 =
sin u cos v
cos u cos v - cos u sin v
cos u cos v
cos u cos v
cos u cos v + sin u sin v
cos u cos v
	
Divide numerator and denominator by  
cos u cos v.
 =
sin u
cos u - sin v
cos v
1 + sin u sin v
cos u cos v
	
Simplify.
 =
tan u - tan v
1 + tan u tan v
	
Quotient identity
We have derived the difference formula for the tangent:
 tan1u −V2 =
tan u −tan V
1 + tan u tan V
4	
Use the sum and difference 
formulas for tangent.

	
Section 6.2    ■    Sum and Difference Formulas 591
Replacing v with -v in the difference formula, we have
 tan1u + v2 = tan3u - 1-v24    u + v = u - 1-v2
 =
tan u - tan1-v2
1 + tan u tan1-v2    Formula for tan1u - v2
 =
tan u - 1-tan v2
1 + tan u 1-tan v2    tan1-v2 = -tan v
 =
tan u + tan v
1 - tan u tan v
    Simplify.
We now have the sum formula for tangent:
tan 1u + V2 =
tan u + tan V
1 −tan u tan V
Verify the identity tan1p - x2 = -tan x.
Solution
Apply the difference formula for the tangent to tan1p - x2.
 tan1p - x2 =
tan p - tan x
1 + tan p tan x
    Replace u with p and v with x in  
the formula for tan1u - v2.
 =
0 - tan x
1 + 0 # tan x
    tan p = 0
 = -tan x
    Simplify.
Therefore, the given equation is an identity.
Practice Problem 11  Verify the identity tan1p + x2 = tan x.
The important identities involving the sum, difference, and cofunctions of two numbers or 
angles are summarized next.
Verifying an Identity
EXAMPLE 11
Summary of Main Facts
Sum and Difference Formula
 cos1u - v2 = cos u cos v + sin u sin v     cos1u + v2 = cos u cos v - sin u sin v 
 sin1u - v2 = sin u cos v - cos u sin v     sin1u + v2 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v
 tan1u - v2 =
tan u - tan v
1 + tan u tan v    
 tan1u + v2 =
tan u + tan v
1 - tan u tan v
Cofunction Identities
 sin ap
2 - xb = cos x    cos ap
2 - xb = sin x     tan ap
2 - xb = cot x
 csc ap
2 - xb = sec x 
 sec ap
2 - xb = csc x 
 cot ap
2 - xb = tan x
Reduction Formula
If 1a, b2 is any point on the terminal side of an angle u (radians) in standard position, then for any real number x,
a sin x + b cos x = 2a2 + b2 sin1x + u2,
where  cos u =
a
2a2 + b2  and  sin u =
b
2a2 + b2.

592	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 16 + 12
4
  2. 12 - 16
4
  5. 1
2  6. - 63
65  8. A = 2, u = p
3
9. 
2
2
π
3

π
2
π
3
π
3
π
11
y
x
y = sin x  √3 cos x
10. Amplitude = 0.115; period =
p
200; frequency = 200
p ;
phase shift ≈-0.0028
Exercises
section 6.2
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 sin1A + B2 =
.
	 2.	 cos A cos B - sin A sin B =
.
	 3.	 tan1A + B2 =
.
	 4.	 True or False. cos c p
2 + xd = sin x 
	 5.	 True or False. sin c p
2 + xd = cos x 
	 6.	 True or False. tan1x + y2 = tan x + tan y 
In Exercises 7–26, find the exact value of each expression.
	 7.	 sin145° + 30°2 
	 8.	 sin145° - 30°2 
	 9.	 sin160° - 45°2 
	10.	 sin160° + 45°2 
	11.	 sin1-105°2 
	12.	 cos 285° 
	13.	 tan 225° 
	14.	 tan1-165°2 
	15.	 sin ap
6 + p
4 b 
	16.	 cos ap
3 - p
4 b 
	17.	 tan ap
4 - p
6 b 
	18.	 cot ap
3 - p
4 b 
	19.	 sec ap
3 + p
4 b 
	20.	 csc ap
4 - p
3 b 
	21.	 cos -5p
12 
	22.	 sin 7p
12 
	23.	 tan 19p
12 
	24.	 sec p
12 
	25.	 tan 17p
12 
	26.	 csc 11p
12 
In Exercises 27–40, verify each identity.
	27.	 sin ax + p
2 b = cos x
	28.	 cos ax + p
2 b = -sin x
	29.	 sin ax - p
2 b = -cos x
	30.	 cos ax - p
2 b = sin x
	31.	 tan ax + p
2 b = -cot x
	32.	 tan ax - p
2 b = -cot x
33.	 csc1x + p2 = -csc x
	34.	 sec1x + p2 = -sec x
	35.	 cos ax + 3p
2 b = sin x
	36.	 cos ax - 3p
2 b = -sin x
	37.	 tan ax - 3p
2 b = -cot x
	38.	 tan ax + 3p
2 b = -cot x
	39.	 cot13p - x2 = -cot x
	40.	 csc a5p
2
- xb = sec x
In Exercises 41–50, find the exact value of each expression 
without using a calculator.
	41.	 sin 56° cos 34° + cos 56° sin 34° 
	42.	 cos 57° cos 33° - sin 57° sin 33° 
	43.	 cos 331° cos 61° + sin 331° sin 61° 
	44.	 cos 110° sin 70° + sin 110° cos 70° 
	45.	 tan 129° - tan 84°
1 + tan 129° tan 84° 
	46.	 tan 28° + tan 17°
1 - tan 28° tan 17° 
	47.	 sin 7p
12  cos 3p
12 - cos 7p
12  sin 3p
12 
	48.	 cos 5p
12  cos p
12 - sin 5p
12  sin p
12 
	49.	
tan 5p
12 - tan 2p
12
1 + tan 5p
12  tan 2p
12 
	50.	
tan 5p
12 + tan 7p
12
1 - tan 5p
12  tan 7p
12 
In Exercises 51–56, find the exact value of each expression, 
given that tan u = 3
4, with u in quadrant III, and sin V = 5
13, 
with V in quadrant II.
	51.	 sin1u - v2 
	52.	 sin1u + v2 
	53.	 cos1u + v2   
	54.	 cos1u - v2   
	55.	 tan1u + v2 
	56.	 tan1u - v2 

	
Section 6.2    ■    Sum and Difference Formulas 593
In Exercises 57–62, find the exact value of each expression, 
given that cos A = −2
5, with A in quadrant II, and 
sin B = −3
7, with B in quadrant IV.
	 57.	 sin1a - b2 
	 58.	 cos1a - b2 
	 59.	 csc1a + b2 
	 60.	 sec1a + b2 
	 61.	 cot1a - b2 
	 62.	 cot1a + b2 
In Exercises 63–70, verify each identity.
	 63.	
sin1x + y2
cos x cos y = tan x + tan y
	 64.	
sin1x + y2
sin x sin y
= cot x + cot y
	 65.	
cos1x + y2
cos x cos y = 1 - tan x tan y
	 66.	
cos1x - y2
sin x sin y
= cot x cot y + 1
	 67.	
cos1x - y2
sin1x + y2 = 1 + cot x cot y
cot x + cot y
	 68.	
cos1x + y2
sin1x - y2 = 1 - cot x cot y
cot x - cot y
	 69.	
sin1x - y2
sin1x + y2 = cot y - cot x
cot y + cot x
	 70.	
cos1x + y2
cos1x - y2 = cot x cot y - 1
cot x cot y + 1
In Exercises 71–78, rewrite each equation in the form 
y = A sin 1x + U2; graph the resulting equation. If U is  
not a common angle, approximate its value to the nearest 
thousandth of the radian.
	 71.	 y = sin x + cos x 
	 72.	 y = sin x - cos x 
	 73.	 y = 3 sin x + 4 cos x 
	 74.	 y = 4 sin x - 3 cos x 
	 75.	 y = 5 sin x - 12 cos x 
	 76.	 y = 12 sin x + 5 cos x 
	 77.	 y = cos x - 3 sin x 
	 78.	 y = 3 cos x - 4 sin x 
Applying the Concepts
	 79.	 Analytic geometry. Suppose two nonvertical lines l1 and 
l2 lie in a plane. The slope of l1 is m1, and the slope of l2 is 
m2. Note that m1 = tan u1 and m2 = tan u2. Show that the 
tangent of the smallest nonnegative angle a between the 
	
	 lines l1 and l2 is given by tan a = 2 m2 - m1
1 + m1m2
2 .
α
l1
l2
θ1
θ2
x
y
In Exercises 80–82, use Exercise 79 to find the smallest  
nonnegative angle in radians between the lines l1 and l2.
	 80.	 Angle between lines. l1: y = x + 5, l2: y = 4x + 2
	 81.	 Angle between lines. l1: y = 2x + 5,  l2: 6x - 3y = 21 
	 82.	 Angle between lines. l1: y = 2x - 4, l2: x + 2y = 7 
	 83.	 Combining two pure tones. The pressure exerted by 
two pure tones in pounds per square foot is given by the 
equations y1 = 0.4 sin1400t2 and y2 = 0.3 cos1400t2. 
Find the amplitude and the phase shift for the total pressure 
y = y1 + y2. 
	 84.	 Combining two pure tones. Repeat Exercise 83 for 
y1 = 0.05 sin1600t2 and y2 = 0.12 cos1600t2.
	 85.	 Simple harmonic motion. A simple harmonic motion 
is described by the equation x = 0.12 sin 2t + 0.5 cos 2t, 
where x is the distance from the equilibrium position and t 
is the time in seconds.
a.	 Find the amplitude of the motion. 
b.	 Find the frequency and the phase shift.
	 86.	 Simple harmonic motion. Repeat Exercise 85 assuming 
that the motion is described by the equation
x = 1
2  sin 3t + 1
3  cos 3t.
Beyond the Basics
	 87.	 Difference quotient. Let f1x2 = sin x. Show that
f 1x + h2 - f 1x2
h
= sin x acos h - 1
h
b + cos x asin h
h
b.
	 88.	 Difference quotient. Let f 1x2 = cos x. Show that
f 1x + h2 - f 1x2
h
= cos x acos h - 1
h
b - sin x asin h
h
b.
In Exercises 89–100, verify each identity.
	 89.	 cos u cos1u + v2 + sin u sin1u + v2 = cos v
	 90.	 sin1x + y2 cos y - cos1x + y2 sin y = sin x
	 91.	 sin 5x cos 3x - cos 5x sin 3x = sin 2x
	 92.	 sin12x - y2 cos y + cos12x - y2 sin y = sin 2x
	 93.	 sin ap
2 + x - yb = cos x cos y + sin x sin y
	 94.	 cos ap
2 + x - yb = cos x sin y - sin x cos y
	 95.	 sin1x + y2 sin1x - y2 = sin2 x - sin2 y
	 96.	 cos1a + b2 cos1a - b2 = cos2 a - sin2 b
	 97.	 sin2 ap
4 + x
2b - sin2 ap
4 - x
2b = sin x
	 98.	 cos2 ap
4 + x
2b - sin2 ap
4 - x
2b = 0
	 99.	
sin1a - b2
sin a sin b
+
sin1b - g2
sin b sin g
+
sin1g - a2
sin g sin a
= 0
	100.	
sin1a - b2
cos a cos b +
sin1b - g2
cos b cos g +
sin1g - a2
cos g cos a = 0 

594	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
In Exercises 101–106, solve each equation in the interval 
30, 2P2 by first converting the left side of the equation to the 
form A sin 1x + U2 (see page 588).
	101.	 sin x + cos x = 1 
	102.	 sin x - cos x = 1   
	103.	 sin x + 13 cos x = -1   
	104.	 13 sin x - cos x = 1 
	105.	 sin x - 13 cos x = 2   
	106.	 5 sin x + 12 cos x = 14 
In Exercises 107–116, find the exact value of each expression.
	107.	 cos2 15° - cos2 30° + cos2 45° - cos2 60° + cos2 75° 
	108.	 cos2 ap
8 b + cos2 a3p
8 b + cos2 a5p
8 b + cos2 a7p
8 b 
	109.	 cos 60° + cos 80° + cos 100° 
	110.	 sin 30° - sin 70° + sin 110° 
	111.	 sin c tan-1 a- 3
4b + cos-1 a4
5b d 
	112.	 cos c sin-1 a-3
5b + cos-1 a3
5b d 
	113.	 sin c sin-1 a3
5b - cos-1 a4
5b d 
	114.	 cos c sin-1 a3
5b + tan-1 a- 4
3b d 
	115.	 tan c cos-1 a4
5b + tan-1 a2
3b d 
	116.	 tan c sin-1 a- 3
5b + cos-1 a4
5b d 
	117.	 Show that tan 70° - tan 20° = 2 tan 50°.
	118.	 Show that sin1u + np2 = 1-12n sin u.
	119.	 Find the exact value of 
tan 1° tan 2° tan 3° g tan 88° tan 89°. 
In Exercises 120–122, assume that x and y are positive num-
bers in the domain of the inverse function considered. Prove 
each identity.
	120.	 sin-1 x { sin-1 y = sin-11x21 - y2 { y21 - x22 
3Hint: Let u = sin-1 x and v = sin-1 y and consider 
sin31u { v2.4
	121.	 cos-1 x + cos-1 y = cos-11xy - 21 - x221 - y22
	122.	 sin-1 x + cos-1 x = p
2
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	123.	 Find values of u and v such that  
cos1u + v2 ≠cos u + cos v. 
	124.	 Find values of u and v such that  
cos1u - v2 ≠cos u - cos v. 
	125.	 Explain why we cannot use the formula for tan1u - v2 to 
	
	 verify that tan ap
2 - xb = cot x.
	126.	 Find a formula for cot1x - y2 in terms of cot x  
and cot y.
	127.	 Find values of u and v such that cos1u + v2 = cos u cos v.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 128 and 129, find the exact value of each  
expression.
	128.	 sin u, if cos u = 4
5 and u is in quadrant IV 
	129.	 tan u, if sin u = -
1
117 and u is in quadrant III 
In Exercises 130–133, determine whether the expression is 
positive or negative if u is in the given quadrant.
	130.	 sin u cos u, quadrant III
	131.	 tan u csc u, quadrant IV
	132.	 cot u tan u
sin u
, quadrant III
	133.	 cos u sin u
sec u
, quadrant III
In Exercises 134–137, find the exact value of each expression.
	134.	 u = p
6, find sin 2u 
	135.	 u = - 13p
12 , find tan 2u
	136.	 u = - p
3, find sin u
2 
	137.	 u = 39p
2 , find cos u
2 

	
Section 6.3    ■    Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas 595
S e c t i o n 6.3
Double-Angle Formulas
Suppose an angle measures x (radians or degrees); then 2x is double the measure of x. 
Double-angle formulas express trigonometric functions of 2x in terms of functions of x. We 
begin with the sum formulas for the sine, cosine, and tangent functions.
 sin 1u + v2 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v
 cos 1u + v2 = cos u cos v - sin u sin v
 tan 1u + v2 =
tan u + tan v
1 - tan u tan v
Cost of Using an Electric Blanket
Three basic properties of electricity—voltage, current, and power—together with the 
rate charged by your electric company, are used to find the cost of using an electric 
device.
Voltage (V) is measured in volts. It is the force that pushes electricity through a 
wire. Current (I), measured in amperes (amps), measures how much electricity is moving 
through the device per second. Power (P), measured in watts, gives the energy con-
sumed per second by an electric device and is defined by the equation
P = VI    Power = (Voltage)(Current)
Your electric company bills you by the kilowatt-hour. When you turn on an elec-
tric device that consumes 1000 watts for one hour, it consumes 1 kilowatt-hour. Sup-
pose your electric company charges 8¢ per kilowatt-hour. An electric blanket might use 
250 watts (depending on the setting). If you turn it on for ten hours, it will consume 
250 * 10 = 2500 = 2.5 kilowatt-hours. This will cost you 12.52182 = 20¢.
In Example 5, we use trigonometric identities to compute the wattage rating of an 
electric blanket.
Double-Angle and  
Half-Angle Formulas
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Sum formulas for sine, cosine, and tangent 
functions (Section 6.2, page 591)
2	 Pythagorean identities (Section 6.1,  
page 569)
3	 Trigonometric functions of common angles 
(Section 5.2, page 491)
Objectives
1	 Use double-angle formulas.
2	 Use power-reducing formulas.
3	 Use half-angle formulas.
1	
Use double-angle formulas.

596	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
To find the double-angle formula for the sine, replace u and v with x in the sum formula 
for sine.
 sin 1u + v2 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v    Sum formula for sine
 sin 1x + x2 = sin x cos x + cos x sin x     Replace both u and v with x.
 sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x
    Simplify.
The identity	
sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x
is the double-angle formula for the sine function. We derive double-angle formulas for the 
cosine and tangent functions by replacing both u and v with x in their sum formulas to obtain:
cos 2x = cos2 x −sin2 x  tan 2x =
2 tan x
1 −tan2 x
To derive two other useful forms for cos 2x, first replace cos2 x with 1 - sin2 x and 
then replace sin2 x with 1 - cos2 x in the formula for cos 2x.
	
cos 2x = cos2 x - sin2 x	
cos 2x = cos2 x - sin2 x
	
= 11 - sin2 x2 - sin2 x	
= cos2 x - 11 - cos2 x2
	
cos 2x = 1 −2 sin2 x	
cos 2x = 2 cos2 x −1
D o u b l e - A n g l e  F o r m u l a s
 sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x         cos 2x = cos2 x - sin2 x
 tan 2x =
2 tan x
1 - tan2 x         cos 2x = 1 - 2 sin2 x
 cos 2x = 2 cos2 x - 1
If cos u = -3
5 and u is in quadrant II, find the exact value of each expression.
a.	 sin 2u        b.   cos 2u        c.   tan 2u
Solution
We first find sin u and tan u.
 sin u = 21 - cos2 u
    u is in quadrant II.
 = B1 - a -3
5b
2
    cos u = -3
5
 = 4
5
    Simplify.
 tan u = sin u
cos u =
4>5
-3>5 = -4
3    cos u = -3
5 is given.
a.	  sin 2u = 2 sin u cos u    Double-angle formula for sine
	
 = 2 a4
5ba -3
5b    Replace sin u with 4
5 and cos u with -3
5.
	
 = -24
25
    Simplify.
Using Double-Angle Formulas
EXAMPLE 1

	
Section 6.3    ■    Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas 597
b.	 cos 2u = cos2 u - sin2 u      Double-angle formula for cosines
	
 = a -3
5b
2
- a4
5b
2
    Replace cos u with -3
5 and sin u with 4
5.
	
 = 9
25 - 16
25 = - 7
25    Simplify.
c.	  tan 2u =
2 tan u
1 - tan2 u
    Double-angle formula for tangent
	
 =
2 a -4
3b
1 - a -4
3b
2       Replace tan u with -4
3.
	
 =
 -8
3   
1 - 16
9
= 24
7     Simplify.
You can also find tan 2u by using parts a and b:
tan 2u = sin 2u
cos 2u =
-24
25
- 7
25
= 24
7
Practice Problem 1  If sin x = 12
13 and p
2 6 x 6 p, find the exact value of each 
expression.
a.	 sin 2x        b.   cos 2x        c.   tan 2x
Find the exact value of each expression.
a.	 1 - 2 sin2 a p
12b        b.   
2 tan 22.5°
1 - tan2  22.5°
Solution
a.	 The given expression is the right side of the following formula, where u = p
12.
 cos 2u = 1 - 2 sin2 u     A double-angle formula for cosine
 1 - 2 sin2 a p
12b = cosc 2 a p
12b d    
Replace u with p
2; interchange sides.
 = cos p
6 = 13
2
b.	 The given expression is the right side of the following formula, where u = 22.5°.
 tan 2u =
2 tan u
1 - tan2  u
    Double-angle formula for tangent
 2 tan 122.5°2
1 - tan2 122.5°2 = tan 32122.5°24    Replace u with 22.5°; interchange sides.
 = tan 45° = 1
Using Double-Angle Formulas
EXAMPLE 2

598	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Practice Problem 2  Find the exact value of each expression.
a.	 2 cos2 a p
12b - 1        b.   cos2 22.5° - sin2 22.5°
Verify the identity sin 3x = 3 sin x - 4 sin3 x.
Solution
We begin by writing 3x as 2x + x and use the sum formula for the sine and the double-
angle formulas to verify this identity.
 sin 3x = sin 12x + x2
 = sin 2x cos x + cos 2x sin x
    Sum formula for sine
 = 12 sin x cos x2 cos x + 11 - 2 sin2 x2 sin x    Replace sin 2x with  
2 sin x cos x and cos 2x with 
1 - 2 sin2 x.
 = 2 sin x cos2 x + sin x - 2 sin3 x
    Multiply; distributive property
 = 2 sin x11 - sin2 x2 + sin x - 2 sin3 x
    cos2 x = 1 - sin2 x
 = 2 sin x - 2 sin3 x + sin x - 2 sin3 x
    Distributive property
 = 3 sin x - 4 sin3 x
    Simplify.
We have verified the identity by showing that the left and right sides of the equation are 
equal.
Practice Problem 3  Verify the identity cos 3x = 4 cos3 x - 3 cos x.
We can use the double-angle formulas to express trigonometric functions of 4u, 6u, 
and 8u in terms of 2u, 3u, and 4u, respectively. For example, the identities
cos 4u = 2 cos2 2u - 1, sin 6u = 2 sin 3u cos 3u, and tan 8u =
2 tan 4u
1 - tan2 4u
can be directly derived from the appropriate double-angle formulas.
Power-Reducing Formulas
The purpose of power-reducing formulas is to express sin2 x, cos2 x, and tan2 x in terms 
of trigonometric functions with powers not greater than 1. These formulas are useful in 
calculus.
Finding a Triple-Angle Formula for Sine
EXAMPLE 3
2	
Use power-reducing formulas.
P o w e r - R e d u c i n g  F o r m u l a s
sin2 x = 1 - cos 2x
2
  cos2 x = 1 + cos 2x
2
  tan2 x = 1 - cos 2x
1 + cos 2x
We can derive the first two power-reducing formulas by using the appropriate formula for 
cos 2x.
 cos 2x = 1 - 2 sin2 x    Double-angle formula for cos 2x in terms of sine
 2 sin2 x = 1 - cos 2x     Add 2 sin2 x - cos 2x to both sides and simplify.
 sin2 x = 1 - cos 2x
2
    Divide both sides by 2.

	
Section 6.3    ■    Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas 599
Similarly, we can derive the second formula.
 cos 2x = 2 cos2 x - 1    Double-angle formula for cos 2x in terms of cosine
 1 + cos 2x = 2 cos2 x
    Add 1 to both sides.
 1 + cos 2x
2
= cos2 x
    Divide both sides by 2.
We begin with the quotient identity to prove the third formula.
 tan2 x = sin2 x
cos2 x
    Quotient identity
 =
1 - cos 2x
2
1 + cos 2x
2
    Power-reducing formulas for sin2 x and cos2 x
 = 1 - cos 2x
1 + cos 2x    Multiply numerator and denominator by 2. Simplify.
Write an equivalent expression for cos4 x that contains only first powers of cosines of 
multiple angles.
Solution
We use the power-reducing formulas repeatedly.
 cos4 x = 1cos2 x22
    a4 = 1a222
 = a1 + cos 2x
2
b
2
    Power-reducing formula
 = 1
4 11 + 2 cos 2x + cos2 2x2
    Expand the binomial.
 = 1
4 a1 + 2 cos 2x + 1 + cos 4x
2
b
    Power-reducing formula for cos2 x; 
replace x with 2x.
 = 1
4 a1 + 2 cos 2x + 1
2 + 1
2 cos 4xb    a + b
c
= a
c + b
c
 = 1
4 + 2
4 cos 2x + 1
8 + 1
8 cos 4x
    Distributive property
 = 3
8 + 1
2 cos 2x + 1
8 cos 4x
    Simplify.
Practice Problem 4  Write an equivalent expression for sin4 x that contains only  
first powers of cosines of multiple angles.
Using Power-Reducing Formulas
EXAMPLE 4
Alternating Current
Alternating current (AC) is the electric current that reverses direction, usually many times 
per second. Most electrical generators produce alternating current. The wattage rating of an 
electric device is 1
12 ≈0.7071 times the maximum wattage of the device.

600	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Half-Angle Formulas
If an angle measures u, then u
2 is half the measure of u. Half-angle formulas express 
trigonometric functions of u
2 in terms of functions of u. To derive the half-angle formulas, 
we replace x with u
2 in the power-reducing formulas and then take the square root of both 
sides. For example,
 cos2 x = 1 + cos 2x
2
    Power-reducing formula for cosines
 cos2 u
2 =
1 + cos c 2 au
2b d
2
    Replace x with u
2.
 cos2 u
2 = 1 + cos u
2
    Simplify.
 cos u
2 = { A
1 + cos u
2
    Square root property
We call the last equation a half-angle formula for cosine. The sign + or - depends on the 
quadrant in which u
2 lies. We can derive half-angle formulas for sine and tangent in a similar 
manner.
3	
Use half-angle formulas.
    Power = voltage * current 
  watts = volts * amps
The voltage V of a household current is given by V = 170 sin 1120pt2 volts, where t  
is in seconds. Suppose the amount of current passing through an electric blanket is 
I = 0.1 sin 1120pt2 amps, where t is in seconds. Find the wattage rating of the blanket.
Solution
We have  P = VI
P = 3170 sin1120pt24 30.1 sin1120pt24    Substitute the given values of  
V and I.
 = 17 sin21120pt2
    Multiply.
 = 17c
1 - cos1240pt2
2
d
    Power-reducing formula
 P = 8.5 - 8.5 cos1240pt2
    Simplify.
The maximum value of P is 17 watts when cos1240pt2 = -1, so the wattage rating for this 
blanket is 17
12 ≈12 watts.
Practice Problem 5  In Example 5, find the wattage rating of a lightbulb for which 
I = 0.83 sin1120pt2 amps.
Finding the Wattage Rating of an Electric Blanket
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 6.3    ■    Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas 601
H a l f - A n g l e  F o r m u l a s
sin u
2 = { A
1 - cos u
2
  cos u
2 = { A
1 + cos u
2
  tan u
2 = { A
1 - cos u
1 + cos u
The sign + or - depends on the quadrant in which u
2 lies. Alternate formulas for tan u
2 are:
tan u
2 =
sin u
1 + cos u  tan u
2 = 1 - cos u
sin u
  (See Exercises 67 and 68.)
Use a half-angle formula to find the exact value of cos 157.5°.
Solution
Because 157.5° = 315°
2 , we use the half-angle formula for cos u
2 with u = 315°.
Because u
2 = 157.5° lies in quadrant II, cos u
2 is negative.
 cos 157.5° = cos 315°
2
 = - B
1 + cos 315°
2
    Half-angle formula for cosine
 = - B
1 + cos 45°
2
    cos 315° = cos1360° - 45°2 
	
= cos 45°
 = - R
a1 + 12
2 b # 2
2 # 2
    
Replace cos 45° with 12
2 . Multiply 
numerator and denominator by 2.
 = - B
2 + 12
2 # 2
= - 22 + 12
2
    Simplify.
Practice Problem 6  Find the exact value of sin 112.5°.
Using Half-Angle Formulas
EXAMPLE 6
Given that sin u = - 5
13, p 6 u 6 3p
2 , find the exact value of each expression.
a.	 sin u
2	
b.   tan u
2
Solution
Because u lies in quadrant III, cos u is negative; so
 cos u = - 21 - sin2 u
    Pythagorean identity
 cos u = - B1 - a - 5
13b
2
    Replace sin u with - 5
13.
 = - A1 - 25
169 = - A
169 - 25
169
= -12
13    Simplify.
Finding the Exact Value
EXAMPLE 7

602	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
a.	 Because p 6 u 6 3p
2 , u
2 lies in quadrant II aif p 6 u 6 3p
2 , then p
2 6 u
2 6 3p
4 b.
	
The half-angle formula gives
 sin u
2 = A
1 - cos u
2
    In quadrant II, sin u
2 is positive.
 = R
1 - a -12
13b
2
    Replace cos u with -12
13.
 = H
25
13
2 =
5
126 = 5126
26     Simplify.
b.	 From the half-angle formula, we have
 tan u
2 = - A
1 - cos u
1 + cos u
    In quadrant II, tan u
2 is negative.
 = -
b
1 - a -12
13b
1 + a -12
13b
    cos u = -12
13
 = -
a
25
13
1
13
= -5
    Simplify.
Practice Problem 7  For u in Example 7, find cos u
2.
Verify the identity sin x cos x
2 = sin x
2 11 + cos x2.
Solution
The left side contains sin x, and the right side contains sin x
2. We replace x with x
2 in the 
double-angle identity for sine.
 sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x     Double-angle identity for sine
 sin x = 2 sin x
2 cos x
2    Replace x with x
2; sinc 2 ax
2b d = sin x.
Begin with the left side of the original equation and use this expression for sin x.
 sin x cos  x
2 = 2 sin x
2 cos x
2 cos x
2
    Replace sin x with 2 sin x
2 cos x
2.
 = 2 sin x
2 cos2 x
2
 = 2 asin x
2b °1 + cosc 2 ax
2b d
2
¢    Power-reducing formula for cosine
 = sin x
2 11 + cos x2
    cosc 2 ax
2b d = cos x; simplify.
Because the left side is identical to the right side of the equation, the identity is verified.
Verifying an Identity Containing Half-Angles
EXAMPLE 8

	
Section 6.3    ■    Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas 603
Practice Problem 8  Verify the identity sin x
2 sin x = cos x
2 11 - cos x2.
Summary of Main Facts
Double-Angle Formulas
 sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x     cos 2x = cos2 x - sin2 x
 tan 2x =
2 tan x
1 - tan2 x     cos 2x = 1 - 2 sin2 x
 
 cos 2x = 2 cos2 x - 1
Power-Reducing Formulas
sin2 x = 1 - cos 2x
2
    cos2 x = 1 + cos 2x
2
    tan2 x = 1 - cos 2x
1 + cos 2x
Half-Angle Formulas
 sin u
2 = { A
1 - cos u
2
    cos u
2 = { A
1 + cos u
2
    tan u
2 = { A
1 - cos u
1 + cos u
 =
sin u
1 + cos u
 = 1 - cos u
sin u
The sign + or - depends on the quadrant in which u
2 lies.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. - 120
169  b. - 119
169  c. 120
119    2. a. 13
2   b. 12
2
4. 3
8 - 1
2 cos 2x + 1
8 cos 4x    5. ≈99.8 watts
6. 22 + 12
2
    7. - 126
26
Exercises
section 6.3 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The double-angle identity for sin 2x is sin 2x =  
.
	 2.	 In the double-angle identity cos 2x = cos2 x - sin2 x, 
replace cos2 x with 1 - sin2 x to obtain a double-angle 
identity cos 2x =  
 in terms of sin2 x. Solve 
this ­identity for sin2 x to obtain the power-reducing identity 
sin2 x =  
.
	 3.	 The identity for cos 2x in terms of cos2 x is cos 2x =  
. Solve this identity for cos2 x to obtain the 
power-reducing identity cos2 x =  
.
	 4.	 True or False. tan 2x = 1 - cos 2x
1 + cos 2x 
	 5.	 True or False. 1
2 tan 2x = tan x 
	 6.	 True or False. cos u
2 = - A
1 + cos u
2
, p 6 u 6 2p 
In Exercises 7–12, use the given information about the angle U 
to find the exact value of
a.  sin 2U.        b.  cos 2U.        c.  tan 2U.
	 7.	 sin u = 3
5, u in quadrant II   
	 8.	 cos u = - 5
13, u in quadrant III   

604	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
	 9.	 tan u = 4, sin u 6 0
	10.	 sec u = - 13, sin u 7 0
	11.	 tan u = -2, p
2 6 u 6 p   
	12.	 cot u = -7, 3p
2
6 u 6 2p   
In Exercises 13–22, use a double-angle identity to find the 
exact value of each expression.
	13.	 1 - 2 sin2 75° 
	
14.	
2 tan 75°
1 - tan2 75° 
	15.	 2 cos2  105° - 1 
	
16.	 1 - 2 sin2 165° 
	17.	
2 tan 165°
1 - tan2 165° 
	
18.	 2  cos2 165° - 1 
	19.	 1 - 2 sin2 p
8 
	
20.	 2 cos2 a-p
8 b - 1 
	21.	
2 tan a-5p
12 b
1 - tan2 a- 5p
12 b 
	
22.	 1 - 2 sin2 a- 7p
12 b 
In Exercises 23 and 24, verify each “quadruple-angle” identity.
	23.	 sin 4u = cos u14 sin u - 8 sin3 u2
	24.	 cos 4u = 8 cos4 u - 8 cos2 u + 1
In Exercises 25–32, verify each identity.
	25.	 cos4 x - sin4 x = cos 2x
	26.	 1 + cos 2x + 2 sin2 x = 2
	27.	 1 + sin 2x
cos 2x
= cos x + sin x
cos x - sin x
	28.	 cos 2x
sin 2x + sin x
cos x = csc 2x
	29.	 sin 2x
sin x - cos 2x
cos x = sec x
	30.	 cos 3x
sin 3x + sin x
cos x =
cos 2x
sin 3x cos x
	31.	 tan 2x + tan x =
sin 3x
cos 2x cos x
	32.	 tan 2x - tan x = tan x sec 2x
In Exercises 33–42, use the power-reducing identities to rewrite 
each expression to one that contains a single trigonometric func-
tion of power 1.
	33.	 4 sin2 x cos2 x 
	
34.	 sin2 x cos2 x 
	35.	 4 sin x cos x11 - 2 sin2 x2 
	36.	 4 sin x cos x12 cos2 x - 12 
	37.	 2 sin 3x cos 3x12 cos2 3x - 12 
	38.	 sin 8x11 - 2 sin2 4x2 
	39.	 sin x
2 cos x
2 a1 - 2 sin2 x
2b	 40.	 sin x a2 cos2 x
2 - 1b 
	41.	 8 sin4 x
2 
	42.	 8 cos4 x
2 
In Exercises 43–54, use half-angle identities to find the exact 
value of each expression.
	43.	 sin p
12 
	
44.	 sin p
8 
	45.	 cos p
8 
	
46.	 tan p
8 
	47.	 sin a- 3p
8 b 
	
48.	 cos a- 3p
8 b 
	49.	 tan a7p
8 b 
	
50.	 sec a- 7p
8 b 
	51.	 tan 112.5° 
	
52.	 cos 112.5° 
	53.	 sin1-75°2 
	
54.	 tan1-105°2 
In Exercises 55–62, use the information about the angle U to find 
the exact value of
a.  sin U
2.        b.  cos U
2.        c.  tan U
2.
	55.	 sin u = 4
5, p
2 6 u 6 p   
	56.	 cos u = - 12
13, p 6 u 6 3p
2   
	57.	 tan u = - 2
3, p
2 6 u 6 p 
	58.	  cot u = 3
4, p 6 u 6 3p
2 
	59.	 sin u = 1
5, cos u 6 0 
	
60.	 cos u = 2
3, sin u 6 0 
	61.	 sec u = 15, sin u 7 0 
	 62.	 csc u = 17, tan u 6 0 
In Exercises 63–72, verify each identity.
	63.	 asin t
2 + cos t
2b
2
= 1 + sin t
	64.	 asin t
2 - cos t
2b
2
= 1 - sin t
	65.	 2 cos2  x
2 =
sin2 x
1 - cos x
66.	 2 sin2 x
2 =
sin2 x
1 + cos x
	67.	 tan x
2 =
sin x
1 + cos x
68.	 tan x
2 = 1 - cos x
sin x
	69.	 sin2 x
2 + cos x = cos2 x
2
	70.	 cos2 x + cos x = 2 cos2 x
2 - sin2 x
	71.	 sin x =
2 tan x
2
1 + tan2 x
2
	
72.	 cos x =
1 - tan2 x
2
1 + tan2 x
2       

	
Section 6.3    ■    Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas 605
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 73–78, assume that the voltage of the current is 
given by V = 170 sin 1120Pt2, where t is in seconds. Find the 
wattage rating amaximum wattage
12
b of each electric device 
assuming that the current flowing through the device is  
I amps and the power in watts is given by P = VI.
	 73.	 Lightbulb. I = 0.832 sin1120pt2 
	 74.	 Microwave oven. I = 7.487 sin1120pt2 
	 75.	 Toaster. I = 9.983 sin1120pt2 
	 76.	 Refrigerator. I = 6.655 sin1120pt2 
	 77.	 Vacuum cleaner. I = 4.991 sin1120pt2 
	 78.	 Television. I = 2.917 sin1120pt2 
	 79.	 Throwing a football. A quarterback throws a ball with 
an initial velocity of v0 feet per second at an angle u with 
the horizontal. The horizontal distance x in feet the ball is 
	
	 thrown is modeled by the equation x = v 2
0
16 sin u cos u. For 
	
	 a fixed v0, use a double-angle identity to find the angle that 
produces the maximum distance x. 
u
x
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 80–90, verify each identity.
	 80.	 tan 3x = 3 tan x - tan3 x
1 - 3 tan2 x
	 81.	 sin 3x + cos 3x
cos x - sin x
= 1 + 2 sin 2x
	 82.	 sin x - cos x
sin x + cos x - sin x + cos x
sin x - cos x = 2 tan 2x
	 83.	
2
tan x + cot x = sin 2x
	 84.	 2 sin x
cos 3x = tan 3x - tan x
	 85.	 cot x - tan x = 2 cot 2x
	 86.	
1 - tan2 ap
4 - xb
1 + tan2 ap
4 - xb
= sin 2x
	 87.	 1 + sin 2x - cos 2x
1 + sin 2x + cos 2x = tan x
	 88.	 cos u cos 2u cos 4u = sin 8u
8 sin u
	 89.	 sin2 ap
8 + x
2b - sin2 ap
8 - x
2b =
1
12
 sin x
	 90.	 22 + 12 + 2 cos 4x = 2 cos x, 0 6 x 6 p
4
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	91.	 Use the figure to find the exact  
value of each expression.
	a.	 sin u	
b.	 cos u
	c.	 sin 2u	
d.	 cos 2u
	e.	 tan 2u	
f.	 sin u
2
	g.	 cos u
2	
h.	 tan u
2
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 92 and 93, use the cofunction identities to find an 
exact value for each expression.
	 92.	 sec ap
2 - ub, if sin u = 16 - 13 
	 93.	 csc u, if cos ap
2 - ub = 15 - 12 
In Exercises 94–97, use the even–odd identities to find an exact 
value for each expression. (Other identities may also be required.)
	 94.	 sin u, if sin1-u2 = 0.76 
	 95.	 cos u, if cos1-u2 = 0.87 
	 96.	 sin u cos2 u, if sin1-u2 = 1
3 
	 97.	 tan u sec2 u, if tan1-u2 = -2 
In Exercises 98–101, use the sum and difference formulas to 
find an exact value for each expression.
	 98.	 cos ap
2 + p
6 b 
	 99.	 sin ap
6 - 3p
4 b 
	100.	 sin2p
9  cos 8p
9
-  cos 2p
9  sin 8p
9 
	101.	 cosp
2  cos p
6 +  sin p
2  sin p
6        
4
3


606	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
6.4
Product-to-Sum Formulas
The following formulas allow us to rewrite products of sines or cosines as sums or differences.
1	
Derive product-to-sum 
formulas.
Touch-Tone Phones
Dual-tone multi-frequency (DTMF), also known as Touch-Tone, tone dialing, or push-but-
ton dialing, is a method for instructing a telephone switching network to dial a telephone 
number. The system was developed by Bell Labs in the late 1950s, and Touch-Tone phones 
were introduced to the public at the 1964 New York World’s Fair. The dual-tone keypad 
on a Touch-Tone phone has four rows and three columns. Each row represents a low 
­frequency, and each column represents a high frequency, as shown in the figure. Pressing 
a button on a Touch-Tone phone produces a unique sound. The sound is produced by the 
combination of two tones (one of low frequency and the other of high frequency) associ-
ated with that button, as shown in the figure. In other words, the sound produced is given 
by y = y1 + y2, with y1 = sin 12plt2 and y2 = sin 12pht2, where l and h are the button’s 
low and high frequencies (in hertz = Hz), respectively.
For example, if you press a single button, such as “1,” it will send a sinusoidal tone of 
two frequencies 697 Hz and 1209 Hz. The sound produced by pressing “1” is represented 
by the equation
 y = sin 32p16972t4 + sin 32p112092t4
or	
 y = sin 11394pt2 + sin 12418pt2.
The two tones are the reason for calling such phones dual-tone multi-frequency phones. 
In Example 6, we analyze the sound produced by the sum of two sine waves. (Source: 
http://en.wikipedia.org)
Product-to-Sum and  
Sum-to-Product Formulas
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Sum and difference formulas for sines and 
cosines (Section 6.2, page 591)
2	 Fundamental identities (Section 6.1,  
page 569)
Objectives
1	 Derive product-to-sum formulas.
2	 Derive sum-to-product formulas.
3	 Verify trigonometric identities involving 
multiple angles.
S e c t i o n 
1209 Hz
1336 Hz
1477 Hz
697 Hz
770 Hz
852 Hz
941 Hz
P r o d u c t- t o - S u m  F o r m u l a s
 cos x cos y = 1
23cos1x - y2 + cos1x + y24
 sin x sin y = 1
23cos1x - y2 - cos1x + y24
 sin x cos y = 1
23sin 1x + y2 + sin1x - y24
 cos x sin y = 1
23sin1x + y2 - sin1x - y24

	
Section 6.4    ■    Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas 607
These formulas are fairly easy to prove. For example, to prove the first formula
cos x cos y = 1
2 3cos1x - y2 + cos1x + y24,
we write the difference and sum formulas for cosine and add.
 cos1x - y2 = cos x cos y + sin x sin y
 cos1x + y2 = cos x cos y - sin x sin y
 cos1x - y2 + cos1x + y2 = 2 cos x cos y + 0
    Add.
 2 cos x cos y = cos1x - y2 + cos1x + y2
    Interchange sides.
 cos x cos y = 1
2 3cos 1x −y2 + cos 1x + y2 4    Multiply both sides by 1
2.
Similarly, subtracting cos1x + y2 from cos1x - y2 gives the second formula:
sin x sin y = 1
2 3cos 1x −y2 −cos 1x + y2 4
We can prove the third and fourth formulas in the box on page 606, by using the sum and 
difference formulas for sine.
Write sin 5u cos 3u as the sum or difference of two trigonometric functions.
Solution
Use the formula  sin x cos y = 1
2 3sin1x + y2 + sin1x - y24.
 sin 5u cos 3u = 1
2 3sin15u + 3u2 + sin15u - 3u24    Replace x with 5u and y with 3u.
 = 1
2 3sin 8u + sin 2u4
    Simplify.
 = 1
2 sin 8u + 1
2 sin 2u
    Distributive property
Practice Problem 1  Write cos 3x cos x as the sum or difference of two  
trigonometric functions.
Using a Product-to-Sum Formula
EXAMPLE 1
Find the exact value of sin 75° sin 15°.
Solution
Use the formula  sin x sin y = 1
2 3cos1x - y2 - cos1x + y24.
 sin 75° sin 15° = 1
2 3cos175° - 15°2 - cos175° + 15°24    Replace x with 75° and y 
with 15°.
 = 1
2 3cos 60° - cos 90°4
    Simplify.
 = 1
2 c 1
2 - 0d = 1
4
    cos 60° = 1
2; cos 90° = 0
Practice Problem 2  Find the exact value of sin 15° cos 75°.
Using a Product-to-Sum Formula
EXAMPLE 2

608	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Sum-to-Product Formulas
The following formulas allow us to do just the opposite—rewrite sums or differences of 
sines or cosines as products.
2	
Derive sum-to-product 
formulas.
S u m - t o - P r o d u c t  F o r m u l a s
 cos x + cos y = 2 cos ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b
 cos x - cos y = -2 sin ax + y
2
b sin ax - y
2
b
 sin x + sin y = 2 sin ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b
 sin x - sin y = 2 sin ax - y
2
b cos ax + y
2
b
We prove these formulas by using the product-to-sum formulas. For example, to prove 
the first formula, we start with the right side of the equation and use the product-to-sum 
formulas.
2 cos ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b
 = 2 # 1
2 c cos ax + y
2
- x - y
2
b + cos ax + y
2
+ x - y
2
b d     
Use the formula  
for the product  
of cosines.
 = cos ax + y - x + y
2
b + cos ax + y + x - y
2
b	
Simplify.
 = cos a2y
2 b + cos a2x
2 b	
Simplify.
 = cos y + cos x	
Simplify.
You can verify the other three formulas in the box in a similar way. See Exercise 87.
Write each expression as a product of two trigonometric functions and simplify where 
possible.
a.	 sin 4u - sin 6u        b.   cos 65° + cos 55°
Solution
a.	 Use the formula  sin x - sin y = 2 sin ax - y
2
b cos ax + y
2
b.
 sin 4u - sin 6u = 2 sin a4u - 6u
2
b cos a4u + 6u
2
b	
Replace x with  
4u and y with 6u.
 = 2 sin1-u2 cos15u2
	
Simplify.
 = -2 sin u cos 5u
	
sin1-u2 = -sin u
Using Sum-to-Product Formulas
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 6.4    ■    Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas 609
b.	 Use the formula  cos x + cos y = 2 cos ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b.
 cos 65° + cos 55° = 2 cos a65° + 55°
2
b cos a65° - 55°
2
b    Replace x with 65°  
and y with  55°.
 = 2 cos 60° cos 5°
    Simplify.
 = 2 a1
2b cos 5° = cos 5°
    cos 60° = 1
2
Practice Problem 3  Write each expression as a product of two trigonometric  
functions and simplify where possible.
a.	 cos 2x - cos 4x        b.   sin 43° + sin 17°
In the next example, we show how to express a sum of a sine and a cosine as a product 
by first using a cofunction identity.
Write sin 5u + cos 3u as a product of two trigonometric functions.
Solution
Use the formula
cos x + cos y = 2 cos ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b.
 sin 5u + cos 3u = cos ap
2 - 5ub + cos 3u	
Cofunction identity
 = 2 cos £
p
2 - 5u + 3u
2
≥ cos £
p
2 - 5u - 3u
2
≥
	
Sum-to-product  
formula for  
cosines
 = 2 cos ap
4 - ub cos ap
4 - 4ub
	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 4  Write sin 3x - cos x as a product of two trigonometric  
functions.
Verify Trigonometric Identities
The next example illustrates the use of sum-to-product formulas to verify identities.
Expressing a Sum of a Sine and a Cosine as a Product
EXAMPLE 4
3	
Verify trigonometric identities 
involving multiple angles.
In Example 4, you could also  
write sin 5u + cos 3u =
sin 5u + sin ap
2 - 3ub and 
then use the appropriate  
sum-to-product formula.
Side  
Note
Verify the identity 
sin 5u + sin 9u
cos 5u - cos 9u = cot 2u.
Verifying an Identity
EXAMPLE 5

610	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Solution
 sin 5u + sin 9u
cos 5u - cos 9u =
2 sin 5u + 9u
2
 cos 5u - 9u
2
-2 sin 5u + 9u
2
 sin 5u - 9u
2
	
Use the sum-to-product formulas for  
sin x + sin y and cos x - cos y.
 =
2 sin 7u cos1-2u2
-2 sin 7u sin1-2u2
	
Simplify.
 =
cos1-2u2
-sin1-2u2
	
Remove the common factors.
 = cos 2u
sin 2u
	
cos1-x2 = cos x and  
sin1-x2 = -sin x
 = cot 2u
	
Quotient identity
Practice Problem 5  Verify the identity cos 5x - cos x
sin x - sin 5x = tan 3x.
Analyzing Touch-Tone Phones
When a sound of frequency f1 is combined with a sound of frequency f2, the resulting 
sound has frequency f1 + f2
2
. In a Touch-Tone phone, when you press a button with a low 
frequency l and a high frequency h, the sound produced is modeled by
 y = sin12plt2 + sin12pht2
 y = 2 sin c 2p al + h
2
btd  cos c 2p al - h
2
btd 	
Sum-to-product formula
 y = 2 cos c 2p ah - l
2
btd  sin c 2p al + h
2
btd 	
cos1-u2 = cos u
The last equation suggests that the resulting sound may be thought of as a sine wave with 
frequency of l + h
2
 and variable amplitude of 2 cos c 2p ah - l
2
btd .
a.	 Write an expression that models the tone of the sound produced by pressing the “8” 
button on your Touch-Tone phone. See Figure 6.7.
b.	 Rewrite the expression from part a as a product of two trigonometric functions.
c.	 Write the frequency and the variable amplitude of the sound from part a.
Solution
a.	 Pressing the “8” key produces the sound given by
 y = sin 32p18522t4 + sin 32p113362t4    l = 852, h = 1336
b.	  y = 2 sinc 2p a852 + 1336
2
btd  cosc 2p a852 - 1336
2
btd   Sum-to-product formula
 = 2 cos32p12422t4 sin32p110942t4
  cos1-u2 = cos u
 = 2 cos1484pt2 sin32p110942t4
c.	 The frequency is 1094 Hz, and the variable amplitude is 2 cos 1484pt2.
Practice Problem 6  Repeat Example 6 assuming that you press the “1” button on  
your Touch-Tone phone.
Touch-Tone Phones
EXAMPLE 6
1209 Hz
1336 Hz
1477 Hz
697 Hz
770 Hz
852 Hz
941 Hz
Figure 6.7 
Graph of 
y = 2 cos1484pt2 sin32p110942t4
2
0
1
2
Technology 
Connection

	
Section 6.4    ■    Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas 611
Summary of Main Facts
Product-to-Sum Formulas
 cos x cos y = 1
23cos1x - y2 + cos1x + y24
 sin x sin y = 1
23cos1x - y2 - cos1x + y24
 sin x cos y = 1
23sin1x + y2 + sin1x - y24
 cos x sin y = 1
23sin1x + y2 - sin1x - y24
Sum-to-Product Formulas
 cos x + cos y = 2 cos ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b
 cos x - cos y = -2 sin ax + y
2
b sin ax - y
2
b
 sin x + sin y = 2 sin ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b
 sin x - sin y = 2 sin ax - y
2
b cos ax + y
2
b
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 1
2 cos 2x + 1
2 cos 4x  2. 2 - 13
4
3. a. 2 sin 3x sin x  b. cos 13°  4. 2 sin a2x - p
4 b cos ax + p
4 b
6. a. y = sin12p # 697t2 + sin12p # 1209t2
b. y = 2 cos1512pt2 sin11906pt2
c. f = 953 Hz, A = 2 cos1512pt2
Exercises
section 6.4 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 We can rewrite the product of two sines as a difference of 
two cosines by using the formula sin x sin y =   
.
	 2.	 We can rewrite the product of a sine and a cosine as the 
sum of two sines by using the formula sin x cos y =  
.
	 3.	 We can rewrite the sum of two cosines as a product 
of two cosines by using the formula cos x + cos y =  
.
	4.	 True or False. cos x - cos y = 2 sin ax + y
2
b sin ay - x
2
b.
	5.	 True or False. sin x + sin y = sin1x + y2. 
	6.	 True or False. sin12x + 12 - sin12x - 12 =
2 sin112 cos 2x. 
In Exercises 7–22, use the product-to-sum formulas to rewrite 
each expression as the sum or difference of two functions. 
Simplify where possible.
	 7.	 sin x cos x
	 8.	 cos x cos x
	 9.	 sin x sin x 
	10.	 cos x sin x 
	11.	 sin 25° cos 5° 
	12.	 sin 40° sin 20° 
	13.	 cos 140° cos 20° 
	14.	 cos 70° sin 20° 
	15.	 sin 7p
12  sin p
12 
	16.	 sin 3p
8  cos p
8
	17.	 cos 5p
8  sin p
8 
	18.	 cos 5p
3  cos p
3 
	19.	 sin 5u cos u 
	20.	 cos 3u sin 2u 
	21.	 cos 4x cos 3x 
	22.	 sin 5x sin 2x  
  
    

612	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
In Exercises 23–30, find the exact value of each expression.
	23.	 sin 37.5° sin 7.5° 
	24.	 cos 52.5° cos 7.5° 
	25.	 sin 67.5° cos 22.5° 
	26.	 cos 105° sin 75° 
	27.	 sin 5p
24  cos p
24 
	28.	 sin 7p
12  sin p
12 
	29.	 cos 13p
24  cos 5p
24 
	30.	 cos 7p
24  sin p
24 
In Exercises 31–50, use sum-to-product formulas to rewrite 
each expression as a product. Simplify where possible.
	31.	 cos 40° - cos 20° 
	32.	 sin 22° + sin 8°
	33.	 sin 32° - sin 16°
	34.	 cos 47° + cos 13°
	35.	 sin p
5 + sin 2p
5
	36.	 cos p
12 + cos p
3
	37.	 cos 1
2 + cos 1
3 
	38.	 sin 2
3 - sin 1
4 
	39.	 cos 3x + cos 5x
	40.	 sin 5x - sin 3x 
	41.	 sin 7x + sin1-x2
	42.	 cos 7x - cos 3x
	43.	 sin x + cos x 
	44.	 cos x - sin x 
	45.	 sin 2x - cos 2x 
	46.	 cos 3x + sin 3x 
	47.	 sin 3x + cos 5x 
	48.	 sin 5x - cos x 
	49.	 a1sin x + cos x2 
	50.	 a1sin bx + cos bx2 
In Exercises 51–60, verify each identity.
	51.	 sin x + sin 3x
cos x + cos 3x = tan 2x
	52.	 sin 2x + sin 4x
cos 2x + cos 4x = tan 3x
	53.	 cos 3x - cos 7x
sin 7x + sin 3x = tan 2x
	54.	 cos 12x - cos 4x
sin 4x - sin 12x = tan 8x
	55.	 cos 2x + cos 2y
cos 2x - cos 2y = cot 1y - x2 cot 1y + x2
	56.	 sin 2x + sin 2y
sin 2x - sin 2y =
tan1x + y2
tan1x - y2
	57.	 sin x + sin 2x + sin 3x = sin 2x11 + 2 cos x2
	58.	 cos x + cos 2x + cos 3x = cos 2x11 + 2 cos x2
	59.	 sin 2x + sin 4x + sin 6x = 4 cos x cos 2x sin 3x
	60.	 cos x + cos 3x + cos 5x + cos 7x = 4 cos x cos 2x cos 4x
Applying the Concepts
	61.	 Touch-Tone phone. 
a.	 Write an expression that models the tone by pressing the 
“7” button on your Touch-Tone phone. See Figure 6.7, 
page 610. 
b.	 Rewrite the expression from part (a) as a product of two 
functions. 
c.	 Write the frequency and the variable amplitude of the 
sound from part (a). 
	62.	 Touch-Tone phone. Repeat Exercise 61 assuming that you 
press the “#” button on your Touch-Tone phone. 
	63.	 Beats in music. When two musical tones of slightly differ-
ent frequencies are played, the sound you hear will fluctuate 
in volume according to the difference in their frequencies. 
These are called beat frequencies. (Piano tuners use the  
	beat frequency to adjust piano wire until it is at the same 
frequency as the tuning fork.) Let y1 = 0.05 cos1112pt2 and 
y2 = 0.05 cos1120pt2 model two tones.
a.	 Write y = y1 + y2 as the product of two functions.
b.	 How many beats are there? 
	64.	 Beats in music. Repeat Exercise 63 for the two tones repre-
sented by y1 = 0.04 sin1110pt2 and y2 = 0.04 sin1114pt2.
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 65 and 66, sketch the graph of f. What is the 
amplitude and period?
	65.	 f 1x2 = cos12x + 12 + cos12x - 12 
	66.	 f 1x2 = sin13x + 12 + sin13x - 12 
In Exercises 67–76, verify each identity.
	67.	 cos 40° + cos 50° + cos 70° + cos 80° = cos 10° + cos 20°
	68.	 sin 10° + sin 20° + sin 40° + sin 50° = 2 cos 5° cos 15°
	69.	 cos 4u cos u - cos 6u cos 9u = sin 5u sin 10u
	70.	 cos 38° cos 46° - sin 14° sin 22° = 1
2 cos 24°
	71.	 sin 25° sin 35° - sin 25° sin 85° - sin 35° sin 85° = - 3
4
	72.	 cos 20° cos 40° cos 60° cos 80° = 1
16
	73.	 sin 3x cos 5x - sin x cos 7x
sin x sin 7x + cos 3x cos 5x = tan 2x
	74.	 sin 11x sin x + sin 7x sin 3x
cos 11x sin x + cos 7x sin 3x = tan 8x 
	75.	 cos x + cos 3x + cos 5x + cos 7x
sin x + sin 3x + sin 5x + sin 7x
= cot 4x
	76.	 sin 3x + sin 5x + sin 7x + sin 9x
cos 3x + cos 5x + cos 7x + cos 9x = tan 6x
	77.	 Verify the identity cos 7x = 2 cos 6x cos x -
2 cos 4x cos x + 2 cos 2x cos x - cos x.
	78.	 a.  Verify the identity 
4 sin u sin ap
3 + ub sin ap
3 - ub = sin 3u.
	
[Hint: Recall that sin 3u = 3 sin u - 4 sin3 u.]
b.	 Use part (a) to show that 
	
sin 20° sin 40° sin 60° sin 80° = 3
16. 
	79.	 Verify the identity 
	
	
sin1x + 3y2 + sin13x + y2
sin 2x + sin 2y
= 2 cos1x + y2.
	80.	 Verify the identity sin3 x sin 3x + cos3 x cos 3x = cos3 2x.
81.	 Verify the following sum-to-product formulas.
a.	 cos x - cos y = -2 sin ax + y
2
b sin ax - y
2
b
b.	 sin x + sin y = 2 sin ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b
c.	 sin x - sin y = 2 sin ax - y
2
b cos ax + y
2
b     

	
Section 6.4    ■    Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas 613
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
82.	 Supply the reason for each step in verifying the identity 
sin p
14 sin 3p
14  sin 5p
14 = 1
8.
 sin p
14 sin 3p
14  sin 5p
14 = cos 3p
7  cos 2p
7  cos p
7
 =
 8 sin p
7  cos p
7  cos 2p
7  cos 3p
7
8 sin p
7
 =
2 sin 4p
7  cos 3p
7
8 sin p
7
 =
sin p + sin p
7
8 sin p
7
 = 1
8
Assume that A + B + C = 180°. Verify each identity.
83.	 sin 2A + sin 2B + sin 2C = 4 sin A sin B sin C
84.	 cos 2A + cos 2B + cos 2C = -1 - 4 cos A cos B cos C
85.	 Explain how to obtain the identity cos2 x = 1 + cos 2x
2
 
	
	 using the product-to-sum formula for cos x cos y.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 86–91, identify each equation as an identity,  
conditional, or inconsistent equation.
	86.	 sin x = 1
2 
	87.	 cos x = 3 
	88.	 sin x = cos x 
	89.	 cos2 x = 1 - sin2 x
	90.	 sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x
	91.	 tan x = 2sec2 x - 1
In Exercises 92–95, find the reference angle for each angle.
	92.	 5p
3 
	93.	 7p
8 
	94.	 -3p
7 
	95.	 -17p
4 
	96.	 Describe all angles coterminal with -p
7.
	97.	 Find a third quadrant angle with reference angle p
5.        

614	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
S E C T I O N
Trigonometric Equations
Recall that a trigonometric equation is a conditional equation that contains only trigonometric  
functions of a variable. An identity is an equation that is true for all values in the domain of 
the variable. We verified trigonometric identities in Sections 6.1–6.4. Now we work with 
trigonometric equations that are satisfied by some but not all values of the variable. For 
example, sin x = 1
2 is satisfied by x = p
6  but not by x = 0.
Solving a trigonometric equation means finding its solution set. Some trigonometric 
equations do not have a solution. For example, the equation sin x = 2 has no solution 
because -1 … sin x … 1 for all real numbers x. However, if a trigonometric equation has 
a solution, it has infinitely many solutions because the trigonometric functions are peri-
odic. Also note that we cannot find an exact solution for every equation. In such cases, we 
­approximate the solution by using a calculator.
In this section, we study three types of equations:
1.	 Equations of the form
a sin1x - c2 = k,  a cos1x - c2 = k,  a tan1x - c2 = k,
	
where a, c, and k are constants.
2.	 Equations that can be solved by factoring using the zero-product property.
3.	 Equations that are equivalent to a polynomial equation in one trigonometric function.
Projectile Motion
The angle that a projectile makes with a horizontal plane on which it rests at takeoff 
and its initial velocity determine the rest of its flight. The time it takes for the projec-
tile to hit the ground after reaching its maximum height is the same as if it had been 
dropped straight down from that height. The horizontal motion has no effect on the 
vertical motion. Suppose we ignore air resistance and measure time in seconds and 
distance in feet. Then the equation h = v0 t sin u - 16t2 gives the height, h, of the pro-
jectile after t seconds, where u is the initial angle the projectile makes with the ground 
and v0 is the projectile’s initial velocity. The horizontal distance, d, the projectile travels 
in t seconds is d = tv0 cos u. In Example 4, we use these equations to investigate the 
flight of a projectile.
Trigonometric Equations I
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Reference angle (Section 5.3, page 504)
2	 Periods of trigonometric functions  
(Sections 5.4 and 5.5)
3	 Factoring techniques (Section P.4)
4	 Solving linear and quadratic equations 
(Sections 1.1 and 1.2)
Objectives
1	 Solve trigonometric equations of the form  
a sin (x - c) = k, a cos (x - c) = k, 
and a tan (x - c) = k.
2	 Solve trigonometric equations by using the 
zero-product property.
3	 Solve trigonometric equations that contain 
more than one trigonometric function.
4	 Solve trigonometric equations by squaring 
both sides.
6.5

	
Section 6.5    ■    Trigonometric Equations I 615
Trigonometric Equations of the Form a sin 1x −c2 = k,
a cos 1x −c2 = k, and a tan 1x −c2 = k
We begin with some simple equations.
1	
Solve trigonometric equations 
of the form a sin1x - c2 = k, 
a cos1x - c2 = k,  and 
a tan1x - c2 = k.
Find all solutions of each equation. Express all solutions in radians.
a.	 sin x = 12
2 	
b.  cos u = - 13
2 	
c.  tan x = - 13
Solution
a.	 We first find the solutions of sin x = 12
2  in the interval 30, 2p2. We know that 
	
sin p
4 = 12
2  and that sin x is positive only in quadrants I and II. See Figure 6.8. 
	
The first and second quadrant angles with reference angle p
4  are
x = p
4 and x = p - p
4 = 3p
4 .
	
So x = p
4  and x = 3p
4  are the only solutions in the interval 30, 2p2. Because the 
	
sine function is periodic with period 2p, adding any integer multiple of 2p to either 
	
of these values still makes the sine of the resulting value 12
2 . All solutions of the 
	
equation sin x = 12
2  are therefore given by 
x = p
4 + 2np or x = 3p
4
+ 2np, for any integer n.
b.	 As in part a, we first find all solutions in the interval 30, 2p2. We know that 
	
cos p
6 = 13
2  and that cos u is negative only in quadrants II and III. See Figure 6.9. 
	
The second and third quadrant angles having reference angle p
6  are
u = p - p
6 = 5p
6  and u = p + p
6 = 7p
6 .
	
So u = 5p
6  and u = 7p
6  are the only solutions in the interval 30, 2p2.
The period of the cosine function is 2p, so all solutions are given by
u = 5p
6
+ 2np or u = 7p
6
+ 2np, for any integer n.
c.	 Because tan x is a periodic function with period p, we first find all solutions of 
	
tan x = - 13 in the interval 30, p2. We know that tan p
3 = 13 and that tan x is 
Solving a Trigonometric Equation
EXAMPLE 1
4
2
2
(–a,      )
2
y
x
4
2
√
(a,      )
2
√
2
√
√
Figure 6.8  sin x = 22
2
(–  3, b)
√
(–  3, –b)
7π
6
2
2
5π
6
y
x
√
–  3
√
Figure 6.9  cos u = - 23
2

616	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
In Example 1, we were able to find the exact solutions of trigonometric equations be-
cause the angles involved were common angles. In the next example, we find approximate 
solutions of trigonometric equations involving other angles.
	
negative in quadrant II. See Figure 6.10. The second quadrant angle with reference 
	
angle p
3  is
x = p - p
3 = 2p
3 .
	
So x = 2p
3  is the only solution in the interval 30, p2. Because the period of tan x is p, 
	
all solutions of tan x = - 13 are given by
x = 2p
3
+ np, for any integer n.
Practice Problem 1  Find all solutions of each equation. Express solutions in radians.
a.	 sin x = 1        b.   cos x = 1        c.   tan x = 1
(–1, √3 )
2π
3
1
2
y
x
√3 
Figure 6.10  tan 2P
3
= −13
a.	 Find all solutions of sin x = 0.3. Round the solutions to the nearest tenth of a degree.
b.	 Find all solutions of cot x = -3.5 in the interval 30, 2p2. Round the solutions to four 
decimal places.
Solution
a.	 We use the function sin-1 to find the reference angle x′ for any angle x with 
sin x = 0.3.
 sin x′ =  sin x = 0.3    Given equation
 x′ = sin-1 10.32
    0° 6 x′ 6 90°
 x′ ≈17.5°
    Use a calculator in degree mode.
	
Because the sine function has positive values in quadrants I and II, we have
x ≈17.5° or x ≈180° - 17.5° = 162.5°.
	
The period of the sine function is 360°, so all solutions are given by
x ≈17.5° + n # 360° or x ≈162.5° + n # 360° for any integer n.
b.	 Because cot x = -3.5 = -7
2, we have
tan x = -2
7    Reciprocal identity
	
First, we find the reference angle x′ for an angle x with tan x = -2
7.
	
 tan x′ =  tan x = ` -2
7 ` = 2
7
	
 x′ = tan-1 a2
7b	
0 6 x′ 6 p
2
	
 x′ ≈0.2783	
Use a calculator in radian mode.
Finding Approximate Solutions
EXAMPLE 2
If x′ denotes the reference angle 
for x, then sin x = {sin x′, 
cos x = {cos x′, and 
tan x = {tan x′. Similar  
identities hold for sec x, csc x,  
and cot x.
Recall

	
Section 6.5    ■    Trigonometric Equations I 617
	
Because the cotangent function is negative in quadrants II and IV, we have
	
x ≈p - 0.2783 ≈2.8633 and x ≈2p - 0.2783 ≈6.0049.
	
These are the only solutions in the interval 30, 2p2.
Practice Problem 2
a.	 Find all solutions of sec x = 1.5. Round the solutions to the nearest tenth of a degree.
b.	 Find all solutions of tan x = -2 in the interval 30, 2p2. Round the solutions to  
four decimal places.
In most of our examples, we find the solutions in the interval 30, 2p2 for equations in-
volving sine, cosine, secant, and cosecant functions. To find all solutions of such equations, 
add 2np to these solutions. Similarly, to find all solutions of an equation involving tangent 
or cotangent function, add np to each solution found in 30, p2. When an equation has only 
a finite number of solutions, we write the solutions using set notation.
The period of y = tan x and 
y = cot x is p. The period of  
the other four trigonometric  
functions is 2p.
Recall
Find all solutions in the interval 30, 2p2 of the equation
2 sin ax - p
4 b + 1 = 2.
Solution
Replace x - p
4  with u in the given equation.
 2 sin u + 1 = 2
 sin u = 1
2    Solve for sin u.
The reference angle for u is p
6  because sin p
6 = 1
2. See page 491 or recall from memory. 
Because sin u is positive only in quadrants I and II, the solutions of sin u = 1
2 in 
30, 2p2 are
u = p
6 or u = p - p
6 = 5p
6 .
Since u = x - p
4,   u = p
6 	
or	
u = 5p
6  gives
Solving a Linear Trigonometric Equation
EXAMPLE 3
 x - p
4 = p
6
 x = p
6 + p
4
 x = 2p
12 + 3p
12 = 5p
12
 x - p
4 = 5p
6 	
Replace u with x - p
4.
 x = 5p
6
+ p
4     Add p
4 to both sides.
 x = 10p
12
+ 3p
12 = 13p
12     Simplify.
The solution set in the interval 30, 2p2 is e 5p
12, 13p
12 f.
Practice Problem 3  Find all solutions in the interval 30°, 360°2 of the equation 
2 sec 1x - 302° + 1 = sec 1x - 302° + 3.	

618	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
A bullet hits a target 1500 feet away 0.9 second after being fired. If the bullet’s velocity is 
3280 ft>sec, from what angle to the ground was the bullet fired? Give your answer to the 
nearest degree.
Solution
We use the equation d = tv0 cos u (from the section introduction) for the horizontal dis-
tance, d, that the projectile travels in t seconds, where u is the initial angle the projectile 
makes with the ground and v0 is the projectile’s initial velocity. Because d = tv0 cos u,
 1500 = 0.9132802 cos u
    Replace d with 1500, t with 0.9, and v0 with 3280.
 cos u =
1500
0.9132802
    Solve for cos u: interchange sides.
 u = cos-1 a
1500
0.9132802b    u is in Q I.
 u ≈59°
    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 4  Rework Example 4 assuming that the target is 2500 feet away  
and the bullet takes 1 second to reach the target.	
Trigonometric Equations and the Zero-Product Property
Finding the Angle from Which a Bullet Was Fired
EXAMPLE 4
2	
Solve trigonometric equations 
by using the zero-product 
property.
Find all solutions of the equation 12 sin x - 1217 tan x + 22 = 0 in the interval 30, 2p2. 
Round the solutions to four decimal places.
Solution
Solving an Equation by Using the Zero-Product Property
EXAMPLE 5
 sin x = 1
2
 x = p
6 or x = 5p
6
See Example 3.
 tan x = -2
7    Solve for sin x and tan x.
 x ≈p - 0.2783 or x ≈2p - 0.2783
 x ≈2.8633 or x ≈6.0049
See Example 2(b).
12 sin x - 1217 tan x + 22 = 0	
Given equation
2 sin x - 1 = 0	
or	
7 tan x + 2 = 0	
Zero-product property
So the solution set of the given equation is
e p
6, 5p
6 , 2.8633, 6.0049f.
Practice Problem 5  Find all solutions of the equation
1sin x - 12113 tan x + 12 = 0
in the interval 30, 2p2.	

	
Section 6.5    ■    Trigonometric Equations I 619
Find all solutions of the equation 2 sin2 u - 5 sin u + 2 = 0. Express the solutions in 
radians.
Solution
The equation is quadratic in sin u. We use the zero-product property to solve for sin u and 
solve the resulting equation for u.
Solving a Quadratic Trigonometric Equation
EXAMPLE 6
You can confirm that the equation 
in Example 6 has the two solutions 
we found in 30, 2p2 by graphing 
Y1 = 2 sin2 x - 5 sin x + 2 
and inspecting the x-intercepts  
using  TRACE .
Technology 
Connection
2 sin2 u - 5 sin u + 2 = 0	
	
2x2 - 5x + 2 = 0 if x = sin u
12 sin u - 121 sin u - 22 = 0	 	
12x - 121x - 22 = 0: factor.
 2 sin u - 1 = 0     or    sin u - 2 = 0	
Zero-product property
 sin u = 1
2 	
sin u = 2	
Solve for sin u.
 u = p
6 or u = 5p
6 	
No solution	
-1 … sin u … 1
So u = p
6  and u = 5p
6  are the only solutions in the interval 30, 2p2. Because sin u has
period 2p, all possible solutions are
u = p
6 + 2np or u = 5p
6
+ 2np, for any integer n.
Practice Problem 6  Find all solutions of the equation 2 cos2 u - cos u - 1 = 0.  
Express the solutions in radians.	
Equations with More Than One Trigonometric Function
When a trigonometric equation contains more than one trigonometric function, sometimes 
we can use trigonometric identities to convert the equation into an equation containing only 
one trigonometric function.
3	
Solve trigonometric equations 
that contain more than one 
trigonometric function.
Find all solutions of the equation 2 sin2 u + 13 cos u + 1 = 0 in the interval 30, 2p2.
Solution
Because the equation contains sine and cosine, we use the Pythagorean identity 
sin2 u + cos2 u = 1 to convert the equation into one containing only cosine.
 2 sin2 u + 13 cos u + 1 = 0    Given equation
 211 - cos2 u2 + 13 cos u + 1 = 0    Replace sin2 u with 1 - cos2 u.
 2 - 2 cos2 u + 13 cos u + 1 = 0    Distributive property
 3 - 2 cos2 u + 13 cos u = 0    Combine terms.
 2 cos2 u - 13 cos u - 3 = 0    Multiply both sides by -1.
Solve the last equation for cos u.
  cos u =
-1- 132 { 21- 1322 - 41221-32
2122
    Use a = 2, b = - 13, and 
c = -3 in the quadratic formula.
 = 13 { 13 + 24
4
    Simplify.
 = 13 { 127
4
= 13 { 313
4
   
127 = 19 # 3 = 1913 = 313
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Using Identities
EXAMPLE 7
9
1
2
0

620	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
So   
 cos u = 13 + 313
4
 = 413
4
= 13
 cos u = 13 7 1
Because -1 … cos u … 1, 
the equation cos u = 13 
has no solution.
or
 cos u = 13 - 313
4
 = 1-2213
4
= - 13
2
The equation cos u = - 13
2  has two solutions 
in the interval 30, 2p2:
 u = p - p
6 = 5p
6  and
 u = p + p
6 = 7p
6
The solution set for the given equations in the interval 30, 2p2 is e 5p
6 , 7p
6 f.
Practice Problem 7  Find all solutions of the equation 2 cos2 u + 3 sin u - 3 = 0  
in the interval 30, 2p2.
Extraneous Solutions
Next, we solve a trigonometric equation by squaring both sides of the equation and then 
using an identity. Recall that squaring both sides of an equation may result in extraneous 
solutions. Therefore, you must check all possible solutions.
4	
Solve trigonometric equations 
by squaring both sides.
The Pythagorean identities
sin2 x + cos2 x = 1
tan2 x + 1 = sec2 x
cot2 x + 1 = csc2 x
can sometimes be used to rewrite 
a trigonometric equation after both 
sides are squared.
Side  
Note
Find all solutions of the equation 13 cos x = sin x + 1 in the interval 30, 2p2.
Solution
 113 cos x22 = 1sin x + 122
    Square both sides of the  
equation.
 3 cos2 x =  sin2 x + 2 sin x + 1    Expand the binomial.
 311 - sin2 x2 =  sin2 x + 2 sin x + 1     Pythagorean identity
 3 - 3 sin2 x = sin2 x + 2 sin x + 1     Distributive property
 -4 sin2 x - 2 sin x + 2 = 0
    Collect like terms.
 2 sin2 x + sin x - 1 = 0
    Divide both sides by -2.
 12 sin x - 121sin x + 12 = 0
    Factor.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation by Squaring
EXAMPLE 8
 2 sin x - 1 = 0 	 or	
sin x + 1 = 0	
Zero-product property
 sin x = 1
2 	
	
	
sin x = -1	
Solve for sin x.
 x = p
6  or x = p - p
6 = 5p
6 	
	
	
	
x = 3p
2 	
Solve for x.
The possible solutions are p
6, 5p
6 , and 3p
2 .
You can confirm that the equa-
tion in Example 8 has two 
solutions in 30, 2p2 by graphing 
Y1 = 13 cos x and the right side 
Y2 = sin x + 1. Find the points 
of intersection using  INTERSECT .
Technology 
Connection
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
0

	
Section 6.5    ■    Trigonometric Equations I 621
Check:
 x = p
6
 13 cos p
6
≟sin p
6 + 1
 13 a 13
2 b ≟1
2 + 1
 3
2
≟3
2  ✓
Yes
 x = 5p
6
 13 cos 5p
6
≟sin 5p
6
+ 1
 13 a - 13
2 b ≟1
2 + 1
 -3
2
≟3
2 *
No
 x = 3p
2
 13 cos 3p
2
≟sin 3p
2
+ 1
 13102 ≟-1 + 1
 0 ≟0  ✓
Yes
The solution set of the equation in the interval 30, 2p2 is e p
6, 3p
2 f.
Practice Problem 8  Find all solutions of the equation 13 cot u + 1 = 13 csc u  
in the interval 30, 2p2.	
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. x = p
2 + 2np  b. x = 2np  c. x = p
4 + np
2. a. x = 48.2° + n # 360°, x = 311.8° + n # 360° 
b. x ≈2.0344, x ≈5.1760    3. x = 90°, x = 330° 
4. 40°  5. e p
2, 5p
6 , 11p
6 f 
6. u = 2np, u = 2p
3
+ 2np, u = 4p
3
+ 2np
7. u = p
6, u = p
2, u = 5p
6   8. e p
3 f
Exercises
section 6.5
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The equation sin x = 1
2 has 
 solution(s) in 
	
	 30, 2p2.
	 2.	 All solutions of sin x = 1
2 are given by 
 and 
	
	
 for any integer n.
	 3.	 The equation cos x = 1 has 
 solution(s) in 
30, 2p2.
	 4.	 All solutions of tan x = 1 are given by 
 for 
any integer n.
	 5.	 True or False. The equation sec x = 1
2 has two solutions in 
	
	 30, 2p2. 
	 6.	 True or False. All solutions of sin x = 0 are given by 
x = np for any integer n. 
In Exercises 7–16, find all solutions of each equation. Express 
the solutions in radians.
	 7.	 cos x = 0 
	 8.	 sin x = 0
	 9.	 tan x = -1 
	10.	 cot x = -1 
	11.	 cos x = 12
2
	12.	 sin x = 13
2
	13.	  cot x = 13 
	14.	 tan x = - 13
3 
	15.	 cos x = - 1
2
	16.	 sin x = - 13
2 

622	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
In Exercises 17–26, find all solutions of each equation. 
Express the solutions in degrees.
	17.	 tan x = 13
3 
	18.	  cot x = 1 
	19.	 sin x = - 1
2
	20.	 cos x = 1
2
	21.	  csc x = 1 
	22.	  sec x = -1 
	23.	 13 csc x - 2 = 0
	24.	 13 sec x + 2 = 0
	25.	 2 sec x - 4 = 0
	26.	 2 csc x + 4 = 0
In Exercises 27–32, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30°, 360°2. Round your answers to the nearest tenth 
of a degree.
	27.	 sin u = 0.4 
	28.	 cos u = 0.6 
	29.	 sec u = 7.2 
	30.	 csc u = -4.5
	31.	 tan 1u - 30°2 = -5
	32.	 cot 1u + 30°2 = 6
In Exercises 33–38, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2. Round the solutions to four decimal places.
	33.	  csc x = -3
	34.	 3 sin x - 1 = 0
	35.	 3 tan x + 4 = 0
	36.	 2 sec x - 7 = 0
	37.	 2 csc x + 5 = 0
	38.	 cos x = 0.1106
In Exercises 39–46, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2.
	39.	 sin ax + p
4 b = 1
2
	40.	 2 cos ax - p
4 b + 1 = 0
	41.	 sec ax - p
8 b + 2 = 0 
	42.	 csc ax + p
8 b - 2 = 0 
	43.	 13 tan ax - p
6 b - 1 = 0 
	44.	 cot ax + p
6 b + 1 = 0 
	45.	 2 sin ax - p
3 b + 1 = 0 
	46.	 2 cos ax + p
3 b + 12 = 0 
In Exercises 47–54, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2.
	47.	 1sin x + 121tan x - 12 = 0 
	48.	 12 cos x + 12113 tan x - 12 = 0 
	49.	 1csc x - 221cot x + 12 = 0 
	50.	 113 sec x - 22113 cot x + 12 = 0 
	51.	 1tan x + 1212 sin x - 12 = 0 
	52.	 12 sin x - 13212 cos x - 12 = 0 
	53.	 112 sec x - 2212 sin x + 12 = 0 
	54.	 1cot x - 12112 csc x + 22 = 0 
In Exercises 55–62, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2.
	55.	 4 sin2 x = 1 
	56.	 4 cos2 x = 1 
	57.	 tan2 x = 1 
	58.	 sec2 x = 2 
	59.	 3 csc2 x = 4 
	60.	 3 cot2 x = 1 
	61.	 2 sin2 u - sin u - 1 = 0 
	62.	 2 cos2 u - 5 cos u + 2 = 0
In Exercises 63–72, use trigonometric identities to solve each 
equation in the interval 30, 2P2.
	63.	 sin x = cos x 
	64.	 13 sin x + cos x = 0 
	65.	 3 sin2 x = cos2 x 
	66.	 3 cos2 x = sin2 x 
	67.	 cos2 x - sin2 x = 1 
	68.	 2 sin2 x + cos x - 1 = 0 
	69.	 2 cos2 x - 3 sin x - 3 = 0 
	70.	 2 sin2 x - cos x - 1 = 0 
	71.	 13 sec2 x - 2 tan x - 213 = 0 
	72.	 csc2 x - 113 + 12 cot x + 113 - 12 = 0 
In Exercises 73–76, solve each trigonometric equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2 by first squaring both sides.
	73.	 13 sin x = 1 + cos x 
	74.	 tan x + 1 =  sec x 
	75.	 13 tan u + 1 = 13 sec u
	76.	 13 cot u + 1 = 13 csc u
Applying the Concepts
	77.	 Angle of elevation. Find the angle of elevation of the sun 
assuming that the shadow of a tree 24 feet high is 813 feet 
in length. 
	78.	 Leaning Tower of Pisa. The Leaning Tower of Pisa is  
179 feet tall, and when the sun is directly overhead, its shad-
ow measures 16.5 feet. At what angle is the tower inclined 
from the vertical? 
	79.	 Returning spacecraft. When a spacecraft reenters the 
atmosphere, the angle of reentry from the horizontal must 
be between 5.1° and 7.1°. Under 5.1°, the craft would “skip” 
back into space, and over 7.1°, the acceleration forces would 
be too high and the craft would crash. On reentry, a space-
craft descends 60 kilometers vertically while traveling 605 
kilometers. Find the angle of reentry off the horizontal to the 
nearest tenth of a degree. 
605 km
60 km
u
	80.	 A flare is fired from the deck of an anchored ship at an initial 
velocity of 78 feet per second. After three seconds, the flare is 
directly over a lifeboat stalled 112 feet from the boat. At what 
angle to the deck was the flare fired? Give your answer to the 
nearest degree. 
	81.	 Find the angle that a golf ball’s path makes with the ground, 
assuming that its initial velocity is 150 feet per second and 
after four seconds it is 25 feet above the ground. Give your 
answer to the nearest degree. 
	82.	 Find the angle that a baseball’s path makes with the ground, 
assuming that its initial velocity is 140 feet per second and 
after two seconds it is 40 feet higher than when it was ini-
tially hit. Give your answer to the nearest degree.  

	
Section 6.5    ■    Trigonometric Equations I 623
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 83–88, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2.
	 83.	 sin x cos x - 13
2  sin x + 1
2 cos x - 13
4
= 0
	
	 [Hint: Factor by grouping.]    
	 84.	 2 sin x tan x + 2 sin x + tan x + 1 = 0
	
	 [Hint: Factor by grouping.]   
	 85.	 5 sin2 u + cos2 u - sec2 u = 0 
	 86.	 2 sin u = cos u 
	 87.	 2 cos x = 1 - sin x
	 88.	 cos4 x - cos2 x + 1 = 0 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
In Exercises 89–92, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2.
	 89.	 tan2 x = 4
	 90.	 3 cos2 x + cos x = 0
	 91.	 cos x - sec x + 1 = 0
	 92.	 3 csc x + 2 cot2 x = 5
	 93.	 Solve for x in 30, 2p2: sin x cos x = 1
2.
	
	 [Hint: Multiply both sides by 2 and use a double-angle  
formula (Section 6.3)] 
	 94.	 Follow the hint given for Exercise 93 to show that the  
equation sin x cos x = 1 has no real-number solutions.
Maintaining skills
In Exercises 95–98, find all solutions of the given equation in 
the interval 30, 2P2.
	 95.	 sin x = - 1
2 
	 96.	 tan x - 1 = 0 
	 97.	 2 cos x = 13 
	 98.	 4 sin2 x = 1
In Exercises 99–102, solve each equation.
	 99.	 x = cos-1 a- 12
2 b 
	100.	 x = sin-1 a1
2b 
	101.	 x = tan-1 112 
	102.	 x = tan-1 1- 132 
	103.	 Use a sum-to-product formula to express cos 3x + cos 5x as 
a product. 
	104.	 If sin-1 x = p
5, then cos ap
2 - p
5 b =
.     

624	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
6.6
Earth
Moon
u
Sun
Figure 6.11  Moon phases
In this section, we solve equations involving trigonometric functions of multiple angles 
and those containing inverse trigonometric functions.
The Phases of the Moon
The moon orbits the earth and completes one revolution in about 29.5 days (a lunar 
month). During this period, the angle between the sun, the earth, and the moon changes.  
See Figure 6.11. This causes different amounts of the illuminated moon to face the 
earth; consequently, the shape of the moon appears to change. The shape varies from 
a new moon—the phase of the moon when the moon is not visible from the earth 
(this happens when the moon is between the sun and the earth)—to a half moon—the 
phase of the moon when the moon looks like half of a circular disk—to a full moon—
the phase of the moon when the moon looks like a full circular disk in the sky—back to 
a half moon and then to a new moon. The portion of the moon visible from the earth 
on any given day is called the phase of the moon. In Example 3, we express the phases 
of the moon by a sinusoidal equation.
Trigonometric Equations II
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Reference angle (Section 5.3, page 504)
2	 Periods of trigonometric functions  
(Sections 5.4 and 5.5)
3	 Factoring techniques (Section P.4)
4	 Solving linear and quadratic equations 
(Sections 1.1 and 1.2)
Objectives
1	 Solve trigonometric equations involving 
multiple angles.
2	 Solve equations using sum-to-product 
identities.
3	 Solve equations containing inverse 
­trigonometric functions.
S e c t i o n 
The expression once in a blue 
moon means “not often,” but what 
exactly is a blue moon? The popular 
definition says that a second full 
moon in a single calendar month is 
called a blue moon. On average, a 
blue moon occurs once every two 
and one-half years.
Do You  
Know?

	
Section 6.6    ■    Trigonometric Equations II 625
Equations Involving Multiple Angles
If x is the measure of an angle, then for any real number k, the number kx is a multiple 
angle of x. Equations such as
sin 3x = 1
2,  cos 1
2 x = 0.7,  and  sin 2x + sin 4x = 0
involve multiple angles. We use the same techniques to solve the equations that we used in 
Section 6.5. We need to be careful when finding all solutions of such equations; the vari-
able itself, such as x, must belong to the specified interval (if any), not its multiple (see 
Example 1).
1	
Solve trigonometric equations 
involving multiple angles.
Find all solutions of the equation cos 3x = 1
2 in the interval 30, 2p2.
Solution
Recall that cos u = 1
2 for the acute angle u = p
3. Because cos u is positive in quadrants I
and IV, we also have u = 2p - p
3 = 5p
3 . The period of the cosine function is 2p; so 
replacing u with 3x, all solutions of the equation cos 3x = 1
2 are given by
 3x = p
3 + 2np or  3x = 5p
3
+ 2np    For any integer n
 x = p
9 + 2np
3  or   x = 5p
9
+ 2np
3     Divide both sides by 3.
To find solutions in the interval 30, 2p2, try the following:
 n = -1  x = p
9 - 2p
3
= -5p
9   ✕	
 x = 5p
9
- 2p
3
= -p
9   ✕
 n = 0  x = p
9   ✓	
 x = 5p
9   ✓
 n = 1  x = p
9 + 2p
3
= 7p
9
✓	
 x = 5p
9
+ 2p
3
= 11p
9   ✓
 n = 2  x = p
9 + 4p
3
= 13p
9
✓	
 x = 5p
9
+ 4p
3
= 17p
9   ✓
 n = 3  x = p
9 + 2p = 19p
9
✕	
 x = 5p
9
+ 2p = 23p
9   ✕
The values resulting from n = -1 are too small and those resulting from n = 3 are too 
large to be in the interval 30, 2p2. The solution set corresponding to n = 0, 1, and 2 is
e p
9, 5p
9 , 7p
9 , 11p
9 , 13p
9 , 17p
9 f.
Practice Problem 1  Find all solutions of the equation sin 2x = 1
2 in the interval 
30, 2p2.
On a graphing calculator, you  
can see that the graphs of 
Y1 = cos 3x and Y2 = 1
2 
intersect in six points, which 
­correspond to the six solutions in 
the interval 30, 2p2.
Technology 
Connection
2
0
y2  1/2
y1  cos 3x
1.25
1.25
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Containing  
Multiple Angles
EXAMPLE 1

626	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
The graphs of Y1 = sin x
2 and 
Y2 = - 13
2
 confirm that the 
equation in Example 2 has no 
solution.
Technology 
Connection
1.5
1.5
2
0
y2   2
3
y1  sin 2
x
Find all solutions of the equation sin x
2 = - 13
2  in the interval 30, 2p2.
Solution
We know that sin p
3 = 13
2 . Because sin u is negative only in quadrants III and IV, the 
solutions for sin u = - 13
2  are
u = p + p
3 = 4p
3  and u = 2p - p
3 = 5p
3 .
Because the sine function has period 2p, all solutions of sin x
2 = - 13
2  are given by
 x
2 = 4p
3
+ 2np or  x
2 = 5p
3
+ 2np     For any integer n
 x = 8p
3
+ 4np or   x = 10p
3
+ 4np    Multiply both sides by 2.
For any integer n, the values of x in both expressions lie outside the interval 30, 2p2.
For example, for n = 0, x = 8p
3
7 2p and for n = -1, x = 8p
3
- 4p = -2p
3
6 0.
The equation sin x
2 = - 13
2 , therefore, has no solution in the interval 30, 2p2; so the 
­solution set is ∅.
Practice Problem 2  Find all solutions of the equation tan x
2 = 13
3  in the interval 
30, 2p2.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Containing  
a Multiple Angle
EXAMPLE 2
The moon orbits Earth in 29.5 days. The portion F of the moon visible from Earth x days 
after the new moon is given by the equation:
F = 0.5 sin c
p
14.75ax - 14.75
2
b d + 0.5.
Find x when 75% of the moon is visible from Earth.
Solution
We are asked to find x when F = 75% = 0.75. We solve the equation.
 0.75 = 0.5 sin c
p
14.75 ax - 14.75
2
b d + 0.5    Replace F with 0.75.
 0.25 = 0.5 sin c
p
14.75 ax - 14.75
2
b d
    Subtract 0.5 from both sides.
 1
2 = sin c
p
14.75 ax - 14.75
2
b d
    Divide both sides by 0.5.
Let u =
p
14.75 ax - 14.75
2
b be a solution of the equation sin u = 1
2.
The Phases of the Moon
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 6.6    ■    Trigonometric Equations II 627
    Multiply both  
sides by  
14.75>p.
We know that sin p
6 = 1
2. Because sin u is positive only in quadrants I and II, we have
p
14.75 ax - 14.75
2
b = p
6   or   
p
14.75 ax - 14.75
2
b = 5p
6
 x - 14.75
2
= 14.75
6
    x - 14.75
2
= 5114.752
6
 x = 14.75
2
+ 14.75
6
    x = 14.75
2
+ 5114.752
6
    Solve for x.
 x ≈10
    x ≈20    Use a calculator and round 
to the nearest day.
So 75% of the moon is visible 10 days and 20 days after the new moon.
Practice Problem 3  In Example 3, find x when 30% of the moon is visible from  
Earth.
Find all solutions of tan 2u = 13 for 0° … u 6 360°.
Solution
We have tan x = 13 for the acute angle x = 60°. Replacing x with 2u in the equation 
tan x = 13, we have all solutions of the equation tan 2u = 13 given by
2u = 60° + 180°1n2    For any integer n; the period of the  
tangent function is p = 180°.
u = 30° + 90°1n2     Divide both sides by 2.
For n = 0, 1, 2, and 3, we have all values of u between 0° and 360° that satisfy the equation 
tan 2u = 13.
 n = 0, u = 30° + 90°102 = 30°
 n = 1, u = 30° + 90°112 = 120°
 n = 2, u = 30° + 90°122 = 210°
 n = 3, u = 30° + 90°132 = 300°
The solution set is 530°, 120°, 210°, 300°6.
Practice Problem 4  Find all solutions of cot 3u = 1 for 0 … u 6 360°.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation
EXAMPLE 4
Solve sin 2x + cos 2x = 12 over the interval 30, 2p2. 
Solution
 sin 2x + cos 2x = 12
    Original equation
 1sin 2x + cos 2x22 = 11222    Square both sides.
 sin2 2x + cos2 2x + 2 sin 2x cos 2x = 2
   
1a + b22 = a2 + b2 + 2ab
 1 + sin 4x = 2
    sin2 A + cos2 A = 1;
2 sin A cos A = sin 2A
 sin 4x = 1
    Solve for sin 4x.
Solving an Equation by Squaring
EXAMPLE 5

628	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Using Sum-to-Product Identities
The next example illustrates a procedure for solving a trigonometric equation of the form 
sin ax { sin bx = 0 or cos ax { cos bx = 0. To solve such equations, review the sum-to-
product identities on page 611.
2	
Solve equations using sum-to-
product identities.
We have sin u = 1 for u = p
2. Replacing u with 4x in the equation sin u = 1, we have all 
solutions of the equation sin 4x = 1 given by
 4x = p
2 + 2np    For any integer n; the period  
of the sine function is 2p.
 x = p
8 + np
2     Divide by 4; simplify.
For n = 0, 1, 2, and 3, we have all possible values of x between 0 and 2p that satisfy the 
equation sin 4x = 1.
 n = 0 x = p
8
 n = 1 x = p
8 + p
2 = 5p
8
 n = 2 x = p
8 + p = 9p
8
 n = 3 x = p
8 + 3p
2
= 13p
8
The possible solutions of the original equation are p
8, 5p
8 , 9p
8 , and 13p
8 . Because squaring 
both sides of an equation may result in extraneous solutions, we must check all possible 
solutions.
You can verify that the solution set of the equation is e p
8, 9p
8 f.
Practice Problem 5  Solve sin 3x + cos 3x = A
3
2 over the interval 30, 2p2.
Solve cos 2x + cos 3x = 0 over the interval 30, 2p2.
Solution
 cos 2x + cos 3x = 0    Original equation
 2 cos 5x
2  cos x
2 = 0    cos u + cos v = 2 cos u + v
2
  cos u - v
2
So
cos 5x
2 = 0  or  cos x
2 = 0    Zero-product property
We know that if cos u = 0, then for any integer n,
u = p
2 + 2np or u = 3p
2
+ 2np
Solving an Equation Using a Sum-to-Product Identity
EXAMPLE 6

	
Section 6.6    ■    Trigonometric Equations II 629
Equations Containing Inverse Functions
We now consider equations containing inverse trigonometric functions.
3	
Solve equations containing 
inverse trigonometric 
functions.
We replace u with 5x
2  and x
2 and find the values of x that lie in the interval 30, 2p2.
cos 5x
2 = 0
cos x
2 = 0
5x
2 = p
2 + 2np
5x
2 = 3p
2
+ 2np
x
2 = p
2 + 2np
x
2 = 3p
2
+ 2np
x = p
5 + 4np
5
x = 3p
5
+ 4np
5
x = p + 4np
x = 3p + 4np
n = 0
x = p
5   ✓
x = 3p
5   ✓
x = p  ✓
x = 3p  *
n = 1
x = p  ✓
x = 7p
5   ✓
x = 5p  *
n = 2
x = 9p
5   ✓
x = 11p
5   *
n = 3
x = 13p
5   *
The solution set of the given equation is e p
5, 3p
5 , p, 7p
5 , 9p
5 f.
Practice Problem 6  Solve sin 2x + sin 3x = 0 over the interval 30, 2p2.
Solve p
6 + 2 tan-11x - 12 = p
2.
Solution
 p
6 + 2 tan-11x - 12 = p
2
    Original equation
 2 tan-11x - 12 = p
2 - p
6 = p
3
    Subtract p
6 and simplify.
 tan-11x - 12 = p
6
    Divide both sides by 2.
 x - 1 = tan p
6
    Definition of inverse function
 x = 1 + tan p
6    Solve for x
 x = 1 + 13
3
= 3 + 13
3
    tan p
6 = 13
3
Practice Problem 7  Solve p
4 + 3 sin-11x + 12 = 5p
4 .
Solving an Equation Containing an  
Inverse Tangent Function
EXAMPLE 7

630	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
The equation sin-1 a1
2b = x has only one solution, x = p
6. However, taking the sine of 
both sides gives sin asin-1 1
2b = sin x, or 1
2 = sin x. The last equation has infinitely many 
solutions. As with squaring both sides of an equation, taking the sine (or any other trigo-
nometric function) of both sides of an equation may result in extraneous solutions. In this 
case, you must check all solutions.
If y = sin-1 x, then sin y = x and 
-p
2 … y … p
2. If t = cos-1 x, 
then cos t = x and 0 … t … p.
Recall
a.  Verify the identity: sin-1 x + cos-1 x = p
2, x in 3-1, 14.
b.  Use part a to solve: sin-1 x - cos-1 x = p
4, x in 3-1, 14.
Solution
a.  Let sin-1 x = u. Then -p
2 … u … p
2, so p
2 Ú -u Ú -p
2 and 0 … p
2 -u … p.
 x = sin u
	
From sin-1 x = u.
 x = cos ap
2 - ub	
Cofunction identity
 cos-1 x = p
2 - u
	
Definition of cos-1 x.
 u + cos-1 x = p
2
	
Add u to both sides.
 sin-1 x + cos-1 x = p
2
	
Replace u with sin-1 x.
b.  sin-1 x - cos-1 x = p
4 	
Given equation
 sin-1x - ap
2 - sin-1 xb = p
4
    From part a.  cos-1 x = p
2 - sin-1 x.
 2 sin-1 x = p
4 + p
2 = 3p
4
    Simplify.
 x = sin 3p
8
    Solve for x.
 x = H
1 - cos a3p
4 b
2
    Half-angle formula
 x = H
1 + 12
2
2
    cos 3p
4
= - 12
2
 x = 22 + 12
2
    Simplify
The solution set is  e 22 + 12
2
f.
Solving an Equation Containing Inverse Functions
EXAMPLE 8

	
Section 6.6    ■    Trigonometric Equations II 631
Practice Problem 8
a.  Verify the identity: tan-1 x + cot-1 x = p
2, x in 1-∞, ∞2.
b.  Use part a. to solve: tan-1 x - cot-1 x = p
4.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. e p
12, 5p
12, 13p
12 , 17p
12 f    2. e p
3 f    3. After about 5 days 
and 24 days    4. 515°, 75°, 135°, 195°, 255°, 315°6
5. e p
36, 5p
36, 25p
36 , 29p
36 , 49p
36 , 53p
36 f
6. e0, 2p
5 , 4p
5 , p, 6p
5 , 8p
5 f    7. e 13 - 2
2
f
8. b. eA
2 + 12
2 - 12
f
Exercises
section 6.6 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 If sin 2x1 = sin 2x2 and 0 6 x1 6 x2 6 p
2, then x2 =  
	
	
.
	 2.	 If cos 2x1 = cos 2x2 and 0 6 x1 6 x2 6 p, then x2 =  
.
	 3.	 If tan 2x1 = tan 2x2 and 0 6 x1 6 x2 6 p, then x2 =  
.  
	 4.	 True or False. sin12 sin-1 x2 = 2x21 - x2 if 
-1 … x … 1. 
	 5.	 True or False. sin 2x
2
= sin x 
	 6.	 True or False. 
2 tan x
2
x
= tan 1 
In Exercises 7–26, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2.
	 7.	 cos 2x = 1
2 
	8.	 cos 2x = 0 
	 9.	 csc 2x = 1
2 
	
10.	 sec 2x = 13
2 
	11.	 tan 2x = 13
3 	
12.	 cot 2x = 13
3
	13.	 sin 3x = 1
2 
	
14.	 cos 3x = 13
2 
	15.	 cos x
2 = 1
2 
	
16.	 csc x
2 = 2 
	17.	 tan x
3 = 1 
	
18.	 cot x
3 = 13 
	19.	 2 sin 3x = 12	
20.	 2 cos 3x = 12
	21.	 2 cos12x + 12 = 1 
	
22.	 2 sin12x - 12 = 13 
	23.	 2 sin14x - 12 = 1 
	
24.	 2 cos14x + 12 = 13 
	25.	 2 cos a3x
2 - 1b = 13 
	
26.	 2 sin a3x
2 + 1b = 1 
In Exercises 27–38, solve each equation for U in the interval 
30°, 360°2. If necessary, write your answer to the nearest tenth 
of a degree.
	27.	 3 cos 2u = 1 
	
28.	 4 sin 2u = 1 
	29.	 2 cos 3u + 1 = 2 
	
30.	 2 sin 3u - 1 = -2 
	31.	 3 sin 3u + 1 = 0 
	
32.	 4 cos 3u + 1 = 0 
	33.	 2 sin u
2 + 1 = 0 
	
34.	 2 cos u
2 + 13 = 0 
	35.	 2 sec 2u + 3 = 7 
	
36.	 2 csc 2u + 1 = 0 
	37.	 3 csc u
2 - 1 = 5 
	38.	5 sec u
2 - 3 = 7        

632	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
In Exercises 39–46, solve each equation by using sum-to- 
product identities in the interval 30, 2P2.
	39.	 sin 2x + sin x = 0 
	
40.	 cos 2x + cos x = 0 
	41.	 cos 3x - cos x = 0 
	
42.	 sin 3x - sin x = 0 
	43.	 cos 3x + cos 5x = 0 
	
44.	 cos 3x - cos 5x = 0 
	45.	 sin 3x - sin 5x = 0 
	
46.	 sin 3x + sin 5x = 0 
In Exercises 47–54, solve each equation for x.
	47.	 sin-1 x - cos-1 x = p
6 	
48.	 sin-1 x + cos-1 x = p
6 
	49.	 sin-1 x + cos-1 x = 3p
4 
	 50.	 sin-1 x - cos-1 x = p
3
	51.	 sin-1 x - cos-1 x = - p
6 	
52.	 sin-1 x + cos-1 x = - 3p
4
	53.	 sin-1 x - tan-1 2
3 = p
4 	
54.	 sin-1 x - cos-1 2
3 = p
6
Applying the Concepts
	55.	 Electric current. The electric current I (in amperes) pro-
duced by an alternator in time t (in seconds) is given by 
I = 60 sin1120pt2. Find the smallest possible positive value 
of t (rounded to four decimal places) such that
a.	 I = 30 amperes. 
b.	 I = -20 amperes. 
	56.	 Simple harmonic motion. A simple harmonic motion 
	
	 is described by the equation x = 6 sin ap
2  tb, where x 
	
	 is the displacement in feet and t is time in seconds.  
Find positive values of t for which the displacement is  
3 feet.
	57.	 Simple harmonic motion. Repeat Exercise 56 assuming 
that the simple harmonic motion is described by the equation 
	
	 x = 6 cos ap
2  tb. 
	58.	 Overcoat sales. The monthly sales of overcoats at the 
menswear store Suit Yourself in Winterland are approximated 
by the equation
S1x2 = 500 + 500 sinc p
4  1x - 22d ,
	
	 where x is the month, with x = 1 for January. Find the 
months (after appropriate rounding) in which the number of 
overcoats sold is
a.	 0. 
b.	 1000. 
c.	 500. 
	59.	 Number of tourists. The weekly number of tourists 
­visiting a tropical island is approximated by the equation
y = 20 + 10 sinc p
26 1x - 142d ,
	
	 where y is the number of visitors (in thousands) in the xth 
week of the year, starting with x = 1 for the first week in 
January. Find the week (after appropriate rounding) in which 
the number of tourists to the island is
a.	 30,000. 
b.	 25,000. 
c.	 15,000. 
	60.	 Average monthly temperature. The average monthly 
sea surface temperature T (in degrees Fahrenheit) on Paradise 
Island is approximated by the equation
T = 10.5 sinc p
6  1x - 52d + 73.5,
	
	 where x is the month, with x = 1 representing January. Find 
the months when the average sea surface temperature is
a.	 78.75° F. 
b.	 84° F. 
	61.	 Average monthly snowfall. The average monthly snow-
fall y (in inches) in Rochester, New York, in the xth month 
can be approximated by
y = 12 + 12 sinc p
4  1x - 22d , 1 … x … 8,
	
	 where October = 1, November = 2, c May = 8. Find the 
months (after appropriate rounding) when the average snow-
fall in Rochester is
a.	 24 inches. 
b.	 18 inches. 
	62.	 Watching TV. A 3-foot-high LCD television is mounted on 
a wall with its base 1.5 feet above the level of the observer’s 
eye. Let u be the angle of vision subtended by the TV when 
you sit x feet from the wall.
a.	 Show that u = tan-1 9
2x - tan-1 3
2x.
b.	 Find the maximum value of x (to the nearest tenth foot) 
	
assuming that tan u = 1
4. 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 63–80, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2.
	63.	 sin4 2x = 1	
64.	 cos4 2x = 1 
	65.	 4 cos2 x
2 = 3 
	
66.	 4 sin2 x
2 = 1 
	67.	 tan2 2x = 1	
68.	 cot2 x
2 = 1        

	
Summary 633
	69.	 3 sec2 x
2 = 12	
70.	 5 csc2 x
2 - 11 = 9
	71.	 1tan 2x - 121sin x + 12 = 0
	72.	 113 cot 2x - 1212 cos x - 12 = 0
	73.	 11 - 2 sin 2x - 12113 + 2 cos x2 = 0
	74.	 113 tan 2x + 1212 cos x + 12 = 0 
	75.	 sin 2x cos 2x + 13
2  sin 2x + 1
2 cos 2x + 13
4
= 0 
	76.	 2 sin 3x tan 2x - 2 sin 3x + tan 2x - 1 = 0 
	77.	 sin 2x + sin 4x = 2 sin 3x 
	78.	 cos x + cos 5x = 2 cos 2x 
	79.	 sin x + sin 3x = cos x + cos 3x 
	80.	 sin 2x + sin 4x = cos 2x + cos 4x 
In Exercises 81–84,
a.	 Write the left side of the equation in the form A sin1Bx −C2.
b.	 Solve for x in the interval 30, 2p2.
	81.	 3 sin 2x + 4 cos 2x = 0	
82.	 3 cos 2x - 4 sin 2x = 5
2 
	83.	 5 sin 3x - 12 cos 3x = 1313
2
 
	84.	 12 sin 3x + 5 cos 3x = 13
2  
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
In Exercises 85 and 86, solve each equation for x.
	85.	 cos12 sin-1 x2 = 1
2	
86.	 tan1tan-1 x + tan-1 12 = 5
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 87 and 88, rewrite each equation to obtain an 
equivalent equation having the variable in the numerator.
	87.	 3
x = 5
p 
	
88.	 sin 12°
4
= 12
2x 
In Exercises 89 and 90, solve each equation for x.
	89.	 12
x = 3
4 
	
90.	 7
9 = 2
3x 
In Exercises 91–94, give the exact value for each expression.
	91.	 sin 60° 
	
92.	 sin 45° 
	93.	 sin1180° - 30°2 
	
94.	 sin1180° - 45°2 
In Exercises 95 and 96, answer True or False.
	95.	 If A, B, and C represent the angles in a triangle and C = 90°, 
then A + B = 90°. 
	96.	 If a, b, and c, represent the lengths of the sides in a triangle, 
then a2 + b2 = c.        
6.1	 Verifying Identities
Reciprocal Identities
csc x =
1
sin x  sec x =
1
cos x  cot x =
1
tan x
Quotient Identities
tan x = sin x
cos x  cot x = cos x
sin x
Pythagorean Identities
sin2 x + cos2 x = 1
1 + tan2 x = sec2 x
1 + cot2 x = csc2 x
Even–Odd Identities
 sin1-x2 = -sin x cos1-x2 = cos x tan1-x2 = -tan x
 csc1-x2 = -csc x sec1-x2 = sec x cot1-x2 = -cot x
See page 577 for guidelines for verifying trigonometric 
­identities.
6.2	 Sum and Difference Formulas
Sum and Difference Formulas
 cos1u - v2 = cos u cos v + sin u sin v
 cos1u + v2 = cos u cos v - sin u sin v
 sin1u - v2 = sin u cos v - cos u sin v
 sin1u + v2 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v
 tan1u - v2 =
tan u - tan v
1 + tan u tan v
 tan1u + v2 =
tan u + tan v
1 - tan u tan v
Cofunction Identities
 sin ap
2 - xb = cos x   cos ap
2 - xb = sin x
 tan ap
2 - xb = cot x   csc ap
2 - xb = sec x
 sec ap
2 - xb = csc x   cot ap
2 - xb = tan x
Reduction Formula
If 1a, b2 is any point on the terminal side of an angle u in standard 
position, then a sin x + b cos x = 2a2 + b2 sin1x + u2 for any 
real number x, where
cos u =
a
2a2 + b2 and sin u =
b
2a2 + b2.
 Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

634	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
6.3	
Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas
Double-Angle Formulas
 sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x
 cos 2x = cos2 x - sin2 x
 cos 2x = 1 - 2 sin2 x
 cos 2x = 2 cos2 x - 1
 tan 2x =
2 tan x
1 - tan2 x
Power-Reducing Formulas
 sin2 x = 1 - cos 2x
2
 cos2 x = 1 + cos 2x
2
 tan2 x = 1 - cos 2x
1 + cos 2x
Half-Angle Formulas
 sin u
2 = { A
1 - cos u
2
 cos u
2 = { A
1 + cos u
2
 tan u
2 = { A
1 - cos u
1 + cos u
 =
sin u
1 + cos u
 = 1 - cos u
sin u
where the sign + or - depends on the quadrant in which u
2 lies.
6.4	 Product-to-Sum and  
Sum-to-Product Formulas
Product-to-Sum Formulas
 cos x cos y = 1
23cos1x - y2 + cos1x + y24
 sin x sin y = 1
23cos1x - y2 - cos1x + y24
 sin x cos y = 1
2 3sin1x + y2 + sin1x - y24
 cos x sin y = 1
2 3sin1x + y2 - sin1x - y24
Sum-to-Product Formulas
 cos x + cos y = 2 cos ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b
 cos x - cos y = -2 sin ax + y
2
b sin ax - y
2
b
 sin x + sin y = 2 sin ax + y
2
b cos ax - y
2
b
 sin x - sin y = 2 sin ax - y
2
b cos ax + y
2
b
6.5	 Trigonometric Equations I
Trigonometric Equations I A trigonometric equation is an equa-
tion that contains a trigonometric function with a variable. Values 
of the variable that satisfy a trigonometric equation are its solutions. 
Solving a trigonometric equation means finding its solution set.
Algebraic techniques are used to solve equations that are in linear, 
quadratic, or factorable form. Sometimes trigonometric identities 
are used to solve trigonometric equations.
In this section, we solve three types of equations.
	 1.	 Equation of the form 
a sin1x - c2 = k, a cos1x - c2 = k, and a tan1x - c2 = k
	 2.	 Equations that can be solved by factoring using the zero-
product property
	 3.	 Equations that are equivalent to a polynomial equation in one 
trigonometric function
6.6	 Trigonometric Equations II
In this section, we solve trigonometric equations involving 
multiple angles. We use sum-to-product and other identities to 
solve trigonometric equations, including those containing inverse 
trigonometric functions.
Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills
In Exercises 1–4, use the information given to find the exact 
value of the remaining trigonometric functions of U.
	 1.	 sin u = - 2
3 and cos u 6 0	
	 2.	 tan u = - 1
2 and csc u 7 0	
	 3.	 sec u = 3 and tan u 6 0	
	 4.	 csc u = 5 and cot u 6 0	
In Exercises 5–20, verify each identity.
	 5.	 1sin x + cos x22 + 1sin x - cos x22 = 2
	 6.	 11 - tan x22 + 11 + tan x22 = 2 sec2 x
	 7.	 1 - tan2 u
1 + tan2 u = cos2 u - sin2 u
	 8.	 sin x + tan x
csc x + cot x = sin2 x sec x	

	
Review Exercises 635
	 9.	
sin u
1 + cos u +
sin u
1 - cos u = 2 csc u
	10.	 tan2 x sin2 x = tan2 x - sin2 x
	11.	
sin u
1 - cot u +
cos u
1 - tan u = cos u + sin u
	12.	 tan u - sin u
sin3 u
=
sec u
1 + cos u
	13.	
tan x
sec x - 1 +
tan x
sec x + 1 = 2 csc x
	14.	
1
csc x - cot x -
1
cot x + csc x = 2 cot x
	15.	 1 + sin u
1 - sin u = 1sec u + tan u22
	16.	 1 - cos u
1 + cos u = 1csc u - cot u22
	17.	 sec x - tan x
sec x + tan x = 1sec x - tan x22
	18.	 csc x + cot x
csc x - cot x = 1csc x + cot x22
	19.	 sin x - cos x + 1
sin x + cos x - 1 = sin x + 1
cos x
	
	 [Hint: Multiply the numerator and the denominator of the left 
side by sin x + 11 - cos x2.]
	20.	 sin2 x cot x =
2 cos x
sin x + csc x + cos2 x csc x
In Exercises 21–28, find the exact value of each expression.
	21.	 cos 15° 
	22.	 sin 105° 
	23.	 csc 75° 
	24.	 tan 75° 
	25.	 sin 41° cos 49° + cos 41° sin 49°	
	26.	 cos 50° cos 10° - sin 50° sin 10°	
	27.	 tan 69° + tan 66°
1 - tan 69° tan 66° 
	28.	 2 cos 75° cos 15° 
In Exercises 29–32, let sin u = 4
5, cos V = 5
13, for 0 * u " P
2 , 
0 * V " P
2 . Find the value of each expression.
	29.	 sin1u - v2 
	30.	 cos1u + v2 
	31.	 cos1u - v2    
	32.	 tan1u - v2   
In Exercises 33–50, verify each identity.
	33.	 sin1x - y2 cos y + cos1x - y2 sin y = sin x
	34.	 cos1x - y2 cos y - sin1x - y2 sin y = cos x
	35.	
sin1u + v2
sin1u - v2 = tan u + tan v
tan u - tan v
	36.	
tan1x + y2
cot1x - y2 =
tan2 x - tan2 y
1 - tan2 x tan2 y
	37.	 sin 4x
sin 2x - cos 4x
cos 2x = sec 2x
	38.	 sin 3x
sin x - cos 3x
cos x = 2
	39.	 sin ax - p
6 b + cos ax + p
3 b = 0
	40.	 cos 2x = cos4 x - sin4 x
	41.	 1 + tan u tan 2u = sec 2u
	42.	
sin u + sin 2u
1 + cos u + cos 2u = tan u
	43.	 sin u + sin 2u
cos u + cos 2u = tan 3u
2
	44.	 sin u - sin 2u
cos u - cos 2u = -cot 3u
2
	45.	 sin 5x - sin 3x
sin 5x + sin 3x = tan x
tan 4x
	46.	 cos 5x - cos 3x
cos 5x + cos 3x = -tan x tan 4x
	47.	 tan 3x + tan x
tan 3x - tan x = 2 cos 2x
	48.	
sin 4x
211 + cos 4x2 =
tan x
1 - tan2 x
	49.	 sin 3x + sin 5x + sin 7x + sin 9x
cos 3x + cos 5x + cos 7x + cos 9x = tan 6x
	50.	 cos x + cos 3x + cos 5x + cos 7x
sin x + sin 3x + sin 5x + sin 7x
= cot 4x
In Exercises 51 and 52, sketch the graph of each equation by 
first converting it to the form y = A sin 1x + U2.
	51.	 y = 13 sin x + cos x 
	52.	 y = sin x + 13 cos x 
In Exercises 53 and 54, assume that A + B + C = 180°. 
Verify each identity.
	53.	 sin 2A + sin 2B - sin 2C = 4 cos A cos B sin C
	54.	 tan A + tan B + tan C = tan A tan B tan C
In Exercises 55–60, find all solutions of each equation in the 
interval 30, 2P2. Use a graphing calculator to verify your 
solutions.
	55.	 2 cos2 x - 1 = 0
	56.	 3 tan2 x - 1 = 0
	57.	 2 cos2 x - cos x - 1 = 0 
	58.	 2 sin2 x - 5 sin x - 3 = 0 
	59.	 2 sin 3x - 1 = 0 
	60.	 2 cos12x - 12 - 1 = 0 
In Exercises 61–66, solve each equation for U in the interval 
30°, 360°2. If necessary, write your answers to the nearest 
tenth of a degree. Use a graphing calculator to verify your 
solutions.
	61.	 3 sin u - 1 = 0 
	62.	 4 cos u + 1 = 0 
	63.	 213 cos 2u - 3 = 0 
	64.	 11 - 2 sin 2u2113 + 2 cos 2u2 = 0
	65.	 113 tan u + 1212 cos u + 12 = 0 
	66.	 13 cos u = sin u + 1 	

636	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
Applying the Concepts
	67.	 A searchlight beam from a Coast Guard boat shines on a lake 
at an angle u to the surface of the water. Viewed by a swim-
mer underwater, the beam appears to make an angle a with 
the surface of the water, as shown in the figure. Under these
	
	 circumstances, cos u = 4
3 cos a. Find a if cos u = 2
3.	
u
a
	68.	 The rabbit population of an area is described by 
N1t2 = 2400 + 500 sinpt, where N1t2 gives the number of 
rabbits in the area after t years. When will the rabbit popula-
tion first reach 1900? 
	69.	 The voltage from an alternating current generator is given by 
V1t2 = 160 cos 120pt, where t is measured in seconds. Find 
the time t when the voltage first equals 80. 
	70.	 A jeweler wants to make a gold pendant in the shape of an 
isosceles triangle. Express the area of the pendant in terms 
	
	 of u
2 and x, where u is the angle included by two sides of 
	
	 equal length x. 
x
x
θ
	71.	 Assuming that the area of the pendant in Exercise 70 is 1 
square inch, find the angle included between the two sides of 
equal length when each measures 2 inches. 
Practice Test A
	 1.	 Assuming that sin u = 3
5 and cos u 6 0, find tan u. 
	 2.	 Assuming that tan x = 2
3 and csc x 6 0, find cos x. 
In Problems 3–8, verify each identity.
	 3.	 1 - sin2 x
sin2 x
= cot2 x
	 4.	 2 sin x cos x = 1sin x + cos x + 121sin x + cos x - 12
	 5.	 sin x sin ap
2 - xb = sin 2x
2
	 6.	
sin 2x
21cos x + sin x2 =
sin x
1 + tan x
	 7.	 sin 2x + sin 4x
cos 2x + cos 4x = tan 3x
	 8.	 cos1x + y2 cos1x - y2 = cos2 x + cos2 y - 1
In Problems 9 and 10, find all solutions of each equation.
	 9.	 tan1-x2 = 1 
	
10.	 sin 4x = 1
2
In Problems 11 and 12, find all solutions of each equation in 
the interval 30, 2P2.
	11.	 cos x
3 = 12
2 
	
12.	 sin 2x + cos x = 0
In Problems 13–15, find the exact value of each expression.
	13.	 sin 56° + cos 146° 
	14.	 cos 48° cos 12° - sin 48° sin 12°	 
	15.	 sin 5p
12 
	16.	 If sin u = 4
5, find the exact value of cos 2u. 
	17.	 If tan u = 3
4, find the exact value of sin 2u. 
	18.	 Determine whether the function y = cos ap
2 - xb + tan x is 
	
	 odd, even, or neither. 
	19.	 Determine whether sin x + sin y = sin1x + y2 is an  
identity. 
	20.	 A golf ball is hit on a level fairway with an initial velocity  
of v0 = 128 ft>sec on an initial angle of flight u (in degrees). 
The range (in feet) of the ball is given by the expression 
	
	 v0
2 sin 2u
32
. Find the value(s) of u if the range is 512 feet.  
 	

	
Practice Test B 637
Practice Test B
	 1.	 If sin u = - 12
13 and p 6 u 6 3p
2 , find sec u. 
a.	 - 13
5 	
b.	 - 12
5
c.	 - 5
12	
d.	 13
5
	 2.	 Which expression is equal to 1sin x + cos x22 +
1sin x - cos x22? 
a.	 1	
b.	 2
c.	 sin x cos x	
d.	 4 sin x cos x
	 3.	 Which expression is equal to 
sin x
1 + cos x +
sin x
1 - cos x? 
a.	 2 sin x	
b.	 2 cos x
c.	 2 sec x	
d.	 2 csc x
	 4.	 Which expression is equal to tan x + tan y
cot x + cot y? 
a.	 cot x cot y	
b.	 tan x tan y
c.	 sec x csc y	
d.	 sin x cos y
	 5.	 Which expression is equal to sin x + sin y
cos x + cos y + cos x - cos y
sin x - sin y ? 
a.	 0	
b.	 1
c.	 tan x tan y	
d.	 tan x + tan y
	 6.	 Which expression is equal to 
sin 2x
1 + cos 2x? 
a.	 cot x	
b.	 tan x
c.	 tan 2x	
d.	 cot 2x
	 7.	 Which expression is equal to 1 - cos 2x
1 + cos 2x? 
a.	 sin2 x	
b.	 cos2 x
c.	 tan2 x	
d.	 cot2 x
	 8.	 Which expression is equal to sin 3x - sin x
cos x - cos 3x? 
a.	 tan x	
b.	 tan 2x
c.	 cot x	
d.	 cot 2x
In Problems 9–11, find all solutions of each equation.
	 9.	 cot1-x2 = -1 
a.	 x = p
4 + 2pn, for any integer n
b.	 x = 3p
4
+ 2pn, for any integer n
c.	 x = p
4 + pn, for any integer n
d.	 x = 3p
4
+ pn, for any integer n
	10.	 2 cos 4x = -1 
a.	 x = 2p
3
+ 2pn and x = 4p
3
+ 2pn, for any integer n
b.	 x = p
3 + np
2  and x = 5p
3
+ np
2 , for any integer n
c.	 x = p
6 + np
2  and x = p
3 + np
2 , for any integer n
d.	 x = p
12 + 2pn and x = 5p
12 + 2pn, for any integer n
	11.	 sin x
3 = 12
2 
a.	 x = p
4 + 2pn and x = 3p
4
+ 2pn, for any integer n
b.	 x = p
4 + 6np and x = p
12 + 6np, for any integer n
c.	 x = 3p
4
+ 6pn and x = 9p
4
+ 6pn, for any integer n
d.	 x = 3p
4
+ 2pn and x = 5p
4
+ 2pn, for any integer n
	12.	 Find all solutions of cos x - sin 2x = 0 for the interval 
30, 2p2. 
a.	 e p
6, p
2, 5p
6 , 3p
2 f	
b.	 e p
6, p
3, 5p
6 , 7p
6 f
c.	 e p
2, 5p
6 , p, 3p
2 f	
d.	 e p
6, p
2, 5p
6 , 11p
6 f
In Problems 13 and 14, find the exact value of each  
expression.
	13.	 sin 71° + cos 161° 
a.	 1.892	
b.	 -1.892
c.	 1	
d.	 0
	14.	 sin 53° cos 37° + cos 53° sin 37° 
a.	 1
2	
b.	 13
2
c.	 0	
d.	 1
	15.	 Assuming that sin u = 2
3, find the exact value of cos 2u. 
a.	 1
3	
b.	 1
9
c.	 14
9 	
d.	 15
3
	16.	 Assuming that tan u = 4
3, find the exact value of sin 2u. 
a.	 24
25	
b.	 4
5
c.	 3
5	
d.	 8
5
	17.	 Which of the following best describes the symmetry of the 
	
	 graph of y = sin ap
2 - xb + cot x? 
a.	 Symmetric with respect to the origin
b.	 Symmetric with respect to the x-axis
c.	 Symmetric with respect to the y-axis
d.	 Not symmetric to either axis or the origin
	18.	 Which pair of values results in a false statement for 
tan1x + y2 = tan x + tan y? 
a.	 x = 0, y = p	
b.	 x = p
4, y = - p
4
c.	 x = p
4, y = 5p
4 	
d.	 x = p
4, y = 3p
4

638	 Chapter 6      Trigonometric Identities and Equations
	19.	 Identify all solutions of 2 cos2 x = 3
2 in the interval 
30, 2p2. 
a.	 e p
6 f	
b.	 e p
6, 5p
6 f
c.	 e p
6, 11p
6 f	
d.	 e p
6, 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 11p
6 f
	20.	 A golf ball is hit on a level fairway with an initial velocity of 
v0 = 128 ft>sec and an initial angle of flight u (in degrees). 
The range (in feet) of the ball is given by the expression 
	
	 v0
2 sin 2u
32
. Find the value(s) of u if the range is 25613 feet. 
a.	 45°	
b.	 30°, 60°
c.	 45°, 135°	
d.	 150°, 175°
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–6
In Exercises 1–6, solve each equation or inequality.
	 1.	 x2 + x - 1 = 0
	 2.	  log2 1x + 12 +  log2 1x - 12 = 1 
	 3.	 5-x = 9 
	 4.	 sin 2x - cos x = 0 10 … x 6 2p2 
	 5.	 x3 - 4x 7 0 
	 6.	 2x - 3
x + 2 - 1 6 0 
	 7.	 Assuming that f1x2 = 2x2 - x + 3, find 
	
	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
. 
	 8.	 Assuming that f1x2 = x + 2
2x - 1, find f -11x2. 
In Exercises 9–16, sketch the graph of each function f 1x2 by 
using transformations on the given basic function.
	 9.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4x - 7;	
use y = x2. 
	10.	 f1x2 = 21x - 3 + 1;	
use y = 1x. 
	11.	 f1x2 = 2x-1 - 2;	
use y = 2x. 
	12.	 f1x2 = 2 ln 1x + 12;	
use y = ln x. 
	13.	 f1x2 = 1
2 sin 2x;	
use y = sin x. 
	14.	 f1x2 = -2 cos 13x - 12;	
use y = cos x. 
	15.	 f1x2 = -3 csc x;	
use y = 3 sin x. 
	16.	 f1x2 = 2 tan 4x;	
use y = tan x. 
	17.	 Simplify 2 csc2 x - 5 cot x - 5
2 cot x + 1
. 
	18.	 Use an identity to find the exact value of sec 15°. 
	19.	 Verify the identity sin ax - 3p
2 b = cos x.
	20.	 The angles to the top of a tower from two points on the 
ground at distances 800 and 3200 feet are complementary 
angles. Find the height of the tower.  

7
Applications of  
Trigonometric Functions
Applications of trigonometry permeate virtually every field, 
from architecture and bionics to medicine and physics. In  
this chapter, we introduce vectors and polar coordinates  
and investigate the many applications of trigonometry to 
real-world problems.
Topics
7.1	 The Law of Sines
7.2	 The Law of Cosines
7.3	 Areas of Polygons Using 
Trigonometry
7.4	 Vectors
7.5	 The Dot Product
7.6	 Polar Coordinates
7.7	 Polar Form of Complex Numbers; 
DeMoivre’s Theorem
C h a p t e r 

7.1
Solving Oblique Triangles
The process of finding the unknown side lengths and angle measures in a triangle is called 
solving a triangle. In Section 5.2, you learned techniques of solving right triangles. We 
now discuss triangles that are not necessarily right triangles. A triangle with no right angle 
is called an oblique triangle. From geometry, we know that two triangles with any of the 
following sets of equal parts will always be congruent. In other words, the following sets 
of given parts determine a unique triangle:
ASA: Two angles and the included side
AAS: Two angles and a nonincluded side
SAS: Two sides and the included angle
SSS: All three sides
Although SSA (two sides and a nonincluded angle) does not guarantee a unique 
­triangle, there can be, at most, two triangles with the given parts. On the other hand, AAA 
(or AA) guarantees only similar triangles, not necessarily congruent ones; so there are 
infinitely many triangles with the same three angle measures.
1	
Learn vocabulary and 
conventions for solving 
triangles.
The Great Trigonometric Survey of India
Triangulation is the process of finding the coordinates and the distance to a point by 
using the Law of Sines. Triangulation was used in surveying the Indian subcontinent. 
The survey, which was called “one of the most stupendous works in the whole history of 
science,” was begun by William Lambton, a British army officer, in 1802. It started in the 
south of India and extended north to Nepal, a distance of approximately 1600 miles. 
Lasting several decades and employing thousands of workers, the survey was named 
the Great Trigonometric Survey (GTS). In 1818, George Everest (1790–1866), a Welsh 
surveyor and geographer, was appointed assistant to Lambton. Everest, who succeeded 
Lambton in 1823 and was later promoted as surveyor general of India, completed the 
GTS. Mount Everest was surveyed and named after Everest by his successor Andrew 
Waugh. In Example 2, we use the Law of Sines to estimate the height of a mountain.
The Law of Sines
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Trigonometric functions of angles  
(Section 5.3, page 500)
2	 Inverse trigonometric functions  
(Section 5.6, page 551)
Objectives
1	 Learn vocabulary and conventions for 
solving triangles.
2	 Derive the Law of Sines.
3	 Solve AAS and ASA triangles by using the 
Law of Sines.
4	 Solve for possible triangles in the 
­ambiguous SSA case.
S e c t i o n 
Mount Everest
In 1852, an unsung hero Radhanath Sikdar 
managed to calculate the height of Peak XV, 
an icy peak in the Himalayas. The highest 
mountain in the world—later named Mount 
Everest—stood at 29,002 feet. Sikdar’s 
­calculations used triangulations as well as 
the phenomenon called refraction—the 
bending of light rays by the density of 
Earth’s atmosphere. Like George Everest, 
Sikdar may have never seen Mount Everest.
Two triangles are congruent if corre-
sponding sides are congruent (equal 
in length) and corresponding angles 
are congruent (equal in measure). 
An included side is the side between 
two angles, and an included angle is 
the angle between two sides.
Recall
640	 Chapter 7       Applications of Trigonometric Functions

	
Section 7.1    ■    The Law of Sines 641
For any triangle ABC, we let each letter, such as A, stand for both the vertex A and the 
measure of the angle at A. As usual, the angles of a triangle ABC are labeled A, B, and C 
and the lengths of their opposite sides are labeled, a, b, and c, respectively. See Figure 7.1.
To solve an oblique triangle, given at least one side and two other measures, we con-
sider four possible cases:
Case 1. Two angles and a side are known (AAS and ASA triangles).
Case 2. Two sides and an angle opposite one of the given sides are known  
(SSA triangles).
Case 3. Two sides and their included angle are known (SAS triangles).
Case 4. All three sides are known (SSS triangles).
We use the Law of Sines to analyze triangles in Cases 1 and 2. In the next section, we 
use the Law of Cosines to solve triangles in Cases 3 and 4.
The Law of Sines
The Law of Sines states that in a triangle ABC with sides of length a, b, and c,
sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
.
We can derive the Law of Sines by using the right triangle definition of the sine of an 
acute angle u:
sin u = opposite leg
hypotenuse
We begin with an oblique triangle ABC. See Figures 7.2 and 7.3. Draw altitude CD from 
the vertex C to the side AB (or its extension, as in Figure 7.3). Let h be the length of 
segment CD.
A
a
b
B
D
h
C
c
Figure 7.2  Altitude CD with acute ∠B
c
180˚ – B
a
b
A
B
D
h
C
Figure 7.3  Altitude CD with obtuse ∠B
In right triangle CDA,
 h
b = sin A or
 h = b sin A.
In right triangle CDB,
 h
a = sin B or
 h = a sin B.
In right triangle CDA,
 h
b = sin A or
 h = b sin A.
In right triangle CDB,
 h
a = sin1180° - B2 = sin B or
 h = a sin B.
2	
Derive the Law of Sines.
A
a
b
c
B
C
Figure 7.1  Labeling a triangle
An altitude of a triangle is a 
­segment drawn from any vertex of 
the triangle perpendicular to the 
opposite side, or to an extension of 
the opposite side.
Recall

642	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Because in each figure h = b sin A and h = a sin B, we have
 b sin A = a sin B
 b sin A
ab
= a sin B
ab
    Divide both sides by ab.
 sin A
a
= sin B
b
    Simplify.
Similarly, by drawing altitudes from the other two vertices, we can show that
sin B
b
= sin C
c  and sin C
c
= sin A
a .
We have proved the Law of Sines.
Solve a triangle given two angles and a side.
Step 1 Find the third angle. Find the measure 
of the third angle by subtracting the measures of the 
known angles from 180°.
Step 2 Make a chart. Make a chart of the six parts 
of the triangle, including the known and the unknown 
parts. Sketch the triangle.
Solve triangle ABC with A = 62°, c = 14 feet, and 
B = 74°. Round side lengths to the nearest tenth.
1.	 C = 180° - A - B
	
 = 180° - 62° - 74°
	
 = 44°
2.	
Solving AAS and ASA Triangles
Objective
EXAMPLE 1
Example
A
a
b
B
C
62°
74°
44°
14 feet
 A = 62°
 B = 74°
 C = 44°
 a = ?
 b = ?
 c = 14
T h e  L a w  o f  S i n e s
In any triangle ABC, with sides of length a, b, and c,
sin A
a
= sin B
b , sin B
b
= sin C
c
, and sin C
c
= sin A
a .
We can rewrite these relations in compact notation:
sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
, or equivalently, a
sin A =
b
sin B =
c
sin C
Solving AAS and ASA Triangles
We solve AAS and ASA triangles of Case 1, where two angles and a side are given. Note 
that if two angles of a triangle are given, then you also know the third angle (because the 
sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°). So in Case 1, all three angles and one side of a 
triangle are known.
3	
Solve AAS and ASA triangles 
by using the Law of Sines.
(continued)
Procedure  
in Action

	
Section 7.1    ■    The Law of Sines 643
When using your calculator to solve 
triangles, make sure it is in degree 
mode.
Side  
Note
Practice Problem 1  Solve triangle ABC with A = 70°, B = 65°, and a = 16 inches. 
Round side lengths to the nearest tenth.
Step 3 Apply the Law of Sines. Select two ratios 
from the Law of Sines in which three of the four quan-
tities are known. Solve for the fourth quantity. Use the 
form of the Law of Sines in which the unknown quan-
tity is in the numerator.
Step 4 Show the solution. Show the solution by 
completing the chart.
3.	
4.	
 b
sin B =
c
sin C
 
b
sin 74° =
14
sin 44°
 b = 14 sin 74°
sin 44°
 b ≈19.4 feet
 a
sin A =
c
sin C
 
a
sin 62° =
14
sin 44°
 a = 14 sin 62°
sin 44°
 a ≈17.8 feet
 A = 62°
 B = 74°
 C = 44°
 a ≈17.8 feet
 b ≈19.4 feet
 c = 14
From a point on a level plain at the foot of a mountain, a surveyor finds the angle of eleva-
tion of the peak of the mountain to be 20°. She walks 3465 meters closer (on a direct line 
between the first point and the base of the mountain) and finds the angle of elevation to be 
23°. Estimate the height of the mountain to the nearest meter.
3465 m
A
B
D
C
b
a
h  height of
the mountain
23°
157°
20°
3°
Figure 7.4  Height of a mountain
Solution
In Figure 7.4, consider triangle ABC.
∠ABC = 180° - 23° = 157° ∠ABC + ∠CBD = 180°
Find the third angle in triangle ABC.
C = 180° - 20° - 157° = 3°
Apply the Law of Sines.
 
a
sin 20° = 3465
sin 3°
 a = 3465 sin 20°
sin 3°
    Multiply both sides by sin 20°.
 ≈22,644 meters    Use a calculator.
Now in triangle BCD, sin 23° = h
a. So h = a sin 23° ≈22,644 sin 23° ≈8848 meters. 
The mountain is approximately 8848 meters high.
Height of a Mountain
EXAMPLE 2

644	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Solving SSA Triangles—the Ambiguous Case
In Case 1, where we know two angles and a side, we obtain a unique triangle. However, if 
we know the lengths of two sides and the measure of the angle opposite one of these sides, 
then we could have a result that is (1) not a triangle, (2) exactly one triangle, or (3) two 
different triangles. For this reason, Case 2 is called the ambiguous case.
Suppose we want to draw triangle ABC with given measures of A, a, and b. We draw 
angle A with a horizontal initial side, and we place the vertex C on the terminal side of 
angle A so that the length of segment AC is b. We need to locate vertex B on the initial side 
of angle A so that the measure of the segment CB is a. See Figure 7.5.
The number of possible triangles depends on the length h of the altitude from C to 
the initial side of angle A. Because sin A = h
b, we have h = b sin A. Various possibilities 
for forming triangle ACB are illustrated in Figure 7.6, where A is an acute angle.
We summarize these results in Table 7.1 on page 645.
4	
Solve for possible triangles in 
the ambiguous SSA case.
Practice Problem 2  From a point on a level plain at the foot of a mountain, the angle 
of elevation of the peak is 40°. If you move 2500 feet farther (on a direct line extending 
from the first point and the base of the mountain), the angle of elevation of the peak is 
35°. How high above the plain is the peak? Round your answer to the nearest foot.
A
B
B
b
h
C
B lies along the initial side of 
angle A if a triangle exists.
Figure 7.5  Locating B
A
b
a
h
C
If a  h  b sin A:
no triangle
(i)
A
b
h  a
C
If a  h  b sin A:
one right triangle
(ii)
A
B
B
1
B2
b
h
a
C
If h  a  b:
two triangles,  ACB1,  ACB2
(iii)
B
b
h
a
a
C
If a  b:
one triangle
(iv)
A
Figure 7.6  Acute angle A
The situation is considerably simpler if the angle A is obtuse. The possibilities are ­illustrated 
in Figure 7.7 and summarized in Table 7.2 on page 645.
A
b
a
C
If a  b:
no triangle
(i)
A
b
a
C
If a  b:
one triangle
(ii)
Figure 7.7  Obtuse angle A

	
Section 7.1    ■    The Law of Sines 645
In general in an SSA triangle, we are given:
(i)    the known angle u,
(ii)   opposite side (side opposite to angle u), and
(iii)  adjacent side (side adjacent to angle u).
Then    altitude = (adjacent side) sin U.
We summarize the situations from Figures 7.6 and 7.7 in Tables 7.1 and 7.2, respectively
Table 7.1 If U is an acute angle
Case
Condition on Opposite Side
Number of Triangles
1
opposite side 6 altitude
None
2
opposite side = altitude
One right triangle
3
altitude 6 opposite side 6 adjacent side
Two triangles
4
opposite side Ú adjacent side
One triangle
Table 7.2 If U is an obtuse angle
Case
Condition on Opposite Side
Number of Triangles
1
opposite side … adjacent side
None
2
opposite side 7 adjacent side
One triangle
How many triangles can be drawn with A = 42°, b = 2.4, and a = 2.1?
Solution
A = 42° is an acute angle, and opposite side = a = 2.1 6 2.4 = b = adjacent side.
We calculate
 altitude = b sin A = 2.4 sin142°2    Replace b with 2.4 and A with 42°.
 ≈1.6
    Use a calculator.
We have: altitude 6 opposite side 6 adjacent side. So by Case 3 of Table 7.1, two triangles 
can be drawn with the given measurements.
Practice Problem 3  How many triangles can be drawn with A = 35°, b = 6.5, 
and a = 3.5?
Finding the Number of Triangles
EXAMPLE 3
How many triangles can be drawn with A = 98°, b = 4.8, and a = 5.1?
Solution
A = 98° is an obtuse angle, and opposite side = a = 5.1 7 4.8 = b = adjacent side. 
So by Case 2 of Table 7.2, exactly one triangle can be drawn with the given measurements.
Practice Problem 4  How many triangles can be drawn with A = 105°, b = 12.5  
and a = 11.2?
Finding the Number of Triangles
EXAMPLE 4
We strongly suggest that you begin with a tentative sketch of the triangle ABC.

646	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Solve a triangle if two sides and an angle u 
opposite one of them is given.
Step 1 Make a chart of the six parts. 
Identify u, opposite and adjacent sides.
Step 2 Count the solutions.
There may be none, one, or two solutions.  
If the known angle
(i)   u is acute—use Table 7.1
(ii)  u is obtuse—use Table 7.2
(iii) u = 90°—use procedures in Section 5.2.
If there are no solutions, you are done. 
Otherwise, continue with Step 3.
Step 3 Apply the Law of Sines to the two 
ratios in which two sides and one angle are 
known, see the chart in Step 1. Solve for the 
sine of the unknown angle. Use the form of the 
Law of Sines in which the unknown angle is in 
the numerator.
Step 4 Find the second angle(s)
If you determined in step 2 that:
(i)  there are two solutions, find two angles; 
one acute and one obtuse.
(ii) there is one solution, find one acute angle.
Step 5 Find the third angle of the 
triangle(s).
Step 6 Use the Law of Sines to find the 
remaining side(s).
Step 7 Show the solution(s).
Solve triangle ABC with B = 32°, b = 100 feet, and c = 150 feet. 
Round each answer to the nearest tenth.
1.	u = B, opposite side = b, adjacent side = c
A = ?
B = 32°
C = ?
a = ?
b = 100
c = 150
2.	Here u = B = 32° is an acute angle, so we use Table 7.1.
 Altitude = 1adjacent side2 sin B
 = 150 sin 32°	
Substitute values.
 ≈79.488	
Use a calculator.
We have
altitude 6 opposite side 6 adjacent side, so there will be two solutions.
3.	 sin C
c
= sin B
b
    The Law of Sines
 sin C = c sin B
b
    Multiply both sides by c.
 = 11502 sin 32°
100
    Substitute values.
 sin C ≈0.7949
    Use a calculator.
4.	Because there are two solutions, we find two angles:
 C1 ≈sin-1 10.79492 ≈52.6°
 C2 ≈180° - 52.6° = 127.4°
5.	 ∠BAC1 ≈180° - 32° - 52.6° = 95.4°
 ∠BAC2 ≈180° - 32° - 127.4° = 20.6°
6.	
7.		
△BAC1	
△BAC2
32°
150 ft
100 ft
100 ft
B
A
C2
C1
187.9 ft
66.4 ft
Solving the SSA Triangles
Objective
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 5
Example
Three quantities are known.
 ∠BAC1 ≈95.4°
 B = 32°
 C1 ≈52.6°
 a1 ≈187.9
 b = 100
 c = 150
 ∠BAC2 ≈20.6°
 B = 32°
 C2 ≈127.4°
 a2 ≈66.4
 b = 100
 c = 150
a1
 sin ∠BAC1
=
b
sin B
a1 = b sin ∠BAC1
sin B
a1 = 100 sin 95.4°
sin 32°
a1 ≈187.9 feet
a2
sin ∠BAC2
=
b
sin B
a2 = b sin ∠BAC2
sin B
a2 = 11002 sin 20.6°
sin 32°
a2 ≈66.4 feet

	
Section 7.1    ■    The Law of Sines 647
Practice Problem 5  Solve triangle ABC with C = 35°, b = 15 feet, and  
c = 12 feet. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.
Solve triangle ABC with A = 50°, a = 8 inches, and b = 15 inches.
Solution
Step 1  Make a chart.
A = 50°
B = ?
C = ?
a = 8
b = 15
c = ?
Step 2  Count the solutions. Because u = A = 50° is acute, we use Table 7.1. The 
opposite side a = 8 is not greater than the adjacent side b = 15, so we need to compute 
the altitude.
 altitude = 1adjacent side2 sin A
 = 15 sin150°2
    Replace: adjacent side with 15, A = 50°
 ≈11.491
    Use a calculator.
We have opposite side a = 8 6 11.491 = altitude, so there is no triangle.
Alternatively, from the Law of Sines:
 sin B
b
= sin A
a  or
 sin B = b sin A
a
    Multiply both sides by b.
 = 15 sin 50°
8
    Substitute values.
 ≈1.44
    Use a calculator.
Because sin B is never greater than 1, we conclude that there is no triangle with the given 
measurements.
Practice Problem 6  Solve triangle ABC with A = 65°, a = 16 meters, and  
b = 30 meters.
Solving an SSA Triangle (No Solution)
EXAMPLE 6
Three quantities are known.
Solve triangle ABC with C = 40°, c = 20 meters, and a = 15 meters. Round each 
answer to the nearest tenth of a meter.
Solution
Step 1  Make a chart.
A = ?
B = ?
C = 40°
a = 15
b = ?
c = 20
Step 2  Find the number of triangles. Because u = C = 40° is acute, we use  
Table 7.1. The opposite side c = 20 is greater than the adjacent side a = 15, 
so there is one triangle.
Solving an SSA Triangle (One Solution)
EXAMPLE 7
Three quantities are known.

648	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Step 3  Apply the Law of Sines.
 sin A
a
= sin C
c
    The Law of Sines
 sin A = a sin C
c
    Multiply both sides by a.
 = 1152 sin 40°
20
    Substitute values.
 sin A ≈0.4821
    Use a calculator.
Step 4  Find the second angle(s). Because there is one solution, we find one angle.
A = sin-110.48212 ≈28.8°
Step 5  The third angle at B has measure ≈180° - 40° - 28.8° = 111.2°.
Step 6  Find the remaining side length.
 b
sin B =
c
sin C
    The Law of Sines
 b = c sin B
sin C
    Multiply both sides by sin B.
 = 1202 sin1111.2°2
sin 40°
    Substitute values.
 b ≈29.0 m
    Use a calculator.
Step 7  Show the solution. See Figure 7.8.
 A ≈28.8°
 B ≈111.2°
 C = 40°
 a = 15 meters
 b ≈29.0 meters
 c = 20 meters
Practice Problem 7  Solve triangle ABC with C = 60°, c = 50 feet, and a = 30 feet.
Bearings
In navigation and surveying, directions are usually given by using bearings. A bearing is 
the measure of an acute angle from due north or due south. The bearing N 40° E means 40° 
to the east of due north, whereas S 30° W means 30° to the west of due south. See Figure 7.9.
C
A
15 m
20 m
29.0 m
B
Figure 7.8 
E
W
N
S
E
W
N
S
E
W
N
S
E
W
N
S
N 40° E
40°
N 60° W
60°
S 30° W
30°
S 75° E
75°
Figure 7.9  Bearings

	
Section 7.1    ■    The Law of Sines 649
A ship sailing due west at 20 miles per hour records the bearing of an oil rig at N 55.4° W. 
An hour and a half later the bearing of the same rig is N 66.8° E.
a.	 How far is the ship from the oil rig the second time?
b.	 How close did the ship pass to the oil rig?
Solution
a.	 In an hour and a half, the ship travels 11.521202 = 30 miles due west. The oil rig (C), 
the starting point for the ship (A), and the position of the ship after an hour and a half 
(B) form the vertices of the triangle ABC shown in Figure 7.10.
66.8°
55.4°
B
A
C
a
b
N
S
W
E
Oil rig
c  30 mi
h
Figure 7.10  Navigation
Then A = 90° - 55.4° = 34.6° and B = 90° - 66.8° = 23.2°. Therefore, 
C = 180° - 34.6° - 23.2° = 122.2°.
 a
sin A =
c
sin C
    The Law of Sines
 a = c sin A
sin C
    Multiply both sides by sin A.
 = 30 sin 34.6°
sin 122.2°
≈20 miles    Substitute values and use a calculator.
	
The ship is approximately 20 miles from the oil rig when the second bearing is taken.
b.	 The shortest distance between the ship and the oil rig is the length of the segment h in 
triangle ABC.
 sin B = h
a
	
Right-triangle definition of the sine
 h = a sin B
	
Multiply both sides by a.
 h ≈20 sin 23.2°	
Substitute values.
 ≈7.9
	
Use a calculator.
	
The ship passes within 7.9 miles of the oil rig.
Practice Problem 8  Rework Example 8 assuming that the second bearing is  
taken after two hours and is N 60.4° E and the ship is traveling due west at  
25 miles per hour.
Navigation Using Bearings
EXAMPLE 8
Answers to Practice Problems
1. C = 45°, b ≈15.4 in, c ≈12.0 in  2. 10,576 ft
3. None  4. None  5. Solution 1: A ≈99.2°, B ≈45.8°,
a ≈20.7 ft; Solution 2: A ≈10.8°, B ≈134.2°, a ≈3.9 ft
6. No triangle exists.  7. A ≈31.3°, B ≈88.7°, b ≈57.7 ft
8. a. ≈31.5 mi  b. ≈15.6 mi

650	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Exercises
section 7.1 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 If you know two angles of a triangle, then you can determine 
the third angle because the sum of all three angles is  
 degrees.
	 2.	 The Law of Sines states that if a, b, and c are the sides 
	
	 opposite angles A, B, and C, then 
a
sin A =
=
	
	
.
	 3.	 If you are given any two angles and one side, then there is 
exactly 
 triangle(s) possible.
	 4.	 For given data a, A, and b, there can be no triangle, exactly 
 triangle, or 
 triangles.
	 5.	 True or False. The Law of Sines allows you to solve a  
triangle if you know two sides and the angle opposite one  
of them. 
	 6.	 True or False. A triangle is uniquely determined if any two 
sides and one angle are given. 
In Exercises 7–12, determine the number of triangles that can 
be drawn with the given data.
	 7.	 a = 40, b = 70, A = 30° 
	 8.	 a = 24, b = 32, A = 45° 
	 9.	 b = 15, c = 19, B = 60° 
	10.	 b = 75, c = 85, B = 135° 
	11.	 a = 50, b = 70, B = 120° 
	12.	 c = 85, a = 45, C = 150° 
In Exercises 13–20, find the exact value requested in a  
triangle ABC
	13.	 Given a = 2, b = 3, and sin A = 2
3, find B. 
	14.	 Given b = 16, c = 2, and B = 60°, find C. 
	15.	 Given b = 13, c = 12, and B = 1
21A + C2, find A. 
	16.	 Given a = 4, b = 18, and A = 1
31B + C2, find B. 
	17.	 Given B = 45°, C = 105°, and a = 2, find b. 
	18.	 Given A = 45°, B = 60°, and a = 10, find b. 
	19.	 Given B = 45°, C = 75°, and b = 16, find a. 
	20.	 Given A = 105°, C = 45°, and b = 112, find c. 
In Exercises 21–28, solve each triangle. Round each answer to 
the nearest tenth.
	21.	
A
c  100 ft
B
C
61°
56°
	22.	
A
a  60 m
B
C
40°
35°
	23.	
A
C
c  47 m
B
110°
43°
	24.	
b  22 ft
46°
93°
A
B
C
	25.	
b  20 ft
a  20 ft
65°
A
B
C
	26.	
b  20 m
a  18 m
40°
A
B
C
	27.	
A
B
C
b  31 m
a  70 m
115°
	28.	
A
c  14 ft
B
C
a  12 ft
115°
In Exercises 29–40, solve triangle ABC. Round each answer to 
the nearest tenth.
	29.	 A = 40°, B = 35°, a = 100 meters
	30.	 A = 80°, B = 20°, a = 100 meters
	31.	 A = 46°, C = 55°, a = 75 centimeters
	32.	 A = 35°, C = 98°, a = 75 centimeters
	33.	 A = 35°, C = 47°, c = 60 feet
	34.	 A = 44°, C = 76°, c = 40 feet
	35.	 B = 43°, C = 67°, b = 40 inches
	36.	 B = 95°, C = 35°, b = 100 inches
	37.	 B = 110°, C = 46°, c = 23.5 feet
	38.	 B = 67°, C = 63°, c = 16.8 feet
	39.	 A = 35.7°, B = 45.8°, c = 30 meters
	40.	 A = 64.5°, B = 54.3°, c = 40 meters
In Exercises 41–60, solve each SSA triangle. Indicate whether 
the given measurements result in no triangle, one triangle, 
or two triangles. Solve each resulting triangle. Round each 
answer to the nearest tenth.
	41.	 A = 40°, a = 23, b = 20 
	42.	 A = 36°, a = 30, b = 24 
	43.	 A = 30°, a = 25, b = 50 
	44.	 A = 60°, a = 2013, b = 40 
	45.	 A = 40°, a = 10, b = 20 
	46.	 A = 62°, a = 30, b = 40 
	47.	 A = 95°, a = 18, b = 21 
	48.	 A = 110°, a = 37, b = 41 
	49.	 A = 100°, a = 40, b = 34               

	
Section 7.1    ■    The Law of Sines 651
	50.	 A = 105°, a = 70, b = 30 
	51.	 B = 50°, b = 22, c = 40 
	52.	 B = 64°, b = 45, c = 60 
	53.	 B = 46°, b = 35, c = 40
	54.	 B = 32°, b = 50, c = 60
	55.	 B = 97°, b = 27, c = 30 
	56.	 B = 110°, b = 19, c = 21 
	57.	 A = 42°, a = 55, c = 62
	58.	 A = 34°, a = 6, c = 8
	59.	 C = 40°, a = 3.3, c = 2.1 
	60.	 C = 62°, a = 50, c = 100 
Applying the Concepts
	61.	 Finding distance. Angela wants to find the distance from 
point A to her friend Carmen’s house at point C on the other 
side of the river. She knows the distance from A to Betty’s 
house at B is 540 feet. See the figure. The measurement of 
angles A and B are 57° and 46°, respectively. Calculate the 
distance from A to C. Round to the nearest foot. 
A
540 feet
B
C
57°
46°
	62.	 Finding distance. In Exercise 61, find the width of the river 
assuming that the houses are on the (very straight) banks of 
the river. 
	63.	 Target. A laser beam with an angle of elevation of 42° is 
reflected by a target and is received 1200 yards from the 
point of origin. Assume that the trajectory of the beam forms 
(approximately) an isosceles triangle.
a.	 Find the total distance the beam travels. Round to the  
nearest yard. 
b.	 What is the height of the target? Round to the nearest 
yard. 
1200 yards
42
42
	64.	 Height of a flagpole. Two surveyors stand 200 feet apart 
with a flagpole between them. Suppose the “transit” at each 
location is 5 feet high. The transit measures the angles of ele-
vation of the top of the flagpole at the two locations to be 30° 
and 25°, respectively. Find the height of the flagpole. Round 
to the nearest foot. 
	65.	 Radio beacon. A ship sailing due east at the rate of  
16 miles per hour records the bearing of a radio beacon at  
N 36.5° E. Two hours later the bearing of the same beacon is 
N 55.7° W. Round each answer to the nearest tenth of a mile.
a.	 How far is the ship from the beacon the second time? 
b.	 How close to the beacon did the ship pass? 
36.5°
55.7°
N
S
W
E
Beacon
	66.	 Lighthouse. A boat sailing due north at the rate of 14 miles 
per hour records the bearing of a lighthouse as N 8.4° E. Two 
hours later the bearing of the same lighthouse is N 30.9° E. 
Round the answers to the nearest tenth of a mile.
a.	 How far is the ship from the lighthouse the second time?
b.	 If the boat follows the same course and speed, how close 
to the lighthouse will it approach? 
	67.	 Geostationary satellite. A camel rider was traveling due 
west at night in the desert. At midnight, his angle of elevation 
to a satellite was 89°. After traveling for 20 miles, his angle 
of elevation to the satellite was 89.05°. The satellite is at a 
constant height above the ground. How high is the satellite? 
Round the answer to the nearest mile. 
	68.	 Height of a tower. A flagpole 20 feet tall is placed on top 
of a tower. At a point on the ground, a surveyor measures the 
angle of elevation of the bottom of the flagpole to be 69.6° 
and that of the top of the flagpole to be 70.9°. What is the 
height of the tower to the nearest foot? 
	69.	 Distance between planets. The angle subtended at Earth 
by lines joining Venus and the Sun is 31°. If Venus is 67 million 
miles from the Sun and Earth is 93 million miles from the Sun, 
what is the distance (to the nearest million) between Earth and 
Venus? [Hint: There are two possible answers.]
31
S
E
V
67
93 

652	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	70.	 Distance between planets. The angle subtended at Mars 
by the lines joining Mars to Earth and the Sun is 23°. If Mars 
is 128 million miles from the Sun and Earth is 93 million 
miles from the Sun, what is the distance (to the nearest mil-
lion) between Earth and Mars? 
	71.	 Navigation. A point on an island is located 24 miles south-
west of a dock. A ship leaves the dock at 1 p.m. traveling west 
at 12 mph. At what time(s) to the nearest minute is the ship 
20 miles from the point? 
	72.	 Navigation. A lighthouse is 23 miles N 55° E of a dock.  
A ship leaves the dock at 3 p.m. and sails due east at a speed 
of 15 mph. Find the time(s) to the nearest minute when the 
ship will be 18 miles from the lighthouse. 
	73.	 Geometry. The sides of a parallelogram are 15 m and 11 m, 
and the longer diagonal makes an angle of 18° with the lon-
ger side. Find the length of the longer diagonal. 
	74.	 Geometry. In the trapezoid shown, find the length x to the 
nearest tenth. 
12
50
18
x
28
Beyond the Basics
	75.	 Suppose CD bisects angle C of triangle ABC. Show that 
	
	 AD
DB = AC
CB. See the figure.
[Hint: Apply the Law of Sines to triangles ACD and DCB.]
A
D
B
C
θ
θ
α
180°  α
	76.	 Distance. A flagpole 15 feet high stands on a building  
75 feet high. To an observer at a height of 90 feet, the build-
ing and the flagpole intercept equal angles. Find the distance  
of the observer from the top of the flagpole. [Hint: Use 
Exercise 75.] 
15 ft
75 ft
u
u
	77.	 Geometry. In a triangle ABC, a cos A = b cos B. Show that 
the triangle is either isosceles or right angled. 
	
	 [Hint: Show sin 2A = sin 2B. Then 2A = 2B or 
2A = 180° - 2B.]
	78.	 Geometry. A side of a parallelogram is 60 inches long and 
makes angles of 28° and 42° with the two diagonals. What 
are the lengths of the diagonals? Round each answer to the 
nearest tenth of an inch. 
	79.	 Mollweide’s formula. In a triangle ABC, prove that
b - c
a
=
sin B - C
2
cos A
2
.
	
	 [Hint: Let 
a
sin A =
b
sin B =
c
sin C = k. Write an expression 
	
	 for b - c
a
 in terms of sines and then use Sum-to-Product and 
	
	 Half-Angle formulas. Note that because the formula contains 
all six parts of a triangle, it can be used as a check for the 
solutions of a triangle.]
	80.	 Mollweide’s formula. In a triangle ABC, prove that
b + c
a
=
cos B - C
2
sin A
2
.
	81.	 Law of Tangents. In a triangle ABC, prove that
b - c
b + c =
tan aB - C
2
b
tan aB + C
2
b
.
	82.	 Angle measure. Two sides of a triangle are 13 + 1 feet 
and 13 - 1 feet, and the measure of the angle between 
these sides is 60°. Use the Law of Tangents (Exercise 81) 
to find the measure of the difference of the remaining 
angles. 

	
Section 7.1    ■    The Law of Sines 653
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
In Exercises 83 and 84, give the most specific description you 
can for a triangle satisfying the specified conditions. Explain 
your reasoning.
	 83.	 In a triangle ABC, a sin A = b sin B.
	 84.	 In a triangle ABC, a cos A = b cos B.
	 85.	 Use the Law of Sines to show that any isosceles triangle has 
two equal angles.
	 86.	 Use the Law of Sines to show that any triangle with two 
equal angles is isosceles.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 87–102, write the exact value of each expression 
without using a calculator.
	 87.	 cos 30°
	 88.	 cos 120°
	 89.	 cos 135°
	 90.	 cos 150°
	 91.	 cos-1 a1
2b 
	 92.	 cos-1 122     
	 93.	 cos-1 a- 1
2b 
	 94.	 cos-1 a- 13
2 b 
	 95.	 If a = 2, b = 3, and cos C = 1
6, find 2a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C.
	 96.	 If b = 4, c = 5, and cos A = 1
10, find 2b2 + c2 - 2bc cos A.
	 97.	 If c = 3, a = 1, and B = 60°, find 2c2 + a2 - 2ca cos B.
	 98.	 If a = 18, b = 4, and C = 45°, find 2a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C.
	 99.	 If a = 2, b = 3, and c = 4, find a2 + b2 - c2
2ab
. 
	100.	 If a = 5, b = 4, and c = 3, find b2 + c2 - a2
2bc
. 
	101.	 If a = 1, b = 1, and c = 13, find cos-1 ab2 + c2 - a2
2bc
b.
	102.	 If a = 3, b = 5, and c = 7, find cos-1 aa2 + b2 - c2
2ab
b.        

654	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
The Law of Cosines
The Pythagorean theorem states that the relationship c2 = a2 + b2 holds in a right triangle 
ABC, where c represents the length of the hypotenuse. This relationship is not true if the 
triangle is not a right triangle. The Law of Cosines is a generalization of the Pythagorean 
theorem that is true in any triangle. This law will be used to solve triangles in which two 
sides and the included angle are known (SAS triangles), as well as those triangles in which 
all three sides are known (SSS triangles).
Generalizing the Pythagorean Theorem
Suppose a Boeing 747 jumbo jet is flying over Disney World in Orlando, Florida, at 
552 miles per hour and is heading due south to Brazil. Twenty minutes later an F-16 
fighter jet heading due east passes over Disney World at a speed of 1250 miles per hour. 
By using the Pythagorean theorem, we can easily calculate the distance d between the 
two planes t hours after the F-16 passes over Disney World. We have
d = B11250t22 + c 1
3 15522 + 552t d
2
    20 minutes = 1
3 hour
Suppose all the other facts in the problem are unchanged except that the F-16 has a 
bearing of N 37° E. Now we can no longer apply the Pythagorean theorem. In Example 2,  
we use the Law of Cosines, described in this section, to solve this problem.
The Law of Cosines
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Distance formula (Section 2.1, page 159)
2	 Inverse trigonometric functions  
(Section 5.6, page 551)
Objectives
1	 Derive the Law of Cosines.
2	 Use the Law of Cosines to solve  
SAS triangles.
3	 Use the Law of Cosines to solve  
SSS triangles.
S e c t i o n 7.2
1	
Derive the Law of Cosines.
T h e  L a w  o f  C o s i n e s
In triangle ABC with sides of lengths a, b, and c (as in Figure 7.11),
 a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc cos A,
 b2 = c2 + a2 - 2ca cos B,
 c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C.
In words, the square of any side of a triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the 
length of the other two sides, less twice the product of the lengths of the other sides 
and the cosine of their included angle.
A
b
a
c
C
B
Figure 7.11 

	
Section 7.2    ■    The Law of Cosines 655
Derivation of the Law of Cosines
To derive the Law of Cosines, place triangle ABC in a rectangular coordinate system with 
the vertex A at the origin and the side c along the positive x-axis. See Figure 7.12.
Label the coordinates of the vertices as shown in Figure 7.12. In Figures 7.12(a) and 
7.12(b), the point C1x, y2 on the terminal side of angle A has coordinates 1b cos A, b sin A2, 
which are found using the cosine and sine definitions.
 cos A = x
b         sin A = y
b
 x = b cos A        y = b sin A
The point B has coordinates 1c, 02. Applying the distance formula to the line segment join-
ing the points B1c, 02 and C1b cos A, b sin A2, we have
 a = d1C, B2
 a2 = 3d1C, B242
    Square both sides.
 a2 = 1b cos A - c22 + 1b sin A - 022
    Distance formula
 a2 = b2 cos2 A - 2bc cos A + c2 + b2 sin2 A    Expand binomial.
 a2 = b21sin2 A + cos2 A2 + c2 - 2bc cos A     Regroup terms.
 a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc cos A
    sin2 A + cos2 A = 1
The last equation is one of the forms of the Law of Cosines. Similarly, by placing the 
vertex B and then the vertex C at the origin, we obtain the other two forms. Notice that 
the Law of Cosines becomes the Pythagorean theorem if the included angle is 90° because 
cos 90° = 0.
Solving SAS Triangles
We solve SAS triangles (Case 3 of Section 7.1) using the Law of Cosines.
y
A(0, 0)
B(c, 0)
b
y
y
a
C(b cos A, b sin A)
c
x
x
Angle A is an acute angle.
(a)
y
x
A(0, 0)
B(c, 0)
b
a
c
Angle A is an obtuse angle.
(b)
C(b cos A, b sin A)
x
Figure 7.12  Two cases for an angle A
2	
Use the Law of Cosines to 
solve SAS triangles.

656	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Practice Problem 1  Solve triangle ABC with c = 25 inches, a = 15 inches, and 
B = 60°. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.
Solve triangles in which the measures of two 
sides and the included angle are known.
Solving the SAS Triangles
Objective
EXAMPLE 1
Solve triangle ABC with a = 15 inches, b = 10 inches, and C = 60°. 
Round each answer to the nearest tenth.
1.	Find side c opposite angle C.
 c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C
  The Law of Cosines
 c2 = 11522 + 11022 - 211521102 cos 60°  Substitute values.
 c2 = 225 + 100 - 211521102a1
2b
  cos 60° = 1
2
 c2 = 175
  Simplify.
 c = 1175 ≈13.2
  Use a calculator.
2.	Find angle B.
 sin B
b
= sin C
c
    The Law of Sines
 sin B = b sin C
c
    Multiply both sides by b.
 sin B = 10 sin 60°
1175
    Substitute values.
 B = sin-1 a10 sin 60°
1175
b ≈40.9°    0° 6 B … 90°
3.	A ≈180° - 60° - 40.9° ≈79.1°	
A + B + C = 180°
4.	
Step 1 Use the appropriate form of the 
Law of Cosines to find the side opposite the 
given angle.
Step 2 Use the Law of Sines to find the 
angle opposite the shorter of the two given 
sides. Note that this angle is always an acute 
angle.
Alternatively, you can use Step 1 and the 
Law of Cosines again to find another angle.
Here
cos B = c2 + a2 - b2
2ca
=
175 + 11522 - 11022
21117521152
≈0.75593
So, B = cos-110.755932 ≈40.9°.
Step 3 Use the angle sum formula to find 
the third angle.
Step 4 Write the solution.
Example
A ≈79.1°
a = 15 inches
B ≈40.9°
b = 10 inches
C = 60°
c ≈13.2 inches
A Boeing 747 is flying over Disney World headed due south at 552 miles per hour. Twenty 
minutes later an F-16 passes over Disney World with a bearing of N 37° E at a speed of 
1250 miles per hour. Find the distance between the two planes three hours after the F-16 
passes over Disney World. Round the answer to the nearest tenth.
Solution
Suppose the F-16 has been traveling for t hours after passing over Disney World. Then 
because the Boeing 747 had a head start of 20 minutes = 1
3 hour, the Boeing 747 
has been traveling at + 1
3b hours due south. The distance d between the two 
planes is shown in Figure 7.13. Using the Law of Cosines in triangle FDB, we have
Using the Law of Cosines
EXAMPLE 2
N
E
37°
143°
F
D
d
B
552(t     ) 
1
3
1250t
Figure 7.13 
Procedure 
in Action

	
Section 7.2    ■    The Law of Cosines 657
 d2 = 11250t22 + c 552 at + 1
3b d
2
- 211250t2 # 552 at + 1
3b cos 143°
 d2 ≈28,469,270.04    Substitute t = 3; use a calculator.
 d ≈5335.7 miles      Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 2  Repeat Example 2 assuming that the F-16 is traveling at a speed of 
1375 miles per hour with bearing of N 75° E and the Boeing 747 is traveling with a bearing  
of S 12° W at 550 miles per hour.
Solving SSS Triangles
We solve SSS triangles (Case 4 of Section 7.1).
3	
Use the Law of Cosines to 
solve SSS triangles.
Solving SSS Triangles
Objective
EXAMPLE 3
Example
Solve triangles in which the measures of the three sides 
are known.
Step 1 Use the Law of Cosines to find the angle  
opposite the longest side.
Step 2 Use the Law of Sines to find either of the two 
remaining acute angles.
Alternatively, you can use the Law of Cosines 
again to find another angle.
Here
 cos B = c2 + a2 - b2
2ca
 = 17.222 + 13.122 - 15.422
217.2213.12
≈0.7233.
So B ≈cos-1 10.72332 ≈43.7°.
Step 3 Use the angle sum formula to find the third 
angle.
Step 4 Write the solution.
Solve triangle ABC with a = 3.1 feet, b = 5.4 feet, and 
c = 7.2 feet. Round answers to the nearest tenth.
1.	Because c is the longest side, we first find angle C.
 c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C  The Law of Cosines
 2ab cos C = a2 + b2 - c2	
Add 2ab cos C - c2 
to both sides.
 cos C = a2 + b2 - c2
2ab
	
Solve for cos C.
 cos C = 13.122 + 15.422 - 17.222
213.1215.42
  Substitute values.
 cos C ≈-0.39
  Use a calculator.
 C ≈cos-11-0.392 ≈113.0°   0° 6 C 6 180°
2.	Find angle B.
 sin B
b
= sin C
c
  The Law of Sines
 sin B = b sin C
c
  Multiply both sides by b.
 B = sin-1 ab sin C
c
b
  0° 6 B 6 90°
 B = sin-1 a5.4 sin 113.0°
7.2
b  Substitute values.
 B ≈43.7°
  Use a calculator.
3.	 A ≈180° - 43.7° - 113.0° 
A + B + C = 180°
	
 A ≈23.3°
  Simplify.
4.	 A ≈23.3°
a = 3.1 feet
B = 43.7°
b = 5.4 feet
C ≈113.0°
c = 7.2 feet
Procedure 
in Action

658	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Practice Problem 3  Solve triangle ABC with a = 4.5, b = 6.7, and c = 5.3. Round 
each answer to the nearest tenth.
Solve triangle ABC with a = 2 meters, b = 9 meters, and c = 5 meters. Round each 
answer to the nearest tenth.
Solution
Step 1  We first find B, the angle opposite the longest side.
 b2 = c2 + a2 - 2ca cos B    The Law of Cosines
 cos B = c2 + a2 - b2
2ca
    Solve for cos B.
 cos B = 52 + 22 - 92
2152122
    Substitute values.
 cos B = -2.6
    Simplify.
Because the range of the cosine function is 3-1, 14, there is no angle B for which 
cos B = -2.6. This means that a triangle with the given information cannot exist. Because 
2 + 5 6 9, you can also use the triangle inequality from geometry to see that there is no 
such triangle.
Practice Problem 4  Solve triangle ABC with a = 2 inches, b = 3 inches, and  
c = 6 inches.
Solving an SSS Triangle
EXAMPLE 4
The triangle inequality states that in 
any triangle, the sum of the lengths 
of any two sides of a triangle is 
greater than the length of the  
third side.
Recall
Answers to Practice Problems
1. b ≈21.8, A ≈36.6°, C ≈83.4°  2. 5219.5 miles  3. A ≈41.9°, B ≈85.9°, C ≈52.1°  4. No triangle exists.
Exercises
section 7.2
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 One form of the Law of Cosines is 
c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos1
2.
	 2.	 If we take the angle in the Law of Cosines to be 90°, then we 
get the 
 theorem.
	 3.	 Triangles with SAS given are solved by the Law of Cosines, 
as are triangles with 
 sides given.
	 4.	 When one angle is found by the Law of Cosines, the other 
can be found with the Law of 
.
	 5.	 True or False. The Law of Cosines is used to solve triangles 
when two angles and a side are given. 
	 6.	 True or False. For a triangle with SSS given, we can find 
angle A by the formula
	
	
A = cos -1 ab2 + c2 - a2
2bc
b. 
In Exercises 7–14, find the exact value requested in each  
triangle ABC.
	 7.	 If b = 4, c = 6, and cos A = 1
16, find a. 
	 8.	 If a = 13, b = 4, and cos C = - 5
13, find c. 
	 9.	 If a = 5, b = 3, and C = 60°, find c. 
	10.	 If a = 6, c = 8, and B = 120°, find b. 
	11.	 If a = 7, b = 6, and c = 5, find cos A. 
	12.	 If a = 7, b = 6, and c = 5, find cos C.  
	13.	  If a = 4, b = 5, and c = 121, find C. 
	14.	  If a = 7, b = 1109, and c = 5, find B. 

	
Section 7.2    ■    The Law of Cosines 659
In Exercises 15–18, solve each triangle. Round each answer to 
the nearest tenth.
	15.	
A
C
B
10.5
14.6
106°
 
	16.	
A
B
C
35°
5.6
7.8
 
	17.	
A
C
15
18
30
B
 
	18.	
A
7
9
12
B
C 
In Exercises 19–34, solve each triangle ABC. Round each 
answer to the nearest tenth. All sides are measured in feet.
	19.	 a = 15, b = 9, C = 120° 
	20.	 a = 14, b = 10, C = 75° 
	21.	 b = 10, c = 12, A = 62° 
	22.	 b = 11, c = 16, A = 110° 
	23.	 c = 12, a = 15, b = 11 
	24.	 c = 16, a = 11, b = 13 
	25.	 a = 9, b = 13, c = 18 
	26.	 a = 14, b = 6, c = 10 
	27.	 a = 2.5, b = 3.7, c = 5.4 
	28.	 a = 4.2, b = 2.9, c = 3.6 
	29.	 b = 3.2, c = 4.3, A = 97.7° 
	30.	 b = 5.4, c = 3.6, A = 79.2° 
	31.	 c = 4.9, a = 3.9, B = 68.3° 
	32.	 c = 7.8, a = 9.8, B = 95.6° 
	33.	 a = 2.3, b = 2.8, c = 3.7 
	34.	 a = 5.3, b = 2.9, c = 4.6 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 35–48, round each answer to the nearest tenth.
	35.	 Chord length. Find the length of the chord intercepted by  
a central angle of 42° in a circle of radius 8 feet. 
	36.	 Central angle. Find the measure of the central angle of  
a circle of radius 6 feet that intercepted a chord of length  
3.5 feet. 
	37.	 Tunnel length. Engineers must bore a straight tunnel 
through the base of a mountain. They select a reference  
point C on the plain surrounding the mountain. The distance 
from C to portal A (the starting tunnel point) and portal B 
(the ending tunnel point) is 2352 yards and 1763 yards, 
respectively. The measure of ∠ACB is 41°. How long is the 
tunnel? 
	38.	 Pond length. A surveyor needs to find the length of a pond 
(see figure), but does so indirectly. She selects a point A on 
one side of the pond and measures distances to the points B 
and C at opposite ends of the pond to be 537 yards and  
823 yards, respectively. The measure of ∠BAC is 130°.  
See figure. How long is the pond? 
	
	
130
537 yd
B
C
A
823 yd
	39.	 Roof truss. A roof truss is made in the shape of an inverted 
V. The lengths of the two edges are 11 feet and 23 feet. The 
edges meet at the peak, making a 65° angle. Find
a.	 The width of the truss. 
b.	 The height of the peak. 
	40.	 Solar panels. A roof of a house addition is being built to 
accept solar energy panels as shown in the figure. Find
a.	 The length of the edge AC of the truss. 
b.	 The measure of ∠BAC. 
	
	
18 ft
25 ft
A
B
C
55
	41.	 Hikers. Two hikers, Sonia and Tony, leave the same point at 
the same time. Sonia walks due east at the rate of 3 miles per 
hour, and Tony walks 45° northeast at the rate of 4.3 miles per 
hour. How far apart are the hikers after three hours? 

660	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	42.	 Distance between ships. Two ships leave the same port—
Ship A at 1.00 p.m. and ship B at 3:30 p.m. Ship A sails on 
a bearing of S 37° E at 18 miles per hour, and B sails on a 
bearing of N 28° E at 20 miles per hour. How far apart are 
the ships at 8.00 p.m.? 
	43.	 Navigation. A ship is traveling due north. At two different 
points A and B, the navigator of the ship sites a lighthouse at 
the point C, as shown in the accompanying figure.
a.	 Determine the distance from B to C. 
b.	 How much farther due north must the ship travel to reach 
the point closest to the lighthouse? 
	
	
2000 m
A
B
C
D
63.7
42.3
	44.	 Tangential circles. Three circles of radii 1.2 inches,  
2.2 inches, and 3.1 inches are tangent to each other exter-
nally. Find the angles of the triangle formed by joining the 
centers of the circles. 
	
	
A
C
B
	45.	 Height of a tree. A tree is planted at a point O on horizon-
tal ground. Two points A and B on the ground are 100 feet 
apart. The angles of elevation of the top of the tree T from the 
points A and B are 45° and 30°, respectively. The measure of 
∠AOB is 60°. Find the height of the tree. 
	
	
100 feet
60
45
30
O
T
A
B
	46.	 Geometry. A parallelogram has adjacent sides 8 centimeters 
and 13 centimeters. If the shorter diagonal is 11 centimeters 
long, find the length of the longer diagonal. 
	47.	 Geometry. A parallelogram has adjacent sides 10 centime-
ters and 15 centimeters long, and the angle between them is 
40°. Find the lengths of the two diagonals. 
	48.	 Geometry. The length of the two diagonals of a parallelo-
gram are 16 centimeters and 22 centimeters. The acute angle 
between these diagonals is 63°. Find the lengths of the sides 
of the parallelogram. [Hint: The diagonals of a parallelogram 
bisect each other.] 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 49–55, triangle ABC has sides a, b, and c and 
s = 1
2 1a + b + c2. Use the Law of Cosines to prove each 
identity.
	49.	 1 - cos A =
1a - b + c21a + b - c2
2bc
	50.	 1 - cos A =
21s - b21s - c2
bc
	51.	 1 + cos A =
1b + c + a21b + c - a2
2bc
	52.	 1 + cos A =
2s1s - a2
bc
	53.	 Use half-angle formula and Exercise 50 to prove the following:
sin A
2 = B
1s - b21s - c2
bc
	54.	 Use half-angle formula and Exercise 52 to prove the following:
cos A
2 = B
s1s - a2
bc
	55.	 Use Exercises 53 and 54 to prove that
sin A = 2
bc2s1s - a21s - b21s - c2.
	56.	 Use the Law of Cosines to show that for a triangle with sides 
of lengths a, b, and c (with a … b),
b - a 6 c 6 b + a.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	57.	 Solve triangle ABC with vertices A1-2, 12, B15, 32, and 
C13, 62.
	58.	 Solve triangle ABC with vertices A1-3, -52, B16, 102, and 
C13, -22.

	
Section 7.2    ■    The Law of Cosines 661
You can use the Law of Cosines to solve triangle ABC in the 
ambiguous case of Section 7.1. For example, to solve triangle 
ABC with B = 150°, b = 10, and c = 6, use the Law of 
Cosines to write b2 = a2 + c2 −2ac cos B.
Substitute values of b, c, and B in this equation to obtain 
a quadratic equation in a. Find the roots of this equation and 
interpret your results. Again use the Law of Cosines to find A. 
Then find C = 180° −A −B.
In Exercises 59–61, use the technique described above to solve 
each triangle ABC.
	59.	 B = 150°, b = 10, and c = 6 
	60.	 A = 30°, a = 6, and b = 10
	61.	 A = 60°, a = 12, and c = 15 
	62.	 Find values of b, c, and A in the form of the Law of Cosines 
a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc  cos  A so that a2 = b2 + c2 - 1.
	63.	 Explain why there are an unlimited number of choices for b 
and c in Exercise 62.
	64.	 In the equation a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc  cos  A, a form of the 
Law of Cosines, discuss the conditions under which a2 is less 
than b2 + c2. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 65–70, use a = 6, b = 4, c = 3, A = 30°, 
B = 45°, and U = 60° to find the exact value of each  
expression without using a calculator.
	65.	 b sin a 
	66.	 c sin b 
	67.	 1
2ab sin u 
	68.	 1
2bc sin a 
	69.	 1
2ca sin b 
	70.	 1
2ab sin a 
In Exercises 71–78, for the given values of a, b, and c, find the 
exact value of
(a)  s = a + b + c
2
.
(b)  K = 2s1s −a21s −b21s −c2.
	71.	  a = 3,  b = 4,  c = 5  
	72.	  a = 5,  b = 12,  c = 13  
	73.	  a = 6,  b = 6,  c = 6  
	74.	  a = 15,  b = 11,  c = 6  
	75.	  a = 18,  b = 10,  c = 14  
	76.	  a = 12,  b = 17,  c = 25  
	77.	  a = 10,  b = 13,  c = 13  
	78.	  a = 26,  b = 28,  c = 30  
 

662	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
The Bermuda Triangle
The Bermuda Triangle, or Devil’s Triangle, is the expanse of the Atlantic Ocean between 
Florida, Bermuda, and Puerto Rico. This mysterious stretch of sea has an unusually high 
occurrence of disappearing ships and planes.
For example, on Halloween in 1991, pilot John Verdi and his copilot were flying a 
Grumman Cougar jet over the triangle. They radioed the nearest tower to get permis-
sion to increase their altitude. The tower agreed and watched as the jet began the 
ascent and then disappeared off the radar. The jet didn’t fly out of range of the radar, 
didn’t descend, and didn’t radio a mayday (distress call). It just vanished, and the plane 
and crew were never recovered. Popular culture has attributed such disappearances 
to extraterrestrial forces. However, documented evidence indicates that the nature of 
disappearances in the region is similar to that in any region of the ocean. In Exercise 43, 
you are asked to find the area of the Bermuda Triangle.
Atlantic
Ocean
Bermuda
Triangle
Caribbean Sea
Gulf of
Mexico
San Juan
Puerto Rico
Miami
Bermuda
Geometry Formulas
Although the area of a rectangle is just the product of its length and width, the general con-
cept of area (and the related concepts of perimeter and volume) is developed with the use of 
calculus. Fortunately, the formulas for calculating these quantities (common plane regions and 
solids in space) require only algebra. Figure 7.14 lists some useful formulas from geometry.
Areas of Polygons  
Using Trigonometry
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Congruent triangles (Section 7.1, page 640)
2	 Solving SSA triangles (Section 7.1, page 644)
Objectives
1	 Use geometry formulas.
2	 Find the area of SAS triangles.
3	 Find the area of AAS and ASA triangles.
4	 Find the area of SSS triangles.
5	 Learn vocabulary associated with polygons.
S e c t i o n 7.3
1	
Use geometry formulas.
Solids
S  2rh  2r2
S  6s2
S  2(lw  wh  hl)
S  4r2
s
s
w
l
h
h
h
r
r
r
s
Rectangular Solid
Right Circular Cylinder
V  r2h
Square
Plane Figures
K  s2
P  4s
Rectangle
K  lw
P  2l  2w
P  a  b  c
P  a  b  c  d
s
s
b
a
a
c
d
c
w
l
Triangle
K 
bh
1
2
1
2
4
3
1
3
K 
h(a  b)
Sphere
V 
r3
Right Circular Cone
V 
r2h
b
Trapezoid
Cube
Formulas for area (K), circumference (C), perimeter (P), volume (V), and surface area (S)
h
h
r
Circle
K  r2
C  2r
V  s3
V  lwh
S  rœh2  r2  r2
Figure 7.14  Geometry formulas

	
Section 7.3    ■    Areas of Polygons Using Trigonometry 663
If a base, b, and the height, h, of a triangle are given, then we use this formula to calculate 
the area of the triangle. In this section, we discover alternative formulas that can be used if 
other sets of data are given instead.
Area of SAS Triangles
We first derive a formula for the area of a triangle in which two sides and the included angle 
are known.
Let ABC be a triangle with known sides b and c and included angle A = u. Let h be the 
altitude from the vertex B to the side b.
Figure 7.15 shows a rectangle with a semicircle on the top. Find
a.	 Its perimeter.        b.   The shaded area enclosed by the figure.
Solution
a.	 The figure consists of three sides of a rectangle and a semicircle. Because the radius 
shown in the figure is 2 ft, its diameter is 2122 = 4 ft. So the sum of the lengths of 
the three sides of the rectangle is 6 + 4 + 6 = 16 ft. The circumference (perimeter) 
	
of the semicircle is 1
21circumference2 = 1
212pr2 = 1
212p # 22 = 2p ft.
	
The perimeter of the figure = 16 ft + 2p ft
	
= 116 + 2p2 ft    Exact answer
	
≈ 22.2832 ft	
Use a calculator.
b.	 Area enclosed by the figure
	
 = Area of the rectangle + area of the semicircle
	
 = l # w + 1
2 1pr22
	
 = 142162 + 1
23p12224    l = 4, w = 6, r = 2
	
 = 124 + 2p2 ft2	
Simplify. Exact answer
	
 ≈ 30.2832 ft2	
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 1  One side of a rectangular plot is 48 feet, and its diagonal is 50 feet. 
Find
a.	 Its perimeter.        b.   Its area.
We recall from Figure 7.14 the following formula.
Finding Perimeter and Area
EXAMPLE 1
2 ft
6 ft
Figure 7.15 
The area K of a triangle is
K = 1
2 1base21height2
or	
K = 1
2 bh,
where b is the base and h is the height (the length of the altitude to the base).
Area of a Triangle
2	
Find the area of SAS triangles.

664	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
If A = u is an acute angle in a triangle (see Figure 7.16), then sin A = h
c; so h = c sin A. 
The area of this triangle is given by
K = 1
2 b h = 1
2 b c sin A    Replace h with c sin A.
The angle A = u shown in Figure 7.17 is an obtuse angle. Here u′ = 180° - u and
sin u = sin u′ = h
c.
So
 h = c sin u′ = c sin u = c sin A
 K = 1
2 b h = 1
2 b c sin A    Replace h with c sin A.
In both cases (A is acute or obtuse), the area K of the triangle is 1
2 bc sin A. By dropping 
altitudes from A and C, we have the following result.
Figure 7.16  Acute angle A

c
h
b
A
C
B
Figure 7.17  Obtuse angle A

c
h
b

C
A
B
The area K of a triangle ABC with sides a, b, and c is
K = 1
2 bc sin A  K = 1
2 ca sin B  K = 1
2 ab sin C.
In words: The area K of a triangle is one-half the product of two of its sides and the 
sine of the included angle.
Area of an SAS Triangle
Find the area of the triangle ABC in Figure 7.18.
Solution
We are given the angle of measure 62° between the sides of lengths 36 feet and 29 feet. The 
area K of the triangle ABC is given by
 K = 1
2 bc sin u
    Area formula
 = 1
213621292 sin 62°    b = 36, c = 29, u = 62°
 ≈460.9 square feet     Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 2  Find the area of triangle ABC assuming that the lengths of the 
sides AC and BC are 27 feet and 38 feet, respectively, and the measure of the angle  
between these sides is 47°.
Finding the Area of a Triangle
EXAMPLE 2
Figure 7.18 
62
36 feet
29 feet
A
C
B
A triangle ABC has area K = 20 ft2. The lengths of two of its sides are a = 10 ft and 
b = 8 ft. Find the measure of the angle between these sides.
The Ambiguous Case
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 7.3    ■    Areas of Polygons Using Trigonometry 665
Solution
Let u be the angle between the sides of lengths a and b. Then
 1
2 ab sin u = K     Area formula
 1
21102182 sin u = 20    a = 10, b = 8, K = 20
 sin u = 1
2     Solve for sin u and simplify.
Then u = sin-1 a1
2b = 30° is an angle between the sides of lengths a and b. However, 
because
sin1180° - u2 = sin u,    See page 513, Exercise 102.
we have
sin 150° = sin1180° - 30°2 = sin 30° = 1
2.
So the angle between the sides of lengths a and b is also 150°. Figure 7.19 shows two pos-
sible triangles with the given information.
10
8
B
A
C
10
8
B
C
A
30
150
Figure 7.19 
Practice Problem 3  Repeat Example 3 with K = 6, a = 4, and b = 3.
Area of AAS and ASA Triangles
Suppose we are given two angles A and C and the side a of triangle ABC. We find the third 
angle B by the angle sum formula. So
B = 180° - A - C.
We find b by the Law of Sines.
 b
sin B =
a
sin A
 b = a sin B
sin A     Multiply both sides by sin B.
The area, K, of triangle ABC is
 K = 1
2 ab sin C
   
SAS formula
 = 1
2 a aa sin B
 sin A b sin C    Replace b with a sin B
sin A .
 = a2 sin B sin C
2 sin A
.
We obtain similar results if any two angles and the side b or the side c is given.
3	
Find the area of AAS and  
ASA triangles.

666	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
The area K of an AAS triangle ABC with given side a, b, or c is
K = a2 sin B sin C
2 sin A
,  K = b2 sin C sin A
2 sin B
, or K = c2 sin A sin B
2 sin C
.
Area of AAS and ASA Triangles
Find the area of triangle ABC with
B = 36°, C = 69°, and b = 15 ft.
Solution
First, we find the third angle of the triangle. We have
 A = 180° - B - C
    Angle sum formula
 = 180° - 36° - 69°    Substitute for B and C.
 = 75°.
Because we are given side b, we use the area formula for an AAS triangle that contains 
side b. Then
 K = b2 sin C sin A
2 sin B
    Area of an AAS triangle
 = 11522 sin 69° sin 75°
2 sin 36°
    Substitute values for b, C, A, and B.
 ≈172.6 ft2
    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 4  Find the area of triangle ABC with A = 63°, B = 74°, and  
c = 18 in.
Area of SSS Triangles
The Law of Cosines can be used to derive a formula for the area of a triangle if the lengths 
of the three sides (SSS triangles) are known. The formula is called Heron’s formula.
Area of an AAS Triangle
EXAMPLE 4
4	
Find the area of SSS triangles.
H e r o n ’ s  F o r m u l a  f o r  S S S  T r i a n g l e s
The area K of an SSS triangle with sides of lengths a, b, and c is given by
K = 1s1s - a21s - b21s - c2,
where s = 1
21a + b + c2 is the semiperimeter.
The derivation of Heron’s formula is given in Exercise 55.
Find the area of triangle ABC with a = 29 inches, b = 25 inches, and c = 40 inches. 
Round your answer to the nearest tenth.
Using Heron’s Formula
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 7.3    ■    Areas of Polygons Using Trigonometry 667
Solution
We first find s.
 s = a + b + c
2
 = 29 + 25 + 40
2
= 47
 Area of the triangle = 1s1s - a21s - b21s - c2
    Heron’s formula
 = 147147 - 292147 - 252147 - 402    Substitute values.
 ≈360.9 square inches
    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 5  Find the area of triangle ABC with a = 11 meters,  
b = 17 meters, and c = 20 meters. Round your answer to the nearest tenth.
A triangular swimming pool has side lengths 23 feet, 17 feet, and 26 feet. How many 
gallons of water will fill the pool to a depth of 5 feet? Round your answer to the nearest 
whole number.
Solution
To calculate the volume of water, we first calculate the area of the triangular surface.
We have a = 23, b = 17, and c = 26. So s = 1
21a + b + c2 = 33.
By Heron’s formula, the area K of the triangular surface is
 K = 1s1s - a21s - b21s - c2
 = 133133 - 232133 - 172133 - 262    Substitute values for a, b, c, and s.
 ≈192.2498 square feet.
 The volume of water = surface area * depth
 ≈192.2498 * 5
 ≈961.25 cubic feet
One cubic foot contains approximately 7.5 gallons of water. So  
961.25 * 7.5 ≈7209 gallons of water will fill the pool.
Practice Problem 6  Repeat Example 6, assuming that the swimming pool has side 
lengths of 25 feet, 30 feet, and 33 feet and the depth of the pool is 5.5 feet.
Polygons
A closed plane figure bounded by at least three line segments (called sides) is called a 
polygon. Generally accepted names of some polygons with n sides are given in the margin. 
A point where two adjacent sides of a polygon meet is called the vertex (plural vertices) of 
a polygon. An angle formed inside the polygon by two adjacent sides is called an interior 
angle. A line joining any two nonconsecutive vertices is called a diagonal of the polygon. 
If all the sides and all the interior angles of a polygon are equal, it is called a regular 
polygon.
Using Heron’s Formula
EXAMPLE 6
5	
Learn vocabulary associated 
with polygons.
Polygon Names
Sides
Name
  n
n-gon
  3
Triangle
  4
Quadrilateral
  5
Pentagon
  6
Hexagon
  7
Heptagon
  8
Octagon
10
Decagon
12
Dodecagon

668	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Here are some facts about polygons with n sides:
1.	 The number of diagonals in a polygon = 1
2
 n1n - 32.
2.	 The number of triangles formed by drawing all the diagonals from one 
vertex = 1n - 22.
3.	 The sum of the interior angles = 1801n - 22 degrees. 
	
One way to find the area of a polygon with n sides is to decompose it into 1n - 22 
triangles, then calculate the sum of the areas of the triangles. In Exercises 47–54,  
we discuss the area and the perimeter of some regular polygons.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 124 ft  b. 672 ft2    2. 375.2 ft2    3. 90°    4. 203.4 in2    5. 93.5 m2    6. 14,801 gal
Exercises
section 7.3
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The area K of a triangle with base b and height h is  
K =
. 
	 2.	 An SAS triangle is a triangle in which two sides and the 
 are known.
	 3.	 The area of an SAS triangle ABC with sides a and c is  
K =
. 
	 4.	 Heron’s formula states that the area of an SSS is  
K =
, where s =  
.
In Exercises 5–10, find the exact value of the area of each SAS 
triangle ABC.
	 5.	 A = 30°, b = 6, c = 5 
	 6.	 B = 60°, a = 12, c = 7 
	 7.	 C = 120°, a = 8, b = 5 
	 8.	 A = 135°, b = 4, c = 6 
	 9.	 B = 150°, a = 12, c = 9 
	10.	 C = 45°, a = 18, b = 5 
In Exercises 11–18, find the area of each SAS triangle ABC. 
Round your answers to the nearest tenth.
	11.	 A = 57°, b = 30 in., c = 52 in. 
	12.	 B = 110°, a = 20 cm, c = 27 cm 
	13.	 C = 46°, a = 15 km, b = 22 km 
	14.	 A = 146.7°, b = 16.7 ft, c = 18 ft 
	15.	 B = 38.6°, a = 12 mm, c = 16.7 mm 
	16.	 B = 112.5°, a = 151.6 ft, c = 221.8 ft 
	17.	 C = 107.3°, a = 271 ft, b = 194.3 ft 
	18.	 A = 131.8°, b = 15.7 mm, c = 18.2 mm 
In Exercises 19–26, find the area of each AAS or ASA triangle 
ABC. Round your answers to the nearest tenth.
	19.	 a = 16 ft, B = 57°, C = 49° 
	20.	 a = 12 ft, A = 73°, C = 64° 
	21.	 b = 15.3 yd, A = 64°, B = 38° 
	22.	 b = 10 m, B = 53.4°, C = 65.6° 
	23.	 c = 16.3 cm, B = 55°, C = 37.5° 
	24.	 c = 20.5 ft, A = 64°, B = 84.2° 
	25.	 a = 65.4 ft, A = 62°15′, B = 44°30′ 
	26.	 b = 24.3 m, B = 56°18′, C = 37°36′ 
In Exercises 27–34, find the area of each SSS triangle ABC. 
Round your answers to the nearest tenth.
	27.	 a = 2, b = 3, c = 4 
	28.	 a = 50, b = 100, c = 130 
	29.	 a = 50, b = 50, c = 75 
	30.	 a = 100, b = 100, c = 125 
	31.	 a = 7.5, b = 4.5, c = 6.0 
	32.	 a = 8.5, b = 5.1, c = 4.5 
	33.	 a = 3.7, b = 5.1, c = 4.2 
	34.	 a = 9.8, b = 5.7, c = 6.5 
In Exercises 35–38, find an angle U between the sides a and b 
of a triangle ABC with given area K.
	35.	 K = 12, a = 6, b = 8 
	36.	 K = 6, a = 4, b = 213 
	37.	 K = 30, a = 12, b = 5 
	38.	 K = 15, a = 512, b = 6 

	
Section 7.3    ■    Areas of Polygons Using Trigonometry 669
In Exercises 39–42, use the following figure of a parallelogram 
(not drawn to scale).
a
b
d
a
u
Note: u  a  180
	39.	 Show that the area of the parallelogram is 
ab sin u = ab sin a.
	40.	 Find the area of the parallelogram if a = 8 cm, b = 13 cm, 
and u = 60°. 
	41.	 Find the area of the parallelogram if a = 12 cm, b = 16 cm, 
and d = 22 cm. 
	42.	 If the area of parallelogram is 10 cm2 with b = 4 cm and
a = 5p
6 , find a. 
Applying the Concepts
	43.	 Area of the Bermuda Triangle. The angle formed by the 
lines of sight from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, to Bermuda and 
to San Juan, Puerto Rico, is approximately 67°. The distance 
from Fort Lauderdale to Bermuda is 1026 miles, and the dis-
tance from Fort Lauderdale to San Juan is 1046 miles. Find 
the area of the Bermuda Triangle, which is formed with those 
cities as vertices. 
	44.	 Landscaping. A triangular region between the three streets 
shown in the figure will be landscaped for +30 a square foot. 
How much will the landscaping cost? 
35 ft
20 ft
30
	45.	 Real estate. You have inherited a commercial triangular-
shaped lot of side lengths 400 feet, 250 feet, and 274 feet. 
The neighboring property is selling for +1 million dollars per 
acre. How much is your lot worth? (Hint: 1 acre = 43,560 
square feet) 
	46.	 Swimming pool. Find the number of gallons of water in  
a triangular swimming pool with sides 11 feet, 16 feet, and 
19 feet and a depth of 5 feet. Round your answer to the near-
est whole number. (Recall: Approximately 7.5 gallons of 
water are in 1 cubic foot.) 
Beyond the Basics
Exercises 47–54 deal with a regular polygon. For n # 3, a 
regular n-gon is an n-sided polygon, all of whose sides are 
equal in length and all of whose angles are equal in measure.
Inscribed polygon. A regular n-gon inscribed in a circle of 
radius r has n vertices that are equally spaced on the circle. 
The adjoining figure is an inscribed octagon 1n = 82 on a 
circle of radius r. Use this figure for Exercises 47–50.
	47.	 a.	 Write the coordinates of the vertices of the inscribed  
octagon with one of the vertices at A = 1r, 02. 
b.	 Find the length of the side AB. 
c.	 Use part (b) to find the perimeter of the octagon. 
y
x
B
A(r, 0)
O
8

2
	48.	 a.	 In the figure, find the area of triangle AOB. 
b.	 Use part (a) to find the area of the inscribed octagon. 
	49.	 a.	 Show that the perimeter P of a regular n-gon inscribed in 
a circle of radius r is
P = nrA2 - 2 cos 2p
n .
b.	 What is the circumference (perimeter) of a circle of radius 
r = 5? 
c.	 Calculate P in part (a) with r = 5 and 
n = 4, 10, 50, and 100. Round your answer to four  
decimal places. What do you observe? 
	50.	 a.	 Show that the area A of a regular n-gon inscribed in a 
circle of radius r is
A = nr2
2  sin 2p
n .
b.	 What is the area of a disc of radius r = 5? 
c.	 Calculate A from part (a) with r = 5 and 
n = 4, 10, 50, and 100. Round your answer to four  
decimal places. What do you observe? 
Circumscribed polygon. A regular circumscribed n-gon 
about a circle of radius r has n vertices, and its sides are  
tangent to n equally spaced points on the circumference  
of the circle. The adjoining figure is a circumscribed  
hexagon 1n = 62 about a circle of radius r. Use this  
figure for Exercises 51–52.
y
x
B
A(r, 0)
O
6


670	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	51.	 a.	 In the figure, show that B = ar, r tan p
6 b and conclude 
	
	 	
that the length of each side of the hexagon is 2r tan p
6.
	
	 b.	 Use part (a) to find the perimeter of the hexagon. 
	52.	 a.	 Use the figure to show that the area of the triangle AOB is 
	
	 	
1
2 r2 tan p
6.
b.	 Use part (a) to find the area of the circumscribed  
hexagon. 
	53.	 a.	 Show that the perimeter P of a regular circumscribed  
n-gon about a circle of radius r is
P = 2nr tanp
n.
b.	 What is the circumference of a circle of radius r = 10? 
c.	 Calculate P in part (a) with r = 10 and 
n = 4, 10, 50, and 100. Round your answer to four  
decimal places. What do you observe? 
	54.	 a.	 Show that the area A of a regular n-gon circumscribed 
about a circle of radius r is
A = nr2 tan p
n.
b.	 What is the area of a disc of radius r = 10? 
c.	 Calculate A by using the formula in part (a) with r = 10 
and n = 4, 10, 50, and 100. Round your answer to four 
decimal places. What do you observe? 
	55.	 Derive Heron’s formula by justifying each step.
In a triangle ABC,
 K = 1
2 ab sin C
 4K2 = a2b211 - cos2 C2
 4K2 = a2b2c 1 - aa2 + b2 - c2
2ab
b
2
d
 16K2 = 4a2b2 - 1a2 + b2 - c222
 16K2 = 32ab + 1a2 + b2 - c224 32ab - 1a2 + b2 - c224
 16K2 = 31a + b22 - c24 3c2 - 1a - b224
 K2 = aa + b + c
2
baa + b - c
2
bac + a - b
2
bac + b - a
2
b
 K = 2s1s - a21s - b21s - c2, s = 1
2 1a + b + c2
	56.	 In a triangle ABC, show that
sin A = 2
bc2s1s - a21s - b21s - c2.
	57.	 Use Heron’s formula to show that the area of an equilateral 
	
	 triangle whose sides have length a is K = 13
4 a2.
	58.	 A segment of a circle is a part of a circle bounded by a  
chord and the arc cut by the chord. See the shaded region  
in the figure.
r
r
u
a.	 Show that the area of the segment of a circle of radius r 
subtended (formed) by a central angle of u radians is 
	
1
2
 r21u - sin u2.
b.	 Find the area of the segment subtended by a central angle 
of 60° in a circle of radius 6 inches. 
	59.	 Circumscribed circle. Perpendicular bisectors of the sides 
of a triangle meet at a point O, and the distance from O to 
each of the vertices is the same number (say, R). The circle 
with center at O and radius R is called the circumscribed 
circle of the triangle. See the figure.
A
B
C
O
R
R
R
	
	 Show that the radius R of the circumscribed circle of triangle 
ABC is given by
	
R =
a
2 sin A =
b
2 sin B =
c
2 sin C.
	
	 (Hint: Use a theorem of geometry: ∠BOC = 2∠A.)
	60.	 A triangle ABC with given angles A, B, and C is inscribed in 
a circle of diameter 1. Find a, b, and c.
	61.	 Use Exercises 56 and 59 to show that
R = abc
4K ,
	
	 where K is the area of the triangle ABC.

	
Section 7.3    ■    Areas of Polygons Using Trigonometry 671
	62.	 A triangle ABC has a = 18, b = 24, and c = 30. Find K 
and R. [Hint: Use Exercise 61.] 
	63.	 Inscribed circle. The bisectors of the angles of a triangle 
meet at a point I, and the perpendicular distance from I to 
each of the sides is the same number (say, r). The circle  
with center I and radius r is called the inscribed circle of  
the triangle. See the figure.
A
B
c
a
I
r
r
r
b
C
	
	 Show that the radius r of the inscribed circle of triangle ABC 
is given by
r =
1s1s - a21s - b21s - c2
s
.
	
	 (Hint: Show that rs = K.)
	64.	 From Exercises 61 and 63, conclude that
rR =
abc
21a + b + c2.
	65.	 In triangle ABC, let p1, p2, and p3 be the lengths of the  
perpendiculars from the vertices A, B, and C to the  
sides a, b, and c, respectively. Show that
1
p1
+ 1
p2
+ 1
p3
= A
s
1s - a21s - b21s - c2.
	
	 aHint: 1
2 ap1 = 1
2 bp2 = 1
2 cp3 = Kb
	66.	 From Exercises 61 and 64, conclude that
1
p1
+ 1
p2
+ 1
p3
= 1
r.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	67.	 Show that the area, K, of a triangle ABC is
	
	
 K = a2 sin 2B + b2 sin 2A
4
= b2 sin 2C + c2 sin 2B
4
	
 = c2 sin 2A + a2 sin 2C
4
.
	68.	 Let r and R be the radii of the inscribed circle and the  
circumscribed circle, respectively, of triangle ABC. 
	
	 Show that r = 4R sin A
2 sin B
2 sin C
2.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 69 and 70, write each expression in the form 
ax + by and compute 2a2 + b2.
	69.	 21-x + 3y2 + 31x - y2 
	70.	 312x - 3y2 - 21x - 2y2 
	71.	 Write the exact value of
a.	 sin p
6 
b.	 cos p
4 
c.	 tan p
3 
	72.	 Write the exact value of
a.	 sin-1 a- 1
2b 
b.	 cos-1 a- 1
2b 
c.	 tan-11- 132 
	73.	 Find angle u in quadrant III whose reference angle 
u′ = tan-11132. 
	74.	 Find angle u in quadrant II whose reference angle 
	
	 u′ = ` tan-1 a- 1
13b ` . 
In Exercises 75–78, let l1 be the line passing through the 
points S and T and l2 the line passing through the points  
O and P. In each case, find
a.  d1S, T2 and d1O, P2.
b.  slope m1 of l1 and m2 of l2. 
c.  Are l1 and l2 parallel, perpendicular, or neither?
	75.	 S = 11, 32, T = 16, 152;  O = 10, 02, P = 15, 122
	76.	 S = 12, -32, T = 1-1, -72;  
O = 10, 02, P = 1-3, 42
	77.	 S = 1-1, 22, T = 1-2, 12;  
O = 10, 02, P = 11, -12
	78.	 S = 1-1, 12, T = 13, -22;  
O = 10, 02, P = 14, -32        

672	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
7.4
Vectors
Many physical quantities such as length, area, volume, mass, and temperature are com-
pletely described by their magnitudes in appropriate units. Such quantities are called scalar 
quantities. Other physical quantities such as velocity, acceleration, and force are com-
pletely described only if both a magnitude (size) and a direction are specified. For example, 
the movement of wind is usually described by its speed (magnitude) and its direction, say, 
15 miles per hour southwest. The wind speed and wind direction together form a vector 
quantity called the wind velocity.
Geometric Vectors
We can represent a vector geometrically by a directed line segment with an arrowhead. The 
arrow specifies the direction of the vector, and its length describes the magnitude. The tail 
of the arrow is the vector’s initial point, and the tip of the arrow is its terminal point. We 
denote vectors by lowercase boldface type, such as a, b, i, j, u, v, and w. When discussing 
vectors, we refer to real numbers as scalars. Scalars will be denoted by lowercase italic 
type, such as a, b, x, y, and z.
The Meaning of Force
A force is a push or pull resulting from an object’s interaction with another object. 
When the interacting objects are physically in contact with each other, the resulting 
force is called a contact force. Examples of contact forces include friction, tension, air 
resistance, and applied forces. A noncontact force is called an action-at-a-distance 
force. Examples of such forces include gravitational, electrical, and magnetic forces. 
The standard units of measurement for the magnitude of a force are pounds (lb) in the 
English system and newtons (N) in the metric system. The conversion factor between 
the systems is
1 pound of force = 4.45 newtons.
In Examples 8–10, we discuss the resultant of two or more forces acting on an object.
S e c t i o n 
Vectors
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Trigonometric functions of angles  
(Section 5.3, page 500)
2	 Inverse trigonometric functions  
(Section 5.6, page 551)
Objectives
1	 Represent vectors geometrically.
2	 Represent vectors algebraically.
3	 Find a unit vector in the direction of v.
4	 Write a vector in terms of its magnitude 
and direction.
5	 Use vectors in applications.
1	
Represent vectors 
geometrically.
The magnitude of a vector is similar 
to the absolute value of a real num-
ber. Like absolute value, the magni-
tude of a vector cannot be negative.
Side  
Note

	
Section 7.4    ■    Vectors 673
As in Figure 7.20, if the initial point of a vector v is P and the terminal point is Q, we 
write the vector v as:
v = PQ>
.
The magnitude (or norm) of a vector v = PQ>
, denoted by 7v7, or 7PQ>7, is the length of 
the vector v and is a scalar quantity.
Equivalent Vectors
Two vectors having the same length and same direction are called equivalent vectors. 
Because a vector is determined by its length and direction only, equivalent vectors are 
regarded as equal even though they may be located in different positions. If v and w are 
equivalent, we write v = w. See Figure 7.21.
P  initial point
Q  terminal
     point
v
Figure 7.20  A vector
v
v  w
Same length, same direction
(a)
w
v
v  u
Different length, same direction
(b)
u
v
v  a
Same length, different direction
(c)
v
v  b
Different length, different direction
(d)
b
a
Figure 7.21  Equivalent vectors have the same length and direction
The vector of length zero is called the zero vector and is denoted by 0. The zero vector 
has zero magnitude and arbitrary direction. If vectors v and a, as in Figure 7.21(c), have 
the same length and opposite direction, then a is the opposite vector of v and we write 
a = −v.
Adding Vectors
We add two vectors v and w, as shown in Figure 7.22.
v
v  w
w
Figure 7.22  Adding v and w
Let v and w be any two vectors. Position the terminal point of v so that it coincides 
with the initial point of w. The sum v + w is the resultant vector whose initial point 
coincides with the initial point of v, and its terminal point coincides with the termi-
nal point of w.
Geometric Vector Addition
In Figure 7.23, we have constructed two sums, v + w and w + v. It shows that
v + w = w + v
and that the sum coincides with the diagonal of the parallelogram determined by v and w 
when v and w have the same initial point.
Figure 7.23  v + w = w + v
v
v
w
w

674	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Vector subtraction is defined just like the subtraction of real numbers. For any two 
vectors v and w, v - w = v + 1-w2, where -w is the opposite of w. See Figure 7.24.
v
w
(a)
v
w
(b)
Figure 7.24  Vector v 2 w
Figure 7.24(b) shows that you can construct the difference vector v - w without first 
drawing -w: place the vectors v and w so that their initial points coincide. Then the vector 
from the terminal point of w to the terminal point of v is the vector v - w.
A second basic arithmetic operation for vectors is multiplying vectors by real numbers.
Let v be a vector and c a scalar (a real number). The vector cv is called the scalar 
multiple of v. See Figure 7.25.
If c 7 0, cv has the same direction as v and magnitude c7v7.
If c 6 0, cv has the opposite direction of v and magnitude  c 7v7.
If c = 0, cv = 0v = 0.
Scalar Multiples of Vectors
v
v
2v
−2v
1
2
Figure 7.25  Scalar multiples of v
Use the vectors u, v, and w in Figure 7.26 to graph each vector.
a.	 u - 2w        b.   2v - u + w
Solution
The graphs are shown in Figure 7.27.
u
2w
(a)
u
w
2v
(b)
Figure 7.27 
Practice Problem 1  Use the vectors u, v, and w of Figure 7.26 to graph each vector.
a.	 2w + v        b.  2w + v - u
Geometric Vectors
EXAMPLE 1
u
v
w
Figure 7.26 

	
Section 7.4    ■    Vectors 675
Algebraic Vectors
We now consider vectors in the Cartesian coordinate plane. Because the location of the ini-
tial point of a vector is not relevant, we typically draw vectors with their initial point at the 
origin. Such a vector is called a position vector. Note that the terminal point of a position 
vector will completely determine the vector, so specifying the terminal point will specify 
the vector. For the position vector v (see Figure 7.28) with initial point at the origin O and 
terminal point at P1v1, v22, we denote the vector by
v = OP>
= 8v1, v29.
2	
Represent vectors 
algebraically.
x
y
y2 = second component
y1 = first component
O
P(n1, y2)
v
Figure 7.28  A position vector
We call v1 and v2 the components of the vector v; v1 is the first component, and v2 
is the second component. Note the difference between the notations for the point 1v1, v22 
and the position vector 8v1, v29. The magnitude of the position vector v = 8v1, v29 fol-
lows directly from the Pythagorean theorem. We have 7v7 = 2v2
1 + v2
2.
If equivalent vectors v and w are located so that their initial points are at the origin, then 
their terminal points must coincide (because the equivalent vectors have the same length 
and same direction). Thus, for the vectors
 v = 8v1, v29 and w = 8w1, w29,
 v = w if and only if v1 = w1 and v2 = w2.
We can use congruent triangles to show that any vector v with initial point P1x1, y12 and 
terminal point Q1x2, y22 is equivalent to the position vector w = 8x2 - x1, y2 - y19. Any 
vector in the Cartesian plane can therefore be represented by a position vector. See Figure 7.29.
x
y
O
(x2  x1, y2  y1)
P(x1, y1)
w
Q(x2, y2)
v
Figure 7.29  Two equivalent vectors
R e p r e s e n t i n g  a  V e c t o r  A s  a  P o s i t i o n  V e c t o r
The vector PQ>
 with initial point P1x1, y12 and terminal point Q1x2, y22 is equal to the 
position vector
w = 8x2 - x1, y2 - y19.
Let v be the vector with initial point P14, -22 and terminal point Q1-1, 32. Write v as a 
position vector.
Solution
Because v has initial point P14, -22, x1 = 4  and  y1 = -2.
Because v has terminal point Q1-1, 32, x2 = -1  and  y2 = 3.
So
 v = 8x2 - x1, y2 - y19
    Position vector representation of PQ>
 v = 8 -1 - 4, 3 - 1-229    Substitute values.
 v = 8 -5, 59
    Simplify.
Representing a Vector in the Cartesian Plane
EXAMPLE 2
Notice that the point (v1, v2) has 
neither magnitude nor direction, 
whereas the position vector 8v1, v29 
has both.
Side  
Note

676	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Practice Problem 2  Let w be the vector with initial point P1-2, 72 and terminal  
point Q11, -32. Write w as a position vector.
The zero vector is 0 = 80, 09, and the opposite of the vector v = 8v1, v29 is 
-v = 8 -v1, -v29. The following properties describe the arithmetic operations on vectors, 
using components.
A r i t h m e t i c  O p e r at i o n s  a n d  P r o p e r t i e s  o f  V e c t o r s
If u = 8u1, u29, v = 8v1, v29, and w = 8w1, w29 are vectors and c and d are any 
scalars, then
	
Vector addition
 v + u = 8v1 + u1, v2 + u29
 v - u = 8v1 - u1, v2 - u29
 u + v = v + u
 1u + v2 + w = u + 1v + w2
	Scalar multiplication
 cv = 8cv1, cv29
 1c + d2v = cv + dv
 c1v + w2 = cv + cw
 c1dv2 = 1cd2v
Let v = 82, 39 and w = 8 -4, 19. Find each expression.
a.	 v + w        b.   -2v        c.   2v - w        d.   72v - w7
Solution
a.	 v + w = 82, 39 + 8 -4, 19 = 82 - 4, 3 + 19 = 8 -2, 49
b.	 -2v = -282, 39 = 8 -2 # 2, -2 # 39 = 8 -4, -69
	
Note that -2v is a vector whose magnitude is  -2 = 2 times the magnitude of  
v and whose direction is opposite that of v.
c.	  2v - w = 282, 39 - 8 -4, 19
	
 = 84, 69 - 8 -4, 19     Scalar multiplication
	
 = 84 - 1-42, 6 - 19    Vector subtraction
	
 = 88, 59
    Simplify.
d.   72v - w7 = 7 88, 59 7
	
From part c
	
 = 282 + 52
	
Definition of magnitude
	
 = 164 + 25 = 189	
Simplify.
Practice Problem 3  Let v = 8 -1, 29 and w = 82, -39. Find each expression.
a.	 v + w        b.   3w        c.   3w - 2v        d.   73w - 2v7 
Unit Vectors
If c 7 0 and v is any vector, then the vector cv has the same direction as v and its magnitude 
is given by
7cv7 = c7v7.
If v is a nonzero vector and c =
1
7v7 , then g 1
7v7  v g =
1
7v7  7v7 = 1. Consequently, 1
7v7  v 
is a vector of magnitude 1 in the same direction as v. A vector of magnitude 1 is called a 
unit vector.
Operations on Vectors
EXAMPLE 3
3	
Find a unit vector in the 
direction of v.

	
Section 7.4    ■    Vectors 677
Let v = 83, -49.
a.	 Find a unit vector u in the direction of v.
b.	 Find a vector of magnitude 15 in the direction of v.
Solution
a.	 First, find the magnitude of v = 83, -49.
 7v7 = 21322 + 1-422    Formula for magnitude
 7v7 = 125 = 5
    Simplify.
	
Now let
 u =
1
7v7  v
    Multiply v by the scalar 1
7v7 . 
 u = 1
583, -49    Substitute values.
 u = h 3
5, -4
5 i     Scalar multiplication
	
Check that 7u7 = 1:
7u7 = B
a3
5b
2
+ a -4
5b
2
= A
9
25 + 16
25 = A
25
25 = 1
	
Therefore, u = h 3
5, -4
5 i is a unit vector in the same direction as v. (Note that u is a 
	
scalar multiple of v.)
b.	 The required vector = 15 u = 15h 3
5, -4
5 i = 89, -129.
Practice Problem 4  Find a unit vector in the direction of v = 8 -12, 59.
Vectors in i, j Form
In a Cartesian coordinate plane, two important unit vectors lie along the positive coordinate 
axes:
i = 81, 09 and j = 80, 19
The unit vectors i and j are called standard unit vectors. See Figure 7.30.
Every vector v = 8v1, v29 can be expressed in terms of i and j as follows:
 v = 8v1, v29 = 8v1, 09 + 80, v29    Vector addition
 = v181, 09 + v280, 19
    Scalar multiplication
 = v1i + v2 j
    Replace 81, 09 with i and 80, 19 with j.
The scalars v1 and v2 are called the horizontal and vertical components of v, respectively. 
A vector v = 8v1, v29 from 10, 02 to 1v1, v22 can therefore be represented in the form
v = v1i + v2j
with
7v7 = 2v2
1 + v2
2.
Finding a Unit Vector
EXAMPLE 4
1
1
2
2
y
x
0
j  0, 1
i  1, 0
Figure 7.30  Standard  
unit vectors

678	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Find each expression for u = 4i + 7j and v = 2i + 5j.
a.	 u - 3v        b.   7u - 3v7
Solution
a.	  u - 3v = 14i + 7j2 - 312i + 5j2
	
 = 4i + 7j - 6i - 15j
    Scalar multiplication
	
 = 14 - 62i + 17 - 152j     Group terms.
	
 = -2i - 8j
    Simplify.
b.	  7u - 3v7 = 7 -2i - 8j7
	
 = 21-222 + 1-822    Definition of magnitude
	
 = 168 = 2117
    Simplify.
Practice Problem 5  Find each expression for u = -3i + 2j and v = i + 4j.
a.	 3u + 2v        b.   73u + 2v7 
Vector in Terms of Magnitude and Direction
Let v = 8v1, v29 be a position vector and suppose u is the smallest nonnegative angle that v 
makes with the positive x-axis. The angle u is called the direction angle of v. See Figure 7.31.
The length (or magnitude) of the vector OP>
 is 7v7; so
 v1
7v7 = cos u and  v2
7v7 = sin u
    Definitions of cosine and sine
 v1 = 7v7  cos u 
 v2 = 7v7  sin u    Multiply both sides by 7v7.
Hence,
 v = v1i + v2 j
    Write v in terms of i and j.
 v = 7v7  cos u i + 7v7  sin u j    Replace values of v1 and v2.
 v = 7v7 1cos u i + sin u j2
    Factor out 7v7.
Vectors Involving i and j
EXAMPLE 5
4	
Write a vector in terms of its 
magnitude and direction.
x
y
O
P(y1, y2)
v
θ
Figure 7.31  v = } v }1cos ui + sin uj2
The formula
v = 7v7 1cos u i + sin u j2
expresses a vector v in terms of its magnitude 7v7  and its direction angle u. This  
representation is called the trigonometric form of the vector v.
Trigonometric Form of a Vector
Note that any angle coterminal with the direction angle u of a vector v can be used in 
place of u in the formula v = 7v7 1cos u i + sin u j2.

	
Section 7.4    ■    Vectors 679
We can find the direction angle u of a position vector v = 8v1, v29 by using the equation 
tan u = v2
v1
 and the quadrant in which the point 1v1, v22 lies.
O
y

(4, 3)
4
4
4
1
x
 143.13
Figure 7.32  The direction angle 
of v = -4i + 3j
Write the vector of magnitude 3 whose direction angle is p
3.
Solution
If v is the required vector, then
 v = 7v7 1cos u i + sin u j2     Write v in terms of its magnitude and direction.
 v = 3 acos p
3  i + sin p
3 jb    Substitute 7v7 = 3 and u = p
3.
 v = 3 a1
2 i + 13
2  jb
    cos p
3 = 1
2, sin p
3 = 13
2
 v = 3
2 i + 313
2
 j
    Distributive property
Practice Problem 6  Write the vector of magnitude 2 that makes an angle of 11p
6  
with the positive x-axis.
Writing a Vector with Given Length and Direction Angle
EXAMPLE 6
Applications of Vectors
It is an experimental fact that forces behave like vectors. This means that if a system of 
forces acts on a particle, that particle will move as though it were acted on by a single force 
equal to the vector sum of the forces. This single force is called the resultant of the system 
of forces. If the particle does not move, the resultant is zero. We say that the particle is in 
equilibrium.
5	
Use vectors in applications.
Find the direction angle u of the vector v = -4i + 3j. Round to the nearest hundredth 
of a degree.
Solution
 v = -4i + 3j
 = 8 -4, 39
    Write v as a position vector.
 tan u =
3
-4 = -3
4
The reference angle u′ is given by
u′ = ` tan-1 a -3
4b ` ≈ -36.87°  = 36.87°    Use a calculator.
Because the point 1-4, 32 lies in quadrant II, we have
u = 180° - u′ ≈180° - 36.87° = 143.13°.
The direction angle of v is 143.13°. See Figure 7.32.
Practice Problem 7  Find the direction angle of v = 2i - 3j.
Finding the Direction Angle of a Vector
EXAMPLE 7

680	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Find the magnitude and bearing of the resultant R of two forces F1 and F2, where F1 is a 
50 lb force acting northward and F2 is a 40 lb force acting eastward.
Solution
We set up the coordinate system with the y-axis pointing northward. Then F1 = 50j and 
F2 = 40i. See Figure 7.33.
 R = F1 + F2 = F2 + F1 = 40i + 50j
 7R7 = 214022 + 15022 ≈64.0
    Use a calculator.
 tan u = 50
40
    Direction angle
 u = tan-1 a50
40b ≈51.3°
    Use a calculator.
The angle between R and the y-axis (north direction) is 90° - 51.3° = 38.7°. Therefore, 
R is a force of approximately 64.0 lb in the direction N 38.7° E.
Practice Problem 8  Repeat Example 8 assuming that F1 is a 40 lb force acting  
northward and F2 is a 30 lb force acting westward.
Finding the Resultant
EXAMPLE 8
An F-15 fighter jet is flying over Mount Rushmore at an airspeed (speed in still air) of 
800 miles per hour on a bearing of N 30° E. The velocity of wind is 40 miles per hour in 
the direction of S 45° E. Find the actual speed and direction (relative to the ground) of the 
plane. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.
Solution
Set up a coordinate system with north along the positive y-axis. See Figure 7.34.
Let v be the air velocity of the plane, 
w be the wind velocity, and 
r be the resultant ground velocity of the plane.
Writing each vector in terms of its magnitude and the direction angle u that the vector 
makes with the positive x-axis, we have
 v = 8001cos 60°i + sin 60°j2     90° - 30° = 60°
 w = 403cos 315°i + sin 315°j4    270° + 45° = 315°
 = 403cos 45°i - sin 45°j4
    cos 315° = cos 45°; sin 315° = -sin 45°
The resultant r is given by
 r = v + w
 r = 8001cos 60°i + sin 60°j2 + 401cos 45°i - sin 45°j2
    Substitute  
values of v  
and w.
 r = 1800 cos 60° + 40 cos 45°2i + 1800 sin 60° - 40 sin 45°2j
    Add vectors.
 7r7 = 21800 cos 60° + 40 cos 45°22 + 1800 sin 60° - 40 sin 45°22    7r1i + r2j7 = 
2r2
1 + r2
2
 7r7 ≈790.6
    Use a  
calculator.
Using Vectors in Air Navigation
EXAMPLE 9
O
R
F1
F2
i
j
E
N

Figure 7.33  The resultant R
O
r
v
w
315
S 45 E
N 30 E
60
E
N
Vectors are not drawn to scale.

Figure 7.34  Velocity vectors

	
Section 7.4    ■    Vectors 681
The ground speed of the F-15 is approximately 790.6 miles per hour. To find the actual 
direction (bearing) of the plane, we first find the direction angle u of r.
 u = tan-1 a 800 sin 60° - 40 sin 45°
800 cos 60° + 40 cos 45° b    For r = r1i + r2 j, u = tan-1 ar2
r1
b.
 ≈57.2°
    Use a calculator.
The angle between r and the y-axis (direction north) is
90° - 57.2° = 32.8°.
The bearing of the F-15 is approximately N 32.8° E.
Practice Problem 9  Repeat Example 9 assuming that the bearing of the plane is  
N 60° W and the direction of the wind is S 30° W.
For a vector v with direction 
angle u, the horizontal component 
v1 = 7v7  cos u and vertical 
­component v2 = 7v7  sin u.
Recall
What single force must be added to the system of forces A, B, C, and D shown in 
Figure 7.35 to obtain a system that is in equilibrium?
x
y
C  1500 lb
A  1200 lb
D  600 lb
B  1000 lb
30
55
45
R
R
Figure 7.35  A system in equilibrium
Solution
We first find the resultant R of the given system. The simplest procedure is to find and add the 
corresponding horizontal components and the vertical components of each force.
The horizontal component r1 of R is given by
 r1 = a1
 + b1
 + c1
 + d1
 = 1200 cos 0° + 1000 cos 45° + 1500 cos 150° + 600 cos 270°
 ≈608.07
Similarly, the vertical component r2 of R is given by
    r2 = a2	
+ b2	
+ c2	
+ d2
 = 1200 sin 0° + 1000 sin 45° + 1500 sin 150° + 600 sin 270°
 ≈857.11
 R = r1i + r2 j
 = 608.07 i + 857.11 j
 7R7 = 21608.0722 + 1857.1122 ≈1051 lb
 u = tan-1 ar2
r1
b = tan-1 a857.11
608.07b
 ≈ 55.0°    Use a calculator.
Obtaining an Equilibrium
EXAMPLE 10

682	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
The force that must be added to obtain equilibrium is the negative of R. This is a force 
of 1051 lb, and -R makes an angle of 180° + 55° = 235° with the positive x-axis. See 
Figure 7.35.
Practice Problem 10  Find the resultant of the following system of forces acting  
simultaneously at a point: u = 200 lb in the direction N 40° E, v = 300 lb in the  
direction N 70° W, and w = 400 lb in the direction S 20° E.
u
v
w
Exercises
section 7.4 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 A vector is a quantity that is characterized by a magnitude 
and a(n) 
.
	 2.	 The resultant of v and w is the vector sum v + w and is  
represented by the diagonal of the 
 with  
adjacent sides v and w.
	 3.	 If v = 8a, b9and a 7 0, then 7v7 =
, and 
its direction angle u = tan-11
2. 
	 4.	 If v is a nonzero vector, then the unit vector u in the direction 
	
	 of v is given by u =
1
7v7 1
2.
	 5.	 True or False. The zero vector 0 is the only vector with no 
direction specified. 
	 6.	 True or False. The vector -v has the same magnitude as v 
but the opposite direction. 
In Exercises 7–14, use the vectors u, v, and w in the accomp­
anying figure to graph each vector.
	 7.	 u + v 
	 8.	 3v 
	 9.	 2u - w 
	10.	 w - 2v 
	11.	 u + v + w 
	12.	 2u - w + v 
	13.	 w - 2v + u 
	14.	 2v + 3w - u 
In Exercises 15–22, the vector v has initial point P and  
terminal point Q. Write v as a position vector.
	15.	 P13, 62, Q12, 92 
	16.	 P16, -42, Q11, 12 
	17.	 P1-5, -22, Q1-3, -42 
	18.	 P10, 02, Q1-3, -62 
	19.	 P1-1, 42, Q12, -32 
	20.	 P13.5, 2.72, Q1-1.5, 1.32 
	21.	 P a1
2, 3
4b, Q a-1
2, -7
4b 
	22.	 P a- 2
3, 4
9b, Q a1
3, - 2
3b 
In Exercises 23–26, determine whether the vectors AB>
 and CD>
 
are equivalent. [Hint: Write AB>
 and CD>
 as position vectors.]
	23.	 A11, 02, B13, 42, C1-1, 22, D11, 62 
	24.	 A1-1, 22, B13, -22, C12, 52, D16, 12 
	25.	 A12, -12, B13, 52, C1-1, 32, D1-2, -32 
	26.	 A15, 72, B16, 32, C1-2, 12, D1-3, 52 
In Exercises 27–34, let v = 8 −1, 29 and w = 83, −29. 
Find each expression.
	27.	 7v7 
	
28.	 7w7 
	29.	 v - w 
	
30.	 v + w 
	31.	 2v - 3w 
	
32.	 2w - 3v 
	33.	 72v - 3w7 
	
34.	 72w - 3v7     
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. v
2w
2w  v
    b. 
v
u
2w
2w  v
2w  v  u
2. 83, -109    3. a. 81, -19  b. 86, -99  c. 88, -139  d. 1233
4. h - 12
13, 5
13 i    5. a. -7i + 14j  b. 715    6. 13i - j
7. tan-1a- 3
2b + 360° ≈303.69°    8. R is a force of 50 pounds 
in the direction N 36.9° W.    9. The ground speed is approxi-
mately 801.0 miles per hour, and the bearing is approximately 
N 62.9° W.    10. The magnitude of the resultant is approxi-
mately 121.2 lb, and the resultant is in the direction S 7.8° W.

	
Section 7.4    ■    Vectors 683
In Exercises 35–40, find a unit vector u in the direction of the 
given vector.
	35.	 81, -19 
	
36.	 81, 39 
	37.	 8 -4, 39 
	
38.	 85, -129 
	39.	 8 12, 129 
	
40.	 8 15, -29 
In Exercises 41–46, find each expression for u = 2i −5j and 
v = −3i −2j.
	41.	 u + v 
	
42.	 u - v 
	43.	 2u - 3v 
	
44.	 2v + 3u 
	45.	 72u - 3v7 
	
46.	 72v + 3u7 
In Exercises 47–54, write the vector v in the form V1i + V2 j, 
given }v} and the angle U that v makes with the positive  
x-axis.
	47.	 7v7 = 2, u = 30° 
	 48.	 7v7 = 5, u = 45° 
	49.	 7v7 = 4, u = 120° 
	
50.	 7v7 = 3, u = 150° 
	51.	 7v7 = 3, u = 5p
3 
	
52.	 7v7 = 4, u = 11p
6 
	53.	 7v7 = 7, u = - p
3 
	
54.	 7v7 = 8, u = 3p
4 
In Exercises 55–62, find the magnitude and the direction 
angle of the vector v.
	55.	 v = 101cos 60°i + sin 60°j2 
	56.	 v = -41cos 30°i + sin 30°j2 
	57.	 v = -31cos 30°i - sin 30°j2 
	58.	 v = 21cos 300°i - sin 300°j2 
	59.	 v = 5i + 12j 
	
60.	 v = 12i - 5j 
	61.	 v = -4i - 3j 
	
62.	 v = -5i + 12j 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 63–74 write each answer to the nearest tenth of 
a unit.
	63.	 Wind and vectors. A wind is blowing 25 miles per hour 
in the direction N 67° E. Express the wind velocity v in the 
form ai + bj. 
	64.	 Wind and vectors. The velocity v of a wind is given 
by v = 5i - 12j, where the vectors i and j represent 
1-mile-per-hour winds blowing east and north, respectively. 
Find the speed (magnitude of v) and the direction of the 
wind. 
	65.	 Resultant force. Find the magnitude and bearing of the 
resultant R of two forces F1 and F2, where F1 is a force of  
25 pounds acting due south and F2 is a force of 32 pounds 
acting due west. 
	66.	 Resultant force. Repeat Exercise 65 assuming that F1 is 
doubled. 
	67.	 Finding components. A force of 80 pounds acts in the direc-
tion N 65° E. Find its east and north components. 
	68.	 Finding components. Repeat Exercise 67 assuming that a 
force of 60 pounds acts in the direction S 32° W. 
	69.	 Resultant force. Two forces of 300 pounds and 400 pounds 
act at the origin and make angles of 30° and 60°, respectively, 
with the positive x-axis. Find the resultant. 
	70.	 Resultant force. Repeat Exercise 69 assuming that the 
forces have the same magnitude but that the angle each force 
makes with the positive x-axis is doubled. 
	71.	 Air navigation. A plane flies at an airspeed (speed in still air) 
of 500 miles per hour on a bearing of N 35° E. An east wind 
(wind from east to west) is blowing at 30 miles per hour. Find 
the plane’s ground speed and direction. 
	72.	 Air navigation. A plane flies at an airspeed of 550 miles 
per hour on a straight course from an airfield F. A 30-mile-
per-hour wind is blowing from the west. What must be the 
plane’s bearing so that after one hour of flying time, the plane 
is due north of F? 
	73.	 River navigation. A river flowing southward has a current 
of 4 miles per hour. A motorboat in still water maintains a 
speed of 15 miles per hour. The motorboat starts at the west 
shore on a bearing of N 40° E. What is the actual speed and 
direction of the boat? 
	74.	 River crossing. A fisherwoman on the west bank of the 
river of Exercise 73 sees several people fishing at a spot P 
directly east of her. If she owns the boat of Exercise 73, what 
direction should she take to land on the spot P? 
In Exercises 75 and 76, find a single force that must be added 
to the system of forces shown in each figure to obtain a system 
that is in equilibrium.
	75.	
O
30 lb
50 lb
40 lb
26
65
x
y
 
	76.	
y
O
15 lb
40 lb
25 lb
30
50
x
 

684	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	 87.	 Use vectors to find the lengths of the diagonals of the paral-
lelogram determined by i + 2j and i - j. 
	 88.	 Use vectors to find the fourth vertex of a parallelogram, 
with three vertices at 10, 02, 12, 32, and 16, 42. [Hint: There 
is more than one answer.] 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
Let A = 11, 22, B = 14, 32, and C = 16, 12 be points in the 
plane. Find P = 1x, y2 so that each of the following is true.
	 89.	 AB>
= CP> 
	
90.	 PA>
= CB> 
	 91.	 AP>
= CB> 
	
92.	 PA>
= BC> 
	 93.	 Explain why two equivalent vectors with the same initial 
point must have the same terminal point.
	 94.	 Give an example of a physical environment in which two 
equivalent vectors have a different effect in that environment.
Maintaining Skills
	 95.	 True or False. If cos u 7 0, then u is an acute angle. 
	 96.	 True or False. If cos u = 0, then u = p
2. 
	 97.	 Find cos-11-12, cos-1102, and cos-1112. 
	 98.	 Show that the lines 2x + 3y = 6 and 3x - 2y = 12 are 
perpendicular to each other.
In Exercises 99–102, let v = 81, −29 and w = 83, 29.
	 99.	 Compute 7v7. 
	100.	 Compute 7w7. 
	101.	 Compute 
112132 + 1-22122
7v7 7w7
. 
	102.	 Verify that 7v + w7 2 = 7v7 2 + 7w7 2 + 23112132 +
1-221224. 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 77 and 78 calculate the magnitude of the forces 
F1 and F2 assuming that the system is in equilibrium.
	 77.	
200 lb
F1
F2
60
50 
	 78.	
F1
F2
60 lb
65
40
	 79.	 Find the terminal point of v = 4i - 3j assuming that the 
initial point is 1-2, 12. 
	 80.	 Find the initial point of v = 8 -3, 59 assuming that the 
­terminal point is 14, 02. 
	 81.	 Let u = 8 -1, 29 and v = 83, 59. Find a vector 
x = 8x1, x29 that satisfies the equation 2u - x = 2x + 3v.
	 82.	 Let P13, 52 and Q17, -42 be two points in a coordinate 
plane. Use vectors to find the coordinates of the point on 
	
	 the line segment joining P and Q that is 3
4 of the way from 
	
	 P to Q. 
In Exercises 83 and 84, show that ABCD is a parallelogram, 
given the coordinates of the points A, B, C, and D. [Hint: 
Show that AB>
= tCD>
.]
	 83.	 A = 12, 32, B = 11, 42, C = 10, -22, and 
D = 11, -32 
	 84.	 A = 1-2, -12, B = 13, 02, C = 11, -22, and 
D = 1-4, -32 
In Exercise 85 and 86, show that the given points P, Q, and R 
are collinear. [Hint: Show that PQ>
= cPR>
 for some scalar c.]
	 85.	 P = 10, -32, Q = 12, 12, and R = 13, 32
	 86.	 P = 1-2, -62, Q = 12, 02, and R = 14, 32   

	
Section 7.5    ■    The Dot Product 685
How to Measure Work
If you move an object a distance of d units by applying a force F in the direction of 
motion, then physicists define the work W done on the object by the force F to be
 W = Fd
 Work = 1force21distance2.
If the force is measured in pounds and the distance is measured in feet, then the 
unit of work is foot-pounds. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to exert a force 
in the direction you would like. For example, if you are pulling a child’s wagon, 
you exert a force in a direction dictated by the position of the hand you use to pull 
the wagon. In this section, we give a precise definition of work done by a constant 
force, and in Example 10, we compute the work done in one such instance.
S E C T I O N 7.5
The Dot Product
We know that scalar multiplication and vector addition and subtraction produce vectors. 
A new operation, the dot product of two vectors, produces a scalar.
The Dot Product
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 The Law of Sines (Section 7.1, page 642)
2	 The Law of Cosines (Section 7.2,  
page 654)
Objectives
1	 Define the dot product of two vectors.
2	 Find the angle between two vectors.
3	 Define orthogonal vectors.
4	 Find the projection of a vector onto  
another vector.
5	 Decompose a vector into two orthogonal 
vectors.
6	 Use the definition of work.
1	
Define the dot product of two 
vectors.
For two vectors v = 8v1, v29 and w = 8w1, w29, the dot product of v and w, 
denoted v # w, is defined by
v # w = 8v1, v29 # 8w1, w29 = v1w1 + v2w2.
The Dot Product
Find the dot product v # w.
a.	 v = 82, -39 and w = 83, 49
b.	 v = -3i + 5j and w = 2i + 3j
Finding the Dot Product
EXAMPLE 1

686	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Solution
a.	  v # w = 82, -39 # 83, 49
	
 = 122132 + 1-32142 = -6    Definition of dot product
b.	  v # w = 1-3i + 5j2 # 12i + 3j2
	
 = 8 -3, 59 # 82, 39
       Rewrite as position vectors.
	
 = 1-32122 + 152132 = 9       Definition of dot product
Practice Problem 1  Find the dot product v # w.
a.	 v = 81, 29 and w = 8 -2, 59
b.	 v = 4i - 3j and w = -3i - 4 j
The Angle Between Two Vectors
We use the Law of Cosines to find another formula for the dot product. The new formula 
will be used to find the angle between any two vectors.
Let u be the angle between the two vectors v = 8v1, v29 and w = 8w1, w29. See 
Figure 7.36. Apply the Law of Cosines to the triangle OPQ in Figure 7.36.
3d1P, Q242 = 7v7 2 + 7w7 2 - 27v7  7w7  cos u        The Law of Cosines
1v1 - w122 + 1v2 - w222 
 
= 1v2
1 + v2
22 + 1w2
1 + w2
22 - 27v7  7w7  cos u    Use the distance formula and square 
of the magnitudes of v and w.
v2
1 - 2v1w1 + w2
1 + v2
2 - 2v2w2 + w2
2 
 
= v2
1 + v2
2 + w2
1 + w2
2 - 27v7  7w7  cos u         1A - B22 = A2 - 2AB + B2
-2v1w1 - 2v2w2 = -27v7  7w7  cos u              Subtract v2
1 + w2
1 + v2
2 + w2
2 
from both sides.
 v1w1 + v2w2 = 7v7  7w7  cos u                Divide both sides by -2.
 v # w = 7v7  7w7  cos u                 Definition of v # w
The last equation provides us with another form for the dot product v # w. Solving the last 
equation for cos u gives us a formula for finding the angle between two vectors.
2	
Find the angle between two 
vectors.
x
y
O
P(v1, v2)
Q(w1, w2)
v
w
θ
Figure 7.36  Angle between  
two vectors
T h e  D o t  P r o d u c t  a n d  t h e  A n g l e  
B e t w e e n  t w o  V e c t o r s
If u 10° … u … 180°2 is the angle between two nonzero vectors v and w, then
v # w = 7v7 7w7  cos u or cos u =
v # w
7v7 7w7 .
If v and w are two vectors of magnitudes 4 and 7, respectively, and the angle between them 
is 30°, find v # w. Round the answer to the nearest tenth.
Solution
 v # w = 7v7  7w7  cos u
    Formula for v # w
 = 142172 cos 30°     Substitute given values.
 = 2813
2
= 1413    Exact answer
 ≈24.2
    Use a calculator.
Finding the Dot Product
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 7.5    ■    The Dot Product 687
Practice Problem 2  Repeat Example 2 assuming that the angle between v and  
w is 60°.
Two vectors v = 8v1, v29 and w = 8w1, w29 are parallel if there is a nonzero scalar, c, 
so that v = cw. The angle u between parallel vectors is either 0° or 180°. So v and w are 
parallel if and only if
 (i)  v # w = { 7v7 7w7  or
(ii)  v1
w1
= v2
w2
.
Determine whether the vectors v = 2i - 3j and w = -4i + 6j are parallel.
Solution
Because w = -212i - 3j2 = -2v, the vectors v and w are parallel. Note that
cos u =
v # w
7v7 7w7 = -8 - 18
113152 =
-26
113121132 = -26
26
= -1,
so that u = 180° is the angle between v and w. The vectors v and w are parallel.
Alternate Solution	
 2
-4
≟-3
6     check v1
w1
= v2
w2
 or -1
2
≟-1
2    YES!
The vectors v and w are parallel.
Practice Problem 3  Determine whether v = -i - 2j and w = 2i + j are parallel.
Because the angle u between two nonzero vectors v and w satisfies cos u =
v # w
7v7 7w7  and 
0° … u … 180°, we have u = cos-1 a
v # w
7 v 7 7 w 7 b.
Deciding Whether Two Vectors Are Parallel
EXAMPLE 3
Find the angle u (in degrees) between the vectors v = 2i + 3j and w = -3i + 4j. Round 
the answer to the nearest tenth of a degree.
Solution
 cos u =
v # w
7v7  7w7
    Formula for the cosine of the angle  
between v and w
 cos u = 12i + 3j2 # 1-3i + 4j2
72i + 3j7  7 -3i + 4j7
    Substitute expressions for v and w.
 cos u =
1221-32 + 132142
222 + 3221-322 + 42    Use formulas for the dot product and  
the magnitude.
 cos u =
6
5113
    Simplify.
 u = cos-1 a
6
5113b
    0° … u … 180°
 u ≈70.6°
    Use a calculator.
Finding the Angle Between Two Vectors
EXAMPLE 4

688	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Practice Problem 4  Find the angle (in degrees) between the vectors v = 2i - 3j  
and w = 3i + 5j. Round the answer to the nearest tenth of a degree.
We can verify the following properties of the dot product by writing the vectors as posi-
tion vectors and using the definitions of vector addition, scalar multiplication, and the dot 
product.
If u, v, and w are vectors and c is a scalar, then
1.  u # v = v # u.
2.  u # 1v + w2 = u # v + u # w.
3.  0 # v = 0.
4.  v # v = 7v7 2.
5.  1cu2 # v = c1u # v2 = u # 1cv2.
Properties of the Dot Product
For the vectors i = 81, 09 and j = 80, 19, we have 
i # i = 7i7 2 = 1, 
j # j = 7j7 2 = 1,  and  i # j = j # i = 0.
Let v and w be two vectors in the plane of magnitudes 12 and 7, respectively. The angle 
between v and w is 65°. Find the magnitude of v + 2w to the nearest tenth.
Solution
 7v + 2w7 2 = 1v + 2w2 # 1v + 2w2
    Property 4
 = 1v + 2w2 # v + 1v + 2w2 # 12w2
    Property 2
 = v # v + 21w # v2 + 21v # w2 + 41w # w2    Properties 1 and 5
 = 7v7 2 + 41v # w2 + 47w7 2
    Properties 1 and 4
 = 7v7 2 + 47v7 7w7  cos u + 47w7 2
    v # w = 7v7 7w7  cos u
 = 11222 + 41122172cos 65° + 41722
    Substitute values.
 7v + 2w7 2 ≈481.9997
    Use a calculator.
 7v + 2w7 ≈21.95 ≈22.0
    Take the positive square root.
Practice Problem 5  Repeat Example 5 assuming that 7v7 = 20 and 7w7 = 12  
and the angle between v and w is 54°.
The procedure in Example 5 can be used to prove the following identities.
Finding the Magnitude of the Sum of Two Vectors
EXAMPLE 5
For any two vectors v and w,
(i)  7v + w7 2 = 7v7 2 + 7w7 2 + 21v # w2.
(ii)  7v - w7 2 = 7v7 2 + 7w7 2 - 21v # w2.
(iii)  1v + w2 # 1v - w2 = 7v7 2 - 7w7 2.

	
Section 7.5    ■    The Dot Product 689
Orthogonal Vectors
We know that if v and w are two nonzero vectors and u10° … u … 180°2 is the measure of 
the angle between them, then
v # w = 7v7 7w7  cos u    Form of the dot product
From this equation, it follows that
(i)  v # w 7 0 if and only if u is zero or an acute angle,
(ii)  v # w 6 0 if and only if u is a straight or an obtuse angle, and
(iii)  v # w = 0 if and only if cos u = 0.
Because 0° … u … 180°, we conclude that
v # w = 0 if and only if u = 90°.
3	
Define orthogonal vectors.
Two vectors v and w are orthogonal (perpendicular) if and only if v # w = 0.
Orthogonal Vectors
Because 0 # w = 0 for any vector w, it follows from the definition that the zero vector is 
orthogonal to every vector.
Determine whether v = 2i - 3j and w = 3i + 2j are orthogonal.
Solution
Because v # w = 12i - 3j2 # 13i + 2j2 = 82, -39 # 83, 29 = 6 - 6 = 0, v and w are 
orthogonal.
Practice Problem 6  Determine whether v = 4i + 8j and w = 2i - j are  
orthogonal.
Deciding Whether Vectors Are Orthogonal
EXAMPLE 6
Find the scalar c so that the vectors v = 3i + 2j and w = 4i + cj are orthogonal.
Solution
The vectors v = 3i + 2j = 83, 29 and w = 4i + cj = 84, c9 are orthogonal if and 
only if
 v # w = 0     Definition of orthogonality
 83, 29 # 84, c9 = 0
 132142 + 1221c2 = 0     Definition of dot product
 12 + 2c = 0     Simplify.
 c = -6    Solve for c.
Practice Problem 7  Find the scalar k so that the vectors v = 8k, -29  
and w = 84, 69 are orthogonal.
Orthogonal Vectors
EXAMPLE 7

690	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Projection of a Vector
A geometric interpretation of the dot product is obtained by considering the projection of 
a vector onto another vector.
Let OP>
 and OQ>
 be representations of the nonzero vectors v and w, respectively, The 
projections of OP>
 in the direction of OQ>
 is the directed line segment OR>
, where R is the 
foot of the perpendicular from P to the line containing OQ>
. See Figure 7.37. Then the 
vector represented by OR>
 is called the vector projection of v onto w and is denoted by 
projwv.
4	
Find the projection of a vector 
onto another vector.
(b)
v
w
O
Q
R
P

v
w
R
P
O
Q
(c)

(a)
v
w
O
R
Q
P

Figure 7.37  Vector projection of v onto w
In Figure 7.38, if a force v is used to pull a box, then the effective force that moves the box 
in the direction of w is the vector projection of v onto w.
Let u10° … u … 180°2 be the measure of the angle between nonzero vectors v and w. 
The number 7v7  cos u is called the scalar projection of v onto w. We can express this 
number in terms of the dot product.
 Scalar projection of v onto w = 7v7  cos u
 = 7 v 7 7 w 7 cos u
7w7
    Multiply numerator and denominator  
by 7w7.
 = v # w
7w7
    v # w = 7v7 7w7  cos u
If u is acute, then projwv has magnitude 7v7  cos u and direction w
7w7 .
If u is obtuse, then cos u 6 0 and projwv has magnitude - 7v7  cos u and direction - w
7w7 . 
See Figure 7.39.
Force  v
w
projwv

Figure 7.38 
v
w
v
w

projwv  v cos
projwv  v cos
projwv 

v cos


2
if  0    
v cos



2
if        
Figure 7.39  Magnitude and direction of projwv

	
Section 7.5    ■    The Dot Product 691
Because 1- 7v7  cos u2 a - w
7w7 b = 17v7  cos u2 a w
7w7 b, in both cases (u acute or obtuse), 
we have
 projwv = 17v7  cos u2 a w
7w7 b    See side note.
 = av # w
7w7 b w
7w7
   
7v7  cos u = v # w
7w7
 = v # w
7w7 2 w.
Any nonzero vector can be  
written as
r = 7r7u,
where u =
r
7r7  is the unit vector 
in the direction of R.
Side 
Note
V e c t o r  a n d  S c a l a r  P r o j e c t i o n s  o f  v  O n t o  w
Let v and w be two nonzero vectors and let u10° … u … 180°2 be the angle between 
them.
The vector projection of v onto w is
projwv = a v # w
7w7 2 bw.
The scalar projection of v onto w is
7v7cos u = v # w
7 w 7 .
Given v = 8 -2, 39 and w = 83, -49, find the vector and scalar projections of v onto w.
Solution
 7v7 = 21-222 + 32 = 113 and 7w7 = 232 + 1-422 = 125 = 5
 v # w = w # v = 8 -2, 39 # 83, -49
 = 1-22132 + 31-42 = -6 - 12 = -18
a.	  projwv = v # w
7w7 2 w
    Vector projection of v onto w
	
 = -18
25 83, -49    Substitute values.
	
 = h -54
25, 72
25 i     Scalar multiplication
b.	 Scalar projection of v onto  w = v # w
7w7
	
	
 = -18
5     v # w = -18, 7w7 = 5
Practice Problem 8  Given v = 81, -29 and w = 82, 59, find the vector and scalar 
projections of v onto w.
Finding the Vector Projection of v onto w
EXAMPLE 8

692	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Decomposition of a Vector
Given two vectors v and w, adding these vectors produces the resultant vector v + w. In 
many applications, it is necessary to decompose a vector into two orthogonal vectors. We 
use the vector projwv to write v as the sum of two orthogonal vectors.
5	
Decompose a vector into two 
orthogonal vectors.
Let v and w be two nonzero vectors. The vector v can be written in the form
v = v1 + v2,
where v1 is parallel to w and v2 is orthogonal to w. We let
v1 = projwv = a v # w
7w7 2 bw and v2 = v - v1.
The expression v = v1 + v2 is called the decomposition of v with respect to w.
The vectors v1 and v2 are called components of v.
Decomposition of a Vector
Because v1 is a scalar multiple of w, v1 is parallel to w. In Exercise 84, we ask you to prove 
that v2 is orthogonal to w.
Express v = v1 + v2, where v1 is parallel to w and v2  
is orthogonal to w.
Step 1  Compute.
v # w and 7w7 2
Step 2  Compute.
v1 = projwv = a v # w
7w7 2 bw
Step 3  Compute.
v2 = v - v1
Check that v2 is orthogonal to w by showing 
v2 # w = 0.
Step 4 Write the decomposition.
v = v1 + v2
Decomposing a Vector into Components
Objective
EXAMPLE 9
Example
Find the decomposition v = v1 + v2 of v = 8 -2, 109 
with respect to w = 83, -29.
1.	  v # w = 8 -2, 109 # 83, -29
	
 = 1-22132 + 11021-22 = -26
	
 7w7 2 = 1322 + 1-222 = 9 + 4 = 13
2.	 v1 = a v # w
7w7 2 bw = -26
13  83, -29    From Step 1
	
 = -283, -29 = 8 -6, 49
    Simplify.
3.	 v2 = v - v1 = 8 -2, 109 - 8 -6, 49
	
 = 8 -2 - 1-62, 10 - 49
	
 = 84, 69
Check
v2 # w = 84, 69 # 83, -29 = 142132 + 1621-22 = 0
4.	 v = 8 -2, 109 =   v1 +   v2
	
 = 8 -6, 49 + 84, 69
(+)+*	
(+)+*
Orthogonal 
to w
Parallel 
to w
Practice Problem 9  Repeat Example 9 with v = 85, 19 and w = 84, 49.
procedure 
in action

	
Section 7.5    ■    The Dot Product 693
Work
7	
Use the definition of work.
The work W done by a constant force F in moving an object from a point P to a 
point Q is defined by
W = F # PQ>
= 7F7 7PQ>7  cos u,
where u is the angle between F and PQ>
.
Work
A child pulls a wagon along level ground, with a force of 40 pounds along the handle on 
the wagon that makes an angle of 42° with the horizontal. How much work has she done 
by pulling the wagon 150 feet?
Solution
The work done is as follows:
 W = F # PQ>
    Definition of work
 = 7F7 7PQ>7  cos u
    u # v = 7u7 7v7  cos u
 = 140211502 cos 42°
    Substitute given values.
 ≈4458.87 foot@pounds    Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 10  In Example 10, compute the work done if the handle on the 
wagon makes an angle of 60° with the horizontal.
Computing Work
EXAMPLE 10
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 8  b. 0    2. 14    3. Not parallel
4. 115.3°    5. ≈39    6. v and w are orthogonal.
7. k = 3    8. a. a- 16
29, - 40
29b  b. - 8129
29
9. 83, 39 + 82, -29     
10. 3000 foot-pounds
Exercises
section 7.5 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The dot product of v = 8a1, a29 and w = 8b1, b29 is 
defined as v # w =
.
	 2.	 If u is the angle between the vectors v and w, then  
v # w =
.
	 3.	 If v and w are orthogonal, then v # w =
.
	 4.	 If v and w are nonzero vectors with v # w = 0, then v and w 
are 
.
	 5.	 True or False. If v # w 6 0, then the angle between v and w 
is an obtuse angle. 
	 6.	 True or False. To find a vector perpendicular to a given 
vector, switch components and change the sign of one of 
them. 
In Exercises 7–14, find u ~ v.
	 7.	 u = 81, -29, v = 83, 59
	 8.	 u = 81, 39, v = 8 -3,19      
	 9.	 u = 82, -69, v = 83, 19
	10.  u = 8 -1, -29, v = 8 -3, -49
	11.	 u = i - 3j, v = 8i - 2j
	12.	 u = 6i - j, v = 2i + 7j
	13.	 u = 4i - 2j, v = 3j 
	14.	 u = -2i, v = 5j 
In Exercises 15–20, find u ~ v, where U is the angle between 
the vectors u and v. Round answers to the nearest tenth.
	15.	 7u7 = 2, 7v7 = 5, u = p
6 
	16.	 7u7 = 3, 7v7 = 4, u = p
3 
	17.	 7u7 = 5, 7v7 = 4, u = 65° 

694	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	18.	 7u7 = 5, 7v7 = 3, u = 78° 
	19.	 7u7 = 3, 7v7 = 7, u = 120° 
	20.	 7u7 = 6, 7v7 = 4, u = 150° 
In Exercises 21–30, find the angle between the vectors v and w.
	21.	 7v7 = 2, 7w7 = 13, and v # w = 13 
	22.	 7v7 = 1, 7w7 = 4 and v # w = - 18 
	23.	 v = -2i - 3j, w = i + j 
	24.	 v = i - j, w = 3i - 4j
	25.	 v = 2i + 5j, w = -5i + 2j 
	26.	 v = 3i - 7j, w = 7i + 3j 
	27.	 v = i + j, w = 3i + 3j 
	28.	 v = -2i + 3j, w = -4i + 6j 
	29.	 v = 2i - 3j, w = -4i + 6j 
	30.	 v = -3i + 4j, w = 6i - 8j 
In Exercises 31–38, let v and w be two vectors in the plane of 
magnitudes 4 and 5, respectively. The angle between v and w is 
60°. Find each expression. 
	31.	 7v + w7 
	32.	 7v - w7 
	33.	 72v + w7 
	34.	 72v - w7 
	35.	 Angle between v + w and w 
	36.	 Angle between v - w and v        
	37.	 Angle between 2v + w and v 
	38.	 Angle between 2v - w and w        
In Exercises 39–44, determine whether the vectors v and w 
are orthogonal.
	39.	 v = 2i + 3j, w = -3i + 2j 
	40.	 v = -4i - 5j, w = 5i - 4j 
	41.	 v = 82, 79, w = 8 -7, -29 
	42.	 v = 8 -3, 49, w = 84, -39 
	43.	 v = 812, 69, w = 82, -49 
	44.	 v = 8 -9, 69, w = 84, 69 
In Exercises 45–50, determine whether the vectors v and w 
are parallel.
	45.	 v = 2i + 3j, w = 2
3 i + j 
	46.	 v = 5i - 2j, w = -10i + 4j 
	47.	 v = 83, 59, w = 8 -6, 109 
48.	 v = 8 -4, -29, w = h -1, 1
2 i 
	49.	 v = 86, 39, w = 82, 19 
	50.	 v = 82, 59, w = 8 -4, -109 
In Exercises 51–54, determine the scalar c so that the vectors 
v and w are (a) orthogonal and (b) parallel.
	51.	 v = 82, 39, w = 83, c9 
	52.	 v = 81, -29, w = 8c, 49 
	53.	 v = 8 -4, 39, w = 8c, -69 
	54.	 v = 8 -1, -39, w = 8 -2, c9  
In Exercises 55–62, find projwv.
	55.	 v = 83, 59, w = 84, 19 
	56.	 v = 83, 59, w = 8 -4, 29    
	57.	 v = 80, 29, w = 83, 49 
	58.	 v = 82, 09, w = 84, -39    
	59.	 v = 5i - 3j, w = i 
	60.	 v = 2i + 7j, w = j 
	61.	 v = 8a, b9, w = i + j 
	62.	 v = 8a, b9, w = i - j        
In Exercises 63–70, decompose v with respect to w.
	63.	 v = 82, 39, w = i 
	64.	 v = 84, -39, w = j 
	65.	 v = i, w = 81, 19 
	66.	 v = j, w = 84, -39       
	67.	 v = 84, 29, w = 8 -2, 49 
	68.	 v = 85, 29, w = 83, 59 
	69.	 v = 84, -19, w = 83, 49
	70.	 v = 8 -3, 59, w = 83, -49
Applying the Concepts
	71.	 Finding resultant force. Two forces of 6 and 8 pounds act 
at an angle of 30° to each other. Find the resultant force and 
the angle of the resultant force to each of the two  
forces. 
	72.	 Finding resultant force. Repeat Exercise 71 assuming that 
the two forces act at an angle of 60° to each other.
	73.	 Work. A force F = 64i - 20j (in pounds) is applied to an 
object. The resulting movement of the object is represented 
by the vector d = 10i + 4j (in feet). Find the work done by 
the force. 
	74.	 Work. A car is pushed 150 feet on a level street by a force 
of 60 pounds at an angle of 18° with the horizontal. Find the 
work done. 
150 ft
F
18
	75.	 Inclined plane. A car is being towed up an inclined plane 
making an angle of 18° with the horizontal as shown in the 
figure. Find the force F needed to make the component of F 
parallel to the ground equal to 5250 pounds. 
F
18
	76.	 Inclined plane. In Exercise 75, find the work done by 
the force F to tow the car up 10 feet along the inclined 
plane.      

	
Section 7.5    ■    The Dot Product 695
	77.	 Work. A vector F represents a force that has a magnitude 
	
	 of 10 pounds, and 2p
3  is the angle for its direction. Find the 
	
	 work done by the force in moving an object from the origin to 
the point 1-6, 32. Distance is measured in feet. 
	78.	 Work. Two forces F1 = 3i - 2j and F2 = -4i + 3j act on 
an object and move it along a straight line from the point 18,  42 
to the point 13, 52. Find the work done by the two forces acting 
together. The magnitudes of F1 and F2 are measured in pounds, 
and distance is measured in feet. 
Beyond the Basics
	79.	 Orthogonality on a circle. In the figure, AB is the diam-
eter of a circle with center O10, 02 and radius a. Show that 
CA>
 and CB>
 are perpendicular. [Hint: x2 + y2 = a2.]
O
A(a, 0)
B(a, 0)
C(x, y)
	80.	 Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. If v and w are two vectors, 
then v # w  … 7v7 7w7. When is v # w  = 7v7 7w7?
[Hint: v # w = 7v7 7w7  cos u.] 
	81.	 Verify that for any vectors u, v, and w, 
u # 1v + w2 = u # v + u # w.
	82.	 Prove that 1v + w2 # 1v + w2 = 7v7 2 + 21v # w2 + 7w7 2.
	83.	 Triangle inequality. Use Exercises 80 and 82 to prove that 
7v + w7 … 7v7 + 7w7.
	84.	 In the decomposition v = v1 + v2 (see page 692) with 
respect to w, show that v2 = v - projwv is orthogonal to w.
	85.	 Show that the vectors v = 82, -59 and w = 85, 29 are  
perpendicular to each other.
	86.	 Let v = 3i + 7j. Find a vector perpendicular to v. 
	87.	 Orthogonal unit vectors. Find the unit vectors orthogonal 
to v = 3i - 4j.
	88.	 Orthogonal unit vectors. Let u1 and u2 be orthogonal unit 
vectors and v = xu1 + yu2. Find
a.	 v # u1 and 
b.	 v # u2. 
	89.	 Right triangle. Use the dot product to show that ABC is 
a right triangle and identify the right angle assuming that 
A = 1-2, 12, B = 13, 12, and C = 1-1, -12.
	 90.	 Parallelogram law. Show that for any two vectors u and v,
7u + v7 2 + 7u - v7 2 = 27u7 2 + 27v7 2.
	
	 [Hint: 7a7 2 = a # a.]
	 91.	 Polarization identity. Show that for any two vectors u and v,
7u + v7 2 - 7u - v7 2 = 41u # v2.
	 92.	 Show that u and v are orthogonal if and only if 
7u + v7 = 7u - v7.
	 93.	 Show that the distance d from a point P1x0, y02 to the line 
l: ax + by + c = 0 is
d =
ax0 + by0 + c
2a2 + b2
.
	
	 [Hint: i. Choose two points Q1x1, y12 and R1x2, y22 on l.
	
	 ii. Show that n = 8a, b9 is perpendicular to l by showing 
that n # QR>
= 0.
	
	 iii. Show that 7projnQP>7 = d.]
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	 94.	 True or False. If u # v = u # w and u ≠0, then v = w. 
Give reasons for your answer.
	 95.	 Explain why v # w
7v7 7w7  is a number between -1 and 1 for 
	
	 any two nonzero vectors v and w.
	 96.	 Is the angle between -v and -w the same as the angle 
between v and w for any two nonzero vectors v and w? 
Explain your answer.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 97–104, describe the graph of each equation. 
Find the x- and y-intercepts of each graph.
	 97.	 x = -1
	 98.	 y = 2
	 99.	 y = x2 - x - 6
	100.	 x = y2 + 4y + 3
	101.	 x2 + 1y - 122 = 4
	102.	 1x + 122 + y2 = 9
	103.	 x2 + y2 - 2x + 4y + 2 = 0
	104.	 x2 + y2 + 6x - 4y - 12 = 0
In Exercises 105–108, test each equation for symmetry about 
the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
	105.	 x3 + y2 = 5
	106.	 x3 + y3 - 3xy2 = 0
	107.	 2x2 - 3y3 = 7
	108.	 2x2 + 3y2 = 6 

696	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
7.6
Polar Coordinates
In a rectangular coordinate system, a point in the plane is described in terms of the horizon-
tal and vertical directed distances from the origin. In a polar coordinate system, we draw a 
ray (usually, horizontal directed to the right), called the polar axis, in the plane; its endpoint 
is called the pole. A point P in the plane is described by an ordered pair of numbers 1r, u2, 
the polar coordinates of P.
Figure 7.40 shows the point P1r, u2 in the polar coordinate system, where r is the 
­“directed distance” from the pole O to the point P and u is a directed angle from the polar 
axis to the line segment OP (see Figure 7.43). The angle u may be measured in degrees or 
radians. As usual, positive angles are measured counterclockwise from the polar axis and 
negative angles are measured clockwise from the polar axis.
To locate a point with polar coordinates 15, 40°2, we draw an angle u = 40° 
­counterclockwise from the polar axis. We then measure 5 units along the terminal side of u.  
In ­Figure 7.41, we have plotted the points with polar coordinates 15, 40°2, 13, 220°2, 
14, -30°2, and 12, 110°2.
1	
Plot points using polar 
coordinates.
Bionics
On large construction sites and maintenance projects, it is common to see mechani-
cal systems that lift, dig, and scoop just like biological systems having arms, legs, and 
hands. The technique of solving mechanical problems with our knowledge of biological 
systems is called bionics. Bionics is used to make robotic devices for the remote-control 
handling of radioactive materials and the machines that are sent to the moon or to 
Mars to scoop soil samples, bring them into the space vehicle, perform analysis on them, 
and radio the results back to Earth. In Example 4, we use polar coordinates to find the 
reach of a robotic arm.
Up to now, we have used a rectangular coordinate system to identify points in the 
plane. In this section, we introduce another coordinate system, called a polar coordinate 
system, that allows us to describe many curves using rather simple equations. The polar 
coordinate system is believed to have been introduced by Jakob Bernoulli (1654–1705).
Polar Coordinates
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Coordinate plane (Section 2.1, page 156)
2	 Degree and radian measure of angles 
(Section 5.1, pages 472 and 475)
3	 Trigonometric functions of angles  
(Section 5.3, page 500)
Objectives
1	 Plot points using polar coordinates.
2	 Convert points between polar and 
­rectangular forms.
3	 Convert equations between rectangular 
and polar forms.
4	 Graph polar equations.
S e c t i o n 
polar axis
pole
O
θ
P(r,    )
θ
r
Figure 7.40  Polar coordinates 
1r, u2 of a point

	
Section 7.6    ■    Polar Coordinates 697
Unlike rectangular coordinates, the polar coordinates of a point are not unique. For ex-
ample, the polar coordinates 13, 60°2, 13, 420°2, and 13, -300°2 represent the same point. 
See Figure 7.42. In general, if a point P has polar coordinates 1r, u2, then for any integer n,
1r, u + n # 360°2 or 1r, u + 2np2
d
         
•
	
u in degrees	
u in radians
are also polar coordinates of P.
When plotting a point in polar 
coordinates, measure the angle u 
first. Then (i) for r 7 0, measure  
a distance of r units from the  
pole along the terminal ray of u 
and (ii) for r 6 0, plot the  
point 1r , u + p2.
Side  
Note
(5, 40°)
(3, 220°)
40°
220°
(a)
(2, 110°)
(4, 30°)
30°
110°
(b)
Figure 7.41  Plotting points using polar coordinates
When equations are graphed in polar coordinates, it is convenient to allow r to be 
negative. That’s why we defined r as a directed distance. If r is negative, then instead of the 
point being on the terminal side of the angle, it is  r  units on the extension of the terminal 
side, which is the ray from the pole that extends in the direction opposite the terminal side 
of u. In other words, to graph a point 1r, u2 for r 6 0, measure  r  units along the terminal 
side of u + p (or u + 180° if u is in degrees). For example, the point P1-4, -30°2 shown 
in Figure 7.43 is the same point as 1 -4, -30° + 180°2 = 14, 150°2. Some other polar 
coordinates for the same point P are 1-4, 330°2, 14, -210°2, and 14, 510°2.
P(4, 30°) or P(4, 150°)
O
30°
(4, 30°)
150°  30°  180°
Figure 7.43  Negative r
(3, 60°)
60°
(a)
(3, 420°)
420°
(b)
(3, −300°)
−300°
O
(c)
O
O
Figure 7.42  Polar coordinates of a point are not unique

698	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Converting Between Polar and Rectangular Forms
Frequently, we need to use polar and rectangular coordinates in the same problem. To do 
this, we let the positive x-axis of the rectangular coordinate system serve as the polar axis and 
the origin serve as the pole. Each point P then has polar coordinates 1r, u2 and rectangular 
coordinates 1x, y2, as shown in Figure 7.45.
From Figure 7.45, we see the following relationships: x2 + y2 = r2, sin u = y
r, cos u = x
r, 
and tan u = y
x. These relationships hold whether r 7 0 or r 6 0, and they are used to convert
a point’s coordinates between rectangular and polar forms.
2	
Convert points between polar 
and rectangular forms.
P(3, 225°)
P(3, 45°)
(b)
(a)
45°
225°
P(3, 315°)
(c)
315°
P(3, 135°)
(d)
−135°
Figure 7.44  Plotting points
a.	 Plot the point P with polar coordinates 13, 225°2.
Find another pair of polar coordinates of P with the following properties.
b.	 r 6 0 and 0° 6 u 6 360°
c.	 r 6 0 and -360° 6 u 6 0°
d.	 r 7 0 and -360° 6 u 6 0°
Solution
a.	 The point P13, 225°2 is plotted by first drawing u = 225° counterclockwise from the 
polar axis. Because r = 3 7 0, the point P is on the terminal side of the angle, 3 units 
from the pole. See Figure 7.44(a).
Finding Different Polar Coordinates
EXAMPLE 1
The answers to parts, b, c, and d are, respectively, 1-3, 45°2, 1-3, -315°2, and 13, -135°2.  
See Figure 7.44(b)–(d).
Practice Problem 1 
a.	 Plot the point P with polar coordinates 12, -150°2.
Find another pair of polar coordinates of P with the following properties.
b.	 r 6 0 and 0° 6 u 6 360°
c.	 r 7 0 and 0° 6 u 6 360°
d.	 r 6 0 and -360° 6 u 6 0°
x
y
P =
r
y
x
O
θ
θ
(x, y)
(r,    )
{
Figure 7.45  P = 1x, y2 or 
P = 1r, u2
C o n v e r t i n g  F r o m  P o l a r  t o  R e c ta n g u l a r 
C o o r d i n at e s
To convert the polar coordinates 1r, u2 of a point to its rectangular coordinates 1x, y2, 
use the equations
x = r cos u  and  y = r sin u.

	
Section 7.6    ■    Polar Coordinates 699
When converting from rectangular coordinates 1x, y2 of a point to its polar coordi-
nates 1r, u2, remember that infinitely many representations are possible. We will find 
the polar coordinates 1r, u2 of the point 1x, y2 that have r 7 0 and 0° … u 6 360° 1or 
0 … u 6 2p2.
A graphing calculator can be used 
to check conversions from polar to 
rectangular coordinates. Choose the 
appropriate options from the ANGLE 
menu. The x- and y-coordinates must 
be calculated separately. The screen 
shown here is from a calculator set 
in degree mode.
Technology
Connection
Convert the polar coordinates of each point to its rectangular coordinates.
a.	 12, -30°2	
b.	 a -4, p
3 b
Solution
a.	  x = r cos u
   y = r sin u
    Conversion equations
	
 x = 2 cos 1-30°2
   y = 2 sin 1-30°2
    Replace r with 2 and u with -30°.
	
 x = 2 cos 30°
   y = -2 sin 30°
    cos 1-u2 = cos u,
sin 1-u2 = -sin u
	
 x = 2 a 13
2 b = 13   y = -2 a1
2b = -1    cos 30° = 13
2 , sin 30° = 1
2
The rectangular coordinates of 12, -30°2 are 113, -12.
b.	  x = r cos u
   y = r sin u
    Conversion equations
	
 x = -4 cos p
3
   y = -4 sin p
3
    Replace r with -4 and u 
with p
3.
	
 x = -4 a1
2b = -2   y = -4 a 13
2 b = -213    cos p
3 = 1
2, sin p
3 = 13
2
The rectangular coordinates of a -4, p
3 b are 1-2, -2132.
Practice Problem 2  Convert the polar coordinates of each point to its rectangular 
­coordinates.
a.	 1-3, 60°2	
b.	 a2, -p
4 b
Converting from Polar to Rectangular Coordinates
EXAMPLE 2
C o n v e r t i n g  F r o m  R e c ta n g u l a r  t o  P o l a r 
C o o r d i n at e s
To convert the rectangular coordinates 1x, y2 of a point to its polar coordinates 1r, u2,
1.	 Find the quadrant in which the given point 1x, y2 lies.
2.	 Use r = 2x2 + y2 to find r.
3.	 Find u by using tan u = y
x and choose u so that it lies in the same quadrant as the 
	
point 1x, y2.

700	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
A graphing calculator can also be 
used to check conversions from 
rectangular to polar coordinates. 
Choose the appropriate options 
on the ANGLE menu. The r and u 
coordinates must be calculated 
­separately. The screen shown here is 
from a calculator set in radian mode
Technology
Connection
For the robotic arm of Figure 7.46, find the polar coordinates of the hand relative to the 
shoulder. Round all answers to the nearest tenth.
Solution
shoulder
elbow
12 in.
16 in.
hand
O
E
H
Figure 7.46  Robotic arm
We need to find the polar coordinates 1r, u2 of the hand H, with the shoulder O as the pole. 
Because segment OE measures 16 inches and makes an angle of 30° with the horizontal, 
we can write the vector OE>
 in terms of its components:
OE>
= 816 cos 30°, 16 sin 30°9
Similarly,
EH>
= 812 cos 45°, 12 sin 45°9.
Positioning a Robotic Hand
EXAMPLE 4
Find polar coordinates 1r, u2 of the point P with r 7 0 and 0 … u 6 2p, whose rectan-
gular coordinates are 1x, y2 = 1-2, 2132.
Solution
1.	 The point P1-2, 2132 lies in quadrant II with x = -2 and y = 213.
2.	  r = 2x2 + y2
    Formula for computing r
	
 = 21-222 + 1213 22     Substitute values of x and y
	
 = 14 + 12 = 116 = 4    Simplify
3.	  tan u = y
x
        Definition of tan u
	
 tan u = 213
-2  = - 13        Substitute values and simplify.
Because tan u is negative in quadrants II and IV, the solutions of equation tan u = - 13 are:
u = p - p
3 = 2p
3  and u = 2p - p
3 = 5p
3 . Because P = 1-2, 2132 lies in quadrant II,
we choose u = 2p
3 . So the required polar coordinates are a4, 2p
3 b.
Practice Problem 3  Find the polar coordinates of the point P with r 7 0 and 
0 … u 6 2p whose rectangular coordinates are 1x, y2 = 1-1, -12.
Converting from Rectangular to Polar Coordinates
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 7.6    ■    Polar Coordinates 701
Converting Equations Between Rectangular  
and Polar Forms
An equation that has the rectangular coordinates x and y as variables is called a rectangular 
(or Cartesian) equation. Similarly, an equation where the polar coordinates r and u are the 
variables is called a polar equation. Some examples of polar equations are
r = sin u, r = 1 + cos u, and r = u.
To convert a rectangular equation to a polar equation, we simply replace x with r cos u and 
y with r sin u and then simplify where possible.
3	
Convert equations between 
rectangular and polar forms.
We know that
 OH>
= OE>
+ EH>
    Resultant vector
 = 816 cos 30°, 16 sin 30°9 + 812 cos 45°, 12 sin 45°9
 = 816 cos 30° + 12 cos 45°, 16 sin 30° + 12 sin 45°9     Vector addition
So the rectangular coordinates 1x, y2 of H are
x = 16 cos 30° + 12 cos 45°, y = 16 sin 30° + 12 sin 45°.
We now convert the coordinates 1x, y2 of H to polar coordinates 1r, u2.
 r = 2x2 + y2
    Formula for r
 = 2116 cos 30° + 12 cos 45°22 + 116 sin 30° + 12 sin 45°22     Substitute values 
for x and y.
 ≈27.8 inches
    Use a calculator.
 u = u′ = tan-1 ay
xb
    Definition of 
inverse tangent
 = tan-1 a 16 sin 30° + 12 sin 45°
16 cos 30° + 12 cos 45° b ≈36.4°
    Substitute values 
and use a calculator.
The polar coordinates of H relative to the pole O are 1r, u2 = 127.8, 36.4°2.
Practice Problem 4  Repeat Example 4 with OE = 15 inches and EH = 10 inches.
Convert the equation x2 + y2 - 3x + 4 = 0 to polar form.
Solution
 x2 + y2 - 3x + 4 = 0    Given equation
 1r cos u22 + 1r sin u22 - 31r cos u2 + 4 = 0    x = r cos u, y = r sin u
 r2 cos2 u + r2 sin2 u - 3r cos u + 4 = 0   
1ab22 = a2b2
 r21cos2 u + sin2 u2 - 3r cos u + 4 = 0    Factor out r2 from the first two terms.
 r2 - 3r cos u + 4 = 0    sin2 u + cos2 u = 1
The equation r2 - 3r cos u + 4 = 0 is a polar form of the given rectangular equation.
Practice Problem 5  Convert the equation x2 + y2 - 2y + 3 = 0 to polar form.
Converting an Equation from Rectangular to Polar Form
EXAMPLE 5

702	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
1
2
3
O
x
y
r  2 cos θ
Figure 7.50  1x - 122 + y2 = 1 
or r = 2 cos u
3
3
r  3
x
y
O
Figure 7.47  x2 + y2 = 9 or r = 3
45°
45°
O
x
y
θ 
Figure 7.48  y = x or u = 45°
1
2
3
O
x
y
r  csc θ
Figure 7.49  y = 1 or r = csc u
Convert each polar equation to a rectangular equation and identify its graph.
a.  r = 3        b.  u = 45°        c.  r = csc u        d.  r = 2 cos u
Solution
a.	
 r = 3    Given polar equation
	
 r2 = 9    Square both sides.
	
 x2 + y2 = 9    Replace r2 with x2 + y2.
The graph of r = 3 1or x2 + y2 = 322 is a circle with center at the pole and 
radius = 3 units. See Figure 7.47.
b.	
 u = 45°
    Given polar equation
	
 tan u = tan 45°    If a = b, then tan a = tan b.
	
 y
x = 1
    tan u = y
x and tan 45° = 1
	
 y = x
    Multiply both sides by x.
The graph of u = 45° 1or y = x2 is a line through the origin, making an angle of 45° 
with the positive x-axis. See Figure 7.48.
c.	
 r = csc u    Given polar equation
	
 r =
1
sin u    Reciprocal identity
	
 r sin u = 1
    Multiply both sides by sin u.
	
 y = 1
    Replace r sin u with y.
	
The graph of r = csc u 1or y = 12 is a horizontal line. See Figure 7.49.
d.	
 r = 2 cos u     Given polar equation
	
 r2 = 2r cos u    Multiply both sides by r.
	
 x2 + y2 = 2x
    Replace r2 with x2 + y2 and r cos u with x.
	
 x2 - 2x + y2 = 0
    Subtract 2x from both sides and simplify.
	
 1x2 - 2x + 12 + y2 = 1
    Add 1 to both sides to complete the square.
	
 1x - 122 + y2 = 1
    Factor perfect square trinomial.
The graph of r = 2 cos u 1or 1x - 122 + y2 = 12 is a circle with center at 11, 02 
and radius 1 unit. See Figure 7.50.
Practice Problem 6  Convert each polar equation to a rectangular equation and identify 
its graph.
a.  r = -5        b.  u = -p
3         c.  r =  sec u        d.  r = 2 sin u
Converting an Equation from Polar to Rectangular Form
EXAMPLE 6
Converting an equation from polar to rectangular form will frequently require some 
ingenuity to use the substitutions:
r2 = x2 + y2, r cos u = x, r sin u = y, and tan u = y
x.

	
Section 7.6    ■    Polar Coordinates 703
As with Cartesian equations, it is helpful to determine symmetry in the graph of a polar 
equation. If the graph of a polar equation has symmetry, then we can sketch its graph by 
plotting fewer points.
The Graph of a Polar Equation
Many important polar equations do not convert “nicely” to rectangular equations. To graph 
such equations, we plot points in polar coordinates. The graph of a polar equation
r = f 1u2
is the set of all points P1r, u2 that have at least one polar coordinate representation that satis-
fies the equation. We make a table of several ordered pair solutions 1r, u2 of the equation, 
plot these points, and join them with a smooth curve.
4	
Graph polar equations.
Sketch the graph of the polar equation r = u 1u Ú 02 by plotting points.
Solution
We choose values of u that are integer multiples of p
2. Because r = u, the polar coordinates 
of points on the curve are as follows:
10, 02, ap
2, p
2 b, 1p, p2, a3p
2 , 3p
2 b, 12p, 2p2, a5p
2 , 5p
2 b, c
Plot these points on a polar grid and join them in order of increasing u to obtain the graph 
of r = u shown in Figure 7.51. This curve is called the spiral of Archimedes.
0
u  0, 2p, 4p
u  p, 3p, 5p
r  5p
r  3p
r  4p
r  p
u       
3p
2
, 7p
2
, 11p
2
u       
p
2
, 5p
2
, 9p
2
r  2p
Figure 7.51  Spiral of Archimedes r = u
Practice Problem 7  Sketch the graph of the polar equation r = 2u 1u … 02 by  
plotting points.
Sketching a Graph by Plotting Points
EXAMPLE 7

704	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
A graphing calculator can be used 
to graph polar equations. The 
calculator must be set in polar 
(Pol) mode. Either radian or degree 
mode may be used, but make 
sure your WINDOW settings are 
appropriate for your choice. See 
your owner’s manual for details on 
polar graphing. The screen shows 
the graph of r = 211 + cos u2.
Technology
Connection
Sketch the graph of the polar equation r = 211 + cos u2.
Solution
Because cos u is an even function 1that is, cos1-u2 = cos u2, the graph of r = 211 + cos u2 
is symmetric about the polar axis. Thus, to graph this equation, it is sufficient to compute 
values for 0 … u … p. We construct Table 7.3 by substituting values for u at increments of 
p
6, calculating the corresponding values of r.
Sketching the Graph of a Polar Equation
EXAMPLE 8
Table 7.3 
U
0
P
6
P
3
P
2
2P
3
5P
6
P
r = 211 + cos u2
4
2 + 13 ≈3.73
3
2
1
2 - 13 ≈0.27
0
We plot the points 1r, u2 and draw a smooth curve through them. Because the graph is sym-
metric about the polar axis, we also reflect the curve about the polar axis.
The graph of the equation r = 211 + cos u2 is shown in Figure 7.52. This type of 
curve is called a cardioid because it resembles a heart.
−1
5
1
2
3
4
(4, 0)
(0,    )
π
3
−3
2,     
π
2
2,     π
2
3,     π
3
π
6
5
2  √3,       
π
6
5
2  √3,       
π
3
2
1,      
π
6
2  √3,      
π
3
2
1,      
3,     
π
3
π
6
2  √3,      
θ
π
2
=
0
θ =
 
T e s t s  F o r  S y m m e t r y  i n  P o l a r  C o o r d i n at e s
The graph of a polar equation has the symmetry described below if an equivalent equation results when making the 
­replacements shown.
Symmetry with respect  
to the polar axis
Symmetry with respect 
to the line U = P
2
Symmetry with respect  
to the pole
O
(r,   )
θ
(r,    )
θ
  0
θ
θ
θ
2
π
θ 
or  (r, π     )
θ
O
(r,   )
θ
(r,    )
θ
(r,       )
θ
π
  0
θ
θ
2
π
θ 
  θ
π
O
(r,   )
θ
(r,    )
θ
(r,       )
θ
π
  0
θ
θ
θ
π
2
π
θ 
Replace 1r, u2 with  
1r, -u2 or 1-r, p - u2.
Replace 1r, u2 with  
1r, p - u2 or 1-r, -u2.
Replace 1r, u2 with  
1r, p + u2 or 1-r, u2.
Note that if a polar equation has two of these symmetries, then it must have the third symmetry.
Figure 7.52  r = 211 + cos u2

	
Section 7.6    ■    Polar Coordinates 705
Sketch the graph of a polar equation r = f 1u2, where f 
is a periodic function.
Step 1 Test for symmetry.
Graphing a Polar Equation
Objective
EXAMPLE 9
Example
(continued)
Limaçons
The graph of an equation of the form
r = a + b cos u or r = a + b sin u
is called a limaçon of Pascal.
If  b 7  a, the limaçon has an interior loop. See Figure 7.53.
If  b =  a, the limaçon is a cardioid. See Figure 7.52.
If  b 6  a 6 2 b, the limaçon is dimpled. See Figure 7.54.
0
1
y
x
1
  0
  2
π
Figure 7.53  Graph of r = 1 + 2 sin u
0
5
3
y
x
3
Figure 7.54  Graph of r = 3 + 2 sin u
In Figures 7.53 and 7.54, note that even though both graphs are symmetric about the 
line u = p
2  (y-axis), the test “replace 1r, u2 with 1-r, -u2” fails. So if a test for polar 
coordinate symmetry fails, the best we can say is “no conclusion.” In other words, the tests 
for polar coordinate symmetry are sufficient but not necessary for showing symmetry.
Practice Problem 8  Sketch the graph of the polar equation r = 211 + sin u2.
Sketch the graph of r = cos 2u.
1.	Replace u with -u,
cos 1-2u2 = cos 2u
(1)
	
Replace u with p - u,
cos32 1p - u24 = cos12p - 2u2 = cos 2u
(2)
From (1) and (2), we conclude that the graph is ­symmetric 
about the polar axis 1u = 02 and about the 
line u = p
2. So, it is also symmetric about the pole.
Procedure  
in Action

706	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Practice Problem 9  Sketch the graph of r = sin 2u.
Step 2 Analyze the behavior of r, sym-
metries from Step 1, and then find selected 
points.
Step 3 Sketch the graph of r = f 1u2  
using the points 1r, u2 found in Step 2.
Step 4 Use symmetries to complete  
the graph.
2.	To get a sense of how r behaves for different values of u, we make 
the following table:
As u goes from:
r varies from:
0 to p
4
1 to 0
p
4  to p
2
0 to -1
p
2  to 3p
4
-1 to 0
3p
4  to p
0 to 1
Because the curve is symmetric about u = 0 and 
u = p
2, we find selected points for 0 … u … p
2:
u
0
p
6
p
4
p
3
p
2
r = cos 2u
1
1
2
0
-1
2
-1
3.	
(1, 0)
0    


4


4



2

  0
2
,
1 
6 

 
    


2
r is negative for
    


4

2
0
(1, 0)


3



2

2
,
1 
3 

, 
2 



1
  0
.
4.	
Using symmetry about the polar axis


2

  0
 
Using symmetry about the line

2



2

  0
The curve of r = cos 2u is called a four-leafed rose.

	
Section 7.6    ■    Polar Coordinates 707
The following graphs have simple polar equations.
LIMAçONS
The graphs of  
r = a { b cos u,  
r = a { b sin u 
1a 7 0, b 7 02  
are called limaçons  
(French for “snail”).
0
π
2
Inner loop 
if a
b 6 1
0
π
2
Cardioid 
if a
b = 1
0
π
2
Dimpled 
if 1 6 a
b 6 2
0
π
2
Not Dimpled 
if a
b Ú 2
ROSE CURVES
The graphs of  
r = a cos nu,  
r = a sin nu
1a 7 02 are called  
rose curves.
If n is odd, the rose  
has n petals. If n is  
even, the rose has  
2n petals.
0
π
2
a
r = a cos 3u
0
π
2
a
r = a sin 5u
0
π
2
a
r = a sin 2u
0
π
2
a
r = a cos 4u
CIRCLES AND 
LEMNISCATES
1a 7 02
0
π
2
a
r = a cos u
Circle
0
π
2
a
r = a sin u
Circle
0
π
2
a
r2 = a2 sin 2u
Lemniscate
0
π
2
a
r2 = a2 cos 2u
Lemniscate
SPIRALS
1a 7 02
0
π
2
r = au, u Ú 0
0
π
2
r = aku, u … 0, 0 6 a 6 1, k 7 0

708	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Exercises
section 7.6 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The polar coordinates 1r, u2 of a point are the directed 
­distance r to the 
 and the directed angle u 
from the polar 
.
	 2.	 The positive value of r corresponds to a distance r on the  
terminal side of u, and a negative value corresponds to a  
distance r  in the 
 direction.
	 3.	 The substitutions x =
 and  
y =
 transform a rectangular equation  
into a polar equation for the same curve.
	 4.	 Polar coordinates are found from the rectangular  
coordinates by the formulas r =
 and  
u =
.
	 5.	 True or False. A point has a unique pair of rectangular 
coordinates, but it has many pairs of polar coordinates. 
	 6.	 True or False. The points 12, u2 and 1-2, u2 are on opposite 
sides of the line through the pole. 
In Exercises 7–14, plot the point having the given polar 
coordinates. Then find different polar coordinates 1r, U2 for 
the same point for which (a) r * 0 and 0° " U * 360°; 
(b) r * 0 and −360° * U * 0°; (c) r + 0 and 
−360° * U * 0°.
	 7.	 14, 45°2 
	 8.	 15, 150°2 
	 9.	 13, 90°2 
	10.	 12, 240°2 
	11.	 13, 60°2 
	12.	 14, 210°2 
	13.	 16, 300°2 
	14.	 12, 270°2 
In Exercises 15–22, plot the point having the given polar coor-
dinates. Then give two different pairs of polar coordinates of 
the same point, (a) one with the given value of r and (b) one 
with r having the opposite sign of the given value of r.
	15.	 a2, - p
3 b 
	16.	 a12, - p
4 b 
	17.	 a-3, p
6 b 
	18.	 a-2, 3p
4 b       
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 
P(2, 150°)
  b. 1-2, 30°2
c. 12, 210°2  d. 1-2, -330°2   
2. a. a- 3
2, - 313
2
b  b. 112, - 122    3. a12, 5p
4 b
4. 124.8, 36.0°2    5. r2 - 2r sin u + 3 = 0
6. a. x2 + y2 = 25; a circle centered at the origin with radius 5
b. y = -x13; a line through the origin with slope - 13
c. x = 1; a vertical line through x = 1  d. x2 + 1y - 122 = 1;  
a circle with center 10, 12 and radius 1
7. 
3
7
4
6
8
  0


9
5

2





2

8. 
9. 
1
1

	
Section 7.6    ■    Polar Coordinates 709
	19.	 a-2, - p
6 b 
	20.	 1-2, -p2 
	21.	 a4, 7p
6 b 
	22.	 12, 32 
In Exercises 23–30, convert the given polar coordinates of 
each point to rectangular coordinates.
	23.	 13, 60°2
	24.	 1-2, -30°2 
	25.	 15, -60°2
	26.	 1-3, 90°2 
	27.	 13, p2 
	28.	 a12, - p
4 b 
	29.	 a-2, - 5p
6 b 
	30.	 a-1, 7p
6 b 
In Exercises 31–38, convert the rectangular coordinates 
of each point to polar coordinates 1r, U2 with r + 0 and 
0 " U * 2P.
	31.	 11, -12
	32.	 1- 13, 12
	33.	 13, 32
	34.	 1-4, 02 
	35.	 13, -32
	36.	 1213, 22
	37.	 1-1, 132
	38.	 1-2, -2132
In Exercises 39–46, convert each rectangular equation to 
polar form.
	39.	 x2 + y2 = 16 
	40.	 x + y = 1
	41.	 y2 = 4x 
	42.	 x3 = 3y2 
	43.	 y2 = 6y - x2 
	44.	 x2 - y2 = 1
	45.	 xy = 1
	46.	 x2 + y2 - 4x + 6y = 12
In Exercises 47–54, convert each polar equation to rectangular 
form. Identify each curve.
	47.	 r = 2 
	48.	 r = -3 
	49.	 u = 3p
4 
	50.	 u = -p
6 
	51.	 r = 4 cos u 
	52.	 r = 4 sin u 
	53.	 r = -2 sin u 
	54.	 r = -3 cos u 
In Exercises 55–62, sketch the graph of each polar equation 
by transforming it to rectangular coordinates.
	55.	 r = -2 
	56.	 r cos u = -1 
	57.	 r sin u = 2 
	58.	 r =  sin u 
	59.	 r = 2 sec u 
	60.	 r + 3 cos u = 0 
	61.	 r =
1
 cos u + sin u 
	62.	 r =
6
2 cos u + 3 sin u 
In Exercises 63–78, sketch the graph of each polar equation.
	63.	 r =  sin u 
	64.	 r =  cos u 
	65.	 r = 1 - cos u 
	66.	 r = 1 + sin u 
	67.	 r =  cos 3u 
	68.	 r =  sin 3u 
	69.	 r =  sin 4u 
	70.	 r =  cos 4u 
	71.	 r = 1 - 2 sin u 
	72.	 r = 2 - 4 sin u 
	73.	 r = 2 + 4 cos u 
	74.	 r = 2 - 4 cos u 
	75.	 r = 3 - 2 sin u 
	76.	 r = 5 + 3 sin u 
	77.	 r = 4 + 3 cos u 
	78.	 r = 5 + 2 cos u 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 79–82, determine the position of the hand rela-
tive to the shoulder by considering the robotic arm illustrated 
in the figure. Round all answers to the nearest tenth.
	79.	 a = 45°, b = 30° 
	80.	 a = -30°, b = 60° 
	81.	 a = -70°, b = 0° 
	82.	 a = 47°, b = 17° 
shoulder
elbow
8 in.
14 in.
hand
a
b
O
E
H
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 83 and 84, convert each rectangular  
equation to polar form. Assume that x # 0, y # 0 and 
that !x2 + y2 * P
2.
	83.	 y = x tan 12x2 + y22 
	84.	 y = x tan 1ln2x2 + y22 
In Exercises 85–90, convert each polar equation to rectangular 
form.
	85.	 r11 - sin u2 = 3
	86.	 r11 + cos u2 = 2
	87.	 r a1 + 1
2 cos ub = 1
	88.	 r a1 + 3
4 sin ub = 3
	89.	 r11 - 3 cos u2 = 5
	90.	 r11 - 2 sin u2 = 4
	91.	 Prove that the distance between the points P1r1, u12 and 
Q1r2, u22 is given by
d1P, Q2 = 2r2
1 + r2
2 - 2r1r2  cos 1u1 - u22.
	92.	 Prove that the equation r = a sin u + b cos u represents a 
circle. Find its center and radius.                   

710	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	 93.	 Prove that the area K of the triangle whose polar  
coordinates are 10, 02, 1r1, u12, and 1r2, u22 is given by 
	
	 K = 1
2 r1r2 sin 1u2 - u12. [Assume that 0 … u1 6 u2 … p 
	
	 and r1 7 0, r2 7 0.]
	 94.	 Show that the polar equation of a circle with center 1a, u02 
and radius a is given by r = 2a cos 1u - u02. Discuss the 
	
	 cases u0 = 0 and u0 = p
2.
In Exercises 95–104, use a graphing calculator to graph the 
polar equation. Identify any horizontal or vertical asymptotes 
that appear on the screen but are not part of the graph.
	 95.	 r = eu (logarithmic spiral) 
	 96.	 r = e
u
3 (logarithmic spiral) 
	 97.	 r2 = 4 sin 2u (lemniscate) 
	 98.	 r2 = 9 sin 2u (lemniscate) 
	 99.	 r2 = 16 cos 2u (lemniscate) 
	100.	 r2 = 4 cos 2u (lemniscate) 
	101.	 r = 2 sin u tan u (cissoid) 
	102.	 1r - 222 = 8u (parabolic spiral) 
	103.	 r = 2 csc u + 3 1conchoid2 
	104.	 r = 2 sec u - 1 1conchoid2 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
Determine whether each statement is true or false. Explain 
your reasoning.
	105.	 The points 1r, u2 and 1-r, u2 are symmetric with respect to 
the y-axis. 
	106.	 The points 1r, u2 and 1-r, -u2 are symmetric with respect 
to the y-axis. 
	107.	 The points 1r, u2 and 1r, -u2 are symmetric with respect to 
the x-axis. 
	108.	 The polar coordinates 1r, -u2 and 1-r, p - u2 represent 
the same point in the plane. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 109–120, write each complex number in the form 
a + bi.
	109.	 12 - 3i2 + 1-5 + i2
110.	 15 + 3i2 - 14 - 2i2
	111.	 i12 + 5i2 
	112.	 -i15 - 3i2 
	113.	 12 + i213 - i2 
	114.	 14 - 3i212 - 5i2
	115.	 12 - 3i22 
	116.	 11 + 2i23 
	117.	
1
3 - 4i 
	118.	
2i
2 + 3i 
	119.	 2 - 3i
3 + 4i 
	120.	 1 + i
2 - i 
In Exercises 121–124, write the trigonometric form  
(see page 678) for each vector.
	121.	 i + j
	122.	 2i - 2j
	123.	 - 13 i + j
	124.	 -i - 13j    
    
 
 

	
Section 7.7    ■    Polar Form of Complex Numbers; DeMoivre’s Theorem 711
S E C T I O N 7.7
Geometric Representation of Complex Numbers
Because each complex number a + bi determines a unique ordered pair 1a, b2 of real 
numbers, we can represent the set of complex numbers geometrically by points in a rect-
angular coordinate system. Specifically, we can represent the complex number a + bi by 
the point 1a, b2 in a rectangular coordinate system. We call the plane in this system the 
complex plane. The x-axis is also called the real axis because the real part of a complex 
number is plotted along the x-axis. Similarly, the y-axis is also called the imaginary axis. 
See Figure 7.55. We can think of a complex number a + bi as a position vector with initial 
point 10, 02 and terminal point 1a, b2.
Alternating Current Circuits
In the early days of the study of alternate current (AC) circuits, scientists concluded 
that AC circuits were somehow different from the battery-powered direct current (DC) 
circuits. However, both types of circuits obey the same physical and mathematical laws. 
The breakthrough in understanding the AC circuits came in 1893 by Charles Steinmetz. 
He explained that in AC circuits, the voltage, current, and resistance (called impedance 
in AC circuits) do not act like scalars, but alternate in direction and possess frequency 
and phase shift. He advocated the use of the polar form of complex numbers to repre-
sent the magnitude, frequency, and phase shift for the AC circuit quantities: voltage, 
current, and impedance. Steinmetz eventually became known as “the wizard who gen-
erated electricity from the square root of minus one.” In Example 6, we use complex 
numbers to compute the total impedance in an AC circuit.
Polar Form of Complex Numbers; 
DeMoivre’s Theorem
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Addition of complex numbers  
(Section 1.3, page 106)
2	 Conversion between polar and rectangular 
coordinates (Section 7.6, pages 698–699)
Objectives
1	 Represent complex numbers geometrically.
2	 Find the absolute value of a complex  
number.
3	 Write a complex number in polar form.
4	 Find products and quotients of complex 
numbers in polar form.
5	 Use DeMoivre’s theorem to find powers of 
a complex number.
6	 Use DeMoivre’s theorem to find the nth 
roots of a complex number.
1	
Represent complex numbers 
geometrically.
O
Real axis
Imaginary axis
b
a
x
y
(a  bi)
(a, b)
Figure 7.55  Complex plane

712	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Plot each complex number in the complex plane.
1 + 3i, -2 + 2i, -3, -2i, and 3 - i
Solution
Figure 7.56 shows the points representing the complex numbers 1 + 3i, -2 + 2i, -3, -2i, 
and 3 - i.
Practice Problem 1  Plot each complex number in the complex plane.
2 + 3i, -3 + 2i, 4, -2 - 3i, and 3 - 2i
The Absolute Value of a Complex Number
Let 1a, b2 represent the complex number z = a + bi in a rectangular coordinate system. 
Then the distance from the origin O to the point 1a, b2 is 2a2 + b2. See Figure 7.57. The 
number 2a2 + b2 is called the absolute value (or magnitude or modulus) of the complex 
number z = a + bi and is denoted by  z .
Plotting Complex Numbers
EXAMPLE 1
O
Real axis
Imaginary axis
3
2i
2  2i
1  3i
x
y
3  i
Figure 7.56  Plotting complex 
numbers
2	
Find the absolute value of a 
complex number.
x
y
O
(a, b)
b
a
|z| = √a2  b2
z  a  bi
Figure 7.57  Absolute value of z
The absolute value of a complex number z = a + bi:
 z  =  a + bi = 2a2 + b2
Absolute Value of a Complex Number
Find the absolute value of each complex number.
a.	 4 + 3i	
b.   2 - 3i	
c.   -4 + i	
d.  -2 - 2i	
e.   -3i
Solution
In each case, we use the formula  a + bi = 2a2 + b2 and simplify.
a.	  4 + 3i = 242 + 32 = 125 = 5
b.	  2 - 3i = 222 + 1-322 = 14 + 9 = 113
c.	  -4 + i =  -4 + 1 # i = 21-422 + 1122 = 116 + 1 = 117
d.	  -2 - 2i = 21-222 + 1-222 = 24 + 4 = 14 # 2 = 212
e.	  -3i =  0 - 3i = 202 + 1-322 = 10 + 9 = 3
Practice Problem 2  Find the absolute value of each complex number.
a.	 -5 + 12i	
b.   -7	
c.   i	
d.   a - bi
Polar Form of a Complex Number
A complex number z written as z = a + bi is said to be in rectangular form. The point 
1a, b2 has polar coordinates 1r, u2, where r = 2a2 + b2, a = r cos u, and b = r sin u.
Finding the Absolute Value of a Complex Number
EXAMPLE 2
3	
Write a complex number in 
polar form.

	
Section 7.7    ■    Polar Form of Complex Numbers; DeMoivre’s Theorem 713
The complex number z = a + bi (see Figure 7.58) can therefore be written in the form
z = r cos u + 1r sin u2i = r1cos u + i sin u2.
We call r1cos u + i sin u2 the polar form or the trigonometric form of z.
x
y


a
O
b
(a, b)
(r,   )

cos
 r
a

sin
 r
b
r     a2  b2
Figure 7.58  Polar form of 
z = a + bi
P o l a r  F o r m  o f  a  C o m p l e x  N u m b e r
The complex number z = a + bi can be written in polar form
z = r1cos u + i sin u2,
where a = r  cos u, b = r sin u, r = 2a2 + b2, and tan u = b
a.
When a nonzero complex number is written in polar form, the positive number r is the 
modulus or absolute value of z; the angle u is called the argument of z (written u = arg z).
Note that the angle u in the polar representation of z is not unique because for any integer n,
r1cos u + i sin u2 = r3cos 1u + n # 360°2 + i sin 1u + n # 360°24.
Two complex numbers in polar form are therefore equal if and only if their moduli (plural of 
modulus) are equal and their arguments differ by an integer multiple of 360° (or an integer 
multiple of 2p2.
Writing a Complex Number in Polar Form
Objective
procedure 
in action
EXAMPLE 3
Example
Write a complex number z = a + bi in polar form.
Step 1 Find r. Identify a and b. Use the formula 
r = 2a2 + b2.
Step 2 Find U. Use tan u = b
a to find the possible 
values of u. Choose u in the quadrant in which 1a, b2 
lies. In general, using a calculator, a value of u is  
given by
u = d
tan-1 b
a if a 7 0
180° + tan-1 b
a if a 6 0
.
Step 3 Write in polar form. From Steps 1 and 2, 
write the polar form z = r1cos u + i sin u2.
Write z = 13 - i in polar form. Express the argument u in 
degrees, 0° … u 6 360°.
1.	z = 13 - i, a = 13, b = -1
	
r = 211322 + 1-122 = 13 + 1 = 2
2.	tan u = b
a = -1
13 = - 1
13. We know that 
	
tan 30° =
1
13 and that tan u is negative in quadrants II
	
and IV; so either u = 180° - 30° = 150° or 
u = 360° - 30° = 330°. Because 1a, b2 = 113, -12 
lies in quadrant IV, we have u = 330°. See the figure.
y
r

x
z  (    3, 1)
3.	z = 21cos 330° + i sin 330°2    r = 2, u = 330°
Practice Problem 3  Write z = -1 - i in polar form, letting 0 … u 6 2p.

714	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
We ask you to prove these rules in Exercises 95 and 96.
Write the complex number z = 2 acos p
6 + i sin p
6 b in rectangular form.
Solution
 z = 2 acos p
6 + i sin p
6 b    Given complex number
 = 2 cos p
6 + 2i sin p
6     Distributive property
 = 2 a 13
2 b + 2i a1
2b
    cos p
6 = 13
2 , sin p
6 = 1
2
 = 13 + i
    Simplify.
The rectangular form of z = 2 acos p
6 + i sin p
6 b is 13 + i.
Practice Problem 4  Write z = 4 acos 5p
3
+ i sin 5p
3 b in rectangular form.
Product and Quotient in Polar Form
The polar representation of complex numbers leads to an interesting interpretation of the 
product and quotient of two complex numbers.
Writing a Complex Number in Rectangular Form
EXAMPLE 4
4	
Find products and quotients 
of complex numbers in polar 
form.
P r o d u c t  a n d  Q u o t i e n t  R u l e s  F o r  T w o  C o m p l e x 
N u m b e r s  i n  P o l a r  F o r m
Let z1 = r11cos u1 + i sin u12 and z2 = r21cos u2 + i sin u22 be two complex num-
bers in polar form. Then
z1z2 = r1r23cos 1u1 + u22 + i sin 1u1 + u224    Product rule
and
z1
z2
= r1
r2
3cos 1u1 - u22 + i sin 1u1 - u224, z2 ≠0    Quotient rule
In words: To multiply two complex numbers in polar form, we multiply their moduli 
and add their arguments; to divide two complex numbers, we divide their moduli and 
subtract their arguments.
Let z1 = 31cos 65° + i sin 65°2 and z2 = 41cos 15° + i sin 15°2. Find z1z2 and z1
z2
. Leave 
the answers in polar form.
Finding the Product and Quotient of Two Complex Numbers
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 7.7    ■    Polar Form of Complex Numbers; DeMoivre’s Theorem 715
Solution
 z1z2 = 31cos 65° + i sin 65°2 # 41cos 15° + i sin 15°2    Product of given numbers
 = 3 # 43cos 165° + 15°2 + i sin 165° + 15°24
    Multiply moduli and add 
arguments.
 = 121cos 80° + i sin 80°2
    Simplify.
 z1
z2
= 31cos 65° + i sin 65°2
41cos 15° + i sin 15°2
    Quotient of given numbers
 = 3
43cos 165° - 15°2 + i sin 165° - 15°24
    Divide moduli and subtract 
arguments.
 = 3
41cos 50° + i sin 50°2
    Simplify.
Practice Problem 5  Let z1 = 51cos 75° + i sin 75°2 and z2 = 21cos 60° + i sin 60°2.
Find z1z2 and z1
z2
. Leave the answers in polar form.
In a parallel circuit, the total impedance Zt is given by
Zt =
Z1Z2
Z1 + Z2
.
Find Zt, if
Z1 = 91cos 90° + i sin 90°2 and Z2 = 43cos 1-60°2 + i sin 1-60°24.
Solution
We first calculate Z1Z2 and Z1 + Z2.
 Z1Z2 = 91cos 90° + i sin 90°2 # 43cos 1-60°2 + i sin 1-60°24    Substitute values for 
Z1 and Z2.
 = 9 # 43cos 190° - 60°2 + i sin 190° - 60°24
    Multiply moduli and 
add arguments.
 = 361cos 30° + i sin 30°2
    Simplify.
To add complex numbers in polar form, convert to rectangular form, perform addition, and 
then convert back to polar form.
 Z1 = 9 cos 90° + 9i sin 90° = 9i
    cos 90° = 0, sin 90° = 1
 Z2 = 43cos 1-60°2 + i sin 1-60°24
 = 4 cos 60° - 4i sin 60°
    cos 1-u2 = cos u, sin 1-u2 = -sin u
 = 4 a1
2b - 4i a 13
2 b
    cos 60° = 1
2, sin 60° = 13
2
 = 2 - 213i
    Simplify.
 Z1 + Z2 = 9i + 2 - 213i
 Z1 + Z2 = 2 + 19 - 2132i
    Regroup.
To write Z1 + Z2 in polar form, find the values of r and u.
 r = 2a2 + b2
 = 222 + 19 - 21322
    Replace a with 2 and b with 9 - 213.
 ≈5.89
    Use a calculator.
 tan u = b
a = 9 - 213
2
 ≈2.768
 u ≈tan-112.7682 ≈70°
    Use a calculator.
Using Complex Numbers in AC Circuits
EXAMPLE 6

716	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
The polar form of Z1 + Z2 is approximately 5.891cos 70° + i sin 70°2. Thus,
 Zt =
Z1Z2
Z1 + Z2
≈
361cos 30° + i sin 30°2
5.891cos 70° + i sin 70°2
   
Substitute values for Z1Z2  
and Z1 + Z2.
 =
36
5.89 3cos 130° - 70°2 + i sin 130° - 70°24    Divide moduli and subtract.
 =
36
5.89 3cos 1-40°2 + i sin 1-40°24
    Simplify.
 =
36
5.89 1cos 40° - i sin 40°2
    cos 1-u2 = cos u, 
sin 1-u2 = -sin u
 ≈6.111cos 40° - i sin 40°2
   
36
5.89 ≈6.11
Practice Problem 6  Repeat Example 6 with
Z1 = 41cos 45° + i sin 45°2 and Z2 = 61cos 0° + i sin 0°2.
Powers of Complex Numbers in Polar Form
Let z = r1cos u + i sin u2 be a complex number in polar form. Then
 z2 = z # z
 = r1cos u + i sin u2 # r1cos u + i sin u2
    Form product z # z.
 = 1r # r23cos 1u + u2 + i sin 1u + u24
    Multiply moduli and add arguments.
 = r21cos 2u + i sin 2u2
    Simplify.
 z3 = z2 # z
 = r21cos 2u + i sin 2u2 # r1cos u + i sin u2    Polar form of z2 and z
 = 1r2 # r23cos 12u + u2 + i sin 12u + u24    Multiply moduli and add arguments.
 = r31cos 3u + i sin 3u2.
    Simplify.
In a similar way, you can show that
z4 = r41cos 4u + i sin 4u2.
DeMoivre’s theorem (whose proof is omitted) follows this pattern.
5	
Use DeMoivre’s theorem to 
find powers of a complex 
number.
D E M O I V R E ’ S  T H E O R E M
Let z = r1cos u + i sin u2 be a complex number in polar form. Then for any integer n,
zn = rn1cos nu + i sin nu2.
Let z = 1 + i. Use DeMoivre’s theorem to find each power of z. Write answers in rect-
angular form.
a.	 z16        b.   z-10
Solution
We first convert z = 1 + i to polar form. We find r and u.
r = 2a2 + b2 = 212 + 12 = 12
Finding the Power of a Complex Number
EXAMPLE 7

	
Section 7.7    ■    Polar Form of Complex Numbers; DeMoivre’s Theorem 717
and
tan u = b
a = 1
1 = 1, so u = p
4
a.	
 z = 12 acos p
4 + i sin p
4 b
    Polar form of z = 1 + i
	
 z16 = c 12 acos p
4 + i sin p
4 b d
16
    Raise both sides to the 16th 
power.
	
 z16 = 112216c cos a16 # p
4 b + i sin a16 # p
4 b d     DeMoivre’s theorem
	
 = 283cos 14p2 + i sin 14p24
   
112216 = 12
1
2216 = 2
1
2#16 = 28
	
 = 25611 + i # 02 = 256
    cos14p2 = 1, sin14p2 = 0
b.	
 z = 12 acos p
4 + i sin p
4 b
    Polar form of z = 1 + i
	
 z-10 = c 12 acos p
4 + i sin p
4 b d
-10
    Raise both sides to the 
-10th power.
	
 z-10 = 1122-10c cos a -10 # p
4 b + i sin a -10 # p
4 b d     DeMoivre’s theorem
	
 = 1
32 c cos a -5p
2 b + i sin a -5p
2 b d     1122-10 = 121>22-10 = 2-5 = 1
32
	
 = 1
32 30 + i1-124 = - 1
32 i	
cos a -5p
2 b = 0, sin a -5p
2 b = -1
Practice Problem 7  Let z = -1 + i. Use DeMoivre’s theorem to find each power of z. 
Write the answers in rectangular form.
a.	 z8        b.   z-12
Roots of Complex Numbers
Let z and w be two complex numbers and let n be a positive integer. The complex number 
z is called an nth root of w if
zn = w.
We can use DeMoivre’s theorem to find the nth roots of a complex number.
A graphing calculator can be used 
to find powers of complex numbers 
or to check your work. The calcula-
tor must be set in a + bi mode.
Technology
Connection
6	
Use DeMoivre’s theorem 
to find the nth roots of a 
complex number.
D e m o i v r e ’ s  n t h  R o o t s  T h e o r e m
The nth roots of a complex number w = r1cos u + i sin u2, where r 7 0 and u is in 
degrees, are given by
zk = r1>nc cos au + 360°k
n
b + i sin au + 360°k
n
b d , for k = 0, 1, 2, … , n - 1.
If u is in radians, replace 360° with 2p in zk.
The result says that there are exactly n nth roots of a nonzero complex number.

718	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Find the three cube roots of 1 + i in polar form, with the argument in degrees.
Solution
In Example 7, we showed that
 1 + i = 12 acos p
4 + i sin p
4 b
    Polar form of 1 + i
 1 + i = 121cos 45° + i sin 45°2.    Replace p
4 with 45°.
From DeMoivre’s theorem for finding complex roots, with n = 3, we have
zk = 11221>3c cos a45° + 360°k
3
b + i sin a45° + 360°k
3
b d , k = 0, 1, 2.
By substituting k = 0, 1, and 2 in the expression for zk and simplifying, we find the three 
cube roots.
 z0 = 21>6c cos a45° + 360° # 0
3
b + i sin a45° + 360° # 0
3
b d     k = 0
 = 21>61cos 15° + i sin 15°2
    Simplify.
 z1 = 21>6c cos a45° + 360° # 1
3
b + i sin a45° + 360° # 1
3
b d    k = 1
 = 21>61cos 135° +  i sin 135°2
    Simplify.
 z2 = 21>6c cos a45° + 360° # 2
3
b + i sin a45° + 360° # 2
3
b d    k = 2
 = 21>61cos 255° + i sin 255°2
    Simplify.
The complex numbers z0, z1, and z2 are the three cube roots of the complex number 1 + i.
Practice Problem 8  Find the three cube roots of -1 + i in polar form, with the  
argument in degrees.
The solutions of the so-called cyclotomic equation zn = 1 are called the nth roots of 
unity. The name refers to the close association of this equation with the regular n-gons 
inscribed in the unit circle.
Finding the Roots of a Complex Number
EXAMPLE 8
12 = 21>2, so 
11221>3 = 121>221>3 = 21>6.
Recall
A graphing calculator can be used 
to check complex roots. The calcula-
tor must be set in a + bi mode. 
The screen shown here is from a 
calculator also set in degree mode.
Technology
Connection
Find the complex sixth roots of unity. Write the roots in polar form and represent them 
geometrically.
Solution
The polar form for 1 = 1 + 0i is
1 = 11cos 0° + i sin 0°2.
From DeMoivre’s theorem for finding complex roots with n = 6, we have
 zk = 1121>6c cos a0° + 360° # k
6
b + i sin a0° + 360° # k
6
b d     k = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
 z0 = 11cos 0° + i sin 0°2
    Let k = 0 in zk and simplify.
 z1 = 11cos 60° + i sin 60°2
    Let k = 1 in zk and simplify.
Finding nth Roots of Unity
EXAMPLE 9

	
Section 7.7    ■    Polar Form of Complex Numbers; DeMoivre’s Theorem 719
 z2 = 11cos 120° + i sin 120°2    Let k = 2 in zk and simplify.
 z3 = 11cos 180° + i sin 180°2    Let k = 3 in zk and simplify.
 z4 = 11cos 240° + i sin 240°2    Let k = 4 in zk and simplify.
 z5 = 11cos 300° + i sin 300°2    Let k = 5 in zk and simplify.
Geometrically, the sixth roots of unity form a regular hexagon and are equally spaced at 60° 
intervals on a unit circle. See Figure 7.59.
Practice Problem 9  Find the complex fourth roots of unity. Write the roots in  
polar form.
z0
z1
z5
z2
z4
z3
x
y
60˚
Figure 7.59  Sixth roots of unity 
Exercises
section 7.7
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 If z = a + bi, a 7 0, then z  =
 and 
arg z = u =
.                 
	 2.	 If z  = r and arg z = u, then the polar form of z is z =
.
	 3.	 To multiply two complex numbers in polar form, multiply 
their 
 and 
 their  
arguments.
	 4.	 DeMoivre’s theorem states that 3r1cos u + i sin u24n =
. 
	 5.	 True or False. If z = r1cos u + i sin u2, then 1
z = z-1 =  
	
	 1
r 1cos u - i sin u2. 
	 6.	 True or False. For n Ú 2, the n complex nth roots of 1 are 
equally spaced points on the unit circle. 
In Exercises 7–14, plot each complex number and find its 
absolute value.
	 7.	 z = 2 
	 8.	 z = -3 
	 9.	 z = -4i 
	10.	 z = 2i 
	11.	 z = 3 + 4i 
	12.	 z = -1 + 2i 
	13.	 z = -2 - 3i 
	14.	 z = 2 - 5i 
In Exercises 15–26, write each complex number in polar form. 
Express the argument U in degrees, with 0 " U * 360°.
	15.	 1 + 13i
	16.	 -1 + 12i
	17.	 -1 + i
	18.	 1 - i
	19.	 i 
	20.	 -i 
	21.	 1 
	22.	 -1 
	23.	 3 - 3i 
	24.	 413 + 4i
	25.	 2 - 213i
	26.	 2 + 3i          
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 
O
x
y
Real axis
Imaginary axis
4
3 
 2i
2 
 3i
2 
 3i
3 
 2i
2. a. 13  b. 7  c. 1  d. 2a2 + b2
3. z = 12 acos 5p
4
+ i sin 5p
4 b  4. 2 - 213i
5. z1z2 = 101cos 135° + i sin 135°2; z1
z2
= 5
2 1cos 15° + i sin 15°2
6. 2.61cos 27.2° + i sin 27.2°2  7. a. 16  b. - 1
64
8. 2
1
61cos 45° + i sin 45°2, 2
1
61cos 165° + i sin 165°2, 
2
1
61cos 285° + i sin 285°2  9. cos 0° + i sin 0°, cos 90° + i sin 90°, 
cos 180° + i sin 180°, cos 270° + i sin 270°

720	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
In Exercises 27–38, write each complex number in  
rectangular form.
	27.	 21cos 60° + i sin 60°2 
	28.	 41cos 120° + i sin 120°2 
	29.	 31cos p + i sin p2 
	30.	 5 acos p
2 + i sin p
2 b 
	31.	 51cos 240° + i sin 240°2 
	32.	 21cos 300° + i sin 300°2 
	33.	 81cos 0° + i sin 0°2 
	34.	 21cos 1-90°2° + i sin 1-90°22 
	35.	 6 acos 5p
6
+ i sin 5p
6 b 
	36.	 4 acos 3p
4
+ i sin 3p
4 b 
	37.	 3 acos a- p
3 b + i sin a- p
3 b b 
	38.	 5 acos a- 7p
6 b + i sin a- 7p
6 b b 
In Exercises 39–50, find z1z2 and z1
z2
. Write each answer in 
polar form.
	39.	 z1 = 41cos 75° + i sin 75°2, z2 = 21cos 15° + i sin 15°2 
	40.	 z1 = 61cos 90° + i sin 90°2, z2 = 21cos 45° + i sin 45°2 
	41.	 z1 = 51cos  240° + i sin 240°2,
z2 = 21cos 60° + i sin 60°2 
	42.	 z1 = 101cos 135° + i sin 135°2,
z2 = 41cos 225° + i sin 225°2 
	43.	 z1 = 31cos 40° + i sin 40°2, z2 = 51cos 20° + i sin 20°2 
	44.	 z1 = 51cos 65° + i sin 65°2, z2 = 21cos 25° + i sin 25°2 
	45.	 z1 = 1 + i, z2 = 1 - i 
	46.	 z1 = 1 + 13 i, z2 = 1 + i 
	47.	 z1 = - 13 + i, z2 = 2 + 2i 
	48.	 z1 = 3 + 3i, z2 = 2 - 213 i 
	49.	 z1 = 213 + 2i, z2 = 13 - i 
	50.	 z1 = 413 + 4i, z2 = 3 - 3i 
In Exercises 51–64, use DeMoivre’s theorem to find the  
indicated power. Write the answers in rectangular form.
	51.	 c 2 acos p
3 + i sin p
3 b d
12 
	52.	 c 12 acos p
4 + i sin p
4 b d
20 
	53.	 c 2 acos a- 3p
4 b + i sin a- 3p
4 b b d
6 
	54.	 acos p
27 + i sin p
27b
-9 
	55.	 c 2 acos a3p
4 b + i sin a3p
4 b b d
-6 
	56.	 c 3 acos a-5p
6 b + i sin a- 5p
6 b b d
16 
	57.	 c 2acos a- p
4 b + i sin a- p
4 b b d
-10 
 
	58.	 c 1
2acos a- 3p
4 b + i sin a- 3p
4 b b d
-6 
	59.	 11 - i212 
	60.	 11 - 13i210
	61.	 i 25 
	62.	 13 + 3i28 
	63.	 a1
2 - 13
2  ib
-8 
	64.	 a 13
2
+ 1
2 ib
10 
In Exercises 65–72, find all complex roots. Write your 
answers in polar form, with the argument U in degrees with 
0 " U * 360°.
	65.	 Cube roots of 64 
	66.	 Cube roots of -64 
	67.	 Square roots of i 
	68.	 Fourth roots of -i 
	69.	 Sixth roots of -1 
	70.	 Eighth roots of unity 
	71.	 Square roots of 1 - 13i 
	72.	 Cube roots of 4 + 413i 
Applying the Concepts
	73.	 Trigonometry. Use DeMoivre’s theorem to verify each 
identity.
a.	 sin 3u = 3 sin u - 4 sin3 u
b.	 cos 3u = 4 cos3 u - 3 cos u
	74.	 Geometry. Show that the area K of a triangle with vertices 
at the origin O, z1, and z2 is given by
K = 1
2z1 z2sin a ` arg z1
z2
 ` b.
	75.	 AC circuits. Use Ohm’s law, I = V
Z, to find the current I, 
	
	 given voltage V = 1201cos 60° + i sin 60°2 and impedance 
Z = 8 cos 130° + i sin 30°2. 
	76.	 AC circuits. Use Ohm’s law from Exercise 75 to find 
the voltage V, given I = 61cos 40° + i sin 40°2 and 
Z = 16 cos 1110° + i sin 110°2. 
In Exercises 77 and 78, use the formula Zt =
Z1Z2
Z1 + Z2
 to find 
the total impedance in a parallel circuit for the given values of 
Z1 and Z2.
	77.	 Z1 = 161cos 180° + i sin 180°2 and 
Z2 = 21cos 150° + i sin 150°2 
	78.	 Z1 = 121cos 270° + i sin 270°2 and 
Z2 = 31cos 60° + i sin 60°2 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 79–84, use DeMoivre’s theorem to compute each 
power in polar form, with U in degrees, with 0 " U * 360°.
	79.	 11 - 13i2101-2 + 2i2-6 
	80.	 a1
2 + 13
2  ib
8
12 - 2i2-6 
	81.	 asin p
6 + i cos p
6 b
10 
	82.	 asin 2p
3
+ i cos 2p
3 b
6 
	83.	 asin 5p
3
+ i cos 5p
3 b
-8 
	84.	 asin 7p
6
+ i cos 7p
6 b
-10  

	
Summary 721
In Exercises 85–88, find all complex solutions of each equation.
	 85.	 z4 = 1 
	 86.	 z8 = -1 
	 87.	 z3 = 1 + i 
	 88.	 z7 = 11 - i22 
	 89.	 Let z = cos u + i sin u, z ≠0. Prove that 
	
	 1
z = cos u - i sin u.
In Exercises 90–93, let z = cos U + i sin U, z 3 0. Use 
Exercise 89 and DeMoivre’s theorem to prove each identity.
	 90.	 z + 1
z = 2 cos u
	 91.	 z - 1
z = 2i sin u
	 92.	 zn + 1
zn = 2 cos nu
	 93.	 zn - 1
zn = 2i sin nu
	 94.	 Prove that
11 + cos u + i sin u2n = a2 cos  u
2b
n
acos nu
2 + i sin nu
2 b.
	 95.	 Prove the product rule for two complex numbers in polar 
form.
	 96.	 Prove the quotient rule for two complex numbers in polar 
form.
	 97.	 Find the product 13 + 2i215 + i2 using FOIL. Then 
	
	 deduce the identity: tan-1 a2
3b + tan-1 a1
5b = p
4.
[Hint: arg 1z1z22 = arg z1 + arg z2.]
	 98.	 Find the product 1p + q + i21p2 + pq + 1 + iq2; then 
	
	 deduce the identity: 
	
	 tan-1 a
1
p + qb + tan-1 a
q
p2 + pq + 1b = tan-1 a1
pb.
	 99.	 Expand 12 + 3i24; then deduce the identity:
4 tan-1 a3
2b - tan-1 a120
119b = p.
	100.	 Find the product 15 + i241-239 + i2; then deduce the 
	
	 identity: 4 tan-1 a1
5b - tan-1 a 1
239b = p
4.
	101.	 Find the three solutions of the equation x3 + x2 +
x + 1 = 0. [Hint: Multiply both sides by 1x - 12, solve 
the new equation, and reject the root x = 1.] 
	102.	 Find the four solutions of the equation 
x4 + x3 + x2 + x + 1 = 0.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	103.	 Let n be a positive integer. State whether each of the follow-
ing is true or false.
a.	 acos p
6 + i sin p
6 b
n
= cos np
6
+ i sin np
6 
b.	 asin p
3 + i cos p
3 b
n
= sin np
3
+ i cos np
3 
c.	 c cos a-p
3 b + i sin a- p
3 b d
n
= cos np
3
- i sin np
3 
d.	 acos p
6 + i sin p
3 b
n
= cos np
6
+ i sin np
3 
e.	 1cos u + i sin u2n = cos nu + i sin nu 
f.	 1cos u - i sin u2n = cos nu - i sin nu 
g.	 1cos u + i sin u2-n = cos nu - i sin nu 
h.	 1cos u - i sin u2-n = cos nu + i sin nu 
i.	 1sin u + i cos u2n = sin nu + i cos nu 
j.	
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 104–107, find the value of a variable that satisfies 
the given condition.
	104.	 Find x if 3x + 2y = 7 and y = 1
2. 
	105.	 Find x if -2x + 9y = 5 and y = 3. 
	106.	 Find y if -4x + 7y = 7 and x = 0. 
	107.	 Find y if 23x - 14y = -5 and x = 1. 
	108.	 Find the slope of the line with equation 10x - 2y = 28. 
	109.	 Find the slope of the line with equation 15x + 5y = 2. 
	110.	 Find an equation of the line through the point 15, -12 
­parallel to the line with equation 6x - 3y = 7. 
	111.	 Find an equation of the line through the point 13, 32  
parallel to the line with equation x + 2y = 1. 
	112.	 Find values for a and b so that the equation ax + by = 3 has 
the same graph as the equation 2x - 4y = 12.
	113.	 Find values for a and b so that the equation ax + by = 2 has  
the same graph as the equation 4x - y = -1.   
7.1	 The Law of Sines
i.	
In a triangle ABC, with sides of length a, b, and c, 
	
sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
, or equivalently, 
	
a
sin A =
b
sin B =
c
sin C.
ii.	
The Law of Sines is used to solve AAS,  ASA, and SSA  
triangles. The SSA case is called the ambiguous case 
because the information provided may lead to two triangles, 
one triangle, or no triangle.
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas
1sin u + i cos u2n = coscn ap
2 - ubd + i sincn ap
2 - ubd

722	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
7.2	 The Law of Cosines
i.	
In a triangle ABC with sides of lengths a, b, and c,
a2 = b2 + c2 - 2 bc cos A,
b2 = c2 + a2 - 2 ca cos B,
c2 = a2 + b2 - 2 ab cos C.
ii.	
The Law of Cosines is used to (a) solve SAS and SSS  
triangles, and (b) Prove Heron’s formula.
7.3	 Areas of Polygons Using Trigonometry
i.	
Area of an SAS triangle
	
The area K of a triangle ABC with sides a, b, and c is 
	
K = 1
2 bc sin A = 1
2 ca sin B = 1
2 ab sin C.
	
Area K is one-half the product of two of its sides and the 
sine of the included angle.
ii.	
Area of AAS and ASA triangles
	
The area K of a triangle ABC with sides a, b, and c is
K = a2 sin B sin C
2 sin A
= b2 sin C sin A
2 sin B
= c2 sin A sin B
2 sin C
.
iii.	 Area of SSS triangles
	
Heron’s formula The area K of a triangle with sides of 
lengths a, b, and c is given by
	
K = 1s1s - a21s - b21s - c2,
	
where s = 1
21a + b + c2 is the semiperimeter.
7.4	 Vectors
i.	
A vector v is a quantity that has both magnitude and direction. 
A vector is geometrically represented by an arrow.
ii.	
The magnitude of the scalar product cv is c times the 
magnitude of v. If c 7 0, cv has the direction of v. If c 6 0, 
cv has the opposite direction of v. The zero vector 0 has 
magnitude 0 but arbitrary direction.
iii.	 To add the vectors v and w geometrically, place w so that its 
initial point coincides with the terminal point of v and draw a 
vector from the initial point of v to the terminal point of w.
iv.	
Algebraic vectors. A vector v with initial point at the origin 
and terminal point 1v1, v22 is written as v = 8v1, v29; v1 and 
v2 are the horizontal and vertical components of v, respectively.
• The magnitude of v = 7v7 = 2v2
1 + v2
2. The direc­- 
tion angle of v is the angle u that v makes with the 
	 positive x-axis. We have cos u = v1
7v7  and sin u = v2
7v7 , 
	 0° … u 6 360°.
• The horizontal and vertical components of vector v with 
magnitude r and direction angle u are given by
v1 = r cos u,  v2 = r sin u.
v.	
Vector operations. For vectors v = 8v1, v29 = v1i + v2 j 
and w = 8w1, w29 = w1i + w2 j, the following operations 
apply:
• Vector addition: v + w = 8v1 + w1, v2 + w29
• Scalar multiplication: cv = 8cv1, cv29
7.5	 The Dot Product
i.	
For two vectors v = 8v1, v29 and w = 8w1, w29, the dot 
product
v ~ w = v1w1 + v2w2 = 7v7 7w7  cos u,
	
where u 10° … u … 180°2 is the angle between v and w.
ii.	
Vectors v and w are
1.	 Orthogonal (perpendicular) if v # w = 0.
2.	 Parallel if v # w = { 7v7 7w7 or v1
w1
= v2
w2
.
iii.	 Vector projection of v onto w is given by projwv = v # w
7w7 2 w. 
	
The scalar projection of v onto w is v # w
7w7 .
iv.	
A nonzero vector v can be written as v = v1 + v2, where 
v1 = projwv is parallel to w and v2 = v - v1 is orthogonal 
to w.
v.	
The work W done by a constant force F in moving an object 
from a point P to a point Q is W = F # PQ>
.
7.6	 Polar Coordinates
i.	
The ordered pair 1r, u2 represents a point P in the plane that 
is a directed distance of r units from the origin (pole) O, 
where u is the directed angle between the polar axis (posi-
tive x-axis) and the line segment OP. The ordered pair 1r, u2 
gives the polar coordinates of P.
ii.	
The polar coordinates of a point P1r, u2 are not unique. In  
fact, if n is any integer, then 
1r, u2, 1r, u + 2np2, and 1-r, u + p + 2np2 
	
are all polar coordinates of the same point.
iii.	 To convert a point from polar coordinates 1r, u2 to rectangu-
lar coordinates, use the equations x = r cos u and y = sin u.
iv.	
To convert a point from rectangular coordinates1x, y2 to 
polar coordinates 1r, u2, use the procedure on page 699.
v.	
A polar equation is an equation whose variables are  
r and u.
7.7	 Polar Form of Complex Numbers;  
DeMoivre’s Theorem
i.	
Geometric representation. A complex number z = a + bi 
can be represented as an ordered pair 1a, b2 in the complex 
plane.
ii.	
Modulus. z  = a + bi = 2a2 + b2, z  is called the 
modulus of z.
iii.	 Polar form. The polar form of z = a + bi is 
	
z = r1cos u + i sin u2, where r = 2a2 + b2, a = r cos u, 
	
b = r sin u, and tan u = b
a. The number r is the modulus of 
	
z, and u is called the argument of z (written arg z).
iv.	
Product and quotient rules. Let z1 = r11cos u1 + i sin u12 
and z2 = r21cos u2 + i sin u22. Then
z1z2 = r1r23cos 1u1 + u22 + i sin1u1 + u224

	
Review Exercises 723
	
and
z1
z2
 = r1
r2
3cos1u1 - u22 + i sin1u1 - u224, z2 ≠0.
v.	
DeMoivre’s theorem. Let z = r1cos u + i sin u2 be a 
­complex number in polar form. Then for any integer n,
3r1cos u + i sin u24n = rn1cos nu + i sin nu2.
vi.	
Roots of complex numbers. The n nth roots of a complex 
number r1cos u + i sin u2 are given by
zk = 1
n r c cos au + 2pk
n
b + i sin au + 2pk
n
b d  or
zk = 1
n r c cos au + 360°k
n
b + i sin au + 360°k
n
b d ,
	
where k = 0, 1, 2, c, n - 1.
Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills
In Exercises 1–10, solve right triangle ABC with right angle at C. 
Round each answer to the nearest tenth.
	 1.	 A = 30°, a = 6
	 2.	 B = 35°, b = 5
	 3.	 A = 37°, b = 4
	 4.	 B = 43°, a = 10
	 5.	 A = 40°, c = 12
	 6.	 B = 50°, c = 8
	 7.	 a = 3, b = 5
	 8.	 a = 5, b = 10
	 9.	 a = 4, c = 6
	10.	 b = 3, c = 7
In Exercises 11–18, use the Law of Sines to solve each triangle 
ABC. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.
	11.	 A = 40°, B = 35°, c = 100	 
	12.	 B = 30°, C = 80°, a = 100	 
	13.	 A = 45°, a = 25, b = 75	 
	14.	 B = 36°, a = 12.5, b = 8.7
	15.	 A = 48.5°, C = 57.3°, b = 47.3
	16.	 A = 67°, a = 100, c = 125	 
	17.	 A = 65.2°, a = 21.3, b = 19 
	18.	 C = 53°, a = 140, c = 115	
	19.	 In triangle ABC, let c = 20 and B = 60°. Find a value of 
b such that C has 1i2 two possible values, 1ii2 exactly one 
value, 1iii2 no value. 
	20.	 Repeat Exercise 19 for c = 20 and B = 150°. 
In Exercises 21–28, use the Law of Cosines to solve each  
triangle ABC. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.
	21.	 a = 60, b = 90, c = 125	 
	22.	 a = 15, b = 9, C = 120°	 
	23.	 a = 40, c = 38, B = 80°	 
	24.	 a = 10, b = 20, c = 22	 
	25.	 a = 2.6, b = 3.7, c = 4.8	 
	26.	 a = 15, c = 26, B = 115°	 
	27.	 a = 12, b = 7, C = 130°	 
	28.	 b = 75, c = 100, A = 80°	 
In Exercises 29–32, find the area of each triangle ABC with 
the given information. Round each answer to the nearest 
square unit.
	29.	 a = 5 meters, b = 7 meters, c = 10 meters	
	30.	 a = 2.4 meters, b = 3.4 meters, c = 4.4 meters
	31.	 A = 65°, b = 6 feet, c = 4 feet 
	32.	 A = 115°, b = 20 inches, a = 30 inches 
In Exercises 33 and 34, let v be the vector with initial point P 
and terminal point Q . Write v as a position vector in terms of 
i and j.
	33.	 P13, 52, Q12, 72 
	34.	 P1-1, 32, Q15, -42 
In Exercises 35–38, let v = 8−2, 39 and w = 85, −69. Find 
each expression.
	35.	 5v 
	36.	 2v + w 
	37.	 3v - 2w 
	38.	 7v + w7 
In Exercises 39–42, find the unit vector u in the direction  
of the vector v.
	39.	 v = i +j
	40.	 v = 2i - 7j 
	41.	 v = 83, -59 
	42.	 v = 8 -5, -29 
In Exercises 43–46, write v in terms of i and j for the given 
magnitude 7v7  and direction angle U.
	 43.	 7v7 = 6, u = 30°
	 44.	 7v7 = 20, u = 120°
	 45.	 7v7 = 12, u = 225°
	 46.	 7v7 = 10, u = -30°
In Exercises 47–50, find the dot product v ~ w and projw v.
	 47.	 v = 82, -39, w = 83, 49
	 48.	 v = 8 -1, -29, w = 84, -19
	 49.	 v = 2i - 5j, w = 5i + 2j	 
	 50.	 v = 2i + j, w = 2i - j
In Exercises 51–54, use the dot product to find the angle 
U 10 " U " P2 between the vectors v and w. Round your 
answers to the nearest tenth of a degree.
	 51.	 v = 2i +3j, w = -i + 2j 	
	 52.	 v = i + 4j, w = -4i - j	 
	 53.	 v = 81, 19, w = 8 -3, 29	 
	 54.	 v = 81, 59, w = 83, -19	 
In Exercises 55–58, plot each point in polar coordinates and 
find its rectangular coordinates.
	 55.	 124, 30°2 
	 56.	 112, -60°2 
	 57.	 a-2, - p
4 b 
	 58.	 a-3, -3p
4 b 												 				 	 	 

724	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
In Exercises 59–62, convert the rectangular coordinates 
of each point to polar coordinates 1r, U2, with r + 0 and 
0 " U * 2P.
	 59.	 1-2, 22
	 60.	 113, 12
	 61.	 1213, -22
	 62.	 1-2, -2132
In Exercises 63–66, convert each rectangular equation to a 
polar equation.
	 63.	 3x + 2y = 12
	 64.	 x2 + y2 = 36 
	 65.	 x2 + y2 = 8x 
	 66.	 x2 + y2 = 6y 
In Exercises 67–72, convert each polar equation to a  
rectangular equation.
	 67.	 r = -3 
	 68.	 u = 5p
6 
	 69.	 r = 3 csc u 
	 70.	 r = 2 sec u 
	 71.	 r = 1 - 2 sin u
	 72.	 r = 3 cos u 
In Exercises 73–76, write each complex number in polar 
form. Express the arguments in radians.
	 73.	 -3i 
	 74.	 -1 + i 
	 75.	 513 - 5i 
	 76.	 -2 - 213i 
In Exercises 77–80, write each complex number in  
rectangular form.
	 77.	 21cos 45° + i sin 45°2 
	 78.	 31cos 240° + i sin 240°2
	 79.	 6 acos 3p
4
+ i sin 3p
4 b 
	 80.	 4 acos 7p
6
+ i sin 7p
6 b 
In Exercises 81–84, find z1z2 and z1
z2
 . Leave your answers in 
polar form.
	 81.	 z1 = 31cos 25° + sin 25°2, z2 = 21cos 10° + i sin 10°2 
	 82.	 z1 = 41cos 300° + i sin 300°2, z2 = 21cos 20° + i sin 20°2 
	 83.	 z1 = 2  acos 5p
6
+ i sin 5p
6 b, z2 = 3  acos p
3 + i sin p
3 b 
	 84.	 z1 = 5 acos 4p
3
+ i sin 4p
3 b, z2 = 15 acos p
3 + i sin p
3 b 
In Exercises 85–88, use DeMoivre’s theorem to find the  
indicated power. Write your answers in polar form.
	 85.	 331cos 40° + i sin 40°243
	 86.	 c 4 acos p
6 + i sin p
6 b d
6 
	 87.	 12 - 213i26 
	 88.	 12 - 2i27 
In Exercises 89–92, find all complex roots. Write your 
answers in polar form, with the arguments in degrees.
	 89.	 Cube roots of -125 
	 90.	 Fourth roots of -16i 
	 91.	 Fifth roots of -1 + 13i
	 92.	 Sixth roots of 1 - i 
Applying the Concepts
	 93.	 Width of a river.  	A surveyor wants to measure the width 
of a river. She stands at a point A, with point B opposite her 
on the other side of the river. From A, she walks 320 feet 
along the bank to a point C. The line CA makes an angle of 
40° with the line CB. What is the width of the river? 
	 94.	 Angle of elevation of a hill.  A tower 120 feet tall is 
located at the top of a hill. At a point 460 feet down the hill, 
the angle between the surface of the hill and the line of sight 
to the top of the tower is 12°. Find the angle of elevation of 
the hill to a horizontal plane. 	
	 95.	 Distance between cars.  Two cars start from a point A 
along two straight roads. The angle between the two roads 
is 72°. The speeds of the two cars are 55 miles per hour  
and 65 miles per hour. How far apart are the two cars after 
80 minutes? Round to the nearest tenth of a mile. 
	 96.	 Triangular plot.  A triangular plot of land has sides of 
lengths 310 feet, 415 feet, and 175 feet. Find the largest 
angle between the sides. 
	 97.	 Area.  Find the area of the triangular plot in Exercise 96. 
Round your answer to the nearest square foot.
	 98.	 Resultant force.  Two forces of magnitudes 16 and  
20 pounds are acting on an object. The bearings of the forces 
are N 75° E and S 20° E, respectively. Find the magnitude 
and the direction of the resultant force, to the nearest tenth.
	 99.	 Work.  A force of magnitude 30 pounds at an angle of 48° 
is used to pull a wagon 60 feet. Find the work done.
	100.	 AC current.  The total impedance in an AC circuit is given 
	
	 by Z =
Z1Z2
Z1 + Z2
. Find Z if Z1 = 20 acos p
6 + i sin p
6  b 
	
	 and  Z2 = 10 acos 2p
3
+ i sin 2p
3  b.     			
 	  
Practice Test A
	 1.	 In Problems 1–4, solve triangle ABC. Round each answer to 
the nearest tenth.
115°
35°
A
15
B
C
b
a
	 2.	 A = 42°, B = 37°, a = 50 meters.
	 3.	
106°
A
b
C
53
35
B
	 4.	 a = 30 feet, b = 20 feet, c = 25 feet.
	 5.	 Solve right triangle ABC if a = 5.6 and b = 4.1. Round each 
answer to the nearest tenth. 				

	
Practice Test B 725
 				 
 	
Practice Test B
	 1.	 In triangle ABC, which  
is closest to the correct  
value for b? 
a.	 b = 13.4
b.	 b = 20.8
c.	 b = 20.2
d.	 b = 0.05
	 2.	 In triangle ABC, if A = 27°, B = 50°, and a = 25 meters, 
which is closest to the correct value for c? 
a.	 c = 0.03 meter
b.	 c = 42.2 meters
c.	 c = 53.7 meters
d.	 c = 0.02 meter
	 3.	 In a triangle ABC, which statement is true for the measure-
ments A = 25°, a = 25 feet, b = 30  feet?	
	
	 (The angle measurements in choices (c) and (d) are given to 
the nearest tenth.)
a.	 No triangle has these measurements.
b.	 One triangle has these measurements.
c.	 Two triangles, with c1 = 48.7 and c2 = 5.6, have these 
measurements (in feet).
d.	 Two triangles, with c1 = 46 and c2 = 6.4, have these 
measurements (in feet).
	 4.	 In triangle ABC, which is closest to the correct value for b?
a.	 b = 35.8
b.	 b = 57.2
c.	 b = 18.7
d.	 b = 48.4
	 5.	 A 3-foot shrub is 4.5 feet away from a 12-foot streetlight. 
What length shadow is cast by the shrub? 
a.  1.5 feet
b.  2 feet
c.  2.67 feet
d.  4 feet
	 6.	 In triangle ABC, with a = 12 feet, b = 13 feet, and
c = 7 feet, which is closest to the correct value for A?	
a.	 24°
b.	 66°
c.	 81.8°
d.	 32.2°
	 7.	 Find the measure of the central angle of a circle of radius 
9 feet that intercepts a chord of length 3 feet. Round to the 
nearest tenth of a degree. 
a.	 70.8°
b.	 63.6°
c.	 26.4°
d.	 19.2°
	 8.	 A hunter leaves a straight east–west road at a point A, walk-
ing 2 miles at a bearing N 40° W to a point B. From point B, 
he walks at a bearing of S 20° E and arrives back on the road 
at a point C . How far, to the nearest tenth of a mile, is point 
B from point C? 
a.	 4.5 miles	
b.	 2.9 miles
c.	 1.6 miles	
d.	 5.3 miles
	 9.	 The vector v has initial point P1-2, 52 and terminal point 
Q13, -12. Write v as a position vector. 
a.	 85, -69
b.	 81, -69
c.	 81, -49
d.	 85, -49
	10.	 If v = 81, -49 and w = 83, -29, find v - w. 
a.	 84, -29
b.	 82, 29
c.  8-2, -29
d.	 84, -69
	11.	 Let v = 7 i + 3j and w = -2 i + j. Find 2v - 3w. 
a.	 20 i + 3 j
b.	 20 i - 3j
c.	 8 i - 6 j
d.	 8 i + 6 j
	12.	 Let 7v7 = 6 and suppose v makes an angle of u = -60° 
with the positive x-axis. Write the vector v in the form 
v1
 i + v2 j. 
a.	 313 i - 3 j	
b.	 313 i + 3 j
c.	 3 i + 313 j	
d.	 3 i - 313 j
	13.	 Find the dot product v # w if v = -2 i - 5 j and
	
	 w = 9 i - 4 j. 
a.	 -38
b.	 38
c.	 2 i + 20 j
d.	 2
	14.	 Find the angle between the vectors v = 7 i - j and
w =
 i + 12 j. Round the answer to the nearest degree. 
a.	 84°
b.	 63°
c.	 32°
d.	 17°
105°
35°
A
12
B
C
b
110°
A
b
B
C
21
37 
	 6.	 Find the measure of the central angle of a circle of radius  
8 feet that intercepts a chord of length 4.5 feet. Round to the 
nearest tenth of a degree.	
	 7.	 A surveyor, starting from point A, walks 580 feet in the 
direction N 70.0° E. From that point, she walks 725 feet in 
the direction N 35.0° W. How far, to the nearest foot, is she 
from her starting point? 
	 8.	 The vector v has initial point P13, 52 and terminal point 
Q12, -72. Write v as a position vector. 
	 9.	 If v = 8 -2, 39 and w = 81, 59, find v - w. 
	10.	 If v = -2i + 3j and w = i + 5j, find 2v - 3w. 
	11.	 Let 7v7  = 3 and suppose v makes an angle of u = -30° 
with the positive x-axis. Write the vector v in the form 
	
	 v1i + v2 j.
	12.	 Find the dot product v # w if v = 4i + 3j and w = -i + 7j.
	13.	 Find the angle u10 … u … 180°2 between the vectors 
v = 3i - 4 j and w = -2i + 5j. Round the answer to the 
nearest tenth of a degree. 
	14.	 Convert 1-2, -45°2 to rectangular coordinates. 
	15.	 Convert 1- 13, -12 to polar coordinates with r 7 0 and 
0 … u 6 2p.
	16.	 Convert the polar equation r = -3 to rectangular form. 
Identify the curve having this equation.
	17.	 Write 3 acos a2p
3 b + i sin a2p
3 b b in rectangular form.
	18.	 Write z1
z2
 in polar form, if z1 = 1 - 13i, z2 = -1 + i, with 
	
	 the argument given in degrees.	
	19.	 Use DeMoivre’s theorem to find
	
	  c 15 acos ap
4 b + i sin ap
4 b b d
-6
. Write the answer in 
	
	 rectangular form.
	20.	 Find all fourth roots of 1 + i. Express the argument in 
degrees.		

726	 Chapter 7      Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	15.	 Convert 1-4, -30°2 to rectangular coordinates. 
a.	 1-213, -22
b.	 12, -2132
c.	 1-213, 22
d.	 1213, -22
	16.	 Convert 13, - 132 to polar coordinates, with r 7 0 and 
0 … u 6 360°. 
a.	 112, 330°2
b.	 1213, 330°2
c.	 1213, 150°2
d.	 113, 150°2
	17.	 Which polar equation has a circle for its graph? 
a.	 r = -4 cos u + 1
b.	 r = -2
c.	 r sin u = 2
d.	 r cos u = 1
	18.	 Write 5 acos a7p
3 b + i sin a7p
3 b b in rectangular form. 
a.	 5 + 513 i
b.	 5 - 513 i
c.	 5
2 + 513
2
  i
d.	 5
2 - 513
2
 i
	19.	 Write z1
z2
 in polar form, if z1 = i and z2 = 1 - i. 
a.	 11cos 135° +  i sin 135°2
b.	 12 1cos 135° + i sin 135°2
c.	 12
2  1cos 135° + i sin 135°2
d.	 12
2  1cos 315° + i sin 315°2
	20.	 Use DeMoivre’s theorem to find
	
	 c 12 acos a p
12b + i sin a p
12b b d
4
. Write the answer in 
	
	 rectangular form. 
a.	 -2 + 213i
b.	 1
2 + 13
2  i
c.	 2 + 213i
d.	 1
2 - 13
2 i
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–7
	 1.	 If f 1x2 = 1x and g1x2 =
1
x - 2, find the domain of g
f .
	 2.	 If f 1x2 = 2x + 7, find f -11x2.
	 3.	 Sketch the graph of y = -2x2 + 8x + 10. 
	 4.	 Solve the inequality x2 - 6x + 8 7 0. 
In Exercises 5 and 6, solve each equation for all solutions in 
the interval 30, 2P2. Give your answers in radians.
	 5.	 sin u cos u = - 13
4
	 6.	 4 sin2 u - 1 = 0
In Exercises 7 and 8, find all complex roots. Write your 
answers in polar form, with the argument in degrees.
	 7.	 Fourth roots of 13 + i
	 8.	 Sixth roots of -64
	 9.	 Find the equation of the line in slope–intercept form that 
passes through the point 1-1, 52 and is perpendicular to the 
line 2x + 3y + 6 = 0.
	10.	 Write the following in condensed form: 
	
	 2 log x + 1
2 log 1y + 12 -  log 13x + 12.	
In Exercises 11–14, use transformations to sketch the graph of 
each function.
	11.	 f 1x2 = 21x - 1 - 3 
	12.	 f 1x2 = - x + 1 + 2 
	13.	 f 1x2 = -2 cos 13x + p2
	14.	 f 1x2 = 2 sec 3x 
	15.	 If cos u = - 5
13 and sin u 7 0, find tan u. 
	16.	 Use an identity to find the exact value of 
cos 65° cos 35° + sin 65° sin 35°.
	17.	 Verify the identity
	
	
1
1 - cos x +
1
1 + cos x = 211 + cot2 x2.
	18.	 Verify the identity 1 + cos 2x
sin 2x
= cot x.
	19.	 Solve triangle ABC with A = 65°, B = 46°, c = 60 meters. 
Round your answers to the nearest tenth if necessary.
	20.	 A ladder leaning against a vertical wall makes an angle of 
47° with the ground. The foot of the ladder is 2.3 meters from 
the wall. Find the length of the ladder. Round to the nearest 
tenth. 
 	 		
 	
 	 
 
 
 	
 		

Systems of equations are frequently the tools used to 
describe relationships among variables representing different 
interrelated quantities. These same systems of equations 
are used to predict results associated with changes in the 
quantities.
The quantities involved can come from the study of  
medicine, taxes, elections, business, agriculture, city planning, 
or any discipline in which multiple quantities interact.
Systems of Equations 
and Inequalities
C h a p t e r 8
Topics
8.1	 Systems of Linear Equations  
in Two Variables
8.2	 Systems of Linear Equations  
in Three Variables
8.3	 Partial-Fraction Decomposition
8.4	 Systems of Nonlinear Equations
8.5	 Systems of Inequalities
8.6	 Linear Programming

728	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Al-Khwarizmi (780–850)
Al-Khwarizmi came to Baghdad from 
the town of Khwarizm, which is now 
called Khiva and is part of Uzbekistan. 
The term algorithm is a corruption of 
the name al-khwarizmi. Originally, the 
word algorism was used for the rules 
for performing arithmetic by using dec-
imal notation. Algorism evolved into 
the word algorithm by the eighteenth 
century. The word algorithm now 
means a finite set of precise instruc-
tions for performing a computation 
or for solving a problem. (The picture 
shown here is a Soviet postage stamp 
from 1983 depicting Al-Khwarizmi.)
System of Equations
A set of equations with common variables is called a system of equations. If each equa-
tion in a system of equations is linear, then the set of equations is called a system of linear 
equations or a linear system of equations. However, if at least one equation in a system of 
equations is nonlinear, then the set of equations is called a system of nonlinear equations. 
In this section, we solve systems of two linear equations in two variables, such as
e2x -
y = 5
x + 2y = 5.
Notice that we designate a system of equations by using a left brace. A system of equa-
tions is sometimes referred to as a set of simultaneous equations. A solution of a system 
Systems of Linear Equations  
in Two Variables
S e c t i o n 8.1 
Algebra–Iraq Connection
The most important contributions of medieval Islamic mathematicians lie in the area of 
algebra. One of the greatest Islamic scholars was Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi 
(780–850). Al-Khwarizmi was one of the first scholars in the House of Wisdom, an acad-
emy of scientists, established by caliph al-Mamun in the city of Baghdad in what is 
now Iraq. Jews, Christians, and Muslims worked together in scholarly pursuits in the 
academy during this period. The eminent scholar al-Khwarizmi wrote several books on 
astronomy and mathematics. Western Europeans first learned about algebra from his 
books. The word algebra comes from the Arabic al-jabr, part of the title of his book 
Kitab al-jabr wal-muqabala.
This book was translated into Latin and was a widely used text. The Arabic word  
al-jabr means “restoration,” as in restoring broken parts. (At one time, it was not  
unusual to see the sign “Algebrista y Sangrador,” meaning “bone setter and blood 
letter,” at the entrance of a Spanish barber’s shop. The sign informed customers of 
the barber’s side business.) Al-Khwarizmi used the term in the mathematical sense of 
removing a negative quantity on one side of an equation and restoring it as a positive 
quantity on the other side.
1	
Verify a solution to a system 
of equations.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Graphs of equations (Section 2.2,  
page 165)
2	 Graphs of linear equations (Section 2.3, 
page 184)
Objectives
1	 Verify a solution to a system of equations.
2	 Solve a system of equations by the  
graphical method.
3	 Solve a system of equations by the  
substitution method.
4	 Solve a system of equations by the  
elimination method.
5	 Solve applied problems by solving systems 
of equations.

	
Section 8.1    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 729
of equations in two variables x and y is an ordered pair of numbers 1a, b2 such that when 
x is replaced with a and y is replaced with b, the resulting equations are true. The solution 
set of a system of equations is the set of all solutions of the system.
a.  Check 13, 12
Equation (1)
Equation (2)
     2x - y = 5
    x + 2y = 5
2132 - 1 ≟5
3 + 2112 ≟5
              5 = 5 ✓
              5 = 5 ✓
Because 13, 12 satisfies both equations,  
it is a solution of the system.
b.  Check 14, 32
Equation (1)
Equation (2)
    2x - y = 5
     x + 2y = 5
2142 - 3 ≟5
4 + 2132 ≟5
              5 = 5 ✓
 10 ≟5  ✕
Because 14, 32 does not satisfy both equa-
tions, it is not a solution of the system.
Check whether each ordered pair is a solution of the system of linear equations:
e2x -
y = 5
x + 2y = 5  (1)
 (2)
a.	 13, 12        b.   14, 32
Solution
Verifying a Solution
EXAMPLE 1
Practice Problem 1  Check whether each ordered pair is a solution of the system:
e x + y = 4
3x - y = 0  (1)
 (2)
a.   12, 22        b.   11, 32
In this section, you will learn three methods of solving a system of two linear equa-
tions in two variables: the graphical method, the substitution method, and the elimination 
method.
Graphical Method
Recall that the graph of a linear equation
ax + by = c   1a and b not both zero2
is a line. Consider the following system of linear equations:
ea1x + b1y = c1
a2x + b2y = c2
A solution of this system is a point (an ordered pair) that satisfies both equations. There-
fore, to find or estimate the solution set of this system, we graph both equations on the same 
coordinate axes and find the coordinates of any points of intersection. This procedure is 
called the graphical method.
2	
Solve a system of equations by 
the graphical method.

730	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
y
2
x
0
(3, 2)
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
(6, 0)
(0, 24)
2
22
22
2x 2 y 5 4
2x 1 3y 5 12
Figure 8.1  Graphical solution
In Example 2, solve each equation 
for y. Graph
 y1 = 2x - 4 and
 y2 = - 2
3x + 4
on the same screen.
Technology
Connection
Use the Intersect feature on your 
calculator to find the point of 
intersection.
22
25
8
6
Use the graphical method to solve the system of equations.
e2x -
y = 4
2x + 3y = 12  (1)
 (2)
Solution
Step 1  Graph both equations on the same coordinate axes.
	
(i)   We first graph equation (1) by finding its intercepts.
	
a.  To find the y-intercept, set x = 0 and solve for y. We have 
2102 - y = 4, or y = -4; so the y-intercept is -4.
	
b.  To find the x-intercept, set y = 0 and solve for x. We have 
2x - 0 = 4, or x = 2; so the x-intercept is 2.
	
The points 10, -42 and 12, 02 are on the graph of equation (1), which is 
sketched in red in Figure 8.1.
	
(ii)  We now graph equation (2) using intercepts.
	
Here the x-intercept is 6 and the y-intercept is 4; so joining the points 
10, 42 and 16, 02 produces the line sketched in blue in Figure 8.1.
Step 2  Find the point(s) of intersection of the two graphs. We observe in Figure 8.1 
that the point of intersection of the two graphs is 13, 22.
Step 3  Check your solution(s). Replace x with 3 and y with 2 in equations (1)  
and (2).
Equation (1)
Equation (2)
     2x - y = 4
        2x + 3y = 12
2132 - 2 ≟4
2132 + 3122 ≟12
              4 = 4 ✓
                  12 = 12 ✓
Step 4  Write the solution set for the system. 
The solution set is 513, 226.
Practice Problem 2  Solve the system of equations graphically.
e x + y = 2
4x + y = -1  (1)
 (2)
If a system of equations has at least one solution (as in Example 2), the system is  
consistent. A system of equations with no solution is inconsistent, and its solution set is 
the empty set, ∅.
A system of two linear equations in two variables must have one of the following types 
of solution sets:
1.	 One solution, also called unique solution (the lines intersect; see Figure 8.2(a)): the 
system is consistent, and the equations in the system are said to be independent.
2.	 No solution (the lines are parallel; see Figure 8.2(b)): the system is inconsistent.
3.	 Infinitely many solutions (the lines coincide; see Figure 8.2(c)): the system is  
consistent, and the equations in the system are said to be dependent.
Solving a System by the Graphical Method
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 8.1    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 731
Substitution Method
Another way to solve a linear system of equations is with the substitution method.
Figure 8.2  Possible solution sets of a system of two linear equations
y
x
O
(a, b)
l1
l2
Consistent system;
independent equations
One solution
(a)
y
x
O
l1
l2
Inconsistent system
No solution
(b)
y
x
O
l2 5 l1
Consistent system;
dependent equations
Inﬁnitely many 
solutions
(c)
3	
Solve a system of equations by 
the substitution method.
Reduce the solution of the system to the solution of one 
equation in one variable by substitution.
Solve the system:
e2x - 5y = 3
y - 2x = 9  (1)
 (2)
The Substitution Method
Objective
procedure 
in action
EXAMPLE 3
Step 1 Solve for one variable. Choose one of the 
equations and express one of its variables in terms of 
the other variable.
1.	We choose equation (2) and express y in terms of x.
y = 2x + 9  (3)           
Solve equation (2) for y.
Step 2 Substitute. Substitute the expression found 
in Step 1 into the other equation to obtain an equation 
in one variable.
2.	
 2x - 5y = 3
    Equation (1)
 2x - 512x + 92 = 3
    Substitute 2x + 9 for y. 
 2x - 10x - 45 = 3
    Distributive property
3.	
 -8x - 45 = 3
    Combine like terms.
 -8x = 3 + 45    Add 45 to both sides.
 x = -6
    Solve for x. 
4.	 y = 2x + 9
         Equation (3) from Step 1
 y = 21-62 + 9 = -3         Substitute x = -6.
Because x = -6 and y = -3, the solution set is 51-6, -326.
5.	Check: x = -6 and y = -3.
Equation (1)
Equation (2)
21-62 - 51-32 ≟3
-3 - 21-62 ≟9
    -12 + 15       = 3 ✓
-3 + 12       = 9 ✓
Step 3 Solve the equation obtained in Step 2.
Step 4 Back-substitute. Substitute the value(s) you 
found in Step 3 back into the expression you found in 
Step 1. The result is the solution(s).
Example
Step 5 Check. Check your answer(s) in the original 
equations.

732	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Practice Problem 3  Solve: e x - y = 5
2x + y = 7  (1)
 (2)
It is possible that in the process of solving the equation in Step 3, you obtain an equa-
tion of the form 0 = k, where k is a nonzero constant. In such cases, the false statement 
0 = k indicates that the system is inconsistent.
It is easy to make arithmetic errors 
in the many steps involved in the 
process of solving a system of 
equations. You should check your 
solution by substituting it into each 
equation in the original system.
Side 
Note
Solve the system of equations.
e x +
y = 3
2x + 2y = 9  (1)
 (2)
Solution
Step 1  Solve equation (1) for y in terms of x.
y = 3 - x    Add -x to both sides.
Step 2  Substitute this expression into equation (2).
 2x + 2y = 9    Equation (2)
 2x + 213 - x2 = 9    Replace y with 3 - x (from Step 1).
Step 3  Solve for x.
 2x + 6 - 2x = 9    Distributive property
 0 = 3    Subtract 6 from both sides and simplify.
False
Because equation 0 = 3 is false, the system is inconsistent. Figure 8.3 shows that the 
graphs of the two equations in this system are parallel lines. Because the lines do not inter-
sect, the system has no solution. The solution set is ∅.
Practice Problem 4  Solve the system of equations.
e
x - 3y = 1
-2x + 6y = 3  (1)
 (2)
In Step 3, it is also possible to end with an equation of the form k = k. In such cases, 
the equations are dependent and the system has infinitely many solutions.
()*
Attempting to Solve an Inconsistent System of Equations
EXAMPLE 4
21
y
1
2
4
5 (0, 4.5)
(4.5, 0)
(0, 3)
(3, 0)
x
0
3
2
4
5
1
3
2x 1 2y 5 9
x 1 y 5 3
Figure 8.3  Inconsistent system
Solve the system of equations.
e
4x + 2y = 12    (1)
-2x -
y = -6   (2)
Solution
Step 1  Solve equation (2) for y in terms of x.
 -2x - y = -6
	
Equation (2)
 -y = -6 + 2x	
Add 2x to both sides.
 y = 6 - 2x 	
Multiply both sides by -1.
Step 2  Substitute 16 - 2x2 for y in equation (1).
 4x + 2y = 12    Equation (1)
 4x + 216 - 2x2 = 12    Replace y with 6 - 2x (from Step 1).
Solving a Dependent System
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 8.1    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 733
Step 3  Solve for x.
 4x + 12 - 4x = 12    Distributive property
 0 = 0     Subtract 12 from both sides and simplify.
True
The equation 0 = 0 is true for every value of x. Thus, any value of x can be used in the 
equation y = 6 - 2x for back-substitution.
The solutions of the system are of the form 1x, 6 - 2x2, and the solution set is
51x, 6 - 2x26.
In other words, the solution set consists of the infinite number of ordered pairs 1x, y2 lying 
on the line with equation 4x + 2y = 12, as shown in Figure 8.4. You can find particular 
solutions by replacing x with any real number. For example, if we let x = 0 in 1x, 6 - 2x2, 
we find that 10, 6 - 21022 = 10, 62 is a solution of the system. Similarly, letting x = 1, 
we find that 11, 42 is a solution.
Practice Problem 5  Solve the system of equations.
e -2x +
y = -3
4x - 2y = 6   (1)
 (2)
Elimination Method
The elimination method of solving a system of equations is also called the addition 
method.
()*
We use the informal notation
51x, 6 - 2x26
rather than
51x, 6 - 2x2x is a real number6.
Do you  
know?
2
2
4
6
4
6
y
x
0
(0, 6)
(1, 4)
4x 1 2y 5 12
Figure 8.4  Dependent equations
4	
Solve a system of equations by 
the elimination method.
Solve a system of two linear equations by first  
eliminating one variable.
Solve the system:
e2x + 3y = 21
3x - 4y = 23   (1)
  (2)
The Elimination Method
Objective
procedure 
in action
EXAMPLE 6
Step 1 Adjust the coefficients. If necessary,  
multiply both equations by appropriate numbers to  
get two new equations in which the coefficients of the 
variable to be eliminated are opposites.
1.	We arbitrarily select y as the variable to be eliminated.
e8x + 12y = 84
9x - 12y = 69     Multiply equation (1) by 4.
Multiply equation (2) by 3.
()*
Step 2 Add the equations. Add the resulting  
equations to get an equation in one variable.
Coefficients are 
opposites of each 
other.
Step 3 Solve the resulting equation.
2.
	
8x + 12y =
84
9x - 12y =
69
17x
= 153
   
Adding the two equations from
Step 1 eliminates the y@terms.
3.	 17x = 153    Equation from Step 2
 x = 153
17     Divide both sides by 17.
 x = 9
    Simplify.
Example
(continued)

734	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Practice Problem 6  Solve the system.
e3x + 2y = 3
9x - 4y = 4  (1)
 (2)
As in the substitution method, if you add the equations in Step 2 and the resulting equa-
tion becomes 0 = k, where k ≠0, then the system is inconsistent: it has no solutions. 
As an illustration, if you solve the system of equations in Example 4 by the elimination 
method, you will obtain the equation 0 = 3. You now conclude that the system is incon-
sistent. Similarly, in Step 2, if you obtain 0x + 0y = 0 (or 0 = 0), then the equations are 
dependent. See Example 5.
Applications
We can deduce from Section 2.4 that as the price of a product increases, demand for  
it decreases and as the price increases, the supply of the product also increases. The  
equilibrium point is the ordered pair 1x,  p2 such that the number of units, x, and the price 
per unit, p, satisfy both the demand and supply equations.
Step 4 Back-substitute the value you found into 
one of the original equations to solve for the other  
variable.
Step 5 Write the solution set from Steps 3 and 4.
Step 6 Check your solution(s) in the original  
equations (1) and (2).
4.	
 2x + 3y = 21    Equation (1)
 2192 + 3y = 21    Replace x with 9 from Step 3.
 18 + 3y = 21    Simplify.
 3y = 3     Subtract 18 from both sides.
 y = 1     Solve for y.
5.	The solution set is 519, 126.
5	
Solve applied problems by 
solving systems of equations.
Find the equilibrium point if the supply and demand functions for a new brand of digital 
video recorder (DVR) are given by the system
p = 60 + 0.0012x (1)    Supply equation
p = 80 - 0.0008x (2)    Demand equation
where p is the price in dollars and x is the number of units.
Solution
We substitute the value of p from equation (1) into equation (2) and solve the resulting 
equation.
 p = 80 - 0.0008x
    Demand equation (2)
 60 + 0.0012x = 80 - 0.0008x
    Replace p with 60 + 0.0012x in (1).
 0.002x = 20
    Collect like terms and simplify.
 x =
20
0.002 = 10,000    Solve for x.
Finding the Equilibrium Point
EXAMPLE 7
The graph of a system of equa-
tions allows you to use geometric 
intuition to understand algebra. If 
the geometric and algebraic rep-
resentations of a solution do not 
agree, you must go back and find 
the error(s).
Side 
Note
6.	Check x = 9 and y = 1.
	 Equation (1)
	 Equation (2)
 2192 + 3112 ≟21
 18 + 3
 = 21 ✓
 3192 - 4112 = 23
  27 - 4
= 23 ✓

	
Section 8.1    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 735
The equilibrium point occurs when the supply and demand for DVRs is 10,000 units. To find 
the price p, we back-substitute x = 10,000 into either of the original equations (1) or (2).
 p = 60 + 0.0012x
    Equation (1)
 = 60 + 0.0012110,0002    Replace x with 10,000.
 = 72
    Simplify.
The equilibrium point is (10,000, 72). See Figure 8.5. This means that at a price of $72 per 
unit, the supply and demand for DVRs is 10,000 units.
Check. Verify that the ordered pair (10,000, 72) satisfies both equations (1) and (2).
Practice Problem 7  Find the equilibrium point.
ep = 20 + 0.002x
p = 77 - 0.008x  (1)
 (2)    Supply equation
Demand equation
In general, to solve an applied problem involving two unknowns, we need to set up two 
equations using two variables that represent the two unknowns. The general rule is that we 
need two equations to find two unknowns.
p
x
10,000 15,000
0
5,000
60
80
70
Supply
Demand
Equilibrium Point
(10,000, 72)
Number of units
Price per unit (dollars)
Figure 8.5  Price of DVRs
Last year Mrs. Rogers invested $40,000. Part was invested at 6% interest rate per year, and 
the rest was invested in a risky venture at 10% per year. Combined income for the year 
totaled $3,120. How much did she invest at each rate?
Solution
Two amounts are to be determined, so we will represent them using two variables. Let
 x = amount invested at 6%
 y = amount invested at 10%.
Because 6% of x is 0.06x and 10% of y is 0.10y, we have
 0.06x = income from the 6% investment
 0.10y = income from the 10% investment.
We now write our two equations in two variables:
 x + y = 40,000   (1)    Total amount invested
 0.06x + 0.10y = 3,120   (2)    Total income from both investments
Let’s use the elimination method to solve these equations.
 -6x -
6y = -240,000
    Multiply equation (1) by -6.
 6x + 10y =
312,000
    Multiply equation (2) by 100.
 4y =
72,000
    Add
 y =
72,000
4
= 18,000    Solve for y.
Back-substitute y = 18,000 in equation (1) to get
 x + 18,000 = 40,000
 x = 40,000 - 18,000    Solve for x.
 = 22,000.
Mrs. Rogers invested $22,000 at 6% and $18,000 at 10%.
Check.   6% of $22,000 is 0.06 * 22,000 = 1320, and 
10% of +18,000 is 0.10 * 18,000 = 1800.
Finally, +22,000 + +18,000 = +40,000, and +1320 + +1800 = +3120, as given.
Analyzing Investments
EXAMPLE 8

736	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Practice Problem 8  A speculator invested part of $150,000 in a high-risk venture  
and received a return of 12% at the end of the year. The rest was invested at 8% annual  
return. The combined annual income from the two ventures was $15,400. How much  
was invested at each rate?
Answers to Practice Problems
1.  a. No  b. Yes    2. 51-1, 326
3. 514, -126    4. ∅    5. 51x, 2x - 326
6. ea2
3, 1
2b f    7. 515700, 31.426 
8. $85,000 at 12%, $65,000 at 8%
Exercises
section 8.1 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The ordered pair 1a, b2 is a(n) 
 of a system 
of equations in x and y provided that when x is replaced with 
a and y is replaced with b, the resulting equations are true.
	 2.	 The two nongraphical methods for solving a system of equa-
tions are the 
 and 
 methods.
	 3.	 If in the process of solving a system of equations you get an 
equation of the form 0 = k, where k is not zero, then the  
system is 
.
	 4.	 If in the process of solving a system of equations you 
get an equation of the form 0 = 0, then the system has 
.
	 5.	 True or False. A system consisting of two identical  
equations has no solution. 
	 6.	 True or False. If in the process of solving a system of two 
equations in x and y you get the equation 5 = 5, then the  
system has exactly one solution. 
In Exercises 7–12, determine which ordered pairs are  
solutions of each system of equations.
	 7.	 e2x + 3y = 3
3x - 4y = 13 11, -32, 13, -12, 16, 32, a5, 1
2b 
	 8.	 e x + 2y = 6
3x + 6y = 18 12, 22, 1-2, 42, 10, 32, 11, 22
	 9.	 e
5x - 2y = 7
-10x + 4y = 11 a5
4, 1b, a0, 11
4 b, 11, -12, 13, 42
	10.	 e x - 2y = -5
3x -
y = 5  11, 32, 1-5, 02, 13, 42, 13, -42 
	11.	 c
x +
y = 1
1
2x + 1
3y = 2 10, 12, 11, 02, a2
3, 3
2b, 110, -92 
	12.	 d
2
x + 3
y = 2
6
x + 18
y = 9
 13, 22, 12, 32, 14, 32, 13, 42 
In Exercises 13–22, estimate the solution(s) (if any) of each 
system by the graphical method. Check your solution(s). For 
any dependent equations, write your answer with x being 
arbitrary.
	13.	 ex + y = 3
x - y = 1 
	14.	 ex + y = 10
x - y = 2 
	15.	 e x + 2y = 6
2x +
y = 6 
	16.	 e2x - y = 4
x - y = 3 
	17.	 e3x - y = -9
y = 3x + 6 
	18.	 c
5x + 2y = 10
y = -5
2x - 5 
	19.	 ex + y = 7
y = 2x 
	20.	 ey - x = 2
y + x = 9 
	21.	 e3x + y = 12
y = -3x + 12 
	22.	 e2x + 3y = 6
6y = -4x + 12 
In Exercises 23–36, determine whether each system is con-
sistent or inconsistent. If the system is consistent, determine 
whether the equations are dependent or independent. Do not 
solve the system.
	23.	 ey = -2x + 3
y =
3x + 5
	24.	 e3x + y = 5
2x + y = 4
	25.	 e2x + 3y = 5
3x + 2y = 7
	26.	 e2x - 4y = 5
3x + 5y = -6
	27.	 e3x +
5y = 7
6x + 10y = 14
	28.	 e3x -
y = 2
9x - 3y = 6
	29.	 e x + 2y = -5
2x -
y = 4
	30.	 e x + 2y = -2
2x - 3y = 5
	31.	 e2x - 3y = 5
6x - 9y = 10
	32.	 e 3x +
y = 2
15x + 5y = 15
	33.	 c
-3x + 4y = 5
9
2x - 6y = 15
2
	34.	 c
6x + 5y = 11
9x + 15
2 y = 21
	35.	 c
7x - 2y = 3
11x - 3
2y = 8
	36.	 c
4x + 7y = 10
10x + 35
2 y = 25     

	
Section 8.1    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 737
In Exercises 37–46, solve each system of equations by the  
substitution method. Check your solutions. For any  
dependent equations, write your answer in the ordered  
pair form given in Example 5.
	37.	 e
y = 2x + 1
5x + 2y = 9
	38.	 e
x = 3y - 1
2x - 3y = 7
	39.	 e3x - y = 5
x + y = 7 
	40.	 e2x + y = 2
3x - y = -7 
	41.	 e
2x -
y = 5
-4x + 2y = 7 
	42.	 e
3x + 2y = 5
-9x - 6y = 15 
	43.	 c
2
3x +
y = 3
3x + 2y = 1 
	44.	 e x - 2y = 3
4x + 6y = 3
	45.	 e
x - 2y = 5
-3x + 6y = -15
	46.	 e x +
y = 3
2x + 2y = 6
In Exercises 47–56, solve each system of equations by the 
elimination method. Check your solutions. For any dependent 
equations, write your answer as in Example 5.
	47.	 ex - y = 1
x + y = 5 
	48.	 e2x - 3y = 5
3x + 2y = 14 
	49.	 e x +
y = 0
2x + 3y = 3 
	50.	 e x + y = 3
3x + y = 1 
	51.	 e5x -
y = 5
3x + 2y = -10
	52.	 e
3x - 2y = 1
-7x + 3y = 1
	53.	 e
x -
y = 2
-2x + 2y = 5 
	54.	 e x +
y = 5
2x + 2y = -10 
	55.	 e4x + 6y = 12
2x + 3y = 6 
	56.	 e
4x +
7y = -3
-8x - 14y = 6 
In Exercises 57–74, use any method to solve each system of 
equations. For any dependent equations, write your answer  
as in Example 5.
	57.	 e2x +
y = 9
2x - 3y = 5 
	58.	 ex + 2y = 10
x - 2y = -6 
	59.	 e2x + 5y = 2
x + 3y = 2 
	60.	 e4x -
y = 6
3x - 4y = 11 
	61.	 e2x + 3y = 7
3x +
y = 7 
	62.	 ex = 3y + 4
x = 5y + 10 
	63.	 e2x + 3y = 9
3x + 2y = 11 
	64.	 c
3x - 4y = 0
y = 2x + 1
3
	65.	 c
x
4 + y
6 = 1
x + 21x - y2 = 7
	66.	 c
x
3 + y
5 = 12
x - y = 4 
	67.	 e3x
= 21x + y2
3x - 5y = 2
	68.	 ey +
x + 2 = 0
y + 2x + 1 = 0
	69.	 e0.2x + 0.7y = 1.5
0.4x - 0.3y = 1.3
	70.	 e0.6x +
y = -1
x - 0.5y = 7
	71.	 d
x
2 + y
3 = 1
3x
4 + y
2 = 1 
	72.	 c
x
3 - y
5 = 2
6y - 10x = 25
	73.	 d
  x
3 - y
2 = 1
3y
8 - x
4 = -3
4
	74.	 d
x
5 - y
2 = 1
15y - 6x = -30
In Exercises 75–82, let u = 1
x and V =  1
y. Solve for u and V;
then solve for x and y.
	75.	 d
2
x + 5
y = -5
3
x - 2
y = -17
	76.	 d
2
x + 1
y = 3
4
x - 2
y = 0 
	77.	 d
3
x + 1
y = 4
6
x - 1
y = 2 
	78.	 d
6
x + 3
y = 0
4
x + 9
y = -1 
	79.	 d
5
x + 10
y = 3
2
x - 12
y = -2 
	80.	 d
3
x + 4
y = 1
6
x + 4
y = 3 
	81.	 c
2
x + 1
y = 4
x + 2y = 6xy
	82.	 c
1
x - 2
y = 3
2x - y = 5xy
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 83–86, the demand and supply functions of a 
product are given. In each case, p represents the price in  
dollars per unit and x represents the number of units in  
hundreds. Find the equilibrium point.
	83.	 e 2p + x = 140
12p - x = 280 	
Demand equation
Supply equation 
	84.	 e 7p + x = 150
10p - x = 20 	
Demand equation
Supply equation 
	85.	 e2p + x = 25
x - p = 13	
Demand equation
Supply equation 
	86.	 ep + 2x = 96
p -
x = 39	
Demand equation
Supply equation 
In Exercises 87–102, use a system of equations to solve each 
problem.
	87.	 Diameter of a pizza. The sum of the diameters of the  
largest and smallest pizzas sold at the Monster Pizza Shop is 
29 inches. The difference in their diameters is 13 inches. Find 
the diameters of the largest and smallest pizzas. 
	88.	 Calories in hamburgers. The sum of the number of  
calories in a hamburger from Boston Burger and a hamburger 
from Carmen’s Broiler is 1130. The difference in the number 
of calories in the hamburgers is 40. If the Boston Burger has 
the larger number of calories, how many calories are in each 
restaurant’s hamburger? 
	89.	 Trash composition. Paper and plastic together account for 48% 
(by weight) of the total trash collected. If the weight of paper trash 
collected is five times the weight of plastic trash, what percent of 
the total trash collected is paper and what percent is plastic?                     
 
 

738	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	 90.	 Cost of food and clothing. The average monthly com-
bined cost of food and clothing for the Martínez family is 
$1000. If they spend four times as much for food as they do 
for clothes, what is the average monthly cost of each? 
	 91.	 Mardi Gras parade “throws.” Levon paid 40 for each 
string of beads and 30 for each doubloon (a special coin) he 
bought to throw from his Mardi Gras float. He paid a total of 
$265 for the two items. His doubloons and beads combined 
to a total of 770 items. How many doubloons and how many 
strings of beads did Levon buy? 
	 92.	 Halloween candy. Janet bought 135 pieces of candy to 
give away on Halloween. She bought two kinds of candy, 
paying 24 apiece for one kind and 18 apiece for the other. 
If she spent $26.70 for the candy, how many pieces of each 
kind did she buy? 
In Exercises 93 and 94, use the information in the  
following table.
Food Description 
McDonald’s
Fat 
(gms)
Carb 
(gms)
Protein 
(gms)
Breakfast Burrito
20
21
13
Egg McMuffin
12
27
17
Source: www.shapefit.com/mcdonalds.html
Suppose you ate breakfast at McDonald’s during one  
workweek (Monday–Friday).
	 93.	 McDonald’s breakfast. If you consumed 123 grams of 
carbohydrates and 77 grams of protein, how many of each 
breakfast item did you eat during the workweek?
	 94.	 McDonald’s breakfast. If you consumed 68 grams of 
fat and 129 grams of carbohydrates, how many of each 
breakfast item did you eat during the workweek?
	 95.	 Investment. Last year Mrs. García invested $50,000. She 
put part of the money in a real estate venture that paid 7.5% 
for the year and the rest in a small-business venture that 
returned 12% for the year. The combined income from the 
two investments for the year totaled $5190. How much did 
she invest at each rate? 
	 96.	 Investment. Mr. Sharma invested a total of $30,000 in 
two ventures for a year. The annual return from one of them 
was 8%, and the other paid 10.5% for the year. He received 
a total income of $2550 from both investments. How much 
did he invest at each rate? 
	 97.	 Tutoring other students. A student earns twice as much 
per hour for tutoring as she does working at McDougal’s. 
If her average wage is $11.25 per hour, how much does she 
earn per hour at each job?
	 98.	 Plumber’s earnings. A plumber earns $15 per hour more 
than her apprentice. For a 40-hour week, their combined 
earnings are $2200. What is the hourly rate for each?
	 99.	 Mixture problem. An herb that sells for $5.50 per pound 
is mixed with tea that sells for $3.20 per pound to produce 
a 100-pound mix that is worth $3.66 per pound. How many 
pounds of each ingredient does the mix contain?
	100.	 Mixture problem. A chemist had a solution of 60% acid. 
She added some distilled water, reducing the acid concentra-
tion to 40%. She then added 1 more liter of water to further 
reduce the acid concentration to 30%. How much of the 
30% solution did she then have? 
	101.	 Airplane speed. With the help of a tail wind, a plane trav-
els 3000 kilometers in five hours. The return trip against the 
wind requires six hours. Assume that the direction and the 
wind speed are constant. Find both the speed of the plane in 
still air and the wind speed. [Hint: Remember that the wind 
helps the plane in one direction and hinders it in the other.]
	102.	 Motorboat speed. A motorboat travels upstream a dis-
tance of 12 miles in two hours. If the current had been twice 
as strong, the trip would have taken three hours. How long 
should it take for the return trip downstream? 
	103.	 Break-even analysis. A local publishing company pub-
lishes City Magazine. The production and setup costs are 
$30,000, and the cost of producing each magazine is $2. 
Each magazine sells for $3.50. Assume that x magazines  
are published and sold.
a.	 Write the total cost function y = C1x2 and the revenue 
function y = R1x2. 
b.	 Graph both functions from part (a) on the same  
coordinate plane. 
c.	 How many magazines must be sold to break even?
	104.	 Break-even analysis. An electronic manufacturer plans 
to make digital portable music players (MP4s). Fixed costs 
will be $750,000, and it will cost $50 to manufacture each 
MP4, which will be sold for $125 to the retailers. Assume 
that x MP4s are manufactured and sold.
a.	 Write the total cost function y = C1x2 and the revenue 
function y = R1x2. 
b.	 Graph both functions from part (a) on the same  
coordinate plane. 
c.	 How many MP4s must be sold to break even? 
	105.	 Making a job decision. Shanaysha has job offers from 
department stores A and B to sell major appliances. Store 
A offers her a fixed salary of $400 per week. Store B offers 
her $150 per week plus a commission of 4% of her weekly 
sales. How much should Shanaysha’s weekly sales be  
for the offer from Store B to be better than that from  
Store A? 
	106.	 Making a job decision. Sheena has job offers from  
companies A and B to sell insurance. Company A offers  
her $25,000 per year plus 2% of her yearly sales premiums. 
Company B offers her $30,000 per year plus 1% of her yearly 
sales premiums. How much must Sheena earn in yearly  
sales premiums for the offer from Company B to be the  
better offer? 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 107–110, solve each system for x and y.
	107.	 e2 log3 x + 3 log3 y = 8
3 log3 x - log3 y = 1 
	108.	 e3 log2 1x + y2 - 5 log2 1x - y2 = 2
2 log2 1x + y2 + 3 log2 1x - y2 = 14 

	
Section 8.1    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 739
	109.	 e3ex - 4ey = 4
2ex + 5ey = 18
	110.	 eex+2y - 3ex-y = 16
3ex+2y - 12ex-y = 46
	111.	 For what value of the constant c is the following system 
consistent?
c
x + 2y = 7
3x + 5y = 11
cx + 3y = 4 
	
	 [Hint: Solve the first two equations for x and y and then 
substitute the solution into the third equation.]
	112.	 Find the value of c for which the following system of  
equations is inconsistent.
e 2x + cy = 11
5x - 7y =
5 
	113.	 If 1x - 22 is a factor of both f1x2 = x3 - 4x2 + ax + b 
and g1x2 = x3 - ax2 + bx + 8, find the values of a and b.
	114.	 Let l1: a1x + b1y + c1 = 0 and l2: a2x + b2y + c2 = 0 
be two nonparallel lines. Then for any constant k, show that 
the line 1a1x + b1y + c12 + k1a2x + b2y + c22 = 0 is an 
equation of the line passing through the point of intersection 
of l1 and l2.
In Exercises 115–117, write your answer in slope–intercept 
form. [Hint: Use Exercise 114.]
	115.	 Find an equation of the line that passes through the point 
of intersection of the lines with equations 2x + y = 3 and 
x - 3y = 12 and that is parallel to the line with equation 
3x + 2y = 8.
	116.	Find an equation of the line that passes through the point 
of intersection of the lines with equations 5x + 2y = 7 
and 6x - 5y = 38 and that passes through the point 
11, 32.
	117.	 Find an equation of the line that passes through the point of 
intersection of the lines with equations 2x + 5y + 7 = 0 
and 13x - 10y + 3 = 0 and that is perpendicular to the 
line with equation 7x + 13y = 8.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	118.	 Consider the system of equations
ea1x + b1y = c1
a2x + b2y = c2
	
	 where a1, b1, c1, a2, b2, and c2 are constants. Find a  
relationship (an equation) among these constants such  
that the system of equations has
a.	 Only one solution. Find the solution in terms of the  
constants.
b.	 No solution.
c.	 Infinitely many solutions.
	119.	 Let 3x + 4y - 12 = 0 be the equation of a line l1 and let 
P15, 82 be a point.
a.	 Find an equation of a line l2 passing through the point P 
and perpendicular to l1. 
b.	 Find the point Q of the intersection of the two lines l1 and l2.
c.	 Find the distance d1P, Q2. This is the distance from the 
point P to the line l1. 
	120.	 Use the procedure outlined in Exercise 119 to show that the 
(perpendicular) distance from a point P1x1, y12 to the line 
	
	 ax + by + c = 0 is given by 
ax1 + by1 + c
2a2 + b2
.
	121.	 Use the formula from Exercise 120 to find the distance from 
the given point P to the given line l.
a.	 P12, 32, l: x + y - 7 = 0 
b.	 P1-2, 52, l: 2x - y + 3 = 0 
c.	 P13, 42, l: 5x - 2y - 7 = 0 
d.	 P10, 02, l: ax + by + c = 0
	122.	 Find the reflection of the point P = 12, 12 about the line 
l: 2x + 3y = 20. [Let Q = 1a, b2 be the reflection point; 
then you get two equations in a and b. (i) The midpoint of 
PQ lies on l, (ii) l is perpendicular to the line containing the 
segment PQ.] 
	123.	 Find the reflection of the point P = 12, 12 about the  
line l: 3x + y = 12. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 124–130, find the requested variable.
	124.	 Find x if 3x - 12x - 12 - 14x + 32 = -5. 
	125.	 Find y if y + 2z = 7 and z = 2. 
	126.	 Find x if x - 3y = 5 and y = -3. 
	127.	 Find x if 2x + 3y + 5z = 21, y = 1, and z = 2. 
	128.	 Find y if 3x - 5y + z = 2, x = -2, and z = 3. 
	129.	 Find x if 2x + 3y - 2z = 5, y - z = 4, and z = -3. 
	130.	 Find x if 3x + 2y + z = 2, y + 2z = 1, and z = 2. 
       

740	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Systems of Linear Equations
A linear equation in the variables x1, x2, c, xn is an equation that can be written in the form
a1x1 + a2x2 + g + anxn = b,
CAT Scans
Computerized axial tomography imaging is more commonly known as a “CAT scan” or 
“CT scan.” Tomography is from the Greek word tomos, meaning “slice or section,” and 
graphia, meaning “describing.” The CAT scan machine was invented in 1972 by British 
engineer Godfrey Hounsfield and, independently, by physicist Allan Cormack of Tufts 
University in Massachusetts. Hounsfield never attended a university, but he started ex-
perimenting with electrical and mechanical devices as a boy. He shared a Nobel Prize 
in 1979 with Cormack for inventing the scanner technology and was honored with 
knighthood in England for his contributions to medicine and science. CAT scanners use 
X-rays measured outside the patient’s body, together with algebraic computations, to 
construct pictures of the patient’s internal body organs, including the brain. The scan-
ner does not “take” any pictures; instead, it computes pictures. The idea behind the 
CAT scanner is simple. When an X-ray passes through an object, it loses intensity. The 
denser the object, the more intensity the X-ray loses. Because tumors are denser than 
healthy tissues, an unexpected loss of intensity may indicate the presence of a tumor. 
To obtain sufficient information, a large number of properly arranged X-rays is needed. 
Imagine a cross section of body tissue with a superimposed mathematical grid. Each 
region bounded by the grid lines is called a grid cell. In an actual CAT scan, each grid 
cell is 2 square millimeters and contains 10,000 or more biological cells. The grid shown 
in Figure 8.6 would require many X-rays. Actual CAT scanners work with grids that have 
512 * 512 grid cells and require hundreds of thousands of X-ray beams. In Example 6, 
we discuss a simple situation in which X-rays pass through three grid cells.
Adapted with permission from Mathematics Teacher, May 1996. © 1996 by the National 
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Solving a system of equations in two  
variables (Section 8.1)
Objectives
1	 Solve a system of linear equations  
in three variables.
2	 Classify systems as consistent  
and inconsistent.
3	 Solve nonsquare systems.
4	 Interpret linear systems in three  
variables geometrically.
5	 Use linear systems in applications.
Systems of Linear Equations 
in Three Variables
8.2
S E C T I O N
Cross section with tumor
Figure 8.6  Cross section with  
tumor
1	
Solve a system of linear 
equations in three variables.

	
Section 8.2    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Three Variables 741
where b and the coefficients a1, a2, c, an are real numbers. The subscript n can be any 
positive integer. When n is small—say, between 2 and 5 (as in most textbook examples and 
exercises)—we normally use x, y, z, u, and v instead of x1, x2, x3, x4, and x5. However, in 
real-life applications, n might be 100 or 1000 or even greater.
A system of linear equations (or a linear system) in three variables is a collection of 
two or more linear equations involving the same three variables. For example,
c
x + 3y +
z = 0
2x -
y +
z = 5
3x - 3y + 2z = 10
is a system of three linear equations in the three variables x, y, and z. An ordered triple 
1a, b, c2 is a solution of a system of three linear equations in three variables x, y, and z 
if each equation in the system is a true statement when a, b, and c are substituted for 
x, y, and z, respectively.
Determine whether the ordered triple 12, -1, 32 is a solution of the following linear  
system.
c
5x + 3y - 2z =
1
x -
y +
z =
6
2x + 2y -
z = -1 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Solution
We replace x with 2, y with -1, and z with 3 in all three equations.
Equation (1)
Equation (2)
Equation (3)
 5x + 3y - 2z = 1
 5122 + 31-12 - 2132 ≟1
 10 - 3 - 6 ≟1
 1 = 1 ✓
 x - y + z = 6
 2 - 1-12 + 3 ≟6
 2 + 1 + 3 ≟6
 6 = 6 ✓
 2x + 2y - z = -1
 2122 + 21-12 - 132 ≟-1
 4 - 2 - 3 ≟-1
 -1 = -1 ✓
Because the ordered triple 12, -1, 32 satisfies all three equations, it is a solution of the 
system.
Practice Problem 1  Determine whether the ordered triple 12, -3, 22 is a solution of 
the following linear system.
c
x +
y +
z = 1
3x + 4y +
z = -4
2x +
y + 2z = 5
We will now use a procedure called Gaussian elimination to convert a system of three 
equations in the variables x, y, and z into an equivalent system in triangular form with lead-
ing coefficient 1, as shown below.
c
x + ay + bz = p
y + cz = q
z = z0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
We can then solve the system by back-substitution. To get a system in triangular form, we 
use the following three operations to obtain equivalent systems (systems with the same 
solution set as the original system).
Verifying a Solution
EXAMPLE 1

742	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
O p e r at i o n s  T h at  P r o d u c e  E q u i va l e n t  S y s t e m s
1.	 Interchange the position of any two equations.
2.	 Multiply any equation by a nonzero constant.
3.	 Add a multiple of one equation to another.
Solve a system of three equations in three vari-
ables by first converting the system to the form
c
x + ay + bz = p
y + cz = q
z = z0
Step 1 Rearrange the equations, if necessary, 
to obtain an x-term with a nonzero coefficient in 
the first equation. Then multiply the first equa-
tion by the reciprocal of the coefficient of the  
x-term to get 1 as a leading coefficient.
Step 2 By adding appropriate multiples  
of the first equation, eliminate any x-terms from 
the second and third equations. Then multiply 
the resulting second equation by the reciprocal 
of the coefficient of the y-term to get 1 as  
a leading coefficient.
Step 3 Add an appropriate multiple of the 
second equation from Step 2 to eliminate any  
y-term from the third equation. Then solve the 
resulting equation for z to obtain an equivalent 
system in triangular form.
Step 4 Back-substitute the value of z from 
Step 3 into one of the equations containing only 
y and z in Step 3 and solve for y.
The Gaussian Elimination Method
Objective
Procedure 
in Action
EXAMPLE 2
Example
Solve the system of equations.
c
3y -
z = 5
2x +
y +
z = 9
x + 2y + 2z = 3 
(1)
(2)
(3)
1.	Interchange equations (1) and (3).
c
x + 2y + 2z = 3
2x +
y +
z = 9
3y -
z = 5 
(3)
(2)
(1)
	
The first equation (equation (3)) already has a leading  
coefficient of 1.
2.	To eliminate x from equation (2), add -2 times equation (3)  
to equation (2).
-2x - 4y - 4z = -6
2x +
y +
z =
9 (2)
-3y - 3z =
3 (4)
	
-21x + 2y + 3z = 32
	
Add.
c
x + 2y + 2z = 3
y +
z = -1
3y -
z = 5  
(3)
(5)
(1)
	
Multiply equation (4) by -1
3.
3.	To eliminate y from equation (1), add -3 times equation (5) to 
equation (1).
-3y - 3z =
3
3y -
z =
5 (1)
-4z =
8
z = -2
 
	
-31y + z = -12
	
Add.
	
Solve for z.
	
Equivalent system in triangular form:
x + 2y + 2z =
3
y +
z = -1
z = -2
 (3)
 (5)
4.		
 y + z = -1	
Equation (5)
 y + 1-22 = -1	
Substitute z = -2.
 y = 1 	
Solve for y.
(continued)

	
Section 8.2    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Three Variables 743
Practice Problem 2  Solve the system.
c
2x + 5y
= 1
x - 3y + 2z = 1
-x + 2y +
z = 7
Number of Solutions of a Linear System
As in the case of two variables, a system of linear equations in three variables may be con-
sistent (having at least one solution) or inconsistent (having no solution). The equations 
in a consistent system may be dependent (the system has infinitely many solutions) or 
independent (the system has one solution).
Step 5 Back-substitute the values of y and z 
from Steps 3 and 4 in any equation containing  
x, y, and z and solve for x.
Step 6 Write the solution set.
Step 7 Check your answer in the original 
equations.
2	
Classify systems as consistent 
and inconsistent.
I n c o n s i s t e n t  S y s t e m
If in the process of converting a linear system to triangular form an equation of the 
form 0 = k occurs, where k ≠0, then the system has no solution and is inconsistent.
Solve the system of equations.
c
x -
y + 2z =  5
2x +
y +
z =  7
3x - 2y + 5z = 20 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Solution
Steps 1–2	 To eliminate x from equation (2), add -2 times equation (1) to equation (2).
-2x + 2y - 4z = -10
2x +
y +
z =
7 (2)
3y - 3z =
-3 (4)
   
-21x - y + 2z = 52
	
Add.
Next, we eliminate x from equation (3) using equations (1) and (3).
-3x + 3y - 6z = -15
3x - 2y + 5z =
20 (3)
y -
z =
5 (5)
	
-31x - y + 2z = 52
	
Add.
Attempting to Solve a Linear System with No Solution
EXAMPLE 3
5.	
 x + 2y + 2z = 3    Equation (3) from Step 1
 x + 2112 + 21-22 = 3    Substitute y = 1, z = -2.
 x = 5    Solve for x.
6.	The solution set is 515, 1, -226.
7.	Check: Verify the solution by substituting x = 5, y = 1, and 
z = -2 in each of the original equations.
 3112 - 1-22 = 5 ✓ (1)
 2152 + 112 + 1-22 = 9 ✓ (2)
 5 + 2112 + 21-22 = 3 ✓ (3)

744	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
We now have the equivalent system:
c
x -
y + 2z =
5
3y - 3z = -3
y -
z =
5 
(1)
(4)
(5)
Step 3	
Multiply equation (4) by 1
3 to obtain
y - z = -1 (6)
We can eliminate y in equation (5) using equation (6).
-y + z = 1
y - z = 5 152
0 = 6 172
   
-11y - z = -12
	
Add.
We now have the system in triangular form:
c
x - y + 2z =
5
y -
z = -1
0 =
6 
(1)
(6)
(7)
False
This system is equivalent to the original system. Because equation (7) is 
false, we conclude that the solution set of the system is ∅ and the system is 
inconsistent.
Practice Problem 3  Solve the system of equations.
c
2x + 2y +
2z = 12
-3x +
y - 11z = -6
2x +
y +
4z = -8
u
D e p e n d e n t  E q u at i o n s
If in the process of converting a linear system to triangular form
 (i)		 an equation of the form 0 = k1k ≠02 does not occur but
	(ii)	 an equation of the form 0 = 0 does occur, then the system of equations has  
infinitely many solutions and the equations are dependent.
Solve the system of equations.
c
x -
y +
z =
7
3x + 2y - 12z = 11
4x +
y - 11z = 18 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Solution
Steps 1–2	 Eliminate x using equations (1) and (2).
-3x + 3y -
3z = -21
3x + 2y - 12z =
11 (2)
5y - 15z = -10 (4)
   
-31x - y + z = 72
	
Add.
Solving a System with Infinitely Many Solutions
EXAMPLE 4
An alternate method for Step 3 
is to solve the 2 * 2 system of 
equations (4) and (5), then back-
substitute into equation (1) to solve 
for the third variable.
Side 
Note

	
Section 8.2    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Three Variables 745
Eliminate x using equations (1) and (3).
-4x + 4y -
4z = -28
4x +
y - 11z =
18 (3)
5y - 15z = -10 (5)
   
-41x - y + z = 72
	
Add.
	
We now have the following equivalent system:
c
x -
y +
z =
7
5y - 15z = -10
5y - 15z = -10 
(1)
(4)
(5)
Step 3	
We eliminate y using equations (4) and (5).
-5y + 15z =
10
5y - 15z = -10 (5)
0 =
0 (6)
   
-115y - 15z = -102
	
Add.
We finally have the system in triangular form:
c
x -
y +
z =
7
5y - 15z = -10
0 =
0 
(1)
(4)
(6)
	
True
The equation 0 = 0 is equivalent to 0 z = 0, which is true for every 
value of z. Solving equation (4) for y, we have y = 3z - 2. Substituting 
y = 3z - 2 into equation (1) and solving for x, we obtain
x = y - z + 7	
Solve equation (1) for x.
x = 13z - 22 - z + 7	
Substitute y = 3z - 2.
x = 2z + 5	
Simplify.
Thus, for every real number z, the triple 1x, y, z2 = 12z + 5, 3z - 2, z2 is 
a solution of the system. For example, when z = 0, the triple 15, -2, 02 
is a solution. When z = 1, the triple 17, 1, 12 is a solution. Therefore, 
the given system has infinitely many solutions, one for each real num-
ber z, and the equations are dependent. The solution set for the system is 
512z + 5, 3z - 2, z26.
Practice Problem 4  Solve the system of equations.
c
x +
y +
z =
5
-4x -
y - 8z = -29
2x + 5y - 2z =
1
Nonsquare Systems
Sometimes in a linear system, the number of equations is not the same as the number of 
variables. Such systems are called nonsquare linear systems.
u
3	
Solve nonsquare systems.
Solve the system of linear equations.
b x +
5y + 3z = 7
2x + 11y - 4z = 6 (1)
(2)
Solving a Nonsquare Linear System
EXAMPLE 5

746	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Solution
Steps 1–2	
We eliminate x using equations (1) and (2).
-2x - 10y -
6z = -14
2x + 11y -
4z =
6 122
y - 10z =
-8 132
   
-21x + 5y + 3z = 72
	
Add.
We obtain the equivalent system:
ex + 5y +
3z =
7
y - 10z = -8 (1)
(3)
Steps 3–4	 Because there is no third equation, Steps 3 and 4 are not needed.
Step 5	
Solve equation (3) for y in terms of z to obtain
y = 10z - 8.
Step 6	
Back-substitute y = 10z - 8 into equation (1) and solve for x.
 x + 5y + 3z = 7
    Equation (1)
 x + 5110z - 82 + 3z = 7
    Replace y with 10z - 8.
 x = -53z + 47    Solve for x.
Steps 5 and 6 mean that z determines both the x and y values. The system has infinitely many 
solutions, one for each real number z. The solution set is 51-53z + 47, 10z - 8, z26.
Practice Problem 5  Solve the system of linear equations.
e x + 3y + 2z = 4
2x + 7y -
z = 5
Geometric Interpretation
The graph of a linear equation in three variables, such as ax + by + cz = d (where a, b, 
and c are not all zero), is a plane in three-dimensional space. Figure 8.7 shows possible 
situations for a system of three linear equations in three variables.
4	
Interpret linear systems in 
three variables geometrically.
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.7 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
a.	 Three planes intersect in a single point. The system has only one solution.
b.	 Three planes intersect in one line. The system has infinitely many solutions.
c.	 Three planes coincide with each other. The system has infinitely many solutions.
d.	 There are three parallel planes. The system has no solution.
e.	 Two parallel planes are intersected by a third plane. The system has no solution.
f.	 Three planes have no point in common. The system has no solution.

	
Section 8.2    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Three Variables 747
An Application to CAT Scans
CAT scanners report X-ray data in units called linear attenuation units (LAUs), also called 
Hounsfield numbers. The data are reported in such a way that if an X-ray passes through 
consecutive grid cells, the total weakening of the beam is the sum of the individual de-
creases. Table 8.1 gives the range of LAUs that determine whether the grid cell contains 
healthy tissue, tumorous tissue, a bone, or a metal.
5	
Use linear systems in 
applications.
Table 8.1 CAT Scanner Ranges
Type of Tissue
LAU Values
Healthy tissue
0.1625–0.2977
Tumorous tissue
0.2679–0.3930
Bone
0.38757–0.5108
Metal
1.54–∞
Reprinted with permission from Mathematics 
Teacher, May 1996. © 1996 by the National  
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Let A, B, and C be three grid cells as shown in Figure 8.8. A CAT scanner reports the fol-
lowing data for a patient named Monica.
(i)	 	 Beam 1 is weakened by 0.80 unit as it passes through grid cells A and B.
(ii)		 Beam 2 is weakened by 0.55 unit as it passes through grid cells A and C.
(iii)  Beam 3 is weakened by 0.65 unit as it passes through grid cells B and C.
Use Table 8.1 to determine which grid cells contain each type of tissue listed.
Solution
Suppose grid cell A weakens the beam by x units, grid cell B weakens it by y units, and grid 
cell C weakens it by z units. Then we have the system:
c
x + y
= 0.80
x
+ z = 0.55
y + z = 0.65 
(1)
(2)
(3)
    (Beam 1)
	
(Beam 2) 
	
(Beam 3)
To solve this system of equations, we use the elimination procedure. Subtracting equation 
(1) from equation (2), we obtain the equivalent system:
c
x +
y
=
0.80
-y + z = -0.25
y + z =
0.65 
(1)
(4)
(3)
    Subtract equation (1) from equation (2).
Add equation (4) to equation (3) to get the system:
c
x +
y
=
0.80
-y +
z = -0.25
2z =
0.40 
(1)
(4)
(5)    Add equation (4) to equation (3).
Multiply equation (5) by 1
2 to obtain z = 0.20. Then back-substitute z = 0.20 in equation 
(4) to get -y + 0.20 = -0.25, or y = 0.45. Next, back-substitute y = 0.45 in equation 
(1) to get x + 0.45 = 0.80. Solving for x gives x = 0.35. Now referring to Table 8.1, we 
conclude that cell A contains tumorous tissue (because x = 0.35), cell B contains a bone 
(because y = 0.45), and cell C contains healthy tissue (because z = 0.20).
A CAT Scan with Three Grid Cells
EXAMPLE 6
A
B
C
Beam 1
X-ray detector
Three grid cells, three X-rays
Beam 2
Beam 3
Figure 8.8  Reprinted with 
permission from Mathematics Teacher, 
May 1996. © 1996 by the National 
Council of Teachers of Mathematics

748	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Practice Problem 6  In Example 6, suppose (i) Beam 1 is weakened by 0.65 unit as 
it passes through grid cells A and B, (ii) Beam 2 is weakened by 0.70 unit as it passes 
through grid cells A and C, and (iii) Beam 3 is weakened by 0.55 unit as it passes  
through grid cells B and C. Use Table 8.1 to determine which grid cells contain each  
type of tissue listed.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. Yes:	
122 +
1-32 +
122 = 1
	
3122 + 41-32 +
122 = -4
	
2122 +
1-32 + 2122 = 5
2. 51-2, 1, 326    3. ∅    4. ea8 - 7
3
 z, 4
3
 z - 3, zb f
5. 5113 - 17z, -3 + 5z, z26    6. Cell A contains bone (be-
cause x = 0.4), cell B contains healthy tissue (because y = 0.25), 
and cell C contains tumorous tissue (because z = 0.3).
Exercises
section 8.2
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 Systems of equations that have the same solution set are 
called 
 systems.
	 2.	 Adding a(n) 
 multiple of one equation to 
another equation in the system produces an equivalent  
system.
	 3.	 If any of the equations in a system has no solution, then the 
system is 
.
	 4.	 If the number of equations is different from the number of 
variables in a linear system, then the system is called a(n) 
 system.
	 5.	 True or False. The graph of the equation x - 2y + z = 1 
is a plane in three-dimensional space. 
	 6.	 True or False. If 512z, 1 - z, z + 326 is the solution set of 
a linear system in three variables, then 10, 1, 32 is a solution 
of this system. 
In Exercises 7–10, determine whether the given ordered triple 
1x, y, z2 is a solution of the given linear system.
	 7.	 c
2x - 2y - 3z = 1
3y + 2z = -1
y +
z = 0
 11, -1, 12 
	 8.	 c
3x - 2y +
z = 2
y +
z = 5
x
+ 3z = 8
 12, 3, 22 
	 9.	 c
x +
3y -
2z = 0
2x -
y +
4z = 5
x - 11y + 14z = 0
 1-10, 8, 72 
	10.	 c
x - 4y +
7z = 14
3x + 8y -
2z = 13
7x - 8y + 26z = 5
 14, 1, 22 
In Exercises 11–14, solve each triangular linear system.
	11.	  x + y +
z = 4
 y - 2z = 4
 z = -1
	12.	  x + 3y +
z = 3
 y + 2z = 8
 z = 5
	13.	  x - 5y + 3z = -1
 y - 2z = -6
 z = 4
	14.	  x + 3y + 5z = 0
 y + 7z = 2
 z = 1
2
	15.	 In the system in Exercise 7, interchange equations (2) and 
(3). Write the new equivalent system. In the new system, 
eliminate y from the last equation. Convert the system to  
triangular form. 
	16.	 In Exercise 8, interchange equations (1) and (3). In the new 
equivalent system, eliminate x from the last equation. Convert 
the system to triangular form. 
	17.	 Convert the system of Exercise 9 to triangular form. 
	18.	 Convert the system of Exercise 10 to triangular form. 
In Exercises 19–22, convert the system to triangular form and 
then use back-substitution to solve the system.
	19.	 c
x -
y +
z = 6
2y + 3z = 5
2z = 6 
	20.	 c
4x + 5y + 2z = -3
3y -
z = 14
- 3z = 15 
	21.	 c
4x + 4y + 4z = 7
3x - 8y
= 14
4z = -1 
	22.	 c
5x + 10y + 10z = 0
2y +
3z = -0.6
4z = 1.6     

	
Section 8.2    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Three Variables 749
In Exercises 23–44, find the solution set of each linear system. 
Identify inconsistent systems and dependent equations. For 
dependent equations, write your answer as in Example 4.
	23.	 c
x + y + z = 6
x - y + z = 2
2x + y - z = 1
	24.	 c
x +
y +
z = 6
2x + 3y -
z = 5
3x - 2y + 3z = 8
	25.	 c
2x + 3y +
z = 9
x + 2y + 3z = 6
3x +
y + 2z = 8 
	26.	 c
4x + 2y + 3z = 6
x + 2y + 2z = 1
2x -
y +
z = -1
	27.	 c
x +
y - 2z =
5
2x -
y -
z = -4
x - 2y +
z = -2
	28.	 c
x +
y +
4z =
6
x +
2y -
2z =
8
7x + 10y + 10z = 60
	29.	 c
2x + 3y + 2z = 7
x + 3y -
z = -2
x -
y + 2z = 8
	30.	 c
x -
y + 2z = 3
2x + 2y +
z = 3
x +
y + 3z = 4
	31.	 c
4x - 2y +
z = 5
2x +
y - 2z = 4
x + 3y - 2z = 6
	32.	 c
x - 3y + 2z =
9
2x + 4y - 3z = -9
3x - 2y + 5z = 12
	33.	 c
2x + y +
z = 6
x + y -
z = 1
x + y + 2z = 4
	34.	 c
2x +
y - 3z = 7
x -
y - 2z = 4
3x + 3y + 2z = 4
	35.	 c
x -
y - z = 3
x + 9y + z = 3
2x + 3y - z = 6 
	36.	 c
x + y -
z =
2
3x - y -
z = 10
3x + y - 2z =
8 
	37.	 c
x +
y
= 0
y + 2z = -4
y +
z = 4 - x
	38.	 c
2x + 4y + 3z = 6
x +
2z = -1
x - 2y +
z = -5
	39.	 c
x +
y +
z = 6
x + 2y + 3z = 14
x + 4y + 7z = 30
	40.	 c
x -
y +
z =
3
2x +
y -
z =
2
x + 2y - 2z = -1
	41.	 c
3x -
2z = 11
2x +
y
= 8
2y + 3z = 1
	42.	 c
2x +
y
= 4
x +
2z = 3
3y -
z = 5
	43.	 b2x + 6y
+ 11 = 0
6y - 18z +
1 = 0 
	44.	 b3x +
5y - 15
= 0
6x + 20y -
6z = 11 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 45–52, use a system of equations to solve each 
problem.
	45.	 Investment. Miguel invested $20,000 in three differ-
ent funds that paid 4%, 5%, and 6% for the year. The total 
income for the year from the three funds was $1060. The 
income from the 6% fund was twice the income from the  
5% fund. What amount was invested in each fund?
	46.	 Number problem. The sum of the digits in a three-digit 
number is 14. The sum of the hundreds digit and the units 
digit is equal to the tens digit. If the hundreds digit and the 
units digit are interchanged, the number is increased by 297. 
What is the original number? 
	47.	 Election campaign. Alex, Becky, and Courtney volun-
teered to stuff 741 envelopes with newsletters for Senator 
Douglas’s reelection campaign. Alex could assemble 124 per 
hour; Becky, 118 per hour; and Courtney, 132 per hour. They 
worked a total of 6 hours. The sum of the number of hours 
that Becky and Courtney spent was twice what Alex spent. 
How long did each of them work? 
	48.	Age of students. A college algebra class of 38 students 
at Central State College was made up of people who were 
18, 19, and 20 years of age. The average of their ages was 
18.5 years. How many of each age were in the class if the 
number of 18-year-olds was eight more than the combined 
number of 19- and 20-year-olds? 
	49.	 Coins in a machine. A vending machine’s coin box con-
tains nickels, dimes, and quarters. The total number of coins 
in the box is 300. The number of dimes is three times the 
number of nickels and quarters together. If the box contains 
$30.05, find the number of nickels, dimes, and quarters that it 
contains. 
	50.	Sports. The Wildcats scored 46 points in a football game. 
Twice the number of points resulting from the sum of field 
goals and extra points equals two more than the number 
of points from touchdowns. Five times the number of 
points scored by field goals equals twice the number of 
points from touchdowns. Find the number of points result-
ing from touchdowns, field goals, and extra points. [A 
touchdown = 6 points, a field goal = 3 points, and an extra 
point = 1 point.] 
	51.	 Weekly wage. Amy worked 53 hours one week and was 
paid at three different rates. She earned $7.40 per hour for 
her normal daytime work, $9.20 per hour for night work, and 
$11.75 per hour for holiday work. If her total gross wages for 
the week were $452.20 and the number of regular daytime 
hours she worked exceeded the combined hours of night and 
holiday work by 9 hours, how many hours of each category 
of work did Amy perform?
	52.	Components of a product. A manufacturer buys three 
components—A, B, and C—for use in making a toaster. 
She used as many units of A as she did of B and C com-
bined. The cost of A, B, and C is $4, $5, and $6 per unit, 
respectively. If she purchased 100 units of these compo-
nents for a total of $480, how many units of each did she 
purchase? 
In Exercises 53–56, use Table 8.1 and Figure 8.8 on page 747 
to determine which grid cells of the patients contain healthy 
tissue, tumorous tissue, bone, or metal.
Beam decrease, in LAUs
Patient
Beam 1
Beam 2
Beam 3
53.  Vicky
0.54
0.40
0.52 
54.  Yolanda
0.65
0.80
0.75 
55.  Nina
0.51
0.49
0.44 
56.  Srinivasan
0.44
2.21
2.23                 
    

750	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 57–60, write a linear equation of the form 
x + by + cz = d that is satisfied by all three of the given 
ordered triples.
	57.	 11, 0, 02, 10, 1, 02, 10, 0, 12 
	58.	 a1
3, 0, 0b, 10, 4, 32, 11, 2, 22 
	59.	 13, -4, 02, a0, 1
4, 1
2b, 11, 1, -42 
	60.	 10, 1, -102, a1
8, 0, 1
4b, a1, 1
3, -2b 
In Exercises 61–64, find an equation of the parabola of the form 
y = ax2 + bx + c that passes through the three given points.
	61.	 10, 12, 1-1, 02, 11, 42 
	62.	 10, 22, 1-1, 302, 12, 62 
	63.	 11, 22, 1-1, 42, 12, 42 
	64.	 10, 32, 1-1, 42, 11, 62 
In Exercises 65–68, find an equation of the circle of the form 
x2 + y2 + ax + by + c = 0 that passes through the three 
given points.
	65.	 10, 42, 1212, 2122, 1-4, 02 
	66.	 10, 32, 10, -12, 113, 22 
	67.	 11, 22, 16, -32, 14, 12 
	68.	 15, 62, 1-1, 62, 13, 22 
In Exercises 69 and 70, solve the system of equations.
	69.	 f
1
x + 3
y - 1
z = 5
2
x + 4
y + 6
z = 4
2
x + 3
y + 1
z = 3 
	70.	 f
1
x + 2
y + 3
z = 8
2
x + 5
y + 9
z = 16
3
x - 4
y - 5
z = 32 
	
	 cHint: Let 1
x = u, 1
y = v, and 1
z = w. Solve for u, v, and w.d
In Exercises 71 and 72, find the value of c for which the given 
system has a unique solution.
	71.	 d
x + 2y - 5z -
9 = 0
3x -
y + 2z - 14 = 0
2x + 3y -
z -
3 = 0
cx - 5y +
z +
3 = 0 
	72.	 d
x + 5y +
z = 42
3x +
y - 3z = c
x -
y + 3z = 4
x +
y -
z = 0 
	73.	 Find a quadratic function of the form y = ax2 + bx + c whose 
graph passes through the points 1-1, -12, 10, 52, and 12, 52.
	74.	 Use Table 8.1 to investigate four grid cells, arranged in a square, 
as shown in the given figure. Figures (a) and (b) reprinted with 
permission from Mathematics Teacher, May 1996. © 1996 by 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
a.	 For Figure (a), the following data were observed.
A
D
B
C
Four grid cells and four X-rays
Beam 4
Beam 3
Beam 2
Beam 1
(a)
1.	 Beam 1 decreased by 0.60 unit.
2.	 Beam 2 decreased by 0.75 unit.
3.	 Beam 3 decreased by 0.65 unit.
4.	 Beam 4 decreased by 0.70 unit.
	
	 Is there sufficient information in Figure (a) to determine 
which grid cells may contain tumorous tissue?
b.	 From two additional X-rays, as shown in Figure (b), the 
following data were observed.
A
D
B
C
Four grid cells and six X-rays
Beam 6
Beam 5
Beam 4
Beam 3
Beam 2
Beam 1
(b)
5.	 Beam 5 decreased by 0.85 unit.
6.	 Beam 6 decreased by 0.50 unit.
	
	 Show that the six X-rays represented in the two figures are 
sufficient to locate tumors in this situation but that, in fact, it 
is not necessary to use all six rays.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	75.	 Write a linear system of three equations in the variables x, y, 
and z that has 511, -1, 226 as its solution set.
	76.	 Write a linear system of three equations in the variables x, y, 
and z such that
a.	 The system is inconsistent.
b.	 The system has infinitely many solutions. 

	
Section 8.2    ■    Systems of Linear Equations in Three Variables 751
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 77–80, solve each equation for the specified  
variable.
	77.	
1
2 # 3 = 1
2 + B
3, for B 
	78.	
2
5 # 7 = A
5 - 1
7, for A 
	79.	
1
n # 1n + 12 = A
n -
1
n + 1, for A 
	80.	
4
n # 1n + 22 = 2
n +
B
n + 2, for B 
	81.	 Find the values of A and B for which the equation
2x + 3 = A1x + 32 + B1x - 12
	
	 is an identity (true for all values of x). [Hint: Evaluate both 
sides at x = 1 and x = -3] 
     
	82.	 Find the values of A and B for which the equation
3x + 2 = A1x - 22 + B1x + 22
	
	 is an identity
In Exercises 83–88, factor each expression.
	83.	 x2 + 5x + 6 
	84.	 x2 - 3x - 10 
	85.	 2x2 + 5x - 3 
	86.	 3x2 + x - 2 
	87.	 4x2 - 9 
	88.	 x3 - 8 
 

752	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Ohm’s Law
If a voltage is applied across a resistor (such as a wire), a current will flow. Ohm’s law 
states that in a circuit at constant temperature,
I = V
R
where V is the voltage (measured in volts), I is the current (measured in amperes), and 
R is the resistance (measured in ohms). A parallel circuit consists of two or more resistors 
connected as shown in Figure 8.9. In the figure, the current I from the source divides 
into two currents, I1 and I2, with I1 going through one resistor and I2 going through the 
other, so that I = I1 + I2. Suppose we want to find the total resistance R in the circuit 
due to the two resistors R1 and R2 connected in parallel. Ohm’s law can be used to show
that in the parallel circuit in Figure 8.9, 1
R = 1
R1
+ 1
R2
. This result is called the parallel 
property of resistors. In Example 7, we examine the parallel property of resistors by  
using partial fractions.
R1
I1
R2
I2
1
2
Figure 8.9  Parallel resistors
S e c t i o n
Partial–Fraction Decomposition
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Division of polynomials (Section 3.3)
2	 Factoring polynomials (Section P.4)
3	 Irreducible polynomials (Section P.4,  
page 39)
4	 Rational expressions (Section P.5,  
page 47)
Objectives
1	 Become familiar with partial-fraction 
decomposition.
2	 Decompose 
P1x2
Q1x2 when Q1x2 has only
	
distinct linear factors.
3	 Decompose 
P1x2
Q1x2 when Q1x2 has 
	
repeated linear factors.
4	 Decompose 
P1x2
Q1x2 when Q1x2 has distinct 
	
irreducible quadratic factors.
5	 Decompose 
P1x2
Q1x2 when Q1x2 has 
	
repeated irreducible quadratic factors.
8.3
Georg Simon Ohm (1787–1854)
Georg Ohm was born in Erlangen,  
Germany. His father, Johann, a 
mechanic and a self-educated man, 
was interested in philosophy and 
mathematics and gave his children an 
excellent education in physics, chem-
istry, mathematics, and philosophy 
through his own teachings. The Ohm’s 
law named in Georg Ohm’s honor 
appeared in his famous pamphlet 
Die galvanische Kette, mathematisch 
bearbeitet (1827). Ohm’s work was 
not appreciated in Germany, where 
it was first published. Eventually, it 
was recognized, first by the British 
Royal Society, which awarded Ohm 
the Copley Medal in 1841. In 1849, 
Ohm became a curator of the Bavarian 
Academy’s science museum and began 
to lecture at the University of Munich. 
Finally, in 1852 (two years before his 
death), Ohm achieved his lifelong 
ambition of becoming chair of physics 
at the University of Munich.

	
Section 8.3    ■    Partial-Fraction Decomposition 753
Partial Fractions
Recall that to add two rational expressions such as 
2
x + 3 and 
3
x - 1
, required you to find 
the least common denominator, rewrite expressions with the same denominator, and then: 
add the corresponding numerators. This procedure gives
2
x + 3 +
3
x - 1 =
21x - 12
1x + 321x - 12 +
31x + 32
1x - 121x + 32 =
5x + 7
1x + 321x - 12
In some applications of algebra and more advanced mathematics, you need a reverse 
procedure for splitting a fraction such as 
5x + 7
1x - 121x + 32 into the simpler fractions to 
obtain:
5x + 7
1x + 321x - 12 =
2
x + 3 +
3
x - 1
Each of the two fractions on the right is called a partial fraction. Their sum is called the 
partial-fraction decomposition of the rational expression on the left.
A rational expression P1x2
Q1x2 is called improper if the degree P1x2 Ú degree Q1x2 and 
is called proper if the degree P1x2 6 degree Q1x2. Examples of improper rational expres-
sions are
x3
x2 - 1
 , 1x + 221x - 12
1x - 221x + 32
 , and x2 + x + 1
2x + 3
 .
Using long division, we can express an improper rational fraction P1x2
Q1x2 as the sum of a
polynomial and a proper rational fraction:
P1x2
Q1x2  =   S1x2  +  R1x2
Q1x2
	
c	
c	
c
	
Improper 	
Polynomial	
Proper 
	
Fraction 	
	
Fraction
We therefore restrict our discussion of the decomposition of P1x2
Q1x2 into partial fractions
to cases involving proper rational fractions. We also assume that P1x2 and Q1x2 have no 
common factor.
The problem of decomposing a proper fraction P1x2
Q1x2 into partial fractions depends 
on the type of factors in the denominator Q1x2. In this section, we consider four cases for 
Q1x2.
1	
Become familiar with partial–
fraction decomposition.
Any polynomial Q1x2 with real 
coefficients can be factored so  
that each factor is linear or is an 
irreducible quadratic factor.
Recall

754	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Q(x) Has Only Distinct Linear Factors
2	
Decompose 
P1x2
Q1x2 when Q1x2 
	
has only distinct linear factors.
C a s e  1 :  T h e  D e n o m i n at o r  i s  t h e  P r o d u c t  o f 
D i s t i n c t  ( N o n r e p e at e d )  L i n e a r  Fa c t o r s
Suppose Q1x2 can be factored as
Q1x2 = c1x - a121x - a22g1x - an2,
with no factor repeated. The partial-fraction decomposition of P1x2
Q1x2 is of the form
P1x2
Q1x2 =
A1
x - a1
+
A2
x - a2
+ g+ 
An
x - an
 ,
where A1, A2, c, An are constants to be determined.
We can find the constants A1, A2, c, An by using the following procedure. Note that if 
the number of constants is small, we use the letters A, B, C, c, instead of A1, A2, A3, c.
Find the partial-fraction decomposition of a 
rational expression.
Step 1 Write the form of the partial-fraction 
decomposition with the unknown constants 
A, B, C, c in the numerators of the decom-
position.
Step 2 Multiply both sides of the equation 
in Step 1 by the original denominator. Use the 
distributive property and eliminate common 
factors. Simplify.
Step 3 Write both sides of the equation in 
Step 2 in descending powers of x and equate 
the coefficients of like powers of x.
Step 4 Solve the linear system resulting 
from Step 3 for the constants A, B, C, c.
Step 5 Substitute the values you found for 
A, B, C, c into the equation in Step 1 and 
write the partial-fraction decomposition.
Partial-Fraction Decomposition
Objective
procedure 
in action
EXAMPLE 1
Example
Practice Problem 1  Find the partial-fraction decomposition of 
2x - 7
1x + 121x - 22
 .
Find the partial-fraction decomposition of 
3x + 26
1x - 321x + 42
 .
1.	
3x + 26
1x - 321x + 42 =
A
x - 3 +
B
x + 4
2.	Multiply both sides by 1x - 321x + 42 and simplify to obtain
3x + 26 = 1x + 42A + 1x - 32B.
3.	3x + 26 = 1A + B2x + 14A - 3B2
e 3 =
A +
B
26 = 4A - 3B     Equate coefficients of x.
Equate constant coefficients.
4.	Solving the system of equations in Step 3, we obtain A = 5 and 
B = -2.
5.	
3x + 26
1x - 321x + 42 =
5
x - 3 +
-2
x + 4    Replace A with 5 and  
B with -2 in Step 1.
	
3x + 26
1x - 321x + 42 =
5
x - 3 -
2
x + 4

	
Section 8.3    ■    Partial-Fraction Decomposition 755
Find the partial-fraction decomposition of the expression.
10x - 4
x3 - 4x
Solution
First, factor the denominator.
 x3 - 4x = x1x2 - 42
    Distributive property
 = x1x - 221x + 22    x2 - 4 = 1x - 221x + 22
Each of the factors x, x - 2, and x + 2 becomes a denominator for a partial fraction.
Step 1  The partial-fraction decomposition is given by
10x - 4
x1x - 221x + 22 = A
x +
B
x - 2 +
C
x + 2    Use A, B, and C instead of 
A1, A2, and A3.
Step 2  Multiply both sides by the common denominator x1x - 221x + 22.	
	
Distribute
x1x - 221x + 22c
10x - 4
x1x - 221x + 22 d = x1x - 221x + 22c A
x +
B
x - 2 +
C
x + 2 d
Finding the Partial-Fraction Decomposition When  
the Denominator Has Only Distinct Linear Factors
EXAMPLE 2
(+++)+++*
 10x - 4 = A1x - 221x + 22 + B x1x + 22 + C x1x - 22 (1)	
Distributive property; 
simplify.
 = A1x2 - 42 + B1x2 + 2x2 + C1x2 - 2x2
	
Multiply.
 = Ax2 - 4A + Bx2 + 2Bx + Cx2 - 2Cx
	
Distributive property
 = 1A + B + C2x2 + 12B - 2C2x - 4A.
	
Combine like terms.
Step 3  Now use the fact that two equal polynomials have equal corresponding  
coefficients. Writing 10x - 4 = 0x2 + 10x - 4, we have
0x2 + 10x - 4 = 1A + B + C2x2 + 12B - 2C2x - 4A.
Equating corresponding coefficients leads to the system of equations.
c
A +
B +
C = 0
2B - 2C = 10
-4A
= -4
   
Equate coefficients of x2.
Equate coefficients of x.
Equate constant coefficients.
Step 4  Solve the system of equations in Step 3 to obtain A = 1, B = 2, and C = -3. 
See Exercise 57.
Step 5  The partial-fraction decomposition is
10x - 4
x3 - 4x = 1
x +
2
x - 2 +
-3
x + 2 = 1
x +
2
x - 2 -
3
x + 2
 .
Alternative Solution of Example 2
In Example 2, to find the constants A, B, and C, we equated coefficients of like powers 
of x and solved the resulting system. An alternative (and sometimes quicker) method is to 
substitute well-chosen values for x in equation (1) found in Step 2:
	
10x - 4 = A1x - 221x + 22 + B x1x + 22 + C x1x - 22	
(1)

756	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Substitute x = 2 in equation (1) to cause the terms containing A and C to be 0.
 10122 - 4 = A12 - 2212 + 22 + B12212 + 22 + C12212 - 22
 16 = 8B
    Simplify.
 2 = B
    Solve for B.
Now substitute x = -2 in equation (1) to get
 101-22 - 4 = A1-2 - 221-2 + 22 + B1-221-2 + 22 + C1-221-2 - 22
 -24 = 8C	
Simplify.  
 -3 = C	
Solve for C.
Finally, substitute x = 0 in equation (1) to get
 10102 - 4 = A10 - 2210 + 22 + B10210 + 22 + C10210 - 22
 -4 = -4A
    Simplify.
 1 = A
    Solve for A.
Because we found the same values for A, B, and C, the partial-fraction decomposition will 
also be the same.
Practice Problem 2  Find the partial-fraction decomposition of
3x2 + 4x + 3
x3 - x
 .
Q(x) Has Repeated Linear Factors
You can reinforce your partial-
fraction connection graphically:
The graph of
Y1 = 10x - 4
x3 - 4x
appears to be identical to the  
graph of
Y2 = 1
x +
2
x - 2 -
3
x + 2.
Technology
Connection
25
210
5
y1
and y2
10
The graphs of Y1 and Y2 are the 
same.
3	
Decompose 
P1x2
Q1x2 when Q1x2 
	
has repeated linear factors.
C a s e  2 :  T h e  D e n o m i n at o r  h a s  a  R e p e at e d  
L i n e a r  Fa c t o r
Let 1x - a2m be the linear factor 1x - a2 that is repeated m times in Q1x2.
Then the portion of the partial-fraction decomposition of P1x2
Q1x2 that corresponds to 
the factor 1x - a2m is
A1
x - a +
A2
1x - a22 + g+ 
Am
1x - a2m
 ,
where A1, A2, c, Am are constants.
Find the partial-fraction decomposition of: 
x + 4
1x + 321x - 122
Solution
Step 1  The linear factor 1x - 12 is repeated twice, and the factor 1x + 32 is nonrepeat-
ing. So the partial-fraction decomposition has the form
x + 4
1x + 321x - 122 =
A
x + 3 +
B
x - 1 +
C
1x - 122
 .
Step 2–4  Multiply both sides of the equation in Step 1 by the original denominator, 
1x + 321x - 122; then use the distributive property on the right side and sim-
plify to get
x + 4 = A1x - 122 + B1x + 321x - 12 + C1x + 32.
Finding the Partial-Fraction Decomposition When  
the Denominator Has Repeated Linear Factors
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 8.3    ■    Partial-Fraction Decomposition 757
Substitute x = 1 in the last equation to obtain
1 + 4 = A11 - 122 + B11 + 3211 - 12 + C11 + 32.
This simplifies to 5 = 4C, or C = 5
4.
To find A, we substitute x = -3 to get
-3 + 4 = A1-3 - 122 + B1-3 + 321-3 - 12 + C1-3 + 32.
This simplifies to 1 = 16A, or A = 1
16.
To find B, we replace x with any convenient number, say, 0. We have
 0 + 4 = A10 - 122 + B10 + 3210 - 12 + C10 + 32
 4 = A - 3B + 3C
    Simplify.
Now replace A with 1
16 and C with 5
4 in the last equation.
 4 = 1
16 - 3B + 3 a5
4b
 64 = 1 - 48B + 60
    Multiply both sides by 16.
 B = - 1
16
    Solve for B.
We have A = 1
16, B = - 1
16, and C = 5
4.
Step 5  Substitute A = 1
16, B = - 1
16, and C = 5
4 in the decomposition in Step 1 to get
x + 4
1x + 321x - 122 =
1
16
x + 3 +
- 1
16
x - 1 +
5
4
1x - 122,
	
or
x + 4
1x + 321x - 122 =
1
161x + 32 -
1
161x - 12 +
5
41x - 122.
Practice Problem 3  Find the partial-fraction decomposition of
x + 5
x1x - 122.
Q(x) Has Distinct Irreducible Quadratic Factors
4	
Decompose 
P1x2
Q1x2 when Q1x2 
	
has distinct irreducible 
quadratic factors.
C a s e  3 :  T h e  D e n o m i n at o r  h a s  a  N o n r e p e at e d 
I r r e d u c i b l e  Q u a d r at i c  Fa c t o r
Suppose ax2 + bx + c is an irreducible quadratic factor of Q1x2. Then the portion of 
the partial-fraction decomposition of P1x2
Q1x2 that corresponds to ax2 + bx + c has
the form
Ax + B
ax2 + bx + c
 .

758	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Find the partial-fraction decomposition of 3x2 - 8x + 1
1x - 421x2 + 12
Solution
Step 1  The factor x - 4 is linear, and x2 + 1 is irreducible; so the partial-fraction de-
composition has the form
3x2 - 8x + 1
1x - 421x2 + 12 =
A
x - 4 + Bx + C
x2 + 1 .
Step 2  Multiply both sides of the decomposition in Step 1 by the original denominator, 
1x - 421x2 + 12, and simplify to get
3x2 - 8x + 1 = A1x2 + 12 + 1Bx + C21x - 42.
	
Substitute x = 4 to find 17 = 17A, or A = 1.
Step 3  Collect like terms and write both sides of the equation in Step 2 in descending 
powers of x.
3x2 - 8x + 1 = 1A + B2x2 + 1-4B + C2x + 1A - 4C2
	
Equate corresponding coefficients to get
c
A +
B =
3
-4B +
C = -8
A - 4C =
1 
(1)
(2)
(3).
   
Equate the coefficients of x2.
Equate the coefficients of x.
Equate the constant coefficients.
Step 4  Substitute A = 1 from Step 2 in equation (1) to get 1 + B = 3, or B = 2.
	
Substitute A = 1 in equation (3) to get 1 - 4C = 1, or C = 0.
Step 5  Substitute A = 1, B = 2, and C = 0 into the decomposition in Step 1 to get
3x2 - 8x + 1
1x - 421x2 + 12 =
1
x - 4 +
2x
x2 + 1
 .
Practice Problem 4  Find the partial-fraction decomposition of
3x2 + 5x - 2
x1x2 + 22
 .
Q(x) Has Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factors
Finding the Partial-Fraction Decomposition When the  
Denominator Has a Distinct Irreducible Quadratic Factor
EXAMPLE 4
The expression ax2 + bx + c is  
irreducible if b2 - 4ac 6 0. In 
that case, ax2 + bx + c = 0 has 
no real solutions.
Recall
5	
Decompose 
P1x2
Q1x2 when Q1x2 
	
has repeated irreducible 
	
quadratic factors.
C a s e  4 :  T h e  D e n o m i n at o r  h a s  a  R e p e at e d 
I r r e d u c i b l e  Q u a d r at i c  Fa c t o r
Suppose the denominator Q1x2 has a factor 1ax2 + bx + c2m, where m Ú 2 and 
ax2 + bx + c is irreducible. Then the portion of the partial-fraction decomposition of 
P1x2
Q1x2 that corresponds to the factor 1ax2 + bx + c2m has the form
A1x + B1
ax2 + bx + c +
A2x + B2
1ax2 + bx + c22 + g+ 
Amx + Bm
1ax2 + bx + c2m.

	
Section 8.3    ■    Partial-Fraction Decomposition 759
Find the partial-fraction decomposition of 2x4 - x3 + 13x2 - 2x + 13
1x - 121x2 + 422
.
Solution
Step 1  The denominator has a nonrepeating linear factor 1x - 12 and an irreducible 
quadratic factor 1x2 + 42 that appears twice. The decomposition therefore has 
the form
2x4 - x3 + 13x2 - 2x + 13
1x - 121x2 + 422
=
A
x - 1 + Bx + C
x2 + 4 +
Dx + E
1x2 + 422.
Step 2  Multiply both sides of the decomposition in Step 1 by the original denominator 
1x - 121x2 + 422, use the distributive property, and eliminate common factors:
2x4 - x3 + 13x2 - 2x + 13 =
 
A1x2 + 422 + 1Bx + C21x - 121x2 + 42 + 1Dx + E21x - 12.
	
Substitute x = 1 and simplify to obtain 25 = 25A, or A = 1.
Steps 3–4  Multiply the factors on the right side of the equation in Step 2 and collect 
like terms to obtain
Finding the Partial-Fraction Decomposition When the  
Denominator Has a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor
EXAMPLE 5
2x4 - x3 + 13x2 - 2x + 13 =
  1A + B2x4 + 1-B + C2x3 + 18A + 4B - C + D2x2 + 1-4B + 4C - D + E2x + 116A - 4C - E2.
	
Equate corresponding coefficients to get the system:
e
A +
B
=
2
112
-
B +
C
= -1
122
8A + 4B -
C + D
= 13
132
- 4B + 4C - D + E = -2
142
16A
- 4C
- E = 13
152
   
Coefficient of x4
Coefficient of x3
Coefficient of x2
Coefficient of x
Constant coefficient
	
Now back-substitute A = 1 from Step 2 in equation (1) to get B = 1.
	
Again, back-substitute B = 1 in equation (2) to get C = 0.
	
Back-substitute A = 1 and C = 0 in equation (5) to obtain E = 3. Again, 
back-substitute A = 1, B = 1, and C = 0 in equation (3) to get D = 1. Hence, 
A = 1, B = 1, C = 0, D = 1, and E = 3.
Step 5  Substitute A = 1, B = 1, C = 0, D = 1, and E = 3 in the equation in Step 1 
to obtain the partial-fraction decomposition.
2x4 - x3 + 13x2 - 2x + 13
1x - 121x2 + 422
=
1
x - 1 +
x
x2 + 4 +
x + 3
1x2 + 422
Practice Problem 5  Find the partial-fraction decomposition of
x2 + 3x + 1
1x2 + 122
 .
Express the sum
1
2 # 3 +
1
3 # 4 +
1
4 # 5 + g+ 
1
2009 # 2010
as a fraction of whole numbers in lowest terms.
Learning a Clever Way to Add
EXAMPLE 6

760	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Solution
Each term in the sum is of the form 
1
k1k + 12. From the partial-fraction decomposition,
we have
1
k1k + 12 = 1
k -
1
k + 1.
Therefore, by using this decomposition for each term, we get
 1
2 # 3
 +
1
3 # 4
 +
1
4 # 5
 + g + 
1
2009 # 2010
=  a1
2 - 1
3b + a1
3 - 1
4b + a1
4 - 1
5b + g + a
1
2009 -
1
2010b.
After removing parentheses, we see that most terms cancel in pairs asuch as -1
3 and 1
3b, 
leaving only the first and the last term. The original sum is therefore referred to as a  
telescoping sum that “collapses” to
1
2 -
1
2010 = 1005 - 1
2010
= 1004
2010 = 502
1005.
Practice Problem 6  Express the sum 1
4 # 5 +
1
5 # 6 +
1
6 # 7 + g+ 
1
3111 # 3112 
as a fraction of whole numbers in lowest terms.
The total resistance R due to two resistors connected in parallel is given by
R = x1x + 52
3x + 10
 .
Use partial-fraction decomposition to write 1
R in terms of partial fractions. What does each 
term represent?
Solution
From R = x1x + 52
3x + 10 , we get the following:
 1
R = 3x + 10
x1x + 52
    Take the reciprocal of both sides.
 3x + 10
x1x + 52 = A
x +
B
x + 5
    Form of partial-fraction decomposition
 3x + 10 = A1x + 52 + Bx    Multiply both sides by x1x + 52 and simplify.
Substitute x = 0 in the last equation to obtain 10 = 5A, or A = 2. Now substitute x = -5 
in the same equation to get -5 = -5B, or B = 1. Thus, we have
 1
R = 3x + 10
x1x + 52 = 2
x +
1
x + 5
 1
R = 1
x
2
+
1
x + 5    Rewrite the right side.
Calculating the Resistance in a Circuit
EXAMPLE 7
The total resistance R in a circuit 
due to two resistors R1 and R2 
connected in parallel satisfies the 
equation
1
R = 1
R1
+ 1
R2
.
Recall

	
Section 8.3    ■    Partial-Fraction Decomposition 761
The last equation says that if two resistors with resistances R1 = x
2 and R2 = x + 5 are 
connected in parallel, they will produce a total resistance R, where R = x1x + 52
3x + 10 .
Practice Problem 7  Repeat Example 7 assuming that R = 1x + 121x + 22
4x + 7
.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 
3
x + 1 -
1
x - 2    2. 
5
x - 1 - 3
x +
1
x + 1
3. 5
x +
6
1x - 122 -
5
x - 1    4. -1
x
+ 4x + 5
x2 + 2
5. 
1
x2 + 1 +
3x
1x2 + 122    6. 777
3112
7. 1
R =
3
x + 1 +
1
x + 2 =
1
x + 1
3
+
1
x + 2;
R1 = x + 1
3
, R2 = x + 2
Exercises
section 8.3
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 In a rational expression, if the degree of the numerator, P1x2, 
is less than the degree of the denominator, Q1x2, then the 
expression is 
.
	 2.	 The numerators in the partial-fraction decomposition of a 
rational expression are constants if the denominator, Q1x2, 
can be factored into 
.
	 3.	 In a rational expression, if 1x - 82 is a linear factor that is 
repeated three times in the denominator, then the portion of 
the expression’s partial-fraction decomposition that corre-
sponds to 1x - 823 has 
 terms.
	 4.	 True or False. The form of the partial-fraction decomposition 
of a rational expression depends only on its denominator. 
	 5.	 True or False. Both 1x - 122 and 1x + 222 are irreducible  
quadratic factors of the polynomial Q1x2 = 1x - 1221x + 222.
	 6.	 True or False. If the denominator of a rational expression is 
Q1x2 = x3 - 9x, then x, x - 3, and x + 3 become denomi-
nators in its partial-fraction decomposition. 
In Exercises 7–16, write the form of the partial-fraction 
decomposition of each rational expression. You do not need to 
solve for the constants.
	 7.	
1
1x - 121x + 22
	 8.	
x
1x + 121x - 32
	 9.	
1
x2 + 7x + 6
	10.	
3
x2 - 6x + 8
	11.	
2
x3 - x2
	12.	
x - 1
1x + 2221x - 32 
	13.	
x2 - 3x + 3
1x + 121x2 - x + 12 
	14.	
2x + 3
1x - 1221x2 + x + 12 
	15.	
3x - 4
1x2 + 122 
	16.	
x - 2
12x + 3221x2 + 322 
In Exercises 17–48, find the partial-fraction decomposition of 
each rational expression.
	17.	
2x + 1
1x + 121x + 22
	18.	
7
1x - 221x + 52
	19.	
1
x2 + 4x + 3 
	20.	
x
x2 + 5x + 6
	21.	
2
x2 + 2x 
	22.	 x + 9
x2 - 9 
	23.	
x
1x + 121x + 221x + 32 
	24.	
x2
1x - 121x2 + 5x + 42 
	25.	
x - 1
1x + 122 
	26.	
3x + 2
x21x + 12 
	27.	 2x2 + x
1x + 123 
	28.	
x
1x - 121x + 12 
	29.	 -x2 + 3x + 1
x3 + 2x2 + x 
	30.	 5x2 - 8x + 2
x3 - 2x2 + x 
	31.	
1
x21x + 122 
	32.	
2
1x - 1221x + 322 
	33.	
1
1x2 - 122 
	34.	
3
1x2 - 422 
	35.	
x - 1
12x - 322 
	36.	
6x + 1
13x + 122 
	37.	
6x + 7
4x2 + 12x + 9 
	38.	
2x + 3
9x2 + 30x + 25 
	39.	 x - 3
x3 + x2 
	40.	
1
x3 + x 
	41.	 x2 + 2x + 4
x3 + x2
	42.	
x2 + 2x - 1
1x - 121x2 + 12           

762	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	43.	
x
x4 - 1 
	44.	 3x3 - 5x2 + 12x + 4
x4 - 16 
	45.	
1
x1x2 + 122 
	46.	
x2
1x2 + 222 
	47.	
2x2 + 3x
1x2 + 121x2 + 22
	48.	
x2 - 2x
1x2 + 921x2 + x + 72
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 49–52, express each sum as a fraction of whole 
numbers in lowest terms.
	49.	
1
1 # 2 +
1
2 # 3 +
1
3 # 4 + g+ 
1
n1n + 12 
	50.	
2
1 # 3 +
2
2 # 4 +
2
3 # 5 + g+ 
2
100 # 102 
	51.	
2
1 # 3 +
2
3 # 5 +
2
5 # 7 + g+ 
2
12n - 1212n + 12 
	52.	
2
1 # 2 # 3 +
2
2 # 3 # 4 +
2
3 # 4 # 5 + g+ 
2
100 # 101 # 102 
	
	 c Hint: Write
	
	  
2
k1k + 121k + 22 = 1
k -
2
k + 1 +
1
k + 2
 = 1
k -
1
k + 1 -
1
k + 1 +
1
k + 2.d
In Exercises 53–56, the total resistance R in a circuit is given. 
Use partial-fraction decomposition to write 1
R in terms of 
partial fractions. Interpret each term in the partial fraction.
	53.	 Circuit resistance. R =
1x + 121x + 32
2x + 4
	54.	 Circuit resistance. R =
1x + 221x + 42
7x + 20
 
	55.	 Circuit resistance. R =
R1R2R3
R1R2 + R2R3 + R3R1
 
	56.	 Circuit resistance. R =
x1x + 221x + 42
3x2 + 12x + 8  
Beyond the Basics
	57.	 Solve the system of equations in Example 2 to verify the  
values of the constants A, B, and C.
In Exercises 58–66, find the partial-fraction decomposition of 
each rational expression.
	58.	
1
x3 + 1 
	59.	
4x
1x2 - 122 
	60.	
2x + 3
1x2 + 121x + 12 
	61.	
x + 1
1x2 + 121x - 122 
	62.	
x
1x2 + 1221x - 12 
	63.	
x3
1x + 1221x + 222 
	64.	 2x3 + 2x2 - 1
1x2 + x + 122 
	65.	
15x
x3 - 27 
	66.	 2x2 - 9x + 10
x3 + 8
 
	67.	 Find the partial-fraction decomposition of
4x
x4 + 4. 
	
[Hint: x4 + 4 = x4 + 4 + 4x2 - 4x2 = 1x2 + 222 - 12x22 
= 1x2 - 2x + 221x2 + 2x + 22.]
	68.	 Find the partial-fraction decomposition of
x2 - 8x + 18
1x - 523
. 
In Exercises 69–72, find the partial-fraction decomposition by 
first using long division.
	69.	 x2 + 4x + 5
x2 + 3x + 2 
	70.	
1x - 121x + 22
1x + 321x - 42 
	71.	 2x4 + x3 + 2x2 - 2x - 1
1x - 121x2 + 12
 
	72.	
x4
1x - 121x - 221x - 32 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	73.	 In the partial-fraction decomposition of an expression, we 
obtain a system of equations by comparing coefficients of the 
like terms. Justify the validity of this step.
	74.	 Let f1x2 =
x + 8
x2 + x - 2 = g1x2 + h1x2, where g1x2 and 
	
	 h1x2 are the terms in the partial-fraction decomposition of f1x2.
a.	 Sketch the graphs of f, g, and h.
b.	 Compare the graphs of f and g. What do you observe?
c.	 Compare the graphs of f and h. What do you observe?
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 75–78, solve each equation for x.
	75.	 x2 + 10x + 21 = 0
	76.	 x2 - 2x - 24 = 0 
	77.	 2x2 + x - 10 = 0 
	78.	 6x2 + x - 2 = 0 
In Exercises 79–82, solve each system of equations by the  
substitution method.
	79.	 b
x + y = 3
3x + 2y = 7 
	80.	 b  3x + y = -3
4x + 3y = 1 
	81.	 b  x - 2y = 1
2x + 3y = 16 
	82.	 c
    x - 2y = 10
1
2
 x + 1
3
 y = 1 
In Exercises 83–86, solve each system of equations by the 
elimination method.
	83.	 b  2x - y = 4
3x + 2y = 13 
	84.	 b2x + 3y = -1
3x - 2y = 5 
	85.	 b2x + 5y = 1
3x - 2y = -8 
	86.	 b
2x - 3y = 6
-3x + 2y = 1     
 

	
Section 8.4    ■    Systems of Nonlinear Equations 763
8.4
Systems of Nonlinear Equations
In Sections 8.1 and 8.2, we discussed systems of linear equations. We now consider systems of 
nonlinear equations involving two variables: In these systems, at least one equation is nonlinear.
To determine whether an ordered pair is a solution of a nonlinear system, you check 
whether it is a solution of each equation in the system. Thus, 12, 12 is a solution of the 
system
e x2 + 3y
=
7
5x2 - 4y2 = 16   (1)
  (2)
because 22 + 3112 = 4 + 3 = 7 and 51222 - 41122 = 20 - 4 = 16 are both true 
statements.
Investing in the Stock Market
A stock is a certificate that shows that you own a small fraction of a corporation. When 
you own stock in a company, you are referred to as a shareholder. When you buy stock, 
you are paying for a small percentage of everything the company owns, including a 
slice of its profits (or losses).
Suppose you inherit some money and want to invest +1000 in the stock market. Where 
do you invest your money? (This is a serious question. You may have to do a great deal of 
research on the companies that interest you, or you may have to get help from a broker.)
Suppose you get a tip from a friend who heard it from his brother-in-law (a taxi 
driver who overheard his customer’s conversation) that Microsoft is coming out with 
a new version of Microsoft Windows that is going to double the company’s business. 
Where do you buy Microsoft stock? You go to a broker. A brokerage house (such as 
Fidelity Investments) is a supermarket of stocks. You can tell any broker that you have 
$1000 and want to buy as much Microsoft stock as you can. The broker might reply, 
“A share of Microsoft at this time [the price may fluctuate every second] costs $31 [the 
actual closing price on june 12, 2013, was $34.40], and I am going to charge you $55 for 
my services. So you can buy 1000 - 55
31
≈30.48, or 30 shares of Microsoft.” You then 
give the broker the money, and you become part owner of Microsoft. (Usually, the bro-
ker does not give you the paper stock certificate, but rather transfers ownership to you.)
You can make a profit on your investment if you sell your stock for more than the total 
amount you paid for it. You can also make money while you own certain stocks by receiv-
ing dividends. A dividend on a share of stock is a return on your investment and represents 
the portion of the company’s profits allocated to that share. The dividend can be in the 
form of cash or additional shares of the company. In Example 3, we discuss such a scenario.
Systems of Nonlinear Equations
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Solve systems of linear equations  
(Sections 8.1 and 8.2)
Objectives
1	 Solve systems of nonlinear equations by 
substitution.
2	 Solve systems of nonlinear equations by 
elimination.
3	 Solve applied problems using nonlinear 
systems.
S e c t i o n
An equation of the form 
ax + by = c 
is a linear equation in the variables  
x and y.
Recall
New York Stock Exchange

764	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equations by 
Substitution
We follow the same steps used in the substitution method for solving a system of linear 
equations in Section 8.1. See page 731. This method is useful when one of the equations in 
the system is linear in one of the variables.
1	
Solve systems of nonlinear 
equations by substitution.
Solve the system of equations by the substitution method.
e
4x + y = -3
-x2 + y =
1   (1)
  (2)
Solution
Because both equations are linear in y, we solve either equation for y.
Step 1	 Solve for one variable. In equation (2), express y in terms of x.
y = x2 + 1 (3)    Solve equation (2) for y.
Step 2	 Substitute. Substitute x2 + 1 for y in equation (1).
 4x + y = -3    Equation (1)
 4x + 1x2 + 12 = -3    Replace y with 1x2 + 12.
 4x + x2 + 4 = 0     Add 3 to both sides.
 x2 + 4x + 4 = 0     Rewrite in descending powers of x.
Step 3	 Solve the resulting equation from Step 2.
 1x + 221x + 22 = 0     Factor.
 x + 2 = 0     Zero-product property
 x = -2    Solve for x.
Step 4	 Back-substitute. Substitute x = -2 in equation (3) to find the corresponding 
y-value.
 y = x2 + 1
    Equation (3)
 y = 1-222 + 1    Replace x with -2.
 y = 5
    Simplify.
Step 5	 From Steps 3 and 4, we have x = -2 and y = 5. The apparent solution set of 
the system is 51-2, 526.
Step 6	 Check:  Replace x with -2 and y with 5 in both equations.
Equation (1)
	
Equation (2)
 4x + y = -3
 41-22 + 5 ≟-3
 -8 + 5 = -3 ✓
 -x2 + y = 1
 - 1-222 + 5 ≟1  Replace x with -2 and y with 5
 -4 + 5 = 1 ✓
	
The graphs of the line 4x + y = -3 and the parabola y = x2 + 1 confirm 
that the solution set is 51-2, 526. See Figure 8.10.
Practice Problem 1  Solve the system of equations by the substitution method.
ex2 + y = 2
2x + y = 3   (1)
  (2)
Using Substitution to Solve a Nonlinear System
EXAMPLE 1
22
26 24
x
4
0
2
6
22
24
8
6
4
2
y
(22, 5)
4x 1 y 5 23
y 5 x2 1 1
Figure 8.10 

	
Section 8.4    ■    Systems of Nonlinear Equations 765
Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equations  
by Elimination
We follow the same steps outlined for solving systems of linear equations by the elimina-
tion method. See page 733. This method works well when both equations of the system are 
of the same degree in the same variable.
2	
Solve systems of nonlinear 
equations by elimination.
Solve the system of equations by the elimination method.
ex2 + y2 = 25
x2 - y
=
5   (1)
  (2)
Solution
Step 1	 Adjust the coefficients. Because x has the same power in both equations, we 
choose the variable x for elimination. We multiply equation (2) by -1 and 
obtain the equivalent system.
e
x2 + y2 = 25
-x2 + y
= -5   (1)
  (3)    Multiply equation (2) by -1.
Step 2	 	
y2 + y
= 20	
(4)	
Add equations (1) and (3).
Step 3	 Solve the equation found in Step 2: y2 + y = 20.
 y2 + y - 20 = 0             Subtract 20 from both sides.
 1y + 521y - 42 = 0             Factor.
 y + 5 = 0  or  y - 4 = 0    Zero-product property
 y = -5  or 
y = 4    Solve for y.
Step 4	 Back-substitute the values in one of the original equations to solve for the 
other variable.
(i)  Substitute y = -5 in equation (2) and solve for x.
 x2 - y = 5    Equation (2)
 x2 - 1-52 = 5    Replace y with -5.
 x2 = 0    Simplify.
 x = 0    Solve for x.
So 10, -52 is a solution of the system.
(ii)  Substitute y = 4 in equation (2) and solve for x.
 x2 - y = 5
    Equation (2)
 x2 - 4 = 5
    Replace y with 4.
 x2 = 9
    Add 4 to both sides.
 x = {3    Square root property
So 13, 42 and 1-3, 42 are solutions of the system.
From (i) and (ii), the apparent solution set for the system is 
510, -52, 13, 42, 1-3, 426.
Step 5  Check:
x2 + y2 = 25
x2 - y = 5
10, -52
 02 + 1-522 ≟25
 25 = 25 ✓
 02 - 1-52 ≟5
 5 = 5 ✓
13, 42
 32 + 42 ≟25
 9 + 16 = 25
 25 = 25 ✓
 32 - 4 ≟5
 9 - 4 = 5 ✓
1-3, 42
 1-322 + 42 ≟25
 9 + 16 ≟25
 25 = 25 ✓
 1-322 - 4 ≟5
 9 - 4 = 5 ✓
Using Elimination to Solve a Nonlinear System
EXAMPLE 2
To use a graphing calculator to 
graph the system in Example 2, 
solve x2 + y2 = 25 for y and 
enter the two resulting equations.
 y1 = 225 - x2
 y2 = - 225 - x2
Then enter
y3 = x2 - 5
and use the ZSquare feature.
Technology
Connection
29
9
26
6
x22y55
x21y2525
5

766	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	
The graphs of the circle x2 + y2 = 25 and the parabola y = x2 - 5 sketched 
in Figure 8.11 confirm the three solutions.
Practice Problem 2  Solve the system of equations.
ex2 + 2y2 = 34
x2 -
y2 =
7
Applications
In the next example, we solve an investment problem that involves a nonlinear system of 
equations.
22
26 24
x
4
0
2
6
26
24
4
6
2
22
y
(0, 25)
(23, 4)
(3, 4)
x2 1 y2 5 25
y 5 x2 2 5
Figure 8.11 
3	
Solve applied problems using 
nonlinear systems.
Danielle bought 240 shares of Alpha Airlines stock at $40 per share and paid $100 in bro-
ker’s fees. She kept these shares for three years, during which time she received a number 
of additional shares of the stock as dividends. At the end of three years, her dividends were 
worth $2400 and she sold all of her stock and made a profit of $7100 (after paying $100 in 
initial broker’s commission). How many shares of the stock did she receive as dividends? 
What was the selling price of each share of the stock?
Solution
Let x = number of shares she received as dividends
p = selling price per share
Then
xp = 2400   (1)    The dividend total is $2400.
The number of shares she sold at p dollars per share is 240 + x.
 Revenue = 1240 + x2p
 Cost = 12402 1402 + 100 = 9700
	
	
number of shares bought	
commission to purchase
	
price she paid per share
and
 Revenue - Cost = Profit
 1240 + x2p - 9700 = 7100
 1240 + x2p = 16,800
	
Add 9700 to both sides.
 240p + xp = 16,800   (2)	
Distributive property
We solve the system of equations:
b
xp = 2400
240p + xp = 16,800   (1)
  (2)    Revenue from the dividends
Revenue - Cost = Profit
Substitute xp = 2400 from equation (1) into equation (2).
 240p +  xp = 16,800   (2)
 240p + 2400 = 16,800   (3)	
Substitute 2400 for xp in (2).
 240p = 14,400
	
Subtract 2400 from both sides.
 p = 60
	
Solve for p.
Investing in Stocks
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 8.4    ■    Systems of Nonlinear Equations 767
Back-substitute p = 60 in equation (1).
 xp = 2400
    Equation (1)
 x1602 = 2400
    Replace p with 60.
 x = 2400
60
= 40    Solve for x.
Danielle received x = 40 shares as dividends and sold her stock at p = +60 per share.
Practice Problem 3  Rework Example 3 assuming that Danielle’s dividends were  
worth $1950 after three years and her profit was $7850.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 511, 126    2. 514, 32, 1-4, 32, 14, -32, 1-4, -326    3. Danielle received x = 30 shares as dividends and sold her stock at 
p = +65 per share.
Exercises
section 8.4
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 In a system of nonlinear equations, 
 equation 
must be nonlinear.
	 2.	 Both the 
 and 
 methods can 
also be used to solve systems of nonlinear equations.
	 3.	 The solutions of the system
e
  ax + by = c
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2  112
122 represent the points 
of 
 of the graphs of equations (1) and (2).
	 4.	 The system of equations in Example 1 has exactly 
one solution because the graph of equation (1) is a(n) 
 line to the graph of equation (2).
	 5.	 True or False. The system of equations
	
	 e
  y = ax2
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2  may have 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 
	
	 real solutions. 
	 6.	 True or False. If 4x + 3y = 8 is one of the equations in a 
system of equations, then the system is linear. 
In Exercises 7–14, determine which of the given ordered pairs 
are solutions of each system of equations.
	 7.	 e2x + 3y = 3
x - y2 = 2	
11, -32, 13, -12, 16, 32, a5, 1
2b
	 8.	 ex + 2y = 6
y = x2	
12, 22, 1-2, 42, 10, 32, 11, 22
	 9.	 e5x - 2y = 7
x2 + y2 = 2	
a5
4, 1b, a0, 11
4 b, 11, -12, 13, 42
	10.	 ex - 2y = -5
x2 + y2 = 25 	
11, 32, 1-5, 02, 13, 42, 13, -42
	11.	 e4x2 + 5y2 = 180
x2 -
y2 = 9
	
15, 42, 1-5, 42, 13, 02, 1-5, -42
	12.	 e
x2 - y2 = 3
x2 - 4x + y2 = -3	
12, 12, 12, -12, 1-2, 12, 1-2, -12
	13.	 ey = ex-1
y = 2x - 1	
11, 12, 10, -12, 12, e2, 1-1, -32
	14.	 ey = ln 1x + 12
y = x
	
11, 12, 10, 02, 1-1, -12, 1e - 1, 12
In Exercises 15–30, solve each system of equations by the  
substitution method. Check your solutions.
	15.	 ey = x2
y = x + 2
	16.	 e
y = x2
x + y = 6
	17.	 ex2 - y = 6
x
- y = 0
	18.	 e x2 - y = 6
5x - y = 0
	19.	 e x2 + y2 = 9
x = 3 
	20.	 ex2 + y2 = 9
y = 3 
	21.	 ex2 + y2 =
5
x
- y
= -3
	22.	 e x2 +
y2 = 13
2x
- 3y
=
0
	23.	 ex2 - 4x + y2 = -2
x - y
=
2
	24.	 ex2 - 8y + y2 = -6
2x - y
=
1
	25.	 ex - y
= -2
xy =
3
	26.	 ex - 2y = 4
xy = 6
	27.	 e4x2 + y2 = 25
x + y
=
5
	28.	 ex2 + 4y2 = 16
x
+ 2y
=
4
	29.	 e x2 - y2 = 24
5x - 7y =
0
	30.	 ex2 - 7y2 = 9
x - y = 3
In Exercises 31–40, solve each system of equations (only real 
solutions) by the elimination method. Check your solutions.
	31.	 ex2 + y2 = 20
x2 - y2 = 12 
	32.	 ex2 + 8y2 = 9
3x2 + y2 = 4 
	33.	 e x2 + 2y2 = 12
7y2 - 5x2 =
8
	34.	 e3x2 + 2y2 = 77
x2 - 6y2 = 19         

768	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	35.	 e x2 - y = 2
2x - y = 4 
	36.	 ex2 + 3y = 0
x
-
y = -12 
	37.	 e x2 +
y2 =
5
3x2 - 2y2 = -5 
	38.	 ex2 + 4y2 = 5
9x2 - y2 = 8 
	39.	 ex2 +
y2 + 2x =
9
x2 + 4y2 + 3x = 14 
	40.	 ex2 + y2
= 9
x2 + y2 - 18x = 0 
In Exercises 41–54, use any method to solve each system of 
equations.
	41.	 ex + y =
8
xy = 15
	42.	 e2x + y = 8
x2 - y2 = 5
	43.	 e x2 +
y2 = 2
3x2 + 3y2 = 9 
	44.	 e x2 + y2 =
5
3x2 - y2 = -11 
	45.	 ey2 = 4x + 4
y
= 2x - 2
	46.	 exy = 125
y = x2 
	47.	 e
x2 + 4y2 = 25
x - 2y + 1 =
0 
	48.	 ey = x2 - 5x + 4
3x + y = 3
	49.	 ex2 - 3y2 = 1
x2 + 4y2 = 8 
	50.	 e4x2 - y2 = 12
4y2 - x2 = 12 
	51.	 e x2 -
xy +
5x =
4
2x2 - 3xy + 10x = -2 
	52.	 e x2 -
xy +
x = -4
3x2 - 2xy - 2x =
4 
	53.	 ex2 +
y2 - 8x = -8
x2 - 4y2 + 6x =
0 
	54.	 e4x2 + y2 - 9y = -4
4x2 - y2 - 3y =
0 
Applying the Concepts
Exercises 55 and 56 show the demand and supply functions of 
a product. In each case, p represents the price per unit and x 
represents the number of units, in hundreds. Determine the 
price that gives market equilibrium and the number of units 
that are demanded and supplied at that price.
	55.	 ep + 2x2 = 96
p - 13x = 39 
	56.	 ep2 + 6p + 3x = 75
-p +
x = 13
In Exercises 57–64, use systems of equations to solve the  
problem.
	57.	 Numbers. Find two positive numbers whose sum is 24 and 
whose product is 143. 
	58.	 Numbers. Find two positive numbers whose difference is 13 
and whose product is 114. 
	59.	 Commercial land. A commercial parcel of land is in the 
form of a trapezoid with two right angles, as shown in the  
figure. The oblique side is 100 meters in length, and  
two sides that meet at the vertex of one of the right angles  
are equal. The perimeter of the land is 360 meters. Find
a.	 The lengths of the remaining sides. 
b.	 The area of the land. 
y
x
x
100 m
	60.	 Dividing a pasture. The area of a rectangular pasture is 
8750 square feet. The pasture is divided into three smaller 
pastures by two fences parallel to the shorter sides. The widths 
of two of the larger pastures are the same, and the width of the 
third is one-half that of the others. Find the possible dimen-
sions of the original pasture if the perimeter of the smaller of 
the subdivisions is 190 feet. 
	61.	 Chartering a fishing boat. A group of students of a frater-
nity chartered a fishing boat that would cost $960. Before the 
date of the fishing trip, eight more students joined the group and 
agreed to pay their share of the cost of the charter. The cost per 
student was reduced by $6. Find the original number of students 
in the group and the original cost per student. 
	62.	Carpet sale. A salesperson sold a square carpet and a 
rectangular carpet whose length was 6 feet more than 
its width. The combined area of the two carpets was 
540 square feet. The price of the square carpet was 
$12 per square yard, and the price of the rectangular carpet 
was $10 per square yard. Assuming that the rectangular 
piece was $50 more than the square piece, find the dimen-
sions of each carpet. 
	63.	 Buying and selling stocks. Flat Fee Brokerage, Inc., 
charges $100 commission for every transaction (purchase or 
sale) you make. Anju bought a block of stock containing over 
400 shares that cost her $10,000, including the commission. 
After one year, she received a stock dividend of 30 shares. She 
then sold all of her stock for $3 more per share than it cost and 
made a profit of $1900 (after paying the commission). How 
many shares did she buy, and what was the original price of 
each share? 
	64.	 Trading stocks. Repeat Exercise 63 with the following 
details: Anju does not receive dividends and decides to keep 
100 shares of the stock. She sells the remaining stock for $10 
more per share than it cost and makes a profit of $3900 after 
paying the commission.
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 65–68, the given circle intersects the given line  
at the points A and B. Find the coordinates of A and B and 
compute the distance d1A, B2.
	65.	 Circle: x2 + y2 - 7x + 5y + 6 = 0; line: x-axis
	66.	 The circle of Exercise 65 and the y-axis
	67.	 Circle: x2 + y2 + 2x - 4y - 5 = 0; line: x - y + 1 = 0
	68.	 Circle: x2 + y2 - 6x - 8y - 50 = 0;  
line: 2x + y - 5 = 0
	69.	 Show that the line with equation x + 2y + 6 = 0 
is a tangent line to the circle with equation 
x2 + y2 - 2x + 2y - 3 = 0. (A line that intersects  
the circle at exactly one point is a tangent line to the  
circle.) 
	70.	 Repeat Exercise 69 for the line with equation 3x - 4y = 0 
and the circle with equation x2 + y2 - 2x - 4y + 4 = 0.        

	
Section 8.4    ■    Systems of Nonlinear Equations 769
In Exercises 71–74, find the value(s) of c so that the graphs of 
the equations in the system are tangent.
	 71.	 ex
+ y
= 2
x2 + y2 = c2
	 72.	 ecx - y
= 5
x2 + y2 = 16 
	 73.	 e4x2 + y2 = 25
8x
+ 3y = c
	 74.	 ex2 + 4y2 = 9
cx + 2y
= -4
In Exercises 75–78, solve by letting u = 1
x and V = 1
y.
	 75.	 d
1
x - 1
y = 5
1
xy - 24 = 0
	 76.	 d
1
x
+ 1
y
=
3
1
x2 - 1
y2 = -3
	 77.	 d
5
x2 - 3
y2 = 2
6
x2 + 1
y2 = 7
	 78.	 d
3
x2 - 2
y2 = 1
6
x2 + 5
y2 = 11
In Exercises 79–84, find square roots of each complex number 
W. [z = a + bi is a square root of W if z2 = W.]
	 79.	 w = -5 + 12i
	 80.	 w = -16 - 30i
	 81.	 w = 7 - 24i 
	 82.	 w = 3 - 4i 
	 83.	 w = 13 + 813i
	 84.	 w = -1 - 415i
In Exercises 85–90, solve each system of equations and verify 
the solutions graphically.
	 85.	 ey = 3x + 4
y = 32x - 2 
	 86.	 ey = ln x + 1
y = ln x - 2 
	 87.	 ey = 2x + 3
y = 22x + 1 
	 88.	 ey = 2x + 3
y = 4x + 1 
	 89.	 e
x = 3y
  
32y = 3x - 2 
	 90.	 e x = 3y
x2 = 3y+1 - 2 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	 91.	 Consider a system of two equations in two variables.
ey = mx + b
y = Ax3 + Bx2 + Cx + D,  A ≠0
	
	 Explain whether it is possible for this system to have
a.	 No real solutions.
b.	 One real solution.
c.	 Two real solutions.
d.	 Three real solutions.
e.	 Four real solutions.
f.	 More than four real solutions.
	 92.	 Repeat Exercise 91 for the system.
ey = mx + b
y = Ax4 + Bx3 + Cx2 + Dx + E, A ≠0
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 93–100, sketch the graph of each equation.
	 93.	 2x + y = 0 
	 94.	 2y - x = 0 
	 95.	 3x + 4y = 12 
	 96.	 4x - 3y = 24 
	 97.	 y - 2x2 = 0 
	 98.	 y - x2 = 3 
	 99.	 y + x2 - 2 = 0 
	100.	 x2 + y2 = 16 
In Exercises 101–104, determine which of the given points are 
on the graph of the equation.
	
Equation	
Points
	101.	 5x + 3y = 0	
10, 02, 1-3, 52, 11, -12, 1-1, 12
	102.	 3x + 4y = 12	
10, 02, 14, 02, 10, 32, 13, 42
	103.	 y = x2 + 3	
10, 02, 11, 42, 1-1, 42, 12, 52
	104.	 y + x2 = 2	
10, 02, 10, 22, 12, -22, 11, 12                   		

770	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
1 Horsepower
5
33,000 foot-pounds
per minute
S E C T I O N
Graph of a Linear Inequality in Two Variables
The statements x + y 7 4, 2x + 3y 6 7, y Ú x, and x + y … 9 are examples of linear 
inequalities in the variables x and y. As with equations, a solution of an inequality in two 
variables x and y is an ordered pair 1a, b2 that results in a true statement when x is replaced 
with a and y is replaced with b in the inequality. For example, the ordered pair 13, 22 is a 
solution of the inequality 4x + 5y 7 11 because 4132 + 5122 = 22 7 11 is a true state-
ment. The ordered pair 11, 12 is not a solution of the inequality 4x + 5y 7 11 because 
4112 + 5112 = 9 7 11 is a false statement. The set of all solutions of an inequality is 
called the solution set of the inequality. The graph of an inequality in two variables is the 
graph of the solution set of the inequality.
What is Horsepower?
The definition of horsepower was originated by the inventor James Watt (1736–1819). 
To demonstrate the power (work capability) of the steam engine that he invented 
and patented in 1783, he rigged his favorite horse with a rope and some pulleys and 
showed that his horse could raise a 3300-pound weight 10 feet in the air in one minute. 
Watt called this amount of work 1 horsepower (hp). So he defined
 1 hp = 33,000 foot@pounds per minute 13300 * 10 = 33,0002
 = 550 foot@pounds per second a33,000
60
= 550b.
Because horses were one of the main energy sources during that time, the pub-
lic easily understood and accepted the horsepower measure. Watt labeled his steam 
engines in terms of equivalent horsepower. A 10 hp engine could do the work of  
10 horses, or could lift 5500 pounds up 1 foot in one second. In the usual definition 
of power =
1force21distance2
time
, the horse provides the force. In Exercise 83, we discuss
engines with different amounts of horsepower.
Systems of Inequalities
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Intersection of sets (Section P.1, page 6)
2	 Graphing a line (Section 2.3, page 184)
3	 Solving systems of equations  
(Sections 8.1, 8.2, and 8.4)
Objectives
1	 Graph a linear inequality in two variables.
2	 Graph systems of linear inequalities in two 
variables.
3	 Graph a nonlinear inequality in two  
variables.
4	 Graph systems of nonlinear inequalities  
in two variables.
8.5
1	
Graph a linear inequality  
in two variables.

	
Section 8.5    ■    Systems of Inequalities 771
Graph the inequality 2x + y 7 6.
Solution
First, graph the equation 2x + y = 6. See Figure 8.12(a). Notice that if we solve this equa-
tion for y, we have y = -2x + 6. Any point P1a, b2 whose y-coordinate, b, is greater than 
6 - 2a must be above this line. Therefore, the graph of y 7 -2x + 6, which is equivalent 
to 2x + y 7 6, consists of all points 1x, y2 in the plane that lie above the line 2x + y = 6. 
The graph of the inequality 2x + y 7 6 is shaded in Figure 8.12(b).
Graphing a Linear Inequality
EXAMPLE 1
Figure 8.12 
x
4
3
2
1
0
y
2
3
4
5
1
6
(3, 0)
(0, 6)
Graph of 2x 1 y . 6
(b)
x
4
3
2
1
0
y
2
3
4
5
1
6
P(a, b)
(a, 622a)
(3, 0)
(0, 6)
(a, 0)
2x 1 y 5 6
(a)
Practice Problem 1  Graph the inequality 3x + y 6 6.
In Figure 8.12(b), the graph of the equation 2x + y = 6 is drawn as a dashed line to indi-
cate that points on the line are not included in the solution set of the inequality 2x + y 7 6. 
In Figure 8.13(a), however, the graph of the inequality 2x + y Ú 6 shows 2x + y = 6 as a 
solid line. The solid line indicates that the points on the line are included in the solution set. 
Note that the region below the line 2x + y = 6 in Figure 8.13(b) is the graph of the inequal-
ity 2x + y 6 6.
x
4
3
2
1
0
y
2
3
4
5
1
6
(3, 0)
(a)
(0, 6)
Graph of 2x 1 y $ 6
x
4
3
2
1
0
y
2
3
4
5
1
6
(3, 0)
(0, 6)
(b)
Graph of 2x 1 y , 6
Figure 8.13 
In general, the graph of a linear inequality’s corresponding equation (found by changing 
the inequality symbol to the equality sign) is a line that separates the plane into two regions, 
each called a half plane. The line itself is called the boundary of each region. All of the points 

772	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
in one region satisfy the inequality, and none of the points in the other region are solutions. 
You can therefore test one point not on the boundary, called a test point, to determine which 
region represents the solution set.
Graph an inequality in two variables.
Graph the linear inequality y Ú -2x + 4.
Graphing a Linear Inequality in Two Variables
Objective
procedure 
in action
Example 2	
Step 1 Replace the inequality symbol with the  
equality 1=2 sign.
y = -2x + 4
Step 2 Sketch the graph of the corresponding  
equation in Step 1. Use a dashed line for the boundary  
if the given inequality sign is 6 or 7 and a solid line  
if the inequality symbol is … or Ú.
The graph of the equation 
y = -2x + 4 is shown in  
the figure.
The line drawn is solid  
because the given  
inequality sign is Ú.
Step 3 The graph in Step 2 divides the plane into two 
regions. Select a test point in either region, but not on 
the graph of the equation in Step 1.
Select 10, 02 as a test point.
Step 4 (i) If the coordinates of the test point satisfy 
the inequality, then so do all of the points in that region. 
Shade that region.
(ii) If the test point’s coordinates do not satisfy the  
inequality, shade the region that does not contain the  
test point.
The shaded region (including the boundary if it is solid) 
is the graph of the inequality.
Because 0 Ú -2102 + 4 is 
false, the coordinates of the 
test point 10, 02 do not satisfy 
the inequality y Ú -2x + 4.
The graph of the solution set 
of y Ú -2x + 4 is on the 
side of the line that does not 
contain 10, 02. It is shaded in 
the figure.
Example
y 5 22x 1 4
y
x
0
2
4
2
4
22
22
y 5 22x 1 4
Test point
(0, 0)
4
22
4
2
22
y
x
(0, 0)
4
2
22
2
4
22
y 5 22x 1 4
y
x
Practice Problem 2  Graph the linear inequality y … -2x + 4.
Sketch the graph of each inequality.
a.	 x Ú 2        b.   y 6 3        c.   x + y 6 4
Graphing Inequalities
EXAMPLE 3
1.	
2.	
3.	
4.	

	
Section 8.5    ■    Systems of Inequalities 773
Solution
Steps
Inequality
1. Change  
the inequality 
to an equality.
a. x Ú 2
  x = 2
b. y 6 3
  y = 3
c. x + y 6 4
  x + y = 4
2. Graph the 
equation in 
Step 1 with 
a dashed line 
16 or 72 or 
a solid line 
1… or Ú2.
2
x 5 2
y
x
0
22
22
2
4
24
24
4
2
y 5 3
y
x
0
22
22
2
4
24
24
4
2
y
x
0
22
22
2
4
24
24
4
x 1 y 5 4
3. Select a 
test point.
Test 10, 02 in x Ú 2; 0 Ú 2 is  
a false statement. The region  
not containing 10, 02, together  
with the vertical line, is the  
solution set.
Test 10, 02 in y 6 3; 0 6 3  
is a true statement. The region 
containing 10, 02 is the  
solution set.
Test 10, 02 in 
x + y 6 4; 0 + 0 6 4 is a 
true statement. The region 
containing 10, 02 is the  
solution set.
4. Shade the 
solution set.
2
x 5 2
y
x
0
22
22
2
4
24
24
4
2
y 5 3
y
x
0
22
22
2
4
24
24
4
2
y
x
0
22
22
2
4
24
24
4
x 1 y 5 4
Practice Problem 3  Graph the inequality x + y 7 9.
To shade a graph on a graphing calculator, first solve the corre-
sponding equation for y. Enter the equation using the Y =  key. On 
some calculators, you can move the cursor to the symbol to the left 
of Y1. Press ENTER to cycle through the shading options:  shades 
below the line, and  shades above it.
Technology
Connection
21
21
4
6

774	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables
An ordered pair 1a, b2 is a solution of a system of inequalities involving two variables if it 
is a solution of each of its inequalities. For example, 10, 12 is a solution of the system
e2x +
y … 1
x - 3y 6 0
because both 2102 + 1 … 1 and 0 - 3112 6 0 are true statements. The solution set of a 
system of inequalities is the intersection of the solution sets of all inequalities in the system. 
To find the graph of this solution set, graph the solution set of each inequality in the system 
(with different-color shadings) on the same coordinate plane. The region common to all of the 
solution sets, (the one where all the shaded parts overlap), is the solution set. If there are no 
points common to all solutions, then the system is inconsistent, and the answer is ∅.
2	
Graph systems of linear 
inequalities in two variables.
Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities.
e2x + 3y 7 6
y -
x … 0   (1)
  (2)
Solution
Graph each inequality separately in the same coordinate plane.
Graphing a System of Two Inequalities
EXAMPLE 4
A graphing calculator uses overlap-
ping crosshatch shading to display 
the solution set of a system of 
inequalities. The solution set for  
the system
e2x + 3y 7 6
y - x … 0
is shown here.
Technology
Connection
22
4
24
4
Inequality 1
2x + 3y 7 6
Step 1  2x + 3y = 6
Step 2  Sketch 2x + 3y = 6 as a  
dashed line by joining the 
points 10, 22 and 13, 02.
Step 3  Test 10, 02 in
 2x + 3y 7 6
 2 # 0 + 3 # 0 7
?  6
 0 7
?  6 False
Step 4  Shade as in Figure 8.14(a).
Inequality 2
y - x … 0
Step 1  y - x = 0
Step 2  Sketch y - x = 0 as a 
solid line by joining the points 
10, 02 and 11, 12.
Step 3  Test 11, 02 in
 y - x … 0
 0 - 1 …
?   0
 -1 …
?   0 True
Step 4  Shade as in Figure 8.14(b).
The graph of the solution set of the system of inequalities (1) and (2) (the region where the 
shadings overlap) is shown shaded in purple in Figure 8.14(c).
y
1
0
1
2
3
4
2
4
x
(a)
3
(b)
y
1
0
1
2
3
4
2
4
x
3
y
1
0
1
2
3
4
2
4
x
3
22 21
21
22
(c)
P
, 6
5
6
5(   )
Solution set of
the system
Figure 8.14  Graph of a system of two inequalities

	
Section 8.5    ■    Systems of Inequalities 775
Practice Problem 4  Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities.
e3x - y 7 3
x - y Ú 1
The point P a6
5, 6
5b in Figure 8.14(c) is the point of intersection of the two lines
2x + 3y = 6 and y - x = 0. Such a point is called a corner point, or vertex, of the 
solution set. It is found by solving the system of equations e2x + 3y = 6
y - x = 0
.
In this case, however, the point P is not in the solution set of the given system because
the ordered pair a6
5, 6
5b satisfies only inequality (2), but not inequality (1), of Example 4. 
We show P as an open circle in Figure 8.14(c).
Sketch the graph and label the vertices of the solution set of the system of linear inequalities.
c
3x + 2y … 11
x -
y …
2
7x - 2y Ú -1 
  (1)
  (2)
  (3)
Solution
First, on the same coordinate plane, sketch the graphs of the three linear equations that cor-
respond to the three inequalities. Because either … or Ú occurs in all three inequalities, all of 
the equations are graphed as solid lines. See Figure 8.15.
Notice that 10, 02 satisfies each of the inequalities but none of the equations. You can use 
10, 02 as the test point for each inequality.
Make the following conclusions:
(i)	 Because 10, 02 lies below the line 3x + 2y = 11, the region on or below the line 
3x + 2y = 11 is in the solution set of inequality (1).
(ii)	 Because 10, 02 is above the line x - y = 2, the region on or above the line x - y = 2 
is in the solution set of inequality (2).
(iii)	 Finally, because 10, 02 lies below the line 7x - 2y = -1, the region on or below the 
line 7x - 2y = -1 belongs to the solution set of inequality (3).
The region common to the regions in (i), (ii), and (iii) (including the boundaries) is the 
solution set of the given system of inequalities. The solution set is the shaded region in 
Figure 8.16, including the sides of the triangle.
Figure 8.16 also shows the vertices of the solution set. These vertices are obtained by 
solving each pair of equations in the system. Because all vertices are solutions of the given 
system, they are shown as (solid) points.
a.	 To find the vertex 13, 12, solve the system
e3x + 2y = 11
x -
y = 2    (1)
  (2)
	
Solve equation (2) for x to obtain x = 2 + y. Substitute x = 2 + y in equation (1).
 312 + y2 + 2y = 11
 6 + 3y + 2y = 11    Distributive property
 y = 1     Solve for y.
	
Back-substitute y = 1 in equation (2) to find x = 3. The vertex is the point 13, 12.
b.	 Solve the system of equations e x -
y =
2
7x - 2y = -1  
	
by the substitution method to find the vertex 1-1, -32.
Solving a System of Three Linear Inequalities
EXAMPLE 5
24
22
0
2
4
6
24
22
2
4
6
y
x
7x 2 2y 5 21
3x 1 2y 511
x 2y 5 2
Figure 8.15 
In working with linear inequali-
ties, you must use the test point 
to graph the solution set. Do not 
assume that just because the  
symbol … or 6 appears in the 
inequality, the graph of the  
inequality is below the line.
Side 
Note
24
22
0
2
4
6
24
22
2
4
6
y
7x22y 5 21
3x12y 5 11
x2y 5 2
x
(1, 4)
(21, 23)
(3, 1)
Figure 8.16  Graph of the  
solution set

776	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
c.	 Solve the system of equations e3x + 2y =  11
7x - 2y = -1  
	
by the elimination method to find the vertex 11, 42.
Practice Problem 5  Sketch the graph (and label the corner points) of the solution set of 
the system of inequalities.
c
2x + 3y 6 16
4x + 2y Ú 16
2x -
y …
8
Nonlinear Inequality
We follow the same steps that we used in solving a linear inequality.
3	
Graph a nonlinear inequality 
in two variables.
Graph a nonlinear inequality in two variables.
Graph y 7 x2 - 2.
Graphing a Nonlinear Inequality in Two Variables
Objective
procedure 
in action
EXAMPLE 6
Step 1  Replace the inequality symbol with an  
equal 1=2 sign.
1.	y = x2 - 2
Step 2 Sketch the graph of the corresponding equation 
in Step 1. Use a dashed curve if the given inequality sign 
is 6 or 7 and a solid curve if the inequality symbol is 
… or Ú.
The graph of the 
parabola with vertex 
10, -22 is sketched 
as a dashed curve in 
the figure.
Step 3 The graph in Step 2 divides the plane into two 
regions. Select a test point in either region, but not on 
the graph.
4.	Because 0 7 02 - 2 = -2, the coordinates of the 
test point, 10, 02, satisfy the inequality y 7 x2 - 2.
The graph of the solution set of y 7 x2 - 2 is shaded.
y 5 x2 2 2
y
0
x
(0, 0)
Step 4 (i) If the coordinates of the test point satisfy 
the inequality, then so do all of the points in that region. 
Shade that region.
(ii) If the test point’s coordinates do not satisfy the  
inequality, shade the region that does not contain the  
test point.
The shaded region (including the boundary if it is a solid 
curve) is the graph of the inequality.
Example
y
0
x
y 5 x2 2 2
(0, 22)
(0, 2 2)
(0, 0)
Test point
y
0
x
Practice Problem 6  Graph y … x2 - 2.
2.	
3.	

	
Section 8.5    ■    Systems of Inequalities 777
Nonlinear Systems
The procedure for solving a nonlinear system of inequalities is identical to the procedure for 
solving a linear system of inequalities.
4	
Graph systems of nonlinear 
inequalities in two variables.
Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities.
d
y … 4 - x2
 (1)
y Ú 3
2x - 3
 (2)
y Ú -6x - 3
 (3)
Solution
Graph each inequality separately in the same coordinate plane. Because 10, 02 is not a solu-
tion of any of the corresponding equations, use 10, 02 as a test point for each inequality.
Inequality (1)
Inequality (2)
Inequality (3)
y … 4 - x2
y Ú 3
2 x - 3
y Ú -6x - 3
Step 1  y = 4 - x2
y = 3
2 x - 3
y = -6x - 3
Step 2  The graph of 
y = 4 - x2 is a parabola 
opening down with vertex 
10, 42. Sketch it as a solid 
curve.
The graph of y = 3
2 x - 3 
is a line through the points 
10, -32 and 12, 02. Sketch  
a solid line.
The graph of y = -6x - 3 
is a line through the points 
10, -32 and a -1
2, 0b. 
Sketch a solid line.
Step 3  Testing 10, 02 in 
y … 4 - x2 gives 0 … 4, a 
true statement. The solution 
set is below the parabola.
Testing 10, 02 in 
y Ú 3
2 x - 3 gives 0 Ú -3, 
a true statement. The solution 
set is above the line.
Testing 10, 02 in 
y Ú -6x - 3 gives  
0 Ú -3, a true statement. 
The solution set is above  
the line.
Step 4  Shade the region 
as in Figure 8.17(a).
Shade the region as in  
Figure 8.17(b).
Shade the region as in  
Figure 8.17(c).
The region common to all three graphs is the graph of the solution set of the given system 
of inequalities. See Figure 8.17(d).
Solving a Nonlinear System of Inequalities
EXAMPLE 7
0
0
23
21
1
3
5
25
23
1
3
5
x
y
25
23
21
1
3
25
23
1
3
5
x
y
25
5
C(21, 3)
B(0, 23)
A(2, 0)
y 5 26x 23
y 5 26x 23
y 5 4 2x2
y 5 4 2x2
C(21, 3)
B(0, 23)
A(2, 0)
y 5 26x 23
y 5 26x 23
y 5 4 2x2
y 5 4 2x2
y 5     x 23
3
2
3
2
y 5     x 23
23
Solution for y # 4 2 x2
Solution for y $ 26x 2 3
Solution of the system
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
21 0
0
1
3
5
25
23
1
3
5
x
y
25
23
21
1
3
25
23
1
3
5
x
y
25
5
C(21, 3)
B(0, 23)
A(2, 0)
y 5 26x 23
y 5 26x 23
y 5 4 2x2
y 5 4 2x2
C(21, 3)
B(0, 23)
A(2, 0)
y 5 26x 23
y 5 26x 23
y 5 4 2x2
y 5 4 2x2
y 5     x 23
3
2
y 5     x 23
3
2
Solution for y $     x 2 3
3
2
Figure 8.17 

778	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Use the substitution method to locate the points of intersection A, B, and C of the correspond-
ing equations. See Figure 8.17(d). Solve all pairs of corresponding equations.
The point A12, 02 is the solution of the system
c
y = 4 - x2
y = 3
2x - 3
   
Boundary of inequality (1)
Boundary of inequality (2)
The point B10, -32 is the solution of the system
c
y = 3
2x - 3
y = -6x - 3
    Boundary of inequality (2)
Boundary of inequality (3)
Finally, the point C1-1, 32 is the solution of the system
ey = -6x - 3
y = 4 - x2
    Boundary of inequality (1)
Boundary of inequality (2)
Practice Problem 7  Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities.
c
y Ú x2 + 1
y … -x + 13
y 6 4x + 13
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
6
7
8
4
2
1
2
x
y
3x  y  6
    2. 
2
2
2
4
6
4
6
4
6
4
2
6
y
x
0
y  2x  4
    3. 
0
4
10
2
8
6
12
2
6
4
2
12
10
8
2
x
y
x  y  9
4. 
3x  y  3
x  y  1
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
    5. 14, 02, 15, 22, and 12, 42 
2x  3y  16
4x  2y  16
2x  y  8
0
12
10
14
8
6
4
2
16
42
10
6
8
4
2
2
6
4
8
10
x
y
   
6. 
2
2
2
4
4
4
6
4
2
y
x
0
y  x2  2
7. 
0
9
(3, 10)
(0, 13)
3
15
15
9
3
12
21
18
6
x
y

	
Section 8.5    ■    Systems of Inequalities 779
Exercises
section 8.5
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 In the graph of x - 3y 7 1, the corresponding equation 
x - 3y = 1 is graphed as a(n) 
 line.
	 2.	 If a test point from one of the two regions determined by an 
inequality’s corresponding equation satisfies the inequality, 
then 
 in that region satisfy the inequality.
	 3.	 In a system of inequalities containing both 2x + y 7 5 and 
2x - y … 3, the point of intersection of the lines 2x + y = 5 
and 2x - y = 3 is 
.
	 4.	 In a nonlinear system of equations or inequalities, 
 equation or inequality must be nonlinear.
	 5.	 True or False. There are always infinitely many solutions of 
an inequality ax + by 6 c, where a, b, and c are real numbers 
and a ≠0. 
	 6.	 True or False. If x2 + 2y 6 5 is one of the inequalities in a 
system of inequalities, then the point 12, 12 cannot be used as 
a test point in graphing the system. 
In Exercises 7–22, graph each inequality.
	 7.	  x Ú 0 
	 8.	  y Ú 0 
	 9.	  x 7 -1 
	10.	  y 7 2 
	11.	  x Ú 2 
	12.	  y … 3 
	13.	  y - x 6 0 
	14.	  y + 2x … 0 
	15.	  x + 2y 6 6 
	16.	  3x + 2y 6 12 
	17.	  2x + 3y Ú 12 
	18.	  2x + 5y Ú 10 
	19.	  x - 2y … 4 
	20.	  3x - 4y … 12 
	21.	  3x + 5y 6 15 
	22.	  5x + 7y 6 35 
In Exercises 23–28, determine which ordered pairs are  
solutions of each system of inequalities.
	23.	 e x + y 6 2
2x + y Ú 6
a.	 10, 02    b.	 1-4, -12    c.	 13, 02    d.	 10, 32
	24.	 e x -
y 6 2
3x + 4y Ú 12
a.	 10, 02	
b.	 a16
5 , 3
5b	
c.	 14, 02	
d.	 a1
2, 1
2b
	25.	 e
y 6 x + 2
x + y … 4
  
a.	 10, 02	
b.	 11, 02	
c.	 10, 12	
d.	 11, 12
	26.	 e
y … 2 - x
x + y … 1 
a.	 10, 02	
b.	 10, 12	
c.	 11, 22	
d.	 1-1, -12
	27.	 c
3x - 4y … 12
x +
y … 4
5x - 2y Ú 6 
a.	 10, 02	
b.	 12, 02	
c.	 13, 12	
d.	 12, 22
	28.	 c
2 +
y … 3
x - 2y … 3
5x + 2y Ú 3
a.	 10, 02	
b.	 11, 02	
c.	 11, 22	
d.	 12, 12
In Exercises 29–44, graph the solution set of each system of  
linear inequalities and label the vertices (if any) of the  
solution set.
	29.	 ex + y …
1
x - y … -1 
	30.	 ex + y Ú 1
y - x Ú 1 
	31.	 e3x + 5y … 15
2x + 2y …
8 
	32.	 e -2x +
y … 2
3x + 2y … 4 
	33.	 e2x + 3y …
6
4x + 6y Ú 24 
	34.	 e x + 2y Ú 6
2x + 4y … 4 
	35.	 e3x +
y … 8
4x + 2y Ú 4 
	36.	 e x + 2y … 12
2x + 4y Ú
8 
	37.	 c
x
Ú 0
y Ú 0
x + y … 1 
	38.	 c
x
Ú 0
y Ú 0
x + y 7 2 
	39.	 c
x
Ú 0
y Ú 0
2x + 3y Ú 6 
	40.	 c
x
Ú
0
y Ú
0
3x + 4y … 12 
	41.	 c
x + y … 1
x - y Ú 1
2x + y … 1 
	42.	 c
x + y … 1
x - y Ú 1
2x + y Ú 1 
	43.	 d
x + y …
1
x - y 6
2
-x + y …
3
x + y Ú -4 
	44.	 d
x +
y … -1
2x -
y 7 -2
-2x +
y Ú -3
2x + 2y Ú -4 
In Exercises 45–50, use the following figure to indicate the 
regions (A–G) that correspond to the graph of the given  
system of inequalities.
x
y
23
25
1
5
3
22
24
2
4
210
(1, 1)
(21, 3)
(23, 25)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
26
x 1 y 5 2
y 2 4x = 7
3x 2 2y 5 1
	45.	 c
x +
y … 2
3x - 2y … 1
y - 4x … 7 
	46.	 c
x +
y Ú 2
3x - 2y … 1
y - 4x … 7 
	47.	 c
x +
y Ú 2
3x - 2y Ú 1
y - 4x … 7 
	48.	 c
x +
y Ú 2
3x - 2y … 1
y - 4x Ú 7 
	49.	 c
x +
y … 2
3x - 2y … 1
y - 4x Ú 7 
	50.	 c
x +
y … 2
3x - 2y Ú 1
y - 4x Ú 7    

780	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
In Exercises 51–64, use the procedure for graphing a nonlinear 
inequality in two variables to graph each inequality.
	51.	 y … x2 + 2 
	52.	 y 6 x2 - 3 
	53.	 y 7 x2 - 1 
	54.	 y Ú x2 + 1 
	55.	 y … 1x - 122 + 3 
	56.	 y 7 - 1x + 122 + 4 
	57.	 x2 + y2 7 4 
	58.	 x2 + y2 … 9 
	59.	 1x - 122 + 1y - 222 … 9 
	60.	 1x + 222 + 1y - 122 7 4 
	61.	 y 6 2x 
	62.	 y Ú ex 
	63.	 y 6 log x 
	64.	 y Ú ln x 
For Exercises 65–70, use the following figure to indicate the 
region or regions that correspond to the graph of each system 
of inequalities.
24
22
0
2
4
26
24
22
2
4
26
6
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
M
J
K
L
x
y
(23, 4)
(3, 4)
(0, 5)
(0, 25)
y 5 x2 2 5
x2 1 y2 5 25
	65.	 c
y Ú x2 - 5
x2 + y2 … 25
x Ú
0 
	66.	 c
y Ú x2 - 5
x2 + y2 Ú 25
x Ú
0 
	67.	 c
y … x2 - 5
x2 + y2 … 25
x Ú
0 
	68.	 c
y … x2 - 5
x2 + y2 Ú 25
y Ú
0 
	69.	 c
y … x2 - 5
x2 + y2 … 25
y Ú
0 
	70.	 c
y Ú x2 - 5
x2 + y2 … 25
y Ú
0 
In Exercises 71–78, graph the region determined by each  
system of inequalities and label all points of intersection.
	71.	 ex + y … 6
y Ú x2 
	72.	 ex + y Ú 6
y Ú x2 
	73.	 ey Ú 2x + 1
y … -x2 + 2 
	74.	 ey … 2x + 1
y … -x2 + 2 
	75.	 e
y Ú x
x2 + y2 … 1 
	76.	 e
y … x
x2 + y2 … 1 
	77.	 ex2 + y2 … 25
x2 + y
…
5 
	78.	 ex2 + y2 … 25
x2 + y Ú
5 
Applying the Concepts
	79.	 Grocer’s shelf space. Your local grocery store has shelf 
space for, at most, 40 cases of Coke and Sprite. The  
grocer wants at least ten cases of Coke and five cases  
of Sprite. Graph the possible stock arrangements and  
find the vertices. 
	80.	 DVD players. An electronic store sells two types, A and 
B, of DVD players. Each player of type A and type B costs 
$60 and $80, respectively. The store wants at least 20 players 
in stock and does not want its investment in the players to 
exceed $6000. Graph the possible inventory of the players 
and find the vertices. 
	81.	 Home builder. A builder has 43 units of material and  
25 units of labor available to build one- and/or two-story 
houses within one year. Assume that a two-story house 
requires seven units of material and four units of labor and  
a one-story house requires five units of material and three 
units of labor. Graph the possible inventory of houses and 
find the vertices. 
	82.	 Financial planning. Sabrina has $100,000 to invest in 
stocks and bonds. The annual rate of return for stocks and 
bonds is 4% and 7%, respectively. She wants at least $5600 
income from her investments. She also wants to invest at least 
$60,000 in bonds. Graph her possible investment portfolio 
and find the vertices. 
	83.	 Engine manufacturing. A company manufactures 3 hp 
and 5 hp engines. The time (in hours) required to assemble, 
test, and package each type of engine is shown in the table 
below.
Process
Engine
Assemble
Test
Package
3 hp
3
2
0.5
5 hp
4.5
1
0.75
	
	 The maximum times (in hours) available for assembling,  
testing, and packaging are 360 hours, 200 hours, and  
60 hours, respectively. Graph the possible processing  
activities and find the vertices. 
	84.	 Pet food. Vege Pet Food manufactures two types of dog 
food: Vegies and Yummies. Each bag of Vegies contains  
3 pounds of vegetables and 2 pounds of cereal; each bag of 
Yummies contains 1.5 pounds of vegetables and 3.5 pounds 
of cereal. The total pounds of vegetables and cereal available 
per week are 20,000 pounds and 27,000 pounds, respectively. 
Graph the possible number of bags of each type of food and 
find the vertices. 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 85–92, write a system of linear inequalities that 
has the given graph.
	85. 
x
5
4
3
2
1
0
y
2
3
1
(0, 2)
(3, 0)
(0, 0)
	86. 
x
3
2
1
4
0
y
2
3
4
5
1
(0, 0)
(2, 0)
(2, 5)
(0, 5)
(0, 3)

	
Section 8.5    ■    Systems of Inequalities 781
	 87.
x
0
y
(21, 0)
(3, 0)
21
22
1
2
3
4
23
22
21
1
2
3
	 88.
x
y
0
(0, 0)
(2, 0)
21
1
2
3
22
21
1
2
	 89.
x
4
3
2
1
0
y
2
3
4
5
1
(2, 3)
(0, 4)
(0, 0)
(4, 0)
	 90.
x
4
3
2
0
y
2
3
4
5
1
1
(2, 4)
(0, 4)
(0, 0)
(4, 0)
	 91.
x
20
16
12
8
0
y
8
12
16
20
4
4
(10, 6)
(0, 16)
(0, 6)
(5, 1)
	 92.
x
20
16
12
8
0
y
8
12
16
20
4
4
(13, 3)
(10, 0)
(0, 16)
(0, 6)
(6, 0)
In Exercises 93–102, graph each inequality.
	 93.	 xy Ú 1 
	 94.	 xy 6 3 
	 95.	 y 6 2x 
	 96.	 y … 2x-1 
	 97.	 y Ú 3x-2 
	 98.	 y 7 -3x 
	 99.	 y Ú ln x 
	100.	 y 6 -ln x 
	101.	 y 7 ln1x - 12 
	102.	 y … -ln1x + 12 
In Exercises 103 and 104, graph the solution set of each 
inequality.
	103.	 1 … x2 + y2 … 9 
	104.	 x2 … y … 4x2 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
In Exercises 105–106, graph the solution set of each inequality.
	105.	 x + y 6 1 
	106.	 x + 2y 6 4 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 107–110, find the point of intersection of the  
two lines.
	107.	 x + 2y = 40 and 3x + y = 30 
	108.	 3x + y = 30 and 4x + 3y = 60 
	109.	 x - 2y = 2 and 3x + 2y = 12      
	110.	 3x + 2y = 12 and -3x + 2y = 3 
In Exercises 111–112, find the vertices of the triangle whose 
sides lie along the given lines.
	111.	 y - x = 1, 2y + x = 8, and y + 2x = 13
	112.	 y + x = 3, y - 3x = -5, and 5y - 3x = 23
	113.	 Consider the following system of linear inequalities:
d
3x + 4y … 12
4x + 3y … 12
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
a.	 Graph and shade the solution set of the system of  
inequalities. 
b.	 List the coordinates of the corner points of the region  
in part (a).   

782	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
8.6
Linear Programming
Recall that if a function f  with domain 3a, b4 has a largest and a smallest value, the largest 
value is called the maximum value and the smallest value is called the minimum value. The 
process of finding the maximum or minimum value of a quantity is called optimization. 
For example, for the function
f 1x2 = x2, -2 … x … 3,
1	
State linear programming 
problems.
The Success of Linear Programming
From 1941 to 1946, George Dantzig was head of the Combat Analysis Branch, U.S. Army 
Air Corps Headquarters Statistical Control. During this period, he became an expert  
on planning methods involving troop supply problems that arose during World  
War II. With a war on several fronts, the size of the problem of coordinating supplies 
was daunting. This problem was known as programming, a military term which at that 
time referred to plans or schedules for training, logistical supply, or the deployment of 
forces. Dantzig mechanized the planning process by introducing linear programming, 
where programming has the military meaning.
In recent years, linear programming has been applied to problems in almost all 
areas of human life. A quick check in the library at a university may uncover entire 
books on linear programming applied to business, agriculture, city planning, and 
many other areas. Even feedlot operators use linear programming to decide how 
much and what kinds of food they should give their livestock each day. In Example 3 
and in the exercises, we consider several linear programming problems involving two 
variables.
Linear Programming
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Intersection of sets (Section P.1, page 6)
2	 Graphing a line (Section 2.3, page 184)
3	 Solving systems of linear inequalities 
(Section 8.5, page 774)
Objectives
1	 State linear programming problems.
2	 Solve linear programming problems.
3	 Use linear programming in applications.
S e c t i o n 
George Dantzig 1914–2005
George Dantzig received numerous 
honors and awards for his work. Dantzig 
attributed his success in mathematics to 
his father, who encouraged him to  
develop his analytic power by making him 
solve thousands of geometry problems 
while George was still in high school.
During his first year of graduate 
studies, Dantzig arrived late in one of 
Professor Neyman’s classes at the  
University of California at Berkeley. On 
the blackboard were two problems that 
Dantzig assumed had been assigned for 
homework. He submitted his homework 
a little late. He was surprised to learn 
that these were the two famous 
unsolved problems in statistics. The 
solutions of these problems became 
part of Dantzig’s dissertation for his 
PhD degree from Berkeley.

	
Section 8.6    ■    Linear Programming 783
Solving Linear Programming Problems
We next describe a procedure for solving linear programming problems that have a 
solution.
2	
Solve linear programming 
problems.
the maximum value of f  occurs at x = 3 and is given by f 132 = 32 = 9, while the mini-
mum value occurs at x = 0 and is given by f 102 = 02 = 0. See Figure 8.18. This is an 
example of an optimization problem involving one variable.
Now we will investigate optimization problems involving two variables, say, x and y. 
Assume the following conditions:
1.	 The quantity f  to be maximized or minimized can be written as a linear expression in 
x and y; that is,
f = ax + by, where a ≠0, b ≠0 are constants.
2.	 The domain of the variables x and y is restricted to a region S that is determined by 
(is a solution set of) a system of linear inequalities.
A problem that satisfies conditions (1) and (2) is called a linear programming problem.
The inequalities that determine the region S are called constraints, the region S is 
called the set of feasible solutions, and f = ax + by is called the objective function. 
A point in S at which f  reaches its maximum (or minimum) value, together with the value 
of f  at that point, is called an optimal solution.
Consider the following linear programming problem:
Find values of x and y that will make f = 2x + 3y as large as possible (in other words, 
that will result in a maximum value for f ), where x and y are restricted by the following 
constraints:
c
3x + 5y … 15
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
To solve the problem, first sketch the graph of the permissible values of x and y; that is, 
find the set of feasible solutions determined by the constraints of the problem. Using the 
method explained in Section 8.5, you find that the set of feasible solutions is the shaded 
region shown in Figure 8.19.
Now you have to find the values of f = 2x + 3y at each of the points in the shaded 
­region of Figure 8.19 and then see where f  takes on the maximum value. The shaded 
­region, however, has infinitely many points. Because you cannot evaluate f  at each point, 
you need another method to solve the problem.
Fortunately, it can be shown that if there is an optimal solution, it must occur at one of 
the vertices (corner points) of the feasible solution set. This means that when there is an 
optimal solution, we can find the maximum (or minimum) value of f by computing the value 
of f at each vertex and then picking the largest (or smallest) value that results.
y
4
6
8
10
2
4
22
24
0
2
(3, 9)
(0, 0)
(22, 4)
x
Figure 8.18  Optimization
23
5
23
5
21
C(0, 3)
B(5, 0)
y 5 0
x 5 0
3x 1 5y 5 15
A(0 , 0)
Figure 8.19  Feasible solutions
S o l u t i o n  o f  a  L i n e a r  P r o g r a m m i n g  P r o b l e m
1.	 If a linear programming problem has a solution, it must occur at one of the vertices 
of the feasible solution set.
2.	 A linear programming problem may have many solutions, but at least one of them 
occurs at a vertex of the feasible solution set.
3.	 In any case, the value of the objective function is unique.

784	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Solve a linear programming problem.
Solving a Linear Programming Problem
Objective
Procedure  
in Action
EXAMPLE 1
Maximize f = 2x + 3y subject to the constraints given below.
1.	Maximize the objective function
f = 2x + 3y
2.	subject to the constraints
c
3x + 5y … 15
x Ú 0
y Ú 0.
3.	See Figure 8.19 for the solution set of the constraints.
4.	Find
A10, 02 by solving ex = 0
y = 0
B15, 02 by solving e
y = 0
3x + 5y = 15
and
C10, 32 by solving e
x = 0
3x + 5y = 15.
5.	 At A10, 02, f = 2102 + 3102 = 0.
 At B15, 02, f = 2152 + 3102 = 10.
 At C10, 32, f = 2102 + 3132 = 9.
6.	At B15, 02, the objective function f has a maximum value of 
10. ­Although you are not asked for the minimum value, it is 
0 at A10, 02.
Step 1 Write an expression for the quantity to 
be maximized or minimized. This expression is 
the objective function.
Step 2 Write all constraints as linear 
­inequalities.
Step 3 Graph the solution set of the ­constraint 
inequalities. This set is the set of ­feasible 
­solutions.
Step 4 Find all vertices of the solution set 
in Step 3 by solving all pairs of equations 
­corresponding to the constraint inequalities.
Step 5 Find the values of the objective 
­function at each of the vertices in Step 4.
Step 6 The largest of the values (if any) in 
Step 5 is the maximum value of the objective 
function, and the smallest of the values (if any) 
in Step 5 is the minimum value of the objective 
function.
Example
Practice Problem 1  Maximize f = 4x + 5y subject to the constraints
c
5x + 7y … 35
x Ú 0
y Ú 0 .
We stated in the box on page 783 that the optimal value of the objective function f  is 
unique, but the solution (the point 1x, y2 at which f  attains this optimal value) may not be 
unique. We next solve a linear programming problem that has infinitely many solutions.

	
Section 8.6    ■    Linear Programming 785
Minimize f = 60x + 40y subject to the constraints x + y … 8, x + 2y Ú 4, 
3x + 2y Ú 6, x Ú 0, y Ú 0.
Solution
Step 1  The objective function is f = 60x + 40y.
Step 2  We want to find the minimum value of f  that can occur at the points 1x, y2 that 
satisfy the constraints
e
x +
y … 8
x + 2y Ú 4
3x + 2y Ú 6
x Ú 0
y Ú 0.
Step 3  The graph of the solution of the inequalities in Step 2 is shaded in Figure 8.20.
y
B (8, 0)
A (4, 0)
D (0, 3)
E (1, 1.5)
C (0, 8)
x
x 1 y  8
x 1 2y  4
3x 1 2y  6
Figure 8.20  Feasible solutions
Step 4  Solving the pairs of equations corresponding to the constraint inequalities, 
we get the coordinates of the vertices A = 14, 02, B = 18, 02, C = 10, 82, 
D = 10, 32, and E = 11, 1.52.
Step 5  Table 8.2 lists the vertices and the corresponding values of the objective function.
	
Table 8.2 
Vertex  
1x, y2
Value of the Objective Function  
f = 60x + 40y
A = 14, 02
f = 1602142 + 1402102 = 240
B = 18, 02
f = 1602182 + 1402102 = 480
C = 10, 82
f = 1602102 + 1402182 = 320
D = 10, 32
f = 1602102 + 1402132 = 120
E = 11, 1.52
f = 1602112 + 140211.52 = 120
Solving a Linear Programming Problem  
Having a Nonunique Solution
EXAMPLE 2

786	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Applications
The next example shows how linear programming is used to minimize the number of 
­calories in a diet.
3	
Use linear programming in 
applications.
Step 6  We observe from Table 8.2 that the minimum value of f  is 120 and that it ­occurs 
at two vertices, D and E. In fact, the unique minimum value occurs at every 
point on the line segment DE. So the linear programming problem has infinitely 
many solutions, each of which satisfies 3x + 2y = 6.
Practice Problem 2  Repeat Example 2 with f = 1
2
 x + y.
Peter Griffin wants to go on a crash diet and needs your help in designing a lunch menu. 
The menu is to include two items: soup and salad. The vitamin units (milligrams) and 
calorie counts in each ounce of soup and salad are given in Table 8.3.
Table 8.3 
Item
Vitamin A
Vitamin C
Calories
Soup
1
3
50
Salad
1
2
40
The menu must provide at least
10 units of vitamin A.
24 units of vitamin C.
Find the number of ounces of each item in the menu needed to provide the required 
­vitamins with the fewest number of calories.
Solution
a.	 State the problem mathematically.
Step 1  Write the objective function. Let the lunch menu contain x ounces of soup 
and y ounces of salad. You need to minimize the total number of calories in the 
menu. ­Because the soup has 50 calories per ounce (see Table 8.3), x ounces of 
soup has 50x calories. Likewise, the salad has 40y calories. The number f of 
calories in the two items is therefore given by the objective function
f = 50x + 40y.
Step 2  Write the constraints. Because each ounce of soup provides 1 unit of vita-
min A and each ounce of salad provides 1 unit of vitamin A, the two items 
together provide 1 # x + 1 # y = x + y units of vitamin A. The lunch must 
have at least 10 units of vitamin A; this means that
x + y Ú 10.
Similarly, the two items provide 3x + 2y units of vitamin C. The menu 
must provide at least 24 units of vitamin C, so
3x + 2y Ú 24.
The fact that x and y cannot be negative means that x Ú 0 and y Ú 0. You 
now have four constraints.
Nutrition; Minimizing Calories
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 8.6    ■    Linear Programming 787
Summarize your information. Find x and y such that the value of
f = 50x + 40y    Objective function from Step 1
is a minimum, with the restrictions
d
x +
y Ú 10
3x + 2y Ú 24
x Ú
0
y Ú
0.
    Constraints from Step 2
b.	 Solve the linear programming problem.
Step 3  Graph the set of feasible solutions. The set of feasible solutions is shaded in 
Figure 8.21. This set is bounded by the lines whose equations are
x + y = 10, 3x + 2y = 24, x = 0, and y = 0.
Step 4  Find the vertices. The vertices of the set of feasible solutions are
A110, 02, found by solving  e
y = 0
x + y = 10
B14, 62, found by solving  e x +
y = 10
3x + 2y = 24
C10, 122, found by solving  e x
= 0
3x + 2y = 24.
Step 5  Find the value of f at the vertices. The value of f at each of the vertices is 
given in Table 8.4.
	
Table 8.4 
Vertex 1x, y2
Value of f = 50x + 40y
110, 02
501102 + 40102 = 500
14, 62
50142 + 40162 = 440
10, 122
50102 + 401122 = 480
Step 6  Find the maximum or minimum value of f. From Table 8.4, the smallest 
value of f is 440, which occurs when x = 4 and y = 6.
c.	 State the conclusion.
The lunch menu for Peter Griffin should contain 4 ounces of soup and 6 ounces of 
salad. His intake of 440 calories will be as small as possible under the given constraints.
Practice Problem 3  How does the answer to Example 3 change if 1 ounce of soup 
contains 30 calories and 1 ounce of salad contains 60 calories?
x
10
8
6
4
2
0
y
4
6
8
10
2
12
A(10, 0)
C(0, 12)
x 1 y 5 10
3x 1 2y 5 24
B(4, 6)
Figure 8.21  Feasible solutions
Notice in Example 3 that the value of the objective function f = 50x + 40y can be 
made as large as you want by choosing x or y (or both) to be very large. So f has a minimum 
value of 440 but no maximum value.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. The objective function f has a maximum of 28 at the point 
17, 02.    2. The minimum value is 2 at 14, 02 and 11, 1.52.
3. The minimum number of calories is 300. The lunch then ­consists 
of 10 ounces of soup and no salad.

788	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Exercises
section 8.6 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The process of finding the maximum or minimum value of a 
quantity is called 
.
	 2.	 In a linear programming problem, the linear expression 
f that is to be maximized or minimized is called a1n2 
.
	 3.	 The inequalities that determine the region S in a linear  
programming problem are called 
, and  
S is called the set of 
 solutions.
	 4.	 In linear programming, the expression for the objective func-
tion is 
, and all of the constraint inequalities 
are 
.
	 5.	 True or False. In a linear programming problem, the optimal 
value of the objective function is unique. 
	 6.	 True or False. In a linear programming problem, the optimal 
value of the objective function occurs at a unique point. 
In Exercises 7–12, find the maximum and the minimum value 
of each objective function f. The graph of the set of feasible 
solutions is as follows:
x
10
8
6
4
2
0
y
4
6
8
10
2
(3, 2)
(0, 8)
(10, 0)
(10, 8)
(1, 4)
	 7.	 f = x + y 
	
8.	 f = 2x + y 
	 9.	 f = x + 2y 
	 10.	 f = 2x + 5y 
	11.	 f = 5x + 2y 
	 12.	 f = 8x + 5y 
In Exercises 13–24, you are given an objective function f  
and a set of constraints. Find the set of feasible solutions 
determined by the given constraints and then maximize  
or minimize the objective function as directed.
	13.	 Maximize f = 9x + 13y, subject to the constraints 
x Ú 0, y Ú 0, 5x + 8y … 40, 3x + y … 12 
	14.	 Maximize f = 7x + 6y, subject to the constraints 
x Ú 0, y Ú 0, 2x + 3y … 13, x + y … 5
	15.	 Maximize f = 5x + 7y, subject to the constraints x Ú 0, 
y Ú 0, x + y … 70, x + 2y … 100, 2x + y … 120
	16.	 Maximize f = 2x + y, subject to the constraints x Ú 0, 
y Ú 0, x + y Ú 5, 2x + 3y … 21, 4x + 3y … 24
	17.	 Minimize f = x + 4y, subject to the constraints x Ú 0, 
y Ú 0, x + 3y Ú 3, 2x + y Ú 2 
	18.	 Minimize f = 5x + 2y, subject to the constraints x Ú 0, 
y Ú 0, 5x + y Ú 10, x + y Ú 6 
	19.	 Minimize f = 13x + 15y, subject to the constraints x Ú 0, 
y Ú 0, 3x + 4y Ú 360, 2x + y Ú 100
	20.	 Minimize f = 40x + 37y, subject to the constraints x Ú 0, 
y Ú 0, 10x + 3y Ú 180, 2x + 3y Ú 60
	21.	 Maximize f = 15x + 7y, subject to the constraints 
3x + 8y … 24, 2x + 2y … 8, 5x + 3y … 18, x Ú 0, 
y Ú 0. 
	22.	 Maximize f = 17x + 10y, subject to the constraints 
2x + 3y Ú 12, 5y - 6x … 6, x … 4, x Ú 0, y Ú 2.
	23.	 Minimize f = 8x + 16y, subject to the constraints 
2x + y Ú 40, x + 2y Ú 50, x + y Ú 35, x Ú 0, y Ú 0. 
	24.	 Minimize f = 12x + 12y, subject to the constraints 
2x + 3y Ú 4, 3x + y … 6, x Ú 0, y Ú 0.
Applying the Concepts
	25.	 Agriculture: crop planning. A farmer owns 240 acres of 
cropland. He can use his land to produce corn and soybeans. 
A total of 320 labor hours is available to him during the pro-
duction period of both of these commodities. Each acre for 
corn production requires two hours of labor, and each acre 
for soybean production requires one hour of labor. Assuming 
that the profit per acre in corn production is $50 and that in 
soybean production is $40, find the number of acres that he 
should allocate to the production of corn and soybeans so as 
to maximize his profit. 
	26.	 Repeat Exercise 25 assuming that the profit per acre in corn 
production is $30 and that in soybean production is $40. 
	27.	 Manufacturing: production scheduling. Two machines  
(I and II) each produce two grades of plywood: Grade A  
and Grade B. In one hour of operation, machine I produces  
20 units of Grade A and 10 units of Grade B plywood. Also 
in one hour of operation, machine II produces 30 units of 
Grade A and 40 units of Grade B plywood. The machines are 
required to meet a production schedule of at least 1400 units of 
Grade A and 1200 units of Grade B plywood. Assuming that 
the cost of operating machine I is $50 per hour and the cost of 
operating machine II is $80 per hour, find the number of hours 
each machine should be operated so as to minimize the cost. 
	28.	 Repeat Exercise 27 assuming that the cost of operating 
machine I is $70 per hour and the cost of operating  
machine II is $90 per hour. 
	29.	 Advertising. The Sundial Cheese Company wants to allocate 
its $6000 advertising budget to two local media—television 
and newspaper—so that the exposure (number of viewers) to 
its advertisements is maximized. There are 60,000 viewers 
exposed to each minute of television time and 20,000 readers 
exposed to each page of newspaper advertising. Each minute        

	
Section 8.6    ■    Linear Programming 789
houses and cottages. A terraced house requires 1 unit of con-
crete, 2 units of wood, and 2 units of glass; a cottage requires 
1 unit of concrete, 1 unit of wood, and 5 units of glass. A ter-
raced house sells for $40,000, and a cottage sells for $45,000. 
How many houses of each type should the contractor build to 
obtain the maximum amount of money? 
	36.	 Hospitality. Mrs. Adams owns a motel consisting of 300 
single rooms and an attached restaurant that serves break-
fast. She knows that 30% of the male guests and 50% of the 
female guests will eat in the restaurant. Suppose she makes 
a profit of $18.50 per day from every guest who eats in her 
restaurant and $15 per day from every guest who does not eat 
in her restaurant. Assuming that Mrs. Adams never has more 
than 125 female guests and never more than 220 male guests, 
find the number of male and female guests that would pro-
vide the maximum profit. 
	37.	 Hospitality. In Exercise 36, find Mrs. Adams’s maximum 
profit during a season in which she always has at least 100 
guests, assuming that she makes a profit of $15 per day from 
every guest who eats in her restaurant and she suffers a loss of 
$2 per day from every guest who does not eat in her restaurant.
	38.	 Transportation. Major Motors, Inc., must produce at least 
5000 luxury cars and 12,000 medium-priced cars. It must 
produce, at most, 30,000 units of compact cars. The company 
owns one factory in Michigan and one in North Carolina. The 
Michigan factory produces 20, 40, and 60 units of luxury, 
medium-priced, and compact cars, respectively, per day, and 
the North Carolina factory produces 10, 30, and 20 luxury, 
medium-priced, and compact cars, respectively, per day. If 
the Michigan factory costs $60,000 per day to operate and the 
North Carolina factory costs $40,000 per day to operate, find 
the number of days each factory should operate to minimize 
the cost and meet the requirements. 
	39.	 Nutrition. Elisa Epstein is buying two types of frozen meals: 
a meal of enchiladas with vegetables and a vegetable loaf meal. 
She wants to guarantee that she gets a minimum of 60 grams 
of carbohydrates, 40 grams of proteins, and 35 grams of fats. 
The enchilada meal contains 5, 3, and 5 grams of carbohy-
drates, proteins, and fats, respectively, per kilogram, and the 
vegetable loaf contains 2, 2, and 1 gram of carbohydrates, pro-
teins, and fats, respectively, per kilogram. If the enchilada meal 
costs $3.50 per kilogram and the vegetable loaf costs $2.25 
per kilogram, how many kilograms of each should Elisa buy to 
minimize the cost and still meet the minimum requirement? 
	40.	 Temporary help. The personnel director of the main post 
office plans to hire extra helpers during the holiday season. 
Because office space is limited, the number of temporary 
workers cannot exceed ten. She hires workers sent by Super 
Temps and by Ready Aid. From her past experience, she 
knows that a typical worker sent by Super Temps can handle 
300 letters and 80 packages per day and that a typical worker 
from Ready Aid can handle 600 letters and 40 packages per 
day. The post office expects that the additional daily vol-
ume of letters and packages will be at least 3900 and 560, 
respectively. The daily wages for a typical worker from Super 
Temps and Ready Aid are $96 and $86, respectively. How 
many workers from each agency should be hired to keep the 
daily wages to a minimum? 
of television time costs $1000, and each page of newspaper 
advertising costs $500. How should the company allocate its 
budget if it has to buy at least one minute of television time 
and at least two pages of newspaper advertising? 
	30.	 Advertising. The Fantastic Bread Company allocates a 
maximum of $24,000 to advertise its product to television 
and newspaper. Each hour of television costs $4000, and each 
page of newspaper advertising costs $3000. The exposure 
from each hour of television time is assumed to be 120,000, 
and the exposure from each page of newspaper advertising 
is 80,000. Furthermore, the board of directors requires at 
least two hours of television time and one page of newspaper 
advertising. How should the advertising budget be divided to 
maximize exposure to the advertisements? 
	31.	 Agriculture. A Florida citrus company has 480 acres of 
land for growing oranges and grapefruit. Profits per acre 
are $40 for oranges and $30 for grapefruit. The total labor 
hours available during the production are 800. Each acre for 
oranges uses two hours of labor, and each acre for grapefruit 
uses one hour of labor. If the fixed costs are $3000, what is 
the maximum profit? 
	32.	 Agriculture. The Florida Juice Company makes two types 
of fruit punch—Fruity and Tangy—by blending orange juice 
and apple juice into a mixture. The fruit punch is sold in 
5-gallon bottles. A bottle of Fruity earns a profit of $3, and a 
bottle of Tangy earns a $2 profit. A bottle of Fruity requires 
3 gallons of orange juice and 2 gallons of apple juice, and a 
bottle of Tangy requires 4 gallons of orange juice and  
1 gallon of apple juice. If 200 gallons of orange juice and  
120 gallons of apple juice are available, find the maximum 
profit for the company. 
	33.	 Manufacturing. The Fantastic Furniture Company manu-
factures rectangular and circular tables. Each rectangular 
table requires one hour of assembling and one hour of finish-
ing, and each circular table requires one hour of assembling 
and two hours of finishing. The company’s 20 assemblers and 
30 finishers each work 40 hours per week. Each rectangular 
table brings a profit of $3, and each circular table brings a 
profit of $4. If all of the tables manufactured are sold, how 
many of each type should be made to maximize profits? 
	34.	 Manufacturing. A company produces a portable global 
positioning system (GPS) and a portable digital video disc 
(DVD) player, each of which requires three stages of process-
ing. The length of time for processing each unit is given in 
the following table.
Stage
GPS  
(hr/unit)
DVD  
(hr/unit)
Maximum Process  
Capacity (hr/day)
I
12
12
840
II
  3
  6
300
III
  8
  4
480
Profit per unit
$6
$4
	
	 How many of each product should the company produce per 
day to maximize profit? 
	35.	 Building houses. A contractor has 100 units of concrete, 
160 units of wood, and 400 units of glass. He builds terraced  

790	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 49–52, solve each system of linear equations by 
the Gaussian elimination method (See page 742.)
	49.	 b
  x - 2y = 4
-3x + 5y = -7	
50. b 3x + 5y = 6
    2x - y = 17 
	51.	 c
       x - 4y - z = 11
   2x - 5y + 2z = 39
-3x + 2y + z = 1
	
52.	 c
x + 3y - 2z = 5
2x + y + 4z = 8
6x + y - 3z = 5
	53.	 Consider the following rectangular array of numbers:
c 2
4
-6
10
3
-2
4
12d d  row 1
d  row 2
	
	 Write the new rectangular array after multiplying each 
	
	 ­number in row 1 by 1
2. 
	54.	In the rectangular array obtained in Exercise 53, add -3 
times each number in row 1 to the corresponding number 
in row 2.
	55.	 In the rectangular array obtained in Exercise 54, multiply 
	
	 each number in row 2 by - 1
8.
	56.	In the rectangular array obtained in Exercise 55, add -2 
times each number in row 2 to the corresponding number 
in row 1.
Beyond the Basics
	41.	 Maximize f = 8x + 7y, subject to the constraints 
x + 2y Ú 10, 8y - 7x … 40, x + y … 20, 4x - y … 40, 
x Ú 0, y Ú 0. 
	42.	Minimize f = 3x + 2y, subject to the constraints 
6y - 5x … 80, 7x - 5y … 80, 5x + 8y Ú 115, 
10x - y … 60, 0 … x … 20, y Ú 0.
	43.	 Minimize f = 5x + 6y, subject to the constraints 
y … x + 5, 7x + 2y … 28, 0 … x … 3, 0 … y … 6.
	44.	 Maximize f = 7x + 3y, subject to the constraints 
x + y … 100, x + y Ú 50, 2x + 5y Ú 150, 2x + y Ú 80, 
x Ú 0, y Ú 0. 
	45.	 Suppose an objective function f = ax + by has the same 
value M at two different points P1x1, y12 and Q1x2, y22. Prove 
that f has the value M at every point of the line segment PQ.
	46.	 Suppose the feasible solution set of a linear programming 
problem is a quadrilateral. Is it possible that the optimal solution 
also occurs at an interior point of the quadrilateral? 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	47.	 Consider this problem: Maximize f = 2x + 3y, subject to 
the constraints y - x … 6, x Ú 0, 0 … y … 8.
a.	 Explain why the region S of feasible solutions is unbounded.
b.	 Show that the problem has no solution.
	48.	 Diet problem. The objective of a diet problem is to have 
certain quantities of food on the menu that meet nutritional 
requirements at a minimum cost. Suppose the consideration is 
limited to milk, chicken, and vegetables and to vitamins A, B, 
and C. The number of milligrams of each of these vitamins 
contained within a unit of each food is given below.
Vitamin
Liters of  
Milk
Pounds of  
Chicken
Pounds of  
Vegetable
Minimum 
Daily  
Requirement
A
1
2
5
1 mg
B
10
5
4
50 mg
C
6
20
7
10 mg
Cost
$3.20
$2.50
$1.30
	
	 Write a linear programming formulation of this problem if 
a daily diet consists of x liters of milk, y pounds of chicken, 
and z pounds of vegetables.    
 
 
 
       
8.1	 Systems of Linear Equations  
in Two Variables
A system of equations is a set of equations with common variables.
A solution of a system of equations in two variables x and y 
is an ordered pair of numbers 1a, b2 that satisfies all equations in 
the system. The solution set of a system of two linear equations of 
the form ax + by = c is the point(s) of intersection of the graphs 
of the equations.
Systems with no solution are called inconsistent, and systems 
with at least one solution are consistent. A system of two linear 
equations in two variables may have one solution (independent 
equations), no solution (inconsistent system), or infinitely many 
solutions (dependent equations).
Three methods of solving a system of equations are the 
graphical method, the substitution method, and the elimination  
or addition method.
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

	
Review Exercises 791
8.2	 Systems of Linear Equations  
in Three Variables
A linear equation in n variables x1, x2, c, xn is an equation that 
can be written in the form
a1x1 + a2x2 + c + anxn = b,
where b and the coefficients a1, a2,c, an are real numbers.
A system of linear equations can be solved by transforming it 
into an equivalent system that is easier to solve.
The following operations produce equivalent systems:
1.	 Interchange the position of any two equations.
2.	 Multiply any equation by a nonzero constant.
3.	 Add a multiple of one equation to another.
The Gaussian elimination method is a procedure for  
converting a system of linear equations into an equivalent  
system in triangular form.
A linear system may have only one solution, infinitely many 
solutions, or no solution.
8.3	 Partial-Fraction Decomposition
In partial-fraction decomposition, we undo the addition of rational 
expressions. A rational expression 
P1x2
Q1x2 is called a proper fraction 
if  degree P1x2 6  degree Q1x2.
There are four cases to consider in decomposing 
P1x2
Q1x2 into 
partial fractions:
1.	 Q1x2 has only distinct linear factors. See page 754.
2.	 Q1x2 has repeated linear factors. See page 756.
3.	 Q1x2 has distinct irreducible quadratic factors. See page 757.
4.	 Q1x2 has repeated irreducible quadratic factors. See  
page 758.
8.4	 Systems of Nonlinear Equations
A system of equations in which at least one equation is  
nonlinear is called a nonlinear system of equations.  
The method of substitution, elimination, or graphing is  
sometimes used to solve a nonlinear system.
8.5	 Systems of Inequalities
A statement of the form ax + by 6 c is a linear inequality in 
the variables x and y. The symbol 6  may be replaced with 
…, 7, or Ú. A procedure for graphing a linear inequality in two 
variables is described on page 772.
The graph of the solution set of a system of inequalities is 
obtained by graphing each inequality of the system in the same 
coordinate plane and then finding the region that is common to 
every graph in the system.
8.6	 Linear Programming
In a linear programming model, a quantity f (to be maximized  
or minimized) that can be expressed in the form f = ax + by  
is called an objective function of the variables x and y. The con-
straints are the restrictions placed on the variables x and y that 
can be expressed as a system of linear inequalities.
A procedure for solving a linear programming problem is 
given on page 784.
Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills
In Exercises 1–18, solve each system of equations by using the 
method of your choice. Identify systems with no solution and 
systems with infinitely many solutions.
	 1.	 e3x -
y = -5
x + 2y =
3 
	 2.	 ex + 3y + 6 = 0
y = 4x - 2
	 3.	 e2x + 4y =
3
3x + 6y = 10 
	 4.	 e x -
y = 2
2x - 2y = 9 
	 5.	 c
3x -
y = 3
1
2x + 1
3y = 2 
	 6.	 e0.02y - 0.03x = -0.04
1.5x - 2y =
3
	 7.	 c
x + 3y +
z =
0
2x -
y +
z =
5
3x - 3y + 2z = 10 
	 8.	 c
2x +
y
= 11
3y -
z =
5
x
+ 2z =
1 
	 9.	 c
x +
y = 1
3y + 2z = 0
2x - 3z = 7 
	10.	 c
2x - 3y +
z =
2
x - 3y + 2z = -1
2x + 3y + 2z =
3 
	11.	 c
x +
y +
z =
1
x + 5y + 5z = -1
3x -
y -
z =
4
	12.	 c
x + 3y - 2z = -4
2x + 6y - 4z =
3
x +
y +
z =
1
	13.	 e x + 4y + 3z = 1
2x + 5y + 4z = 4 
	14.	 e3x -
y + 2z = 9
x - 2y + 3z = 2 
	15.	 c
3x -
y =
2
x + 2y =
9
3x +
y = 10 
	16.	 c
x - 2y =
1
3x + 4y = 11
2x + 2y =
7 
	17.	 c
x +
y +
z = 3
2x -
y +
z = 4
x + 4y + 2z = 5 
	18.	 c
x -
y +
z = 4
x + 2y + 3z = 2
2x +
y + 4z = 6 
In Exercises 19–24, graph each system of inequalities.
	19.	 c
x + y … 1
x - y … 1
x Ú 0 
	20.	 c
2x + 3y …
6
4x - 3y … 12
x Ú
0 			

792	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	21.	 c
4x +
y …
7
2x + 5y Ú -1
x - 2y Ú -5 
	22.	 c
7x - 2y +
6 … 0
x +
y + 14 Ú 0
2x - 3y +
9 Ú 0 
	23.	 d
x +
y -
3 … 0
3x -
y -
9 … 0
y +
3 Ú 0
7x + 4y + 23 Ú 0 
	24.	 d
x + 5y - 11 … 0
5x +
y -
7 … 0
x - 5y - 17 … 0
7x +
y + 25 Ú 0 
In Exercises 25–28, solve each linear programming problem.
	25.	 Maximize z = 2x + 3y, subject to the constraints 
x Ú 0, y Ú 0, 3x + 7y … 21. 
	26.	 Minimize z = -5x + 2y, subject to the constraints x Ú -2, 
y … 1, x - 2y + 2 … 0. 
	27.	 Minimize z = x + 3y, subject to the constraints 
2x - 3y + 2 Ú 0, 4x + y - 10 … 0, x - 3y - 9 … 0, 
3x + y + 3 Ú 0. 
	28.	 Maximize z = 2x + 5y, subject to the constraints 
x + 3y - 3 … 0, 3x - y - 9 … 0, x + 4y + 10 Ú 0, 
3x - 2y + 2 Ú 0. 	
In Exercises 29–34, solve each nonlinear system of equations.
	29.	 ex
+ 3y = 1
x2 - 3x = 7y + 3 
	30.	 e4x -
y = 3
y2 - 2y = x - 2 
	31.	 e x
- y
=
4
5x2 + y2 = 24 
	32.	 e x
- 2y
=
7
2x2 + 3y2 = 29 
	33.	 e
xy = 2
x2 + 2y2 = 9 
	34.	 e
xy =
3
2x2 + 3y2 = 21 
In Exercises 35–40, graph each nonlinear system of  
inequalities.
	35.	 e x - y
…
1
x2 + y2 … 13 
	36.	 ex
- y
Ú
1
x2 + y2 … 13 
	37.	 d
x - y …
1
x2 + y2 … 13
x Ú
0
y Ú
0 
	38.	 d
x - y Ú
1
x2 + y2 Ú 13
x …
4
y Ú
0 
	39.	 d
y … 3x
x2 + y2 … 25
x Ú
0
y Ú
0 
	40.	 d
y Ú 3x
x2 + y2 … 25
x Ú
0
y Ú
0 
In Exercises 41–46, find the partial-fraction decomposition of 
each rational expression.
	41.	
x + 4
x2 + 5x + 6 
	42.	
x + 14
x2 + 3x - 4 
	43.	 3x2 + x + 1
x1x - 122 
	44.	
3x2 + 2x + 3
1x2 - 121x + 12 
	45.	 x2 + 2x + 3
1x2 + 422 
	46.	
2x
x4 - 1 
Applying the Concepts
	47.	 Investment. A speculator invested part of $15,000 in a 
high-risk venture and received a return of 12% at the end of 
the year. The rest of the $15,000 was invested at 4% annual 
interest. The combined annual income from the two sources 
was $1300. How much was invested at each rate? 
	48.	 Agriculture. A farmer earns a profit of $525 per acre of 
tomatoes and $475 per acre of soybeans. His soybean  
acreage is 5 acres more than twice his tomato acreage.  
If his total profit from the two crops is $24,500, how many 
acres of tomatoes and how many acres of soybeans does  
he have?	
	49.	 Geometry. The area of a rectangle is 63 square feet, and  
its perimeter is 33 feet. What are the dimensions of the  
rectangle? 
	50.	 Numbers. Twice the sum of the reciprocals of two 
	
	 numbers is 13, and the product of the numbers is 1
9. 
	
	 Find the numbers. 
	51.	 Geometry. The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 17.  
If one leg of the triangle is increased by 1 and the other  
leg is increased by 4, the hypotenuse becomes 20. Find the 
sides of the triangle. 
	52.	 Paper route. Chris covers her paper route, which is  
21 miles long, by 7:30 a.m. each day. If her average rate of 
travel were 1 mile faster each hour, she would cover the route 
by 7 a.m. What time does she start in the morning? 
	53.	 Agriculture. A rectangular pasture with an area of  
6400 square meters is divided into three smaller pastures by 
two fences parallel to the shorter sides. The width of two of the 
smaller pastures is the same, and the width of the third is twice 
that of the others. Find the dimensions of the original pasture if 
the perimeter of the larger of the subdivisions is 240 m.
	54.	 Leasing. Budget Rentals leases its compact cars for $23.00 
per day plus $0.17 per mile. Dollar Rentals leases the same 
car for $24.00 per day plus $0.22 per mile.
a.	 Find the cost functions describing the daily cost of leasing 
from each company. 
b.	 Graph the two functions in part (a) on the same coordinate 
axes. 
c.	 From which company should you lease the car if you  
plan to drive (i) 50 miles per day; (ii) 60 miles per day; 
(iii) 70 miles per day?
	55.	 Break-even analysis. Auto-Sprinkler Corp. manufactures 
seven-day, 24-hour variable timers for lawn sprinklers. The 
corporation has a monthly fixed cost of $60,000 and a pro-
duction cost of $12 for each timer manufactured. Each timer 
sells for $20.
a.	 Write the cost function and the revenue function for  
selling x timers per month. 
b.	 Graph the two functions in part (a) on the same coordinate 
plane and find the break-even point graphically. 
c.	 Find the break-even point algebraically. 
d.	 How many timers should be sold in a month to realize a 
profit (before taxes) of 15% of the cost? 
	56.	 Equilibrium quantity and price. The demand equation 
	
	 for a product is p = 4000
x
, where p is the price per unit and 
	
	 x is the number of units of the product. The supply equation 
	
	 for the product is p = x
20 + 10.
a.	 Find the equilibrium quantity. 
b.	 Find the equilibrium price. 
c.	 Graph the supply and demand functions on the same  
coordinate plane and label the equilibrium point. 	

	
Practice Test A 793
	57.	 Apartment lease. Alisha and Sunita signed a lease on an 
apartment for nine months and split the rent evenly. At the 
end of six months, Alisha got married and moved out. She 
paid the landlady an amount equal to the difference between 
double-occupancy rental and single-occupancy rental for the 
remaining three months, and Sunita paid the single-occupancy 
rate for the same three months. If the nine-month rental cost 
Alisha $2250 and Sunita $3150, what were the single and 
double monthly rates?
	58.	Seating arrangement. The 600 graduating seniors at 
Central State College are seated in rows, each of which  
contains the same number of chairs, and every chair is  
occupied. If five more chairs were in each row, everyone 
could be seated in four fewer rows. How many chairs are  
in each row?
	59.	 Passing a final exam. Twenty-six students in a college 
algebra class took a final exam on which the passing score 
was 70. The mean score of those who passed was 78, and 
the mean score of those who failed was 26. The mean of all 
scores was 72. How many students failed the exam? 
	60.	 Finding numbers. The average of a and b is 2.5, the aver-
age of b and c is 3.8, and the average of a and c is 3.1. Find 
the numbers a, b, and c. 
	61.	 May–December match. Steve and his wife, Janet, have the 
same birthday. When Steve was as old as Janet is now, he was 
twice as old as Janet was then. When Janet becomes as old as 
Steve is now, the sum of their ages will be 119. How old are 
Steve and Janet now? 
	62.	 Percentage increase. Let x and y be positive real numbers. 
Increasing x by y percent gives 46, and increasing y by x  
percent gives 21. Find x and y. 
	63.	 Criminals rob a bank. Three criminals—Butch, Sundance, 
and Billy—robbed a bank and divided the loot in the follow-
ing manner: Because Butch planned the job and drove the 
getaway car, he got 75% as much as Sundance and Billy put 
together. Because Sundance was an expert safecracker, he got 
$500 more than 50% of Billy’s and Butch’s cut put together. 
Billy got $1000 less than three times the difference of Butch 
and Sundance’s cut. How much did they steal, and what was 
each criminal’s take?
	64.	 Curve fitting. Find all of the curves of the form 
y = ax2 + bx + c that contain the points 10, 12, 11, 02,  
and 1-1, 62. 
	65.	 Using exponents. Given that 2x = 8y and 9y = 3x-2, find 
x and y. 			 	
	66.	 Area of an octagon. A square of side length 8 has its cor-
ners cut off to make it a regular octagon. Find the area of the 
octagon. (See the figure.) 
x
x
y
8
	67.	 Building houses. A builder has 42 units of material and  
32 units of labor available during a given period. She builds 
two-story houses or one-story houses or some of both. 
Suppose she makes a profit of $10,000 on each two-story 
house and $4000 on each one-story house. A two-story house 
requires 7 units of material and 1 unit of labor, whereas a one-
story house requires 1 unit of material and 2 units of labor.  
How many houses of each type should she build to make  
a maximum profit? What is the maximum profit?
	68.	 Minimizing cost. An animal food is to be a mixture of two 
products X and Y. The content and cost of 1 pound of each 
product is given in the following table.
Product
Protein 
Grams
Fat  
Grams
Carbohydrates 
Grams
Cost
X
180
2
240
$0.75
Y
  36
8
200
$0.56
	
	 How much of each product should be used to minimize the cost 
if each bag must contain at least 612 grams of protein; at least 
22 grams of fat; and, at most, 1880 grams of carbohydrates?
	69.	 Lobster prices. The Captain’s Catch classifies its lobsters as 
small, medium, and large. A package of one large, two medi-
um, and four small lobsters sells for $344; a package of two 
large and three small lobsters sells for $255; and a package of 
two large, two medium, and five small lobsters sells for $449. 
What is the individual price of each size lobster?
	70.	 Ancient mathematics. The Nine Chapters in the 
Mathematical Art, a Chinese work written about 250 b.c. 
contains the following problem: Three sheafs of good crop, 
two sheaf of mediocre crop, and one sheaf of bad crop are 
sold for 39 dou. Two sheafs of good, three mediocre, and one 
bad are sold for 34 dou. And one good, two mediocre, and 
three bad are sold for 26 dou. What price is received for a 
sheaf of each of good crop, mediocre crop, and bad crop?			
Practice Test A
In Problems 1–7, solve each system of equations.
	 1.	 e2x - y = 4
2x + y = 4 
	 2.	 e x + 2y =
8
3x + 6y = 24
	 3.	 e -2x +
y = 4
4x - 2y = 4 
	 4.	 e3x + 3y = -15
2x - 2y = -10
	 5.	 d
5x
3 + y
2 = 14
2x
3 - y
8 =
3 
	 6.	 e
y = x2
3x - y + 4 = 0
	 7.	 e
x - 3y = -4
2x2 + 3x - 3y =
8	
   	

794	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	 8.	 Two gold bars together weigh a total of 485 pounds. One bar 
weighs 15 pounds more than the other.
a.	 Write a system of equations that describes these  
relationships.
b.	 How much does each bar weigh? 
	 9.	 Convert the given system to triangular form.
c
2x +
y + 2z =
4
4x + 6y +
z =  15
2x + 2y + 7z = -1
	10.	 Use back-substitution to solve the given linear system.
c
x - 6y + 3z = -2
9y - 5z =
2
2z =  10 
In Exercises 11–13, solve the system of equations.
	11.	 c
x +
y +
z =
8
2x - 2y + 2z =
4
x +
y -
z = 12
	12.	 c
x
+
z = -1
3y + 2z =
5
3x - 3y +
z = -8
	13.	 c
2x -
y +
z =
2
x +
y -
z = -1
x - 5y + 5z =
7
	14.	 A vending machine’s coin box contains nickels, dimes, and 
quarters. The total number of coins in the box is 300. The 
number of dimes is three times the number of nickels and 
quarters together. Assuming that $30.65 is in the box, find the 
number of nickels, dimes, and quarters that it contains.
For Problems 15 and 16, write the form of the partial-fraction 
decomposition of the given rational expression. You do not 
need to solve for the constants.
	15.	
2x
1x - 521x + 12
	16.	
-5x2 + x - 8
1x - 221x2 + 122
	17.	 Find the partial-fraction decomposition of the rational  
expression
x + 3
1x + 4221x - 72.
	18.	 Graph the inequality 3x + y 6 6.	
	19.	 Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities.
ey - x2 … 3
y - x
7 0 
	20.	 Maximize z = 2x + y, subject to the constraints 
x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + 3y … 3.	 
 
 
 				 	 
Practice Test B
In Problems 1–7, solve each system of equations.
	 1.	 e2x - 3y = 16
x -
y =
7 
a.	 515, -226
b.	 518, 026
c.	 510, -726
d.	 514, -326
	 2.	 e6x - 9y = -2
3x - 5y = -6 
a.	 51-3, 026
b.	 ea0, 5
6b f
c.	 ea44
3 , 10b f
d.	 511, 126
	 3.	 e2x -
5y =
9
4x - 10y = 18 
a.	 ea0, 9
2b f
b.	 ea5y
2 + 9
2, yb f
c.	 eax, 5x
2 + 9
2b f
d.	 ∅
	 4.	 e
3x +
5y = 1
-6x - 10y = 2 
a.	 ea0, - 1
5b f
b.	 512, -126
c.	 ∅
d.	 ea- 5y
3
 + 1
3
 , yb f
	 5.	 d
x
5
 + 2y
5
 = 1
x
4
 - y
3
 
= - 5
12 
a.	 51-15, 1026
b.	 511, 226
c.	 51-10, -1526
d.	 511, 026
	 6.	 •
x - 3y =
1
2
-2x + 6y = -1 
a.	 ea1
2, 0b f
b.	 ea2, 1
2b f
c.	 ∅
d.	 ea3y + 1
2, yb f
	 7.	 e3x
+
4y
= 12
3x2 + 16y2 = 48 
a.	 510, 42, 13, 026
b.	 510, -426
c.	 510, -42,13, 026
d.	 e 14, 02, a2, 3
2b f

	
Practice Test B 795
	 8.	 Student tickets for a dance cost $2, and nonstudent tickets 
cost $5. Three hundred tickets were sold, and the total ticket 
receipts were $975. How many of each type of ticket  
were sold? 
a.	 150 student tickets 
150 nonstudent tickets
b.	 200 student tickets 
100 nonstudent tickets
c.	 210 student tickets 
90 nonstudent tickets
d.	 175 student tickets 
125 nonstudent tickets
	 9.	 Convert the given system to triangular form.	
c
x + 3y + 3z = 4
2x + 5y + 4z = 5
x + 2y + 2z = 6
a.	  x + 3y + 3z = 4
	
 y + 2z = 8
	
 z = 2
b.	  x + 3y + 3z = 4
	
 2y + z = 1
	
 z = 5
c.	  x + 3y + 3z = 4
	
 y + 2z = 3
	
 z = 5
d.	  x + 3y + 3z =
4
	
 2y + z = -2
	
 z =
5
	10.	 Use back-substitution to solve the linear system.
c
2x +
y +
z = 0
10y - 2z = 4
3z = 9 
a.	 51-2, 1, 326
b.	 510, -3, 326
c.	 510, 2, 826
d.	 51-1, 1, 126
	11.	 Solve the given system of equations or state that the system  
is inconsistent.
c
2x + 13y +
6z =
1
3x + 10y + 11z = 15
2x + 10y +
8z =
8 
a.	 513, -1, -426
b.	 511, -1, 226
c.	 ∅
d.	 11, 6, 826
	12.	 Solve the given system of equations or state that the system  
is inconsistent.
c
4x - y +
7z = -2
2x + y + 11z =  13
3x - y +
4z = -3 
a.	 51-3z + 1, -5z + 11, z26
b.	 51-14, -14, 526
c.	 ea- 19
5 , 3, 8
5b f
d.	 ∅
	13.	 Solve the given system of equations or state that the system  
is inconsistent.
c
x - 2y + 3z =
4
2x -
y +
z =
1
x +
y - 2z = -3 
a.	 511, 6, 526
b.	 510, 1, 226
c.	 51x, 5x + 1, 3x + 226
d.	 ∅
	14.	 Forty-six students will go to France, Italy, or Spain for six 
weeks during the summer. The number of students going to 
France or Italy is four more than the number going to Spain. 
The number of students going to France is two less than the 
number going to Spain. How many students are going to each 
country? 
a.	 France: 23 
Italy: 21 
Spain: 2
b.	 France: 19 
Italy: 6 
Spain: 21
c.	 France: 21 
Italy: 6 
Spain: 19
d.	 France: 2 
Italy: 21 
Spain: 23
For Problems 15 and 16, write the form of the partial-fraction 
decomposition of the given rational functions. You do not 
need to solve for the constants.
	15.	
x
1x + 221x - 72 
 
a.	
A
x + 2 +
Bx
x - 7
b.	
Ax
x + 2 +
Bx
x - 7
c.	
A
x + 2 +
B
x - 7
d.	
A
x + 2 + Bx + C
x - 7
	16.	
7 - x
1x - 321x + 522 
a.	
A
x - 3 +
B
x + 5 +
C
1x + 522
b.	
A
x - 3 +
B
x + 5 + Cx + D
1x + 522 
c.	
A
x + 3 +
B
1x + 522
d.	
A
x + 3 + Bx + C
1x + 522
	17.	 Find the partial-fraction decomposition of the rational  
expression
x2 + 15x + 18
x3 - 9x
. 
a.	
26
x - 9 - 2
x
b.	
4
x + 3 - 2
x -
1
x - 3
c.	
4
x - 3 - 2
x -
1
x + 3
d.	 3x - 15
x2 - 9 - 2
x
	18.	 Which of the graphs at the right is the graph of x + 3y 7 3? 
	19.	 Which of the graphs at the right is the graph of the solution 
set of the system of inequalities
ey - x2 + 4 Ú 0
3x - y … 0? 
	20.	 Maximize z = 3x + 21y, subject to the constraints 
x Ú 0, y Ú 0, 2x + y … 8, 2x + 3y … 16. 
a.	 84
b.	 112
c.	 16
3
d.	 12

796	 Chapter 8      Systems of Equations and Inequalities
y
x
0
0
0
0
(a)
y
x
(b)
y
x
(c)
y
x
(d)
Figure for Exercise 19
y
x
23
21 0
0
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
0
0
1
3
5
24
22
3
5
y
x
21
23
1
3
5
24
22
1
3
5
y
x
23
21
1
3
5
7
7
24
22
1
3
5
7
7
y
x
23
21
1
3
5
7
7
24
22
3
1
1
5
7
7
Figure for Exercise 18
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–8
In Exercises 1–8, solve each equation or inequality.
	 1.	
1
x - 1 +
4
x - 4 =
5
x - 5	
	 2.	 2 ax + 1
x b
2
- 7 ax + 1
x b + 5 = 0
	 3.	 13x - 5 = x - 3 
	 4.	 x - 1
x + 3 … 0 
	 5.	 x2 - 9x + 20 7 0
	 6.	 2x-1 = 5
	 7.	 logx16 = 4 
	 8.	 log1x - 32 + log1x - 12 = log12x - 52	
In Exercises 9–12, use transformations to graph each  
function.
	 9.	 f1x2 = x + 1 - 2 
	10.	 f1x2 = - 1x - 222 + 3 
	11.	 f1x2 = 2x-1 - 3 
	12.	 f1x2 = 1x - 1 + 3 
	13.	 Let f1x2 = 2x - 2.
a.	 Find f -11x2.
b.	 Graph f and f -1 on the same coordinate plane. 
	14.	 Let f1x2 = x3 - x2 + x - 6.
a.	 List all possible rational zeros of f. 
b.	 Use synthetic division to test the possible rational zeros 
and find a real zero. 
c.	 Use the zero from part (b) to find all of the (real or complex) 
zeros of f1x2.
	15.	 Expand and simplify: log319x42 
	16.	 A radioactive substance decays so that the amount present 
in t years is given by A = A0e-kt, where A0 is the initial 
amount. Find the half-life of the substance if
a.	 k = 0.05 
b.	 k = 0.0002 
	17.	 If f is a one-to-one function and f122 = 9, find f -1192. 
	18.	 Find the time required to double your money if it is  
compounded continuously at 7.5%. 
In Exercises 19 and 20, solve the system of equations.
	19.	 e5x - 2y + 25 = 0
4y - 3x - 29 = 0	
	20.	 c
2x -
y +
z =
3
x + 3y - 2z = 11
3x - 2y +
z =
4			 		

Matrices and 
Determinants
C h a p t e r 9
Topics
9.1	 Matrices and Systems  
of Equations
9.2	 Matrix Algebra
9.3	 The Matrix Inverse
9.4	 Determinants and Cramer’s Rule
The linear programming problems introduced in the previous 
chapter involving quantities from the study of such disciplines as 
medicine, traffic control, structural design, and city planning often 
involve an extremely large number of variables. To solve such 
problems successfully requires the use of powerful computers and 
new techinques. In this chapter, we study matrices and several 
methods of solving linear systems that are easily implemented  
on computers.

Definition of a Matrix
Suppose Great Builders Incorporated (GBI), builds ranch, colonial, and modern houses. 
GBI wants to compare the cost of labor and the cost of material involved in building each 
type of house during one year. These data could be represented as in Table 9.1.
	
Table 9.1 
Type of House
Ranch
Colonial
Modern
Cost of labor (in millions)
12
13
14
Cost of material (in millions)
  9
11
10
Or it could be represented more compactly by the following array:
c 12
13
14
9
11
10d
1	
Define a matrix.
Leontief Input–Output Model
In 1949, the Russian-born Harvard Professor Wassily Leontief opened the door to 
a new era in mathematical modeling in economics. He divided the U.S. economy 
into 500 “­sectors,” such as the coal, automotive, a communications industries and 
­agriculture. For each ­sector, he wrote a linear equation that described how that sector 
distributed its output to other sectors of the economy. In 1949, the largest computer 
was the Mark II, and it could not handle the resulting system of 500 equations in 500 
variables. Leontief then combined some of the sectors and reduced the system to 
42 equations in 42 ­variables to solve the problem. As computers have become more 
powerful, scientists and engineers can now work on problems far more complex than 
they ever dreamed of a few decades ago. In Example 10, we explore Leontief’s input–
output model applied to a simple economy.
Matrices and Systems 
of Equations
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Systems of equations (Sections 8.1  
and 8.2)
2	 Equivalent systems (Section 8.2,  
page 742)
3	 Gaussian elimination (Section 8.2,  
page 741)
Objectives
1	 Define a matrix.
2	 Use matrices to solve a system of 
­linear equations.
3	 Use Gaussian elimination to solve 
a ­system.
4	 Use Gauss–Jordan elimination to solve 
a system.
S e c t i o n 9.1
Wassily Leontief 1906–1999
Leontief studied philosophy, sociol-
ogy, and economics at the University 
of Leningrad and earned the degree 
of Learned Economist in 1925. He 
continued his studies at the University 
of Berlin, where he earned his PhD 
degree. In 1973, the Nobel Prize in 
Economic Sciences was awarded to 
Leontief for his work on input–output 
analysis of the U.S. economy.
798	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants

	
Section 9.1    ■    Matrices and Systems of Equations 799
This rectangular array of numbers is called a matrix (plural, matrices). This matrix has two 
rows (the types of costs) and three columns (the types of houses).
A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers.
A = D
a11
a12
g
a1n
a21
a22
g
a2n
f
f
f
am1
am2
g
amn
T
d Row 1
d Row 2
d Row m
	
c	
c	
c
	
Column 1	 Column 2	 Column n
If a matrix A has m rows and n columns, then we say that A is of order m by n 
(written m * n).
Matrix
The entry or element in the ith row and jth column is a real number and is denoted by 
the double-subscript notation aij. We call aij the 1i,  j2th entry. For example, a24 is the 
entry in the second row and fourth column of the matrix A. In general, we will use capital 
letters A, B, c to denote matrices and the corresponding lowercase letter aij, bij, cfor 
their entries.
If A has n rows and n columns, then A is called a square matrix of order n. The entries 
a11, a22, c, ann form the main diagonal of A. A 1 * n matrix is called a row matrix, 
and an n * 1 matrix is called a column matrix.
Determine the order of each matrix. Identify square, row, and column matrices. Identify 
entries in the main diagonal of each square matrix.
a.  A = 334    b.  B = 33
5
-74    c.  C = c
0
1
-3
4d    d.  D = C
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
S
Solution
a.  Matrix A with one row and one column is a 1 * 1 matrix. A is a square matrix of order 1. 
In A, a11 = 3 is the main diagonal. A is also a column and a row matrix.
b.  Matrix B with one row and three columns is a 1 * 3 matrix. B is a row matrix.
c.  Matrix C, a 2 * 2 matrix, is a square matrix of order 2. In C, the entries c11 = 0 and 
c22 = 4 form the main diagonal.
d.  Matrix D, a 3 * 3 matrix, is a square matrix of order 3. In D, the entries d11 = 1,
d22 = 5, and d33 = 9 form the main diagonal.
Practice Problem 1  Determine the order of each matrix.
a.  C
-1
3
7
4
0
0
S         b.  33
-84
Determining the Order of Matrices
EXAMPLE 1
Using Matrices to Solve Linear Systems
To solve a system of linear equations by the elimination method, the particular symbols 
used for the variables do not matter; only the coefficients and the constants are important. 
We can display the constants and coefficients of a system in a matrix called the augmented 
2	
Use matrices to solve a system 
of linear equations.

800	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
matrix of the system. The matrix containing only the coefficients of the variables is the 
coefficient matrix. Consider the following system.
c
x -
y -
z =
1
2x - 3y +
z = 10
x +
y - 2z =
0
	
Coefficients of x
	
Coefficients of y
	
Coefficients of z
Augmented Matrix:   
C
1
-1
-1
2
-3
1
1
1
-2
 †  
1
10
0
S    
	
Constants
Coefficient Matrix:   
C
1
-1
-1
2
-3
1
1
1
-2
S
Notice that the numbers in the first column of the augmented matrix are the coefficients 
of x, those in the second column are the coefficients of y, and those in the third column are 
the coefficients of z. The constants on the right side of the equations in the system are found 
in the fourth column. The vertical line in the augmented matrix is to remind you of the 
equal signs in the equations. If a variable does not appear in one of the equations, represent 
it with a zero in the matrix.
Many graphing calculators let you 
first name a matrix, specify the size, 
and then insert the entries for the 
matrix. No vertical line separates 
the column of constants, but this 
does not affect any of the matrix 
operations. The augmented matrix 
from Example 2 has been named A.
Technology 
Connection
Write the augmented matrix of the linear system.
c
2x + 3z = 1
2z + y = 5
-4x + 5y = 7
Solution
First, write the system with the variables lined in columns and insert zeros as coefficients of 
any missing variables.
c
2x + 0y + 3z = 1
0x + 1y + 2z = 5
-4x + 5y + 0z = 7
The augmented matrix of the given system is as follows:
C
2
0
3
0
1
2
-4
5
0
 †  
1
5
7
S
Practice Problem 2  Write the augmented matrix of the linear system.
c
3y - z =
8
x + 4y = 14
-2y + 9z =
0
Writing the Augmented Matrix of a Linear System
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 9.1    ■    Matrices and Systems of Equations 801
We can reverse this process and write a linear system from a given augmented matrix. 
For example, the augmented matrix
C
9
2
-1
3
4
7
0
1
5
 †  
6
-8
11
S  corresponds to the system of equations c
9x + 2y -
z =
3x + 4y + 7z =
y + 5z =
6
-8
11
.
The basic strategy for solving a system of equations is to replace the given system with 
an equivalent system (one with the same solution set) that is easier to solve. In the previous 
chapter, we used three basic operations to solve a linear system:
1.	 Interchange two equations.
2.	 Multiply all the terms in an equation by a nonzero constant.
3.	 Add a multiple of one equation to another equation. In other words, replace one equa-
tion with the sum of itself and a multiple of another equation.
In matrix terminology, the three corresponding operations are called the elementary 
row operations. Two matrices are row equivalent if one can be obtained from the other 
by a sequence of elementary row operations, given next. The symbol Ri represents the  
ith row of a matrix.
E l e m e n ta r y  R o w  O p e r at i o n s
Row Operation
In Symbols
Description
1.  Interchange two rows.
Ri 4 Rj
Interchange the ith and jth rows.
2.  Multiply a row by a nonzero  
constant.
cRj
Multiply the jth row by 
c, c ≠0.
3.  Add a multiple of one row to  
another row.
cRi + Rj S Rj
Replace the jth row by adding c 
times the ith row to it.
Perform the indicated row operations (a), (b), and (c) in order on the following matrix:
A = c 3
-2
-3
2
4
14d
a.	 R1 4 R2,	
b.	 1
2 R1,	
c.	 -3R1 + R2 S R2
Solution
a.	 A = c 3
-2
-3
2
4
14d  ¬¬¬¡
R1 4 R2 c 2
4
14
3
-2
-3d = B	
Interchange the 1st and 
2nd rows.
b.	 B = c 2
4
14
3
-2
-3d ¡
1
2
 R1
c 1
2
7
3
-2
-3d = C	
Multiply the 1st row by 1
2.
c.	 C = c 1
2
7
3
-2
-3d  ¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¡
-3R1 + R2 S R2
c 1
2
7
0
-8
-24d   Add -3 times the 1st 
row to the 2nd row.
Practice Problem 3  Perform the row operations of Example 3 in order on the following 
matrix:
A = c 3
4
5
2
4
6d
Applying Elementary Row Operations
EXAMPLE 3

802	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
In the next example, we solve a system of equations both with and without matrix 
­notation and place the results side by side for comparison. We solve the system by convert-
ing it into triangular form by first using elimination and then back-substitution.
Many graphing calculators provide 
all three row operations. Consider 
the matrix A.
Here are some examples of row 
operations on the matrix A.
Swap rows 1 and 3.
Multiply row 1 by 4.
Add 3 times row 1 to row 2.
Technology 
Connection
Solve the system of linear equations:
c
x -  y -  z =
1
2x - 3y +  z = 10
x +  y - 2z =
0 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Solution
Linear System	
Augmented Matrix
c
x -
y -
z =
1
2x - 3y +
z = 10
x +
y - 2z =
0 
(1)
(2)
(3)
	
A = C
1
-1
-1
2
-3
1
1
1
-2
 †  
1
10
0
S
 
Use the first row to produce zeros at
the (2, 1) and (3, 1) positions.
c
x -
y -
z =
1
 
-y + 3z =
8
2y -
z = -1 
(1)
(4)
(5)
	
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
-2R1 + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬˚¬¬¬¬S
1-12R1 + R3 S R3 C
1
-1
-1
0
-1
3
0
2
-1
 †  
1
8
-1
S

	
Produce a 1 at the (2, 2) position.
c
x -
y -
z =
1
y - 3z = -8
2y -
z = -1 
(1)
(6)
(5)
	
¬¬¬¬¬¬S
1-12R2 C
1
-1
-1
0
1
-3
0
2
-1
 †  
1
-8
-1
S

	
Use the second row to produce a zero
 at the (3, 2) position.
c
x - y -
z =
1
y - 3z = -8
5z = 15 
(1)
(6)
(7)
	
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
-2R2 + R3 S R3
 C
1
-1
-1
0
1
-3
0
0
5
 †  
1
-8
15
S
Equation (7), 5z = 15, which corresponds to row 3 of the final matrix, gives the value 
z = 3. We find y by back-substitution.
 y - 3z = -8    Equation (6); final matrix row 2
 y - 3132 = -8    Replace z with 3.
 y = 1     Solve for y.
We find x by back-substitution.
 x - y - z = 1    Equation (1); final matrix row 1
 x - 1 - 3 = 1    Replace y with 1 and z with 3.
 x = 5    Solve for x.
Comparing Linear Systems and Matrices
EXAMPLE 4

	
Section 9.1    ■    Matrices and Systems of Equations 803
The last matrix in the solution of Example 4 is in row-echelon form, which is defined 
next. In the definition, a nonzero row means a row that contains at least one nonzero entry; 
a leading entry of a row is the leftmost nonzero entry in a nonzero row.
The solution of the system is x = 5, y = 1, and z = 3. You should check this solution by 
substituting it into the original system of equations. The solution set is 515, 1, 326.
Practice Problem 4  Solve the system of linear equations:
c
x - 6y + 3z = -2
3x + 3y - 2z = -2
2x - 3y +
z = -2
R o w - E c h e l o n  F o r m  a n d  R e d u c e d  R o w - E c h e l o n  F o r m
An m * n matrix is in row-echelon form if it has the following three properties:
1.	 The leading entry of each nonzero row is 1.
2.	 The leading entry in any row is to the right of the leading entry in the row above it.
3.	 All nonzero rows are above the rows consisting entirely of zeros.
A matrix in row-echelon form having the following property is in reduced row-­echelon 
form: Each leading 1 is the only nonzero entry in its column.
Property 2 says that the leading entries form an echelon (steplike) pattern that moves down 
and to the right.
The following matrices are in row-echelon form; a starred entry may be any value, 
including zero.
C
1
*
*
0
1
*
0
0
1
S  C
1
*
*
*
0
1
*
*
0
0
1
*
S  D
1
*
*
*
0
0
1
*
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
T
The following matrices are in reduced row-echelon form because the entries above and 
­below each leading 1 are zero. (Again, the starred entries may be any value, including zero.)
C
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
S  C
1
0
0
*
0
1
0
*
0
0
1
*
S  D
1
*
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
T
An augmented matrix may be transformed into several different row-echelon form ­matrices 
by using different sequences of row operations. However, its reduced row-echelon form is 
unique. See Exercise 91.
Gaussian Elimination
The method of solving a system of linear equations by transforming the augmented matrix 
of the system into row-echelon form and then using back-substitution to find the solution 
set is known as Gaussian elimination. See Section 8.2.
3	
Use Gaussian elimination to 
solve a system.

804	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Solve a system of linear equations by Gaussian 
elimination.
Solving Linear Systems by Using Gaussian Elimination
Objective
EXAMPLE 5
Step 1 Write the augmented matrix of the 
system.
Step 2 Use elementary row operations 
to transform the augmented matrix into 
­row-­echelon form.
Step 3 Write the system of linear equations 
that corresponds to the last matrix in Step 2.
Step 4 Use the system of equations from 
Step 3, together with back-substitution, to 
find the system’s solution set.
Example
Practice Problem 5  Solve by Gaussian elimination.
e x - 2y =
1
2x + 3y = 16
Note that when we perform a row 
operation such as
3R1 + R2 S R2 on a matrix,
1.	 the entries in row 1 are 
­unchanged and
2.	 we multiply each entry of row 1 
by 3 and add this product to the 
corresponding entries of row 2 
to obtain a new row 2.
Side  
Note
Solve by Gaussian elimination.
c
2x +
y +
z =
6
-3x - 4y + 2z =
4
x +
y -
z = -2
Solution
Step 1	
A = C
2
1
1
-3
-4
2
1
1
-1
 †  
6
4
-2
S     The augmented matrix  
of the system
Step 2	
R1 4 R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S C
1
1
-1
-3
-4
2
2
1
1
 †  
-2
4
6
S
	
3R1 + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
-2R1 + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
C
1
1
-1
0
-1
-1
0
-1
3
 †  
-2
-2
10
S
Solving a System by Using Gaussian Elimination
EXAMPLE 6
Solve the system of equations.
e x + 2y = -2
4x + 3y = 7
1.	A = c 1
2
4
3 `  -2
7d 	
Augmented matrix
2.	 -4R1 + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S c 1
2
0
-5 `  -2
15d 	
This operation ­produces 
a 0 in the 12, 12 position.
- 1
5
 R2
¬¬¬¬¬S c 1
2
0
1 `  -2
-3d 	
This operation produces 
a 1 in the 12, 22 position.
3.	ex + 2y = -2
y = -3 (1)
(2)
4.	
 x + 2y = -2	
Equation (1)
 x + 21-32 = -2	
Replace y with -3.
 x = 4 	
Solve for x.
You should check the solution set, 514, -326, by substituting x = 4 
and y = -3 into the original system of equations.
Procedure  
in Action

	
Section 9.1    ■    Matrices and Systems of Equations 805
	
1-12R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬S C
1
1
-1
0
1
1
0
-1
3
 †  
-2
2
10
S
	
R2 + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
C
1
1
-1
0
1
1
0
0
4
 †  
-2
2
12
S
	
1
4R3
¬¬¬¬S
C
1
1
-1
0
1
1
0
0
1
 †  
-2
2
3
S
The last matrix is in row-echelon form.
Step 3	
The system of equations corresponding to the last matrix in Step 2 is
c
x + y - z = -2
y + z =
2
z =
3 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Step 4	
Equation (3) in Step 3 gives the value z = 3. Back-substitute z = 3 in  
equation (2).
 y + z = 2     Equation (2)
 y + 3 = 2     Replace z with 3.
 y = -1    Solve for y.
Now back-substitute z = 3 and y = -1 in equation (1).
 x + y - z = -2    Equation (1)
 x - 1 - 3 = -2
 x = 2     Solve for x.
You should check the solution set, 512, -1, 326, by substituting these values 
into the original system of equations.
Practice Problem 6  Solve the system of equations:
c
2x +
y -
z = 7
x - 3y - 3z = 4
4x +
y +
z = 3
Solve the system of equations by Gaussian elimination:
c
y + 5z = -4
x + 4y + 3z = -2
2x + 7y +
z =
8
Solution
Step 1	
A = C
0
1
5
1
4
3
2
7
1
 †  
-4
-2
8
S.    The augmented matrix of the system
Step 2	
R1 4 R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬S
 C
1
4
3
0
1
5
2
7
1
 †  
-2
-4
8
S
Attempting to Solve a System with No Solution
EXAMPLE 7

806	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
	
-2R1 + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
C
1
4
3
0
1
5
0
-1
-5
 †  
-2
-4
12
S     Row 2 already begins with a 0.
	
R2 + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
C
1
4
3
0
1
5
0
0
0
 †  
-2
-4
8
S
	
1
8 R3
¬¬¬S
C
1
4
3
0
1
5
0
0
0
 †  
-2
-4
1
S     The matrix is now in row-echelon form.
A system is called inconsistent if it 
has no solution.
Recall
4	
Use Gauss–Jordan elimination 
to solve a system.
Many graphing calculators can 
produce the unique reduced row-
echelon form of an augmented 
matrix. Consider the augmented 
matrix A in Example 4.
We use the “rref” (reduced row-
echelon form) option to obtain the 
reduced row-echelon form.
Technology
Connection
Solve the system given in Example 4 by Gauss–Jordan elimination.
c
x -
y -
z =
1
2x - 3y +
z = 10
x +
y - 2z =
0
    The given system
Solution
C
1
-1
-1
0
1
-3
0
0
5
 †  
1
-8
15
S     The final augmented matrix of the system  
in Example 4
1
5
 R3
¬¬¬S
C
1
-1
-1
0
1
-3
0
0
1
 †  
1
-8
3
S     The matrix is now in row-echelon form.
R2 + R1 S R1
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
C
1
0
-4
0
1
-3
0
0
1
 †  
-7
-8
3
S
4R3 + R1 S R1
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
3R3 + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
 †  
5
1
3
S
Solving a System of Equations by Gauss–Jordan Elimination
EXAMPLE 8
Step 3	 The system of equations corresponding to the last matrix in Step 2 is
c
x + 4y + 3z = -2
y + 5z = -4
0 =
1     A false statement
Because the third equation 0 = 1 is a false statement, we conclude that 
this system is inconsistent. Because this system is equivalent to the original  
system, the original system is also inconsistent.
Step 4	 The solution set for the system is ∅.
Practice Problem 7  Solve the following system of equations by first transforming the 
augmented matrix into row-echelon form.
c
6x + 8y - 14z =
3
3x + 4y -
7z = 12
6x + 3y +
z =
0
Gauss–Jordan Elimination
If we continue the Gaussian elimination procedure until we have a reduced row-echelon 
form, the procedure is called Gauss–Jordan elimination.

	
Section 9.1    ■    Matrices and Systems of Equations 807
We now have an equivalent matrix in reduced row-echelon form. The corresponding sys-
tem of equations for the last augmented matrix is as follows:
c
x = 5
y = 1
z = 3
The solution set is therefore 515, 1, 326, as in Example 4.
Practice Problem 8  Solve the system by Gauss–Jordan elimination:
c
2x - 3y - 2z = 0
x +
y - 2z = 7
3x - 5y - 5z = 3
Solve the system of equations:
c
x + 2y +
5z = 4
y +
4z = 4
2x + 4y + 10z = 8
Solution
The augmented matrix A of the system is given below. We want to find the equivalent sys-
tem in reduced row-echelon form.
Because a11 = 1 and a21 = 0, we need a zero at the 13, 12 position.
A = C
1
2
5
0
1
4
2
4
10
 †  
4
4
8
S  -2R1 + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
C
1
2
5
0
1
4
0
0
0
 †  
4
4
0
S
Next, we need a zero at the 11, 22 position.
-2R2 + R1 S R1
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
C
1
0
-3
0
1
4
0
0
0
 †  
-4
4
0
S
    The matrix is now in reduced  
row-echelon form.
The equivalent system is
 x - 3z = -4
 y + 4z =
4.
Solving for x and y in terms of z, we obtain
 x = 3z - 4
 y = -4z + 4.
Each real number z results in a solution with y = -4z + 4 and x = 3z - 4, giv-
ing infinitely many solutions of the form 13z - 4, -4z + 4, z2. The solution set is 
513z - 4, -4z + 4, z26.
Practice Problem 9  Solve the system of equations:
c
x
+
z = -1
3y + 2z =
5
3x - 3y +
z = -8
Solving a System with Infinitely Many Solutions
EXAMPLE 9

808	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Consider an economy that has steel, coal, and transportation industries. There are two 
types of demands (measured in dollars) on the production of each industry: interindustry 
demand and external consumer demand. The outputs and requirements of the three indus-
tries are shown in Figure 9.1. For example, $1.00 of transportation output requires $0.10 
from steel and $0.01 from coal.
Steel output s
Coal output c
6.72
1.25
13.05
0.1t
0.01t
0.25s
0.01s
0.2s
0.1c
0.02c
0.3c
Transportation
output t
Consumers
Figure 9.1  Output diagram of an economy
a.	 Write a system of equations that expresses the outputs of the three industries. Assume 
that all quantities are given in millions of dollars.
b.	 Verify that s = 15, c = 10, and t = 8 will meet both interindustry and consumer 
demand.
Solution
a.	 To satisfy both consumer and interindustry demand, we obtain the following system 
of outputs. (s denotes total steel output; c, total coal output; t, total transportation 
output.)
c
s = 0.01s +
0.1t +
0.1c + 13.05
c = 0.2s
+ 0.01t + 0.02c +
6.72
t = 0.25s +
0.3c +
1.25
    Distribution of steel output 
Distribution of coal output 
Distribution of transportation output
You can rewrite this system as follows:
c
0.99s -
0.1c -
0.1t = 13.05
-0.2s + 0.98c - 0.01t =
6.72
-0.25s -
0.3c +
t =
1.25 
(1)
(2)
(3)
b.	 To verify that the given numbers (obtained by solving the system above using matrices) 
satisfy these equations, we substitute s = 15, c = 10, and t = 8 into each equation.
 10.9921152 - 10.121102 - 10.12182 = 13.05 ✓  (1)
 1-0.2021152 + 10.9821102 - 10.012182 = 6.72 ✓  (2)
 1-0.2521152 - 10.3021102 + 8 = 1.25 ✓  (3)
In other words, output levels of s = 15, c = 10, and t = 8 million dollars will meet inter-
industry and consumer demand.
Leontief Input–Output Model
EXAMPLE 10

	
Section 9.1    ■    Matrices and Systems of Equations 809
Practice Problem 10  In Example 10, assume that consumer demand (in millions of 
dollars) is 12.46 for steel, 3 for coal, and 2.7 for transportation.
a.	 Write a system of equations to express the outputs for the three industries.
b.	 Verify that s = 14, c = 6, t = 8 will meet both interindustry and consumer  
demand.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 3 * 2  b. 1 * 2    2. C
0
 3
-1
1
 4
 0
0
-2
 9
3
8
14
0
S
3. B = c 2
4
6
3
4
5d ¡
1
2
 R1
c 1
2
3
3
4
5d¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¡
-3R1 + R2 S R2
C = c 1
2
3
0
-2
-4d     4. ea-1, - 1
3, -1b f    5. 515, 226
6. 511, 2, -326    7. ∅    8. 511, 2, -226
9. ea-z - 1, 5
3 - 2
3z, zb f
10. a. c
s = 0.01s + 0.1c + 0.1t + 12.46
c = 0.2s + 0.02c + 0.01t + 3
t = 0.25s + 0.3c + 2.7
b. 10.9921142 - 10.12162 - 10.12182 = 12.46 ✓
1-0.2021142 + 10.982162 - 10.012182 = 3 ✓
1-0.2521142 - 10.302162 + 8 = 2.7 ✓
Exercises
section 9.1
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 A matrix is any rectangular array of 
.
	 2.	 The array of coefficients and constants in a linear system is 
called the 
 of the system.
	 3.	 Two matrices are row-equivalent if one can be obtained from 
the other by a sequence of 
.
	 4.	 If a matrix is in row-echelon form and each leading entry 1 
is the only nonzero entry in its column, then the matrix is in 
 form.
	 5.	 True or False. If A is a 3 * 4 matrix, then each row of A 
has three entries. 
	 6.	 True or False. Every m * n 1n Ú 22 matrix is the matrix 
of some linear system. 
	 7.	 True or False. The augmented matrix for the system of 
equations 
c
2x + 3y
=
5
3y - 4z = -1
x +
2z =
3  is  C
2
3
3
-4
1
2
 †  
5
-1
3
S.
	 8.	 True or False. The augmented matrix for the system of 
equations 
c
2x -
y = 1
3x +
y = 9
5x - 2y = 4  is  C
2x
-y
3x
y
5x
-2y
 †  
1
9
4
S.
In Exercises 9–14, determine the order of each matrix.
	 9.	 374 
	10.	 31
3
5
94 
	11.	 c 3
4.3
7.5
8
2
-1
-3
0d 
	12.	 C
-1
2
3
4
-5
7
1
0
0
S 
	
13.	 c 4
5
1
0
0
0d 
	14.	 D
-5
2
3
7
2.5
e
-p
1
2
-e
p
0
1
T
	15.	 Let A = C
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
S. Identify the entries 
	
	 a13, a31, a33, and a34. 
	16.	 In matrix A from Exercise 15, identify the 1i, j2th location aij 
of each entry.
a.	 7 
b.	 10 
c.	 4 
d.	 12 
	17.	 Is the following array a matrix? Why or why not? 
	
	 C
2
0
4
1
-3
5
0
0  
	18.	 Write the matrix A with the following entries:
	
	 a13 = 5, a22 = 2, a11 = 6, a12 = -5, a23 = 4, and a21 = 7
In Exercises 19–24, write the augmented matrix for each  
system of linear equations.
	19.	 e2x + 4y = 2
x - 3y = 1 
	20.	 e x + 2y = 7
3x + 5y = 11 
	21.	 e 5x - 11 = 7y
17y - 19 = 13x 
	22.	 e2y - 10 = 3x
5x +
7 = y 
	23.	 c
-x + 2y + 3z = 8
 2x - 3y + 9z = 16
 4x - 5y - 6z = 32 
	24.	 c
x - y
= 2
2x
+ 3z = -5
y - 2z = 7  

810	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
In Exercises 25–28, write the system of linear equations  
represented by each augmented matrix. Use x, y, and z as  
the variables.
	25.	 C
1
2
-3
-2
-3
1
3
-3
2
 †  
4
5
7
S 
	26.	 C
-1
2
3
2
3
1
4
3
2
 †  
6
2
1
S 
	27.	 c 1
-1
1
2
1
-3 `  2
6d 
	28.	 D
1
1
1
1
-1
-1
2
3
1
-1
1
-1
 ∞ 
2
4
6
8
T 
In Exercises 29–32, perform the indicated elementary row 
operations in the stated order.
	29.	 c 2
3
5
1
2
3d ; (i) R1 4 R2, (ii) -2R1 + R2 S R2, (iii) -R2 
	30.	 c 2
4
2
1
5
7d ; (i) 1
2R1, (ii) 1-12 R1 + R2 S R2, (iii) 1
3R2 
	31.	 C
1
2
3
4
0
4
-3
11
0
1
5
-3
S; 1i2 R2 4 R3, 1ii2 -4R2 + R3 S R3,
1iii2 - 1
23R3 
	32.	 D
1
3
2
-2
1
2
0
2
3
4
-2
-1
7
3
T; 1i2 2R1 + R3 S R3,
1ii2 1
2R2 + R3 S R3 
In Exercises 33–36, identify the elementary row operation 
used and supply the missing entries in each row-equivalent 
matrix.
	33.	 c 4
5
-7
5
4
-2d S C
1
?
- 7
4
5
4
-2 S S D
1
?
- 7
4
0
- 9
4
?
T S
C
1
?
-7
4
0
1
?
S 
	34.	 c 2
6
-8
3
-1
2d S c 1
3
-?
3
-1
2d S c 1
3
?
0
-?
14d S
c 1
3
-?
0
1
?d 
	35.	 C
1
4
3
1
0
-3
-2
0
0
7
5
-3
S S C
1
4
3
1
0
1
?
0
0
7
5
-3
S S
C
1
4
3
1
0
1
?
0
0
0
?
-3
S S C
1
4
3
1
0
1
?
0
0
0
1
?
S 
	36.	 C
1
1
1
3
2
3
3
8
1
-3
-2
5
S S C
1
1
1
3
0
1
?
2
1
-3
-2
5
S S
C
1
1
1
3
0
1
?
2
0
-4
?
2
S S C
1
1
1
3
0
1
?
2
0
0
?
10
S 
In Exercises 37–44, determine whether each matrix is in 
row-echelon form. If your answer is no, explain why. If your 
answer is yes, is the matrix in reduced row-echelon form?
	37.	 c 0
1
2
1
0
3d
	38.	 c 1
2
5
0
3
6d
	39.	 C
1
0
0
2
0
1
0
3
0
0
1
4
S
	40.	 C
0
0
1
2
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
3
S
	41.	 c 1
2
0
2
0
0
1
5d
	42.	 c 0
1
-1
-2
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
0d
	43.	 D
1
0
0
-2
0
1
0
3
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
T 
	44.	 D
1
0
0
3
0
1
0
4
0
0
0
5
0
0
1
3
T 
In Exercises 45–54, the augmented matrix of a system of 
equations has been transformed to an equivalent matrix 
in row-echelon form or reduced row-echelon form. Using 
x, y, z, and  W as variables, write the system of equations cor-
responding to the matrix. If the system is consistent, solve it.
	45.	 c 1
2
0
1 `  1
-2d 
	46.	 c 1
0
0
1 `  2
3d 
	47.	 c 1
4
2
0
0
1 `  2
3d 
	48.	 c 1
2
3
0
0
0 `  4
1d 
	49.	 C
1
2
3
0
1
-2
0
0
1
 †  
2
4
-1
S 
	50.	 C
1
0
2
0
1
3
0
0
1
 †  
12
12
5
S 
	51.	 D
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
 ∞ 
2
-5
3
0
T 
	52.	 C
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
 †  
4
3
2
S 
	53.	 D
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
1
 ∞ 
-5
4
3
0
T 
	54.	 D
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
 ∞ 
3
2
0
1
T 
In Exercises 55–68, solve each system of equations by 
Gaussian elimination.
	55.	 e x - 2y = 11
2x -
y = 13 
	56.	 e3x - 2y = 4
4x - 3y = 5 
	57.	 e2x - 3y =
3
4x -
y = 11 
	58.	 e3x + 2y = 1
6x + 4y = 3 
	59.	 e3x -
5y =
4
4x - 15y = 13
	60.	 e -2x + 4y =
1
3x - 5y = -9 

	
Section 9.1    ■    Matrices and Systems of Equations 811
	61.	 c
x -
y = 1
2x +
y = 5
3x - 4y = 2 
	62.	 c
y
= 2x + 1
3x + 2y + 1.5 = 0
4x - 2y +
2 = 0
	63.	 c
x + y + z = 6
x - y + z = 2
2x + y - z = 1 
	64.	 c
2x + 4y + z = 5
x +
y + z = 6
2x + 3y + z = 6 
	65.	 c
2x + 3y - z =
9
x +
y + z =
9
3x -
y - z = -1 
	66.	 c
x + y + 2z = 4
2x - y + 3z = 9
3x - y -
z = 2 
	67.	 c
3x + 2y + 4z = 19
2x -
y +
z =
3
6x + 7y -
z = 17 
	68.	 c
4x + 3y +
z =
8
2x +
y + 4z = -4
3x +
z =
1 
In Exercises 69–74, solve each system of equations by  
Gauss–Jordan elimination.
	69.	 c
x - y
=
1
x
- z = -1
2x + y - z =
3 
	70.	 c
4x + 5z = 7
y - 6z = 8
3x + 4y = 9 
	71.	 c
x +
y -
z =
4
x + 3y + 5z = 10
3x + 5y + 3z = 18 
	72.	 c
x + y + z = -5
2x - y - z = -4
y + z = -2 
	73.	 c
x + 2y -
z = 6
3x +
y + 2z = 3
2x + 5y + 3z = 9 
	74.	 c
2x + 4y -
z = 9
x + 3y - 3z = 4
3x +
y + 2z = 7 
In Exercises 75 and 76, the reduced row-echelon forms of the 
augmented matrices of three systems of equations are given. 
How many solutions does each system have?
	75. a.	 c 1
0
0
1 `  2
3d 
b.	 C
1
2
3
0
0
1
0
0
0
 †  
8
2
0
S
c.	 c 1
0
0
0 `  2
3d 
	76. a.	 C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
 †  
-1
2
3
S
b.	 C
1
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
 †  
4
5
6
S
c.	 C
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
 †  
3
0
0
S 
In Exercises 77 and 78, determine whether the statement is 
true or false and justify your answer.
	77.	 If A is a 5 * 7 matrix, then each column of A has seven 
entries. 
	78.	 If a matrix A is in reduced row-echelon form, then at least 
one of the entries in each column must be a 1. 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 79–82, Leontief’s input–output model of a simpli-
fied economy is described. See Example 10. For each exercise, 
do the following.
a.	 Set up (without solving) a linear system whose solution will 
represent the required production schedule.
b.	 Write an augmented matrix for the economy.
c.	 Solve the system of equations by using part (b) to find the 
production schedule that will meet interindustry and consumer 
demand.
	79.	 Two-sector economy. Consider an economy with only two 
industries: A and B. Suppose industry B needs $0.10 worth 
of A’s product for each $1.00 of output B produces and that 
industry A needs $0.20 worth of B’s product for each $1.00 
of output A produces. Consumer demand for A’s product is 
$1000, and consumer demand for B’s product is $780. 
	80.	 A company with two branches. A company has two 
interacting branches: A and B. Branch A consumes $0.50 of 
its own output and $0.20 of B’s output for every $1.00 it pro-
duces. Branch B consumes $0.60 of A’s output and $0.30 of 
its own output for $1.00 of output. Consumer demand for A’s 
product is $50,000, and consumer demand for B’s product is 
$40,000. 
	81.	 Three-sector economy. An economy has three sectors: 
labor, transportation, and food industries. Suppose the 
demand on $1.00 in labor is $0.40 for transportation and 
$0.20 for food; the demand on $1.00 in transportation is 
$0.50 for labor and $0.30 for transportation; and the demand 
on $1.00 in food production is $0.50 for labor, $0.05 for 
transportation, and $0.35 for food. Outside consumer demand 
for the current production period is $10,000 for labor, 
$20,000 for transportation, and $10,000 for food. 
	82.	 Three-sector economy. Consider an economy with three 
industries A, B, and C, with outputs a, b, and c, respectively. 
Demand on the three industries is shown in the figure. 
320
150
90
0.2b
0.5b
0.1a
0.2a
0.4c
0.3c
Consumers
C
(c)
A
(a)
B
(b)       

812	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
	83.	 Heat transfer. In a study of heat transfer in a grid of wires, 
the temperature at an exterior node is maintained at a con-
stant value 1in °F2 as shown in the accompanying figure. 
When the grid is in thermal equilibrium, the temperature at 
an interior node is the average of the temperatures at the four 
	
	 adjacent nodes. For instance, T1 = 0 + 0 + 300 + T2
4
, or 
	
	 4T1 - T2 = 300. Find the temperatures T1, T2, and T3 when 
the grid is in thermal equilibrium. 
300
200
100
0
0
0
190
T1
T2
T3
	84.	 Heat transfer. Repeat Exercise 83 for the following grid of 
wires. 
30
20
20
50
50
30
40
40
T3
T2
T1
T4
	85.	 Traffic flow. The sketch shows the intersections of certain 
one-way streets. The traffic volume during one hour was 
observed. To keep the traffic moving, traffic controllers use 
the formula that the number of cars per hour entering an 
intersection equals the number of cars per hour exiting the 
intersection.
a.	 Set up a system of equations that keeps traffic moving. 
b.	 Solve the system of equations in part (a). 
y
x
z
60
cars/hr
40
cars/hr
70
cars/hr
300
cars/hr
180
cars/hr
200 
cars/hr
270
cars/hr
	86.	 Traffic flow. Repeat Exercise 85 for the following pattern of 
one-way streets. 
x
y
w
z
450
cars/hr
550
cars/hr
350
cars/hr
350
cars/hr
350
cars/hr
200
cars/hr
120
cars/hr
370
cars/hr
	87.	 Parabola. Find the equation of the parabola 
y = ax2 + bx + c that passes through the points 
1-1, 92, 11, 32, and 12, 62. 
	88.	 Modeling. A football was punted. Its height h above the 
ground at time t is given by the following table:
Time t (seconds)
Height h (feet)
t = 0.5
31
t = 1
51
t = 2
67
a.	 Use the system of equations to find the 
equation of the parabola of the form 
h = at2 + bt + c. 
b.	 What is the hang time (the time it takes the ball to touch 
the ground) of the punt? 
c.	 What is the maximum height of the ball? 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 89 and 90, solve each system of equations by 
Gauss–Jordan elimination.
	89.	 c
x +
y +
z +
w = 0
x + 3y + 2z + 4w = 0
2x
+
z -
w = 0 
	90.	 d
x -
y +
z -
w = 4
x + 2y +
z +
w = 2
2x + 3y + 4z + 5w = 5
3x + 4y + 2z -
w = 8 

	
Section 9.1    ■    Matrices and Systems of Equations 813
	 91.	 Let A = D
1
2
-3
1
1
0
-3
2
0
1
1
0
2
3
0
-2
T.
a.  Find two different matrices B and C in row-echelon form 
that are row-equivalent to A. 
b.  Show that the reduced row-echelon form of the matrices 
B and C of part (a) produce the same matrix. 
	 92.	 Consider the following system of linear equations:
c
x + y + z = 6
x - y + z = 2
2x + y - z = 1
a.  Find two different matrices B and C in row-echelon form 
that yield the same solution set. 
b.  Show that the reduced row-echelon form of the matrices 
B and C of part (a) produces the same matrix. 
	 93.	 a.  Use the methods of this section to solve a general 2 * 2 
system:
eax + by = m
cx + dy = n  
	
	 b.  Under what conditions on the coefficients does the 
­system have (i) a unique solution, (ii) no solution, and 
(iii) infinitely many solutions? 
	 94.	 Construct three different augmented matrices for linear 
­systems whose solution set is x = 1, y = 0, z = -2. There 
are many different correct answers. 
In Exercises 95 and 96, solve each system of equations by 
using row operations.
	 95.	 c
log x +
log y +
log z = 6
3 log x -
log y + 3 log z = 10
5 log x + 5 log y - 4 log z = 3 
	
	 [Hint: Let u = log x, v = log y, and w = log z.]
	 96.	 c
4 # 2x - 3 # 3y +
5z = 1
2x + 4 # 3y - 2 # 5z = 10
2 # 2x - 2 # 3y + 3 # 5z = 4 
	
	 [Hint: Let u = 2x, v = 3y, and w = 5z.]
	 97.	 Find the cubic function y = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d whose 
graph passes through the points 11, 52, 1-1, 12,12, 72,
and 1-2, 112.
	 98.	 Find the cubic function y = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d whose 
graph passes through the points 11, 82, 1-1, 22, 12, 82,
and 1-2, 202.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	 99.	 Find the form of all 2 * 1 matrices in reduced row-echelon 
form.
	100.	 Find the form of all 2 * 2 matrices in reduced row-echelon 
form.
	101.	 Suppose a matrix A is transformed to a matrix B by an ele-
mentary row operation. Is there an elementary row operation 
that transforms B to A? Explain.
	102.	 Are the following statements true or false? Justify your 
answers. Suppose a matrix A is in reduced row-echelon 
form.
	
	 a.  If we delete a row of A, then the remaining matrix is in 
reduced row-echelon form. 
	
	 b.  Repeat part (a), replacing row with column. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 103–106, solve each equation.
	103.	 31x - 12 = 5 - x 
	104.	 51x - 22 = 31x - 32 + 13 
	105.	 -31x + 42 + 2 = 8 - x 
	106.	 6x - 315x + 22 = 4 - 5x 
In Exercises 107–110, solve each system.
	107.	 b2x - y = 5
x + 2y = 25 
	108.	 bx - 3y = 1
2x + y = -5 
	109.	 b x + 3y = 6
2x + 6y = 8 
	110.	 b  2x - y = 3
6x - 3y = 9 
In Exercises 111–114, identify each statement as True or False.
	111.	 If x13t2 + p2t4 + t2 + 52 = 0 where t is a real number, 
then x = 0. 
	112.	 If x, y, and z are any real numbers, then xy + z = x + yz. 
	113.	 If x, y, and z are real numbers, then xy1z + 52 = xyz + 5xy.
	114.	 If 1x4 + x221y - 32 = 1 and y = 10
3 , then x4 + x2 = 3.          

814	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Equality of Matrices
In Section 9.1, we defined a matrix as a rectangular array of numbers written within brack-
ets. In this and the next sections, you will learn about the operations with and uses of 
matrices. A matrix may be represented in any of the following ways:
1.	 A matrix may be denoted by capital letters: A, B, C, and so on.
2.	 A matrix may be denoted by its representative 1i, j2th entry: 3aij4, 3bij4, 3cij4, and so on.
3.	 A matrix may be written as a rectangular array of numbers:
A = 3aij4 = D
a11
a12
g
a1n
a21
a22
g
a2n
f
f
g
f
am1
am2
g
amn
T
Computer Graphics
The following fields illustrate the widespread and growing applications of computer 
graphics:
1.   The automobile industry. Both computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided 
manufacturing (CAM) have revolutionized the automotive industry. Many months 
before a new car is built, engineers design and construct a mathematical car—a 
wire-frame model that exists only in computer memory and on graphics display ter-
minals. The mathematical model organizes and influences each step of the design 
and manufacture of the car.
2.   The entertainment industry. Computer graphics are used by the entertainment in-
dustry with spectacular success. They were used in AVATAR and other action movies, 
such as the latest James Bond thriller, for special effects, and they are used in the 
design and creation of arcade games.
3.   Military. From the beginning of the widespread use of computers (in the 1960s), 
computer graphics have been used by the military to prepare for or defend against 
war. Modern weaponry depends heavily on computer-generated images.
Engineers use matrix algebra techniques on graphic images to change their orientation 
of scale, to zoom in on them, or to switch between two- and three-dimensional views. 
In Example 10 and in the exercises, we examine how basic matrix algebra can be used 
to manipulate graphical images.
Matrix Algebra
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Solving systems of equations  
(Sections 8.1 and 8.2)
Objectives
1	 Define equality of two matrices.
2	 Define matrix addition and scalar  
multiplication.
3	 Define matrix multiplication.
4	 Apply matrix multiplication to  
computer graphics.
S E C T I O N 9.2
1	
Define equality of two 
matrices.

	
Section 9.2    ■    Matrix Algebra 815
We now examine some algebraic properties of matrices.
James Joseph Sylvester 
(1814–1897)
In 1850, Sylvester 
coined the term 
matrix to denote 
a rectangular ar-
ray of numbers.  
Sylvester, who was born into a  
Jewish family in London and studied 
for several years at Cambridge, was 
not permitted to take his degree there 
for religious reasons. Therefore, he  
received his degree from Trinity College, 
Dublin. In 1871, he accepted the chair 
of mathematics at the newly opened 
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. 
While at Hopkins, Sylvester founded 
the American Journal of Mathemat-
ics and helped develop a tradition of 
graduate education in mathematics in 
the United States.
Two matrices A = 3aij4 and B = 3bij4 are said to be equal, written A = B, if
1.   A and B have the same order m * n (that is, A and B have the same number m 
of rows and same number n of columns).
2.   aij = bij for all i and j; that is, each 1i, j2th entry of A is equal to the correspond-
ing 1i, j2th entry of B.
Equality of Matrices
Find x and y such that
c x + y
2
3
x - yd = c 4
2
3
1d .
Solution
Because equal matrices must have identical entries in corresponding positions, we have the 
following system of equations:
ex + y = 4 112
x - y = 1 122
Solve this system: Add the two equations to obtain x = 5
2. Substitute x = 5
2 in equation
x - y = 1 and solve for y to obtain y = 3
2. So x = 5
2 and y = 3
2.
Practice Problem 1  Find x and y such that 
c
1
2x - y
x + y
5
d = c 1
1
2
5d .
Matrix Addition and Scalar Multiplication
Matrix addition differs somewhat from real number addition. You can add any two real 
numbers, but you can add two matrices only if they have the same order.
Determining Equality of Matrices
EXAMPLE 1
2	
Define matrix addition and 
scalar multiplication.
If A = 3aij4 and B = 3bij4 are two m * n matrices, their sum A + B is the m * n 
matrix defined by
A + B = 3aij + bij4,
for all i and j.
Matrix Addition
The definition of matrix addition says that
	(i)   we can add two matrices of the same order simply by adding their corresponding 
entries, but
(ii)   the sum of two matrices of different orders is not defined.

816	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
In other words, to multiply a matrix A by a real number c, you multiply each entry of A 
by c. When c = -1, we frequently write -A instead of 1-12A. The matrix -A is called 
the negative of A. Further, the difference of two matrices, A - B, is defined to be the sum 
A + 1-B2.
Let A = C
-2
3
4
-1
0
2
S, B = C
6
4
-7
9
8
-5
S, and C = c 1
2
3
4d . Find each sum if possible.
a.	 A + B         b.   A + C
Solution
a.	 Because A and B have the same order, A + B is defined. We have
A + B = C
-2
3
4
-1
0
2
S + C
6
4
-7
9
8
-5
S = C
-2 + 6
3 + 4
4 - 7
-1 + 9
0 + 8
2 - 5
S = C
4
7
-3
8
8
-3
S
b.	 A + C is not defined because A and C do not have the same order.
Practice Problem 2  Let A = c 2
-1
4
5
0
9d  and B = c -8
2
9
7
3
6d . Find A + B.
You can also multiply any matrix A by any real number c. The real number c is called 
a scalar, and the multiplication process is called scalar multiplication.
Adding Matrices
EXAMPLE 2
Let A = 3aij4 be an m * n matrix and let c be a real number. Then the scalar prod-
uct of A and c is denoted by cA and is defined by
cA = 3caij4.
Scalar Multiplication
If A and B are two m * n matrices, then their difference is defined by
A - B = A + 1-B2.
Subtraction A - B is performed by subtracting the corresponding entries of B from 
those of A.
Matrix Subtraction
Let A = C
1
2
0
-1
3
1
2
-1
4
S  and B = C
2
1
3
1
0
-2
-3
4
5
S. Find the following.
a.	 3A        b.   2B        c.   3A - 2B
Performing Scalar Multiplication and Matrix Subtraction
EXAMPLE 3
To find the sum of two matrices 
with a graphing calculator, name 
the matrices and then use the 
regular addition key with the names 
of the matrices.
Consider the matrices A and B 
in Example 2 as follows:
The sum is
Technology
Connection

	
Section 9.2    ■    Matrix Algebra 817
Solution
a.	 3A = 3 C
1
2
0
-1
3
1
2
-1
4
S = C
3112
3122
3102
31-12
3132
3112
3122
31-12
3142
S = C
3
6
0
-3
9
3
6
-3
12
S
b.	 2B = 2 C
2
1
3
1
0
-2
-3
4
5
S = C
2122
2112
2132
2112
2102
21-22
21-32
2142
2152
S = C
4
2
6
2
0
-4
-6
8
10
S
c.	 3A - 2B = 3A + 1-122B
= C
3
6
0
-3
9
3
6
-3
12
S + C
-4
-2
-6
-2
0
4
6
-8
-10
S
= C
3 + 1-42
6 + 1-22
0 + 1-62
-3 + 1-22
9 + 0
3 + 4
6 + 6
-3 + 1-82
12 + 1-102
S = C
-1
4
-6
-5
9
7
12
-11
2
S
Practice Problem 3  Let A = C
7
-4
3
6
0
-2
S  and B = C
1
-3
2
2
5
8
S. Find 2A - 3B.
An m * n matrix whose entries are all equal to 0 is called the m * n zero matrix and 
is denoted by 0mn. When m and n are understood from the context, we simply write 0. Be-
cause the entries of a matrix are real numbers, many of the algebraic properties of matrix 
addition and scalar multiplication are similar to the familiar properties of real numbers.
M at r i x  A d d i t i o n  a n d  S c a l a r 
M u lt i p l i c at i o n  P r o p e r t i e s
Let A, B, and C be m * n matrices and c and d be scalars.
1.	 A + B = B + A	
Commutative property of addition
2.	 A + 1B + C2 = 1A + B2 + C    Associative property of addition
3.	 A + 0 = 0 + A = A	
Additive identity property
4.	 A + 1-A2 = 1-A2 + A = 0	
Additive inverse property
5.	 1cd2A = c1dA2	
Associative property of scalar multiplication
6.	 1A = A	
Scalar identity property
7.	 c1A + B2 = cA + cB	
Distributive property
8.	 1c + d2A = cA + dA	
Distributive property
In the next example, we use these properties to solve an equation involving matrices. 
Such an equation is called a matrix equation.
Solve the matrix equation 3A + 2X = 4B for X, where
A = c 2
0
4
6d  and B = c 1
3
5
2d .
Solving a Matrix Equation
EXAMPLE 4
To find the difference of two 
matrices with a graphing calculator, 
name the matrices and then use 
the regular subtraction key with the 
names of the matrices. Similarly, to 
multiply a matrix by a scalar, use the 
name of the matrix and the regular 
multiplication key.
Consider the matrices A and B 
in Example 3 as follows:
We find 3A - 2B:
Technology
Connection
    Substitute from parts a and b,  
changing the sign of each entry  
in b.

818	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Solution
 3A + 2X = 4B
 2X = 4B - 3A
 X = 1
214B - 3A2
 = 1
2
 a4c 1
3
5
2d - 3c 2
0
4
6d b
 = 1
2
 a c 4
12
20
8 d - c 6
0
12
18 d b
 = 1
2c -2
12
8
-10d
 = c -1
6
4
-5d
You should check that the matrix X = c -1
6
4
-5d  satisfies the given matrix equation.
Practice Problem 4  Solve the matrix equation 5A + 3X = 2B for X, where
A = c 1
-1
3
5d  and B = c
2
7
-3
-5d .
Matrix Multiplication
You know that the sum of two matrices is defined only if both matrices are of the same 
order. In the case of multiplication, however, the general rule is that if A is an m * p matrix 
and B is a p * n matrix, then the product AB is defined; otherwise, it is not defined.
3	
Define matrix multiplication.
R u l e  f o r  D e f i n i n g  t h e  P r o d u c t  A B
To define the product AB of two matrices A and B, the number of columns of A must 
be equal to the number of rows of B. If A is an m * p matrix and B is a p * n matrix, 
then the product AB is an m * n matrix.
For each pair of matrices A and B, state whether the product matrix AB is defined. If it is, 
find the order of AB.
a.	 A = 31
3
54, B = C
2
3
7
S         b.   A = C
2
3
-1
4
5
6
S, B = c 2
1
3
5
4
-1
-2
6d
c.	 A = C
1
-1
2
S, B = c 2
1
4
0
2
2d
Solution
a.	 Yes, the product AB is defined. A is a 1 * 3 matrix, and B is a 3 * 1 matrix; so the 
number of columns of A equals the number of rows of B. The product AB is a 1 * 1 
matrix that has a single entry.
Determining the Order of the Product
EXAMPLE 5
order of A	
order of B
	 m * p	
p * n
must be same
order of AB
m * n
Î
Î
Î
Î

	
Section 9.2    ■    Matrix Algebra 819
b.	 Yes, AB is defined. A is a 3 * 2 matrix, and B is a 2 * 4 matrix; so the number of 
columns of A equals the number of rows of B. The product AB is a 3 * 4 matrix.
c.	 No, AB is not defined. A is a 3 * 1 matrix, and B is a 2 * 3 matrix; so the number of 
columns of A does not equal the number of rows of B.
Practice Problem 5  State whether the product matrix AB is defined. If AB is defined, 
find the order of the product matrix AB.
A = c 1
4
7
0
2
-2d , B = C
4
3
-1
S
Before you learn how to multiply two matrices A and B, consider the next example.
A car dealership sold 10 sports cars 1S2, 30 compacts 1C2, and 45 mini-compacts 1M2. 
The average price per car of type S, C, and M was 42, 24, and 17 (in thousands of dollars), 
respectively. Find the total revenue received by the dealership from the sale of these cars.
Solution
You can represent the number of cars of each type sold by a 1 * 3 matrix:
N = 3S
C
M4 = 310
30
454
Using the price of each type of car, you can construct a 3 * 1 price matrix:
P = C
42
24
17
S
Then the total revenue R received by the dealership from the sale of these cars last month 
is given by R = 101422 + 301242 + 451172 = 1905 (or $1,905,000).
We define the right side of this equation to be the product NP of the two matrices N and 
P. In matrix notation,
NP = 310
30
454 C
42
24
17
S = 101422 + 301242 + 451172 = 1905.
Practice Problem 6  In Example 6, suppose the average price per car of types S, C,  
and M is 41, 26, and 19 (in thousands of dollars), respectively. Find the total revenue 
received by the dealership from the sale of these cars.
Example 6 leads to the following definition.
Calculating the Total Revenue from Car Sales
EXAMPLE 6
P r o d u c t  o f  1 : n  a n d  n : 1  M at r i c e s
Suppose A is a 1 * n matrix and B is an n * 1 matrix:
A = 3a1
a2
a3 g an4 and B = D
b1
b2
f
bn
T.
We define the product AB by
AB = 3a1b1 + a2b2 + g + anbn4.

820	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
We make the following observations about this definition.
1.	 Because A is a 1 * n matrix and B is an n * 1 matrix, the product AB is defined and 
is a 1 * 1 matrix.
2.	 To find the product AB, multiply the leftmost entry of A and the top entry of B; then 
move to the right in A and down in B while multiplying corresponding (first, second, 
third, and so on) entries together; finally, add all of the resulting products.
Find AB, where A = 32 0 1 -24 and B = D
3
1
-1
4
T.
Solution
Because A has order 1 * 4 and B has order 4 * 1, AB is defined. The product rule gives
AB = 32132 + 0112 + 11-12 + 1-221424 = 3-34.
The product of the 1 * 4 matrix A and the 4 * 1 matrix B is therefore the 1 * 1 matrix 3-34.
Practice Problem 7  Find AB:
A = 33
-1
2
74 and B = D
-2
0
1
5
T
In Example 7, you may think of the answer -3 as the 1 * 1 matrix 3-34 or simply as 
the number -3. We will have occasion to make use of both points of view.
The rule for multiplying any two matrices can be reduced to the special case of multi-
plying a 1 * p matrix by a p * 1 matrix repeatedly.
Finding the Product AB
EXAMPLE 7
Let A = 3aij4 be an m * p matrix and B = 3bij4 be a p * n matrix. Then the 
product AB is the m * n matrix C = 3cij4, where the entry cij of C is obtained by 
matrix multiplying the ith row of A by the jth column of B.
The definition of the product AB says that
cij = ai1b1j + ai2b2j + g + aipbpj.
Matrix Multiplication
Written in full, the matrix product AB = C in the definition is as follows:
F
a11
a12
g
a1p
a21
a22
g
a2p
f
f
f
ai1
ai2
g
aip
f
f
f
am1
am2
g
amp
V  F
b11
b12
g
b1j
g
b1n
b21
b22
g
b2j
g
b2n
f
f
g
f
g
f
bp1
bp2
g
bpj
g
bpn
V = F
c11
c12
g
c1j
g
c1n
f
f
g
f
f
ci1
ci2
g
cij
g
cin
f
f
f
f
cm1
cm2
g
cmj
g
cmn
V

	
Section 9.2    ■    Matrix Algebra 821
The product BA is not defined because B is of order 2 * 3 and A is of order 2 * 2; that 
is, the number of columns of B is not equal to the number of rows of A.
Practice Problem 8  Find the products AB and BA if possible.
A = c 5
0
2
-1d and B = C
8
1
-2
6
0
4
S
In Example 8, it is obvious that AB ≠BA because BA is undefined. Even if both AB 
and BA are defined, AB may not equal BA, as the next example illustrates.
Find the products AB and BA, if possible.
A = c
1
2
-1
3d and B = c 3
-2
1
1
2
3d
Solution
Because A is of order 2 * 2 and the order of B is 2 * 3, the product AB is defined and 
has order 2 * 3.
Let AB = C = 3cij4. By the definition of the product AB, each entry cij of C is found 
by multiplying the ith row of A by the jth column of B. For example c11 is found by multi-
plying the first row of A by the first column of B:
c 1
2
*
*d c 3
*
*
1
*
*d = c 1132 + 2112
*
*
*
*
*d
So
AB = c
1
2
-1
3d c 3
-2
1
1
2
3d
Finding the Product of Two Matrices
EXAMPLE 8
To find the product of two matrices 
using a graphing calculator, name 
the matrices and then use the 
regular multiplication key with the 
names of the matrices.
Consider the matrices A and B 
in Example 8.
We find the product AB.
Technology
Connection
1st row of A times 
1st column of B
1st row of A times 
2nd column of B
1st row of A times 
3rd column of B
2nd row of A times 
1st column of B
2nd row of A times  
2nd column of B
2nd row of A times  
3rd column of B
AB = c 1132 + 2112
11-22 + 2122
1112 + 2132
-1132 + 3112
-11-22 + 3122
-1112 + 3132d = c 5
2
7
0
8
8d
¸˚˚˝˚˚˛
¸˚˚˝˚˚˛
¸˚˚˝˚˚˛
¸˚˚˝˚˚˛
¸˚˚˝˚˚˛
¸˚˚˝˚˚˛
Î
Î
Î
Î
Î
Î
Find the products AB and BA.
A = c
2
3
-1
0d and B = c 3
4
5
1d
Solution
 AB = c
2
3
-1
0d c 3
4
5
1d = c 2132 + 3152
2142 + 3112
-1132 + 0152
-1142 + 0112d = c 21
11
-3
-4d
 BA = c 3
4
5
1d c
2
3
-1
0d = c 3122 + 41-12
3132 + 4102
5122 + 11-12
5132 + 1102d = c 2
9
9
15d
Finding the Product of Two Matrices
EXAMPLE 9

822	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Practice Problem 9  Find the products AB and BA.
A = c 7
1
0
3d and B = c 2
-1
4
4d
In Example 9, observe that AB ≠BA. Thus, in general, matrix multiplication is not com-
mutative. Matrix multiplication, however, does share many of the properties of the multi-
plication of real numbers.
Let A, B, and C be matrices and let c be a scalar. Assume that each product and sum 
is defined. Then
1.	 1AB2C = A1BC2	
Associative property of multiplication
2.	
(i)  A1B + C2 = AB + AC	
Distributive property
(ii)  1A + B2C = AC + BC	
Distributive property
3.	 c1AB2 = 1cA2B = A1cB2	
Associative property of scalar multiplication
Properties of Matrix Multiplication
In the exercises, you will be asked to verify these properties and compare them to similar 
properties of real numbers. Also, integral powers of square matrices are defined exactly as 
for the real numbers. We write A2 to mean AA, A3 to mean AAA, and so on. We define A0 by
A0 = In = E
1
0
0
g
0
0
1
0
g
0
0
0
1
g
0
f
f
f
0
0
0
g
1
U.
The matrix In is called the identity matrix.
When the order of the matrix is clear from the context, we can drop the subscript n and 
write I for In. For any square matrix A, we have
IA = A and AI = A
So in matrix multiplication, the matrix I plays a role similar to that of the number 1 in the 
multiplication of real numbers.
Computer Graphics
Letters used for labels on a computer screen are very simple two-dimensional graphics. 
The next example illustrates how a letter (or a figure) is transformed when the coordinates 
of the points on the figure are all multiplied by the same matrix.
4	
Apply matrix multiplication  
to computer graphics.
The capital letter L in Figure 9.2 is determined by six points (or vertices) P1 through P6. 
The coordinates of the six points can be stored in a data matrix D. We draw line segments 
connecting these vertices in order.
x@coordinate
y@coordinate
 c
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
0
4
4
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
6
6 d = D
If A = c 1
0.25
0
1
d , compute AD and graph the figure it represents.
Transforming a Letter
EXAMPLE 10
P1
P4
1
1
2
3
4
5
P5
P6
y
P3
P2
x
3
2
Figure 9.2 

	
Section 9.2    ■    Matrix Algebra 823
Solution
The columns of the product matrix AD represent the transformed vertices of the letter L.
AD = c 1
0.25
0
1
d c 0
4
4
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
6
6d
= c1 # 0 + 0.25 # 0
1 # 4 + 0.25 # 0
1 # 4 + 0.25 # 1
1 # 1 + 0.25 # 1
1 # 1 + 0.25 # 6
1 # 0 + 0.25 # 6
0 # 0 + 1 # 0
0 # 4 + 1 # 0
0 # 4 + 1 # 1
0 # 1 + 1 # 1
0 # 1 + 1 # 6
0 # 0 + 1 # 6
d
P1′	 P2′	 P3′	
P4′	
P5′	
P6′
= c 0
4
 4.25
1.25
2.5
 1.5
0
0
1
1
6
6
d
Figure 9.3 shows the transformed vertices and the transformed figure “L” formed by these 
vertices.
Practice Problem 10  In Example 10, use the matrix A = c 0
1
1
0.25d . Graph the figure
represented by the matrix AD.
P'1
P'4
P'5
P'6
P'2
P'3
y
x
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
3
2
Figure 9.3 
Answers to Practice Problems
1. x = 1, y = 1    2. c -6
1
13
12
3
15d
3. C
11
1
0
6
-15
-28
S     4. X = D
- 1
3
19
3
-7
- 35
3
T
5. Yes, the product AB is defined with order 2 * 1.    6. $2045 
thousand    7. 3314    8. The product AB is not defined.
BA = C
42
-1
2
-6
8
-4
S     9. AB = c 18
-3
12
12d , BA = c 14
-1
28
16d
10. 
P'3
P'4
P'1
P'5
P'6
y
x
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
P'2
Exercises
section 9.2
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 Two m * n matrices A = 3aij4 and B = 3bij4 are equal if  
 for all i and j.
	 2.	 Let A = 3aij4, B = 3bij4, and C = 3cij4. If A + B = C, 
then cij =  
 for all i and for all j.
	 3.	 The product of a 1 * n matrix A and an n * 1 matrix B is a  
 matrix.
	 4.	 If A is an m * n matrix and B is an n * p matrix, then AB is 
defined and is a(n) 
 matrix.
	 5.	 True or False. If AB and BA are defined, then AB = BA.
	 6.	 True or False. Any two square matrices can be multiplied.
In Exercises 7–14, find the values of all variables.
	 7.	 c
2
-3d = c x
ud
	 8.	 C - y
2
x
S = c 4
3d
	 9.	 c 2
x
y
-3d = c 2
-1
3
-3d 
	10.	 c 2 - x
1
-2
3 + yd = c
3
1
-2
-3d     

824	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
	11.	 c 2x - 3y
-4
5
3x + yd = c 1
-4
5
7d 
	12.	 c 3x + y
-17
19
2 d = C
- 1
2
-17
19
2x + 3y
S 
	13.	 C
x - y
1
2
4
3x - 2y
3
5
6
5x - 10y
S = C
-1
1
2
4
-1
3
5
6
6
S 
	14.	 C
x + y
2
3
2
x - y
4
3
4
2x + 3y
S = C
-1
2
3
2
5
4
3
4
-5
S
In Exercises 15–22, find each of the following if possible.
a.  A + B
b.  A - B
c.  -3A
d.  3A - 2B
e.  1A + B22
f.  A2 - B2
	15.	 A = c 1
2
3
4d , B = c -1
0
2
-3d 
	16.	 A = C
1
3
1
-1
2
S, B = C
1
0
2
-1
2
S 
	17.	 A = c
2
3
-4
5d , B = c 1
0
2
3
1
4d 
	18.	 A = c
1
2
3
-1
-3
4d , B = C
1
0
2
3
1
4
S 
	19.	 A = C
4
0
-1
-2
5
2
0
0
1
S, B = C
3
1
0
1
-4
2
2
1
3
S 
	20.	 A = C
1
0
2
2
1
0
0
1
3
S, B = C
3
-1
2
0
2
1
1
4
-1
S 
	21.	 A = C
1
2
-3
3
4
5
2
-1
0
S, B = C
3
1
0
1
-4
2
2
1
3
S 
	22.	 A = C
1
0
2
2
1
0
0
1
3
S, B = C
3
-1
2
0
2
1
1
4
-1
S 
In Exercises 23–30, solve each matrix equation for X, where
A = c 2
3
-1
1
-2
4d and B = c -2
1
0
2
3
4d .
	23.	 A + X = B 
	24.	 B + X = A 
	25.	 2X - A = B 
	26.	 2X - B = A 
	27.	 2X + 3A = B 
	28.	 3X + 2A = B 
	29.	 2A + 3B + 4X = 0 
	30.	 3X - 2A + 5B = 0 
In Exercises 31–40, find each product if possible.
a.  AB
b.  BA
	31.	 A = c 1
2
3
4d , B = c -2
1
3
5d 
	32.	 A = C
3
2
1
5
0
1
S, B = c 1
3
-2
2
5
0d 
	33.	 A = c
2
-1
0
-3
1
2d , B = C
1
5
-2
3
4
0
S 
	34.	 A = c 1
2
3
4
5
6d , B = c -1
-3
-6
2
5
7d
	35.	 A = 32 3 54, B = C
1
-2
4
S 
	36.	 A = C
1
2
-1
S, B = 3-3 0 24 
	37.	 A = 31 2 34, B = C
1
2
-1
0
3
1
2
0
-3
S 
	38.	 A = C
4
-6
2
2
3
0
1
2
-3
S, B = 3-2
0
14 
	39.	 A = C
2
0
1
1
4
2
3
-1
0
S, B = C
3
1
0
-1
2
0
4
5
2
S 
	40.	 A = C
3
-1
2
0
4
-3
1
-2
2
S, B = C
2
-5
0
-1
2
-1
3
0
2
S 
	41.	 Let A = C
3
1
2
0
4
3
1
-2
2
S  and B = C
2
5
0
1
2
-1
3
0
2
S.
Verify that AB ≠BA. 
	42.	 Let A = C
5
2
4
-6
-3
10
-2
6
5
S  and B = C
4
1
2
-3
0
5
-1
3
4
S.
Verify that AB = BA. 
In Exercises 43–46, let
A = c 1
2
3
4d , B = c 2
-3
3
5d , and C = c 0
1
2
4d .
	43.	 Verify the associative property of multiplication: 
1AB2C = A1BC2.
	44.	 Verify the distributive property: A1B + C2 = AB + AC.
	45.	 Verify the distributive property: 1A + B2C = AC + BC.
	46.	 For any real number c, verify that 
c1AB2 = 1cA21B2 = A1cB2.
Applying the Concepts
	47.	 Cost matrix. The Build-Rite Co. is building an apartment 
complex. The cost of purchasing and transporting specific 
amounts of steel, glass, and wood (in appropriate units) from 
two different locations is given by the following matrices:
Steel	 Glass	 Wood
 A = c 7
3
18
4
1
3d  Cost of material
Transportation cost
 B = c 6
2
20
3
1
4d  Cost of material
Transportation cost
	
	 Find the matrix representing the total cost of material and 
transportation for steel, glass, and wood from both locations.  

	
Section 9.2    ■    Matrix Algebra 825
	48.	 Cost matrix. Repeat Exercise 47 if the order from location 
A is tripled and the order from location B is doubled. 
	49.	Stock purchase. Ms. Goodbyer plans to buy 100 shares  
of computer stock, 300 shares of oil stock, and 400 shares 
of automobile stock. The computer stock is selling for  
$60 a share, oil stock is selling for $38 a share, and auto-
mobile stock is selling for $17 a share. Use matrix mul-
tiplication to calculate the total cost of Ms. Goodbyer’s 
purchases. 
	50.	 Product export. The International Export Corporation 
received an export order for three of its products, say, A, B, 
and C. The export order is (in thousands) for 50 of product 
A, 75 of product B, and 150 of product C. The material  
cost, labor, and profit (each in appropriate units) required  
to produce each unit of the product are given in the  
following table:
Material	
Labor	 Profit
Product A
Product B
Product C
 C
20
2
20
15
3
25
25
1
15
S
	
	 Use matrix multiplication to compute the total material  
cost, total labor, and total profit if the entire export order  
is filled.
	51.	 Executive compensation. The Multinational Oil 
Corporation pays its top executives a salary, a cash bonus, 
and shares of its stock annually. In 2012, the chairman of the 
board received $2.5 million in salary, a $1.5 million bonus, 
and 50,000 shares of stock; the president of the company 
received one-half the compensation of the chairman; and each 
of the four vice presidents was paid $100,000 in salary, a 
$150,000 bonus, and 5000 shares of stock.
a.	 Express payments to these executives in salary, bonus, and 
stock as a 3 * 3 matrix. 
b.	 Express the number of executives of each rank as a column 
matrix. 
c.	 Use matrix multiplication to compute the total amount the 
company paid to each executive in each category  
in 2012. 
	52.	 Calories and protein. The Browns 1B2 and Newgards 1N2 
are neighboring families. The Brown family has two men, 
three women, and one child, and the Newgard family has one 
man, one woman, and two children. Both families are weight 
watchers. They have the same dietician, who recommends the 
following daily allowance of calories and proteins:
Calories
male adults: 2400 calories
female adults: 1900 calories
children: 1800 calories
Protein (in grams)
male adults: 55
female adults: 45
children: 33
	
	 Represent the preceding information in matrix form. Use 
matrix multiplication to compute the total requirements of 
calories and proteins for each of the two families. 
In Exercise 53–56, a matrix A is given. Graph the figure  
represented by the matrix AD, where D is the matrix  
representation of the letter L of Example 10.
	53.	 A = c 1
0
0
-1d 
	54.	 A = c -1
0
0
1d 
	55.	 A = c
1
0
0.25
1d 
	56.	 A = c 1
-0.25
0
1d 
Beyond the Basics
	57.	 Let A = c 0
3
0
0d , B = c 2
1
3
0d , and C = c 5
4
3
0d .
Verify that AB = AC. This example shows that AB = AC 
does not, in general, imply that B = C.
	58.	 Let A = C
2
-3
-5
-1
4
5
1
-3
-4
S  and B = C
-1
3
5
1
-3
-5
-1
3
5
S.
Verify that AB = 0. This example shows that AB = 0 does 
not imply that A = 0 or B = 0.
	59.	 Select appropriate 2 * 2 matrices A and B to show that, in 
general, 1A + B22 ≠A2 + 2AB + B2. 
	60.	 Repeat Exercise 59 to show that, in general, 
A2 - B2 ≠1A - B21A + B2. 
	61.	 Let A = C
1
-2
3
2
-4
1
3
-5
2
S. Show that
	
3A2 - 2A + I = C
17
-23
15
-13
30
10
-9
22
21
S,
	
	 where I = C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S.
	62.	 Let A = C
1
3
2
2
0
3
1
-1
1
S. Show that
	
A3 - 3A2 + A - I = C
-3
14
-3
5
-2
8
5
-7
6
S,
where I is given in Exercise 61.
	63.	 If possible, find a matrix B such that c 2
3
1
2d B = c 1
0
0
1d .
	64.	 If possible find a matrix B such that
c
1
-2
-2
4 dB = c1
0
0
1 d. 
	65.	 Find x and y if
a4c2
-1
3
1
0
2 d - c1
2
-1
2
-3
4 d b C
2
-1
1
S = cx
y d.
	66.	 Find x, y, and z if
C
3
2
-1
4
9
2
5
0
-2
S C
x
y
z
S = C
0
7
2
S .   

826	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
	67.	 A = c 0
1
0
0d , B = c 1
0
0
0d
Show that AB = 0 but BA = c 0
1
0
0d ≠0.
	68.	 Find matrices A and B such that
A + B = c5
2
0
9 d  and A - B = c3
6
0
-1 d.
	69.	 Find matrices A and B such that
2A - B = c 6
-6
0
-4
2
1 d  and A + B = c 3
0
3
-2
1
-4 d.
	70.	 Let A = C
2
-3
-5
-1
4
5
1
-3
-4
S, B = C
-1
3
5
1
-3
-5
-1
3
5
S. 
	
	 Show that AB = 0 and BA = 0.
	71.	 Let A = C
2
-3
-5
-1
4
5
1
-3
-4
S, B = C
2
-2
-4
-1
3
4
1
-2
-3
S. 
	
	 Show that (i) AB = A, (ii) BA = B, (iii) A2 = A.
	72.	 Let A = c 2
3
-1
2d .
a.	 Show that A2 = 4A - 7I.
b.	 Use part (a) to show that A4 = 8A - 63I.
c.	 Use part (b) to show that A4 = c -47
24
-8
-47d .
	73.	 Let A = C
4
-1
-4
3
0
-4
3
-1
-3
S. Show that A2 = I.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	74.	 Let A be a 3 * n matrix and B be a 5 * m matrix.
a.	 Under what conditions is AB defined? What is the order of 
AB when this product is defined?
b.	 Repeat part (a) for BA.
	75.	 Let A = c
3
-1
0
-2
3
1d , B = C
2
3
4
S, and C = 3-1
24.
In which order should all three matrices be multiplied to  
produce a number? 
	76.	 Market share. The Asma Corporation (A), Bronkial 
Brothers (B), and Coufmore Company (C) simultaneously 
decide to introduce a new cigarette at a time when each com-
pany has one-third of the market. During the year, the follow-
ing occurs:
(i)  A retains 40% of its customers and loses 30% to B and 
30% to C.
(ii)  B retains 30% of its customers and loses 60% to A and 
10% to C.
(iii)  C retains 30% of its customers and loses 60% to A and 
10% to B.
	
	 The foregoing information can be represented by the follow-
ing transition matrix:
	
A	
B	
C
P =
A 
B 
C 
C
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.6
0.3
0.1
0.6
0.1
0.3
S
	
	 Write the initial market share as X = c 1
3
 1
3 
1
3 d .
a.	 Compute XP2 and interpret your result.
b.	 Compute XP3, XP4, and XP5; observe the pattern for the long 
run. Describe the long-term market share for each company.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 77 and 78, rewrite each expression without  
exponents.
	77.	 a1
2b
-1 
	78.	 a 5
12b
-1 
In Exercises 79–84, solve each equation.
	79.	 x -1 = 1
8 
	80.	 a x
35b
-1
= 7 
	81.	 1
4x - 7
12 = 11
12 - 5
4x 
	82.	 2
3x - 3
5 = 4
3x + 2
15
	83.	
2
4x - 1 =
3
4x + 1 
	84.	
2
x + 1 =
1
x - 1 
In Exercises 85–88, solve each system.
	85.	 e 3x + 5y = 2
6x + 10y = 4
	86.	 e -9x + 2y = 8
5x + 8y = 32 
	87.	 e 3x + 2y = 6
6x + 4y = -13 
	88.	 e3x - 4y = 13
2x + 5y = 1 
   
 
 
 
   

	
Section 9.3    ■    The Matrix Inverse 827
S E C T I O N 9.3
The Multiplicative Inverse of a Matrix
In arithmetic, you know that if a is a nonzero real number, then a has a unique reciprocal, 
denoted by 1
a, or a-1. The number a-1 is called the multiplicative inverse of a, and
aa-1 = a-1a = 1.
Similarly, certain square matrices have multiplicative inverses, with an identity matrix act-
ing as “1.”
Coding and Decoding Messages
Imagine you are a secret agent who is looking for spies in different parts of the world. 
Periodically, you communicate with your headquarters via your laptop or by satellite. 
You expect that your communications will be intercepted. So before you broadcast any 
message, you must write it using a secret code. A message written with a secret code is 
called a cryptogram.
First, you might replace each letter in the message with a number and send the 
message as a sequence of numbers. The problem with this approach is that it is rather 
easy to crack such a code. For example, if letters such as e are always represented by 
the same symbol, then a code breaker (hacker) can guess which symbol represents each 
letter and eventually translate your message. In Example 8, we show you a better way 
to encode and decode a message using matrix multiplication.
The Matrix Inverse
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Matrix multiplication (Section 9.2,  
page 818)
2	 Equality of matrices (Section 9.2,  
page 815)
3	 Gauss–Jordan elimination procedure 
(Section 9.1, page 806)
4	 Leontieff input–output model (Section 9.1, 
page 808)
Objectives
1	 Verify the multiplicative inverse  
of a matrix.
2	 Find the inverse of a matrix.
3	 Find the inverse of a 2 * 2 matrix.
4	 Use matrix inverses to solve systems of 
linear equations.
5	 Use matrix inverses in applied problems.
1	
Verify the multiplicative 
inverse of a matrix.
Let A be an n * n matrix and let I be the n * n identity matrix. If there is an n * n 
matrix B such that
AB = I and BA = I,
then B is called the inverse of A and we write B = A-1 (read “A inverse”).
The Inverse of a Matrix
Notice that if B is the inverse of A, then A is the inverse of B.

828	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Recall that in general (even for square matrices), AB ≠BA. However, if A and B are 
square matrices with AB = I, then it can be shown that BA = I. Therefore, to determine 
whether A and B are inverses, you need only check that either AB = I or BA = I.
Arthur Cayley 
(1821–1895)
English mathemati-
cians of the first third 
of the 19th century 
attempted to extend 
the basic ideas of 
algebra and to determine exactly how 
much one can generalize the properties 
of integers to other types of quanti-
ties. Although Sylvester (see page 799) 
coined the term matrix, it was Arthur 
Cayley who developed the algebra of 
matrices. Cayley studied mathematics 
at Trinity College, Cambridge, but be-
cause there was no suitable teaching 
job available, he decided to become 
a lawyer. Although he became skilled 
in legal work, he regarded the law as 
just a way to support himself. During 
his legal career, he was able to write 
more than 300 mathematical papers. In 
1863, Cambridge University established 
a new post in mathematics and offered 
it to Cayley. He accepted the job eagerly 
even though it paid less money than he 
made as a lawyer.
Show that B is the inverse of A.
A = c 1
3
2
7d  and B = c
7
-3
-2
1d
Solution
You need to verify that AB = I or BA = I.
AB = c 1
3
2
7d c
7
-3
-2
1d = c 1172 + 31-22
11-32 + 3112
2172 + 71-22
21-32 + 7112d = c 1
0
0
1d = I
Because AB = I, it follows that B = A-1.
Practice Problem 1  Show that B is the inverse of A.
A = c 3
2
2
1d and B = c -1
2
2
-3d
In working with real numbers, you know that if a = 0, then a-1 does not exist. So it 
should not come as a surprise that if A is a square zero matrix, then A-1 does not exist. 
Surprisingly, there are also nonzero matrices that do not have inverses.
Verifying the Inverse of a Matrix
EXAMPLE 1
Show that the matrix A does not have an inverse.
A = c 2
0
0
0d
Solution
Suppose A has an inverse B, where
B = c x
y
z
w d .
Then you have
 c 2
0
0
0d c x
y
z
w d = c 1
0
0
1d    
AB = I
 c 2x
2y
0
0d = c 1
0
0
1d     Multiply the two matrices on the left side.
Because these two matrices are equal, you must have
0 = 1    Equate the entries in the 12, 22 position.
Because 0 = 1 is a false statement, the matrix A does not have an inverse.
Practice Problem 2  Show that the matrix A = c 3
1
3
1d  does not have an inverse.
Proving That a Particular Nonzero Matrix Has No Inverse
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 9.3    ■    The Matrix Inverse 829
Finding the Inverse of a Matrix
It can be shown that if a square matrix A has an inverse, then the inverse is unique. This 
means that a square matrix cannot have more than one inverse. If a matrix A has an inverse, 
then A is called invertible or nonsingular. A square matrix that does not have an inverse 
is called a singular matrix. The following discussion derives a technique for finding the 
inverse of an invertible matrix.
Suppose we want to find the inverse of the matrix A = c 1
2
3
5d . We first let
B = c x
y
z
w d  be the inverse of the matrix A. Then
 AB = I
    Definition of inverse
 c 1
2
3
5d c x
y
z
w d = c 1
0
0
1d     Substitute for A, B, and I.
 c x + 2z
y + 2w
3x + 5z
3y + 5w d = c 1
0
0
1d     Multiply matrices A and B.
Equating corresponding entries in the last equation yields two systems of linear equations.
e x + 2z = 1
3x + 5z = 0     Equate the entries in the 11, 12 
and 12, 12 positions.
e y + 2w = 0
3y + 5w = 1    Equate the entries in the 11, 22
and 12, 22 positions.
Let’s solve the two systems by Gauss–Jordan elimination.
System of Equations
Matrix Form
e x + 2z = 1
3x + 5z = 0
c 1
2
3
5 `  1
0d
e y + 2w = 0
3y + 5w = 1
c 1
2
3
5 `  0
1d
Because the coefficient matrix for both systems of equations is the original matrix
A = c 1
2
3
5d ,
the calculations involved in the Gauss–Jordan elimination on the coefficient matrix A will 
be the same for both systems. Therefore, you can solve both systems at once by considering 
the “doubly augmented” matrix
C = c 1
2
3
5 `  1
0
0
1d .
Note that the matrix C is formed by adjoining the identity matrix I to matrix A:
C = 3A 0  I 4
Now apply Gauss–Jordan elimination to the matrix C.
C = c 1
2
3
5 `  1
0
0
1d  -3R1  + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S c 1
2
0
-1 `  1
0
-3
1d 1-12R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬S c 1
2
0
1 `  1
0
3
-1d
-2R2  + R1 S R1
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S c 1
0
0
1 `  -5
2
3
-1d
2	
Find the inverse of a matrix.
To use a graphing calculator to find 
the inverse of an invertible matrix, 
name the matrix and then use the 
regular reciprocal key with the name 
of the matrix.
Technology
Connection

830	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Converting the last matrix back into two systems of equations, we have
c 1
0
0
1 `  -5
3d  represents e1 # x + 0 # z = -5
0 # x + 1 # z = 3  or ex = -5
z = 3
Similarly,
c 1
0
0
1 `  2
-1d  represents e1 # y + 0 # w = 2
0 # y + 1 # w = -1 or e y = 2
w = -1
We conclude that x = -5, y = 2, z = 3, and w = -1.
Because B = c x
y
z
w d , it follows that
B = c -5
2
3
-1d = A-1.
You should check that AB = I.
We have shown that to find the inverse of an invertible matrix A, we transform the matrix 
3A   I4 by a sequence of elementary row operations into 3I   B4, where B = A-1.
P r o c e d u r e  f o r  F i n d i n g  t h e  I n v e r s e  o f  a  M at r i x
Let A be an n * n matrix.
1.	 Form the n * 2n augmented matrix 3A 0  I 4, where I is the n * n identity matrix.
2.	 If there is a sequence of elementary row operations that transforms A into I, then 
this same sequence of row operations will transform 3A 0  I 4 into 3I 0  B4, where 
B = A-1.
3.	 Check your work by showing that AA-1 = I.
If it is not possible to transform A into I by row operations, then A does not have an 
inverse. (This occurs if, at any step in the process, you obtain a matrix 3C 0  D4 in 
which C has a row of zeros.)
Find the inverse (if it exists) of the matrix A = C
1
2
3
2
5
7
2
4
6
S.
Solution
Step 1  Start by adjoining the identity matrix I = C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S  to the matrix A to
	
form the augmented matrix 3A 0  I 4.
3A   I 4 = C
1
2
3
2
5
7
2
4
6
 †  
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S
Step 2  Perform row operations on 3A 0  I 4 to transform it to a matrix of the form 3I 0  B4.
C
1
2
3
2
5
7
2
4
6
 †  
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S
-2R1 + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
-2R1 + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
C
1
2
3
0
1
1
0
0
0
 †  
1
0
0
-2
1
0
-2
0
1
S = 3C 0  D4
	
Because the third row of matrix C consists of zeros, it is impossible to trans-
form A into I by row operations. Hence, A is not invertible.
Finding the Inverse of a Matrix
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 9.3    ■    The Matrix Inverse 831
Practice Problem 3  Find the inverse (if it exists) of the matrix A = C
1
4
-2
-1
1
2
3
7
-6
S.
Find the inverse (if it exists) of the matrix A = C
1
1
0
0
3
1
2
3
3
S.
Solution
Step 1  Start with the matrix 3A   I 4:
3A   I 4 = C
1
1
0
0
3
1
2
3
3
 †  
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S     I = I3
Step 2  Use row operations on 3A   I 4. Then 3A   I 4 S
-2R1  + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
D
1
1
0
0
1
1
3
0
1
3
4  
1
0
0
0
1
3
0
-2
0
1
T
1-12R2  + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
E
1
1
0
0
1
1
3
0
0
8
3
 5
1
0
0
0
1
3
0
-2
-1
3
1
U
3
8R3
¬¬¬¬S
E
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
3
0
1
3
0
0
0
1
-6
8
-1
8
3
8
5
U
-1
3R3  + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S E
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
2
8
3
8
-1
8
0
0
1
-6
8
-1
8
3
8
5
U
1-12R2  + R1 S R1
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
F
1
0
0
6
8
-3
8
1
8
0
1
0
2
8
3
8
-1
8
0
0
1
-6
8
-1
8
3
8
6
V .
Hence, A is invertible and
A-1 = F
6
8
-3
8
1
8
2
8
3
8
-1
8
-6
8
-1
8
3
8
V = 1
8 C
6
-3
1
2
3
-1
-6
-1
3
S.
Step 3  You should verify that AA-1 = I.
Practice Problem 4  Find the inverse (if it exists) of the matrix A = C
1
2
3
-2
3
1
4
5
-2
S.
Finding the Inverse of a Matrix
EXAMPLE 4
1
3  R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S

832	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
A Rule for Finding the Inverse of a 2 : 2 Matrix
You can quickly determine whether any 2 * 2 matrix is invertible and, if so, what its in-
verse is.
3	
Find the inverse of a  
2 * 2 matrix.
The matrix
A = c a
b
c
dd
is invertible if and only if ad - bc ≠0. Moreover, if ad - bc ≠0, then
A-1 =
1
ad - bc c
d
-b
-c
ad .
If ad - bc = 0, the matrix A does not have an inverse.
A Rule for Finding the Inverse of a 2 : 2 Matrix
Find the inverse (if it exists) of each matrix.
a.	 A = c 5
2
4
3d       b.   B = c 4
6
2
3d
Solution
a.	 For the matrix A, a = 5, b = 2, c = 4, and d = 3. 
Here ad - bc = 152132 - 122142 = 15 - 8 = 7 ≠0; so A is invertible and
 A-1 = 1
7 c
3
-2
-4
5d     Substitute for a, b, c, and d in 
1
ad - bc c
d
-b
-c
ad .
 = D
3
7
-2
7
-4
7
5
7
T     Scalar multiplication
	
You should verify that AA-1 = I.
b.	 For the matrix B, a = 4, b = 6, c = 2, and d = 3; so
ad - bc = 142132 - 162122 = 12 - 12 = 0.
	
Therefore, the matrix B does not have an inverse.
Practice Problem 5  Find the inverse (if it exists) of each matrix.
a.	 A = c 8
2
4
1d       b.   B = c 8
-2
3
1d
Finding the Inverse of a 2 : 2 Matrix
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 9.3    ■    The Matrix Inverse 833
Solving Systems of Linear Equations  
by Using Matrix Inverses
Matrix multiplication can be used to write a system of linear equations in matrix form.
System of Equations
Matrix Form
e3x - 2y = 4
4x - 3y = 5
c 3
-2
4
-3d c x
yd = c 4
5d
c
2x1 + 4x2 -
x3 = 9
3x1 +
x2 + 2x3 = 7
x1 + 3x2 - 3x3 = 4
C
2
4
-1
3
1
2
1
3
-3
S C
x1
x2
x3
S = C
9
7
4
S
Solving a system of linear equations amounts to solving a corresponding matrix equation 
of the form
AX = B,
where A is the coefficient matrix of the system, X is the column matrix containing the 
variables, and B is the column matrix of the system’s constants.
If A is a square matrix and A is invertible, then the matrix equation AX = B has a 
unique solution, X = A-1B, as the following derivation shows.
 AX = B
    Given equation
 A-11AX2 = A-1B 
  Be careful to multiply by A-1 on the left on both  
sides of the equation because multiplication of  
matrices is not commutative.
 1A-1A2X = A-1B    Associative property
 IX = A-1B   
A-1A = I
 X = A-1B    I is the identity matrix, and IX = X.
4	
Use matrix inverses to solve 
systems of linear equations.
Use a matrix inverse to solve the linear system: c
x +
y
= 4
3y +
z = 7
2x + 3y + 3z = 21
Solution
Write the linear system in matrix form.
C
1
1
0
0
3
1
2
3
3
S C
x
y
z
S = C
4
7
21
S     Use zeros for coefficients of missing variables.
(+)+*
	
c	
c	
c
	
A	
X	
B
Solving a Linear System by Using an Inverse Matrix
EXAMPLE 6

834	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
We need to solve the matrix equation AX = B for X. Because the matrix A is invertible (see 
Example 4), the system has a unique solution X = A-1B. Use the following:
 A-1 = 1
8 C
6
-3
1
2
3
-1
-6
-1
3
S
    Computed in Example 4
 X = A-1B
 = 1
8 C
6
-3
1
2
3
-1
-6
-1
3
S C
4
7
21
S
    Substitute for A-1 and B.
 = 1
8 C
6142 - 3172 + 11212
2142 + 3172 - 11212
-6142 - 1172 + 31212
S     Matrix multiplication
 = 1
8 C
24
8
32
S = C
3
1
4
S
    Scalar multiplication
The solution set is 513, 1, 426, which you can check in the original system.
Practice Problem 6  Use a matrix inverse to solve the linear system.
c
3x + 2y + 3z = 9
3x +
y
= 12
x
+
z = 6
Applications of Matrix Inverses
The Leontief Input–Output Model  We can use the inverse of a matrix to 
analyze input–output models that we studied in Section 9.1.
Suppose a simplified economy depends on two products: energy 1E2 and food 1F2.
To produce 1 unit of E requires 1
4 unit of E and 1
2 unit of F. To produce 1 unit of F requires 
1
3 unit of E and 1
4 unit of F. Then the interindustry consumption is given by the following 
matrix.
E F
A = D
1
4
1
2
1
3
1
4
T
E
F
Output
The matrix A is the interindustry technology input–output matrix, or simply the technology 
matrix, of the system. If the system is producing x1 units of energy and x2 units of food, then 
the column matrix X = c x1
x2
d is called the gross production matrix.
Consequently,
AX = D
1
4
1
2
1
3
1
4
T c x1
x2
d = D
1
4 x1 + 1
2 x2
1
3 x1 + 1
4 x2
T
d units consumed by E
d units consumed by F
5	
Use matrix inverses in applied 
problems.
Input

	
Section 9.3    ■    The Matrix Inverse 835
represents the interindustry consumptions. If the column matrix D = c d1
d2
d represents consumer 
demand, then
 D = X - AX
    Gross production minus  
interindustry consumption
 = IX - AX
    I is the identity matrix.
 D = 1I - A2X
    Distributive property
 1I - A2-1D = 1I - A2-11I - A2X    Multiply both sides by  
1I - A2-1 if I - A is invertible.
 1I - A2-1D = IX
   
1I - A2-11I - A2 = I
 = X
    I is the identity matrix.
So if 1I - A2 is invertible, then the gross production matrix is X = 1I - A2-1D.
If ad - bc ≠0, then for 
A = c a
b
c
dd , we have
A-1 =
1
ad - bc c
d
-b
-c
ad .
Recall
In the preceding discussion, suppose the consumer demand for energy is 1000 units and 
for food is 3000 units. Find the level of production 1X2 that will meet interindustry and 
consumer demand.
Solution
For the matrix A, we have
I - A = c 1
0
0
1d - D
1
4
1
2
1
3
1
4
T = D
3
4
-1
2
-1
3
3
4
T.
Use the formula for the inverse of a 2 * 2 matrix.
 1I - A2-1 =
1
3
4 # 3
4 - a -1
2ba -1
3b
 D
3
4
1
2
1
3
3
4
T
 = 48
19D
3
4
1
2
1
3
3
4
T = 1
19c 36
24
16
36d
    Simplify.
The matrix D = c 1000
3000d . Therefore, the gross production matrix X is
 X = 1I - A2-1D = 1
19 c 36
24
16
36d c 1000
3000d
    Substitute for  
1I - A2-1 and D.
 = 1
19 c 108,000
124,000d = D
108,000
19
124,000
19
T.
To meet the consumer demand for 1000 units of energy and 3000 units of food, the energy 
produced must be 108,000
19
 units and food production must be 124,000
19
 units.
Practice Problem 7  In Example 7, find the level of production 1X2 that will meet  
both the interindustry and consumer demand if consumer demand for energy is  
800 units and consumer demand for food is 3400 units.
Using the Leontief Input–Output Model
EXAMPLE 7

836	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Cryptography
To encode or decode a message, first associate each letter in the message with a number, in 
the obvious manner. The blank corresponds to 0.
blank
  A
   B
   C
   D
   E
   F
   G
   H
   I
   J
   K
   L
   M
0
  1
   2
   3
   4
   5
   6
   7
   8
   9
   10
   11
   12
   13
  N
   O
   P
   Q
   R
   S
   T
   U
   V
   W
   X
   Y
   Z
  14
   15
   16
   17
   18
   19
   20
   21
   22
   23
   24
   25
   26
For example, the message
JOHNSON IS IN DANGER
becomes
10
15
8
14
19
15
14
0
9
19
0
9
14
0
4
1
14
7
5
18
J
O
H
N
S
O
N
I
S
I
N
D
A
N
G
E
R
This message is easy to decode, so we will make the coding more complicated. First, parti-
tion these 20 numbers into groups of three, enclosed in brackets, and insert zeros at the end 
of the last bracket if necessary.
310
15
84 314
19
154 314
0
94 319
0
94 314
0
44 31
14
74 35
18
04
J
O
H
 N
S
O 
N
I 
S
I 
N
D A
N
G E
R
Let’s write these seven groups of three numbers as the seven columns of a 3 * 7 matrix.
M = C
10
14
14
19
14
1
5
15
19
0
0
0
14
18
8
15
9
9
4
7
0
S
Now choose any invertible 3 * 3 matrix A, say,
A = C
1
2
3
1
3
3
1
2
4
S.
We can use the matrix A to convert the message into code and then use A-1 to decode the 
message, as in the next example. The matrix A is called the coding matrix.
Encode and decode the message
JOHNSON IS IN DANGER
by using the matrix A given above.
Solution
Step 1  Express the message numerically and partition the numbers into groups of three.
310   15   84 314   19   154 314   0   94 319   0   94 314   0   44 31   14   74 35   18   04
Step 2  Write each group of three numbers in Step 1 as a column of a matrix M.
M = C
10
14
14
19
14
1
5
15
19
0
0
0
14
18
8
15
9
9
4
7
0
S
Step 3  Select an invertible 3 * 3 matrix A, such as
A = C
1
2
3
1
3
3
1
2
4
S.
Encoding and Decoding a Message
EXAMPLE 8

	
Section 9.3    ■    The Matrix Inverse 837
Step 4  Multiply the matrices in Steps 2 and 3 to form AM.
 AM = C
1
2
3
1
3
3
1
2
4
S C
10
14
14
19
14
1
5
15
19
0
0
0
14
18
8
15
9
9
4
7
0
S
 = C
64
97
41
46
26
50
41
79
116
41
46
26
64
59
72
112
50
55
30
57
41
S    
Matrix  
multiplication
The coded message sent will be the numbers from column 1 of AM, followed 
by the ­numbers from column 2, and so on.
64 79 72 97 116 112 41 41 50 46 46 55 26 26 30 50 64 57 41 59 41
Step 5  To decode the message in Step 4, write the numbers received in the message 
in groups of three and as columns of the matrix AM. Find the decoding  
matrix A-1 of the coding matrix A. You can verify that
A-1 = C
6
-2
-3
-1
1
0
-1
0
1
S.
Step 6  Compute the message matrix M.
 M = A-11AM2 = C
6
-2
-3
-1
1
0
-1
0
1
S C
64
97
41
46
26
50
41
79
116
41
46
26
64
59
72
112
50
55
30
57
41
S
 = C
10
14
14
19
14
1
5
15
19
0
0
0
14
18
8
15
9
9
4
7
0
S     Matrix 
multiplication
Step 7  Finally, convert the numerical message from the matrix M in Step 6 back 
into English.
JOHNSON IS IN DANGER
Practice Problem 8  Rework Example 8, replacing the message JOHNSON IS IN ­ 
DANGER with the message JACK IS NOW SAFE.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. c 3
2
2
1d c -1
2
2
-3d = c 1
0
0
1d
2. c 3x + z
3y + w
3x + z
3y + wd ≠c 1
0
0
1d
because this implies that 1 = 3x + z = 0, which is false.
3. The inverse of matrix A does not exist.
4. A-1 = F
1
7
- 19
77
1
11
0
2
11
1
11
2
7
- 3
77
- 1
11
V
5. a. The inverse of matrix A does not exist;
b. B -1 = D
1
14
1
7
- 3
14
4
7
T     6. ea11
2 , - 9
2, 1
2b f    7. X = D
110,400
19
135,200
19
T
8. AM = C
1
2
3
1
3
3
1
2
4
S C
10
11
19
15
19
5
1
0
0
23
1
0
3
9
14
0
6
0
S
           = C
21
38
61
61
39
5
22
38
61
84
40
5
24
47
75
61
45
5
S

838	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
Exercises
section 9.3 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 For n * n matrices A and B, if AB = I = BA, then B is 
called the 
 of A.
	 2.	 An n * n matrix A is invertible if there is a matrix B such 
that 
 = I.
	 3.	 To find the inverse of an invertible matrix A, we transform 
3A   I 4 by a sequence of row operations into 3I   B4, where 
B =  
.
	 4.	 A = c a
b
c
dd  is invertible if and only if 
.
	 5.	 True or False. Every square matrix is invertible. 
	 6.	 True or False. A = c 8
16
4
8 d  is invertible. 
In Exercises 7–16, determine whether B is the inverse of A by 
computing AB and BA.
	 7.	 A = c 1
2
1
3d , B = c
3
-2
-1
1d 
	 8.	 A = c 3
2
4
3d , B = c
3
-2
-4
3d 
	 9.	 A = c 3
2
1
4d , B = D
2
5
- 1
5
- 1
10
3
10
T 
	10.	 A = c 2
-3
4
-3d , B = D
- 1
2
1
2
- 2
3
1
3
T 
	11.	 A = c
1
0
-1
-1
1
1d , B = C
2
1
1
1
1
1
S 
	12.	 A = C
-2
1
3
0
-1
1
1
2
0
S, B = 1
8C
-2
6
4
1
-3
2
1
5
2
S 
	13.	 A = C
1
-2
1
-8
6
-2
5
-3
1
S, B = 1
2C
0
1
2
1
2
3
3
1
1
S 
	14.	 A = C
2
3
1
1
2
3
3
1
2
S, B = 1
18C
1
-5
7
7
1
-5
-5
7
1
S 
	15.	 A = C
1
1
1
1
2
3
-1
1
-1
S, B = 1
4C
5
-2
-1
2
0
2
-3
2
-1
S 
	16.	 A = C
1
-1
0
0
1
-1
1
0
1
S, B = 1
2C
1
1
1
-1
1
1
-1
-1
1
S 
In Exercises 17–26, find A−1 (if it exists) by forming the 
matrix 3A ∣ I4 and using row operation to obtain 3I ∣ B4, 
where B = A−1.
	17.	 A = c 2
0
1
3d 
	
18.	 A = c 4
3
1
0d 
	19.	 A = c 2
4
3
6d 
	 20.	 A = c 9
6
6
4d 
	21.	 A = C
1
6
4
0
2
3
0
1
2
S 
	
22.	 A = C
2
0
-1
5
1
0
0
1
3
S
	23.	 A = C
2
3
1
2
4
1
3
7
2
S 	
24.	 A = C
1
1
5
4
3
-5
1
1
0
S 
	25.	 A = C
3
-3
4
2
-3
4
0
-1
1
S 	
26.	 A = C
1
2
-2
-1
3
0
0
-2
1
S
In Exercises 27–32, find the inverse (if it exists) of A = c a
b
c
dd  
by using the formula A−1 =
1
ad - bc c
d
−b
−c
ad . Check that 
A−1A = I.
	27.	 A = c 1
0
3
2d 
	
28.	 A = c 3
4
5
6d 
	29.	 A = c
2
-3
-3
5d 
	
30.	 A = c 3
-4
2
-2d 
	31.	 A = c a
-b
b
-ad , a2 ≠b2 
	32.	 A = c 2
-1
1
-1d 
In Exercises 33–36, write the given linear system of equations as 
a matrix equation AX = B.
	33.	 e2x + 3y = -9
x - 3y =  13 
	
34.	 e5x - 4y = 7
4x - 3y = 5 
	35.	 c
3x + 2y +
z = 8
2x +
y + 3z = 7
x + 3y + 2z = 9 
	
36.	 c
x + 3y +
z =
4
x - 5y + 2z =
7
3x +
y - 4z = -9 
In Exercises 37–40, write each matrix equation as a linear 
system of equations.
	37.	 c 1
-2
2
1d c x
yd = c 0
5d 
	
38.	 c 2
3
3
-1d c x1
x2
d = c 0
11d 
	39.	 C
2
3
1
5
7
-1
4
3
0
S C
x1
x2
x3
S = C
-1
5
5
S 
	40.	 C
3
-2
3
5
0
4
2
7
0
S C
r
s
t
S = C
4
3
-8
S        

	
Section 9.3    ■    The Matrix Inverse 839
	41.	 Let A = C
1
2
5
2
3
8
-1
1
2
S. Show that A-1 = C
2
-1
-1
12
-7
-2
-5
3
1
S.
	54.	 Sandwich sales. The Fresh Sandwich specializes in  
chicken, fish, and ham sandwiches. In April, May, and  
June 2012, they sold the following quantities.
Sales Volume in Hundreds
April
May
June
Chicken
      8
      7
    4
Fish
    11
      8
    6
Ham
      6
      7
    3
Monthly revenue, in ­hundreds, 
from the sales of these 
­sandwiches
$164
$141
$86
Find the selling price of each of the three types of 
­sandwiches. 
	55.	 Euler’s formula. A plane graph connects points called 
­vertices with nonintersecting lines called edges and divides 
the plane into regions. The accompanying figure has seven 
vertices, nine edges, and four regions. Euler’s theorem states 
that in a plane graph,
V - E + R = 2,
where  V = the number of vertices,
	
E = the number of edges, and
	
R = the number of regions.
In a certain plane graph, twice 
the number of edges is three 
times the number of vertices 
and twice the number of regions 
is one less than the number 
of edges. Find the number of 
­vertices, edges, and regions for 
this graph. Sketch a plane graph 
that satisfies the conditions of this 
­exercise.  
	56.	 Projectile. On a planet, the height h of a projectile fired up 
from an initial height h0 with initial vertical velocity of v0 ft>sec 
	
	 after t seconds is given by h = 1
2 at2 + v0 t + h0, where a is 
	
	 the gravitational constant. The following measurements were 
recorded.
Time t in seconds
1
2
3
Height h in feet
100
92
76
a.	 Find the initial height. 
b.	 Find the height of the projectile after 2.5 seconds. 
In Exercises 57–60, technology matrix A, representing inter-
industry demand, and matrix D, representing consumer 
demand for the sectors in a two- or three-sector economy, are 
given. Use the matrix equation X = 1I −A2−1D to find the 
production level X that will satisfy both demands.
	57.	 Two-sector economy. In a two-sector economy,
A = c 0.1
0.4
0.5
0.2d , D = c 50
30d .  
In Exercises 42–44, use the result of Exercise 41 to solve the 
system of equations.
	42.	 c
x + 2y + 5z = 4
2x + 3y + 8z = 6
-x +
y + 2z = 3 
	
43.	 c
 x1 + 2x2 + 5x3 =
1
2x1 + 3x2 + 8x3 =
3
-x1 +
x2 + 2x3 = -3
	44.	 d
x + 2y + 5z = -4 
2x + 3y + 8z = -6 
-x +
y + 2z = - 5
2 
	45.	 a.  Find the inverse of the matrix A = C
1
1
1
1
2
3
1
4
9
S. 
b.  Use the result of part (a) to solve the linear system.
c
x +
y +
z =
6
x + 2y + 3z = 14
x + 4y + 9z = 36
 
	46.	 a.  Find the inverse of the matrix A = C
2
4
-1
3
1
2
1
3
-3
S. 
b.  Use the result of part (a) to solve the linear system.
c
2x + 4y -
z = 9
3x +
y + 2z = 7
x + 3y - 3z = 4
 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 47–52, solve each linear system by using an 
inverse matrix.
	47.	 e
3x + 7y = 11
-5x + 4y = 13 
	48.	e x - 7y =
3
2x + 3y = 23 
	49.	 c
x +
y + 2z =
7
x -
y - 3z = -6
2x + 3y +
z =
4
	
50.	 c
x +
y +
z =
6
2x - 3y + 3z =
5
3x - 2y -
z = -4
	51.	 c
2x + 2y + 3z =
7
5x + 3y + 5z =
3
3x + 5y +
z = -5
	
52.	 c
9x + 7y + 4z = 12
6x + 5y + 4z =
5
4x + 3y +
z =
7
In Exercises 53–56, use the method presented in this section to 
solve the problem.
	53.	 Investment. At the beginning of 2012, Liz decided to invest 
$90,000, splitting it three different ways. Part of the money 
she invested in a treasury bill that yields 3% annual interest, 
she invested another part in bonds with an annual yield 7%, 
and the rest she invested in a mutual fund that estimated an 
annual interest rate of 8%. Liz expected her net income for 
2012 to be $5920. Unfortunately, the mutual fund lost 11% 
of its assets during the year so that Liz received only $980 
income from all three investments combined. How much 
money did Liz put in each investment?      
R1
R2
R3
R4

840	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
	58.	 Two-sector economy. In a two-sector economy,
A = c 0.2
0.5
0.1
0.6d , D = c 11
18d .
	59.	 Three-sector economy. In a three-sector economy,
A = C
0.2
0.2
0
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
0
0.2
S, D = C
400
600
800
S. 
	60.	 Three-sector economy. In a three-sector economy,
A = C
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.3
S, D = C
500
300
200
S.
In Exercises 61 and 62, use a 2 : 2 invertible coding matrix A 
of your choice. Remember to partition the numerical message 
into groups of two. (a) Write a cryptogram for each message.  
(b) Check by decoding.
	61.	 Coding and decoding. CANNOT FIND COLOMBO.
	62.	 Coding and decoding. FOUND HEAD OF TERRORIST 
NETWORK.
In Exercises 63 and 64, use a 3 : 3 invertible coding matrix A 
of your choice.
	63.	 Code and then decode the message of Exercise 61.
	64.	 Code and then decode the message of Exercise 62.
Beyond the Basics
	65.	 Suppose A is an invertible square matrix.
a.	 Is A-1 invertible? Why or why not?
b.	 If your answer to part (a) is yes, then what is 1A-12-1?
	66.	 Let A-1 = c 2
1
3
-4d . Find A.
	67.	 Let A be a square matrix. Show that if A2 is invertible, then A 
must be invertible. [Hint: A2B = A1AB2.]
	68.	 Show that if A is invertible, then A2 is invertible.
	69.	 Show that if A and B are n * n invertible matrices, then AB 
is invertible and 1AB2-1 = B -1A-1. (Note the order.)
	70.	 Verify the result of Exercise 69 for
A = c 1
2
3
4d , B = c -1
0
3
-2d .
	71.	 Let A, B, and C be n * n matrices such that AB = AC. 
Show that if A is invertible, then B = C.
	72.	 Is the result of Exercise 71 true if A is not invertible?
	73.	 Let A and B be n * n matrices such that AB = A. Show that 
if A is invertible, then B = I.
	74.	 Give an example to show that the result of Exercise 73 is not 
true if A is not invertible.
	75.	 Let A = c 3
4
2
3d .
a.	 Show that the matrix A satisfies the equation
A2 - 6A + I = 0.
b.	 Use the equation in part (a) to show that A-1 = 6I - A.
c.	 Use the equation in part (b) to find A-1.
	76.	 Let A = C
2
-1
1
-1
2
-1
1
-1
2
S.
a.	 Show that A satisfies the equation 
A3 - 6A2 + 9A - 4I = 0.
b.	 Use the equation in part (a) to show that
A-1 = 1
4 1A2 - 6A + 9I2.
	
[Hint: Consider the product 1
4 1A2 - 6A + 9I2A.]
c.	 Use part (b) to find A-1. 
In Exercises 77 and 78, use your graphing utility to find the 
inverse of the coefficient matrix. Then use the inverse to solve 
each linear system.
	77.	 d
x - y - z - w = -4
x + y + z - w =
2
2x + y + z - w =
3
x - y + z - w = -2
	78.	 d
x + y + z -
w = 1
x - y - z +
w = 1
x - y + z + 3w = 1
x + y + z +
w = 3
	79.	 Suppose A and B are 2 * 2 matrices and B -1 = c 1
2
3
4d .
Find A
a.	 If AB = c -1
3
0
2d . 
b.	 If BA = c -1
3
0
2d . 
c.	 If BAB -1 = c 1
1
1
2d .
d.	 If B -1AB = c 1
1
1
2d .
	80.	 a.  Is the matrix c x
-1
2
x + 2d  invertible for all real numbers x?
b.	 Is the matrix c x - 1
-1
3
x - 5d  invertible for all real 
	
­numbers x? 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	81.	 True or False. Justify your answers.
a.	 If A and B are matrices for which AB = BA, then the 
formula A2B = BA2 must hold.
b.	 If A and B are invertible matrices, then A + B must be 
invertible.                 

	
Section 9.3    ■    The Matrix Inverse 841
	82.	 Give an example of a nonzero 2 * 2 matrix A such that 
A2 = 0. Show that the matrix I + A is invertible and that 
1I + A2-1 = I - A.
	83.	 Is it true that every nonsingular matrix is a square matrix? 
Why or why not? 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 84–87, state whether each expression is equal to 
1 or −1.
	84.	 1-120 
	
85.	 1-1210 
	86.	 1-1217 
	
87.	 1-126+9      
In Exercises 88–91, perform the indicated operation.
	88.	 3-1, 44 c 2
3d 
	
89.	 c -1
-3d 35, 04 
	90.	 3c 7
1
5
-2d 
	
91.	 1-12c -6
7
4
-1d
In Exercises 92–95, solve each system of equations.
	92.	 c 2x - 3y = 16
x - y = 7 
	 93.	 c 16x -
9y = -5
10x + 18y = -11
	94.	 c
x - y + 5z = -6
3x + 3y - z = 10
x + 3y + 2z = 5
	
95.	 c
2x - y + 2z = 3
2x + 2y - z = 0
-x + 2y + 2z = -12  

842	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
9.4
The Determinant of a 2 : 2 Matrix
Associated with each square matrix A is a number called the determinant of A.
1	
Calculate the determinant  
of a 2 * 2 matrix.
A Little History of Determinants
It appears that determinants were first investigated in 1683 by the outstanding 
­Japanese mathematician Seki Köwa in connection with systems of linear equations. 
Determinants were independently investigated in 1693 by the German ­mathematician 
Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716). The French mathematician Alexandre-Théophile 
­Vandermonde (1735–1796) was the first to give a coherent and systematic exposition 
of the theory of determinants. Determinants were used extensively in the 19th century 
by eminent mathematicians such as Cauchy, Jacobi, and Kronecker. Today determinants 
are of little numerical value in the large-scale matrix computations that occur so often. 
­Nevertheless, a knowledge of determinants is useful in some applications of matrices.
Determinants and Cramer’s Rule
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Definition of a matrix (Section 9.1,  
page 799)
2	 Systems of equations (Section 8.1,  
page 728)
Objectives
1	 Calculate the determinant  
of a 2 * 2 matrix.
2	 Find minors and cofactors.
3	 Evaluate the determinant  
of an n * n matrix.
4	 Apply Cramer’s Rule.
S e c t i o n 
Seki Köwa (1642–1708)
Seki Köwa has been called “the 
Japanese Newton.” He was born in the 
same year as Newton. Like Newton, 
he acquired much of his knowledge by 
self-study and was a brilliant problem 
solver. But the greatest similarity 
between the two men lies in the claim 
that Seki Kowa was the creator of 
yenri (calculus). Thus, Seki Köwa prob-
ably invented the calculus in the East 
just as Newton and Leibniz invented 
the calculus in the West.
A determinant can be thought of as 
a function whose domain is the set 
of all square matrices and whose 
range is the set of real numbers.
Side  
Note
The determinant of a 2 * 2 matrix
A = c a
b
c
dd ,
denoted by det1A2,  A, or ` a
b
c
d ` , is called the 2 by 2 determinant of A and is 
defined by
det1A2 = ad - bc.
Determinant of a 2 : 2 Matrix

	
Section 9.4    ■    Determinants and Cramer’s Rule 843
Minors and Cofactors
To define the determinants of square matrices of order 3 or higher, we need some additional 
terminology.
2	
Find minors and cofactors.
To remember this definition, note that you form products along diagonal elements as 
shown by the arrows.
c a
b
c
dd
-bc +ad
You attach a plus sign if you descend from left to right and a minus sign if you descend 
from right to left. Then you form the sum ad - bc.
bR
Note carefully the notations used for matrices and determinants. Brackets, [ ], denote a  
matrix, the vertical bars, 0  0 , denote the determinant of a matrix. These bars are not  
the same as the absolute value bars. Remember that the determinant of a matrix is  
a number that may be positive, negative, or zero.
Warning
Evaluate each determinant.
a.	 ` 3
-4
1
5 ` 	
b.	 ` -2
3
4
-5 `
Solution
a.	 ` 3
-4
1
5 ` = 132152 - 1-42112 = 15 - 1-42 = 15 + 4 = 19
b.	 ` -2
3
4
-5 ` = 1-221-52 - 132142 = 10 - 12 = -2
Practice Problem 1  Evaluate each determinant.
a.	 ` 5
1
3
-7 ` 	
b.	 `
2
-9
-4
18 `
Calculating the Determinant of a 2 : 2 Matrix
EXAMPLE 1
Signs of cofactors
E
+
-
+
-
g
-
+
-
+
g
+
-
+
-
g
-
+
-
+
g
f
f
f
f
U
Note how the positions where 
i + j is even alternate with those 
where i + j is odd.
Side  
Note
Let A be an n * n square matrix. The minor Mij of the element aij is the determi-
nant of the 1n - 12 * 1n - 12 matrix obtained by deleting the ith row and the  
jth column of A. The cofactor Aij of the entry aij is defined by
Aij = 1-12i+jMij.
Minors and Cofactors in an n : n Matrix
When i + j is an even integer, 1-12i+j = 1. When i + j is an odd integer, 1-12i+j = -1.  
Therefore,
Aij = e
Mij if i + j is an even integer
-Mij if i + j is an odd integer.
Notice that to compute a minor in an n * n matrix, you must know how to compute the 
determinant of an 1n - 12 * 1n - 12 matrix. At this point in the text, because you have 
learned the definition of the determinant of a 2 * 2 matrix, you can find the minors and 
cofactors of entries in a 3 * 3 matrix.

844	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
For the matrix A = C
2
3
4
5
-3
-6
0
1
7
S, find the following.
a.	 The minors M11, M23, and M32
b.	 The cofactors A11, A23, and A32
Solution
a. (i)    To find M11, delete the first row and first column of the matrix A.
C
2
3
4
5
-3
-6
0
1
7
S
Now find the determinant of the resulting matrix.
M11 = ` -3
-6
1
7 ` = 1-32172 - 1-62112 = -21 + 6 = -15
	 (ii)   To find the minor M23, delete the second row and third column of the matrix A.
C
2
3
4
5
-3
-6
0
1
7
S
Now find the determinant of the resulting matrix.
M23 = ` 2
3
0
1 ` = 122112 - 132102 = 2
	 (iii)  To find M32, delete the third row and second column of A.
C
2
3
4
5
-3
-6
0
1
7
S
So M32 = ` 2
4
5
-6 ` = 1221-62 - 142152 = -12 - 20 = -32.
b.	 To find the cofactors, use the formula Aij = 1-12i+j Mij.
	
A11 = 1-121+1 M11 = 1121-152 = -15 
1-121+1 = 1-122 = 1; M11 = -15
	
A23 = 1-122+3M23 = 1-12122 = -2
 
1-122+3 = 1-125 = -1; M23 = 2
	
A32 = 1-123+2M32 = 1-121-322 = 32  
1-123+2 = 1-125 = -1; M32 = -32
Practice Problem 2  For the matrix A = C
3
-1
2
4
5
6
7
1
2
S, find the following.
a.	 The minors M11, M23, and M32
b.	 The cofactors A11, A23, and A32
Finding Minors and Cofactors
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 9.4    ■    Determinants and Cramer’s Rule 845
The Determinant of an n : n Matrix
There are several ways of defining the determinant of a square matrix. Here we give an 
inductive definition. This means that the definition of the determinant of a matrix of order 
n uses the determinants of the matrices of order 1n - 12.
3	
Evaluate the determinant  
of an n * n matrix.
Let A be a square matrix of order n Ú 3. The determinant of A is the sum of the 
entries in any row of A (or column of A) multiplied by their respective cofactors.
n by n Determinant
Use the Det option on a graphing 
calculator to find the determinant 
of a matrix.
Technology
Connection
Applying the preceding definition to find the determinant of a matrix is called expanding 
by cofactors. Expanding by the cofactors of the ith row gives
det1A2 = ai1Ai1 + ai2Ai2 + g + ainAin.
Similarly, expanding by the cofactors of the jth column yields
det1A2 = a1jA1j + a2jA2j + g + anjAnj.
We usually say “expanding by the ith row (column)” instead of “expanding by the cofactors 
of the ith row (column).”
Find the determinant of A = C
2
3
4
1
-2
2
3
4
-1
S.
Solution
Expanding by the first row, we have 0 A0 = a11A11 + a12A12 + a13A13 where
 A11 = 1-121+1M11 = 112 ` -2
2
4
-1 `
 A12 = 1-121+2M12 = 1-12 ` 1
2
3
-1 `
 A13 = 1-121+3M13 = 112 ` 1
-2
3
4 ` .
Thus,
†
2
3
4
1
-2
2
3
4
-1
† = 2112 ` -2
2
4
-1 ` + 31-12 ` 1
2
3
-1 ` + 4112 ` 1
-2
3
4 `
= 212 - 82 - 31-1 - 62 + 414 + 62    Evaluate determi-
nants of order 2.
= -12 + 21 + 40 = 49
    Simplify.
Practice Problem 3  Find the determinant of A = C
2
-3
7
-2
-1
9
0
2
-9
S.
Evaluating a 3 by 3 Determinant
EXAMPLE 3

846	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
The definition says that we can expand the determinant by any row or column. If we 
expand by the third column of A in Example 3, we have
 †
2
3
4
1
-2
2
3
4
-1
† = 4112 ` 1
-2
3
4 ` + 21-12 ` 2
3
3
4 ` + 1-12112 ` 2
3
1
-2 `
 = 414 + 62 - 218 - 92 - 11-4 - 32
 = 40 + 2 + 7 = 49.
Some properties of determinants are discussed in Exercises 70–73. They are useful in eval-
uating determinants (see Exercise 74).
Cramer’s Rule
You have already learned several methods for solving a system of linear equations. Another 
method called Cramer’s Rule uses determinants. To see a derivation of the rule, consider 
a system of two linear equations in two variables.
ea1x + b1y = c1 (1)
a2x + b2y = c2 (2)
We can solve this system by using the elimination method. Let’s first eliminate y and solve 
for x.
 a1b2x + b1b2y = c1b2
    Multiply equation (1) by b2
 -a2b1x - b1b2y = -c2b1
	
Multiply equation (2) by -b1.
 1a1b2 - a2b12x = c1b2 - c2b1 	
Add to eliminate y.
 x = c1b2 - c2b1
a1b2 - a2b1
    Divide both sides by a1b2 - a2b1 if 
a1b2 - a2b1 ≠0.
Similarly, by eliminating x and solving for y, we have
y = a1c2 - a2c1
a1b2 - a2b1
    if a1b2 - a2b1 ≠0
The solution of the system of equations (1) and (2) is therefore given by
x = c1b2 - c2b1
a1b2 - a2b1
 , y = a1c2 - a2c1
a1b2 - a2b1 provided that a1b2 - a2b1 ≠0.
You can write the solution in the form of determinants:
x =
` c1
b1
c2
b2
`
` a1
b1
a2
b2
`
 , y =
` a1
c1
a2
c2
`
` a1
b1
a2
b2
` provided that D = ` a1
b1
a2
b2
` = a1b2 - a2b1 ≠0.
Note that the denominator of both the x- and y-values in the solution is the determinant D 
of the coefficient matrix of the linear system.
Suppose we write Dx = ` c1
b1
c2
b2
`  and Dy = ` a1
c1
a2
c2
` , which are obtained by ­replacing 
the column containing the coefficients of x in D and the column containing the coefficients 
of y in D with the column of constants, respectively. Then the solution just found can be 
written as
x = Dx
D
 , y =
Dy
D provided that D ≠0.
This representation of the solution is Cramer’s Rule for solving a system of linear equations.
4	
Apply Cramer’s Rule.
In the definition, we note that the 
value det1A2 does not depend on 
the choice of a row or a column. 
The proof of this fact is outside the 
scope of this book.
Side  
Note

	
Section 9.4    ■    Determinants and Cramer’s Rule 847
Cramer’s Rule, as used in Example 4, can be generalized to a system of equations with 
more than two variables. We state the rule for three equations in three variables.
Gabriel Cramer was 
one of three sons of 
a medical doctor in 
Geneva, Switzerland. 
Gabriel moved rap-
idly through his education in Geneva, 
and in 1722, while he was still 18 years 
old, he was awarded a PhD degree. 
Two years later he accepted the chair 
of mathematics at the Académie de 
Clavin in Geneva.
Cramer taught and traveled exten-
sively and yet found time to produce 
articles and books covering a wide 
range of subjects. Although Cramer  
was not the first person to state  
the rule, it is universally known as 
“Cramer’s Rule.”
Gabriel Cramer  
(1704–1752)
C r a m e r ’ s  R u l e  f o r  S o lv i n g  T w o  E q u at i o n s  
i n  T w o  Va r i a b l e s
The system
ea1x + b1y = c1
a2x + b2y = c2
of two equations in two variables has a unique solution 1x, y2 given by
x = Dx
D and y =
Dy
D
provided that D ≠0, where
D = ` a1
b1
a2
b2
` , Dx = ` c1
b1
c2
b2
` , and Dy = ` a1
c1
a2
c2
` .
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system: e5x + 4y = 1
2x + 3y = 6
Solution
Step 1  Form the determinant D of the coefficient matrix.
D = ` 5
4
2
3 ` = 15 - 8 = 7
Because D = 7 ≠0, the system has a unique solution.
Step 2  Replace the column of coefficients of x in D with the constant terms to get
Dx = ` 1
4
6
3 ` = 3 - 24 = -21.
Step 3  Replace the column of coefficients of y in D with the constant terms to get
Dy = ` 5
1
2
6 ` = 30 - 2 = 28.
Step 4  By Cramer’s Rule,
x = Dx
D = -21
7
= -3 and y =
Dy
D = 28
7 = 4.
The solution is x = -3 and y = 4, or 51-3, 426.
Check: 	
You should check the solution in the original system.
Practice Problem 4  Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the following system:
e2x + 3y = 7
5x + 9y = 4
Using Cramer’s Rule
EXAMPLE 4

848	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
C r a m e r ’ s  R u l e  f o r  S o lv i n g  T h r e e  E q u at i o n s  
i n  T h r e e  Va r i a b l e s
The system
c
a1x + b1y + c1z = k1
a2x + b2y + c2z = k2
a3x + b3y + c3z = k3
of three equations in three variables has a unique solution 1x, y, z2 given by
x = Dx
D
 , y =
Dy
D
 , and z =
Dz
D
provided that D ≠0, where
D = 3
a1
b1
c1
a2
b2
c2
a3
b3
c3
3 , Dx = 3
k1
b1
c1
k2
b2
c2
k3
b3
c3
3 , Dy = 3
a1
k1
c1
a2
k2
c2
a3
k3
c3
3 , and Dz = 3
a1
b1
k1
a2
b2
k2
a3
b3
k3
3 .
When you apply Cramer’s Rule, 
make sure that all linear equations 
are written in the form
ax + by + cz = k.
Side  
Note
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system of equations.
c
7x +
y +
z - 1 = 0
5x + 3z - 2y = 4
4x -
z + 3y = 0
Solution
First, rewrite the system of equations so that the terms on the left side of the equal sign are 
in the proper order and only the constant terms appear on the right side.
c
7x +
y +
z = 1
5x - 2y + 3z = 4
4x + 3y -
z = 0
Step 1 
 D = †
7
1
1
5
-2
3
4
3
-1
†
    D is the determinant of 
the coefficient matrix.
 = 7 ` -2
3
3
-1 ` - 5 ` 1
1
3
-1 ` + 4 `
1
1
-2
3 `     Expand by column 1.
 = 712 - 92 - 51-1 - 32 + 413 + 22
    Evaluate determinants  
of order 2.
 = 71-72 - 51-42 + 4152 = -9
    Simplify.
Because D ≠0, the system has a unique solution.
Step 2 
 Dx = †
1
1
1
4
-2
3
0
3
-1
†
 
Replace the x-coefficients 
in the first column in D 
with the constants.
 = 1 ` -2
3
3
-1 ` - 4 ` 1
1
3
-1 ` + 0 `
1
1
-2
3 `   Expand by column 1.
 = 112 - 92 - 41-1 - 32
  Evaluate determinants of 
order 2.
 = 11-72 - 41-42 = 9
  Simplify.
Using Cramer’s Rule
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 9.4    ■    Determinants and Cramer’s Rule 849
Step 3 
 Dy = †
7
1
1
5
4
3
4
0
-1
†
    Replace column 2 in D 
with the constants.
 = -1 ` 5
3
4
-1 ` + 4 ` 7
1
4
-1 ` - 0 ` 7
1
5
3 `     Expand by column 2 
­because it contains a zero.
 = -11-5 - 122 + 41-7 - 42
    Evaluate the determinants.
 = 17 - 44 = -27
    Simplify.
Step 4 
 Dz = †
7
1
1
5
-2
4
4
3
0
†
    Replace column 3 in D with 
the constants.
 = 1 ` 5
-2
4
3 ` - 4 ` 7
1
4
3 ` + 0 ` 7
1
5
-2 `     Expand by column 3.
 = 115 + 82 - 4121 - 42
    Evaluate the determinants.
 = 23 - 41172 = -45
    Simplify.
Step 5 
Cramer’s Rule gives the following values:
 x = Dx
D =
9
-9 = -1    From Steps 1 and 2
 y =
Dy
D = -27
-9 = 3     From Steps 1 and 3
 z =
Dz
D = -45
-9 = 5     From Steps 1 and 4
The solution set is therefore 51-1, 3, 526.
Check:  You should check the solution.
Practice Problem 5  Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system.
c
3x + 2y + z = 4
4x + 3y + z = 5
5x +
y + z = 9
It is important to note that Cramer’s Rule does not apply if D = 0. In this case, the system is ­either 
consistent and has dependent equations (has infinitely many solutions) or inconsistent (has no solu-
tion). When D = 0, use a different method for solving systems of equations to find the solution set.
Warning
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. -38  b. 0    2. a. M11 = 4, M23 = 10, M32 = 10
b. A11 = 4, A23 = -10, A32 = -10    3. 8
4. 5117, -926    5. 512, -1, 026
Exercises
section 9.4 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The determinant of c a
b
c
dd  is 
.
	 2.	 The minor of an element is the determinant you get by ­deleting 
the 
 and the 
 ­containing that 
element.
	 3.	 To expand an n * n determinant, you multiply each element of 
some row (or column) by its 
 and add the result.
	 4.	 A system of n linear equations in n variables has a unique 
solution provided the determinant of the 
 is 
not zero.  

850	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
	31.	 †
0
1
6
1
0
4
8
3
1
† 
	
32.	 †
0
2
3
1
0
1
3
2
0
† 
	33.	 †
a
b
0
0
a
b
b
0
a
† 
	
34.	 †
0
z
y
z
0
x
y
x
0
† 
	35.	 †
a
b
c
c
a
b
b
c
a
† 	
36.	 †
u
v
w
w
v
u
u
v
w
† 
In Exercises 37–46, use Cramer’s Rule (if applicable) to solve 
each system of equations.
	37.	 ex + y = 8
x - y = -2 
	
38.	 e4x + 3y = -1
2x - 5y = 9
	39.	 e5x + 3y = 11
2x +
y = 4 
	
40.	 e2x - 7y = 13
5x + 6y = 9 
	41.	 e2x + 9y = 4
3x - 2y = 6 
	
42.	 e5x + 3y = 1
2x - 5y = -12
	43.	 e2x - 3y = 4
4x - 6y = 8	
44.	 e3x +
y = 2
6x + 2y = 4
	45.	 d
2
x + 3
y = 2
5
x + 8
y = 31
6 
	
46.	 d
3
x - 6
y = 2
4
x + 7
y = -3
c Hint: For Exercises 45 and 46, let u = 1
x and v = 1
y.d
In Exercises 47–56, solve each system of equations by means 
of Cramer’s Rule. You may use technology to compute the 
determinants involved.
	47.	 c
x - 2y + z = -1
3x +
y - z = 4
 
y + z = 1
	
48.	 c
x + 3y = 4
y + 3z = 7
z + 4x = 6 
	49.	 c
x +
y - z = -3
2x + 3y + z = 2
2y + z = 1
	
50.	 c
3x +
y + z = 10
x +
y - z = 0
5x - 9y
= 1
	51.	 c
x +
y +
z = 3
2x - 3y + 5z = 4
x + 2y - 4z = -1
	
52.	 c
x + 2y - z = 3
3x -
y + z = 8
x +
y + z = 0
	53.	 c
2x - 3y + 5z =  11
3x + 5y - 2z = 7
x + 2y - 3z = -4
	
54.	 c
x - 3y
- 1 = 0
2x -
y - 4z
= 2
y + 2z - 4 = 0
	55.	 c
5x + 2y +
z = 12
2x +
y + 3z = 13
3x + 2y + 4z = 19
	
56.	 c
2x +
y +
z = 7
3x -
y -
z = -2
x + 2y - 3z = -4
Applying the Concepts
It is known that the area of a triangle with vertices 1x1, y12, 
1x2, y22, and 1x3, y32 is equal to the absolute value of D, where
D = 1
2 †
x1
y1
1
x2
y2
1
x3
y3
1
† .
	 5.	 True or False. A 2 by 2 determinant is always positive. 
	 6.	 True or False. To expand an n * n determinant, you ­multiply 
each element of some row by its minor and add the result. 
In Exercises 7–16, evaluate each determinant.
	 7.	 ` 2
3
4
5 ` 
	
8.	 ` 3
-5
1
4 ` 
	 9.	 ` 4
-2
3
-3 ` 
	
10.	 † -2
1
2
3
1
† 
	11.	 ` -1
-3
-4
-5 ` 
	
12.	 ∞
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
6
∞ 
	13.	 ∞
3
8
1
2
- 1
9
5
∞ 
	
14.	 ∞
- 1
2
1
3
1
4
- 1
3
∞ 
	15.	 ` 1a
1b
1b
1a ` 
	
16.	 ` 13
1
-1
13 ` 
For Exercises 17–20, consider the matrix
A = C
2
-3
4
1
-1
2
0
1
2
S.
	17.	 Find the minors.
a.  M21        b.  M23        c.  M32
	18.	 Find the cofactors.
a.  A21        b.  A23        c.  A32
	19.	 Find the minors.
a.  M11        b.  M22        c.  M31
	20.	 Find the cofactors.
a.  A11        b.  A22        c.  A31
In Exercises 21–36, evaluate each determinant.
	21.	 †
1
0
-1
0
2
2
-1
0
0
† 
	
22.	 ∞
2
0
1
2
1
0
2
4
0
-5
∞ 
	23.	 †
1
2
3
0
3
4
0
0
4
† 
	
24.	 †
2
3
4
0
-4
6
0
0
-5
† 
	25.	 †
1
0
0
2
0
0
3
4
5
† 
	
26.	 †
-1
0
0
3
2
0
4
5
-3
† 
	27.	 †
1
6
0
2
5
3
3
4
0
† 
	
28.	 †
1
0
2
0
5
7
3
1
0
† 
	29.	 †
3
4
1
1
4
3
4
3
1
† 
	
30.	 †
3
1
-2
4
0
-4
2
-1
-3
†    
                 

	
Section 9.4    ■    Determinants and Cramer’s Rule 851
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 69–73, we list some properties of determinants. 
These properties are true for n : n matrices. Verify the 
­properties for n = 2 or n = 3.
	69.	 If each entry in any row or each entry in any column of a 
matrix A is zero, then 0 A0 = 0. Verify each of the following.
a.  ` 0
0
2
5 ` = 0	
b.	 ` 1
0
3
0 ` = 0
c.	 †
1
-2
3
0
0
0
4
5
-7
† = 0	
d.	 †
4
5
0
6
-7
0
8
15
0
† = 0
	70.	 If a matrix B is obtained from matrix A by interchanging 
two rows (or columns), then 0 B0 = - 0 A0 . Verify each of the 
­following.
a.	 ` 2
3
4
5 ` = - ` 4
5
2
3 `
b.	 ` -5
3
2
-4 ` = - `
3
-5
-4
2 `
c.	 †
1
3
5
0
1
2
3
-1
4
† = - †
1
3
5
3
-1
4
0
1
2
†
	71.	 If two rows (or columns) of a matrix A have corresponding 
entries that are equal, then 0 A0 = 0. Verify the following.
a.	 †
2
3
5
-1
4
8
2
3
5
† = 0	
b.	 †
3
4
3
1
2
1
-1
6
-1
† = 0
	72.	 If a matrix B is obtained from a matrix A by multiplying 
every entry of one row (or one column) by a real number c, 
then 0 B0 = c0 A0 . Verify each of the following.
a.	 †
-1
2
3
1 # 5
4 # 5
8 # 5
2
3
6
† = 5 †
-1
2
3
1
4
8
2
3
6
†
b.	 †
1
2
3
-1
5
6
0
2
9
† = 3 †
1
2
1
-1
5
2
0
2
3
†
	73.	 If a matrix B is obtained from a matrix A by replacing any 
row (or column) of A by the sum of that row (or column) and 
c times another row (or column), then 0 B0 = 0 A0 .
Verify that the following two determinants are equal:
†
2
-3
4
-4
7
-8
5
-1
3
†  2R1 + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S †
2
-3
4
0
1
0
5
-1
3
†
	74.	 Evaluate the determinant
D = ∞
1
2
3
3
4
5
2
1
1
2
5
3
2
4
3
7
∞
by following these steps:
	
(i)	
1-12R1 + R3 S R3
	
(ii)	
Expand by the cofactors of row 3.
	
(iii)	 In (ii), you will have a determinant of order 3.
	
	 Evaluate it to obtain the value of D. 
In Exercises 57–60, use determinants to find the area of each 
triangle.
	57.	 Area of a triangle. The triangle with vertices 
11, 22, 1-3, 42, and 14, 62. 
	58.	 Area of a triangle. The triangle with vertices 
13, 12, 14, 22, and 15, 42. 
	59.	 Area of a triangle. The triangle with vertices 
1-2, 12, 1-3, -52, and 12, 42. 
	60.	 Area of a triangle. The triangle with vertices 
1-1, 22 and 12, 42 and the origin. 
Collinearity. Three points A1x1, y12, B1x1, y22, and C1x3, y32 
are collinear (lie on the same line) if and only if the area of 
the triangle ABC is 0. In terms of determinants, three points 
1x1, y12, 1x2, y22, and 1x3, y32 are collinear if and only if
†
x1
y1
1
x2
y2
1
x3
y3
1
† = 0.
In Exercises 61–64, use determinants to find whether the 
three given points are collinear.
	61.	 10, 32, 1-1, 12, and 12, 72 
	62.	 12, 02, a1, 1
2b, and 14, -12 
	63.	 10, -42, 13, -22, and 11, -42 
	64.	 a0, - 1
4b, 11, -12, and 12, -22 
Equation of a line. Three points 1x, y2, 1x1, y12, and 1x2, y22 all 
lie on the same line if and only if
D = †
x
y
1
x1
y1
1
x2
y2
1
† = 0.
In other words, a point P1x, y2 lies on the line passing through 
the points 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 if and only if the determinant 
D = 0. Therefore, the equation
†
x
y
1
x1
y1
1
x2
y2
1
† = 0
is an equation of the line passing through the points 1x1, y12 
and 1x2, y22.
In Exercises 65–68, use determinants to write an equation  
of the line passing through the given points. Then evaluate  
the determinant and write the equation of the line in  
slope–­intercept form.
	65.	 1-1, -12, 11, 32 
	66.	10, 42, 11, 12 
	67.	 a0, 1
3b, 11, 12 
	 68.	 a1, - 1
3b, 12, 02 

852	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
	 92.	 Evaluate.
	a.   ` log2 3
log8 3
log3 4
log3 4 ` 
	
b.	 ` log3 512
log4 3
log3 8
log4 9 ` 
	 93.	 Find the value of k for which the following system has no 
solution.
c
kx + 3y - z = 1
x + 2y + z = 2
-kx + y + 2z = -1
 
	 94.	 Find the values of a and b for which the system of equations
c
2x + ay + 6z = 8
x + 2y + bz = 5
x + y + 3z = 4
	
	 has
	
(i)	
A unique solution. 
	
(ii)	 Infinitely many solutions. 
	
(iii)	 No solution. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 95 and 98, solve each equation for y.
	 95.	 x2 = 8y 
	 96.	 1x + 322 = 41y - 12 
	 97.	 1x - 222 = 61y - 32
	 98.	 1x - 522 = -21y + 72 
In Exercises 99–102, find the quadratic function, y = f1x2, 
with the given properties.
	 99.	 Having form y = ax2, and passing through the point 
1-2, -22 
	100.	 Having form y = ax2 + bx + c, vertex 10, 02, and passing 
through the point 12, -202 
	101.	 Having form y = ax2 + bx + c, vertex 1-3, -82, and 
passing through the point 10, 102 
	102.	 Having form y = ax2 + bx + c, x-intercepts 1 and -3, and 
y-intercept 6 
In Exercises 103 and 104, determine whether the given 
­quadratic function
a.  Opens up or down.
b.  Find its vertex.
c.  Find the axis of symmetry.
d.  Find the x-intercepts, if any.
e.  Find the y-intercept.
	103.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 4x - 6	
104.	 f1x2 = -2x2 + 12x - 10
In Exercises 75–78, use the properties of determinants in 
Exercises 69–73 to obtain three zeros in one row (or column) 
and then evaluate the given determinant by evaluating the 
resulting determinant of order 3.
	 75.	 ∞
2
0
-3
4
0
1
0
5
5
0
-9
8
1
2
0
7
∞ 
	
76.	 ∞
-3
1
2
3
0
-2
4
7
-9
3
5
2
2
-4
3
-12
∞ 
	 77.	 ∞
5
7
1
2
6
8
9
3
24
22
6
10
21
17
7
10
∞ 
	
78.	 ∞
1
2
3
0
2
-3
1
0
-1
-3
4
5
1
3
7
4
∞ 
In Exercises 79–86, solve each equation for x.
	 79.	 ` 3
2
6
x ` = 0 
	
80.	 ` 3
2
x
12 ` = 0 
	 81.	 ` x
-2
1
x - 1 ` = 0	
82.	 ` 2x + 7
4
1
x ` = 0 
	 83.	 †
1
-3
1
4
7
x
0
2
2
† = 0 
	 84.	 †
x
x + 1
x + 2
2
3
-1
3
-2
4
† = 0
	 85.	 †
x
0
1
0
x
0
1
0
x
† = 0 
	86.	†
x
2
3
x
x
1
2
0
1
† = -8 
In Exercises 87 and 88, use the formula on page 851 for the 
area of a triangle.
	 87.	 If the area of the triangle formed by the points 1-4, 22, 
10, k2, and 1-2, k2 is 28 square units, find k. 
	 88.	 If the area of the triangle formed by the points 12, 32, 
11, 22, and 1-2, k2 is 3 square units, find k. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	 89.	 Solve the system by using Cramer’s Rule.
d
1
x - 2 +
3
y + 1 = 13
4
x - 2 -
5
y + 1 = 1
 
	
	 [Hint: Do not try to simplify the equations by clearing the 
denominators because the resulting equations will not be linear. 
	
	 Instead, let u =
1
x - 2 and v =
1
y + 1. Solve the system for 
	
	 u and v and then use this solution to solve for x and y.]
In Exercises 90 and 91, use Cramer’s Rule to solve each 
­system of equations.
	 90.	 d
6
x + 1 +
4
y - 1 = 7
8
x + 1 +
5
y - 1 = 9 
	 91.	 d
1
3x + 4
4y = 25
2
3x - 1
4y = 14      

	
Review Exercises 853
9.1	 Matrices and Systems of Equations
i.	
Matrix. An m * n matrix is a rectangular array of numbers 
with m rows and n columns.
ii.	
Augmented matrix. The augmented matrix of a system of 
linear equations is a matrix whose entries are the coefficients 
of the variables in the system together with the constants.
iii.	 Elementary row operations. For an augmented matrix of a 
system of linear equations, the following row operations will 
result in the matrix of an equivalent system:
1.  Interchange any two rows.
2.  Multiply any row by a nonzero constant.
3.  Add a multiple of one row to another row.
iv.	
Row-echelon form and reduced row-echelon form. The 
elementary row operations are used to transform an aug-
mented matrix to row-echelon form or reduced row-echelon 
form. See page 803.
v.	
Gaussian elimination is the method of transforming the 
augmented matrix to row-echelon form and then using back-
substitution to find the solution set of a system of linear 
equations.
vi.	
Gauss–Jordan elimination. If you continue the Gaussian 
elimination procedure until a reduced row-echelon form is 
obtained, the procedure is called Gauss–Jordan elimination.
9.2	 Matrix Algebra
i.	
Equality of matrices. Two matrices A = 3aij4 and 
B = 3bij4 are equal if (i) A and B have the same order and 
(ii) all corresponding entries are equal.
ii.	
Matrix addition. The matrices A and B can be added or sub-
tracted if they have the same order. Their sum or difference can 
be obtained by adding or subtracting the corresponding entries.
iii.	 Scalar multiplication. The product of a matrix by a real 
number (scalar) is obtained by multiplying every entry of 
the matrix by the real number.
iv.	
Matrix multiplication. The product AB of two matrices 
is defined only if the number of columns of A is equal to 
the number of rows of B. If A is an m * p matrix and B is 
a p * n matrix, then the product AB is an m * n matrix. 
The (i, j)th entry of AB is the sum of the products of the 
corresponding entries in the ith row of A and the jth col-
umn of B.
v.	
The identity matrix. The n * n identity matrix denoted by 
In or I is a matrix that has 1s on the main diagonal and 0s 
elsewhere. If A is an n * n matrix, then AI = IA = A.
9.3	 The Matrix Inverse
i.	
Inverse of a matrix. Let A be an n * n matrix and I be the 
n * n identity matrix. If there is an n * n matrix B such 
that AB = BA = I, then A is invertible and B is called the 
inverse of A. We write B = A-1.
ii.	
Finding the inverse. A procedure for finding A-1 (if it 
exists) is given on page 830.
iii.	 Inverse of a 2 : 2 matrix. The matrix A = c a
b
c
dd  has an
	
inverse if and only if ad - bc ≠0. Moreover, if 
ad - bc ≠0, then
A-1 =
1
ad - bcc
d
-b
-c
ad .
iv.	
If A is invertible, then the solution of the matrix equation 
AX = B is X = A-1B.
9.4	 Determinants and Cramer’s Rule
i.	
Determinant. The determinant of a square matrix A is a real 
number denoted by det 1A2 or 0 A0 .
ii.	
The determinant of a 2 * 2 matrix A = c a
b
c
dd  is defined 
	
by det1A2 = ` a
b
c
d ` = ad - bc.
iii.	 The determinant of a matrix of order n Ú 3 can be found by 
expanding by cofactors. See page 845.
iv.	
Cramer’s Rule gives formulas for solving a square system of 
linear equations for which the determinant of the coefficient 
matrix is nonzero. See page 847 for solving a system of two 
equations in two variables and page 848 for solving a system 
of three equations in three variables.
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas
Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills
In Exercises 1–4, determine the order of each matrix.
	 1.	 3-1
2
3
44 
	
2.	 354 
	 3.	 C
2
3
-1
2
0
1
S 
	
4.	 c 1
-1
2
-4
5
4
3
2d 
	 5.	 Let A be the matrix of Exercise 4. Identify the entries 
a12, a14, a23, and a21.
	 6.	 Write the 2 * 3 matrix A with entries a22 = 3, a21 = 4,
a12 = 2, a13 = 5, a11 = -1, and a23 = 1. 
In Exercises 7 and 8, write the augmented matrix for each 
system of linear equations.
	 7.	 e2x - 3y = 7
3x +
y = 6  	
8.	 c
x +
y -
z = 6
2x - 3y - 2z = 2
5x - 3y +
z = 8
 
In Exercises 9 and 10, convert each matrix to row-echelon form 
(Answers may vary).
	 9.	 C
0
1
2
1
2
0
3
4
1
-2
1
7
S   	
10.	 C
3
-1
2
12
1
1
-1
2
1
2
1
7
S  	 

854	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
In Exercises 11 and 12, convert each matrix to reduced  
row-echelon form.
	11.	 C
3
1
3
1
2
1
1
1
1
-1
-1
0
S   	
12.	 C
3
4
-4
2
2
1
-2
1
1
1
2
1
S  
In Exercises 13–16, solve each system of equations by 
Gaussian elimination.
	13.	 c
x +
y -
z = 0
2x +
y - 2z = 3
3x - 2y + 3z = 9
  	
14.	 c
x -
y + 2z = 1
x + 3y -
z = 6
2x +
y - 3z = 1
 
	15.	 c
x - 2y + 3z = -2
2x - 3y +
z = 9
3x -
y + 2z = 5
	
16.	 c
2x +
y +
z = 7
x + 2y +
z = 3
x + 2y + 2z = 6
 
In Exercises 17–20, solve each system of equations by Gauss–
Jordan elimination.
	17.	 c
x - 2y - 2z = 11
3x + 4y -
z = -2
4x + 5y + 7z = 7
	
18.	 c
x -
y - 9z = 1
3x + 2y -
z = 2
4x + 3y + 3z = 0
	19.	 c
2x -
y + 3z = 4
x + 3y + 3z = -2
3x + 2y - 6z = 6
	 20.	 c
x -
y - 9z = 1
3x + 2y -
z = 2
4x + 3y + 3z = 0
	21.	 Find x and y if c x - y
0
1
x + yd = c 1
0
1
3d . 
	22.	 Find x and y if 
C
2x + 3y
-1
-2
0
1
x - y
2
3x + 4y
5
S = C
4
-1
-2
0
1
-3
2
5
5
S.
	23.	 Let A = c
1
2
-3
4d  and B = c
2
-3
-5
6d . Find each of the 
	
	 following.
a.	 A + B 
b.	 A - B 
c.	 2A 
d.	 -3B 
e.	 2A - 3B 
	24.	 Let A = C
2
0
-1
1
2
2
-2
0
3
S  and B = C
0
1
-1
1
-1
0
-1
0
1
S.
	
	 Find each of the following.
a.	 A + B 
b.	 A - B 
c.	 2A + 3B 
	25.	 For the matrices A and B of Exercise 23, solve the matrix 
equation 3A + 2B - 3X = 0 for X. 
	26.	 For the matrices A and B of Exercise 24, solve the matrix 
equation A - 2X + 2B = 0 for X. 
In Exercises 27–30, find the products, if possible.
a.   AB  b.   BA
	27.	 A = c 0
1
2
3d , B = c -1
-1
-3
4d  
	28.	 A = c
0
1
2
-1
0
1d , B = C
1
2
3
-1
0
4
S  
	29.	 A = 31
2
-14, B = C
2
3
1
S  
	30.	 A = C
1
0
2
-1
3
-2
S, B = c 1
2
3
4
2
-1
2
3d  
	31.	 Find a matrix A = c x
y
z
wd  such that
c 1
2
3
-1d  A = c 5
6
1
-3d . 
	32.	 Find a matrix B = c x
y
z
wd  such that
Bc 1
2
3
-1d = c 5
6
1
-3d .
	
	 Compare your answers for Exercises 31 and 32.
	33.	 Find a matrix A = c x
y
z
wd  such that
c 5
3
4
2d  A = c 1
0
0
1d .
	34.	 Find a matrix A = c x
y
z
wd  such that
Ac 5
3
4
2d = c 1
0
0
1d .
	
	 Compare your answers for Exercises 33 and 34.
	35.	 Let A = c
0
1
-1
3d .
a.	 Find A-1. (Use the formula on page 832.) 
b.	 Find 1A22-1. 
c.	 Find 1A-122. 
d.	 Use your answers in parts (b) and (c) to show that 1A-122 
is the inverse of A2.
	36.	 Repeat Exercise 35 for A = c 3
4
2
3d . 
In Exercises 37–40, show that B is the inverse of A.
	37.	 A = c 7
6
6
5d , B = c -5
6
6
-7d
	38.	 A = c -1
3
1
-4d , B = c -4
-3
-1
-1d
	39.	 A = C
2
-1
0
1
0
4
1
-1
1
S, B = 1
5C
4
1
-4
3
2
-8
-1
1
1
S
	40.	 A = C
2
0
1
0
-1
2
1
0
1
S, B = C
1
0
-1
-2
-1
4
-1
0
2
S
In Exercises 41–44, find the inverse (if it exists) of each matrix.
	41.	 c 3
1
2
4d  
	42.	 c 3
-4
1
2d  
	43.	 C
1
2
-2
-1
3
0
0
-2
1
S  
	44.	 C
1
2
1
2
2
4
0
0
3
S  
	 
	  
	

	
Review Exercises 855
In Exercises 45–50, use an inverse matrix (if possible) to solve 
each system of linear equations.
	45.	 e x + 3y = 7
2x + 5y = 4
	46.	 e3x + 5y = 4
2x + 4y = 5
	47.	 c
x + 3y + 3z = 3
x + 4y + 3z = 5
x + 3y + 4z = 6
 
	48.	 c
x + 2y + 3z = 6
2x + 4y + 5z = 8
3x + 5y + 6z = 10
 
	49.	 c
x -
y + z = 3
4x + 2y
= 5
7x -
y - z = 6
 
	50.	 c
x + 2y + 4z = 7
4x + 3y - 2z = 6
x
- 3z = 4
In Exercises 51–54, find the determinant of each matrix.
	51.	 c 2
-5
3
4d  
	52.	 c -1
4
11
-3d 
	53.	 c 12
21
4
7d 
	54.	 c -7
9
-4
5d 
In Exercises 55 and 56, find (a) the minors M12, M23, and M22 
and (b) the cofactors A12, A23, and A22 of the given matrix A.
	55.	 A = C
4
-1
2
-2
-3
5
0
2
-4
S 
	56.	 A = C
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
S 
In Exercises 57 and 58, find the determinant of each matrix 
A by expanding (a) by the second row and (b) by the third 
column.
	57.	 A = C
1
-2
3
4
-1
-2
-2
1
5
S 
	58.	 A = C
1
4
3
6
8
10
2
5
4
S 
In Exercises 59 and 60, find the determinant of each matrix A.
	59.	 A = C
1
2
0
0
1
2
1
0
2
S 
	60.	 A = C
2
3
4
2
5
9
2
7
16
S 
In Exercises 61–64, use Cramer’s Rule to solve each system of 
equations.
	61.	 e5x + 3y = 11
2x +
y = 4 
	62.	 e2x - 7y - 13 = 0
5x + 6y -
9 = 0 
	63.	  c
3x +
y -
z =
14
x + 3y -
z =
16
x +
y - 3z = -10 
	64.	 c
2x + 3y - 2z = 0
5y - 3x + 4z = 9
3x + 7y - 6z = 4 
In Exercises 65 and 66, solve each equation for x.
	65.	 †
1
2
4
-3
5
7
1
x
4
† = 0 
	66.	 †
1
-1
2
0
 x
1
3
2
x - 1
† = 14 
	67.	 Show that the equation of the line passing through the points 
12, 32 and 11, -42 is equivalent to the equation
†
x
y
1
2
3
1
1
-4
1
† = 0. (See page 851.) 
	68.	 Use a determinant to find the area of the triangle with vertices 
A11, 12, B14, 32, and C12, 72. (See page 851.) 
Applying the Concepts
	69.	 Maximizing profit. A company is considering which of 
three methods of production it should use in producing the 
three products A, B, and C. The number of units of each  
product produced by each method is shown in this matrix:
A    B   C
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3
C
4
8
2
5
7
1
5
4
8
S 
	
	 The profit per unit of the products A, B, and C is $10, $4, 
and $6, respectively. Use matrix multiplication to find which 
method maximizes total profit for the company.
	70.	 Nutrition. Consider two families: Ardestanis (A) and 
Barkley (B). Family A consists of two adult males, three adult 
females, and one child. Family B consists of one adult male, 
one adult female, and two children. Their mutual dietician 
considers the age and weight of each member of the two fam-
ilies and recommends daily allowances for calories—adult 
males 2200, adult females 1700, and children 1500—and for 
protein—adult males 50 grams, adult females 40 grams, and 
children 30 grams.
	
	    Represent the information in the preceding paragraph 
by matrices. Use matrix multiplication to calculate the total 
requirements of calories and proteins for each family. 
In Exercises 71–76, each problem produces a system of linear 
equations in two or three variables. Use the method of your 
choice from this chapter to solve the system of equations.
	71.	 Airplane speed. An airplane traveled 1680 miles in 3 hours 
with the wind. It would have taken 3.5 hours to make the 
same trip against the wind. Find the speed of the plane and 
the velocity of the wind assuming that both are constant.
	72.	 Walking speed. In 5 hours, Nertha walks 2 miles farther 
than Kristina walks in 4 hours; then in 12 hours, Kristina 
walks 10 miles farther than Nertha walks in 10 hours. How 
many miles per hour does each woman walk?
	73.	 Friends. Andrew, Bonnie, and Chauncie have $320 between 
them. Andrew has twice as much as Chauncie, and Bonnie 
and Chauncie together have $20 less than Andrew. How much 
money does each person have?
	74.	 Ratio. Steve and Nicole entered a double-decker bus in 
	
	 London on which there were 5
8 as many men as women. After 
	
	 they boarded the bus, there were 7
11 as many men as women 
	
	 on the bus. How many people were on the bus before they 
entered it?
	75.	 Hospital workers. Metropolitan Hospital employs three 
types of caregivers: registered nurses, licensed practical nurs-
es, and nurse’s aides. Each registered nurse is paid $75 per 
hour, each licensed practical nurse is paid $20 per hour, and 
each nurse’s aide is paid $30 per hour. The hospital has bud-
geted $4850 per hour for the three categories of caregivers. 
The hospital requires that each caregiver spend some time 
in a class learning about advanced medical practices each 
week: registered nurses, 3 hours; licensed practical nurses, 
 
			

856	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
5 hours; and nurse’s aides, 4 hours. The advanced classes can 
accommodate a maximum of 530 person-hours each week. 
The hospital needs a total of 130 registered nurses, licensed 
practical nurses, and nurse’s aides to meet the daily needs 
of the patients. Assume that the allowable payroll is met, the 
training classes are full, and the patients’ needs are met. How 
many registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and nurse’s 
aides should the hospital employ?
	76.	 Sales tax. A drugstore sells three categories of items:
  (i)	 Medicine, which is not taxed
 (ii)	 Nonmedical items, which are taxed at the rate of 8%
(iii)	 Beer and cigarettes, which are taxed at the “sin tax” rate 
of 20%
	
	 Last Friday, the total sales (excluding taxes) of all three items 
were $18,500. The total tax collected was $1020. The sales of 
medicines exceeded the combined sales of the other items by 
$3500. Find the sales in each category. 	
Practice Test A
	 1.	 Give the order of the matrix and the value of the designated 
entry of the matrix.
E
3
-1
-3
0
2
4
1
7
5
0
3
2
8
10
9
6
-4
0
0
3
U a43 
	 2.	 Write an augmented matrix for the system of equations.
c
7x - 3y + 9z = 5
-2x + 4y + 3z = -12
8x - 5y +
z = -9 
	 3.	 Write the system of linear equations represented by the aug-
mented matrix
C
4
0
-1
1
3
0
2
7
5
 †  
-3
9
8
S.
	
	 Use x, y, and z for the variables. 
	 4.	 Find values for the variables so that the matrices
c x - 5
y + 3
z
9
d = c 5
13
0
9d
	
	 are equal. 
In Problems 5 and 6, solve the system of equations by using 
matrices.
	 5.	 c
x + 2y +
z = 6
x +
y -
z = 7
2x -
y + 2z = -3	 
	 6.	 c
2x +
y - 4z = 6
-x + 3y -
z = -2
2x - 6y + 2z = 4	 
	 7.	 Let A = C
5
-2
4
0
7
6
S and B = C
-3
-1
0
-8
-4
6
S. Find A - B. 
In Problems 8 and 9, find the product AB or state that AB is 
not defined.
	 8.	 A = 33
-7
24, B = C
0
1
4
S 
	 9.	 A = c -4
1
2
-9
0
3d , B = c 2
8
7
-5d 
For Problems 10–13, let
A = c -3
1
0
5
7
2d , B = c -1
4
8
2d , and C = c 1
5
0
4d .
	10.	 Find 2A. 
	11.	 Find A + BA. 
	12.	 Find C2. 
	13.	 Find C-1. 
	14.	 Find the inverse of the matrix
A = C
2
1
3
1
2
-1
3
1
5
S. 
	15.	 Write the linear system
e5x + 2y = 32
3x +
y = 18
	
	 as a matrix equation in the form AX = B, where A is the 
coefficient matrix and B is the constant matrix. 
	16.	 Write the matrix equation
c 12
-3
-2
7d c x
yd = c
5
-9d
	
	 as a system of linear equations without matrices.
	17.	 Solve the matrix equation A - 5X = 2B for X, where 
	
	 A = c 1
5
-2
4
-2
7d  and B = c 2
5
-11
18
8
11d .
In Problems 18 and 19, evaluate the determinant.
	18.	 ∞
1
2
- 1
4
1
2
3
4
∞ 
	19.	 †
1
3
5
2
0
10
-3
1
-15
† 
	20.	 Use Cramer’s Rule to write the solution of the system
c
2x -
y +
z = 3
x +
y +
z = 6
4x + 3y - 2z = 4
	
	 in the determinant form. (You do not need to find the  
solution.) 
		

	
Practice Test B 857
Practice Test B
	 1.	 Give the order of the matrix and the value of the designated 
entries of the matrix.
A = ≥
0
3
0
-10
6
14
-5
7
-7
8
-15
9
-6
13
-2
0.4
11
4
-3
0
T a34 
a.	 Order: 5 * 4; a34 = 6
b.	 Order: 4 * 5; a34 = 11
c.	 Order: 20; a34 = -4
d.	 Order: 4 * 5; a34 = 13
	 2.	 Write an augmented matrix for the following system of  
equations.
c
8x + 4y + 5z = 10
-2x + 3y + 6z = -9
-2x + 8y + 6z = 4 
a.	 C
8
4
5
-2
3
6
-2
8
6
S
b.	 C
10
5
4
-9
6
3
4
6
8
 †  
8
-2
-2
S
c.	 C
8
-2
-2
4
3
8
5
6
6
 †  
10
-9
4
S
d.	 C
8
4
5
-2
3
6
-2
8
6
 †  
10
-9
4
S
	 3.	 Write the system of linear equations represented by the  
following augmented matrix.
C
-1
7
0
2
0
6
0
8
-8
†  
-6
5
4
S
	
	 Use x, y, and z for the variables. 
a.	 c
x + 7y +
z = -6
2x +
6z = 5
8y + 8z = 4
b.	 c
-x + 7y + z = -6
 2x + 6y
= 5
 8x - 8y
= 4
c.	 c
-x + 7y +
z = -6
2x +
y + 6z = 5
x + 8y - 8z = 4
d.	 c
-x + 7y
= -6
 2x
+ 6z = 5
8y - 8z = 4
	 4.	 Find values for the variables so that the matrices
c x + 3
y + 4
7
3
d and c 9
2
7
z d
	
	 are equal. 
a.	 x = -6; y = 2; z = 3
b.	 x = 6; y = 9; z = 3
c.	 x = 6; y = -2; z = 3
d.	 x = 9; y = 2; z = 3
	 5.	 Find the value of z in the following system.
c
2x + y = 15
2y + z = 25
2z + x = 26 
a.	 4
b.	 9
c.	 11
d.	 12
	 6.	 Find the value of 4x + 3y + z in the following system.
c
2x + y
= 17
y + 2z = 15
x
+
z =
9 
a.	 41
b.	 43
c.	 55
d.	 45
	 7.	 Let A = C
-1
4
0
4
8
-4
S  and B = C
7
2
17
4
2
2
S. Find A - B. 
a.	 C
1
2
7
0
6
-2
S
b.	 C
3
-3
7
0
-6
6
S
c.	 C
-8
2
-17
0
6
-6
S
d.	 C
1
5
7
8
10
0
S
In Problems 8 and 9, find the product AB if possible.
	 8.	 A = 3 -8
2
94, B = C
3
0
-3
S 
a.	 3-24
0
-274
b.	 3-514
c.	 32104
d.	 C
-24
0
-27
S
	 9.	 A = c 3
-2
1
0
4
-2d , B = c
5
0
-2
1d 
a.	 AB is not defined.
b.	 c 15
-10
5
-6
8
-4d
c.	 C
15
-6
-10
8
5
-4
S
d.	 c 15
0
0
4d
For Problems 10–13, let
A = c
2
1
-3
-5
2
1d , B = c -3
7
2
4d , and C = c 5
4
1
0d .
	10.	 Find 2A. 
a.	 D
1
1
2
- 3
2
- 5
2
1
1
2
T
b.	 c
4
2
-6
-10
4
2d
c.	 c
4
3
-1
-3
4
3d
d.	 c
0
-1
-5
-7
0
-1d
	11.	 Find A + BA. 
a.	 c
2
-4
10
-5
4
5d
b.	 c
4
-2
6
-10
4
2d
c.	 c -39
12
13
-21
12
-1d
d.	 c -41
17
-2
-16
6
10d
	12.	 Find C2. 
a.	 c 10
8
2
0d
b.	 c 41
5
5
1d
c.	 c 29
20
5
4d
d.	 c 0
4
1
5d

858	 Chapter 9      Matrices and Determinants
	13.	 Find C-1. 
a.	 D
-5
4
1
1
4
0
T
b.	 C
0
1
1
4
- 5
4
S
c.	 C
1
4
- 5
4
0
1
S
d.	 C
0
-1
- 1
4
- 5
4
S
	14.	 Find the inverse of the following matrix.
A = C
1
0
0
2
1
0
3
-4
1
S 
a.	 C
1
0
0
-2
1
0
3
4
1
S
b.	 C
1
0
0
-2
1
0
-8
3
1
S
c.	 C
1
-2
-11
0
1
4
0
0
1
S
d.	 C
1
0
0
-2
1
0
-11
4
1
S
	15.	 Write the linear system as a matrix equation
e
4x + 2y = 15
-2x + 4y = 9
	
	 in the form AX = B, where A is the coefficient matrix and B 
is the constant matrix. 
a.	 c
4
2
-2
4d c x
yd = c 15
9d
b.	 c 4
2
4
-2d c x
yd = c 15
9d
c.	 c 15
2
9
-2d c x
yd = c 4
4d
d.	 c 4
-2
2
4d c x
yd = c 15
9d
	16.	 Write the matrix equation
c -3
9
-8
-4d c x
yd = c -4
-5d
	
	 as a system of linear equations. 
a.	 e -3x + 9y = -4
-8x - 4y = -5
b.	 e -3x + 9y = -4
-4x - 8y = -5
c.	 e
9x - 3y = -4
-8x - 4y = -5
d.	 e -3x + 9y = 4
-8x - 4y = 5
	17.	 Let A = c -2
-3
1
-5
3
-2d  and B = c -1
-2
-1
1
0
1d .
	
	 Solve the matrix equation A - 3X = -5B for X. 
a.	 X = D
- 5
2
- 9
2
-1
-1
3
2
1
2
T
b.	 X = C - 7
3
- 13
3
- 4
3
0
1
1
S
c.	 X = D
-1
3
2
-1
-5
2
- 9
2
-1
T
d.	 X = D
-1
3
1
3
8
3
- 20
3
3
- 11
3
T
In Problems 18 and 19, evaluate the determinant.
	18.	 ` -8
5
-4
-1 ` 
a.	 -28
b.	 -44
c.	 -12
d.	 28
	19.	 †
2
3
-2
3
0
-3
-3
0
-5
† 
a.	 -72
b.	 18
c.	 72
d.	 -18
	20.	 Solve the system of equations
c
x + y +
z = -6
x - y + 3z = -22
2x + y +
z = -10
	
	 by using Cramer’s Rule. 
a.	 ∅
b.	 51-4, 3, -526
c.	 51-5, -4, 326
d.	 51-5, 3, -426
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–9
	 1.	 Assuming that the distance between the points 12, -32 and 
1-1, y2 is 5 units, find y. 
In Problems 2–8, solve each equation or inequality.
	 2.	
4
x - 1 -
3
x + 2 =
18
1x + 221x - 12 
	 3.	 0 2x - 50 = 3 
	 4.	 4x2 = 8x - 13 
	 5.	 a3x - 1
x + 5 b
2
- 3a3x - 1
x + 5 b - 28 = 0 
	 6.	 log20 x0 + log20 x + 60 = 4 
	 7.	 x + 2
2x - 1 7 0 
	 8.	 x2 - 7x + 6 … 0 
	 9.	 Write all possible rational zeros of
f1x2 = 4x3 + 8x2 - 11x + 3.
	10.	 Show that 1
2 is a zero of multiplicity 2 of the function f in 
	
	 Exercise 9.
	11.	 The horsepower required to propel a ship varies as the cube 
of the ship’s speed. If the horsepower required for a speed of 
15 miles per hour is 10,125, find the horsepower required for 
a speed of 20 miles per hour. 
 

	
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–9 859
	12.	 A city covers an area of 400 square miles. At present, only 
2, of its area is reserved for parks. In the unincorporated 
area outside the city limits, 20, of the area could be devel-
oped into parks. How many square miles of the incorporated 
area had to be annexed so that the city could develop 12% of 
its area as parks? 
In Problems 13 and 14, solve the system of equations.
	13.	 e3x +
y = 2
4x + 5y = -1 
	14.	 e2x + y = 5
y2 - 2y = -3x + 5 
	15.	 Use transformations to sketch the graph of
f1x2 = 3x + 1 + 2. 
	16.	 Find the inverse of the matrix C
1
2
-2
-1
3
0
0
-2
1
S.
	17.	 Use the result in Exercise 16 to solve the system of equations.
c
x + 2y - 2z = 5
-x + 3y
= 2
- 2y +
z = -3 
	18.	 Assuming that f1x2 = x2 + 3x - 1 and g1x2 = x + 2, find 
(a) F1x2 = 1f ∘g21x2 and (b) F142.
	19.	 Let f1x2 =
x
x + 4. Find f -11x2. 
	20.	 In Exercise 19, find the domain and range of f. 

C h a p t e r 10
Greek mathematicians were fascinated by certain curves, 
called conic sections, now used to describe natural phenomena 
such as planetary orbits. Modern applications also include 
the construction of lenses, whispering galleries, navigation 
systems, and even medical devices. In this chapter, we 
investigate the conic sections and their many uses.
Topics
10.1		 Conic Sections: Overview
10.2 	The Parabola
10.3 	The Ellipse
10.4 	The Hyperbola
Conic Sections

	
Section 10.1    ■    Conic Sections: Overview 861
Conic Sections: Overview
Most of the sections in this chapter focus on the plane curves called conics or conic 
sections. As the name implies, these curves are the sections of a cone (similar to an ice 
cream cone) formed when a plane intersects the cone. We also discuss parametric equa-
tions of conics and other curves in the plane.
Euclid defined a cone as a surface generated by rotating a right triangle about one of 
its legs. However, the following description of a cone given by Apollonius is more 
appropriate.
S e c t i o n 10.1
Draw a circle on a plane (say, horizontal). Draw a line l, called the axis, passing 
through the center of the circle and perpendicular to the plane. Choose a point V 
above the plane on this line. The surface consisting of all lines that simultaneously 
pass through the point V and the circle is called a right circular cone with vertex V. 
The vertex V separates the surface into two parts called nappes of the cone. 
See Figure 10.1.
Right Circular Cone
Figure 10.1  Parts of a cone
l
Axis
V(vertex)
Upper
nappe
Lower
nappe
Center
Circle
Plane
If we slice the cone with a plane not passing through the vertex, the intersections of the 
slicing plane and the cone are conic sections. If the slicing plane is horizontal (parallel to 
the first plane), the intersection is a circle (Figure 10.2(a)). If the slicing plane is inclined 
slightly from the horizontal, the intersection is an oval-shaped curve called an ellipse. As 
the angle of the slicing plane increases, more elongated ellipses are formed (Figure 10.2(b)). 
If the angle of the slicing plane increases still further so that the slicing plane is parallel to 
one of the lines generating the cone, the intersection is called a parabola (Figure 10. 2(c)). 
If the angle of the slicing plane increases yet further so that the slicing plane intersects both 
nappes of the cone, the resulting intersection is called a hyperbola (Figure 10. 2(d)).
Apollonius of Perga  
(c. 262 b.c.–190 b.c.)
The mathematician Apollonius was 
born in Perga, in southern Asia Minor 
(today known as Murtina in Turkey). 
He went to Alexandria to study with 
the successors of Euclid. He became 
famous in ancient times for his work 
on astronomy and his eight books 
on conics. He was able to discover 
and prove hundreds of beautiful and 
difficult theorems without modern 
algebraic symbolism. He is credited 
with introducing the terms ellipse, 
hyperbola, and parabola.

862	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Intersections of the slicing plane through the vertex results in points and lines called 
degenerate conic sections. See Figure 10.3.
Circle: plane perpendicular
to the axis of the cone
(a)
(b)
Ellipse
Parabola: plane parallel
to the side of the cone
(c)
Hyperbola: plane intersects
both nappes of the cone
(d)
Figure 10.2  Conic sections
Figure 10.3  Degenerate conic sections
Point: plane through
the vertex of the cone
Single line: plane
tangent to the cone
Pair of intersecting
lines
Just as a circle (see page 171) is defined as the set of points in the plane at a fixed 
distance r (the radius) from a fixed point (the center), we can define each of the conic sec-
tions just described as a set of points in the plane that satisfies certain geometric conditions. 
It can be shown that these alternative definitions give the same family of curves described 
earlier. This enables us to keep our work in a two-dimensional setting. Using these defi-
nitions, we will derive the equations of the conic sections and show that an equation of 
the form Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0 is (except in degenerate cases represented in 
Figure 10.3.) the equation of a parabola, an ellipse, or a hyperbola. (A circle is a special 
case of an ellipse.)
We study these conic sections because of their practical applications. For example, 
a satellite dish, a flashlight lens, and a telescope lens have a parabolic shape; the planets 
travel in elliptical orbits, and comets travel in orbits that are either elliptical or hyperbolic. 
A comet with an elliptical orbit can be viewed from Earth more than once, while those with 
a hyperbolic orbit can be viewed only once!

	
Section 10.2    ■    The Parabola 863
S e c t i o n 10.2
The Parabola
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	
Distance formula (Section 2.1, page 159)
2	 Midpoint formula (Section 2.1, page 161)
3	 Completing the square (Section 3.1,  
page 295)
4	 Line of symmetry (Section 2.2, page 168)
5	 Slopes of perpendicular lines (Section 2.3,  
page 185)
Objectives
1	 Define a parabola geometrically.
2	 Find an equation of a parabola.
3	 Translate a parabola.
4	 Use the reflecting property of parabolas. 
Edwin Hubble (1889–1953)
Edwin Hubble is renowned for 
discovering that there are other galaxies 
in the universe beyond the Milky Way. 
Hubble then wanted to classify the 
galaxies according to their content, 
distance, shape, and brightness patterns. 
He made the momentous discovery that 
the galaxies were moving away from 
each other at a rate proportional to 
the distance between them (Hubble’s 
Law). This led to the calculation of the 
point where the expansion began and 
to confirmation of the Big Bang theory 
of the origin of the universe. Recent 
estimates place the age of the universe 
at about 14 billion years.
Hubble Telescope
The Hubble Space Telescope
In 1918, the 2.5-meter (100-inch) Hooker Telescope was installed at Mount Wilson 
Observatory in Pasadena, California. With this telescope, astronomer Edwin Hubble 
measured the distances and velocities of the galaxies. His work led to today’s concept 
of an expanding universe. In 1977, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) named its largest, most complex, and most capable orbiting telescope in honor 
of Edwin Hubble.
On April 25, 1990, the Hubble Space Telescope was deployed into orbit from the 
space shuttle Discovery. However, due to a spherical aberration in the telescope’s para-
bolic mirror, the Hubble had “blurred vision.” (See Example 4.) In 1993, astronauts from 
the space shuttle Endeavor installed replacement instruments and supplemental optics 
to restore the telescope to full optimal performance.
Not since Galileo turned his telescope toward the heavens in 1610 has any event so 
changed our understanding of the universe as did the deployment of the Hubble Space 
Telescope. The first instrument of any kind that was specifically designed for routine 
servicing by spacewalking astronauts, the Hubble telescope brought stunning pictures 
from the ends of the universe to the general public.

864	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Geometric Definition of a Parabola
In Section 3.1, we named the graph of a quadratic function y = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0, a 
parabola. In this section, we give a geometric definition of a parabola. Then we show that 
this definition leads to the graph of a quadratic function.
1	
Define a parabola 
geometrically.
Let l be a line and F a point not on the line l on the plane determined by F and l. See 
Figure 10.4(a). Then the set of all points P in the plane that are the same distance 
from F as they are from the line l is called a parabola. See Figure 10.4(b). Thus, a 
parabola is the set of points P for which d1F, P2 = d1P, l2 where d1P, l2 denotes 
the distance between the point P and the line l.
Parabola
figure 10.4  Defining a parabola
(a)
l
F
(b)
l
P
F
M
figure 10.5
Parabola
Axis
Focus
Vertex
l
Directrix
M
F
The line l is the directrix of the parabola, and the point F is the focus. The line through  
the focus perpendicular to the directrix is called the axis, or the axis of symmetry, 
of the parabola. The point at which the axis intersects the parabola is called the vertex. 
See Figure 10.5. Note that the vertex of a parabola is the midpoint of the segment FM. 
Equation of a Parabola
A coordinate system allows us to transform the geometric description of a parabola into 
an algebraic equation of the parabola. This equation is particularly simple if we place the 
vertex V at the origin and the focus on one of the coordinate axes. Suppose for a moment 
that the focus F is on the positive x-axis. Then F has coordinates of the form 1p, 02 with 
p 7 0, as shown in Figure 10.6.
The vertex V lies on the parabola with focus F and directrix l; so we have the following:
 d1V, l2 = d1V, F2    By the definition of parabola
 = p
The vertex V at the origin is located midway between the focus and the directrix, so the 
equation of the directrix is x = -p.
Suppose a point P1x, y2 lies on the parabola shown in Figure 10.6. Then the distance 
from the point P to the directrix l is the distance between the points P1x, y2 and M1-p, y2. 
So we have
d1P, F2 = d1P, M2.
2	
Find an equation of a 
parabola.
figure 10.6  Deriving the  
equation of a parabola
F(p, 0)
P(x, y)
V(0, 0)
y
x
l
M(p, y)
A(p, 0)
x  p
The distance from a point to a 
line is defined as the length of the 
perpendicular line segment from the 
point to the line.
Recall

	
Section 10.2    ■    The Parabola 865
Using the distance formula on each side gives
 21x - p22 + y2 = 21x + p22
 1x - p22 + y2 = 1x + p22
    Square both sides.
 x2 - 2px + p2 + y2 = x2 + 2px + p2    Expand squares.
 y2 = 4px
    Simplify.
The equation y2 = 4px is called the standard equation of a parabola with vertex  
10, 02 and focus 1p, 02. Similarly, if the focus of a parabola is placed on the negative  
x-axis, we obtain the equation y2 = -4px as the standard equation of a parabola with ver-
tex 10, 02 and focus 1-p, 0 2.
By interchanging the roles of x and y, we find that x2 = 4py is the standard equation of 
a parabola with vertex 10, 02 and focus 10, p2. Similarly, the equation x2 = -4py is the 
standard equation of a parabola with vertex 10, 02 and focus 10, -p2. 
Summary Of Main Facts
Main facts about a parabola with p + 0 
Standard Equation
y2 = 4px
y2 = −4px
x2 = 4py
x2 = −4py
Vertex
10, 02
10, 02
10, 02
10, 02
Description
Opens right
Opens left
Opens up
Opens down
Axis of Symmetry
y = 0 (x-axis)
y = 0 (x-axis)
x = 0 (y-axis)
x = 0 (y-axis)
Focus
1p, 02
1-p, 02
10, p2
10, -p2
Directrix
x = -p
x = p
y = -p
y = p
y
x  p
y2     4px
x
F( p, 0)
V(0, 0)
y
x  p
y2         4px
x
F(p, 0)
V(0, 0)
y
y  p
x2      4py
x
F(0, p)
V(0, 0)
y
y  p
x
F(0, p)
V(0, 0)
x2         4py
Graph
Graph each parabola and specify the vertex, focus, directrix, and axis.
a.	 x2 = -8y        b.   y2 = 5x
Solution
a.	 The equation x2 = -8y has the standard form x2 = -4py, so
 -4p = -8    Equate coefficients of y.
 p = 2     Divide both sides by -4.
	
The parabola opens down. The vertex is the origin, and the focus is 10, -22. The di-
rectrix is the horizontal line y = 2; the axis of the parabola is the y-axis. You should 
plot some additional points to ensure the accuracy of your sketch. Because the focus 
is 10, -22, substitute y = -2 in the equation x2 = -8y of the parabola to obtain
 x2 = 1-821-22    Replace y with -2 in x2 = -8y.
 x2 = 16
    Simplify.
 x = {4	
Solve for x.
Graphing a Parabola
Example 1

866	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Thus, the points 14, -22 and 1-4, -22 are two symmetric points on the parabola to 
the right and left of the focus. The graph of this parabola is sketched in Figure 10.7.
figure 10.7  Graph of x2 = -8y
y
x
5
0
1
3
4
6
(0, 2)
(4, 2)
(4, 2)F
V
2
4
3
1
5
Directrix: y  2
b.	 The equation y2 = 5x has the standard form y2 = 4px.
 4p = 5    Equate coefficients of x.
 p = 5
4    Divide both sides by 4.
	
The parabola opens to the right. The vertex is the origin, and the focus is a5
4, 0b. 
	
The directrix is the vertical line x = -p = -5
4; the axis of the parabola is the x-axis. 
	
To find two symmetric points on the parabola that are above and below the focus, 
	
substitute x = 5
4 in the equation of the parabola.
 y2 = 5x
    Equation of the parabola
 y2 = 5 a5
4b    Replace x with 5
4.
 y2 = 25
4
    Simplify.
 y = {5
2    Solve for y.
Plot the two additional points a5
4, 5
2b and a5
4, -5
2b on the parabola. The graph of 
y2 = 5x is sketched in Figure 10.8.
Practice Problem 1  Graph the parabola and specify the vertex, focus, directrix,  
and axis.
a.	 x2 = 12y        b.   y2 = -6x
The line segment joining the focus and the two points symmetric about the axis on a  
parabola is called the latus rectum of the parabola. Intuitively, the length of the latus rec-
tum determines the “size of the opening” of the parabola.
figure 10.8  Graph of y2 = 5x
5
4
, 5
2
5
4
, 5
2
5
4
, 0
x  5
4
Directrix:
y
x
2
3
0
V
1
2
3
1
1
2
3
2
3
1
F
You can use a graphing calculator 
to graph parabolas.
To graph x2 = 4py, just 
graph Y1 = 1
4px2.
For example, when x2 = -8y, 
you have 4p = -8; so you graph 
Y1 = - 1
8x2.
Technology
Connection
8
5
8
1

	
Section 10.2    ■    The Parabola 867
The line segment that passes through the focus of a parabola, is perpendicular  
to the axis, and has endpoints on the parabola is called the latus rectum of the  
parabola. Figure 10.9 shows that the length of the latus rectum for each of the 
graphs y2 = {4px and x2 = {4py for p 7 0 is 4p.
Latus Rectum
figure 10.9  The latus rectum
Latus rectum
y
x
(p, 2p)
(p, 2p)
(p, 0)
(a) y2  4px, p  0
Latus rectum
y
x
(2p, p)
(2p, p)
(0, p)
(c) x2  4py, p  0
Latus rectum
y
x
(p, 2p)
(p, 2p)
(p, 0)
(b) y2  4px, p  0
Latus rectum
y
x
(2p, p)
(2p, p)
(0, p)
(d) x2  4py, p  0
To graph y2 = 4px, solve the 
equation for y to obtain
y = {14px.
Then graph Y1 = 14px and 
Y2 = - 14px. For example, to 
graph y2 = 5x, you graph 
Y1 = 15x, Y2 = - 15x.
Technology
Connection
1.5
3
1.5
3
Find the standard equation of each parabola with vertex 10, 02 satisfying the given description.
a.	 The focus is 1-3, 02.
b.	 The axis of the parabola is the y-axis, and the graph passes through the point 1-4, 22.
Solution
a.	 The vertex 10, 02 of the parabola and its focus 1-3, 02 are on the x-axis, so the  
parabola opens to the left. Its equation must be of the form y2 = -4px with p = 3.
 y2 = -4px
    Form of the equation
 y2 = -4132x    Replace p with 3.
 y2 = -12x
    Simplify.
	
The equation of the parabola is y2 = -12x.
b.	 Because the vertex of the parabola is 10, 02, the axis is the y-axis, and the point 1-4, 22 
is above the x-axis, the parabola opens up and the equation of the parabola is of the form
x2 = 4py.
Finding the Equation of a Parabola
Example 2 

868	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
	
This equation is satisfied by x = -4 and y = 2 because the parabola passes through 
the point 1-4, 22.
 1-422 = 4p122    Replace x with -4 and y with 2.
 16 = 8p
    Simplify.
 2 = p
    Divide both sides by 8.
	
Therefore, the equation of the parabola is
 x2 = 4122y	
Replace p with 2 in x2 = 4py.
 x2 = 8y	
Simplify.
	
The required equation of the parabola is x2 = 8y.
Practice Problem 2  Find the standard equation of each parabola with vertex 10, 02 
satisfying the following conditions.
a.	 The focus is 10, 22.
b.	 The axis of the parabola is the x-axis, and the graph passes through 11, 22.
Translations of Parabolas
The equation of a parabola with vertex 10, 02 and axis on a coordinate axis is of the form 
x2 = {4py or y2 = {4px. You can use translations of the graphs of these equations to 
find the equation of a parabola with vertex 1h, k2 and axis of symmetry parallel to a coor-
dinate axis. We obtain these translations by replacing x with x - h (a horizontal shift) and 
y with y - k (a vertical shift).
3	
Translate a parabola.
Summary Of Main Facts
Main facts about a parabola with vertex 1h, k2 and p + 0
Standard  
Equation 
1y −k22 = 4p1x −h2
1y −k22 = −4p1x −h2
1x −h22 = 4p1y −k2
1x −h22 = −4p1y −k2
Equation  
  of axis
y = k
y = k
x = h
x = h
Description
Opens right
Opens left
Opens up
Opens down
Vertex
1h, k2
1h, k2
1h, k2
1h, k2
Focus
1h + p, k2
1h - p, k2
1h, k + p2
1h, k - p2
Directrix
x = h - p
x = h + p
y = k - p
y = k + p
Graph
y
x
F(h  p, k)
(y     k)2     4p(x     h)
y  k
x  h  p
V(h, k)
y
x = h + p
x
V(h, k)
y = k
(y     k)2         4p(x     h)
F(h  p, k)
y
x
V(h, k)
x  h 
F(h, k  p)
y  k  p
(x     h)2     4p(y     k)
y
x
V(h, k)
x  h 
F(h, k  p)
y  k  p
(x     h)2         4p(y     k)
Expanding the standard equations of a parabola and collecting like terms results in an 
equation of the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
with A = 0 or C = 0 but not both. Conversely, except in degenerate cases, any equation of 
this form can be put into one of the standard forms of a parabola by completing the square 
on the x- or y-terms.

	
Section 10.2    ■    The Parabola 869
Find the vertex, focus, and directrix of the parabola 2y2 - 8y - x + 7 = 0. Sketch the 
graph of the parabola.
Solution
First, complete the square on y. Then you can compare the resulting equation with one of 
the standard forms of the equation of a parabola.
 2y2 - 8y - x + 7 = 0
    The given equation
 2y2 - 8y = x - 7
    Isolate terms containing y.
 21y2 - 4y2 = x - 7
    Factor out the common factor, 2.
 21y2 - 4y + 42 = x - 7 + 8    Add 2 a-4
2b
2
= 21-222 = 2 # 4 = 8 to 
	
both sides to complete the square.
 21y - 222 = x + 1
    y2 - 4y + 4 = 1y - 222; simplify.
 1y - 222 = 1
21x + 12     Divide both sides by 2.
The last equation is in one of the standard forms of the parabola. Comparing it with
the form 1y - k22 = 4p1x - h2, we have h = -1; k = 2; and 4p = 1
2, or p = 1
8. 
The parabola opens to the right, the vertex is 1h, k2 = 1-1, 22, the focus is 
1h + p, k2 = a -1 + 1
8, 2b = a -7
8, 2b, and the directrix is the vertical line 
x = h - p = -1 - 1
8 = -9
8. The graph is shown in Figure 10.10.
Practice Problem 3  Find the vertex, focus, and directrix of the parabola 
2x2 - 8x - y + 7 = 0.
Sketch the graph of the parabola.
Reflecting Property of Parabolas
A property of parabolas that is useful in applications is the reflecting property: if a reflect-
ing surface has parabolic cross sections with a common focus, then all light rays entering 
the surface parallel to the axis will be reflected through the focus. See Figure 10.11(a). 
This property is used in reflecting telescopes and satellite antennas because the light rays 
or radio waves bouncing off a parabolic surface are reflected to the focus, where they are 
collected and amplified.
Conversely, if a light source is located at the focus of a parabolic reflector, the reflected 
rays will form a beam parallel to the axis. See Figure 10.11(b). This principle is used in 
flashlights, searchlights, and other such devices.
Î
Î
Graphing a Parabola
Example 3 
y
x
2
0
1
1
2
3
4
9
8
7
8
, 2
F
figure 10.10  Converting  
2y2 - 8y - x + 7 = 0 to standard  
form
4	
Use the reflecting property  
of parabolas.
Headlight
(b)
(a)
figure 10.11 

870	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
The parabolic mirror used in the Hubble Space Telescope has a diameter of 94.5 inches. 
See Figure 10.12. Find the equation of the parabola if its focus is 2304 inches from the 
vertex. What is the thickness of the mirror at the edges?
Solution
Position the parabola so that its vertex is at the origin and its focus is on the positive y-axis. 
The equation of the parabola is of the form
x2 = 4py
x2 = 4123042y	
p = 2304
x2 = 9216y	
Simplify.
To find the thickness y of the mirror at the edge, substitute x = 47.25 (half the diameter) 
in the equation x2 = 9216y and solve for y.
 147.2522 = 9216y    Replace x with 47.25.
 147.2522
9216
= y
    Divide both sides by 9216.
 0.2422485 ≈y
    Use a calculator.
Thus, the thickness of the mirror at the edges is approximately 0.2422485 inch.
The Hubble telescope initially had “blurred vision” because the mirror was ground at the 
edges to a thickness of 0.24224 inch. In other words, it had been ground 0.000008 inch, or 
two-millionths of a meter, smaller than it should have been. What a difference a rounding 
error can make! The problem was fixed in 1993.
Practice Problem 4  A small imitation of the Hubble’s parabolic mirror has a diameter of  
3 inches. Find the equation of the parabola if its focus is 7.3 inches from the vertex. What is 
the thickness of the mirror at its edges, correct to four decimal places?
Calculating Some Properties of the Hubble Space Telescope
EXAMPLE 4
figure 10.12  Hubble Space 
Telescope
y
x
94.5 in
Axis of symmetry
Thickness
Incoming light
Incoming light
(Not to scale)
F(0, 2304)
Focus
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. 
0
6
2
10
10
6
2
x
y
2. a. x2 = 8y  b. y2 = 4x
3. Vertex: 12, -12; focus: a2, - 7
8b; directrix: y = - 9
8 
0
1
0.5
2.5
1.5
0.5
x
y
0.5
1
8
9
F(
)
8
7
2
4. Equation: x2 = 29.2y. The thickness of the mirror at the edges 
is 0.077055 in.
Vertex: 10, 02; focus: 10, 32;
directix: y = -3;
axis: y-axis
b. 
0
3
1
5
5
3
1
x
y
Vertex: 10, 02;
focus: a- 3
2, 0b;
directix: x = 3
2;
axis: x-axis

	
Section 10.2    ■    The Parabola 871
Exercises
section 10.2 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 A parabola is the set of all points P in the plane that are 
equidistant from a fixed line called the 
 and a 
fixed point not on the line called the 
.
	 2.	 The line segment through the focus perpendicular to the 
directrix with endpoints on the parabola is called the 
 of the parabola.
	 3.	 The point at which the axis intersects the parabola is called 
the 
 of the parabola.
	 4.	 The graph of y + 2 = 31x - 422 is obtained by shifting 
the graph of y = 3x2 to the right 
 units and 
shifting 
 2 units.
	 5.	 True or False. The vertex of a parabola is midway between 
its focus and its directrix. 
	 6.	 True or False. A parabola is symmetric about its axis. 
In Exercises 7–14, find the focus and directrix of the parabola 
with the given equation. Then match each equation to one of 
the graphs labeled (a) through (h). 
	 7.	 x2 = 2y 
	 8.	 9x2 = 4y 
	 9.	 16x2 = -9y 
	10.	 x2 = -2y 
	11.	 y2 = 2x 
	12.	 9y2 = 16x 
	13.	 9y2 = -16x 
	14.	 y2 = -2x 
y
x
(a)
1
1
1,
1
0
1
2

1,
1
2

y
x
1
1
0
(b)
1
(0.5, 1)
(0.5, 1)
y
x
(c)
1
0
1
8
9
4
9
8
9
,
4
9,
y
x
1
0
(d)
9
64
,
9
32
9
64
,
9
32
y
x
0
1
1
(e)
1
2
1,
1
2
1,
(f)
y
x
0
1
4
9
8
9
     ,      
4
9
8
9
      ,    
y
x
0
1
1
(g)
1
2
     , 1
1
2, 1
1
y
x
0
(h)
1
9
2
9
      ,    
1
9
2
9 ,    
In Exercises 15–20, use a graphing device to graph each 
parabola. 
	15.	 x2 - 2y = 0 
	16.	 x2 = 6y 
	17.	 y2 = -3x 
	18.	 y2 + 5x = 0 
	19.	 3x + 2y2 = 0 
	20.	 y2 - 5x = 0 
In Exercises 21–36, find the standard equation of the parabola 
that satisfies the given conditions. Also find the length of the 
latus rectum of each parabola. 
	21.	 Focus: 10, 22; directrix: y = 4 
	22.	 Focus: 10, 42; directrix: y = -2 
	23.	 Focus: 1-2, 02; directrix: x = 3 
	24.	 Focus: 1-1, 02; directrix: x = -2 
	25.	 Vertex: 11, 12; directrix: x = 3 
	26.	 Vertex: 11, 12; directrix: y = 2 
	27.	 Vertex: 11, 12; directrix: y = -3 
	28.	 Vertex: 11, 12; directrix: x = -2 
	29.	 Vertex: 11, 02; focus: 13, 02 
	30.	 Vertex: 10, 12; focus: 10, 22 
	31.	 Vertex: 10, 12; focus: 10, -22 
	32.	 Vertex: 1-1, 02; focus: 1-3, 02 
	33.	 Vertex: 12, 32; directrix: x = 4 
	34.	 Vertex: 12, 32; directrix: y = 4 
	35.	 Vertex: 12, 32; directrix: y = 1 
	36.	 Vertex: 12, 32; directrix: x = 1 
In Exercises 37–40, use a graphing device to graph each 
parabola. 
	37.	 1x + 12 = 41y - 122 
	38.	 1x - 22 = -41y - 122 
	39.	 1x - 122 = -91y + 12 
	40.	 1x + 222 = 61y + 12 
In Exercises 41–56, find the vertex, focus, and directrix of 
each parabola. Graph the equation. 
	41.	 1y - 122 = 21x + 12 
	42.	 1y + 222 = 81x - 32 
	43.	 1x + 222 = 31y - 22 
	44.	 1x - 322 = 41y + 12 
	45.	 1y + 122 = -61x - 22 
	46.	 1y - 222 = -121x + 32
	47.	 1x - 122 = -101y - 32
	48.	 1x + 222 = -81y + 32       

872	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
	49.	 y = x2 + 2x + 2 
	50.	 y = 3x2 + 6x + 2 
	51.	 2y2 + 4y - 2x + 1 = 0 
	52.	 3y2 - 6y + x - 1 = 0 
	53.	 y + x2 + x + 5
4 = 0
	54.	 x = 8y2 + 8y 
	55.	 x = 24y - 3y2 - 2 
	56.	 y = 16x - 2x2 + 3 
In Exercises 57–64, find two possible equations for the  
parabola with the given vertex V that passes through the 
given point P. The axis of symmetry of each parabola is  
parallel to a coordinate axis. 
	57.	 V10, 02, P11, 22 
	58.	 V10, 02, P1-3, 22 
	59.	 V10, 12, P12, 32 
	60.	 V11, 22, P12, 12 
	61.	 V1-2, 12, P1-3, 02 
	62.	 V11, -12, P10, 02 
	63.	 V1-1, 12, P10, 22 
	64.	 V12, 32, P13, -12 
Applying the Concepts
	65.	 Satellite dish. A parabolic satellite dish is 40 inches across 
and 20 inches deep (from the vertex to the plane of the rim). 
How far from the vertex must the signal-receiving (receptor) 
unit be located to ensure that it is at the focus of the parabolic 
cross sections?
	66.	 Repeat Exercise 65 assuming that the dish is 8 feet across and 
3 feet deep. 
	67.	 Solar heating. A parabolic reflector mirror is to be used for 
the solar heating of water. The mirror is 18 feet across and 
6 feet deep. Where should the heating element be placed to 
heat the water most rapidly? 
	68.	 Flashlights. A parabolic flashlight reflector is to be 4 inches 
across and 2 inches deep. Where should the lightbulb be 
placed? 
	69.	 Flashlight. The shape of a parabolic flashlight reflector can 
be described by the equation x = 4y2. Where should the  
lightbulb be placed? 
	70.	 Repeat Exercise 69 assuming that the parabolic flashlight 
	
	 reflector has the shape described by the equation x = 1
2 y2.
	71.	 Satellite dish. The shape of a parabolic satellite dish can be 
described by the equation y = 4x2. Where should the micro-
phone be placed? 
	72.	 Repeat Exercise 71 assuming that the shape of the dish can 
be described by the equation y = x2. 
	73.	 Suspension bridge. The ends of a suspension bridge  
cable are fastened to two towers that are 800 feet apart and  
120 feet high. Assume that the cable hangs in the shape of a 
parabola and touches the roadbed midway between the tow-
ers. Find the length of the straight wire needed to suspend  
the roadbed from the cable at a distance of 250 feet from  
the tower. 
	74.	 Suspension bridge. Repeat Exercise 73 assuming that the 
suspension bridge cable is at a height of 8 feet above the  
midway between the towers. 
	75.	 Kicking a football. A football is kicked from the ground  
70 yards along a parabolic path. The maximum height of the 
ball is 30 yards. Find the height of the ball 5 yards before it 
hits the ground.
30 yd
70 yd
	76.	 Parabolic arch bridge. A parabolic arch of a bridge has  
a 60-foot base and a height of 24 feet. Find the height of  
the arch at distances of 5, 10, and 20 feet from the center  
of the base. 
	77.	 Variable cost. The average variable cost y, in dollars, of a 
monthly output of x tons of a company producing a metal is 
	
	 given by y = 1
10x2 - 3x + 50. Find the output and cost at 
	
	 the vertex of the parabola. 
	78.	 Repeat Exercise 77 assuming that the variable cost is given 
	
	 by y = 1
8x2 - 2x + 60. 
Beyond the Basics
	79.	 Find the coordinates of the points at which the line 
2x - 3y + 16 = 0 intersects the parabola y2 = 16x.
	80.	 Show that the line y = 2x + 3 intersects the parabola 
y2 = 24x at only one point. Find the point of intersection.
	81.	 Find the equation of the directrix of a parabola with vertex 
1-2, 22 and focus 1-6, 62.
[Hint: Note that the axis of this parabola is not parallel to a 
coordinate axis. Recall that the vertex is midway between the 
focus and the directrix.]
	82.	 A parabola has focus 1-4, 52, and the equation of its directrix 
is 3x - 4y = 18.
a. 	Find the equation for the axis of the parabola.
b.	 Find the point of intersection of the axis and the directrix.
c.	 Use part (b) to find the vertex of this parabola.       

	
Section 10.2    ■    The Parabola 873
	83.	 Find an equation of two possible parabolas whose latus 
rectum is the line segment joining the points 13, 52 and 
13, -32. 
	84.	 Repeat Exercise 83 assuming that the latus rectum is the line 
segment joining the points 1-5, 12 and 13, 12.
	85.	 Find an equation of the parabola with axis parallel to the 
y-axis, passing through the points 10, 52, 11, 42, and 12, 72. 
	86.	 Find an equation of the parabola with axis parallel to the x-axis, 
passing through the points 1-1, -12, 13, 12, and 14, 02. 
	87.	 Find the vertex, focus, directrix, and axis of the parabola 
x2 - 8x + 2y + 4 = 0. 
	88.	 Repeat Exercise 87 for the parabola 
Ax2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0, 
A ≠0, E ≠0. 
	89.	 Find the vertex, focus, directrix, and axis of the parabola 
y2 + 3x - 6y + 15 = 0. 
	90.	 Repeat Exercise 89 for the parabola 
Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0, C ≠0, D ≠0. 
In Exercises 91–94, use the following definition: A tangent line 
to a parabola is a line that is not parallel to the axis of the 
parabola and that intersects the parabola at exactly one point. 
	91.	 Find an equation of the tangent line at the point 11, 32 on the 
parabola y = 3x2 by using the following steps.
Step 1	 Let m be the slope of the tangent line. Then the equa-
tion of the tangent line is y - 3 = m1x - 12. Solve 
this equation for y.
Step 2	 Substitute the value of y from Step 1 in the equation 
y = 3x2. You will obtain a quadratic equation in x.
Step 3	 For the line in Step 1 to be the tangent line to the 
parabola, the roots of the quadratic equation in Step 2 
must be equal. Set discriminant = 0 and solve for m.
Step 4	 Use the value of m from Step 3 to write the equation of 
the tangent line to the parabola y = 3x2.
	92.	 Show that an equation of the tangent line at the point  
1x1, y12 on the parabola y = 4ax2 is y = 8ax1x - y1.  
[Hint: Follow the steps in the Exercise 91 and note that 
y1 = 4ax1
2.]
	93.	 Show that an equation of the tangent line at the point 
	
	 1x1, y12 on the parabola x = 4ay2 is y =
1
8ay1
x + y1
2 .
	94.	 Reflection property of a parabola. Let P1x1 y12 be a 
point on the parabola y = 4ax2 with focus F = 10, a2  
and the directrix y = -a. Let AP be the tangent line to the 
parabola. See the figure.
a.	 Use Exercise 92 to show that d1F, A2 = a + y1. 
Then use the definition of the parabola to show that 
d1P, F2 = a + y1. Conclude that ∠b = ∠g.
	
   This will suggest the following construction of the 
tangent line: Let B be a point on the axis of the parabola 
such that BP is perpendicular to the axis. Let V be the 
vertex of the parabola. Find the point A on the axis of the 
parabola such that d1B, V2 = d1A, V2. Then the line AP is 
the tangent line to the parabola at the point P.
b.	 Use geometry to show that the angle between the y-axis 
and the line AP equals the angle between the lines AP  
and the line x = x1 (which is parallel to the axis of  
parabola).
	
   This demonstrates the reflection property of a parabola, 
which says that the tangent line to a parabola at a point P 
makes equal angles with
1.	 The line through P and the focus.
2.	 The axis of the parabola.
y
x
B
F
P(x1, y1)

V
A

y
x
F
P(x1, y1)


V
A
B
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	95.	 a.  Is a parabola always the graph of a function? Why or  
why not? 
b.	 Find all possible values of the slope of the directrix of a 
parabola such that the parabola is always the graph of a 
function. 
	96.	 The equation y2 = 4kx describes a family of curves for each 
value of k. Sketch the graphs of the members of this family 
for k = {1, {2, {3. What is the common characteristic of 
this family? 
	97.	 True or False. The graph of x = ay2 + by + c 1a ≠02 is 
a parabola whose axis is parallel to the y-axis. 
	98.	 It can be proved that the distance d from a point 1x1, y12 to a 
line ax + by + c = 0 is given by 
d =
ax1 + by1 + c
2a2 + b2
Use this fact and the definition of a parabola to find an equation 
of the parabola whose focus is 14, 52 and whose directrix is the 
line 3x + 4y = 7. Find an equation for the axis of this parabola.
	99.	 Given that the vertex of a parabola is 16, -32 and the directrix 
is the line 3x - 5y + 1 = 0, find the coordinates of the focus.   

874	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 100 and 101, find the distance between the given 
points.
	100.	 1-1, 32 and 16, 22 
	101.	 1-1, 22 and 1-1, -52 
In Exercises 102–103, expand each expression.
	102.	 1x - 522 
	103.	 12x + 322 
In Exercises 104 and 105, find the x- and y-intercepts of the 
graph of the given equation.
	104.	 x2 + x - 2y = 2 
	105.	 x2 + 8x + y2 - 6y + 16 = 0
In Exercises 106 and 107, solve each equation.
	106.	 26x + 7 = x + 2  
	107.	 2 + 23x - 5 = x - 1 
In Exercises 108 and 109, rewrite each expression in the form 
a1x −b22 + c by completing the square.
	108.	 x2 - 6x + 7 
	109.	 4x2 - 8x + 14 
In Exercises 110 and 111, use the horizontal and vertical 
shifts of the parabola with the given equation to find an  
equation of a parabola with the specified vertex.
	110.	 y = 4x2, vertex 11, -22 
	111.	 y = 1x + 222 + 3, vertex 1-1, 22  

	
Section 10.3    ■    The Ellipse 875
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Distance formula (Section 2.1, page 159)
2	 Completing the square (Section 3.1,  
page 295)
3	 Midpoint formula (Section 2.1, page 161)
4	 Transformations of graphs (Section 2.7, 
page 251)
5	 Symmetry (Section 2.2, page 168)
Objectives
1	 Define an ellipse.
2	 Find the equation of an ellipse.
3	 Translate ellipses.
4	 Use ellipses in applications.
S e c t i o n 10.3
Definition of Ellipse
1	
Define an ellipse.
What Is Lithotripsy?
Lithotripsy is a combination of two words: litho and tripsy. In Greek, the word lith 
denotes a stone and the word tripsy means “crushing.” The complete medical term 
for lithotripsy is extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL). Lithotripsy is a medical 
procedure in which a kidney stone is crushed into small sandlike pieces with the help of 
ultrasound high-energy shock waves, without breaking the skin.
The lithotripsy machine is called a lithotripter. The technology for the lithotripter 
was developed in Germany. The first successful treatment of a patient by a lithotripter 
was in February 1980 at Munich University. In the beginning, the patient had to lie in 
an elliptical tank filled with water and only small kidney stones were crushed. But as 
the medical research advanced, newer machines with better technology were manufac-
tured. Now there is no need to keep the patient unconscious with an empty stomach, 
nor is the tub of water required.
In Example 5, you will see how the reflecting property of an ellipse is used in 
­lithotripsy.
The Ellipse
You can draw an ellipse with the use of thumbtacks, a fixed length of string, and a pencil. 
Stick a thumbtack at each of the two points (the foci) and tie one end of the string to each 
tack. Place a pencil inside the loop of the string and pull it taut. Move the pencil, keeping 
the string taut at all times. The pencil traces an ellipse, as shown in Figure 10.13.
The points of intersection of the ellipse with the line through the foci are called the 
­vertices (plural of vertex). The line segment connecting the vertices is the major axis of 
the ellipse. The midpoint of the major axis is the center of the ellipse. The line segment 
that is perpendicular to the major axis at the center and with endpoints on the ellipse is 
called the minor axis. See Figure 10.14.
figure 10.13  Drawing an ellipse
Lithotripter
An ellipse is the set of all points in the plane, the sum of whose distances from two 
fixed points is a constant. The fixed points are called the foci (the plural of focus) 
of the ellipse.
Ellipse

876	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Equation of an Ellipse
To find a simple equation of an ellipse, we place the ellipse’s major axis along one of the 
coordinate axes and the center of the ellipse at the origin. We will begin with the case in 
which the major axis lies along the x-axis. Let F11-c, 02 and F21c, 02 be the coordinates 
of the foci. See Figure 10.15. Note that the center at the origin is the midpoint of the line 
segment having the foci as endpoints. To simplify the equation, it is customary to let 2a be 
the constant distance referred to in the definition. Let P1x, y2 be a point on the ellipse. Then
2	
Find the equation of an 
ellipse.
figure 10.14 
V1
V2
F1
M1
M2
C
P
F2
Points F1 and F2 are the foci.
Points V1 and V2 are the vertices.
Point C is the center.
Segment V1 V2 is the major axis.
Segment M1 M2 is the minor axis.
The sum of the distances
PF1  PF2 from any point P on the
ellipse to the foci is constant.
 d1P, F12 + d1P, F22 = 2a
    Definition of ellipse
 21x + c22 + y2 + 21x - c22 + y2 = 2a
    Distance formula
 21x + c22 + y2 = 2a - 21x - c22 + y2
    Isolate a radical.
 1x + c22 + y2 = 12a - 21x - c22 + y222    Square both sides.
 x2 + 2cx + c2 + y2 = 4a2 - 4a21x - c22 + y2
+ 1x - c22 + y2             Expand squares.
 x2 + 2cx + c2 + y2 = 4a2 - 4a21x - c22 + y2
+ x2 - 2cx + c2 + y2         Expand squares.
 4cx - 4a2 = -4a21x - c22 + y2
    Isolate the radical and simplify.
 cx - a2 = -a21x - c22 + y2
    Divide both sides by 4.
 1cx - a222 = a231x - c22 + y24
    Square both sides.
 c2x2 - 2a2cx + a4 = a21x2 - 2cx + c2 + y22
    Expand squares.
 1c2 - a22x2 - a2y2 = a2c2 - a4
    Simplify and rearrange.
 1a2 - c22x2 + a2y2 = a21a2 - c22  112
    Multiply both sides by -1 and factor a4 - a2c2.
Now consider triangle F1PF2 in Figure 10.15. The triangle inequality from  
geometry states that the sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle is greater 
than the length of the third side; so for this triangle, we have
 d1P, F12 + d1P, F22 7 d1F1, F22
 2a 7 2c
	
2a = d1P, F12 + d1P, F22; d1F1, F22 = 2c
 a 7 c
	
Divide both sides by 2.
 a2 7 c2
	
Square both sides.
Therefore, a2 - c2 7 0. Letting b2 = a2 - c2, we obtain
 1a2 - c22x2 + a2y2 = a21a2 - c22    Equation (1)
 b2x2 + a2y2 = a2b2
    Replace a2 - c2 with b2.
 x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1  122       Divide both sides by a2b2.
The last equation is the standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center 
10, 02 and foci 1-c, 02 and 1c, 02, where b2 = a2 - c2.
figure 10.15 
V1(−a, 0)
F1(−c, 0)
F2(c, 0)
P(x, y)
C
V2(a, 0)
y
x

	
Section 10.3    ■    The Ellipse 877
To find the x-intercepts for the graph of this ellipse, set y = 0 in equation (2) to get x2
a2 = 1.
The solutions are x = {a, so the x-intercepts of the graph are -a and a.
Therefore, the ellipse’s vertices are 1-a, 02 and 1a, 02. The distance between the  
vertices V11-a, 02 and V21a, 02 is 2a, so the length of the major axis is 2a.
The y-intercepts of the ellipse (found by setting x = 0 in equation (2)) are -b and b, 
so the endpoints of the minor axis are 10, -b2 and 10, b2 Consequently, the length of the 
minor axis is 2b. See the left-hand figure in the table below.
Similarly, by reversing the roles of x and y, an equation of the ellipse with center 10, 02 
and foci 10, -c2 and 10, c2 on the y-axis is given by
x2
b2 + y2
a2 = 1, where b2 = a2 - c2   (3)
In equation (3), the major axis, of length 2a, is along the y-axis and the minor axis, of 
length 2b, is along the x-axis. See the right-hand figure in the table below.
If the major axis of an ellipse is along or parallel to the x-axis, the ellipse is called a hori-
zontal ellipse, an ellipse with major axis along or parallel to the y-axis is called a vertical 
ellipse.
We summarize the facts about horizontal and vertical ellipses with center 10, 02. By the 
equation of a major or minor axis, we mean the equation of the line on which that axis lies.
Summary Of Main Facts
Main facts about an ellipse with center 10, 02
Standard Equation
x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1; a + b + 0 
(Horizontal ellipse) 
x2
b2 + y2
a2 = 1; a + b + 0 
(Vertical ellipse) 
Relationship between a, b, and c
b2 = a2 - c2
b2 = a2 - c2
Major axis along
x-axis
y-axis
Length of major axis
2a
2a
Minor axis along
y-axis
x-axis
Length of minor axis
2b
2b
Vertices
1{a, 02
10, {a2
Foci
1{c, 02
10, {c2
Endpoints of minor axis
10, {b2
1{b, 02
Symmetry
The graph is symmetric about  
the x-axis, y-axis, and origin.
The graph is symmetric 
about the x-axis, y-axis,  
and origin.
Graph
(a, 0)
(a, 0)
(0, b)
(0, b)
(c, 0)
F1
V1
(c, 0)
F2 V2
(0, 0)
Horizontal ellipse
x2
a2
y2
b2

 1
y
x
                     
(b, 0)
(b, 0)
(0, a)
V2
(0, a)
V1
(0, c)
F2
F1
(0, c)
(0, 0)
x2
b2
y2
a2

= 1
y
x
Vertical ellipse

878	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Notice that if a = b, then a2 = b2 and equations (2) and (3) of an ellipse are equiva-
lent to x2 + y2 = a2; this is the equation for a circle with center at (0, 0) and radius a.  
Consequently, a circle is a special case of an ellipse.
Find the standard form of the equation of the ellipse that has vertex 15, 02 and foci 1{4, 02.
Solution
Because the foci are 1-4, 02 and 14, 02, the major axis is on the x-axis. We know that 
c = 4 and a = 5. Then find b2:
b2 = a2 - c2
    Relationship between a, b, and c
b2 = 1522 - 1422 = 9    Replace c with 4 and a with 5.
Substituting 25 for a2 and 9 for b2 in the standard form for a horizontal ellipse, we get
x2
25 + y2
9 = 1.
Practice Problem 1  Find the standard form of the equation of the ellipse that has  
vertex 10, 102 and foci 10, -82 and 10, 82.
Finding an Equation of an Ellipse
EXAMPLE 1
Graph the ellipse whose equation is 9x2 + 4y2 = 36. Find the foci of the ellipse and the 
lengths of its axes.
Solution
First, write the equation in standard form.
 9x2 + 4y2 = 36    Given equation
 9x2
36 + 4y2
36 = 1     Divide both sides by 36.
 x2
4 + y2
9 = 1     Simplify.
larger denominator
Because the denominator in the y2-term is larger than the denominator in the x2-term, the 
ellipse is a vertical ellipse. Here a2 = 9 and b2 = 4, so c2 = a2 - b2 = 9 - 4 = 5. 
Thus, a = 3, b = 2 and c = 15. From the table on page 877, we know the following 
features of the vertical ellipse:
Vertices:	
10, {a2 = 10, {32
Foci:	
10, {c2 = 10,{152
Length of major axis:        2a = 2132 = 6
Length of minor axis:        2b = 2122 = 4
The graph of the ellipse is shown in Figure 10.16.
Practice Problem 2  Repeat Example 2 for the ellipse whose equation is  
4x2 + y2 = 16.
Graphing an Ellipse
EXAMPLE 2
To graph the ellipse x2
4 + y2
9 = 1, 
solve the equation for y:
y2
9 = 1 - x2
4
or y2 = 9 a1 - x2
4 b
so that y = {3B1 - x2
4 . 
Then graph both functions 
Y1 = 3B1 - x2
4 , and 
Y2 = -3B1 - x2
4 . 
Technology
Connections
2.5
3.5
2.5
3.5
figure 10.16  Ellipse with 
equation 9x 2 + 4y  2 = 36
y
x
4
0
2
4
2
2
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
4
2
4
V2(0, 3)
V1(0, 3)
F2(0,     5)
œ
F1(0,     5)
œ

	
Section 10.3    ■    The Ellipse 879
Translations of Ellipses
The graph of the equation
x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1
is an ellipse with center 10, 02 and major axis along a coordinate axis. As in the case of a 
parabola, horizontal and vertical shifts can be used to obtain the graph of an ellipse whose 
equation is
1x - h22
a2
+ 1y - k22
b2
= 1.
The center of such an ellipse is 1h, k2, and its axes are parallel to the coordinate axes.
3	
Translate ellipses.
Summary of main facts
Main facts about horizontal and vertical ellipses with center  1h, k2
Standard Equation
1x −h22
a2
 + 
1y −k22
b2
= 1; 
a + b + 0
(Horizontal ellipse)
1x −h22
b2
 + 
1y −k22
a2
= 1;
a + b + 0
(Vertical ellipse)
Center
1h, k2
1h, k2
Major axis along the line
y = k
x = h
Length of major axis
2a
2a
Minor axis along the line
x = h
y = k
Length of minor axis
2b
2b
Vertices
1h + a, k2,1h - a, k2
1h, k + a2,1h, k - a2
Endpoints of minor axis
1h, k - b2,1h, k + b2
1h - b, k2,1h + b, k2,
Foci
1h + c, k2,1h - c, k2
1h, k + c2,1h, k - c2
Relations between a, b, and c
c2 = a2 - b2
c2 = a2 - b2
Symmetry
The graph is symmetric about  
the lines x = h and y = k.
The graph is symmetric about  
the lines x = h and y = k.
Graph
(0, 0)
(h, k)
Horizontal ellipse
x2
a2
y2
b2

 1
(x  h)2
a2
(y  k)2
b2

 1
y
x
   
x2
b2
y2
a2

 1
y
x
(0, 0)
(h, k)
(x  h)2
b2
(y  k)2
a2

 1
Vertical ellipse 

880	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Find an equation of the ellipse that has foci 1-3, 22 and 15, 22 and that has a major axis 
of length 10.
Solution
Because the foci 1-3, 22 and 15, 22 lie on the horizontal line y = 2, the ellipse is a hori-
zontal ellipse. The center of the ellipse is the midpoint of the line segment joining the foci. 
We have k = 2 and using the midpoint formula, we obtain
h = -3 + 5
2
= 1.
The center of the ellipse is 11, 22. See Figure 10.17. Because the length of the major axis 
is 10, the vertices must be at a distance a = 5 units from the center.
In Figure 10.17, the foci are 4 units from the center. Thus, c = 4. Now find b2:
b2 = a2 - c2 = 1522 - 1422 = 9
Because the major axis is horizontal, the standard form of the equation of the ellipse is
1x - h22
a2
+ 1y - k22
b2
= 1    a 7 b 7 0
1x - 122
25
+ 1y - 222
9
= 1   
Replace h with 1, k with 2, 
a2 with 25, and b2 with 9.
For this horizontal ellipse with center 11, 22 we have a = 5,  b = 3, and c = 4.
Vertices:
1h { a, k2 = 11 { 5, 22 = 1-4, 22 and 16, 22
Endpoints of Minor Axis:
1h, k { b2 = 11, 2 { 32 = 11, -12 and 11, 52
Using the center and these four points, we sketch the graph shown in Figure 10.18.
Practice Problem 3  Find an equation of the ellipse that has foci at 12, -32 and 12, 52 
and has a major axis of length 10.
Both standard forms of the equations of an ellipse with center 1h, k2 can be written in  
the form:
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  142
where neither A nor C is zero and both have the same sign. For example, consider the el-
lipse with equation
 1x - 122
4
+ 1y + 222
9
= 1,
 91x - 122 + 41y + 222 = 36    Multiply both sides by 36.
 91x2 - 2x + 12 + 41y2 + 4y + 42 = 36    Expand squares.
 9x2 - 18x + 9 + 4y2 + 16y + 16 = 36    Distributive property
 9x2 + 4y2 - 18x + 16y - 11 = 0     Simplify.
Comparing this equation with equation (4), we have
A = 9, C = 4, D = -18, E = 16, and  F = -11.
Conversely, equation (4) can be written in a standard form for an ellipse by completing the 
squares in both of the variables x and y.
Finding the Equation of an Ellipse
EXAMPLE 3
The midpoint of the segment  
joining 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 is 
ax1 + x2
2
, y1 + y2
2
b.
RECALL
figure 10.17  Finding the center 
given the foci
F1(3, 2)
F2(5, 2)
y  2
Center (1, 2)
figure 10.18  Ellipse with foci 
(-3, 2) and (5, 2), and major axis 10.
y
x
5
7
0
1
3
2
4
2
(1, 2)
(1, 1)
(1, 5)
(3, 2)
(4, 2)
(5, 2) (6, 2)
6
1
3
5

	
Section 10.3    ■    The Ellipse 881
Find the center, vertices, and foci of the ellipse with equation 
3x2 + 4y2 + 12x - 8y - 32 = 0.
Solution
Complete squares on x and y.
 3x2 + 4y2 + 12x - 8y - 32 = 0
	
Original equation
 13x2 + 12x2 + 14y2 - 8y2 = 32
	
Group like terms.
 31x2 + 4x2 + 41y2 - 2y2 = 32
	
Factor out 3 and 4.
 31x2 + 4x + 42 + 41y2 - 2y + 12 = 32 + 12 + 4    Complete squares on x and y:  
add 3 # 4 and 4 # 1 to each side.
 31x + 222 + 41y - 122 = 48	
Factor and simplify.
 1x + 222
16
+ 1y - 122
12
= 1	
Divide both sides by 48.  
(16 is the larger denominator.)
The last equation is the standard form for a horizontal ellipse with center 1-2, 12, 
a2 = 16, b2 = 12, and c2 = a2 - b2 = 16 - 12 = 4. Thus, a = 4, b = 112 = 213, 
and c = 2. 
From the table on page 879, we have the following information:
The length of the major axis is 2a = 8.
The length of the minor axis is 2b = 413.
Center:	
 1h, k2 = 1-2, 12
Foci:	
  1h { c, k2 = 1-2 { 2, 12
	
 = 1-4, 12 and 10, 12
Vertices:	
 1h { a, k2 = 1-2 { 4, 12
	
 = 1-6, 12 and 12, 12
Endpoints of  
minor axis:	
 1h, k { b2 = 1-2, 1 { 2132
	
 = 1-2, 1 + 2132 and 1-2, 1 - 2132
	
 ≈1-2, 4.462 and 1-2, -2.462
The graph of the ellipse is shown in Figure 10.19.
Practice Problem 4  Find the center, vertices, and foci of the ellipse with equation
x2 + 4y2 - 6x + 8y - 29 = 0.
A circle is considered an ellipse in which the two foci coincide at the center. Converse-
ly, if the two foci of an ellipse coincide, then 2c = 0 (remember, 2c is the distance between 
the two foci of an ellipse); so c = 0 Again, from the relationship c2 = a2 - b2 = 0 we 
have a = b. Thus, the equation for the ellipse becomes the equation for a circle of radius 
r = a having the same center as that of the ellipse.
Applications
Ellipses have many applications. We mention just a few.
1.	 The orbits of the planets are ellipses with the sun at one focus. This fact alone is suffi-
cient to explain the overwhelming importance of ellipses since the 17th century, when 
Kepler and Newton did their monumental work in astronomy.
2.	 Newton also reasoned that comets move in elliptical orbits about the sun. His friend 
Edmund Halley used this information to predict that a certain comet (now called 
Halley’s comet) reappears about every 77 years. Halley saw the comet in 1682 and 
Converting to Standard Form
EXAMPLE 4
4	
Use ellipses in applications.
figure 10.19  Ellipse with equation  
3x2 + 4y2 + 12x - 8y - 32 = 0 
y
x
0
1
3
(2, 1)
(0, 1)
(2, 1)
(4, 1)
(6, 1)
2
4
2
4
6
1
3
5
7
(2, 12    3)

(2, 12    3)


882	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Edmund Halley was  
a friend of Isaac 
Newton. 
Although 
Halley is known pri-
marily for calculating 
the orbit of Halley’s comet, he was also 
a biologist, a geologist, a sea captain, a 
spy, and the author of the first actuarial 
mortality tables.
correctly predicted its return in 1759. The last sighting of the comet was in 1986, 
and it is due to return in 2061. A recent study shows that Halley’s comet has made 
approximately 2000 cycles so far and has about the same number to go before the sun 
erodes it away completely. See Exercise 73.
3.	 We can calculate the distance that a planet travels in one orbit around the sun.
4.	 The reflecting property of ellipses. The reflecting property for an ellipse says  
that a ray of light originating at one focus will be reflected to the other focus. See  
Figure 10.20. Sound waves also follow such paths. This property is used in the  
construction of “whispering galleries,” such as the gallery at St. Paul’s Cathedral in  
London. Such rooms have ceilings whose cross sections are elliptical with common 
foci. As a result, sounds emanating from one focus are reflected by the ceiling to the 
other focus. Thus, a whisper at one focus may not be audible at all at a nearby place, 
but may nevertheless be clearly heard far off at the other focus.
Example 5 illustrates how the reflecting property of an ellipse is used in lithotripsy. 
Recall from the introduction to this section that a lithotripter is a machine designed 
to crush kidney stones into small sandlike pieces with the help of high-energy shock 
waves. To focus these shock waves accurately, a lithotripter uses the reflective property 
of ellipses. A patient is carefully positioned so that the kidney stone is at one focus of 
the ellipsoid (a three-dimensional ellipse) and the shock-producing source is placed at 
the other focus. The high-energy shock waves generated at this focus are concentrated 
on the kidney stone at the other focus, thus pulverizing it without harming the patient.
Edmund Halley 
(1656–1742)
An elliptical water tank has a major axis of length 6 feet and a minor axis of length 4 feet. The 
source of high-energy shock waves from a lithotripter is placed at one focus of the tank. To 
smash the kidney stone of a patient, how far should the stone be positioned from the source?
Solution
Because the length of the major axis of the ellipse is 6 feet, we have 2a = 6; so a = 3. 
Similarly, the minor axis of 4 feet gives 2b = 4, or b = 2. To find c, we use the equation 
c2 = a2 - b2. We have
c2 = 1322 - 1222 = 5. Therefore, c = {15.
If we position the center of the ellipse at 10, 02 and the major axis along the x-axis, then 
the foci of the ellipse are 1- 15, 02 and 115, 02. The distance between these foci is 
215 ≈4.472 feet. The kidney stone should be positioned 4.472 feet from the source of 
the shock waves.
Practice Problem 5  In Example 5, if the tank has a major axis of 8 feet and a minor 
axis of 4 feet, how far should the stone be positioned from the source?
Lithotripsy
EXAMPLE 5
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
3
1
1
3
x
y
figure 10.20  Reflective property
Answers to Practice Problems
1. x2
36 +
y2
100 = 1
2. 
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
V2(0, 4)
V1(0, 4)
F2(0, 2 3)
F1(0, 2 3)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
4x2  y2  16
2a = 8; 2b = 4
3. 
1x - 222
9
+
1y - 122
25
= 1
4. Center: 13, -12; vertices: 13 + 142, -12 and 13 - 142, -12; 
foci: a3 + 3114
2
, -1b and a3 - 3114
2
, -1b
5. 413 ≈6.9282 ft

	
Section 10.3    ■    The Ellipse 883
Exercises
section 10.3 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 An ellipse is the set of all points in the plane, the 
 of whose distances from two fixed points  
is a constant.
	 2.	 The points of intersection of the ellipse with the line through 
the foci are called 
 of the ellipse.
	 3.	 The standard equation of an ellipse with center 10, 02 
	
	 vertices 1{a, 02 and foci 1{c, 02 is x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1, 
	
	 where b2 =
.
	 4.	 In the equation x2
m2 + y2
n2 = 1 
	
	 (i) if m2 7 n2, the graph is a(n) 
 ellipse; 
	
	 (ii) if m2 6 n2, the graph is a(n) 
 ellipse; 
	
	 (iii) if m2 = n2, the graph is a(n) 
.
	 5.	 True or False. The ellipse x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1 lies inside the box 
	
	 formed by the four lines x = {a, y = {b.  
	 6.	 True or False. The graph of Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0 
is a degenerate conic or an ellipse if AC 7 0. 
In Exercises 7–26, find the vertices and foci for each ellipse. 
Graph each equation.
	 7.	 x2
16 + y2
4 = 1 
	 8.	 x2
4 + y2
16 = 1 
	 9.	 x2
9 + y2 = 1 
	10.	 x2 + y2
4 = 1 
	11.	 x2
25 + y2
16 = 1 
	12.	 x2
25 + y2
9 = 1 
	13.	 x2
16 + y2
36 = 1 
	14.	 x2
9 + y2
16 = 1 
	15.	 x2 + y2 = 4 
	16.	 x2 + y2 = 16 
	17.	 x2 + 4y2 = 4 
	18.	 9x2 + y2 = 9 
	19.	 9x2 + 4y2 = 36 
	20.	 4x2 + 25y2 = 100 
	21.	 3x2 + 4y2 = 12 
	22.	 4x2 + 5y2 = 20 
	23.	 5x2 - 10 = -2y2 
	24.	 3y2 = 21 - 7x2 
	25.	 2x2 + 3y2 = 7 
	26.	 3x2 + 4y2 = 11 
In Exercises 27–40, find the standard form of the equation for 
the ellipse satisfying the given conditions. Graph the equation.
	27.	 Foci: 1{1, 02; vertex 13, 02 
	28.	 Foci: 1{3, 02; vertex 15, 02 
	29.	 Foci: 10, {22; vertex 10, 42 
	30.	 Foci: 10, {32; vertex 10, -62 
	31.	 Foci: 1{4, 02; y-intercepts: {3 
	32.	 Foci: 1{3, 02; y-intercepts: {4 
	33.	 Foci: 10, {22 x-intercepts: {4 
	34.	 Foci: 10, {32; x-intercepts: {5 
	35.	 Center: 10, 02; vertical major axis of length 10; minor axis  
of length 6 
	36.	 Center: 10, 02; vertical major axis of length 8; minor axis  
of length 4 
	37.	 Center: 10, 02; vertices: 1{6, 02; c = 3 
	38.	 Center: 10, 02; vertices: 10, {52; c = 3 
	39.	 Center: 10, 02; foci: 10, {22; b = 3 
	40.	 Center: 10, 02; foci: 1{3, 02; b = 2 
In Exercises 41–56, find the center, foci, and vertices of each 
ellipse. Graph each equation.
	41.	
1x - 122
4
+
1y - 122
9
= 1 	42.	
1x - 122
4
+
1y - 122
16
= 1
	43.	 x2
16 +
1y + 322
4
= 1 
	44.	
1x + 222
4
+ y2
9 = 1 
	45.	 31x - 122 + 41y + 222 = 12 
	46.	 91x + 122 + 41y - 222 = 36 
	47.	 41x + 322 + 51y - 122 = 20 
	48.	 251x - 222 + 41y + 522 = 100 
	49.	 5x2 + 9y2 + 10x - 36y - 4 = 0 
	50.	 9x2 + 4y2 + 72x - 24y + 144 = 0 
	51.	 9x2 + 5y2 + 36x - 40y + 71 = 0 
	52.	 3x2 + 4y2 + 12x - 16y - 32 = 0 
	53.	 x2 + 2y2 - 2x + 4y + 1 = 0 
	54.	 2x2 + 2y2 - 12x - 8y + 3 = 0 
	55.	 2x2 + 9y2 - 4x + 18y + 12 = 0 
	56.	 3x2 + 2y2 + 12x - 4y + 15 = 0 
In Exercises 57–60, use a graphing utility to sketch the graph 
of each ellipse.
	57.	 x2
3 + y2
5 = 1 
	58.	 x2
6 + y2
4 = 1 
	59.	 x2 + 3y2 = 21 
	60.	 5x2 + y2 = 10 
Applying the Concepts
	61.	 Semielliptical arch. A portion of an arch in the shape of a 
semiellipse (half an ellipse) is 50 feet wide at the base and 
has a maximum height of 20 feet. Find the height of the arch 
at a distance of 10 feet from the center. See the figure. 
50 feet
20 feet
10 feet
	62.	 In Exercise 61, find the distance between the two points at 
the base where the height of the arch is 10 feet. 
	63.	 Semielliptical arch bridge. A bridge is built in the shape 
of a semielliptical arch. The span of the bridge is 150 meters, 
and its maximum height is 45 meters. There are two verti-
cal supports, each at a distance of 25 meters from the central 
position. Find their heights.        

884	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
	64.	 Elliptical billiard table. Some billiard tables (similar to 
pool tables, but without pockets) are manufactured in the 
shape of an ellipse. The foci of such tables are plainly marked 
for the convenience of the players. An elliptical billiard  
table is 6 feet long and 4 feet wide. Find the location of  
the foci. 
	65.	 “Ellipti-pool.” In Exercise 64, suppose there is a pocket at 
one of the foci. A pool shark places the ball at the table and 
bets that he will be able to make the ball fall into the pocket 
10 out of 10 times. Explain why you should or should not 
accept the bet. 
	66.	 Whispering gallery. The vertical cross section of the dome 
of Statuary Hall in Washington, D.C., is semielliptical. The 
hall is 96 feet long and 23 feet high. It is said that John  
C. Calhoun used the whispering-gallery phenomenon to 
eavesdrop on his adversaries. Where should Calhoun and his 
foes have been standing for the maximum whispering effect?
	67.	 Whispering gallery. The vertical cross section of the 
dome of the Mormon Tabernacle in Salt Lake City, Utah, 
is semielliptical in shape. The cross section is 250 feet long 
with a maximum height of 80 feet. Where should two people 
stand to maximize the whispering effect?
In Exercises 68–71, use the fact (discovered by Johannes 
Kepler in 1609) that the planets move in elliptical orbits with 
the Sun at one of the foci. Astronomers have measured the 
perihelion (the smallest distance from the planet to the Sun) 
and aphelion (the largest distance from the planet to the Sun) 
for each of the planets. The distances given in Table 10.1 are 
in millions of miles.
Table 10.1 
Planet 
Perihelion 
Aphelion 
Mercury
28.56
43.88
Venus
66.74
67.68
Earth
91.38
94.54
Mars
128.49
154.83
Jupiter
460.43
506.87
Saturn
837.05
936.37
Uranus
1699.45
1866.59
Neptune
2771.72
2816.42
	68.	 Mars. Find an equation of Mars’s orbit about the Sun.
c Hint: Set up a coordinate system with the sun at one 
focus and the major axis lying on the x-axis. See the figure. 
Calculate a from the equation 2a = aphelion + perihelion. 
Calculate c from the equation c = a - perihelion. Calculate 
b2 from the equation b2 = a2 - c2. Write the equation 
x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1.d 
Sun
Aphelion
Perihelion
(0, 0)
	69.	 Earth. Write an equation for the orbit of Earth about the 
Sun. 
	70.	 Mercury. Write an equation for the orbit of the planet 
Mercury about the Sun. 
	71.	 Saturn. Write an equation for the orbit of the planet Saturn 
about the Sun. 
	72.	 Moon. The moon orbits Earth in an elliptical path with  
Earth at one focus. The major and minor axes of the  
orbit have lengths of 768,806 kilometers and 767,746 kilome-
ters, respectively. Find the perihelion and aphelion of  
the orbit. 
Moon’s orbit
	73.	 Halley’s comet. In 1682, Edmund Halley (1656–1742) 
identified the orbit of a certain comet (now called Halley’s 
comet) as an elliptical orbit about the Sun, with the sun at 
one focus. He calculated the length of its major axis to be 
approximately 5.39 * 109 kilometers and its minor axis to 
be approximately 1.36 * 109 kilometers. Find the perihelion 
and aphelion of the orbit of Halley’s comet.
	74.	 Orbit of a satellite. Assume that Earth is a sphere with a 
radius of 3960 miles. A satellite has an elliptical orbit around 
Earth with the center of Earth as one of its foci. The maxi-
mum and minimum heights of the satellite from the surface 
of Earth are 164 miles and 110 miles, respectively. Find an 
equation for the orbit of the satellite.    

	
Section 10.3    ■    The Ellipse 885
Beyond the Basics
	75.	 Find an equation of the ellipse in standard form with center 
(0, 0) and with major axis of length 10 passing through the 
	
	 point a-3, 16
5 b. 
76.		Find an equation of the ellipse in standard form with center 
10, 02 and with major axis of length 6 passing through the 
	
		point a1, 315
2
b. 
77.		Find the lengths of the major and minor axes of the ellipse 
x2
b2 + y2
a2 = 1,
	
		given that the ellipse passes through the points 
	
		12, 12 and 11, -32. 
78.	 Find an equation of the ellipse with center 12, 12 and passing 
through the points 110, 12 and 16, 22.
79.		The eccentricity of an ellipse, denoted by e, is defined as 
	
		e =
distance between the foci
distance between the vertices = 2c
2a = c
a. What 
	
		happens when e = 0? 
In Exercises 80–84, use the definition of e given in Exercise 79 
to determine the eccentricity of each ellipse. (This e has noth-
ing to do with the number e, discussed in Chapter 3, that is 
the base for natural logarithms.)
80.	 x2
16 + y2
9 = 1 
81.	 20x2 + 36y2 = 720 
82.	 x2 + 4y2 = 1 
83.	
1x + 122
25
+
1y - 222
9
= 1
84.	 x2 + 2y2 - 2x + 4y + 1 = 0 
85.	 An ellipse has its major axis along the x-axis and its minor
	
	 axis along the y-axis. Its eccentricity is 1
2, and the distance
	
	 between the foci is 4. Find an equation of the ellipse.
86.	 Find an equation of the ellipse whose major axis has 
	
	 endpoints 1-3, 02 and 13, 02 and that has eccentricity 1
3.
87.	 A point P1x, y2 moves so that its distance from the point 
14, 02 is always one-half its distance from the line x = 16 
Show that the equation of the path of P is an ellipse of 
	
	 eccentricity 1
2.
88.	 A point, P1x, y2 moves so that its distance from the point 
10, 22 is always one-third its distance from the line y = 10 
Show that the equation of the path of P is an ellipse of 
	
	 eccentricity 1
3.
89.	 The latus rectum of an ellipse is a line segment that passes 
through a focus and that is perpendicular to the major  
axis and has endpoints on the ellipse. Show that the 
	
	 length of the latus rectum of an ellipse is 2b2
a , where b is 
	
	 half the length of the minor axis and a is half the length  
of the major axis.
(a, 0)
(0, b)
(c, 0)
(0, 0)
y
x
Latus rectum
90.	 Find an equation of the ellipse with center 10, 02, major 
	
	 axis along the x-axis, eccentricity 1
12 and latus rectum of 
	
	 length 3 units.
In Exercises 91–94, find all points of intersection of the  
given curves by solving systems of nonlinear equations. 
Sketch the graphs of the curves and show the points of  
intersection.
91.	 e x  + 3y
= -2
4x2 + 3y2 =
7 
92.	 e x2
= 2y
2x2 + y2 = 12 
93.	 e x2 + y2 = 20
9x2 + y2 = 36 
94.	 e 9x2 + 16y2 = 36
18x2 +
5y2 = 45 
In Exercises 95 and 96, use the following definition: A tangent 
line to an ellipse is a line that intersects the ellipse at exactly 
one point.
95.	 Find the equation of the tangent line to the ellipse with 
	
	 equation x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1, with a = 5
2 and b = 5 at the 
	
	 point 12, 32
	
	 [Hint: See the steps for Exercise 91 in Section 10.2 and  
(in Step 3) write the discriminant as a perfect square.]
96.	 Show that the equation of the tangent line to the ellipse with 
	
	 equation x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1, at the point 1x1, y12, is
	
	 y = - b2x1
a2y1
x + b2x1
2
b2y1
2 + y1.
	
	 [Hint: See the steps for Exercise 91 in Section 10.2 and show 
that 1a2y1m + b2x122 = 0.]
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
97.	 Find the number of circles with a radius of 3 units that touch 
both of the coordinate axes. Write the equation of each circle.
98.	Find the number of ellipses with a major axis and a minor 
axis of lengths 6 units and 4 units, respectively, that touch 
both axes. Write the equation of each ellipse.        
 
 
 

886	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 99 and 100, find the center and radius of each 
circle whose equation is given.
	 99.	 x2 + 6x + y2 - 2y - 5 = 0 
	100.	 x2 + 4x + y2 + 6y + 5 = 0
In Exercises 101 and 102, find the x- and y-intercepts of the 
graph of the given equation.
	101.	 x2 + y2 = 25
	102.	 1x - 222 + 1y + 322 = 8
In Exercises 103–106, find the slope–intercept form of the line 
with the given properties. 
	103.	 Slope = -4, y@intercept = 11 
	104.	 Slope = 0,  passes through1-5, 72 
	105.	 Passes through 1-3, 72 and 1-1, -52 
	106.	 Passes through 12, -42 parallel to the line with equation 
6x + 2y = 7 
In Exercises 107 and 108, find the asymptotes of the graph of 
the given function.
	107.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x + 1
x - 2 
	108.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4x - 5
x - 3    

	
Section 10.4    ■    The Hyperbola 887
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Distance formula (Section 2.1, page 159)
2	 Midpoint formula (Section 2.1, page 161)
3	 Completing the square (Section 3.1, page 295)
4	 Oblique asymptotes (Section 3.6, page 366)
5	 Transformations of graphs  
(Section 2.7, page 251)
6	 Symmetry (Section 2.2, page 168)
Objectives
1	 Define a hyperbola.
2	 Find the asymptotes of a hyperbola.
3	 Graph a hyperbola.
4	 Translate hyperbolas.
5	 Use hyperbolas in applications.
S e c t i o n 10.4
What Is Loran?
LORAN stands for LOng-RAnge Navigation. The federal government runs the LORAN 
system, which uses land-based radio navigation transmitters to provide users with 
­information on position and timing. During World War II, Alfred Lee Loomis was ­selected 
to chair the National Defense Research Committee. Much of his work focused on the 
problem of creating a light system for plane-carried radar. As a result of this ­effort, 
he invented LORAN, the long-range navigation system whose offshoot, LORAN-C,  
remains in widespread use. The navigational method provided by LORAN is based on 
the principle of determining the points of intersection of two hyperbolas to fix the 
two-dimensional position of the receiver. In Example 8, we illustrate how this is done.
The LORAN-C system is now being supplemented by the global positioning system 
(GPS), which works on the same principle as LORAN-C. The GPS system consists of 24 
­satellites that orbit 11,000 miles above Earth. The GPS was created by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense to provide precise navigation information for targeting weapons 
­systems anywhere in the world. The GPS is available to civilian users worldwide in a 
degraded mode. It is now used in aviation, navigation, and automobiles. The system 
can provide your exact position on Earth anywhere, anytime.
The GPS and LORAN-C work together, giving a highly accurate, duplicate ­navigation 
system for the Defense Department.
The Hyperbola
Definition of Hyperbola
1	
Define a hyperbola.
Alfred Lee Loomis (1887–1975)
Alfred Loomis was an American lawyer, 
investment banker, physicist, and 
patron of scientific research. Besides 
inventing LORAN, he made significant 
contributions to the ground-based 
technology for landing airplanes by 
instruments. President Roosevelt 
recognized the value of Loomis’s work 
and described him as second perhaps 
only to Churchill as the civilian most 
responsible for the Allied victory in 
World War II.
figure 10.21 
foci
F1
F2
P
Figure 10.22 shows a hyperbola in standard position, with foci F11-c, 02 and F21c, 02 
on the x-axis at equal distances from the origin. The two parts of the hyperbola are called 
branches.
A hyperbola is the set of all points in the plane, the positive difference of whose 
distances from two fixed points is constant. The fixed points are called the foci of 
the hyperbola. See Figure 10.21.
Hyperbola

888	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
As in the discussion of ellipses in Section 10.3 (see page 876), we take 2a as the posi-
tive constant referred to in the definition.
A point P1x, y2 lies on a hyperbola if and only if
  d1P, F12 - d1P, F22 = 2a
    Definition of hyperbola
 21x + c22 + y2 - 21x - c22 + y2 = {2a    Distance formula
As in the case of an ellipse, we eliminate radicals and simplify (see Exercise 93) to obtain 
the equation.
 1c2 - a22x2 - a2y2 = a21c2 - a22    (1)
 b2x2 - a2y2 = a2b2
    Replace 1c2 - a22 with b2.
 x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1
    Divide both sides by a2b2.
Equation (2) is called the standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center 
10, 02. The x-intercepts of the graph of equation (2) are -a and a. The points corresponding  
to these x-intercepts are the vertices of the hyperbola. The distance between the vertices 
V11-a, 02 and V21a, 02 is 2a. The line segment joining the two vertices is called the trans-
verse axis. The midpoint of the transverse axis is the center of the hyperbola. The center is 
also the midpoint of the line segment joining the foci. See Figure 10.23. The line segment 
joining the points 10, -b2 and 10, b2 is called the conjugate axis.
figure 10.22  PF1-PF2  is a  
constant for any P on the hyperbola
F1(c, 0)
F2(c, 0)
P(x, y)
y
x
figure 10.23  A hyperbola
F1(c, 0)
V1(a, 0) V2(a, 0)
B1(0, b)
B2(0, b)
O
F2(c, 0)
P(x, y)
y
x
Points F1 and F2 are foci.
Points V1 and V2 are vertices.
Point O is the center.
Segment V1V2 is the transverse axis.
Segment B1B2 is the conjugate axis.
The difference of the distances
 PF1  PF2  from any point P on the
hyperbola is constant.
Similarly, an equation of a hyperbola with center 10, 02 and foci 10, -c2 and 10, c2 on 
the y-axis is given by:
y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1, where b2 = c2 - a2    (3)
Here the vertices are 10, -a2 and10, a2. The transverse axis of length 2a of the graph of 
equation (3) lies on the y-axis, and its conjugate axis is the segment joining the points 1-b, 02 
and 10, b2 of length 2b that lies on the x-axis.
    (2)

	
Section 10.4    ■    The Hyperbola 889
Summary Of Main Facts
Main facts about hyperbolas centered at 10, 02
Standard Equation
x2
a2 −y2
b2 = 1; a + 0, b + 0
y2
a2 −x2
b2 = 1; a + 0, b + 0
Transverse axis along
y = 0 (x-axis)
x = 0 (y-axis)
Length of transverse axis
2a
2a
Conjugate axis along
x = 0 (y-axis)
y = 0 (x-axis)
Length of conjugate axis
2b
2b
Vertices
1{a, 02
10, {a2
Endpoints of conjugate axis
10, {b2
1{b, 02
Foci
1{c, 02, where c2 = a2 + b2
10, {c2, where c2 = a2 + b2
Description
Hyperbola has a left branch and a right 
branch. (Hyperbola opens left and right.)
Hyperbola has an upper branch and a lower  
branch. (Hyperbola opens up and down.)
Graph 
B2(0, b)
V2(a, 0)
F2(c, 0) x
y
Horizontal transverse axis
V2(0, a)
B2(b, 0)
F2(0, c)
x
y
Vertical transverse axis
figure 10.24  x2
4 -
y2
10 = 1
y
x
3
1
5
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
1
3
5
1
3
5
5
3
1
Does the hyperbola
x2
4 - y2
10 = 1 
have its transverse axis on the x-axis or y-axis?
Solution
The orientation (left–right branches or up–down branches) of a hyperbola is determined by 
noting where the minus sign occurs in the standard equation. From the table above, we see 
that the transverse axis is on the x-axis when the minus sign precedes the y2-term and is on 
the y-axis when the minus sign precedes the x2-term. In the equation in this example, the 
minus sign precedes the y2-term; so the transverse axis is on the x-axis. See Figure 10.24.
Practice Problem 1  Does the hyperbola y2
8 - x2
5 = 1 have its transverse axis on the 
x-axis or the y-axis?
Determining the Orientation of a Hyperbola
EXAMPLE 1

890	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Finding the Vertices and Foci from the Equation  
of a Hyperbola
EXAMPLE 2
Find the vertices and foci for the hyperbola
28y2 - 36x2 = 63.
Solution
First, convert the equation to the standard form.
 28y2 - 36x2 = 63    Given equation
 28y2
63
- 36x2
63
= 1     Divide both sides by 63.
 4y2
9
- 4x2
7
= 1     Simplify.
 y2
9
4
- x2
7
4
= 1     Divide the numerator and denominator  
of each term by 4.
The last equation is the equation of a hyperbola in standard form with center10, 02. ­Because 
the coefficient of x2 is negative, the transverse axis lies on the y-axis.
Here a2 = 9
4 and b2 = 7
4. The equation c2 = a2 + b2 gives the value of c2.
 c2 = a2 + b2
 = 9
4 + 7
4     Replace a2 with 9
4 and b2 with 7
4.
 = 16
4 = 4    Simplify.
Now a2 = 9
4 gives a = 3
2 and c2 = 4 gives c = 2 because we require a 7 0 and c 7 0.
The vertices of the hyperbola are 10, -a2 = a0, -3
2b and 10, a2 = a0, 3
2b. The foci 
of the hyperbola are 10, -c2 = 10, -22 and10, c2 = 10, 22.
Practice Problem 2  Find the vertices and foci for the hyperbola 
x2 - 4y2 = 8.
Find the standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with vertices 1{4, 02 and foci 
1{5, 02.
Solution
Because the foci of the hyperbola 1-5, 02 and 15, 02 are on the x-axis, the transverse axis 
lies on the x-axis. The center of the hyperbola is midway between the foci, at10, 02. The 
standard form of such a hyperbola is
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1.
We need to find a2 and b2.
The distance a between the center 10, 02 to either vertex, 1-4, 02 or 14, 02 is 4;  
so a = 4 and a2 = 16. The distance c between the center 10, 02 to either focus,  
1-5, 02 or 15, 02, is 5; so c = 5 and c2 = 25. Now use the equation b2 = c2 - a2 to find 
Finding the Equation of a Hyperbola
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 10.4    ■    The Hyperbola 891
The Asymptotes of a Hyperbola
Recall from Section 3.6 that a line y = mx + b is a horizontal asymptote (if m = 0) 
or an oblique (slant) asymptote (if m ≠0) of the graph of y = f 1x2 if the difference 
f1x2 - 1mx + b2 approaches 0 as x S ∞ or as x S - ∞. When horizontal or oblique 
asymptotes exist, they provide us with information about the end behavior of the graph of 
f. This is especially helpful in graphing a hyperbola.
To find the asymptotes of the hyperbola with equation x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1, we first solve this 
equation for y.
 x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1
    Given equation of hyperbola
 - y2
b2 = - x2
a2 + 1
    Subtract x2
a2 from both sides.
 y2
b2 = x2
a2 - 1
    Multiply both sides by -1.
 y2 = b2 ax2
a2 - 1b
    Multiply both sides by b2.
 y2 = b2 ax2
a2 - x2
a2 # a2
x2b    Write 1 = x2
a2 # a2
x2.
 y2 = b2x2
a2  a1 - a2
x2 b
    Factor out x2
a2.
 y = {bx
a A1 - a2
x2
    Square root property
As x S ∞ or as x S - ∞, the quantity a2
x2 approaches 0. Thus, A1 - a2
x2 approaches 1 and
the value of y approaches {bx
a . Therefore, the lines y = b
a x and y = -b
a x are the oblique 
asymptotes for the graph of the hyperbola x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1. Similarly, you can show that 
the lines y = a
b x and y = -a
b x are the oblique asymptotes for the graph of the hyperbola 
y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1.
2	
Find the asymptotes of a 
hyperbola.
b2 = c2 - a2 = 25 - 16 = 9. Substitute a2 = 16 and b2 = 9 in x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1 to get the 
standard form of the equation of the hyperbola
x2
16 - y2
9 = 1.
Practice Problem 3  Find the standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with  
vertices at 10, {42 and foci at10, {62.
A convenient device can be used to 
obtain equations of the asymptotes 
of a hyperbola in standard form. 
Substitute 0 for the 1 on the right 
side of the equation of the hyper-
bola and then solve for y in terms  
of x. For example, for the 
hyperbola x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1, replace 
the 1 on the right side with 0 to 
obtain x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 0.
Solve this equation for y.
 y2
b2 = x2
a2
 y2 = b2
a2 x2
The lines y = {b
a x are the slant
asymptotes of the hyperbola.
Side  
Note

892	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Graphing a Hyperbola with Center 10,02
Consider the hyperbola with equation
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1.
The vertices of this hyperbola are 1-a, 02 and 1a, 02. The endpoints of the conjugate 
axis are 10, -b2 and 10, b2. The rectangle with vertices 1a, b2, 1-a, b2, 1-a, -b2,  
and 1a, -b2 is called the fundamental rectangle of the hyperbola. See Figure 10.26 on 
page 893 (Step 3). The diagonals of the fundamental rectangle have slopes b
a and -b
a. Thus, 
the extensions of these diagonals are the asymptotes of the hyperbola.
3	
Graph a hyperbola.
T h e  A s y m p t o t e s  O f  A  H y p e r b o l a  W i t h  C e n t e r  10, 02
1.	 The graph of the hyperbola x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1 has transverse axis along the x-axis and 
	
has two asymptotes:
y = b
a x  and  y = -b
a x
2.	 The graph of the hyperbola y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1 has transverse axis along the y-axis and 
	
has two asymptotes:
y = a
b x  and  y = -a
b x 
10
5
10
5
10
5
10
5
(a)
x
y
x2
4
y2
9
 1

3
2
y 
x
3
2
y      x
figure 10.25  Asymptotes
y2
9
x2
16
 1

3
4
y 
x
3
4
y      x
10
5
10
5
10
5
10
5
x
y
(b)
Determine the asymptotes of each hyperbola.
a.  x2
4 - y2
9 = 1        b.  y2
9 - x2
16 = 1
Solution
a.  The hyperbola x2
4 - y2
9 = 1 is of the form x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1; so a = 2 and b = 3.
Substituting these values into y = b
a x and y = -b
a x, we get the asymptotes 
y = 3
2 x and y = -3
2 x.
b.  The hyperbola y2
9 - x2
16 = 1 has the form y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1; so a = 3 and b = 4.
Substituting these values into y = a
b x and y = -a
b x, we get the asymptotes
y = 3
4 x and y = -3
4 x.
The hyperbola of parts a and b and their asymptotes are shown in Figure 10.25(a) and  
Figure 10.25(b), respectively.
Practice Problem 4  Determine the asymptotes of the hyperbola y2
4 - x2
9 = 1.
Finding the Asymptotes of a Hyperbola
EXAMPLE 4

	
Section 10.4    ■    The Hyperbola 893
Sketch the graph of a hyperbola in the form
(i)  Ax2 - By2 = C or (ii)  Ay2 - Bx2 = C
A, B, C 7 0.
Graphing a Hyperbola Centered at 10, 02
Objective
EXAMPLE 5
Sketch the graph of
a.	 16x2-9y2 = 144.
1.	  16x2 - 9y2 = 144
	
 16x2
144 - 9y2
144 = 144
144
	
 x2
9 - y2
16 = 1
b.	 25y2-4x2 = 100.
	
 25y2 - 4x2 = 100
	
 25y2
100 - 4x2
100 = 100
100
	
 y2
4 - x2
25 = 1
Minus sign precedes y2-term, 
and transverse axis is along 
the x-axis; hyperbola opens 
left and right.
Minus sign precedes x2-term, 
and transverse axis is along 
the y-axis; hyperbola opens up 
and down.
2.	Because a2 = 9, a = 3. 
Also, b2 = 16; so b = 4. The 
vertices are 1{3, 02, and the 
­endpoints of the conjugate 
axis are 10, {42.
	
Because a2 = 4, a = 2. Also, 
b2 = 25; so b = 5. The ver-
tices are 10, {22, and the 
­endpoints of the conjugate 
axis are 1{5, 02.
3.	Draw dashed lines 
x = 3, x = -3, y = 4, and 
y = -4 to form the funda-
mental rectangle with vertices 
13, 42, 1-3, 42, 1-3, -42, 
and 13, -42.
2
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
4
6
2
4
6
x
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
y
	
Draw dashed lines 
y = 2, y = -2, x = 5, and 
x = -5 to form the funda-
mental rectangle with vertices 
15, 22, 1-5, 22, 1-5, -22, 
and 15, -22.
2
2
2
4
6
4
6
4
6
(5, 2)
(5, 2)
(5, 2)
(5, 2)
y
x
0
4
6
2
4.	
2
4
6
2
4
6
x
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
y
y     x
4
3
y     x
4
3
2
2
2
5
2
2
4
6
4
6
4
6
y
x
y      x
0
4
6
2
5
y      x
Step 1  Write the equation in standard 
form. Determine transverse axis and the 
­orientation of the hyperbola.
Step 2  Locate vertices and the endpoints of 
the conjugate axis.
Step 3  Lightly sketch the fundamental 
­rectangle by drawing dashed lines parallel 
to the coordinate axes through the points in 
Step 2.
Step 4  Sketch the asymptotes. Extend 
the diagonals of the fundamental rectangle. 
These are the asymptotes.
Example
(continued)
Procedure  
in Action

894	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Translations of Hyperbolas
We can use horizontal and vertical shifts to find the standard form of the equations of  
hyperbolas centered at1h, k2.
4	
Translate hyperbolas.
5.	
2
4
6
2
4
6
x
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
y
F1(5, 0)
F2(5, 0)
y     x
4
3
y     x
4
3
x2
9
y2
16

 1
figure 10.26 
2
2
4
2
6
2
6
4
4
6
y
x
0
4
6
25 1
4
y2
x2

2
5
y      x
2
5
y      x
F2 (0, 29)
F1 (0, 29)
figure 10.27 
Step 5  Sketch the graph. Draw both 
branches of the hyperbola through the 
­vertices, approaching the asymptotes. See 
­Figures 10.26 and 10.27. The foci are located 
on the transverse axis, c units from the  
center, where c2 = a2 + b2.
Practice Problem 5  Sketch the graph of the equations.
a.  25x2 - 4y2 = 100        b.  9y2 - x2 = 1
We now describe a procedure for sketching the graph of a hyperbola centered at1h, k2.
Summary of Main Facts
Main Properties of Hyperbolas Centered at 1h, k2
Standard Equation
1x −h22
a2
−
1y −k22
b2
= 1; 
a + 0, b + 0 
1y −k22
a2
−
1x −h22
b2
= 1;
a + 0, b + 0
Transverse axis along
y = k
x = h
Length of transverse axis
2a
2a
Conjugate axis along
x = h
y = k
Length of conjugate axis
2b
2b
Center
1h, k2
1h, k2
Vertices
1h - a, k2 and 1h + a, k2
1h, k - a2 and 1h, k + a2
Endpoints of conjugate axis
1h, k - b2 and 1h, k + b2
1h - b, k2 and 1h + b, k2
Foci
1h - c, k2 and 1h + c, k2;
c2 = a2 + b2
1h, k - c2 and 1h, k + c2; 
c2 = a2 + b2
Asymptotes
y - k = {b
a
 1x - h2
y - k = {a
b
 1x - h2

	
Section 10.4    ■    The Hyperbola 895
EXAMPLE 6
Graphing a Hyperbola Centered at 1h, k2
OBJECTIVE
Sketch the graph of either
a.  1x - h22
a2
- 1y - k22
b2
= 1 or
b.  1y - k22
a2
- 1x - h22
b2
= 1.
Step 1  Plot the center 1h, k2 and draw  
horizontal and vertical dashed lines through the 
center.
Step 2  Locate the vertices and the ­ 
endpoints of the conjugate axis. Lightly sketch 
the ­fundamental rectangle, with sides parallel to 
the coordinate axes, through these points.
Step 3  Sketch dashed lines through opposite 
vertices of the fundamental rectangle. These are 
the asymptotes.
EXAMPLE
Sketch the graph of each equation.
a.  1x - 122
4
- 1y + 222
9
= 1.  b.  1y + 222
9
- 1x - 122
4
= 1.
1.	
y
x
0
4
8
4
4
4
C(1, 2)
	
4
4
4
8
4
C(1, 2)
y
x
0
2.	
(1, 1)
(1, 5)
C(1, 2)
V2(3, 2)
V1(1, 2)
y
x
0
4
8
4
4
4
	
4
0
4
8
4
4
V2(1, 1)
V1(1, 5)
C(1, 2)
(3,2)
(1, 2)
y
x
3.	
4
4
8
4
0
4
(1, 1)
C(1, 2)
V2(3, 2)
V1(1, 2)
(1, 5)
y
x
	
4
4
8
4
4
0
V2(1, 1)
V1(1, 5)
C(1, 2)
(3, 2)
(1, 2)
y
x
(continued)
procedure 
in action

896	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Practice Problem 6  Sketch the graph of each equation.
a.	 1x + 122
4
- 1y - 122
16
= 1        b.   1y - 122
4
- 1x + 122
9
= 1
Expanding the binomials in the equation of a hyperbola in standard form and collecting 
like terms results in an equation of the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0,
with A and C of opposite sign (that is, AC 6 0.) Conversely, except in degenerate cases, 
any equation of this form can be put into one of the standard forms of a hyperbola by com-
pleting the squares on the x- and y-terms.
Step 4  Draw both branches of the  
hyperbola through the vertices, approaching  
the asymptotes.
Step 5  Locate the foci on the transverse  
axis, c units from the center, where  
c2 = a2 + b2.
4.	
4
4
8
(1, 1)
C(1, 2)
V2(3, 2)
V1(1, 2)
(1, 5)
y
x
0
4
4
	
4
0
4
8
4
4
y
x
V2(1, 1)
V1(1, 5)
C(1, 2)
(3, 2)
(1, 2)
5.	
4
4
x
y
4
0
4
8
(1, 1)
C(1, −2)
V2(3, 2)
V1(1, 2)
(1, 5)
F1(1    13, 2)
F2(1    13, 2)
	
4
4
0
4
8
4
y
x
V2(1, 1)
V1(1, 5)
C(1, 2)
(3, 2)
(1, 2)
F2(1, 2    13)
F1(1, 2    13)
Show that 9x2 - 16y2 + 18x + 64y - 199 = 0 is an equation of a hyperbola; then 
graph the hyperbola.
Solution
Because we plan on completing squares, first group the x- and y-terms on the left side and 
the constants on the right side.
 9x2 - 16y2 + 18x + 64y - 199 = 0
    Given equation
 19x2 + 18x2 + 1-16y2 + 64y2 = 199
    Group terms in each variable.
 91x2 + 2x2 - 161y2 - 4y2 = 199
    Factor out 9 and -16.
 91x2 + 2x + 12 - 161y2 - 4y + 42 = 199 + 9 - 64    Complete the squares: add 
9 # 1 and -16 # 4.
Graphing a Hyperbola
EXAMPLE 7

	
Section 10.4    ■    The Hyperbola 897
 91x + 122 - 161y - 222 = 144
    Factor and simplify.
 91x + 122
144
- 161y - 222
144
= 1
   
Divide both sides by 144 to 
obtain 1 on the right side.
 1x + 122
16
- 1y - 222
9
= 1
    Simplify.
The last equation is the standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center 1-1, 22.
Now we sketch the graph of this hyperbola.
Steps 1–2	 Locate the vertices. For this hyperbola with center 1-1, 22, a2 = 16 and  
b2 = 9. Therefore, a = 4 and b = 3. From the table on page 894, with  
h = -1 and k = 2, the vertices are 1h - a, k2 = 1-1 - 4, 22 = 1-5, 22
and 1h + a, k2 = 1-1 + 4, 22 = 13, 22.
	
	
Draw the fundamental rectangle. The vertices of the fundamental 
­rectangle are13, -12, 13, 52, 1-5, 52, and15, -12.
Steps 3	
Sketch the asymptotes. Extend the diagonals of the fundamental rectangle 
to sketch the asymptotes:
	
	
y - 2 = 3
41x + 12  and  y - 2 = -3
41x + 12
Steps 4	
Sketch the graph.  Draw two branches of the hyperbola opening to the left 
and right, starting from the vertices 1-5, 22 and 13, 22 and approaching the 
asymptotes. See Figure 10.28.
Practice Problem 7  Show that x2 - 4y2 - 2x + 16y - 20 = 0 is an equation  
of a hyperbola and graph the hyperbola.
Applications
Hyperbolas have many applications. We list a few of them here.
1.	 Comets that do not move in elliptical orbits around the sun almost always move in a 
hyperbolic orbit. (In theory, they also can move in parabolic orbits.)
2.	 Boyle’s Law states that if a perfect gas is kept at a constant temperature, then its pres-
sure P and volume V are related by the equations PV = c, where c is a constant. The 
graph of this equation is a hyperbola. In Exercise 94(b), you are asked to explore the 
case where c = 8. In this case, the transverse axis is not parallel to a coordinate axis.
3.	 The hyperbola has the reflecting property that a ray of light from a source at one focus 
of a hyperbolic mirror (a mirror with hyperbolic cross sections) is reflected along the 
line through the other focus.
The reflecting properties of the parabola and hyperbola are combined into one 
design for a reflecting telescope. See Figure 10.29. The parallel rays from a star are 
finally focused at the eyepiece at F2.
4.	 The definition of a hyperbola forms the basis of several important navigational  
systems.
How Does LORAN Work?
Suppose two stations A and B (several miles apart) transmit synchronized radio signals. 
The LORAN receiver in your ship measures the difference in reception times of these 
­synchronized signals. The radio signals travel at a speed of 186,000 miles per second. 
Using this information, you can determine the difference 2a in the distance of your ship’s 
receiver from the two transmitters. By the definition of a hyperbola, this information places 
your ship somewhere on a hyperbola with foci A and B. With two pairs of transmitters, the 
position of your ship can be determined at a point of intersection of the two hyperbolas. 
See Exercises 87 and 88.
5	
Use hyperbolas in applications.
figure 10.28  The hyperbola 
9x2 - 16y2 + 18x + 64y - 199 = 0
y
x
4
6
0
4
4
8
(5, 5)
(3, 5)
(3, 2)
(5, 2) (1, 2)
(3, 1)
(5, 1)
8
Common focus of
the two mirrors
Parabolic mirror
Hyperbolic mirror
Eyepiece
F1
F2
figure 10.29 

898	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
LORAN navigational transmitters A and B are located at 1-130, 02 and 1130, 02, respec-
tively. A receiver P on a fishing boat somewhere in the first quadrant listens to the pair 
1A, B2 of transmissions and computes the difference of the distances from the boat to A 
and B as 240 miles. Find the equation of the hyperbola on which P is located.
Solution
With reference to the transmitters A and B, P is located on a hyperbola with 2a =  240, or 
a = 120, and the hyperbola has foci 1-130, 02 and 1130, 02.
 x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1
    Standard from of the equation of a 
hyperbola
 
 a2 = 112022 = 14,400    Replace a with 120.
 b2 = c2 - a2 = 113022 - 112022 = 2500     Replace c with 130 and a with 120.
 x2
14,400 -
y2
2500 = 1
    Replace a2 with 14,400 and b2 with 
2500.
Therefore, the location of the ship lies on a hyperbola (see Figure 10.30) with equation
x2
14,400 -
y2
2500 = 1.
Practice Problem 8  In Example 8, the transmitters A and B are located at 1-150, 02 
and 1150, 02, respectively, and the difference of the distances from the boat to A and B  
is 260 miles. Find the equation of the hyperbola on which P is located.
Using LORAN
EXAMPLE 8
figure 10.30 
y
x
0
200
200
150
150
B(130, 0)
A(−130, 0)
(0, 0)
Answers to Practice Problems
1. y-axis    2. Vertices: 1212, 02 and 1-212, 02; foci: 1110, 02
and 1- 110, 02    3. y2
16 - x2
20 = 1    4. y = 2
3x and y = - 2
3x
5. a. The standard form of the 
equation is x2
4 - y2
25 = 1. 
Vertices: 12, 02 and 1-2, 02;  
Foci: 1{ 129, 02; endpoints  
of the conjugate axis: 10, 52 and 
10, -52; asymptotes: y = 5
2x 
and y = -5
2x
b. The standard form of the 
equation is y2
1
9
- x2
1 = 1. 
Vertices: a0, 1
3b and a0, - 1
3b; 
Foci: a0, { 110
3
b; endpoints 
of the conjugate axis: 11, 02 and 
1-1, 02; asymptotes: y = 1
3 x 
and y = -1
3x
6. a. 
1x + 122
4
-
1y - 122
16
= 1 1 a = 2, b = 4, and center 
1-1, 12. The vertices are 1-1 - 2, 12 = 1-3, 12 and 
1-1 + 2, 12 = 11, 12. The endpoints of the conjugate axes are 
1-1, 1 - 42 = 1-1, -32 and 1-1, 1 + 42 = 1-1, 52. The 
asymptotes are y - k = { b
a1x - h2 1 y - 1 = {21x + 12. 
c2 = a2 + b2 1 c2 = 4 + 16 1 c = { 120  
The foci are 1- 120 - 1, 12 and 1120 - 1, 12.
6
2
0
4
6
8
2
4
6
2
2
(1, 1)
(3, 1)
(1, 3)
(1, 5)
4
6
4
x
y
y 2x1
y 2x3
(√20 1, 1)
(√20 1, 1)
y 
29, 0)
(
29, 0)
(
(2, 0)
(0,5)
(0, 5)
(2, 0)
5x
2
y  5x
2
0
6
2
10
6
10
2
10
6
2
2
6
10
x
y
F1
F2
0
3
1
3
y  x
1
3
y 
x
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
3
3
3
x
y
1
3
0,
1
3
0, 
10
3
0,
F1
10
3
0,
F2


	
Section 10.4    ■    The Hyperbola 899
b. 
1y - 122
4
-
1x + 122
9
= 1 1 a = 2, b = 3, and center 
1-1, 12. The vertices are 1-1, 1 - 22 = 1-1, -12 and 
1-1, 1 + 22 = 1-1, 32. The endpoints of the conjugate axes are 
1-1 - 3, 12 = 1-4, 12 and 1-1 + 3, 12 = 12, 12 The 
asymptotes are y - k = {a
b1x - h2 1 y - 1 = {2
31x + 12. 
c2 = a2 + b2 1 c2 = 4 + 9 1 c = { 113 The foci are 
1-1, 1 + 1132 and 1-1, 1 - 1132.
6
2
0
4
6
2
4
6
2
2
(2, 1)
(1, 1)
(4, 1)
(1, 3)
4
6
8
4
x
y
(1, 1 √13)
(1, 11√13)
2
3
5
3
y 5
x1
2
3
1
3
y 52
x1
7. 
1x - 122
5
-
1y - 222
5
4
= 1. Center: 11, 22; vertices: 
11 + 15 , 22 and11 - 15 , 22; endpoints of the conjugate 
axis: a1, 2 + 15
2  b and a1, 2 - 15
2  b; asymptotes: 
y - 2 =
{ 1
21x - 12; foci: a7
2, 2b and a- 3
2, 2b
2
0
2
4
6
2
4
2
4
6
x
y
(x  1)  2
y  1
2
(1, 2)
(1      , 2)
(x  1)  2
y  1
2
5
(1      , 2)
5
1, 2  5
—2
1, 2  5
—2
, 2
7–2
 , 2
3–2
8. 
x2
16,900 -
y2
5,600 = 1
Exercises
section 10.4
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 A hyperbola is a set of all points in the plane the absolute 
value of the 
 of whose distances from two 
fixed points is constant.
	 2.	 The line segment joining the two vertices of a hyperbola is 
called the 
 axis.
	 3.	 The standard equation of the hyperbola with center 10, 02, 
	
	 vertices 1{a, 02, and foci 1{c, 02 is
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1, where b2 =  
.
	 4.	 For the hyperbola y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1, the vertices are 
	
	
 and 
 and the foci 
	
	 are10, {c2, where c2 =  
.
	 5.	 True or False. The graph of x2
a2 - y2
b2 = -1 is a hyperbola. 
	 6.	True or False. The graph of Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx +
Ey + F = 0 is a degenerate conic or a hyperbola if AC 6 0.
In Exercises 7–14, the equation of a hyperbola is given. Match 
each equation with its graph shown in (a)–(h). 
	 7.	 x2
9 - y2
4 = 1 
	 8.	 x2
4 - y2
25 = 1 
	 9.	 y2
25 - x2
4 = 1 
	10.	 y2
4 - x2
9 = 1 
	11.	 4x2 - 25y2 = 100 
	12.	 16x2 - 49y2 = 196 					
	13.	 16y2 - 9x2 = 100 
	14.	 9y2 - 16x2 = 144 
y
x
3
5
0
1
(a)
5
1
3
3
1
5
5
1
3
	
y
x
3
5
0
1
(b)
5
3
1
1
3
5
5
3
1
y
x
3
5
0
1
(c)
5
3
1
1
3
5
5
3
1
	
y
x
0
3
1
5
7
(d)
5
7
3
3
1
5
7
3 1
5
7

900	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
5
3
1
3
1
0
5
5
3
1
3
1
5
y
x
(e)
	
y
x
(f)
3
1
5
1
3
5
0
1
3
5
1
3
5
x
y
(g)
1
3
5
0
5
3
1
1
3
5
1
3
5
	
(h)
y
x
5 3 1
7
1
3
5
7
0
3
5
7
3
5
1
7
In Exercises 15–26, the equation of a hyperbola is given.
a.  Find and plot the vertices, the foci, and the transverse axis of 
the hyperbola.
b.  State how the hyperbola opens.
c.  Find and plot the vertices of the fundamental rectangle.
d.  Sketch the asymptotes and write their equations.
e.  Graph the hyperbola by using the vertices and the asymptotes.
	15.	 x2 - y2
4 = 1 
	16.	 y2 - x2
4 = 1 
	17.	 x2 - y2 = -1 
	18.	 y2 - x2 = -1 
	19.	 9y2 - x2 = 36 
	20.	 9x2 - y2 = 36 
	21.	 4x2 - 9y2 - 36 = 0 
	22.	 4x2 - 9y2 + 36 = 0 
	23.	 y = { 24x2 + 1 
	24.	 y = {22x2 + 1 
	25.	 y = { 29x2 - 1 
	26.	 y = {32x2 - 4 
In Exercises 27–40, find an equation of the hyperbola satisfying 
the given conditions. Graph the hyperbola.
	27.	 Vertices:1{2, 02; foci: 1{3, 02 
	28.	 Vertices:1{3, 02; foci: 1{5, 02 
	29.	 Vertices:10, {42; foci: 10, {62 
	30.	 Vertices:10, {52; foci: 10, {82 
	31.	 Center:10, 02; vertex:10, 22; focus: 10, 52 
	32.	 Center:10, 02; vertex:10, -12; focus: 10, -42 
	33.	 Center:10, 02; vertex:11, 02; focus: 1-5, 02 
	34.	 Center:10, 02; vertex:1-3, 02; focus: 16, 02 
	35.	 Foci:10, {52; the length of the transverse axis is 6. 
	36.	 Foci:1{2, 02; the length of the transverse axis is 2. 
	37.	 Foci:1{ 15, 02; asymptotes: y = {2x 
	38.	 Foci:10, {102; asymptotes: y = {3x 
	39.	 Vertices:10, {42; asymptotes: y = {x 
	40.	 Vertices:1{3, 02; asymptotes: y = {2x 
In Exercises 41–48, use a graphing device to graph each 
hyperbola.
	41.	 x2
2 - y2
4 = 1 
	42.	 x2
6 - y2
2 = 1 
	43.	 2y2 - x2 = 6 
	44.	 y2 - 3x2 = 12 
	45.	 1x + 122 - 2y2 = 4 
	46.	 3x2 - 1y - 222 = 6 
	47.	 2x2 - y2 - 4x - 2y - 7 = 0	
	48.	 4y2 - 3x2 - 16y - 6x + 1 = 0 
In Exercises 49–68, the equation of a hyperbola is given.
a.  Find and plot the center, vertices, transverse axis, and 
­asymptotes of the hyperbola.
b.  Use the vertices and the asymptotes to graph the hyperbola.
	49.	
1x - 122
9
-
1y + 122
16
= 1 
	50.	
1y - 122
16
-
1x + 122
4
= 1 
	51.	
1x + 222
25
- y2
49 = 1 
	52.	
1x + 122
9
-
1y + 222
36
= 1 
	53.	
1x + 422
25
-
1y + 322
49
= 1 
	54.	
1x - 322
9
-
1y + 122
9
= 1 
	55.	 4x2 - 1y + 122 = 25 
	56.	 91x - 122 - y2 = 144 
	57.	 1y + 122 - 91x - 222 = 25 
	58.	 61x - 422 - 31y + 322 = 4 
	59.	 x2 - y2 + 6x = 36 
	60.	 x2 + 4x - 4y2 = 12 
	61.	 x2 - 4y2 - 4x = 0 
	62.	 x2 - 2y2 - 8y = 12 
	63.	 2x2 - y2 + 12x - 8y + 3 = 0 
	64.	 y2 - 9x2 - 4y - 30x = 33 
	65.	 3x2 - 18x - 2y2 - 8y + 1 = 0 
	66.	 4y2 - 9x2 - 8y - 36x = 68 
	67.	 y2 + 212 - x2 + 212x = 1 
	68.	 x2 + x = y2 - 1
4 
In Exercises 69–78, identify the conic section represented by 
each equation and sketch the graph.
	69.	 x2 - 6x + 12y + 33 = 0 
	70.	 9y2 = x2 - 4x 
	71.	 y2 - 9x2 = -1 
	72.	 4x2 + 9y2 - 8x + 36y + 4 = 0 
	73.	 x2 + y2 - 4x + 8y = 16 
	74.	 2y2 + 3x - 4y - 7 = 0 
	75.	 2x2 - 4x + 3y + 8 = 0 
	76.	 y2 - 9x2 + 18x - 4y = 14 
	77.	 4x2 + 9y2 + 8x - 54y + 49 = 0 
	78.	 x2 - 4y2 + 6x + 12y = 0 

	
Section 10.4    ■    The Hyperbola 901
Applying the Concepts
	79.	 Sound of an explosion. Points A and B are 1000 meters 
apart, and it is determined from the sound of an explosion 
heard at these points at different times that the location of the 
explosion is 600 meters closer to A than to B. Show that the 
location of the explosion is restricted to points on a hyperbola 
and find the equation of the hyperbola. [Hint: Let the coordi-
nates of A be 1-500, 02 and those of B be 1500, 02.] 
	80.	 Sound of an explosion. Points A and B are 2 miles apart. 
The sound of an explosion at A was heard three seconds 
before it was heard at B. Assume that the sound travels at 
1100 feet>second. Show that the location of the explosion  
is restricted to a hyperbola and find the equation of the  
hyperbola. [Hint: Recall that 1 mile = 5280 feet.] 
	81.	 Thunder and lightning. Nicole and Juan, who are 8000 feet 
apart, hear thunder. Nicole hears the thunder three seconds 
before Juan does. Find the equation of the hyperbola whose 
points are locations where the lightning might have struck. 
Assume that the sound travels at 1100 feet>second. 
	82.	 Locating source of thunder. In Exercise 81, Valerie is at 
a location midway between Nicole and Juan, and she hears 
the thunder two seconds after Juan does. Determine the loca-
tion where the lightning strikes in relation to the three people 
involved.
	83.	 LORAN. Two LORAN stations, A and B, are situated  
300 kilometers apart along a straight coastline. Simultaneous 
radio signals are sent from each station to a ship. The ship 
receives the signal from A 0.0005 second before the signal 
from B. Assume that the radio signals travel 300,000 kilome-
ters per second. Find the equation of the hyperbola on which 
the ship is located. 
	84.	 LORAN. In Exercise 83, assuming that the ship follows the 
graph of the hyperbola, determine the location of the ship 
when it reaches the coastline. 
	85.	 Target practice. A gun at G and a target at T are 1600 feet 
apart. The muzzle velocity of the bullet is 2000 feet per sec-
ond. A person at P hears the crack of the gun and the thud of 
the bullet at the same time. Show that the possible locations 
of the person are on a hyperbola. Find the equation of the 
hyperbola with G at 1-800, 02 and T at 1800, 02. Assume 
that the speed of sound is 1100 feet/second. [Hint:  Show that 
d1P, G2 - 1P, T2 is a constant.] 
	86.	 LORAN. Two LORAN stations, A and B, lie on an east–west 
line with A 250 miles west of B. A plane is flying west on 
a line 50 miles north of the line AB. Radio signals are sent 
(traveling at 980 feet per microsecond) simultaneously from 
A and B, and the one sent from B arrives at the plane  
500 microseconds before the one from A. Where is  
the plane? 
	87.	 Using LORAN. LORAN navigational transmitters A, B,  
C, and D are located at1-100, 02, 1100, 02, 10, -1502,  
and 10, 1502, respectively. A navigator P on a ship 
­somewhere in the second quadrant listens to the pair (A, B) 
of transmitters and computes the difference of the distances 
from the ship to A and B as 120 miles. Similarly, by ­listening 
to the pair (C, D) of transmitters, navigator P computes 
the difference of the distances from the ship to C and D 
as 80 miles. Use a calculator to find the coordinates of the 
ship. 
	88.	 Using LORAN. LORAN navigational transmitters A, B, 
and C are located at1200, 02, 1-200, 02, and1200, 10002, 
­respectively. A navigator on a fishing boat listens to the pair  
(A, B) of transmitters and finds that the difference of the distances 
from the boat to A and B is 300 miles. She also finds that the dif-
ference of the distances from the boat to A and C is 400 miles. 
Use a calculator to find the possible locations of the boat. 
Beyond the Basics
	89.	 Write the standard form of the equation of the hyperbola for 
which the difference of the distances from any point on the 
hyperbola to 1-5, 02 and 15, 02 is equal to (a) 2 units;  
(b) 4 units; (c) 8 units. 
	90.	 Sketch the graphs of all three hyperbolas in Exercise 89 on 
the same coordinate plane. 
	91.	 Write the standard form of the equation of the hyperbola for 
which the difference of the distances from any point on the 
hyperbola to the points F1 and F2 is 2 units, where
	
	 a.  F1 is 10, 62 and F2 is 10, -62. 
	
	 b.  F1 is 10, 42 and F2 10, -42. 
	
	 c.  F1 is 10, 32 and F2 10, -32. 
	92.	 Sketch the graphs of all three hyperbolas in Exercise 91 on 
the same coordinate plane. 
	93.	 Rewrite equation
	
	
21x + c22 + y2 - 21x - c22 + y2 = {2a
	
	 from page 888 as
	
	
21x + c22 + y2 = {2a + 21x - c22 + y2.
	
	 Square both sides to obtain
1x + c22 + y2 = 4a2 { 4a21x - c22 + y2 + 1x - c22 + y2.
	
	 Simplify and isolate the radical; then square both sides again 
to show that the equation can be simplified to
	
	
1c2 - a22x2 - a2y2 = a21c2 - a22.
	94.	 a.  Let p 7 0. Prove that the graph of the equation xy = p2
2  is a 
hyperbola by showing that this equation is the equation 
of the hyperbola with foci 1p, p2 and 1-p, -p2 and with 
­difference 2p in distance.
JHint: Show that the equation 
	
	 21x + p22 + 1y + p22 - 21x - p22 + 1y - p22 = 2p 
simplifies to xy = p2
2 .R
	
	 b.  Use part (a) to sketch the graph of the hyperbola xy = 8. 
Find the coordinates of the foci. 
	95.	 A hyperbola for which the lengths of the transverse and 
conjugate axes are equal is called an equilateral hyperbola. 
Show that the asymptotes of an equilateral hyperbola are 
­perpendicular to one another.
	96.	 The latus rectum of a hyperbola is a line segment that 
­passes through a focus, is perpendicular to the transverse 
axis, and has endpoints on the hyperbola. Show that the 
length of the latus rectum of the hyperbola 
	
	
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1  is  2b2
a .

902	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
	 97.	 The eccentricity of a hyperbola, denoted by e, is defined by
e =
Distance between the foci
Distance between the vertices = 2c
2a = c
a.
	
	 Show that for every hyperbola, e 7 1. What happens when 
e = 1? 
In Exercises 98–102, find the eccentricity and the length of the 
latus rectum of each hyperbola.
	 98.	 x2
16 - y2
9 = 1 
	 99.	 36x2 - 25y2 = 900 
	100.	 x2 - y2 = 49 
	101.	 81x - 122 - 1 y + 222 = 2 
	102.	 5x2 - 4y2 - 10x - 8y - 19 = 0 
	103.	 For the hyperbola x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1 with eccentricity e, show 
	
	 that b2 = a21e2 - 12. 
	104.	 Find an equation of a hyperbola assuming that its foci are 
1{6, 02 and the length of its latus rectum is 10. 
	105.	 A point P1x, y2 moves in the plane so that its distance from 
the point 13, 02 is always twice its distance from the line 
x = -1. Show that the equation of the path of P is  
a hyperbola of eccentricity 2. 
	106.	 A point P1x, y2 moves in the plane so that its distance from 
the point 10, -32 is always three times its distance from 
the line y = 1. Show that the equation of the path of P is 
a hyperbola of eccentricity 3. 
In Exercises 107–112, find all points of intersection of the 
given curves. Make a sketch of the curves that shows the 
points of intersection.
	107.	 y - 2x - 20 = 0 and y2 - 4x2 = 36 
	108.	 x - 2y2 = 0 and x2 = 8y2 + 5 
	109.	 x2 + y2 = 15 and  x2 - y2 = 1 
	110.	 x2 + 9y2 = 9 and  4x2 - 25y2 = 36 
	111.	 9x2 + 4y2 = 72 and x2 - 9y2 = -77 
	112.	 3y2 - 7x2 = 5 and 9x2 - 2y2 = 1 
In Exercises 113 and 114, use the following definition. A tan-
gent line to a hyperbola is a line that is not parallel to either 
asymptote of the hyperbola and that intersects the hyperbola 
at only one point. 
	113.	 Find the equation of the tangent line to the hyperbola with 
	
	 equation x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1, with a = A
5
3 and b = A
5
7 at the 
	
	 point12, 12.
	
	 [Hint: See the steps for Exercise 91 in Section 10.2 and (in 
Step 3) write the discriminant as a perfect square.]
	114.	 Show that the equation of the tangent line to the hyperbola 
	
	 with equation x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1, at the point 1x1, y12, is 
	
	 y = b2x1
a2y1
x - b2x2
1
a2y2
1
+ y1.
	
	 [Hint: See guidelines for Exercise 92 in Section 10.2 and 
show that1a2y1m - b2x122 = 0.]
Critical Thinking/Writing/Discussion
	115.	 Explain why each of the following represents a degenerate 
conic section. Where possible, sketch the graph.
	
	 a.  4x2 - 9y2 = 0 
	
	 b.  x2 + 4y2 + 6 = 0 
	
	 c.  8x2 + 5y2 = 0 
	
	 d.  x2 + y2 - 4x + 8y = -20 
	
	 e.  y2 - 2x2 = 0 
	116.	 Discuss the graph of a quadratic equation in x and y of the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0,
 
 
 
     AC ≠0.
Rewrite that equation in the form
Aax2 + D
Ax + D2
4A2b + C ay2 + E
C
 y + E2
4C2b
= D2
4A + E2
4C - F.
	
	 Include in your discussion the types of graphs you will 
obtain in each of the following cases:
	
 i.		 A 7 0, C 7 0
	 ii.	 A 7 0, C 6 0
	
iii.	 A 6 0, C 7 0
	 iv.	 A 6 0, C 6 0
	
	 In each case, discuss how the classification is affected by 
the sign of
D2
4A + E2
4C - F. 
	117.	 Explain why the hyperbolas with equations x2 - y2 = {1 
have the same asymptotes. Sketch the graphs on the same 
coordinate system. 
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 118–121, find the value of each function for the 
given number.
	118.	 f1x2 =
1
1 + x; x = 3   
	119.	 g1x2 = 2x + 1; x = 10
	120.	 h1x2 = 1-1233x-1; x = 5 
	121.	 f1x2 =
16x
x2 + 12; x = 6   
In Exercises 122–125, find the values of the given expression 
for the specified integer, n.
	122.	 1-12n; n = 17 
	123.	 1-12n
1
n + 1; n = 8      
	124.	 1-12n+12n;  n = 5   
	125.	 1-12n-212n + 12 + 1-12n; n = 7 
In Exercises 126 and 127, specify the integer that is the result 
of the computation, where a represents a nonzero real number.
	126.	 3 # p # e2 # 7 # 11 # 19 # a
a # 3 # p # e2 # 19 
	127.	 a # 2 # 3 # 4 # 5 # 6 # 7 # 8 # 9 # 10
3 # 5 # 7 # 8 # 9 # 10 # a 
In Exercises 128 and 129, specify whether the given statement 
is true or false.
	128.	 c11 - 5a + 3b2 = c - 5ac + 3bc 
	129.	 3a - 2b + 6c - 5d = 13a + 6c2 - 12b + 5d2   

	
Summary 903
10.1	Conic Sections: Overview
Conic sections are the curves formed when a plane intersects the 
surface of a right circular cone. Except in some degenerate cases, 
the curves formed are the circle, the ellipse, the parabola, and the 
hyperbola.
10.2	The Parabola
i.	
Definition. A parabola is the set of all points in the plane 
that are the same distance from a fixed line and a fixed point 
not on the line. The fixed line is called the directrix, and the 
fixed point is called the focus.
ii.	
Axis or axis of symmetry. This is the line that passes 
through the focus and is perpendicular to the directrix.
iii.	 Vertex. This is the point at which the parabola intersects  
its axis. The vertex is halfway between the focus and the 
directrix.
iv.	
Standard forms of equations of parabolas with vertex at 
10,02 and p + 0 are
	
y2 = {4px and x2 = {4py. (See the table on page 865.)
v.	
The latus rectum of a parabola is the line segment that 
passes through the focus, is perpendicular to the axis of the 
parabola, and has endpoints on the parabola.
vi.	
Standard forms of equations of parabolas with vertex  
1h, k2 and p + 0 are 1y - k22 = {4p1x - h2 and 
1x - h22 = {4p1y - k2. (See the table on page 868.)
10.3	The Ellipse
i.	
Definition. An ellipse is the set of all points in the plane, the 
sum of whose distances from two fixed points is a constant. 
The fixed points are called the foci of the ellipse.
ii.	
Vertices. These are the two points where the line through the 
foci intersects the ellipse.
iii.	 Major axis. This is the line segment joining the two vertices 
of the ellipse.
iv.	
Center. This is the midpoint of the line segment joining the 
foci. It is also the midpoint of the major axis.
v.	
Minor axis. This is the line segment that passes through the 
center of the ellipse, is perpendicular to the major axis, and 
has endpoints on the ellipse.
vi.	
Standard forms of equations of ellipses with center  
10, 02, a + b + 0, c 6 a, and b2 = a2 − c2  are 
x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1, with foci 1{c, 02 and vertices 1{a, 02, 
	
and 
x2
b2 + y2
a2 = 1, with foci 10, {c2 and vertices 10, {a2.
	
See the table on page 877.
vii.	 Standard forms of equations of ellipses with center  
1h, k2, a + b + 0, and b2 = a2 −c2 are 
1x - h22
a2
+
1y - k22
b2
= 1 and 
1x - h22
b2
+
1y - k22
a2
= 1.
	
See the table on page 879.
10.4 	The Hyperbola
i.	
Definition. A hyperbola is the set of all points in the plane, 
the difference of whose distances from two fixed points  
is a constant. The fixed points are called the foci of the 
hyperbola.
ii.	
Vertices. These are the two points where the line through the 
foci intersects the hyperbola.
iii.	 Transverse axis. This is the line segment joining the two 
vertices of the hyperbola.
iv.	
Center. This is the midpoint of the line segment joining the 
foci. It is also the midpoint of the transverse axis.
v.	
Standard forms of equations of hyperbolas with center 
10, 02, c + a, and b2 = c2 −a2  are
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1, with foci 1{c, 02 and vertices 1{a, 02 
	
and 
y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1, with foci 10, {c2 and vertices 10, {a2.
	
See the table on page 889.
vi.	
Conjugate axis. This is a line segment of length 2b that 
passes through the center of the hyperbola and is  
perpendicularly bisected by the transverse axis.
vii.	 Asymptotes. The asymptotes of the hyperbola 
	
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1 are the two lines y = {b
ax; the asymptotes 
	
of the hyperbola y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1 are the lines y = {a
bx.
viii.	 Graphing. A procedure for graphing a hyperbola centered at 
10, 02 is given on page 893.
ix.	
Standard forms of equations of hyperbolas centered at 
1h, k2 are
1x - h22
a2
 - 
1y - k22
b2
= 1 and 
1y - k22
a2
 - 
1x - h22
b2
= 1.
See the table on page 894. Also see page 895 for a  
procedure for graphing such hyperbolas.
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

904	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
Review Exercises
In Exercises 1–8, sketch the graph of each parabola. Determine 
the vertex, focus, axis, and directrix of each parabola.
	 1.	 y2 = -6x 
	 2.	 y2 = 12x 
	 3.	 x2 = 7y 
	 4.	 x2 = -3y 
	 5.	 1x - 222 = - 1y + 32 
	 6.	 1y + 1)2 = 51x + 22 
	 7.	 y2 = -4y + 2x + 1 
	 8.	 -x2 + 2x + y = 0 
In Exercises 9–12, find an equation of the parabola satisfying 
the given conditions.
	 9.	 Vertex: 10, 02 focus: 1-3, 02	 
	10.	 Vertex: 10, 02 focus: 10, 42	 
	11.	 Focus: 10, 42 directrix: y = -4	 
	12.	 Focus: 1-3, 02; directrix: x = 3 
In Exercises 13–20, sketch the graph of each ellipse. 
Determine the foci, vertices, and endpoints of the  
minor axis of the ellipse.
	13.	 x2
25 + y2
4 = 1 
	14.	 x2
9 + y2
36 = 1 
	15.	 4x2 + y2 = 4 
	16.	 16x2 + y2 = 64 
	17.	 161x + 122 + 91y + 422 = 144 
	18.	 41x - 122 + 31y + 222 = 12 
	19.	 x2 + 9y2 + 2x - 18y + 1 = 0	 
	20.	 4x2 + y2 + 8x - 10y + 13 = 0 
In Exercises 21–24, find an equation of the ellipse satisfying 
the given conditions.
	21.	 Vertices: 1{4, 02; endpoints of minor axis: 10, {22 
	22.	 Vertices: 10, {62; endpoints of minor axis: 1{2, 02 
	23.	 Length of major axis: 20; foci: 1{5, 02 
	24.	 Length of minor axis: 16; foci: 10, {62 
In Exercises 25–32, sketch the graph of each hyperbola. 
Determine the vertices, the foci, and the asymptotes  
of each hyperbola.
	25.	 y2
16 - x2
4 = 1 
	26.	 x2
16 - y2
9 = 1 
	27.	 8x2 - y2 = 8 
	28.	 4y2 - 4x2 = 1 
	29.	
1x + 222
9
 - 
1y - 322
4
= 1 
	30.	
1y + 122
6
 - 
1x - 222
8
= 1 
	31.	 4y2 - x2 + 40y - 4x + 60 = 0	 
	32.	 4x2 - 9y2 + 16x - 54y - 29 = 0	
In Exercises 33–36, find an equation of the hyperbola  
satisfying the given condition.
	33.	 Vertices: 1{1, 02; foci: 1{2, 02 
	34.	 Vertices: 10, {22; foci: 10, {42 
	35.	 Vertices: 1{2, 02; asymptotes: y = {3x 
	36.	 Vertices: 10, {32; asymptotes: y = {x 
In Exercises 37–48, identify each equation as representing a 
circle, a parabola, an ellipse, or a hyperbola. Sketch the graph 
of the conic.
	37.	 5x2 - 4y2 = 20 
	38.	 x2 - x + y = 1 
	39.	 3x2 + 4y2 + 8y - 12x - 6 = 0	
	40.	 2y - x2 = 0 
	41.	 x2 + y2 + 2x - 3 = 0 
	42.	 2x + y2 = 0 
	43.	 y2 = x2 + 3 
	44.	 x2 = 10 - 3y2 
	45.	 3x2 + 3y2 - 6x + 12y + 5 = 0 
	46.	 y + 2x - x2 + 2y2 = 0 
	47.	 9x2 + 8y2 = 36 
	48.	 2y2 + 4y = 3x2 - 6x + 9 
	49.	 Find an equation of the hyperbola whose foci are the  
vertices of the ellipse 4x2 + 9y2 = 36 and whose vertices 
are the foci of this ellipse. 
	50.	 Find an equation of the ellipse whose foci are the vertices of 
the hyperbola 9x2 - 16y2 = 144 and whose vertices are the 
foci of this hyperbola. 	
In Exercises 51–54, find all points of intersection of the given 
curves and make a sketch.
	51.	 x2 - 4y2 = 36 and x - 2y - 20 = 0 
	52.	 y2 - 8x2 = 5 and y - 2x2 = 0	 
	53.	 3x2 - 7y2 = 5 and 9y2 - 2x2 = 1 
	54.	 x2 - y2 = 1 and x2 + y2 = 7	 
	55.	 Parabolic curve. Water flowing from the end of a horizontal 
pipe 20 feet above the ground describes a parabolic curve 
whose vertex is at the end of the pipe. If at a point 6 feet 
below the line of the pipe the flow of water has curved out-
ward 8 feet beyond a vertical line through the end of the pipe, 
how far beyond this vertical line will the water strike the 
ground? 
20 ft
6 ft
8 ft
? ft
	56.	 Parabolic arch. A parabolic arch has a height of 20 meters 
and a width of 36 meters at the base. Assuming that the  
vertex of the parabola is at the top of the arch, find the  
height of the arch at a distance of 9 meters from the center  
of the base. 
	57.	 Football. A football is 12 inches long, and a cross section 
containing a seam is an ellipse with a minor axis of length 
7 inches. Suppose every cross section of the ball formed by 
a plane perpendicular to the major axis of the ellipse is a 

	
Practice Test B 905
circle. Find the circumference of such a circular cross section 
located 2 inches from an end of the ball. 
	58.	 Production cost. A company assembles computers at two 
locations A and B that are 1000 miles apart. The per unit cost 
of production at location A is $20 less than at location B. 
Assume that the route of delivery of the computers is along 
a straight line and that the delivery cost is 25c per unit per 
mile. Find the equation of the curve at any point the comput-
ers can be supplied from either location at the same cost.
	
	 [Hint: Take A at 1-500, 02 and B at 1500, 02.]  
Practice Test A
	 1.	 Find the standard form of the parabola with focus 10, 122 and 
directrix with equation x = -12.	 
	 2.	 Convert the equation y2 - 2y + 8x + 25 = 0 to the stan-
dard form for a parabola by completing the square. 
	 3.	 Find the focus and directrix of the parabola with equation 
x2 = -9y.	  
	 4.	 Graph the parabola with equation y2 = -5x.	
	 5.	 Find the vertex, focus, and directrix of the parabola with 
equation 1x + 222 = -81y - 12.
	 6.	 The base of a water slide is parabolic in shape and is 6 feet 
wide and 2 feet deep. Find the height of the slide 1 foot from 
its center. 
	 7.	 Find an equation of the parabola with vertex 13, -12 and 
directrix x = -3.	 
In Problems 8–10, find the standard form of the equation of 
the ellipse satisfying the given conditions.
	 8.	 Foci: 10, -22,10, 22 vertices: 10, -42,10, 42
	 9.	 Foci: 1-2, 0212, 02; y-intercepts: -5, 5 
	10.	 Major axis horizontal with length 18; minor axis of length 4; 
center 10, 02 
	11.	 Graph the ellipse with equation 9x2 + y2 = 9. 
	12.	 Find the vertices and foci for the hyperbola with equation 
49y2 - x2 = 49.
	13.	 Graph the hyperbola with equation x2
49 - y2
4 = 1. 
	14.	 Find the standard form of the equation of the hyperbola with 
foci 10, -1452,10, 1452 and vertices 10, -62,10, 62.
In Problems 15 and 16, convert the equation to the standard 
form for a hyperbola by completing the squares on x and y.
	15.	 y2 - x2 + 2x = 2	 
	16.	 x2 - 2x - 4y2 - 16y = 19	 
In Problems 17–20, identify the conic section and  
sketch its graph.
	17.	 x2 - 9y2 = -16 
	18.	 x2 - x + 4y + 1
4 = 0 
	19.	 x2 + y2 + 2x - 6y = 3 
	20.	 25x2 + 4y2 = 100 			
Practice Test B
	 1.	 Find the standard form of the equation of the parabola with 
focus 1-10, 02 and directrix x = 10.
a.  y2 = -10x
b.  y2 = -40x
c.  x2 = -40y
d.  y2 = 40x
	 2.	 Convert the equation y2 - 4y - 5x + 24 = 0 to the standard 
form for a parabola by completing the square. 
a.  1y + 222 = 51x - 42
b.  1y - 222 = 51x - 42
c.  1y + 222 = -51x - 42
d.  1y - 222 = 51x + 42	
	 3.	 Find the focus and directrix of the parabola with equation 
x = 7y2. 
a.  focus: a 1
28, 0b; directrix: x = - 1
28
b.  focus: a0, 1
28b; directrix: y = - 1
28
c.  focus: a 1
28, 0b; directrix: x = 1
28
d.  focus: a1
7, 0b directrix: x = -1
7  

906	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
	 4.	 Graph the parabola with equation y2 = -7x. 
y
x
(a)
7
4
7
4
y
x
(b)
7
4
y
x
(c)
7
4
y
x
(d) 
	 5.	 Find the vertex, focus, and directrix of the parabola with 
equation 1x - 322 = 121y - 12. 
a.  vertex: 13, 12; focus: 13, 42; directrix: y = -2
b.  vertex: 13, -12; focus: 1-3, 22; directrix: y = -4
c.  vertex: 13, 12; focus: 13, -22; directrix: x = 4
d.  vertex: 11, 32; focus: 11, 62; directrix: y = 0	
	 6.	 The parabolic arch of a bridge has a 180-foot base and a 
height of 25 feet. Find the height of the arch 45 feet from the 
center of the base. 
a.  12.5 ft
b.  6.25 ft
c.  16.7 ft
d.  18.75 ft 
	 7.	 Find an equation of the parabola with vertex 1-2, 12 and 
directrix x = 2. 
a. 1y - 122 = -161x + 22
b. 1y - 122 = 161x + 22
c. 1y + 222 = -161x - 12
d. 1y + 222 = 161x - 12 
In Problems 8–10, find the standard form of the equation  
of the ellipse satisfying the given conditions.
	 8.	 Foci: 1-3, 02, 13, 02; vertices: 1-5, 02, 15, 02 
a.  x2
9 + y2
16 = 1
b.  x2
25 + y2
16 = 1
c.  x2
9 + y2
25 = 1
d.  x2
16 + y2
25 = 1	
	 9.	 Foci: 10, -32, 10, 32; y-intercepts: -7, 7 
a.  x2
49 + y2
40 = 1
b.  x2
9 + y2
49 = 1
c.  x2
9 + y2
40 = 1
d.  x2
40 + y2
49 = 1 
	10.	 Major axis vertical with length 16; length of minor axis = 8; 
center: 10, 02 
a.  x2
16 + y2
64 = 1
b.  x2
64 +
y2
256 = 1
c.  x2
8 + y2
64 = 1
d.  x2
64 + y2
16 = 1
	11.	 Graph the ellipse with equation  
91x - 122 + 41y - 222 = 36. 
3
5
1
1
3
5
0
1
3
5
1
3
5
y
x
(a)
1
3
5
1
3
5
0
1
3
5
1
3
5
y
x
(b)
5
3
1
1
3
5
0
3
1
1
3
5
5
y
x
(c)
y
x
0
1
3
5
(d)
1
3
5
1
3
5
5
1
3
	12.	 Find the vertices and foci of the hyperbola with equation 
	
	 x2
121 - y2
4 = 1. 
a.  vertices: 1-11, 02,111, 02; foci: 1-2, 02, 12, 02
b.  vertices: 10, -12,10, 112; foci: 1-515, 021515, 02
c.  vertices: 1-11, 02,111, 02; foci: 1-515, 021515, 02
d.  vertices: 1-2, 02,12, 02; foci: 1-515, 021515, 02	
	13.	 Graph the hyperbola with equation x2
25 - y2
4 = 1. 
x
4
4
8
8
0
4
8
4
y
8
(a)
x
5
5
0
5
y
5
(b)  

	
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–10 907
(c)
x
5
5
10
10
0
5
10
5
10
y
x
4
4
8
8
0
4
8
4
y
8
(d)
	14.	 Find the standard form of the equation of the hyperbola with 
foci 10, -102, 10, 102 and vertices 10, -52, 10, 52. 
a.  y2
25 - x2
100 = 1
b.  y2
25 - x2
75 = 1
c.  x2
25 - y2
100 = 1
d.  x2
25 - y2
75 = 1
In Problems 15 and 16, convert the equation to the standard 
form for a hyperbola by completing the square on x and y.
	15.	 y2 - 4x2 - 2y - 16x - 19 = 0 	
a. 
1y - 222
4
 - 1x + 422 = 1
b. 
1x - 122
4
 - 1y + 222 = 1
c. 
1y - 122
4
 - 1x + 222 = 1
d. 1x + 222 - 
1y - 122
4
= 1
	16.	 4y2 - 9x2 - 16y - 36x - 56 = 0 
a. 
1y - 222
4
 - 
1x + 222
9
= 1
b. 
1x - 222
4
 - 
1y + 222
9
= 1
c. 
1y - 222
9
 - 
1x + 222
4
= 1
d. 
1y + 222
9
 - 
1x - 222
4
= 1
In Problems 17–20, identify the conic section.
	17.	 3x2 + 2y2 - 6x + 4y - 1 = 0 
a.  parabola
b.  circle
c.  ellipse
d.  hyperbola
	18.	 x2 + 2x + 4y + 5 = 0 
a.  parabola
b.  circle
c.  ellipse
d.  hyperbola
	19.	 4x2 - y2 + 16x + 2y + 11 = 0 
a.  parabola
b.  circle
c.  ellipse
d.  hyperbola
	20.	 5y2 - 3x2 + 20y - 6x + 2 = 0 
a.  parabola
b.  circle
c.  ellipse
d.  hyperbola
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–10
	 1.	 Let f1x2 = x2 - 3x + 2. Find 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
.
	 2.	 Sketch the graph of f1x2 = 2x + 1 - 2. 
	 3.	 Let f1x2 = 2x - 3. Find the inverse function f -1. Verify that 
f1f -11x22 = x. 
	 4.	 Sketch the graph of f1x2 = a1
2b
x +  2
. 
	 5.	 Solve the equation  log 51x - 12 +  log 51x - 22 = 3 log 52
3 6.
	 6.	 Express
	
	
 log a3
3 x2yz
	
	 in terms of logarithms of x, y, and z.
	 7.	 Solve the inequality 
x
x - 2 Ú 1.	
	 8.	 The current I in an electric circuit is given by 
I = V
R 11-e -0.3t2.
	
	 Use natural logarithms to solve for t.
In Problems 9–12, solve each system of equations.
	 9.	 e1.4x - 0.5y = 1.3
0.4x + 1.1y = 4.1	
	10.	 •
2x +
y - 4z = 3
x - 2y + 3z = 4
   -3x + 4y -
z = -2
	11.	 e
y = 2 - log x
y - log1x + 32 = 1	
	12.	 e
y = x2 - 1
3x2 + 8y2 = 8	 
	13.	 Find the determinant of the matrix C
1
4
7
2
5
8
3
6
9
S . 
	14.	 Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system of equations.
e2x - 3y = -4
5x + 7y =
1 			

908	 Chapter 10      Conic Sections
	15.	 Find the inverse of the matrix A = c
3
-2
-5
4d .
	16.	 Find an equation of the line that passes through the 
point of intersection of the lines x + 2y - 3 = 0 and 
3x + 4y - 5 = 0 and that is perpendicular to the line 
x - 3y + 5 = 0. Write your answer in slope–intercept 
form. 
	17.	 Solve the equation 2x4 - 5x2 + 3 = 0. 
In Problems 18–20, an equation of a conic section is given. 
Identify the conic and sketch its graph.
	18.	 x2 - y2 = -4 
	19.	 9x2 + 9y2 = 144 
	20.	 Sketch the graph of the rational function f1x2 =
x
x2 - 16. 

Probability was studied in ancient Eastern civilizations, 
including those in Babylonia and Egypt. Probability is most 
famously used in gambling, and Egyptians even used objects 
made from the heel bones of animals, called tali, as a type 
of dice. Today, probability is used not only in gambling, but 
also in polling, insurance, business, the life sciences, and 
many other areas. In this chapter, we learn to understand and 
compute the probability of an event.
Further Topics  
in Algebra
C h a p t e r 11
Topics
11.1	 Sequences and Series
11.2	 Arithmetic Sequences;  
Partial Sums
11.3	 Geometric Sequences and Series
11.4	 Mathematical Induction
11.5	 The Binomial Theorem
11.6	 Counting Principles
11.7	 Probability

910	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
The Family Tree of the Honeybee
The bee that most of us know best is the honeybee, an insect that lives in a colony and 
has an unusual family tree. Perhaps the most surprising fact about honeybees is that 
not all of them have two parents. This phenomenon begins with a special female in 
the colony called the queen. Many other female bees, called worker bees, live in the 
colony, but unlike the queen bee, they produce no eggs. Male bees do no work and are 
produced from the queen’s unfertilized eggs. The female bees are produced as a result 
of the queen bee mating with a male bee. Consequently, all female bees have two 
parents—a male and a female—whereas male bees have just one parent—a female. 
In this section, we study sequences, and in Example 4, we see how a famous sequence 
accurately counts a honeybee’s ancestors.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	
Algebraic expressions (Section P.1,  
page 13)
2	
Finding functional values (Section 2.4, 
page 198)
Objectives
1	 Use sequence notation and find specific 
and general terms in a sequence.
2	 Use factorial notation.
3	 Use summation notation to write partial 
sums of a series.
Sequences and Series
11.1
S e c t i o n
Sequences
The word sequence is used in mathematics in much the same way it is used in ordinary 
English. If someone saw a sequence of bad movies, you know that the person could list the 
first bad movie he or she saw, the second bad movie, and so on.
1	
Use sequence notation and 
find specific and general 
terms in a sequence.
An infinite sequence is a function whose domain is the set of positive integers. The 
function values, written as
a1, a2, a3, a4, c, an, c,
are called the terms of the sequence. The nth term, an, is called the general term 
of the sequence.
If the domain of a function consists of only the first n positive integers, the  
sequence is called a finite sequence.
Sequence
In computer science, finite sequences of the form a1, a2, c, an are called strings. 
Sometimes for convenience, we include 0 in the domain of the function that defines a 
sequence, and we write the sequence terms as a0, a1, a2, a3, c. The nth term of such a 
sequence is an-1.

	
Section 11.1    ■    Sequences and Series 911
We can use subscripts on variables other than a to represent the terms of a sequence. In 
Example 1(c), we use the variable b.
Notice in Example 1 that converting 
an = 5n - 1 to standard function 
notation gives us f1n2 = 5n - 1, 
a linear function.
Do you  
know?
Write the first four terms of each sequence.
a.	 an = 5n - 1        b.   an =
1
n + 1         c.   bn = 1-12n+1 a1
nb
Solution
The first four terms of each sequence are found by replacing n with the integers 1, 2, 3, and 
4 in the equation defining an.
a.	 an = 5n - 1	
General term of the sequence
	
a1 = 5112 - 1 = 4	
1st term: Replace n with 1.
	
a2 = 5122 - 1 = 9	
2nd term: Replace n with 2.
	
a3 = 5132 - 1 = 14	
3rd term: Replace n with 3.
	
a4 = 5142 - 1 = 19	
4th term: Replace n with 4.
	
The first four terms of the sequence are 4, 9, 14, and 19.
b.	  an =
1
n + 1
	
 a1 =
1
1 + 1 = 1
2
	
 a2 =
1
2 + 1 = 1
3
	
 a3 =
1
3 + 1 = 1
4
	
 a4 =
1
4 + 1 = 1
5
	
The first four terms are 1
2, 1
3, 1
4 , and 1
5.
Writing the Terms of a Sequence from the General Term
EXAMPLE 1
Write the general term an for a sequence whose first five terms are given.
a.	 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, c       b.   0, 1
2, -2
3, 3
4, -4
5, c
Solution
Write the position number of the term above each term of the sequence and look for a 
­pattern that connects the term to the position number of the term.
a.	
n:   1, 2, 3, 4, 5, c, n
term: 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, c, an
	
Apparent pattern: Here 1 = 12, 4 = 22, 9 = 32, 16 = 42, and 25 = 52. Each term is 
the square of the position number of that term. This suggests an = n2.
Finding a General Term of a Sequence from a Pattern
EXAMPLE 2
c.	  bn = 1-12n+1 a1
nb
	
 b1 = 1-121+1 a1
1b = 1-122112 = 1
	
 b2 = 1-122+1 a1
2b = 1-123 a1
2b = -1
2
	
 b3 = 1-123+1 a1
3b = 1-124 a1
3b = 1
3
	
 b4 = 1-124+1 a1
4b = 1-125 a1
4b = -1
4
	
The first four terms are 1, -1
2, 1
3, and - 1
4 .
Practice Problem 1  Write the first four terms of the sequence with general term 
an = -2n.
Frequently, the first few terms of a sequence exhibit a pattern that suggests a natural 
choice for the general term of the sequence.
A graphing calculator can write 
the terms of a sequence and graph 
the sequence. You must first select 
sequence mode.
The first four terms of the 
sequence an =
1
n + 1 and the 
graph of this sequence are shown 
here. Use the right arrow key   
to scroll to the right to display the 
sequence values corresponding to 
n = 3 and n = 4.
Now press  GRAPH .
Technology
Connection
[0, 10, 1] by [0, 1, 1]
0
10

912	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Leonardo, 
often 
known today by the 
name 
Fibonacci 
(son of Bonaccio) 
was born around 
1175. He traveled 
extensively through North Africa and 
the Mediterranean, probably on busi-
ness with his father. At each location, 
he met with Islamic scholars and ab-
sorbed the mathematical knowledge 
of the Islamic world. After returning 
to Pisa around 1200, he started writ-
ing books on mathematics. He was one 
of the earliest European writers on al-
gebra. In his most famous book Liber 
abaci, or Book of Calculations, he intro-
duced the Western world to the rules of 
computing with the new Hindu–Arabic 
numerals.
b.	
n:   1, 2,  3, 4,  5, c, n
term: 0, 1
2, -2
3, 3
4, -4
5, c, an
	
Apparent pattern: When the terms alternate in sign and n = 1, we use the factor 
1-12n if we want to begin with the factor -1 and we use the factor 1-12n+1 if we 
want to begin with the factor 1. Notice that each term can be written as a quotient 
with denominator equal to the position number and numerator equal to one less than 
	
the position number, suggesting the general term an = 1-12n  n - 1
n
.
Practice Problem 2  Write a general term for a sequence whose first five terms are 
0, -1
2, 2
3, -3
4, 4
5, c.
In Example 2, we found the general term of a sequence by finding a pattern in the first few 
terms of the sequence. However, when only a finite number of successive terms are given 
without a rule that defines the general term, a unique general term cannot be found.
To indicate why this is so, consider the two sequences:
 an = n2, and 
 bn = n2 + 1n - 121n - 221n - 321n - 42. 
The first four terms of these two sequences are identical: 1, 4, 9, 16. However, the fifth 
term is different: a5 = 25, but b5 = 49. Thus, either an or bn could correctly describe a se-
quence whose first four terms are 1, 4, 9, and 16. So you can never find a unique general 
term from a finite number of terms in a sequence.
Warning
Recursive Formulas
Up to this point, we have expressed the general term as a function of the position of the 
term in the sequence. A second approach is to define a sequence recursively. A recursive 
formula requires that one or more of the first few terms of the sequence be specified and 
all other terms be defined in relation to previously defined terms.
For example, the Fibonacci sequence is a famous sequence that is defined recursively 
and occurs often in nature. In this sequence, we specify the first two terms as a0 = 1 and 
a1 = 1; each subsequent term is the sum of the two terms immediately preceding it. So 
we have
 a0 = 1, a1 = 1, a2 = a0 + a1 = 1 + 1 = 2    Add the two given terms.
 a1 = 1, a2 = 2, a3 = a1 + a2 = 1 + 2 = 3    Add the two previous terms.
 a2 = 2, a3 = 3, a4 = a2 + a3 = 2 + 3 = 5    Add the two previous terms.
 a3 = 3, a4 = 5, a5 = a3 + a4 = 3 + 5 = 8    Add the two previous terms.
The first six terms of the sequence are then 
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8.
This sequence can also be defined in subscript notation: 
a0 = 1, a1 = 1, ak = ak-2 + ak-1, for all k Ú 2
Replacing k with 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, in the equation ak = ak-2 + ak-1 will pro-
duce the values a2 = 2, a3 = 3, a4 = 5, and a5 = 8.
Leonardo of Pisa  
(Fibonacci)
(1175–1250)

	
Section 11.1    ■    Sequences and Series 913
Write the first five terms of the recursively defined sequence
a1 = 4,  an+1 = 2an - 9.
Finding Terms of a Recursively Defined Sequence
EXAMPLE 3
Great-Great-Great-Grand-
parents
8
Great-Great-Grand-
parents
5
Great-Grand-
parents
3
Grand-
parents
2
Male
Bee
1
3 Great-Grandparents
F
F
F
F
2 Grandparents
M
M
M
1 Parent
Parents
1
1 Male Bee
 Male
 Female
5 Great-Great-Grandparents
8 Great-Great-Great-Grandparents
F
M
M
F
M
F
F
M
F
M
F
F
M
F
F
Figure 11.1 
Find a sequence that accurately counts the ancestors of a male honeybee. The first term 
of the sequence should give the number of parents of a male honeybee, the second term 
the number of grandparents, the third term the number of great-grandparents, and so on.
Solution
Recall from the introduction to this section that female honeybees have two parents— 
a male and a female—but that male honeybees have just one parent—a female.
First, we consider the family tree of a male honeybee. A male bee has one parent: a female. 
Because his mother had two parents, he has two grandparents. Because his grandmother had 
two parents and his grandfather had only one parent, he has three great-grandparents.
Now to count the bee’s ancestors, we count backward using Figure 11.1. You should 
recognize the first six terms of the Fibonacci sequence: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8. This sequence is 
defined by a0 = 1, a1 = 1, and ak = ak-2 + ak-1, for all k Ú 2.
Diagramming the Family Tree of a Honeybee
EXAMPLE 4
Solution
We are given the first term of the sequence: a1 = 4.
 a2 = 2a1 - 9
    Replace n with 1 in an+1 = 2an - 9.
 a2 = 2142 - 9 = -1
    Replace a1 with 4.
 a3 = 2a2 - 9
    Replace n with 2 in an+1 = 2an - 9.
 a3 = 21-12 - 9 = -11     Replace a2 with -1.
 a4 = 2a3 - 9
    Replace n with 3 in an+1 = 2an - 9.
 a4 = 21-112 - 9 = -31    Replace a3 with -11.
 a5 = 2a4 - 9
    Replace n with 4 in an+1 = 2an - 9.
 a5 = 21-312 - 9 = -71    Replace a4 with -31.
Thus, the first five terms of the sequence are 
4, -1, -11, -31, -71.
Practice Problem 3  Write the first five terms of the recursively defined sequence 
a1 = -3, an+1 = 2an + 5.

914	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Factorial Notation
Special types of products, called factorials, appear in some very important sequences.
2	
Use factorial notation.
The symbol n! was first introduced 
by Christian Kramp of Strasbourg 
in 1808 as a convenience for the 
printer. Alternative symbols ∟n and 
p1n2 were used until late in the 
19th century.
A typical calculator will 
­compute approximate values of n! 
up to n = 69.
69! ≈1.7112 * 1098
Do You  
Know?
Technology
Connection
For any positive integer n, n factorial (written as n!) is defined as
n! = n # 1n - 12 g 4 # 3 # 2 # 1.
As a special case, zero factorial 10!2 is defined by
0! = 1.
Factorial
Here are the first eight values of n!
 0! = 1
     4! = 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 = 24
 1! = 1
     5! = 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 = 120
 2! = 2 # 1 = 2
     6! = 6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 = 720
 3! = 3 # 2 # 1 = 6     7! = 7 # 6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 = 5040
The values of n! get large very quickly. For example, 10! = 3,628,800 and 
12! = 479,001,600.
In simplifying some expressions involving factorials, it is helpful to note that
n! = n # 1n - 12!
Simplify.
a.  16!
14!        b.  1n + 12!
1n - 12!
Solution
a.   16!
14! = 16 # 15 # 14!
14!
    16! = 16 # 15! = 16 # 15 # 14!
 = 16 # 15 = 240    Divide out the factor 14!
b.   1n + 12!
1n - 12! = 1n + 12 # n # 1n - 12!
1n - 12!
    1n + 12! = 1n + 12 # n! =  
1n + 12 # n # 1n - 12!
 = 1n + 12n
    Divide out the common factor 1n - 12!
Practice Problem 5  Simplify.
a.  13!
12!        b. 
n!
1n - 32!
Simplifying a Factorial Expression
Example 5
Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is an = 1-12n+1
n!
.
Writing Terms of a Sequence Involving Factorials
Example 6
Practice Problem 4  Find a sequence that accurately counts the ancestors of a  
female honeybee.

	
Section 11.1    ■    Sequences and Series 915
Summation Notation
If we know the general term of a sequence, we can represent a sum of terms of the sequence 
by using summation (or sigma) notation. In this notation, the Greek letter g (capital ­sigma) 
indicates that we are to add the given terms. The letter g corresponds to the ­English letter S, 
the first letter of the word sum.
3	
Use summation notation to 
write partial sums of a series.
Solution
Replace n in the formula for the general term with each positive integer from 1 through 5.
 a1 = 1-121+1
1!
 = 1-122
1
= 1
     a4 = 1-124+1
4!
 = 1-125
24
 = - 1
24
 a2 = 1-122+1
2!
 = 1-123
2
= -1
2     a5 = 1-125+1
5!
 = 1-126
120
 =
1
120
 a3 = 1-123+1
3!
 = 1-124
6
= 1
6
Using these five terms, we could write this sequence as
1, -1
2
, 1
6
, - 1
24
, 1
120
, c.
Practice Problem 6  Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is
an = 1-12n2n
n!
.
 S u m m at i o n  N o tat i o n
The sum of the first n1Ú12 terms of a sequence a1, a2, a3, c, an, cis denoted by
a
n
i=1
ai = a1 + a2 +  a3 + g + an.
The letter i in the summation notation is called the index of summation, n is called 
the upper limit, and 1 is called the lower limit of the summation.
A graphing calculator in sequence 
mode can sum terms of a series.
The viewing window shows 
a
7
j=4
12j2 - 12. Note that the 
calculator replaces the variable j 
with n.
Technology
Connection
In summation notation, the index need not start at i = 1. Also, any letter may be used 
in place of the index i. In general, we have
a
n
j=k
aj = ak + ak+1 + g+ an, n Ú k Ú 0.
Find each sum.
a.  a
9
i=1
i        b.  a
7
j=4
12j2 - 12        c.  a
4
k=0
2k
k!
Solution
a.  Replace i with successive integers from 1 to 9 inclusive; then add.
a
9
i=1
i = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 + 9 = 45
Evaluating Sums Given in Summation Notation
Example 7

916	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
The familiar properties of real numbers, such as the distributive, commutative, and 
­associative properties, can be used to prove the summation properties listed next.
b.	 The index of summation is j. Evaluate 12j2 - 12 for all consecutive integers from 4 
through 7 inclusive; then add.
 a
7
j=4
12j2 - 12 = 321422 - 14 + 321522 - 14 + 321622 - 14 + 321722 - 14
 = 31 + 49 + 71 + 97 = 248
c.	 The index of summation is k. Evaluate 2k
k! for consecutive integers 0 through 4 inclusive; 
	
then add.
 a
4
k=0
2k
k! = 20
0! + 21
1! + 22
2! + 23
3! + 24
4!
 = 1
1 + 2
1 + 4
2 + 8
6 + 16
24 = 1 + 2 + 2 + 4
3 + 2
3 = 7
Practice Problem 7  Find the following sum: a
3
k=0
1-12kk!
Let ak and bk represent the general terms of two sequences and let c represent any 
real number. Then
1.	 a
n
k=1
c = cn
2.	 a
n
k=1
cak = ca
n
k=1
ak
3.	 a
n
k=1
1ak + bk2 = a
n
k=1
ak + a
n
k=1
bk
4.	 a
n
k=1
1ak - bk2 = a
n
k=1
ak - a
n
k=1
bk
5.	 a
n
k=1
ak = a
j
k=1
ak +
a
n
k=j+1
ak, for 1 … j 6 n
Summation Properties
Let a1, a2, a3, c, ak, cbe an infinite sequence. Then
1.	 The sum of all terms of the sequence is called a series and is denoted by
a1 + a2 + a3 + g = a
∞
i=1
ai.
2.	 The sum of the first n terms of the sequence
a1 + a2 + a3 + g+ an = a
n
i=1
ai
	
is called the nth partial sum of the series.
Series
Series
We all know how to add numbers, but do you think it is possible to add infinitely many 
numbers? It is sometimes possible to add infinitely many numbers, although a complete 
explanation of this kind of addition must be put off until a calculus course. For now, we 
need some definitions.

	
Section 11.1    ■    Sequences and Series 917
Write each sum in summation notation.
a.  3 + 5 + 7 + g+ 21        b.  1
4 + 1
9 + g+ 1
49
Solution
a.  The finite series 3 + 5 + 7 + g+ 21 is a sum of consecutive odd numbers from 
3 to 21. Each of these numbers can be expressed in the form 2k + 1, starting with 
k = 1 and ending with k = 10. With k as the index of summation, 1 as the lower 
limit, and 10 as the upper limit, we write
3 + 5 + 7 + g+ 21 = a
10
k=1
12k + 12.
b.  The finite series 1
4 + 1
9 + g+ 1
49 is a sum of fractions, each of which has numerator 1 
	
and denominator k2, starting with k = 2 and ending with k = 7. We write
1
4 + 1
9 + g+ 1
49 = a
7
k=2
 1
k2.
Practice Problem 8  Write the following in summation notation: 2 - 4 + 6 - 8 +
10 - 12 + 14
Writing a Sum in Summation Notation
Example 8
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a1 = -2, a2 = -4, a3 = -8, a4 = -16
2. an = 1-12n+1a1 - 1
nb    3. a1 = -3, a2 = -1, a3 = 3,
a4 = 11, a5 = 27    4. a1 = 2, a2 = 3, and ak = ak-2 + ak-1, 
for all k Ú 3    5. a. 13  b. n1n - 121n - 22
6. a1 = -2, a2 = 2, a3 = - 4
3, a4 = 2
3, a5 = - 4
15    7. -4
8. a
7
k=1
1-12k+112k2
Exercises
section 11.1 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 An infinite sequence is a function whose domain is the set of 
. 
	 2.	 If a sequence is defined by an = 2n - 10
n , then a5 =
	
	
	 3.	 By definition, 0! =
.
	 4.	 Evaluate a
5
k=0
 2k + 1
2
. 
	 5.	 True or False. If a1 = 3 and an+1 = a2
n, then a3 = 27. 
	 6.	 True or False. 
12n2!
n!
= 2. 
In Exercises 7–26, write the first four terms of each sequence.
	 7.	 an = 3n - 2
	 8.	 an = 2n + 1
	 9.	 an = 1 - 1
n 
	10.	 an = 1 + 1
n 
	11.	 an = -n2 
	12.	 an = n3 
	13.	 an =
2n
n + 1 
	14.	 an =
3n
n2 + 1 
	15.	 an = 1-12n+1 
	16.	 an = 1-32n-1 
	17.	 an = 3 - 1
2n 
	18.	 an = a3
2b
n 
	19.	 an = 0.6 
	20.	 an = -0.4 
	21.	 an =
1-12n
n! 
	22.	 an = n
n!   

918	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
	23.	 an = 1-12n3-n 
	24.	 an = 1-12n3n-1 
	25.	 an = en
2n 
	26.	 an = 2n
en 
In Exercises 27–40, write a general term an for each sequence. 
Assume that n begins with 1.
	27.	 1, 4, 7, 10, c 
	28.	 7, 9, 11, 13, c
	29.	 1
2, 1
3, 1
4, 1
5, c 
	30.	 2
3, 3
4, 4
5, 5
6, c 
	31.	 2, -2, 2, -2, c
	32.	 -3, 6, -9, 12, c
	33.	 1
2, 3
4, 9
8, 27
16, c 
	34.	 - 1
2, 1
4, - 1
8, 1
16, c
	35.	 1 # 2, 2 # 3, 3 # 4, 4 # 5, c 
	36.	 - 1
1 # 2, 1
2 # 3, - 1
3 # 4, 1
4 # 5, c 
	37.	 2 + 1
2, 2 - 1
3, 2 + 1
4, 2 - 1
5, c 
	38.	 1 + 1
2, 1 + 1
3, 1 + 1
4, 1 + 1
5, c 
	39.	 32
2 , 33
3 , 34
4 , 35
5 , c
	40.	 e
2, e2
4 , e3
8 , e4
16, c
In Exercises 41–50, write the first five terms of each 
­recursively defined sequence.
	41.	 a1 = 2, an+1 = an + 3 
	42.	 a1 = 5, an+1 = an - 1 
	43.	 a1 = 3, an+1 = 2an 
	44.	 a1 = 1, an+1 = 1
2an 
	45.	 a1 = 7, an+1 = -2an + 3 
	46.	 a1 = -4, an+1 = -3an - 5 
	47.	 a1 = 2, an+1 = 1
an 
	48.	 a1 = -1, an+1 = -1
an 
	49.	 a1 = 25, an+1 =
1-12n
5an 
	50.	 a1 = 12, an+1 =
1-12n
3an 
In Exercises 51–56, use a graphing calculator to (a) find the 
first ten terms of the sequence and (b) graph the first ten 
terms of the sequence.
	51.	 an = 3n2 - 1 
	52.	 an = 4 - 3
n 
	53.	 an = n a1 - 1
nb 
	54.	 an = n3 - n2 
	55.	 an = 1 -
1
an-1
, a1 = 1
2 
	56.	 an = a2
n-1, a1 = 1 
In Exercises 57–64, simplify the factorial expression.
	57.	 3!
5! 
	58.	 8!
10! 
	59.	 12!
11! 
	60.	 20!
18! 
	61.	
n!
1n + 12! 
	62.	
1n - 12!
1n - 22! 
	63.	
12n + 12!
12n2! 
	64.	
12n + 12!
12n - 12! 
In Exercises 65–76, find each sum.
	65.	 a
7
k=1
5 
	66.	 a
4
j=1
12 
	67.	 a
5
j=0
j2 
	68.	 a
4
k=0
k3 
	69.	 a
5
i=1
12i - 12 
	70.	 a
6
k=0
11 - 3k2 
	71.	 a
7
j=3
j + 1
j 
	72.	 a
8
k=3
1
k + 1 
	73.	 a
6
i=2
1-12i3i-1 
	74.	 a
4
k=2
1-12k+1k 
	75.	 a
7
k=4
12 - k22 
	76.	 a
9
j=4
1 j3 + 12 
In Exercises 77–84, write each sum in summation notation.
	77.	 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 + g+ 101
	78.	 2 + 4 + 6 + 8 + g+ 102
	79.	
1
5112 +
1
5122 +
1
5132 +
1
5142 + g+ 
1
51112 
	80.	
2
1 # 2 +
2
2 # 3 +
2
3 # 4 +
2
4 # 5 + g+ 
2
9 # 10 
	81.	 1 - 1
2 + 1
3 - 1
4 + g- 1
50 
	82.	 1 - 2 + 3 - 4 + g+ 1-502
	83.	 1
2 + 2
3 + 3
4 + 4
5 + g+ 10
11 
	84.	 2
1 + 22
2 + 23
3 + 24
4 + g+ 210
10 
In Exercises 85–90, use a graphing calculator to find each sum.
	85.	 a
10
i=1
12i2 
	86.	 a
50
i=1
12i + 72 
	87.	 a
30
k=5
7
1 - k2 
	88.	 a
25
k=10
1k + 122
k 
	89.	 a
100
j=1
1-12jj 
	90.	 a
50
j=8
a7 +
1-12j
j
b          

	
Section 11.1    ■    Sequences and Series 919
Applying the Concepts
	 91.	 Free fall. In the absence of friction, a freely falling body 
will fall about 16 feet the first second, 48 feet the next 
­second, 80 feet the third second, 112 feet the fourth second, 
and so on. How far has it fallen during
a.	 The seventh second? 
b.	 The nth second? 
	 92.	 Bacterial growth. A colony of 1000 bacteria doubles 
in size every hour. How many bacteria will there be in
a.	 2 hours? 
b.	 5 hours? 
c.	 n hours? 
	 93.	 Workplace fines. A contractor who quits work on a house 
was told she would be fined $50 if she did not resume work 
on Monday, $75 if she failed to resume work on Tuesday, 
$100 if she did not resume work on Wednesday, and so on 
(including weekends). How much will her fine be on the 
ninth day she fails to show up for work? 
	 94.	 Appreciating value. A painting valued at $30,000 is 
expected to appreciate $1280 the first year, $1240 the 
­second year, $1200 the third year, and so on. How much 
will the painting appreciate in
a.	 The seventh year? 
b.	 The tenth year? 
	 95.	 Cell phone use. At the end of the first six months after 
a company began providing cell phones to its sales force, 
it averaged 600 cell minutes per month. For the next four 
years, its monthly cell phone use doubled every six months. 
How many cell minutes per month were being used at the 
end of three years? 
	 96.	 Motorcycle acceleration. A motorcycle travels 10 yards 
the first second and then increases its speed by 20 yards per 
second in each succeeding second. At this rate, how far will 
the motorcycle travel during
a.	 The eighth second? 
b.	 The nth second? 
	 97.	 Compound interest. Suppose $10,000 is deposited into 
an account that earns 6% interest compounded semiannually. 
The balance in the account after n compounding periods is 
given by the sequence
An = 10,000 a1 + 0.06
2 b
n
, n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
a.	 Find the first six terms of this sequence. 
b.	 Find the balance in the account after 8 years. 
	 98.	 Compound interest. Suppose $100 is deposited at the 
beginning of a year into an account that earns 8% interest 
compounded quarterly. The balance in the account after  
n compounding periods is
An = 100 a1 + 0.08
4 b
n
, n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
a.	 Find the first six terms of this sequence. 
b.	 Find the balance in the account after ten years. 
	 99.	 Real estate value. Analysts estimate that a $100,000 
­condominium will increase 5% in value each year for the 
next seven years. Find the value of the condominium in 
each of those years. Write a formula for a sequence whose 
first seven terms give these values. 
	100.	 Diminishing savings. Laura withdraws 10% of her 
$50,000 savings each year. Find the amount remaining in 
her account for each of the next ten years. Write a formula 
for a sequence whose first ten terms give these values. 
Beyond the Basics
	101.	 Find a formula for the nth term of the sequence defined 
recursively by a1 = 12, an+1 = 12an. [Hint: Write each 
of the first five terms as a power of 2.] 
	102.	 The triangular tiles used in the figures shown have white 
interiors and gold edges. A sequence of figures is obtained 
by adding one triangle to the previous figure.
One tile
Two tiles
Three tiles
a.	 Write a recursive sequence whose nth term, an, gives 
the number of gold edges in the nth ­figure.
b.	 Write a recursive sequence whose nth term, bn, gives the 
number of gold edges that lie on the perimeter of the nth 
figure. 
	103.	 The figure shows a sequence of successively smaller squares 
formed by connecting the midpoints of the sides of the 
­preceding larger square. The area of the largest square is 1.
a.	 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general 
term, an, gives the area of the nth square.
b.	 Write the general term, an, of the sequence. 
	104.	 A sequence of concentric circles is designed so that the 
radius of the first circle is 1 and each successive circle has a 
radius that is twice the length of the radius of the preceding 
circle. Write a recursive sequence whose nth term, an, gives 
the area of the nth circle.     

920	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
	105.	 Find the first ten terms of the sequence defined recursively by 
a1 = a2 = 1, an = aan - 1 + an-an - 1. In 1989, a prize of 
$1000 was offered to whoever first discovered (for this sequence)
a value of n for which ` ai
i ` - ` 1
2 ` 6 1
20 for all i 7 n.
A mathematician named Colin L. Mallows of AT&T/Bell 
Laboratories found that n = 1489 and claimed the prize.
(Source: http://el.media.mit.edu/logo-foundation/pubs/
papers/easy_as_11223.html) 
	106.	 A sequence of numbers a0, a1, a2, a3, c satisfies the  
equation
an
2 = 1-12n an-1 + an+1.
	
	 If a0 = 1 and a1 = 3, find a3. 
	107.	 Find a sequence with general term am such that 
a
20
n=1
 n2 = a
19
m=0
 am. 
	108.	 Find a real number c such that
a
50
n=1
 1n - 322 = a
50
n=1
 1n2 - 6n2 + a
50
n=1
 c. 
	109.	 Find a lower limit p and an upper limit q such that
a
10
n=0
 n3 = a
q
m=p
 1m - 223. 
	110.	 Give an example of two sequences ak and bk such that
a
20
k=1
 akbk ≠a a
20
k=1
 akba a
20
k=1
 bkb. 
	111.	 Show that 7! - 215!2 = 4015!2.
	112.	 Show that 10!
6! 4! + 10!
5! 5! = 11!
6! 5!.
	113.	 If 1
5! + 1
6! = x
7!, find x. 
	114.	 If 1n + 12! = 121n - 12!, find n. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	115.	 Find the largest integer value for the upper limit k if
a
k
n=1
 1n2 + n2
= a
k
n=1
 31n - 121n - 221n - 321n - 421n - 52 + n2 + n4.
	116.	 The Ulam conjecture. Define the sequence an recursively by
an = c
an-1
2
if an-1 is even
3an-1 + 1
if an-1 is odd.
	
	 The Ulam conjecture says that if your first term a0 is any 
positive integer, the sequence an will eventually reach the 
integer 1. Verify the conjecture for a0 = 13.
	117.	 Show that 
12n2!
n!
= 31 # 3 # 5 #  g 12n - 1242n.
	118.	 Explain why 1n! + 12 is not divisible by any integer 
between 2 and n.
Maintaining Skills
For each sequence in Exercises 119–122, find a2 −a1, a3 −a2,
a4 −a3, and a5 −a4.
	119.	 1, 5, 9, 13, 17 
	120.	 2, 5.2, 8.4, 11.6, 14.8
	121.	 6, 1, -4, -9, -14
	122.	 5, 1.5, -2, -5.5, -9
In Exercises 123–126, the first term a1 and a number d are 
given. Write the next four terms of the sequence defined by 
a2 = a1 + d, a3 = a2 + d, a4 = a3 + d, and a5 = a4 + d.
	123.	 a1 = 3, d = 4
	124.	 a1 = 4, d = 2.5
	125.	 a1 = 7, d = -3
	126.	 a1 = 8, d = -4.5
In Exercises 127–130, the nth term an is given. Find 
a2 −a1, a3 −a2, a4 −a3, and a5 −a4.
	127.	 an = 3n + 5 
	128.	 an = 5n - 7 
	129.	 an = -2n - 6
	130.	 an = -3n + 8
	131.	 Let an = 2n - 5. Find an+1 and an-1.
	132.	 Let an = -3n + 4. Find an+1 and an-1.
      
  
   
  
  
   

	
Section 11.2    ■    Arithmetic Sequences; Partial Sums 921
Arithmetic Sequence
When the difference 1an+1 - an2 between any two consecutive terms of a sequence is 
always the same number, the sequence is called an arithmetic sequence. In other words, 
the sequence a1, a2, a3, a4, cis an arithmetic sequence if a2 - a1 = a3 - a2 =
a4 - a3 = g .
Falling Space Junk
One April more than 300 kilograms (700 pounds) of “space junk” crashed to the ground 
in South Africa. The material was eventually identified as part of a Delta 2 rocket used 
to launch a global positioning satellite. Once an object begins a free fall toward Earth, 
it falls (in the absence of friction) 16 feet in the first second, 48 feet in the next second, 
80 feet in the third second, and so on. The number of feet traveled in succeeding sec-
onds is the sequence
16, 48, 80, 112, c.
This is an example of an arithmetic sequence. We investigate such a sequence in Example 5.
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 The general term of a sequence  
(Section 11.1, page 910)
2	 Partial sums (Section 11.1, page 916)
Objectives
1	 Identify an arithmetic sequence and  
find its common difference.
2	 Find the sum of the first n terms of  
an arithmetic sequence.
Arithmetic Sequences; 
Partial Sums
11.2
S e c t i o n 
1	
Identify an arithmetic 
sequence and find its  
common difference.
The sequence
a1, a2, a3, a4, c, an, c
is an arithmetic sequence, or an arithmetic progression, if there is a number d 
such that each term in the sequence except the first is obtained from the preceding 
term by adding d to it. The number d is called the common difference of the arith-
metic sequence. We have
d = an+1 - an, n Ú 1.
Arithmetic Sequence
Find the common difference of each arithmetic sequence.
a.	 3, 23, 43, 63, 83, c        b.   29, 19, 9, -1, -11, c
Finding the Common Difference
EXAMPLE 1

922	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Solution
a.	 The common difference is 23 - 3 = 20 1or 43 - 23, 63 - 43, or 83 - 632.
b.	 The common difference is 19 - 29 = -10 1or 9 - 19, -1 - 9, or -11 - 1-122.
Practice Problem 1  Find the common difference of the arithmetic sequence 
3, -2, -7, -12, -17, c.
An arithmetic sequence can be completely specified by giving the first term a1 
and the common difference d. Let’s see why. Suppose we are told that the sequence 
a1, a2, a3, a4, c is an arithmetic sequence and that a1 = 5 and d = 4. Then
 a2 - a1 = 4, so a2 = a1 + 4 = 5 + 4  = 9;
 a3 - a2 = 4, so a3 = a2 + 4 = 9 + 4  = 13;
 a4 - a3 = 4, so a4 = a3 + 4 = 13 + 4 = 17; and so on.
Rewriting d = an+1 - an as an+1 = an + d, we have a recursive definition of an arith-
metic sequence.
An arithmetic sequence a1,
   a2, a3, a4, c, an, c can be defined recursively. The 
recursive formula
an+1 = an + d for n Ú 1
defines an arithmetic sequence with first term a1 and common difference d.
Recursive Definition of an Arithmetic Sequence
Consider an arithmetic sequence with first term a1 and common difference d. Using the 
recursive definition an+1 = an + d, for n Ú 1, we write
 a1 = a1
    The first term is a1.
 a2 = a1 + d
    Replace n with 1 in an+1 = an + d.
 a3 = a2 + d = 1a1 + d2 + d = a1 + 2d     Replace a2 with a1 + d; simplify.
 a4 = a3 + d = 1a1 + 2d2 + d = a1 + 3d    Replace a3 with a1 + 2d; simplify.
 a5 = a4 + d = 1a1 + 3d2 + d = a1 + 4d    Replace a4 with a1 + 3d; simplify.
 f
 an = an-1 + d
 = 3a1 + 1n - 22d4 + d
    Replace an-1 with a1 + 1n - 22d.
 = a1 + 1n - 12d
    Simplify.
Thus, we can find the general term an from the values a1 and d.
n t h  T e r m  o f  a n  A r i t h m e t i c  S e q u e n c e
If a sequence a1, a2, a3, c is an arithmetic sequence, then its nth term, an, is  
given by
an = a1 + 1n - 12d,
where a1 is the first term and d is the common difference.
Find an expression for the nth term of the arithmetic sequence
3, 7, 11, 15, c
Finding the nth Term of an Arithmetic Sequence
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 11.2    ■    Arithmetic Sequences; Partial Sums 923
Solution
Because a1 = 3 and d = 7 - 3 = 4, we have
 an = a1 + 1n - 12d
    Formula for the nth term
 = 3 + 1n - 124
    Replace a1 with 3 and d with 4.
 = 3 + 4n - 4 = 4n - 1    Simplify.
Note that in the expression an = 4n - 1, we get the sequence 3, 7, 11, 15, cby substi-
tuting n = 1, 2, 3, 4, c.
Practice Problem 2  Find an expression for the nth term of the arithmetic sequence 
-3, 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, c.
Find the common difference d and the nth term an of the arithmetic sequence whose 5th 
term is 15 and whose 20th term is 45.
Solution
      an = a1 + 1n - 12d     Formula for the nth term
      45 = a1 + 120 - 12d    Replace n with 20; an = a20 = 45
(1)   45 = a1 + 19d.
    Simplify.
Also,
      15 = a1 + 15 - 12d	
Replace n with 5; an = a5 = 15
(2)   15 = a1 + 4d.
	
Simplify.
Solving the system of equations
ea1 + 19d = 45 
a1 +
4d = 15
(1) 
(2)
gives d = 2 and a1 = 7. We substitute a1 = 7 and d = 2 in the formula for the nth 
term.
 an = a1 + 1n - 12d
    Formula for the nth term
 an = 7 + 1n - 122
    Replace a1 with 7 and d with 2.
 = 7 + 2n - 2 = 2n + 5    Simplify.
The nth term of this sequence is given by
an = 2n + 5, n Ú 1.
Practice Problem 3  Find the common difference d and the nth term an of the  
arithmetic sequence whose 4th term is 41 and whose 15th term is 8.
Sum of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence
We can use the following formula in many applications involving the sum of a finite arith-
metic sequence.
1 + 2 + 3 + g + n = n1n + 12
2
Finding the Common Difference of an Arithmetic Sequence
EXAMPLE 3
2	
Find the sum of the first 
n terms of an arithmetic 
sequence.

924	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
It is said that Karl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) discovered this formula when he real-
ized that any sum of numbers added in reverse order produces the same sum. Therefore, if  
S denotes the sum of the first n natural numbers, then
 S =   1   +   2   +   3  + g +   n
  S =   n   + 1n - 12 + 1n - 22 + g +     1     
 2S = 1n + 12 + 1n + 12 + 1n + 12 + g + 1n + 12    Add S + S = 2S.
n terms
2S = n1n + 12
S = n1n + 12
2
	
Divide both sides by 2.
For example, if n = 100, we have
S = 1 + 2 + 3 + g + 100 = 1001100 + 12
2
 = 10011012
2
= 5050.
We can use this method to calculate the sum Sn of the first n terms of any arithmetic  
sequence.
First, we write the sum Sn of the first n terms:
Sn = a1 + 1a1 + d2 + 1a1 + 2d2 + 1a1 + 3d2 + g+ an
We can also write Sn (with the terms in reverse order) by starting with an and subtracting 
the common difference d:
Sn = an + 1an - d2 + 1an - 2d2 + 1an - 3d2 + g+ a1
Adding the two equations for Sn, we find that the d’s in the sums “drop out” 1for example, 
1a1 + d2 + 1an - d2 = a1 + an2 and we have
 2Sn = 1a1 + an2 + 1a1 + an2 + g+ 1a1 + an2
n terms
 2Sn = n1a1 + an2
 Sn = n aa1 + an
2
b    Divide both sides by 2.
(++++++++++)++++++++++*
(+++++++++)+++++++++*
S u m  O f  T h e  F i r s t  n  T e r m s  
O f  A n  A r i t h m e t i c  S e q u e n c e
Let a1, a2, a3, can be the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence with common  
difference d. The sum Sn of these n terms is given by
 Sn = n aa1 + an
2
b
or
 Sn = n a
2a1 + 1n - 12d
2
b    an = a1 + 1n - 12d
Karl Friedrich Gauss 
discovered this for-
mula in his arithme-
tic class at the age  
of 8. One day, the 
story goes, the teacher became so in-
censed with the class that he assigned 
the students the task of adding up 
all of the numbers from 1 to 100. As 
Gauss’s classmates dutifully began to 
add, Gauss walked up to the teacher 
and presented the answer, 5050. The 
story goes that the teacher was nei-
ther impressed nor amused. Here are 
Gauss’s calculations:
 S = 1 + 2 + 3 + g + 100
 S = 100 + 99 + 98 + g + 1
 2S = 101 + 101 + 101 + g + 101
	
100 terms
 2S = 100 * 101
 S = 100 * 101
2
= 5050
Karl Friedrich Gauss 
(1777–1855)
(+++++++)++++++*
Consider the arithmetic sequence of numbers 1, 4, 7, c25. Find
a.	 The number of terms in the sequence.
b.	 The sum 1 + 4 + 7 + g+ 25.
Finding the Sum of Terms of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence
EXAMPLE 4

	
Section 11.2    ■    Arithmetic Sequences; Partial Sums 925
Solution
a.	 In this arithmetic sequence, a1 = 1 and d = 3. Let’s find the number of terms.
 an = a1 + 1n - 12d    Formula for nth term
 25 = 1 + 1n - 123     Replace an with 25, a1 with 1, and d with 3.
 24 = 1n - 123
    Subtract 1 from both sides.
 8 = n - 1
    Divide both sides by 3.
 n = 9
    Solve for n.
	
So there are 9 terms in the sequence.
b.	  Sn = n aa1 + an
2
b     Formula for Sn
	
 S9 = 9 a1 + 25
2
b     Replace n with 9, a1 with 1, and an1= a92 with 25.
	
 = 91132 = 117    Simplify.
	
So 1 + 4 + 7 + g+ 25 = 117.
Practice Problem 4  Find the sum 2
3 + 5
6 + 1 + 7
6 + 4
3 + 3
2 + 5
3 + 11
6 + 2 + 13
6 .
In the introduction to this section, we described the arithmetic sequence 16, 48, 80, 112, c 
whose terms gave the number of feet that freely falling space junk falls in successive  
seconds. For this sequence, find the following:
a.	 The common difference d
b.	 The nth term an
c.	 The distance a piece of space junk travels in 10 seconds
Solution
a.	 The common difference d = a2 - a1 = 48 - 16 = 32.
b.	  an = a1 + 1n - 12d     Formula for the nth term
	
 = 16 + 1n - 1232    Replace a1 with 16 and d with 32.
	
 = 32n - 16
    Simplify.
c.	 The sum of the first ten terms of this sequence gives the distance the piece travels in 
ten seconds. We find a10 from the formula:
 an = 32n - 16
    From part b
 a10 = 321102 - 16
    Replace n with 10.
 = 304
 Sn = n aa1 + an
2
b
    Formula for Sn
 S10 = 10 a16 + 304
2
b    Replace n with 10, a1 with 16, and  
an1= a102 with 304.
 = 1600
    Simplify.
The piece falls 1600 feet in ten seconds.
Practice Problem 5  In Example 5, find the distance the piece travels during the  
11th through 15th seconds.
Calculating the Distance Traveled by a Freely Falling Object
EXAMPLE 5

926	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Answers to Practice Problems
1. -5  2. an = 4n - 7  3. d = -3, an = 53 - 3n  4. 85
6   5. 2000 ft
Exercises
section 11.2
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 If 5 is the common difference of an arithmetic sequence with 
general term an, then a17 - a16 =  
.
	 2.	 If 5 is the common difference of an arithmetic sequence with 
a general term an and a21 = 7, then a22 =  
.
	 3.	 If 14 is the term immediately following the sequence term 
17 in an arithmetic sequence, then the common difference is 
.
	 4.	 If a1 = 2 and a11 = 22 for an arithmetic sequence, then the 
common difference, d, is 
.
	 5.	 True or False. The common difference of an arithmetic 
sequence is always positive. 
	 6.	 True or False. The sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic 
sequence always equals n times the average of its first and 
nth terms. 
In Exercises 7–20, determine whether each sequence is 
­arithmetic. For those that are, find the first term a1 and the 
common difference d.
	 7.	 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, c. 
	 8.	 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, c 
	 9.	 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, c 
	10.	 10, 7, 4, 1, -2, c 
	11.	 1, 1
2, 0, - 1
2, - 1
4, c 
	12.	 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, c 
	13.	 1, -1, 2, -2, 3, c 
	14.	 - 1
4, 1
4, 3
4, 5
4, 7
4, c 
	15.	 0.6, 0.2, -0.2, -0.6, -1, c 
	16.	 2.3, 2.7, 3.1, 3.5, 3.9, c 
	17.	 an = 2n + 6 
	18.	 an = 1 - 5n 
	19.	 an = 1 - n2 
	20.	 an = 2n2 - 3 
In Exercises 21–30, find an expression for the nth term of the 
arithmetic sequence.
	21.	 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, c 
	22.	 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, c 
	23.	 11, 6, 1, -4, -9, c 
	24.	 9, 5, 1, -3, -7, c 
	25.	 1
2, 1
4, 0, - 1
4, - 1
2, c 
	26.	 2
3, 5
6, 1, 7
6, 4
3, c 
	27.	 - 3
5, -1,  - 7
5, - 9
5, - 11
5 , c 
	28.	 1
2, 2, 7
2, 5, 13
2 , c 
	29.	 e, 3 + e, 6 + e, 9 + e, 12 + e, c 
	30.	 2p, 21p + 22, 21p + 42, 21p + 62, 21p + 82c
In Exercises 31–36, find the common difference d and the nth 
term an of the arithmetic sequence with the specified terms.
	31.	 4th term 21; 10th term 60 
	32.	 3rd term 15; 21st term 87 
	33.	 7th term 8; 15th term -8 
	34.	 5th term 12; 18th term -1 
	35.	 3rd term 7; 23rd term 17 
	36.	 11th term -1; 31st term 5 
In Exercises 37–46, find the sum of each arithmetic sequence.
	37.	 1 + 2 + 3 + g+ 50 
	38.	 2 + 4 + 6 + g+ 102 
	39.	 1 + 3 + 5 + g+ 99 
	40.	 5 + 10 + 15 + g+ 200 
	41.	 3 + 6 + 9 + g+ 300 
	42.	 4 + 7 + 10 + g+ 301 
	43.	 2 - 1 - 4 - g- 34 
	44.	 -3 - 8 - 13 - g- 48 
	45.	 1
3 + 1 + 5
3 + g+ 7 
	46.	 3
5 + 2 + 17
5 + g+ 101
5 
In Exercises 47–52, find the sum of the first n terms of the 
given arithmetic sequence.
	47.	 2, 7, 12, c; n = 50 
	48.	 8, 10, 12, c; n = 40 
	49.	 -15, -11, -7, c; n = 20 
	50.	 -20, -13, -6, c; n = 25 
	51.	 3.5, 3.7, 3.9, c; n = 100 
	52.	 -7, -6.5, -6, c; n = 80 
In Exercises 53–58, find n for the given value of an in each 
arithmetic sequence.
	53.	 an = 75; 1, 3, 5, c 
	54.	 an = 120; 2, 4, 6, c 
	55.	 an = 95; -1, 3, 7, c  

	
Section 11.2    ■    Arithmetic Sequences; Partial Sums 927
	56.	 an = 83; -5, -3, -1, c 
	57.	 an = 5013; 213, 413, 613, c 
	58.	 an = 73p; 3p, 5p, 7p, c 
Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 59–67, assume that the indicated sequence is 
arithmetic.
	59.	 Orange picking. When Eric started work as an orange  
picker, he picked 10 oranges in the first minute, 12 in the 
second minute, 14 in the third minute, and so on. How many 
oranges did Eric pick in the first half hour? 
	60.	 Exercise. Walking up a steep hill, Jan walks 60 feet in the 
first minute, 57 feet in the second minute, 54 feet in the third 
minute, and so on.
a.	 How far will Jan walk in the nth minute? 
b.	 How far will Jan walk in the first 15 minutes? 
	61.	 Contest winner. A contest winner will receive money 
each month for three years. The winner receives $50 the first 
month, $75 the second month, $100 the third month, and so 
on. How much money will the winner have collected after  
30 months? 
	62.	 Salary. Darren took a 12-month temporary job with a 
monthly salary that increased a fixed amount each month. 
He can’t recall the starting salary, but does remember that he 
was paid $820 at the end of the third month and $910 for his 
last month’s work. How much was Darren’s total pay for the 
entire 12 months? 
	63.	 Hourly wage. Antonio’s new weekend job started at an 
hourly wage of $12.75. He is guaranteed a raise of 25. an 
hour every three months for the next four years. What will 
Antonio’s hourly wage be at the end of four years? 
	64.	 Competing job offers. Denzel is considering offers from 
two companies. A marketing company pays $32,500 the first 
year and guarantees a raise of $1300 each year; an exporting 
company pays $36,000 the first year, with a guaranteed raise 
of $400 each year. Over a five-year period, which company 
will pay more? How much more?
	65.	 Theater seating. A theater has 25 rows of seats. The first 
row has 20 seats, the second row has 22 seats, the third row has 
24 seats, and so on. How many seats are in the theater? 
	66.	 Bricks in a driveway. A brick driveway has 50 rows of 
bricks. The first row has 16 bricks, and the fiftieth row has  
65 bricks. How many bricks does the driveway contain? 
	67.	 Stacked boxes. A stack of boxes has 17 rows. The bottom 
row has 40 boxes, and the top row has 8 boxes. How many 
boxes does the stack contain? 
	68.	 Elena wanted to teach her young daughter Sophia about 
­saving. She gave Sophia 10. the first day and an additional 
5. per day on each subsequent day. After a while, Sophia 
counted her money and found that she had saved a total of 
$3.25. How many days had she been saving? 
	69.	 Only 3 customers showed up for the opening day of a flea 
market. However, 9 came the second day, and an additional  
6 customers came on each subsequent day. After several days, 
there was a total of 192 customers. How many days had the 
flea market been open? 
	70.	 Two cars, A and B, start together in the same direction from 
the same place. Car A goes with a uniform speed of 60 mph.  
Car B goes at a speed of 50 mph in the first hour and increases 
its speed by 5 mph each succeeding hour. After how many 
hours will car B overtake car A? 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 71 and 72, show that the given sequence an is an 
arithmetic sequence. Find the common difference d.
	71.	 an = log a an
bn-1b 
	72.	 an = log1abn2 
	73.	 If the sum Sn of the first n terms of a sequence an is 3n2 + 4n, 
show that the sequence an is an arithmetic sequence [Hint: 
an = Sn - Sn-1; then show an+1 - an is a constant d.] 
	74.	 Prove that a sequence an is an arithmetic sequence if and only 
if the sum Sn of its first n terms is of the form An2 + Bn.
	75.	 Find the sum of all natural numbers between 45 and 100 that 
are divisible by 3. 
	76.	 Find the sum of all natural numbers between 26 and 120 that 
are divisible by 7. 
	77.	 A sequence is harmonic if the reciprocals of the terms of the 
sequence form an arithmetic sequence. Is the sequence 
	
	 1
2, 3
5, 3
4, 1, 3
2, 3c harmonic? Explain your reasoning.
	78.	 Consider the harmonic sequence 2
5, 2
7, 2
9, c.
a.	 Find the fourth term. 
b.	 Find the nth term.    
	79.	 Show that if the numbers a, m, b are consecutive terms in an 
	
	 arithmetic sequence, then m = a + b
2
. We call m the 
	
	 arithmetic mean of a and b.
	80.	 If the numbers a, m1, m2, c, mk, b form an arithmetic 
sequence, we say that the numbers m1, m2, c, mk are  
k-arithmetic means between a and b. Insert k-arithmetic  
means between 1 and 30 so that the sum of the resulting 
series is 465. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	81.	 Find the nth term of an arithmetic sequence whose first term 
is 10 and whose 21st term is 0.  
	82.	 If a1 and d are the first term and common difference, 
­respectively, of an arithmetic sequence, find the first term 
and difference of an arithmetic sequence whose terms are the 
negatives of the terms in the given sequence. 

928	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
	83.	 How many terms are in the sum a
100
i=22
17i3? 
	84.	 The sum of the first n counting numbers is 12,403. Find the 
value of n. 
Maintaining Skills
For each sequence in Exercises 85–88, find a2
a1
, a3
a2
, a4
a3
, and a5
a4
. 
	85.	 3, 6, 12, 24, 48 
	86.	 2, 4
3, 8
9, 16
27, 32
81 
	87.	 4, -12, 36, -108, 324 
	88.	 3, - 3
2
 , 3
4
 , - 3
8
 , 3
16 
In Exercises 89–92, the first term a1 and a number r are 
given. Write the next four terms of the sequence defined by 
a2 = a1 r, a3 = a2 r, a4 = a3 r, and a5 = a4 r. 
	89.	 a1 = 2, r = 3 
	90.	 a1 = 3, r = 2
5 
	91.	 a1 = 1, r = -2 
	92.	 a1 = 1, r = - 3
2 
In Exercises 93–96, the nth term an of a sequence is given. Find
a2
a1
 , a3
a2
 , a4
a3
 , and a5
a4
 . 
	93.	 an = 5 # 2n 
	94.	 an = 4 # 3n 
	95.	 an = 21-32n 
	96.	 an = 51-22-n 
	97.	 Let an = -3 # 2n. Find an+1 and an-1.
	98.	 Let an = 51-32-n. Find an+1 and an-1.
  

	
Section 11.3    ■    Geometric Sequences and Series 929
S e c t i o n 11.3
Geometric Sequence
When the ratio aan+1
an
b of any two consecutive terms of a sequence is always the same 
number, the sequence is called a geometric sequence. In other words, the sequence a1, a2,
a3, a4, c is a geometric sequence if
a2
a1
=  a3
a2
= a4
a3
= . c
Geometric Sequences and Series
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 The general term of a sequence  
(Section 11.1, page 910)
2	 Partial sums (Section 11.1, page 916)
3	 Compound interest (Section 4.1,  
page 400)
Objectives
1	 Identify a geometric sequence  
and find its common ratio.
2	 Find the sum of a finite  
geometric sequence.
3	 Solve annuity problems.
4	 Find the sum of an infinite  
geometric sequence.
Spreading the Wealth
Cities across the nation compete to host a Super Bowl. Cities across the world compete 
to host the Olympic Games. What is the incentive? The multiplier effect is often listed 
among the benefits for hosting one of these events. The effect refers to the phenom-
enon that occurs when money spent directly on an event has a ripple effect on the 
economy that is many times the amount spent directly on the event.
Suppose, for example, that $10 million is spent directly by tourists for hotels, meals, 
tickets, cabs, and so on. Some portion of that amount will be respent by its recipients 
on groceries, clothes, gas, and so on.
This process is repeated over and over, affecting the economy much more than the 
initial $10 million spent. Under certain assumptions, the spending just described results 
in an infinite geometric series, whose sum is called the multiplier. Example 9 illustrates 
this effect.
1	
Identify a geometric sequence 
and find its common ratio.
The sequence
a1, a2, a3, a4, c, an, c
is a geometric sequence, or a geometric progression, if there is a number r such 
that each term except the first in the sequence is obtained by multiplying the previ-
ous term by r. The number r is called the common ratio of the geometric sequence. 
We have
an+1
an
= r, n Ú 1.
Geometric Sequence

930	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Find the common ratio for each geometric sequence.
a.	 2, 10, 50, 250, 1250, c        b.   -162, -54, -18, -6, -2, c
Solution
a.	 The common ratio is 10
2 = 5 aor 50
10
 , 250
50
 , or 1250
250 b.
b.	 The common ratio is -54
-162 = 1
3
 aor -18
-54
 , -6
-18
 , or -2
-6b.
Practice Problem 1  Find the common ratio for the geometric sequence 6, 18, 54,
162, 486, c.
A geometric sequence can be completely specified by giving the first term a1 and the 
common ratio r. Suppose, for example, that we are told that the sequence a1, a2, a3, a4, c 
is geometric and that a1 = 3 and r = 4. Then we can find a2:
a2
a1
= 4, so a2 = 4a1 = 4 # 3 = 12
Now we continue:
 a3
a2
= 4, so a3 = 4a2 = 4 # 12 = 48;
 a4
a3
= 4, so a4 = 4a3 = 4 # 48 = 192; and so on.
By rewriting an+1
an
= r as an+1 = ran, we have a recursive definition of a geometric 
sequence.
Finding the Common Ratio
EXAMPLE 1
A geometric sequence a1, a2, a3, a4, c, an, c can be defined recursively. The 
recursive formula
an+1 = ran, n Ú 1
defines a geometric sequence with the first term a1 and the common ratio r.
Recursive Definition of a Geometric Sequence
Determine whether each sequence is geometric. If it is, find the first term and the common ratio.
a.	 an = 4n        b.   bn = 3
2n        c.   cn = 1 - 5n
Solution
a.	 The sequence 4, 16, 64, 256, c, 4n, c appears to be geometric, with a1 = 41 = 4 
	
and r = 4. To verify this, we check that an+1
an
= 4 for all n Ú 1.
 an+1 = 4n+1
    Replace n with n + 1 in the general term an = 4n.
 an+1
an
= 4n+1
4n
= 4    4n+1
4n
= 4n4
4n = 4
Consequently, an+1
an
= 4 for all n Ú 1, and the sequence is geometric.
Determining Whether a Sequence Is Geometric
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 11.3    ■    Geometric Sequences and Series 931
b.	 The sequence 3
2
 , 3
4
 , 3
8
 , 3
16
 , cappears to be geometric, with b1 = 3
2 and r = 1
2.
	
To verify this, we check that bn+1
bn
= 1
2 for all n Ú 1.
 bn+1 =
3
2n+1	
Replace n with n + 1 in the general term bn = 3
2n.
 bn+1
bn
=
3
2n+1 , 3
2n	
bn+1
bn
=  bn+1 , bn
 =
3
2n+1 # 2n
3 = 1
2
	
Consequently, bn+1
bn
= 1
2 for all n Ú  1, and the sequence is geometric.
c.	 The sequence -4, -24, -124, -624, c, 1 - 5n, c is not a geometric sequence
	
because not all pairs of consecutive terms have identical quotients, an+1
an
. The quotient
	
of the first two terms is -24
-4 = 6, but the quotient of the third and second terms is
	
-124
-24 = 31
6 .
Practice Problem 2  Determine whether the sequence an = a3
2b
n
 is geometric. If so, 
find the first term and the common ratio.
From the equation an+1 = anr used in the recursive definition of a geometric sequence, 
we see that each term after the first is obtained by multiplying the preceding term by the 
common ratio r.
T h e  G e n e r a l  T e r m  o f  a  G e o m e t r i c  S e q u e n c e
Every geometric sequence can be written in the form
a1, a1r, a1r2, a1r3, c a1rn-1, c,
where r is the common ratio. Because a1 = a1112 = a1r0, the nth term of the  
geometric sequence is
an = a1rn-1, for n Ú  1.
For the geometric sequence 1, 3, 9, 27, c, find each of the following:
a.	 a1        b.   r        c.   an
Solution
a.	 The first term of the sequence is given: a1 = 1.
b.	 The sequence is geometric, so we can take the ratio of any two consecutive terms, 
	
an+1
an
. The ratio of the first two terms gives us
r = 3
1 = 3.
Finding Terms in a Geometric Sequence
EXAMPLE 3

932	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
c.	  an = a1rn-1
	
Formula for the nth term
	
 = 11213n-12	
Replace a1 with 1 and r with 3.
	
 = 3n-1
Practice Problem 3  For the geometric sequence 2, 6
5, 18
25, 54
125, c, find the following:
a.	 a1        b.   r        c.   an
Notice in Example 3 that converting an = 3n-1 to standard function notation gives us 
f1n2 = 3n-1, an exponential function. A geometric sequence with first term a1 and com-
mon ratio r can be viewed as an exponential function f1n2 = a1rn-1 with the set of natural 
numbers as its domain.
Find the 23rd term of a geometric sequence whose first term is 10 and whose common 
ratio is 1.2.
Solution
 an = a1rn-1
	
Formula for the nth term
 a23 = 1011.2223-1	
Replace n with 23, a1 with 10, and r with 1.2.
 = 1011.2222
	
Exact value
 ≈552.06
	
Use a calculator.
Practice Problem 4  Find the 18th term of a geometric sequence whose first term  
is 7 and whose common ratio is 1.5.
Finding a Particular Term in a Geometric Sequence
EXAMPLE 4
Find the number of terms of the geometric sequence 4, 2, 1, 1
2, 1
4, c, 1
64.
Solution
The given geometric sequence has first term a1 = 4 and common ratio r = 2
4 = 1
2.
Let the nth term be 1
64. Then
 an = 1
64
 a1rn-1 = 1
64
    an = a1rn-1
 4 a1
2b
n-1
= 1
64	
a1 = 4, r = 1
2
 a1
2b
n-1
=
1
4 # 64 =
1
256    Divide both sides by 4.
 a1
2b
n-1
= a1
2b
8
	
1
256 = 1
28 = a1
2b
8
 n - 1 = 8
	
am = an  implies m = n.
 n = 9
	
Solve for n.
There are 9 terms in the given sequence.
Finding the Number of Terms of a Geometric Sequence
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 11.3    ■    Geometric Sequences and Series 933
Practice Problem 5  Find the number of terms of the geometric sequence 
1
9, 1
3, 1, 3, c, 243.
Finding the Sum of a Finite Geometric Sequence
We can find a formula for the sum Sn of the first n terms in a geometric sequence. (We have 
already found a similar formula for arithmetic sequences.)
 Sn = a1 + a1r + a1r2 + a1r3 + g+ a1rn-1    Definition of Sn
 rSn = a1r + a1r2 + a1r3 + a1r4 + g+ a1rn    Multiply both sides by r.
 Sn - rSn = a1 - a1rn
    Subtract the second  
equation from the first.
 11 - r2Sn = a111 - rn2
    Factor both sides.
 Sn = a111 - rn2
1 - r
, r ≠1	
Divide both sides by  
1 - r. 
2	
Find the sum of a finite 
geometric sequence.
S u m  o f  t h e  T e r m s  o f  a  F i n i t e  G e o m e t r i c  S e q u e n c e
Let a1, a2, a3, c, an be the first n terms of a geometric sequence with first term a1,  
nth term an , and common ratio r. The sum Sn of these terms is
Sn = a
n
i=1
a1ri-1 = a111 - rn2
1 - r
, r ≠ 1.
A geometric sequence with r = 1 is a sequence in which all terms are identical; that is, 
an = a1112n-1 = a1. Consequently, the sum of the first n terms, Sn, is
a1 + a1 + g+ a1 = na1.
n terms
¯˚˚˚˘˚˚˚˙
Find each sum.
a.	 a
15
i=1
510.72i-1        b.  a
15
i=1
510.72i
Solution
a.	 We can evaluate a
15
i=1
510.72i-1 by using the formula for Sn = a
n
i=1
a1ri-1 = a111 - rn2
1 - r
, 
	
where a1 = 5, r = 0.7, and n = 15.
 S15 = a
15
i=1
a1ri-1 = 5c 1 - 10.7215
1 - 0.7
d 	
Replace a1 with 5, r = 0.7, and n = 15.
 ≈16.5875	
Use a calculator.
b.	 a
15
 
i=1
 510.72i = 10.72 a
15
i=1
510.72i-1	
Factor out 0.7 from each term.
	
 ≈10.72116.58752
	
From part a
	
 = 11.6113
Practice Problem 6  Find the sum a
17
i=1
310.42i.
 
Finding the Sum of Terms of a Finite Geometric Sequence
EXAMPLE 6
The following screen shows the  
result of Example 6a obtained  
using a graphing calculator.
Technology
Connection

934	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Annuities
One of the most important applications of the sum of a finite geometric sequence is the com-
putation of the value of an annuity. An annuity is a sequence of equal periodic payments. 
When a fixed rate of compound interest applies to all payments, the sum of all of the pay-
ments made plus all interest can be found by using the formula for the sum of a finite geomet-
ric sequence. The value of an annuity (also called the future value of an annuity) is the sum 
of all payments and interest. To develop a formula for the value of an annuity, we suppose $P 
is deposited at the end of each year at an annual interest rate i compounded annually.
The compound interest formula A = P11 + i2t gives the total value after t years when 
$P earns an annual interest rate i (in decimal form) compounded once a year. At the end 
of the first year, the initial payment of $P is made and the annuity's value is $P. At the end 
of the second year, $P is again deposited. At this time, the first deposit has earned interest 
during the second year. The value of the annuity after two years is
P  +   P11 + i2.
The value of the annuity after three years is
P  + P11 + i2  + P11 + i22
The value of the annuity after t years is
P + P11 + i2 + P11 + i22 + P11 + i23 + g + P11 + i2t-1.
The value of the annuity after t years is the sum of a geometric sequence with first term 
a1 = P and common ratio r = 1 + i. We compute this sum A as follows:
 A = Sn = a111 - rn2
1 - r
    Formula for Sn
 A = P31 - 11 + i2t4
1 - 11 + i2
    Replace n with t, a1 with P, and r with 1 + i.
 = P31 - 11 + i2t4
-i
    Simplify.
 = P311 + i2t - 14
i
    Multiply numerator and denominator by -1.
If interest is compounded n times per year and equal payments are made at the end of each 
compounding period, we adjust the formula as we did in Section 3.1 to account for the 
more frequent compounding.
3	
Solve annuity problems.
¡
¡
Payment made at the end of year 2
First payment plus interest earned for one year
¡
¡
¡
Payment made 
at the end of 
year 3
Second payment 
plus interest earned 
for one year
First payment plus 
interest earned for 
two years
¡
¡
Payment made at the end of year t
First payment plus interest earned for t - 1 year
Va l u e  o f  a n  A n n u i t y
Let P represent the payment in dollars made at the end of each of n compounding periods 
per year and let i be the annual interest rate. Then the value A of the annuity after t years is
A = P ≥
a1 + i
nb
nt
- 1
i
n
¥.
The sum Sn of the first n terms of a 
geometric sequence with first term 
a1 and common ratio r is given by 
the formula
Sn =
a111 - r n2
1 - r
.
Recall

	
Section 11.3    ■    Geometric Sequences and Series 935
An individual retirement account (IRA) is a common way to save money to provide funds 
after retirement. Suppose you make payments of $1200 into an IRA at the end of each 
year at an annual interest rate of 4.5% per year, compounded annually. What is the value 
of this annuity after 35 years?
Solution
Each annuity payment is P = $1200. The annual interest rate is 4.5% 1so i = 0.0452, and 
the number of years is t = 35. Because interest is compounded annually, n = 1. The value 
of the annuity is
 A = 1200≥
a1 + 0.045
1
b
11235
- 1
0.045
1
¥
 = $97,795.94                    Use a calculator.
The value of the IRA after 35 years is $97,795.94.
Practice Problem 7  If in Example 7 the end-of-year payments are $1500, the annual 
interest rate remains 4.5%, compounded annually, and the payments are made for  
30 years, what is the value of the annuity?
Infinite Geometric Series
The sum Sn of the first n terms of a geometric series is given by the formula Sn = a111 - rn2
1 - r
. 
If this finite sum Sn approaches a number S as n S ∞(that is, as n gets larger and larger), 
we say that S is the sum of the infinite geometric series, and we write
S = a
∞
i=1
a1ri-1.
If r is any real number with -1 6 r 6 1 (equivalently,  r  6 1), then the value of rn, 
like the value of a1
2b
n
, gets closer and closer to 0 as n gets larger and larger. We indicate 
that the values of rn approach 0 by writing
lim
nS∞rn = 0 if  r  6 1.
The expression lim
nS∞rn is read “the limit, as n approaches infinity, of r to the n” or “the limit, 
as n approaches infinity, of r to the nth power.”
When  r  6 1, 
Sn = a111 - rn2
1 - r
S a111 - 02
1 - r
=
a1
1 - r as n S ∞.
Finding the Value of an Annuity
EXAMPLE 7
4
Find the sum of an infinite 
geometric sequence.
S u m  O f  T h e  T e r m s  O f  A n  I n f i n i t e  
G e o m e t r i c  S e q u e n c e
If  r  6 1, the infinite sum
a1 + a1r + a1r2 + a1r3 + c + a1rn-1 + c
is given by
S = a
∞
i=1
a1ri-1 =
a1
1 - r.

936	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
When  r  Ú 1, the infinite geometric series does not have a sum. This is because the value 
of rn does not approach 0 as n S ∞. For example, if r = 2, we have
21 = 2, 22 = 4, 23 = 8, 24 = 16, 25 = 32, 26 = 64, c.
Find the sum 2 + 3
2 + 9
8 + 27
32 + g.
Solution
The first term is a1 = 2, and the common ratio is
r =
3>2
2
= 3
4.
Because  r  = 3
4 6 1, we can use the formula for the sum of an infinite geometric series.
 S =
a1
1 - r     Formula for S
 =
2
1 - 3
4
    Replace a1 with 2 and r with 3
4.
 = 8
    Simplify.
Practice Problem 8  Find the sum 3 + 2 + 4
3 + 8
9 + c.
Finding the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series
EXAMPLE 8
The host city for the Super Bowl expects that tourists will spend $10,000,000. Assume that 
80% of this money is spent again in the city, then 80% of this second round of spending 
is spent again, and so on. In the introduction to this section, we said that such a spending 
pattern results in a geometric series whose sum is called the multiplier. Find this series 
and its sum.
Solution
We start our series with the $10,000,000 brought into the city and add the subsequent 
amounts spent.
10,000,000 + 10,000,00010.802 + 10,000,00010.8022 + 10,000,00010.8023 + c
Using the formula a
∞
i=1
ari-1 =
a
1 - r for the sum of an infinite geometric series, 
we have
a
∞
i=1
110,000,000210.802i-1 = $10,000,000
1 - 0.80
= $50,000,000.
This amount should shed some light on why there is so much competition to serve as the 
host city for a major sports event.
Practice Problem 9  Find the series and the sum that results in Example 9 assuming  
that 85%, rather than 80%, occurs in the repeated spending.
Calculating the Multiplier Effect
EXAMPLE 9
¡
¡
¡
¡
original  
10,000,000
80% of  
10,000,000
80% of  
previous amount
80% of  
previous amount

	
Section 11.3    ■    Geometric Sequences and Series 937
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 3  2. It is geometric; a1 = 3
2, r = 3
2
3. a. a1 = 2  b. r = 3
5  c. an = 2 a3
5b
n-1
4. 711.5217 ≈6896.8288  5. 8  6. ≈2  7. $91,510.60
8. 9  9. a
∞
n=0
110,000,000210.852n ≈$66,666,666.67
Exercises
section 11.3
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 If 5 is the common ratio of a geometric sequence with 
	
	 general term an, then a63
a62
=
.
	 2.	 If 5 is the common ratio of a geometric sequence with  
general term an and a15 = -2, then a16 =
.
	 3.	 If 24 is the term immediately following the sequence  
term 8 in a geometric sequence, then the common ratio is  
.
	 4.	 An infinite geometric series a1 + a1r + a1r2 + c does 
not have a sum if 
Ú 1.
	 5.	 True or False. If the sum of an infinite geometric series having 
	
	 the common ratio r = 1
3 is S = 15, then a1 = 10. 
	 6.	 True or False. The sum of an infinite geometric series can 
never be negative. 
In Exercises 7–26, determine whether each sequence is  
geometric. If it is, find the first term and the common ratio.
	 7.	 3, 6, 12, 24, c. 
	 8.	 2, 4, 8, 16, c 
	 9.	 1, 5, 10, 20, c
	10.	 1, 1, 3, 3, 9, 9, c
	11.	 1, -3, 9, -27, c 
	12.	 -1, 2, -4, 8, c 
	13.	 7, -7, 7, -7, c 
	14.	 1, -2, 4, -8, c 
	15.	 9, 3, 1, 1
3,c 
	16.	 5, 2, 4
5, 8
25, c 
	17.	 an = a- 1
2b
n 
	18.	 an = 5 a2
3b
n 
	19.	 an = 2n-1 
	20.	 an = -11.062n-1 
	21.	 an = 7n2 + 1
	22.	 an = 1 - 12n22
	23.	 an = 3-n 
	24.	 an = 5010.12-n 
	25.	 an = 5n>2 
	26.	 an = 72n 
In Exercises 27–34, find the first term a1, the common ratio r, 
and the nth term an for each geometric sequence.
	27.	 2, 10, 50, 250, c
	28.	 -3, -6, -12, -24, c
	29.	 5, 10
3 , 20
9 , 40
27, c 
	30.	 1, 13, 3, 313, c 
	31.	 0.2, -0.6, 1.8,-5.4, c
	32.	 1.3, -0.26, 0.052, -0.0104, c
	33.	 p4, p6, p8, p10, c
	34.	 e2, 1, e -2, e -4, c 
In Exercises 35–44, find the indicated term of each geometric 
sequence.
	35.	 a7 when a1 = 5 and r = 2 
	36.	 a7 when a1 = 8 and r = 3 
	37.	  a10 when a1 = 3 and r = -2 
	38.	  a10 when a1 = 7 and r = -2 
	39.	 a6 when a1 = 1
16 and r = 3 
	40.	 a6 when a1 = 1
81 and r = 3 
	41.	 a9 when a1 = -1 and r = 5
2 
	42.	 a9 when a1 = -4 and r = 3
4 
	43.	 a20 when a1 = 500 and r = - 1
2 
	44.	 a20 when a1 = 1000 and r = - 1
10 
In Exercises 45–50, find the number of terms of the given  
geometric sequence.
	45.	 5, 10, 20, c, 5120 
	46.	 2, 6, 18, c, 4374 
	47.	 16, 8, 4, c,  1
32 
	48.	 27, 9, 3, c,  1
27 
	49.	 18, -12, 8, c,  512
729 
	50.	 25, -15, 9, c,  729
625 
In Exercises 51–56, find the sum Sn of the first n terms of each 
geometric sequence.
	51.	 1
10, 1
2, 5
2, 25
2 , c; n = 10 
	52.	 6, 2, 2
3, 2
9, c; n = 10 
	53.	 1
25, - 1
5, 1, -5, c; n = 12 
	54.	 -10, 1
10, -1
1000, 
1
100,000, c; n = 12 
	55.	 5, 5
4, 5
42, 5
43, c; n = 8
	56.	 2, 2
5, 2
52, 2
53, c; n = 8               

938	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
In Exercises 57–64, find each sum.
	57.	 a
5
i=1
a1
2b
i-1 
	58.	 a
5
i=1
a1
5b
i-1 
	59.	 a
8
i=1
3 a2
3b
i-1 
	60.	 a
8
i=1
2 a3
5b
i-1 
	61.	 a
10
i=3
2i-1
4 
	62.	 a
10
i=3
5i-1
2 
	63.	 a
20
i=1
a- 3
5ba- 5
2b
i-1
	64.	 a
20
i=1
a- 1
4b 132-i2 
In Exercises 65–70, use a calculator to find each sum. Round 
your answers to three decimal places.
	65.	 1
5 + 1
10 + 1
20 + c +
1
320 
	66.	 2 + 6 + 18 + c + 1458 
	67.	 a
10
n=1
3n-2 
	68.	 a
15
n=1
a1
7b
n-1 
	69.	 a
10
n=1
1-12n-132-n 
	70.	 a
20
n=1
1-423-n 
In Exercises 71–80, find each sum.
	71.	 1
3 + 1
9 + 1
27 + 1
81 + c
	72.	 5
2 + 5
4 + 5
8 + 5
16 + c 
	73.	 - 1
2 + 1
4 - 1
8 + 1
16 - c
	74.	 - 3
2 + 3
4 - 3
8 + 3
16 + c
	75.	 8 - 2 + 1
2 - 1
8 + c 
	76.	 1 - 3
5 + 9
25 - 27
125 + c
	77.	 a
∞
n=0
5 a1
3b
n 
	78.	 a
∞
n=0
3 a1
4b
n 
	79.	 a
∞
n=0
a- 1
4b
n 
	80.	 a
∞
n=0
a-1
3b
n 
Applying the Concepts
	81.	 Population growth. The population in a small town is 
increasing at the rate of 3% per year. If the present popula-
tion is 20,000, what will the population be at the end of five 
years? 
	82.	 Growth of a zoo collection. The butterfly collection at 
a local zoo started with only 25 butterflies. If the number of 
butterflies doubled each month, how many butterflies were in 
the collection after 12 months? 
	83.	 Savings growth. Ramón deposits $100 on the last day of 
each month into a savings account that pays 6% annually, 
compounded monthly. What is the balance in the account 
after 36 compounding periods? 
	84.	 Savings growth. Kat deposits $300 semiannually into a 
savings account for her son. If the account pays 8% annually, 
compounded semiannually, what is the balance in the account 
after 20 compounding periods? 
	85.	 Ancestors. Every person has two parents, four grandpar-
ents, eight great-grandparents, and so on. Find the number of 
ancestors a person has in the tenth generation back. 
	86.	 Bacterial growth. A colony of bacteria doubles in number 
every day. If there are 1000 bacteria now, how many will 
there be
a.	 On the 7th day? 
b.	 On the nth day? 
	87.	 Investment. An actuarial firm budgets a new position  
at $36,000 for the first year and a 5% raise each year  
thereafter. Find the total compensation a successful applicant  
for the job would receive during the first 20 years of  
employment. 
	88.	 Investment. A realtor offers two choices of payment for a 
small condominium:
a.	 Pay $4000 per month for the next 25 months.
b.	 Pay 1. the first month, 2. the second month, 4. the third 
month, and so on for 25 months.
	
	 Which option, a or b, is the better choice for the buyer? 
Explain your reasoning. 
	89.	 Pendulum motion. The distance traveled by any point on 
a certain pendulum is 20% less than in the preceding swing. 
If the length traveled by the pendulum bob during the first 
swing is 56.25 centimeters, find the total distance the bob has 
traveled at the end of the fifth swing. 
	90.	 Depreciating a tractor. Every year a tractor loses 20% 
of the value it had at the beginning of the year. If the tractor 
now has a value of $120,000, what will its value be in five 
years? 
	91.	 Rebounding ball. A particular ball always rebounds 3
5 
	
	 the distance it falls. If the ball is dropped from a height of 
5 meters, how far will it travel before coming to a stop? 
	92.	 Rebounding ball. Repeat Exercise 91 assuming that the 
ball is dropped from a height of 9 meters. 
Beyond the Basics
	93.	 The accompanying figure shows the first six squares in an 
infinite sequence of successively smaller squares formed by 
connecting the midpoints of the sides of the preceding larger 
square. The area of the largest square is 1. Find the total area 
of the indicated sections that are shaded as the number of 
squares increases to infinity. 
	94.	 The accompanying figure shows the first three equilateral  
triangles in an infinite sequence of successively smaller  
equilateral triangles formed by connecting the midpoints  
of the sides of the preceding larger triangle. The largest 
      

	
Section 11.3    ■    Geometric Sequences and Series 939
triangle has sides of length 4. Find the total perimeter of  
all of the triangles. 
	 95.	 Prove that if a1, a2, a3, c is a geometric sequence of posi-
tive terms, then the sequence ln a1, ln a2, ln a3,  c is an 
arithmetic sequence.
	 96.	 Prove that if a1, a2, a3, c is a geometric sequence, then 
a1
2, a2
2, a3
2,  c is also a geometric sequence.
	 97.	 Show that if a1, a2, a3, c is a geometric sequence with 
	
	 common ratio r, then 1
a1
, 1
a2
, 1
a3
, c is also a geometric 
	
	 sequence. Also find its common ratio. 
	 98.	 Show that if c is any nonzero real number, then 
	
	 c2, c, 1, 1
c,  c is a geometric sequence.
	 99.	 Show that if x is any nonzero real number, then 
	
	 x, 2, 4
x, 8
x2,  c is a geometric sequence.
	100.	 Show that if a and x are any two nonzero real numbers, then 
	
	 x
a, -1,  a
x, - a2
x2,  c is a geometric sequence.
	101.	 Show that if a, x, and y are any three nonzero real numbers, 
	
	 then a
x, - a
xy,  a
xy2,  a
xy3,  c is a geometric sequence.
	102.	 Show that if a1, a2, a3, c is an arithmetic sequence with 
common difference d, then 2a1, 2a2, 2a3,  c is a geometric 
sequence. Also find its common ratio. 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	103.	 If an denotes the nth term of an arithmetic sequence with 
a1 = 10 and d = 2.7 and if bn denotes the nth term of a 
geometric sequence with b1 = 10 and r = 2, which  
number is larger, a1001 or b1001? 
	104.	 If the sum 
a111 - rn2
1 - r
 of the first n terms of a geometric 
	
	 sequence is 1023, find a1 when n = 10 and r = 1
2. 
	105.	 Find n and k so that the sum 
5 + 5 # 2 + 5 # 22 + c + 5 # 215 can be written as 
	
	 a
n
i=0
5 # 2i or as a
k
i=1
5 # 2i-1. 
	106.	 The sum of three consecutive terms of a geometric sequence is 
35, and their product is 1000. Find the numbers. 
	
	 [Hint: Let a
r, a, and ar be the three terms of the geometric 
	
	 sequence.]
	107.	 The sum of three consecutive terms of an arithmetic 
sequence is 15. If 1, 4, and 19 are respectively added to the 
three terms, the resulting numbers form three consecutive 
terms of a geometric sequence. Find the numbers.
	108.	 The product of the first three terms of a geometric sequence 
is 1000. If 6 is added to the second term and 7 is added to the 
third term, the resulting numbers form the three consecutive 
terms of an arithmeti sequences. Find the numbers.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 109–112, a statement Pn involving positive integers 
n is given. Write the statements P3 and P4. State whether P3 
and P4 are true or false.
	109.	 Pn: n1n + 12 is even.
	110.	 Pn: n3 + n is divisible by 3.
	111.	 Pn: 1 + 2 + 3 + c + n =
n1n + 12
2
	112.	 Pn: 2n 7 3n 
 
In Exercises 113–116, a statement Pn involving a positive  
integer n is given. Write the statement Pn+1.
	113.	 Pn: n2 + n is divisible by 2.
	114.	 Pn: 23n - 1 is divisible by 7.
	115.	 Pn: 3n 7 5n 
	116.	 Pn: 1 + 4 + 7 + c + 13n - 22 = 1
2n13n - 12
	117.	 show that 
k1k + 12
2
 + 1k + 12 =
1k + 121k + 22
2
.
	118.	 show that 1
6
 k1k + 1212k + 12 + 1k + 122 =
	
	 1
61k + 121k + 2212k + 32.   
    
 

940	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
11.4
Mathematical Induction
Suppose your boss wants you to verify that each of a thousand bags contains two specific 
gold coins. There is only one way to be absolutely sure: You must check every bag. That 
would take a very long time, but you can eventually finish the job. However, consider the 
problem of verifying that a statement about the natural numbers such as
12 + 22 + 32 + g + n2 = n1n + 1212n + 12
6
is true for all natural numbers n. Let’s first test the statement for several values of n by 
comparing the value of 12 + 22 + 32 + g + n2 in the second column of Table 11.1 with 
the value of n1n + 1212n + 12
6
 the third column.
1	
Prove statements by 
Mathematical Induction.
Mathematical Induction
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 Natural numbers (Section P.1, page 3)
2	 Inequalities (Section 1.5, page 129)
3	 Exponents (Section P.2, page 18)
4	 Series (Section 11.1, page 916)
Objective
1	 Prove statements by mathematical  
induction.
S e c t i o n 
Jumping to Conclusions; Good Induction 
Versus Bad Induction
A scientist had two large jars before him on the laboratory table. The jar on his left con-
tained a hundred fleas; the jar on his right was empty. The scientist carefully lifted a flea 
from the jar on the left; placed the flea on the table between the two jars; stepped back; 
and said in a loud voice, “Jump!” The flea jumped and was put into the jar on the right.  
A second flea was carefully lifted from the jar on the left and placed on the table between the 
two jars. Again, the scientist stepped back and said in a loud voice, “Jump!” The flea jumped 
and was put into the jar on the right. In the same manner, the scientist treated each of the 
hundred fleas in the jar on the left, and each flea jumped as ordered. The two jars were 
then interchanged, and the experiment was continued with a slight difference. This time 
the scientist carefully lifted a flea from the jar on the left; yanked off its hind legs; placed 
the flea on the table between the jars; stepped back; and said in a loud voice, “Jump!” The 
flea did not jump and was put into the jar on the right. A second flea was carefully lifted 
from the jar on the left, its hind legs yanked off, and then placed on the table between the 
two jars. Again, the scientist stepped back and said in a loud voice, “Jump!” The flea did 
not jump and was put into the jar on the right. In this manner, the scientist treated each of 
the hundred fleas in the jar on the left, and in no case did a flea jump when ordered. So the 
scientist recorded the following inductive statement in his notebook: “A flea, if its hind legs 
are yanked off, cannot hear.” (Source: Modified from Howard Eves, Mathematical Circles.)
This, of course, is an example of truly bad reasoning. The principle of mathematical 
induction, demonstrated in Example 2, is the gold standard for reasoning in proving 
that statements about natural numbers are true.

	
Section 11.4    ■    Mathematical Induction 941
We see that the statement is correct for the natural numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5; further-
more, you can continue to verify that the statement is correct for any particular natural 
number n you try. But is it always correct? Clearly, we can’t check every natural number!
The principle of mathematical induction provides a method for proving that statements 
about natural numbers are true for all natural numbers. The principle is based on the fact 
that after any natural number n, there is a next-larger natural number n + 1 and that any 
specified natural number can be reached by a finite number of such steps, starting from the 
natural number 1.
Table 11.1 
n
12 + 22 + 32 + P + n2
n1n + 12 12n + 12
6
Equal?
1
12 = 1
111 + 1232112 + 14
6
= 1
Yes
2
12 + 22 = 5
212 + 1232122 + 14
6
= 5
Yes
3
12 + 22 + 32 = 14
313 + 1232132 + 14
6
= 14
Yes
4
12 + 22 + 32 + 42 = 30
414 + 1232142 + 14
6
= 30
Yes
5
12 + 22 + 32 + 42 + 52 = 55
515 + 1232152 + 14
6
= 55
Yes
T h e  P r i n c i p l e  O f  M at h e m at i c a l  I n d u c t i o n
Let Pn be a statement that involves the natural number n with the following two properties:
1.	 P1 is true (the statement is true for the natural number 1).
2.	 If Pk is a true statement, then Pk+1 is a true statement.
Then the statement Pn is true for every natural number n.
A common physical interpretation is helpful in understanding why this principle works. 
Imagine an unending line of dominoes, as shown in Figure 11.2. Suppose the dominoes are ar-
ranged so that if any domino is knocked down, it will knock down the next domino behind it as 
well. What will happen if the first domino is knocked down? All of the dominoes will fall because
1.	 knocking down the first domino causes the second domino to be knocked down;
2.	 when the second domino is knocked down, it knocks down the third domino, and so on.
Determining the Statement Pk+1 from the Statement Pk
To successfully use the Principle of Mathematical Induction, you must be able to determine 
the statement Pk+1 from a given statement Pk. Suppose the given statement is
Pk: k Ú 1;
then we have
Pk+1: k + 1 Ú 1.    Replace k with k + 1 in Pk.
It is important to recognize that because Pk says “k is greater than or equal to 1,” the state-
ment Pk+1 says, “k + 1 is greater than or equal to 1.” That is, Pk+1 asserts the same property 
for k + 1 that Pk asserts for k.
Figure 11.2 

942	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
The first known use 
of mathematical in-
duction is in the work 
of the 16th-century 
mathematician Francesco Maurolico. 
Maurolico wrote extensively on the 
works of classical mathematics and 
made many contributions to geometry 
and optics. In his book Arithmeticorum 
Libri Duo, Maurolico presented a variety 
of properties of the integers, together 
with proofs of these properties. To prove 
some of the properties, he devised the 
method of mathematical induction. His 
first use of mathematical induction in 
this book was to prove that the sum  
of the first n odd positive integers 
equals n2.
Francesco Maurolico 
(1494–1575)
Find the statement Pk+1 from the given statement Pk.
a.	 Pk: k 6 2k
b.	 Pk: Sk = 3k2 + 9
c.	 Pk: 1 + 2 + 22 + 23 + g + 2k-1 = 2k - 1
d.	 Pk: 3 + 6 + 9 + 12 + g + 3k = 3k1k + 12
2
Solution
a.	 Pk: k 6 2k,  Pk+1: k + 1 6 2k+1	
Replace k with k + 1.
b.	 Pk: Sk = 3k2 + 9,  Pk+1: Sk+1 = 31k + 122 + 9	
Replace k with k + 1.
c.	 Pk: 1 + 2 + 22 + 23 + g + 2k-1 = 2k - 1,
	
Pk+1: 1 + 2 + 22 + 23 + g + 21k+12-1 = 2k+1 - 1	
Replace k with k + 1.
d.	 Pk: 3 + 6 + 9 + 12 + g + 3k = 3k1k + 12
2
,
Determining Pk+1 from Pk
EXAMPLE 1
Use mathematical induction to prove that for all natural numbers n, 
2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2n = n1n + 12.
Solution
First, we verify that this statement is true for n = 1.
Check:  2112 = 111 + 12    Replace n with 1 in the original statement.
2 = 2.  ✓
The given statement is true for n = 1, so the first condition for the principle of mathematical 
induction holds.
The second condition for the principle of mathematical induction requires two steps.
Step 1  Assume that the formula is true for some unspecified natural number k:
Pk: 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2k = k1k + 12    Assumed true
Step 2  On the basis of the assumption that Pk is true, show that Pk+1 is true, which is 
the same as showing that
Pk+1: 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 21k + 12 = 1k + 1231k + 12 + 14    Replace k with 
k + 1 in Pk.
Begin by using Pk, the statement assumed to be true. Add 21k + 12 to both sides of Pk in 
Step 1, which again results in a true statement.
Using Mathematical Induction
EXAMPLE 2
	
Pk+1: 3 + 6 + 9 + 12 + g + 31k + 12 = 31k + 1231k + 12 + 14
2
  
Replace k  
with k + 1.
Practice Problem 1  Find Pk+1 for Pk: 1k + 322 7 k2 + 9. 

	
Section 11.4    ■    Mathematical Induction 943
 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2k = k1k + 12
    Assumed true
 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2k + 21k + 12 = k1k + 12 + 21k + 12     Add 21k + 12 to 
both sides
 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2k + 21k + 12 = 1k + 121k + 22
    Factor out the 
common factor  
 1k + 12.
 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 21k + 12 = 1k + 1231k + 12 + 14    Rewrite 1k + 22 
as 1k + 12 + 1.
This last equation says that Pk+1 is true if Pk is assumed to be true. Therefore, by the principle 
of mathematical induction, the statement
2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2n = n1n + 12
is true for every natural number n.
Practice Problem 2  Use mathematical induction to prove that for all natural numbers n,
1 + 2 + 3 + g + n = n1n + 12
2
.
It is not necessary to write 2k 
here because it is understood 
that 2k is the even integer 
that precedes 21k + 12.
Use mathematical induction to prove that
2n 7 n
for all natural numbers n.
Solution
First, we show that the given statement is true for n = 1.
21 7 1    Replace n with 1 in the original statement.
Thus, the inequality is true for n = 1.
Next, we assume that for some unspecified natural number k,
Pk: 2k 7 k  is true.
Then we must use Pk to prove that Pk+1 is true; that is,
Pk+1: 2k+1 7 k + 1.
Now by the product rule of exponents, 2k+1 = 2k # 21 = 2k # 2; so we can get some 
information about 2k+1 by multiplying both sides of Pk: 2k 7 k by 2.
 2k 7 k
    Pk is assumed true.
 2k # 2 7 2 # k
    Multiply both sides by 2.
 2k+1 = 2k # 2 7 2k = k + k Ú k + 1    Because k Ú 1, k + k Ú k + 1.
Thus, 2k+1 7 k + 1 is true.
By the principle of mathematical induction, the statement
2n 7 n
is true for every natural number n.
Practice Problem 3  Use mathematical induction to prove that 3n 7 2n for all natural 
numbers n.
Using Mathematical Induction
EXAMPLE 3
⁄

944	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Answer to Practice Problem
1. Pk+1:1k + 422 7 1k + 122 + 9
Exercises
section 11.4 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 Mathematical induction can only be used to prove statements 
about the 
.
	 2.	 The first step in a mathematical induction proof that 
a statement Pn is true for all natural numbers n is that 
.
	 3.	 The second step in a mathematical induction proof is to 
assume that Pk is true for a natural number k and then show 
that 
.
	 4.	 True or False. If Pn is a statement about natural numbers 
and there is exactly one natural number, r, for which Pr is 
false, then Pn is false. 
	 5.	 True or False. The statement en Ú n cannot be proved by 
mathematical induction because e is not a natural number. 
	 6.	 True or False. The first step in proving that 2n = n for all 
natural numbers n is to note that 2 = 1. 
In Exercises 7–10, find Pk+1 from the given statement Pk.
	 7.	 Pk: 1k + 122 - 2k = k2 + 1 
	 8.	 Pk: 11 + k211 - k2 = 1 - k2
	 9.	 Pk: 2k 7 5k 
	10.	 Pk+1: 1 + 3 + 5 + g + 12k - 12 = k2
In Exercises 11–34, use mathematical induction to prove that 
each statement is true for all natural numbers n.
	11.	 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2n = n2 + n
	12.	 1 + 3 + 5 + g + 12n - 12 = n2
	13.	 4 + 8 + 12 + g + 4n = 2n1n + 12
	14.	 3 + 6 + 9 + g + 3n =
3n1n + 12
2
	15.	 1 + 5 + 9 + g + 14n - 32 = n12n - 12
	16.	 3 + 8 + 13 + g + 15n - 22 =
n15n + 12
2
	17.	 3 + 9 + 27 + g + 3n =
313n - 12
2
	18.	 5 + 25 + 125 + g + 5n =
515n - 12
4
	19.	
1
1 # 2 +
1
2 # 3 +
1
3 # 4 + g +
1
n1n + 12 =
n
n + 1
	20.	
1
2 # 4 +
1
4 # 6 +
1
6 # 8 + g +
1
2n12n + 22 =
n
41n + 12
	21.	 2 … 2n
	22.	 2n + 1 … 3n
	23.	 n1n + 22 6 1n + 122
	24.	 n … n2
	25.	 n!
n = 1n - 12!
	26.	
n!
1n + 12! =
1
n + 1
	27.	 12 + 22 + 32 + g + n2 =
n1n + 1212n + 12
6
	28.	 13 + 23 + 33 + g + n3 =
n21n + 122
4
	29.	 2 is a factor of n2 + n.
	30.	 2 is a factor of n3 + 5n.
	31.	 6 is a factor of n1n + 121n + 22.
	32.	 3 is a factor of n1n + 121n - 12.
	33.	 1ab2n = anbn
	34.	 aa
bb
n
= an
bn
Applying the Concepts
	35.	 Counting hugs. At a family reunion of n people 1n Ú 22. 
each person hugs everyone else. Use mathematical induction 
	
	 to show that the number of hugs is n2 - n
2
.
	36.	 Winning prizes. In a contest in which n prizes are possible, 
a contestant can win any number of the prizes (from 0 to n). 
Use mathematical induction to show that there are 2n possible 
outcomes for the sets of prizes the contestant might win.
[Hint: If n = 1, there are 21=212 outcomes: winning 0 
prizes or winning the one prize.]
	37.	 Koch’s snowflake. A geometric shape called the Koch 
snowflake can be formed by starting with an equilateral tri-
angle, as in the figure. Assume that each side of the triangle 
has length 1. On the middle part of each side, construct an 
	
	 equilateral triangle with sides of length 1
3 and erase the side 
	
	 of the smaller triangle that is on the side of the original tri-
angle. Repeat this procedure for each of the smaller triangles. 
This process produces a figure that resembles a snowflake.
a.	 Find a formula for the number of sides of the nth figure. 
Use mathematical induction to prove that this formula is 
correct. 
b.	 Find a formula for the perimeter of the nth figure.  
Use mathematical induction to prove that this  
formula is correct.   

	
Section 11.4    ■    Mathematical Induction 945
	38.	 Sierpinski’s triangle. A geometric figure known as 
Sierpinski’s triangle is constructed by starting with an 
­equilateral triangle as in the figure. Assume that each side of 
the triangle has length 1. Inside the original triangle, draw a 
second triangle by connecting the midpoints of the sides of 
the original triangle. This divides the original triangle into 
four identical equilateral triangles. Repeat the process by con-
structing equilateral triangles inside each of the three smaller 
blue triangles, again using the midpoints of the sides of the 
triangle as vertices. Continuing this process with each group 
of smaller triangles produces Sierpinski’s triangle. Coloring 
each set of smaller triangles helps in following the construc-
tion. (Be sure to count blue as well as white triangles.)
a.	 When a process is repeated over and over, each repetition 
is called an iteration. How many triangles will the fourth 
iteration have? 
b.	 How many triangles will the fifth iteration have? 
c.	 Find a formula for the number of triangles in the nth itera-
tion. Use mathematical induction to prove that this formula 
is correct.
	39.	 Towers of Hanoi. Three pegs are attached vertically to a 
horizontal board, as shown in the figure. One peg has n rings 
stacked on it, each ring smaller than the one below it. In a game 
known as the Tower of Hanoi puzzle, all of the rings must be 
moved to a different peg, with only one ring moved at a time, 
and no ring can be moved on top of a smaller ring. Determine 
the least number of moves that will accomplish this transfer. Use 
mathematical induction to prove that your answer is correct.
	40.	 Exam answer sheets. An exam in which each question is 
answered with either “True” or “False” has n questions.
a.	 If every question is answered, how many answer sheets are 
possible
 (i)  If n = 1? 
(ii)  If n = 2? 
b.	 Find a formula for the number of possible answer sheets 
for an exam with n questions (for any natural number n) 
and use mathematical induction to prove that the formula 
is correct. 
Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 41–49, use mathematical induction to prove each 
statement for all natural numbers n.
	41.	 5 is a factor of 8n - 3n.
	42.	 24 is a factor of 52n - 1.
	43.	 64 is a factor of 32n+2 - 8n - 9.
	44.	 64 is a factor of 9n - 8n - 1.
	45.	 3 is a factor of 22n+1 + 1.
	46.	 5 is a factor of 24n - 1.
	47.	 a - b is a factor of an - bn.
[Hint: ak+1 - bk+1 = a1ak - bk2 + bk1a - b2.]
	48.	 If a = 1, then 1 + a + a2 + g + an-1 = an - 1
a - 1 .
	49.	 a
n+1
k=1
1
n + k … 5
6
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	50.	 Consider the statement “2 is a factor of 4n - 1 for all natural 
numbers n.” Then  Pk: 2 is a factor of 4k - 1.
Assume that Pk is true so that 4k - 1 = 2m for some  
integer m. Then
 Pk+1 = 41k + 12 - 1
 = 4k + 4 - 1
 = 14k - 12 + 4
 = 2m + 4
 = 21m + 22
	
	 Thus, if Pk is true, then Pk+1 is also true. However, 2 is never 
a factor of 4n - 1 because 4n - 1 is always an odd integer. 
Explain why this “proof” is not valid.
Extended principle of mathematical induction. This principle 
states that if a statement Pn about natural numbers satisfies 
the two conditions
(1)  Pm is true for some natural number m,
(2)  Pk is true implies that Pk+1 is also true,  
Then Pn is true for all natural numbers n, with n Ú m.
In Exercises 51 and 52, use the extended principle of  
mathematical induction to prove the statement.
	51.	 Prove that 2n 7 n2 for all natural numbers n, n 7 4.
	52.	 Prove that n! 7 n3 for all natural numbers n, n Ú 6.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 53–56, verify each product by using the product 
rules.
	53.	 1x + y22 = 1x + y21x + y2 = x2 + 2xy + y2
	54.	 1x + y23 = 1x + y21x + y22 = x3 + 3x2y + 3xy2 + y3
	55.	 1x + y24 = 1x + y21x + y23 
 = x4 + 4x3y + 6x2y2 + 4xy3 + y4
	56.	 1x + y25 = 1x + y21x + y24 
 = x5 + 5x4y + 10x3y2 + 10x2y3 + 5xy4 + y5
	57.	 In Exercises 53–56, what is the pattern on the exponents of x?
	58.	 In Exercises 53–56, what is the pattern on the exponents of y?
From the pattern of expansions in Exercises 53–56, if we 
expand 1x + y2n for a positive integer n, what will be your 
answer to each of the following?
	59.	 The sum of the exponents on x and y in each term 
	60.	 The number of terms in the expansion  

946	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
11.5
Binomial Expansions  Recall that a polynomial that has exactly two terms is called 
a binomial. In the current section, we study a method for expanding 1x + y2n for any positive 
integer n.
First, consider these binomial expansions:
 1x + y21 = x + y
 1x + y22 = x2 + 2xy + y2
 1x + y23 = x3 + 3x2y + 3xy2 + y3
 1x + y24 = x4 + 4x3y + 6x2y2 + 4xy3 + y4
 1x + y25 = x5 + 5x4y + 10x3y2 + 10x2y3 + 5xy4 + y5
The expansions of 1x + y22 and 1x + y23 should be familiar to you from Section P.3; 
the last two are left for you to verify (see Exercises 55 and 56 in Section 11.4). The 
key point is that each is a product of the previous binomial and 1x + y2. For example, 
1x + y24 = 1x + y231x + y2.
The Binomial Theorem
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 Special products (Section P.3, page 34)
2	 Factorials (Section 11.1, page 914)
3	 Summation notation (Section 11.1,  
page 915)
Objectives
1	 Use Pascal’s Triangle to compute  
binomial coefficients.
2	 Use Pascal’s Triangle to expand a  
binomial power.
3	 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand  
a binomial power.
4	 Find the coefficient of a term in a  
binomial expansion.
S e c t i o n 
Blaise Pascal
Blaise Pascal was a French mathematician. An evident genius, he was 14 when he be-
gan to accompany his father to gatherings of mathematicians that were arranged by 
Father Marin Mersenne. At the age of 16, Pascal presented his own results at one of 
Mersenne’s meetings.
Pascal’s desire to help his father with his work collecting taxes led him to invent the 
first digital calculator, called the Pascaline. Pascal was also interested in atmospheric 
pressure, and in 1648, he observed that the pressure of the atmosphere decreased with 
height and that a vacuum existed above the atmosphere.
Pascal’s intense interest in mathematics led him to produce important results 
related to conic sections and to engage in correspondence with Fermat in which he 
formulated the foundations for the theory of probability. Pascal died a painful death 
from cancer at the age of 39.
In this section, we study Pascal’s Triangle. This triangle of numbers contains the im-
portant binomial coefficients. See page 947. Pascal’s work was influential in Newton’s 
discovery of the general Binomial Theorem for fractional and negative powers.
Blaise Pascal (1623–1662)
Pascaline

	
Section 11.5    ■    The Binomial Theorem 947
The patterns for expansions of 1x + y2n (with n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) suggest the following:
1.	 The expansion of 1x + y2n has n + 1 terms.
2.	 The sum of the exponents on x and y in each term equals n.
3.	 The exponent on x starts at n 1xn = xn # y02 in the first term and decreases by 1 for 
each term until it is 0 in the last term 1x0 # yn = yn2.
4.	 The exponent on y starts at 0 1xn = xn # y02 in the first term and increases by 1 for 
each term until it is n in the last term 1x0 # yn = yn2.
5.	 The variables x and y have symmetrical roles. That is, replacing x with y and y with x 
in the expansion of 1x + y2n yields the same terms, just in the reverse order.
You may also have noticed that the coefficients of the first and last terms are both  
1 and the coefficients of the second and the next-to-last terms are equal. In general, the 
coefficients of
xn-j y j and xj yn-j
are equal for j = 0, 1, 2, c, n.
The coefficients in the expansion of 1x + y2n are called the binomial coefficients.
Pascal’s Triangle
As early as a.d. 1100, the Chinese scholar Chia Hsien had discovered the secret of the 
binomial coefficients that was later rediscovered by the French philosopher and mathemati-
cian Blaise Pascal (1623–1662). To understand Chia Hsien’s and Pascal’s construction of 
binomial coefficients, let’s first look at the coefficients in these binomial expansions:
 1x + y20 =
 1
 1x + y21 =
 1x + 1y
 1x + y22 =
 1x2 + 2xy + 1y2
 1x + y23 =
 1x3 + 3x2y + 3xy2 + 1y3
 1x + y24 =
 1x4 + 4x3y + 6x2y2 + 4xy3 + 1y4
 1x + y25 =  1x5 + 5x4y + 10x3y2 + 10x2y3 + 5xy4 + 1y5
If we remove the variables and the plus signs and list only the coefficients, we get a triangle 
of numbers composed of the binomial coefficients. This triangle of numbers is known as 
Pascal’s Triangle.
 1x + y20: 
 1
  Row 0
 1x + y21: 
 1  1
  Row 1
 1x + y22: 
 1  2  1
  Row 2
 1x + y23: 
 1  3  3  1
  Row 3
 1x + y24: 
 1  4  6  4  1
  Row 4
 1x + y25: 
 1  5  10  10  5  1
  Row 5
   1  6  15  20  15  6  1  Row 6
	
¡
	
¡
	
¡
	
¡
	
¡
	
1 + 5	  5 + 10	 10 + 10	 10 + 5	 5 + 1
Note the symmetry in Pascal’s Triangle. If the triangle were folded vertically down the 
middle, the numbers on each side of the crease would match. To create a new bottom row 
in the triangle, put the number 1 in the first and last places of the new row and add two 
neighboring entries in the previous row.
The top row is called the zeroth row because it corresponds to the binomial expansion 
of 1x + y20. The next row is called the first row because it corresponds to the binomial 
expansion of 1x + y21. All of the rows are named so that the nth row corresponds to the 
coefficients of 1x + y2n.
1
	Use Pascal’s Triangle 
to compute binomial 
coefficients.

948	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
The Binomial Theorem
The coefficients in a binomial expansion can be computed by using ratios of certain factorials. 
We first introduce the symbol an
r b.
3	
Use the Binomial Theorem to 
expand a Binomial power.
Expand 14y - 2x25.
Solution
From the fifth row of Pascal’s Triangle, we see that the binomial coefficients are
1, 5, 10, 10, 5, 1.
We must make some changes in the expansion
1x + y25 = x5 + 5x4y + 10x3y2 + 10x2y3 + 5xy4 + y5
to get the expansion for 14y - 2x25:
1.	 Replace x with 4y.
2.	 Replace y with -2x.
 14y - 2x25 = 34y + 1-2x245 = 14y25 + 514y241-2x2
+ 1014y231-2x22 + 1014y221-2x23 + 514y21-2x24 + 1-2x25
 = 1024y5 - 2560y4x + 2560y3x2 - 1280y2x3 + 320yx4 - 32x5
We note that expanding a difference results in alternating signs between terms.
Practice Problem 1  Expand 13y - x26.
Using Pascal’s Triangle to Expand a Binomial Power
EXAMPLE 1
2	
Use Pascal’s Triangle to 
expand a binomial power.
Most graphing calculators can 
compute the binomial coefficients 
an
r b. They frequently use the 
function nCr. Note that a5
3b is 
shown as 5  ncr  3 on the 
­viewing screen.
Technology
Connection
If r and n are integers with 0 … r … n, then we define
an
r b =
n!
r!1n - r2!, Note that an
0b = 1, and an
nb = 1, becuase 0! = 1.
The symbol an
r b
The symbol an
r b is read “n choose r.” It can be shown that an
r b is the number of ways of 
choosing a subset containing exactly r elements from a set with n elements.
Evaluate each expression.
a.  a4
1b        b.  a5
3b        c.  a9
0b        d.  a35
35b
Solution
a.  a4
1b =
4!
1!14 - 12! =
4!
1! 3! = 4 # 3 # 2 # 1
113 # 2 # 12 = 4
1 = 4
b.  a5
3b =
5!
3!15 - 3!2 =
5!
3! 2! = 5 # 4 # 3!
3! 2!
= 5 # 4
2
= 5 # 2 = 10
Evaluating an
r b
EXAMPLE 2

	
Section 11.5    ■    The Binomial Theorem 949
The numbers an
r b show up as the coefficients in the expansion of a binomial power. For 
example, 1x + y24 can be written as either
 1x + y24 =
 x4 +
 4x3y +
 6x2y2 +
 4xy3 + y4
or
 1x + y24 =  a4
0bx4 +  a4
1bx3y +  a4
2bx2y2 +  a4
3bxy3 + a4
4by4.
This result is the Binomial Theorem (for n = 4), which can be proved by mathematical  
induction. It provides an efficient method for expanding a binomial power. (See Exercise 64.) 
The Binomial Theorem can be used to expand a binomial power directly, without reference 
to Pascal’s Triangle. This technique is particularly useful in expanding large powers of a 
binomial. For example, the expansion of 1x + y220 would require that you produce 20 rows 
of the Pascal Triangle.
c.  a9
0b =
9!
0!19 - 02! =
9!
0!  9! = 1
1 = 1     Recall that 0! = 1.
d.  a35
35b =
35!
35!135 - 352! =
35!
35!  0! = 1
1 = 1
Practice Problem 2  Evaluate each expression.
a.  a6
2b        b.  a12
9 b
T h e  B i n o m i a l  T h e o r e m
If n is a natural number, then the binomial expansion of 1x + y2n is given by
 1x + y2n = an
0bxn + an
1bxn-1y + an
2bxn-2y2 + g+ an
r bxn-ryr  +  g + an
nbyn
 = a
n
r=0
an
r bxn-ryr.
The coefficient of xn-ryr is an
r b =
n!
r!1n - r2!.
Find the binomial expansion of 1x - 3y24.
Solution
 1x - 3y24 = 3x + 1-3y244
 = a4
0bx4 + a4
1bx31-3y2 + a4
2bx21-3y22 + a4
3bx1-3y23 + a4
4b 1-3y24
 =
4!
0!  4!x4 +
4!
1!  3!x31-3y2 +
4!
2!  2!x21-3y22 +
4!
3!  1!x1-3y23 +
4!
4!  0!1-3y24
 = x4 + 4 # 3!
1! 3!x31-3y2 + 4 # 3 # 2!
2! 2! x21-3y22 + 4 # 3!
3! 1!x1-3y23 + 1-3y24
 = x4 + 4x31-3y2 + 4 # 3
2! x219y22 + 4x1-27y32 + 181y42
 = x4 - 12x3y + 54x2y2 - 108xy3 + 81y4
Practice Problem 3  Find the binomial expansion of 13x - y24.
Expanding a Binomial Power by Using the Binomial Theorem
EXAMPLE 3

950	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Binomial Coefficients
The Binomial coefficients an
r b are useful for finding a particular term in a binomial expansion.
4	
Find the coefficient of a term 
in a binomial expansion.
Find the coefficient of x9y3 in the expansion of 1x + y212.
Solution
The form of the expansion is
1x + y212 = a12
0 bx12 + a12
1 bx11y + a12
2 bx10y2 + a12
3 bx9y3 + g + a12
11bxy11 + a12
12by12.
From the fourth term, a12
3 bx9y3, the coefficient of x9y3 is
a12
3 b =
12!
3!112 - 3!2 = 12!
3! 9! = 12 # 11 # 10 # 9!
3! 9!
= 220.
Practice Problem 4  Find the coefficient of x3y9 in the expansion of 1x + y212.
Finding a Particular Coefficient in a Binomial Expansion
EXAMPLE 4
The method illustrated in Example 4 allows us to find any particular term in a binomial 
expansion without writing out the complete expansion.
Pa r t i c u l a r  T e r m  I n  A  B i n o m i a l  E x pa n s i o n
The term containing the factor xr in the expansion of 1x + y2n is
a
n
n - rbxryn-r.
Find the term containing x10 in the expansion of 1x + 2a215.
Solution
We begin with the formula for the term containing the factor xr.
 a
n
n - rbxryn-r = a
15
15 - 10bx1012a215-10
    Replace n with 15, r with 10, 
and y with 2a.
 = a15
5 bx1012a25
    Simplify.
 =
15!
5!115 - 52!
 x1025a5
    Recall that an
r b =
n!
r!1n - r2!
 =
15!
5! 10! # 32x10a5
     25 = 32
 = 15 # 14 # 13 # 12 # 11 # 10!
5! # 10!
# 32x10a5     Use a calculator.
 = 96,096x10a5
Practice Problem 5  Find the term containing x3 in the expansion of 1x + 2a215. 
Finding a Particular Term in a Binomial Expansion
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 11.5    ■    The Binomial Theorem 951
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 13y - x26 = 729y6 - 1458y5x + 1215y4x2 - 540y3x3 +
135y2x4 - 18yx5 + x6
2. a. a6
2b = 15  b. a12
9 b = 220
3. 13x - y24 = 81x4 - 108x3y + 54x2y2 - 12xy3 + y4
4. 220  5. 1,863,680x3a12
Exercises
section 11.5
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 The expansion of 1x + y2n has 
 terms.
	 2.	 In the expansion of 1x + y25, the coefficient of x2y3 is an
r b 
	
	 when n =  
 and r =  
.
	 3.	 Expanding a difference such as 12x - y210 results in 
 between terms.
	 4.	 For any positive integer n, an
nb =  
.
	 5.	 True or False. Every coefficient in the expansion of 
1x + y2n, for n 7 1, appears exactly twice. 
	 6.	 True or False. If n 7 3, then 2 an
2b = n. 
In Exercises 7–16, evaluate each expression.
	 7.	  6!
3! 
	 8.	  11!
9! 
	 9.	  12!
11! 
	10.	  3!
0! 
	11.	  a6
4b 
	12.	  a6
3b 
	13.	  a9
0b 
	14.	  a12
0 b 
	15.	  a7
1b 
	16.	  a7
3b 
In Exercises 17–24, use Pascal’s Triangle to expand each  
binomial.
	17.	 1x + 224 
	18.	 1x + 324 
	19.	 1x - 225 
	20.	 13 - x25 
	21.	 12 - 3x23 
	22.	 13 - 2x23 
	23.	 12x + 3y24 
	24.	 12x + 5y24 
In Exercises 25–46, use either the Binomial Theorem or 
Pascal’s Triangle to expand each binomial.
	25.	 1x + 124 
	26.	 1x + 224 
	27.	 1x - 125 
	28.	 11 - x25 
	29.	 1y - 323 
	30.	 12 - y25 
	31.	 1x + y26 
	32.	 1x - y26 
	33.	 11 + 3y25 
	34.	 12x + 125 
	35.	 12x + 124 
	36.	 13x - 124 
	37.	 1x - 2y23 
	38.	 12x - y23 
	39.	 12x + y24 
	40.	 13x - 2y24 
	41.	 ax
2 + 2b
7 
	42.	 a2 - x
2b
7 
	43.	 aa2 - 1
3b
4 
	44.	 a1
2 - a2b
4 
	45.	 a1
x + yb
3 
	46.	 ax + 2
y b
3 
In Exercises 47–54, find the specified term.
	47.	 1x + y210; term containing x7 
	48.	 1x + y210; term containing y7 
	49.	 1x - 2212; term containing x3 
	50.	 12 - x212; term containing x3 
	51.	 12x + 3y28; term containing x6 
	52.	 12x + 3y28; term containing y6 
	53.	 15x - 2y211; term containing y9 
	54.	 17x - y215; term containing x9 
	55.	 Find the value of 11.225 by writing it in the form 11 + 0.225 
and applying the Binomial Theorem. 
	56.	 Use the method in Exercise 55 to evaluate each expression.
a.	 12.924 
b.	 110.423 
Beyond the Basics
	57.	 Find the middle term in the expansion of a1x - 2
x2b
10
.
	58.	 Find the middle term in the expansion of a1x + 1
x2b
10
.
	59.	 Find the middle term in the expansion of 11 - x2y-3212.
	60.	 Show that the middle term in the expansion of 11 + x22n is 
	
	
1 # 3 # 5 g# 12n - 12
n!
  2nxn.
	61.	 Prove that an
0b + an
1b + an
2b + g + an
nb = 2n.
	
	 3Hint: Expand 11 + 12n = 2n.4

952	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
	62.	 Prove that an
0b - an
1b + an
2b - an
3b + g
+ 1-12n an
nb = 0.
3Hint: Expand 11 - 12n = 0.4
	63.	 Prove that a k
j b + a 
k
j - 1b = ak + 1
j
b.
	64.	 Prove the Binomial Theorem by using the Principle of 
Mathematical Induction.
c Hint: 
 1x + y2k+1 = 1x + y21x + y2k = 1x + y2a
k
j=0
a k
j bxk-jy j
 = a
k
j=0
a k
j bxk+1-jy j + a
k
j=0
a k
j bxk-jy j+1.
	
	 Use Exercise 63 to show that 
	
	
1x + y2k+1 = a
k+1
j=0
ak + 1
j
bxk+1-jyj.d
In Exercises 65–67, find the value of the expression without 
expanding any term.
	65.	 12x - 124 + 412x - 12313 - 2x2 + 612x - 12213 - 2x22
	
	 + 412x - 1213 - 2x23 + 13 - 2x24 
	66.	 1x + 124 - 41x + 1231x - 12 + 61x + 1221x - 122
	
	 - 41x + 121x - 123 + 1x - 124 
	67.	 13x - 125 + 513x - 12411 - 2x2
	
	 + 1013x - 12311 - 2x22 + 1013x - 12211 - 2x23
	
	 + 513x - 1211 - 2x24 + 11 - 2x25 
	68.	 Find the constant term in each expansion.
a.	 ax2 - 1
x b
9 
b.	 a2x - 2
x2b
10 
	69.	 If the constant term in the expansion of akx - 1
x2b
6
 is 240, 
	
	 find k. 
	70.	 If the constant term in the expansion of ax3 + k
x8b
11
 is 1320, 
	
	 find k. 
	71.	 Show that there is no constant term in the expansion of 
	
	 a2x2 - 1
4xb
11
.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	72.	 Use the binomial expansion of 1x + y26, with x = 1 and 
y = 1, to show that
	
26 = a6
0b + a6
1b + a6
2b + a6
3b + a6
4b + a6
5b + a6
6b.
	73.	 Use the binomial expansion of 1x + y210 to show that
a10
0 b - a10
1 b + a10
2 b - a10
3 b + a10
4 b - a10
5 b
+ a10
6 b - a10
7 b + a10
8 b - a10
9 b + a10
10b = 0.
	74.	 Show that if x ⩾0 and y ⩾0, then 1x + y2 ⩾2x2 + y2.
	75.	 Use the binomial expansion of 1x + y2n to show that if 
x 7 0 and y 7 0, then 1x + y2n 7 xn + yn.
	76.	 Use the binomial expansion of 11 + x2n to show that if 
x 7 0, then 11 + x2n 7 1 + nx.
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises 77–80, write each expression using factorial  
notation.
	77.	 5 # 6 # 7 # 8 
	78.	  10 # 9 # 8 # 7 # 6 
	79.	 2 # 4 # 6 # 8 # 10 # 12 
	80.	 3 # 6 # 9 # 12 # 15   
	81.	 Compute  12!
10!. 
	82.	 Compute 
n!
1n - r2!. for n = 100 and r = 2. 
	83.	 Compute 8!
5!3!. 
	84.	 Compute 
n!
1n - r2!r! for n = 10 and  r = 3. 

	
Section 11.6    ■    Counting Principles 953
S e c t i o n 11.6
Fundamental Counting Principle
You may think that you already know all there is to know about counting. However, math-
ematicians have developed a variety of techniques that allow you to determine the number 
of items that are of interest to you without making the effort of listing and counting all 
of them. We start with an example that easily lists the items to be counted, but that also 
demonstrates a general counting procedure.
The Mystery of Social Security Numbers
Social Security numbers may seem to be assigned randomly, but they are not. Although 
the details are complicated, here is a brief introduction: First, the format for all Social 
Security numbers is NNN-NN-NNNN, where N must be one of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. U.S. citizens, permanent residents, and certain temporary residents are 
issued these numbers. For working people, the numbers help track tax contributions 
and Social Security benefits.
The first three digits in a Social Security number make up an area number assigned 
to a geographic location. The area number indicates the state in which the card was 
issued or the ZIP Code in the mailing address provided in the original application.
The middle two digits constitute a group number and are designed simply to break 
the Social Security number into convenient blocks for issuance. The exact procedure is 
not very enlightening.
The last four digits are serial numbers and are assigned in each group from 0001 
through 9999.
Various restrictions limit the numbers that can be used. For example, numbers with 
all zeros in any of the digit blocks (000-xx-xxxx, xxx-00-xxxx, or xxx-xx-0000) are never 
issued. Even if there were no restrictions, at some point, there might be more people 
than available numbers. How many numbers can be issued in the Social Security format 
with no restrictions? The answer is 1,000,000,000 (1 billion). (The U.S. population in 
January 2013 was about 315,000,000 (315 million).)
In Example 3, you learn how to calculate the total number of possible Social Security 
numbers.
Counting Principles
Before Starting this  
Section, Review
1	 Exponents (Section P.2, page 18)
2	 Factorials (Section 11.1, page 914)
Objectives
1	 Use the Fundamental Counting Principle.
2	 Use the formula for permutations.
3	 Use the formula for combinations.
4	 Use the formula for distinguishable  
permutations.
1	
Use the Fundamental 
Counting Principle.
Suppose you are trying to decide between buying a sport-utility vehicle (SUV) and a four-
door sedan. The SUV is available in black, red, and silver. The sedan is available in black, 
blue, and green. In how many ways can you choose a type of car and its color?
Counting Possible Car Selections
EXAMPLE 1

954	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Solution
We can represent the possible solutions by using a tree diagram, as shown in Figure 11.3. 
There are two initial choices: an SUV and a sedan. For each of these two choices, there are 
three additional choices of color; so a total of 2 # 3 = 6 car selections are possible.
Practice Problem 1  Construct a tree diagram and determine the number of ways you 
can choose to take one of three courses—English, French, or Math—in the morning, 
afternoon, or evening.
The car selection process in Example 1 involves making two choices. First, choose a 
type of car; second, choose a color. It is important in this process that the same number of 
choices be available for the second choice regardless of the result of the first choice. The 
exact rules for counting by this method are given next.
Figure 11.3  Tree diagram
F u n d a m e n ta l  C o u n t i n g  P r i n c i p l e
If a first choice can be made in p different ways, a second choice can be made in q 
different ways, a third choice can be made in r different ways, and so on, then the 
sequence of choices can be made in p # q # r c different ways.
A disc jockey wants to open a program by picking a song from among 40 songs by one 
artist and close the program by picking a song from among 32 songs by a second artist. 
How many different choices are possible?
Solution
Each choice of an opening and ending song sequence can be obtained as follows:
First, choose an opening song in 40 ways.
Second, choose the song to end the program in 32 ways.
Because no matter which song is chosen to open the program, all 32 songs are available 
to end the program, the counting principle applies, and there are a total of 
40 # 32 = 1280
possible choices for the opening and ending sequences.
Practice Problem 2  Reba gets to choose both dinner and a movie for a Saturday  
night date. She can choose from any of seven restaurants and five movies. How many  
different choices are possible?
Counting Music Programs
EXAMPLE 2
Black SUV
Red SUV
Silver SUV
Black Sedan
Blue Sedan
Green Sedan
Red
Silver
Black
SUV
Sedan
Blue
Green
Black
Be careful when using the Fundamental Counting Principle. Suppose you are trying to decide 
between buying an SUV available only in black, red, or silver and a convertible available only 
in black or red. In how many ways can you choose a type of car and its color? The car and 
color can be selected by making two choices: type (SUV or convertible) followed by color. But 
in this situation, the number of ways you can make the second choice depends on the first 
choice. You can choose from three colors for an SUV, but only two colors for a convertible. 
The Fundamental Counting Principle does not apply. Fortunately, there are so few different 
choices here that you can easily list all five: black SUV, red SUV, silver SUV, black convertible, 
and red convertible.
Warning

	
Section 11.6    ■    Counting Principles 955
Social Security numbers have the format NNN-NN-NNNN, where each N must be one 
of the integers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Assuming that there are no other restrictions, 
how many such numbers are possible?
Solution
There are nine positions in the format
NNN-NN-NNNN.
Because the number of choices available at each position is not affected by previous choices, 
the Fundamental Counting Principle can be used. Replace each of the letters N with a blank 
to be filled in with one of the ten digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.
We have
10 # 10 # 10 # 10 # 10 # 10 # 10 # 10 # 10 = 109.
Thus, there are 109 = 1,000,000,000 possible Social Security numbers.
Practice Problem 3  In Example 3, suppose we fix the area number for the Social  
Security number to be 433. How many social security numbers can be assigned to this 
area—that is, numbers having the form 433-NN-NNNN?
Permutations
Counting Possible Social Security Numbers
EXAMPLE 3
2	
Use the formula for 
permutations.
A permutation is an arrangement of n distinct objects in a fixed order in which no 
object is used more than once. The specific order is important: Each different order-
ing of the same objects is a different permutation.
Permutation
How many different ways can five people be arranged in a row for a group photograph?
Solution
To count the number of ways we can arrange five people in a row for a group photograph, 
we can assign numbers to each of the five photograph positions.
1  
2  
3  
4  
5
Then we proceed as follows:
First, choosing any of the five people for Position 1 gives 5 ways.
Second, choosing one of the four remaining people for Position 2 gives 4 ways.
Third, choosing one of the three remaining people for Position 3 gives 3 ways.
Fourth, choosing one of the remaining two people for Position 4 gives 2 ways.
Fifth, choosing the last person remaining for Position 5 gives 1 way.
Using the Fundamental Counting Principle, we see that there are
5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 = 5!, or 120,
possible arrangements.
Practice Problem 4  How many different ways can seven books be arranged on a shelf?
This technique gives a general formula for counting permutations of n distinct objects.
Counting Possible Arrangements for a Group Photograph
EXAMPLE 4

956	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Sometimes only some, but not all, of the available objects are to be arranged in a spe-
cific order, again with no object being used more than once. You may want to choose r 
objects from among n available objects. This type of ordering is called a permutation of 
n objects taken r at a time.
n u m b e r  o f  p e r m u tat i o n s  o f  n  o b j e c t s
The number of permutations of n distinct objects is
n! = n1n - 12 # c # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1.
That is, n distinct objects can be arranged in n! different ways.
Three prizes (for first, second, and third place) are to be given out in a dog show having 
27 contestants. In how many different ways can dogs come in first, second, and third?
Solution
Consider how we might list the prize winners:
Any dog might win first prize; there are 27 possibilities.
Any remaining dog might win second prize; there are 26 possibilities.
Any remaining dog might win third prize; there are 25 possibilities. We can use the  
Fundamental Counting Principle: there are
27  #   26  #   25 = 17,550
distinct ways that the dogs can come in first, second, and third. This is an example of  
permutations of 27 objects taken 3 at a time.
Practice Problem 5  There are nine different rides at a state fair. A group has to  
decide which four rides they will go on and in what order. How many possibilities  
are there?
Counting Prizewinners
EXAMPLE 5
¡
¡
¡
3rd  
prize
1st  
prize
2nd  
prize
P e r m u tat i o n s  O f  n  O b j e c t s  Ta k e n  r  At  A  T i m e
The number of permutations of n distinct objects taken r at a time is denoted by 
P1n, r2, where
 P1n, r2 = n1n - 121n - 22 c 1n - r + 12
 =
n!
1n - r2!.
Use the formula for P1n, r2 to evaluate each expression.
a.   P17, 32        b.   P16, 02
Using the Permutations Formula
EXAMPLE 6

	
Section 11.6    ■    Counting Principles 957
Solution
a.   P17, 32 =
7!
17-3!2    Replace n with 7 and r with 3 in P1n, r2.
 = 7!
4! = 7 # 6 # 5 # 4!
4!
= 7 # 6 # 5 = 210
b.    P16, 02 =
6!
16-02!    Replace n with 6 and r with 0 in P1n, r2.
	
 = 6!
6! = 1
Practice Problem 6  Evaluate.
a.   P19, 22        b.   P1n, 02
Let’s apply the permutations formula to the problem of counting prizewinners in 
Example 5. The number of permutations of 27 dogs taken 3 at a time is
 P127, 32 =
27!
127-32!
 = 27!
24! = 27 # 26 # 25 # 24!
24!
= 27 # 26 # 25 = 17,550.
This is the same answer we found in Example 5.
Combinations
Order is not always important in selecting objects. For example, if someone is bringing six 
movies on a vacation, the order in which the movies were chosen is unimportant.
3	
Use the formula for 
combinations.
When r objects are chosen from n distinct objects without regard to order, we call the 
set of r objects a combination of n objects taken r at a time. The symbol C1n, r2 
denotes the total number of combinations of n objects taken r at a time.
A Combination of n Distinct Objects Taken r at a Time
Most graphing calculators can 
compute P(n, r). They frequently use 
the symbol nPr. Note that P(7, 3) 
is shown as 7 nPr 3 on the viewing 
screen.
Technology
Connection
List all of the combinations of the four mascot names “bears,” “bulls,” “lions,” and 
“tigers,” taken two at a time. Find C14, 22.
Solution
If “bears” is one of the mascots chosen, the possibilities are {bears, bulls}, {bears, lions}, 
and {bears, tigers}.
If “bulls” is one of the mascots chosen, the remaining possibilities (excluding {bears, 
bulls}) are {bulls, lions} and {bulls, tigers}.
The final choice of two mascot names is {lions, tigers}.
The combinations of the four mascot names taken two at a time are {bears, bulls},  
{bears, lions}, {bears, tigers}, {bulls, lions}, {bulls, tigers}, and {lions, tigers}.
Because there are six such combinations, we have C14, 22 = 6.
Practice Problem 7  List all of the combinations of the four mascot names “bears,” 
“bulls,” “lions,” and “tigers,” taken three at a time. Find C14, 32.
To find a formula for C1n, r2, we begin by comparing C1n, r2 with P1n, r2, the number 
of permutations of n objects taken r at a time. Suppose, for example, we have seven distinct 
objects—A, B, C, D, E, F, and G—and we pick three of them—A, D, and E (a combination 
Listing Combinations
EXAMPLE 7

958	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
of seven objects taken three at a time). This one combination ADE gives 3! = 6 permuta-
tions of seven objects taken three at a time. Here are all of the possible arrangements of 
the letters A, D, and E: ADE, AED, DAE, DEA, EAD, and EDA. Because one combination 
generates six permutations, there are six 13!2 times as many permutations of seven objects 
taken three at a time as there are combinations of seven objects taken three at a time. Thus, 
3! (number of combinations) = (number of permutations).
 3! C17, 32 = P17, 32
 C17, 32 = P17, 32
3!
 =
7!
17 - 32!
3!
    Replace P17, 32 with 
7!
17 - 32!.
 = 
7!
17 - 32!  3! =
7!
4!  3! = 7 # 6 # 5 # 4!
4!  3!
= 7 # 6 # 5
3 # 2 # 1 = 35
A similar process leads to a more general formula.
Notice that the value of C(n, r) is 
the same as that of an
r b.
Recall
T h e  N u m b e r  O f  C o m b i n at i o n s  O f  n  D i s t i n c t  
O b j e c t s  Ta k e n  r  At  A  T i m e
The number of combinations of n distinct objects taken r at a time is 
C1n, r2 =
n!
1n - r2! r!.
Use the formula C1n, r2 to evaluate each expression.
a.   C17, 52        b.   C18, 02        c.   C14, 42
Solution
a.   C17, 52 =
7!
17 - 52! 5!    Replace n with 7 and r with 5 in C1n, r2.
 =
7!
2! 5! = 7 # 6
3 # 5!
2 # 1 # 5! = 21
b.  C18, 02 =
8!
18 - 02! 0!    Substitute n = 8 and r = 0 in C1n, r2.
 =
8!
8!  0! = 1
c.  C14, 42 =
4!
14 - 42! 4!    Substitute n = 4 and r = 4 in C1n, r2.
=
4!
0!  4! = 1
Practice Problem 8  Evaluate.
a.  C19, 22        b.   C1n, 02        c.   C1n, n2
Using the Combinations Formula
EXAMPLE 8
Most graphing calculators can 
compute C(n, r). Note that C(7, 5) 
is shown as 7 nCr 5 on the viewing 
screen.
Technology
Connection

	
Section 11.6    ■    Counting Principles 959
How many different ways can five pizza toppings be chosen from the following choices: 
pepperoni, onions, mushrooms, green peppers, olives, tomatoes, mozzarella, and anchovies?
Solution
Eight toppings are listed, so the question is, in how many ways can we pick five things from 
a collection of eight things? That is, we need to find the number of combinations of eight 
objects taken five at a time, or C18, 52.
Use the formula C1n, r2 =
n!
1n - r2! r!.
 C18, 52 =
8!
18 - 52!  5!    Replace n with 8 and r with 5.
 =
8!
3!  5! = 8 # 7 # 6
3 # 2 # 1 = 56.
There are 56 ways that five of the eight pizza toppings can be chosen.
Practice Problem 9  A box of assorted chocolates contains 12 different kinds of  
chocolates. In how many ways can three chocolates be chosen?
Distinguishable Permutations
Suppose you were to stand in a line with identical twins. Although the three of you can 
arrange yourselves in 3! = 6 different ways, someone who could not tell the twins apart 
could distinguish only three different arrangements. These three arrangements are called 
distinguishable permutations. To better understand the idea of distinguishable permuta-
tions, suppose we have three tiles with the numbers 1, 2, and 3 printed on the fronts and the 
letters M O M printed on the backs, respectively.
1  
2  
3        
M 
O  
M
There are 3! = 6 permutations of the numbers 1, 2, 3.
Now consider the corresponding arrangements of the letters M, O, and M on the back 
view of the tiles as the front view of the tiles are arranged to show each of the six permuta-
tions of 1, 2, 3. (See margin.)
There are only three distinguishable arrangements that appear when the tiles are viewed 
from the back: MOM, MMO, and OMM.
The front view shows the permutations of three distinct objects, but the back view 
shows the permutations of three objects of which one is of one kind (the letter O) and two 
are of a second kind (the letter M).
Choosing Pizza Toppings
EXAMPLE 9
4	
Use the formula for 
distinguishable permutations.
—
—
—
—
—
—
Front view of tiles
Back view of tiles
	Front View	
Back View 
	 of Tiles	
of Tiles
1  2  3	
M  O  M
1  3  2	
M  M  O
2  1  3	
O  M  M
2  3  1	
O  M  M
3  1  2	
M  M  O
3  2  1	
M  O  M
D i s t i n g u i s h a b l e  P e r m u tat i o n s
The number of distinguishable permutations of n objects of which n1 are of one kind, 
n2 are of a second kind, . . . , and nk are of a kth kind is
n!
n1! # n2! # c # nk!,
where n1 + n2 + g+ nk = n.

960	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
In how many ways can nine gifts be distributed among three children if each child receives 
three gifts?
Solution
If we number the gifts 1 through 9 and use A, B, and C to represent the children, we can 
visualize any distribution of gifts as an arrangement of the letters A, B, and C (each letter 
being used three times) above the numbers 1 through 9. Here is one possible arrangement:
B A A C C B A C B
1  2 3  4  5 6 7  8 9
In this arrangement, child A gets gifts 2, 3, and 7; child B gets gifts 1, 6, and 9; and child 
C gets gifts 4, 5, and 8.
To count all of the possible distributions of gifts, we count the number of permutations 
of nine objects, of which three are of one kind, three are of a second kind, and three are of 
a third kind:
9
3! 3! 3! = 1680
There are 1680 ways the nine gifts can be distributed among the three children.
Practice Problem 10  In how many ways can six counselors be sent in pairs to three  
different locations?
Deciding Whether to Use Permutations, Combinations, 
or the Fundamental Counting Principle
Suppose 23 students show up late for a private screening of a new movie. Suppose also that 
there is one seat available in each of the first, second, eighth, and tenth rows and that five 
students will be allowed to stand in the back of the theater.
Distributing Gifts
EXAMPLE 10
Summary of Main Facts
Permutations
If order is important, use permutations.
In how many ways can 4 of the 23 students be assigned the 
available seats in rows 1, 2, 8, and 10?
Answer:
23 # 22 # 21 # 20 # = 212,520 ways
Combinations
If order is not important, use combinations.
In how many ways can 5 of the 19 students not given seats 
be chosen to stand in the back?
Answer: C119, 52 = 11,628 ways
Fundamental Counting Principle
Whenever you are making consecutive choices and  
the number of choices at each stage is not affected by  
the way earlier choices were made, you can use the  
Fundamental Counting Principle.
In how many ways can students be assigned to the available 
seats and five students be chosen to stand in the back?
Answer: 1212,520 * 11,6282 ways
Assign the four seats.    Pick five students.
= 2,471,182,560 ways
Row 1
Row 2
Row 8
Row 10
—
—

	
Section 11.6    ■    Counting Principles 961
Notice that
• Because the Fundamental Counting Principle is used to count permutations, you can 
always use that principle instead of the formula for permutations.
• There are frequently equally good, although different, ways to use counting tech-
niques to solve a problem. For example, we could first choose 5 students to stand in 
the back of the theater in C123, 52 ways and then assign the seats in rows 1, 2, 8, and 
10 to the 18 remaining students in 18 # 17 # 16 # 15 ways. The total number of ways 
students can be assigned to stand in the back and assigned to the available seats is then 
C123, 52 # 18 # 17 # 16 # 15. We verify that
C123, 52 # 18 # 17 # 16 # 15 = 33,649 * 73,440 = 2,471,182,560 ways.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. 
English
Afternoon
Afternoon
Afternoon
French
Math
Morning
Morning
Morning
Evening
Evening
Evening
There are 132132 = 9 ways to choose a course.
2. 35  3. 1,000,000  4. 5040  5. 3024  6. a. 72  b. 1
7. 5bears, bulls, lions6, 5bears, bulls, tigers6,
 5bears, lions, tigers6,5bulls, lions, tigers6; C14, 32 = 4  
8. a. 36  b. 1  c. 1  9. 220  10. 90
Exercises
section 11.6 
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 Any arrangement of n distinct objects in a fixed order  
in which no object is used more than once is called  
a1n2 
.
	 2.	 The number of permutations of five distinct objects is 
.
	 3.	 When r objects are chosen from n distinct objects, the set  
of r objects is called a(n) 
 of n objects  
taken r at a time.
	 4.	 The number of distinguishable permutations of 10 objects 
of which 3 are of one kind and 7 are of a second kind is 
.
	5.	 True or False. When order is important in counting objects, 
we use permutations. 
	6.	 True or False. There are more permutations of n objects 
taken r at a time than there are combinations of n objects 
taken r at a time.         
In Exercises 7–14, use the formula for P1n, r2 to evaluate each 
expression.
	 7.	 P16, 12 
	 8.	 P17, 32 
	 9.	 P18, 22 
	10.	 P110, 62 
	11.	 P19, 92 
	12.	 P15, 52 
	13.	 P17, 02 
	14.	 P14, 02 
In Exercises 15–22, use the formula for C1n, r2 to evaluate 
each expression.
	15.	 C18, 32 
	16.	 C17, 22 
	17.	 C19, 42 
	18.	 C110, 52 
	19.	 C15, 52 
	20.	 C16, 62 
	21.	 C13, 02 
	22.	 C15, 02 
In Exercises 23–26, use the Fundamental Counting Principle 
to solve each problem.
	23.	 How many different two-letter codes can be made from the 
26 capital letters of the alphabet if (a) repeated letters are 
allowed; (b) repeated letters are not allowed.    
	24.	 How many possible answer sheets are there for a ten-question 
true–false exam if no answer is left blank? 
	25.	 In how many ways can a president and vice president be  
chosen from an organization with 50 members? 
	26.	 How many four-digit numbers can be formed with the digits  
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 if the first digit cannot be 0? 
In Exercises 27–30, use the formula for counting permutations 
to solve each problem.
	27.	 In how many different ways can the members of a family of 
four be seated in a row of four chairs?     

962	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
	28.	 Ten teams are entered in a bowling tournament. In how many 
ways can first, second, and third prizes be awarded? 
	29.	 Frederico has five shirts, three pairs of pants, and four ties 
that are appropriate for an interview. If he wears one of each 
type of apparel, how many different outfits can he wear? 
	30.	 A choreographer has to arrange eight pieces for a dance  
program. In how many ways can this be done? 
In Exercises 31–34, use the formula for counting combinations 
to solve each problem.
	31.	 A pizza menu offers pepperoni, peppers, mushrooms, sausage, 
and meatballs as extra toppings that can be added to your pizza. 
How many different pizzas can you order with two additional 
toppings? 
	32.	 In how many ways can 2 student representatives be chosen 
from a class of 15 students? 
	33.	 Students are allowed to choose 9 out of 11 problems to work 
for credit on an exam. How many ways can this be done? 
	34.	 You have to choose 3 out of 18 potential teammates to help 
you with a group assignment. How many ways can this be 
done? 
In Exercises 35–40, solve the problem by any appropriate 
counting method.
	35.	 How many ways can Ashley choose 4 out of 11 different 
canned goods to donate to charity? 
	36.	 How many ways can a computer store hire a salesclerk and 
a technician from seven applicants for the clerk position and 
four applicants for the technician position? 
	37.	 How many ways can six people be seated in a row with eight 
seats, leaving two seats vacant? 
	38.	 Seven students arrive to rent two canoes and three kayaks. 
How many ways can two students be selected to rent the 
canoes and three to rent the kayaks? 
	39.	 Dakota is trying to decide in which order to visit five pro-
spective colleges. How many ways can this be done? 
	40.	 How many ways can the first 4 numbers be called from the 
75 possible bingo numbers? 
Applying the Concepts
	41.	 Area codes. How many three-digit area codes for telephones 
are possible if
a.	 The first digit cannot be a 0 or 1 and the second digit must 
be a 0 or 1? 
b.	 There are no restrictions on the second digit? (Previous 
restrictions were abandoned in 1995.) 
	42.	 Radio station call letters. Radio stations in the United 
States have call letters that begin with either K or W (for 
example, WXYZ in Detroit). Some have a total of three  
letters, and others have four. How many different call-letter 
selections are possible? 
	43.	 Fraternity letters. The Greek alphabet contains 24 letters. 
How many three-letter fraternity names can be made with 
Greek letters
a.	 if no repetitions are allowed? 
b.	 if repetitions are allowed? 
	44.	 Codes. How many three-letter codes can be made from the 
first ten letters of the alphabet if
a.	 No letters are repeated? 
b.	 Letters may be repeated? 
	45.	 Supreme Court decisions. In how many ways can all of 
the nine justices of the U.S. Supreme Court reach a majority 
decision? (The U.S. Supreme Court has nine justices who are 
appointed for life.) 
	46.	 Committee selection. A club consists of ten members. 
How many ways can a committee of four be selected? 
	47.	 Wardrobe choices. Al’s wardrobe consists of eight pairs 
of slacks, eight shirts, and eight pairs of shoes. He does not 
want to wear the same outfit on any two days of the year. 
Will his current wardrobe allow him to do this? 
	48.	 Menu selection. A French restaurant offers two choices of 
soup, three of salad, eight of an entree, and five of a dessert. 
How many different complete dinners can you order? 
	49.	 Housing development. A developer wants to build seven 
houses, each of a different design. How many ways can she 
arrange these homes on a street if
a.	 Four lots are on one side of the street and three are on the 
opposite side? 
b.	 Five lots are on one side of the street and two are on the 
opposite side? 
	50.	 Designing exercise sets. The author of a mathematics 
textbook has seven problems for an exercise set, and she is 
trying to arrange them in increasing order of difficulty. How 
many ways can she select the problems if no two of them are 
equally difficult? How many ways can the author fail?
	51.	 Letter selection. From the letters of the word CHARITY, 
groups of four letters are formed (without regard to order). 
How many of them will contain
a.	 Both A and R? 
b.	 A but not R? 
c.	 Neither A nor R? 
	52.	 Committee selection. How many ways can a committee  
of 4 students and 2 professors be formed from 20 students 
and 8 professors? 
	53.	 Inventory orders. A manufacturer makes shirts in five dif-
ferent colors, seven different neck sizes, and three different 
sleeve lengths. How many shirts should a department store 
order to have one of each type? 
	54.	 International book codes. All recent books are identi-
fied by their International Standard Book Number (ISBN), 
a ten-digit code assigned by the publisher. A typical ISBN 
is 0-321-75526-2. The first digit, 0, represents the language 
of the book (English); the second block of digits, 321, rep-
resents the publishing company (Pearson); the third block of 
digits, 75526, is the number assigned by the publishing com-
pany to that book; and the final digit, 2, is the check digit, 
used to detect the most commonly made errors when ISBNs 
are copied. How many ISBNs are possible? (Remember that 
the previous nine digits determine the last digit.) 
	55.	 Political polling. A senator sends out questionnaires asking his 
constituents to rank ten issues of concern to them, such as crime, 
education, and taxes, in order of importance. Replies are filed 
in folders, and two or more replies are put in the same folder if 
and only if they give the same ranking to all ten issues. Find the 
maximum number of folders that might be needed.  

	
Section 11.6    ■    Counting Principles 963
	56.	 Parcel delivery. A UPS driver must deliver 12 parcels to 12 
different addresses. In how many orders can the driver make 
these deliveries? 
	57.	 Circus visit. A father with seven children takes four of them 
at a time to a circus as often as he can, without taking the 
same four children more than once. What is the maximum 
number of times each child will go to the circus, and how 
many times will the father go?
	58.	 Arranging books. From six history books, four biology 
books, and five economics books, how many ways can a per-
son select three history books, two biology books, and four 
economics books and arrange them on a shelf? 
	59.	 Bingo. Each of four columns on a bingo card contains 5 
different numbers chosen in any order from 15. Column “B” 
chooses from 1 to 15, column “I” from 16 to 30, . . . , and  
column “O” from 61 to 75. Only four numbers are  
under column “N” because of the free space. How many  
different cards are possible? 
	60.	 Football conferences. The Grid-Iron Football League in 
Sardonia is divided into two conferences—East and West—
each having six members. Each team in the league must play 
each team in its conference twice and each team in the other 
conference once during a season. What is the total number of 
games played in the league? 
	61.	 Married couples prohibited. How many ways can a com-
mittee of four people be selected from five married couples if 
no committee is to include husband-and-wife pairs? 
	62.	 Social club committees. A social club contains seven 
women and four men. The club wants to select a committee 
of three to represent it at a state convention. How many of the 
possible committees contain at least one man? 
	63.	 Coin gifts. Among Corey’s collection of early American 
coins, he has a half-dollar, a quarter, a nickel, and a penny. 
He wants to give his younger sister some or all of these four 
coins. How many different sets of coins can Cory give? 
	64.	 Meal possibilities. The university cafeteria offers two 
choices of soups, three of salad, five of main dishes, and six 
of desserts. How many different four-course meals can you 
choose? 
In Exercises 65–68, how many distinguishable ways can the 
letters of each word be arranged?
	65.	 TAIWAN 
	66.	 AMERICA 
	67.	 SUCCESS 
	68.	 ARRANGE 
Beyond the Basics
	69.	 A company that supplies temporary help has a contract for 
20 weeks to provide three workers per week to an insurance 
firm. The agreement specifies that in no two weeks can the 
same three workers be sent to work at the firm. How many 
different workers are necessary? 
	70.	 An FM radio station wants to start its evening programming 
with five songs every day for 21 days without using the same 
five songs on any two days. What is the smallest number of 
songs that can be used to accomplish this result? 
	71.	 In geometry, any two points determine a line. How many 
lines are determined by 30 given points, no 3 of which lie on 
the same line? 
	72.	 In geometry, any 3 noncollinear points determine a triangle. 
How many triangles can be determined by 21 given points, 
no 3 of which are collinear? 
In Exercises 73–80, solve each equation.
	73.	 am + 1
m - 1 b = 3! 
	74.	 6 an - 1
2
b = an + 1
4
b
	75.	 2 an - 1
2
b = an
3b 
	76.	 4
3
 ak
2b = ak + 1
3
b 
	77.	 an
0b + an
1b + an
2b + g + an
nb = 64 
	78.	 ak
1b + ak
2b + ak
3b + g + a
k
k - 1b = 126 
	79.	 am
4 b = am
5 b 
	80.	 an
7b = an
3b 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	81.	 How many terms of the form xnym are possible if n and m can 
be any integer such that 1 … n … 5 and 1 … m … 5 ? 
	82.	 Use the Fundamental Counting Principle to determine the 
number of terms in the product
1a + b21x2 + 2xy + y22.
	
	 Explain your reasoning.
[Hint: Each term in the product can be obtained by multiply-
ing one term chosen from each factor.]
Maintaining Skills
In Exercises, 83–86 the notation n(E) means the number of 
elements in the set E.
	83.	 If E = 52, 5, 76, find n1E2. 
	84.	 If E = 5-3, -16, find n1E2. 
	85.	 If E = 506, find n1E2. 
	86.	 If E = ∅, find n1E2. 
In Exercises 87–90, let A = 51, 2, 3, 56 and B = 53, 4, 5, 6, 76.
	87.	 Find n1A2 and n1B2. 
	88.	 Find A ´ B and n1A ´ B2. 
	89.	 Find A ¨ B and n1A ¨ B2. 
	90.	 Verify that n1A ´ B2 = n1A2 + n1B2 - n1A ¨ B2.
In Exercise 91–94, let A = 5a, b, c6 and B = 52, 4, 6, 86.
	91.	 Find n1A2 and n1B2. 
	92.	 Find A ´ B and n1A ´ B2. 
	93.	 Find A ¨ B and n1A ¨ B2. 
	94.	 Verify that n1A ´ B2 = n1A2 + n1B2 - n1A ¨ B2.     

964	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
S e c t i o n 
The Probability of an Event
Any process that terminates in one or more outcomes (results) is an experiment. For  
example, if we ask people what time of the day they typically eat their first meal or if we 
pull balls from a bag of colored balls, we have performed an experiment. The outcomes of 
the first experiment are the times of day given as responses to our question. The outcomes 
of the second experiment are the colors of the balls drawn from the bag.
The set of all possible outcomes of a given experiment is called the sample space of 
the experiment. Suppose the experiment is tossing a coin. Then we could denote the out-
come “heads” by H; denote the outcome “tails” by T; and write the sample space, S, in set 
notation as
S = 5H, T6.
A single die is a cube, each face of which contains one, two, three, four, five, or six dots 
and no two faces contain the same number of dots. A roll of the die is an experiment, the 
Double Lottery Winner
Many people dream of winning a lottery, but only the most optimistic dream of  
winning it twice. When Evelyn Marie Adams won the New Jersey state lottery for the 
second time, the New York Times (February 14, 1986) claimed that the chances of one 
person winning the lottery twice were about 1 in 17 trillion. Two weeks later a letter 
from 2 statisticians appeared in the Times challenging this claim. Although they agreed 
that any particular person had very little chance of winning a lottery twice, they said 
that it was almost certain that someone in the United States would win twice. Further, 
they said that the odds were even for another double lottery win to occur within seven 
years. In less than two years, Robert Humphries won his second Pennsylvania lottery 
prize.
Evaluating how likely an event is to occur is the realm of probability, which we 
study in this section. In Example 4, we determine the probability of winning a lottery in 
which 6 numbers are randomly selected from the numbers 1 through 53.
Probability
Before Starting This  
Section, Review
1	 Set notation (Section P.1, page 3)
2	 Fundamental Counting Principle  
(Section 11.6, page 954)
3	 Permutations (Section 11.6, page 955)
4	 Combinations (Section 11.6, page 957)
Objectives
1	 Find the probability of an event.
2	 Use the Additive Rule for finding  
probabilities.
3	 Find the probability of mutually  
exclusive events.
4	 Find the probability of the  
complement of an event.
5	 Find experimental probabilities.
11.7
1	
Find the probability  
of an event.

	
Section 11.7    ■    Probability 965
outcome of which is the number of dots showing on the upper face, and the sample space 
S can be written in set notation as 
S = 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 66. 
An event is any set of possible outcomes; that is, an event is any subset of a sample 
space. For the die-rolling experiment, one possible event is “The number showing is even.” 
In set notation, we write this event as E = 52, 4, 66. The event “The number showing is 
a 6” is written in set notation as A = 566.
Outcomes of an experiment are said to be equally likely if no outcome should result 
more often than any other outcome when the experiment is run repeatedly. In both the coin-
tossing and die-rolling experiments, all of the outcomes are equally likely.
If all of the outcomes in a sample space S are equally likely, then the probability 
of an event E, denoted P1E2, is the ratio of the number of outcomes in E, denoted 
n1E2, to the total number of outcomes in S, denoted n1S2. That is,
P1E2 = n1E2
n1S2.
Probability of an Event
Because E is a subset of S, 0 … n1E2 … n1S2. Dividing by n1S2 yields 0 … n1E2
n1S2 … 1. 
So the probability P1E2 of an event E is a number between 0 and 1 inclusive.
A single die is rolled. Write each event in set notation and find the probability of the event.
a.	 E1: The number 2 is showing.
b.	 E2: The number showing is odd.
c.	 E3: The number showing is less than 5.
d.	 E4: The number showing is greater than or equal to 1.
e.	 E5: The number showing is 0.
Solution
The sample space for the experiment of rolling a die is S = 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 66, so n1S2 = 6.
For any event E, P1E2 = n1E2
n1S2.
a.	 E1 = 526, so n1E12 = 1. P1E12 = n1E12
n1S2 = 1
6
b.	 E2 = 51, 3, 56, so n1E22 = 3. P1E22 = n1E22
n1S2 = 3
6 = 1
2
c.	 E3 = 51, 2, 3, 46, so n1E32 = 4. P1E32 = n1E32
n1S2 = 4
6 = 2
3
d.	 E4 = 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 66, so n1E42 = 6. P1E42 = n1E42
n1S2 = 6
6 = 1
e.	 E5 = ∅, so n1Es2 = 0. P1E52 = n1E52
n1S2 = 0
6 = 0
Finding the Probability of an Event
EXAMPLE 1

966	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Practice Problem 1  A single die is rolled. Write each event in set notation and give the 
probability of each event.
a.	 E1: The number showing is odd.
b.	 E2: The number showing is greater than 4.
Notice in Example 1d that E4 = S; so the event E4 is certain to occur on every roll of 
the die. Every certain event has probability 1. On the other hand, in Example 1e, the event 
E5 = ∅; so E5 never occurs, and P1E52 = 0. An impossible event always has probability 0.
What is the probability of getting at least one tail when a coin is tossed twice?
Solution
Tossing a coin once results in two equally likely outcomes: heads 1H2 and tails 1T2. Tossing  
the coin twice results in two equally likely outcomes for the first toss and, regardless of 
the first outcome, two equally likely outcomes for the second toss. By the Fundamental  
Counting Principle, there are 2 # 2, or 4, outcomes when we toss the coin twice. We can 
represent these outcomes as (first toss, second toss) pairs:
S = 51H, H2, 1H, T2, 1T, H2, 1T, T26.
Because three of these outcomes, E = 51H, T2, 1T, H2, 1T, T26, result in at least one tail 
we have
P1E2 = n1E2
n1S2 = 3
4.
Practice Problem 2  What is the probability of getting exactly one head when a  
coin is tossed twice?
Equally likely outcomes occur in most games of chance that involve tossing coins, 
rolling dice, or drawing cards. Lotteries and games involving spinning wheels also are as-
sumed to generate equally likely outcomes.
Tossing a Coin
EXAMPLE 2
What is the probability of getting a sum of 8 when a pair of dice is rolled?
Solution
There are six equally likely outcomes for each die; so by the Fundamental Counting 
Principle, there are 6 # 6 or 36, equally likely outcomes when a pair of dice is rolled. It is 
useful to think of having two dice of different colors—say, red and green—in distinguish-
ing the 36 outcomes. In this way, 2 on the red die and 6 on the green die is easily seen to 
be a different physical outcome from 6 on the red die and 2 on the green die, even though 
the same sum results.
We can represent the 36 outcomes as (red die, green die) pairs:
 S = 511, 12, 11, 22, 11, 32, 11, 42, 11, 52, 11, 62, 
 12, 12, 12, 22, 12, 32, 12, 42, 12, 52, 12, 62,
 13, 12, 13, 22, 13, 32, 13, 42, 13, 52, 13, 62,
 14, 12, 14, 22, 14, 32, 14, 42, 14, 52, 14, 62,
 15, 12, 15, 22, 15, 32, 15, 42, 15, 52, 15, 62,
 16, 12, 16, 22, 16, 32, 16, 42, 16, 52, 16, 626
Rolling a Pair of Dice
EXAMPLE 3

	
Section 11.7    ■    Probability 967
The highlighted ordered pairs in the sample space are the outcomes that have a sum of 8. 
In set notation, the event “The sum of the numbers on the dice is 8” is 
E = 516, 22, 15, 32, 14, 42, 13, 52, 12, 626.
Because n1E2 = 5 and n1S2 = 36,
P1E2 = n1E2
n1S2 = 5
36.
So the probability of getting a sum of 8 is 5
36.
Practice Problem 3  What is the probability of getting a sum of 7 when a pair of  
dice is rolled?
Table tennis balls numbered 1 through 53 are mixed together in a turning drum or basket. 
Six of the balls are chosen in a random way. To win the lottery, a player must have selected 
all six of the numbers chosen. The order in which the numbers are chosen does not matter. 
What is the probability of matching all six numbers? (Source: www.fllottery.com)
Solution
Because the order in which the numbers are selected is not important, the sample space 
S consists of all sets of 6 numbers that can be selected from 53 numbers. Therefore, 
n1S2 = C153, 62 = 22,957,480. Because only 1 set of 6 numbers matches the 6 numbers 
drawn, the probability of the event “guessed all 6 numbers” is
 P1winning the lottery2 = P1guessed all 6 numbers2
 =
1
22,957,480 ≈0.00000004.
Whether you say your chances of winning are 1 in 22,957,480 or about 0.00000004, you 
definitely know they are not very good!
Practice Problem 4  A state lottery requires a winner to correctly select 6 out of  
50 numbers. The order of the numbers does not matter. What is the probability of  
matching all six numbers?
The Additive Rule
Consider the experiment of rolling one die. The sample space is S = 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 66, 
and n1S2 = 6.
Let E be the event “The number rolled is greater than 4” and let F be the event “The 
number rolled is even.” Then
E = 55, 66  and  F = 52, 4, 66.
The event “The number rolled is greater than 4 and even” is E ¨ F.
E ¨ F = 566
Because n1E2 = 2, n1F2 = 3, n1E ¨ F2 = 1, and n1S2 = 6, we have
P1E2 = 2
6, P1F2 = 3
6, P1E ¨ F2 = 1
6.
The event “The number rolled is either greater than 4 or even” is E ´ F.
E ´ F = 52, 4, 5, 66
Winning the Florida Lottery
EXAMPLE 4
2	
Use the Additive Rule for 
finding probabilities.

968	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Note that 6 is in both E and F, so it is counted once when n1E2 is counted and a second 
time when n1F2 is counted. However, 6 is counted only once when n1E ´ F2 is counted. 
We have n1E ´ F2 = n1E2 + n1F2 - n1E ¨ F2. That is, because 6 was counted twice 
in adding n1E2 + n1F2, we must subtract n1E ¨ F2 to get an accurate count for E ´ F.
 n1E ´ F2 = n1E2 + n1F2 - n1E ¨ F2
 n1E ´ F2
n1S2
= n1E2
n1S2 + n1F2
n1S2 - n1E ¨ F2
n1S2
    Divide both sides by n1S2.
 P1E ´ F2 = P1E2 + P1F2 - P1E ¨ F2    Definition of probability
This example illustrates the Additive Rule.
T h e  A d d i t i v e  R u l e
If E and F are events in a sample space, then
P1E ´ F2 = P1E2 + P1F2 - P1E ¨ F2.
Mutually Exclusive Events
Two events are mutually exclusive if it is impossible for both to occur simultaneously. That 
is, E and F are mutually exclusive events if E ¨ F contains no outcomes. In this case, 
P1E ¨ F2 = 0 and the Additive Rule is somewhat simplified.
3	
Find the probability of 
mutually exclusive events.
M u t u a l ly  E x c l u s i v e  E v e n t s
If E and F are any events in a sample space and E ¨ F = ∅, then
P1E ´ F2 = P1E2 + P1F2.
A standard deck of 52 playing cards uses four different designs called suits:
clubs, 3; diamonds, 2; hearts, 1; and spades, 0
Each suit has 13 cards: an ace, a king, a queen, and a jack, and cards numbered 2 through 
10. The diamond and heart symbols are red, and the club and spade symbols are black. 
For the purposes of this section, we assume that all decks of cards are standard and well 
shuffled, so that all cards drawn or dealt from a deck are equally likely.
A card is drawn from a deck. What is the probability that the card is
a.	 A king?
b.	 A spade?
c.	 A king or a spade?
d.	 A heart or a spade?
Solution
The sample space S is the 52-card deck; so n1S2 = 52.
a.	 There are four kings, one in each suit; so
P1king2 = 4
52 = 1
13.
Drawing a Card from a Deck
EXAMPLE 5

	
Section 11.7    ■    Probability 969
b.	 There are 13 spades in the deck; so
P1spade2 = 13
52 = 1
4.
c.	 By the Additive Rule, we have
P1king or spade2 = P1king2 + P1spade2 - P1king and spade2.
	
Because there is only one card that is both a king and a spade,
	
P1king and spade2 = 1
52. From parts a and b in this example,
 P1king or spade2 = 4
52 + 13
52 - 1
52
 = 16
52 = 4
13.
d.	 Because no card is both a heart and a spade, the events “Draw a heart” and “Draw a 
spade” are mutually exclusive. Thus,
 P1heart or spade2 = P1heart2 + P1spade2
 = 13
52 + 13
52 = 1
2.
Practice Problem 5  What is the probability that a card pulled from a deck is a jack  
or a king?
The Complement of an Event
The complement of an event E is the set of all outcomes in the sample space that are not in 
E. The complement of E is denoted by E′. Because every outcome in the sample space is in E 
or in E′, the event E ´ E′ is a certain event and P1E ´ E′2 = 1. Also, E and E′ are mutually 
exclusive events 1E ¨ E′ = f, and P1E ¨ E′2 = 02, so P1E ´ E′2 = P1E2 + P1E′2. 
Thus, P1E2 + P1E′2 = 1 and P1E′2 = 1 - P1E2. 
4	
Find the probability of the 
complement of an event.
P r o b a b i l i t y  O f  T h e  C o m p l e m e n t
If E is any event and E′ is its complement, then
P1E′2 = 1 - P1E2.
Brandy has applied to receive funding from her company to attend a conference. She 
knows that her name, along with the names of nine other deserving candidates, was put in 
a box from which two names will be drawn. What is the probability that Brandy will be 
one of the two selected?
Solution
It is easier to determine the probability that Brandy will not be selected. Because there are 
nine candidates other than Brandy, there are C19, 22 ways of selecting two employees not 
including Brandy. There are C110, 22 ways of selecting two employees from all ten candi-
dates. Hence, the probability that Brandy is not selected is
 P1Brandy is not selected2 = C19, 22
C110, 22
 =
9!
2! 7! # 2! 8!
10! = 8
10 = 4
5.
Finding the Probability of the Complement
EXAMPLE 6

970	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
The probability that Brandy is selected is
 P1Brandy is selected2 = 1 - P1Brandy is not selected2
 = 1 - 4
5 = 1
5.
Practice Problem 6  In Example 6, what is the probability of Brandy being selected  
if three names are drawn from the box?
Experimental Probabilities
The probabilities we have seen up to this point have been determined by some form of 
reasoning, not data. Data support the decision to assign the value 1
2 as the probability of a 
head resulting from one toss of a coin, but the assignment is not based on data. This is also 
true for the probabilities associated with drawing a card, rolling a pair of dice, drawing a 
ball from an urn, and so on. Probability assigned this way is called theoretical probability.
In contrast, we can assign probability values based on observation and data. If an  
experiment is performed n times (where n is large) and a particular outcome occurs k times, 
then the number k
n is the value for the probability of that outcome. Probability determined 
this way is called experimental probability. A statement such as “The probability that a 
10-year-old child will live to be 95 years old is 
3
100,000” refers to experimental probability.
5	
Find experimental 
probabilities.
R e l at i v e  F r e q u e n c y  P r i n c i p l e
If an experiment is performed n times and an event E occurs k times, then we say that 
the experimental (or statistical) probability of the event, P1E2, is
P1E2 = k
n.
Table 11.2 shows the gender distribution of students at four California city colleges.
Using Data to Estimate Probabilities
EXAMPLE 7
Find the probability that a student selected at random is:
a.	 A female.
b.	 Attending Los Angeles City College.
c.	 A female attending Los Angeles City College.
Round your answers to the nearest hundredth.
Table 11.2 
College
Male
Female
Los Angeles
  6,995
  8,179
San Diego
12,251
14,914
San Francisco
16,857
  2,000
Sacramento
  9,040
11,838
Source: www.areaconnect.com

	
Section 11.7    ■    Probability 971
Solution
The term randomly selected means that every possible selection is equally likely. In our 
example, this means that each student is equally likely to be selected. With random selec-
tion, the percentage of students in a given category gives the probability that a student in 
that category will be chosen.
a.	 The total number of students is 82,074. The total number of female students is 
	
36,931. Thus, P1female2 = 36,931
82,074 ≈0.45.
b.	 The total number of students is 82,074. The total number of students attending  
Los Angeles City College is 15,174. Hence,
	
P1attends Los Angeles City College2 = 15,174
82,074 ≈0.18.
c.	 There are 8179 female students attending Los Angeles City College. Consequently,
P1female and attending Los Angeles City College2 =
8179
82,074 ≈0.10.
Practice Problem 7  In Example 7, find the probability that a student selected  
at random is a male or attends Sacramento College.
Answers to Practice Problems
1. a. E1 = 51, 3, 56, P1E12 = 1
2  b. E2 = 55, 66, P1E22 = 1
3
2. 1
2  3. 1
6  4. 
1
15,890,700  5. 2
13  6. 3
10  7. 0.69
Exercises
section 11.7
Basic Concepts and Skills
	 1.	 If no outcome of an experiment results more often than any 
other outcome, the outcomes are said to be 
.
	 2.	 A certain event has probability 
, and an 
impossible event has probability 
.
	 3.	 If it is impossible for two events to occur simultaneously, 
then the events are said to be 
.
	 4.	 If the probability that an event occurs is 0.7, then the prob-
ability that the event does not occur is 
.
	 5.	 True or False. The probability of any event is a number 
between 0 and 1. 
	 6.	 True or False. If an experiment is performed 100 times and 
an event E occurs 65 times, then the experimental probability 
of the event is 0.65. 
In Exercises 7–12, write the sample space for each experiment.
	 7.	 Students are asked to rank Wendy’s, McDonald’s, and Burger 
King in order of preference. 
	 8.	 Students are asked to choose either a hamburger or a cheese-
burger and then pick Wendy’s, McDonalds, or Burger King as 
the restaurant from which they would prefer to order it. 
	 9.	 Two albums are selected from among Thriller (Michael 
Jackson), The Wall (Pink Floyd), Eagles: Their Greatest Hits 
(Eagles), and Led Zeppelin IV (Led Zeppelin). 
	10.	 Three types of potato chips are selected from among regular 
salted, regular unsalted, barbecue, cheddar cheese, and sour 
cream and onion. 
	11.	 Two blanks in a questionnaire are filled in, the first identify-
ing race as white, African American, Native American, Asian, 
other, or multiracial, and the second indicating gender as 
male or female 
	12.	 A six-sided die is chosen from a box containing a white, a 
red, and a green die. Then the die is tossed. 
In Exercises 13–16, find the probability of the given event if a 
year is selected at random.
	13.	 Thanksgiving falls on a Sunday. 
	14.	 Thanksgiving falls on a Thursday. 
	15.	 Christmas in the United States falls on December 25. 
	16.	 Christmas falls on January 1. 

972	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
In Exercises 17–26, classify each statement as an example of 
theoretical probability or experimental probability.
	17.	 The probability that Ken will go to church next Sunday  
is 0.85. 
	18.	 The probability of exactly two heads when a fair coin is 
	
	 tossed twice is 1
4. 
	19.	 The probability of drawing a heart from a deck of cards  
is 0.25. 
	20.	 The probability that an American adult will watch a major 
network’s evening newscast is 0.17. 
	21.	 The probability that a person driving during the Memorial 
Day weekend will die in an automobile accident is 
	
	
1
58,000. 
	22.	 The probability that a student will get a D or an F in a college 
statistics course is 0.21. 
	23.	 The probability of drawing an ace from a deck of cards is 
	
	 1
13. 
	24.	 The probability that a person will be struck by lightning this 
	
	 year is 
1
727,000. 
	25.	 The probability that a plane will take off on time from JFK 
International airport is 0.78. 
	26.	 The probability that a college student cheats on an exam  
is 0.32. 
	27.	 Match each given sentence with an appropriate probability. 
An event that
has probability
is very likely to happen
0
will surely happen
0.5
is a rare event
0.001
equally likely to happen or not
1
will never happen
0.999
	28.	 A coin is tossed three times. Rearrange the order of the  
following events from the most probable event (first) to  
the least probable event (last).
{exactly two heads}, {the sure event},  
{at least one head}, {at least two heads}. 
In Exercises 29–34, a die is rolled. Find the probability of 
each event.
	29.	 The number showing is a 1 or a 6. 
	30.	 The number 5 is showing. 
	31.	 The number showing is greater than 4. 
	32.	 The number showing is a multiple of 3.  
	33.	 The number showing is even. 
	34.	 The number showing is less than 1. 
In Exercises 35–40, a card is drawn randomly from a  
standard 52-card deck. Find the probability of each event.
	35.	 A queen is drawn.  
	36.	 An ace is drawn. 
	37.	 A heart is drawn.    
	38.	 An ace of hearts or a king of hearts is drawn.  
	39.	 A face card (jack, queen, or king) is drawn. 
	40.	 A heart that is not a face card is drawn. 
In Exercises 41–46, a digit is chosen randomly from the  
digits 0 through 9; then 3 is added to the digit and the  
sum recorded. Find the probability of each event.
	41.	 The sum is 11. 
	42.	 The sum is 0. 
	43.	 The sum is less than 4. 
	44.	 The sum is greater than 8. 
	45.	 The sum is even. 
	46.	 The sum is odd. 
Applying the Concepts
	47.	 A blind date. The probability that Tony will like his blind 
date is 0.3. What is the probability that he will not like his 
blind date? 
	48.	 Drawing cards. The probability of drawing a spade from 
a standard 52-card deck is 0.25. What is the probability of 
drawing a card that is not a spade? 
	49.	 Gender and the Air Force. In 2012, about 20% of mem-
bers of the U.S. Air Force were women. What is the probabil-
ity that an Air Force member chosen at random is a woman? 
(Source: www.af.mil/news) 
	50.	 Movie attendance. If 85% of people between the ages of 
18 and 24 go to a movie at least once a month, what is the 
probability that a randomly chosen person in this age group 
will go to a movie this month? 
	51.	 Gender and the Marines. In 2012, about 6% of members 
of the U.S. Marines were women. What is the probability that 
a Marine chosen at random is a man? (Source: DMDC-June 
2005, TFDW-June 2005) 
	52.	 Movie attendance. If 20% of people over 65 go to a 
movie at least once a month, what is the probability that a 
randomly chosen person over 65 will not go to a movie this 
month? 
	53.	 Raffles. One hundred twenty-five tickets were sold at a 
raffle. If you have ten tickets, what is the probability of your 
winning the (only) prize? If there are two prizes, what is the 
probability of your winning both?
	54.	 Committee selection. To select a committee with two 
members, two people will be selected at random from a 
group of four men and four women. What is the probability 
that a man and a woman will be selected? 
	55.	 Gender of children. A couple has two children. Assuming 
that each child is equally likely to be a boy or a girl, find the 
probability of having
a.	 Two boys.
b.	 Two girls.
c.	 One boy and one girl.
	56.	 Gender of children. A couple has three children. Assuming 
that each child is equally likely to be a boy or a girl, find the 
probability that the couple will have
a.	 All girls.
b.	 At least two girls.
c.	 At most two girls.
d.	 Exactly two girls.     
   
    

	
Section 11.7    ■    Probability 973
	57.	 Car ownership. The following table shows the number of 
cars owned by each of the 4440 families in a small town.
No. of families
37
1256
2370
526
131
120
No. of cars owned
0
1
2
3
4
5
	
	 A family is selected at random. Find the probability that this 
family owns
a.	 Exactly two cars.
b.	 At most two cars.
c.	 Exactly six cars.
d.	 At most six cars.
e.	 At least one car.
	58.	 Mammograms. According to the American Cancer Society, 
199 of 200 mammograms (for breast cancer screening) turn 
out to be normal. Find the probability that a mammogram of 
a woman chosen at random is not normal. 
	59.	 Lactose intolerance. Lactose intolerance (the inability  
to digest sugars found in dairy products) affects about  
20% of non-Hispanic white Americans and about 75% of 
African, Asian, and Native Americans. What is the prob-
ability that a non-Hispanic white American has no lactose 
intolerance? Answer the same question for a person in the 
second group.
	60.	 Guessing on an exam. A student has just taken a ten-
question true–false test. If he must guess to answer each of 
the ten questions, what is the probability that
a.	 He scores 100% on the test.
b.	 He scores 90% on the test.
c.	 He scores at least 90% on the test.
	61.	 Committee selection. A five-person committee is choos-
ing a subcommittee of two of its members. Each member of 
the committee is a different age. The subcommittee members 
are chosen at random.
a.	 What is the probability that the subcommittee will consist 
of the two oldest members?
b.	 What is the probability that the subcommittee will consist 
of the oldest and the youngest members?
	62.	 Children in U.S. In 2012, the total number of children ages 
0–17 in U.S. was 73.7 million. The age distribution (in millions) 
is given in the following table.
Age
Number of Children
0–5
24.1
6–11
24.5
12–17
25.1
Source: www.childstats.gov
	
	 If a child from this age group is chosen at random, what is the 
probability that he/she is at least 6 years old? 
	63.	 A test for depression. Suppose that 10% of the U.S. pop-
ulation suffers from depression. A pharmaceutical company is 
believed to have developed a test with the following results: 
The test works for 90% of the people who are tested and are 
actually depressed (as diagnosed through other acceptable 
methods). In other words, if a patient is actually depressed, 
there is a probability of 0.9 that this patient will be diag-
nosed as a depressed patient by the pharmaceutical company. 
The test also works for 85% of people who are tested and 
not depressed. Suppose the company tests 1000 people for 
depression. Complete the following table.
Number of 
people who are
Depressed according 
to the test
Normal according 
to the test
actually depressed
actually normal
	64.	 Playing marbles. Natasha and Deshawn are playing a 
game with marbles. Natasha has one marble (call it N), and 
Deshawn has two (call them M1 and M2). They roll their 
marbles toward a stake in the ground. The person whose 
marble is closest to the stake wins. Assume that measure-
ments are accurate enough to eliminate ties. List all of the 
sample points. Use the notation M1NM2 to denote the sample 
point when M1 is closest to the stake and M2 is farthest 
from the stake. If the children are equally skillful (when the 
sample points are all equally likely), find the probability that 
Deshawn wins. 
	65.	 Gender among siblings. If a family with four children is 
chosen at random, are the children more likely to be three of 
one gender and one of the other gender than two boys and 
two girls? (Assume that each child in a family is equally 
likely to be a boy or a girl.)
	66.	 Hospital treatments. Hospital records show that 11% of 
all patients admitted are admitted for surgical treatment, 15% 
are admitted for obstetrics, and 3% are admitted for both 
obstetrics and surgery. What is the probability that a new 
patient admitted is an obstetrics patient or a surgery patient or 
both? 
	67.	 Pain relief medicine. A pharmaceutical company testing a 
new over-the-counter pain relief medicine gave the new medi-
cine, their old medicine, and a placebo to different groups of 
patients. (A placebo is a sugar pill with no medicinal ingredi-
ents. However, it sometimes works, supposedly for psychologi-
cal reasons.) The following table shows the results of the tests.
Amount of Pain Relief
Medicine
Some
Complete
None
Placebo
12
4
34
Old
25
25
10
New
18
40
12
Total
55
69
56
	
	 Find the probability that a randomly chosen person from the 
group of 180 people receiving one of the three types of  
medicines
a.	 Received the placebo or had no pain relief.
b.	 Received the new medicine or had complete pain relief.           
       
   
     

974	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Beyond the Basics
	68.	 A famous problem called the birthday problem asks for the 
probability that at least two people in a group of people have 
the same birthday (the same day and the same month but not 
necessarily the same year). The best way to approach this 
problem is to consider the complementary event that no two 
people have the same birthday. Assume that all birthdays are 
equally likely.
a.	 Find the probability that in a group of two people, both 
have the same birthday.
b.	 Find the probability that in a group of three people, at least 
two have the same birthday.
c.	 Find the probability that in a group of 50 people, at least 
two have the same birthday.
	69.	 What is the probability that a number between 1 and 
1,000,000 contains the digit 3? [Hint: Consider the comple-
mentary event.]
	70.	 A business executive types four letters to her clients and 
then types four envelopes addressed to the clients. What is 
the probability that if the four letters are randomly placed in 
envelopes, they are placed in correct envelopes? 
	71.	 Juan gave his telephone number to Maggie. She remembers 
that the first three digits are 407 and the remaining four digits 
consist of two 3s, one 6, and one 8. She is not certain about 
the order of the digits, however. Maggie dials 407-3638. What 
is the probability that Maggie dialed the correct number? 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
	72.	 The March 2005 population survey by the U.S. Census 
Bureau found that among the 187 million people aged 25 
or older, 59,840,000 reported high school graduation as the 
highest level of education attained. Find the probability that a 
person chosen at random from the 187 million in the survey 
would report his or her highest level of education as high 
school graduation. 
	73.	 Find the probability of randomly choosing a dark caramel 
from a box that contains only light and dark caramels and has 
twice as many light as dark caramels. 
	74.	 If a single die is rolled two times, what is the probability that 
the second roll will result in a number larger than the first 
roll?    
   
  
11.1  Sequences and Series
i.	
An infinite sequence is a function whose domain is the set of 
positive integers. The function values a1, a2, a3, c, an, c 
are called the terms of the sequence. The term an is the  
nth term, or general term, of the sequence.
ii.	
Recursive formula
	
A sequence may be defined recursively, with the nth term of 
the sequence defined in relation to previous terms.
iii.	 Factorial notation
n! = n1n - 12 g3 # 2 # 1 and 0! = 1
iv.	
Summation notation
a
n
i=1
ai = a1 + a2 + a3 + g + an
v.	
Series
	
Given an infinite sequence a1, a2, a3, c, an, c, the sum 
	
a
n
i=1
ai = a1 + a2 + a3 + g is called a series and the 
	
sum a
n
i=1
ai is called the nth partial sum of the series.
11.2  Arithmetic Sequences; Partial Sums
i.	
A sequence is an arithmetic sequence if each term after 
the first differs from the preceding term by a constant. The 
constant difference d between the consecutive terms is called 
the common difference. We have d = an - an-1 for all 
n Ú 2.
ii.	
The nth term an of the arithmetic sequence a1, a2, a3, c, 
an, c is given by an = a1 + 1n - 12d, n Ú 1 where d is 
the common difference.
iii.	 The sum Sn of the first n terms of the arithmetic sequence 
a1, a2, c, an, c is given by the formula
 Sn = n aa1 + an
2
b = n a
2a1 + 1n - 12d
2
b.
11.3  Geometric Sequences and Series
i.	
A sequence is a geometric sequence if each term after the 
first is a constant multiple of the preceding term. The con-
stant ratio r between the consecutive terms is called the 
	
common ratio. We have an+1
an
= r, n Ú 1.
ii.	
The nth term an of the geometric sequence 
a1, a2,  c, an, c is given by an = a1rn-1, n Ú 1, where 
r is the common ratio.
iii.	 The sum Sn of the first n terms of the geometric sequence 
a1, a2,  c, an, c with common ratio r ≠1 is given by 
the formula
Sn =
a111 - rn2
1 - r
.
	
The sum S of an infinite geometric sequence is given by
S = a
∞
i=1
a1ri-1 =
a1
1 - r if r  6 1.
Summary  Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

	
 Review Exercises 975
iv.	
An annuity is a sequence of equal payments made at equal 
time intervals. Suppose $P is the payment made at the end of 
each of n compounding periods per year and i is the annual 
interest rate. Then the value A of the annuity after t years is
A = P
a1 + i
nb
nt
- 1
i
n
.
v.	
If r  6 1, the infinite geometric series a1 + a1r +  
	
a1r2 + g + a1rn-1 + g has the sum S =
a1
1 - r.
	
When r  Ú 1, the series does not have a finite sum.
11.4  Mathematical Induction
The statement Pn is true for all positive integers n if the following 
properties hold:
i.	
P1 is true.
ii.	
If Pk is a true statement, then Pk+1 is a true statement.
11.5  The Binomial Theorem
i.	
Binomial coefficient: an
j b =
n!
j!1n - j2!, 0 … j … n
an
0b = 1 = an
nb
ii.	
Binomial theorem:
 1x + y2n = an
0bxn + an
1bxn-1y + an
2bxn-2y2 + g
  + an
j bxn-jyj + g + an
nbyn
 = a
n
j=0
an
j bxn-jyj
iii.	 The term containing the factor xj in the expansion of 
1x + y2n is
a
n
n - jbxjyn-j.
11.6  Counting Principles
i.	
Fundamental Counting Principle: If a first choice can be 
made in p different ways, a second choice in q different ways, 
a third choice in r different ways, and so on, then the sequence 
of choices can be made in p # q # r c different ways.
ii.	
A permutation is an arrangement of n distinct objects in a 
fixed order in which no object is used more than once. The 
order in an arrangement is important.
iii.	 Permutation formula: The number of permutations of n 
distinct objects taken r at a time is
P1n, r2 = n1n - 121n - 22 c1n - r + 12 =
n!
1n - r2!.
iv.	
Combination formula: When r objects are chosen from  
n distinct objects without regard to order, we call the set of 
r objects a combination of n objects taken r at a time. The 
number of combinations of n distinct objects taken r at a 
time is denoted by C1n, r2, where
C1n, r2 =
n!
1n - r2!r!.
v.	
Distinguishable permutations: The number of permutations 
of n objects of which n1 are of one kind n2 are of a second 
kind, . . . , and nk are of a kth kind is
n!
n1!n2! c nk!,
	
where n1 + n2 + g + nk = n.
11.7  Probability
i.	
Experiment: Any process that terminates in one or more 
outcomes (results) is an experiment.
ii.	
Sample space: The set of all possible outcomes of an  
experiment is called the sample space of the experiment.
iii.	 Event: An event is any subset of a sample space.
iv.	
Equally likely events: Outcomes of an experiment are said 
to be equally likely if no outcome should result more often 
than any other outcome when the experiment is performed 
repeatedly.
v.	
Probability: If all of the outcomes in a sample space S are 
equally likely, the probability of an event E, denoted P1E2,  
is defined by
P1E2 =
n1E2
n1S2,
	
where n1E2 is the number of outcomes in E and  n1S2 is the 
total number of outcomes in S.
	
a.  The Additive Rule: If E and F are events in a sample 
space S, then
P1E or F2 = P1E ´ F2 = P1E2 + P1F2 - P1E ¨ F2.
	
b.  If E ¨ F = ∅, E and F are called mutually exclusive 
events. For mutually exclusive events E and F, 
P1E ´ F2 = P1E2 + P1F2.
	
c.  P1E′2 = P1not E2 = 1 - P1E2; the event E' is called 
the complement of the event E.
Review Exercises
In Exercises 1–4, write the first five terms of each sequence.
	 1.	 an = 2n - 3 
	 2.	 an =
n1n - 22
2
 
	 3.	 an =
n
2n + 1 
	 4.	 an = 1-22n-1 
In Exercises 5 and 6, write a general term an for each 
sequence.
	 5.	 30, 28, 26, 24, c 
	 6.	 -1, 2, -4, 8, c 

976	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
In Exercises 7–10, simplify each expression.
	 7.	 9!
8! 
	 8.	 10!
7!  
	 9.	
1n + 12!
n!
 
	10.	
n!
1n - 22! 
In Exercises 11–14, find each sum.
	11.	 a
4
k=1
k3 
	12.	 a
5
j=1
1
2j 
	13.	 a
7
k=1
k + 1
k
 
	14.	 a
5
k=1
1-12k3k+1 
In Exercises 15 and 16, write each sum in summation  
notation.
	15.	 1 + 1
2 + 1
3 + 1
4 + g + 1
50 
	16.	 2 - 4 + 8 - 16 + 32  	
In Exercises 17–20, determine whether each sequence is  
arithmetic. If a sequence is arithmetic, find the first term a1 
and the common difference d.
	17.	 11, 6, 1, -4, c
	18.	 2
3, 5
6, 1, 7
6, c
	19.	 an = n2 + 4
	20.	 an = 3n - 5 
In Exercises 21–24, find an expression for the nth term of 
each arithmetic sequence.
	21.	 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, c 
	22.	 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, c 
	23.	 x, x + 1, x + 2, x + 3, x + 4, c 
	24.	 3x, 5x, 7x, 9x, 11x, c 
In Exercises 25 and 26, find the common difference d and the 
nth term an for each arithmetic sequence.
	25.	 3rd term: 7; 8th term: 17  	
	26.	 5th term: -16; 20th term: -46	 
In Exercises 27 and 28, find each sum.
	27.	 7 + 9 + 11 + 13 + g + 37 
	28.	 1
4 + 1
2 + 3
4 + 1 + g + 15	 
In Exercises 29 and 30, find the sum of the first n terms of 
each arithmetic sequence.
	29.	 3, 8, 13, c; n = 40 
	30.	 -6, -5.5, -5, c; n = 60
In Exercises 31–34, determine whether each sequence is  
geometric. If a sequence is geometric, find the first term a1 
and the common ratio r.
	31.	 4, -8, 16, -32, c
	32.	 1
5, 1
10, 1
20, 1
40, c
	33.	 1
3, 1, 5
3, 9, c
	34.	 an = 2-n
In Exercises 35 and 36, for each geometric sequence, find the 
first term a1, the common ratio r, and the nth term an.
	35.	 16, -4, 1, - 1
4, c
	36.	 -5
6, - 1
3, - 2
15, - 4
75, c
In Exercises 37 and 38, find the indicated term of each  
geometric sequence.
	37.	 a10 when a1 = 2, r = 3
	38.	 a12 when a1 = -2, r = 3
2
In Exercises 39 and 40, find the sum Sn of the first n terms of 
each geometric sequence.
	39.	 1
10, 1
5, 2
5, 4
5, c; n = 12
	40.	 2, -1, 1
2, - 1
4, c; n = 10
In Exercises 41–44, find each sum.
	41.	 1
2 + 1
6 + 1
18 + 1
54 + g
	42.	 -5 - 2 - 4
5 - 8
25 -  c
	43.	 a
∞
i=1
a3
5b
i 
	44.	 a
∞
i=1
7 a- 1
4b
i 
In Exercises 45 and 46, use mathematical induction to prove 
that each statement is true for all natural numbers n.
	45.	 a
n
k=1
2k = 2n+1 - 2
	46.	 a
n
k=1
k1k + 12 =
n1n + 121n + 22
3
In Exercises 47 and 48, evaluate each binomial coefficient.
	47.	 a12
7 b 
	48.	 a11
0 b 
In Exercises 49 and 50, find each binomial expansion.
	49.	 1x - 324
	50.	 ax
2 + 2b
6
In Exercises 51 and 52, find the specified term.
	51.	 1x + 2212; term containing x5 
	52.	 1x + 2y212; term containing x7 
In Exercises 53–64, use any method to solve the problem.
	53.	 How many different numbers can be written with the digits  
1, 2, 3, and 4 if no digit may be repeated? 
	54.	 How many ways can horses finish in first, second, and third 
place in a ten-horse race? 
	55.	 How many ways can seven people line up at a ticket  
window? 
	56.	 In a building with seven entrances, how many ways can you 
enter the building and leave by a different entrance? 
	57.	 How many ways can five movies be listed on a display  
(vertically, one movie per line)? 
	58.	 How many different amounts of money can you make with  
a nickel, a dime, a quarter, and a half-dollar? 
	59.	 How many ways can three candies be taken from a box of  
ten candies? 
	60.	 How many ways can 2 face cards be drawn from a standard 
52-card deck? 
	61.	 How many ways can 2 shirts and 3 pairs of pants be chosen 
from 12 shirts and 8 pairs of pants? 
 
	
 						

	
Practice Test A 977
	62.	 How many doubles teams can be formed from eight tennis 
players? 
	63.	 In how many distinguishable ways can the letters of the word 
R E I T E R A T E be arranged? 
	64.	 A bookshelf has room for four books. How many different 
arrangements can be made on the shelf from six available 
books? 
In Exercises 65–74, find the probability requested.
	65.	 Four silver dollars, all with different dates, are randomly 
arranged on a horizontal display. What is the probability that the 
two with the most recent dates will be next to each other? 
	66.	 A jar contains five white, three black, and two green stones. 
What is the probability of drawing a black stone on a single 
draw? 
	67.	 The word R A N D O M has been spelled in a game of 
Scrabble. If two letters are chosen from this word at random, 
what is the probability that they are both consonants? 
	68.	 The names of all 30 party guests are placed in a box, and one 
name is drawn to award a door prize. If you and your date are 
among the guests, what is the probability that one of you will 
win the prize? 
	69.	 If two people are chosen at random from a group consisting 
of five men and three women, what is the probability that one 
man and one woman are chosen? 
	70.	 A company determines that 32% of the e-mail it receives is 
junk mail. What is the probability that a randomly chosen 
e-mail at this company is not junk mail? 
	71.	 If 2 cards are drawn from a standard 52-card deck, what is 
the probability that both are clubs? 
	72.	 A battery manufacturer inspects 500 batteries and finds that 
30 are defective. What is the probability that a randomly 
selected battery is not defective? 
	73.	 A ball is taken at random from a pool table containing balls 
numbered 1 through 9. What is the probability of obtaining 
(a) ball number 7? (b) an even-numbered ball? (c) an odd-
numbered ball? 
   
	74.	 A clothes dryer load contains two shirts, four pairs of socks, 
and three nightgowns. You pull one item randomly from the 
dryer.
a.	 What is the probability that it is a sock? 
b.	 What is the probability that it is a nightgown? 
Practice Test A
In Problems 1 and 2, write the first five terms of each 
sequence. State whether the sequence is arithmetic or  
geometric.
	 1.	 an = 315 - 4n2 
	 2.	 an = -312n2 
	 3.	 Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by 
a1 = -2   and an = 3an-1 + 5   for n Ú 2. 
	 4.	 Evaluate 
1n - 12!
n!
. 
	 5.	 Find a7 for the arithmetic sequence with a1 = -3 and 
d = 4 . 
	 6.	 Find a8 for the geometric sequence with a1 = 13 and 
	
	 r = - 1
2. 
In Problems 7–9, find each sum.
	 7.	 a
20
k=1
13k - 22 
	 8.	 a
5
k=1
a3
4b 12-k2 
	 9.	 a
∞
k=1
18a 1
100b
k
; write the answer as a fraction in lowest 
	
	 terms. 
	10.	 Evaluate a13
 0 b 
	11.	 Expand 11 - 2x24.
	12.	 Find the term containing x1 in the expansion of 
12x + 124. 
	13.	 In how many ways can you answer every question on a  
true–false test containing ten questions? 
In Problems 14 and 15, evaluate each expression.
	14.	 P(9, 2) 
	15.	 C(7, 5) 
	16.	 A firm needs to fill two positions—one in accounting and one 
in human resources. How many ways can these positions be 
filled if there are six applicants for the accounting position 
and ten applicants for the human resources position? 
	17.	 A state is considering using license plates consisting of two 
letters followed by a four-digit number. How many distinct 
license plate numbers can be formed? 
	18.	 A box contains five red balls and seven black balls. What is 
the probability that a ball drawn at random will be red? 
	19.	 What is the probability that a 4 does not come up on one roll 
of a die? 
	20.	 A box contains seven quarters, six dimes, and five nickels. If 
two coins are drawn at random, what is the probability that 
both are quarters?  

978	 Chapter 11      Further Topics in Algebra
Practice Test B
In Problems 1 and 2, write the first five terms of each sequence. 
State whether the sequence is arithmetic or geometric.
	 1.	 an = 412n - 32 
a.	 -1, 1, 3, 5, 7; arithmetic
b.	 -1, 1, 3, 5, 7; geometric
c.	 -4, 4, 12, 20, 28; arithmetic
d.	 -4, 4, 12, 20, 28; geometric
	 2.	 an = 214n2  
a.	 2, 8; 32, 128, 512; arithmetic
b.	 2, 8, 32, 128, 512; geometric
c.	 8, 32, 128, 512, 2048; arithmetic
d.	 8, 32, 128, 512, 2048; geometric
	 3.	 Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by a1 = 5 
and an = 2an-1 + 4, for  n Ú 2. 
a.	 5, 14, 32, 68, 140
b.	 5, 14, 19, 24, 29
c.	 5, 9, 13, 17, 21
d.	 5, 8, 10, 12, 14
	 4.	 Evaluate 
1n + 22!
n + 2 . 
a.	 2! 
b.	 1
c.	 1n + 12! 
d.	 n + 1
	 5.	 Find a8 for the arithmetic sequence with a1 = -6 and d = 3.
a.	 15
b.	 -271
c.	 30
d.	 18
	 6.	 Find a10 for the geometric sequence with a1 = 247 and 
	
	 r = 1
3. 
a.	 250
b.	
247
19,683
c.	
247
59,049
d.	
247
177,147
In Problems 7 and 8, find each sum.
	 7.	 a
45
k=1
14k - 72 
a.	 4185
b.	 3735
c.	 4027.5
d.	 3825
	 8.	 a
5
k=1
a4
3b 12k2 
a.	 248
3
b.	 251
3
c.	 242
3
d.	 287
3
	 9.	 Evaluate a
∞
k=1
81-0.32k-1 . 
a.	 6
b.	 80
13
c.	 - 80
13
d.	 - 83
20
	10.	 Evaluate a12
11b. 
a.	 1.09
b.	 12
c.	 1
d.	 11!
	11.	 Expand 13x - 124. 
a.	 81x4 - 108x3 + 54x2 - 12x + 1
b.	 -81x4 - 108x3 - 54x2 + 12x - 1
c.	 -81x4 + 108x3 + 54x2 + 12x + 1
d.	 81x4 - 108x2 + 54x - 12
	12.	 Find the coefficient of x in the expansion of 12x + 323. 
a.	 108
b.	 9
c.	 36
d.	 54
	13.	 Karen has four necklaces, ten pairs of earrings, and three 
bracelets. How many ways can she choose a necklace, a pair 
of earrings, and a bracelet? 
a.	 40
b.	 17
c.	 120
d.	 240
In Problems 14 and 15, evaluate each expression.
	14.	 P17, 32 
a.	 210
b.	 840
c.	 1680
d.	 5040
	15.	 C110, 72 
a.	 3
b.	 720
c.	 620,400
d.	 120
	16.	 How many two-digit numbers can be formed from the digits 
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9? No digit can be used more than 
once. 
a.	 45
b.	 81
c.	 3,628,880
d.	 100
	17.	 You have selected eight CDs for your dad, but have only 
enough money to buy five of them. In how many ways can 
you select the five if you decide that a particular CD is a 
“must buy”? 
a.	 56
b.	 70
c.	 1680
d.	 35
	18.	 What is the probability of rolling a 5 on one roll of a die? 
a.	 1
5
b.	 4
c.	 1
6
d.	 0.05
	19.	 What is the probability of getting a sum greater than 9 when 
a pair of dice is rolled? 
a.	 1
6
b.	 1
4
c.	 1
12
d.	 1
18
	20.	 What is the probability that a card drawn at random from a 
standard 52-card deck is not a spade? 
a.	 2
5
b.	 1
4
c.	 4
13
d.	 3
4 

	
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–11 979
Cumulative Review Exercises Chapters P–11
In Problems 1–9, solve each equation or inequality.
	 1.	 3x - 8 = x   
	 2.	   x21x2 - 52 = -4
	 3.	 log213x - 52 + log2 x = 1 
	 4.	 e2x - ex - 2 = 0 
	 5.	
6
x + 2 = 4
x 
	 6.	 21x - 82-1 = 1x - 22-1
	 7.	 1x - 3 = 1x - 1 
	 8.	 x2 + 4x Ú 0
	 9.	 18 … x2 + 6x 
In Problems 10–11, solve each system.
	10.	 e5x + 4y =
6
4x - 3y = 11 
	11.	 •
x - 3y +
6z = -8
5x - 6y -
2z =
7
3x - 2y - 10z = 11 
	12.	 Graph the function y = cos 2
3
 x over one period. 
	13.	 Use identities to find the exact value of sin a-7p
12 b.
	14.	 Write the complex number 2 + 213i in polar form.
	15.	 Use transformations to sketch the graph of f1x2 = 1x - 3. 
	16.	 Find the domain of f1x2 =
x + 3
x1x + 12.
	17.	 Write 7 ln x - ln1x - 52 in condensed form.
	18.	 If A = £
1
0
-2
4
1
0
1
1
7
§ , find A-1. 
	19.	 Four students are pairing up to ride two tandem bicycles, 
each of which accommodates two riders, one in back and 
one in front. How many ways can this be done if we count 
arrangements as different if either the front or back rider is 
different? 
	20.	 A room has 6 people who are 25 years or older and12 people 
whose age is between 17 and 24. Half the members of each 
group have gotten speeding tickets at some time. What is the 
probability that a person chosen at random from the room 
will be a person who is 25 years or older or has gotten a 
speeding ticket at some time?    
   		

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter P
Section P.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  710
333  2.  a.  true  b.  true   c.  false
3.  A ¨ B = 506, A ´ B = 5-4, -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 46 
4.  a.  1- ∞, ∞2  b.  32, 52  5.  a.  10  b.  1  c.  1
6.  9  7.  a.  5  b.  1  c.  -33  d.  1  8.  a.  17
8   b.  34
15  c.  3
2  d.  2
3
9.  a.  10
3   b.  22
3   10.  17°C
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  zero  2.  rational number; real number  3.  left  4.  irrational 
5.  true  6.  false  7.  0.3 repeating  8.  0.6 repeating 
9.  -0.8 terminating  10.  -0.25 terminating  11.  0.27 repeating 
12.  0.3 repeating  13.  3.16 repeating  14.  2.73 repeating  15.  15
4
16.  - 47
20  17.  - 16
3   18.  29
3   19.  211
99   20.  320
99   21.  2239
495
22.  14,093
9900   23.  Rational  24.  Rational  25.  Rational
26.  Rational  27.  Rational  28.  Rational  29.  Irrational
30.  Irrational  31.  3 7 -2  32.  -3 6 -2  33.  1
2 Ú 1
2
34.  x 6 x + 1  35.  5 … 2x  36.  x - 1 7 2  37.  -x 7 0
38.  x 6 0  39.  2x + 7 … 14  40.  2x + 3 … 5  41.  =
42.  6   43.  6  44.  =   45.  5-4, -3, -2, 1, 2, 3, 46
46.  50, 2, 46  47.  5-4, -2, 0, 26  48.  5-4, 3, 2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 46
49.  5-4, -3, -2, 0, 2, 46  50.  5-3, 0, 2, 46
51.  5-4, -3, -2, 0, 26  52.  5-4, -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 46
53.  1-2, 52, 31, 32  54.  31, 74, 13, 52  55.  1-6, 102, ∅
56.  1- ∞, ∞2, ∅  57.  1- ∞, ∞2, 32, 52  58.  1-2, ∞2, 10, ∞2 
59.  1- ∞, ∞2, 3-1, 32 ´ 35, 74  60.  1- ∞, 24 ´ 16, ∞2, 3-3, 04
61.  4  62.  -17  63.  5
7  64.  3
5  65.  5 - 12  66.  5 - 12
67.  2 - 23  68.  p - 3  69.  1  70.  -1  71.  2  72.  3
73.  0 3 - 80 = 5  74.  0 2 - 140 = 12  75.  0 -6 - 90 = 15
76.  0 -12 - 30 = 15  77.  0 -20 - 1-620 = 14
78.  0 -14 - 1-120 = 13  79.  ` 22
7 - a - 4
7 b ` = 26
7
80.  ` 16
5 - a - 3
5 b ` = 19
5
81.  -3 6 x … 1 
3
1
82.  -6 … x 6 -2 
2
6
83.  x Ú -3   
3
84.  x Ú 0   
0
85.  x … 5   
5
86.  x … -1 
1
87.  - 3
4 6 x 6 9
4   
9
4
3
4

 
88.  -3 6 x 6 - 1
2   
3
1
2

89.  4x + 4  90.  -6 + 3x  91.  5x - 5y + 5  92.  6x + 10 - 2y
93.  -5; 1
5  94.  2
3; - 3
2  95.  0; No reciprocal  96.  -1.7; 10
17 
97.  Additive inverse  98.  Additive inverse  99.   Multiplicative identity 
100.  Multiplicative identity  101.  Multiplicative associative
102.  Multiplicative associative  103.  Multiplicative inverse 
104.  Multiplicative inverse  105.  Additive identity 
106.  Additive identity   107.  Additive associative 
108.  Additive, commutative, and associative  109.  29
15  110.  29
20 
111.  67
35  112.  59
12  113.  17
15  114.  34
45  115.  - 11
40  116.  27
40 
117.  - 8
99  118.  1
24  119.  - 1
10  120.  1
12  121.  2
9  122.  2
3  123.  3
2 
124.  1
3  125.  2
3  126.  9
14  127.  1  128.  11
2   129.  1
15  130.  11
6  
131.  11  132.  -21  133.  -1  134.  56  135.  -6  136.  43
3  
137.  -13  138.  - 77
5   139.  62
15  140.  - 104
75   141. 
3x + xy
3y
 
142.  1x + 221x + 32 = x2 + 5x + 6  143.  51x + 32 = 5x + 15 
144.  125x214x2 = 100x2  145.  x - 13y + 22 = x - 3y - 2 
146.  2x - 14y - 52 = 2x - 4y + 5  147. 
x + y
x
= 1 +
y
x 
148. 
x + y
x + z =
x
x + z +
y
x + z  149.  1x + 121y + 12 = xy + x + y + 1
150. 
1
x
1
y
=
y
x
Applying the Concepts:
153.  a.  People who own either an MP3 or DVD player
b.  People who own both an MP3 and DVD player
154.  a.  A = 52011 Lexus LS 4606
b.  B = 52011 Lexus LS 460, 2011 Lincoln Town Car6
c.  C = 52011 Lexus LS 460, 2011 Lincoln Town Car, Audi A46
d.  A ¨ B = 52011 Lexus LS 4606
e.  B ¨ C = 52011 Lexus LS 460, 2011 Lincoln Town Car6
f.  A ´ B = 52011 Lexus LS 460, 2011 Lincoln Town Car6
g.  A ´ C = 52011 Lexus LS 460, 2011 Lincoln Town Car, 
2011 Audi A46
155.  119.5 … x … 134.5
134.5
119.5
...
156.  30 … x … 107
107
30
...
157.  a.  0 124 - 1200 = 4  b.  0 137 - 1200 = 17
c.  0 114 - 1200 = 6  158.  a.  0 15 - 140 = 1  b.  0 15 - 17.50 = 2.5
c.  0 15 - 90 = 6  159.  950 g  160.  Two orders
Answers
  
A-1

A-2  Answers   ■   Section P.4
14.  Yes  15.  Degree: 1; terms: 7x, 3  16.  Degree: 2; terms: -3x2, 7
17.  Degree: 4; terms: -x4, x2, 2x, -9  18.  Degree: 7; terms: 
2x3, 9x7, x, -21  19.  2x2 - 3x - 1  20.  2x3 - x2 - 2x - 2 
21.  x3 - x2 + 5x - 8  22.  -2x3 - 3x2 + 9x - 6 
23.  -10x4 - 6x3 + 12x2 - 7x + 17  24.  13x2 - 8x + 14 
25.  -24x2 - 14x - 14  26.  -2x2 - 30x + 2  27.  2y3 + y2 - 2y - 1 
28.  6y2 + 6y + 1  29.  12x2 + 18x  30.  21x2 - 28x 
31.  x3 + 3x2 + 4x + 2  32.  2x3 - 13x2 + 16x - 5 
33.  3x3 - 5x2 + 5x - 2  34.  2x3 - 5x2 + 5x + 4  35.  x2 + 3x + 2 
36.  x2 + 5x + 6  37.  9x2 + 9x + 2  38.  2x2 + 11x + 15 
39.  -4x2 - 7x + 15  40.  -2x2 + 11x - 5  41.  6x2 - 7x + 2 
42.  5x2 - 8x + 3  43.  4x2 + 4ax - 15a2  44.  5x2 + 23ax - 10a2 
45.  4x + 4  46.  -6x + 9  47.  9x2 + 27x + 27  48.  -6x2 + 12x - 8 
49.  16x2 + 8x + 1  50.  9x2 + 12x + 4  51.  27x3 + 27x2 + 9x + 1 
52.  8x3 + 36x2 + 54x + 27  53.  -4x2 + 25  54.  -16x2 + 9 
55.  x2 + 3
2x + 9
16  56.  x2 + 4
5x + 4
25  57.  2x3 - 9x2 + 19x - 15
58.  x3 - 6x2 + 5x + 6  59.  y3 + 1  60.  y3 + 64  61.  x3 - 216
62.  x3 - 1  63.  3x2 + 11xy + 10y2  64.  14x2 + 11xy + 2y2
65.  6x2 + 11xy - 7y2  66.  2x2 - xy - 15y2  67.  x4 - 2x2y2 + y4
68.  16x4 - 8x2y2 + y4  69.  x3 - 3x2y + 4y3  70.  x3 + 3x2y - 4y3
71.  x4 - 4x3y + 16xy3 - 16y4  72.  16x4 + 16x3y - 4xy3 - y4
73.  10  74.  13  75.  a.  7  b.  47  76.  a.  6  b.  34  77.  72  78.  58
Applying the Concepts:
79.  In 2012, it was $6.02.  80.  In 2012, it was $6.33 billion.
81.  $250  82.  $100  83.  500 ft  84.  84 ft  85.  a.  -x + 22.50
b.  -10x2 + 195x + 675  86.  a.  10n + 250  b.  -20n2 + 12,500
Section P.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  2x313x2 + 72  b.  7x21x3 + 3x2 + 52
2.  a.  1x + 421x + 22  b.  1x - 521x + 22
3.  a.  1x + 222  b.  13x - 122  4.  a.  1x + 421x - 42
b.  12x - 5212x + 52  5.  1x2 + 921x - 321x + 32
6.  a.  1x - 521x2 + 5x + 252  b.  13x + 2219x2 - 6x + 42
7.  $16.224 million  8.  a.  1x + 321x2 + 12
b.  17x - 5212x + 1212x - 12  c.  1x + y + 121x - y - 12
9.  1x2 + x + 321x2 - x + 32  10.  a.  15x + 121x + 22
b.  14x - 321x + 12
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  factors  2.  greatest common monomial  3.  10x2  4.  irreducible
5.  true  6.  true  7.  81x - 32  8.  51x + 52  9.  -6x1x - 22
10.  -31x2 - 72  11.  7x211 + 2x2  12.  9x311 - 2x2
13.  x21x2 + 2x + 12  14.  x21x2 - 5x + 72  15.  x213x - 12
16.  2x21x + 12  17.  4ax212x + 12  18.  ax1x3 - 2x + 12
19.  1x + 321x2 + 12  20.  1x + 521x2 + 12  21.  1x - 521x2 + 12
22.  1x - 721x2 + 12  23.  13x + 2212x2 + 12  24.  1x + 2213x2 + 12
25.  x213x2 + 1214x3 + 12  26.  x21x2 + 1213x3 + 12
27.  1x + 321x + 42  28.  1x + 321x + 52  29.  1x - 221x - 42
30.  1x - 221x - 72  31.  1x + 121x - 42  32.  1x + 121x - 62
33.  Irreducible  34.  Irreducible  35.  12x + 921x - 42
36.  12x + 921x - 32  37.  12x + 3213x + 42  38.  12x - 3214x + 12
39.  13x + 121x - 42  40.  1x + 1215x + 22  41.  Irreducible
42.  Irreducible  43.  1x + 322  44.  1x + 422  45.  13x + 122
46.  16x + 122  47.  15x - 222  48.  18x + 222  49.  17x + 322
50.  13x + 422  51.  1x - 821x + 82  52.  1x - 1121x + 112
53.  12x - 1212x + 12  54.  13x - 1213x + 12  55.  14x - 3214x + 32
56.  15x - 7215x + 72  57.  1x - 121x + 121x2 + 12
58.  1x - 321x + 321x2 + 92  59.  512x2 - 1212x2 + 12
60.  312x2 - 5212x2 + 52  61.  1x + 421x2 - 4x + 162 
62.  1x + 521x2 - 5x + 252  63.  1x - 321x2 + 3x + 92 
64.  1x - 621x2 + 6x + 362  65.  12 - x214 + 2x + x22 
66.  13 - x219 + 3x + x22  67.  12x - 3214x2 + 6x + 92 
68.  12x - 5214x2 + 10x + 252  69.  512x + 1214x2 - 2x + 12 
70.  71x + 221x2 - 2x + 42  71.  1x2 + 3x + 521x2 - 3x - 52 
Section P.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  8  b.  9a2  c.  1
16  2.  a.  1
2  b.  1  c.  4
9  3.  a.  3x9  b.  16
4.  a.  81  b.  125  c.  2x7
3   5.  a.  1  b.  1  c.  1
x8  d.  x10
6.  a.  2
x  b.  25
x2  c.  x3y6  d.  x6
y3  7.  a.  1
9  b.  49
100
8.  a.  1
4x8  b.  - 1
xy3  9.  7.32 * 105  10.  $89 per person
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  exponent  2.  3  3.  16  4.  53a3  5.  false  6.  false
7.  Exponent: 3; base: 17  8.  Exponent: 2; base: 10
9.  Exponent: 0; base: 9  10.  Exponent: 0; base: -2
11.  Exponent: 5; base: -5  12.  Exponent: 2; base: -99
13.  Exponent: 3; base: 10  14.  Exponent: 7; base: -3
15.  Exponent: 2; base: a  16.  Exponent: 3; base: -b  17.  6  18.  81
19.  1  20.  1  21.  64  22.  729  23.  1
81  24.  1
49  25. 
1
15,625
26. 
1
125  27.  16  28.  7  29.  2  30.  0  31.  2
9  32.  2
25  33.  - 1
8
34.  - 1
9  35.  1
9  36.  - 1
8  37.  2  38.  1
9  39.  1  40.  81  41.  6
42.  100  43.  - 2
25  44.  - 3
49  45.  49
121  46.  25
169  47.  x4
48.  1
x  49. 
y
x  50.  x2
y2  51.  1
xy2  52. 
1
x3y2  53.  1
x12  54.  1
x10
55.  x33  56.  x48  57.  -3x5y5  58.  -8x6y6  59.  4x2
y2   60. 
6y3
x3
61.  3x5
y5   62.  -
5y6
x6   63.  1
x4  64.  1
x10  65. 
8y3
x3   66. 
625y4
x8
67.  -243x5y5  68.  -8x3y3  69.  25
9x2  70. 
81
625y4  71. 
64
x9y15
72.  243x10
y10
  73.  x5
y4  74.  x3
y4  75.  3x
y2  76. 
5y
x2  77.  1
x  78.  1
b16
79.  -
1
16x5y2  80. 
y12
x2   81. 
16
x15 y10 z5  82.  4z3
x3   83.  5b4
a6
84.  - 9a3
8bc2  85.  x3z15
y3   86. 
y3
x6z7  87.  1.25 * 102  88.  2.47 * 102
89.  8.5 * 105  90.  2.05 * 105  91.  7 * 10-3  92.  1.9 * 10-3
93.  2.75 * 10-6  94.  3.8 * 10-6
Applying the Concepts:
95.  1080 ft3  96.  25 in3  97.  a.  12x212x2 = 4x2 = 22A
b.  13x213x2 = 9x2 = 32A  98.  a.  pa2d
2 b
2
= 4pad
2 b
2
= 22A
b.  pa3d
2 b
2
= 9pad
2 b
2
= 32A  99.  F = 1562.5  100.  F = 17,662.5
101.  1.27 * 104 1km2; 3480; 1.39 * 106 1km2; 134,000; 
4.8 * 103 1km2  102.  3.76 * 1022 atoms  103.  6.02 * 1020 atoms
104.  2.66 * 10-20 kg  105.  1.67 * 10-21 kg  106.  3.8 * 108 m
107.  5.98 * 1024 kg
Section P.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  889 ft  2.  5x3 + 5x2 + 2x - 4  3.  5x4 - 5x3 - x2 - x + 12
4.  -8x5 - 4x4 + 10x3  5.  -10x4 + x3 - 33x2 - 14x
6.  a.  4x2 + 27x - 7  b.  6x2 - 19x + 10  7.  9x2 + 12x + 4
8.  1 - 4x2  9.  x2y + x3
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  -3; 7  2.  standard  3.  4  4.  7  5.  true  6.  true 
7.  Yes; x2 + 2x + 1  8.  No  9.  No
10.  Yes; x7 + 3x5 + 3x4 - 2x + 1  11.  No  12.  No  13.  Yes

Section P.6    ■    Answers  A-3
57.  - x3 + 2x2 + 4x - 8
x1x - 221x + 22   58.  2x3 + 6x2 - x - 1
x1x - 121x + 12   59.  121x - 22
60.  2111 + 3x2  61.  12x - 1212x + 122  62.  13x + 1213x - 122
63.  1x - 121x + 121x + 22  64.  1x - 321x + 321x + 22
65.  1x - 121x - 421x + 22  66.  1x - 321x + 121x + 22
67. 
7x + 15
1x - 321x + 32  68. 
x13x + 42
1x - 121x + 12  69. 
x14 - x2
1x - 221x + 22
70.  - 2x2 + 6x + 5
1x - 421x + 42  71. 
2x + 3
1x - 221x + 52  72. 
2x2 + x + 5
1x - 221x + 122
73. 
219x2 - 5x + 12
13x + 1213x - 122  74. 
214x2 + 3x + 12
12x - 1212x + 122
75. 
91x - 32
1x + 421x + 521x - 52  76.  -
7
1x + 421x - 32
77. 
2x - 3
12 + x212 - x2  78. 
51x + 82
15 - x215 + x2  79. 
16a2
1x - 5a21x - 3a2
80. 
5x2
12x - a213x + a2  81.  -
h
x1x + h2  82.  -
h12x + h2
x21x + h22  83.  2x
3
84.  -3x2  85. 
1
x - 1  86. 
1
11 - x211 + x2  87.  1 - x
1 + x
88. 
21x - 12
x + 2
  89.  -x  90.  -x  91. 
x12x - 12
2x + 1   92. 
x12x + 32
2x + 1
93.  -
1
x1x + h2  94.  -
2x + h
x21x + h22  95.  x
a, x ≠-a  96. 
2x
x2 + a2
Applying the Concepts
97.  10 cm  98.  1 ft  99.  a. 
3
100 + x  b.  2% 
100.  a. 
1500
200,000 + x  b.  0.5%  101.  a.  $ 0.1px3 + 2.4
x
  b.  $2.46 
102.  a.   $ 0.4x3 + 3.6
x
  b.  $3.30
Section P.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  12  b.  1
7  c.  1
4  2.  a.  215  b.  413  c.  20 x0 13
d. 
2y15y
3130 x0   3.  « 67 mph  4.  a.  -2  b.  2  c.  3 
d.  Not a real number  5.  a.  22
3 9  b.  22
4 3a2  c.  a2  6.  a.  1313 
b.  0  7.  2
10 972  8.  a.  722
4
  b.  2
3 6
2
  9.  a.  27 + 25 
b.  2x - 22  10.  a.  1
2  b.  5  c.  -2  11.  a.  52
3 5  b.  -216 
c. 
1
1024  d.  Not a real number  12.  a.  12x7>10  b. 
5
x7>12  c. 
1
x2>15
13.  a.  2
3 x2  b.  5   c.  x2  14. 
12x + 321x + 321>2
x + 3
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  two  2.  numerator; denominator; 25.  3.  like radicals  4.  2
3 7
5.  false  6.  true  7.  8  8.  10  9.  4  10.  5  11.  -3  12.  -6
13.  - 1
2  14.  3
4  15.  3  16.  -6  17.  Not a real number
18.  Not a real number  19.  1  20.  -1  21.  -7  22.  4  23.  412
24.  515  25.  3x12  26.  3x13  27.  3x1x  28.  2x12x
29.  3x12  30.  5x12  31.  3x15x  32.  6x1x  33.  -2x
34.  4x  35.  -x2  36.  -3x2  37.  110
8
  38.  16
10   39.  2
x
40.  2
3 7
2x   41.  2
4 2x3
x2
  42.  - 2
4 5x3
2x2   43.  x2  44.  2x2
5y3  45.  3x3
y2
46.  x3y  47.  713  48.  612  49.  915  50.  617  51.  312x
52.  515x  53.  - 2
3 3  54.  52
3 2  55.  22
3 3x  56.  102
3 2x
57.  12x1x2 + 3x - 202  58.  12x110x2 + 7x - 182
59.  12x - y2223xy  60.  12xy12x + 4y - 3x22  61.  213
3
72.  1x2 + x + 121x2 - x + 12  73.  1x2 + x + 821x2 - x + 82 
74.  1x2 + x - 321x2 - x - 32  75.  1x2 + 3x + 421x2 - 3x + 42 
76.  1x2 + 2x - 621x2 - 2x - 62  77.  1x2 + 2x + 221x2 - 2x + 22 
78.  1x2 + 4x + 821x2 - 4x + 82  79.  11 - 4x211 + 4x2 
80.  12 - 5x212 + 5x2  81.  1x - 322  82.  1x - 422  83.  12x + 122 
84.  14x + 122  85.  21x + 121x - 52  86.  51x + 221x - 42 
87.  12x - 521x + 42  88.  12x + 521x - 62  89.  Irreducible 
90.  Irreducible  91.  3x31x + 222  92.  2x31x + 422 
93.  13x + 1213x - 12  94.  14x + 5214x - 52  95.  14x + 322 
96.  12x + 522  97.  Irreducible  98.  Irreducible
99.  x15x + 2219x - 22  100.  x15x - 1215x + 92
101.  a1x + a21x - 8a2  102.  a1x + 2a21x - 12a2
103.  1x + 4 + 4a21x + 4 - 4a2  104.  1x + 3 + 6a21x + 3 - 6a2
105.  3x31x + 2y22  106.  4x31x + 3y22
107.  1x + 2 + 5a21x + 2 - 5a2  108.  1x + 2 + 4a21x + 2 - 4a2
109.  2x413x + y22  110.  3x412x + y22
Applying the Concepts:
111.  x18 - x2  112.  x121 - x2  113.  4x118 - x218 - x2
114.  4112 - x2112 + x2  115.  p12 - x212 + x2
116.  8p1x - 321x + 32  117.  2x11400 - x2
118.  1
4 x196 - px2
Section P.5
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  0.32  2.  a.  2x
3   b.  x - 2
x + 2  3. 
x1x - 32
14
  4.  a. 
7
x - 6
b. 
1
x + 4  5.  a. 
x15x - 42
1x + 221x - 52  b. 
x13x + 232
1x + 321x - 42
6.  a.  3x21x + 2221x - 222  b.  1x - 521x + 521x - 12
7.  a. 
x2 + 2x + 8
1x + 221x - 222  b.  45 - 7x
31x - 522  8. 
1
x - 5  9. 
25x
15x - 12
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  each denominator  2.  factor  3.  x1x - 221x + 12
4.  complex rational expression  5.  false  6.  true
7. 
2
x + 1, x ≠-1  8. 
3
x - 2, x ≠2  9. 
3
x - 1, x ≠-1, x ≠1
10. 
5
2 + x, x ≠-2, x ≠2  11.  -
2
x + 3, x ≠-3, x ≠3
12. 
3
x - 5, x ≠-5, x ≠5  13.  -1, x ≠1
2  14.  -1, x ≠2
5
15.  x - 3
4
, x ≠3  16.  x - 5
3
, x ≠5  17. 
7x
x + 1, x ≠-1
18. 
4x
x + 3, x ≠-3  19.  x - 10
x + 7 , x ≠-7, x ≠1 
20.  x + 5
x - 4, x ≠3, x ≠4  21.  x + 2
x - 2, x ≠- 1
3, x ≠0, x ≠2 
22. 
1
x - 4, x ≠- 1
3, x ≠0, x ≠4  23.  1  24.  1
3  25. 
x + 3
21x - 32 
26. 
15x + 321x + 22
4
  27.  x - 1
x
  28.  5  29.  x - 1
x + 3 
30. 
1x - 221x + 42
1x + 521x + 12  31.  -1  32.  -1  33.  3
8  34.  9
80 
35. 
5x1x - 32
2
  36. 
1x + 122
21
  37. 
31x + 32
x + 4
  38.  x + 4
x + 1 
39. 
x - 3
x2 - 2x + 4
  40.  x - 1
x - 4  41.  x + 3
5
  42.  7 - x
4
  43.  x + 4
2x + 1 
44. 
3x
7x - 3  45. 
1
x + 1  46.  x + 9
3x + 2  47. 
21x - 22
x - 3
  48.  - x - 4
x - 1 
49. 
7x
x2 + 1
  50. 
2x
1x - 122  51. 
4x
x - 3  52. 
3x
1x + 522  53. 
1
x + 2 
54. 
5
x + 1  55. 
211 - 3x2
12x - 1212x + 12  56. 
1 - 8x
14x - 1214x + 12

A-4  Answers   ■   Section 1.1
75.  9x4 + 11x3 - 12x2 + 14  76.  15x4 + 7x3 + 11x2 + 2 
77.  x2 - 15x + 36  78.  x2 - 14x + 49  79.  x10 - 4  80.  16x2 - 9 
81.  6x2 - 7x - 55  82.  3x3 - 24  83.  1x - 521x + 22 
84.  1x + 121x + 92  85.  16x - 11214x + 12  86.  315x + 621x + 12 
87.  1x + 521x + 112  88.  1x - 121x2 + 22  89.  1x - 121x3 + 72 
90.  13x + 422  91.  15x + 4212x + 32  92.  14x + 3212x + 32 
93.  14x - 3213x + 42  94.  x21x - 221x + 22  95.  12x - 7212x + 72 
96.  14x - 9214x + 92  97.  1x + 622  98.  Irreducible  99.  18x + 322 
100.  12x - 1214x2 + 2x + 12  101.  12x + 3214x2 - 6x + 92 
102.  71x - 121x2 + x + 12  103.  1x - 421x + 421x + 52 
104.  1x - 321x + 321x + 62  105. 
14
x - 9 
106. 
214x - 52
1x - 121x + 121x - 22  107. 
22 - 5x
1x + 221x + 621x + 82 
108. 
4x2 + 3x + 33
1x - 121x - 621x + 42  109.  - 
4x
1x - 121x + 12  110.  2 
111.  2x + 3
2x + 1  112.  x - 2
x + 3  113. 
x1x - 22
212x + 32  114.  3x - 2
x - 1  
115. 
11 - x211 + x + x22
11 + x211 - x + x22
  116.  x1x - 121x + 22  117.  -1 
118.  x + 4
x + 1 
Applying the Concepts:
119.  29  120.  13 in.  121.  A = 96, P = 48  122.  140  123.  48 ft2 
124.  1.05 g  125.  74.46 mi  126. 
20,000
1,000,000 + x  127.  1.5 ft 
128.  1521 ft 
Practice Test
1.  4  2.  100 - 12  3.  -8  4.  1- ∞, -92 ´ 1-9, 32 ´ 13, ∞2
5.  -27x3y3  6.  -2x2  7.  213x  8.  - 1
64  9.  5x5>2
y1>2
10.  - 5 + 513
2
  11.  19x2 - 18x + 11  12.  5x2 - 11x + 2
13.  x4 + 6x2y2 + 9y4  14.  1x - 521x + 52p  15.  1x - 321x - 22
16.  13x + 222  17.  12x - 3214x2 + 6x + 92  18. 
-9
1x + 22
19. 
1
13x + 1213x - 12  20.  37
Chapter 1
Section 1.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  1- ∞, ∞2  b.  1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2  c.  31, ∞2  2.  e - 3
5 f  3.  ∅
4.  1- ∞, ∞2  5.  10°C  6.  w = P - 2/
2
  7.  Width: 3 m; length: 11 m
8.  +3750 in bonds and +11,250 in stocks  9.  +1500  10.  395 m
11.  34.3 ft
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  defined  3.  equivalent  5.  false  7.  a.  No  b.  Yes  9.  a.  Yes
b.  No  11.  a.  Yes  b.  Yes  13.  1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-2, 12 ´ 11, ∞2
15.  1- ∞, 32 ´ 13, 42 ´ 14, ∞2  17.  No, x = 0  19.  Yes
21.  536  23.  5-26  25.  576  27.  5-16  29.  566  31.  5126
33.  516  35.  5-116  37.  e 23
6 f  39.  e 7
8 f  41.  526  43.  5286 
45.  e 4
5 f  47.  r = d
t   49.  r = C
2p  51.  R = E
I   53.  h =
2A
a + b 
55.  u =
fv
v - f   57.  m =
y - b
x
  59.  0.065x  61.  +22,000 - x
62.  215  63.  7 115
15
  64.  - 312
4
  65.  12 - x
2 - x2   66.  15 - 2x
5 - 4x2
67.  312 + 132  68.  511 + 122  69.  13 - 12
70.  3115 + 132  71.  7 - 2110
3
  72.  5 + 121
2
73. 
2x + h - 21x1x + h2
h
  74.  a2x + 6a 1x  + 9
a2x - 9
  75. 
1
14 + h + 2
76. 
1
1y + 9 + 3
  77. 
1
2 + 14 - x
  78. 
1
1x + 2 + 12
79. 
1
1x + 2
  80. 
1
1x + 5211x + 152
  81. 
2x
2x2 + 4x + x
82. 
x
2x2 + 2x + 3 + 2x2 + 3
  83.  5  84.  12  85.  -2
86.  -3  87.  4  88.  64  89.  - 1
125  90.  - 1
27  91.  125
27   92.  9
93.  x9>10  94.  5x19>15  95.  x1>10  96.  x11>12  97.  4x4  98.  4x3>2
99. 
1
9x4y2  100. 
1
64x6y9  101.  5x5>4  102.  5x11>6  103.  x3
y8
104.  x5>6
3y   105.  31>2  106.  51>2  107.  x3  108.  x4  109.  x2y3
110.  2xy4  111.  3  112.  7  113.  x5>3  114.  2x  115.  2
15 864
116.  2
12 648  117.  x12
12 x52  118.  x12
35 x42  119.  m2
9 250m8n7
120.  3xy12
6 3xy2  121.  xy12
30 x9y132  122.  ab2
30 3675a4b12
123.  2
3 x1>317x - 62  124.  1
3 x1>3149x + 42
125.  213x + 121>317x - 12  126.  713x - 121>31x + 12
127.  1x2 + 121>2114x3 - 5x2 + 8x - 22
128.  1x2 + 221>215x3 - 8x2 + 4x - 42
Applying the Concepts:
133.  40 cm  134.  8,  135.  2 cm>sec   136.  21 m>sec 
137.  23 amp  138.  1.74 * 106 m  139.  0.46 lb>in.2  140.  218 lb 
Review Exercises 
1.  a.  546  b.  50, 46  c.  5-5, 0, 46  d.  e -5, 0, 0.2, 0.31, 1
2, 4 f 
e.  517, 1126  f.  e -5, 0, 0.2, 0.31, 1
2, 17, 112, 4 f  2.  Additive 
commutative  3.  Distributive  4.  Multiplicative commutative 
5.  Multiplicative identity 
6.  -2 … x 6 3  
2
3
 
7.  x … 1  
1
 
8.  31, 42  
4
1
 
9.  10, ∞2  
0
 
10.  -6  11.  1  12.  12  13.  115 - 1  14.  -1  15.  -64 
16.  2  17.  -29  18.  64  19.  -5  20.  1
2  21.  16  22.  9 
23.  216
125  24. 
1
729  25.  250  26.  288  27.  0.7  28.  10  29.  5 
30.  9  31.  -5  32.  9  33.  1
4  34.  10  35.  -1  36.  64  37.  2 
38.  48  39.  - 5
4  40.  0  41.  1
4  42.  x3  43.  x10  44. 
y2
x3  45.  x6
y2 
46.  x8
y4  47.  64
xy2  48. 
x2
343y  49. 
y3
16x2  50.  10x17>12  51.  21x7>4 
52.  4x5>12  53.  2x5  54.  2x2  55.  x10y2  56.  22 13  57.  8 111
11
 
58.  6x15  59.  16  60.  25 1
3 2  61.  2x 13  62.  5x 13  63.  5x 
64.  12x  65.  141
3 5  66.  -y 1
3 7x  67.  7 13
3
  68.  36 + 4 16
75
 
69.  -2 + 13  70.  - 49 + 18 15
71
  71.  2.3051 * 1013 
72.  0.0001595  73.  4x3 - 12x2 + 9x - 6  74.  5x3 + 9x2 - 11x + 6 

Section 1.4    ■    Answers  A-5
Maintaining Skills:
129.  -27  131.  5 - 226  133.  2 + 23  135.  3 - 23
2
137.  4x - 3  139.  3x - 9  141.  6x2 - 7x - 20  143.  25x2 - 4
145.  -5 { 25
2
  147.  5 { 217
4
Section 1.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  Real = -1, imaginary = 2  b.  Real = - 1
3, imaginary = -6
c.  Real = 8, imaginary = 0  2.  a = -2; b = 1  3.  a.  4 - 2i
b.  -1 + 4i  c.  -2 + 5i  4.  a.  26 + 2i  b.  -15 - 21i
5.  a.  5 - 12i  b.  16 + 1412i  6.  a.  37  b.  4
7.  a.  1 + i  b.  - 15
41 - 12
41 i  8.  23
10 + 11
10 i  9.  a.  e - 3
2 i, 3
2 i f
b.  52 - 3i, 2 + 3i6  10.  a.  One real  b.  Two unequal real
c.  Two nonreal complex
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  1-1; -1  3.  i1b  5.  true  7.  x = 3; y = 2 
9.  x = 2; y = -4  11.  8 + 3i  13.  -1 - 6i  15.  -5 - 5i 
17.  15 + 6i  19.  -8 + 12i  21.  -3 + 15i  23.  20 + 8i 
25.  3 + 11i  27.  13  29.  24 + 7i  31.  -141 - 2413i 
33.  26 - 2i  35.  z = 2 + 3i, zz = 13  37.  z = 1
2 + 2i, zz = 17
4  
39.  z = 12 + 3i, zz = 11  41.  5i  43.  - 1
2 + 1
2 i  45.  1 + 2i 
47.  5
2 + 1
2 i  49.  43
65 - 6
65 i  51.  2  53.  - 19
13 + 4
13 i 
55.  5-2i, 2i6  57.  51 - i, 1 + i6  59.  55 - i13, 5 + i136 
61.  e 4
7 - 15
7  i, 4
7 + 15
7  i f  63.  e - 5
3 i, 5
3 i f
Applying the Concepts:
65.  9 + i  67.  Z = 595
74 + 315
74  i  69.  V = 45 + 11i
71.  I = 17
15 + 4
15 i
Beyond the Basics:
73.  i  75.  i  77.  6  79.  5i  81.  -4i  89.  x = 1; y = 4
91.  x = 1; y = 0  93.  - 3
5 + 4
5i
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
97.  n = 4
Maintaining Skills:
99.  1x - 121x - 321x + 32  101.  x1x - 12  103.  1x - 321x + 32
105.  1x - 321x - 221x + 12  107.  9  109.  32  111.  3 + x2
113.  3x2 + 7 
Section 1.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  5-2, -1, 16  2.  5-2, 0, 26  3.  5-2, 2, 56  4.  5-10, 16  5.  ∅
6.  50, 36  7.  5106  8.  596  9.  a.  536  b.  e - 9
2, 7
2 f
10.  51, 2166  11.  e 1
3, 1 f  12.  0.6c or 60% of the speed of light
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  extraneous  3.  16  5.  false  7.  50, 26  9.  50, 16  11.  506
13.  5-1, 0, 16  15.  50, 36  17.  e 1
4, 2 f  19.  51 - 12, 1 + 126
21.  e 7
2 - 153
2
, 7
2 + 153
2
f  23.  5-3, 56  25.  e 1
26, 5 f  27.  ∅
29.  ∅  31.  5-16  33.  5-2, 76  35.  536  37.  ∅  39.  5-26
Applying the Concepts:
63.  13 ft  65.  Length: 25 ft; width: 15 ft  67.  57 cm  69.  2 m
71.  19 ft  73.  +62,000 and +85,000  75.  July: 530 tickets; August: 583 
tickets  77.  Younger son: +45,000; older son: +180,000
79.  a.  81  b.  78  81.  +4000 in a tax shelter and +3000 in a bank
83.  +2500  85.  35,000 shaving sets  87.  2.5 hr  89.  30 mph
91.  65 mph and 70 mph  93.  1500 cameras  95.  7 and 21
97.  14 and 28
Beyond the Basics:
99.  a.  No, because the solution sets are 50, 16 and 516, respectively.
b.  No, because the solution sets are 5-3, 36 and 536, respectively.
c.  No, because the solution sets are 50, 16 and 506, respectively.
d.  No, because the solution sets are 5∅6 and 526, respectively.
101.  50 mph  103.  25 liters  105.  72 yr  107.  26 min
109.  a.  112 mi  b.  448
3
= 149.33 mph
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
111.  (c)
Maintaining Skills:
113.  222  115.  223  117.  1 + 322  119.  3 - 23 
121.  x1x + 12  123.  1x - 221x + 22  125.  1x + 222
127.  1x - 121x - 72  129.  13x + 1212x - 12  131.  15x + 2211 - x2 
Section 1.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  5-21, -46  2.  e 0, 5
2 f  3.  536  4.  5-2 - 15, -2 + 156
5.  53 - 12, 3 + 126  6.  e 3 - 111
2
, 3 + 111
2
f  7.  e - 1
2, 2
3 f
8.  25.48 ft by 127.41 ft  9.  18 + 1815 ≈58.25 ft
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  quadratic  3.  { 25  5.  true  7.  Yes  9.  Yes  11.  Yes  13.  No
15.  k = 2  17.  50, 56  19.  5-7, 26  21.  5-1, 66  23.  5-4, 46
25.  5-2, 26  27.  5-3, 56  29.  4  31.  9  33.  49
4   35.  1
36
37.  a2
4   39.  5-1 - 16, -1 + 166  41.  e 3 - 113
2
, 3 + 113
2
f
43.  e -3, 3
2 f  45.  5-1 - 15, -1 + 156  47.  e - 1
2, 5
3 f
49.  e 1 - 122
3
, 1 + 122
3
f  51.  e -3, 1
2 f  53.  e 2, - 2
3 f
55.  56 - 133, 6 + 1336  57.  e -2, - 2
3 f  59.  e -1, - 2
3 f
61.  e -2, - 2
5 f  63.  e - 7 + 113
6
, - 7 - 113
6
f  65.  e -3, 5
2 f
67.  e - 2
3, 3
2 f  69.  5-9 - 114, -9 + 1146  71.  e 1
6, 7
3 f
73.  e - 110
2
, 110
2
f  75.  e - 25
2 , 15 f  77.  23.82 in.  79.  5.23 cm
Applying the Concepts:
81.  60 ft by 180 ft  83.  7 and 21  85.  23, 34  87.  20 cm by 25 cm
89.  4 in. and 12 in.  91.  2 in.  93.  19.8 in. by 19.8 in.
95.  After 6 hours  97.  6 ft  99.  a.  160 ft  b.  After 1 sec and after 6 sec
c.  7 sec  101.  a.  1.59 sec and 4.41 sec  b.  9.24 sec 
103.  a. 0.45 sec and 15.55 sec  b. 17.70 sec
Beyond the Basics:
105.  -213 or 213  107.  0 or 8  109.  - 1
2 
113.  2  115.  ax2 + bx + c = ax2 - a1r + s2x + ars
= a1x2 - rx - sx + rs2
= a3x1x - r2 - s1x - r24 = a1x - r21x - s2
117.  a.  x2 - x - 12 = 0  b.  x2 - 10x + 25 = 0
c.  x2 - 6x + 7 = 0  123.  51, 96  125.  b

31.  12, ∞2
2
33.  ∅
35.  a - ∞, 3
2 d
3
2
37.  1- ∞, ∞2
39.  1- ∞, 34 
3
  41.  32, ∞2  43.  3-18, ∞2
45.  ∅  47.  315, ∞2  49.  1- ∞, ∞2  51.  1- ∞, -22 ´ 12, ∞2
53.  a - ∞, 11
2 d  55.  1- ∞, -24 ´ 16, ∞2  57.  1- ∞, ∞2  59.  3-2, 54
61.  3-2, 52  63.  ∅  65.  1- ∞, 54  67.  1-2,-12  69.  3-2, 42
71.  3-6, 14  73.  1-3, 34  75.  a -1, 3
2 d   77.  ∅  79.  a = 5, b = 8
81.  a = 1, b = 3  83.  a = -1, b = 19  85.  3-6, 24
87.  a - ∞, - 3
2 d ´ c 1
3, ∞b  89.  3-3, -14 ´ 31, ∞2
91.  1-2, 02 ´ 16, ∞2  93.  ∅  95.  506 ´ 31, ∞2
97.  1- ∞, -14 ´ 31, ∞2  99.  1- ∞, -22  101.  1-2, 52  103.  1-4, 02
105.  a - ∞, - 5
2 d ´ 1-2, ∞2  107.  1-2, 02 ´ 12, ∞2
109.  1- ∞, -52 ´ 3-1, 24 ´ 13, ∞2  111.  1-2, -14 ´ 31, 22
113.  a2
3, 3 d   115.  a - 1
2, 3
4 d   117.  a -3, - 1
3 d ´ 13, ∞2
119.  a -1, 1
7 d ´ 13, ∞2
Applying the Concepts:
121.  +2012.50 to +2100  123.  7.5 gal to 12 gal  125.  At least 15 qt
127.  At least 8  129.  32°F to 100°F
131.  More than 133 cards but not more than 180
Beyond the Basics:
133.  1- ∞, -42 ´ 14, ∞2  135.  1- ∞, 02 ´ 14, ∞2  137.  ∅
139.  1- ∞, -124 ´ 312, ∞2  141.  At most, 4000 radios
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
143.  a.  1x + 421x - 52 6 0  b.  1x + 221x - 62 … 0  c.  x2 Ú 0
d.  x2 6 0  e.  1x - 322 … 0  f.  1x - 222 7 0
Maintaining Skills:
145.  3  147.  2  149.  0  151.  7  153.  3.4  155.   x + 2  = 5
157.   x - 4  … 2  159.   x - 5 … 3 
Section 1.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  526  b.  5-1, 26  2.  e 1
2 f  3.  e 6
5, 2 f 
4.  3-3, 14 
1
3
  5.  3270, 4204 
6.  a - ∞, - 9
2 d ´ c 3
2, ∞b 
9
2
3
2
 
7.  a.  1- ∞, ∞2  b.  ∅  8.  1- ∞, -62 ´ a - 14
5 , ∞b
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  5-a, a6  3.  1- ∞, -a4 ´ 3a, ∞2  5.  true  7.  5-3, 36
9.  5-3, 36  11.  5-5, -16  13.  5-1, 76  15.  e - 7
6, 11
6 f
17.  5-2, -16  19.  5-6, 66  21.  5-20, 46  23.  5-1, 26  25.  ∅
27.  ∅  29.  5-2, 26  31.  5-1, 26  33.  e - 1
3, 1 f  35.  5-46
41.  536  43.  566  45.  5-2, 16  47.  53, 76  49.  50, 86
51.  596  53.  5-26  55.  53, 76  57.  5136  59.  e - 24
5 , 6 f
61.  54, 96  63.  e 1
4, 49 f  65.  e - 1
6, 1
7 f  67.  58, 646  69.  e 1
16 f
71.  5-3, -2, 2, 36  73.  e - 12
2 , 12
2 , -i, i f  75.  5-2, 26
77.  e 0, 1
3 f  79.  506  81.  5-212, - 13, 13, 2126
83.  5-1, 1, 2, 46
Applying the Concepts:
85.  6
8  87.  a.  20 shares  b.  +90  89.  230 ft  91.  2 mph  93.  40 min
95.  120,000 ft2  97.  CE = 6 mi or CE = 3162
205 ≈15.4 mi
Beyond the Basics:
99.  5-1, 2 - 17, 3, 2 + 176  101.  526  103.  5-7, -26
105.  e -3, - 5
3 f  107.  e 1
8, 8 f  109.  5{212, {3136  111.  5366 
113.  5-5b, 2b6  115.  e 2a
3 , a f
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
117.  x = 1 + 15
2
  119.  x = 1
2 + 14n + 1
2
Maintaining Skills:
121.  526  123.  5-116  125.  506  127.  5- 217, 2176
129.  e 1
5 f  131.  5-3, 26  133.  6x + 5
2x
  135.  -x2 + 4x + 11
1x + 121x + 32
Section 1.5 
Answers to Practice Problems:
1. a. 12, ∞2 
2
b. 1- ∞, 54 
5
2.  2.5 hours  3.  a.  1- ∞, ∞2  b.  ∅  4.  1- ∞, 24 ´ 34, ∞2
5. 1-1, 34 
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
6. c -1, 3
2 b 
3
2
1
  7.  a = -4, b = 11
8.  59°F to 77°F  9.  1-1, 42  10.  3-6, 12
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  6   3.  Ú   5.  6   7.  Ú   9.  6
11.  1-2, 52
5
2
13.  10. 44
4
0
15.  3-1, ∞2
1
17.  1- ∞, -24
2
19.  1- ∞, 32
3
21.  3-3, ∞2
3
23.  1- ∞, 22
2
25.  1- ∞, -42
4
27.  1- ∞, -12
1
29.  1- ∞, 34
3
A-6  Answers   ■   Section 1.6

Section 2.1    ■    Answers  A-7
121.  8 liters of the 4 1
2, and 2 liters of the 12,  123.  8 people 
125.  220  127.  36  129.  40
Practice Test A
1.  526  2.  516  3.  e - 2130
5
, 2130
5
f  4.  6 cm by 9 cm
5.  5-9, -46  6.  +8200  7.  1 in.  8.  e -4, - 5
2 f
9.  1
9, ax + 1
3 b
2
  10.  e 5
6 - 137
6
, 5
6 + 237
6
f  11.  9 in.
12.  5-6 - 13, -6 + 136  13.  5-5, 0, 56  14.  546
15.  5-12, -66  16.  390, ∞2  17.  a - 1
2, 7
2 b
18.  1- ∞, -22 ´ 15, ∞2  19.  1- ∞, 24  20.  c 2
5, 2 d
Practice Test B
1.  d  2.  d  3.  a  4.  c  5.  b  6.  a  7.  d  8.  d  9.  b  10.  a  11.  b
12.  d  13.  a  14.  a  15.  d  16.  d  17.  b  18.  c  19.  a  20.  a
Chapter 2
Section 2.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
T(2, 1
2
P(2, 2)
Q(4, 0)
S(0, 3)
R(5, 3)
)
1
2
3
4
5
6
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
2.  (2005, 17.9), (2006, 17.8), (2007, 17.8) (2008, 17.6), (2009, 17.6), 
(2010, 16.3), (2011, 16.0), and (2012, 18.0)
2005
2007
Years
2009
2011
2013
15.5
16
17
18
16.5
17.5
18.5
t
%
3.  12 ≈1.4  4.  Yes   5.  6012 ≈84.85 feet  6.  a11
2 , - 3
2 b 
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  second  3.  21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122  5.  true
7.	
12, 22, quadrant I  
13, -12, quadrant IV 
1-1, 02, x-axis  
1-2, -52, quadrant III  
10, 02, origin  
1-7, 42, quadrant II  
10, 32, y-axis  
1-4, 22, quadrant II 
0
1
1
2
3
3
5
6
4
2
7
3
5
1
2
4
1
3
2
4
5
x
y
(2, 2)
(3, 1)
(2, 5)
(1, 0)
(4, 2)
(7, 4)
(0, 0)
(0, 3)
37.  e -3, - 5
9 f  39.  50, 26  41.  e 5
4, 3
2 f  43.  ∅  45.  1-4, 42 
47.  1- ∞, -42 ´ 14, ∞2  49.  1-4, 22  51.  1- ∞, ∞2  53.  a - 1
2, 7
2 b 
55.  1- ∞, 12 ´ 14, ∞2  57.  c - 23
3 , 5 d   59.  ∅  61.  a - 1
2, ∞b 
63.  1- ∞, -64 ´ 30, ∞2  65.  3-5, -22 ´ 1-2, -14
67.  a1
2,1b ´ a1, 5
2 b  69.  a - ∞, 11
5 d ´ 33, ∞2
Applying the Concepts:
71.  The temperatures in Tampa during December are between 55°F  
and 95°F.  73.  0 x - 7000 … 50  75.  0 x - 1200 … 6.75
77.  Between +5040 and +6480  79.  Between +18.90 and +19.50
Beyond the Basics:
81.  a.  536  b.  5-4, -26  c.  5-1, 2, 3, 66  d.  5-4, -3, 0, 16 
83.  e 1
3, 3 f  85.  5-6, 66  91.  0 x - 40 6 3  93.  0 x - 40 … 6 
95.   x - 7  7 4  97.   2x - 5  Ú 15  99.   2x - a - b  6 b - a
101.   2x - a - b  7 b - a  103.  0 x - 390 … 31
105.  3-1, 14 ´ 33, 5]  107.  1- ∞, -14 ´ 37, ∞2  109.  a -2, - 1
2 d
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
111.  1- ∞, 24 ´ 34, ∞2
Maintaining Skills:
113.  3.5  115.  -5  117.  5  119.  213  121.  4, 1x + 222
123.  25
4 , ax - 5
2 b
2
  125.  9
16, ax + 3
4 b
2
Review Exercises
1.  536  3.  526  5.  1- ∞, ∞2  7.  516  9.  516  11.  5116 
13.  e -4, - 1
3 f  15.  e - 3
2 f  17.  e 1
5, 3 f  19.  g =
p - k
t
 
21.  B =
T
T - 2  23.  50, 76  25.  5-2, 56  27.  5-6, 16 
29.  5-5, 16  31.  e -1, 2
3 f  33.  e 3
2 - 113
2
, 3
2 + 113
2
f 
35.  e -1, 1
2 f  37.  52 - 213, 2 + 2136  39.  e 1
4 - 117
4
, 1
4 + 117
4
f 
41.  e 1
2 - 13
2  i, 1
2 + 13
2  i f  43.  53 - 2i, 3 + 2i6 
45.  e 1 - 3
2 i, 1 + 3
2 i f  47.  D = 49, two real, unequal  49.  D = -16, 
two unequal complex roots  51.  5-4, 46  53.  e 1
2 f  55.  596 
57.  5166  59.  e - 10
7 , - 2
7 f  61.  5-64, 16  63.  506 
65.  e -3, - 1
2, 1
2, 3 f  67.  506  69.  e - 3
10, 6 f  71.  5-3y, y6 
73.  5y - 1, y - 26  75.  1- ∞, -22  77.  a - ∞, 17
3 d   79.  c - 6
7, ∞b 
81.  a7
6, ∞b  83.  1- ∞, 214  85.  a - ∞, 41
10 b  87.  1- ∞, 12 ´ 13,∞2 
89.  12, 32  91.  3-2, 32  93.  3-47, 32  95.  1- ∞, -34 ´ 32, ∞2 
97.  1- ∞, -52 ´ 3-3, -22 ´ 31, ∞2  99.  c -3, 5
3 d  
101.  1- ∞, 12 ´ 13, ∞2  103.  1- ∞, -14 ´ 39, ∞2 
105.  a - ∞, - 7
2 d ´ c - 5
4, ∞b  107.  1- ∞, -22 ´ a -2, - 1
4 d  
Applying the Concepts:
109.  11
p  cm  111.  3 m  113.  13 cm  115.  350 cm 
117.  35°, 35°, 110°  119.  +12,000 at 6,; +18,000 at 8, 

A-8  Answers   ■   Section 2.2
Beyond the Basics:
65.  22
2 c  67.  c.  a2
3, 5
3 b and a7
3, 4
3 b
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
69.  a.  y-axis  b.  x-axis  71.  a.  Quadrants I and III  b.  Quadrants II 
and IV  73.  a.  Right half-plane  b.  Upper half-plane
Maintaining Skills:
75.  a.  1
2  b.  1  77.  a.  0  b.  0  79.  9  81.  9
4  83.  a2
4
Section 2.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1. 
2
4
2
4
2
2
4
x
y
0
9.  a.  On the y-axis  b.  Vertical line intersecting the x-axis at -1
11.  a.  y 7 0  b.  y 6 0  c.  x 6 0  d.  x 7 0  13.  a. 4  b. 12, 32
15.  a. 113  b. 10.5, -42  17.  a.  415  b.  11, -2.52
19.  a.  1  b.  112, 4.52  21.  a.  12 t - k   b.  at + k
2
, t + k
2
b
23.  Yes  25.  Yes  27.  Yes  29.  No  31.  1-3, 22, 1-2, 42, 1-1, 62
33.  Isosceles  35.  Scalene  37.  Scalene  39.  Equilateral
41.  d1P, R2 = d1Q, S2 = 1712  43.  -2 or 6  45.  a - 8
7, 0b
Applying the Concepts:
47. 
1975
1985
1995
Year
2005
2015
50
0
100
150
200
250
300
350
x
y
Population
49. 
1950
1970
1990
2010
Year
Births
10
12
14
16
18
20
26
22
24
x
y
51. 
1950
1970
1990
Year
Marriages
2010
7
9
8
10
11
x
y
53.  15,771  55.  +595.15 billion in 2005, +642.25 billion in 2006, 
+689.375 billion in 2007, +736.5 billion in 2008, +783.625 billion in 
2009, +830.75 billion in 2010, and +877.875 billion in 2011
57.  a. 
0
4
8
12
16
20
8
4
16
12
4
x
y
Middale
Dullsville
Pleasantville
b.  2500 mi  c.  500113 ≈1802.78 mi
2.  x-intercepts: -2, 1
2; y-intercept: 
-2  3.  Symmetric about the y-axis   
4.  Not symmetric about the x-axis, 
symmetric about the y-axis, not sym-
metric about the origin 
5.  a. 
0
2
4
6
8
2
4
6
8
1000
1000
2000
2000
t
y
 
b. 
0
2 3
5
7
9
1
4
6
8
10
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
t
y
c. After 9 years  6.  1x - 322 + 1y + 622 = 100
7. 
0
6
8
4
(2, 1)
10
2
4
86
8
4
6
2
4
2
6
8
x
y
8.  1x + 222 + 1y - 322 = 25: C = 1-2, 32, r = 5
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  that satisfy the equation  3.  y-  5.  false
7.  On the graph: 1-3, -42, 11, 02, 14, 32; not on the graph: 12, 32
9.  On the graph: 13, 22, 10, 12, 18, 32; not on the graph: 18, -32
11.  On the graph: 11, 02, 12, 132, 12, - 132; not on the graph: 10, -12
13.  a.  x-intercepts -3 and 3; no y-intercepts  b.  Symmetric about  
x-axis, y-axis, and origin  15.  a.  x-intercepts -3 and 3; y-intercepts -2  
and 2  b.  Symmetric about x-axis, y-axis, and origin  17.  a.  x-intercept 
0; y-intercept 0  b.  Symmetric about x-axis  19.  a.  x-intercepts -3 and 
3; y-intercept 2  b.  Symmetric about y-axis  21.  a.  No x-intercept;  
y-intercept 1  b.  No Symmetries  23.  a.  x-intercepts 0 and 3; y-intercept 0 
b.  Symmetric about x-axis

Section 2.2    ■    Answers  A-9
45.	
4
2
3
1
0
(3, 1)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)
(3, 5)
(2, 0)
(1, 1)
(0, 2)
4
2
3
6
5
1
4 3 2 1
x
y
47.  x-intercept: 4; y-intercept: 3  49.  x-intercepts: 2, 4; y-intercept: 8
51.  x-intercepts: -2, 2; y-intercepts: -2, 2  53.  x-intercepts: -1, 1; no 
y-intercept   55.  No x-intercepts; y-intercept 1  57.  Not symmetric with 
respect to the x-axis, symmetric with respect to the y-axis, not symmetric 
with respect to the origin  59.  Not symmetric with respect to the x-axis, 
not symmetric with respect to the y-axis, symmetric with respect to the 
origin  61.  Not symmetric with respect to the x-axis, symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis, not symmetric with respect to the origin   63.  Not 
symmetric with respect to the x-axis, not symmetric with respect to the 
y-axis, symmetric with respect to the origin   65.  Not symmetric with 
respect to the x-axis, not symmetric with respect to the y-axis, symmetric 
with respect to the origin   67.  Center: 12, 32; radius: 6
69.  Center: 1-2, -32; radius: 111
71.  x2 + 1y - 122 = 4
2
1
0
(0, 1)
2
3
1
2
1
2
1
x
y
73.  1x + 122 + 1y - 222 = 2
0
(1, 2)
2.5
1.5
0.5
2
3
1
2 1.5 1 0.5
x
y
75.  1x - 322 + 1y + 422 = 97
0
(3, 4)
5
5
10
15
5
5
10
15
x
y
77.  1x - 122 + 1y - 222 = 4
0
(1, 2)
1
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
1
2
4
3
x
y
79.  1x - 222 + 1y - 522 = 26
3
1
0
5
7
6
4
2
8
2
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
x
y
(2, 5)
81.  a.  Circle; center: 11, 12; radius: 16 
b.  11 - 15, 02, 11 + 15, 02, 10, 1 - 152, 10, 1 + 152
83.  a.  Circle; center: 10, -12; radius: 1  b.  10, 02, 10, -22
85.  a.  Circle; center: a1
2, 0b; radius: 1
2  b.  11, 02, 10, 02 
25.	
0
3
1
(1, 0)
(3, 2)
(2, 1)
(1, 2)
(2, 3)
(3, 4)
(0, 1)
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
3
5
x
y
27.	
0
4
2
(3, 6)
(2, 4)
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
(0, 0)
(2, 4)
(3, 6)
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
4
6
x
y
29.	
1
(3, 9)
(2, 4)
(1, 1)
(3, 9)
(2, 4)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
5
3
1
5
3
10
8
9
5
3
4
7
6
2
1
x
y
31.	
3
1
(3, 3)
(1, 1)
(2, 2)
(3, 3)
(2, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
5
3
1
5
1
2
3
4
x
y
0
33.	
3
1
(3, 4)
(1, 2)
(2, 3)
(3, 4)
(2, 3)
(1, 2)
(0, 1)
5
3
1
5
1
3
5
x
y
0
35.	
1
(3, 5)
(1, 3)
(2, 0)
(3, 5)
(1, 3)
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
5
3
1
3
1
2
4
3
7
6
5
2
3
1
5
4
5
x
y
0
37.	
1
(0, 3)
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(1, 2.83)
(1, 2.83)
(2, 2.24)
(2, 2.24)
3
2
1
3 2
1
2
x
y
0
39.	
0
4
2
3
1
(3, 27)
(2, 8)
(1, 1)
(3, 27)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(2, 8)
4 3
1
2
35
15
25
5
15
25
35
x
y
41.	
4
2
3
1
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(3, 1.44)
(3, 1.44)
(2, 1.26)
(2, 1.26)
4 3
1
2
4
2
3
1
1
3
2
4
x
y
0
43.	
0
4
2
3
1
(3, 3)
(2, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(3, 3)
(2, 2)
(1, 1)
4
2
3
1
1
3
2
4
x
y

A-10  Answers   ■   Section 2.3
Maintaining Skills:
105.  1
2  107.  - 1
2  109.  2
5  111. 
A
1 + rt  113.  5
2x - 15
115.  y = a
bx - c
b  117.  - 1
2  119.  3
2  121.  - 11
2
Section 2.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  - 8
13; for every 13 units increase in x, the y-value decreases by 8 units.
2.  y + 3 = - 2
3 1x + 22; y = - 2
3 x - 13
3   3.  y + 4 = 51x + 32; 
y = 5x + 11  4.  y + 3 = 2x; y = 2x - 3
5. 
0
10
2
2
2
10
10
2
10
x
y
(3, 2)
(0, 4)
6.
0
2
4
6
8
24
26
28
22
4
6
8
10
2
22
24
26
28
210
x
y
y57
x523
  7.	
2
4
6
8 10
2
64
8
10
4
6
8
2
2
4
8
6
10
x
y
(8, 0)
(0, 6)
0
8.  Between 1.77 and 1.79 meters  9.  a.  4x - 3y + 23 = 0
b.  5x - 4y - 31 = 0  10.  10.22 million
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  slope  3.  parallel  5.  5  7.  false  9.  4
3, rising  11.  0, horizontal
13.  -2.2, falling  15.  4, rising  17.  a.  /3  b.  /2  c.  /4  d.  /1
19.  a.  y = 0  b.  x = 0
21.  y = 1
2 x + 4
2
4
6
8 10
2
64
8
10
4
6
8
2
2
4
8
6
10
x
y
(2, 5)
(0, 4)
0
23.  y = - 3
2 x + 4
2
4
6
2
4
6
4
6
2
3
1
2
1
3
5
4
6
x
y
(2, 1)
(0, 4)
0
Applying the Concepts:
87.  0 x0 = 0 y0   89.  x =
y2
4 + 1 
91.  a.  $12 million (profit)  b.  - +5.5 million (loss)
c. 
0
2
4
6
6
4
2
5
15
10
20
30
t
P
 
d.  t = 2; it represents the 
begining of September 2012, 
when there is neither profit nor 
loss.  e.  8; it represents the 
profit in July 2012.
93.  a.  After 0 second: 320 ft; after 1 second: 432 ft; after 2 seconds:  
512 ft; after 3 seconds: 560 ft; after 4 seconds: 576 ft; after 5 seconds:  
560 ft; after 6 seconds: 512 ft 
b. 
0
10
8
6
4
2
400
600
200
200
t
y
Beyond the Basics:
95.	
x
O
y
97.	
y
x
origin symmetry
O
99.  Area: 11p 
2
8
4
6
2
4
5
3
1
2
4
6
x
y
0
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
101.  The graph is the union of the graphs of y = 12x and y = - 12x. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
2
3
1
1
2
3
x
y
c.  0 … t … 10  d.  t-intercept: 
10; it represents the time when 
the object hits the ground. 
y-intercept: 320; it shows the 
height of the building. 
103.  c.  10.4, 02 and 12.6, 02

Section 2.3    ■    Answers  A-11
Applying the Concepts:
87.  1
10  89.  a.  x: time in weeks; y: amount of money after x weeks in 
the account; y = 7x + 130  b.  Slope: weekly deposit in the account;  
y-intercept: initial deposit
91.  a.  x: number of hours worked; y: amount of money earned per week; 
y = e 11x
x … 40
16.5x - 220 x 7 40
b.  Slope: hourly wage; y-intercept: salary for 0 hours of work
93.  a.  x =  amount of rupees; y =  amount of dollars equal to x rupees; 
y =
1
53.87 x, or y = 0.0186x  b.  Slope: the number of dollars per rupee; 
when x = 0, y = 0  95.  a.  Initial value  b.  +1000  c.  The value of the 
machine decreased +800 per year.  d.  y = -0.8x + 9  e.  The slope 
gives the machine’s yearly depreciation, +800 or 0.8 Thous. 
97.  y = 5x + 40,000  99.  a.  y = 266.8t + 2425 
b. 
t
15
10
5
Years after 2005
0
y
y5266.8t12425
2000
4000
Number of women
6000
8000
25.  y = - 4 
3
1
4
5
2
5
3
1
2
4
x
y
0
(5, 4)
27.  y = -x + 1  29.  y = 3  31.  y = 2
3 x + 1
3
33.  y = - 7
2 x + 2  35.  x = 5  37.  y = 0  39.  y = 14
41.  y = - 2
3 x - 4  43.  y = 4
3 x + 4  45.  y = 7  47.  y = -5
49.  a.  Parallel  b.  Neither  c.  Perpendicular
51.  m = - 1
2; y-intercept = 2;  
x-intercept = 4
0
1
2
4
3
5
3
4
2
5
1
5
3
4
1
2
3
4
2
1
5
x
y
53.  m = 3
2 ; y-intercept = 3;  
x-intercept = -2
0
1
2
3
4
3
1
4
2
4
3
1
2
3
4
1
2
x
y
55.  m is undefined; no y-intercept;  
x-intercept = 5
0
3
1
2
4
5
3 2 1
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
x
y
57.  m is undefined; y-intercept  
= y-axis; x-intercept = 0
1
3
5
1
3
5
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
0
61.  x
3 +
y
2 = 1; x-intercept = 3; y-intercept = 2  63.  y = -x - 2
65.  y = x + 2; because the coordinates of the point 1-1, 12 satisfy this 
equation, 1-1, 12 also lies on this line.  67.  y = - 1
2 x + 37
4
69.  Parallel  71.  Neither  73.  Perpendicular  75.  Neither
77.  a.  y = 3x - 9  b.  y = 2x + 4  79.  y = -x + 2
81.  y = -3x - 2  83.  y = - 1
6  x + 4  85.  y = 3
2x + 13
4
c.  3225  d.  5627
101.  a.  y = 23.1x + 117.8
0
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
150
50
100
300
200
250
400
350
x
y
(4, 210.20)
(10, 348.80)
b.  Slope: cost of producing one modem; y-intercept: fixed overhead cost 
c.  395  103.  9.98%  105.  a.  y = -2x + 12.4 
b.   
c.  0 papers
Beyond the Basics:
109.  c = -1  115.  19.5, 122 or 1-5.5, -82 
117.  x2 + y2 + x - 2y - 41 = 0  119.  y = 4
3x - 25
3  
121.  Lines with slope 2 and different y-intercepts
123.  Lines passing through the point 11, 02 with different slopes

A-12  Answers   ■   Section 2.5
d. 
0
2
1
4
3
6
5
8
7
50
100
250
300
150
200
t
h
95.  P = 28x - x2  97.  S = 2x2 + 256
x   99.  A = x2
4p + 1
16 120 - x22
101.  C = 2x2 + 6912
x
  103.  d = 31x - 222 + 1x3 - 3x + 52241>2 
105.  a.  p152 = 1150; if 5000 
TVs can be sold, the price per TV 
is +1150. p1152 = 900; if 15,000 
TVs can be sold, the price per TV 
is +900. p1302 = 525; if 30,000 
TVs can be sold, the price per TV 
is +525.
b. 
0
10
5
20
15
Number of TVs sold
(thousands)
30
25
200
400
1000
1200
600
800
x
P
(5, 1150)
(15, 900)
(30, 525)
c.  p1252 = 650; if the TVs are priced at +650 each, 25,000 can be sold.
107.  a.  C1x2 = 5.5x + 75,000  b.  R1x2 = 9x
c.  P1x2 = 3.5x - 75,000  d.  21,429  e.  +86,000
Beyond the Basics:
109.  f1x2 = 4x + 2
x
; domain: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2; f142 = 9
2
111.  f1x2 = 2 - x
x2 + 1
; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; f142 = - 2
17
113.  No, because they have different domains  115.  No, because g is not 
defined at -1  117.  Yes  119.  3  121.  a = -9, b = 6
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
127.  a.  ax2 + bx + c = 0  b.  y = c  c.  b2 - 4ac 6 0 
d.  Not possible  129.  a.  9  b.  8  131.  y = -x  133.  y = 1
2x + 7
2 
135.  a. 2x2 + 3x  b. -2x2 + 3x  137.  a. -x3 + 2x  b. -x3 + 2x
Section 2.5
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  Increasing on 12, ∞2,  decreasing on 1- ∞, -32, and constant on 
1-3, 22  2.  Relative minimum at 10, 02; relative maximum at 11, 12
3.  Mrs. Osborn’s windpipe should be contracted to a radius of 7.33 mm 
for maximizing the airflow velocity.
4.  f1-x2 = - 1-x22 = -x2 = f1x2; 
therefore, f  is even. 
O
x
y
y  x2
5.  f1-x2 = - 1-x32 = x3 = -f1x2; 
therefore, f  is odd.
O
x
y
y  x3
6.  a.  Even  b.  Odd  c.  Neither  7.  -6  8.  -1  9.  -2x + 1 - h
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
125.  a.  This is a family of lines 
parallel to the line y = -2x, and 
they all have slope equal to -2.
1
3
y 5 22x 1 3
y 5 22x 2 2
5
5
3
1
x
y
0
b.  This is a family of all lines that 
pass through the point 10, -42. 
1
3
5
2
1
x
y
0
Maintaining Skills:
127.  5-1, 26  129.  5-3, -26  131.  1- ∞, 24 ´ 33, ∞2
133.  -
1
x1x + h2  135. 
1
15 + 12
Section 2.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  Yes  b.  No  2.  a.  No  b.  Yes  3.  a.  0  b. -7
c.  -2x2 - 4hx + 5x - 2h2 + 5h  4.  44 sq. units  5.  a.  1- ∞, 12
b.  1- ∞, -24 h 13, ∞2  6.  a.  No  b.  Yes  c.  30, 94  7.  No
8.  a.  Yes  b.  -3, -1  c.  -5  d.  -5, 1  9.  Domain: 1-3, ∞2; 
range: 1-2, 24 ´ 536  10.  range: 36, 12); C1112 = 11.994 
11.  If c = cost per foot on land, then 
C = c31.32150022 + x2 + 1200 - x4.  12.  a.  C = 12002 + 100,000
b.  R = 2500x  c.  P = 1300x - 100,000  d.  77
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  independent  3.  -14  5.  y = 0  7.  true  9.  Domain: 5a, b, c6; 
range: 5d, e6; function  11.  Domain; 5a, b, c6; range: 51, 26; function
13.  Domain: 50, 3, 86: range: 5-3, -2, -1, 1, 26; not a function
15.  Yes  17.  Yes  19.  No  21.  Yes  23.  Yes
25.  No  27.  Yes  29.  f102 = 1, g102 is not defined, 
h102 = 12, f1a2 = a2 - 3a + 1, f1-x2 = x2 + 3x + 1
31.  f 1-12 = 5, g1-12 is not defined, h1-12 = 13, h1c2 = 12 - c, 
h1-x2 = 12 + x  33.  a.  0  b.  213
3
  c.  Not defined  d.  Not defined
e. 
-2x
24 - x2  35.  9  37.  1- ∞, ∞2  39.  1- ∞, 92 ´ 19, ∞2
41.  1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  43.  33, ∞2
45.  1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-2, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2  47.  1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2  49.  Yes
51.  Yes  53.  No  55.  f1-42 = -2, f1-12 = 1, f132 = 5, f152 = 7
57.  h1-22 = -5, h1-12 = 4, h102 = 3, h112 = 4  59.  x = -2 or 3
61.  a.  No  b.  x = -1 { 13  c.  5  d.  x = -1 { 1
2 114
63.  Domain: 3-3, 24; range: 3-3, 34  65.  Domain: 3-4, ∞2; range: 
3-2, 34  67.  Domain: 3-3, ∞2; range: 5-36 ´ 3-1, 44
69.  Domain: 1- ∞, -44 ´ 3-2, 24 ´ 34, ∞2; range: 3-2, 24 ´ 536
71.  3-9, ∞2  73.  -3, 4, 7, 9  75.  f1-72 = 4, f112 = 5, f152 = 2
77.  5-3.75, -2.14, 36 ´ 312, ∞2  79.  3-9, ∞2
81.  g1-42 = -1, g112 = 3, g132 = 4  83.  3-9, -52
Applying the Concepts:
85.  Yes, because there is only one high temperature every day.
87.  No, because Nevada and North Carolina both start with N.
89.  A1x2 = x2; A142 = 16; A142 represents the area of a square tile with 
side of length 4.  91.  It is a function. S1x2 = 6x2; S132 = 54
93.  a.  30, 84  b.  h122 = 192, h142 = 256, h162 = 192  c.  8 sec

Section 2.6    ■    Answers  A-13
Section 2.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  g1x2 = 2x + 6  2.  15.524 m
3.  Domain: 1- ∞, 04; range: 
30, ∞2
x
28
24
212
216
0
y
2
3
4
4.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞4; range: 
3- ∞, ∞2
22
24
4
2
0
24
26
28
22
4
6
8
2
x
y
5.  f1-22 = 4, f132 = 6
6.  a.   f 1x2 = b 50 + 41x - 552, 56 … x 6 75
200 + 51x - 752, x Ú 75
  b.  $70  c.  $275
7.  f 1x2 = -3x, x … -1 
f 1x2 = 2x, x 7 -1
0
3
1
(21, 22)
(21, 3)
5
23
25
21
5
3
1
21
23
x
y
8.  f1x2 = µ
-x - 4
if
x …
- 2
4
5x - 2
5
if
- 2 6 x 6 3
-2x + 8
if
x Ú 3
9.  Œ -3.4œ = -4; Œ4.7œ = 4
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  horizontal  3.  3
5.  f1x2 = x + 1
0
1
3
2
4
5
23
24
22
25
21
5
6
3
4
1
2
23
22
24
21
x
y
7.  f1x2 = 2x + 3
0
1
3
2
4
5
23
24
22
25
21
5
6
7
3
4
1
2
23
22
21
x
y
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  7  3.  f1-x2 = f1x2 for all x in the domain of f   5.  true
7.  Increasing on 1- ∞, ∞2  9.  Increasing on 1∞, 22, decreasing on 
12, ∞2  11.  Increasing on 1- ∞, -22 and 12, ∞2, constant on 1-2, 22
13.  Increasing on 1- ∞, -32 and a - 1
2, 2b, decreasing on a -3, - 1
2 b and 
12, ∞2  15.  No relative extrema  17.  12, 102 is a relative maximum 
point and a turning point.  19.  Any point 1x, 22 is a relative maximum 
and a relative minimum point on the interval 1-2, 22; none of these points 
are turning points.  21.  1-3, 42 and 12, 52 are relative maximum points 
and turning points; a - 1
2, -2b is a relative minimum and a turning point.
23.  Odd  25.  Neither  27.  Odd  29.  Even  31.  Neither  33.  Even
35.  Odd  37.  Neither  39.  Even  41.  Odd  43.  Even  45.  Neither
47.  a.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 1- ∞, 34  b.  x-intercepts: -3, 3;  
y-intercept: 3   c.  Increasing on 1- ∞, 02; decreasing on 10, ∞2
d.  Relative maximum at 10, 32  e. Even  49.  a.  Domain: 1-3, 42; range: 
3-2, 24  b.  x-intercept: 1; y-intercept: -1  c.  Constant on 1-3, -12 and 
13, 4); increasing on 1-1, 32  d.  Any point 1x, -22 is a relative maxi-
mum and a relative minimum on 1-3, -12, and 1-1, -22 is a relative 
minimum. Any point 1x, 22 is a relative maximum and a relative minimum 
on 13, 42, and 13, 22 is a relative maximum.  e.  Neither  51.  a.  Domain: 
1-2, 42; range: 3-2, 34  b.  x- and y-intercept: 0  c.  Decreasing on 
1-2, -12 and 13, 42; increasing on 1-1, 32   d.  Relative maximum at  
13, 32; relative minimum at 1-1, -22  e. Neither  53.  a.  Domain: 
1- ∞, ∞2; range: 10, ∞2   b.  x-intercepts: none; y-intercept: 1 
c.  Increasing on 1- ∞, ∞2  d.  None  e.  Neither  55.  -2  57.  3
59.  -2  61.  -2  63.  7  65.  - 1
12  67.  2  69.  -x - 1
71.  3x + 7  73.  - 4
x  75.  1  77.  -2  79.  m  81.  2x + h
83.  4x + 2h + 3  85.  0  87.  -
1
x1x + h2
Applying the Concepts:
89.  30, ∞2; the particle’s motion is tracked indefinitely from time t = 0.
91. The graph is above the t-axis on the intervals 10, 92 and 121, 242;  
the particle is moving forward between 0 and 9 sec and again between 
21 and 24 sec.  93.  The particle is moving with increasing speed 
forward on 10, 32, 15, 62, and 121, 232 and moving backward on 
111, 152.  95.  Maximum speed is attained between times t = 15 and 
t = 16.  97.  The particle is moving forward with increasing  
velocity.  99.  b.  10, 62  c.  30, 1284  d.  When x = 2, V has a maxi-
mum value of 128.  101.  a.  C1x2 = 210x + 10,500  b.  +21,000 
c.  +420  d.  100  103.  a.  4 ft from the origin  b.  28 ft  c.  6 ft/sec   
d.  10 ft/sec
Beyond the Basics:
107.  1-1, 52; no  109. 
1
2x + h + 2x
111. 
1
2x1x + h212x + 2x + h2
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
113.  f has a relative maximum (minimum) at x = a if there is an interval 
3a, x12 with a 6 x1 6 b such that f1a2 Ú f1x2 1 f1a2 … f1x22 for every  
x in the interval.  115.  a.  f1x2 = x on the interval 3-1, 14 
b.  f1x2 = e x
if 0 … x 6 1
0
if x = 1
  c.  f1x2 = e x
if 0 6 x … 1
1
if x = 0
d.  f1x2 = •
0
if x = 0 or x = 1
1
if 0 6 x 6 1 and x is rational
-1
if 0 6 x 6 1 and x is irrational
Maintaining Skills:
117.  y = -3x + 20  119.  (i) 222, (ii) 8, (iii) -8i

A-14  Answers   ■   Section 2.6
27. 
0
2
1
3
4
5
22 21
3
2
1
22
21
23
x
y
  Domain: 3-2, ∞2;  
range: 30, ∞2
29. 
Domain: 1- ∞, 44; range: 
5 c , -3, -2, -1, 06 ´ 3-8, -24
  31. 
33.  f1x2 = b
x + 1
if
x 6 2
-3x + 9
if
x Ú 2
35.  f1x2 = c
2x + 6
if
x 6 -2
4
if
-2 … x 6 2
-x + 3
if
x Ú 2
Applying the Concepts:
37.  a.  f1x2 =
1
33.81x; domain: 30, ∞2; range: 30, ∞2  b.  0.0887; it 
means that 3 oz = 0.0887 liters.   c.  0.3549   39.  a.  No d-intercept because 
d Ú 0; y-intercept: 1. It means that the pressure at sea level 1d = 02 is 1 atm.    
b.  P102 = 1, P1102 ≈1.3, P1332 = 2, P11002 ≈4.03  c.  132 ft
41.  a.  C = 50x + 6000 
b.  The y-intercept is the fixed overhead cost. 
0
500
250
2500 2250
8000
4000
24000
28000
x
y
  c.  110
43.  a.  R = 900 - 30x  b.  +720  c.  Ten days after the first of the month
45.  70  47.  a.  y = 2
27 1x - 1502 + 30  b.  45  c.  690 mg>m3
49.  a. 
20,000
40,000 60,000
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x
T
9.  f1x2 = -3x + 4
1
3
2
4
5
23
24
22
25
21
5
6
7
3
4
1
2
23
22
21
x
y
0
11.  f1x2 = 1
2 x + 3
1
2
23
24
22
25
26
27
28
21
5
6
7
3
4
1
2
23
22
21
x
y
0
13.  f1x2 = - 2
3 x - 1
0
1
2
4
3
5
23
24
25
21
22
3
1
2
4
23
21
22
24
25
26
x
y
15.  a.  f112 = 2, f122 = 2, f132 = 3
b. 
1
2
4
3
5
6
23
24
21
22
5
6
7
8
9
3
1
2
4
21
x
y
0
17.  a.  f1-152 = -1, f1122 = 1
b. 
0
1
2
3
23
21
22
3
1
2
23
21
22
x
y
  c.  Domain: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2; 
range: 5-1, 16
19.   
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2;  
range: 1- ∞, ∞2
21. 
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2;  
range: 1- ∞, ∞2
23. 
0
2
1
3
22
23
21
3
2
1
22
23
x
y
y
x
0
1
0
1
2
4
(1, 2)
(3, 0)
(22, 21)
(0, 1)
3
5
23
24
25
21
22
5
3
1
2
4
23
21
22
x
y
0
1
2
3
4
22
23
24
25
21
x
y
(1, 2)
(4, 8)
22
0
24
x
2
22
24
4
y
2
4
y
x
0
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range:  
5 c , -3, -2, -1, 06 ´ 31, ∞2
25. 
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2;  
range: 30, ∞2 
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2;  
range: 1- ∞, 22
b.  i.  +480  ii.  +800   
iii.  +2600  c.  i.  +15,000   
ii.  +26,667  iii.  +45,000

Section 2.7    ■    Answers  A-15
Section 2.7
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  The graph of g is the graph of f  
shifted 1 unit up; the graph of h is 
the graph of f  shifted 2 units down.
0
3
g(x)
h(x)
f(x)
1
5
5
3
1
x
y
2.  The graph of g is the graph of f  
shifted 1 unit to the right; the graph 
of h is the graph of f  shifted 2 units 
to the left.
0
3
g(x)
h(x)
f(x)
1
5
5
3
1
x
y
3. 
4
2
3
6
5
1
0
4
2
3
6
5
1
x
y
(2, 3)
4.  Shift the graph of y = x2 to the 
right 1 unit, reflect the resulting 
graph about the x-axis, and shift it 
up 2 units.
5. 
0
3
1
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
3
5
x
y
f(x)  2x  4
 
0
3
1
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
3
5
x
y
6.  The graph of g is the graph of f  
vertically stretched by multiplying 
each of its y-coordinates by 2.
4
2
3
6
5
1
0
4
2
3
6
5
1
x
y
g(x)
f(x)
7.  a.
0
3
4
2
1
(0, 3) (4, 3)
(2, 0)
2
3
1
x
y
b.
0
3
4
2
1
(0, 3)
(1, 3)
2
3
1
x
y
(
)
, 0
1
2
8. 
0
3
1
5
2
4
1
2
(1, 2)
5
3
1
4
2
1
2
x
y
9.  y = f1x2 S f1x - 12 S f12x - 12
S 1
2f12x - 12 S 1
2f12x - 12 + 3
0
x
y
(2, 2)
(0, 3)
(22, 3)
(21, 5)
Beyond the Basics:
51.  a.  i.  -1  ii.  -1  iii.  -1   
b.  x = 1
2
c. 
0
1
2
4
3
5
23
24
25
21
22
5
3
1
2
4
23
21
22
24
25
x
y
53.  a.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2;  range 30, 12  b.  Increasing on 1n, n + 12 for 
every integer n  c.  Neither  55.  2
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
57.  a.  C1x2 = 171f1x2 - 12 + 44
b. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Weight (oz)
Cost ($)
0.44
0.58
0.75
0.92
1.09
1.26
x
C
  c.  Domain: 10, ∞2; range: 
517n + 44: n a nonnegative integer6
59.  a.  C1x2 = e 150,
if x … 100
-0.2Œ100 - xœ + 150, if x 7 100
b. 
50 100 150 200
300
250
Miles driven
Cost
150
160
170
180
190
x
C
  c.  1299, 3004
Maintaining Skills:
61.  f1x2 + 3  63.  f1-x2
65. 
x
f
g
y
67. 
x
y
f
g

A-16  Answers   ■   Section 2.7
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  down  3.  71  5.  false  7.  a.  Shift 2 units up  b.  Shift 1 unit down
9.  a.  Shift 1 units left  b.  Shift 2 units right  11.  a.  Shift 1 unit left and 
2 units down  b.  Shift 1 unit right and 3 units up  13.  a.  Reflect about 
x-axis  b.  Reflect about y-axis  15.  a.  Stretch vertically by a factor of 2
b.  Compress horizontally by a factor of 2  17.  a.  Reflect about x-axis, 
shift 1 unit up  b.  Reflect about y-axis, shift 1 unit up  19.  a.  Shift 1 unit 
up  b.  Shift 1 unit left  21.  e  23.  g  25.  i  27.  b  29.  l  31.  d
33.	
0
2
6
4
6 4 2
8
10
4
6
2
2
4
x
y
f(x)  x2  2
35.	
0
2
8
6
4
4 2
4
2
2
4
x
y
g(x)    x  1
37.	
0
2
6
4
6 4 2
8
4
6
2
2
4
x
y
h(x)  |x  1|
39. 
41.	
0
2
6
4
6 4 2
8
4
6
2
2
6
4
x
y
g(x)  (x  2)2  1
43.	
0
2
8
6
4
4 2
4
2
2
4
x
y
h(x)    x
45.	
0
6
4
2
6 4 2
4
6
2
2
6
4
x
y
1
f(x)  x
47.	
0
2
6
4
6 4 2
8
10
4
6
2
2
4
x
y
1
2
g(x) 
|x|
0
2
6
4
6 4 2
8
10
4
6
2
2
8
10
4
6
x
y
f(x)  (x  3)3
49.	
0
2
4
6
4
6
2
8
10
4
6
2
2
4
8
10
6
x
y
h(x)  x31
51. 
53.	
0
2
4
6
4
6
2
4
6
2
2
4
6
x
y
g(x)  5 x 2
55.	
0
2
4
6
4
6
2
4
6
2
2
4
x
8
y
h(x)  1x
57. 
59. 
0
2
2
8 6 4
4
2
2

4
y
4 x
g(x)    x2
61. 

h(x)  2[[x 1]]
0
2
4
4 2
8
4
6
2
2
4
8
6
x
y
63.  y = x3 + 2  65.  y = -  x   67.  y = 1x - 322 + 2
69.  y = - 1x + 3 - 2  71.  y = 314 - x23 + 2
73.  y = -  2x - 4  - 3
75.	
(3, 0)
(1, 2)
(4, 4)
x
y
77.	
x
y
(3, 1)
(1, 3)
(4, 5)
0
2
4
6
4
6
2
4
6
2
2
4
6
x
y
f(x)  2(x1)2 1
0
2
4
6 4 2
8
4
6
2
2
4
6
x
y
f(x)   x  3 1

Section 2.7    ■    Answers  A-17
93.  a. 
b. 
95.  a. 
b. 
97.  a. 
x
y
(0, 1)
(1, 5)
(2, 5)
5
2


,7
b. 
(0, 1)
(2, 5)
(1, 5)
5
2


, 7
x
y
Applying the Concepts:
99.  g1x2 = f1x2 + 800  101.  p1x2 = 1.021f1x2 + 5002
103.  a. 
C(x)
1
2
5
4
3
Number of employees
Annual cost
5000
5005
5010
5015
5020
5030
5025
4995
x
y
b.  +5199.75
105.  a. 
4
8
20
16
12
Price (cents)
Number of hats
109,100
109,200
109,300
109,400
109,500
109,600
p
y
x(p)
b.  +2  c.  +3.30
79.	
3
(2, 5)
1
2 ,
x
y



1
3
2 ,



81. 
(4, 1)
(2, 3)
(3, 5)
x
y
83.  	
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
21
22
20
19
18
16
17
15
t
P
P(t) = −0.002t2 + 0.51t + 17.5
85. 
x
y
(5, 7)
(0, 5)
(2, 3)
87. 
x
y
(1, 3)
(2, 1)
3
2


, 5

89.  a. 
b. 
2
0
4
6
x
2
2
4
6
y
y  ug(x)u
2
4
6
(5, 5)
(3, 0)
(1, 3)
(4, 1)
91.  a.	
b. 
4
0
8
12
x
2
2
4
6
y
4
8
12
y  ug(x)u
(6, 1)
(2, 2)
(8, 2)
(10, 4)
2
0
4
6
x
2
2
4
6
y
2
4
6
(5, 5)
(3, 0)
(1, 3)
(4, 1)
(2, 2)
(6, 1)
(10, 4)
(8, 2)
4
0
8
12
x
2
2
4
6
y
4
8
12
2
0
4
x
2
2
4
6
y
2
4
6
8
y  ug(x)u
(6, 4)
(4, 1)
(2, 2)
(3, 2)
2
0
4
x
2
2
4
6
y
2
6
8
(4, 1)
(3, 2)
(2, 2)
(6, 4)
y  ug(x)u
(2, 5)
(4, 5)
(5, 7)
(0, 1)
2
0
4
6
x
2
2
4
4
6
8
y
2
4
6
2
0
4
6
x
2
2
4
4
6
8
y
2
4
6
(5, 7)
(0, 1)
(2, 5)
(4, 5)
107.  The first coordinate gives the 
month. The second coordinate gives 
the hours of daylight.
(1, 1.7)
(12, 2)
(6, 2)
(3, 0)
(9, 0)
0
2
8
12
10
6
4
4
5
2
3
1
2
t
y

A-18  Answers   ■   Section 2.8
Maintaining Skills:
129.  6x2 + 14x + 3  131.  2x2 + 15x - 3  133.  x3 - 8
135.  1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, 32 ´ 13, ∞2  137.  c 3
2, ∞b
Section 2.8
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  1 f + g21x2 = x2 + 3x + 1  
1 f - g21x2 = -x2 + 3x - 3
1 fg21x2 = 3x3 - x2 + 6x - 2 
a
f
g b 1x2 = 3x - 1
x2 + 2
2.  Domain: fg = 31, 34; 
f
g = 31, 32; 
g
f = 11, 34
3.  a.  1 f ∘g2102 = -5  b.  1g ∘f 2102 = 1
4.  a.  1g ∘f 21x2 = 2x2 - 8x + 9  b.  1 f ∘g21x2 = 1 - 2x2
c.  1g ∘g21x2 = 8x4 + 8x2 + 3  5.  1- ∞, 14 ´ 13, ∞2
6.  a.  3- 13, 134  b.  31, 54  7.  f 1x2 = 1
x  8.  a.  A = 9pt2
b.  A = 324p square miles; ≈1018 square miles   
9.  a.  r1x2 = x - 4500  b.  d1x2 = 0.94x
c.  (i)  1r ∘d21x2 = 0.94x - 4500  (ii)  1d ∘r21x2 = 0.94x - 4230
d.  1d ∘r21x2 - 1r ∘d21x2 = 270
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  -8  3.  1  5.  false  7.  a.  1 f + g21-12 = -1  b.  1 f - g2102 = 0
c.  1 f # g2122 = -8  d.  a
f
g b 112 = -2  9.  a.  1 f + g21-12 = 0
b.  1f - g2102 = 1
2 112 - 22  c.  1f # g2122 = 5
2  d.  a
f
g b 112 = 13
9
11.  a.  1 f + g21x2 = x2 + x - 3; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
b.  1 f - g21x2 = -x2 + x - 3; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
c.  1 f # g21x2 = x3 - 3x2; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2  d.  a
f
g b 1x2 = x - 3
x2
 ; 
domain: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2  e.  a
g
f b 1x2 =
x2
x - 3 ; domain: 
1- ∞, 32 ´ 13, ∞2  13.  a.  1 f + g21x2 = x3 + 2x2 + 4; domain: 
1- ∞, ∞2  b.  1 f - g21x2 = x3 - 2x2 - 6; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
c.  1 f # g21x2 = 2x5 + 5x3 - 2x2 - 5; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
d.  a
f
g b 1x2 = x3 - 1
2x2 + 5
; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2  e.  a
g
f b 1x2 = 2x2 + 5
x3 - 1
; 
domain: 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  15.  a.  1 f + g21x2 = 2x + 1x - 1; 
domain: 30, ∞2  b.  1 f - g21x2 = 2x - 1x - 1; domain: 30, ∞2
c.  1 f # g21x2 = 2x1x - 1x; domain: 30, ∞2  d.  a
f
g b 1x2 = 2x - 1
1x
; 
domain: 10, ∞2  e.  a
g
f b 1x2 =
1x
2x - 1; domain: c0, 1
2 b ´ a1
2, ∞b
17.  a.  1f + g21x2 = 2 + x
x + 1; domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2
b.  1f - g21x2 = 2 - x
x + 1; domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2
c.  1f # g21x2 =
2x
1x + 122; domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2
d.  a
f
g b 1x2 = 2
x; domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 02 ´ 10, ∞2
e.  a
g
f b 1x2 = x
2; domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2
19.  a.  1f + g21x2 = x3 - x2 + 2x
x2 - 1
; domain: 
1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 12 ´ 11, ∞2
b.  1f - g21x2 = x2 - 2x
x - 1 ; domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 12 ´ 11, ∞2
c.  1f # g21x2 =
2x3
x3 + x2 - x - 1
; domain: 
1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 12 ´ 11, ∞2
Beyond the Basics:
109.  g1x2 = - 21 - x
111.  Shift 2 units to the left, and 4 
units down.
0
3
1
3
5
7
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
113.  -x2 + 2x = - 1x2 - 2x + 12
+1 = - 1x - 122 + 1 Shift 1 unit 
to the right, reflect about the x-axis, 
and shift 1 unit up.
0
3
1
5
4
2
6
4
1
2
3
3
1
1
3
5
7
x
y
115.  2x2 - 4x = 21x2 - 2x + 12
-2 = 21x - 122 - 2 Shift 1 unit 
to the right, stretch vertically by 
a factor of two, and shift 2 units 
down.
0
3
1
5
4
2
6
4
1
2
3
3
1
4
2
7
5
6
1
2
3
x
y
117.  -2x2 - 8x + 3 =
-21x2 + 4x + 42 + 11 =
-21x + 222 + 11 Shift 2 units to 
the left, stretch vertically by a factor 
of 2, reflect about the x-axis, and 
shift 11 units up.
0
1
2
3
4
654321
2
6
10
4
8
12
16
20
x
y
119. 
0
1 2
3
4
6
1
2
3
4
5
9
10
7
5
3
8
6
4
2
1
x
y
121. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
4
2
1
10
8
9
7
6
x
y
123. 
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
x
y
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
125.  a.  x-intercept 1  b.  x-intercept -2; y-intercept 15  c.  x-intercept -2; 
y-intercept -3  d.  x-intercept 2; y-intercept 3  127.  a.  The graph of g is 
the graph of h shifted 3 units to the right and 3 units up.  b.  The graph of g 
is the graph of h shifted 1 unit to the left and 1 unit down.  c.  The graph of 
g is the graph of h stretched horizontally and vertically by a factor of 2.
d.  The graph of g is the graph of h stretched horizontally by a factor of 
3, reflected about the y-axis, stretched vertically by a factor of 3, and 
reflected about the x-axis.

Section 2.9    ■    Answers  A-19
Applying the Concepts:
67.  a.  Cost function  b.  Revenue function  c.  Selling price of x shirts 
after sale tax  d.  Profit function  69.  a.  P1x2 = 20x - 350
b.  P1202 = 50; profit made after 20 radios were sold  c.  43
d.  1R ∘x21C2 = 5C - 1,750. The function represents the revenue in 
terms of the cost C.  71.  a.  f1x2 = 0.7x  b.  g1x2 = x - 5
c.  1g ∘f21x2 = 0.7x - 5  d.  1f ∘g21x2 = 0.71x - 52  e.  $1.50
73.  a.  f1x2 = 1.1x; g1x2 = x + 8  b.  1f ∘g21x2 = 1.1x + 8.8; a  
final test score, which originally was x, after adding 8 points and then  
increasing the score by 10%  c.  1g ∘f 21x2 = 1.1x + 8; a final test score,  
which originally was x, after increasing the score by 10% and then  
adding 8 points  d.  85.8 and 85.0  e.  No  f.  (i)  73.82  (ii)  74.55   
75.  a.  f1x2 = px2  b.  g1x2 = p1x + 3022  c.  The area between the 
fountain and the fence  d.  $16,052  77.  a.  1f ∘g21t2 = p12t + 122   
b.  A1t2 = p12t + 122  c.  They are the same.
Beyond the Basics:
79.  a.  f + g = 51-2, 32, 11, 02, 13, 226
b.  fg = 51-2, 02, 11, -42, 13, 026  c. 
f
g = 511, -12, 13, 026
d.  f ∘g = 510, 12, 11, 32, 13, 126
81.  c.  h1x2 =
h1x2 + h1-x2
2
+
h1x2 - h1-x2
2
83.  1- ∞, -22 ´ 3-1, 14 ´ 12, ∞2
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
85.  a.  Domain: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 31, ∞2   b.  Domain: 30, 24  c.  Domain: 
31, 24  d.  Domain: 31, 22  87.  a.  Even function  b.  Odd function
c.  Neither  d.  Even function  e.  Even function  f.  Odd function
Maintaining Skills:
89.  a.  Yes  b.  S = 512, -32, 11, -12, 13, 12, 11, 226 S is not a function.
91.  y = x - 3
2
  93.  x = - 24 - y2
Section 2.9
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  Not one-to-one; the horizontal 
line y = 1 intersects the graph at 
two different points.
0
2
1
3
1
4
3
2
1
x
y
2.  a.  -3  b.  4
3.  1 f ∘g21x2 = 3ax + 1
3
b - 1 = x + 1 - 1 = x and 
1g ∘f 21x2 = 3x - 1 + 1
3
= 3x
3 = x; therefore, f  and g are inverses of 
each other.
4. 
0
3
1
5
4
3
2
1
x
y
(4, 3)
y 5 f 1(x)
  5.  f -11x2 = 3 - x
2
6.  f -11x2 =
3x
1 - x, x ≠1  7.  Domain: 1- ∞, -32 ´ 1-3, ∞2; 
range: 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  8.  G-11x2 = - 2x + 1  9.  3597 ft
d.  a
f
g b 1x2 = x2 - x
2
; domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 02 ´ 10, 12 ´ 11, ∞2
e.  a
g
f b 1x2 =
2
x2 - x
; domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 02 ´ 10, 12 ´ 11, ∞2
21.  a.  1f + g21x2 =
4x2 - 5x - 28
x3 - 3x2 - 16x + 48
; 
domain: 1- ∞, -42 ´ 1-4, 32 ´ 13, 42 ´ 14, ∞2
b.  1f - g21x2 = -
7
1x - 321x + 42; 
domain: 1- ∞, -42 ´ 1-4, 32 ´ 13, 42 ´ 14, ∞2
c.  1f # g21x2 =
4x2 - 14x
x4 - 7x3 - 4x2 + 112x - 192
; 
domain: 1- ∞, -42 ´ 1-4, 32 ´ 13, 42 ´ 14, ∞2
d.  a
f
g b 1x2 =
2x2 - 6x
2x2 + x - 28
; 
domain: 1- ∞, -42 ´ 1-4, 32 ´ a3, 7
2 b ´ a7
2, 4b ´ 14, ∞2
e.  a
g
f b 1x2 = 2x2 + x - 28
2x2 - 6x
; 
domain: 1- ∞, -42 ´ 1-4, 02 ´ 10, 32 ´ 13, 42 ´ 14, ∞2
23.  a. [1, 5]  b. 31, 52  25.  a. 3-2, 34  b. 3-2, 32
27.  g1 f 1x22 = 2x2 + 1; g1 f1222 = 9; g1 f1-322 = 19  29.  11
31.  31  33.  8a2 + 8a - 1  35.  7  37. 
2x
x + 1; 1- ∞, -12´ 1-1, 02´ 10, ∞2
39.  1-3x - 1; a - ∞, - 1
3 d   41.  0 x2 - 10 ; 1- ∞, ∞2
43.  a.  1 f ∘g21x2 = 2x + 5; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
b.  1g ∘f 21x2 = 2x + 1; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2  c.  1 f ∘f 21x2 = 4x - 9; 
domain: 1- ∞, ∞2  d.  1g ∘g21x2 = x + 8; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
45.  a.  1 f ∘g21x2 = -2x2 - 1; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
b.  1g ∘f 21x2 = 4x2 - 4x + 2; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
c.  1 f ∘f 21x2 = 4x - 1; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
d.  1g ∘g21x2 = x4 + 2x2 + 2; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2
47.  a.  1 f ∘g21x2 = x; domain: 30, ∞2  b.  1g ∘f 21x2 = 0 x0 ; domain: 
1- ∞, ∞2  c.  1 f ∘f 21x2 = x4; domain: 1- ∞, ∞2  d.  1g ∘g21x2 = 2
4 x; 
domain: 30, ∞2  49.  a.  1 f ∘g21x2 = -
x2
x2 - 2
; domain: 
1- ∞, - 122 ´ 1- 12, 02 ´ 10, 122 ´ 112, ∞2
b.  1g ∘f 21x2 = 12x - 122; domain: a - ∞, 1
2 b ´ a1
2, ∞b
c.  1 f ∘f 21x2 = - 2x - 1
2x - 3; domain: a - ∞, 1
2 b ´ a1
2, 3
2 b ´ a3
2, ∞b
d.  1g ∘g21x2 = x4; domain: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2
51.  a.  1 f ∘g21x2 = 214 - x - 1; domain: 1- ∞, 34
b.  1g ∘f 21x2 = 24 - 1x - 1; domain: 31, 174
c.  1 f ∘f 21x2 = 21x - 1 - 1; domain: 32, ∞2
d.  1g ∘g21x2 = 24 - 14 - x; domain: 3-12, 44
53.  a.  1f ∘g21x2 = 23 - x2; domain = 3- 23, 234
b.  1g ∘f21x2 = 25 - x2; domain = 3- 25, -14 ´ 31, 254
c.  1 f ∘f21x2 = 2x2 - 2; domain = 3- ∞, 224 ´ 322, ∞2
d.  1g ∘g21x2 =  x ; domain = 3-2, 24  55.  a.  1 f ∘g21x2 =
2
1 + x; 
domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  b.  1g ∘f 21x2 = -2x - 1; 
domain: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2  c.  1 f ∘f 21x2 = 2x + 1
x + 1 ; domain: 
1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 02 ´ 10, ∞2  d.  1g ∘g21x2 = - 1
x; domain: 
1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  57.  f1x2 = 1x; g1x2 = x + 2
59.  f1x2 = x10; g1x2 = x2 - 3  61.  f1x2 = 1
x; g1x2 = 3x - 5
63.  f1x2 = 2
3 x; g1x2 = x2 - 7  65.  f1x2 =
1
0 x0 ; g1x2 = x3 - 1

A-20  Answers   ■   Section 2.9
47.  a.  One-to-one  b.  g-11x2 = 1x3 - 12
c. 
g(x)
g1(x)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
  d.  Domain g: 1- ∞, ∞2  
x-intercept: -1  
y-intercept: 1  
Domain g-1: 1- ∞, ∞2  
x-intercept: 1  
y-intercept: -1
49.  a.  One-to-one  b.  f -11x2 = x + 1
x
c. 
f(x)
f 1(x)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
  d.  Domain f: 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  
No x-intercept 
y-intercept: -1  
Domain f -1: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2  
x-intercept: -1 
No y-intercept
51.  a.  One-to-one  b.  f -11x2 = x2 - 4x + 3
c. 
0
3
4
5
6
2 1
1
2
6
4
5
3
1
2
2
1
x
y
f 1(x)
f(x)
(1, 2)
(2, 1)
  d.  Domain f: 3-1, ∞2.  
y-intercept: 3  
No x-intercept  
Domain f -1: 32, ∞2  
x-intercept is 3.  
No y-intercept
53.  Domain: 1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-2, ∞2; range: 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2
55.  f -11x2 = 2x + 1
x - 1  Domain: 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2; 
range: 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  57.  f -11x2 = 1 - x
x + 2 
Domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2; range: 1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-2, ∞2
59.  y = 1-x, x … 0
0
2
4
6
4
6
2
4
6
2
2
4
6
x
y
f(x)  x 2
f 1(x)   x
f 1(x) 
f(x)
y  x
61.  y = x, x Ú 0
0
2
4
6
4
6
2
4
6
2
2
4
6
x
y
y  x
y  f(x)
y  f 1(x) 
 f 1(x)  x
f(x)  x
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  one-to-one  3.  1
3 x  5.  true  7.  One-to-one  9.  Not one-to-one
11.  Not one-to-one  13.  One-to-one  15.  2  17.  -1  19.  a
21.  337  23.  -1580  25.  a.  3  b.  3  c.  19  d.  5  27.  a.  2  b.  1
c.  269
35. 
37. 
39. 
5
y  x
(4, 3)
(3, 4)
(2, 3)
(1, 5)
(5, 1)
(3, 2)
2
2
4
3
1
1
3
5
4
1
2 3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
x
y
f(x)
f1(x)
41.  a.  One-to-one  b.  f -11x2 = 5 - 1
3 x
c. 
0
f 1(x)
−10 −5
5
10
15
20
−10
−5
5
10
15
20
y
x
f(x)
  d.  Domain f: 1- ∞, ∞2  
x-intercept: 5  
y-intercept: 15  
Domain f -1: 1- ∞, ∞2 
x-intercept: 15  
y-intercept: 5
43.  Not one-to-one
45.  a.  One-to-one  b.  f -11x2 = 1x - 322
c. 
f1(x)
f(x)
0
4
2
10
6
8
10
4
2
8
6
x
y
  d.  Domain f: 30, ∞2  
No x-intercept  
y-intercept: 3  
Domain f -1: 33, ∞2  
x-intercept: 3  
No y-intercept
x
y  x
y
f(x)
f1(x)
y  x
x
y
f(x)
f1(x)

Review Exercises    ■    Answers  A-21
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
7
3
1
1
3
x
y
g(x)
c.
89.  a.  (i) f -11x2 = 1
2 x - 3
2  (ii) g-11x2 = 2
3 x + 1
(iii) 1 f ∘g21x2 = 2x3 + 1  (iv) 1g ∘f 21x2 = 8x3 + 36x2 + 54x + 26
(v) 1 f ∘g2-11x2 = A
3 x - 1
2
  (vi) 1g ∘f 2-11x2 = 1
2 2
3 x + 1 - 3
2 
(vii) 1 f -1 ∘g-121x2 = 1
2 2
3 x + 1 - 3
2  (viii) 1g-1 ∘f -121x2 = B
3 x - 1
2
b.  (i) 1 f ∘g2-11x2 = A
3 x - 1
2
= 1g-1 ∘f -121x2 
(ii) 1g ∘f 2-11x2 = 1
2 1
3 x + 1 - 3
2 = 1 f -1 ∘g-121x2
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
91.  No. f1x2 = x3 - x is odd, but it does not have an inverse because 
f102 = f112. So it is not one-to-one.  93.   Yes, because increasing and 
decreasing functions are one-to-one
Maintaining Skills:
95.  x = 3, x = 4  97.  x = -1, x = 3
99. 
0
3
1
5
3
1
x
y
(2, 3)
5
3
1
1
3
5
Review Exercises
1.  false  3.  true  5.  false  7.  true  9.  a.  215  b.  11, 42  
c.  1
2  11.  a.  512  b.  a13
2 , - 11
2 b  c.  -1  13.  a.  134    b.  a7
2, - 9
2 b 
c.  5
3  15.  AC2 + BC2 = AB2 134 + 34 = 682  17.  14, 52  19.  a31
18, 0b 
21.  Not symmetric with respect to the x-axis, symmetric with respect to 
the y-axis, not symmetric with respect to the origin   23.  Symmetric with 
respect to the x-axis, not symmetric with respect to the y-axis, not sym-
metric with respect to the origin  
25. 
0
2
4 6
8 10
14
12
6
2
4
10
6
2
2
10
6
x
y
  x-intercept: 4; y-intercept: 2; 
not symmetric with respect to 
the x-axis, not symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis, not sym-
metric with respect to the origin 
63.  y = - 1x - 1, x Ú 1
0
2
4
6
24
26
22
4
6
2
22
24
26
x
y
y5x
y5f(x)
y5f 21(x)
f(x)  x2  1
f 21(x)    x1
65.  y = - 12 - x, x … 2
0
2
4
6
4
6
2
4
6
2
2
4
6
x
y
y  x
y  f(x)
y  f 1(x) 
f 1(x)   2  x
f(x)  x2  2
Applying the Concepts:
67.  a.  C1K2 = K - 273; it represents the Celsius temperature corre-
sponding to a given Kelvin temperature.  b.  27°C  c.  295 K
69.  a.  F1K1C22 = 9
5 C + 32  b.  C1K1F22 = 5
9 F = 160
9
71.  a.  Dollars to euros: f1x2 = 0.75x (x is the number of dollars; f1x2 is the 
number of euros); euros to dollars: g1x2 = 1.25x (x is the number of euros; 
g1x2 is the number of dollars)   c.  She loses money. 
73.  a.  w = e 4 + 0.05x, 
if x 7 60
7, 
if x … 60
b.  It does not have an inverse because it is constant on 10, 602 and hence is 
not one-to-one.   c.  Restriction of the domain: 360, ∞2  75.  a.  x = 1
64 V2; 
it gives the height of the water in terms of the velocity.  b.  (i) 14.0625 ft 
(ii) 6.25 ft  77.  a.  The balance due after x months
b.  f -11x2 = 60 -
1
600 x; it shows the number of months that have passed 
from the first payment until the balance due is +x.  c.  23.333≈24 months
Beyond the Basics:
81.  a. 
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
x
y
83.  a. 
b.  f -11x2 =
x
1 - x 
c.  Domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2; 
range: 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2
85.  a.  The midpoint is M15, 52. Because its coordinates satisfy the equa-
tion y = x, it lies on the line y = x.  b.  The slope of the line segment PQ 
is -1, and the slope of the line y = x is 1. Because 1-12 112 = -1, the 
two lines are perpendicular.
87.  a. The graph of g is the graph of f  shifted 1 unit to the right and  
2 units up.  
g(x)
y  x
g1(x)
0
1
6
4
1
6
1
1
4
x
y
0
1 2
3
4
6
1
2
3
4
5
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
b.  No
c.  Domain: 3-2, 24;  
range: 30, 24
f  satisfies the horizontal-line test.
b.  g-11x2 = 2
3 x - 2 + 1

A-22  Answers   ■   Review Exercises
41.  x2 + y2 - 2x + 4y - 4 = 0 1 1x - 122 + 1y + 222 = 9; circle 
centered at 11, -22 and with radius 3  
0
2
(1, 2)
1
4
3
1
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
x
y
 
43.  y = -2x + 4  45.  y = -2x + 5  47.  a.  Parallel  b.  Neither
c.  Perpendicular  d.  Neither 
49. 
0
1
(2, 1)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
2
1
1
1
2
x
y
(1, 2)
Domain: 5-1, 0, 1, 26; range: 5-1, 0, 1, 26; function  
51. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
4
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
x
y
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 1- ∞, ∞2; function  
53. 
0
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.4
x
y
Domain: 3-0.2, 0.24; range: 3-0.2, 0.24; not a function  
55. 
0
3
2
1
10
6
8
2
4
2
4
10
6
8
x
y
Domain: 516; range: 1- ∞, ∞2; not a function  
27. 
0
1
3
5
3
5
11
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x
y
  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; not 
symmetric with respect to the  
x-axis, symmetric with respect 
to the y-axis, not symmetric 
with respect to the origin 
29. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; 
not symmetric with respect to 
the x-axis, not symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis, symmetric 
with respect to the origin  
31. 
0
1
3
5
3
5
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x
y
  No x-intercept; y-intercept: 2; 
not symmetric with respect 
to the x-axis, symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis, not sym-
metric with respect to the origin  
33. 
0
1
2
4
3
4
1
2
3
4
3
2
1
1
4
3
2
x
y
  x-intercepts: -4 and 4; y-
intercepts: -4 and 4; symmetric 
with respect to the x-axis, 
symmetric with respect to the 
y-axis, symmetric with respect 
to the origin  
35.  1x - 222 + 1y + 322 = 25  37.  1x + 222 + 1y + 522 = 4 
39.  x
2 -
y
5 = 1 1 y = 5
2x - 5; 
line with slope 5
2; x-intercept 2 and 
y-intercept -5  
0
3
2
1
5
4
6
3
4
1
2
2
1
1
3
4
2
5
7
8
6
x
y
 

Review Exercises    ■    Answers  A-23
87.  Even; not symmetric with respect to the x-axis, symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis, not symmetric with respect to the origin  
89.  Even; not symmetric with respect to the x-axis, symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis, not symmetric with respect to the origin  
91.  Neither even nor odd; not symmetric with respect to the x-axis, not 
symmetric with respect to the y-axis, not symmetric with respect to the 
origin  93.  f1x2 = 1g ∘h21x2, where g1x2 = 1x and h1x2 = x2 - 4 
95.  h1x2 = 1f ∘g21x2, where f1x2 = 1x and g1x2 = x - 3
2x + 5 
97.  One-to-one; f -11x2 = x - 2  
0
2
4
4
6
2
2
4
6
2
4
x
y
f(x)
f 1(x)
 
99.  One-to-one; f -11x2 = x3 + 2  
f(x)
f 1(x)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
 
101.  f -11x2 = 2x + 1
1 - x ; domain: 1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-2, ∞2; range: 
1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  103.  a.  f1x2 = d
3x + 6, if -3 … x … -2
1
2 x + 1, if -2 6 x 6 0
x + 1,
 if 0 … x … 3
 
b.  Domain: 3-3, 34; range: 3-3, 44  c.  x-intercept: -2; y-intercept: 1  
d. 
0
1
3
5
5
3
1
5
1
3
1
3
5
x
y
(0, 1)
(2, 0)
(3, 3)
(3, 4)
 
e. 
0
5
3
5
3
5
1
3
5
3
x
y
(3, 4)
(0, 1)
(3, 3)
(2, 0)
 
f. 
0
5
1
3
5
3
1
5
1
3
5
3
1
x
y
(3, 5)
(0, 2)
(3, 2)
(2, 1)
 
g. 
0
5
1
3
5
1
5
1
3
5
3
x
y
(2, 4)
(4, 3)
(3, 0)
(1, 1)
 
57. 
0
−6 −5−4 −3 −2−1
1 2 3 4
1
2
3
4
5
y
x
y = |x + 1|
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 30, ∞2; function  
59.  -5  61.  x = 1  63.  3  65.  -10  67.  22  69.  3x2 - 5 
71.  9x + 4  73.  3a + 3h + 1   75.  3 
77. 
0
2
4
1
2
4
1
2
3
4
5
x
y
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 5-36; constant on 1- ∞, ∞2  
79. 
0
3
1
5
4
5
1
2
3
x
y
Domain: c 2
3, ∞b; range: 30, ∞2; increasing on a2
3, ∞b  
81. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
x
y
Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 31, ∞2; decreasing on 1- ∞, 02,  
increasing on 10, ∞2  
83.  The graph of g is the graph of f  shifted 1 unit to the left.  
0
−2 −1
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
y
x
g(x)
f(x)
 
85.  The graph of g is the graph of f  shifted 2 units to the right and 
reflected in the x-axis. 
−5 −4 −3 −2 −1
1
0
2
3
4
5
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
1
2
3
4
5
y
x
g(x)
g(x)
f(x)
f(x)
 

A-24  Answers   ■   Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–2)
Practice Test A
1.  1x + 322 + 1y - 422 = 2  2.  Symmetric about the x-axis
3.  x-intercept: -1, 0, 3; y-intercept: 0
4. 
0
2
1
3
1
3
2
1
1
x
y
C(1, 1)
5.  y = -x + 9  6.  y = 4x - 9  7.  -36  8.  -1
9.  x4 - 4x3 + 2x2 + 4x  10.  a. f1-12 = -3   b. f102 = -2 
c. 
f112 = -1  11.  30, 12  12.  2  13.  Even  14.  Increasing 
on 1- ∞, 02 ´ 12, ∞2, decreasing on 10, 22  15.  Shift the graph of 
y = 1x 3 units to the right, stretch the graph of y = 1x - 3 vertically 
by a factor of 2, and shift the graph of y = 21x - 3 4 units up. 
16.  2.5 sec  17.  2  18.  f -11x2 =
x
x - 2
19.  A1x2 = 100x + 1000  20.  a.  +87.50  b.  110 mi
Practice Test B
1.  d  2.  b  3.  d  4.  d  5.  c  6.  c  7.  d  8.  b  9.  a  10.  c  11.  a
12.  d  13.  a  14.  a  15.  b  16.  d  17.  c  18.  c  19.  b  20.  a
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–2)
1.  a. 
y2
x3  b. 
1 
x + y  3.  a.  313  b. 
2x
1x + 12 1x + 22  5.  a.  x = 4
b.  No solution  7.  a.  1
4 { 123
4
 i  b.  x = 3
2  9.  a.  x = 7 + 117
8
b.  x = 0; 8
9  11.  a.  (0, 4)  b.  3-3, -24  13.  Because the length of the side
BC is equal to the length of the side AC (which is 5), the triangle is isosceles.   
15.  All of the points satisfy the equation 1x - 222 + 1y + 122 = 52, 
which is a circle with center 12, -12 and radius 5.   17.  y = -3x + 5
19.  y = -0.5x  21.  y = - 1
4 x + 4  23.  x = 2
25. 
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
27. 
0
4
2
6
2
8
6
4
2
x
y
29.  She purchased 60 books.  31.  a.  3-1, ∞2  b.  x-intercept: 8; 
y-intercept: -2  c.  -3  d.  18, ∞2  33.  a.  1f ∘g21x2 =
x
2 - 2x, and its 
domain is1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, 12 ´ 11, ∞2.  b.  1g ∘f21x2 = 21x - 22, and 
its domain is 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2.
h. 
0
5
3
1
5
3
1
8
1
3
2
4
5
6
7
6
2
3
1
4
5
x
y
(3, 8)
(3, 6)
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
 
i. 
0
5
3
1
5
3
5
1
2
5
3
1
x
y
(1.5, 4)
(0, 1)
(1.5, 3)
(1, 0)
 
j. 
0
6
1
6
1
5
5
x
y
(6, 4)
(0, 1)
(6, 3)
(4, 0)
  k.  It satisfies the horizontal-line 
test.  
l. 
0
5
3
5
3
1
5
1
3
1
5
3
x
y
(1, 0)
(0, 2)
(3, 3)
(4, 3)
 
Applying the Concepts: 
105.  a.  C = 0.875w - 22,125  b.  Slope: the cost of disposing 1 pound 
of waste; x-intercept: the amount of waste that can be disposed with no 
cost; y-intercept: the fixed cost  c.  +510,750  d.  1,168, 142.86 lb 
107.  a.  She won +98.  b.  She was winning at a rate of +49>h.  c.  Yes, 
after 20 hours  d.  +5>hr  109.  a.  0.520.000004t4 + 0.004t2 + 5 
b.  1.13  111.  a.  y = 7.4474x - 363.88 
b. 
y  7.4474x  363.88
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
72 74
76 78
80 82
84 86
  c.  202 lb

Chapter 3
Section 3.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.   y = 31x - 122 - 5; f has minimum value -5.
2.   The graph is a parabola. a = -2, h = -1, k = 3. It opens ­downward. 
Vertex 1-1, 32. It has maximum value 3; x-intercepts: { A
3
2 - 1;
y-intercept: 1
 
1
2
2
3
4
1
0
x
y
(1, 3)
3.   The graph is a parabola. It opens upward. Vertex a1
2, -27
4
b; It has a 
minimum value - 27
4 ; x-intercepts: -1, 2; y-intercept: -6
1
4
2
3
1
4
3
2
0
x
y
(
)
, 
1
2
27
4
4. 
0
2
1
3
4
2 1
4
6
2
4
2
x
y
 
c 3 - 223
3
, 3 + 223
3
d
5.   a 6 0, b 6 0, c 7 0  6.  a.   h1t2 = -16t2 + 96t + 100 (feet)
b.   3 seconds  7.   Maximum area is 62,500 sq ft. The playground is 
square, 250 feet on each side.
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  vertex  3.  true  5.  1
2  7.  true  9.  f  11.  a  13.  h  15.  g
17.  y = -2x2  19.  y = 5x2  21.  y = 2x2  23.  y = - 1x + 322
25.  y = 21x - 222 + 5  27.  y = 11
49 1x - 222 - 3
29.  y = -12ax - 1
2 b
2
+ 1
2  31.  y = 3
4 1x + 222
33.  y = 3
4 1x - 322 - 1  35.  a 7 0  b 6 0  c 6 0  37.  a 7 0
b 6 0  c 7 0  39.  a 6 0  b 6 0  c 6 0 
41. 
1
2
1
2
x
y
The graph is the graph of y = x2 
stretched vertically by a factor of 3.
43. 
4
1
7
4
1
x
y
 
The graph is the graph of y = x2 
shifted 4 units to the right. 
45. 
2
2
12
10
8
6
4
2
x
y
 
The graph is the graph of y = x2  
stretched vertically by a factor of 2,  
reflected about the x-axis, and  
shifted down 4 units. 
47. 
0
1
5
3
7
2
4
6
8
10
x
y
The graph is the graph of y = x2 
shifted 3 units right and 2 units up.
49.  The graph is the graph of 
y = x2 shifted 2 units right, 
stretched vertically by a ­factor of 
3, reflected about the x-axis, and 
shifted 4 units up. 
 
0
4
3
2
1
5
4
5
1
2
3
x
y
51.  y = 1x + 222 - 4. The graph 
is the graph of y = x2 shifted  
2 units to the left and 4 units down. 
Vertex: 1-2, -42; axis: x = -2;  
x-intercepts: -4 and 0; y-intercept: 0
1
2
3
4
5
2
4
6
2
1
2
3
0
x
y
53.  y = - 1x - 322 - 1. The 
graph is the graph of y = x2 shifted 
3 units to the right, reflected about 
the x-axis, and shifted 1 unit down. 
­Vertex: 13, -12; axis: x = 3; no 
x-intercept; y-intercept: -10
5
6
1
0
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x
y
7
Section 3.1    ■    Answers  A-25

A-26  Answers    ■    Section 3.2
59.  a.  Opens up  b.  14, -12 
c.  x = 4  d.  x-intercepts: 3 and  
5; y-intercept: 15
e. 
61.  a.  Opens up
b.  a1
2, -25
4
b  c.  x = 1
2
d.  x-intercepts: -2 and 3; 
y-intercept: -6
e. 
63.  a.  Opens up  b.  11, 32
c.  x = 1  d.  x-intercepts: none;  
y-intercept: 4
e. 
65.  a.  Opens down  b.  1-1, 72
c.  x = -1  d.  x-intercepts:  
-1 { 17; y-intercept: 6 
e. 
55.  y = 21x - 222 + 1. The 
graph is the graph of y = x2 shifted 
2 units to the right, stretched verti-
cally by a factor of 2, and shifted 1 
unit up.
0
2
2
4
6
1
3
5
7
9
11
x
y
14
Vertex: 12, 12; axis: x = 2; no x-
intercept; y-intercept: 9
57.  y = -31x - 322 + 16. The  
graph is the graph of y = x2  
shifted 3 units to the right,  
stretched vertically by a factor  
of 3, reflected about the x-axis,  
and shifted 16 units up.
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
8
4
12
16
20
8
16
12
4
20
x
y
7
Vertex: 13, 162; axis: x = 3;
x-intercepts: 3 { 4
3 13;
y-intercept: -11
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
2
4
3
1
120
x
4 5 6 7 8 9
2
y
2
1
2
4
3
5
6
7
1
0
4
4
5
2
3
1
2
3
1
y
x
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
2 1
3
4
1
0
3
2
y
x
4
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
3
1
2
1
0
4
2
3
y
x
5
67.  a.  Minimum: -1  b.  3-1, ∞2  69.  a.  Maximum: 0  b.  1- ∞, 04
71.  a.  Minimum: -5  b.  3-5, ∞2  73.  a.  Maximum: 16
b.  1- ∞, 164 
75. 
0
1
1
1
2
3
4
5
2
3
1
2
3
4
2
3
4
x
y
 Solution: 3-2, 24 
77. 
2
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6 x
y
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Solution: 1- ∞, 12 ´ 13, ∞2
79. 
0
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2
2
1
1
2
y
x
 Solution: a -1, 7
6 b
Applying the Concepts:
81.  a.  ≈550 ft  b.  ≈140 ft  c.  547 ft; 139 ft  83.  19
85.  25  87.  Square with 20-unit sides; maximum area: 400 square units
89.  Dimensions: 75 m * 100 m; area: 7500 m2  91.  38
93.  28 students; maximum revenue: +1568
95.  a.  h1t2 = -0.8t2 + 8t + 5 (meters)  b.  5 sec  97.  a.  64 ft
b.  After 4 sec  99.  Dimensions of the rectangle: height =
18
p + 4 ft; 
width =
36
p + 4 ft  101.  a.  159, 36.812  b.  120 ft  c.  37 ft
d.  9 ft  e.  113.6 ft
Beyond the Basics:
103.  f 1x2 = 3x2 + 12x + 15  105.  f 1x2 = 6x2 - 12x + 4
107.  f 1x2 = -2x2 + 12x + 14  109.  Opening up: x2 - 4x - 12; 
opening down: -x2 + 4x + 12  111.  Opening up: x2 + 8x + 7; 
­opening down: -x2 - 8x - 7  113.  a = 2
Maintaining Skills:
121.  -1  123.  - 1
16  125.  1  127.  9x2
4   129.  (2x + 3)(2x - 3)
131.  (3x + 4)(5x - 3)  133.  (x - 2)(x - 1)(x + 2)  135.  (x2 + 3)(x + 4)
Section 3.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  Not a polynomial function  b.  A polynomial function; the degree 
is 7, the leading term is 2x7, and the leading coefficient is 2.

Section 3.2    ■    Answers  A-27
51.  a.  y S ∞ as x S - ∞ and 
y S - ∞ as x S ∞  b.  Zeros: 
x = -1, the graph crosses the 
x-axis; x = 0, the graph touches but 
does not cross the x-axis.   
c.  The graph is above the x-axis 
on 1- ∞, -12 and below the x-axis 
on 1-1, 02 ´ 10, ∞2.  d.  0  e.  no 
symmetries  f.  2
g. 
2.  P1x2 = 4x3 + 2x2 + 5x - 17 = x3a4 + 2
x + 5
x2 - 17
x3 b 
When  x   is large, the terms 2
x, 5
x2, and - 17
x3 are close to 0. Therefore, 
P1x2 ≈x314 + 0 + 0 - 02 = 4x3.  3.  y S - ∞ as x S - ∞ and 
y S - ∞ as x S ∞  4.  3
2  5.  f 112 = -7, f 122 = 4. Because f 112 and
 f 122 have opposite signs, by this Intermediate Value Theorem, f  has 
a real zero between 1 and 2.  6.  -5, -1, and 3  7.  -5 and -3 with 
multiplicity 1 and 1 with multiplicity 2  8.  3
9. 
0
1
2
3
2
3
1
4
2
4
6
2
x
y
  10.  207.378 liters
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  5;  2x5;  2;  -6  3.  end behavior  5.  zero  7.  n - 1
9.  Polynomial function; degree: 5; leading term: 2x5; leading coefficient: 2
11.  Polynomial function; degree: 3; leading term: 2
3 x3; leading 
coefficient: 2
3  13.  Polynomial function; degree: 4; leading term: px4; 
leading coefficient: p  15.  Presence of  x   17.  Domain not 1- ∞, ∞2
19.  Presence of 1x  21.  Domain not 1- ∞, ∞2  23.  Graph not 
­continuous  25.  Graph not continuous  27.  Not a function  29.  c
31.  a  33.  d  35.  Zeros: x = -5, multiplicity: 1, the graph crosses 
the x-axis; x = 1, multiplicity: 1, the graph crosses the x-axis; maximum 
number of turning points: 1  37.  Zeros: x = -1, multiplicity: 2, the 
graph touches but does not cross the x-axis; x = 1, multiplicity: 3, the 
graph crosses the x-axis; maximum number of turning points: 4
39.  Zeros: x = - 2
3, multiplicity: 1, the graph crosses the x-axis; x = 1
2, 
multiplicity: 2, the graph touches but does not cross the x-axis; maximum 
number of turning points: 2  41.  Zeros: x = 0, multiplicity: 2, the graph 
touches but does not cross the x-axis; x = 3, multiplicity: 2, the graph 
touches but does not cross the x-axis; maximum number of turning points: 3
43.  2.09  45.  2.28  47.  a.  y S ∞ as x S - ∞ and y S ∞ as x S ∞ 
b.  No zeros  c.  The graph is above the x-axis on 1- ∞, ∞2.  d.  3 
e.  y-axis symmetry  f.  1  g. 
4
 
3
2
1
5
6
2
0
1
1
3
3
2
y
x
49.  a.  y S ∞ as x S - ∞ and 
y S ∞ as x S ∞  b.  Zeros: 
x = -7, the graph crosses the 
x-axis; x = 3, the graph crosses 
the x-axis.  c.  The graph is above 
the x-axis on 1- ∞, -72 and 
13, ∞2 and below the x-axis on 
1-7, 32.  d.  -21  e.  symmetric 
about x = -2  f.  1
g. 
5
7
3 1
5
5
10
10
15
20
25
30
5
3
1
0
9
y
x
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
y
x
1
2
3
2
3
1
53.  a.  y S ∞ as x S - ∞  
and y S ∞ as x S ∞   
b.  Zeros: x = 0, the graph touches 
but does not cross the x-axis; x = 1, 
the graph touches but does not cross 
the x-axis. 
c.  The graph is above the x-axis on 
1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, 12 ´ 11, ∞2. 
d.  0  e.  no symmetries  f.  3
g. 
3
1
1
2
2
0
5
2
1
3
4
x
y
55.  a.  y S ∞ as x S - ∞ and 
y S ∞ as x S ∞  b.  Zeros: 
x = -3, the graph crosses the 
x-axis; x = 1, the graph touches but 
does not cross the x-axis; x = 4, 
the graph crosses the x-axis.  c.  The 
graph is above the  
x-axis on 1- ∞, -32 and 
14, ∞2 and below the x-axis on 
1-3, 12 ´ 11, 42.  d.  -12   
e.  no symmetries  f.  3
g. 
2
3
1
20
20
40
60
80
100
40
60
2
4
1
3
5
4
0
x
y
x
57.  a.  y S ∞ as x S - ∞ and 
y S - ∞ as x S ∞  b.  Zeros: 
x = -1, the graph touches but 
does not cross the x-axis; x = 0, 
the graph touches but does not 
cross the x-axis; x = 1, the 
graph crosses the x-axis.  c.  The 
graph is above the x-axis on 
1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 02 ´ 10, 12 
and below the x-axis on 
11, ∞2.  d.  0  e.  no symmetries  f.  4
g. 
2
3
1
1
2
3
1
2
3
2
3
0
1
y
x
59.  a.  y S ∞ as x S - ∞ and 
y S ∞ as x S ∞  b.  Zeros:  
x = -2, the graph crosses 
the x-axis; x = -1, the graph 
crosses the x-axis; x = 0, the graph 
crosses the x-axis; x = 1, the 
graph crosses the x-axis.  c.  The 
graph is above the x-axis on 
1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-1, 02 ´ 11, ∞2 
and below the x-axis on 
1-2, -12 ´ 10, 12.  d.  0  e.  no 
symmetries  f.  3
g. 
0
3
1
3
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
3
4
x
y

A-28  Answers   ■   Section 3.2
71.  a.  V1x2 = x21108 - 4x2  b. 
9
18
27
8000
2000
6000
4000
12,000
10,000
0
V
x
73.  a.  V1x2 = x2162 - 2x2  b. 
5000
3000
1000
7000
9000
3
0
9
15
21
27
33
V
x
75.  a.  V1x2 = 6x2115 - x2  b. 
2000
500
1500
1000
3000
2500
12
6
3
9
0
15
V
x
77. 
50
30
10
90
110
70
4
0
6
2
8
f
t
 
79.  
D
t
1
0
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Years from 2000
Deaths (in thousands)
80
D(t)  0.205996t3 2.526415t2 
                11.156629t  17.337104
70
60
50
40
30
20
 The model function D1t2 
fits the actual data very 
well.
Applying the Concepts:
61.  a.  Zeros: x = 0, multiplicity 2; x = 4, multiplicity 1
b. 
x
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
10
10
20
30
40
50
0
y
  c.  2  d.  Domain: 30, 44. The 
portion between the x-intercepts 
constitutes the graph of R1x2. 
63.  a.  30, 14  b. 
O
v
r
65.  a.  R1x2 = 27x -
1
90,000x3  b.  30, 900134
c. 
0
18,000
14,000
10,000
6000
2000
400
1000 1600 x
R
67.  a.  N1x2 = 1x + 1221400 - 2x22  b.  30, 10124
c. 
4000
5000
6000
3000
2000
1000
0
4
8
12
14
16 x
N
69.  a.  V1x2 = x18 - 2x2115 - 2x2
b. 
90
100
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
V
x

Section 3.3    ■    Answers  A-29
95.  f 1x2 = x21x + 12  97.  f 1x2 = 1 - x4  99.  Degree 5 because the 
graph has 5 x-intercepts and four turning points  101.  Degree 6 because 
the graph has five turning points
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
103.  No, because the domain of any polynomial function is 1- ∞, ∞2, 
which includes the point x = 0.  105.  Not possible; this is inconsistent 
with its end behavior.  107.  P ∘Q is a polynomial of degree m # n
Maintaining Skills:
109.  1
x2  111.  x3 - 3  113.  a.  7 = 1 # 7  b.  7 = 7 # 1
c.  7 = 1-121-72  d.  7 = 1-721-12
115.  {1, {2, {3, {4, {5, {6, {8, {10, {12, {15, {20, 
{24, {30, {40, {60, {120  117.  g(3) = 70  119.  f (-12) = 0
121.  12x + 1211 - x2  123.  1x - 9213x + 1212x - 32
Section 3.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  Quotient: 3x + 4; remainder = -2x + 3
2.  x2 + x + 3 +
2x - 3
x2 - x + 3
  3.  2x2 - x - 3 +
-4
x - 3
4.  2x2 - 5x - 3 +
2
x - 3  5.  4  6.  32  7.  e -2, - 2
3, 3 f  8.  18
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  x4 - 2x3 + 5x2 - 2x + 1; x2 - 2x + 3;  x2 + 2; 2x - 5
3.  F1a2  5.  true  7.  Quotient: 3x - 2; remainder: 0
9.  Quotient: 3x3 - 3x2 - 3x + 6; remainder: -13  11.  Quotient: 
2x - 1; remainder: 0  13.  Quotient: z2 + 2z + 1; remainder: 0
15.  Quotient: x2 - 7;  remainder: -5  17.   Quotient: x2 + 2x - 11; 
remainder: 12   19.  Quotient: x3 - x2 + 4; remainder: 13
21.  Quotient: 2x2 + 5x - 1
2; remainder: 3
4
23.  Quotient: 2x2 - 6x + 6; remainder: -1
25.  Quotient: x4 + 2x3 - 5x2 - 3x - 2; remainder: -3
27.  Quotient: x4 - x3 + x2 - x + 1; remainder: 0
29.  Quotient: x5 - x4 + 3x3 - 4x2 + 4x - 4; remainder: 9
31.  a.  5  b.  3  c.  15
8   d.  1301  33.  a.  -17  b.  -27  c.  -56  d.  24
43.  k = -1  45.  k = -7  47.  Remainder: 1  49.  Remainder: 6
Applying the Concepts:
51.  2x2 + 1  53.  a.  R1x2 = -2x2 + 200x - 4800
b.  R1x2 = -2x2 + 200x - 1800  c.  The maximum weekly revenue is 
+3200 if the phone is priced at +50.  55.  2008  57.  2006
Beyond the Basics:
61.  a.  n is an odd integer.  b.  n is an even integer.
c.  There is no such n.  d.  n is any positive integer.
63.  a.  Remainder: 2  b.  Remainder: -2
69.  For example, g1x2 = x4 + 1
Maintaining Skills:
71.  x3 + 2x + 3; 0  73.  -x5 + 2x; 3  75.  {1, {11
77.  {1, {3, {17, {51  79.  degree = 2; leading coefficient = 1; 
constant term = -1  81.  degree = 10; leading coefficient = -7; 
constant term = 4
Beyond the Basics:
81.  The graph of f  is the graph of  
y = x4 shifted 1 unit to the right.
4
2
1
3
3
0
2
1
1
y
x
Zero: x = 1, multiplicity: 4
83.  The graph of f  is the graph of  
y = x4 shifted 2 units up.
3
1
2
4
5
6
0
2
3
2
3
1
1
y
x
No zeros
85.  The graph of f  is the graph of  
y = x4 shifted 1 unit to the right  
and reflected about the x-axis.
4
2
1
3
3
2
0
1
1
x
y
Zero: x = 1, multiplicity: 4
87.  The graph of f  is the graph of  
y = x5 shifted 1 unit up.
6
1
2
3
4
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
0
1
2
y
x
3
Zero: x = -1, multiplicity: 1
89.  The graph of f  is the graph  
of y = x5 shifted 1 unit to the ­
left, compressed by a factor of 1
4, 
reflected about the x-axis, and 
shifted 8 units up.
5
10
20
5
10
15
1
2
3
0
1
2
y
x
4
Zero: x = 1, multiplicity: 1
93.  Maximum vertical distance:  
≈0.25. It occurs at x ≈0.71.
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
x
y

A-30  Answers   ■   Section 3.4
33.  Number of positive zeros: 0 or 2; number of negative zeros: 1
35.  Number of positive zeros: 0 or 2; number of negative zeros: 1
37.  Number of positive zeros: 1 or 3; number of negative zeros: 0 or 2
39.  Number of positive zeros: 1 or 3; number of negative zeros: 1
41.  Number of positive zeros: 0; number of negative zeros: 0
43.  Number of positive zeros: 0; number of negative zeros: 0
45.  Number of positive zeros: 1; number of negative zeros: 0
47.  Upper bound: 1; lower bound: -1
49.  Upper bound: 1; lower bound: -3
51.  Upper bound: 31; lower bound: -31
53.  Upper bound: 4 lower bound: -4
55.  51, -3 + 111, -3 - 1116  57.  e - 13, 1
2, 13 f
59.  e 1
2, 2 - 13, 2 + 13 f  61.  5-2, - 13, 1, 136
63.  e -1, 1, 3 + 15
2
, 3 - 15
2
f  65.  e - 13, 1
2, 13, 2 f
67.  e - 12, - 1
3, 1
2, 12 f  69.  5- 13, -1, 1, 13, 26
71.  e -2, - 13, 1
2, 1, 13 f  73.  e - 1
2, 1, 2, 3 f
Applying the Concepts:
75.  Length: 51; width: 6  77.  x = 4  79.  1500  81.  a.  5 yr
b.  y = - 1
18 x1x - 321x - 82  c.  export 1.7 million barrels
83.  a.  y = 1
54x1x - 621x - 82  b.  +592.59 profit
c.  2004, 2007  d.  +898.46 in 2006
Beyond the Basics:
89.  y = x3 - x  91.  y = 6x3 - 23x2 + 15x + 14
93.  y = x3 - 5x2 + 5x + 3  95.  y = x4 - 8x3 + 17x2 - 2x - 14
97.  y = x4 - 10x2 + 1  99.  y = x4 - 12x3 + 40x2 - 24x - 36
103.  a.  False  b.  False
Maintaining Skills:
105.  -32i  107.  -4x2 - 1  109.  25x2 + 4
111.  x2 - 2x + 5  113.  x2 - 4x + 13
Section 3.5
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  P1x2 = 31x + 221x - 121x - 1 - i21x - 1 + i2 
b.  P1x2 = 3x4 - 3x3 - 6x2 + 18x - 12
2.  -3, -3, 2 + 3i, 2 + 3i, 2 - 3i, 2 - 3i, i, -i
3.  The zeros are 1, 2, 2i, and -2i.
4.  The zeros are 2, 4, 1 + i, and 1 - i.
Beyond the Basics:
1.  complex  3.  a - bi  5.  false  7.  x = {5i  9.  x = -2 { 3i
11.  52, 3i, -3i6  13.  3 - i  15.  -5 - i  17.  -i, -3i
19.  P1x2 = 2x4 - 20x3 + 70x2 - 180x + 468
21.  P1x2 = 7x5 - 119x4 + 777x3 - 2415x2 + 3500x - 1750
23.  P1x2 = x1x + 121x2 + 92
25.  P1x2 = x1x - 121x + 221x2 - 6x + 102
27.  1,  4 + i,  4 - i  29.  - 4
3, 1 + 3i, 1 - 3i
31.  1 (with multiplicity 2), 3
2 + 3
2 i, 3
2 - 3
2 i  33.  -3, 1, 3 + i, 3 - i
35.  1
2, 2, 3, i, -i  37.  f1x2 = 1
3 1x2 + 92
39.  f1x2 = 1
2 12 - x21x2 + 121x2 + 42
Beyond the Basics:
41.  There are three cube roots: 1, - 1
2 + 13
2 i, and - 1
2 - 13
2  i
43.  P1x2 = 1x - 221x + i2  45.  P1x2 = 1x - 421x + 121x - i2
Section 3.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  5-26  2.  1
2, 2 + 13, 2 - 13  3.  Number of positive zeros: 1; 
number of negative zeros: 0 or 2  4.  Upper bound: 1; lower bound: -3
5.  - 12, 2
3, 12, 3  6. 
1
2
4
6
0
4
6
2
8
y
2
1
1
3
2 x
3

3
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  a0; an  3.  variations; even integer  5.  false
7.  e {1
3, {1, {5
3, {5 f
9.  e {1
4, {1
2, {3
4, {1, {3
2, {2, {3, {6 f
11.  5-2,  1,  26  13.  5-16  15.  e -3, 1
2, 2 f  17.  e 2
3 f  19.  e - 1
3 f
21.  5-1, 26  23.  5-3, -1, 1, 46  25.  No rational zeros
27. 
1
1
5
0
5
x
y
2
29. 
1
2
3
10
20
0
20
30
10
y
1
2
3 x
31. 
0.5
1
0
4
2
y
0.5
1 x
y = 3x3 - x2 - 9x + 3

Section 3.6    ■    Answers  A-31
8.  No x-intercept; y-intercept: 1
2; 
no vertical asymptote; horizontal as-
ymptote: y = 1. The graph is below 
the line y = 1 on 1- ∞, ∞2.
x
0
1
1
3
5
3
5
0.5
1
1.5
y
9.  No x-intercept; y-intercept:-2; 
vertical asymptote: x = 1; no 
horizontal asymptote; y = x + 1 
is an oblique asymptote. The graph 
is above the line y = x + 1 on 
11, ∞2 and below it on 1- ∞, 12.
4
8
2
6
10
4
8
2
6
10
0
1
3
5
7
1
3
5
y
x
10.  a.  R1102 = +30 billion
R1202 = +40 billion
R1302 = +42 billion
R1402 = +40 billion
R1502 = +35.7 billion
R1602 = +30 billion
b. 
20
40
60
80 100
10
0
20
30
40
x
y
c.  29,
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1. 
N1x2
D1x2, where N1x2 and D1x2 are polynomials and D1x2 is not the zero 
polynomial  3.  ∞; - ∞  5.  false  7.  1- ∞, -42 ´ 1-4, ∞2
9.  1- ∞, ∞2  11.  1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-2, 32 ´ 13, ∞2
13.  1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, 42 ´ 14, ∞2  15.  ∞  17.  ∞  19.  1
21.  1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-2, 12 ´ 11, ∞2  23.  x = -2; x = 1
25.  Domain: 1- ∞, 42 ´ 14, ∞2 
Range: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2 
Vertical Asymptote: x = 4 
Horizontal Asymptote: y = 0
2
6
10
0
10
6
2
6
6
2
10
10
x
y
47.  f1x2 = -41x - 221x2 - 2x + 52
y S ∞ as x S - ∞, y S - ∞ as x S ∞
49.  f1x2 = -21x2 - 121x2 - 6x + 102
y S - ∞ as x S - ∞, y S - ∞ as x S ∞
Maintaining Skills:
53.  5-4, -1 + i, -1 - i6  55.  e 1, 3
2 f 
57.  5-3, 0, 46  59.  Q(x) = x + 1; R(x) = -2 
61.  Q(x) = 4x + 3; R(x) = -4x2 - 3x - 5  63.  -8  65.  11
Section 3.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  Domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, 52 ´ 15, ∞2
2.  a.  Domain: 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2; 
range: 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2; ­Vertical  
asymptote: x = 2;  
horizontal asymptote: y = 0
0
1
3
5
1
3
5
x
y
b.  Domain: 1- ∞, -12 ´ 1-1, ∞2; 
range: 1- ∞, 22 ´ 12, ∞2; vertical 
asymptote: x = -1; Horizontal 
asymptote: y = 2
0
1
3
5
1
3
5
x
y
3.  x = -5 and x = 2  4.  x = -3  5.  a.  y = 2
3
b.  No horizontal asymptote  c.  y = 0
6.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; 
vertical asymptotes: x = -1 and 
x = 1; horizontal asymptote: x-
axis. The graph is above the x-axis 
on 1-1, 02 ´ 11, ∞2 and below the 
x-axis on 1- ∞, -12 ´ 10, 12.
3
1
5
0
3
11
3
5
1
3
5
5
x
y
7.  x-intercepts: { 12
2 ; y-intercept: 
1
3; vertical asymptotes: x = - 3
2 
and x = 1; horizontal asymptote: 
y = 1; The graph is above the line 
y = 1 on a - ∞, - 3
2 b ´ 11, ∞2 and 
below it on a - 3
2, 1b. The graph 
crosses the horizontal at 12, 12.
0
1
3
(2, 1)
5
1
3
5
x
y
g1x2 = 
3
x - 2
y = 2x + 5
x + 1
27.  Domain: 
a- ∞, - 1
3 b ´ a- 1
3, ∞b 
Range: a - ∞, - 1
3 b ´ a - 1
3, ∞b 
Vertical Asymptote: x = - 1
3 
Horizontal Asymptote: y = - 1
3
3
5
5
3
3
3
5
5
x
y

A-32  Answers   ■   Section 3.6
65.  x-intercept: -1; y-intercept: 
- 1
6; vertical asymptotes: x = -3 
and x = 2; horizontal asymptote: 
x-axis. The graph is above the x-axis 
on 1-3, -12 ´ 12, ∞2 and below 
the x-axis on 1- ∞, -32 ´ 1-1, 22.
5
1
3
3
1
5
1
3
2
5
0
5
3
1
x
y
67.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; no 
vertical asymptote; horizontal as-
ymptote: y = 1. The graph is above 
the x-axis on 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2 
and below the line y = 1 on 
1- ∞, ∞2.
1
0.5
1.5
0
4
6
4
6
2
2
y
x
69.  x-intercept: {2; no y-intercept: a
hole at a0, 4
9 b; vertical asymptotes:
x = -3 and x = 3; horizontal 
asymptote: y = 1. The graph 
is above the line y = 1 on 
1- ∞, -32 ´ 13, ∞2 and below it 
on 1-3, 02 ´ 10, 32.
2
4
3
3
6
0
4
0, 
(
6
2
2
4
6
6
2
4
x
y
)
4
9
71.  No x-intercept; y-intercept: -2; 
a hole at 12, 02; no vertical asymp-
tote; no horizontal asymptote. The 
graph is above the x-axis on 12, ∞2 
and below the x-axis on 1- ∞, 22.
2
2
0
4
4
6
2
4
6
2
4
x
y
73.  f 1x2 =
-21x - 12
x - 2
  75.  f 1x2 =
1x - 121x - 32
x1x - 22
77.  Oblique asymptote: y = 2x
1
0
5
3
5
3
1
3
1
5
3
5
x
y
79.  Oblique asymptote: y = x
2
3
4
1
0
2
4
1
3
2
1
2
3
1
4
5
3
x
y
81.  Oblique asymptote: y = x - 2
4
6
2
4
6
8
10
2
2
4
1
3
5
0
3
1
5
2
4
x
y
83.  Oblique asymptote: y = x - 2
3
5
1
3
1
7
0
3
1
3
5
1
5
x
y
29.  Domain: 
1- ∞, -22 ´ 1-2, ∞2  
Range: 1- ∞, -32 ´ 1-3, ∞2 
Vertical Asymptote: x = -2 
Horizontal Asymptote: y = -3
2
6
10
0
10
6
6
2
6
2
10
10
x
y
31.  Domain: 1- ∞, 42 ´ 14, ∞2  
Range: 1- ∞, 52 ´ 15, ∞2 
Vertical Asymptote: x = 4 
Horizontal Asymptote: y = 5
4
12
20
0
12
20
4
12
4
12
4
20
20
x
y
33.  x = 1  35.  x = -4 and x = 3  37.  x = -3 and x = 2
39.  x = -3  41.  No vertical asymptote  43.  y = 0  45.  y = 2
3 
47.  No horizontal asymptote  49.  y = 0  51.  d  53.  e  55.  a
57.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; 
vertical asymptote: x = 3; horizon-
tal asymptote: y = 2; symmetry: 
none. The graph is above the line 
y = 2 on 13, ∞2 and below it on 
1- ∞, 32.
0
2
6
4
4
8
12
8
12
2
6
10
14
18
y
x
59.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0;  
vertical asymptotes: x = -2 and 
x = 2; horizontal asymptote: x-
axis. The graph is above the x-axis 
on 1-2, 02 ´ 12, ∞2 and below the 
x-axis on 1- ∞, -22 ´ 10, 22.
2
4
6
4
6
0
2
6
2
2
4
6
4
y
x
61.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 
0; vertical asymptotes: x = -3 
and x = 3; horizontal asymptote: 
y = -2. The graph is above the 
line y = -2 on 1-3, 32 and below 
it on 1- ∞,-32 ∪13, ∞2.
10
6
2
6
10
2
10
6
0
6
10
y
x
63.  No x-intercept; y-intercept: -1; 
vertical asymptotes: x = - 12 and 
x = 12; horizontal asymptote: 
x-axis. The graph is above the x-axis 
on 1- ∞, - 122 ∪112, ∞2 and 
below the x-axis on 1- 12, 122.
1
3
5
0
5
3
3
3
1
5
5
x
y

Section 3.6    ■    Answers  A-33
103.  Shift the graph of y = 1
x2 one unit to the right and one unit up.
0
10
4
2
6
8
5
3
1
7
9
4
6
2
5
3
1
21
3
4
x
y
105.  a.  f 1x2 S 0 as x S - ∞, f 1x2 S 0 as x S ∞, f 1x2 S - ∞ as 
x S 0-, and f 1x2 S ∞ as x S 0+; no x-intercept; no y-intercept; vertical 
asymptote: y-axis; horizontal asymptote: x-axis. The graph is above the 
x-axis on 10, ∞2 and below the x-axis on 1- ∞, 02.
0
y
x
b.  f 1x2 S 0 as x S - ∞, f 1x2 S 0 as x S ∞, f 1x2 S ∞ as x S 0-, and 
f 1x2 S - ∞ as x S 0+; no x-intercept; no y-intercept; vertical asymptote: 
y-axis; horizontal asymptote: x-axis. The graph is above the x-axis on 
1- ∞, 02 and below the x-axis on 10, ∞2.
0
y
x
c.  f 1x2 S 0 as x S ∞, f 1x2 S 0 as x S - ∞, f 1x2 S ∞ as x S 0-, and 
f 1x2 S ∞ as x S 0+; no x-intercept; no y-intercept; vertical asymptote: 
y-axis; horizontal asymptote: x-axis. The graph is above the x-axis on 
1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2.
0
y
x
Applying the Concepts:
85.  c.  C(100) = 20.5, C(500) = 4.5, C(1000) = 2.5. These show the 
average cost of producing 100, 500, and 1000 trinkets, respectively.
d.  Horizontal asymptote: y = 0.5. It means the average cost approaches 
the daily fixed cost of producing each trinket if the number of trinkets 
produced approaches ∞.
87.  a. 
400
100
300
200
60
80
100
40
0
20
t
x
  b.  about 4 min;  
about 12 min;  
about 76 min; 397 min;  
c. (i)  ∞  (ii)  Not applicable; 
the domain is x 6 100.
89.  a.  $3.02 billion
b. 
20
0
40
60
80
100
10
20
30
40
C
x
  c.  90.89%
91.  a.  16,000  b.  The population will stabilize at 4000.
93.  a.  f1x2 = 110x + 200,0002> 1x - 25002  b.  $40
c.  More than 25,000  d.  x = 25001free books2; y = 10 1cost per book2
Beyond the Basics:
95.  Stretch the graph of y = 1
x 
vertically by a factor of 2 and reflect 
the graph about the x-axis.
1
0
5
3
5
3
1
3
1
1
5
3
5
y
x
97.  Shift the graph of y = 1
x2 two 
units to the right.
3
2
5
7
1
0
1
3
6
2
4
10
8
7
3
5
9
1
x
y
99.  Shift the graph of y = 1
x2 one 
unit to the right and two units down.
0
6
2
1
3
2
1
3
5
7
4
21
3
4
4
2
1
3
5 6
y
x
101.  Shift the graph of y = 1
x2 six 
units to the left.
6
2
4
10
12
8
2
0
4
8
6
10
12
x
y

113.  Point of intersection: a - 1
3, 1b; horizontal asymptote y = 1
1
5
7
3
0
1
3
5
6
6
2
2
1
4
4
x
y
115.  f 1x2 = 2 - x
x - 3  117.  f 1x2 = -x2 + 1
x
119.  f 1x2 = 1x + 42> 1x - 22  121.  f 1x2 = 14x2 - 12> 1x - 122
123.  f 1x2 = 13x2 - x + 12> 1x - 12
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
125.  a.  f 1x2 = 1
x  b.  f 1x2 =
x2 + 2
x2 + x - 2
c.  f 1x2 = x3 + 2x2 - 7x - 1
x3 + x2 - 6x + 5
127.  R1x2 =
1x + 12x3 + 1x - 221x - 52
x3
Maintaining Skills:
129.  a.  y = - 2
3x - 1
3  b.  y = -1  131.  c = 4  133.  k = 3; y = 3
4
Section 3.7
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  y = 24  2.  275  3.  y = 300  4.  A = 20  5.  x = 9
4
6.  ≈3.7 m>sec2
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  P = kT  3.  y = k1x  5.  V = kx3y4  7.  z = kxu
v2
9.  k = 1
2, x = 14  11.  k = 16, s = 400  13.  k = 33, r = 99
15.  k = 8, B = 1
8  17.  k = 7, y = 4  19.  k = 2, z = 50
21.  k = 1
17, P = 324
17   23.  k = 54, x = 4  25.  y = 6  27.  y = 200
Applying the Concepts:
29.  y = Hx, where y is the speed of the galaxies and x is the distance 
between them  31.  a.  y = 30.5x, where y is the length measured in 
centimeters and x is the length measured in feet.  b.  (i)  244 cm
(ii)  162.67 cm  c.  (i)  1.87 ft  (ii)  4.07 ft  33.  35 g  35.  3
4 sec
37.  60 lb>in2  39.  a.  18.97 lb  b.  201.01 lb  41.  1.63 m>s2
43.  a.  1280 candlepower  b.  8.94 ft from the source
45.  The length is multiplied by 4.  47.  a.  H = kR2N, where k is a  
constant  b.  The horsepower is multiplied by 4.  c.  The horsepower is 
doubled.  d.  The horsepower is cut in half.
Beyond the Basics:
49.  a.  E = kl 2v3  b.  k = 0.0375  c.  37,500 W
d.  E is multiplied by 8.  e.  E is multiplied by 4.
f.  E is multiplied by 32.  51.  a.  k = 2.94  b.  287.25 W
c.  The metabolic rate is multiplied by 2.83.
d.  373.93 kg  53.  a.  T2 = a4p2
G ba
r3
M1 + M2
b  b.  2.01 * 1030kg
55.  a.  R = kN1P - N2, where k is the constant of variation  b.  k =
5
106
c.  125 people per day  d.  2764 or 7236
d.  f 1x2 S 0 as x S - ∞, f 1x2 S 0 as x S ∞, f 1x2 S - ∞ as x S 0-, 
and f 1x2 S - ∞ as x S 0+; no x-intercept; no y-intercept; vertical asymp-
tote: y-axis; horizontal asymptote: x-axis. The graph is below the x-axis on 
1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, ∞2.
0
y
x
107. 
3
5
1
1
3
5
1
3
5
g(x)
0
1
3
5
f(x)
y
x
109.  3 f 1x24 -1 =
1
2x + 3 and f -11x2 = 1
2x - 3
2. The two functions are 
different.
3
5
1
1
3
5
1
3
5
0
1
3
5
f (x)
[f (x)](1)
f 1(x)
y
x
111.  g1x2 has the oblique asymptote 
y = 2x + 3; y S - ∞ as x S - ∞, and y S ∞ as x S ∞.
20
10
10
20
4
8
0
4
8
y
x
A-34  Answers   ■   Section 3.7

Review Exercises    ■    Answers  A-35
9.  i.  Opens up 
3
5
1
1
3
5
4
3
2
1
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
y
x
ii.  Vertex: a1
3, 2
3 b 
iii.  Axis: x = 1
3 
iv.  No x-intercept  
v.  y-intercept: 1  
vi.  Decreasing on a - ∞, 1
3 b,
increasing on a1
3, ∞b 
11.  Minimum: -1  13.  Maximum: 25
8
15.  Shift the graph of y = x3 one 
unit to the left and two units down. 
x
y
4
6
2
2
4
12
10
8
6
4
2
2
0
4
6
8
 
17.  Shift the graph of y = x3 one 
unit right, reflect the resulting graph 
in the x-axis, and shift it one unit 
up.  
4
2
2
4
6
8
6
4
2
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
x
y
 
19.  (i)  f1x2 S - ∞ as x S - ∞ and f1x2 S ∞ as x S ∞  (ii)  Zeros: 
x = -2, multiplicity: 1, the graph crosses the x-axis; x = 0, multiplicity: 1,  
the graph crosses the x-axis; x = 1, multiplicity: 1, the graph crosses the 
x-axis.   (iii)  x-intercepts: -2, 0, 1; y-intercept: 0   (iv)  The graph is above the 
x-axis on 1-2, 02 ´ 11, ∞2 and below the x-axis on 1- ∞, -22 ´ 10, 12.   
(v) 
2
4
2
1
4
15
12
9
6
3
3
0
6
9
12
15
x
y
 
21.  (i)  f1x2 S - ∞ as x S - ∞ and f1x2 S - ∞ as x S ∞  (ii)  Zeros: 
x = 0, multiplicity: 2, the graph touches but does not cross the x-axis; 
x = 1, multiplicity: 2, the graph touches but does not cross the x-axis.  
(iii)  x-intercepts: 0, 1; y-intercept: 0   (iv)  The graph is below the x-axis 
on 1- ∞, 02 ´ 10, 12 ´ 11, ∞2.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
57.  a.  $480  b.  $15,920  c.  The value of the original diamond is 
$112,500. The value of a diamond whose weight is twice that of the  
original is $450,000.  59.  1:2
Maintaining Skills:
61.  1  63.  1
2  65.  16  67.  5x  69.  2x2-x  71.  m =
y - b
x
 
73.  C = A
B - 1  75.  B = A # 10n
Review Exercises
Basic Skills  and Concepts:
1.   
i.  Opens up 
3 2 1
1
2
3
4
5
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x
y
 
ii.  Vertex: 11, 22  
iii.  Axis: x = 1 
iv.  No x-intercept  
v.  y-intercept: 3  
vi.  Decreasing on 1- ∞, 12,  
increasing on 11, ∞2 
3.  i.  Opens down 
1
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
ii.  Vertex: 13, 42  
iii.  Axis: x = 3 
iv.  x-intercepts: 3 { 12 
v.  y-intercept: -14 
vi.  Increasing on 1- ∞, 32,  
decreasing on 13, ∞2 
5.  i.  Opens down 
43
5
21
2
4
1
3
5
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
0
2
3
4
y
x
ii.  Vertex: 10, 32  
iii.  Axis: y-axis  
iv.  x-intercepts: { 16
2  
v.  y-intercept: 3  
vi.  Increasing on 1- ∞, 02,  
decreasing on 10, ∞2 
7.  i.  Opens up 
4
2
2
4
6
2
1
0
4
3
6
8
5
7
9
10
x
y
ii.  Vertex: 11, 12  
iii.  Axis: x = 1 
iv.  No x-intercept  
v.  y-intercept: 3  
vi.  Decreasing on 1- ∞, 12,  
increasing on 11, ∞2 

A-36  Answers   ■   Review Exercises
75.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; 
vertical asymptotes: x = -1 and 
x = 1; horizontal asymptote:  
x-axis. The graph is above the x-axis 
on 1-1, 02 ´ 11, ∞2 and below the 
x-axis on 1- ∞, -12 ´ 10, 12. 
4
2
3
5
1
2
1
4
3
5
5
4
3
2
1
1
0
2
3
4
5
x
y
 
77.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; 
vertical asymptotes: x = -3 and 
x = 3; no horizontal asymptote. 
The graph is above the x-axis on 
1-3, 02 ´ 13, ∞2 and below the 
x-axis on 1- ∞, -32 ´ 10, 32.  
10
6
2
2
6
10
20
12
4
4
12
20
x
y
y  x
 
79.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercept: 0; 
vertical asymptotes: x = -2 and 
x = 2; no horizontal asymptote. 
The graph is above the x-axis on 
1- ∞, -22 ´ 12, ∞2 and below the 
x-axis on 1-2, 02 ´ 10, 22. 
2
4
1
3
5
4
5
2
3
1
20
10
30
40
20
10
30
40
0
x
y
 
Applying the Concepts: 
81.  y = 15  83.  s = 45 
85.  Maximum height: 1000; the missile hits the ground at x = 200.  
0
40
120 160
80
200
200
400
600
800
1000
x
y
 
87.  x = ≈24.5 ft, y ≈16.3 ft 
89.  a. 
200
400
600
800 1000
10
20
30
40
50
x
p
  b.  x = 50 
(v) 
1
2
3
2
3
1
4
3
2
1
5
6
0
x
y
 
23.  (i)  f1x2 S - ∞ as x S - ∞ and f1x2 S - ∞ as x S ∞  (ii)  Zeros: 
x = -1, multiplicity: 1, the graph crosses the x-axis; x = 0,  
multiplicity: 2, the graph touches but does not cross the x-axis; x = 1 
multiplicity: 1, the graph crosses the x-axis.   (iii)  x-intercepts: -1, 0, 1; 
y-intercept: 0   (iv)  The graph is above the x-axis on 1-1, 02 ´ 10, 12 and 
below the x-axis on 1- ∞, -12 ´ 11, ∞2.   
(v) 
1
2
2
1
4
3
2
1
1
0
x
y
 
25.  Quotient: 2x + 3; remainder: -7  27.  Quotient: 
8x3 - 12x2 + 14x - 21; remainder: 186  29.  Quotient: x2 + 3x - 3; 
remainder: -6  31.  Quotient: 2x3 - 5x2 + 10x - 17; remainder: 182 
33.  -11  35.  88  37.  1, 2, 4  39.  -3, -2, 1
3 
41.  -6, -3, -2, -1, 1, 2, 3, 6  43.  -2, - 1
5, 0  45.  -3, -2, 2 
47.  -2, 3 { 12  49.  1
2, 1 { 13  51.  -3, 1, 2  53.  -1, 3, 3i, -3i 
55.  2i, -2i, -1 + 2i, -1 - 2i  57.  5-2, 1, 26  59.  e -1, - 1
2, 3
2 f 
61.  52, 3 { i126  63.  e - 1
3, 1 { i15 f  65.  5-1, 2, i, -i6 
67.  e -2, 1
2, 1 { i12 f  69.  The only possible rational roots are 
-2, -1, 1, and 2. None of them satisfy the equation.  71.  1.88 
73.  x-intercept: -1; no y-intercept; 
vertical asymptote: y-axis; horizon-
tal asymptote: y = 1; symmetry: 
none. The graph is above the x-axis 
on 1- ∞, -12 ´ 10, ∞2 and below 
the x-axis on 1-1, 02. 
2
4
1
3
5
4
5
2
3
1
4
2
4
2
1
0
x
y
6
 

Section 4.1    ■    Answers  A-37
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–2) 
1.  113 
3.  x-intercepts: 4, -2 y-intercept: 
-8 
0
4
2
6
4 2
10
15
5
10
5
x
y
 
5.  Slope is 1
2; x-intercept: -6;
y-intercept: 3 
0
2
2
4
6
8
2
5
4
3
1
1
x
y
 
7.  Center: 1-1, 22; radius: 3  9.  y = - 2
3 x + 11
3   11.  Domain 1- ∞, 22. 
13.  a.  f 1g1x22 = 2x2 + 1  b.  g1f 1x22 = x + 1  c.  f 1f 1x22 = 2
4 x 
d.  g1g1x22 = x4 + 2x2 + 2  15.  f -11x2 = 1
2x + 3
2 
17.  -6, -3, -2, - 3
2, -1, - 1
2, 1
2, 1, 3
2, 2, 3, 6 
19. 
0
1
3
3
5
1
6
4
2
4
2
x
y
 
21. 
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
4
5
3
2
5
0
2
5
x
y
 
23.  9  25.  x = 50
Chapter 4
Section 4.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  f 122 = 1
16; f 102 = 1; f 1-12 = 4; f   a5
2 b = 1
32; f   a - 3
2 b = 8
2.  a.  3312 = 2712  b.  a4
3. 
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
3
2
1
3 2 1
 
4. 
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
3
2
1
3 2 1
5.  a.  7x  b.  4 a1
2 b
x
  6.  $11,500  7.  a.  A = +11,485.03 
b.  I = +3,485.03  8.  i.  $5325.00  ii.  $5330.28  iii.  $5333.01
iv.  $5334.86  v.  $5335.76  9.  10.023%  10.  $14,764.48 
91.  a.  P1x2 = -
3
1000 x2 + 20.1x - 150  b.  3350 
c.  C1x2 =
3
1000 x + 3.9 + 150
x  
1000
2000
3000
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
x
C(x)
 
93.  +245  95.  612 in  97.  a.  36 amp  b.  150 Ω 
99.  a.  k =
1
200,000  b.  500 people every day  c.  10,00 or 19,000 
Practice Test A
1.  x-intercepts: 3 { 17
2. 
1
3
1 0
3
5
7
6
4
2
1
4
2
x
y
3.  11, 102  4.  1- ∞, -42 ∪1-4, 12 ∪11, ∞2
5.  Quotient: x2 - 4x + 3; remainder: 0
6. 
16
20
8
12
4
8
16
4
12
20
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
y
x
7.  -2, 1, 2  8.  Quotient: -3x2 + 5x + 1  9.  P1-22 = -53
10.  -2, 2, 5  11.  0, - 1
2 + 161
2
, - 1
2 - 161
2
12.  -9, - 9
2, -3, - 3
2, -1, - 1
2, 1
2, 1, 3
2, 3, 9
2, 9
13.  f 1x2 S - ∞ as x S - ∞ and f 1x2 S ∞ as x S ∞
14.  x = -2, multiplicity: 3; x = 2, multiplicity: 1
15.  Number of positive zeros: 0 or 2; number of negative zeros: 1
16.  Horizontal asymptote: y = 2; vertical asymptotes: x = -4 and x = 5
17.  y = kx
t2 , where k ≠0 is a constant  18.  y = 4  19.  x = 15
20.  V1x2 = x18 - 2x2117 - 2x2
Practice Test B
1.  b  2.  d  3.  a  4.  b  5.  d  6.  c  7.  c  8.  b  9.  c  10.  a  11.  a
12.  d  13.  c  14.  b  15.  c  16.  c  17.  d  18.  b  19.  b  20.  d

A-38  Answers   ■   Section 4.1
53.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 
1- ∞, 42; horizontal asymptote: 
y = 4 
g(x)  2 • 5x1  4
y
x
0
1
4
1
3
2
1
2
3
55.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 
1- ∞, 32; horizontal asymptote: 
y = 3 
y
x
0
1
3
1
2
4
3
1
g(x)  ex2  3
57.  f 1x2 = 11.52x + 2; f 122 = 4.25  59.  f 1x2 = a1
3 b
x
- 2;
f 122 = - 17
9   61.  y = 2x+2 + 5  63.  y = 2a1
2 b
x
- 5  65.  $2500
67.  $5764.69  69.  a. $7936.21  b. $4436.21  71.  a. $12,365.41 
b. $4865.41  73.  $4631.93  75.  $4493.68
77.  f 1x2 = e-x; y = 0
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
2
1
2 1
  79.  f 1x2 = ex-2; y = 0
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
4
3
2
1
81.  f 1x2 = 1 + ex; y = 1
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
2
1
2 1
  83.  f 1x2 = -ex-2 + 3; y = 3
0
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
y
x
4
3
2
1
Applying the Concepts:
85.  a.  176.6°C; 148.1°C  b.  5 hours  c.  25°C  87.  $220,262
89.  $35,496.43  91.  16.81%  93.  0.1357 mm2  95.  3.9%   
97.  a.  0.015 * 230 ≈16,106,127 cm   
b.  0.015 * 240 ≈16,492,674,420 cm
c.  0.015 * 250 ≈1.689 * 1013 cm
Beyond the Basics:
101.  S5 = 2.716666, S10 = 2.7182818, S15 = 2.718281828
105.  y = ex S y = ex-1 S y = e2x-1 S y = 3e2x-1
107.  y = ex S y = e2+x S y = e2+3x S y = 5e2+3x S y =
5e2-3x S y = 5e2-3x + 4
Maintaining Skills:
115.  1  117.  -2  119.  49  121.  312
123.  f -1(x) = x - 4
3
 Domain and range of f -1 is (- ∞, ∞).
125.  f -1(x) = x2, x Ú 0 Domain and range of f -1 is 30, ∞).
127.  f -1(x) = 1 + 1
x Domain of f -1 = (- ∞, 0) ´ (0, ∞); range of 
f -1 = 1- ∞, 12 ´ 11, ∞2.
11.  y = -ex-1 - 2  
0
1
3
4
5
6
y
x
2
3
1
3 2 1
2
12.  a.  9.82  b.  5.18  13.  $7471.10
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  1- ∞, ∞2; 
10, ∞2  3.  x-axis  5.  P a1 + r
n b
nt
  7.  false
9.  true  11.  No, the base is not a constant.  13.  Yes, the base is 1
2.
15.  No, the base is not a constant.  17.  No, the base is not a positive 
­constant.  19.  1
5  21.  0.0892, 11.2116  23.  4
9, 729
64   25.  3212  27.  2p
29.  316  31.  a6  33.  a.  4x  b.  3x  35.  a.  1
5 # 5x  b.  5 # a1
5 b
x
37.	
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
y
x
1
2
1
2
39.	
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
4
3
2
1
4321
41.	
0
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
y
x
2
1
2 1
43.	
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
4
3
2
1
4321
45.  c  47.  a
49.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 
10, ∞2; horizontal asymptote: 
y = 0 
y
x
0
1
4
1
2
1
2
g(x)  3x1
51.  Domain: 1- ∞, ∞2; range: 
10, ∞2; horizontal asymptote: 
y = 0 
g(x)  4x
y
x
0
1
4
1
2
1
1
2

Section 4.2    ■    Answers  A-39
71.  Domain = 11, ∞2 
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2 
Asymptote: x = 1
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
y
x
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
73.  Domain = 1- ∞, 32 
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2 
Asymptote: x = 3
5
4
3
2
1
2
1
3
4
5
y
x
4
2
6 4 2
75.  Domain = 1- ∞, 32 
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2 
Asymptote: x = 3
5
4
6
3
2
1
2
1
3
4
y
x
4
2
6 4 2
77.  Domain = 1- ∞, 02h 10, ∞2 
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2 
Asymptote: x = 0
5
4
3
2
1
2
1
3
4
5
y
x
5
4
3
2
1
54321
79.  1  81.  2  83.  4  85.  x = 100  87.  x = e
89.	
5
4
3
2
1
2
1
3
4
5
y
x
5
4
3
2
1
54321
91.	
5
4
3
2
1
2
1
3
4
5
y
x
5
4
3
2
1
54321
93. 
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
y
x
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
6
7
8
Applying the Concepts:
95.  8.66 yr  97.  11.55%  99.  a.  ≈280.8 million  b.  0.93%
c.  2039  101.  a.  i.  22.66°F  ii.  20.13°F  iii.  20°F  b.  5.5 min
103.  17.6 min  105.  a.  0.27%  b.  26.85 months
107.  a.  P ≈1500e0.231t  b.  7557  c.  10 yr
109.  a.  log14>32 ≈0.125 = 12.5%  b.  The sum is 1. One of the 
digits 1 … 9 will appear at the first place.
Beyond the Basics:
111.  1- ∞, -12 ´ 12, ∞2  113.  a.  11, ∞2  b.  12, ∞2 
c.  12, ∞2  d.  111, ∞2  115.  y = log x S y = log 1x - 22 S
y = log a1
2x - 2b S y = 3 log a1
2x - 2b S
y = -3 log a1
2x - 2b S y = -3 log  a1
2x - 2b + 4
117.  a.  $24,659.70  b.  4.05%
Section 4.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1. a. log2 1024 = 10  b. log9 a1
3 b = - 1
2  c. loga  p = q
2. a. 26 = 64  b. yw = u  3. a. 2  b. -1>2  c. -5
4. a. 0  b. 5  c. 5  5. 1- ∞, 12
6. 
0
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
y
x
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
y  log2 x
7. Shift the graph of y = log2 x 
3 units right and reflect the graph 
about the x-axis.
0
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
y
x
8
7
6
5
4
2
1
3
y  log2(x  3)
8. P2 = log 3 - log 2 ≈ 0.176. About 17.6% of the data is expected to 
have 2 as the first digit.  9. a. -1  b. ≈0.693  10. a. ≈17 years 
b. 21.97%  11. ≈5.4 min
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  10, ∞2; 1- ∞, ∞2  3.  common; natural  5.  false  7.  log5 25 = 2
9.  log1>16 4 = - 1
2  11.  log10 1 = 0  13.  log10 0.1 = -1
15.  loga 5 = 2  17.  loga 113>22 = 3  19.  25 = 32  21.  102 = 100
23.  100 = 1  25.  10-2 = 0.01  27.  81>3 = 2  29.  ex = 2  31.  3
33.  4  35.  -3  37.  3
2  39.  1
4  41.  0  43.  1  45.  7  47.  5  49.  4
51.  8  53.  1-1, ∞2  55.  11, ∞2  57.  12, ∞2  59.  11, 22
61.  a.  f  b.  a  c.  d  d.  b  e.  e  f.  c
63.  Domain = 1-3, ∞2 
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2  
Asymptote: x = -3
0
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
y
x
4
3
2
1
4321
65.  Domain = 10, ∞2 
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2 
Asymptote: x = 0
0
3
2
1
1
2
y
x
5
4
3
2
1
67.  Domain = 1- ∞, 02 
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2 
Asymptote: x = 0
0
2
3
1
1
2
3
y
x
6 5 4 3 2 1
69.  Domain = 10, ∞2 
Range = 30, ∞2 
Asymptote: x = 0
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
6
5
4
3
2
1

A-40  Answers   ■   Section 4.4
Maintaining Skills:
121.  11  123.  2  125.  t2 - t + 1 = 0  127.  t2 + 4 = 0  129.  -2
131.  -4, 1  133.  1- ∞, 72  135.  12, ∞2
Section 4.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  x = 5  b.  x = 2
3  2.  x =
ln a11
7 b
ln 3
- 1 ≈-0.59
3.  x =
ln 3
2 ln 2 - ln 3 ≈3.82  4.  x = ln 5 ≈1.609 
5.  a.  United States: 343.61 million; Pakistan: 255.96 million 
b.  Sometime in 2022 (after 11.69 yr)  c.  In 23.68 yrs (sometime in 2033)
6.  x = e3>2  7.  x = 9  8.  ∅  9.  The average growth rate was 
approximately 1.74%.  10.  x 6 -2  11.  x 6 1 - e2
3
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  exponential  3.  logistic  5.  false  7.  x = 4  9.  x = 5
3
11.  x = {7
2  13.  ∅  15.  x = 1  17.  x = 1
2  19.  x = {9
21.  x = 10,000  23.  x = ln 3
ln 2 = 1.585
25.  x = aln 15 - 3 ln 2
2ln 2
b = 0.453  27.  x = ln 17 - ln 5
ln 2
= 1.766
29.  x = ln 10 -  ln 3 + ln 4
2ln 4
= 0.934  31.  x =
ln 5
ln 5 + ln 2 = 0.699
33.  x = ln 2 - 6ln 3
4ln 3 + ln 2 = -1.159  35.  x = ln 2 - ln 3 - ln 5
ln 5 - ln 3
= -3.944
37.  t =
ln 2
ln11.0652 = 11.007  39.  x = ln 7
ln 2 = 2.807
41.  x = ln 2
ln 3, ln 4
ln 3 = 0.631, 1.262  43.  x = ln 4
ln 3 = 1.262
45.  x = ln 5 - ln 3
2 ln 3
= 0.232  47.  x = ln 2
ln 3 ≈0.631
49.  x = ln 18 - ln 7 
ln 3
≈0.860  51.  ∅  53.  x = -49
20  55.  x = 3, -2
57.  x = 5, 2  59.  x = 8  61.  x = 1  63.  x = 3  65.  x = 4
67.  ∅  69.  x = 2
3, 5
2  71.  a = 30, k = 2; 500  73.  a = 5, k = 1
2; 31
75.  a = 2, k = ln a17
2 b; 0.068  77.  a = -2, k = ln a11
18 b; -7.902
79.  x Ú
ln 2
ln 0.3  81.  x … 0  83.  1-3, 172  85.  x Ú e + 5
87.  a7
3, 5b
Applying the Concepts:
89.  a.  10.087 yr;  b.  9.870 yr;  c.  9.821 yr;  d.  9.797 yr;  e.  9.796 yr
91.  r ≈8.66%; +30,837.52  93.  a.  2.134 lm  b.  19.08 ft
95.  a.  18,542  b. 5 wk  97.  a.  20  b.  4490 
c. 
0
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
y
t
12
10
8
6
4
2
y5P(t)
Beyond the Basics:
99.  t = 1
k ln a
P
M - Pb  103.  x = 1,10  105.  1
9, 3  107.  x = 2
109.  ∅  111.  f -11x2 = log31x - 52  113.  f -11x2 = log4
x - 7
3
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
119.  1  121.  16  123.  a.  Yes  b.  The increasing property
Maintaining Skills:
125.  a9  127.  a4  129.  a2
3 b
4
  131.  3.807 * 1013 
Section 4.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  -1  b.  13  2.  a.  ln 12x - 12 - ln 1x + 42 
b.  log 2 + 1
2 log x + 1
2 log y - 1
2 log z  3.  log2x2 - 1
4.  2.215088 * 101343  5. 
log 15
log 3 = ln 15
ln 3 ≈2.46497
6.  a.  y = 5 -
2
log 3 log x  b.  y = 5 - 2 log3 x  7.  ≈25 years
8.  ≈65.34%
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  loga M; loga N  3.  r loga M  5.  false  7.  0.78  9.  0.7  11.  -1.7
13.  7.3  15.  16
3   17.  0.56  19.  ln 1x2 + ln 1x - 12
21.  1
2loga x + 3 loga y  23.  1
3logax - 1
3loga y  25.  1
4log2x + 1
2log2 y - 3
4
27.  1
2 log 1x2 + 12 - log 1x + 32  29.  2 logb x + 3 logb y + logb z
31.  ln x + 1
2 ln1x - 12 - ln 1x2 + 22
33.  2 ln1x + 12 - ln1x - 32 - 1
2 ln1x + 42
35.  ln1x + 12 + 1
2 ln 1x2 + 22 - 1
2 ln 1x2 + 52
37.  3 ln x + 4 ln13x + 12 - 1
2 ln1x2 + 12 + 5 ln1x + 22 - 2 ln1x - 32
39.  log2 17x2  41.  log az 1x
y
b  43.  log2 1zy221>5  45.  ln 1xy2z32
47.  ln a
x2
2x2 + 1
b  49.  1.4036 # 10217  51.  9.3762 # 101897
53.  234567  55.  362  57.  2.322  59.  -1.585  61.  1.760  63.  3.6
65.  1
2  67.  1  69.  18  71.  2  73.  y = 2 - log x  75.  y = 2 - ln x
77.  y = 1 + 3 log5 x  79.  y = -1 + 5 log2 x  81.  ≈10.7 yrs
83.  ≈10.4 hrs
Applying the Concepts:
85.  1.2775%  87.  1.0498%  89.  12.53 yr  91.  12.969 g
93.  12.60 yr  95.  k = 0.1204  97.  13.7 g  99.  P = +859.72; 
interest ≈+86,332,80  101.  He can afford a mortgage of $110,545.60
Beyond the Basics:
107. 
[0, 10, 1] by [4, 4, 1]
109.  a.  0  b.  0  c.  2  d.  1  111.  (8, 10)  113.  a.  False  b.  True
c.  False  d.  False  e.  True  f.  True  g.  False  h.  True  i.  False
j.  True
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
117.  Because log1
2 is a negative number, 3 6 4 implies that 
3 log 1
2 7 4 log 1
2.  119.  12978189

Review Exercises    ■    Answers  A-41
23.  Domain = 1- ∞, ∞2
Range = 10, 14 Asymptote: y = 0
0
1.0
0.5
y
x
2
1
2 1
 
25.  Domain = 1- ∞, 02
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2
Asymptote: x = 0 
0
3
2
1
1
2
3
y
x
6 5 4 3 2 1
 
27.  Domain = 11, ∞2
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2
Asymptote: x = 1 
0
3
2
1
1
2
3
y
x
6
5
4
3
2
1
 
29.  Domain = 1- ∞, 02
Range = 1- ∞, ∞2
Asymptote: x = 0 
0
5
6
4
3
2
1
1
2
y
x
2
4
6
8
 
31.  a.  x@intercept = ln12>32, 
y@intercept = 1 
b.  lim
xS∞ f 1x2 = 3 lim
xS-∞ f 1x2 = - ∞ 
0
3
2
1
1
2
3
y
x
4
3
2
1
2 1
 
33.  a.  x-intercept: none, 
y@intercept = 1 
b.  as x S ∞, y S 0 
as x S - ∞, y S 0 
0
1.0
0.5
y
x
2
1
1
2
 
35.  a = 10, k = 2, f 122 = 160 
37.  a = 3, k = -0.2824, f 142 = 0.38898  39.  y = 3 # 2x 
41.  y = log5 1x - 12  43.  a.  y = -21x-12 - 3  b.  y = -21x-12 + 3 
45.  ln x + 2 ln y + 3 ln z  47.  ln x + 1
2 ln 1x2 + 12 - 2 ln 1x2 + 32 
49.  y = 3x  51.  y = -1 + 1x - 2  53.  y = 2x2 - 1
x2 + 1
  55.  4 
57.  -1 { 15  59.  ln 23
ln 3 ≈2.854  61.  ln 19
ln 273 ≈0.525  63.  0 
65. 
-ln 3
ln a
11.723
9
b
≈1.815  67.  5
2  69.  0  71.  8  73.  5  75.  9 
77.  3  79.  x Ú -1  81.  a- 7
2, 93
3 b 
Applying the Concepts:
83.  11.4 yr  85.  40 hr  87.  At 5% compounded yearly, A = +9849.70. 
At 4.75% compounded monthly, A = +9754.74. The 5% investment will 
provide the greater return.  89.  a.  34 million  b.  In 2206 (after 199.3 yr) 
115.  f -11x2 = 2x-1 + 1  117.  f -11x2 = 1 + e2x
1 - e2x  119.  130
121.  209  123.  380  125.  1
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
127.  t = ln a
k
Maintaining Skills:
129.  log9 81 = 2  131.  log 3 = x  133.  64 = 26  135.  A = 2 # 103 
137.  x =
1
125  139.  x = 10  141.  x = 4  143.  x = ln 3 + 3 ln 5
2 ln 5 - ln 3
Section 4.5
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  5.57  b.  3.39 # 10-9  2.  ≈2512  3.  3,162,278I0  4.  IMoz ≈63ICal  
5.  178 times  6.  73 dB  7.  100 times more  8.  6.3 # 10-8 W>m2 
9.  ≈494 hertz  10.  ≈400 - 386 = 14 (cents)  11.  a.  100.8 ≈6.3 
times brighter  b.  ≈4.1598
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  acidic  3.  log a I
I0
b  5.  10 log a I
I0
b  7.  2.5 log a
b1
b2
b  9.  true
11.  pH = 8, base  13.  pH ≈4.64, acid
15.  3H+4 = 10-6, 3OH-4 = 10-8
17.  3H+4 = 3.16 # 10-10 3OH-4 = 3.16 # 10-5  19.  a. 105 I0 
b.  7.94 # 1011  21.  a. 6.3 # 107 I0  b. 1.26 # 1016  23.  a. 6; b. 106 I0
25.  a. 5.1 b. 1.26 # 105 I0  27.  40  29.  55.4  31.  10-4
33.  2.95 # 10-6  35.  A#466 Hz, C523 Hz  37.  ≈18 cents; noticeable
39.  A is ≈2.5 * 106 times brighter than B.
41.  B is ≈6.31 times brighter than A.
Applying the Concepts:
43.  7.4; basic  45.  a.  7.1 # 10-4  b.  6.3 # 10-8  c.  1.7 # 10-8  d.  10-3
47.  1.6 # 10-4; about 160 times more  49.  pHA = pHB - 2
51.  pH decreased by log 50 ≈1.7; more acidic
53.  a. 6.3 # 107 I0  b. 1.259 # 1016  55.  a.  IA = 10IB  b.  EA = 31.6EB
57.  log 150 ≈2.18  59.  ≈77 dB  61.  ≈3.16 # 106 times as intense
63.  160 dB  65.  I2 ≈1.26I1.  67.  ≈4 cents more  69.  ≈3.98 # 105
71.  ≈1.58 # 109  73.  ≈-5.4
Beyond the Basics:
75.  a.  26 dB; 18 dB; 12 dB; 6 dB  b.  200 ft
c.  a = 1014 + log 42≈46; b = -20  d.  r =
200
10L>20
77.  5 * 1015 vs 2.5 * 1016; earthquake is 5 times more powerful.
79.  3875, 8854 Hz  81.  -2.2
Maintaining Skills:
83.  3
2; -6  85.  -e-1.2; e2.2  87.  10, 22; 3  89.  13, -12; 17  91.  11, 02; 2
93.  11, -22; 3
Review Exercises 
Basic Concepts and Skills: 
1.  False  3.  False  5.  True  7.  False  9.  True  11.  h  13.  f
15.  d  17.  a 
19.  Domain = 1- ∞, ∞2
Range = 10, ∞2 Asymptote: y = 0
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
3
2
1
3 2 1
 
21.  Domain = 1- ∞, ∞2
Range = 13, ∞2 Asymptote: y = 3 
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
4
3
2
1
4321
 

A-42  Answers   ■   Section 5.1
9.  a.  Yes, f -11x2 = ax - 1
2
b
1>3
  b.  No  c.  Yes, f -11x2 = ex 
11.  a.  1x - 121x - 221x + 32 = x3 - 7x + 6  b.  x4 - 1 
13.  a.  log 1xy  b.  ln x3
y2  15.  a.  536  b.  51, 36  c.  3.77 
17.  a.  1, 1, 1, -2, -2, 3  b.  At 
x = 1 and x = 3, the graph crosses 
the x-axis. At x = -2, the graph 
touches but does not cross the 
x-axis.  c.  f 1x2 S ∞ as x S ∞; 
f 1x2 S ∞ as x S - ∞ 
d. 
0
40
30
20
10
10
20
30
40
y
x
4
3
2
1
321
Chapter 5
Section 5.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1. 
x
y
2258
2.  a.  13.16°  b.  41°16′30″  3.  - p
4  radians  4.  270° 
5.  Complement = 23°; supplement = 113°  6.  5p
2  ≈ 7.85 meters 
7.  ≈790 miles  8.  50p
3
≈52.36 square inches
9.  v = 36p radians per minute; v = 360p ≈ 1131 feet per minute
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  clockwise  3.  one-sixtieth  5.  true
7.	
30
x
y
9.	
120
x
y
11.	
5
3
x
y

13.	
4
3

x
y

15.  70.75°  17.  23.71°  19.  -15.72°  21.  27°19′12″  23.  13°20′49″
25.  19°3′4″  27.  p
9   29.  -p  31.  7p
4   33.  8p
3   35.  - 17p
6   37.  15°
91.  a.  
0
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
y
t
10
8
6
4
2
Time (hours)
Concentration
  b.  ≈5 hr 
93.  t = 6.57 min   95.  a.  5000 people>square mile  b.  7459 people>
square mile  c.  ≈ 13.73 miles  97.  I = 0.2322I0  99.  a.  11.27 ft>sec 
b.  5.29 ft>sec  c.  201  101.  a.  1 g  b.  Remains stationary at 6 g 
c.  4.6 days  103.  16 cents; yes, it is noticeable.  105.  4.0 # 10-3; 1585 
times more  107.  100 times more intense  109.  ≈9.7
Practice Test A
1.  x = -3  2.  x = 32
3.  Range = 1- ∞, 12; horizontal asymptote: y = 1  4.  -3  5.  x = 3
6.  -3  7.  ln 3x5  8. 
 ln a5
2 b
 ln 2   9.  ln 2  10.  ln 2 + 3 ln x - 5 ln 1x + 12
11.  -5  12.  y = ln 1x - 12 + 3
13. 
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
y
x
3
2
1
3 2 1
14.  1- ∞, 02  15.  ln 
x31x3 + 22
23x2 + 2
  16.  x = 3  17.  x = 3
18.  A1t2 = 15,00011.017524t  19.  In 1983 (after 23.03 yr)
20.  The Nicaragua earthquake was about 2.5 times the intensity of the 
Morocco earthquake.
Practice Test B
1.  b  2.  b  3.  b  4.  d  5.  d  6.  b  7.  b  8.  c  9.  d  10.  d
11.  b  12.  d  13.  b  14.  a  15.  a  16.  d  17.  b  18.  d  19.  b  20.  b
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–4)
1.  x-intercept: 0; y-intercepts: 0, 2; symmetric about y-axis 
3.  Center: 1-1, 22; radius: 5 
0
4
4
8
4
4
x
8
y
(1, 2)
 
5.  1- ∞, -32 ´ 12, ∞2 
7.  Start with y = 1x, shift 1 unit 
left, stretch vertically by a factor of 
3, and shift 2 units down. 
0
4
3
2
1
1
2
y
x
4
3
2
1
2 1
 

Section 5.2﻿    ■    Answers  A-43
39.  -100°  41.  300°  43.  450°  45.  -495°  47.  0.21 radian
49.  -1.47 radians  51.  53.86°  53.  -470.40°  55.  Complement:  
43°; supplement: 133°  57.  Complement: none because the measure  
of the angle is greater than 90°; supplement: 60°  59.  Complement:  
none because the measure of the angle is greater than 90°; supplement: 
none because the measure of the angle is greater than 180° 
61.  7>25 ≈0.28 radian  63.  44
21 ≈2.095 radians  65.  5p
12 ≈1.309 m 
67.  78 m  69.  60 m/min  71.  2 rad/sec  73.  200 in2 
75.  A
120
p
≈6.180 ft
Applying the Concepts:
77.  70.69 in  79.  2p
3  radians  81.  18 in  83.  86°  85.  a.  120 radians 
per minute  b.  300 radians per minute  87.  132,000 radians per hour
89.  84,823 inches per minute  91.  ≈508 mi  93.  ≈462 mi   
95.  ≈6.366°
Beyond the Basics:
99.  4  103.  7 m  105.  250  107.  99
112 ≈0.884 ft2
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
109.  3, p, 4, 3p
2
Maintaining Skills:
113.  c = 13  115.  a = 8  117.  a = 313  119.  13
3
Section 5.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  sin u = 4
5 csc u = 5
4 
cos u = 3
5 sec u = 5
3
tan u = 4
3 cot u = 3
4
2.  tan u = 3
4, csc u = 5
3, sec u = 5
4, cot u = 4
3
3.  sin u = 212
3  csc u = 312
4
 cos u = 1
3
 1given2   sec u = 3
tan u = 212  cot u = 12
4
4.  csc 45° = 12, sec 45° = 12, cot 45° = 1
5.  sin 60° = 13
2 , cos 60° = 1
2, tan 60° = 13
csc 60° = 213
3
, sec 60° = 2, cot 60° = 13
3   6.  a.  sec 69° ≈2.7904
b.  cot 15° ≈3.7321  7.  ≈1.096 miles  8.  ≈20,320 feet   
9.  ≈43 feet
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  1
3  3.  0.7  5.  true 
7.  sin u = 215
25  csc u = 515
2
cos u = 1115
25  sec u = 515
11  
tan u = 2
11 cot u = 11
2
9.  sin u = 3
5 csc u = 5
3
cos u = 4
5 sec u = 5
4
tan u = 3
4 cot u = 4
3
11.  sin u = 12
10  csc u = 512
cos u = 712
10  sec u = 512
7
tan u = 1
7 cot u = 7 
13.  tan u = 12
5 , csc u = 13
12, sec u = 13
5 , cot u = 5
12
15.  tan u = 21
20, csc u = 29
21, sec u = 29
20, cot u = 20
21
17.  tan u = 2121
21
, csc u = 5
2, sec u = 5121
21
, cot u = 121
2
19.  sin u = 15
3   csc u = 315
5
cos u = 2
3    sec u = 3
2
tan u = 15
2   cot u = 215
5
21.  sin u = 5134
34
  csc u = 134
5
cos u = 3134
34
  sec u = 134
3
tan u = 5
3     cot u = 3
5
23.  sin u = 5
13  csc u = 13
5
cos u = 12
13  sec u = 13
12
tan u = 5
12  cot u = 12
5   25.  0.8480  27.  0.5095  29.  2.3662
31.  1  33.  13
2   35.  3  37.  16 - 12
4
39.  c ≈12.806, sin u ≈0.625, tan u = 0.8   41.  c ≈24.042;
cos u ≈0.291, tan u ≈3.286  43.  sin u = 0.5, b ≈15.588, c = 18
45.  c ≈13.953, sin u ≈0.896, cos u ≈0.444
47.  a ≈11.040, sin u ≈0.761, tan u ≈1.174
49.  a.  3  b.  212
3
  c.  12
4   d.  12
4   51.  a.  1
5  b.  216
5
  c.  216
d.  16
12   53.  a.  2
5  b.  129
2
  c.  2129
29
  d.  5129
29
Applying the Concepts:
55.  ≈11.3 ft  57.  ≈1029 m  59.  2500 ft  61.  413 ≈6.9 ft 
63.  15 ft  65.  ≈43 ft  67.  The Empire State Building is approximately 
150 m away and is approximately 381 m tall.  69.  ≈238,844 mi 
71.  2.1 m  73.  101.5 ft  75.  ≈2383 miles
Beyond the Basics:
77.  1612 + 3
8
  79.  1
9  81.  ≈15.8 ft  83.  ≈496 ft  85.  ≈5402 m
87.  ≈20,168 feet per minute  89.  ≈48 square units
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
91.  1  93.  (i) 13; 30°  (ii) 16
2 ; 16
2 ; 45°  (iii) 45°; 45°  (iv) 12
2 ; 12
2  
(v)  26 + 22
2
; 16 - 12
2
  (vi)  15°; 75° 
(vii)   sin 15° = 16 - 12
4
 cos 15° = 16 + 12
4
 
(viii)  sin 75° ≈16 + 12
4
; cos 75° ≈16 - 12
4
Maintaining Skills:
95.  2 - 13  97.  11 - 613  99.  5p
12   101.  -17
6  p
103.  360 # 3 + 140  105.  360 # 1-22 + 240

A-44  Answers    ■    Section 5.4
57.   sin u = - 12
13  csc u = - 13
12
 cos u = - 5
13  sec u = - 13
5
 tan u = 12
5   cot u = 5
12
59.   sin u = 4
5  csc u = 5
4
 cos u = - 3
5 sec u = - 5
3
 tan u = - 4
3  cot u = - 3
4
61.   sin u = 3
5  csc u = 5
3   cos u = - 4
5  sec u = - 5
4
 tan u = - 3
4  cot u = - 4
3
63.   sin u = - 212
3   csc u = - 312
4
   cos u = 1
3  sec u = 3
 tan u = - 212 cot u = - 12
4   65.  1
2  67.  1  69.  -2
71.  - 23
3   73.  23
2   75.  - 23
2   77.  1  79.  2
81.  sin s = 13
2 , cos s = - 1
2, tan s = - 13
83.  sin s = - 1
2, cos s = - 13
2 , tan s = - 13
3
85.  sin s = - 12
2 , cos s = - 12
2 , tan s = 1
Applying the Concepts:
87.  813 ≈13.86 ft  89.  H = 7.5625 ft; t = 1.375 sec; R = 52.39 ft
91.  H = 22.6875 ft; t = 2.38 sec; R = 52.39 ft  93.  a.  y = x -
x2
200
 .
b.  50 ft  95.  3.54 sec  97.  0.99 ft  99.  a.  50 ft  b.  5013 ≈86.6 ft
Beyond the Basics:
101.  Triangle SOM  103.  Triangle RON  105.  - 12
2 ; - 13
107.  -  12
2 ; - 1
2; 13
3   111.  0  113.  The value on the left is ­negative, 
but the value on the right is positive.  115.  The value on the left is 
­negative, but the value on the right is positive.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
117.  False. The two sides are unequal for u = 90°.
Maintaining Skills:
119.  4
3  121.  -5, 2  123.  Odd  125.  Neither  127.  Even
Section 5.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.	
5
1
3
5
2

2

y  5 sin x
y  sin x
y     sin x
1
5
x
y
2.	
5
3
1
3
1
5
2

2

y  5 cos x
x
y
Amplitude = 5; range = 3-5, 54
3.	
1
0.5
0.5
1
y  sin x
y  sin     x
1
2
2
3
4

x
y
4. 
2
2

y  2 cos 2x
x
y
4

2

3
4

5.  Answers will vary.
Section 5.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  sin u = - 5129
29
  csc u = - 129
5   cos u = 2129
29
 sec u = 129
2
tan u = - 5
2 cot u = - 2
5 
2.  a.   sin 180° = sin p = 0 csc 180° = csc p is undefined.
 cos 180° = cos p = -1 sec 180° = sec p = -1
 tan 180° = tan p = 0 cot 180° = cot p is undefined.
b.   sin 270° = sin 3p>2 = -1 csc 270° = csc 3p>2 = -1
 cos 270° = cos 3p>2 = 0 sec 270° = sec 3p>2 is undefined.
 tan 270° = tan 3p>2 is undefined  cot 270° = cot 3p>2 = 0
3.  a.  cos 1830° = 13
2   b.  sin 31p
3
= 13
2   4.  Quadrant II
5.  sin u = - 4141
41
, sec u = 141
5
  6.  a.  5°  b.  p
3  
c.  3p - 8.22 ≈1.20  7.  cos 60° ≈0.5  8.  a.  csc 1035° = - 12 
b.  cot 17p
6
= - 13  9.  101.4 m 
10.  sin t = - 1
2, cos t = - 13
2 , tan t = 13
3
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  2x2 + y2; 
y
r;  x
r; 
y
x  3.  x-axis  5.  false 
7.  sin u = 4
5  csc u = 5
4
cos u = - 3
5 sec u = - 5
3
tan u = - 4
3 cot u = - 3
4
9.   sin u = 12
13  csc u = 13
12
 cos u = 5
13  sec u = 13
5
 tan u = 12
5   cot u = 5
12
11.   sin u = 24
25  csc u = 25
24
 cos u = 7
25  sec u = 25
7
 tan u = 24
7   cot u = 7
24
13.   sin u = - 7
25  csc u = - 25
7
 cos u = - 24
25  sec u = - 25
24
 tan u = 7
24  cot u = 24
7  
15.   sin u =
1
12
= 12
2   csc u = 12
1
= 12
 cos u =
1
12
= 12
2   sec u = 12
1
= 12
 tan u = 1
1 = 1  cot u = 1
1 = 1
17.   sin u = 12
2   csc u =
2
12
= 12
 cos u = 12
2   sec u =
2
12
= 12
 tan u = 12
12
= 1  cot u = 12
12
= 1
19.   sin u = - 1
2  csc u = - 2
1 = -2
 cos u = 13
2   sec u =
2
13
= 213
3
 tan u = - 1
13
= - 13
3   cot u = - 13
1
= - 13
21.   sin u = -
2
129
= - 2129
29   csc u = - 129
2
 cos u =
5
129
= 5129
29
  sec u = 129
2
 tan u = - 2
5  cot u = - 5
2 
23.  1  25.  0  27.  Undefined  29.  0  31.  Undefined  33.  -1
35.  -1  37.  0  39.  1  41.  0  43.  0  45.  Quadrant III
47.  Quadrant II  49.  Quadrant IV  51.  Quadrant II  53.  -12  55.  24

Section 5.4    ■    Answers  A-45
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  p  3.  3-1, 14  5.  false  7.  true
9.	
22
21
1
2
22p
2p
2p
p
y 5 2 sin x
x
y
11.	
0.5
0.5
2

2

y    sin x
1
2
x
y
13.	
2
1
1
2
2

2

y     cos x
3
2
x
y
15.	
1
1
2

2

y  cos 2x
x
y
17.	
1
1
2

2

y  cos    x
2
3
x
y
19.	
1
1
2

2

y  cos (x  
2)
x
y
21.	
1
1
2

2

y  cos (x  
3)
x
y
23.	
2
2
2

2

y  2 cos (x  
2)
x
y
25.	
1
2
2
−
2

y  sin x  1 
x
y
27.	
1
2
2

2

y  cos x  1 
x
y
29.  Amplitude = 5; period = 2p; phase shift = p
31.  Amplitude = 7; period = 2p
9 ; phase shift = - p
6
33.  Amplitude = 6; period = 4p; phase shift = -2
35.  Amplitude = 0.9; period = 8p; phase shift = p
4
37.  y = 1
4
 sin c16 ax - p
16 b d
39.  y = 6 sin c 2
3
 ax + p
4 b d
41.  y = 2.4 sin c p
3 1x - 32d
43.  y = p
2  sin c 16p
5  ax + 1
4 b d
45.	
−4
4
6
11
3
4
6
5
3

6

−

y  4 cos (x  
6)
x
y
47.	
4
2
4
3
5
4





2.5
2.5
x
y
y      sin   2(x      )
4

2
5
6. 
1
1
4
4
3
5
4



7
4

9
4

y  cos (x     )
4

x
y
7.  Amplitude = 1
3; period = 5p; phase shift = - p
6
y      cos      x 
3
1
3
1
5
2
6

0.5
,
3
5



4
2
2
3
4
5
 x
y

3
1
, 
3
1
,
0
,
6

        
3
7
         
6

         
12
13
29

        
0
,
12
43
        
8. 
2
2
y  2 cos    3(x  )
3
2
3

x
y
9.  a.  Period = p; phase shift = - p
8   b.  Period = 2; phase shift = 1
p
10. 
2
2
y  2 cos (3x     )
 
3
2
3


x
y
11. 
6
2
2
9
4
9


9
7
3

y  4 sin (3x     )  2
x
y
12. 
2
4
6
8
10 12
8
10
12
14
16
18
x
y
y  3.6 sin       (x  3)   12.2

6
  13.  y = -4 cos 2p
3  t

A-46  Answers   ■   Section 5.5
Beyond the Basics:
75.	
3
3
4

2


2
3
2
y  3 sin (x     )
x
y
77.	
1
2
3
4
2


2
3
2
y  2 cos (3x     )  2
2

x
y
79.	
0.5
1
2


2
3
2
y  sin x
x
y
81.	
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
2


2
3
2
y  x sin x
x
y
83. 
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0.5
1
1.5
2


2
3
2
y    x sin x
x
y
85. 
5
5
30
20
10
10
20
30
y  x2 sin x
y  x2
y  x2
x
y
87.  y = 3 cos 2x  89.  y = 2 sin 4x  91.  y = 3 sin c2ax - p
4 b d
93.  y = -2 sin c2 ax + p
8 b d
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
95.  a.  10 units  b.  5 units
Maintaining Skills:
97.  y = 5x - 13  99.  y = - 1
2x + 5
2  101.  -1, 2; x = -2, x - 3
103.  -2, -4; no vertical asymptotes  105.  Odd  107.  Neither
109.  Odd  111.  Odd
Section 5.5
Answers to Practice Problems
1.  y = 13
3  x + 3 - 213
3
2. 
0
10
10
x
y
2

2



3
2



49. 
6
3
2
3




2
5
5
x
y
y  5 cos   4(x      )
6

51. 
1
2
3
4
4
2




 2
x
y
y      sin   4(x      )
4

2
1
53.  y = 4 cos c2ax + p
6 b d; period = p; phase shift = - p
6
55.  y = - 3
2 sin c2ax - p
2 b d; period = p; phase shift = p
2
57.  y = 3 cos px; period = 2; phase shift = 0
59.  y = 1
2 cos c p
4  1x + 12d; period = 8; phase shift = -1
61.  y = 2 sin cpax + 3
p b d; period = 2; phase shift = - 3
p
Applying the Concepts:
63.  t = 7558; P ≈-0.63; E ≈-0.43; I ≈0.19  65.  a.  Period = 1
70. 
The pulse is the frequency of the function; it says how many times the 
heart beats in one minute.
b. 
1
140
1
70
100
110
120
122 130
140
p
t
p(t)  20 sin (140   t)  122

  c.  142
102
67.  a.  Amplitude = 156; period = 1
60  b.  Frequency = 60
c. 
1
60
1
30
160
120
40
40
120
160
V
t
V(t)  156 sin (120   t)

69.  a.  800 kangaroos  b.  500 kangaroos  c.  p
2  yrs ≈1.57 yr
71.  y = 4.35 sinc p
6  1x - 32d + 12.25 
73.  a. y = 25.5 sinc p
6  1x - 42d + 44.5 
b.  
2
4
6
8 10 12
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
x
y
y  25.5 sin       (x  4)    44.5

6
  c.  January = f 112 = 19; 
April = f 142 = 44.5;
July = f 172 = 70; 
October = f 1102 = 44.5. 
The computed values are 
very close to the measured 
values.

Section 5.5    ■    Answers  A-47
25.	
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
2



2
3
2
y  sec (x    )
x
y
27.	
5
10
2
4
4
3
2
4
x
y
29.	
5
10
4
3
4
2
x
y
2
31.	
5
10
2
3
2
1
x
y
33.	
5
10
2
1
2
2
4 x
y
35.	
4
2
2
4
4

2

4
3

4

y  sec   4(x      )
x
y
37.	
9
6
3
6
9
2

2

2
3
2
7
2
5

y  3 csc(x     )
2

x
y
39.	
5
10
10
4

2

4
5
2

4
11
y  tan       (x     )
2

3
2
x
y
41. 
6

3
2
5
10
10

12
5
12

12
11
y  5 tan   2 (x     )
3

x
y
3. 
0
10
10
y
2

2


5
4

3
4



    4. 
y  2 sec 3x
y  2 cos 3x
2
4
2
2
4
3

4
3


3

x
y
5.  ≈32.6, 5.14
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  p  3.  p
2   5.  y = x + 5  7.  y = - 13x - 1313 + 22 
9.	
4
2

4


10
5
5
10
4
3
4

y  tan (x      )
x
y
11.	
4
2

4


10
5
5
10
4
3
4

y  cot (x      )
x
y
13.	
y  tan 2x
2
4


10
5
5
10
4
3
x
y
15.	

2

2
10
5
5
10
2
3
2
x
y  cot 
x
y
17.	
4


4

10
5
5
10
2

2

y  tan x
x
y
19.	
30
20
10
10
20
30
4


4

2

2

y  3 tan x
x
y
21.	
y  sec 2x
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
4

2

4
3

x
y
23.	
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
6
3

2


3
2
y  csc 3x
x
y

A-48  Answers   ■   Section 5.6
65. 
8

8
3
10
5
5
10
4

2

y  4 cot (     4x)  3

x
y
67.  y = 2 tan ax + p
2 b  69.  y = -3 sec ax
2 - pb
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
71.  6
Maintaining Skills:
73.  f -11x2 = x - 7
3
  75.  True  77.  True  79.  30, ∞2  81.  No; 
30, p4
Section 5.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  - p
3   b.  - p
2   2.  a.  3p
4   b.  p
3   3.   p
6   4.   p
3   5.   b. 1 
6.  a.  1.3490  b.  0.2898  c.  2.932  7.  a.  53.1301°  b.  4.4117°
c.  -85.2364°  8.   - p
2   9.   222
3
  10.   29 - x2
x
  11.   cot u   
12.   80°
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  3-1, 14  3.  p
3   5.  true  7.  false  9.  0  11.  - p
6   13.  p
15.  Undefined  17.  p
3   19.  - p
4   21.  3p
4   23.  Undefined  25.  2p
3
27.  1
8  29.  p
7   31.  247  33.  - p
3   35.  - p
3   37.  p
3   39.  p
6
41.  2p
3   43.  - p
3   45.  2p
3   47.  1  49.  -1  51.  1  53.  53.13°
55.  -43.63°  57.  73.40°  59.  85.91°  61.  -88.64°  63.  15
3
65.  3
5  67.  2129
29
  69.  3
4  71.  4117
17
  73.  13  75. 
x
24 + x2
77.  225 - 9x2
3x
  79. 
x
24 - x2  81.  cot u  83.  sin u  85.   csc u
Applying the Concepts:
87.  62°  89.  159°
Beyond the Basics:
91.  Increasing  93.  Increasing
95.	
2
x
y
2
6
10
97.	
10
6
2
2
6
10
y  sec1 x
2

x
y
99.  c0, p
2 b ´ ap
2 , p d
43. 
5
10
3
1
4
4
3
2
x
y
Applying the Concepts:
45.  a.  
1
2
3
4
5
d(t)  20 tan
t
5

t
d
b.  The light is pointing parallel to the wall. 
47.   y = 7 tan  c p
8 1x + 12d; -1.39,  10.48  49.  y = 2 cot c p
4 1x - 12d
51.  y = -2 sec c p
2 1x + 12d; 4
Beyond the Basics:
57.	
5
10
10
5
y  2 cot (3x)
3
2
3

x
y
59.	
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
10
y
csc (
)
2
1
5
x
x
y
61.	
2
5
10
2
3
2
2
x
y
63.	
4

4
3
4
7
4
5
8
6
4
2
2
4
6
8
y  2 sec (     2x)

x
y

Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–5)    ■    Answers  A-49
51.  5p
8   53.  p
3   55.  12
2   57.  - 13  59.  ≈ 44 in  61.  ≈ 866 mi 
63.  3
2 radians >sec  65.  11,100 km/hr 
67.  y = 2.25 sin c p
6  1x - 42d + 12.05 
Practice Test A
1.  2.4435  2.  252°  3.  2129
29
  4.  1.5  5.  75 cm2  6.  315
7
7.  Quadrant II  8.  13
5   9.  37°  10.  0.223  11.  72 m
12.  Amplitude = 7; range = 3-7, 74
13.  Amplitude = 19; period = p
6 ;  phase shift = -3p
14.  y = -7 cos ap
2  tb
15.	
1
1
2
3
4

y  cos    x
2
x
y
16.	
1
1
2



y  sin   2(x    )
x
y
17. 



4
2

4


10
5
5
10
4
3
4

y  tan (x     )
x
y
18.  - p
3   19.  2p
3   20.  - 12
4
Practice Test B
1.  b  2.  d  3.  a  4.  a  5.  d  6.  b  7.  d  8.  b  9.  c  10.  a
11.  c  12.  a  13.  b  14.  d  15.  d  16.  c  17.  c  18.  a
19.  d  20.  d
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–5) 
1.  5 ± 13
3   3.  12, 42  5.  10, 22 
7. 
5
5
5
10
f(x)  4ex  1
x
y
 
9.  a.  f -11x2 = x
3 - 7
3  b.  The function does not have an inverse.  
11.  y = -3, x = -5, x = 1 
Maintaining Skills:
103.  Conditional equation  105.  Neither  107.  Identity
109.  Conditional equation  111.  Neither  113.  Identity  115. 
2
x2 - 1
117. 
x
x2 - 1
  119.  13 - 1  121.  0
Review Exercises 
1. 
240
 
3. 
 3
2
 
5.  p
9   7.  - p
3   9.  50°  11.  2.667  13.  1.257 m  15.  2.513 ft2 
17.  sin u = 177
9
, tan u = 177
2
, cot u = 2177
77
, sec u = 9
2, csc u = 9177
77
 
19.  sin u = 5134
34
, cos u = 3134
34
, cot u = 3
5, sec u = 134
3
, csc u = 134
5
 
21.  sin u = 4117
17
, cos u = 117
17 , tan u = 4, cot u = 1
4, sec u = 117, 
csc u = 117
4
  23.  sin u = 2
3, cos u = - 15
3 , tan u = - 215
5
, 
cot u = - 15
2 , sec u = - 315
5
, csc u = 3
2  25.  IV  27.  III
29.  sin u = - 3
5, tan u = 3
4, cot u = 4
3, sec u = - 5
4, csc u = - 5
3 
31.  cos u = - 4
5, tan u = - 3
4, cot u = - 4
3, sec u = - 5
4, csc u = 5
3
33.  - 13
2   35.  13
3  
37. 
1.5
1.5
2

2

y      cos x
2
3
x
y
 
39. 
3
3
2

2

y  3 sin(x     )

3
x
y
 
41.  Amplitude = 14; period = p; phase shift = - p
14 
43.  Vertical stretch = 6; period = p
2 ; phase shift = - p
10 
45. 
6
5
6
11
6
17
6
23
6


2
2
3
2
y  2 cos (x       )

x
y
 
47. 
10
10
4

2

4
3

4

y  5 tan   2(x     )
x
y
 
49. 
2
2
3
5
7

2
1
2
x
y      sec 
x
y
 

A-50  Answers   ■   Section 6.2
49. 
2
2π
2π
2
sin(x)cos(x)
1
y
y
Not an 
identity
51. 
3
2π
2π
1
1cos(x)
sin2(x)
1cos(x)
y
y
 An identity
53. 
 An identity
55. 
 An identity
57. 
 Not an identity
95.  sec u  97.  tan u  99.  cot u
Applying the Concepts:
101.  20  csc u  103.  tan u = m1 - m2
1 + m1m2
Beyond the Basics:
111.  1  113.  1  115.  2 + 4 cot2 u  117.  1  119.  1
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
125.  a. x = p
2   127.  t = 0  129.  a = b, and a, b ≠0
Maintaining Skills:
131.  4x2 - 4xy + y2  133.  - 1
2  135.  13
3   137.  tan2 x + 1 = sec2 x
139.  sin t = 113
4
Section 6.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  16 + 12
4
  2.  12 - 16
4
  5.  1
2  6.  - 63
65  8.  A = 2, u = p
3
13. 
5
5
5
5
f(x) {
ln x  if x > 0
ln x  if x < 0
x
y
 
15.  {1, {2, {3, {6, {1
2, {3
2 
17.  a.  sin u = 3
5, tan u = - 3
4, cot u = - 4
3, sec u = - 5
4, csc u = 5
3 
b.  sin u = - 12
13, cos u = - 5
13, tan u = 12
5 , sec u = - 13
5 , csc u = - 13
12 
19.  a.  216
5
  b.  7153
53
Chapter 6
Section 6.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  - 3
4  2.  sin x = 15
5 , cos x = - 215
5
, sec x = - 15
2 , csc x = 15, 
cot x = -2  3. 
2
sin x  4.  At x = 3p
2 , 0 ≠2.  10.  3 cos u
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  identity  3.  cos2 x; tan2 x; 1  5.  true  7.  - 5
13  9.  - 25
2   11.  15
2
13.  tan x = - 4
3, cot x = - 3
4, sec x = - 5
3, csc x = 5
4 
15.  tan x = 12
2 , cot x = 12, sec x = 16
2 , csc x = 13 
17.  sin x = - 15
5 , cos x = - 215
5
, cot x = 2, csc = - 15 
19.  sin x = 1
3, cos x = 212
3
, tan x = 12
4 , sec x = 312
4
 
21.  cos x = - 12
13, tan x = 5
12, sec x = - 13
12, csc x = - 13
5  
23.  sin x = - 212
3
, cos x = 1
3, tan x = -212, 
cot x = - 12
4 , csc x = - 312
4
  25.  c  27.  a  29.  d  31.  2  33.  1 
35.  csc2 x + cot2 x  37.  1  39.  tan x - 3  41.  x = p; 0 ≠2
43.  x = p; -1 ≠1  45.  x = p
3 ; 3
4 ≠1
4 
47. 
2
cos2xsin2x
2π
2π
2
2 cos2x1
y
y
An identity

Section 6.4    ■    Answers  A-51
Section 6.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a. - 120
169  b. - 119
169  c. 120
119  2.  a. 13
2   b. 12
2
4.   3
8 - 1
2 cos 2x + 1
8 cos 4x  5.  ≈99.8 watts  6.  22 + 12
2
7.  - 126
26
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  2 sin x cos x  3.  2 cos2 x - 1; 1 + cos 2x
2
  5.  false  7.  a.  - 24
25   
b.  7
25  c.  - 24
7   9.  a.  8
17  b.  - 15
17  c.  - 8
15  11.  a.  - 4
5  b.  - 3
5 
c.  4
3  13.  - 13
2   15.  - 13
2   17.  - 13
3   19.  12
2   21.  13
3  
33.  1 - cos 4x
2
  35.  sin 4x  37.  sin 12x
2
  39.  sin 2x 
4
41.  cos 2x - 4 cos x + 3  43.  22 - 13
2
  45.  22 + 12
2
47.  - 22 + 12
2
  49.  - 22 - 12
22 + 12
  51.  - 12 - 1
53.  - 22 + 13
2
  55.  a.  215
5
  b.  15
5   c.  2
57.  a.   B
13 + 3113
26
  b.  B
13 - 3113
26
  c.  B
13 + 3113
13 - 3113
59.  a.  B
5 + 216
10
  b.  B
5 - 216
10
  c.  B
5 + 216
5 - 216
61.  a.  B
5 - 15
10
  b.  B
5 + 15
10
  c.  B
5 - 15
5 + 15
Applying the Concepts:
73.  100 watts  75.  1200 watts  77.  600 watts  79.  p
4
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
91.  a.  4
5  b.  3
5  c.  24
25  d.  - 7
25  e.  - 24
7   f.  15
5   g.  215
5
  h.  1
2
Maintaining Skills:
93. 
1
15 - 12
  95.  0.87  97.  10  99.  - 12 + 16
4
  101.  1
2
Section 6.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  1
2 cos 2x + 1
2 cos 4x  2.  2 - 13
4
  3.  a.  2 sin 3x sin x  b.  cos 13°
4.  2 sina2x - p
4 bcosax + p
4 b 
6.  a.  y = sin 12p # 697t2 + sin 12p # 1209t2
b.  y = 2 cos 1512pt2 sin 11906pt2
c.  f = 953 Hz, A = 2 cos 1512pt2
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  1
2 3cos 1x - y2 - cos 1x + y24  3.  2 cos a
x + y
2
b cos a
x - y
2
b
5.  false  7.  1
2 sin 2x  9.  1
2 - 1
2 cos 2x  11.  1
4 + 1
2 sin 20°
13.  - 1
4 - 1
2 cos 20°  15.  1
4  17.  12
4
- 1
2  19.  1
2 sin 6u + 1
2 sin 4u 
21.  1
2 cos x + 1
2 cos 7x  23.  13
4
- 12
4   25.  1
2 + 12
4  
27.  1
4 + 12
4   29.  1
4 - 12
4   31.  -sin 10°  33.  2 sin 8° cos 24° 
9. 
2
2
π
3

π
2
π
3
π
3
π
11
y
x
y = sin x  √3 cos x
  10.  Amplitude = 0.115; 
period =
p
200; 
frequency = 200
p ;  
phase shift ≈ -0.0028
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  sin A cos B + cos A sin B  3.  tan A + tan B
1 - tan A tan B  5.  true
7.  16 + 12
4
  9.  16 - 12
4
  11.  - 16 + 12
4
  13.  1  15.  16 + 12
4
17.  2 - 13  19.  - 16 - 12  21.  16 - 12
4
  23.  -2 - 13 
25.  2 + 13  41.  1   43.  0  45.  1  47.  13
2   49.  1 
51.  56
65  53.  63
65  55.  16
63  57.  21210 - 6
35
  59.  351210 - 105
402
 
61.  -4110 - 3121
21210 - 6
71.
1
2
2
x
y
4
73.
5
2
x
y
y = 5 sin (x + 0.927)
75.
13
2
x
y
77.
3
2
x
y
Applying the Concepts:
81.  0  83.  A = 0.5; u ≈-0.00161  85.  a.  A ≈0.5142
b. Frequency = 1
p; phase shift ≈-0.6676
Beyond the Basics:
101.  0, p
2   103.  5p
6 , 3p
2   105.  5p
6   107.  1
2  109.  1
2  111.  0
113.  0  115.  17
6   119.  1
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
123.  u = 0, v = 0  127.  u = any real number, v = kp, k any integer
Maintaining Skills:
129.  tan u = 1
4  131.  Positive  133.  Negative  135.  - 13
3
137.  12
2

A-52  Answers   ■   Section 6.6
Beyond the Basics:
83.  e p
6 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  85.  e 0, p
3 , 2p
3 , p, 4p
3 , 5p
3 f  87.  e p
2 , 5.6397 f
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
89.  51.107, 2.034, 4.249, 5.1766  91.  50.905, 5.3796
93.  e p
4 , 5p
4 f  95.  e 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  97.  e p
6 , 11p
6
f  99.  e 3p
4 f
101.  e p
4 f  103.  2 cos 4x cos x
Section 6.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  e p
12, 5p
12 , 13p
12 , 17p
12 f  2.  e p
3 f  3.  After about 5 days and 24 days
4.  515°, 75°, 135°, 195°, 255°, 315°6  5.  e p
36, 5p
36 , 25p
36 , 29p
36 , 49p
36 , 53p
36 f
6.  e 0, 2p
5 , 4p
5 , p, 6p
5 , 8p
5 f  7.  e 13 - 2
2
f  8.  b.  e 22 + 12
2
f
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  p
2 + x1  3.  p
2 - x1  5.  false  7.  e p
6 , 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  9.  ∅
11.  e p
12, 7p
12 , 13p
12 , 19p
12 f  13.  e p
18, 5p
18 , 13p
18 , 17p
18 , 25p
18 , 29p
18 f
15.  e 2p
3 f  17.  e 3p
4 f  19.  e p
12, p
4 , 3p
4 , 11p
12 , 17p
12 , 19p
12 f
21.  e p
6 - 1
2, 5p
6
- 1
2, 7p
6
- 1
2, 11p
6
- 1
2 f
23.  e p
24 + 1
4, 5p
24 + 1
4, 13p
24
+ 1
4, 17p
24
+ 1
4, 25p
24
+ 1
4, 29p
24
+ 1
4,
37p
24
+ 1
4, 41p
24
+ 1
4 f  25.  e - p
9 + 2
3, p
9 + 2
3, 11p
9
+ 2
3, 13p
9
+ 2
3 f
27.  535.3°, 144.7°, 215.3°, 324.7°6
29.  520°, 100°, 140°, 220°, 260°, 340°6
31.  566.5°, 113.5°, 186.5°, 233.5°, 306.5°, 353.5°6  33.  ∅
35.  530°, 150°, 210°, 330°6  37.  560°, 300°6  39.  e 0, 2p
3 , p, 4p
3 f
41.  e 0, p
2 , p, 3p
2 f  43.  e p
8 , 3p
8 , p
2 , 5p
8 , 7p
8 , 9p
8 , 11p
8 , 3p
2 , 13p
8 , 15p
8
f
45.  e 0, p
8 , 3p
8 , 5p
8 , 7p
8 , p, 9p
8 , 11p
8 , 13p
8 , 15p
8
f  47.  e 13
2 f  49.  ∅
51.  e 1
2 f  53.  e 5126
26
f
Applying the Concepts:
55.  a.  ≈ 0.0014 sec  b.  ≈ 0.0092 sec
57.  2
3 + 4n sec, 10
3 + 4n sec, n an integer  59.  a.  27  b.  18, 36
c.  10, 44  61.  a.  January  b.  February, December
Beyond the Basics:
63.  e p
4 , 3p
4 , 5p
4 , 7p
4 f  65.  e p
3 , 5p
3 f
67.  e p
8 , 3p
8 , 5p
8 , 7p
8 , 9p
8 , 11p
8 , 13p
8 , 15p
8
f  69.  e 2p
3 , 4p
3 f
71.  e p
8 , 5p
8 , 9p
8 , 3p
2 , 13p
8
f  73.  e 0, p
2 , 5p
6 , p, 7p
6 , 3p
2 f
75.  e 5p
12 , 7p
12 , 11p
12 , 17p
12 , 19p
12 , 23p
12 f  77.  e 0, p
3 , 2p
3 , p, 4p
3 , 5p
3 f
79.  e p
8 , p
2 , 5p
8 , 9p
8 , 3p
2 , 13p
8
f  81.  a.  5 sin c2x + tan-1a4
3 b d  
b.  51.107, 2.678, 4.249, 5.8206  83.  a.  13 sin c3x + tan-1 a - 12
5 b d  
b.  50.741, 1.090, 2.835, 3.185, 4.930, 5.2796
35.  2 sin 3p
10  cos p
10  37.  2 cos 5
12 cos 1
12  39.  2 cos 4x cos x 
41.  2 sin 3x cos 4x  43.  12 cos ax - p
4 b  45.  12 sin a2x - p
4 b
47.  2 sin ap
4 - xb cos a4x - p
4 b  49.  a12 cos ax - p
4 b
Applying the Concepts:
61.  a.  y = sin32p18522t4 + sin32p112092t4
b.  y = 2 cos 1357pt2 sin32p11030.52t4
c.  f = 1030.5 Hz, A = 2 cos 1357pt2
63.  a.  y = 0.1 cos 1116pt2 cos 14pt2  b.  f = 4 beats per unit time
Beyond the Basics:
65.  The amplitude is 2 cos 1 ≈1.081. The period is p.
0
2
2
x
y

2

2

y  cos(2x  1)  cos(2x  1)
Maintaining Skills:
87.  Inconsistent  89.  Identity  91.  Conditional  93.  p
8   95.  p
4  
97.  6p
5
Section 6.5
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  x = p
2 + 2np  b.  x = 2np  c.  x = p
4 + np
2.  a.  x = 48.2° + n # 360°, x = 311.8° + n # 360° 
b.  x ≈2.0345, x ≈5.1761  3.  x = 90°, x = 330°  4.  40°
5.  e p
2 , 5p
6 , 11p
6
f  6.  u = 2np, u = 2p
3
+ 2np, u = 4p
3
+ 2np
7.  u = p
6 , u = p
2 , u = 5p
6   8.  e p
3 f
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  two  3.  one  5.  false  7.  p
2 + 2np, 3p
2
+ 2np  9.  3p
4
+ np
11.  p
4 + 2np, 7p
4
+ 2np  13.  p
6 + np  15.  2p
3
+ 2np, 4p
3
+ 2np
17.  30° + 180°n  19.  210° + 360°n, 330° + 360°n  21.  90° + 360°n
23.  60° + 360°n, 120° + 360°n  25.  60° + 360°n, 300° + 360°n
27.  523.6°, 156.4°6  29.  582.0°, 278.0°6  31.  5131.3°, 311.3°6
33.  53.4814, 5.94336  35.  52.2143, 5.35596  37.  53.5531, 5.87176
39.  e 7p
12 , 23p
12 f  41.  e 19p
24 , 35p
24 f  43.  e p
3 , 4p
3 f  45.  e p
6 , 3p
2 f
47.  e p
4 , 5p
4 f  49.  e p
6 , 3p
4 , 5p
6 , 7p
4 f  51.  e p
6 , 3p
4 , 5p
6 , 7p
4 f
53.  e p
4 , 7p
6 , 7p
4 , 11p
6
f  55.  e p
6 , 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  57.  e p
4 , 3p
4 , 5p
4 , 7p
4 f
59.  e p
3 , 2p
3 , 4p
3 , 5p
3 f  61.  e p
2 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  63.  e p
4 , 5p
4 f
65.  e p
6 , 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  67.  0, p  69.  e 7p
6 , 3p
2 , 11p
6
f
71.  e p
3 , 5p
6 , 4p
3 , 11p
6
f  73.  e p
3 , p f  75.  e p
6 f
Applying the Concepts:
77.  60°  79.  ≈5.7°  81.  28°

	
Section 7.2   ■    Answers  A-53
13.	
1
1
x
y
2π
2π
π
π
y  sin x
y     sin 2x
1
2
15.	
x
y
y  3sin x
y  3csc x
2π
2π
π
π
6
4
2
2
4
6
17.  cot x - 3
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
85.  e - 1
2, 1
2 f
Maintaining Skills:
87.  x
3 = p
5   89.  5166  91.  13
2   93.  1
2  95.  True
Review Exercises
1.  cos u = - 15
3 , tan u = 215
5
, cot u = 15
2 , 
sec u = - 315
5
, csc u = - 3
2
3.  sin u = - 212
3
, cos u = 1
3, tan u = -212,
cot u = - 12
4 , csc u = - 312
4
  21.  22 + 13
2
  23.  16 - 12 
25.  1  27.  -1  29.  - 16
65  31.  63
65
51. 
2
1

1
2
π
3
π
6
π
π
6
5
π
3
4
π
6
11
x
y
π
6
y  2 sin   x      
55.  e p
4 , 3p
4 , 5p
4 , 7p
4 f  57.  e 0, 2p
3 , 4p
3 f
59.  e p
18, 5p
18 , 13p
18 , 17p
18 , 25p
18 , 29p
18 f  61.  519.5°, 160.5°6
63.  515°, 165°, 195°, 345°6  65.  5120°, 150°, 240°, 330°6
Applying the Concepts:
67.  60°  69. 
1
360 sec  71.  30°
Practice Test A
1.  - 3
4  2.  - 3113
13
  9.  - p
4 + np  10.  p
24 + n p
2 , 5p
24 + n p
2
11.  e 3p
4 f  12.  e p
2 , 7p
6 , 3p
2 , 11p
6
f  13.  0  14.  1
2  15.  16 + 12
4
16.  - 7
25  17.  24
25  18.  Odd  19.  No, let x = y = p
2 .  20.  45°
Practice Test B
1.  a  2.  b  3.  d  4.  b  5.  a  6.  b  7.  c  8.  d  9.  c  10.  c  11.  c
12.  a  13.  d  14.  d  15.  b  16.  a  17.  d  18.  c  19.  d  20.  b
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–6)
1.  x = - 1
2 { 15
2   3.  x = -
log 9
log 5  5.  1-2, 02 ´ 12, ∞2
7.  4x - 1 + 2h
9.	
4
2
2
4
6
12
9
6
3
3
6
y  x2
y  x2  4x  7
x
y
11.	
543
2 3 4 5
4
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
x
y
y  2x1  2
y  2x
CHAPTER 7
Section 7.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  C = 45°, b ≈15.4 in, c ≈12.0 in  2.  10,576 ft  3.  None 
4.  None  5.  Solution 1: A ≈99.2°, B ≈45.8°, a ≈20.7 ft;  
Solution 2: A ≈10.8°, B ≈134.2°, a ≈3.9 ft  6.  No triangle  
exists.  7.  A ≈31.3°, B ≈88.7°, b ≈57.7 ft  8.  a.  ≈31.5 mi
b.  ≈15.6 mi
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1. 180  3. one  5. true  7.  Two  9.  None  11.  One  13.  90°
15.  75°  17. 212  19.  3  21. C = 63°, a ≈98.2 ft, b ≈93.0 ft
23.  B = 27°, a ≈64.8 m, b ≈31.3 m
25.  B = 65°, C = 50°, c ≈16.9 ft
27.  B ≈23.7°, C ≈41.3°, c ≈51.0 m
29.  C = 105°, b ≈89.2 m, c ≈150.3 m
31.  B = 79°, b ≈102.3 cm, c ≈85.4 cm
33.  B = 98°, a ≈47.1 ft, b ≈81.2 ft
35.  A = 70°, a ≈55.1 in, c ≈54.0 in
37.  A = 24°, a ≈13.3 ft, b ≈30.7 ft
39.  C = 98.5°, a ≈17.7 m, b ≈21.7 m
41.  B ≈34°, C ≈106°, c ≈34.4
43.  C = 60°, B = 90°, c = 2513
45.  No triangle exists.  47.  No triangle exists.
49.  B ≈56.8°, C ≈23.2°, c ≈16.0  51.  No triangle exists.
53.  Solution 1: C ≈55.3°, A ≈78.7°, a ≈47.7
Solution 2: C ≈124.7°, A ≈9.3°, a ≈7.9  55.  No triangle ­exists.
57.  Solution 1: C ≈49.0°, B ≈89.0°, b ≈82.2
Solution 2: C ≈131.0°, B ≈7.0°, b ≈10.0  59.  No triangle exists.
Applying the Concepts:
61.  ≈399 ft  63.  a.  1615 yd  b. 540 yd  65.  a.  25.7 mi  b.  14.5 mi
67.  22,912 mi  69.  33 or 127 million miles  71.  1:32 p.m.; 3:18 p.m. 
73.  24.2 m
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
83.  An isosceles triangle with ∠A = ∠B
Maintaining Skills:
87.  13
2   89.  - 12
2   91.  60°  93.  120°  95.  111  97.  17
99.  - 1
4  101.  30°
Section 7.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  b ≈21.8, A ≈36.6°, C ≈83.4°  2.  5219.5 miles
3.  A ≈41.9°, B ≈85.9°, C ≈52.1°  4.  No triangle exists.
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  C  3.  three  5.  false  7.  7  9.  119  11.  1
5  13.  60°
15.  b ≈20.2, A ≈44°, C ≈30°
17.  A ≈130.5°, B ≈27.1°, C ≈22.4°
19.  c = 21, A ≈38.2°, B ≈21.8°
21.  a ≈11.5, B ≈50.4°, C ≈67.6°

A-54  Answers   ■   Section 7.4
23.  A ≈81.3°, B ≈46.4°, C ≈52.3°
25.  A ≈28.3°, B ≈43.3°, C ≈108.4°
27.  A ≈23.7°, B ≈36.4°, C ≈119.9°
29.  a ≈5.7, B ≈33.8°, C ≈48.5°
31.  b ≈5.0, A ≈46.3°, C ≈65.4°
33.  A ≈38.4°, B ≈49.1°, C ≈92.5°  35.  5.7 ft  37.  1543.1 yd
39.  a. 20.9 ft  b.  11.0 ft  41.  9.1 mi  43.  a.  3689 m  b.  1634.5 m
45.  66.4 ft  47.  9.8 cm, 23.6 cm
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
57.  a = 113, b = 512, c = 153, A ≈29.1°, B ≈72.2°, C ≈78.7°
59.  a ≈4.3, A ≈12.5°, C ≈17.5°  61.  No triangle can be 
formed.  63.  We need 2bc cos A = 1, for example A = 60°, b 7 0 and 
c = 1
b
Maintaining Skills:
65.  2  67.  613  69.  912
2
  71.  a.  6  b.  6  73.  a.  9  b.  913
75.  a.  21  b.  21111  77.  a.  18  b.  60
Section 7.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  124 ft  b.  672 ft2  2.  375.2 ft2  3.  90°  4.  203.4 in2
5.  93.5 m2  6.  14,801 gal
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  1
2 bh  3.  1
2ac sin B  5.  7.5  7.  1013  9.  27  11.  654.2 sq in
13.  118.7 sq km  15.  62.5 sq mm  17.  25,136.6 sq ft  19.  84.3 sq ft
21.  167.1 sq yd  23.  178.6 sq cm  25.  1621.9 sq ft  27.  2.9
29.  1240.2  31.  13.5  33.  7.7  35.  30° or 150°  37.  90°
41.  187.35 cm2  43.  493,941 sq mi  45.  ≈+775,668
47.  a.  1r, 02, ar12
2 , r12
2
b, 10, r2, a - r12
2 , r12
2
b, 1-r, 02,
a - r12
2 , - r12
2
b, 10, -r2, ar12
2 , - r12
2
b  b.  r22 - 12
c.  8r22 - 12  49.  b.  10p ≈31.4159  c.  28.2843, 30.9017, 
31.3953, 31.4108, resp. Perimeters approach the circumference of the circle.
51.  b. 4r13  53.  b.  20p ≈62.8319  c. 80.0, 64.9839, 62.9147, 
62.8525, resp. Perimeters approach the ­circumference of the circle. 
Maintaining Skills:
69.  x + 3y, 110  71.  a.  1
2  b. 12
2   c.  13  73.  u = 4p
3
75.  a.  d1S, T2 = d1O, P2 = 13  b.  m1 = m2 = 12
5   c.  Parallel
77.  a.  d1S, T2 = d1O, P2 = 12  b.  m1 = 1, m2 = -1
c.  Perpendicular
Section 7.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a. 
v
2w
2w  v
  b. 
v
u
2w
2w  v
2w  v  u
2.  83, -109  3.  a.  81, -19  b.  86, -99  c.  88, -139  d.  1233
4.  h - 12
13, 5
13 i  5.  a.  -7i + 14j  b.  715  6.  13i - j
7.  tan-1a - 3
2 b + 360° ≈303.69°  8.  R is a force of 50 pounds in the 
direction N 36.9° W.  9.  The ground speed is approximately 801.0 miles 
per hour, and the bearing is approximately N 62.9° W.  10.  The 
­magnitude of the resultant is approximately 121.2 lb, and the resultant is in 
the direction S 7.8° W.
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  direction  3.  2a2 + b2, b
a  5.  true
7. 
u
v
u  v
9. 
2u
w
2u  w
 
11.	
u
v
u  v
w
u  v  w
13.	
2v
w
w  2v
u
w  2v  u
15.  8 -1, 39  17.  82, -29  19.  83, -79  21.  h -1, - 5
2 i
23.  Equivalent  25.  Not equivalent  27.  15  29.  8 -4, 49
31.  8 -11, 109  33.  1221  35.  h 12
2 , - 12
2 i  37.  h - 4
5, 3
5 i
39.  h 12
2 , 12
2 i  41.  -i - 7j  43.  13i - 4j  45.  1185
47.  13i + j  49.  -2i + 213j  51.  3
2 i - 313
2
 j  53.  7
2 i - 713
2
 j
55.  10, 60°  57.  3, 150°  59.  13, 67.38°  61.  5, 216.87°
Applying the Concepts:
63.  23.0i + 9.8j  65.  40.6, 218.0°  67.  72.5, 33.8  69.  The resultant 
is a force of 676.64 lb making an angle of 47.19° with the positive x-axis.   
71.  483.4 mi>hr, N 32.1° E  73.  12.2 mi>hr, N 52.2° E  75.  A force of 
magnitude 10.08 lb making an angle of 176.61° with the positive x-axis 

	
Section 7.6   ■    Answers  A-55
7. 
3
7
4
6
8
  0


9
5

2





2

8. 
9. 
1
1
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  origin, axis  3.  r cos u, r sin u  5.  true
7. 
(4, 45°)  a.  1-4, 225°2 
b.  1-4, -135°2 
c.  14, -315°2
9. 
(3, 90°)
  a.  1-3, 270°2 
b.  1-3, -90°2 
c.  13, -270°2
11. 
(3, 60°)
  a.  1-3, 240°2
b.  1-3, -120°2
c.  13, -300°2
13. 
(6, 300°)
  a.  1-6, 120°2
b.  1-6, -240°2
c.  16, -60°2
Beyond the Basics:
77.  7 F17 = 106.42 lb, 7 F27 = 136.81 lb  79.  12, -22
81.  h - 11
3 , - 11
3 i  83.  AB>
= -CD>
  85.  PQ>
= 2
3
 PR>
87.  3, 15  89.  19, 22  91.  1-1, 42  95.  false  97.  p, p
2 , 0
99.  15  101.  - 1
165
Section 7.5
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  8  b.  0  2.  14  3.  Not parallel  4.  115.3°  5.  ≈39  6.  v and 
w are orthogonal.  7.  k = 3  8.  a.  a - 16
29, - 40
29 b  b.  - 8129
29
9.  83, 39 + 82, -29  10.  3000 foot-pounds
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  a1b1 + a2b2  3.  0  5.  true  7.  -7  9.  0  11.  14
13.  -6  15.  513 ≈8.7  17.  8.5  19.  -10.5  21.  60°
23.  cos-1 a -
5
126
b ≈168.7°  25.  90°  27.  0°  29.  180°
31.  161  33.  1129  35.  cos-1a
7
161
b  37.  cos-1a
21
21129
b
39.  Orthogonal  41.  Not orthogonal  43.  Orthogonal
45.  Parallel  47.  Not parallel  49.  Parallel
51.  a. c = -2, b. c = 9
2  53.  a. c = - 9
2, b. c = 8
55.  84, 19  57.  h 24
25, 32
25 i  59.  85, 09  61.  h a
2 + b
2, a
2 + b
2 i
63.  82, 09 + 80, 39  65.  h 1
2, 1
2 i + h 1
2, - 1
2 i
67.  80, 09 + 84, 29  69.  h 24
25, 32
25 i + h 76
25, - 57
25 i
Applying the Concepts:
71.  13.5 lb, 12.8°, 17.2°  73.  560 foot-pounds  75.  5520.2 lb
77.  56 foot-pounds
Beyond the Basics:
87.  { h 4
5, 3
5 i
Maintaining Skills:
97.  Vertical line; x-intercept: -1, no y-intercept  99.  Parabola;  
x-intercepts: -2, 3, y-intercept: -6  101.  Circle; x-intercepts: {13,  
y-intercepts: -1, 3  103.  Circle; no x-intercepts, y-intercepts: -2 { 12
105.  Only the x-axis  107.  Only the y-axis
Section 7.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a. 
P(2, 150°)
  b.  1-2, 30°2
c.  12, 210°2  d.  1-2, -330°2 
2.  a.  a - 3
2, - 313
2
b  b.  112, - 122  3.  a 12, 5p
4 b
4.  124.8, 36.0°2  5.  r2 - 2r sin u + 3 = 0
6.  a.  x2 + y2 = 25; a circle centered at the origin with radius 5
b.  y = -x13; a line through the origin with slope - 13
c.  x = 1; a vertical line through x = 1  d.  x2 + 1y - 122 = 1;  
a circle with center 10, 12 and radius 1

A-56  Answers   ■   Section 7.6
67. 
1
1
69. 
1
1
71.
2
1
73.
2
4
75.
4
2
77.
8
5
79.  121.8, 39.6°2  81.  118.3, -45.8°2
Beyond the Basics:
83.  r = u  85.  y = x2
6 - 3
2  87.  y2 = 1 - x - 3x2
4
89.  y2 - 8x2 - 30x - 25 = 0
15. 
(2,        )
3
π

  a.  a2, 5p
3 b
b.  a -2, 2p
3 b
17. 
(3,     )
6
π
  a.  a -3, - 11p
6 b 
b.  a3, - 5p
6 b
19. 
(2,     )
6
π
  a.  a -2, 11p
6 b
b.  a2, 5p
6 b
21. 
(4,      )
6
7π
  a.  a4, - 5p
6 b
b.  a -4, p
6 b
23.  a3
2, 313
2
b  25.  a5
2, - 513
2
b  27.  1-3, 02  29.  113, 12
31.  a 12, 7p
4 b  33.  a312, p
4 b  35.  a312, 7p
4 b  37.  a2, 2p
3 b
39.  r = 4  41.  r = 4 cot u csc u  43.  r = 6 sin u
45.  r2 =
1
sin u cos u  47.  x2 + y2 = 4; circle centered at 10, 02 with 
radius 2  49.  y = -x; a line with slope -1 and y-intercept 0
51.  1x - 222 + y2 = 4; a circle centered at 12, 02 with radius 2
53.  x2 + 1y + 122 = 1; a circle centered at 10, -12 with radius 1
55.
3
3
3
0
3
x
y
r  2
x2  y2  4
57.
4
4
4
0
4
r sin     2
y  2
θ
x
y
  
59.
2
4
3
0
3
r  2 sec
x  2
x
y
θ
61.
3
3
3
0
3
r  
y  1  x
y
x
1
cos      sin   
θ
θ
63.	
1
1
65.	
1
1

	
Review Exercises   ■    Answers  A-57
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  2a2 + b2, tan-1 ab
a b  3.  moduli, add  5.  true  7.  2  9.  4
11.  5  13.  113
7–14. 
O
Real axis
Imaginary axis
7. z  2
9. z  4i
13. z  2  3i
11. z  3  4i
x
y
15.  21cos 60° + i sin 60°2  17.  121cos 135° + i sin 135°2
19.  cos 90° + i sin 90°  21.  cos 0° + i sin 0° 
23.  3121cos 315° + i sin 315°2
25.  41cos 300° + i sin 300°2  27.  1 + 13i  29.  -3
31.  - 5
2 - 513
2
 i  33.  8  35.  -313 + 3i  37.  3
2 - 313
2
 i 
39.  z1z2 = 81cos 90° + i sin 90°2; z1
z2
= 21cos 60° + i sin 60°2
41.  z1z2 = 101cos 300° + i sin 300°2; z1
z2
= 5
2 1cos 180° + i sin 180°2
43.  z1z2 = 151cos 60° + i sin 60°2; z1
z2
= 3
5 1cos 20° + i sin 20°2
45.  z1z2 = 21cos 0° + i sin 0°2; z1
z2
= cos 90° + i sin 90°
47.  z1z2 = 4121cos 195° + i sin 195°2; z1
z2
= 12
2  1cos 105° + i sin 105°2
49.  z1z2 = 8; z1
z2
= 21cos 60° + i sin 60°2  51.  212  53.  -64i
55.  - 1
64 i  57.  1
210 i  59.  -64  61.  i  63.  - 1
2 + 13
2  i
65.  41cos 0° + i sin 0°2, 41cos 120° + i sin 120°2, 41cos 240° + i sin 240°2
67.  cos 45° + i sin 45°, cos 225° + i sin 225°
69.  cos 30° + i sin 30°, cos 90° + i sin 90°, cos 150° + i sin 150°,
cos 210° + i sin 210°, cos 270° + i sin 270°, cos 330° + i sin 330°
71.  121cos 150° + i sin 150°2,121cos 330° + i sin 330°2
Applying the Concepts:
75.   151cos 30° + i sin 30°2  77.  1.81cos 153.2° + i sin 153.2°2
Beyond the Basics:
79.  21cos 30° + i sin 30°2  81.  cos 240° + i sin 240°
83.  cos 240° + i sin 240°  85.  cos 0° + i sin 0°, cos 90° + i sin 90°,
cos 180° + i sin 180°, cos 270° + i sin 270° 
87.  2
1
61cos 15° + i sin 15°2, 2
1
61cos 135° + i sin 135°2,
2
1
61cos 255° + i sin 255°2  101.  5-1, i, -i6 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
103.  a.  True  b.  False  c.  True  d.  False  e.  True  f.  True  g.  True  
h.  True  i.  False  j.  True
Maintaining Skills:
105.  11  107.  2  109.  -3  111.  x + 2y = 9  113.  a = -8, b = 2
Review Exercises
1.  B = 60°, b ≈10.4, c = 12  3.  B = 53°, a ≈3.0, c ≈5.0
5.  B = 50°, a ≈7.7, b ≈9.2  7.  A ≈31.0°, B ≈59.0°, c ≈5.8
9.  A ≈41.8°, B ≈48.2°, b ≈4.5
11.  C = 105°, a ≈66.5, b ≈59.4
13.  No triangle exists
15.  B = 74.2°, a ≈36.8, c ≈41.4
Applying the Concepts:
95.	
5
40
140
10
40
97.	
2.3
3.1
2.3
3.1
99.	
4.1
6.2
4.1
6.2
101.	
6
2.5
6
0.5
103. 
5.5
20.5
1.5
20.5
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
105.  False  107.  True
Maintaining Skills:
109.  -3 - 2i  111.  -5 + 2i  113.  7 + i  115.  -5 - 12i
117.  3
25 + 4
25i  119.  - 6
25 - 17
25i  121.  12 acos p
4 i + sin p
4 jb
123.  2 acos 5p
6 i + sin 5p
6 jb
Section 7.7
Answers to Practice Problems:
1. 
O
x
y
Real axis
Imaginary axis
4
3 
 2i
2 
 3i
2 
 3i
3 
 2i
2.  a.  13  b.  7  c.  1  d.  2a2 + b2
3.  z = 12 acos 5p
4
+ i sin 5p
4 b  4.  2 - 213i
5.  z1z2 = 101cos 135° + i sin 135°2; 
z1
z2
= 5
2 1cos 15° + i sin 15°2
6.  2.61cos 27.2° + i sin 27.2°2  7.  a.  16  b.  - 1
64
8.  2
1
61cos 45° + i sin 45°2, 2
1
61cos 165° + i sin 165°2, 
2
1
61cos 285° + i sin 285°2  9.  cos 0° + i sin 0°, cos 90° + i sin 90°, 
cos 180° + i sin 180°, cos 270° + i sin 270°

A-58  Answers   ■   Section 8.1
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–7)
1.  10, 22 ´ 12, ∞2  3. 
0
4
2
6
2
5
15
20
10
5
x
y
5.  e 2p
3 , 5p
6 , 5p
3 , 11p
6
f  7.  2
1
41cos 7.5° + i sin 7.5°2, 
2
1
41cos 97.5° + i sin 97.5°2, 2
1
41cos 187.5° + i sin 187.5°2,
2
1
41cos 277.5° + i sin 227.5°2  9.  y = 3
2
 x + 13
2
11.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 x
y
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
f(x)  2√x  1  3
0
13.
3
2
1
1
0
2
3
f(x)  2 cos(3x    )
π
3
2π
3
π
x
y
15.  - 12
5   19.  C = 69°, a ≈58.2 m, b ≈46.2 m
Chapter 8
Section 8.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  No  b.  Yes  2.  51-1, 326  3.  514, -126  4.  ∅ 
5.  51x, 2x - 326  6.  e a2
3, 1
2 b f  7.  515700, 31.426 
8.  $85,000 at 12%, $65,000 at 8%
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  solution  3.  inconsistent  5.  false  7.  13, -12
9.  None of them  11.  110, -92 
13.  512, 126
0
3
1
5
7
3
1
5
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
x  y  3
x  y  1
(2, 1)
15.  512, 226
0
3
1
5
7
4
2
6
8
21
5
3
1
6
7
8
4
2
(2, 2)
1
2
x
y
2x  y  6
x  2y  6
17.  B ≈54.1°, C ≈60.7°, c ≈20.5
19.  Answers will vary. Sample answers:  i. 18,  ii. 1013,  iii. 10
21.  A ≈26.6°, B ≈42.1°, C ≈111.3°
23.  A ≈51.7°, C ≈48.3°, b ≈50.2
25.  A ≈32.5°, B ≈49.8°, C ≈97.7°
27.  A ≈32.0°, B ≈18.0°, c ≈17.3
29.  16 square meters  31.  11 square feet  33.  -i + 2j  35.  8 -10, 159
37.  8 -16, 219  39.  12
2  i + 12
2  j   41.  h 3134
34
, - 5134
34
i
43.  313i + 3j  45.  -612i - 612j
47.  -6; projw v = h - 18
25, - 24
25 i  49.  0; projw v = 80, 09
51.  60.3°  53.  101.3°  55. 
(24, 30°)
5
 11213, 122
57. 
(2,       )
4
π

 1- 12, 122  59.    a212, 3p
4 b
61.  a4, 11p
6 b  63.  r =
12
3 cos u + 2 sin u  65.  r = 8 cos u
67.  x2 + y2 = 9  69.  y = 3  71.  1x2 + y2 + 2y22 = x2 + y2
73.  3 acos 3p
2
+ i sin 3p
2 b  75.  10 acos 11p
6
+ i sin 11p
6 b
77.  12 + 12i  79.  -312 + 312i
81.  z1z2 = 61cos 35° + i sin 35°2; z1
z2
= 3
2 1cos 15° + i sin 15°2
83.  z1z2 = 6 acos 7p
6
+ i sin 7p
6 b; z1
z2
= 2
3 acos p
2 + i sin p
2 b
85.  271cos 120° + i sin 120°2  87.  40961cos 0 + i sin 02
89.  51cos 60° + i sin 60°2, 51cos 180° + i sin 180°2, 
51cos 300° + i sin 300°2  91.  2
1
51cos 24° + i sin 24°2, 
2
1
51cos 96° + i sin 96°2, 2
1
51cos 168° + i sin 168°2,
 2
1
51cos 240° + i sin 240°2, 2
1
51cos 312° + i sin 312°2  93.  268.5 ft
95.  94.7 mi  97.  24,625 square feet  99.  1204.4 foot@pounds
Practice Test A
1.  B = 30°, a ≈23.7, b ≈13.1
2.  C = 101°, b ≈45.0 m, c ≈73.4 m
3.  A ≈28.2°, C ≈45.8°, b ≈71.1
4.  A ≈82.8°, B ≈41.4°, C ≈55.8°
5.  c ≈6.9, A ≈53.8°, B ≈36.2°
6.  32.7°  7.  803 ft  8.  8 -1, -129  9.  8 -3, -29  10.  -7i - 9j
11.  313
2
 i - 3
2 j    12.  17  13.  164.9°  14.  1- 12, 122
15.  a2, 7p
6 b    16.  x2 + y2 = 9; circle with center 10, 02 and radius 3 
17.  -3
2 + 313
2
i  18.  121cos 165° + i sin 165°2  19. 
1
125 i
20.  2
1
81cos 11.25° + i sin 11.25°2, 2
1
81cos 101.25° + i sin 101.25°2, 
2
1
81cos 191.25° + i sin 191.25°2, 2
1
81cos 281.25° + i sin 281.25°2
Practice Test B
1.  a  2. c  3.  c  4.  d  5.  a  6.  b  7.  d  8.  c  9.  a  10.  c  11.  a   
12.  d  13.  d  14.  b  15.  c  16.  b   17.  b  18.  c  19.  c  20.  c

	
Section 8.2   ■    Answers  A-59
17.  Inconsistent
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
10
8
6
9
7
5
4
3
2
1
2
x
y
3x  y  9
y  3x  6
19.  e a7
3, 14
3 b f
0
3
1
5
4
2
6
7
8
5
3
1
6
4
8
9
7
2
x
y
(    )
7
3
, 14
3
21.  51x, 12 - 3x26
0
4
2
6
8
10 12
4 2
8
4
6
12
10
14
2
2
x
y
3x  y  12
y  3x  12
23.  Consistent; Independent  25.  Consistent; Independent
27.  Consistent; Dependent  29.  Consistent; Independent
31.  Inconsistent  33.  Inconsistent  35.  Consistent; Independent
37.  e a7
9, 23
9 b f  39.  513, 426  41.  ∅  43.  51-3, 526
45.  5 1x, 1
21x - 5226  47.  513, 226  49.  51-3, 326
51.  510, -526  53.  ∅  55.  e ax, 2 - 2
3xb f  57.  514, 126
59.  51-4, 226  61.  512, 126  63.  513, 126   65.  e a19
6 , 5
4 b f
67.  514, 226  69.  514, 126  71.  ∅  73.  ax, 2
3 1x - 32b
75.  e a - 1
5, 1bf  77.  e a3
2, 1
2 bf  79.  515, 526  81.  ∅
Applying the Concepts:
83.  180, 302  85.  117, 42  87.  The diameter of the largest pizza is  
21 inches, and the diameter of the smallest pizza is 8 inches.
89.  8% of the total trash collected is plastic, and 40% is paper.
91.  340 beads and 430 doubloons  93.  3 Egg McMuffins and 2 Breakfast 
Burritos  95.  $18,000 at 7.5% and $32,000 at 12%  97. $7.50 per hour 
at McDougal’s and $15 per hour for tutoring  99.  20 pounds of herb and 
80 pounds of tea  101. The speed of the plane is 550 km/hr, and the wind 
speed is 50 km/hr.  103.  a.  C1x2 = 30,000 + 2x; R1x2 = 3.5x
b. 
C(x)
(20,000, 70,000)
R(x)
0
15,000
5,000
30,000 x
50,000
30,000
10,000
60,000
40,000
90,000
70,000
100,000
80,000
20,000
y
 
c.  20,000 magazines
105.  Her weekly sales should be more than $6250.
107.  13, 92  109.  1ln 4, ln 22  111.  c = 2  113.  a = 4, b = 0
115.  y = - 3
2x + 3
2  117.  y = 13
7 x + 6
7  119.  a.  3y - 4x = 4
b. a4
5, 12
5 b  c.  7  121.  a.  12  b.  615
5
  c.  0   d. 
 c 
2a2 + b2
123.  15, 22
Maintaining Skills:
125.  3  127.  4  129.  -2
Section 8.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  Yes: 122 +
1-32 +
122 = 1 
3122 + 41-32 +
122 = -4
2122 +
1-32 + 2122 = 5
2.  51-2, 1, 326  3.  ∅
4.  e a8 - 7
3
 z, 4
3
 z - 3, zb f  5.  5113 - 17z, -3 + 5z, z26 
6.  Cell A contains bone (because x = 0.4), cell B contains healthy tissue 
(because y = 0.25), and cell C contains tumorous tissue (because z = 0.3).
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  equivalent  3.  inconsistent  5.  true  7.  Yes  9.  No
11.  513, 2, -126  13.  51-3, 2, 426  15.  d
x - y - 3
2 z = 1
2
y +  z = 0
z = 1
17.  d
x + 3y - 2z = 0
y - 8
7 z = - 5
7
0 = k, k ≠0
  19.  511, -2, 326
21.  e a30
11, - 8
11, - 1
4 b f  23.  511, 2, 326  25.  e a35
18, 29
18, 5
18 bf
27.  Inconsistent  29.  513, -1, 226  31.  512, 2, 126  33.  513, -1, 126
35.  e a3 + 4
5 z, - 1
5 z, zbf  37.  5112, -12, 426
39.    Dependent: 51z - 2, 8 - 2z, z26  41.  513, 2, -126
43.  Dependent; e a -5 - 9z, 3z - 1
6, zbf  45.  $4000 invested at 4%, 
$6000 invested at 5%, and $10,000 invested at 6%  47.  Alex worked 2 
hours, Becky worked 2.5 hours, and Courtney worked 1.5 hours. 
49.  56 nickels, 225 dimes, and 19 quarters  51.  31 hours for normal 
daytime work, 14 hours at night, and 8 hours on a holiday
Beyond the Basics:
57.  x + y + z = 1  59.  x + 2
3
 y + 1
3
 z = 1
3
61.  y = x2 + 2x + 1  63.  y = x2 - x + 2
65.  x2 + y2 - 16 = 0  67.  x2 + y2 - 2x + 6y - 15 = 0
69.  e a - 9
14, 9
19, - 9
2 b f  71.  c = - 16
5   73.  y = -2x2 + 4x + 5 
Applying the Concepts:
47.  Alex worked 2 hours, Becky worked 2.5 hours, and Courtney worked 
1.5 hours.  53.  Cell A contains healthy tissue 1because x = 0.212, cell B 
contains tumorous tissue 1because y = 0.332, and cell C contains healthy 
tissue 1because z = 0.192.  55.  Cells A, B, and C contain healthy tissue 
(because x = 0.28, y = 0.23, and z = 0.21).
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
75.  c
x + y -
z = -2
2x - y + 3z = 9
x + y +
z = 2
 Answers may vary.
Maintaining Skills:
77.  -1  79.  1  81.  A = 5
4  B = 3
4  83.  1x + 221x + 32
85.  12x - 121x + 32  87.  12x - 3212x + 32

A-60  Answers   ■   Section 8.4
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  at least one  3.  intersection  5.  true  7.  13, -12
9.  11, -12  11.  15, 42, 1-5, 42, 1-5, -42  13.  11, 12
15.  51-1, 12, 12, 426  17.  513, 32, 1-2, -226
19.  513, 026  21.  51-2, 12, 1-1, 226  23.  511, -12, 13, 126
25.  51-3, -12, 11, 326  27.  512, 32, 10, 526
29.  517, 52, 1-7, -526  31.  514, 22, 1-4, 22, 14, -22, 1-4, -226
33.  512, 22, 1-2, 22, 12, -22, 1-2, -226
35.  ∅  37.  511, 22, 1-1, 22, 11, -22, 1-1, -226
39.  e 12, 12, 12, -12, a - 11
3 , - 126
3
b, a - 11
3 , - 126
3
b f 
41.  515, 32, 13, 526  43.  ∅  45.  510, -22, 13, 426
47.  e 13, 22, a -4, - 3
2 b f  49.  51-2, 12, 12, 12, 1-2, -12, 12, -126
51.  e 12, 52, a -7, - 10
7 b f  53.  e 12, -22, 12, 22,
 a16
5 , 2146
5
b, a16
5 , - 2146
5
b f
Applying the Concepts:
55.  13, 782  57.  11 and 13  59.  a.  x = 60 m; y = 140 m 
b.  6000 m2  61.  32 people; $30  63.  450 original shares; purchased at 
$22 per share
Beyond the Basics:
65.  A11, 02, B16, 02, d1A, B2 = 5 
67.  A1-2, -12, B12, 32, d1A, B2 = 412  69.  10, -32
71.  c = { 12  73.  c = {25  75.  e a - 1
3, - 1
8 b, a1
8, 1
3 b f
77. 51-1, 12, 11, 12, 1-1, -12, 11, -126  79.  {12 + 3i2
81.  {14 - 3i2  83.  {14 + 13i2
85.  511, 726
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
1
x
y
y  3x  4
y  32x  2
(1, 7)
87.  511, 526
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
1
2
x
y
y  22x  1
y  2x  3
(1, 5)
89.  e 11, 02, a2, ln 2
ln 3 b f
0
5
4
6
1
2
3
3
2
1
x
y
1
2
3
x  3y
32y  3x  2
(1, 0)
2,(
)
ln2
ln3
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing: 
91.  a. Not possible  b. Possible  c. Possible  d. Possible
e. Not possible  f. Not possible
Section 8.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1. 
3
x + 1 -
1
x - 2  2. 
5
x - 1 - 3
x +
1
x + 1
3.  5
x +
6
1x - 122 -
5
x - 1  4.  -1
x
+ 4x + 5
x2 + 2
5. 
1
x2 + 1
+
3x
1x2 + 122  6.  777
3112
7.  1
R =
3
x + 1 +
1
x + 2 =
1
x + 1
3
+
1
x + 2; 
R1 = x + 1
3
, R2 = x + 2
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  proper  3.  three  5.  false  7. 
A
x - 1 +
B
x + 2
9. 
A
x + 6 +
B
x + 1  11.  A
x2 + B
x +
C
x - 1
13. 
A
x + 1 +
Bx + C
x2 - x + 1
  15.  Ax + B
x2 + 1
+
Cx + D
1x2 + 122
17. 
3
x + 2 -
1
x + 1  19.  - 
1
21x + 32 +
1
21x + 12
21.  1
x -
1
x + 2  23. 
2
x + 2 -
3
21x + 32 -
1
21x + 12
25. 
1
x + 1 -
2
1x + 122  27. 
2
x + 1 -
3
1x + 122 +
1
1x + 123
29.  1
x +
3
1x + 122 -
2
x + 1  31.  - 2
x + 1
x2 +
1
1x + 122 +
2
x + 1
33. 
1
41x - 122 +
1
41x + 122 +
1
41x + 12 -
1
41x - 12
35. 
1
212x - 32 +
1
212x - 322  37.  - 
2
12x + 322 +
3
2x + 3
39.  4
x - 3
x2 -
4
x + 1  41. 
3
x + 1 - 2
x + 4
x2 
43.  - 
x
21x2 + 12
+
1
41x + 12 +
1
41x - 12
45.  - 
x
x2 + 1
+ 1
x -
x
1x2 + 122  47.  4 - 3x
x2 + 2
+ 3x - 2
x2 + 1
Applying the Concepts:
49. 
n
n + 1  51. 
2n
2n + 1  53.  1
R =
1
x + 1 +
1
x + 3
55.  1
R = 1
R1
+ 1
R2
+ 1
R3
 
Beyond the Basics:
59. 
1
1x - 122 -
1
1x + 122  61.  - 
1
21x - 12 +
x - 1
21x2 + 12
+
1
1x - 122
63.  - 
4
x + 2 -
8
1x + 222 -
1
1x + 122 +
5
x + 1
65. 
5
31x - 32 +
-5x + 15
31x2 + 3x + 92
  67. 
1
x2 - 2x + 2
-
1
x2 + 2x + 2
69.  1 +
2
x + 1 -
1
x + 2  71.  2x + 3 + 2x - 1
x2 + 1
+
1
x - 1
Maintaining Skills:
75.  -7, -3  77.  - 5
2, 2  79.  11, 22  81.  15, 22
83.  13, 22  85.  1-2, 12
Section 8.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  511, 126  2.  514, 32, 1-4, 32, 14, -32, 1-4, -326 
3.  Danielle received x = 30 shares as dividends and sold her stock at 
p = +65 per share.

	
Section 8.5   ■    Answers  A-61
93. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
2x  y  0
95. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
3x  4y  12
97. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
y  2x2  0
99. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
y  x2  2  0
Maintaining Skills:
101.  10, 02, 1-3, 52  103.  11, 42, 1-1, 42
Section 8.5
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
6
7
8
4
2
1
2
x
y
3x  y  6
 
2.
2
2
2
4
6
4
6
4
6
4
2
6
y
x
0
y  2x  4
 
3.
0
4
10
2
8
6
12
2
6
4
2
12
10
8
2
x
y
x  y  9
4. 
3x  y  3
x  y  1
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
5.  14, 02, 15, 22, and 12, 42 
2x  3y  16
4x  2y  16
2x  y  8
0
12
10
14
8
6
4
2
16
42
10
6
8
4
2
2
6
4
8
10
x
y
6.
2
2
2
4
4
4
6
4
2
y
x
0
y  x2  2
7. 
0
9
(3, 10)
(0, 13)
3
15
15
9
3
12
21
18
6
x
y
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  dashed  3.  not a solution of the system  5.  true
7.	
0
6
2
4
8 10
64
8
10
2
10
6
2
2
6
8
4
4
8
10
x
y
9.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
11.	
0
3
1
5
7
3
1
5
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
13.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
15.	
0
3
1
5
7
1
3
5
3
1
1
4
7
6
2
2
3
x
y
17.	
0
3
1
5
7
4
2
6
8
1
2
5
3
1
1
4
7
6
8
2
2
x
y

A-62  Answers   ■   Section 8.5
51.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
4
8
6
7
2
2
x
y
53.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
3
1
1
2
5
4
2
3
4
5
x
y
55.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
3
1
1
2
5
4
7
6
8
2
x
y
57.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
 
59.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
6
7
4
2
1
2
3
x
y
61.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
63.	
0
1
2
3
4
2 1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
65.  D, K  67.  E, L  69.  E, B
71.	
y  x2
x  y  6
0
2
(2, 4)
(3, 9)
4
6
8
2
4
6
8
10
4
2
2
x
y
73.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
2
3
4
1
2
1
3
4
5
6
x
y
y  2x  1
y  x2  2
, 2

2  1
2  1
2 1
2  1
, 2
(
)
(
)
19.	
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
21.	
0
3
1
5
7
9
1
2
1
4
3
5
7
6
2
1
3
x
y
23.  None  25.  10, 02, 11, 02, 10, 12, 11, 12  27.  12, 02, 13, 12, 12, 22
29.	
0
1
3
(0, 1)
3
5
7
1
5
3
1
3
4
2
2
1
4
5
x
y
x  y  1
x  y  1
31.	
0
3
1
5
7
3
1
5
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
2x  2y  8
3x  5y  15
,
(
)
5
2
3
2
33.  Inconsistent. 
0
3
1
5
7
4
2
6
8
1
2
5
3
1
1
4
7
6
2
2
3
x
y
4x  6y  24
2x  3y  6
35.	
0
6
(6, 10)
2
10
14
8
4
12
2
4
6
6
2
2
8
4
4
6
8
10
12
x
y
4x  2y  4
3x  y  8
37.	
x  y  1
0
2
1
(0, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
3
2
3
1
3
4
2
1
1
2
x
y
39.	
0
3
(0, 2)
(3, 0)
1
5
7
1
3
3
1
1
4
2
6
7
5
2
3
x
y
2x  3y  6
41.	
0
3
,  )
2
3(
1
5
3
5
1
5
1
3
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
2x  y  1
x  y  1
x  y  1
43.	
0
3
(1, 2)
, 

)
7
2
(
1
5
3
5
1
5
1
2
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
x  y  1
x  y  3
x  y  2
x  y  4
45.  A  47.  B  49.  E

	
Section 8.6   ■    Answers  A-63
97.	
0
2
1
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
99.	
0
2
3
4
1
5
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
101.	
0
3
4
5
2
6
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
103.	
0
2
1
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
x2  y2  9
x2  y2  1
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
105. 
1
1
1
2
2
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
2
2
1
y
x
0
x  y  1
Maintaining Skills:
107.  14, 182  109.  a7
2, 3
4 b  111.  12, 32, 14, 52, 16, 12
113.  a.  and b. 
1
5
3
5
1
5
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
5
x
y
(0, 3)
(3, 0)
O
,
(
)
12
7
12
7
Section 8.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  The objective function f  has a maximum of 28 at the point 
17, 02.  2.  The minimum value is 2 at 14, 02 and 11, 1.52.  3.  The 
minimum number of calories is 300. The lunch then ­consists of 10 ounces 
of soup and no salad.
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  optimization  3.  constraints, feasible  5.  true  7.  Max 18,  
Min 5  9.  Max 26, Min 7  11.  Max 66, Min 13  13.  Maximum value 
75.	
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
y  x
x2  y2  1
2
2
2
2


,
(
)
2
2
2
2
,
(
)
77.	
0
4
(0, 5)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
x2  y  5
x2  y2  25
Applying the Concepts:
79.	
y
(35, 5)
(10, 5)
(10, 30)
5
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
x
x  10 
y  5
x  y  40
81.	
y
1
1
2
3
4
5 6.25 7
(0, 0)
(4, 3)
(0,     )
2
3
4
5
6
7
8.3
9
x
25
3
(    , 0)
43
7
7x  5y  43
4x  3y  25
83. 
y
(0, 80)
(90, 20)
(0, 0)
(100, 0)
20
20
40
60
80 100 120
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
x
2x  y  200
3x  4.5y  360
0.5x  0.75y  60
Beyond the Basics:
85.  d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
y … -2
3 x + 2
  87.  e x Ú -1
x … 3
  89.  f
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
y … - 1
2x + 4
y … - 3
2x + 6
 
91.  d
x Ú 0
y Ú x - 4
y Ú -x + 6
y … -x + 16
93.	
0
2
1
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
95.	
0
2
1
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y

A-64  Answers   ■   Practice Test A
33.  e 11, 22, 1-1, -22, a212, 12
2 b, a -212, - 12
2 b f
35.
0
2
1
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
x  y  1
x2  y2  13
(3, 2)
(2, 3)
37.
0
(0, 0)
(1, 0)
2
1
(3, 2)
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
x2  y2  13
x  y  1
(0, œ13)
39. 
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
x
y
(5, 0)
(0, 0)
(   ,      )
√10
2
3√10
2
x2 y2  25 
y  3x 
41. 
2
x + 2 -
1
x + 3  43. 
2
x - 1 + 1
x +
5
1x - 122 
45.  -1 + 2x
1x2 + 422 +
1
x2 + 4
 
Applying the Concepts:
47.  $8750 was invested at 12%, and $6250 was invested at 4%.   
49. 10.5 ft by 6 ft  51.  15 and 8  53.  The original width is 40 m, and the 
original length is 160 m.  55.  a.  C1x2 = 60,000 + 12x, R1x2 = 20x
b. 
R(x)
C(x)
(7500, 150,000)
0
10,000
x
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
25,000
50,000
75,000
100,000
125,000
Number of timers
Revenue
150,000
175,000
200,000
y
 
c.  17500, 150,0002 
d.  11,129 timers
57.  $450 for the single and $600 for the double  59. 3  61.  Janet is 34, 
and Steve is 51.  63.  They stole $35,000, and $15,000 went to Butch, 
$12,000 went to Sundance, and $8000 went to Billy.  65.  x = 6, y = 2
67.  She should build 4 two-story houses and 14 one-story houses to obtain 
a maximum profit of $96,000.  69.  large: $60; medium: $52; small: $45
Practice Test A
1.  512, 026  2.  e x, 4 - x
2 f  3.  ∅  4.  51-5, 026  5.  516, 826 
6.  51-1, 12, 14, 1626  7.  e a -3, 1
3 b, 12, 22f  8.  a.  e x + y = 485
x - y =
15 
b.  x = 250, y = 235  9.   x + 1
2 y + z = 2   y - 3
4 z = 7
4 
 z = -27
23   10.  511, 3, 526  11.  17, 3, -22 
12.  ax, 2x
3 + 7
3, -x - 1b  13.  a1
3, - 4
3 + z, zb  14.  53 nickels, 
225 dimes, and 22 quarters  15. 
A
1x - 52 +
B
1x + 12 
is 1284
19  at a56
19, 60
19 b.  15.  Maximum value is 410 at 140, 302. 
17.  Minimum value is 3 at 13, 02.  19.  Minimum value is 1364 at 
18, 842.  21.  Maximum value is 54 at 13.6, 02.  23.  Minimum value is 
400 for all 1x, y2 on the line segment between 120, 152 and 150, 02. 
Applying the Concepts:
25.  80 acres of corn and 160 acres of soybeans to obtain a maximum 
profit of $10,400  27.  40 hours for machine I and 20 hours for machine 
II to obtain a minimum cost of $3600  29.  Five minutes of television and 
two pages of newspaper advertisement to obtain a maximum of 340,000 
viewers  31.  The maximum profit is $14,600.  33.  400 of both the 
rectangular and circular table should be made to have a maximum profit 
of $2800.  35.  The contractor should build 33 terraced houses and 66 
cottages to obtain a maximum amount of money: $4,290,000.  37.  Mrs. 
Adams’s maximum profit is $1355 when she has 175 male guests and 
125 female guests.  39.  Elisa should buy ten enchilada meals and five 
vegetable loafs to obtain a minimum cost of $46.25.
Beyond the Basics:
41.  Maximum value is 152 at 112, 82.  43.  Minimum value is 0 at 10, 02.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing
47.  a. There is no upper bound on the values for x.  b. For x1 7 x0 Ú 0 
and 0 … y … 8, we have 2x1 + 3y 7 2x0 + 3y.
Maintaining Skills:
49.  1-6, -52  51.  1-1, -5, 82  53.  c1
2
-3
5
3
-2
4
12 d  
55.  £
1
2
-3
5
0
1
- 13
8
3
8
§
Review Exercises
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  51-1, 226  3.  ∅  5.  512, 326  7.  511, -1, 226
9.  51-1, 2, -326  11.  ∅  13.  5x, 2x - 8, 11 - 3x6  15.  ∅
17.  a7
3 - 2
3 z, 2
3 - 1
3 z, zb
19.
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
x  y  1
x  y  1
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
21.
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
1
2
x
y
2x  5y  1
x  2y  5
4x  y  7
(1, 3)
(2, 1)
(3, 1)
23. 
0
9
3
15
9
15
3
15
18
9
12
3
6
3
6
9
12
x
y
3x  y  9  0
7x  4y  23  0
y  3  0
x  y  3  0
(3, 0)
(2, 3)
 35
3 , 44
3
(
)
11
7 , 3
(
)
25.  Max of 14 at x = 7, y = 0  27.  Min of -9 at x = 0, y = -3
29.  e 1-2, 12, a8
3, - 5
9 b f  31.  e 12, -22, a - 2
3, - 14
3 b f

	
Section 9.1   ■    Answers  A-65
C = c1
2
3
0
-2
-4 d   4.  e a -1, - 1
3, -1b f  5.  515, 226
6.  511, 2, -326  7.  ∅  8.  511, 2, -226
9.  e a -z - 1, 5
3 - 2
3z, zb f
10.  a.  c
s = 0.01s + 0.1c + 0.1t + 12.46
c = 0.2s + 0.02c + 0.01t + 3
t = 0.25s + 0.3c + 2.7
b.  10.9921142 - 10.12162 - 10.12182 = 12.46 ✓
1-0.2021142 + 10.982162 - 10.012182 = 3 ✓
1-0.2521142 - 10.302162 + 8 = 2.7 ✓
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  numbers  3.  row operations  5.  false  7.  false  9.  1 * 1
11.  2 * 4  13.  2 * 3  15.  a13 = 3, a31 = 9, a33 = 11, a34 = 12
17.  No, it is not a rectangular array of numbers.  19.  c2
 4
1
-3 `  2
1 d  
21.  c
5
-7
-13
17 `  11
19 d   23.  C
-1
2
3
2
-3
9
4
-5
-6
†  
8
16
32
S  
25.  c
x + 2y - 3z = 4
-2x - 3y +
z = 5
3x - 3y + 2z = 7
  27.  e x - y +
z = 2
2x + y - 3z = 6   29.  c1
2
3
0
1
1 d
31.  C
1
2
3
4
0
1
5
-3
0
0
1
-1
S   33.  c4
5
-7
5
4
-2 d   1
4R1   
¬S C 1
5
4
- 7
4
5
4
-2
S
-5R1 + R2 S R2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S
D
1
5
4
- 7
4
0
- 9
4
27
4
T - 4
9 R2
¬¬¬S £ 1
5
4
- 7
4
0
1
-3
§
35.  C
1
4
3
1
0
-3
-2
0
0
7
5
-3
S
- 1
3 R2
¬¬¬S D
1
4
3
1
0
1
2
3
0
0
7
5
-3
T
-7R2 + R3 S R3
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬S E
1
4
3
1
0
1
2
3
0
0
0
1
3
-3
U 3R3
¬¬S D
1
4
3
1
0
1
2
3
0
0
0
1
-9
T
37.  No, because Property 2 is not satisfied  39. The matrix is in reduced 
row-echelon form because Properties 1–4 are satisfied  41.  The matrix is 
in reduced row-echelon form because Properties 1–4 are satisfied.  43.  The 
matrix is in reduced row-echelon form because Properties 1–4 are satisfied. 
45.  15, -22; e x + 2y =
1
y = -2 
47.  1-4 - 4y, y, 32; e x + 4y + 2z = 2
z = 3
49.  11, 2, -12; c
x + 2y + 3z =
2
y - 2z =
4
z = -1
51.  12, -5, -2w + 3, w2; c
x
=
2
y
= -5
z + 2w =
3
53.  1-5, 4, 3, 02; d
x
= -5
y
=
4
z + 2w =
3
w =
0
  55.  515, -326
57.  513, 126  59.  e a - 1
5, - 23
25 b f  61.  512, 126  63. 511, 2, 326
65. 512, 3, 426  67. 511, 2, 326  69.  e a5
2, 3
2, 7
2 b f
71.  511 + 4z, 3 - 3z, z26  73.  511, 2, -126
16. 
A
x - 2 + Bx + C
x2 + 1
+
Dx + E
1x2 + 122 
17.  -
10
1211x + 42 +
1
111x + 422 +
10
1211x - 72 
18.	
0
2
4
6
8
8
4
6
2
x
y
19.	
0
2
4
6
8
4
8 6
2
8
4
6
2
2
4
8
6
x
y
y  x2  3
y  x  0
20.  Maximum value is 6 at 13, 02.
Practice Test B
1.  a  2.  c  3.  b  4.  c  5.  b  6.  d   7.  d  8.  d  9.  c  10.  a 
11.  b 12.  d  13.  c  14.  b  15.  c  16.  a  17.  c  18.  b  19.  a 
20.  b
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–8)
1.  e 5
2 f  3.  576  5.  1- ∞, 42 ´ 15, ∞2  7.  526 
9.
0
2
4
4
6
2
5
4
2
3
1
1
2
3
4
5
x
y
(1, 2)
11.
0
3
1
5
3
y  3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
13.  a.  f -11x2 = x + 2
2
  b. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
f(x)
f1(x)
y  x
15.  2 + 4  log3 1x2  17.  2  19.  51-3, 526
Chapter 9
Section 9.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  3 * 2  b.  1 * 2  2.  C
0
 3
-1
1
 4
 0
0
-2
 9
3
8
14
0
S
3.  B = c2
4
6
3
4
5 d ¡
1
2
 R1 c1
2
3
3
4
5 d ¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¡
-3R1 + R2 S R2

A-66  Answers   ■   Section 9.2
10. 
P'3
P'4
P'1
P'5
P'6
y
x
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
P'2
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  aij = bij  3.  1 * 1  5.  false  7.  x = 2, u = -3
9.  x = -1, y = 3  11.  x = 2, y = 1  13.  ∅  15.  a.  c0
2
5
1 d
b.  c2
2
1
7 d   c.  c -3
-6
-9
-12 d   d.  c5
6
5
18 d   e.  c10
2
5
11 d
f.  c 6
10
23
13 d   17.  a, b, d, e, and f are not defined. c. c -6
-9
12
-15 d
19.  a.  C
7
1
-1
-1
1
4
2
1
4
S   b.  C
1
-1
-1
-3
9
0
-2
-1
-2
S   c.  C
-12
0
3
6
-15
-6
0
0
-3
S
d.  C
6
-2
-3
-8
23
2
-4
-2
-3
S   e.  C
46
7
-7
0
4
21
21
7
18
S   f.  C
6
1
-7
-21
6
16
-13
-1
-10
S
21.  a.  C
4
3
-3
4
0
7
4
0
3
S  b.  C
-2
1
-3
2
8
3
0
-2
-3
S  c.  C
-3
-6
9
-9
-12
-15
-6
3
0
S
d.  C
-3
4
-9
7
20
11
2
-5
-6
S   e.  C
16
12
0
44
12
9
28
12
-3
S   f.  C
-9
14
5
22
-2
13
-14
-1
-22
S
23.  X = c -4
-2
1
1
5
0 d   25.  X = D
0
2
- 1
2
3
2
1
2
4
T
27.  X = D
-4
-4
3
2
- 1
2
9
2
-4
T   29.  X = D
1
2
- 9
4
1
2
-2
- 5
4
-5
T  
31.  a.  AB = c4
11
6
23 d   b.  BA = c 1
0
18
26 d
33.  a.  AB = c4
7
3
-12 d   b.  BA = C
-13
4
10
-13
5
6
8
-4
0
S
35.  a.  AB = 3164  b.  BA = C
2
3
5
-4
-6
-10
8
12
20
S
37.  a.  AB = 37
8
-84  b.  The product BA is not defined.
39.  a.  AB = C
10
7
2
7
19
4
10
1
0
S   b.  BA = C
7
4
5
0
8
3
19
18
14
S
41.  AB = C
13
17
3
13
8
2
6
1
6
S ≠C
6
22
19
2
11
6
11
-1
10
S = BA
75.  a.  One solution  b.  Infinitely many solutions  c.  No solution
77.  False. Each row of A has seven entries.
Applying the Concepts:
79.  a.  e a = 0.1b + 1000
b = 0.2a + 780   b.  c
1
-0.1
-0.2
1 `  1000
780 d
c.  a = 1100, b = 1000  81.  a. 
l = 0.4t + 0.2f + 10,000
t = 0.5l + 0.3t + 20,000
f = 0.5l + 0.05t + 0.35f + 10,000
b.  C
1
-0.4
-0.2
-0.5
0.7
0
-0.5
-0.05
0.65
†  
10,000
20,000
10,000
S   c.  food, $55,000; transportation, 
$61,000; labor, $45,400  83.  T1 = 110, T2 = 140, T3 = 60
85.  a.  c
x - y
=
70
-x +
z = -120
y - z =
50
  b.  51120 + z, 50 + z, z26: 0 … z … 130
87.  y = 2x2 - 3x + 4
Beyond the Basics:
89.  51y + 2w, y, -2y - 3w, w26
91.  a.  B = G
1
3
2
0
-1
0
1
0
1
2
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
1
W , C = F
1
2
-3
  1
0
1
0
- 1
2
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
1
V
b.  The reduced row-echelon form of the matrices B and C is 
D
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
T .  93.  a.  e adm - nb
ad - bc , an - cm
ad - bc bf
b.  (i) cb ≠ad  (ii) cb = ad and m
b ≠n
d  (iii) cb = ad and m
b = n
d
95.  5110, 100, 100026  97.  y = -x3 + 2x2 + 3x + 1
99.  c0
0 d, c1
0 d   101.  Yes, the inverse of the operation used to transform 
A to B
Maintaining Skills:
103.  526  105.  5-96  107.  517, 926  109.  ∅
111.  true  113.  true
Section 9.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  x = 1, y = 1  2.  c -6
1
13
12
3
15 d   3.  C
11
1
0
6
-15
-28
S
4.  X = D
- 1
3
19
3
-7
- 35
3
T  5.  Yes, the product AB is defined with order 2 * 1.
6.  $2045 thousand  7.  3314  8.  The product AB is not defined.
BA = C
42
-1
2
-6
8
-4
S   9.  AB = c18
-3
12
12 d, BA = c14
-1
28
16 d

	
Section 9.3   ■    Answers  A-67
6.  e a11
2 , - 9
2, 1
2 b f  7.  X = D
110,400
19
135,200
19
T
8.  AM = C
1
2
3
1
3
3
1
2
4
S C
10
11
19
15
19
5
1
0
0
23
1
0
3
9
14
0
6
0
S
           = C
21
38
61
61
39
5
22
38
61
84
40
5
24
47
75
61
45
5
S
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  inverse  3.  A-1  5.  false  7.  Yes  9.  Yes  11.  No  13.  No
15.  Yes  17.  A-1 = D
1
2
0
- 1
6
1
3
T   19.  Does not exist
21.  A-1 = C
1
-8
10
0
2
-3
0
-1
2
S   25.  C
1
-1
0
-2
3
-4
-2
3
-3
S
27.  A-1 = C
1
0
- 3
2
1
2
S   29.  A-1 = c5
3
3
2 d
31.  A-1 =
1
b2 - a2 c -a
b
-b
a d, where a2 ≠b2
33.  c2
3
1
-3 d cx
y d = c -9
13 d   35.  C
3
2
1
2
1
3
1
3
2
S C
x
y
z
S = C
8
7
9
S
37.  e x - 2y = 0
2x +
y = 5    39.  c
2x1 + 3x2 + x3 = -1
5x1 + 7x2 - x3 =
5
4x1 + 3x2
=
5
41.  C
1
2
5
2
3
8
-1
1
2
S C
2
-1
-1
12
-7
-2
-5
3
1
S = C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S
43.  512, -3, 126  45.  a.  A-1 = E
3
- 5
2
1
2
-3
4
-1
1
- 3
2
1
2
U   b. 511, 2, 326
Applying the Concepts:
47.  51-1, 226  49.  512, -1, 326  51.  51-5, 1, 526
53.  Treasury: $16,000; bonds: $48,000; fund: $26,000
55.  V = 10, E = 15, R = 7 
R5
R7
R2
R1
R3
R6
R4
 
57.  X = c100
100 d   59.  X = F
216,000
277
310,000
277
304,000
277
V
Applying the Concepts:
47.    Steel	
Glass	 Wood
C = c13  5  38
7
 2   7 dCost of material
Transportation cost   49.  $24,200
51.  a.       Chairman    President    Vice president
Salary 
Bonus 
Stock
C
2,500,000
1,250,000  100,000
1,500,000
750,000  150,000
  50,000   25,000    5000
S
b.  C
1
1
4
S  
Chairman
President
Vice president
  c.  C
4,150,000
2,850,000
95,000
S 
Total salary  
Total bonuses
Total stocks  
53.  AD = c0
4
4
1
1
0
0
0
-1
-1
-6
-6 d  
P6
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
55.  AD = c0
4
4
1
1
0
0
1
2
1.25
6.25
6 d  
P1
P6
P3
P2
P5
P4
Beyond the Basics:
57.  AB = c9
0
0
0 d = AC  59.  Let A = c1
2
3
4 d  and B = c -1
0
2
-3 d. 
Then 1A + B22 = c10
2
5
11 d ≠c14
-2
17
7 d = A2 + 2AB + B2.
63.  B = c
2
-3
-1
2 d   65.  x = 33, y = 5 
69.  A = c 3
-2
1
-2
1
-1 d, B = c0
2
2
0
0
-3 d
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
75.  1CA2B 
Maintaining Skills:
77.  2  79.  586  81.  516  83.  e 5
4 f  85.  e ax, 2 - 3x
5
b f  87.  ∅
Section 9.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  c3
2
2
1 d c -1
2
2
-3 d = c1
0
0
1 d   2.  c3x + z
3y + w
3x + z
3y + w d ≠c1
0
0
1 d
because this implies that 1 = 3x + z = 0, which is false.
3.  The inverse of matrix A does not exist.  4.  A-1 = F
1
7
- 19
77
1
11
0
2
11
1
11
2
7
- 3
77
- 1
11
V
5.  a.  The inverse of matrix A does not exist;  b.  B -1 = D
1
14
1
7
- 3
14
4
7
T

A-68  Answers   ■   Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–9)
25.  X = D
7
3
0
- 19
3
8
T   27.  AB = c -3
4
-11
10 d, BA = c -2
-4
8
9 d
29.  AB = 374, BA = C
2
4
-2
3
6
-3
1
2
-1
S   31.  c1
0
2
3 d   33.  c -1
3
2
2
-5
2
d
35.  a.  c3
-1
1
0 d   b.  c8
-3
3
-1 d   c.  c8
-3
3
-1 d
41.  D
2
5
- 1
10
- 1
5
3
10
T   43.  C
3
2
6
1
1
2
2
2
5
S   45.  51-23, 1026
47.  51-12, 2, 326  49.  e a7
6, 1
6, 2b f  51.  23  53.  0
55.  a.  M12 = 8, M23 = 8, M22 = -16  b.  A12 = -8, A23 = -8, 
A22 = -16  57.  35  59.  6  61.  511, 226  63.  515, 6, 726
65.  2  67.  They both satisfy the equation y = 7x - 11  69.  Method 3
71.  The speed of the plane is 520 miles per hour, and the velocity of the 
wind is 40 miles per hour.  73.  Andrew has $170, Bonnie has $65, and 
Chauncie has $85.  75.  30 registered nurses, 40 licensed practical nurses, 
and 60 nurse’s aides
Practice Test A
1.  5 * 4; 9  2.  C
7
-3
9
-2
4
3
8
-5
1
 3  
5
-12
-9
 S   3.  c
4x -
z = -3
x + 3y
=
9
2x + 7y + 5z =
8
4.  110, 10, 02  5.  512, 3, -226  6.  e a20
7 + 11
7 z, 2
7 + 6
7z, zb f
7.  A - B = C
8 -1
4 8
11 0
S   8.  AB = 314  9.  The product AB is not defined.
10.  c -6
2
0
10
14
4 d   11.  c 20
28
8
-9
29
6 d   12.  c1
25
0
16 d
13.  D
1
- 5
4
0
1
4
T   14.  C
-11
2
7
8
-1
-5
5
-1
-3
S   15.  c5
2
3
1 d cx
y d = c32
18 d
16.  e 12x - 3y = 5
-2x + 7y = -9  17. X = c -3
5
-1
4
-32
5
-18
5
-3 d
18.  1
2  19.  0  20.  x =
†
3
-1
1
6
1
1
4
3
-2
†
†
2
-1
1
1
1
1
4
3
-2
†
, y =
†
2
3
1
1
6
1
4
4
-2
†
†
2
-1
1
1
1
1
4
3
-2
†
,
z =
†
2
-1
3
1
1
6
4
3
4
†
†
2
-1
1
1
1
1
4
3
-2
†
Practice Test B
1.  d  2.  d  3.  d  4.  c  5.  c  6.  d  7.  c  8.  b  9.  a  10.  b   
11.  c  12.  c  13.  b  14.  d  15.  a  16.  a  17.  b  18.  d  19.  c 
20.  b
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–9)
1.  -7, 1  3.  4, 1  5.  -9, -19
7   7.  x 6 -2 or x 7 1
2
9.  {1, {1
2, {1
4, {3, {3
2, {3
4  11.  24,000  13.  511, -126
Beyond the Basics:
65.  a. Yes. By the definition of inverse, if AB = I, then BA = I and A 
and B are inverses. b.  1A-12-1 = A  73.  If A is invertible, then 
I = A-1A = A-1(AB) = (A-1A)B = I B = B.
75.  c.  A-1 = c
3
-4
-2
3 d    77.  511, 2, 1, 226  79.  a. A = c8
10
6
8 d
b.  A = c -1
7
-3
17 d   c.  A = D
3
2
1
2
5
2
3
2
T   d.  A = C
-1
-2
5
2
4 S
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
81.  a.  True. A2B = AAB = ABA = BAA = BA2  b. False. Let A = I 
and B = -I.  83.  True
Maintaining Skills:
85.  1  87.  -1  89.  c -5
0
-15
0 d   91.  1-12c
6
-7
-4
1 d
93.  e a - 1
2, - 1
3 b f  95.  512, -3, -226
Section 9.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  -38  b.  0  2.  a.  M11 = 4, M23 = 10, M32 = 10
b.  A11 = 4, A23 = -10, A32 = -10  3.  8
4.  5117, -926  5.  512, -1, 026
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  ad - bc  3.  cofactor  5.  false  7.  -2  9.  -6  11.  -7
13.  139
72   15.  a - b  17.  a. -10  b. 2  c. 0  19.  a.  -4  b.  4  c.  -2
21.  -2  23.  12  25.  0  27.  42  29.  16  31.  49
33.  a3 + b3  35.  a3 + b3 + c3 - 3abc  37.  513, 526  39.  511, 226
41.  512, 026     43.  e a3
2y + 2, yb f  45.  512, 326   47.  511, 1, 026
49. 511, -1, 326   51. 511, 1, 126   53. 511, 2, 326   55.  511, 2, 326
Applying the Concepts:
57.  11  59.  10.5  61.  Yes  63.  No  65.  y = 2x + 1
67.  y = 2
3 x + 1
3
Beyond the Basics:
75.  21  77.  476  79.  546  81.  e 1
2 { 17
2
 i f  83.  5236
85.  5-1, 0, 16  87.  30 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
89.  e a9
4, - 2
3 b f  91.  51-2, -126  93.  k = - 7
2  95.  y = 1
8x2
97.  y = 1
6x2 - 2
3x + 11
3   99.  y = - 1
2x2  101.  y = 2x2 + 12x + 10
103.  a. Opens up  b. 1-1, -82  c. x = -1  d. -3 and 1  e. -6
Review Exercises
1.  1 * 4  3.  3 * 2  5.  a12 = -1, a14 = -4, a23 = 3, a21 = 5
7.  c2
-3
3
1 `  7
6 d   9.  C
1
-2
1
7
0
1
2
1
0
0
1
2
S   11.  F
1
0
0
1
3
0
1
0
1
2
0
0
1
- 1
6
V
13.  512, -3, -126  15.  513, -2, -326  17.  515, -4, 126
19.  e a2, -1, - 1
3 b f  21.  512, 126  23.  a.  c
3
-1
-8
10 d
b.  c -1
5
2
-2 d   c.  c
2
4
-6
8 d   d.  c -6
9
15
-18 d   e.  c -4
13
9
-10 d

	
Section 10.2   ■    Answers  A-69
15. 
3
5
0
1
1
3
5
7
9
1
5
3
y
x
17.  511, 1, -126  19.  f -11x2 = -
4x
x - 1
Chapter 10
Section 10.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.	
0
6
2
10
10
6
2
x
y
Vertex: 10, 02; focus: 10, 32;
directix: y = -3;
axis: y-axis
b.	
0
3
1
5
5
3
1
x
y
Vertex: 10, 02;
focus: a - 3
2, 0b;
directix: x = 3
2;
axis: x-axis
2.  a.  x2 = 8y  b.  y2 = 4x  3.  Vertex: 12, -12; focus: a2, - 7
8 b; 
directrix: y = - 9
8 
0
1
0.5
2.5
1.5
0.5
x
y
0.5
1
8
9
F(
)
8
7
2
4.  Equation: x2 = 29.2y. The thickness of the mirror at the edges is 
0.077055 in.
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  directrix, focus  3.  vertex  5.  true  
7.  Focus: a0, 1
2 b directrix: y = - 1
2; graph: e 
9.  Focus: a0, - 9
64 b directrix: y = 9
64; graph: d
11.  Focus: a1
2, 0b directrix: x = - 1
2; graph: g
13.  Focus: a - 4
9, 0b directrix: x = 4
9; graph: f
15.	
8
2
8
16
17.	
10
6
6
6
19. 
10
6
6
6
  21.  x2 = -41y - 32; 4
23.  y2 = -10 ax - 1
2 b; 10
25.  1y - 122 = -81x - 12; 8
27.  1x - 122 = 161y - 12; 16
29.  y2 = 81x - 12; 8 
31.  x2 = -121y - 12; 12
33.  1y - 322 = -81x - 22; 8
35.  1x - 222 = 81y - 32; 8
37.	
4
3
12
3
39.	
6
8
8
4
41.  Vertex: 1-1, 12; 
focus: a - 1
2, 1b; 
directrix: x = - 3
2 
V(1, 1)
F(
)
, 1
2
1
x   2
3
0
2
1
3
4
2 1
3
4
2
1
1
2
x
y
43.  Vertex 1-2, 22; 
focus: a -2, 11
4 b; 
directrix: y = 5
4 
V(2, 2)
F(
)
2, 4
11
y  4
5
0
1
1
3
3
5
7
1
5
3
9
7
1
6
4
10
8
2
x
y
45.  Vertex: 12, -12; 
focus: a1
2, -1b; 
directrix: x = 7
2 
V(2, 1)
x  2
7
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
3
4
1
2
1
3
5
4
2
6
x
y
F(
)
, 1
2
1
47.  Vertex: 11, 32; 
focus: a1, 1
2 b; 
directrix: y = 11
2  
V(1, 3)
F(
)
1, 2
1
y  2
11
0
3
1
5
7
3
5
1
5
7
3
1
1
3
5
x
y

A-70  Answers   ■   Section 10.3
Section 10.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  x2
36 +
y2
100 = 1  2. 
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
V2(0, 4)
V1(0, 4)
F2(0, 2 3)
F1(0, 2 3)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
4x2  y2  16
3. 
1x - 222
9
+
1y - 122
25
= 1  4.  Center: 13, -12; 
vertices: 13 + 142, -12 and 13 - 142, -12; foci: a3 + 3114
2
, -1b 
and a3 - 3114
2
, -1b  5.  413 ≈6.9282 ft
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  sum  3.  a2-c2  5.  true   
7.  Vertices: 14, 02 and 1-4, 02;  
focus: 1213, 02 and 1-213, 02 
V2(4, 0)
V1(4, 0)
F2(2 3, 0)
F1(2 3, 0)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
 
9.  Vertices: 13, 02 and 1-3, 02;  
foci: 1212, 02 and 1-212, 02 
V2(3, 0)
V1(3, 0)
F2(2 2, 0)
F1(2 2, 0)
0
2
1
4
3
3
4
1
2
2
1
1
2
x
y
11.  Vertices: 15, 02 and 1-5, 02;  
foci: 13, 02 and 1-3, 02 
V1(5, 0)
F1(3, 0)
V2(5, 0)
F2(3, 0)
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
13.  Vertices: 10, 62 and 10, -62;  
foci: 10, 2152 and 10, -2152 
V1(0, 6)
V2(0, 6)
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
F1(0, 2 5)
F2(0, 2 5)
15.  Circle centered at the origin 
with radius 2
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
(0, 2)
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
17.  Vertices: 12, 02 and 1-2, 02;  
foci: 113, 02 and 1- 13, 02 
V1(2, 0)
V2(2, 0)
F1( 3, 0)
F2( 3, 0)
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
49.  Vertex: 1-1, 12; 
focus: a -1, 5
4 b; 
directrix: y = 3
4 
V(1, 1)
F(
)
1, 4
5
y  4
3
0
2
1
2
3
4
1
3
2
1
6
5
4
x
y
51.  Vertex: a - 1
2, -1b; 
focus: a - 1
4, -1b; 
directrix: x = - 3
4 
V(
)
 , 1
x  4
3
2
1
F(
)
 , 1
4
1
0
1
2
1
2
1
3
2
x
y
53.  Vertex: a - 1
2, -1b; 
focus: a - 1
2, - 5
4 b; 
directrix: y = - 3
4 
V(
)
 , 1
y  4
3
2
1
F(
)
 , 
2
1
4
5
0
1
2
1
2
3
4
2
x
y
55.  Vertex: 146, 42; 
focus: a551
12 , 4b; 
directrix: x = 553
12  
x 
12
551
12
553
F(
)
, 4
0
20
10
30
40
50
5
6
4
10
8
2
2
x
y
V(46, 4)
57.  y2 = 4x and x2 = 1
2y  59.  1y - 122 = 2x and x2 = 21y - 12
61.  1y - 122 =  - 1x + 22 and 1x + 222 =  - 1y - 12
63.  1y - 122 = x + 1 and 1x + 122 = y - 1
Applying the Concepts:
65.  5 in  67.  33
8 ft from the vertex  69.  a 1
16, 0b  71.  a0, 1
16 b 
73.  16.875 ft  75.  7.96 yd  77.  Output: 15 tons; cost: $27.50
Beyond the Basics:
79.  14, 82 and 116, 162  81.  y = x - 4  83.  1y - 122 = 81x - 12 
and 1y - 122 = -81x - 52  85.  ax - 3
4 b
2
= 1
2ay - 31
8 b
87.  Vertex: 14, 62; focus: a4, 11
2 b; directrix: y = 13
2 ; axis: x = 4
89.  Vertex: 1-2, 32; focus: a - 11
4 , 3b; directrix: x = - 5
4; axis: y = 3
91.  y = 6x - 3 
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
95.  a.  No, because if the axis is horizontal, it does not pass the vertical 
line test.  b.  0  97.  false  99.  19, -82
Maintaining Skills:
101.  7  103.  4x2 + 12x + 9  105.  x-intercept: -4; y-intercepts: none
107.  576  109.  41x - 122 + 10  111.  y = 1x + 122 + 2

	
Section 10.3   ■    Answers  A-71
35.  x2
9 +
y2
25 = 1 
F1(0, 4)
F2(0, 4)
V2(0, 5)
V1(0, 5)
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
x2
9 
 1
y2
25
37.  x2
36 +
y2
27 = 1 
V1(6, 0)
V2(6, 0)
F1(3, 0)
F2(3, 0)
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
x2
36 
 1
y2
27
39.  x2
9 +
y2
13 = 1 
F1(0, 2)
F2(0, 2)
V1(0,  13)
V2(0,
13)
x2
9 
 1
y2
13
0
2
1
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
41.  Center: 11, 12; foci: 
11, 1 + 152 and 11, 1 - 152; 
vertices: 11, 42 and 11, -22 
C(1, 1)
F2(1, 1 
V1(1, 4)
V2(1, 2)
5)
F1(1, 1  5)
0
2
1
4
5
3
2
3
1
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
43.  Center: 10, -32; foci: 
1213, -32 and 1-213, -32;  
vertices: 14, -32 and 1-4, -32 
V2(4, 3)
C(0, 3)
V1(4, 3)
F1(2 3, 3)
F2(2 3, 3)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
2
2
4
6
8
x
y
45.  Center: 11, -22; foci: 12, -22 
and 10, -22; vertices: 13, -22  
and 1-1, -22 
C(1, 2)
V2(3, 2)
V1(1, 2)
F1(0, 2)
F2(2, 2)
0
2
1
3
4
2 1
1
1
2
3
4
5
x
y
47.  Center: 1-3, 12; foci: 1-2, 12  
and 1-4, 12; vertices: 1-3 + 15, 12 
and 1-3 - 15, 12 
C(3, 1)
V2(3 
F2(2, 1)
F1(4, 1)
5, 1)
V1(3 
5, 1)
0
2
3
1
5
6
4
3
4
2
1
1
2
x
y
49.  Center: 1-1, 22 foci: 11, 22  
and 1-3, 22; vertices: 12, 22  
and 1-4, 22 
V1(4, 2)
F2(1, 2)
F1(3, 2)
V2(2, 2)
C(1, 2)
0
2
1
3
2
3
4
5
1
4
3
6
5
2
1
1
2
x
y
19.  Vertices: 10, 32 and 10, -32;  
foci: 10, 152 and 10, - 152 
V1(0, 3)
V2(0, 3)
F1(0,  5)
F2(0,
5)
0
2
1
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
21.  Vertices: 12, 02 and 1-2, 02;  
foci: 11, 02 and 1-1, 02 
V1(2, 0)
V2(2, 0)
F1(1, 0)
F2(1, 0)
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
23.  Vertices: 10, 152 and 10, - 152;  
foci: 10, 132 and 10, - 132 
V1(0,  5)
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
V2(0,
5)
F1(0,  3)
F2(0,
3)
25.  Vertices: a 114
2
, 0b and 
a - 114
2
, 0b; foci: a 142
6
, 0b 
and a - 142
6
, 0b 
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
(
)
V2
, 0
14
2
(
)
V1
, 0
14
2
(
)
F2
, 0
42
6
(
)
F1
, 0
42
6
27.  x2
9 +
y2
8 = 1 
V1(3, 0)
V2(3, 0)
x2
F1(1, 0)
F2(1, 0)
0
2
9
1
4
3
2
3
4
1

 1
4
y2
8
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
29.  x2
12 +
y2
16 = 1 
V2(0, 4)
V1(0, 4)
F1(0, 2)
F2(0, 2)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
x2
12 
 1
y2
16
31.  x2
25 +
y2
9 = 1 
V1(5, 0)
V2(5, 0)
(0, 3)
(0, 3)
F1(4, 0)
F2(4, 0)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
x2
25 
 1
y2
9
33.  x2
16 +
y2
20 = 1 
(4, 0)
(4, 0)
F1(0, 2)
F2(0, 2)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
V1(0, 2 5)
V2(0, 2 5)
x2
16 
 1
y2
20

A-72  Answers   ■   Section 10.4
Maintaining Skills:
99.  Center: 1-3, 12; radius: 115  101.  x-intercepts: none; y-intercepts: 
-5, -1  103.  y = -4x + 11  105.  y = -6x - 11  107.  Vertical 
asymptote: x = 2; oblique asymptote: y = 2x + 1
Section 10.4
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  y-axis  2.  Vertices: 1212, 02 and 1-212, 02; foci: 1110, 02 and 
1- 110, 02  3. 
y2
16 - x2
20 = 1  4.  y = 2
3x and y = - 2
3x
5.  a.  The standard form of the 
equation is x2
4 -
y2
25 = 1. 
Vertices: 12, 02 and 1-2, 02;  
Foci: 1{129, 02; endpoints  
of the conjugate axis: 10, 52 and 
10, -52; asymptotes: y = 5
2x 
and y = - 5
2x
y 
29, 0)
(
29, 0)
(
(2, 0)
(0,5)
(0, 5)
(2, 0)
5x
2
y  5x
2
0
6
2
10
6
10
2
10
6
2
2
6
10
x
y
F1
F2
b.  The standard form of the equation 
is 
y2
1
9
- x2
1 = 1. Vertices: a0, 1
3 b and 
a0, - 1
3 b; Foci: a0, { 110
3
b; endpoints of the conjugate axis: 11, 02 and 
1-1, 02; asymptotes: y = 1
3 x and y = - 1
3x
0
3
1
3
y  x
1
3
y 
x
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
3
3
3
x
y
1
3
0,
1
3
0, 
10
3
0,
F1
10
3
0,
F2

6.  a. 
1x + 122
4
-
1y - 122
16
= 1 1 a = 2, b = 4, and center 1-1, 12. 
The vertices are 1-1 - 2, 12 = 1-3, 12 and 1-1 + 2, 12 = 11, 12. 
The endpoints of the conjugate axes are 1-1, 1 - 42 = 1-1, -32 and 
1-1, 1 + 42 = 1-1, 52. The asymptotes are 
y - k = {b
a 1x - h2 1 y - 1 = {21x + 12. 
c2 = a2 + b2 1 c2 = 4 + 16 1 c = { 120  
The foci are 1- 120 - 1, 12 and 1120 - 1, 12.
6
2
0
4
6
8
2
4
6
2
2
(1, 1)
(3, 1)
(1, 3)
(1, 5)
4
6
4
x
y
y 2x1
y 2x3
(√20 1, 1)
(√20 1, 1)
51.  Center: 1-2, 42; foci: 1-2, 62 
and 1-2, 22; vertices: 1-2, 72  
and 1-2, 12 
F1(2, 2)
F2(2, 6)
V1(2, 1)
V2(2, 7)
C(2, 4)
0
1
2
2
3
4
5
6
1
4
3
2
7
8
6
5
1
x
y
53.  Center 11, -12; foci: 12, -12  
and 10, -12; vertices: 
11 + 12, -12 and 11 - 12, -12 
V2(1 
2, 1)
V1(1 
F2(2,  1)
F1(0,  1)
C(1,  1)
2, 1)
0
1
2
3
1
1
1
3
2
x
y
55.  No graph
57.	
4
3
4
3
59.	
8
6
8
6
Applying the Concepts:
61.  18.3 ft  63.  42.4 m  65.  The bet should not be accepted. The pool 
shark can hit the ball from any point straight into the pocket. or he can 
shoot it through the other focus and it will fall into the pocket because of 
the reflecting property.  67.  29 ft from the walls on the opposite sides, 
along the major axis.  69. 
x2
8,641.5616 +
y2
8, 639.0652 = 1 
71. 
x2
786,254.6241 +
y2
783,788.5085 = 1  73.  Perihelion: 8.72 * 107 km; 
aphelion: 5.3028 * 109 km
Beyond the Basics:
75.  x2
25 +
y2
16 = 1 or x2
625
41
+
y2
25 = 1
77.  Major axis: 21105
3
; minor axis: 170
2
  79.  When e = 0, the ellipse 
becomes a circle.  81.  2
3  83.  4
5  85.  x2
16 +
y2
12 = 1
91.  Points of intersection: 
a - 17
13, - 3
13 b and 11, -12 
0
2
4x2  3y2  7
x  3y  2
1
3
2


3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
17
13,
(
)
(1, 1)
3
13
93.  Points of intersection: 
112, 3122, 112, -3122, 
1- 12, 3122, 1- 12, -3122 
( 2,3 2)
( 2,3 2)
2, 3 2)
(
2, 3 2)
(
9x2  y2  36
x2  y2  20
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
95.  y = - 8
3x + 25
3  
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
97.  Four circles: 1x - 322 + 1y - 322 = 9, 
 1x + 322 + 1y - 322 = 9,  1x + 322 + 1y + 322 = 9, 
 1x - 322 + 1y + 322 = 9

	
Section 10.4   ■    Answers  A-73
19.  Vertices: 10, 22 and 10, -22;  
foci: 10, 21102 and 10, -21102;  
transverse axis: y-axis; the hyper­
bola opens up and down; vertices  
of the fundamental rectangle:  
16, 22, 1-6, 22, 1-6, -22, 16, -22; 
asymptotes: y = {1
3x 
(6, 2)
(6, 2)
(6, 2)
(6, 2)
(0, 2)
(0, 2)
(0, 2 10)
(0, 2 10)
y  3
x
y  3
x
0
3
1
7
5
5
7
3 1
7
5
3
1
3
5
7
x
y
21.  Vertices: 13, 02 and 1-3, 02;  
foci: 1113, 02 and 1- 113, 02;  
transverse axis: x-axis; the hyper-
bola opens left and right; vertices  
of the fundamental rectangle:  
13, 22, 1-3, 22, 1-3, -22, 13, -22; 
asymptotes: y = {2
3x 
y   x
3
2
y  x
3
2
( 13, 0)
( 13, 0)
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
(3, 2)
(3, 2)
(3, 2)
(3, 2)
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
23.  Vertices: 10, 12 and 10, -12; 
foci: a0, 15
2 b and a0, - 15
2 b; 
transverse axis: y-axis; the  
hyperbola opens up and down;  
vertices of the fundamental 
rectangle: a1
2, 1b, a - 1
2, 1b,
a - 1
2, -1b, a1
2, -1b; 
asymptotes: y = {2x 
y  2x
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
y  2x
5
1
2 , 1
0,
(
(
)
)
1
2 , 1
(
)
1
2 , 1
(
)
1
2 , 1
(
)
2
5
0, 
(
)
2
0
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
x
y
25.  Vertices: a1
3, 0b and 
a - 1
3, 0b; foci: a 110
3
, 0b and 
a - 110
3
, 0b; transverse axis: 
x-axis; the hyperbola opens left and 
right; vertices of the fundamental 
rectangle: 
a1
3, 1b, a - 1
3, 1b, a - 1
3, -1b,
a1
3, -1b; asymptotes: y = {3x 
y  3x
y  3x
1
3 , 1
(
)
1
3 , 1
(
)
1
3, 0
(
)
1
3 , 1
(
)
1
3, 0
(
)
1
3, 1
(
)
10, 0
(
)
3
10, 0
(
)
3
0
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
x
y
27.  x2
4  -  
y2
5 = 1 
F2(3, 0)
V2(2, 0)
F1(3, 0)
V1(2, 0)
x2
4 
 1
y2
5
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
29. 
y2
16 -  x2
20 = 1 
F2(0, 6)
V2(0, 4)
F1(0, 6)
V1(0, 4)
y2
16 
 1
x2
20
0
3
1
7
5
5
7
3 1
7
5
3
1
3
5
7
x
y
b. 
1y - 122
4
-
1x + 122
9
= 1 1 a = 2, b = 3, and center 1-1, 12. 
The vertices are 1-1, 1 - 22 = 1-1, -12 and 1-1, 1 + 22 = 1-1, 32. 
The endpoints of the conjugate axes are 1-1 - 3, 12 = 1-4, 12 
and 1-1 + 3, 12 = 12, 12 The asymptotes are 
y - k = {a
b 1x - h2 1 y - 1 = {2
3 1x + 12. 
c2 = a2 + b2 1 c2 = 4 + 9 1 c = { 113 The foci are 
1-1, 1 + 1132 and 1-1, 1 - 1132.
6
2
0
4
6
2
4
6
2
2
(2, 1)
(1, 1)
(4, 1)
(1, 3)
4
6
8
4
x
y
(1, 1 √13)
(1, 11√13)
2
3
5
3
y 5
x1
2
3
1
3
y 52
x1
7. 
1x - 122
5
-
1y - 222
5
4
= 1. 
Center: 11, 22; vertices: 
11 + 15 , 22 and11 - 15 , 22; 
endpoints of the conjugate axis: 
a1, 2 + 15
2  b and a1, 2 - 15
2  b; 
asymptotes: y - 2 =
{ 1
2 1x - 12; 
foci: a7
2, 2b and a - 3
2, 2b
2
0
2
4
6
2
4
2
4
6
x
y
(x  1)  2
y  1
2
(1, 2)
(1      , 2)
(x  1)  2
y  1
2
5
(1      , 2)
5
1, 2  5
—2
1, 2  5
—2
, 2
7–2
 , 2
3–2
8. 
x2
16,900 -
y2
5,600 = 1
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  difference  3.  c2 - a2  5.  true  7.  g  9.  h  11.  d  13.  b
15.  Vertices: 11, 02 and 1-1, 02;  
foci: 115, 02 and 1- 15, 02;  
transverse axis: x-axis; the hyper­
bola opens left and right; vertices of 
the fundamental rectangle:  
11, 22, 1-1, 22, 1-1, -22, 11, -22; 
asymptotes: y = {2x 
(1, 2)
(1, 0)
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
(1, 0)
y  2x
y  2x
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
( 5, 0)
( 5, 0)
17.  Vertices: 10, 12 and 10, -12;  
foci: 10, 122 and 10, - 122;  
transverse axis: y-axis; the hyper­
bola opens up and down; vertices of 
the fundamental rectangle:  
11, 12, 1-1, 12, 1-1, -12, 11, -12;  
asymptotes: y = {x 
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
y  x
y  x
(0, 2)
(0,  2)
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y

A-74  Answers   ■   Section 10.4
49.  Center: 11, -12; vertices:  
14, -12 and 1-2, -12; transverse  
axis: y = -1; asymptotes: 
y + 1 = {4
3 1x + 12 
V1(2, 1)
C(1, 1)
V2(4, 1)
y  1  
(x  1)
4
3
y  1 
(x  1)
4
3
0
4
6
2
4
2
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
51.  Center: 1-2, 02; vertices:  
13, 02 and 1-7, 02; transverse  
axis: x-axis; asymptotes: 
y = {7
5 1x + 22 
V1(7, 0)
V2(3, 0)
C(2, 0)
y  
(x  2)
7
5
y 
(x  2)
7
5
0
2
4
6
4
8
10
6
2
8
4
6
2
2
4
8
6
x
y
53.  Center: 1-4, -32; vertices:  
11, -32 and 1-9, -32; transverse  
axis: y = -3; asymptotes: 
y + 3 = {7
5 1x + 42 
V1(9, 3)
V2(1, 3)
C(4, 3)
0
3
5
9
5
13
7
5
3
3
5
7
9
11
x
y
y   (x  4)  3
7
5
y 
(x  4)  3
7
5
55.  Center: 10, -12; vertices: 
a5
2, -1b and a - 5
2, -1b; transverse 
axis: y = -1; asymptotes:
y + 1 = {2x 
,  1)
V1(
C(0, 1)
y  2x  1
y  2x  1
5
2
, 1)
V2( 5
2
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
3
1
4
2
1
3
5
2
4
6
x
y
57.  Center: 12, -12; vertices:  
12, 42 and 12, -62; transverse  
axis: x = 2; asymptotes:  
y + 1 = {3x - 2 
V1(2, 6)
V2(2, 4)
C(2, 1)
y  3(x  2)  1
y  3(x  2)  1
0
4
2
6
4
2
6
8
4
2
2
4
6
10
8
x
y
59.  Center: 1-3, 02; vertices:  
1-3 + 315, 02 and  
1-3 - 315, 02; transverse axis:  
x-axis; asymptotes:  
y = {1x + 32 
V1(3  3
C(3, 0)
y  (x  3)
y  x  3
5, 0)
V2(3  3 5, 0)
8
6
2 4
10
12
16
8 4
x
0
8
4
2
10
6
4
6
8
10
y
31. 
y2
4  -  x2
21 = 1 
V1(0, 2)
F1(0, 5)
F2(0, 5)
C(0, 0)
V2(0, 2)
y2
4 
 1
x2
21
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
33.  x2 -  
y2
24 = 1 
F1(5, 0)
V2(1, 0)
C(0, 0)
y2
24
0
3
1
5
5
3
1
x
y
35. 
y2
9  -  x2
16 = 1 
V1(0, 
3)
F1(0, 
5)
V2(0, 3)
F2(0, 5)
 1
x2
16
y2
9
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
37.  x2 -  
y2
4 = 1 
V1(1, 0)
V2(1, 0)
x2 
y  2x
y  2x
 1
y2
4
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
F1( 5, 0)
F2( 5, 0)
39. 
y2
16 -  x2
16 = 1 
V1(0, 4)
V2(0, 4)
y  x
y  x
F1(0,4 2)
F2(0, 4 2)
 1
 x2
16
y2
16
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
41.	
8
6
8
6
43.	
8
6
8
6
45.	
14
10
12
10
47. 
12
10
14
8

	
Section 10.4   ■    Answers  A-75
77.  Ellipse
(1, 3)
x
y
(4, 3)
(1, 1)
(2, 3)
(1, 5)
Applying the Concepts:
79.  The difference in the distances of the location of the explosion from A 
and B is given 600 m. Therefore, the location of the explosion is restricted 
to points on a hyperbola, the length of whose transverse axis is 600 m.
Equation: 
x2
90,000 -
y2
160,000 = 1
81.  Let the coordinates of Nicole be 1-4000, 02 and those of Juan be 
14000, 02 .The lightening is 3300 ft closer to Nicole than Juan. The location of 
the lightening is on a hyperbola with equation 
x2
2,722,500 -
y2
13,277,500 = 1 .
83.  Let the coordinates of A be 1-150, 02 and the coordinates of B 
be 1150, 02 . Equation: x2
5625 -
y2
16,875 = 1
85. 
x2
193,600 -
y2
446,400 = 1  87.  1-68.5748, 44.27192 
Beyond the Basics:
89.  a.  x2 -
y2
24 = 1  b.  x2
4 -
y2
21 = 1  c.  x2
16 -
y2
9 = 1
91.  a.  y2 - x2
35 = 1  b.  y2 - x2
15 = 1  c.  y2 - x2
8 = 1
97.  When e = 1, the graph is the union of two rays.  99.  e = 161
5
; 
length of the latus rectum: 72
5   101.  e = 3; length of the latus rectum: 8
107.  Points of intersection: 
a - 91
20, 109
10 b
0
10
20
10
20
20
15
30
25
10
5
5
10
15
20
x
y
91
20 ,
(
)
109
10
y2  4x2  36
y  2x  20
109.  Points of intersection: 
1-212, - 172, 1-212, 172,
1212, - 172, 1212, 172 
(2 2,  7)
(2 2,
7)
(2 2,  7)
(2 2,
7)
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
x2  y2  15
x2  y2  1
111.  Points of intersection: 1-2, -32, 1-2, 32, 12, -32, 12, 32 
(2, 3)
(2, 3)
(2, 3)
(2, 3)
x2  9y2  77
9x2  4y2  72
0
2
4
6
8
4
8 6
2
8
4
6
2
2
4
8
6
x
y
61.  Center: 12, 02; vertices: 14, 02  
and 10, 02; transverse axis: x-axis; 
asymptotes: y = {1
2 1x - 22 
V2(4, 0)
V1(0, 0)
C(2, 0)
y  x  2
2
y  x  2
2
0
3
1
5
7
3
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
63.  Center: 1-3, -42; vertices:  
1-3, -32 and 1-3, -52;  
transverse axis: x = -3; asymp­
totes: y + 4 = { 121x + 32 
y  
C(3, 4)
V1(3, 5)
V2(3, 3)
2(x  3)  4
y 
2(x  3)  4
0
2
1
4
6
8
2
1
1
3
5
7
9
x
y
65.  Center: 13, -22;  
vertices: 13 + 16, -22 and 
13 - 16, -22; transverse axis: 
y = -2; asymptotes: 
y + 2 = { 16
2 1x - 32 
C(3, 2)
V1(3 
y  
(x  3)  2
6
2
y 
(x  3)  2
6
6, 2)
V2(3  6, 2)
2
0
4
2
6
8
2
3
1
1
3
5
7
x
y
67.  Center: 112, 02; vertices: 
112 + 2212 + 1, 02 and 
112 - 2212 + 1, 02;  
transverse axis: x-axis;  
asymptotes: y = { 1x - 122 
2, 0)
C(
V1( 2 
, 0)
1  2 2 
V2( 2 
, 0)
1  2 2 
y  x  2
y  x 
2
0
4
2
6
4
2
5
3
1
4
2
1
2
3
4
5
x
y
69.  Parabola
0
4
2
8
6
10
4 2
2
2
4
6
8
x
y
71.  Hyperbola
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
73.  Circle
0
3
1
7
9
5
5 3 1
3
1
3
5
7
9
11
x
y
75.  Parabola
0
4
2
6
4
2
1
2
1
2
3
6
7
8
5
4
x
y
  113.  y = 6
7
 x - 5
7

A-76  Answers   ■   Review Exercises
13. 
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
F1( 21, 0)
F2( 21, 0)
V1(5, 0)
V2(5, 0)
(0, 2)
(0, 2)
Foci: 1121, 02 and 1- 121, 02;  
vertices: 15, 02 and 1-5, 02;  
endpoints of the minor axis:  
10, 22 and 10, -22
15. 
F1(0,  3)
F2(0, 3)
V1(0, 2)
V2(0, 2)
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
Foci: 10, 132 and 10, - 132; 
vertices: 10, 22 and 10, -22; 
endpoints of the minor axis: 11, 02 
and 1-1, 02
17. 
F1(1, 4  7)
F2(1, 4  7)
V1(1, 8)
V2(1, 0)
(2, 4)
(4, 4)
0
3
5
1
5
7
3
1
2
2
4
6
8
10
x
y
Foci: 1-1, -4 + 172 and 
1-1, -4 - 172; vertices: 1-1, 02 
and 1-1, -82; endpoints of the 
minor axis: 12, -42 and 1-4, -42
19. 
F1(1  2 2, 1)
F2(1  2 2, 1)
V2(2, 1)
V1(4, 1)
(1, 2)
(1, 0)
0
2
1
3
2
3
4
5
1
4
5
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
Foci: 1-1 + 212, 12 and 
1-1 -212, 12; vertices: 12, 12 
and 1-4, 12; endpoints of the minor 
axis: 1-1, 22 and 1-1, 02
21.  x2
16 +
y2
4 = 1  23.  x2
100 +
y2
75 = 1 
25. 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
7
3
1
1
3
5
7
x
y
y  2x
y  2x
V1(0, 4)
V2(0, 4)
F2(0, 2 5)
F1(0, 2 5)
Vertices: 10, 42 and 10, -42;  
foci: 10, 2152 and 10, -2152; 
asymptotes: y = {2x
27. 
0
3
1
7
5
5
7
3
7
5
3
1
3
5
7
x
y
V1(1, 0)
V2(1, 0)
F1(3, 0)
F2(3, 0)
y  2 2x
y  2 2x
Vertices: 11, 02 and 1-1, 02;  
foci: 13, 02 and 1-3, 02  
asymptotes: y = {212x
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
115.  a.  Two lines, y = {2
3x  b.  Because all variable terms on the left-
hand side are nonnegative and 6 is positive, the left-hand side is always 
positive. Therefore, there are no x and y values that satisfy the equation.
c.  A point, 10, 02  d.  A point, 12, -42  e.  Two lines, y = { 12x
117. 
x2  y2  1
x2  y2  1
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
5
3
x
y
Maintaining Skills:
119.  21  121.  2  123.    1
9  125.  -16  127.  48  129.  true
Review Exercises
1. 
, 0
(
)
V(0, 0)
F
x  3
2
3
2
0
2
4
6
8
2
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
Vertex: 10, 02; focus: a - 3
2, 0b; 
axis: x-axis; directrix: x = 3
2
3. 
y  
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
V(0, 0)
0,
F
7
4
7
4
)
(
Vertex: 10, 02; focus: a0, 7
4 b; axis: 
y-axis; directrix: y = - 7
4
5. 
y  
V(2, 3)
2, 
F
13
4
11
4
)
(
0
3
1
5
4
2
6 7
8
1
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
x
y
Vertex: 12, -32; 
focus: a2, - 13
4 b; 
axis: x = 2; directrix: y = - 11
4
7. 
x  3
F(2, 2)
 , 2
V
5
2
)
(
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
3
1
1
3
5
7
x
y
Vertex: a - 5
2, -2b; 
focus: 1-2, -22; 
axis: y = -2; directrix: x = -3
9.  y2 = -12x  11.  x2 = 16y 

	
Practice Test A   ■    Answers  A-77
51.  Point of intersection: 
a109
10 , - 91
20 b 
0
10
5
15
10
15
5
15
10
5
5
10
15
x
y
x2  4y2  36
x  2y  20  0
109,
10
91
20

)
(
53.  Points of intersection: 
12, 12, 12, -12, 1-2, 12, 1-2, -12 
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
3x2  7y2  5
9y2  2x2  1
(2, 1)
(2, 1)
(2, 1)
(2, 1)
55.  14.6 ft  57.  16.4 in.
Practice Test A
1.  1y - 1222 = 241x + 62  2.  1y - 122 = -81x + 32  3.  Focus: 
a0, 9
4 b; directrix: x = 9
4 
4. 
0
2
4
6
8
2
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
5.  Vertex: 1-2, 12; focus: 
1-2, -12; directrix: y = 3   
6.  2>9 ft   
7.  1y + 122 = 241x - 32 
8.  x2
12 +  
y2
16 = 1 
9.  x2
29 +
y2
25 = 1 
10.  x2
81 +
y2
4 = 1
11. 
0
2
1
4
3
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
x
y
12.  Vertices: 10, 12 and 10, -12, 
foci: 10,  5122 and 10, -5122
13.	
0
8
4
12
8
12
4
6
4
2
4
2
6
x
y
14. 
y2
36 - x2
9 = 1 
15.  y2 - 1x - 122 = 1 
16. 
1x - 122
4
 - 1y + 222 = 1
17.  Hyperbola
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
18.  Parabola
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
1
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x
y
29. 
3
1
5
3
5
7
9
1
8
4
2
2
x
y
V1(5, 3)
V2(1, 3)
(x  2)  3
y 2
3
(x  2)  3
y  2
3
F1(2    13, 3)
F2(2    13, 3)
Vertices: 11, 32 and 1-5, 32; 
foci: 1-2 + 113, 32 and 
1-2 - 113, 32; asymptotes: 
y - 3 = {2
3 1x + 22
31. 
0
8
4
8
12
4
6
2
4
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x
y
V1(2, 8)
V2(2, 2)
(x  2)  5
y  1
2
(x  2)  5
y  1
2
F1(2, 5  3  5)
F2(2, 5  3  5)
Vertices: 1-2, -22 and 1-2, -82; 
foci: 1-2, -5 + 3152 and 
1-2, -5 - 3152; asymptotes: 
y + 5 = {1
2 1x + 22
33.  x2 - 
y2
3 = 1  35.  x2
4  - 
y2
36 = 1
37.  Hyperbola
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
39.  Ellipse
5
1
2
3
4
6
1
2
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
x
y
0
41.  Circle
1
2
2
3
4
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
0
43.  Hyperbola
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
45.  Circle
1
2
3
4
2 1
1
1
2
3
4
5
x
y
0
47.  Ellipse
0
2
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
2
3
x
y
49.  x2
5  - 
y2
4 = 1 

A-78  Answers   ■   Section 11.1
17.  a1 = 5
2, a2 = 11
4 , a3 = 23
8 , a4 = 47
16
19.  a1 = 0.6, a2 = 0.6, a3 = 0.6, a4 = 0.6
21.  a1 = -1, a2 = 1
2, a3 = - 1
6, a4 = 1
24
23.  a1 = - 1
3, a2 = 1
9, a3 = - 1
27, a4 = 1
81
25.  a1 = e
2, a2 = e2
4 , a3 = e3
6 , a4 = e4
8   27.  an = 3n - 2
29.  an =
1
n + 1  31.  an = 1-12n-1122  33.  an = 3n-1
2n
35.  an = n1n + 12  37.  an = 2 -
1-12n
n + 1  39.  an =
3n+1
n + 1
41.  a1 = 2, a2 = 5, a3 = 8, a4 = 11, a5 = 14
43.  a1 = 3, a2 = 6, a3 = 12, a4 = 24, a5 = 48
45.  a1 = 7, a2 = -11, a3 =  25, a4 = -47, a5 = 97
47.  a1 = 2, a2 = 1
2, a3 = 2, a4 = 1
2,  a5 = 2
49.  a1 = 25, a2 = - 1
125, a3 = -25, a4 =
1
125, a5 = 25
51.  a.  2, 11, 26, 47, 107, 146, 191, 242, 299
b. 
400
10
0
11
53.  a.  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
b. 
12
2
0
11
55.  a.  0.5, -1, 2, 0.5, -1, 2, 0.5, -1, 2, 0.5
b.
5
5
0
11
57.  1
20  59.  12  61. 
1
n + 1  63.  2n + 1  65.  35  67.  55  69.  25
71.  853
140  73.  183  75.  -118  77.  a
51
k=1
12k - 12  79.  a
11
k=1
1
5k
81.  a
50
k=1
1-12k+1
k
  83.  a
10
k=1
 
k
k + 1  85.  4620  87.  -1.345 (rounded to 
three decimal places)  89.  50
Applying the Concepts:
91.  a.  208 ft  b.  116 + 1n - 12322 ft  93.  $250  95.  19,200 min
97.  a.  A1 = 10,300, A2 = 10,609, A3 = 10,927.27, A4 = 11,255.09,
A5 = 11,592.74, A6 = 11,940.52  b.  $16,047.10  99.  1st year: 
$105,000; 2nd year: $110,250; 3rd year: $115,762.50; 4th year: $121,550.63; 
5th year: $127,628.16; 6th year: $134,009.56; 7th year: $140,710.04;  
formula: an = 1100,0002(1.05n2
19.  Circle
0
4
2
4
6
2
5
6
7
8
3
4
1
2
1
2
x
y
20.  Ellipse
0
4
2
6
4
6
2
6
4
2
2
4
6
x
y
Practice Test B
1.  b  2.  b  3.  a  4.  a  5.  a  6.  d  7.  a  8.  b  9.  d  10.  a   
11.  a  12.  c  13.  b  14.  b  15.  c  16.  c  17.  c  18.  a  19.  d 
20.  d 
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–10)
1. 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
= 2x + h - 3  3.  f -11x2 = 1
2
 x + 3
2
f 1 f -11x22 = f a1
2
 x + 3
2 b = 2 a1
2
 x + 3
2 b - 3 = x + 3 - 3 = x
5.  x = 4  7.  12,∞2  9.  x = 2, y = 3  11.  x = 2, y = 2 - log 2
13.  0  15.  A-1 = c2
1
5
2
3
2
d   17.  1, -1, 1
2 16, - 1
2 16
19.  Circle
0
3
1
5
3
5
1
5
3
1
1
3
5
x
y
Chapter 11
Section 11.1
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a1 = -2, a2 = -4, a3 = -8, a4 = -16
2.  an = 1-12n+1a1 - 1
n b  3.  a1 = -3, a2 = -1, a3 = 3,
a4 = 11, a5 = 27  4.  a1 = 2, a2 = 3, and ak = ak-2 + ak-1, 
for all k Ú 3  5.  a.  13  b.  n1n - 121n - 22
6.  a1 = -2, a2 = 2, a3 = - 4
3, a4 = 2
3, a5 = - 4
15  7.  -4
8.  a
7
k=1
1-12k+112k2
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  positive integers  3.  1  5.  false 
7.  a1 = 1, a2 = 4, a3 = 7, a4 = 10
9.  a1 = 0, a2 = 1
2, a3 = 2
3, a4 = 3
4
11.  a1 = -1, a2 = -4, a3 = -9, a4 = -16
13.  a1 = 1, a2 = 4
3, a3 = 3
2, a4 = 8
5
15.  a1 = 1, a2 = -1, a3 = 1, a4 = -1

Section 11.5    ■    Answers  A-79
Beyond the Basics:
101.  an = 21- 11>2n2  103.  a.  a1 = 1, a2 = 1
2 , a3 = 1
4 , a4 = 1
8 , 
a5 = 1
16  b.  an =
1
2n-1  105.  a1 = 1, a2 = 1, a3 = 2, a4 = 2, 
a5 = 3, a6 = 4, a7 = 4, a8 = 4, a9 = 5, a10 = 6
107.  am = 1m + 122  109.  p = 2, q = 12  113.  x = 49
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
115.  k = 5
Maintaining Skills:
119.  4, 4, 4, 4  121.  -5, -5, -5, -5
123.  a2 = 7, a3 = 11, a4 = 15, a5 = 19  125.  a2 = 4, a3 = 1, 
a4 = -2, a5 = -5  127.  3, 3, 3, 3  129.  -2, -2, -2, -2
131.  an+1 = 2n - 3, an-1 = 2n - 7
Section 11.2
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  -5  2.  an = 4n - 7  3.  d = -3, an = 53 - 3n  4.  85
6  
5.  2000 ft
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  5  3.  -3  5.  false  7.  Arithmetic; a1 = 1, d = 1
9.  Arithmetic; a1 = 2, d = 3  11.  Not arithmetic  13.  Not arithmetic
15.  Arithmetic: a1 = 0.6, d = -0.4  17.  Arithmetic; a1 = 8, d = 2
19.  Not arithmetic  21.  an = 3n + 2  23.  an = 16 - 5n
25.  an = 3 - n
4
  27.  an = - 2n + 1
5
  29.  an = 3n + e - 3
31.  d = 13
2
 , an = 13
2
 n - 5  33.  d = -2, an = 22 - 2n
35.  d = 1
2, an = n + 11
2
  37.  1275  39.  2500  41.  15,150
43.  -208  45.  121
3   47.  6225  49.  460  51.  1340  53.  n = 38
55.  n = 25  57.  n = 25
Applying the Concepts:
59.  1170  61.  $12,375  63.  $16.75  65.  1100  67.  408  69.  8
Beyond the Basics:
71.  d = log aa
b b  73.  d = 6  75.  1368  77.  Yes, it is harmonic 
because the reciprocals form an arithmetic sequence with d = - 1
3.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
81.  an = 21 - n
2
  83.  79
Maintaining Skills:
85.  2, 2, 2, 2  87.  -3, -3, -3, -3
89.  a2 = 6, a3 = 18, a4 = 54, a5 = 162
91.  a2 = -2, a3 = 4, a4 = -8, a5 = 16  93.  2, 2, 2, 2
95.  -3, -3, -3,-3  97.  an+1 = -3 # 2n+1, an-1 = -3 # 2n-1
Section 11.3
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  3  2.  It is geometric; a1 = 3
2, r = 3
2  3.  a.  a1 = 2  b.  r = 3
5
c.  an = 2 a3
5 b
n-1
  4.  711.5217 ≈6896.8288  5.  8  6.  ≈2
7.  $91,510.60  8.  9  9.  a
∞
n=0
110,000,000210.852n ≈$66,666,666.67
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  5  3.  3  5.  true  7.  Geometric; a1 = 3, r = 2
9.  Not geometric  11.  Geometric; a1 = 1, r = -3  13.  Geometric; 
a1 = 7, r = -1  15.  Geometric; a1 = 9, r = 1
3  17.  Geometric; 
a1 = - 1
2, r = - 1
2  19.  Geometric; a1 = 1, r = 2  21.  Not geometric
23.  Geometric; a1 = 1
3, r = 1
3    25.  Geometric; a1 = 15, r = 15
27.  a1 = 2, r = 5, an = 2152n-1  29.  a1 = 5, r = 2
3, an = 5 a2
3 b
n-1
31.  a1 = 0.2, r = -3, an = 0.21-32n-1
33.  a1 = p4, r = p2, an = p2n+2  35.  a7 = 320  37.  a10 = -1536
39.  a6 = 243
16   41.  a9 = - 390,625
256
  43.  a20 = -
125
131,072  45.  11
47.  10  49.  9  51.  S10 = 1,220,703
5
  53.  S12 = - 40,690,104
25
55.  S8 = 109,225
16,384   57.  31
16  59.  6305
729   61.  255  63.   
31520 - 2202
3512219
65.  0.397  67.  9841.333  69.  2.250  71.  1
2  73.  - 1
3  75.  32
5
77.  15
2   79.  4
5
Applying the Concepts:
81.  23,185  83.  $3933.61  85.  1024  87.  $1,190,374.35
89.  189.09 cm  91.  20 m
Beyond the Basics:
93.  2
3
  97.  common ratio = 1
r
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
103.  b1001 is larger  105.  n = 15, k = 16  107.  2, 5, and 8; or 26, 5, 
and -16
Maintaining Skills:
109.  P3: 313 + 12 is even; true  P4: 414 + 12 is even; true
111.  P3: 1 + 2 + 3 =
313 + 12
2
; true 
P4: 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 =
414 + 12
2
; true 
113.  Pn+1: 1n + 122 + 1n + 12 is divisible by 2.
115.  Pn+1: 3n+1 7 51n + 12
Section 11.4
Answer to Practice Problem:
1.  Pk+1:1k + 422 7 1k + 122 + 9
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  natural numbers  3.  Pk+1 is true  5.  false
7.  Pk+1:1k + 222 - 21k + 12  9.  Pk+1: 2k+1 7 51k + 12
Applying the Concepts:
37.  a.  The number of sides of the nth figure is 314n-12.  b.  The perimeter 
of the nth figure is 3a4
3 b
n-1
.  39.  The smallest number of moves to 
accomplish the transfer is 2n - 1.
Maintaining Skills:
59.  n
Section 11.5
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  13y - x26 = 729y6 - 1458y5x + 1215y4x2 - 540y3x3 +
135y2x4 - 18yx5 + x6  2.  a.  a6
2b = 15  b.  a12
9 b = 220

A-80  Answers   ■   Section 11.7
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
81.  25
Maintaining Skills:
83.  3  85.  1  87.  4, 5  89.  53, 56, 2  91.  3, 4  93.  ∅, 0
Section 11.7
Answers to Practice Problems:
1.  a.  E1 = 51, 3, 56, P1E12 = 1
2  b.  E2 = 55, 66, P1E22 = 1
3
2.  1
2  3.  1
6  4. 
1
15,890,700  5.  2
13  6.  3
10  7.  0.69
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  equally likely  3.  mutually exclusive
5.  true (if “between 0 and 1” includes 0 and 1)
7.  S = 51Wendy’s, McDonald’s, Burger King2, 1Wendy’s, 
Burger King, McDonald’s2, 1McDonald’s, Wendy’s, Burger King2, 
 1McDonald’s, Burger King, Wendy’s2, 1Burger King, Wendy’s,
McDonald’s2, 1Burger King, McDonald’s, Wendy’s,26
9.  S = 55Thriller, The Wall6, 5Thriller, Eagles: Their Greatest
Hits6, 5Thriller, Led Zappelin IV6, 5The Wall, Eagles:
Their Greatest Hits6, 5The Wall, Led Zappelin IV6, 
 5Eagles: Their Greatest Hits, Led Zappelin IV66
11.  S = 51white, male2, 1white, female2, 1African American, male2,
1African American, female2, 1Native American, male2,
1Native American, female2, 1Asian, male2,
1Asian, female2, 1other, male2, 1other, female2,
1multiracial, male2, 1multiracial, female26
13.  0  15.  1   17.  experimental  19.  theoretical  21.  experimental
23.  theoretical  25.  experimental
27.  An event that is very likely to happen has probability 0.999.
An event that will surely happen has probability 1.
An event that is a rare event has probability 0.001.
An event that may or may not happen has probability 0.5.
An event that will never happen has probability 0.
29.  1
3  31.  1
3  33.  1
2  35.  1
13  37.  1
4  39.  3
13  41.  1
10
43.  1
10  45.  1
2
Applying the Concepts:
47.  0.7  49.  1
5  51.  47
50  53.  The probability of winning one prize is 
2
25. The probability of winning both is 
9
1550.  55.  a.  1
4  b.  1
4  c.  1
2
57.  a.  79
148  b.  33
40  c.  0  d.  1  e.  119
120  59.  The probability that a 
non-Hispanic white American has no lactose intolerance is 4
5. The 
probability for the second group is 1
4.  61.  a.  1
10   b.  1
10 
63.  90; 135; 10; 765  65.  Three of one gender and one of the other 
is more likely.  67.  a.  2
5   b.  89
180
Beyond the Basics:
69.  468,559
1,000,000  71.  1
12
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
73.  1
3
3.  13x - y24 = 81x4 - 108x3y + 54x2y2 - 12xy3 + y4
4.  220  5.  1,863,680x3a12
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  n + 1  3.  alternating signs  5.  false  7.  120  9.  12  11.  15
13.  1  15.  7  17.  1x + 224 = x4 + 8x3 + 24x2 + 32x + 16
19.  1x - 225 = x5 - 10x4 + 40x3 - 80x2 + 80x - 32
21.  12 - 3x23 = -27x3 + 54x2 - 36x + 8
23.  12x + 3y24 = 16x4 + 96x3y + 216x2y2 + 216xy3 + 81y4
25.  1x + 124 = x4 + 4x3 + 6x2 + 4x + 1
27.  1x - 125 = x5 - 5x4 + 10x3 - 10x2 + 5x - 1
29.  1y - 323 = y3 - 9y2 + 27y - 27
31.  1x + y26 = x6 + 6x5y + 15x4y2 + 20x3y3 + 15x2y4 + 6xy5 + y6
33.  11 + 3y25 = 243y5 + 405y4 + 270y3 + 90y2 + 15y + 1
35.  12x + 124 = 16x4 + 32x3 + 24x2 + 8x + 1
37.  1x - 2y23 = x3 - 6x2y + 12xy2 - 8y3
39.  12x + y24 = 16x4 + 32x3y + 24x2y2 + 8xy3 + y4
41.  ax
2 + 2b
7
=
1
128 x7 + 7
32 x6 + 21
8  x5 +
35
2  x4 + 70x3 + 168x2 + 224x + 128
43.  aa2 - 1
3 b
4
= a8 - 4
3 a6 + 2
3 a4 - 4
27 a2 + 1
81
45.  a1
x + yb
3
= y3 + 3
y2
x + 3
y
x2 + 1
x3  47.  120x7y3
49.  -112.640x3  51.  16,128x6y2  53.  -704,000x2y9  55.  2.48832
Beyond the Basics:
57.  - 80642x
x8
  59.  924 x12
y18  65.  16  67.  x5  69.  k = {2
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing:
77.  8!
4!  79.  26 # 6!  81.  132  83.  56
Section 11.6
Answers to Practice Problems:
1. 
English
Afternoon
Afternoon
Afternoon
French
Math
Morning
Morning
Morning
Evening
Evening
Evening
There are 132132 = 9 ways to choose a course.  2.  35
3.  1,000,000  4.  5040  5.  3024  6.  a.  72  b.  1
7.  5bears, bulls, lions6,5bears, bulls, tigers6,
 5bears, lions, tigers6,5bulls, lions, tigers6; C14, 32 = 4  
8.  a.  36  b.  1  c.  1  9.  220  10.  90
Basic Concepts and Skills:
1.  permutation  3.  combination  5.  true  7.  6  9.  56
11.  362,880  13.  1  15.  56  17.  126  19.  1  21.  1  23.  a.  676
b.  650  25.  2450  27.  24  29.  60  31.  10  33.  55  35.  330
37.  20,160  39.  120  41.  a.  160  b.  800  43.  a.  12,144  b.  13,824   
45.  256  47.  Yes  49.  a.  5040  b.  5040  51.  a.  10  b.  10  c.  5   
53.  105  55.  3,628,800  57.  The maximum number of times each child 
will go to the circus is 20.  The father will go 35 times.
59.  111,007,923,832,370,565  61.  80  63.  15  65.  360  67.  420
Beyond the Basics:
69.  6  71.  435  73.  m = 3  75.  n = 6  77.  n = 6  79.  m = 9

Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–11)    ■    Answers  A-81
Practice Test B
1.  c  2.  d  3.  a  4.  c  5.  a  6.  b  7.  d  8.  a  9.  b  10.  b
11.  a  12.  d  13.  c  14.  a  15.  d  16.  b  17.  d  18.  c
19.  a  20.  d
Cumulative Review Exercises (Chapters P–11)
1.  52, 46  3.  x = 2  5.  x = 4  7.  x = 4
9.  1- ∞, -3 - 3134 ´ 3-3 + 313, ∞2  11.  x = 10, y = 7, z = 1
2
13.  - 16 - 12
4
15.  Shift the graph of g1x2 = 1x three units to the right.
6
y
x
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
f(x)     x  3
g(x)     x
17.  ln a
x7
x - 5 b  19.  12
Review Exercises
1.  a1 = -1, a2 = 1, a3 = 3, a4 = 5, a5 = 7
3.  a1 = 1
3, a2 = 2
5, a3 = 3
7, a4 = 4
9, a5 = 5
11  5.  an = 32 - 2n
7.  9  9.  n + 1  11.  100  13.  1343
140   15.  a
50
k=1
1
k
17.  Arithmetic; a1 = 11, d = -5  19.  Not arithmetic  21.  an = 3n
23.  an = x + n - 1  25.  d = 2, an = 2n + 1  27.  352  29.  4020
31.  Geometric: a1 = 4, r = -2  33.  Not geometric
35.  a1 = 16, r = - 1
4, an =
1-12n-1
4n-3 
  37.  a10 = 39,366
39.  S12 = 819
2   41.  3
4  43.  3
2  47.  792
49.  1x - 324 = x4 - 12x3 + 54x2 - 108x + 81  51.  101,376x5
53.  24  55.  5040  57.  120  59.  120  61.  3696  63.  15,120
65.  1
2  67.  2
5  69.  15
28  71.  1
17  73.  a.  1
9  b.  4
9  c.  5
9
Practice Test A
1.  a1 = 3, a2 = -9, a3 = -21, a4 = -33, a5 = -45; arithmetic 
sequence  2.  a1 = -6, a2 = -12, a3 = -24, a4 = -48, a5 = -96; 
geometric sequence  3.  a1 = -2, a2 = -1, a3 = 2, a4 = 11, a5 = 38
4.  1
n  5.  a7 = 21  6.  a8 = - 13
128  7.  590  8.  93
128  9.  2
11  10.  1
11.  16x4 - 32x3 + 24x2 - 8x + 1  12.  8x  13.  1024  14.  72
15.  21  16.  60  17.  6,760,000  18.  5
12  19.  5
6  20.  7
51

This page intentionally left blank 

credits
Text Credits
Page 16 Table, Problem No: 154, Standard Car Features. Yahoo! Inc. 16 Problem No: 156, Population Projections. U.S. Census  
Bureau. 157 Table, Prevalence of Smoking Among Adults 18 Years and Older in United States. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,  
National Health Interview Survey. 163 Problem No.47, Population Table. U.S. Census Bureau. 163 Problem No.49–52, Population Statistics 
Table. U.S. Census Bureau. 163 Problem No.53, Murders in United States. Disaster Center. 163 Problem No.54, Spending on Prescrip-
tion Drugs. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 163 Problem No.55, Defense Spending. Usgovernmentspending.com 176 Problem 
No.90, Spending on Prescription Drugs. U.S. Census Bureau. 176 Problem No.92, Female Students in Colleges. United States Census Bureau.  
192 Problem No.103, Health Insurance Coverage. Michigan Department of Community Health. 192 Problem No.104, Oil Consumption. 
Central Intelligence Agency. 194 The Ups and Downs of Drug Levels. Adapted from The Ups and Downs of Drug Levels, by Bob Munk.  
237 Table, Problem No. 50, Federal Income Tax. Internal Revenue Service. 287 Table, Problem No. 105, Waste Disposal. Sioux Falls Health 
Department. 321 Problem No. 76. Source:www.aa.com. 321 Table, Problem No. 79, Deaths from FDA Approved Drugs. fda.com/drugs/ 
GuidancecomplianceRegulatoryInformation/Surveillance/AdverseDrugEffects/ucm070461.html. 331 Example 08, Crude Oil and Petroleum 
Consumption. Source: www.eia.gov. 333 Problem No. 55, Total Energy Consumption. Source:www.eia.gov. 333 Problem No. 56, Lottery  
Sales. Source: www.floridafiscalportal.state.fl.us. 333 Problem No. 57, Marine Corps. Source: www.census.gov. 333 Problem No. 58,  
Unemployment. www.multpl.com. 441 Table, Example 05, Solving a Population Growth Problem. Central Intelligence Agency. 449 Problem 
No: 98, Facebook Users. BenPoster. 453 Example 03, Intensity of an Earthquake. U.S. Geological Survey. 454 Table, Major Earthquakes 
(M >= 7.5) of the 20th & 21st Century. National Earthquake Information Center, U.S. Geological Survey. 498 Problem No: 82, Height of a 
Building. Wikipedia. 534 Table, Problem No: 73, Average Temperatures. Weatherbase. 534 Table, Problem No: 74, Average Temperatures.  
ShapeFit.COM. 738 Table, Problem No:93, McDonald's Breakfast. ShapeFit.COM. 740 CAT Scans. Reprinted with permission from  
Mathematics Teacher, May 1996. © 1996 by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 747 Table, CAT Scanner Ranges. Reprinted 
wiith permission from Mathematics Teacher, May 1996. © 1996 by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 747 Figure, Three 
Grid Cells, Three X-rays. Reprinted wiith permission from Mathematics Teacher, May 1996. © 1996 by the National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics. 750 Figure (a), Problem No:74, Four Grid Cells and Four X-rays. Reprinted wiith permission from Mathematics Teacher, May 
1996. © 1996 by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 750 Figure (b), Problem No:74, Four Grid Cells and Six X-rays. Reprinted  
with permission from Mathematics Teacher, May 1996. © 1996 by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 920 Problem No. 105.  
http://el.media.mit.edu/logo-foundation/pubs/papers_as_11223.html. 970 Table, Example 07, Using Data to Estimate Probabilities.  
www.areaconnect.com. 972 Problem No. 49, Gender and the Airforce. www.af.mil/news. 972 Problem No. 51, Gender and the Marines. 
DMDC-June 2005, TFDW-June 2005.
Photo Credits
Chapter P: p. 1, Mykhaylo Palinchak/Shutterstock  Chapter 1: p. 76, Caroline Letrange/Fotolia p. 88, Topdeq/Fotolia p. 88, Xalanx/
Fotolia p. 91, Michele Burgess/Corbis p. 91, Corbis/SuperStock p. 91, Portrait of Lisa Gherardini (The Mona Lisa; La Gioconda) (ca. 
1506), Leonardo da Vinci. Oil on poplar, 77 cm × 53 cm (30 in × 21 in). Acquired by François I, 1518 [Inv. 779]. Musée du Louvre/Andrew 
Howe/Getty Images p. 101, Jonelle Weaver/Photodisc/Getty Images p. 104, Library of Congress prints and Photographs Division [LC-
USZC4-4940] p. 115, Library of Congress prints and Photographs Division/Doris Ulmann [LC-USZC4-4940] p. 129, Enno Kleinert/Alamy 
p. 140, Fuse/Thinkstock p. 141, JupiterImages/Thinkstock p. 142, Margo Harrison/Fotolia p. 149, Lynn Clayton Photography/Getty Images 
p. 152, Rolf Bruderer/Blend Images/Getty Images  Chapter 2: p. 155, Bloomberg/Getty Images p. 156, Beth Anderson/Pearson Education,  
Inc. p. 157, Mark Yuill/Fotolia p. 165 Ruszkiewicz/Fotolia p. 178, Newscom p. 194, Steve Cukrov/Shutterstock p. 205, George Doyle/
Stockbyte/Getty Images p. 207, Moviestore Collection, Ltd./Alamy p. 214, Selecstock/Fotolia p. 226, Mj007/Shutterstock p. 226, David P. 
Stephens/Shutterstock p. 239, Piotr Marcinski/Fotolia p. 257, US Coast Guard/AP Images p. 270, Chris Ridley/Alamy  Chapter 3: p. 291, 
Image Source/Getty Images p. 292, Rudi1976/Fotolia p. 304, Robert Glusic/Getty Images p. 306, Nickolae/Fotolia p. 323, David Carillet/
Shutterstock p. 331, Bomboman/Fotolia p. 335, Alamy p. 347, Mary Evans Picture Library/Alamy p. 355, Eldon Doty/Getty Images p. 374, 
J. L. Charmet/Science Source/Photo Researchers, Inc.  Chapter 4: p. 391, Buckwheat/Fotolia p. 392, Dmitrijs Gerciks/Fotolia p. 399, Keith 
Brofsky/Thinkstock p. 402, Georgios Kollidas/Fotolia p. 405, Inna Felker/Fotolia p. 410, Volodymyr Goinyk/Shutterstock p. 417, Pearson 
Education, Inc. p. 420, Gsmith/Fotolia p. 425, Andrew Holt/Alamy p. 433, Jules le Baron/Courtesy AIP Emilio Segre Visual Archives p. 438, 
Fotolia p. 445, Pearson Education, Inc. p. 450, Brian Lasenby/Shutterstock p. 451, SPL/Science Source/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 452, AP 
Images p. 456, Drx/Fotolia p. 459, NASA  Chapter 5: p. 470, Klaus Lang/All Canada Photos/Corbis p. 471, Pearson Education, Inc. p. 485,  
Robert Hardholt/Shutterstock p. 500, Paul Rapson/Alamy p. 512, Ekaterina V. Borisova/Shutterstock p. 514, HP Photo/Fotolia p. 536,  
Everett Collection p. 547, Anton Gvozdikov/Shutterstock  Chapter 6: p. 567, Kerenby/Fotolia p. 568, North Wind Picture Archives p. 582, 
Corbis p. 595, David De Lossy/Photodisc/Getty Images p. 614, Lucidio Studio, Inc./Flickr/Getty Images p. 618, Nmarques74/Fotolia p. 624, 
Oriontrail/Shutterstock p. 632, Christian Wheatley/Shutterstock  Chapter 7: p. 639, NASA p. 640, Jagdish Agarwal/Dinodia/Corbis p. 652, 
FloridaStock/Shutterstock p. 654, MaxFX/Shutterstock p. 672, Kirk Geisler/Shutterstock p. 685, Design Pics/Newscom p. 696, Oliver Sved/
Shutterstock p. 711, John Foxx/Stockbyte/Getty Images  Chapter 8: p. 727, Starush/Fotolia p. 728, Juulijs/Fotolia p. 740, Stockbyte/Getty 
Images p. 752, Mary Evans Picture Library/Alamy p. 763, xPACIFICA/Alamy p. 782, Pearson Education, Inc. p. 786, 20th Century Fox 
Film Corp/Everett Collection  Chapter 9: p. 797, Yaacov Dagan/Alamy p. 798, AP Images p. 814, 20th Century Fox/Everett Collection  
p. 815, AKG Images/Newscom p. 827, Nomad Soul/Shutterstock p. 828, Science Source/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 842, Pearson Education, 
Inc. p. 847, Science Source/Photo Researchers, Inc.  Chapter 10: p. 860, Peter Barritt/Robert Harding World Imagery/Alamy p. 861, Xtuv 
Photography/Shutterstock p. 863, NASA p. 863, AP Images p. 872, Jess Alford/Getty Images p. 875, Kevin Beebe Custom Medical Stock 
Photo/Newscom p. 882, Interfoto/Alamy p. 884, NASA p. 884, Photo by Jill Britton/Table by Dan Bergerud/Camosun College, Victoria 
C-1

C-2	
Credits
BC/Courtesy of author p. 887, Pearson Education, Inc. p. 905, Photolink/Getty Images  Chapter 11: p. 909, Andrew Zarivny/Shutterstock 
p. 910, Georgette Douwma/Getty Images p. 912, Pearson Education, Inc. p. 921, Chris Butler/Science Source/Photo Researchers, Inc.  
p. 924, Pearson Education, Inc. p. 929, ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy p. 941, Stockbyte/Getty Images p. 942, Pearson Education, Inc. p. 945, 
Beth Anderson/Pearson Education, Inc. p. 946, Georgios Kollidas/Shutterstock p. 946, Dave King/Dorling Kindersley, Ltd. p. 953, John Paul 
Endress/Pearson Education, Inc. p. 964, David Gould/Getty Images p. 968, Beth Anderson/Pearson Education, Inc.  Front matter: p. xxi, 
Sturti/E+/Getty Images.  FEP: p. 2, Andrew Rich/E+/Getty Images p. 3, Shutterstock p. 4, Mike Flippo/Shutterstock.

Index
A
AAS triangles, 640, 642–644
area of, 665–666
Absolute value function, 230
Absolute values
of complex numbers, 712, 713
determining, 8
distance on number line and, 9
equations involving, 142–144
inequalities involving, 144–147
properties of, 9
of real numbers, 8
Acceleration, 374, 379
Acidity, 450–452
Action-at-a-distance forces, 672
Acute angles, 472
Adams, Evelyn Marie, 964
Addition
of complex numbers, 106–107
of fractions, 12
of functions, 257–259
of matrices, 815–818
of polynomials, 30
of rational expressions, 50–53
of vectors, 673–674
Addition method, 733–734
Additive identity, 10
Additive Rule, 967–968
Air navigation, 680–681
Algebra, word origin, 728. See also specific 
topics
Algebraic expressions
for converting cricket chirps to degrees 
­Celsius, 13–14
defined, 13
evaluating, 13
trigonometric expressions and, 556–557
Algebraic numbers/functions,  
transcendental vs., 403
Algebraic vectors, 675–676
Algorithms
defined, 324
division, 323–326
word origin, 728
Al-Khwarizmi, Muhammad ibn Musa, 728
All Students Take Calculus, 504
Alternating current, 599–600, 711,  
715–716
Altitude of triangle, 641
Ambiguous case, 644, 664–665
American Museum of Natural History, 226
Amperes, 595
Amplitude
finding and changing, 519–523
in simple harmonic motion, 530
Analytic trigonometry
double-angle and half-angle formulas, 
595–603
product-to-sum and sum-to-product formulas, 
606–611
sum and difference formulas, 582–592
trigonometric equations, 614–621
trigonometric identities and equations, 
568–578
Angles
arc length formula, 478
area of sectors, 479
definitions, 471–472
degree-radian conversions, 475–477
of depression, 492
of elevation, 492
finding complements and supplements, 477
included, 640
interior, 667
linear and angular speed, 479–481
measuring, 472–474
reference, 504–508
Angular speed, 479–481
Annuity problems, 934–935
Apollonius, 156, 861
Apparent magnitude, 459
Applied problems, 82–86
composite functions, 264–266
cosecants, 543–544
dot product, 693
ellipses, 881–882
exponential equations, 441–442
exponential functions
growth and decay, 404–405
interest, 398–403
finance, 83–84
geometric sequences, 934–935
geometry, 82–83
hyperbolas, 897
inverse functions, 278
linear programming, 786–787
logarithms, 432–434
matrix inverses, 834–835
matrix multiplication, 821–822
polynomials, 331
quadratic functions, 298–300
right triangles, 492–495
system of linear equations
in three variables, 747–748
in two variables, 734–736
systems of nonlinear equations, 766–767
trigonometric equations, 619, 626–627
uniform motion, 84–86
variation, 375–380
vectors, 679–682
Arccosine function, 549
Archimedes, spiral of, 703
Arc length formula, 478
Arcsine function, 547–548
Arctangent function, 550
Area
finding, 663
of rectangles, 199
of sectors, 479
of triangles, 663–664, 665–667
Argument of complex number, 713
Arithmetic expressions, 9–10
evaluating, 10
order of operations for, 10
Arithmeticorum Libri Duo (Maurolico), 942
Arithmetic sequences, 921–925
Ars Magna (The Great Art) (Cardano), 347
ASA triangles
area of, 665–666
defined, 640
solving, 642–644
Astronomia Nova (Kepler), 306
Asymptotes
horizontal, 358, 362
of hyperbolas, 891–892
oblique, 366–367
vertical, 357–358, 360–361
Augmented matrices, 799–800
Average rate of change, 219–221
Axes
of cones, 861
coordinate, 156, 243–245
of ellipses, 875
of hyperbolas, 888
of parabolas, 864
of symmetry, 168, 293, 864
B
Ball thrown upward, 298–299
Base(s)
change-of-, 430–432
exponential equations with different, 440
of exponential functions, defined, 18, 393
of logarithmic functions, defined, 411
Bearings, 648–649
Bees, 910, 913
Bell, Alexander Graham, 455
Bendel, Hannskarl, 292
The Bermuda Triangle, 662
Bernoulli, Johann, 402
Bernoulli’s equation, 58
Binary operations, 2
Binomial coefficients, 947–950
Binomial expansions, 946–947, 950
Binomial powers, expanding, 948, 949
Binomials, defined, 29
Binomial sum, squaring, 33–34
Binomial Theorem, 948–949
Bioavailability, 194
Bionics, 696, 700–701
Biorhythm states, 514, 523
Blood pressure, 239
Blue moon, 624
Boeing 745 jumbo jet, 654, 656–657
Book of Calculations (Leonardo of Pisa), 912
Boundary, 771
Bounds on real zeros, 339–340
Boyle’s Law, 897
Brahe, Tycho, 306
Branches of hyperbolas, 887
Break even, 207–208
British Petroleum (BP) oil spill, 257
British thermal units (BTU), 331
Building functions, 205–206
Bungee-jumping, 76, 86
Bunghole, 306
Bungrod, 306
C
Calculators. See Graphing calculators
Calories, minimizing, 786–787
Cameras, rotation angle of, 557
Carbon dating, 433–434
Carcharodon megalodon, 226
Cardano, Gerolamo, 347
Carnarvon, Lord, 425
Carrying capacity, 438
Car sales, applying matrix multiplication  
to, 819–820
I-1

I-2	
Index
Carter, Howard, 425
Cartesian equations, conversion between  
polar and, 701–702
Cartesian plane. See Coordinate plane
CAT scans, 740, 747
Cayley, Arthur, 828
Center
of circles, 171
of ellipses, 875
of hyperbolas, 888
Central angles, radian measure of, 474
Cents (musical), 457–459
Change-of-base formula, 430–432
Chapman, Helen, 178
Chessboard, grains of wheat on, 392
Chia Hsien, 947
Cholesterol-reducing drugs, 205–206
Circles
arc length formula, 478
area of sectors, 479
as conic section, 861–862
definitions, 171–172
graphing, 172
polar equations and, 707
unit, 172, 508–510
Circular functions. See Trigonometric identities
Classification of numbers, 2–3
Closed interval, 7
Closure property, real numbers, 10
Clouds, finding height of, 493
Coding matrices, 836
Coefficient matrices, 800
Coefficients
factoring polynomials with real, 351
leading, 29, 306
of the monomial, 28, 35
of the polynomial, 29
Cofactors, 843–844
Cofunction identities, 492, 584–585
Cogito ergo sum, 157
Column matrices, 799
Combinations, 957–959, 960–961
Combined variation, 378–380
Comets’ orbits, 881–882, 897
Commentarii Academia Petropolitanae, 195
Common difference, 921–922, 923
Common logarithms, 417. See also Logarithms
Common ratio, 929–930
Complementary angles
finding, 477
trigonometric functions for, 491–492
Complement of events, 969–970
Completing the square
solving quadratic equations by, 94–97
when converting circle equations, 173
Complex fractions, 53–54
Complex numbers
absolute value of, 712
adding and subtracting, 106–107
conjugates, 109
definition, 105
dividing, 109–111
equality of, 106
geometric representation of, 711–712
multiplying, 107–108
in polar form
powers, 716–717
products and quotients, 714–716
roots, 717–719
writing, 712–714
Complex plane, defined, 711
Complex polynomials, 348
Complex zero, 348
Components of vectors, 675, 692
Composite functions
applications of, 264–266
domain of, 262–263
main discussion, 260–261
trigonometric, 554–558
Compound inequalities, 133–136
Compound interest, 399–401
Compressing functions, 245–248
Computer graphics, 814, 822–823
Computerized axial tomography  
imaging, 740, 747
Conditional equations, 77, 80
Conditional inequality, 130
Conditional linear equation in one  
variable, 78, 79
Cones and conic sections, 861–862
Congruent triangles, 640
Conjugate axis of hyperbolas, 888
Conjugate Pairs Theorem, 349–352
Conjugates
of complex numbers, 109
radical expressions, 64
verifying identities using, 576–578
Consistent systems, 730, 743
Constant function, 214–215, 226
Constant of variation/proportionality, 375
Constants, 2
Constant term, 29, 306
Constraints, 783
Contact forces, 672
Continuous compound interest, 402–403
Continuous curves, 307
Conway, John, 182
Coordinate, real number, 5
Coordinate axes, 156, 243–245
Coordinate line. See Real number line
Coordinate plane. See also Graphs and graphing
conversions between polar and rectangular 
forms, 698–701
defined, 156
distance formula in, 159–160
vectors in, 675–676
Cormack, Allan, 740
Corner points, 775
Correspondence diagrams, 195
Cosecant function. See also Trigonometric 
­functions
application, 543–544
graphing and properties of, 540–544
inverse, 551
Cosine function. See also Law of Cosines; 
­Trigonometric functions
amplitude and period of, 519–523
biorhythm states, 523
graphing, 516–519
inverse, 549
phase shifts, 524–527
properties of, 514–516
simple harmonic motion, 529–532
sum and difference formulas for, 582–584
Cotangent function. See also Trigonometric 
functions
graphing and properties of, 540–544
inverse, 551
Coterminal angles, 472
Counter examples, 572
Counting principles
combinations, 957–959
deciding which method to use, 960–961
fundamental, 953–955
permutations, 955–957
distinguishable, 959–960
Cramer, Gabriel, 847
Cramer’s Rule, 846–849
Crickets, 2, 13–14
Cryptography, 827, 836–837
CT scans, 740, 747
Cube root function, 228–229
Cube roots, 61
Cubes, difference and sum of, factoring, 42–43
Cubic polynomials, 307
Cubing function, 218
Current (electric), 595, 752
Cycle of sine/cosine graphs, 515–516
Cylinders, 316, 378–379
D
Dantzig, George, 782
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 91
Daylight hours, 528–529
Decay, exponential, 404–405
Decay factor, 396
Decibels, 455–457
Decoding matrices, 837
Decomposition
of functions, 264
of vectors, 692
Decreasing function, 214–215
Degenerate conic sections, 862
Degrees. See also Angles
measuring angles using, 472–474
of polynomials, 28–29, 35
radians and, 475–477
real zeros, turning points, and, 313–315
DeMoivre’s Theorem, 716–719
Denominator, 11, 47
Dependent systems
defined, 730, 743
using Gaussian elimination for, 744–745
using substitution method for, 732–733
Dependent variables, defined, 165, 194
Depressed equations, 330
De Propria Vita (Cardano), 347
De Rossi, 452
Descartes, René
background information on, 157
coordinate plane discovery by, 156
Rule of Signs, 338–339
Descending order, 29
Determinants
Cramer’s Rule, 846–849
history, 842
of n × n matrices, 845–846
of 2 × 2 matrices, 842–843
The Devil’s Triangle, 662
Diagonals
number of, 668
of polygon, 667
Difference quotients, 220–221

	
Index        I-3
Digit count and logarithms, 429–430
Direct current, 711
Direction of vectors, 672, 678–679
Direction/sense of inequality, 131
Directrix, of parabolas, 864
Direct variation, 375–377
Discriminant, 111–112
Disney World, 654
Distance formula, 159–160
Distinguishable permutations, 959–960
Division
of complex numbers, 109–111
of fractions, 12
of functions, 257–259
of polynomials, 323–326
of rational expressions, 49–50
of real numbers, 11–12
DJIA (Dow Jones Industrial Average), 335
Domain
agreement on, 199
of combined functions, 259–260
of composite functions, 262–263
of exponential functions, 393
of functions in general, 195, 199–200
of logarithmic functions, 413–414
of one-to-one functions, 277–278
of rational functions, 356–357
of sine and cosine functions, 514–515
of tangent function, 537
of variable in equation, 76–77
of variable in inequality, 130
Dot product
angle between two vectors and, 686–688
decomposition of vectors, 692
defined, 685
orthogonal vectors, 689
projection of vectors, 690–691
work, 685, 693
Double-angle formulas, 595–603
Double root, 94
Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), 335
Drug’s bioavailability, 194
Dual-tone multi-frequency (DTMF), 606
E
Earthquake intensity, 452–455
Economics, functions in, 207–208
Economics, Leontief Input-Output Model,  
798, 808, 835
Electrical circuits, direct variation in,  
375–376
Electric blanket, 595, 600
Elementary row operations, 801–802
Elements in matrices, defined, 799
Elements of sets, defined, 3
Elimination method, 733–734, 765–766
Ellipses. See also Cones and conic sections
applications, 881–882
defined, 861–862, 875
equation of, 876–878, 880
graphing, 878
translating, 879–881
Empty set, 4
End behavior of polynomial functions, 308–310
Endpoint, defined, 471
Energy units, 331
Entries in matrices, defined, 799
Equality
of complex numbers, 106
of numbers, 3
Equally likely outcomes, defined, 965
Equal ordered pairs, defined, 156
Equal sign (=), 3
Equations
of circles, 171–172
defined, 76
of ellipses, 876–878, 880
exponential, 439–441
functions defined by, 197–199
graph of, 165–167 (See also Graphs and 
graphing)
of hyperbolas, 888, 890–891
involving absolute value, 142–144
linear, 78–80
logarithmic, 442–445
in one variable, 76–78
of parabolas, 864–868
quadratic in form, 122–125
radicals in, 119–121
with rational exponents, 121–122
Equilateral triangle, 490
Equilibrium, 679, 681–682
Equilibrium point, 734–735
Equivalent equations, 78
Equivalent inequalities, 130
Equivalent vectors, 673
Euler, Leonhard, 195, 402, 403
Euler number, 402
Even degree, power functions of, 308
Even functions, 217–218
Even-odd identities, 569
Even-odd properties
of cosecant, secant, and cotangent  
functions, 540–541
of sine and cosine functions, 515
of tangent function, 537
Events, defined, 965
Everest, George, 640
Everest Mount, 640
Experimental probabilities, 970–971
Experiments, defined, 964
Exponential equations, 439–441
Exponential expressions, simplifying,  
22–23
Exponential functions
continuous compound interest,  
402–403
converting from/to logarithmic form,  
411–412
defined, 393
evaluating, 393–394
finding, 397
graphing, 394–397
growth and decay, 404–405
natural, 403–404
properties of, 396, 415
rules of exponents, 394
simple and compound interest, 398–401
Exponential inequalities, 445–446
Exponents
evaluating expressions that use, 18
integer, 17–19
main facts about, 25
rational, 65–68
rules of, 19–22, 394
Expressions
algebraic (See Algebraic expressions)
exponential, simplifying (See Exponential 
expressions, simplifying)
radical (See Radical expressions)
Extraneous root, 117
Extraneous solutions
of rational equations, 117, 118–119
of trigonometric equations, 620–621
Extreme value, defined, 216
F
Factorials, 914–915
Factoring
formulas, 40
by grouping, 43–44
a monomial, 38–39
over the integers, 38
perfect-square trinomial, 41
polynomials, 38–46
solving equations by, 116–117
solving quadratic equations by, 92–94
trinomials of the form Ax2+ Bx + C, 44
trinomials of the form x2+ bx + c, 39–40
Factorization Theorem for Polynomials,  
348, 351
Factors, defined, 3
Factors of polynomials, defined, 323
Factor Theorem, 330
Feasible solutions set, defined, 783
Federal taxes and revenues, 355, 367–368
Femur, inferring height from, 185
F-15 fighter jet, 680–681
F-16 fighter jet, 654, 656–657
Fiber-optics cables, cost of, 206
Fibonacci sequence, 912
Filene’s Basement store, 547
Finance, 83–84
Finite geometric sequences, 933
Fiore, Antonio Maria, 347
First component
of ordered pairs, 156
of vectors, 675
First-degree equation, 78
Fixed cost, 207
Foci
of ellipses, 875
of hyperbolas, 890
of parabolas, 864
FOIL method, 32–33
Force, gravitation and, 374, 379
Forces, 672
Formulas, 80–81. See also Area; Volume
apparent magnitude, 459
arc length, 478
ball thrown upward, 298–299
Celsius (C) to degrees Fahrenheit (F) 
­conversion, 80–81
change-of-base, 431
compound interest, 400
continuous compound interest, 403
degree-radian conversion, 475
degrees, minutes, and seconds, 473
 distance, 85, 159–160
double-angle, 596
force, 374, 379
geometry, 662–663

I-4	
Index
Formulas (continued)
growth and decay, 404
half-angle, 601
half-life, 432
Heron’s, 666–667
Law of Cooling, 420
Law of Cosines, 654
Law of Sines, 642
linear and angular speed, 480
midpoint, 161
pH scale, 450
pitch, change in, 457
population growth, 438
power-reducing, 598
product-to-sum, 606
radian measure of central angles, 474
recursive, 912–913
reduction, 588
Richter, 452
simple interest, 83, 398
sound, loudness of, 455
speed, 374
sum and difference
for cosine, 582
for sine, 586
for tangent, 590
sum-to-product, 608
water pressure, 270, 278
Fractions, 11
adding, 12
complex, 53–54
dividing, 12
multiplying, 12
properties of, 12
subtracting, 12
Free-falling objects, 921, 925
Frequency
pitch and, 457–459
pure tone and, 582
in simple harmonic motion, 530
Full moon, 624
Functions
average rate of change, 219–221
basic, graphing, 233–234
building, 205–206
combining, 257–260
constant, 214–215
cube root, 228–229
decomposing, 264
decreasing, 214–215
defined, 195
domain of, 199–200
in economics, 207–208
graphs of, 201–203
increasing, 214–215
information from graph, 203–204
linear, 226–228
notation, 195–196
power, 308
price–supply, 207
properties of, 214–225
range of, 200–201
relative maximum value of, 215–217
relative minimum value of, 215–217
representations of, 196–199
square root, 228
transformations, 239–256
Fundamental Counting Principle, 953–955, 
960–961
Fundamental rectangle of hyperbolas, 892
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, 348
Future values, 400
G
Gateway Arch, 292
Gauss, Karl Friedrich, 348, 924
Gaussian elimination
with matrices, 803–806
for systems with three variables, 742–743
Gauss-Jordan elimination, 806–809
GCF (Greatest common monomial factor), 38, 39
General form
of equation of circle, 173–174
of equation of line, 183–185
General term of sequences, 910–912
Geometric interpretation, 746
Geometric sequences
annuity problems, 934–935
overview, 929–932
sum of finite, 933
sum of infinite, 935–936
Geometric vectors, 672–673
Geometry, 82–83
Geometry formulas, 662–663
Global positioning system (GPS), 887
Global warming, 323
Golden ratio, 91, 99–100
Golden rectangle, 91, 99–100
GPS (Global positioning system), 887
Grains of wheat on chessboard, 392
Graphical method, 729–731
Graphing calculators
absolute values, 9
angle measurement, 474, 476
binomial coefficients, 948
circles, 173
combinations, 958
complex numbers, 105
addition of, 107
conjugates, 109
division, 110
powers, 717
reciprocals, 110
roots, 718
subtraction of, 107
conversion between polar and rectangular 
coordinates, 699, 700
cosines, 584
ellipses, 878
exponential functions
compound interest, 402
Euler number, 403
evaluating, 393
exponents, integer, 18, 19
factorials, 914
greatest integer function, 233
horizontal lines, 183
inverse functions, 277
inverse trigonometric functions, 551, 553–554
linear regression, 188
lines in slope-intercept form, 184
logarithmic function, 431
logarithms, 417, 418
matrices
addition, 816
creating, 800
determinants, 845
inverses, 829
multiplication, 821
reduced row-echelon form, 806
row operations, 802
subtraction, 817
opposite of a, 11
parabolas, 866, 867
partial fractions, 756
permutations, 957
piecewise function, 231
polar coordinates, 704
polynomial functions, 309
rational functions
connected vs. dot, 361
with hole, 360–361
revenue curve, 368
rational zeros, 337
scientific notation, 24
sequences, 911
square roots, 59
summation, 915
sum-to-product formula, 610
for symmetry, 169
synthetic division, 326
system of linear equations in two  
variables, 730
trigonometric equations, 619, 620, 625, 626
trigonometric functions
cosine, 522, 526
evaluating angles, 491
tangent, 538
trigonometric identities, 573, 574
turning points on, 315
vertical shifts, 240
zeros of function, 311
Graphs and graphing
basic functions, 234
circles, 172
compound inequalities, 133–135
cosecant, secant, and cotangent  
functions, 540–544
cosine function, 516–519 (See also Cosine 
function; Sine function)
of cube root function, 228–229
cubing function, 218
ellipses, 878
equations in two variables, 166
exponential functions, 394–397
finding intercepts of, 167
function information from, 203–204
functions defined by, 197
hyperbolas, 892–894, 896–897
intervals, 7
inverse functions, 275
linear inequalities in one variable, 131–132
linear inequalities in two variables, 770–773
logarithmic functions, 414–416
nonlinear inequalities in two variables, 776
ordered pairs, 157
parabolas, 865–867, 869
piecewise functions, 230–232
by plotting points, 166
points, 157

	
Index        I-5
polar equations, 703–704
polynomial functions, 307, 315–317, 342–343
power functions, 308
quadratic functions, 293–298
rational functions, 359, 363–368
real numbers, 5
scales on, 158
sinusoidal, 516–519 (See also Cosine function; 
Sine function)
of square root function, 228
squaring function, 217–218
step functions, 233
symmetry and, 168–171
systems of linear inequalities in two variables, 
774–776
systems of nonlinear inequalities in two 
­variables, 777–778
tangent, 538–540
using reduction formula, 589
vertical and horizontal shifts, 240–242
zeros of function, 312
Gravity, 374, 379
Greatest common monomial factor (GCF), 38, 39
Greatest integer function, 233
Great Pyramid of Giza, 91
Great Trigonometric Survey (GTS), 640
Greenhouse effect, 323
Grid cells, 740, 747
Gross production matrix, 834
Grouping symbols, 9
Growth, exponential, 404–405
Growth factor, 396
H
Hales, Stephen, 239
Half-angle formulas, 600–603
Half circles, 173–174
Half-life, 432–433
Half moon, 624
Half plane, defined, 771
Halley’s comet, 881–882
Harmonic motion, simple, 529–532
Hawass, Zahi, 425
Height, inferring from femur, 185
Heron’s formula, 666–667
Hertz, 582
Hipparchus, 459, 568
Honeybees, 910, 913
Horizontal asymptotes, 358, 362
Horizontal compressing/stretching, 246–248
Horizontal ellipses, 877, 879
Horizontal lines, 182–183
Horizontal-line test, 271–272
Horizontal shifts
of functions in general, 239–242
of sinusoidal graphs, 524–527
Horsepower, 770
Hounsfield, Godfrey, 740
Hounsfield numbers, 747
Hubble, Edwin, 863
Hubble Space Telescope, 863, 870
Hyperbolas. See also Cones and conic sections
applications, 897
asymptotes of, 891–892
defined, 861–862, 887–891
determining orientation of, 889
equation of, 888, 890–891
graphing, 892–894, 896–897
reflecting property of, 897
translating, 894–897
Hypotenuse, defined, 485
I
Identities
defined, 130
equations that are, 77, 80
nonnegative, 130
Identity function, 226
Identity matrix, defined, 822
Imaginary axis, defined, 711
Imaginary part of complex numbers, 105–106
Imaginary unit, 104
Improper expressions, 324, 753
Included angles, 640
Included sides, 640
Inconsistent equations, 77, 79, 80
Inconsistent inequality, 130
Inconsistent systems
defined, 730, 743
using Gaussian elimination for, 805–806
using substitution method for, 732
Increasing function, 214–215
Independent systems, 730, 743
Independent variables, defined, 165, 194
Indexes, radicals with different, 63
Index of summation, 915
Induction, 940–943
Inequalities, 5–6
absolute values in, 144–147
compound, 133–136
conditional, 130
defined, 130
equivalent, 130
exponential, 445–446
identifying, 5
inconsistent, 130
linear, 131–133
logarithmic, 445–446
real numbers, 5
solving, 130
test-point method, 136–137
Inequality symbols, defined, 5
Infinite geometric sequences, 935–936
Infinite intervals, 7
Infinite sequences, defined, 910
Initial points, of vectors, 672
Initial side, defined, 471
Integer exponents, 17–19
Integers, defined, 3
Intercepts, finding, 167
Interest
compound, 399–401
continuous compound, 402–403
defined, 83
simple, 83–84, 398
Interest rate, defined, 83, 398
Interindustry technology input-output  
matrix, 834
Interior angles
defined, 667
sum of, 668
Intermediate Value Theorem, 312, 336
Intersections
of intervals, 7–8
of sets, 6
of unions, 6
Intervals, 6–8
Inverse functions. See also One-to-one functions
applications, 278
defined, 272
finding, 274–277, 278
verifying, 274
Inverse trigonometric functions
application, 557
arccosine, 549
arcsine, 547–548
arctangent, 550
composition of, 554–558
of cosecant, secant, and cotangent functions, 551
evaluating, 551–554
solving equations, 629–631
Inverse variation, 377–378
Invertible matrices, 829
Investments, doubling, 419. See also Interest
IRA, 935
Irrational numbers, 4
as exponents, 393–394
Irreducible polynomials, 41
Isosceles right triangle, 490
J
Jets
distance between, 654, 656–657
navigation using vectors, 680–681
Joint and combined variation, 378–380
Joules, 454
K
Kepler, Johannes, 306
background information on, 306
elliptical orbits, 881
volume of wine barrels, 306, 316–317
Key points in sine/cosine graphs, 518–519
Kidney stones, 875, 882
Kilimanjaro, 485, 493–494
Kilowatt-hours, 595
King Tut, 425, 433–434
Kramp, Christian, 914
Krypton-85, 432
L
Lambton, William, 640
Large numbers, estimating, 430
Latitudes, 471, 478
Latus rectum of parabolas, 867
LAUs. See Linear attenuation units
Law, Boyle’s, 897
Law of Cooling, 420
Law of Cosines
deriving, 655
Heron’s formula, 666–667
solving SAS triangles, 655–657
solving SSS triangles, 657–658
Law of Sines
deriving, 641–642
solving AAS and ASA triangles, 642–644
solving SSA triangles, 644–648

I-6	
Index
Law of Universal Gravitation, 374, 379
LCD (least common denominator), 51–53
Leading coefficient, defined, 29, 306
Leading entries, defined, 803
Leading term, defined, 29, 306
Leading-term test, 310
Least common denominator (LCD), 51–53
Least-squares line, 187
Legs of triangle, defined, 485
Leibniz, Gottfried, 842
Lemniscates, 707
Leonardo of Pisa, 912
Leontief, Wassily, 798
Leontief Input-Output Model, 798, 807, 834
Libby, Willard Frank, 433
Liber abaci (Leonardo of Pisa), 912
Light years, 378
Like radicals, 62–63
Like terms, 29
Limaçons, 705–708
Linear attenuation units (LAUs), 747
Linear cost function, 207
Linear equations, 78–80
Linear function, 226–228
Linear growth, 398
Linear inequalities in one variable, 131–133
Linear inequalities in two variables, 770–773
Linear price-demand function, 207
Linear programming, 782–787
Linear regression, 187
Linear speed, 479–481
Linear systems of equations. See Systems of  
linear equations
Line of symmetry, defined, 168
Lines and linear equations
defined, 178
general form of, 183–185
horizontal and vertical, 182–183
least-squares, 187
parallel and perpendicular, 185–186
point-slope form of, 180–181
regression, 187
slope-intercept form of, 181–182
slopes of, 178–180
Line segments, finding midpoint of, 168
Lithotripsy, 875, 882
Local/relative maxima/minima of functions, 314
Logarithmic equations, solving, 442–445
Logarithmic functions. See also Logarithms
common, 417
converting from/to exponential form, 411–412
defined, 410–411
domain of, 413–414
evaluating, 412–413
graphing, 414–416
modeling with, 431–432
natural, 418
properties of, 415
transformations, 416
Logarithmic inequalities, 445–446
Logarithmic scales
defined, 450
pH, 450–452
Richter, 452–455
sound intensity and pitch, 455–459
star brightness, 459
Logarithms. See also Logarithmic functions; 
Logarithmic scales
applications, 432–434
common, 417
estimating large numbers, 430
exponential equations, solving using, 439–440
logistic growth model, 438, 445
natural, 418
number of digits and, 429–430
one-to-one property of, 444
rules of, 425–429, 443–444
Logistic growth model, 438, 445
London Eye, 500
Long division of polynomials, 324–326
Longitudes, 471, 478
Longley, Wild Bill, 178
Long-range navigation (LORAN),  
887, 897–898
Loomis, Alfred Lee, 887
LORAN (Long-range navigation),  
887, 897–898
Lottery, 964, 967
Loudness of sound, 455–457
Lower bound on zeros, 339–340
Lower limit of summation, 915
Lowest terms, 48, 357
M
Mach, Ernst, 536
Mach numbers, 536, 543–544
Magnitude
of complex numbers, 712, 713
of vectors, 673, 678–679
Main diagonal of matrices, 799
Maisey, John, 226
Major axis of ellipses, 875
Marginal cost, 207
Mass, 374, 379
Mastlin, Michael, 306
Mathematical induction, 940–943
Mathematical modeling, defined, 82
Matrices. See also Determinants
addition and subtraction, 815–818
Cramer’s Rule, 846–849
defined, 798–799
equality of, 814–815
Gaussian elimination, 803–806
Gauss-Jordan elimination, 806–809
minors and cofactors, 843–844
multiplication, 818–822
scalar multiplication, 815–818
solving linear systems using, 799–803
Matrix equations, solving, 817–818
Matrix inverses
applications, 834–835
defined, 827
finding, 829–831
solving linear systems using, 833–834
verifying, 828
of 2 × 2 matrices, 832
Maurolico, Francesco, 942
Maximum value, defined, 782
Maximum value of quadratic functions, 293
McDonald’s coffee, 420
“Megatooth” shark, 226, 227–228
Members of sets, defined, 3
Mercalli, Giuseppe, 452
Meridians, 471, 478
Midpoint formula, 161
Millennium Wheel, 500, 507–508
Minimum value, defined, 782
Minimum value of quadratic functions, 293
Minor axis of ellipses, 875
Minors, 843–844
Minutes (angular), 473
Modulus of complex numbers, 712, 713
Monomials, defined, 28, 29, 35
Monter, 182
Moon, phases of, 624, 626–627
Mountains, estimating height of, 643
Mount Kilimanjaro, 485, 493–494
Multiplication
of complex numbers, 107–108
of fractions, 12
of functions, 257–259
of matrices, 818–822
of polynomials, 31–32, 35
of rational expressions, 49–50
Multiplicative identity, 10
Multiplicative inverses, 827. See also Matrix 
inverses
Multiplicity of zeros, 313–314
Multiplier effect, 929, 936
Munk, Bob, 194
Musical pitch, 457–459
Mutually exclusive events, 968–969
N
Natural exponential functions, 403–404
Natural logarithms, 418. See also Logarithms
Natural numbers, defined, 3
Navigation
using bearings, 649
using vectors, 680–681
Negative angles, defined, 472
Negative exponents, 18
evaluating expressions using, 18–19
Negative numbers, 5
square root of, 105
New moon, 624
Newton, Sir Isaac
background information on, 374
elliptical orbits, 881
Law of Cooling, 420
Law of Universal Gravitation, 374, 379
Newtons (N), 672
Nominal rate, defined, 400
Nonlinear inequalities in two variables,  
graphing, 776
Nonlinear systems of equations, 763–766
Nonlinear systems of inequalities, 777–778
Nonnegative identity, 130
Nonrigid transformations, defined, 245
Nonsingular matrices, 829
Nonsquare systems, 745–746
Nonterminating repeating decimals, 3
Nonzero rows, defined, 803
Norm, of vectors, 673
Notations
factorial, 914–915
functional, 195–196
summation, 915–916
Nova Stereometria Doliorum Vinariorum 
(­Kepler), 306
nth partial sum, 916
nth roots, 717–719

	
Index        I-7
nth term
of arithmetic sequences, 922–923
of geometric sequences, 931–932
of sequences in general, 910
Null set, 6
Number line
absolute values and, 8
defined, 156
distance formula on, 9
Number of diagonals, defined, 668
Number of triangles, defined, 668
Numerator, 11, 47
Nutrition, 786–787
O
Objective function, defined, 783
Oblique asymptotes, 366–367
Oblique triangles, solving, 640–641. See also 
Law of Sines
Obtuse angles, defined, 472
Octaves, 457
Odd degree, power functions of, 308
Odd-degree polynomials with real zeros, 350
Odd functions, 218, 219
Oecanthus fultoni, 2
Ohm, Georg Simon, 752
Ohm’s Law, 752
Oil spill, 257, 264–265
One-to-one functions. See also Inverse functions
defined, 270–271
finding domain and range of, 277
horizontal-line test, 271–272
One-to-one property of logarithms, 444
Open interval, 6
Opposite of a, 11
Opposite vectors, defined, 673
Optimal solution, defined, 783
Optimization, 782–787
Ordered, real numbers, 5
Ordered pairs
defined, 156
functions defined by, 196
graphing, 157
Order of matrices, 799
Origin, 5, 156
Orthogonal vectors, 689
Oxford Dangerous Sports Club, 76
P
Parabolas. See also Cones and conic sections; 
Quadratic functions
defined, 861–862
equation of, 864–868
geometric definition, 864
graphing, 865–867, 869
by plotting points, 166
parts of, 293
reflecting property of, 869–870
translating, 868–869
Parallel circuits, 752
Parallel lines, 185–186
Partial-fraction decomposition
defined, 753
when denominator has
distinct irreducible quadratic factors, 757–758
only distinct linear factors, 754–756
repeated irreducible quadratic factors, 758–761
repeated linear factors, 756–757
Pascal’s Triangle, 947–948
Peak, defined, 205
Perfect-square trinomial, 95
factoring, 41
Period
of cosecant, secant, and cotangent functions, 
540–541
of sine and cosine functions
defined, 515–516
finding and changing, 519–523
in simple harmonic motion, 530
of tangent function, 537
Periodic functions, 515–516
Permutations, 955–957, 960–961
distinguishable, 959–960
Perpendicular lines, 185–186
Petroleum consumption, 331
Pharmacokinetics, 194
Phase shifts, 524–527
Phases of moon, 624, 626–627
pH scale, 450–452
Pi, as exponent, 393–394
Piecewise functions, 229–230
Pitch, musical, 457–459
Pitiscus, 485
PK (pharmacokinetics), 194
Planes, distance between, 654, 656–657
Planets’ orbits, 881–882
Points
conversions between polar and rectangular 
forms, 698–701
finding distance between two, 159
graphing, 157
by plotting, 166, 703
plotting using polar coordinates, 696–698
Point-slope form, 180–181
Poiseuille, Jean Louis Marie, 239
Polar axis, defined, 696
Polar coordinates
converting equations between polar and 
­rectangular forms, 701–702
converting points between polar and 
­rectangular forms, 698–701
definitions, 696
graphing equations, 703–704
plotting points using, 696–698
symmetry, 704
Pole, defined, 696
Polygons, 667–668
Polynomial factors, defined, 323
Polynomial functions. See also Polynomials
complex zeros of, 347–354
definitions, 306
end behavior of, 308–310
finding zeros for, 351–352
graphing, 315–317, 342–343
power functions, 308
properties of, 307
rational zeros theorem, 336–338
real zeros of, 313–314, 335–336
Polynomials. See also Polynomial functions
adding, 30
definitions, 28, 323
dividing, 323–326
factoring, 38–46
Factorization Theorem for, 348
irreducible, 41
multiplying, 31–32, 35
Remainder and Factor Theorems, 328–330
special products, 32–33
subtracting, 30–31
Population growth, 405, 438, 441–442, 445
Position vectors, defined, 675
Positive angles, defined, 472
Positive exponents, 18
Positive numbers, 5
Pounds (lb), 672
Power (in watts), 595
Power functions, 308
Power-of -a-power rule of exponents, 20–21
Power-of -a-product rule of exponents, 21–22
Power-of -quotient rule of exponents, 22
Power-reducing formulas, 598–599
Power rule for logarithms, 426–429
Powers
of complex numbers in polar form, 716–717
direct variation with, 376–377
inverse variation with, 378
Prime meridian, 471
Principal, defined, 83, 398
Principal nth root of a real number, 61
Principal square root, 58
Probabilities
of an event, 964–967
of complement of events, 969–970
experimental, 970–971
of mutually exclusive events, 968–969
using Additive Rule for finding, 967–968
Product rule for logarithms, 426–429, 443–444
Product rule of exponents, 19–20
Product-to-sum formulas, 606–607
Profit function R(x), 207
Projectile motion, 614
Proper expressions, 324, 753
Proving statements by induction, 940–943
Ptolemy, 459
Pure imaginary number, 105
Pure tones in music, 582, 589–590
Push-button dialing, 606
Pythagorean identities, 569
Pythagorean identity, 514
Pythagorean Theorem
distance formula and, 159–160
generalizing, 654 (See also Law of Cosines)
Q
Quadrantal angles, 472, 502–503
Quadrants, 156, 504
Quadratic equations, 91–103
completing the square, solving, 94–97
with complex solutions, 111–112
factoring, solving, 92–94
quadratic formula, 97–98
square root, solving, 94
Quadratic form, exponential equations in, 440–441
Quadratic formula, 97–98
Quadratic functions
applications, 298–300
characteristics from graph, 297
converting to standard form, 293–295
graphing
in any form, 295–298
in standard form, 293–295

I-8	
Index
Quadratic inequality, 136
Quadratic in form, 122–125
Quartic polynomials, 307
Quetelet, Lambert, 445
Quintic polynomials, 307
Quotient, 11
Quotient and reciprocal identities, 487–489
Quotient identities, 569
Quotient rule for logarithms, 426–429, 443–444
Quotient rule of exponents, 20
R
Radians, 474, 475–477
Radical expressions, 61
conjugates, 64
rationalizing, 63–64
Radicals
defined, 59
with different indexes, 63
equations involving, 119–121
Radical sign, 58, 61
Radicand, 59, 61
Radiocarbon dating, 433–434
Radius, 171
Range
defined, 196
of exponential functions, 396
finding from graph, 203–204
of function, 200–201
of logarithmic functions, 413
of one-to-one functions, 277
of sine and cosine functions, 514–515
of tangent function, 537
Ratio, 11
Rational approximation, irrational number, 4
Rational equations, 117–119
Rational exponents, 65–68
equations with, 121–122
Rational expressions
adding and subtracting, 50–53
complex, 53–54
defined, 47
multiplying and dividing, 49–50
reducing to lowest terms, 48–49
Rational functions
defined, 355, 356
finding vertical and horizontal asymptotes, 
360–361
graphing, 359, 363–368
with oblique asymptotes, 366–367
using translations to graph, 359
Rational inequality, 137–138
Rationalizing radical expressions, 63–64
Rationalizing the denominator, 63–64
Rationalizing the numerator, 63–64
Rational numbers, 3–4
Rational zeros theorem, 336–338
Rays, defined, 471
Real axis, defined, 711
Real line. See Real number line
Real number line, 5
finding distance between, 9
Real numbers
absolute values, 8
algebraic expressions and, 13–14
arithmetic expressions and, 9–10
closure property of, 10
defined, 4
distance between, 9
division of, 11–12
inequalities, 5
integer exponents and, 17–19
interval notation, 7
principal nth root, 61
properties of, 10–11
sets of, 4
subtraction of, 11–12
Real part of complex numbers, 105–106
Real zeros of polynomial functions, 313–314, 
335–336
finding, 340–343
Reciprocal and quotient identities, 487–489
Reciprocal identities, 569
Reciprocal of a, 11
Rectangles, finding area of, 199
Rectangular coordinates, converting between 
polar and, 698–701
Rectangular equations, converting between polar 
and, 701–702
Rectangular form, complex numbers in, 712
Recursive definitions/formulas,  
205, 912–913, 922
Reduced row-echelon form, defined, 803
Reduction formula, 588–590
Reference angles, 504–508
Reflecting property
of ellipses, 882
of hyperbolas, 897
of parabolas, 869–870
reflecting property of, 882
Reflections, 243–245
Regression line, 187
Regular polygon, defined, 667
Relations, defined, 196
Relative frequency principle, 970
Relative maxima/minima of functions, 314
Relative maximum value of functions, 215–217
Relative minimum value of functions, 215–217
Remainder Theorem, 328–330
Resistance (ohms), 752, 760–761
Resultant (force), 679, 680
Resultant vectors, defined, 673
Retail theft, 547
Revenue curves, 355, 367–368
Revenue function R(x), 207
Richter, Charles Francis, 452
Richter scale, 452–455
Right angles, defined, 472
Right circular cones, 861
Right triangles. See also Pythagorean Theorem
applications, 492–495
distance formula and, 159–160
evaluating trigonometric functions in, 487–489
expressing trigonometric functions using, 
485–486
Rigid transformations, defined, 239
Rise, defined, 178
Rivers, finding width of, 494
Robotic arm, 700–701
Root of multiplicity 2, 94
Roots. See also Radicals
of complex numbers, 717–719
of equations, 77
Rose curves, 707
Roster method, 6
Row-echelon form, defined, 803
Row equivalent matrices, defined, 801
Row matrices, defined, 799
Rule of Signs, Descartes’s, 338
Rules of exponents, 19–22, 394
Run, defined, 178
S
Saarinen, Eero, 292
Sample space, defined, 964
SAS triangles
area of, 663–665
defined, 640
solving, 655–657
Scalar multiples of vectors, defined, 674
Scalar multiplication of matrices, 815–818
Scalar projection of vectors, 690–691
Scalar quantities, defined, 672
Scalars, 672
Scales on graphs, 158
Scatter diagram, 158
Scatterplots, defined, 197
Scientific notation, 23–25
converting a decimal number to, 24
defined, 23
Secant function. See also Trigonometric  
functions
graphing and properties of, 540–544
inverse, 551
Secant line, average rate of change and, 219
Second component
of ordered pairs, 156
of vectors, 675
Seconds (angular), 473
Sectors, area of, 479
Security cameras, rotation angle of, 557
Seki Köwa, 842
Semicircles, 173–174
Semiperimeter, defined, 666
Semitones, 457
Sequences
arithmetic, 921–925
defined, 910
factorial notation, 914–915
geometric, 929–936
recursively defined, 912–913
summation notation, 915–916
writing and finding terms of, 911–912
Series, 916–917
Sets, 3, 6
of numbers, classifying, 3
objects in, 3
Sickdhar, Radhanath, 640
Sides, included, 640
Sign-chart method, 136–138
Signs
Descartes’ Rule of, 338–339
of trigonometric functions, 503–504, 540
variation of, 338
Similar triangles, 486
Simple harmonic motion, 529–532
Simple interest, 83–94, 398
Simultaneous equations, 728
Sine function. See also Law of Cosines; 
­Trigonometric functions
amplitude and period of, 519–523
applications, 528–529

	
Index        I-9
graphing, 516–519
inverse, 547–548
phase shifts, 524–527
properties of, 514–516
simple harmonic motion, 529–532
sum and difference formulas for, 586–588
Singular matrices, 829
Sinusoidal curves/graphs, 519. See also Cosine 
function; Sine function
Slope-intercept form, 181–182
Slopes
defined, 178–179
finding and interpreting, 179–180
main facts about, 180
use of m to represent, 182
Smokers, graphing data on, 157–158
Smooth curves, 307
Social Security numbers, 953, 955
Sodium-24, 433
SOHCAHTOA, 486
Solutions and solution sets
of equations, 77
of inequalities, 130
in two variables, 770
of systems of equations
in three variables, 741
in two variables, 728–729
of systems of inequalities, 774–776
Sørensen, Søren, 451
Sound intensity and pitch, 455–459
Space junk, 921, 925
Special products, 32–33
formulas, 34–35
Speed
formula for, 374
linear and angular, 479–481
Spiral of Archimedes, 703, 707
Square matrices, defined, 799
Square root function, 228
Square roots, 58–60
of negative number, 105
product and quotient properties of, 60
simplifying, 60–61
Squares, difference of, factoring, 41–42
Squaring function, 217–218
SSA triangles, solving, 644–648
SSS triangles
area of, 666–667
defined, 640
solving, 657–658
Standard form
for complex numbers, 105
for equation in one variable, 78
for equation of circle, 171–172, 174
for equation of ellipse, 876, 881
for equation of hyperbola, 888
for equation of parabola, 865
for polynomials, 29
for quadratic equations, 92
for quadratic functions, 293–295
Standard position, angles in
defined, 472
drawing, 473–474
finding trigonometric function values of, 
500–501
Standard unit vectors, defined, 677
Star brightness, 459
Statins, 205
Steinmetz, Charles, 711
Step functions, 233
Straight angles, defined, 472
Stretching functions, 245–248
Substitution method, 731–733, 764
Subtraction
of complex numbers, 106–107
of fractions, 12
of functions, 257–259
of matrices, 815–818
of polynomials, 30–31
of rational expressions, 50–53
of real numbers, 11–12
of vectors, 674
Sum and difference formulas
for cosine, 582–584
for sine, 586–588
for tangent, 590–592
Summation, 915–916
Sum of the interior angles, defined, 668
Sum-to-product formulas, 608–609
Sum-to-product identities, 628–629
Supplementary angles, finding, 477
Sylvester, James Joseph, 815
Symmetry
defined, 168
graphing using, 169–170
inverse functions and, 275
in polar coordinates, 704
testing for, 168
Synthetic division of polynomials, 324, 326–328
Systems of equations, defined, 728
Systems of linear equations. See also Matrices
solving using matrices, 799–803
solving using matrix inverses, 833–834
in three variables
applications, 747–748
dependent, 744–745
geometric interpretation, 746
inconsistent, 743–744
nonsquare, 745–746
verifying solutions to, 741–742
in two variables
application, 734–736
elimination method, 733–734
graphical method, 729–731
substitution method, 731–733
verifying solutions to, 728–729
Systems of linear inequalities in two variables
applications, 770–776
graphing, 774–776
Systems of nonlinear equations, 763
solving by
elimination method, 765–766
substitution method, 764
Systems of nonlinear inequalities in two 
­variables, 777–778
T
Tables, functions defined by, 197
Tangent function. See also Trigonometric 
­functions
application, 557
graphing, 538–540
inverse, 550
properties of, 536–537
sum and difference formulas for, 590–592
Tartaglia, Nicolo, 347
Tax rates and revenues,  
355, 367–368
Technology matrix, 834
Temperature, cricket chirps and, 2, 13–14
Terminal points
Terminal points, of vectors, 672
Terminal side, defined, 471
Terminating decimals, 3
Terms. See also Sequences
of algebraic expression, 13
binomial expansions, 946–947, 950
for polynomials, 29
product of the sum and difference of, 34
of sequences, 910–912
Test point, defined, 772
Test-point method, 136–137
Theft, retail, 547
Theorems
Binomial, 948–949
Conjugate Pairs Theorem, 349–352
DeMoivre’s, 716–719
Factor, 330
Factorization Theorem for Polynomials,  
348, 351
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, 348
Intermediate Value, 312, 336
Number of Zeros Theorem, 349
Remainder, 328–330
Theoretical probabilities, 970
Threshold of hearing, 455
Time dilation, defined, 115
Tone dialing, 606
Touch-Tone phones, 606, 610
Transcendental numbers/functions, 403
Transformations
of exponential functions, 404
of functions in general
multiple, 248–251
reflections, 243–245
stretching or compressing, 245–248
vertical and horizontal shifts, 239–242
of logarithmic functions, 416
of sinusoidal graphs
amplitude and period of, 519–523
phase shifts, 524–527
Transitive property, 5, 6
Translations
of ellipses, 879–881
graphing rational functions using, 359
of hyperbolas, 894–897
of parabolas, 868–869
Transverse axis of hyperbolas, 888
Tree diagrams, 954
Triangles. See also Pythagorean Theorem; 
specific types
AAS and ASA, solving, 642–644
Areas of, 663–664, 665–667
congruent, 640
number of, 668
oblique, solving, 640–641  
(See also Law of Sines)
SAS, solving, 655–657
similar, 486
SSA, solving, 644–648
SSS, solving, 657–658
Triangulation, 640
Trichotomy property, 5, 6

I-10	 Index
Trigonometric equations
on calculator, 619, 620, 625, 626
defined, 614
solving
equations containing inverse functions, 
629–631
linear, 617
by squaring both sides, 627–628
using identities, 619–620
using sum-to-product identities, 628–629
using zero-product property, 618–619
when containing multiple angles, 625–628
when containing multiple functions, 
619–620
when of form a T (x − c) = k, 615–618
when of quadratic type, 619
verifying identities, 572–578
Trigonometric expressions, simplifying, 571
Trigonometric functions. See also Analytic 
­trigonometry; specific functions  
(e.g., sine function)
of angles
coterminal, 504
defined, 500–501
finding values, 489–491, 501
quadrantal, 502–503
signs of, 503–504
using calculator, 491
using reference angles, 505–508
composition of, 554–558
evaluating, 570–571
of real numbers
defined, 508
reciprocal and quotient identities,  
 487–489
visualizing, 568
Trigonometric identities
basic/fundamental, 569
on calculator, 573, 574
using sum-to-product, 628–629
verifying
with half-angles, 602–603
with multiple angles, 609–610
overview and guidelines for, 572–578
using sum or difference formula, 588, 591
using sum-to-product formulas, 608–609
Trigonometric substitution, 578
Trigonometry, word origin, 485
Trinomials
defined, 29
perfect-square, factoring, 41
Trough, defined, 205
Turning points, 216, 314–315
Tutankhamun, King Nebkheperure,  
425, 433–434
U
Unbounded intervals, 7
Uniform motion, 84–86
Unions
of intersections, 6
of intervals, 7–8
of sets, 6
Unique solution, defined, 730
Unit circle, 172, 508–510.  
See also ­Trigonometric functions
Unit vectors, 676–677
Upper bound on zeros, 339–340
Upper limit of summation, 915
U.S.S. Enterprise, 536
V
Value of arithmetic expression, 9
Vandermonde, Alexandre-Théophile, 842
Variable cost, 207
Variables, defined, 2
Variation of sign, 338
Variation problems, 375–380
Vectors. See also Dot product
algebraic, 675–676
angle between two, 686–688
applications, 679–682
components of, 675, 692
decomposition of, 692
defined, 672
equivalent, 673
geometric, 672–673
in i, j form, 677–678
orthogonal, 689
projection of, 690–691
in terms of magnitude and direction,  
678–679
unit, 676–677
Velocity, defined, 374
Verhulst, Pierre François, 438, 445
Vertical asymptotes, 357–358, 360–361
Vertical compressing/stretching, 245–246
Vertical ellipses, 877, 879
Vertical lines, 182–183
Vertical-line test, 201
Vertical shifts
of functions in general, 239–242
of sinusoidal graphs, 527–529
Vertices
of angles, 471
of cones, 861
defined, 667
of ellipses, 875
of hyperbolas, 888, 890
of parabolas
defined, 293, 864
finding, 296
of solution set of system of inequalities, 775
Viewing rectangles, 158
Voltage, 595, 752
Volume, of cylinders, 316, 378–379
W
Water pressure, 270, 278
Watt, James, 770
Wattage ratings, 595, 600
Waugh, Andrew, 640
Wheat on chessboard, 392
Whole numbers, defined, 3
Wine barrels, volume of, 306, 316–317
Work, 685, 693
X
x-axis, defined, 156
x-coordinate, defined, 156–157
x-intercepts, defined, 167
xy-plane
defined, 156
midpoint formula in, 161
Y
y-axis, defined, 156
y-coordinate, defined, 156–157
y-intercepts, defined, 167
Z
Zero polynomial, 29
Zero-product property, 11
solving quadratic equations using, 92
solving trigonometric equations using, 
618–619
Zero(s)
of cosecant, secant, and cotangent  
functions, 540
of functions in general, 311–312
multiplicity of, 313–314
rational zeros theorem, 336–338
of sine and cosine functions, 515
of tangent function, 537
Zeros of polynomial functions
complex, 348
Conjugate Pairs Theorem, 349–352
degree and, 313–315
finding, 311–312, 351–352
finding bounds on real, 340
Zero vectors, defined, 673

Rational Expressions
(Assume all denominators not to be zero.)
Common Products and Factors
Distance Formula
The distance between 
and 
is
Midpoint Formula
The midpoint 
of the line segment with endpoints 
and 
is
Lines
Slope
Point-slope form
Slope-intercept form
Horizontal line
Vertical line
General form
Quadratic Formula
The solutions to the equation 
are
Standard Form of a Circle
center: 
radius: r
1h, k2
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r2
x = -b ; 2b2 - 4ac
2a
 .
ax2 + bx + c = 0, a Z 0,
ax + by + c = 0
x = k
y = k
y = mx + b
y - y1 = m1x - x12
m = rise
run = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
M1x, y2 = ax1 + x2
2
 ,  y1 + y2
2
 b.
Q1x2, y22
P1x1, y12
M1x, y2
d1P, Q2 = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122.
Q1x2, y22
P1x1, y12
A3
 - 3A2B + 3AB2 - B3 = 1A - B23
A3
 + 3A2B + 3AB2 + B3 = 1A + B23
A3
 + B3
 = 1A + B21A2 - AB + B22
A3
 - B3
 = 1A - B21A2 + AB + B22
A2
 - 2AB + B2
 = 1A - B22
A2
 + 2AB + B2
 = 1A + B22
A2
 - B2
 = 1A + B21A - B2
A
B ; C
D = A # D ; B # C
B # D
A
C ;  B
C = A ; B
C
  A
B  
C
D
= A
B ,  C
D = A
B #  D
C = A # D
B # C
A
B #  C
D = A # C
B # D
Algebra—Formulas and Definitions
Real-Number Properties
If 
then 
or 
Absolute Value
if 
and
if 
.
Assume that 
and is an algebraic expression:
is equivalent to 
is equivalent to 
is equivalent to 
Exponents
Logarithms
means
ln
(change-of-base formula)
Radicals
if n is even
if n is odd
B
n a
b = 2
n a
2
n b
2
n ab = 2
n a 2
n b
a
mn = 12
n a2m = 2
n am
a
1n =
n2a
n2an = a
n2an = ƒaƒ
2a2 = ƒ
  a  ƒ
log b x =
 log a x
 log a b =
 log x
 log b =
 ln x
 ln b 
log a Mr = r log a M
log a M
N = log a M -
 log a N
log a MN = log a M +
 log a N
x =
 log e  x
log x =
 log 10  x
log a a = 1
log a  1 = 0
aloga x
 
= x
log a  ax = x
ay = x
y = log a  x
a a
bb
-n
 = ab
a b
n
 = bn
an
a a
bb
n
 = an
bn
1a # b2n
 = an # bn
1am2n = amn
am
an = am-n
aman = am+n
a-n
 = 1
an , a Z 0
a0
 = 1, a Z 0
an
 = a # a Á a
u 6 -a or u 7 a.
ƒ
  u  ƒ 7 a
-a 6 u 6 a .
ƒ
  u  ƒ 6 a
u = a or u = -a.
ƒ
  u  ƒ = a
u
a 7 0
a 6 0
ƒ
  a  ƒ = -a
a Ú 0
ƒ
  a  ƒ = a
b = 0.
a = 0
a #  b = 0,
a #  0 = 0 #  a = 0
aa 1
ab = 1, a Z 0
a + 1-a2 = 0
a # 1 = 1 # a = a
a + 0 = 0 + a = a
1a + b2c = ac + bc
a1b + c2 = ab + ac
1ab2c = a1bc2
1a + b2 + c = a + 1b + c2
ab = ba
a + b = b + a
n factors
s

Solving Triangles
Law of Sines
Law of Cosines
c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C
 b2 = a2 + c2 - 2ac cos B
 a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc cos A
sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
Trigonometry
Trigonometric Functions
Acute Angles
A
b
a
C
c
B


0 <    < 90

a  length of the side opposite

b  length of the side adjacent to
c  length of the hypotenuse
cot u = adjacent
opposite = b
a
tan u = opposite
adjacent = a
b
sec u = hypotenuse
adjacent
= c
b
cos u =
adjacent
hypotenuse = b
c
csc u = hypotenuse
opposite
= c
a
sin u =
opposite
hypotenuse 
= a
c
Any Angle

P(x, y)
r
O
x
y
cot u = x
y
tan u = y
x,
sec u = r
x,
cos u = x
r,
csc u = r
y,
sin u = y
r,
Real Numbers
t
t
(1, 0)
O
P(x, y)
1
0
x
y
cot t = x
y,
tan t = y
x,
sec t = 1
x,
cos t = x,
csc t = 1
y,
sin t = y,
Trigonometric Identities
Fundamental Identities
cot2
 u + 1 = csc2
 u
tan2
 u + 1 = sec2
 u
sin2
 u + cos2
 u = 1
csc u =
1
sin u
sec u =
1
cos u
cot u =
1
tan u
tan u = sin u
cos u
cot u = cos u
sin u
Even-Odd Identities
tan 1-u2 = -tan u    cot 1-u2 = -cot u
 cos 1-u2 = cos u   
 sec 1-u2 = sec u
sin 1-u2 = -sin u    csc 1-u2 = -csc u
Sum and Difference Formulas
 tan 1u - v2 =
tan u - tan v 
1 + tan u tan v 
 tan 1u + v2 =
tan u + tan v 
1 - tan u tan v 
 cos 1u - v2 = cos u cos v + sin u sin v
 cos 1u + v2 = cos u cos v - sin u sin v
sin 1u - v2 = sin u cos v - cos u sin v
sin 1u + v2 = sin u cos v + cos u sin v
A
a
b
c
B
C
2
x
y
3
2




2
1
1
y  sin x
3

1
1
x
y
2

2

2
y  cos x
Sine and cosine function graphs and properties
x
y
1
1

2

2

y  tan x
x
y

2
1
1

y  cot x
Tangent and cotangent fuction graphs and properties
1
y
x

1
2



2

y  sec x
2
1
1
2

y
x




y  csc x
Secant and cosecant fuction graphs and properties
Trigonometric Function Graphs

Standard Form of a Parabola
vertex: 
and 
Functions/Graphs
Constant Function
Identity Function
Squaring Function
Cubing Function
Absolute Value Function
Square Root Function
Cube Root Function
Reciprocal Function
Greatest Integer Function
x
y
f1x2 = Œxœ
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
f1x2 = 1
x
f1x2 = 2
3 x
f1x2 = 1x
f1x2 = ƒxƒ
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
f1x2 = x3
f1x2 = x2
f1x2 = x
f1x2 = c
1x - h22 = ;4a1y - k2
1a 7 02
1h, k2
1y - k22
 = ;4a1x - h2
Standard Form of an Ellipse
(Horizontal ellipse)
(Vertical ellipse)
a 7 b 7 0
1x - h22
b2
+
1y - k22
a2
= 1;
a 7 b 7 0
1x - h22
a2
+
1y - k22
b2
= 1;
Standard Form of a Hyperbola
(Horizontal)
(Vertical)
a 7 0, b 7 0
1y - k22
a2
-
1x - h22
b2
= 1;
a 7 0, b 7 0
1x - h22
a2
-
1y - k22
b2
= 1;
Reciprocal Square Function
0
y
x
f(x)  1
x2
Exponential Functions
Logarithmic Functions
(a, 1)
(1, 0)
f(x)  loga x (0  a  1)
(b)
y
x
Q   , 1R
1
a
x  0
(1, 0)
(a, 1)
f(x)  loga x (a  1)
(a)
y
x
Q   , 1R
1
a
x  0
y
x
(1, a)
(0, 1)
f(x)  ax (0  a  1)
y  0
1a
1, 


y
x
(1, a)
(0, 1)
f(x)  ax (a  1)
1a
1, 


y  0

