COLOUR SCHEMES  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Creating a colour scheme may seem difficult, but many 
manufacturers of paints and wallcoverings carefully co-
ordinate their colour cards and design collections so that 
most of the hard work is already done for you 
  
 
 
You may need to climb a ladder to paint a ceiling or hang 
wallpaper. Make sure the ladder is stable, and take care not 
to over-reach. 
  
 
 
Colour is the first thing you notice when you enter a room. It
creates mood and atmosphere, and allows you to transform 
your home quickly and cheaply with stunning results. 
  
When we come to choose colours, most of us are aware that 
dark colours will make a room look smaller, and pale ones 
make a room seem more spacious, but colour, together with 
pattern and texture, are far more versatile than this. Paints, 
wallcoverings and fabrics can be used to create a variety of 
impressions and, armed with just a few basic facts, you will 
be able to make them work for you in many different ways. 
 
2  - Choosing colour  
Red or pink tones look deeper and richer in artificial light, 
but blues and greens can look washed out. Keep this in mind
when choosing colours for a room that will be used primarily 
in the evenings.  
 
 
 
Colours have characteristics that can affect our mood and 
make the same room appear completely different, simply by 
the way it is decorated. So before you begin to think about 
colours, take a good look around the room and make a note 
of how much natural light it gets and what you like or dislike 
about it.  
 
 
 
Warm colours such as red, orange and yellow are 
'advancing' colours which appear to draw surfaces closer, 
and create a sense of cosy comfort. These are lively colours, 
which make them a good choice for gloomy rooms facing 
north or east which receive little natural light, basements, 
and rooms heavily shaded by trees.  
 
 
 
Cool colours such as green, blue and violet are 'receding' 
colours which maximise space, and make a room feel fresh 
and airy. These are relaxing colours ideal for sunny rooms 
facing south and west, or anywhere there is abundant 
natural light.  
 
 
 

Neutral colours such as cream and beige are useful for 
toning down more adventurous colours but, used in their 
own right, will allow attention to be focused on the contents 
of a room, rather than the room itself. They also 
complement natural woods and cork well.  
 
 
 
Some colours evoke a definite mood which makes them a 
good choice for particular rooms. Pinks and red-blues, for 
example, have a romantic feel that is perfect for dining 
rooms and bedrooms, while fresh outdoor colours like yellow 
and green are best suited to busy daytime rooms.  
 
3  - Mixing colours 
Colours that are opposite 
each other on the colour 
wheel, such as yellow and 
blue, create stimulating 
colour schemes, while those 
that are close to each other, 
like blue and green, 
harmonise well and are more 
relaxing to live with (1).  
 
 
 
To create light and depth in a room and to make sure that 
no one colour dominates, use colours in different strengths 
and add neutral accessories.  
 
 
 
Pale colours reflect over 80% of light and dark colours 
absorb nearly 90%, so a higher level of artificial light is 
needed in a room where there is a dark or strong colour 
scheme.  
 
 
 
Contrasting colours that clash, like lime and yellow or pink 
and orange, can create a very dramatic, modern colour 
scheme, and work best in big bold blocks with nothing else 
competing for attention.  
 
 
 
If you are not a confident decorator, a colour scheme which 
uses several strengths of the same basic colour is a safe 
choice and very easy on the eye. Use the mid-tone for a 
large area like curtains or the floorcovering, a lighter tone 
for walls and ceiling, and the strongest only for emphasis 
with accessories.  
 
 
 
Using only shades of a single colour can look dull, but the 
effect is easily spiced up with an accent colour from the 
opposite side of the colour spectrum. A splash of orange or 
peach will brighten up a blue room; green makes an elegant 
contrast to rosy pinks; and yellow adds warmth to a lilac 

colour scheme. An accent colour needn't be paint or 
wallpaper - colourful lampshades or cushions will do jus
well.  
 
t as 
 
 - Using colours 
f it is painted a bold or advancing 
 
 
 
 
 
It also helps if the floorcovering is a similar colour to the 
ceiling (4).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 high ceiling looks lower i
A
colour (2). By continuing the colour down to a picture rail, 
you can draw down a ceiling even further (3).  
 
 

 
 
 
 
Low ceilings seem less oppressive if painted a brilliant white 
or in a pale receding shade (5).  
 
 
 
The light reflecting sheen of silk vinyl emulsion will also help 
to make the most of natural light and a room with a low 
ceiling may seem brighter.  
 
 
Turn a fireplace, bookcase or 
large piece of furniture into a 
behind it in a more 
vibrant colour than the rest of 
the room (6).  
 
 
 
focal point by painting the 
wall 
 

A narrow hall will appear to 
 
 
 
 
nattractive features such as radiators and built-in 
 same 
 - Choosing patterns 
 draw in walls and make big 
attern can also create optical illusions and because of its 
gular patterns will highlight walls that are out-of-true and 
orals don't allow the eye to fix on any one point, so they 
 
ainty floral sprigs are perfect for small rooms, narrow 
own
ripes suit almost any style or size or room. Classic stripes 
em 
be wider if end walls are 
decorated with dark or warm
colours, and side walls with a 
paler, receding shade (7). 
The same technique will also
make a rectangular room 
seem more square.  
 
U
cupboards will be less obvious if they are painted the
colour as surrounding walls. In small rooms, doors should 
also be painted to merge with their surroundings.  
 
5 
Large and busy designs tend to
rooms seem cosy, but they will overwhelm a small space. 
Similarly, tiny or subdued patterns will make the most of 
small rooms, but get lost in a large one.  
 
 
 
P
ability to trick the eye, it can be a useful decorating tool if 
the features of a room aren't pleasing.  
 
 
 
e
R
uneven walls can make pattern matching very difficult, so 
choose a wallcovering design with care.  
 
 
 
Fl
are wonderful for irregular walls and for softening awkward
angles or disguising an unattractive feature.  
 
 
 
D
hallways and cloakrooms, whereas big florals are best sh
off in large or high-ceilinged rooms, and in bedrooms with 
co-ordinating fabrics.  
 
 
 
t
S
in contrasting colours are a good choice for smart daytime 
rooms and hallways, whereas stylised stripes are more 
informal and very versatile. Stripes are also useful for 
altering the proportions of a room. Horizontal stripes se
to push out walls in a small room, and will make a low 
ceiling appear higher when used vertically.  
 
 
 

Trimming wallpaper around doors, windows or cupboards 
 
ecks range from smart tartans to informal ginghams, and 
 
eometrics are neat and restful, and make walls seem to 
t 
 
 you have chosen a stimulating colour scheme, be sparing 
 - Mixing patterns 
d scale of a pattern, and use 
for 
 
 a large room, don't be afraid to break up walls with 
odest
can ruin the look of a large pattern. Stripes and small 
designs will be a better choice, and more economical on the 
number of rolls needed.  
 
 
h
C
are as versatile as stripes but look busier, so they work best 
in simple colour schemes where the pattern can be fully 
appreciated. Checks are also useful for drawing in far-away 
walls and softening harsh edges.  
 
 
G
recede, so they create the perfect backdrop to a busy or 
cluttered room, or pictures and memorabilia that you wan
to display.  
 
 
If
with pattern on furnishing and accessories. Busy patterns 
will simply compete for attention.  
 
6 
Pay attention to the size an
large designs over large areas such as a sofa or curtains 
a wide window, and keep small-scale designs for accessories 
like cushion covers and lampshades.  
 
 
In
pattern and add deep borders for emphasis. In more m
 
rooms, mix a small pattern with a bolder design, and if you 
think that a room is becoming too busy, tone it down with 
areas of plain colour or paint-effect wallpaper.  
 
 
ecorating a stairwell can be tricky, but dividing tall walls 
er and 
 
 you are not a confident decorator, choose wallcoverings 
r 
owever, if you do want to try mixing different patterns, the 
 
 
D
with a dado rail or border and using complementary 
wallcoverings above and below will make the job easi
add interest.  
 
 
If
and fabrics from a fully co-ordinated collection which will 
ensure that patterns are evenly balanced and have a simila
dominating colour. This allows the eye to flow from one part 
of the room to the other, and is especially important for 
open-plan living areas and dual-purpose rooms.  
 
 
 
H
key to success is to choose designs that have a common 
colour and style, and stick to it throughout.  
 
 

Decorative borders aren't just for walls. They help to 
an old 
 - Introducing texture 
 visual interest. Matt, rough
 
xture can enhance the overall effect you want to create. 
 
xture is very important in one-colour schemes. Where a 
 
or surfaces will be much more obvious with a plain painted
integrate patterns, and can be used to jazz up doors, 
pelmet or bedhead, and even some types of furniture.  
 
7 
Texture is a subtle way of adding
textures such as wool, brick, wood and cork add warmth, 
while smooth, shiny surfaces such as chrome, glass and 
ceramic tiles are cool and more sophisticated.  
 
 
e
T
Matt emulsion, for example, has a rich velvety finish that 
helps to make big rooms seem more cosy, while the light-
reflecting sheen of silk vinyl has a brightening effect that 
makes small rooms seem more airy.  
 
 
e
T
room has no colour contrast, add rugs and fabrics with a 
woven pattern for warmth.  
 
 
o
P
finish so, if you don't want to add pattern, add texture. Paint 
techniques such as sponging and ragging will help to 
disguise blemishes.  
 
 
 pattern isn't to your taste, paint-effect paper will give 
 - Starting out 
ough to start decorating from scratch. 
ith plain carpets and fabrics, you can be as bold or as 
ky. 
 
orals look good against an otherwise plain background, 
s. 
 - Finishing touches  
ies such as picture frames 
 
If
walls an instant facelift with colour and texture, but without 
the skill or effort needed for the real thing.  
 
8 
Few of us are lucky en
There is usually an item that we don't want to replace, and 
which has to blend in with the new colour scheme.  
 
 
 
W
restrained as the mood takes you, but picking colours or 
patterns to complement existing designs can be more tric
Take your cue from a shade in carpet or curtains, and use it 
as the starting point for the new scheme.  
 
 
Fl
while stripes and small geometrics mix well with other 
patterns and won't compete with more demanding design
Paint-effect papers are extremely adaptable, and a failsafe 
choice.  
 
9 
Don't forget to update accessor
and table lamps to complement your new colour scheme. If 
you can't afford to buy, it is possible to paint many surfaces 

with the right preparation.  
 
 
mpshades that complement or contrast with your colour 
 
immer switches are easy to install but will allow you to 
 
La
scheme are a quick and easy way to create a stylish, co-
ordinated look.  
 
 
D
change the mood of a room at the touch of a button.  
 

