
	
	
)(((#  !&$%"&'!
$-1&(%(#(%#

0&(%,)*#%)**(+)**(&(*.,(*%$,""
*%.%()+)*$"%$)*(+*%$&(%+*)$(*)&(%(#

,"+*)$%$(#)
&(%+*/))+)*$"**(+*)1&(%(##.")%)))*$$*.$&(%+*)**
"&'+".%(&%$*)+$(# %(($(*$).)*#))+)($	+"$
%+$"/)
($	+"$$**,/)($"%)%(

	/)&(%&%)*%$"($	+"$*$(
	$*%#)*%#!$)+(**&(%+*)&%))))*)+)*$"**(+*)"#.%+
$*(+)*


+ 
		
*


Commercial Drafting 
and Detailing

This page intentionally left blank 

Commercial Drafting 
and Detailing
Third Edition
Alan Jefferis
Clackamas Community College, Oregon City, OR
Kenneth D. Smith, A.I.A.
Principal—Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

© 2010 Delmar, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein 
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, web distribution, information networks, 
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2008930578
ISBN-13: 978-1-4354-2597-2
ISBN-10: 1-4354-2597-9
Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your lifelong learning solutions, visit www.delmar.cengage.com 
Visit our corporate website at www.cengage.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein 
or perform any independent analysis in connection with any of the product 
information contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly 
disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that 
provided to it by the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider 
and adopt all safety precautions that might be indicated by the activities de-
scribed herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions 
contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such 
instructions. The publisher makes no representations or warranties of any kind, 
including but not limited to, the warranties of ﬁ tness for particular purpose or 
merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the 
material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect 
to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequen-
tial, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from the readers’ use of, 
or reliance upon, this material.
Commercial Drafting and Detailing, 
Third Edition
Alan Jeﬀ eris & Kenneth D. Smith
Vice President, Editorial: Dave Garza
Director of Learning Solutions: Sandy Clark
Senior Acquisitions Editor: James Devoe
Managing Editor: Larry Main
Senior Product Manager: Sharon Chambliss
Editorial Assistant: Christopher Savino
Vice President, Marketing: 
Jennifer McAvey
Executive Marketing Manager: 
Deborah S. Yarnell
Marketing Manager: Jimmy Stephens
Marketing Specialist: Mark Pierro
Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Production Manager: Mark Bernard
Content Project Manager: David Plagenza
Art Director: Bethany Casey
Technology Project Manager: 
Christopher Catalina
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Professional & Career Group Customer Support, 1-800-648-7450
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions 
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Printed in the United States of America
1  2  3  4  X  X  11  10  09 
10% total recycled ﬁ ber

v
Contents
Preface, vi
SECTION 1 CAD Drafting and Design 
Considerations of Commercial Structures
Chapter 1 Professional Careers and Commercial 
CAD Drafting, 3
Chapter 2 The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice 
and Procedure, 18
Chapter 3 Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial 
Drawings, 38
Chapter 4 Introduction to the International 
Building Code, 73
Chapter 5 Access Requirements for People 
with Disabilities, 94
SECTION 2 Building Methods and 
Materials of Commercial Construction
Chapter 6 Making Connections, 125
Chapter 7 Wood and Timber Framing 
Methods, 146
Chapter 8 Engineered Lumber Products, 166
Chapter 9 Steel Framing Methods and 
Materials, 186
Chapter 10 Unit Masonry Methods and 
Materials, 207
Chapter 11 Concrete Methods and Materials, 232
Chapter 12 Fire-Resistive Construction, 263
SECTION 3 Preparing Architectural 
and Civil Drawings
Chapter 13 Structural Considerations Affecting 
Design, 281
Chapter 14 Project Manuals and Written 
Specifications, 306
Chapter 15 Land Descriptions and Drawings, 317
Chapter 16 Floor Plan Components, Symbols, 
and Development, 344
Chapter 17 Orthographic Projection and 
Elevations, 384
Chapter 18 Roof Plan Components and 
Drawings, 403
Chapter 19 Drawing Sections, 426
Chapter 20 Interior Elevations, 450
Chapter 21 Ramp, Stair, and Elevator 
Drawings, 464
SECTION 4 Preparing Structural Drawings
Chapter 22 Drawing Framing Plans, 485
Chapter 23 Drawing Structural Elevations 
and Sections, 518
Chapter 24 Foundation Systems and 
Components, 547
Index, 600

Preface
vi
COMMERCIAL DRAFTING AND DETAILING is a 
practical, comprehensive textbook intended to intro-
duce students to the development of architectural and 
structural drawings required to develop a commercial 
structure. Students are expected to have previously 
completed either a basic drawing class or a class deal-
ing with residential drafting as well as have a working 
knowledge of AutoCAD. Students will build on their 
knowledge gained through residential drafting and 
design as common materials and construction methods 
for commercial structures are explored. Throughout 
the text, students will be exposed to the work that the 
engineer or architect will do to develop the project. This 
book is in no way an attempt to transform CAD techni-
cians into junior engineers. The work of the engineer 
and the architect is presented to help develop an under-
standing of the technician’s role in the overall process of 
developing a set of plans.
LAYOUT
This text has two major divisions. Chapters 1 through 
12 are designed to introduce the student to the materi-
als and construction methods of commercial construc-
tion. This portion of the book is itself divided into two 
major sections. Each chapter provides an end-of-chapter 
test to assess understanding, as well as practical drawing 
problems to apply knowledge. Many drawing problems 
are intended to force the student to make use of Sweets 
Catalogs, vendor Web sites, or local suppliers to prepare 
for the research that is expected in most professional 
offices.
Section 1 introduces students to the major codes that 
they will encounter in an engineer or architect’s office. 
The content of the entire book is based on the 2009 edi-
tion of the International Building Code Handbook. Students 
are also introduced to Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) standards that affect commercial structures. 
Although this is information that the project designer will 
be responsible for, we feel it is critical for the CAD techni-
cian to understand the codes that shape design.
Section 2 deals with the materials that shape the 
construction process, including wood, engineered 
lumber, timber, steel, concrete block, poured concrete 
construction, and the fasteners used to connect these 
materials. Each chapter could serve as the core for a 
class dealing with each material or as an overview of 
the entire process.
The second half of this text is intended to be a 
practical approach to the development of the archi-
tectural and structural drawings. The key elements 
that make up the architectural and structural draw-
ings are introduced in Chapters 15 through 24. In 
Chapter 15, the site drawings for four major projects 
are introduced, with each project reflecting one of 
the major building materials. These projects include 
the following: 
● Wood: multifamily complex 
● Concrete block/truss roof: retail sales 
● Concrete block: warehouse with mezzanine, panel-
ized roof 
● Precast concrete: warehouse with mezzanine, truss 
roof 
Various aspects of these projects are presented 
throughout the remaining chapters so that students 
will develop the key drawings that make up a set of 
architectural and structural drawings related to one 
structure. Portions of each of the projects contained 
in Chapters 15 through 24 can be accessed from the 
student CD in the DRAWING PROJECTS folder and 
used as a base to complete the assignment. The draw-
ings are a rough draft only and need to be updated 
to reflect common standards; appropriate symbols, 
linetypes, and dimensioning methods; and notation 
methods. 
Note: The drawings contained at the end of the 
chapters are to be used as a guide only. You should 
use these drawings with the mindset that the pre-
vious CAD drafter who started the drawings was 
fired. Information may not be reliable. Because 
your name will go in the title block, you must be 
very careful before blindly accepting another per-
son’s layout. As you progress through the drawings 

Preface 
vii
you’ll find that some portions of the drawings do 
not match things that have been drawn on previ-
ous drawings. 
Each project has errors that will need to be solved. 
The errors are placed in the project to force you to 
think, in addition to drawing. Most of the errors 
are so obvious that you will have no trouble finding 
them. If you think you have found an error, do not 
make changes until you have discussed the problem 
and possible solutions with your engineer (your 
instructor). It’s not enough to find the mistakes. 
Come up with a solution that incorporates materi-
als that have been completed in previous chapters, 
and coordinate your ideas with materials that will be 
drawn in future chapters.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In addition to the staff of Delmar Cengage Learning, 
we’re especially grateful to the following people:
Janice Ann Jefferis, Chief Encourager/Photographer
Dean K. Smith, Ginger M. Smith, Gisela Smith, and 
David Ambler of Kenneth D. Smith Architect & 
Associates, Inc.
Julie Searls for her excellent mastery of the English 
language and skill as a copy editor
Terrel Broiles of Architectural Drafting, Design, and 
Rendering of Albany, New York, for his excellent art-
work in this text
Deepti Narwat and her staff at International 
Typesetting and Composition for her excellent work 
on the production of this text 
The International Building Code related topics in 
Chapters 4, 12, and 13 were reviewed by the ICC 
Staff under the supervision of Hamid Naderi. The 
International Code Council, a member association dedi-
cated to building safety and fire prevention, develops 
the codes used to construct residential and commercial 
buildings. Most U.S. cities, counties, and states that 
adopt codes choose the International Codes developed 
by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey 
Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001-2070 
[P]1-888-ICC-SAFE (422-72330; www.iccsafe.org).
The following architects and engineers have reviewed 
portions of the manuscript and provided the illustra-
tions that are used throughout the text: 
G. Williamson Archer, A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.
Scott Beck, Scott R. Beck, Architect 
Bill Berry, Berry-Nordling Engineers, Inc.
Laura Bourland, Halliday Associates 
Charles J. Conlee, P.E., Conlee Engineers, Inc.
LeRoy Cook, Architectural Instructor, Clackamas 
Community College 
Chris DiLoreto, DiLoreto Architects, LLC
Russ Hanson, H.D.N. Architects, A.I.A.
Havlin G. Kemp P.E., Van Domelen/Looijenga/
McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers 
Tom Kuhns, Michael and Kuhns Architects, P.C.
Ron Lee, A.I.A., Architects Barrentine, Bates 
& Lee, A.I.A.
Ned Peck, Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects 
David Rogencamp, KPFF Consulting Engineers 
The following associations and companies have also 
made major contributions to this text and would be 
excellent references for students who desire further 
information:
Robert G. Wiedyke 
Director of Publications Services 
American Concrete Institute 
PO Box 19150 
Detroit, MI 48219 
Web site: www.aci-int.net
American Institute of Architects Press
1735 New York Ave, NW 
Washington, DC 20006-5292 
Web site: www.aia.org
American Institute of Steel Construction 
1 East Wacker Dr.
Suite 3100 
Chicago, IL 60601 
Web site: www.aiscweb.com
Bruce D. Pooley, P.E.
Director of Technical Services 
American Institute of Timber Construction 
7012 S. Revere Pkwy.
Suite 140 
Englewood, CO 80112 
Web site: www.aitc-glulam.org
American Society for Concrete Construction 
1902 Techny Ct.
Northbrook, IL 60062
Americans with Disabilities Act 
Federal Register Vol 56, No 144, July 26, 1991 
Concrete Masonry Association of California 
and Nevada 
6060 Sunrise Vista Dr.
Suite 1875 
Citrus Heights, CA 95610 
Web site: www.amacn.org

viii 
Preface
Steven E. Ellingson, P.E.
Director of Marketing 
Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute 
933 N. Plum Grove Rd.
Schaumburg, IL 60173-4758 
Web site: www.crsi.org
Construction Metrication Council 
National Institute of Building Sciences 
1201 L St., NW
Suite 400 
Washington, DC 20005 
Web site: www.nibs.org
Construction Specifications Institute 
601 Madison St. 
Alexandria, VA 22314-1791 
Web site: www.csinet.org
Mike Shultz 
Engineered Wood Association (formerly the American 
Plywood Association) 
PO Box 11700 
Tacoma, WA 98411-0700 
Web site: www.apawood.org
Hamid Naderi, P.E,
CBO Vice President
Product Development International Code Council
8650 Spicewood Springs 
#145, Box 610 Austin, Texas 78759
Web site: www.hnaderi@iccsafe.org
Patsy Harms 
Portland Cement Association 
54200 Old Orchard Rd. 
Skokie, IL 60077-1083 
Web site: www.cement.org
Post-Tensioning Institute 
1717 W. Northern Ave.
Suite 218 
Phoenix, AZ 85021 
Web site: www.post-tensioning.org
Sarah Carlson 
Simpson Strong-Tie 
4637 Chabot Dr.
Suite 200 
Pleasanton, CA 94588 
Web site: www.strongtie.com
Richard Wallace 
Media Director 
Southern Forest Products Association 
PO Box 641700 
Kenner, LA 70064 
Web site: www.sfpa.org
R. Donald Murphy 
Managing Director 
Steel Joist Institute 
1205 48th Ave. 
North Suite A 
Myrtle Beach, SC 29577-5424 
Web site: www.steeljoist.org
Western Wood Products Association
1500 Yeon Building 
Portland, OR 97204
Web site: www.wwpa.org
Weyerhaeuser Company
PO Box 9777
Federal Way, WA 98063-9777
Web site: www.weyerhaeuser.com

CAD Drafting and Design 
Considerations of 
Commercial Structures
Section 1

This page intentionally left blank 

You are about to start the exciting exploration of com-
mercial drafting. As authors who have spent our lives in 
commercial design and education, we wrote this book 
with the expectation that you will enter the drawing field 
as a CAD technician, or use the skills you will acquire in 
this text to progress through an accredited architectural 
or engineering program. The exploration of commercial 
drawing will occur in four distinct stages, including:
● CAD drafting and design consideration of commer-
cial structures.
● Common materials and building methods of com-
mercial construction.
● Preparation of architectural drawings.
● Preparation of structural drawings.
This chapter opens our exploration of commercial 
construction by discussing:
● Common employment opportunities in the design 
and drafting of commercial structures.
● The effect of green construction on the design and 
construction of commercial structures. 
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES IN 
COMMERCIAL DESIGN AND DRAFTING
To many in the construction field, commercial draft-
ing is the development of the construction drawings 
for any nonresidential structure. For most profession-
als involved in the design process, the general area 
of commercial drafting and construction comprises 
public, industrial, institutional, and commercial proj-
ects. Examples of each are listed below:
● Public structures are buildings or portions of struc-
tures used for assembly, education, or civic admin-
istration, such as schools, churches, stadiums, post 
offices, and libraries.
● Industrial structures are buildings or portions of 
structures used for manufacturing, assembly, or stor-
age, such as factories, warehouses, and businesses 
involved in hazardous, toxic, or unstable materials.
● Institutional structures are buildings or portions of 
structures used by occupants with limitations caused 
by health, age, correctional purposes, or in which the 
mobility is restricted such as residential care facilities, 
medical facilities where 24-hour care is provided, day 
care facilities, jails, and prisons.
● Commercial structures are buildings or portions of 
structures used for sales, business and professional, 
or service transactions, including office buildings and 
eating and drinking establishments.
This text will look at commercial drafting as it relates 
to all these fields. Your role in the development of com-
mercial drawings will vary depending on the size and 
structure of the firm where you work. Some design 
firms are very specialized and work only in one field, 
such as educational or institutional facilities. Some firms 
have several different divisions within the company for 
designing various areas of occupancy. Chapter 4 will 
introduce specific areas of construction based on the 
occupancy of the structure.
No matter how you define commercial construction, 
commercial drawing offers far more career options and 
challenges than residential drawing. Commercial proj-
ects are typically much larger and are completed by a 
team rather than an individual. In addition to the design 
team, engineers, architects, and CAD technicians from 
several different firms in a variety of construction fields 
complete the project.
The field of architecture has always offered many 
career opportunities. The use of computers and software 
such as AutoCAD®, Revit® Architecture, and AutoCAD®
Architecture has revolutionized architectural and engi-
neering offices and opened an almost unlimited potential 
for design. This chapter explores the use of AutoCAD 
and some of the main areas of employment in the field 
of commercial architecture, and explains how CAD has 
affected each area. Although Revit Architecture and 
AutoCAD Architecture play important roles in the world 
of construction drawings, their use lies beyond the scope 
of this text. Major areas of employment in the archi-
tectural field are that of CAD drafter, designer, interior 
designer, architect, and engineer.
1
Professional Careers and 
Commercial CAD Drafting
3

4 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
CAD TECHNICIAN
A CAD technician is a person who draws the designs 
that originate with another person. Traditionally referred 
to as a drafter in the days of manual drafting, most firms 
and job postings now use the term CAD technician or 
use both terms interchangeably. The drafter’s main 
responsibility is to take a drawing similar to Figure 1-1 
and fill in the missing material, using acceptable office 
standards so that it resembles the drawing in Figure 1-2. 
The experience and education of the drafter affect the 
actual job assignments.
Entry-Level Technician 
An entry-level CAD technician is typically preoccupied 
with making corrections, running prints, and complet-
ing simple drawings while confidence is gained in the 
standard office procedure. In some areas of the coun-
try, and in a thriving economy, it is possible to obtain 
an entry-level technician intern position as a high 
school student. Because of the complexities involved in 
creating commercial drawings, most offices require col-
lege training. A new CAD technician with some college 
or trade school experience will typically start a new job 
by making corrections to existing drawings. To advance 
in an office you’ll need to become proficient using the 
firm’s computer standards and any special menus and 
list-processing language (LISP) routines needed to work 
efficiently. An understanding of basic construction tech-
niques is also essential for advancement. One of the best 
ways to gain an understanding of typical construction 
practice is to spend time at construction sites. Being 
able to follow a project through the various stages of 
construction will greatly aid a new CAD drafter in gain-
ing an understanding of the information that is entered 
at the keyboard.
In addition to improving CAD drafting skills, most 
employers expect academic skills to increase before 
more challenging projects are assigned. Although most 
office procedures for an entry-level technician involve 
only basic math skills, an understanding of alge-
bra, geometry, and trigonometry will help in career 
advancement. Other necessities for advancement are 
confidence, and the ability to work in a team. As con-
fidence is gained, and understanding of the types of 
drawings being completed increases, the supervisor 
will be able to provide sketches with less detail and 
rely on the technician to research a solution based 
on the governing code and similar projects that have 
been completed in the office. The decisions involved 
in making drawings without sketches also require the 
FIGURE 1-2 The CAD technician’s main responsibility is to 
accurately convey information from the architect or engineer 
to those involved in the construction project using acceptable 
office standards. This drawing was completed by the technician 
using the sketch in Figure 1-1 as a guide, along with vendor 
catalogs.
FIGURE 1-1 The project manager will typically provide a 
sketch for an entry-level CAD technician to use as a guide. The 
job of the drafter is to accurately represent all materials using 
the proper office formatting for lines and layers.

Chapter 1: Professional Careers and Commercial CAD Drafting 
5
technician to have a good understanding of what is 
being drawn. This understanding does not come just 
from a textbook. A good method to gain an under-
standing of what you are drafting is to spend time 
working at a construction site so that you understand 
what a craftsperson must do as a result of what you 
have drawn. 
An additional skill required for a new technician is 
to be reliable. Reliability within an office is measured 
by the maintenance of good attendance patterns and 
the production of drawings as scheduled. To advance 
and become a leader on the drawing team will require 
you to become an effective manager of your time. This 
includes the ability to determine what drawings will 
need to be created, to select them from a stock library 
and edit them, and to estimate the time needed to com-
plete these assignments and meet deadlines established 
by the team captain, the client, the lending institution, 
or the building department. It is also important that the 
drafter be able to accurately estimate the time required 
to complete each project. You can develop this skill 
while working on school projects by estimating the 
amount of time that will be required to complete the 
project prior to starting the drawing. In the planning 
stage, break the project into components and estimate 
how long each component will take. When the draw-
ing is complete, review your estimates and use the 
AutoCAD TIME command to determine the actual 
time required to complete the drawing. Although most 
firms would prefer a drafter who can quickly complete 
a project, speed is no substitute for accuracy. Push 
yourself as a student to meet a self-imposed time dead-
line while maintaining quality and accuracy. Reliability 
is also important because a team completes the draw-
ings for a structure. The ability to get along with others, 
to complete assigned projects in a timely manner, and 
to coordinate different parts of a project with others 
will greatly affect how fast a drafter will advance.
Don’t be discouraged as you consider the typical 
entry-level CAD drafting position. This is the type of 
position you might consider during your first year in 
school, not as a career. Although you might aspire to 
design the eighth, ninth, and tenth wonders of the 
world, an entry-level position can offer valuable insight 
into the world of architecture and supplement your aca-
demic course work. Depending on the size of the office 
where you work, you may also spend a lot of your time 
as a new employee editing stock details, running prints, 
making deliveries, obtaining permits, and doing other 
office chores. Don’t get the idea that a technician only 
does the menial chores around an office. But do be pre-
pared, as you go to your first drafting job, to do things 
other than drafting.
Senior CAD Technician
A senior CAD technician, often referred to as a project 
manager or a job captain, is part of a design team in most 
midsized offices. This person is responsible for super-
vising several CAD technicians. The senior technician 
is expected to be familiar with the building codes that 
govern the project and to maintain legal building stan-
dards. In small firms, the senior technician is typically 
in charge of producing the working drawings and is 
often expected to perform simple beam calculations and 
preliminary wind and seismic studies. Other job duties 
might include assigning projects for the drawing team, 
site visitations, and conferences with municipal build-
ing officials. A senior CAD drafter is often instrumental 
in assigning file and layer names, linetype, and other 
CAD drawing standards and requirements to be used 
throughout the project.
In many offices that draw multifamily and light com-
mercial projects, senior CAD drafters are part of a larger 
design team made up of other drafters and supervised by 
an architect or engineer. The drafter is expected to select 
material from vendor catalogs such as Sweets Catalogs 
and to apply basic information from Architectural 
Graphics or Time-Saver Standards to specific items 
within each project. To advance as a senior drafter and 
be a good team leader, you will also need to develop 
skills that promote a sense of success among your team-
mates. Although it is against the law to discriminate on 
the basis of race, color, religion, gender, sexual orienta-
tion, age, marital status, or disability, moving beyond 
the law and creating a friendly and productive work 
environment is a critical skill for a team leader. 
Educational Requirements
The education required to be a CAD technician ranges 
from a degree from an accredited junior college or techni-
cal school to a graduate degree from an accredited school 
of architecture. Basic writing, math, art, and drafting 
classes will enhance job opportunities. Computer classes 
such as keyboarding and LISP will also be helpful. Classes 
offering a complete mastery of AutoCAD’s 2D commands 
are a must and update classes in the most recent release 
of AutoCAD are often required. Once you are established 
within the firm, continuing education that will improve 
job performance is often a company benefit.
Employment Opportunities
Firms of all sizes hire drafters to help complete drawing 
projects. Many opportunities exist for converting hand-
drawn details and drawings to AutoCAD. In addition 

6 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
to jobs in architectural and engineering offices, many 
architectural equipment suppliers such as heating, 
air-conditioning, electrical, and plumbing companies 
employ CAD drafters. Construction subcontractors 
also hire CAD technicians to create their shop draw-
ings. Firms that manufacture the actual construction 
components such as trusses, steel, and concrete beams 
also employ drafters to produce the needed drawings to 
manufacture their components. Due to their computer 
skills and construction knowledge, CAD technicians 
are often hired as sales representatives by many firms. 
Utility companies such as cable television, telephone, 
water, and gas companies all employ large numbers of 
CAD technicians to draw maps of individual routes of 
service. City, county, state, and federal agencies also 
hire large numbers of CAD drafters to update munici-
pal records and projects such as parcel and subdivision 
maps, sewer layouts, and roadway projects. Figure 1-3 
A green or sustainable building is a structure that is 
designed, built, renovated, operated, or reused in 
an ecological and resource-efficient manner. Green 
buildings are designed to meet certain objectives 
such as protecting the health of the occupants; using 
energy, water, and other resources more efficiently; 
and reducing the overall impact to the environment. 
As a senior CAD technician, or with each of the 
following design positions to be described, you will 
be expected to provide input regarding materials and 
construction methods. Much of your time will also 
be spent investigating the use of environmentally 
friendly products suitable for each specific project. This 
will require good use of the Internet, good research 
skills, and a thorough understanding of the project to 
determine a product’s compatibility with the project. As 
a new technician, one of your main responsibilities will 
be to become familiar with the Leadership in Energy 
and Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building Rating 
System and certification process.
EASY BEING GREEN
FIGURE 1-3 Many federal, state, county, and city agencies employ CAD drafters to complete required drawings. This profile drawing 
was completed by a CAD technician employed by a city sanitation department. Courtesy of Oregon City.
RIM 434.02±
IE OUT 15" 429.27
RIM 438.40±
IE OUT 15" 435.00
RIM 440.51±
IE OUT 15" 435.99
IE IN 12" 436.28
339.92 L.F.
339.92 L.F.
S=1.28%
S=1.28%
EXIST. MH STA 46+21
EXIST. 15" CSP
NEW MH STA 47+69
206 L.F.
206 L.F.
15" 
15" 
S=0.43%
S=0.43%
NEW MH STA 49+75
IE IN 12" 436.23
IE IN 8" 436.27
IE IN 12" 429.37
IE IN 30" 429.37
IE IN 15" 429.27
IE IN 15" 435.10
15" X 12" TEE BRANCH
FOR AREA DRAIN
STA 49+30
1
1
450
445
440
435
430
425
420
44+00
45+00
46+00
47+00
48+00
49+00
50+00
200 VC
S=0.50%
S=3.39%
90 VC
S=0.85%
BVC STA 44+00
ELEV 429.42
VPI STA 45+00
ELEV 429.92
e=0.72
EVC STA 46+00
ELEV 433.31
BVC STA 47+40
ELEV 437.85
VPI STA 47+85
ELEV 438.80
e=-0.14
BVC STA 49+85.99
ELEV 440.51
VPI STA 49+96.49
ELEV 440.58
e=0.06
EVC STA 50+07.00
ELEV 440.91
21 VC
BVC STA 50+07.00
ELEV 440.91
EVC STA 50+28.00
ELEV 441.30
VPI STA 50+17.50
ELEV 441.22
e=-0.06
21 VC
STA 46+18.99
MATCH EXISTING CURB
MATCH EXISTING CURB
STA 50+23.84
MATCH EXISTING CURB
NEW CURB GRADE RT
EXISTING CURB
S=2.11%
S=2.95%
S=0.76%
EVC STA 48+30
ELEV 439.18
CURB AND GUTTER     STD. VERT. CURB
1"=50' HORIZ
1"=50' HORIZ
PROFILE
PROFILE
1"=5' VERT
1"=5' VERT

Chapter 1: Professional Careers and Commercial CAD Drafting 
7
shows an example of a sewer drawing prepared by a 
CAD technician working for a city sanitation depart-
ment. Information about CAD drafting opportunities 
in related construction trades can be obtained from 
the American Design Drafting Association. This orga-
nization includes members who work in areas such 
as heating and air-conditioning, plumbing, and elec-
trical design. Contact the American Design Drafting 
Association for further information: 
American Design Drafting Association 
P.O. Box 11937 
Columbia, SC 29211 
803-771-0008
Web site: www.adda.org
DESIGNER
In some states a designer is a drafter who, by experience 
or state certification, is allowed to design multifamily 
and small commercial projects. The size of the project 
is dictated by the state. State laws vary on the types of 
buildings a designer may assume responsibility for with-
out the supervision of an architect or engineer. In some 
areas of the country, anyone can decide that he or she is 
a building designer. In most states a designer working 
with commercial projects is required to work under the 
direct supervision of a licensed architect or engineer.
Because of increasing liability problems, many 
states now require any person using the title designer 
to be licensed. The American Institute of Building 
Design (AIBD) now oversees designers in 40 states 
throughout the United States. Contact the AIBD for 
further information: 
American Institute of Building Design 
P.O. Box 1148 
Pacific Palisades, CA 64057
Web site: www.aibd.org
INTERIOR DESIGNER
Interior designers work with the architect to optimize 
and harmonize the interior design of structures. In addi-
tion to health and safety concerns, interior designers help 
plan how a space will be used, the amount of light that 
will be required, acoustics, seating, storage, and work 
areas. The elements of interior design include the con-
sideration of how the visual, tactile, and auditory senses 
of the occupants will be impacted. An interior designer 
must have an aesthetic, practical, and technical apprecia-
tion for how people use and respond to these elements, 
and how the elements interact with one another. 
Designers must also be knowledgeable about the 
many types and characteristics of furnishings, accesso-
ries, and ornaments used in creating interiors. Furniture, 
lighting, carpeting and floor covering, paint and wall 
covering, glass, wrought metal, fixtures, art, and arti-
facts are just some of the many items and materials 
designers select from. In addition, they must be familiar 
with the various styles of design, art, and architecture 
and their history.  
Educational Requirements
Although a college degree is currently not a require-
ment, the trend among employers and in states that 
have licensing requirements is to require a degree from 
an accredited institution. This can range from training 
in a two-year program to earn an associate’s degree or 
certificate, to a four- or five-year program leading to a 
bachelor’s (BA, BS, BFA) or master’s (MA, MS, MFA) 
degree. The option chosen may depend on the licens-
ing requirements in your state and whether you have 
completed a degree in another field.
In the United States, interior designers are registered 
by title. People cannot represent themselves using 
the title interior designer or registered interior designer 
unless they have met the requirements for education, 
experience, and examination as set forth in the statutes 
established by the National Council for Interior Design 
Qualification (NCIDQ). Candidates who apply to take 
the NCIDQ examination must demonstrate an accept-
able level of professional work experience and comple-
tion of related course work. The minimum examination 
requirements include two years of formal interior design 
experience and four years of full-time work experience 
in the practice of interior design. Passage of the exami-
nation is required in 20 jurisdictions in the United States 
and 8 provinces in Canada that regulate the profession 
of interior design. For further information about careers 
in the field of interior design, contact:
American Society of Interior Designers (ASID)
202-546-3480
Web site: www.asid.org
International Interior Design Association
Web site: www.iida.org
ARCHITECT
An architect is a person who is licensed by individual 
states to design and supervise the construction of 
structures. Although a few work full-time in the design 
or supervision of residential projects, most work in 

8 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
multifamily and commercial design because of the 
design challenges, job security, pay, and fringe benefits. 
Figure 1-4 shows a project designed by an architect. 
An architect is responsible for the design of a structure, 
from the preliminary drawings through the construc-
tion process, and must be able to coordinate the desires 
and limitations of the client, the financial restraints of 
the project, the physical setting of the project, and the 
structural elements of the material to be used.
Use of the title architect is legally restricted by each 
state. In order to be a licensed architect, a person must 
obtain a master’s degree from an accredited school of 
architecture, complete three years of work experience 
for a licensed architect, and then pass the state test to 
demonstrate competency in several areas related to 
architectural practice. In some states, an architect’s 
license can be obtained by gaining practical experi-
ence under the direct supervision of an architect and 
then passing the written exams. The length of time 
varies with each state, but typically five to eight years 
of work experience under the direct supervision of an 
architect are required before the state examinations 
may be taken.
Educational Requirements
Because of the wide range of areas in which an architect 
must be competent, the educational requirements are 
very diverse. High school and two-year college students 
can prepare for a degree program by taking classes in 
fine arts, math, science, and social science. Many two-
year drafting programs offer drafting classes that can 
be used for credit in four- or five-year architectural 
programs. A student planning to transfer to a four-year 
program should verify with the new college which 
classes can be transferred. Preparation to enter a degree 
program in architecture should include the following:
● Fine arts classes such as drawing, sketching, design, 
and art, along with architectural history, will help 
the future architect develop an understanding of the 
cultural significance of structures and help transform 
ideas into reality. 
● Math and science, including algebra, geometry, trigo-
nometry, and physics, will provide a stable base for 
the advanced structural classes that will be required.
● Sociology, psychology, cultural anthropology, and 
classes dealing with human environments will help 
develop an understanding of the people who will use 
the structure. 
● Literature and philosophy courses will help prepare 
students to read, write, and think clearly about 
abstract concepts. 
In addition to formal study, students should discuss 
with local architects the opportunities and possible dis-
advantages that may await them in pursuing the study 
and practice of architecture.
Areas of Study
The study of architecture is not limited to the design of 
buildings. Although the architectural curriculum typi-
cally is highly structured for the first two years of study, 
students begin to specialize in an area of interest during 
the third year of the program. Students may branch 
from architecture into related fields such as urban plan-
ning, interior architecture, and landscape architecture. 
● Urban planners study the relationship among the 
components within a city.
● Interior architects work specifically with the interior 
of a structure to ensure that all aspects of the building 
will be functional. 
● Landscape architects specialize in relating the exterior 
of a structure to the environment. 
FIGURE 1-4 The entryway to the Interfirst II project by S.O.M. 
Architects of Houston, Texas, is representative of the wide range 
of projects architects design and draw. Courtesy MERO Structures, Inc.

Chapter 1: Professional Careers and Commercial CAD Drafting 
9
Employment Opportunities
An architect performs the tasks of many professionals, 
including designer, artist, project manager, and con-
struction supervisor.
As described by the American Institute of Architects 
(AIA), common positions that architects fill include:
Technical staff—CAD operators; drafters; consult-
ing engineers such as mechanical, electrical, and 
structural engineers; landscape architects; interior 
designers.
Intern—Unlicensed architectural graduate with less 
than three years of experience. Common responsi-
bilities include developing design and technical solu-
tions under the supervision of an architect.
Architect I—Licensed architect with three to five 
years of experience. The job description typically 
includes responsibility for a specific portion of a proj-
ect within the parameters set by a supervisor.
Architect II—Licensed architect with six to eight 
years of experience. The job description typically 
includes responsibility for the daily design and tech-
nical development of a project.
Architect III—Licensed architect with eight to ten 
years of experience. The job description typically 
includes responsibility for the management of major 
projects.
Manager—Licensed architect with more than ten 
years of experience. Job duties include management 
of several projects, project teams, client contacts, 
project scheduling, and budgeting.
Associate—Senior management architect, but not 
an owner in the firm. This person is responsible for 
major departments and their functions.
Principal—Owner or partner in an architectural 
firm.
The work of an architect is not limited to the design 
of structures. Architects are often employed by local 
and state governments to work as urban planners, plan-
ning whole areas rather than a single structure. Some 
architects, such as interior planners, lighting specialists, 
or audio experts, specialize in specific areas of design. 
Contact the AIA for more information about the role of 
an architect: 
American Institute of Architects 
1735 New York Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
Web site: www.aia.org
Contact the following organizations for related infor-
mation about specialties in the field of architecture: 
American Society of Landscape Architects, Inc.
636 Eye Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20001-3736 
202-898-2444 
Web site: www.asla.org
American Society of Interior Design 
Web site: www.asid.org
ENGINEER
The title engineer encompasses a wide variety of profes-
sions. Structural, electrical, mechanical, and civil engi-
neers are typically involved in the design of a structure. 
Structural engineers are licensed professionals who spe-
cialize in the design of the structural skeleton of a struc-
ture. Figure 1-5 shows the framework of a structure that 
is the result of an engineer’s calculations and drawings. 
FIGURE 1-5 The steel skeleton for a structure can be seen 
before the nonstructural materials are applied. Engineers are 
responsible for the design of the structural skeleton. Courtesy 
Janice Jefferis.

10 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Electrical engineers work with architects and struc-
tural engineers and are responsible for the design of 
lighting, power supply, and communications systems. 
This includes supervision of the design and installa-
tion of specific lighting fixtures, telephone services, and 
requirements for computer networking. 
Mechanical engineers are responsible for the sizing 
and layout of the heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning 
systems (HVAC) and details similar to those shown 
in Figure 1-6. This involves working with the project 
architect, who determines the number of occupants and 
the heating and cooling loads, and designing the route 
that conditioned air will take through the building. The 
mechanical engineer also plans the size and locations 
of plumbing lines for fresh and wastewater as well as 
lines for other liquids or gases that might be required 
for specific occupancies.
Civil engineers are responsible for the design and 
supervision of a wide variety of construction projects 
such as subdivision plans, as well as grading and util-
ity plans for construction projects such as buildings, 
highways, bridges, sanitation facilities, and water 
treatment plants. Civil engineers are often directly 
employed by construction companies to oversee the 
construction of large projects and to verify that the 
specifications of the design architects and engineers 
have been carried out.
Educational Requirements
A license is required to function as an engineer. The 
license can be applied for after several years of practical 
experience, or after obtaining a bachelor’s degree and 
three years of practical experience. Success in any of the 
engineering fields requires a high degree of proficiency 
in math and science, including courses in physics, 
mechanics, print reading and architecture, mathemat-
ics, and material sciences. Similar to the requirements 
for becoming an architect, engineers are required to 
complete five years of education at an approved college 
or university, followed by successful completion of a 
state-administered examination. Certification can also 
be accomplished by training under a licensed engineer 
and then successfully completing the examination. 
Contact these organizations for additional information 
about the field of engineering: 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) 
1801 Alexander Bell Drive 
Reston, VA 20191-4400 
800-548-2723 
Web site: www.asce.org
American Consulting Engineers Council (ACEC) 
1015 15th Street, NW, Suite 802 
Washington, DC 20005 
202-347-7474 
Web site: www.acec.org
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-
Conditioning Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE) 
1791 Tullie Circle NE 
Atlanta, GA 30329-2305
800-527-4723 
Web site: www.ashrae.org
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America 
(IESNA) 
120 Wall Street, 17th Floor 
New York, NY 10005 
212-248-5000
Web site: www.iesna.org
DETAIL - GRILLE & FIRE DAMPER
FIGURE 1-6 Mechanical engineers are responsible for the 
design of the HVAC system and all required drawings and 
details. Courtesy Tereasa Jefferis, Systems Designer; Manfull Curtis, 
Consulting Engineer.

Chapter 1: Professional Careers and Commercial CAD Drafting 
11
RELATED FIELDS
In addition to the drawing and design aspects of con-
struction drawings, a drafting background can lead to 
several other careers such as illustrator, model maker, 
specifications writer, and inspector. A drafting back-
ground can also be useful in careers such as sales repre-
sentative, contractor, and estimator. Although these jobs 
do not require drafting as a job requirement, knowledge 
of drafting fundamentals will help in the performance of 
job requirements.
Illustrator
Commercial drawing requires the use of a rendering 
such as that seen in Figure 1-7. By combining artistic 
talent with a basic understanding of architectural prin-
ciples, an illustrator is able to produce drawings that 
realistically show a proposed structure. Traditionally, 
graphite, ink, and watercolor have been the main tools 
of an illustrator. Many firms are now adopting the use 
of AutoCAD’s solid modeling programs and third-
party software to create computer-generated renderings. 
Drawings created in 3D allow the viewpoint to be 
altered, providing a realistic look at the structure from 
any vantage point. Illustrators also use virtual reality to 
represent how a structure will blend with its environ-
ment and to allow clients to walk through proposed 
buildings and see how components can be arranged.
Model Maker
In addition to presentation drawings, many architectural 
firms use models of building projects to help convey 
design concepts. Models similar to the one in Figure 1-8 
are often used for public presentations to groups such 
as zoning commissions, citizens’ advisory committees, 
and other regulatory commissions. Model makers need 
basic drafting skills to interpret the working drawings 
so that the model can be an accurate representation of 
the proposed structure. Model makers can be employed 
within a large architectural firm or by a company that 
specializes in modeling.
Specifications Writer
Most architectural and engineering firms have an inter-
nal staff that specializes in written documentation. The 
written specifications that accompany the working draw-
ings, environmental impact reports, and addendums to 
the permit forms are all written by a specifications 
writer. An understanding of basic drafting principles, 
a mastery of grammar and basic English, keyboarding, 
word processing, and spreadsheet skills are all essential 
for a specifications writer. A thorough understanding of 
the Construction Specifications Institute’s (CSI) chapter 
format, which will be introduced in Chapter 14, is also 
required.
Inspector
Municipalities require that the plans and the construc-
tion process be inspected to ensure that the required 
codes for public safety have been met. A plans exam-
iner must be licensed by the state to certify a thorough 
understanding of the construction process and common 
engineering practices. Most states require a degree in 
architecture or engineering for a state or city inspector 
FIGURE 1-7 Drawings are often prepared by an architectural illustrator to help convey design concepts. Courtesy Dean K. Smith, Kenneth 
D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.

12 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
or plans examiner. Most architectural and engineering 
firms also require job inspection as part of their design 
process to ensure that contractors have rigidly followed 
the plans and specifications. This also ensures that 
conflicts between the numerous firms involved in the 
construction process can be resolved to the benefit of 
the client. An inspector or job supervisor is not required 
to be a licensed architect or engineer, but a thorough 
understanding of the drawings and the construction 
process is essential.
GREEN CONSTRUCTION
Reduce, reuse, recycle! No matter what area of the 
design or construction field you enter, an important 
aspect of your career will be a building mind-set that 
revolves around these three words. Whether it is called 
earth-friendly, green, ecological, or sustainable construc-
tion, the concept is to build in a manner that will pro-
duce a structure that uses energy efficiently, that uses 
materials that have a low impact on the environment, 
and that contributes to a healthier workplace. 
One of the leaders in the development of sustain-
able construction is the Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design Green Building Rating System, 
referred to as LEED. LEED is a rating system used to 
evaluate key areas of building projects, such as:
● Sustainable sites
● Water efficiency
● Indoor environmental quality
● Energy and atmosphere
● Material and resources
● Innovation and the design process
Other key organizations that are leaders in green con-
struction will be introduced in Chapter 4, and infor-
mation related to specific materials will be discussed 
throughout the text. As a new CAD technician, you may 
not be making the decisions on how to increase the sus-
tainability of a structure, but in order to advance in an 
office, you must understand key green issues.
Section 2 of this text will examine common fram-
ing methods found in commercial construction. 
Environmentally friendly framing is not just a matter 
of selecting green materials; once selected, these 
green products must be used in a manner that will 
reduce the environmental impact of the structure. 
Products that are not considered green can be used in 
a structure, but they must benefit the building owner 
and the occupants in a manner that contributes to its 
sustainability. Creating an environmentally friendly 
structure requires the matching of materials to a spe-
cific design and site that minimizes the effect on that 
site. Five questions should be considered that will 
affect the selection of materials to make a sustainable 
structure: 
1. Can products be selected that are made from envi-
ronmentally friendly materials?
2. Can products be selected because of what they do not 
contain?
3. Will the products to be used reduce the environmen-
tal impact during construction?
4. Will the products to be used reduce the environmen-
tal impact of operating the building? 
5. Will the products to be used contribute to a safe, 
healthy indoor environment?
Environmentally Friendly Materials
One of the major considerations that affect framing 
materials is the selection of products and construction 
materials that are made from environmentally friendly 
components. The materials used to produce a building 
product, and where those materials came from, are key 
determinants in labeling a product a green building 
material. Points to consider in selecting building mate-
rials include products that can be salvaged, products 
with recycled content, certified green quick-growth 
products, agricultural waste materials, and products 
that require minimal processing. 
Salvaged Products
A major goal of sustainable construction is to reuse a 
product whenever possible instead of producing a new 
one. Common salvaged materials used in buildings 
FIGURE 1-8 Models are used for public displays to convey 
design ideas. Courtesy KOIN Center, Olympia & York Properties, Inc 
(Oregon).

Chapter 1: Professional Careers and Commercial CAD Drafting 
13
include bricks, millwork, framing lumber, plumbing 
fixtures, and period hardware. Each of these mate-
rials is sold on a local or regional basis by salvage 
yards. Depending on the occupancy rating of a struc-
ture, this may not be possible on larger commercial 
projects.
Products with Recycled Content  
Recycled content is an important feature of many 
green products because materials are more likely to be 
diverted from landfills. Industrial by-products such as 
iron-ore slag can be used to make mineral wool insula-
tion, fly ash can be used to make concrete, and PVC 
pipe scraps can be used to make shingles.
Certified Wood Products
Third-party forest certification, based on standards 
developed by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), 
will help to ensure that wood products come from well-
managed forests. Wood products must go through a cer-
tification process to carry an FSC stamp. Manufactured 
wood products can meet the FSC certification require-
ments with less than 100% certified wood content.  
Quick Growth and Waste By-Products 
The use of quick-growth products for framing mate-
rials allows old- and second-growth trees to remain 
in the forest. Rapidly renewable materials are made 
with wood from tree farms with a harvest rotation of 
approximately 10 years to make products such as LVL, 
OSB, and laminated beams. Interior finish products are 
also produced from agricultural crops or their waste 
products. Examples of green products made from agri-
cultural crops include linoleum, form-release agents 
made from plant oils, natural paints, textile fabrics 
made from coir and jute, cork, organic cotton, wool, 
and sisal. Building products can also be produced 
from agricultural waste products made from straw 
(the stems left after harvesting cereal grain), rice hulls, 
and citrus oil. These products can be used to improve 
the interior environment and create an ecologically 
friendly structure.
Engineered lumber products are an example of a 
green building product. Engineered lumber products 
are made by turning small pieces of wood into framing 
members. Structural engineered members are made 
from fast-growing tree species grown on tree farms 
specifically for the purpose of being used to make 
structural materials. Depending on the product to be 
made, sawdust, wood scraps, small pieces of lumber, 
or whole pieces of sawn lumber can be joined by 
adhesives applied under heat and pressure to produce 
engineered building products. Common engineered 
products found throughout a structure include lami-
nated veneered lumber, oriented strand board, engi-
neered studs, I-joists, and laminated beams. Production 
of engineered framing products offers three benefits: 
(1) efficient use of each log that enters the mill, (2) pre-
dictable, superior structural quality, and (3) reduced 
construction waste at the job site. See Chapter 8 for 
additional information.
Minimally Processed Products
Products that are minimally processed can be green 
because of low energy use and low risk of chemical 
releases during manufacture. These can include wood 
products, agricultural or nonagricultural plant prod-
ucts, and mineral products such as natural stone and 
slate shingles.
Removing Materials to Become 
Earth Friendly 
Some building products are considered green, not 
because of their content, but because they allow 
material savings elsewhere, or they are better alterna-
tives to conventional products containing harmful 
chemicals. Chemicals that deplete the ozone, CCA 
wood preservative, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and 
polycarbonate are products that should be avoided in 
a structure, but products with these chemicals may be 
considered earth friendly because the products have 
significant environmental benefits. Some examples 
include drywall clips that allow the elimination of 
corner studs, engineered lumber that reduces lumber 
waste, the piers for a joist floor system that minimizes 
concrete use compared to a post-and-beam system, 
and concrete pigments that eliminate the need for 
conventional finish flooring by using the concrete 
slabs as the finished floor. 
Reducing the Impact of Construction
Some building products produce their environmen-
tal benefits by avoiding pollution or other environ-
mental impacts during construction. Products that 
reduce the impacts of new construction include vari-
ous erosion-control products, foundation products 
that eliminate the need for excavation, and exterior 
stains that result in lower volatile organic compound 
(VOC) emissions into the atmosphere. The greatest 
impact from construction can come from careful 
design that creates a home that suits the site, and a 

14 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
foundation system that requires minimal excavation. 
See Chapters 15 for methods of reducing site impact 
during construction.
Reducing the Impact after Construction
The ongoing environmental impact that results from 
operating a structure will far outweigh the impact 
associated with the construction phase. It is important 
during the design phase to select components that will 
reduce heating and cooling loads and conserve energy, 
select fixtures and equipment that conserve water, 
choose materials with exceptional durability or low-
maintenance requirements, select products that prevent 
pollution or reduce waste, and specify products that 
reduce or eliminate pesticide treatments.
Reducing Energy Demands
Structurally insulated panels (SIPs), insulated con-
crete forms (ICFs), autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) 
blocks, and high-performance windows are examples 
of materials that can be used during construction to 
reduce HVAC loads over the life of the structure. Other 
energy-consuming equipment such as water heaters, 
furnaces, and basic office equipment should be care-
fully selected for their ability to conserve energy after 
construction. Most office equipment is now rated by 
Energy Star™ standards that have been adopted nation-
ally. Energy Star is a government-backed program 
designed to help consumers obtain energy efficiency. 
Using compact fluorescent lamps and occupancy or 
day lighting control equipment can save additional 
energy. Installing efficient equipment as the structure 
is constructed will reduce energy needs over the life of 
the structure. 
Renewable Energy
Equipment that uses renewable energy rather than 
fossil fuels and conventional electricity is highly ben-
eficial from an environmental standpoint. Examples 
for smaller projects include solar water heaters and 
photovoltaic systems. Natural gas fuel cells or cells 
that use other fossil fuels such as a hydrogen source 
are considered green because emissions are lower 
than that of the combustion-based equipment they 
replace. 
Conserving Water
All toilets are required to meet the federal water effi-
ciency standards. Other products, such as rainwater 
storage systems will also contribute to making a struc-
ture earth friendly. 
Reducing Maintenance
Products that reduce maintenance make a structure 
environmentally attractive because those products need 
to be replaced less frequently, or their maintenance has 
very low impact. Sometimes, durability is a contribut-
ing factor to the green designation but not enough to 
distinguish the product as green on its own. Included in 
this category are such products as fiber-cement siding, 
fiberglass windows, slate shingles, and vitrified clay 
waste pipes. 
Preventing Pollution
Methods of controlling substances from entering 
the environment contribute to making a structure 
earth friendly. Alternative wastewater disposal sys-
tems reduce groundwater pollution by decomposing 
organic wastes more effectively. Porous paving prod-
ucts and vegetated roofing systems result in less storm 
water runoff and thereby reduce surface water pollu-
tion. Providing convenient recycling centers within 
the structure allows the occupants to safely store recy-
clables for collection. 
Eliminating Pesticide Treatments
Although they may be needed to increase livability 
in smaller wood-framed structures, periodic pesticide 
treatment around buildings can be a significant health 
and environmental hazard. The use of products such as 
termite barriers, borate-treated building products, and 
bait systems that eliminate the need for pesticide appli-
cation all contribute to a sustainable structure.  
Contributing to the Environment
Product selection has a significant effect on the quality 
of the interior environment. Green building products 
that help ensure a healthy interior living space can be 
separated into several categories including products that 
don’t release pollutants, products that block the spread 
of indoor contaminants, and products that warn occu-
pants of health hazards.
Nonpolluting Products 
One of the dangers of modern construction is the ability 
to make a structure practically airtight. This in itself is 
not a problem, but the adhesives in most products can 
be harmful when constant air changes are not provided. 

Chapter 1: Professional Careers and Commercial CAD Drafting 
15
Products that don’t release significant pollutants into a 
structure contribute to an earth-friendly home. Interior 
products that contribute to improving the interior envi-
ronment include zero- and low-VOC paints, caulks, 
and adhesives, as well as products with very low emis-
sions, such as nonformaldehyde manufactured wood 
products. 
Blocking, Removing, and Warning 
of Contaminants
Certain materials and products are green because 
they prevent contaminants from entering the interior 
environment. Linoleum is available that helps control 
microbial growth. Coated duct board is available that 
helps control mold growth, and products are available 
for blocking the entry of mold-laden air into a duct 
system. Other products can help remove pollutants 
from the shoes of people entering the structure. Each 
of these types of products can help provide an earth-
friendly interior environment. 
Once contaminants have entered the structure, 
several products are available to warn the occupants. 
Examples of warning systems include carbon mon-
oxide (CO) detectors and lead paint test kits. Once 
occupants are aware of environmental dangers, several 
products are available to remove the contaminants. 
Ventilation products, filters, radon mitigation equip-
ment, and other equipment can remove pollutants or 
introduce fresh air. 
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to 
help you keep current with changes in professional 
design careers.  
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.acec.org  
American Consulting 
Engineers Council
www.aceee.org 
American Council 
for Energy Efficient 
Economy
www.aiaonline.com  
American Institute of 
Architects
www.ashrae.org 
American Society 
of Heating, 
Refrigerating, and 
Air-Conditioning 
Engineers
www.asla.org  
American Society of 
Landscape Architects
www.aspenational.com 
American Society of 
Professional Engineers
www.aeinstitute.org 
Architectural Engineering 
Institute 
www.usace.army.mil 
Army Corp of Engineers
www.awa-la.org 
Association for Women 
in Architecture
www.athenasmi.ca 
Athena Sustainable 
Materials Institute
www.buildinggreen.com   
Building Green Inc. 
(This site contains a 
listing of site-related 
links based on LEED 
standards and CSI 
formats.)
www.crbt.org  
Center for Resourceful 
Building Technology
www.corrim.org 
Consortium for Research 
of Renewable Industrial 
Materials
www.thebluebook.com  
Construction Information 
Network
www.csinet.org 
Construction 
Specifications Institute
www.eere.energy.gov 
Department of 
Energy Integrated 
Building for Energy 
Efficiency
www.dbia.org 
Design-Build Institute of 
America
www.enercept.com 
Enercept, Inc. (SIPs)
www.energydesignresources.com Energy Design Resources
www.eeba.org 
Energy and 
Environmental Building 
Association
www.energystar.gov 
Energy Star (appliance 
energy standards)
www.ei.org 
Engineering Information
www.iesna.org  
Illuminating Engineering 
Society of North America
www.ieee.org 
Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics 
Engineers
www.thegbi.org 
Green Building Initiative

16 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
www.greenguard.org 
Green Guard 
Environmental 
Institute
www.greenbuilder.com 
Greenbuilder
www.buildinggreen.com 
GreenSpec
www.noma.net 
National Organization of 
Minority Architects
www.nsbe.org 
National Society of 
Black Engineers
www.nspe.org  
National Society of 
Professional Engineers
www.naima.org 
North American 
Insulation Manufacturers 
Association
www.pge.com 
Pacific Energy Center
www.raic.org 
Royal Architectural 
Institute of Canada
www.scscertified.com 
Scientific Certification 
Systems
www.sara-national.org 
Society of American 
Registered Architects
www.oneshpe.org 
Society of Hispanic 
Professional Engineers
www.same.org 
Society of Military 
Engineers
www.housingzone.com 
Sustainable Buildings 
Industry Council
www.usgbc.org  
U.S. Green Building 
Council
www.wbdg.org 
Whole Building Design 
Guide
www.beconstructive.com 
Wood Promotion 
Network
REVIEW ACTIVITIES
Activity 1-1 Contact your state’s branch of the AIA and 
list the requirements for becoming an architect in 
your state.
Activity 1-2 Visit the “Information for Consumers” 
section of the AIA Web site and list the three areas 
of information found under “Commercial.”
Activity 1-3 List the benefits of using an architect, 
as described in the “Institutional” area of the AIA 
Web site.
Activity 1-4 Visit the National Society of Professional 
Engineers Web site and briefly describe three cur-
rent news items that are listed.
Activity 1-5 Use a search engine to list and describe 
a minimum of five Web sites for structural 
engineers.
KEY TERMS
Architect
CAD technician
CAD technician, senior
Certified Wood Products
Commercial structures
Engineer
Engineer, civil
Engineer, electrical
Engineer, mechanical
Environmentally friendly materials
Green construction
Interior designer
LEED

Chapter 1: Professional Careers and Commercial CAD Drafting 
17
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Using a word processor, type the chapter title, question 
number, and a short complete statement for each question. 
Question 1-1 List the main job responsibilities of a senior 
CAD drafter.
Question 1-2 List several skills or assets needed to become a 
senior CAD drafter.
Question 1-3 List and describe nine careers in which CAD 
drafting could be helpful.
Question 1-4 List three duties a junior CAD technician 
might perform.
Question 1-5 Why would a student in an architecture pro-
gram need to take classes in social science?
Question 1-6 List the Web sites of five architectural or engi-
neering associations in your area.
Question 1-7 Why are engineering students required to 
have such a strong understanding of math?
Question 1-8 Explain the term VOC and explain how it 
relates to construction.
Question 1-9 Why are engineered lumber products consid-
ered earth friendly?
Question 1-10 Contact one member of the AIBD, AIA, or 
ASCE and determine specific requirements for education, 
employment, and advancement in your area.
Professional Careers and Commercial CAD Drafting
CHAPTER 1 TEST

18
2
The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office 
Practice and Procedure
The office that you work in, the size of the staff, and 
the type of project being drawn will all affect the role 
of the drafter. This chapter explores common roles of a 
drafter and common types of drawings included in a set 
of plans. Because most graduates of two-year technical 
and junior college programs work for architectural and 
engineering firms, these will be the only types of draw-
ings explored in this text. This chapter will explore: 
● Common office procedures you’re likely to encoun-
ter as a new technician.
● The types of drawings you’re likely to encounter in 
an architect’s or engineer’s office.
● Common drawing set organization.
● Using the engineer’s calculations, vendor catalogs, 
and codes.
● Common drawing page layout and project coordination.
COMMON OFFICE PRACTICE
The design of a structure starts with the selection of the 
design team. The client typically selects the architectural 
firm based on several common reasons. The reputation 
of the design firm is typically of utmost importance. 
The relationship with previous clients and the abil-
ity to meet the design requirements in a timely and 
economical manner are key elements in any designer’s 
reputation. Previous experience with projects similar to 
the structure to be designed is also an important consid-
eration. Although many large firms work with a variety 
of structures and materials, some smaller architectural 
firms are very specialized in the type of structures they 
design. For instance, some firms work primarily with 
educational structures. Some firms work only with spe-
cific materials such as concrete tilt-up structures or with 
rigid steel frames.
Recommendations from a realtor, builder, or previ-
ous client, as well as marketing also play an important 
part in the selection of an architectural firm.
Once selected, the architectural team can provide 
valuable assistance to the client in the selection of the 
construction site and in the refinement of the design 
criteria. With an understanding of the basic design 
requirements, analysis of the potential site based on 
access, climate, and zoning laws can begin. Chapters 4 
and 5 will provide further information on how building 
codes and accessibility standards affect the design pro-
cess. Other areas such as the shape of the potential job 
site, availability of utilities, topography, soil conditions, 
drainage patterns, and proposed building materials also 
must be considered in the initial stages of design. With 
a specific site purchased, design studies can be done 
to determine the best possible merging of the client’s 
desires with the limitations of the site and the financial 
constraints of the project.
The Role of the CAD Drafter
The experience of the CAD drafter, the number of CAD 
drafters assigned to a project, and the complexity of 
the project will dictate when the CAD technician will 
become involved in the project. The CAD technician 
may be brought into the project at a very early stage 
to set up sheet templates to meet specific needs of the 
projects. As the template is established, drafters need to 
be sure to use established scaling values. See Appendix 
A for common construction drawing scales. Typically, 
a CAD drafter will become involved in the completion 
of the preliminary drawings that make up the design 
presentation. This includes work on the site plan, floor 
plan, elevations, and sections so that the key elements of 
the design can be presented to the client. One of the first 
needs of the designer is a layout of the site. Working 
with drawings provided by a civil engineer, the archi-
tectural team can start the preliminary site plan. On 
simpler projects the technician may need to draw the 
lot boundary and other items such as the street and curb 
(see Chapter 15).
After the designer has developed a concept site plan, 
floor plan, and exterior elevations, the technician may 
be directed to clean up the drawings. This work might 
include developing a site or building section, calculating 
areas, numbering parking spaces, or adding text such as 
room names, reference grid lines, and dimensions. The 
technician may also be asked to assist in preparing pre-
sentation drawings by adding color, texture, and foliage 

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
19
to the various drawings. These drawings will be used 
to present and explain the project to the client, control 
committees, planning commissions, lenders, and other 
similar groups. 
Design Development
The next step for the technician will probably be to 
further refine the drawings to work out drawing con-
flicts, and to get preliminary input from consultants to 
make sure that the necessary space has been provided 
for their needs. This is a time to carefully review the 
project again to make sure that the project still complies 
with code requirements. One major item that should be 
checked is the exit path (see Chapter 4). Another item 
to review is the requirements for firewalls for occupancy 
or area separation. Once these reviews have been done, 
background drawings required by consultants need to 
be prepared. Consultants for the project may include a 
civil engineer, landscape architect, electrical engineer, 
mechanical engineer, and structural engineer, among 
others. These consultants will add to the drawings cre-
ated by the architectural technician or incorporate the 
technician’s drawings into their projects. This basic 
design information from the consultants will then be 
returned to the architect so that any necessary adjust-
ments can be made.
Construction Documents
Once all the adjustments have been incorporated into 
the preliminary drawings, the technician begins the 
biggest job, preparing the working drawings. Most 
likely the first thing to be done is issuing new base 
sheets to the consultants. Getting the revised base 
sheets out to the consultants first will allow them to 
be developing their drawings while the technician is 
completing the  architectural drawings. The aim here 
is to have the consultants’ drawings completed simul-
taneously while staff members at the architect’s office 
complete the architectural drawings.
After the consultants’ drawings have been distrib-
uted, the technician can continue developing all of the 
architectural working drawing sheets. During this pro-
cess, changes may develop that impact the information 
that has been sent to the consultants. It is very impor-
tant to keep communication lines open, informing the 
consultants of these changes and distributing new base 
sheets if necessary. Information may also flow the other 
way. The consultants may need updates to be made to 
the design to make their system work. The mechanical 
engineer may need a shaft added to adequately distrib-
ute the heating, ventilation, air-conditioning (HVAC); 
the structural engineer may need to add a sheer wall or 
column. This information will need to be incorporated 
into the drawings and distributed to the other con-
sultants. The use of external referenced drawings can 
greatly aid in this communication.
Depending on the size and complexity of the project, 
a structural engineering firm will work in conjunction 
with the architectural firm to analyze the forces that will 
be imposed on the structure. Chapter 13 will introduce 
common structural considerations affecting the design 
of a structure. The structural engineer might provide 
calculations, framing plans, structural elevations and 
sections, and details for the architectural firm to use to 
complete the project or might provide a complete set 
of structural drawings to accompany the architectural 
drawings. In either case, CAD drafters will be required 
to ensure that materials required to meet all of the math-
ematical calculations of the engineer have been incor-
porated into the drawings. CAD drafters will also be 
required to incorporate information supplied by several 
other firms including mechanical, electrical, plumbing, 
lighting, and interior design firms.
Permit and Bidding Stages
Once the working drawings have been completed and 
the consultants’ drawings have been received, the draw-
ings are assembled, printed, and submitted to the build-
ing department. The building department will check 
the drawings and frequently will require corrections to 
be done. The technician will make these corrections so 
the project can be resubmitted to the building depart-
ment. Once the corrections have been completed and 
the drawings rechecked by the building department, a 
building permit can be issued.
At some time during this process, the plans will be 
issued to contractors so that they can prepare a bid for 
the project. It is normal for the plans to be issued prior 
to the building department completing their plan check. 
When changes and corrections are made to the plans it 
will be necessary to inform the bidding contractors of 
those changes so that they can make appropriate price 
adjustments to their bid.
Construction Phase 
After the contractors have turned in their bids, one of 
them will be selected as the general contractor to build 
the project. The building permit will not normally be 
issued until the general contractor has been named. 
During the construction process, the general contractor 
will normally submit shop drawings to the architect’s 
office. Shop drawings are prepared by subcontractors 
and show a level of detail beyond that which is in the 
working drawings. The technician may be asked to 
check the shop drawings to see if they are in general 
compliance with the working drawings. During the 

20 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
construction process, unanticipated conditions may 
arise that necessitate changes to the working drawings. 
The technician may be asked to prepare the drawings 
for these changes. 
TYPES OF DRAWINGS
Commercial projects often contain five major types of 
drawings:
● Procurement drawings are issued for bidding or nego-
tiating before an agreement is signed.
● Contract drawings describe the work required to 
complete the project.
● Resource drawings show existing conditions or new 
work not included in the project.
● Addenda drawings and modification drawings—Both 
types of drawings are known as supplemental draw-
ings. Addenda drawings are used to amend the work 
during the bidding process but prior to the awarding 
of the contract. Modification drawings are used to alter 
or revise an element of the working drawings after the 
drawings have been released for construction.
The majority of the information that is provided 
in Sections 3 and 4 is devoted to preparing contract 
drawings.
Drawing Organization
Commercial drawing sets often include more than 100 
sheets of 24" × 36" or 30" × 42" drawings. Because of 
the size and scope of most commercial projects, draw-
ings are arranged by subsets of related information. 
Based on the National CAD Standards (NCS), these 
common drawing groups, and their order within the 
drawing set include:
G—General
H—Hazardous Materials
V—Survey Mapping
B—Geotechnical
C—Civil
L—Landscape
S—Structural
A—Architectural
I—Interiors
Q—Equipment
F—Fire Protection
P—Plumbing
D—Process
M—Mechanical
E—Electrical
T—Telecommunications
R—Resource
X—Other Disciplines
Z— Contractor/Shop Drawings
O—Operations
The letter that precedes each subset name will be 
used in the page numbering system to reference the 
subset. The NCS refer to this letter as the sheet type 
designator. Page numbering will be introduced later in 
this chapter. Not all of these subsets will be required for 
each project, and some projects may require additional 
subsets depending on the scope, size, and complexity 
of the project. The most common drawing subsets and 
their order in the completed drawing set include:
C—Civil 
S—Structural
A—Architectural 
I—Interiors
P—Plumbing
M—Mechanical
E—Electrical
Separate consulting firms that are coordinated by the 
architectural firm usually prepare these drawings. On 
smaller projects, the architectural team may prepare 
these drawings based on recommendations from con-
sulting firms. 
Note: Even though the NCS recommends that struc-
tural drawings be placed before the architectural 
drawings, in order to help better understand the 
process, the architectural drawings will precede the 
structural drawings in Sections 3 and 4 of this text.
Drawing Set Organization
Regardless of the source of origination, CAD drafters 
will be employed to develop each type of drawing. The 
first page of most commercial plans is a title page, which 
contains a table of contents similar to the one seen in 
Figure 2-1. Other items that should be placed on the 
title page include: 
● The name and contact information of the project 
owner.
● The name, logo, and contact information for the 
project architect and each consulting firm respon-
sible for some aspect of the plans. 

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
21
● A rendering or a photograph (for franchise struc-
tures) of the project.
● A list of abbreviations, project data, a location map, 
and general notes relevant to the entire project. 
Drawing Set Page Designators
For a very simple project that will be completely drawn 
by the architectural team, drawings within the project 
can be numbered in successive order using a designa-
tor such as A-1, A-2, A-3. Most projects require a more 
thorough system of sheet designators. Common sheet 
designators for a single-level structure include:
0—General information such as symbols, legends, 
and notes specific to the subset
1—Plan views
2—Elevations
3—Sections 
4—Large-scale views such as plans, elevations, stair 
sections, or sections that are not details
5—Details
6—Schedules and diagrams
7—User-defined sheets that do not fall into other 
categories such as typical detail sheets
8—User-defined sheets that do not fall into other 
categories
9—3D drawings including isometric perspectives 
and photographs
This numbering system would be used for each subset 
throughout the project.
For multiple-level structures, a modified version of 
this system is used. The categories remain the same, but 
instead of using a single digit, a number based on 100 
is used. Floor plans for a three-level structure would be 
numbered:
101—First floor plan
102—Second floor plan
103—Third floor plan
With this expanded system, 1 represents a floor 
plan, and the 01 represents the first floor. A number 
starting with 00 is not permitted by the NCS. These 
numbers are also used throughout each of the subsets 
to aid in coordination. Sheet A-102 would contain 
the architectural floor plan for the second level; sheet 
S-102 would contain the second structural framing 
plan; and E-102 would contain the electrical plan for 
the second level.
Civil Drawings
Drawings that are related to the construction site typically 
follow the title page. Each drawing is numbered in succes-
sive order starting with C-1 (Civil) or L-1 (Landscape). 
Figure 2-2 shows an example of a commercial site plan. 
FIGURE 2-1 The title page, the first sheet of each project, 
typically contains a table of contents to help print readers 
use the drawings effectively. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, 
Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

22 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 2-2 A commercial site plan can be completed by a CAD technician working for an architect or a civil engineer. Courtesy Peck, 
Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
23
Depending on the complexity of the project and the site, 
the site drawings might include an existing site plan, a 
proposed site plan, a grading plan, a utility plan, an irriga-
tion or sprinkler plan, and a landscape plan.
Each of these drawings will be introduced in 
Chapter 15.
Architectural Drawings
The architectural drawings are placed in the working 
drawings in the subset represented by the letter A. The 
architectural drawings are the drawings that describe 
the size and shape of a structure. They are prepared by 
or under the direct supervision of an architect. Common 
architectural drawings for a commercial project include 
floor plans, enlarged floor plans, elevations, wall sec-
tions, roof plan, reflected ceiling plan, interior eleva-
tions, finish schedules, and interior details. Each type of 
architectural drawing will be introduced in Section 3. 
Structural Drawings
As their name implies, these are the drawings used to 
construct the skeleton of the structure. Engineers or 
CAD drafters working directly under the supervision 
of the engineer prepare these drawings. Structural 
drawings will be discussed in Section 4 and are placed 
in the working drawings in the subset represented by 
the letter S. Structural drawings include the framing 
plans, foundation plan, and related sections and details. 
Figure 2-3 shows an example of a framing plan drawn 
by CAD drafters working in an engineering firm.
Cabinet and Fixture Drawings
On structures with few cabinets, the interior details and 
elevations similar to Figure 2-4 are part of the architec-
tural drawings. On structures such as a restaurant or a 
medical facility that will contain a magnitude of spe-
cialty  cabinet (or trim) drawings, these drawings will be 
in their own section and be in successive order starting 
with I-1 (for Interiors). This section will also include 
details covering interior trim and specialized equip-
ment, as well as cabinets. Figure 2-5 shows an example 
of interior drawings for a commercial kitchen.
Electrical Drawings
The electrical drawings include the electrical plans, 
lighting plans, equipment plans, and related schedules 
and details needed to completely specify the electrical 
requirements of the structure. For simple projects, CAD 
technicians working for the architectural firm might 
complete the electrical drawings. Electrical drawings 
for larger projects are prepared by CAD drafters work-
ing under the direct supervision of a licensed electrical 
engineer. These drawings will be successively arranged 
starting with drawing E-1 or E-101. The preparation of 
electrical drawings and details for commercial plans will 
not be discussed in this text.
Mechanical Drawings
The drawings that are used to show the movement of 
air throughout the structure make up the mechani-
cal drawing portion of a project. These drawings will 
be successively arranged starting with M-1 or M-101. 
Several schedules and details are also typically very 
instrumental to these drawings. The preparation of 
mechanical drawings and details will not be discussed 
in this text.
Plumbing Drawings
The plumbing drawings are used to show how fresh 
water and wastewater will be routed throughout the 
structure. Plumbing drawings, schedules, and details 
are successively arranged starting with page P-1 or 
P-101. The preparation of plumbing drawings and 
details will not be discussed in this text.
WORKING WITH CALCULATIONS
With so many different types of drawings and so many 
different firms contributing to the structure, an inexpe-
rienced drafter could easily get lost in the developmen-
tal process of a structure. To ensure that all required 
information is incorporated in the drawings, architects 
and engineers typically provide a set of calculations 
and sketches for the drawing team to use in order to 
complete the plans. The calculations for the structural 
drawings are usually required to be signed by an archi-
tect or engineer and must be submitted to the building 
department with the completed drawings in order for a 
building permit to be obtained.
Figure 2-6 shows a portion of one page of an engi-
neer’s calculations. Typically, calculations are divided 
into three sections that include a problem statement, 
mathematical solution, and the material to be used 
to meet the imposed stress. In Figure 2-6, the engineer 
is determining the size of two beams and how they will 
be connected. Although it is important that the drafter 
understand basic structural principles to advance in 
the field, the technician will not be expected to do 
structural calculations. Sections 3 and 4 will introduce 
concepts the drafter should be familiar with to complete 

24 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 2-3 The structural drawings show how to construct the skeleton of a structure. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf 
Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
25
FIGURE 2-5 Drawings to describe special equipment in a structure are often drawn by drafters employed by a consulting firm. 
Courtesy Halliday Associates.
FIGURE 2-4 Cabinet drawings and interior elevations are drawn by the architectural team. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns Architects, P. C.

26 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
structural drawings. The CAD drafter’s role is to be sure 
that the third portion of the calculations—the solu-
tion—is correctly placed on the drawings and to draw 
the connecting detail.
Although the layout of the calculations can take 
many forms, usually the loads are determined from 
the top of the structure to the foundation. This allows 
loads to be accumulated as formulas are completed for 
the upper levels and used to solve problems at lower 
levels. Figure 2-7 shows the framing detail that was 
created to comply with the engineer’s design. Notice 
that some information in Figure 2-7 was not specified 
by the engineer’s sketch. As a drafter gains experi-
ence and knowledge of the construction industry, the 
drafter is expected to be able to complete the detail. 
Depending on the engineer and the experience of the 
drafting team, the calculations may or may not contain 
sketches. When an engineer is specifying a common 
construction method to a skilled team, usually a sketch 
will not be provided. Chapter 6 provides an introduc-
tion to drawing common construction details.
USING VENDOR CATALOGS
Closely related to the use of the engineer’s calcula-
tions is the use of vendor catalogs. Common sources of 
building materials include the Internet, Sweets Catalogs, 
Architects’ First Source for Products, and the local yellow 
pages of your phone book. The World Wide Web is 
an excellent source for obtaining materials related to 
every phase of construction. Sweets is a collection of 
vendor catalogs that is available in book, CD-ROM, and 
Internet formats. Published yearly, Sweets has become a 
staple of every architectural firm as a convenient source 
for construction materials and supplies. Information is 
listed using the numbering system of the Construction 
Specifications Institute’s MasterFormat, which will be 
discussed in Chapter 14. Architects’ First Source is 
an index of materials with a short listing of the prod-
uct descriptions and performance features. Book and 
Web site options are available. Yellowpages.com or the 
yellow pages of your area phone book are also excellent 
sources of local suppliers. Most firms will gladly supply 
written specifications or construction details on disk or 
CD-ROM to help ensure the use of their products.
FIGURE 2-6 The engineer’s calculations provide the math-
ematical proof that components in the structure will resist all 
loads and stresses. Courtesy Dean Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architects & 
Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 2-7 A framing detail based on the calculations shown 
in Figure 2-6. Courtesy Ginger M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architects & 
Associates, Inc.

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
27
As seen in Figure 2-6, the engineer has specified 
a particular column cap to be used. Notice that no 
information is supplied about the cap other than the 
manufacturer and the model number. The drafter 
is expected to be able to research a specific product 
and completely specify the product on the working 
drawings. Figure 2-8 shows a sample listing from the 
Simpson Strong-Tie brochure for standard column 
caps. The sizes and bolting for the required connector 
can be obtained from the company’s Web site, or from 
their display in Sweets Catalogs.
WORKING WITH CODES
In addition to using calculations and vendor catalogs, 
a CAD technician will also be required to have a 
working knowledge of the building code that governs 
the municipality where the structure will be built. 
Chapter 4 introduces basic code considerations for 
design and construction.
Building codes address two general categories in the 
design of a structure. To ensure public safety, most 
aspects of a code relate directly to either fire protection 
W1
11/4"
"
11/4" 11/4"
3"
4"
3"
L
H1
11/2
"
W2
21/2
FIGURE 2-8 CAD drafters are often required to consult vendor catalogs to find needed information to complete drawings. Courtesy 
Simpson Strong-Tie Co., Inc.

28 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
or the ability of a material or portion of a structure to 
resist collapsing under the loads that will be resisted. 
The first concern of building codes, fire resistance, is 
broken down into three general areas: (1) the tendency 
of a material to fail by combustion, (2) the tendency 
of a material to lose its strength once a fire has broken 
out, and (3) methods of fire containment. You will be 
introduced to basic code requirements as you progress 
throughout this text.
The second major concern of the building code is the 
ability of the materials and the structure as a whole to 
resist loads. Building codes typically use either the work-
ing stress method or the factored load method to assure 
the safety of a structure. Each method deals with the 
resistance of loads from stress on materials and the pre-
determined ability of a material to resist stress. Chapter 
13 will provide an introduction to forces that affect the 
design of a structure. Subsequent chapters will explain 
how these stresses are resisted throughout a structure.
Although the architect or engineer will complete the 
majority of work with codes, it is important for the drafter 
to have a basic understanding of the code. The architect 
will determine the size, height, and type of materials to 
be used in construction, based on a thorough knowledge 
of the code. The drafter will need an understanding of 
the code to comprehend many of the components that 
will be added to a drawing. This will require knowledge 
of basic code layout and, specifically, an understanding 
of the chapters dealing with basic building requirements 
based on a specific type of construction.
DRAWING PLACEMENT
Just as you should develop an outline before writing a 
research paper, thought should be given to the draw-
ings needed to describe a construction project. The 
drawing layout must be one of the first things consid-
ered in planning a project. General office practice is to 
plan the drawing requirements and placement prior to 
starting the working drawings. The general order of a 
set of drawings was introduced earlier in this chapter. 
As the drawing layout is being planned, the placement 
on the page should be carefully considered. Great care 
must be taken, however, when several drawings will be 
placed on the same sheet. The architect, engineer, or 
project coordinator will typically provide new drafters 
with a sketch of the intended page layout along with 
individual sketches of each drawing to be placed on the 
page. These sketches of the proposed project are similar 
to an outline that is developed for a written project. The 
sketches provide a tentative layout for the placement of 
each plan, elevation, section, schedule, and detail that 
is anticipated.
When all drawings are complete and printed, they 
will be assembled into a set and bound along the left 
margin. The larger the sheets used, the more likely that 
drawings, notes, or parts of drawings placed on the left 
side of the sheet will not be seen. Whenever only one 
drawing is to be placed on a sheet, it should be placed 
near the right margin, leaving any blank space on the left 
(or binding) side. This same guideline should be used if 
smaller drawings, such as details, are to be placed with 
a large drawing. Placing the details on the left could 
cost the print reader needless time in skimming the 
drawings because the details might not be seen. Details 
placed on the right side can be clearly seen while the 
reader thumbs through the drawing. It is true that the 
print reader should be careful when examining a set 
of drawings; however, anything the drafter can do to 
improve communication should be done.
Another consideration in placing details is to place 
them as close as possible to where they occur, still being 
careful that small drawings will not be lost. The layout 
in Figure 2-9 places the detail close to its source and 
in a location where it can’t be hidden by other pages. 
Wherever possible on symmetrical drawings, place the 
detail symbol where the right side can be seen.
When positioning drawings together, it is impor-
tant that the limits of each drawing not interfere with 
its neighboring drawing. Lettering from one drawing 
should not be intertwined with a neighboring drawing. 
Some offices share text between two drawings, as seen 
in Figure 2-10. Text that relates only to the drawing on 
the right should be separated to avoid confusion. Other 
offices use a layout similar to Figure 2-11, which places 
details in neat rows with no shared text. Another option 
is to use a grid system similar to Figure 2-12. All boxes 
do not need to be the same size, but the box edges must 
align. Care must be taken to number the detail grids in 
an orderly manner. Order can vary, with the numbering 
of details starting in any one of the corners, but the same 
order of progression should be used throughout the 
project. Text assigned to details’ symbols will be further 
discussed as the drawings are being coordinated.
Keep in mind that there is no one correct way to 
arrange details. When entire sheets will be filled with 
details, it is important to have a logical order to their 
arrangement. Figure 2-13 shows a section of a brick 
wall. Notice that three details are required to completely 
explain this component. These details have been placed 
in an order that matches their arrangement within the 
section. 
Another consideration in placing details throughout 
the drawing set is to place them in groups according 
to the labor force that will do the work. Roof drawings 
should not be mixed with concrete drawings because 

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
29
FIGURE 2-9 The smaller the detail, the more important that it be placed on the right side of the page to avoid being ignored as pages are skimmed. Details should also be placed as 
close as possible to the drawing that they reference. Courtesy G. Williamson Archer A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.

30 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 2-10 Text can be shared between two similar details to save space and drawing time. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
31
FIGURE 2-11 Careful placement of details and other small drawings is critical to good page clarity. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

32 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 2-12 Many offices arrange details in neat rows and columns surrounded by a border to add clarity to each drawing. Courtesy G. Williamson Archer A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
33
FIGURE 2-13 Placing details near the source of the reference and using a logical order of presentation can aid the print reader. 
Courtesy G. Williamson Archer A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.

34 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
two completely different work crews will complete 
those jobs. If possible, place all concrete details with 
the foundation plan, or on a separate sheet following 
the foundation, and all roof details with the roof plan or 
very close to it. Chapters 3 and 6 will present additional 
information regarding details and their placement.
PROJECT COORDINATION
Completion of the last drawing is no cause to celebrate. 
All working drawings must now be coordinated. The 
architectural office will arrange all of the architectural 
drawings and each consulting engineer will be respon-
sible for the coordination of his or her drawings. 
Consulting firms will provide electronic copies ready 
to be added to the project. Drawing coordination  
involves the placing of each page in its final order within 
the drawing set and assigning numbers to each page and 
detail. Project coordination is typically done working 
with a small paper copy of each sheet. Pages are usually 
arranged in the order presented earlier in this chapter. 
Although this order will vary for each office and from 
job to job, the placement of drawings in the subset 
should match the National CAD Standards as much as 
possible to aid the print readers. 
Assigning Page Numbers
A space in the lower-right corner of the title block is 
generally reserved for the display of the page number. 
Two methods of page numbering have been introduced. 
As long as the drawings communicate effectively, they 
can be arranged in either order, based on office proce-
dure. Generally, offices try to maintain a similar order 
for each of their jobs so that bidders and construction 
crews will have a sense of familiarity with their plans. 
Sheets that contain abbreviations or symbols should be 
placed very early in the drawing set.
Assigning Detail References
Once the page numbers have been assigned, details on 
each specific page can be numbered. Each detail should 
have a detail symbol that shows the detail number over 
the page number. A title is often placed near the detail 
symbol similar to the drawing shown in Figure 2-13. If 
the project manager has not assigned a title, determine 
a suitable title by asking the question “Why did I draw 
this detail?” No fair using an answer such as “I was 
paid.” The title should reflect the contents or the goal of 
the drawing. The text used for titles and detail numbers 
is usually between 1/8" and 1/4" high. A uniform height 
should be used throughout the entire project. Pages, 
details, and scales are usually placed in 1/8"-high text. 
One of two methods is typically used to assign detail 
numbers:
● Some offices assign consecutive numbers for each 
detail on a specific page, but begin with 1 for every 
page containing a detail, as shown in Figures 2-11 
and 2-12.
● Other offices opt to begin numbering with detail 1 on 
page 1, and then to use consecutive numbering for 
all subsequent details through the end of the draw-
ing set. This method eliminates having several details 
with a detail number of 1.
Once every detail in the project has been assigned 
a detail and page number, each reference to the detail 
must be represented on the plan, elevation, or sec-
tion where it occurs. Junior drafters are often given a 
check print with all numbers assigned to be filled in. 
Experienced drafters are generally expected to coordi-
nate a project without the benefit of a check print. This 
is best done by working with a paper copy of each draw-
ing. Although the detail does not have to be referenced 
to every occurrence on a plan view, it should be marked 
so that there is no confusion about where a particular 
detail occurs. Referencing every occurrence of the detail 
would often decrease drawing clarity and take unneces-
sary drawing time. The print reader is required to make 
intelligent decisions regarding where every occurrence 
of the detail will take place.
REVISIONS
No matter how carefully a set of drawings is prepared, 
portions of the drawing set might need to be revised. 
Common causes for revisions are:
● Changes in building codes after the drawings were 
completed but before the building permits were 
issued.
● Changing owner or tenant requirements.
● Changes occurring at the job site.
● Errors by the design team.
To make all users of the plans aware of the change, 
an addendum is issued. An addendum is a written noti-
fication of the changes, along with a drawing showing 
the new design requirements. Figure 2-14 shows an 
example of a revised framing plan. Notice that a portion 
of the drawing is encircled by a squiggly line to draw 
attention to the changes. A number inside a triangle 
is also used to draw attention to the changes that have 
been made from earlier prints.

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
35
The number relates to a note that is then placed 
somewhere on the page to explain the required changes. 
Many offices have a specific portion of the title block 
or the drawing area reserved for revision references or 
explanations.
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to 
help you keep current with changes in professional 
design careers.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
Major research tools:
www.afsonl.com  
Architects’ First Source for 
Products
www.sweets.com  
Sweets Building Product 
Information
Major testing labs, quality assurance, and inspection 
agencies:
www.apawood.org  
APA—The Engineered 
Wood Association
www.etl.go.jp  
ETL Testing Services
www.fmglobal.com/researchstandard_testing/research.html
 
Factory Mutual Research
 
Corporation
www.itsglobal.com  
Intertek Testing Services
www.ul.com  
Underwriters Laboratories 
Inc.
www.wwpa.org  
Western Wood Products 
Association
Other U.S. and federal agencies related to construction:
www.access-board.gov  
U.S. Architectural and 
Transportation Barriers 
Compliance Board
www.eren.doe.gov 
U.S. Department of 
Energy’s Energy Efficiency 
and Renewable Energy 
Network
www.epa.gov  
U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency
www.nara.gov/fedreg  
Federal Register—The 
Government Printing Office
FIGURE 2-14 Revisions are often enclosed by a squiggly line to draw attention to the change. The number 2 inside the triangle refers 
to a notation in the title block. In this case, floor elevations have been added in two places on the drawing since the last printing. 
Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

36 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
www.nist.gov 
National Institute of 
Standards and Technology
www.thomas.loc.gov  
Thomas (Federal legislative 
information, status of bills, 
Congressional Record, and 
related information)
Other agencies that impact building codes:
www.ansi.org  
American National 
Standards Institute
www.astm.org  
American Society for 
Testing and Materials
www.nfpa.org  
National Fire Protection 
Association
In addition to these regulatory agencies that influence 
construction, architects and engineers often consult sev-
eral related organizations to ensure quality materials. 
These agencies and their Web sites include:
www.aia.org 
The American Institute of 
Architects
www.csinet.org 
The Construction 
Specifications Institute
www.ieee.org 
Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, Inc.
www.iafconline.org  
International Association of 
Fire Chiefs
www.iccsafe.org 
International Code Council
www.iec.ch  
International 
Electrotechnical 
Commission
www.iso.ch  
International Organization 
for Standardization
www.ncma.org  
National Concrete Masonry 
Association
www.nibs.org 
National Institute of 
Building Sciences
The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office 
Practice and Procedure
CHAPTER 2 TEST
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Using a word processor, type the chapter title, question 
number, and a short complete statement for each question. Use 
material in the Appendix found on the CD as necessary.
Question 2-1 List the three major portions of a set of 
calculations.
Question 2-2 How is information arranged in the Sweets 
Catalogs?
Question 2-3 List the four main national building codes.
Question 2-4 Where should small details be located in the 
drawing area? Explain your answer.
Question 2-5 Explain the guidelines for labeling details.
Question 2-6 Describe methods of arranging details on 
a page.
Question 2-7 What does drawing coordination entail?
Question 2-8 List and describe two common methods of 
assigning page numbers.
Question 2-9 List two methods of describing revisions.
Question 2-10 What is an addendum?
Use Figures 2-7 and 2-8 to answer the following questions:
Question 2-11 List the quantity and size of bolts to be used 
to connect a CC68 to a 6 × 8 column.
Question 2-12 How many bolts will be needed to connect a 
CCO68 to a 6 ×12 beam?
Question 2-13 How much uplift can a CC88 resist?
KEY TERMS
Architectural drawings
Cabinet drawings 
Calculations
Civil drawings
Construction documents
Drawing coordination
Electrical drawings
Mechanical drawings
National CAD Standards
Plumbing drawings
Preliminary drawings
Structural drawings

Chapter 2: The CAD Drafter’s Role in Office Practice and Procedure 
37
Question 2-14 When would a CCO cap be useful and how 
is it attached?
Question 2-15 How many pounds can an ECC106 
support?
Use Figure 2-6 to answer the following questions:
Question 2-16 The letter L represents the length of the 
beam. What length of beam will be used?
Question 2-17 The letter P is used to represent the loads on 
the beam. What loads will this beam support?
Question 2-18 List the size of the beams to be supported.
Question 2-19 List three connectors that will be used at this 
beam intersection.
Question 2-20 List the size, quantity, and location of the 
bolts to be used with the column cap.

38
3
Applying AutoCAD Tools 
to Commercial Drawings
This chapter will provide an overview and practical 
application of the computer skills necessary to produce 
a set of drawings. It is assumed that you have com-
pleted an entry-level CAD drafting class prior to work-
ing through this text and that you are working with 
AutoCAD 2004 or newer. This chapter will help you 
utilize your CAD skills to prepare a set of commercial 
drawings. Consideration will be given to:
● The use of computers in architectural and engineer-
ing offices.
● Managing the drawing environment.
● Managing drawing properties with a template.
● Managing efficient use of drawing templates, assem-
bling drawings for plotting at multiple scales, using 
the XREF command, working with multiple docu-
ments, and using DesignCenter.
● Management of drawing information.
● Management of drawing files and folders.
CAD INFLUENCES IN ARCHITECTURAL 
AND ENGINEERING OFFICES
The use of computers in the construction industry 
has had a substantial impact on the design and docu-
mentation of a structure. Given the magnitude of the 
project size and the number of professionals to be 
coordinated, the use of computers has greatly aided 
the management and production of architectural proj-
ects. This text assumes you have mastered basic CAD 
skills and will attempt to help you understand how 
the skills taught in those classes relate to construction 
drawings.
Working Drawings
Computers are a valuable tool for drawing and coordi-
nating the working drawings of a structure. Figure 3-1
shows a detail of open-web steel floor trusses inter-
secting a steel column that was completed by a CAD 
drafter. 
Mathematical Calculations
Third-party software programs that work within 
AutoCAD are available to provide many of the math-
ematical calculations required for structural analysis. 
Programs have been available for several years to 
design wood, steel, and concrete beams and supports. 
Computer models of a structure can also be created 
to analyze how specific features of a structure, and the 
entire structure as a whole, will react under various 
loading conditions. These studies can be used to deter-
mine how a structure will respond to wind pressure, 
floodwater, or an earthquake of a specific magnitude. 
Software programs are also available for designing static 
and fatigue calculations to predict repair and mainte-
nance cost. Third-party software is available to provide 
computer analysis of heat loss. Many programs will also 
show the average outdoor temperature and the average 
amount of energy needed to reach specific temperatures 
within the structure. Cost comparisons can be deter-
mined based on predicted weather patterns, cost of a 
specific fuel, and predicted efficiency of a heating unit.
Three-Dimensional Drawings
Software innovations by AutoCAD and third-party 
developers provide the ability to draw 3D drawings 
similar to Figure 3-2. These drawings can be used to 
help develop the working drawings as well as the artistic 
drawings for preliminary planning. In addition to 3D 
and wire-frame drawings, one of the biggest advances in 
the architectural field is the use of solid models. Once 
drawn, the structure can be rotated so that the client 
can view the structure at any angle; also, the drawing 
can depict the shade that would be generated at specific 
times of the day, at any specified time of the year.
Three-dimensional models can also be used to pro-
vide the client with a walk-through of the structure 

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
39
before the working drawings are even started. These 
models can save huge amounts of time by providing 
insight to placement of heating ducts, electrical con-
duits, and various piping runs. Placement problems, 
which may not be easily identified in 2D drawings, often 
can be identified in 3D drawings.
MANAGING THE DRAWING 
ENVIRONMENT 
A well-drawn set of plans doesn’t just happen because 
you’ve worked really hard. Long hours and hard work 
may be required, but they will not assure that effective 
FIGURE 3-1 Computers are used to aid CAD drafters, architects, and engineers in nearly every phase of drawing development. 
Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.
FIGURE 3-2 Three-dimensional drawings can be drawn and rendered using AutoCAD and third-party software. Courtesy Ginger 
M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architects & Associates, Inc.

40 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
communication can take place. Facilitating effective 
communication between the owner, the design team, 
consultants, and the construction team requires plans 
that accurately present information in a clear, concise 
format similar to the drawing in Figure 3-3. This can 
be accomplished by complying with industry standards 
for presenting information, by organizing material in an 
orderly fashion within the project, and by presenting 
information in a uniform way within each drawing of 
the project.
National CAD Drawing Standards
Unlike other areas of drafting, there is no one standard 
way of doing things in the field of architecture. Each 
office has its own standard. The office standard can 
even vary based on time constraints, or the fees that 
have been set for the project. The need for a drawing 
standard has been hindered by the mindset that archi-
tects were part artist. As computers, the Internet, and 
the World Wide Web dominate the office setting, most 
professionals have found that a standard method for 
creating drawings is a must. A uniform drawing stan-
dard offers the following advantages as offices share 
information:
● Consistent display of information for all projects, 
regardless of the project type or client. 
● Seamless transfer of information among team mem-
bers and consulting architects, engineers, and design 
professionals.
● Reduced preparation time for translation of electronic 
data files between different proprietary software file 
formats; predictable file translation results. 
● Reduced data file formatting and setup time. 
● Reduced staff training time to teach “office standards.”
Several organizations have worked to provide the 
industry with a uniform drawing standard. Among the 
leaders in developing a CAD standard are:
● The National Institute of Building Sciences publishes 
the National CAD Standard. More information can be 
obtained at www.nibs.org.
● The Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) pub-
lishes the Uniform Drawing Standard (UDS)—a stan-
dard consisting of eight modules that cover drawing 
set organization, sheet organization, drafting conven-
tions, terms and abbreviations, symbols, notations, 
and general regulatory information. More informa-
tion can be obtained at www.csinet.org.
● The American Institute of Architects (AIA) publishes 
the CAD Layer Guidelines. More information can be 
obtained at www.aia.org.  
These groups have come together and developed 
the National CAD Standard. This standard is a set 
of standards based on AIA CAD Layer Guidelines; 
CSI Uniform Drawing System, modules 1–8; and Tri-
Service (and U.S. Coast Guard) Plotting Guidelines. 
The National CAD Standard is published by the 
National Institute of Building Sciences. The most 
recent edition of this standard is the U.S. National 
CAD Standard, Version 4.0. This text will present key 
features of the standard. Verify with your instruc-
tor what standards will govern your projects. If you 
are allowed to modify one of the base models or the 
standards presented in this text, just remember to be 
consistent. 
Working with Complex Drawings 
One of the biggest challenges a new CAD drafter will 
face when completing commercial projects is the dif-
ference in size and complexity when compared to 
residential projects. Combined with the fact that the 
drafter is now working on a project as part of a team, 
good computer skills will be essential. Three skills that 
will be essential in working with the drawings include: 
(1) using the XREF command to create drawings, (2) 
creating views to move about a drawing, and (3) using 
layouts to display drawings.
External Referenced Drawings 
External referencing is executed by using the AutoCAD 
XREF command. The command provides an effective 
method for working with related drawings when 
multiple firms will be collaborating on a project. 
Floor-related drawings provide an excellent example 
of drawings that can be referenced. A CAD techni-
cian working for the architect can be working on the 
floor plan while other consultants are working on the 
structural, electrical, or mechanical plans. A technician 
for the architectural team can draw information in a 
base drawing that will be reflected on all other plan 
drawings. Copies of this drawing file can then be given 
electronically to other firms that will develop related 
drawings.  
An externally referenced drawing is similar to a 
wblock, in that it is displayed each time the master 
drawing is accessed. This drawing is not stored as part 
of the master drawings file. It is brought into other 

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
41
FIGURE 3-3 To facilitate effective communication between the owner, the design team, consultants, and the construction team 
requires plans that accurately present information in a clear, concise format. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

42 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
drawing files for viewing, but it does not become part 
of the current drawing base. Only the name of the ref-
erenced drawing and a small amount of information 
are stored in the new drawing base. Attaching drawings 
using XREF also helps when sheets containing details 
with multiple scales must be plotted. In addition to 
simplifying the assembly of multiple drawings for plot-
ting, this method ensures that stock details are current. 
If a stock detail must be changed to reflect new code 
requirements, the base detail can be corrected and all 
drawings that contain the referenced drawing will be 
automatically updated. Figures 3-4a, 3-4b, and 3-4c 
show examples of a base drawing and information 
that has been attached to create the floor and framing 
drawings. 
Note: Because the use of referenced drawings is so 
prevalent when compiling commercial drawings, 
students should be prepared to demonstrate skill 
with the XREF command when applying for a job. 
One of the best methods for improving your use of 
this command is to reference information to base 
drawings as you complete a project from Section 3 
and Section 4 of this book.
Creating Views 
On small drawings, the ZOOM command is a con-
venient way to navigate around a drawing. On larger 
commercial drawings using the ZOOM command 
can be slow. You can overcome this by using the 
PARTIALOAD or PARTIALOPEN commands, or by 
using the VIEW command. When you work with 
large files, the PARTIALOAD and PARTIALOPEN 
commands can be used to allow a specific portion 
of the drawing to be accessed. If the entire drawing 
is to be opened, the VIEW command can be used to 
display specific areas of the drawing. The command 
allows specific areas to be named, saved, and quickly 
retrieved and magnified. Figure 3-5a shows a partial 
sheet of details that are unreadable because of the 
ZOOM magnification required to show the full width 
of the details. Figure 3-5b shows the results of using 
FIGURE 3-4a The XREF command can be used to attach a drawing to another drawing. The information contained in the attached 
drawing is not stored in the base drawings. Each time the base drawing is updated, all drawings that are attached to it will also be 
updated. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
43
FIGURE 3-4b The drawing shown in Figure 3-4a is used as the base for the floor plan shown here as well as the drawings that will be 
prepared by the mechanical, electrical, and plumbing contractors. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.
FIGURE 3-4c The framing plan is completed by an engineering firm that uses the base drawing created by the architectural team. 
The drawing is attached using XREF, and then the needed material is added to the drawing by the engineering team. Courtesy Domelen/
Looijeng/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers..

44 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 3-5a The display of an entire drawing is often too small to be read while viewing the screen. Courtesy David Jefferis, StructureForm 
Masters, Inc.
FIGURE 3-5b The VIEW command allows specific areas of the drawing to be named and saved within the drawing file. View names 
can be assigned to a specific zone of a template before a drawing is even started. Once named, movement between named views can 
be quickly accomplished. Courtesy David Jefferis, StructureForm Masters, Inc.
the VIEW command to display the DTL-3/4. Although 
a ZOOM window could have been used, establishing 
named views once in the drawing template is a much 
quicker method of being able to move between areas of 
a complicated drawing.
Layouts 
A layout is a paper space tool that consists of one 
or more viewports to aid plotting. Layouts allow 
the ease of plotting associated with single drawing 
files and the benefits of referenced drawings to be 

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
45
used in displaying multiple drawings for display and 
plotting at varied scales. To understand the process 
of viewing a drawing in a layout, visualize a sheet 
of 24" × 36" vellum with a title block and border 
printed on the sheet. Imagine a hole, the viewport, 
cut in the vellum that allows you to look through 
the paper and see the floor plan on another sheet of 
vellum. Figure 3-6 shows the theory of displaying a 
drawing in model space in a layout created in paper 
space. This is a simplified version of what is required 
to display a drawing for plotting. Now imagine the 
floor plan shown is 90'–0" wide in model space. If 
you were to hold a sheet of D-size vellum in front of 
the plan, the paper would be minute. To make the 
floor plan fit inside the viewport in the paper, you’ll 
have to hold the paper a great distance away from 
the floor plan until the drawing is small enough to 
be seen through the hole. AutoCAD will figure the 
distance as drawings are placed in the viewport. By 
entering the desired scale factor for plotting, the floor 
plan is reduced to fit inside the viewport and main-
tain a scale typically used in the construction trade. 
Multiple viewports can be placed in a single layout, 
and multiple layouts can be created within a single 
drawing file. Multiple viewports will be discussed 
later in this chapter.
MANAGING DRAWING PROPERTIES 
WITH A TEMPLATE 
Most schools and all professionals have drawing tem-
plates to reflect who they are. A template drawing 
is a base drawing file prepared for a specific class or 
company that contains all the typical settings normally 
required for a specific type of drawing. If you need to 
create your own template, it should include:
● A border and title block with company- and job-
specific attributes.
● Common settings for units of measurements for lines 
and angles.
● Drawing limits.
● Layers.
● Scaling information.
● Linetypes.
● Lineweight.
● Text styles and formatting settings. 
● Text specific to the title block.
● Dimension styles and formatting settings.
Border, Title Blocks, 
and the Drawing Area
Key elements of a template are the border, title block, 
and drawing area. Drawing borders are thick lines 
that surround the entire sheet. Top, bottom, and 
right-side borderlines are usually offset 1/2" in from 
the paper edge. The exact size will vary depending on 
plotting limitations. The left border is approximately 
1 1/2" from the edge of the paper to allow for space 
to staple the drawing set. Template drawings are 
usually created for plotting projects on a specific size 
such as: 
English 
Metric
Size C: 24 × 18 inches 
Size C: 610 × 460 mm
Size D: 36 × 24 inches  
Size D: 915 × 610 mm
Size E: 48 × 36 inches  
Size E: 1220 × 915 mm
The title block contains information about the 
client, designer, sheet management information, and 
sheet contents. As seen in Figure 3-7, the title block is 
generally located along the right edge of the drawing 
template. Key elements of architectural title blocks 
will be introduced later in this chapter. Additional 
information regarding production of the drawing is 
generally located near the left border. The production 
VIEWPORT
BORDER
EDGE OF PAPER
DRAWING CREATED
IN MODEL SPACE
TEMPLATE DRAWING
CREATED IN PAPER
SPACE
FIGURE 3-6 One viewport is automatically provided with each 
drawing layout. Additional viewports can be created to allow 
multiple drawings to be inserted into a drawing and be plotted 
at different scales.

46 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
information describes the storage location of the 
drawing sheet. Common information that might be 
provided includes:
● File path
● Sheet file name
● Reference files
● Layers plotted
● Default settings
● Overlay drafting 
control data
● Pen assignments
Drawing Area 
The drawing area is the area that lies between the 
drawing borders. It is the space that contains drawings, 
general sheet notes, keynotes, key plans, schedules, 
and any other graphic information necessary to illus-
trate a specific portion of a project. In most profes-
sional offices, the drawing area is divided into modules, 
similar to those represented in Figure 3-7. The lines, 
numbers, and letters that define the modules should 
be placed on a non-plotting layer. The size of each 
module will vary depending on the size of the draw-
ing sheet, the size of the drawing area, and common 
sizes of drawing blocks that are typically inserted into 
the template. Although the actual size of the modules 
may vary with each office, sizes should remain constant 
within each office to allow for the creation of a library 
of stock details to be developed. A constant module size 
will also allow for objects to be easily moved from one 
sheet to another.
Drawing Area Coordination System The drawing 
area modules are arranged in horizontal rows and 
vertical columns. Each column is identified by a 
number starting with 1 on the left and progressing 
sequentially to larger numbers for the columns on 
the right side of the drawing area. Rows are labeled 
by letters, with row A on the bottom, and moving 
sequentially through the alphabet to the top of the 
page. This labeling system allows individual modules 
to be identified by a letter and a number. Module A1 
will be in the lower-left corner of the drawing area, 
and module E6 is located in the upper-right corner of 
the drawing area. 
C:\MY DOCUMENTS\CURRENT PROJECTS\MILLER\FLOOR PLAN
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
B
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 3-7 A drawing template should contain a title block, a reference for drawing production information, drawing borders, and 
the drawing area.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
47
Drawings often occupy more than one module. A 
plan view typically fills most of the drawing area, pro-
viding little use for the module system. The modules 
provide an excellent reference system to define specific 
portions of the plan. The modules are very helpful for 
defining space for pages filled with details and partial 
sections. Depending on the size of a detail, one detail 
can be assigned per module. For larger details, two 
or more modules can be used to contain the draw-
ing. When a drawing fills more than one module, the 
module group is referenced by the letter and number for 
the lower-left corner of the module group. This can be 
seen in Figure 3-8 where information has been placed 
in four groups of modules. Each filled module would be 
referenced as: 
● The single module is C3.
● The double module is B4.
● The group of 4 is D3.
● The group of 10 is A5.
When this system is used to define drawing space, 
details can be assigned to a module, and then the 
module identifier can be used to specify the detail, 
allowing drawings to be identified early in the drawing 
process. The numbering system also allows for a consis-
tent location throughout the drawing set. 
Units of Measurement 
The units of measurement should be included in a 
template drawing. Architectural and engineering units 
are the units of measurement normally associated with 
construction drawings. With the exception of large-
scale site drawings that are drawn using the engineering 
units, most architectural drawings use architectural 
units. This would produce numbers that are expressed 
as 125'–6 3/4". Occasionally, offices use engineering 
units that express numbers in decimal fractions, such 
as 75'–3.5". The unit of measurements selected can 
be changed throughout a drawing session, but office 
C:\MY DOCUMENTS\CURRENT PROJECTS\MILLER\FLOOR PLAN
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
B
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 3-8 The drawing area should be divided into drawing modules that are placed on a non-plotting layer. The modules can be 
used to reference the placement of details within the drawing sheet. If a detail is placed in two or more modules, the module is refer-
enced by the identification letter and number of the lower-left corner of the group.

48 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
standard should dictate the unit used for a template of a 
particular type of drawing.
Angle Measurement 
Decimal degrees expressed as 28.30° and surveyor’s 
units expressed as N30°30'15"E are the two most 
common methods of angular measurement used on 
construction drawings. More important than the 
method of expressing the measurement is adjusting 
the starting point from which angles are measured. 
Standard AutoCAD setup allows for 0° to be mea-
sured from the three o’clock position. This is not 
appropriate for site-related drawings. Common office 
practice for adjusting the direction of north is to 
draw the site plan while assuming north is at the top 
of a page. This may result in property lines that are 
not parallel to the border of the paper. Once drawn, 
however, the site plan and the north arrow can be 
rotated so that the longest property line is parallel to 
a border. 
Drawing Limits 
The limits for a drawing template should be set for 
both the model and layout views as the template is 
created. Buildings should be drawn at full scale in 
model space. Completed drawings are plotted in paper 
space at a reduced scale. What will be seen in each 
setting can be controlled by the use of the LIMITS 
command. 
● Set the limits for model space at approximately 
150' × 100'. It is important to remember that a draw-
ing can be started with the limits set to any convenient 
size, and that the model space limits can be adjusted 
at any point throughout the drawing session.
● Set the limits for the viewport in paper space based 
on the size of the paper that will be used for plotting. 
Select the desired display scale for the model space 
from the Viewports toolbar.
Naming Layers 
On drawing projects involving multiple design firms, 
a uniform layer and drawing filing naming system will 
aid efficiency. Although layers are used on all draw-
ings, they are particularly important to a template 
drawing. Layers can be created, saved, and reused for 
all similar drawings in a template drawing. Layering 
can be especially useful in assigning particular line-
types and colors to specific layers of the template. 
Because of their importance to a template, and to aid 
in coordination between consultants, layer titles must 
be consistent between each member of the design 
team. To increase drawing uniformity between con-
sulting firms, the CAD layer standards developed by 
the National CAD Standards (NCS) should be used. 
The U.S. National CAD Standards are incorporated 
in the AIA CAD Layer Guidelines that are used by 
many architectural firms. Copies of the standards can 
be obtained from the National Institute of Building 
Sciences (NIBS) at www.nibs.org. The NCS recom-
mends using a layer name consisting of four portions 
to the title, including:
1. Discipline designator
2. Major group name
3. Minor group name
4. Status code
These name subcomponents are recommended 
because they are not all needed for very simple projects. 
A layer name can be composed of the discipline des-
ignator and major group name. A minor group name 
and status code can be added to the sequence for more 
complex projects. Figure 3-9 shows an example of how 
a layer name might be composed. 
Discipline Designator
The names of NCS drawing subsets were presented in 
the previous chapter. The letter of the drawing subset 
is used to represent the discipline designator. Key 
LAYER NAME FORMAT
DISCIPLINE CODE - 1 CHARACTER THAT BREAKS THE LIST 
INTO MANAGEABLE SECTIONS USING THE SAME DIVISIONS 
AS A MODEL  NAME  (A, C, E, F, L, M, P,  AND S). 
MAJOR GROUP - 4 CHARACTERS.  USED TO DEFINE
THE BUILDING SYSTEM CONTAINED ON THE LAYER
SUCH AS DOOR, EQPM, FLOR, FURN, OR WALL.
MODIFIER - 4 CHARACTERS. THIS IS 
OPTIONAL TEXT FOR DIFFERENTIATION 
OF MAJOR GROUPS. HRAL, IDEN, LEVL, 
OTLN, RISR, SPCL, OR STRS.
STATUS - 1 CHARACTER USED 
TO SPECIFY THE STATUS OF 
THE MATERIAL ON THAT LAYER 
SUCH AS E, D, F, M, N, T, OR  X.
FIGURE 3-9 Layer names should be based on the abbrevia-
tions created by the National CAD Standards to describe the 
contents of each layer. By using a uniform system, architects, 
engineers, and consultants can easily produce a coordinated 
set of drawings.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
49
designators that will be used for the projects included 
in this text include:
Discipline Designator 
Description
G  
General drawings
C  
Civil drawings
L  
Landscape drawings
S  
Structural drawings
A 
Architectural drawings
I  
Interior drawings
Z  
Contractor/shop drawings
In addition to using the single letter to represent 
the discipline designator such as A for Architectural 
drawings, a second letter can be added to clarify the 
type of work on the layer. Examples of two-letter dis-
cipline designators within the Architectural category 
include:
Discipline Designator 
Description
A 
Architectural
 AD 
 Architectural demolition
 AE 
 Architectural elements
 AF 
 Architectural finishes
 AG 
 Architectural graphics
 AS 
 Architectural site
 AJ or AK 
 User-defined
Consult the National CAD Standards for a complete 
list of discipline designators.
Major Group Name
The major group name is a four-character code that 
identifies a building component specific to the defined 
layer. Major group layer codes are divided into the major 
groups of architectural, civil, electrical, fire protection, 
general, hazardous, interior, landscape, mechanical, 
plumbing, equipment, resource, structural, and telecom-
munication. Codes such as ANNO (annotation), EQIP 
(equipment), FLOR (floor), GLAZ (glazing), and WALL 
(walls) are examples of major group codes that are asso-
ciated with the architectural layers. A complete listing of 
major codes for each group can be found in the National 
CAD Standards. User-defined names are not permitted 
at this level.
Minor Group Name
The minor group name is an optional four-letter code 
that can be used to define subgroups to the major 
group. The code A FLOR (architectural–floor) might 
include minor group codes for OTLN (outline), LEVL 
(level changes), STRS (stair treads or escalators), 
EVTR (elevators), or PFIX (plumbing fixtures). A 
layer name of A FLOR IDEN would contain room 
names, numbers, and other related titles or tags. A 
complete listing of minor group codes specific to each 
discipline is listed in the National CAD Standards. 
Figure 3-10 shows samples of common layer names 
and their contents.
ARCHITECTURAL LAYER NAMES
ANNOTATION 
A-ANNO-DIMS
A-ANNO-KEYN
A-ANNO-NOTE
A-ANNO-NPLT
A-ANNO-NRTH
A-ANNO-REVS
A-ANNO-REDL
A-ANNO-SYMB
A-ANNO-TEXT
A-ANNO-TTLB
DIMENSIONS
KEY NOTES
NOTES
NON-PLOTTING INFORMATION
NORTH ARROW
REVISIONS
REDLINE
SYMBOLS
TEXT
BORDER & TITLE BLOCK
A-ANNO-LEGN
LEGENDS & SCHEDULES
FLOOR PLAN 
A-FLOR-EVTR
A-FLOOR-FIXT
A-FLOR-FIXD
A-FLOR-HRAL
A-FLOR-NICN
A-FLOR-OVHD
A-FLOR-PFIX
A-FLOR-STRS
A-FLOR-TPIN
ELEVATOR CAR & EQUIPMENT
FLOOR INFORMATION
FIXED EQUIPMENT
HANDRAILS
EQUIPMENT NOT IN CONTRACT
OVERHEAD ITEMS (SKYLIGHTS)
PLUMBING FIXTURES
STAIR TREADS
TOILET PARTITIONS
ROOF PLAN 
A-ROOF
ROOF
A-ROOF-OTLN
ROOF OUTLINE
A-ROOF-LEVL
ROOF LEVEL CHANGES
A-ROOF-PATT
ROOF PATTERNS
BUILDING OUTLINES
FINISHES & TRIM
ELEVATIONS
MATERIAL BEYOND SECTION CUT
COMPONENT IDENT. NUMBERS
ELEVATIONS
A-ELEV
A-SECT-MBND
A-SECT
SECTIONS
A-SECT-IDEN
A-ELEV-IDEN
A-ELEV-FNSH
A-ELEV-PATT
A-ELEV-OTLN
COMPONENT IDENT. NUMBERS
SECTIONS
TEXTURES & HATCH PATTERNS
MATERIAL CUT BY SECTION PLANE
A-SECT-PATT
A-SECT-MCUT
TEXTURES AND HATCH PATTERNS
FIGURE 3-10 Sample layer names and their contents based 
on the National CAD Standards use a discipline code, major 
group name, minor group name, and status group format.

50 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Status Code
The status code is an optional single-character code 
that can be used to define the status of either a major 
or minor group. The code is used to specify the phase 
of construction. The layer names for the walls of a floor 
plan (A WALL FULL) could be further described using 
one of the following status codes:
Status Field Code 
Description
D 
Existing to demolish
E 
Existing to remain
F 
Future work
M 
Items to be moved
N 
New work
T 
Temporary work
X  
Not in contract
1-9 
Phase numbers
Common Scales Used 
on Commercial Drawings
The term scale has two meanings for the CAD techni-
cian. Scale is used to refer to a measuring tool that 
you’ve most likely mastered in your introductory 
drawing classes. The term scale also refers to using 
a ratio that is used to reduce or enlarge the size of a 
drawing for plotting. Even though you’ll be drawing 
with a highly accurate computer, the end product of 
your work will typically be a paper copy. Electronic 
copies of your drawings can be sent to collaborators 
around the world using the World Wide Web, but the 
most common end use of your drawings will be printed 
copies that are reduced to a scale common to the con-
struction industry. Your drawings are created at full 
size. When finished, these drawings will be reduced in 
size to fit on paper. The amount of reduction, or scale 
factor, is determined during the initial planning stages 
of the project. The scale that is chosen will be influ-
enced by the paper size and the complexity of the proj-
ect. This section will introduce common scales used in 
commercial construction including architectural, civil, 
and metric scales.  
Architect’s Scale
An architect’s scale typically contains 11 different 
scales. One is a standard foot divided into inches, with 
each inch divided into 1/16" intervals. This scale is 
known as full scale and may be listed as FULL SCALE 
or represented by the numbers 1/1. The other scales use 
ratios based on inches/feet. Common scales found on an 
architect’s scale and their uses include:
● The scales 3/32" = 1'–0", 1/8" =1'–0", 3/16" = 1'–0", 
and 1/4" = 1'–0" are common scales for creating 
plan views. 
● The 3/8" = 1'–0" scale is used for drawing interior 
elevations and simple building sections that do not 
require large amounts of detailing.
● The 1/2" = 1'–0" and 3/4" = 1'–0" scales are recom-
mended for drawing enlarged floor plans to supple-
ment detailed areas of the small-scaled plan, wall 
sections, and common construction details.
● The 1" = 1'–0" and 1 1/2" = 1'–0" scales are used for 
drawing details.
● The 3" = 1'–0", half, and full scales are recommended 
for door and window details and cabinet details as 
well as detailed intersections and connections.
Civil Engineering Scale
A civil engineering scale is used to draw and verify 
measurements on land-related drawings such as site 
plans, maps, or subdivision plats. The basic civil draw-
ing scales are 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60. The typical 
use of these numbers would be multiples of 10, 100, 
or 1000, so that 1" = 10', 1" = 100', or 1" = 1000'. 
Multiples can be used for any of the other five base 
numbers.
Occasionally, on very large projects, 1" = 20', 1" = 
10', and 1" = 5' scales are used for the same purposes 
as the 1/16" = 1'–0", 1/8" = 1'–0", and 1/4" = 1'–0" 
architectural scales.
Metric and the Construction Industry
Federal law mandated in 1988 that the metric system 
is to be the preferred system of measurement for the 
United States. Federal agencies involved in construction 
agreed to the use of metric in the design of all federal 
construction projects as of January 1994. Although 
most firms are still working with traditional units of 
measurement, metric measurement is required on all 
federal projects. Although the construction industry 
does not have one uniform standard, metric guidelines 
expressed throughout this text are based on the recom-
mendations of the Metric Guide for Federal Construction, 
the International Building Code, and the Construction 
Metrication Council.
Basic Metric Units
Although many in the construction industry are not 
familiar with metric units (SI), the system is logical and 
easy to use. Six base units of metric measurement are 

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
51
typically used in the construction industry, as Table 3-1 
shows.
The numerical base of the metric system is 10, with 
all functions either a multiple or decimal fraction of 10, 
as shown in Appendix A. Each linear unit is smaller or 
larger than its predecessor by a factor of 10, each square 
unit by a factor of 100, and each volume by a factor of 
1000. 
The basic module in construction will be based on 
100 mm (about 4"). The preferred order for submodules 
and their approximate inch equivalent are 50 mm (2"), 
25 mm (1"), 20 mm (3/4"), 10 mm (3/8"), and 5 mm 
(3/16"). The preferred order for multiple modules and 
their approximate inch/foot equivalents are 300 mm 
(about 12"), 600 mm (2'), 1200 mm (4'), 3000 mm 
(10'), and 6000 mm (20').
Metric Scales
Common metric scales used in construction and their 
uses listed from largest to smallest include: 
1:1  
Door, window, and cabinet details
1:2 
Door, window, and cabinet details
1:5 
Door, window, and cabinet details
1:10 
Wall sections and construction details
1:20 
 Enlarged floor plans, wall sections, and 
construction details
1:30 
Interior elevations
1:50 
Floor plans, elevations, and sections
1:100 
Floor plans, elevations, and sections
1:200  
Floor plans, elevations, and sections
1:500  
Site plans
1:1000 
Site plans
1:1250  
Site plans
1:2500  
Site plans
1:5000  
Site plans
1:Smoot 
 Used by Lambda Chi Alpha for measur-
ing important objects
Metric Conversion Factors
The International Building Code (IBC), many construc-
tion suppliers, and this text feature dual units where 
measurements are specified. Conversion from impe-
rial units to metric units can be done by hard or soft 
conversions. Hard conversions are made by using a 
mathematical formula to change a value of one system 
(for example, 1") to the equivalent value in another 
system such as 25.4 mm. A 6 × 12 inch beam using 
hard conversion methods would now be a 152 × 305 
mm (6 × 25.4 and 12 × 25.4). Soft conversions change 
a value from one system, such as 1", to a rounded value 
in another system such as 25 mm. A 6 × 12 beam 
using soft conversion would be a 150 × 300 mm. Many 
construction products can be soft converted and still be 
reliable in metric form. Hard conversions will be used 
throughout this text for all references to minimum stan-
dards listed in the IBC. All other references to metric 
sizes will be soft converted. Common conversion factors 
from imperial to metric can be seen in Appendix B.
Care must be taken in rounding numbers so that 
unnecessary accuracy is not specified. Remember that 
it is easiest for field personnel to measure in 10 mm or 
5 mm increments. Generally, any dimension over a few 
inches long can be rounded to the nearest 5 mm (1/5") 
and anything over a few feet long can be rounded to the 
nearest 10 mm (2/5"). Dimensions between 10' and 50' 
can be rounded to the nearest 100 mm, and dimensions 
over 100' can be rounded to the nearest meter.
Uncommon But Useful Conversions
Time between slipping on a peel  
1 Bananosecond 
and smacking the pavement:
Two monograms:  
1 Diagram 
Ratio of an igloo’s circumference  
Eskimo Pi 
to its diameter:
1 kilogram of figs:  
1 Fig Newton 
Basic unit of laryngitis:  
1 Hoarsepower 
1000 aches:  
1 Kilohurtz 
Time it takes to sail 220 yards at  
Knot-furlong 
1 nautical mph:
365.25 days of drinking less-filling  
1 Lite year 
low-calorie beer:
1000 cubic centimeters of wet socks: 1 Literhosen 
1,000,000 bicycles:  
2 Megacycles 
1,000,000 microphones:  
1 Megaphone 
1/1,000,000 of a fish:  
1 Microfish 
1/1,000,000 of a mouthwash:  
1 MicroScope 
453.6 graham crackers:  
1 Poundcake 
Half of a large intestine:  
1 Semicolon
Quality  
Unit  
Symbol
length  
meter  
m 
mass (weight)  
kilogram  
kg 
time  
second  
s 
electric  
current ampere  
A
temperature  
kelvin  
K 
luminous intensity  
candela  
cd 
TABLE 3-1 Base Units of Metric Measurement in the 
Construction Industry

52 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Metric Paper and Scale Sizes
Because of the abundance of preprinted paper, many 
professional firms might not convert to metric paper 
sizes. Metric projects can be plotted on standard draw-
ing paper. The five standard sizes of metric drawing 
material are: 
A0: 1189 × 841 mm (46.8 × 33.1 in.)
A1:  841 × 594 mm (33.1 × 23.4 in.)
A2:  594 × 420 mm (23.4 ×16.5 in.)
A3:  420 × 297 mm (16.5 × 11.7 in.)
A4:  297 × 210 mm (11.7 × 8.3 in.)
When drawings are to be produced in metric, an 
appropriate scale should be used. Metric scales are 
true ratios and are the same for both architectural and 
engineering drawings. A conversion of common archi-
tectural and engineering scales to metric is shown in 
Appendix B. 
Many of the scales traditionally used in architec-
ture cannot be found on a metric scale. Although this 
does not affect CAD drafters, print readers do require 
scales that are easy to work with. With the print 
reader in mind, preferred metric drawing scales and 
their approximate inch/foot equivalents are shown in 
Appendix B.
Expressing Metric Units on Drawings
Units on a drawing should be expressed in feet and 
inches or in the metric equivalent, but not as dual units. 
Metric dimensions on most drawings should be repre-
sented as millimeters. The “mm” symbol does not need 
to be placed after the specified size. Large dimensions 
on site plans or other civil drawings can be expressed 
as meters and should be followed by the “m” symbol 
so that no confusion results. When expressing sizes in 
notation, mm should be used. Plywood thickness would 
be noted as
12.7 MM STD. GRADE PLY ROOF SHEATHING
Chapters 7 through 11 will discuss the effects of metric 
conversion on specific building materials. Chapter 14 
covers other guidelines for expressing written metric 
measurements. Appendix B contains guidelines for 
writing metric symbols and names.
Common Linetypes on 
Construction Drawings
Guidelines established by the American National 
Standards Institute (ANSI) and the National CAD 
Standards are used throughout the construction indus-
try to ensure drawing uniformity. Common linetypes 
include object, hidden, center, cutting plane, section, 
break, phantom, extension, dimension, and leader. 
Examples of these lines can be seen in Figure 3-11. 
Specific uses for each linetype will be discussed 
throughout the text.
Note: AutoCAD will assign lengths to each line seg-
ment based on the LTSCALE settings. A review of 
the LTSCALE command will be provided after each 
linetype is reviewed.
Object Lines 
Object lines are continuous lines used to describe the 
shape of an object or to show changes in the surface of 
an object. Object lines can be thick or thin depending 
on how they are being used. Figure 3-12 shows thick 
lines used to represent walls on a simple framing plan. 
Figure 3-13 uses both thick and thin object lines to 
represent material in a detail. Office standards for line 
thickness will vary greatly, but it is important that a 
detailer use line widths that allow easy identification of 
key features.
Hidden Lines
Dashed or hidden lines are thin lines used to represent a 
surface or object that is hidden from view. Hidden lines 
THIN
BOLD
VERY BOLD
THIN
THIN
THIN
VERY BOLD
BREAK LINES
LEADER LINES
EXTENSION LINES
DIMENSION LINES
CENTER LINES
CENTERPOINTS
DIMENSIONING
GRID LINES
CONTINUOUS LINES
OBJECT LINES, 
WALL LINES, OR 
GRADE LINES
OUTLINES
SECTION LINES
HIDDEN OBJECTS, OR
BEAMS IN PLAN VIEW
BEAMS IN PLAN VIEW
HIDDEN
PHANTOM
PROPERTY,
SETBACKS, OR
LIMITS OF A SURFACE
FIGURE 3-11 Common linetypes found throughout construc-
tion drawings.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
53
are also used to represent beams, the outline of surface 
materials, or surface changes in plan views. Figure 3-12 
shows the use of hidden lines to represent the beams 
that support the upper floor.
Centerlines
A centerline is composed of thin lines that create a long-
short-long pattern. AutoCAD will control the length 
and space of each portion of the line. Centerlines are 
used to locate the center axis of circular features such 
as drilled holes, bolts, columns, and piers. They are 
also used to represent the center axis of pipes, circular 
steel columns, and other round objects. Centerlines 
also represent dimensions that extend to the center of 
interior wood or steel stud walls. Figure 3-12 shows 
the use of centerlines to represent the outline of the 
upper floor.
Note: AutoCAD can reproduce each of the linetypes 
that contains a line pattern, but the lengths of the 
lines need to be adjusted based on the scale that will 
be used to display the drawing. 
Cutting Plane Lines
A cutting plane line is placed on the floor or fram-
ing plan to indicate the location of a section and the 
direction of sight when viewing the section. Cutting 
planes are represented by a long-short-short-long line 
pattern. The section line is terminated with arrows to 
indicate the viewing direction. Place a letter at each 
end of the line using 1/4" high text to indicate the 
view or a detail reference bubble. Figure 3-12 shows 
examples of cutting planes (D, F, and G) and line 
terminators. 
Section Lines
When an object has been sectioned to reveal its cross- 
section, a pattern is placed to indicate the portion of 
the part that has been sectioned. In their simplest 
form, section lines are thin parallel lines used to indi-
cate what portion of the object the cutting plane has 
cut. Section lines are usually drawn at a 45° angle. 
Angles between 15° and 75° can be used, but should 
not be parallel or perpendicular to any part of the 
object that has been sectioned. If two adjacent parts 
have been sectioned, section lines should be placed at 
opposing angles. Section lines should be placed using 
the HATCH command. Section lines are generally 
used only to represent masonry in plan or sectioned 
views. Most materials have their own special pattern. 
Figure 3-13 shows varied hatch patterns used to rep-
resent concrete masonry units (CMUs), brick, and 
insulation. 
Break Lines
Break lines are used to remove unimportant portions 
of an object from a drawing so that it will fit into a 
specific space. The three common break lines used on 
construction drawings are short, long, and cylindri-
cal break lines. A short break line is a thick jagged 
17
17
U
L
M
G
G
A
D
D
F
F
17'
5'-10"
12'-8"
8'-8"
4'-0"
16'-8"
5'-6"
4'-0"
10'-11 1/2"
3'-0"
16'-6"
10'-4"
2'-6"
3'-0"
4'-0"
6'-4"
6'-2"
5'-10"
1'-0"
3'-6"
4'-8"
2'-4"
3'-0 1/2"
5'-11"
7'-10"
4'-0"
42'-0"
7'-8"
8'-10"
4'-2"
11
11
7
7
11
11
12
12
15
15
6
2 X 8 F.J.- SEE
2 X 8 F.J.- SEE
1/2" PLY 
1/2" PLY 
SHEAR
SHEAR
PANELS
PANELS
2 X 8 F.J.- SEE
2 X 8 F.J.- SEE
SCHEDULE PAGE
SCHEDULE PAGE
# 8 FOR SPACING
# 8 FOR SPACING
1/2" PLY 
1/2" PLY 
SHEAR
SHEAR
PANELS
PANELS
6 X 12 HDR.
6 X 12 HDR.
4 X 10
4 X 10
SUR410 HGRS.
SUR410 HGRS.
4 X 6 
4 X 6 
POST W/
POST W/
CB46BASE
CB46BASE
&CC 5|-6
&CC 5|-6
CAPS
CAPS
5_ X 13\ GLU-
5_ X 13\ GLU-
3-2 X 6
3-2 X 6
3-2 X 6
3-2 X 6
2-2 X0
2-2 X0
HDR.
HDR.
4 X 6
4 X 6
4 X 6
4 X 6
2-2
2-2
FLU
FLU
5_ X 12 FLUSH
5_ X 12 FLUSH
 GLU-LAM
 GLU-LAM
4 X 12
4 X 12
4 X 12
4 X 12
4 X 12
4 X 12
4 X 12
4 X 12
2 X 10 F.J. @ 24" O.C.
2 X 10 F.J. @ 24" O.C.
2 X 10 F.J. @ 24" O.C.
2 X 10 F.J. @ 24" O.C.
2 X 10 F.J.
2 X 10 F.J.
@ 24" O.C.
@ 24" O.C.
2 X 10 F.J. @ 16" O.C.
2 X 10 F.J. @ 16" O.C.
2 X 10 F.J. @ 16" O.C.
2 X 10 F.J. @ 16" O.C.
FIGURE 3-12 Examples of common linetypes used on com-
mercial projects can be seen in this framing plan for a multi-
level wood-framed office structure. Assigning varied linetypes 
to a specific layer in a drawing template can save a great deal 
of drafting time. Courtesy Michael Jefferis.

54 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
line placed where material has been removed. A long 
break line is a thin line with a zigzag shape or inverted 
S shape inserted into the line at intervals. A cylindri-
cal break line is a thin line resembling a backward S. 
Examples of each type of break line can be seen in 
Figure 3-14.
Phantom Lines
Phantom lines are thin lines in a long-short-short-long 
pattern that are used to represent the location of a cut-
ting plane, to show motion, or to show an alternative 
position of a moving part. They can also be used in 
place of centerlines to represent upper levels or projec-
tions of a structure, or on site plans to represent ease-
ments or utilities. Examples of phantom lines can be 
seen in Figure 3-11.
Extension Lines
Extension lines are thin lines used to relate dimension 
text to a specific surface of a part. See Figure 3-12. 
Provide a space between the object being described 
and the start of the extension line. Extend the exten-
sion line about 1/8" past the dimension line. An exten-
sion line can cross other extension lines, object lines, 
centerlines, hidden lines, and any other line, with 
one exception: An extension line can never cross a 
dimension line. Future chapters will introduce other 
guidelines for placing extension lines using the various 
commands for placing dimensions. Extension lines 
should be placed using the dimensioning tools of 
AutoCAD.
Dimension Lines
Dimension lines are thin lines used to relate dimension 
text to a specific part of an object. See Figure 3-12. 
Dimension lines extend from one extension line to 
another. Dimension lines require a line terminator 
where the line intersects the extension line. The ter-
minator is usually a tick mark or a solid arrowhead. 
Dimension text is typically 1/8" high text. Dimension 
text should be placed centered over the dimension 
line, although it might need to be placed off-center 
to aid clarity when several lines of text are near one 
another. The space between the dimension text and the 
dimension line should be equal to half the height of the 
dimension text. Dimension lines should be placed using 
the dimensioning tools of AutoCAD. Future chapters 
will provide specific uses of dimension lines and dimen-
sion text as the various commands for dimensioning are 
introduced.
Leader Lines
Leader lines are thin lines used to relate a dimension 
or note to a specific portion of a drawing. A solid 
@ 24" o.c.
DOWEL
FLOOR/BASE
AS SCHED.
6" CMU
INSULATION
4" FACE 
FLASHING
FLASHING
W/ CONC.
14"
3/4"
1'-0"
1" RIGID 
BRICK
FILL CELL
SEE 3/A6.3 FOR
NOTES & DIM.
WALL SECTION
WALL SECTION
6
A6.3
A6.3
FIGURE 3-13 Thick and thin object lines are used to repre-
sent materials that are represented in details. Courtesy William G. 
Williamson Archer, A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.
SHORT BREAK LINES
CYLINDRICAL 
BREAK LINE
FIGURE 3-14 Short and cylindrical break lines are used to 
shorten long objects with a consistent shape. Long break lines 
can be used to break entire portions of a drawing.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
55
arrowhead should be used at the object end of the 
leader line. A horizontal line approximately 1/8" long 
should be used at the note end of the leader line. 
Leader lines can be placed at any angle, but angles 
between 15° and 75° are most typical. Vertical and 
horizontal leader lines should never be used. The 
arrow end of the leader line should touch the edge of 
the part it describes. The leader line should extend far 
enough away from the object it is describing so that 
the attached note is a minimum of 3/4" from the outer 
surface of the object. See Figure 3-13. Depending on 
the version of software to be used, leader lines should 
be placed using the LEADER, QUICK LEADER, or 
MULTILEADER command.
Linetype Scale
In addition to linetypes created and set based on a spe-
cific layer, the scale factor for linetypes should also be 
set for a template drawing. The scale can be adjusted 
using the LTSCALE command. To display linetypes 
for a drawing in a paper space layout, PSLTSCALE 
must be set to 0. Common line scales can be seen in 
Table 3-2. The line scale is determined by the size at 
which the drawing will be plotted. Using an LTSCALE 
of 2 will make the line pattern twice as big as the line 
pattern created by a scale of 1. For a drawing plotted 
at 1/4" = 1'–0", a dashed line that should be 1/8" 
when plotted would need to be 3" long when drawn at 
full scale. This was determined by multiplying 0.125" 
× 24 (the LTSCALE). The linetype scale factor can be 
determined by using half of the drawing scale factor. 
The drawing scale factor is always the reciprocal of 
the drawing scale. Using a drawing scale of 1/4" = 1'–0" 
would equal 0.25" = 12". Dividing 12 by 0.25 pro-
duces a scale factor of 48. Keep in mind that when 
the LTSCALE is adjusted, it will affect all linetypes 
within the drawing. This is typically not a problem 
unless you are trying to create one unique line and 
CTLTSCALE can be used.
Note: If you’re using AutoCAD 2008 or newer, 
LTSCALE can be adjusted by using the Annotative 
feature of the 2D drafting and annotation workspace. 
Lineweight
Varied line widths will help you and the print reader keep 
track of various components of a complex drawing. As 
you assign lineweight to template drawings, remember 
that you’re  using thick and thin lines to add contrast, 
not represent thickness of an object. Lineweights can 
be assigned to a layer by selecting Lineweights from the 
Format pull-down menu. Common lineweights and 
their width in millimeters based on NCS recommenda-
tions can be seen in Table 3-3. 
MANAGING DRAWING TEXT 
Text is an important part of every architectural draw-
ing. Before text is placed on a drawing, several 
important factors should be considered. Each time a 
drawing is started, consider who will use the draw-
ing, the information the text is to define, and the 
scale factor of the text. Once these factors have been 
considered, the text values can be placed in a template 
and saved for future use. Architectural offices dealing 
 
ARCHITECTURAL VALUES
 
ENGINEERING VALUES
Drawing Scale
Text Scale
Drawing Scale
Text Scale
      1" = 1'–0"
12
1" = 1'–0"
12
  3/4" = 1'–0"
16
1" = 10'
120
  1/2" = 1'–0"
24
1" = 100'
1200
  3/8" = 1'–0"
32
1" = 20'
240
  1/4" = 1'–0"
48
1" = 200'
2400
1/16" = 1'–0"
64
1" = 30'
360
  1/8" = 1'–0"
96
1" = 40'
480
3/32" = 1'–0"
128
1" = 50'
600
1/16" = 1'–0"
192
1" = 60'
720
TABLE 3-2 Common Architectural Scales and Linetype Scales

56 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
with construction projects use a style of lettering that 
features thin vertical strokes, with thicker horizontal 
strokes to give a more artistic flair to the drawing. 
Figure 3-15 shows some of the text variations that can 
be found on drawings.
Text Similarities
With all the variation in styling, two major areas that 
are uniform throughout architectural offices are text 
height and capital letters. Text placed in the draw-
ing area is approximately 1/8" high. Titles are usually 
between 1/4" and 1" in height, depending on office 
practice. The other common feature is that text is 
always composed of capital letters, although there are 
exceptions based on office practice. The letter “d” is 
always printed in lowercase when representing the 
pennyweight of a nail. Numbers are generally the same 
height as the text with which they are placed. When 
a number is used to represent a quantity, it is gener-
ally separated from the balance of the note by a dash. 
Another common method of representing the quantity 
is to place the number in parentheses ( ) to clarify the 
quantity and the size. 
Fractions are generally placed side by side (3/4") 
rather than one above the other so that larger text 
size can be used. When a distance such as one foot, 
two and one half inches is to be specified, it should be 
written as 1'–2 1/2". The ' (foot) and " (inch) symbols 
are always used, with the numbers separated with 
a dash.
Text Placement
Text placement refers to the location of text relative to 
the drawing and within the drawing file. Care should 
be taken with the text orientation so that it is placed 
parallel to the bottom or parallel to the right edge of 
the page. When structural material shown in plan view 
is described, the text is placed parallel to the member 
being described. Figure 3-16 shows common text place-
ment methods. On plan views text is typically placed 
within the drawing, but arranged so that it does not 
interfere with any part of the drawing. Text is generally 
placed within 2" of the object being described. A leader 
line is used to connect the text to the drawing. The 
leader line can be either a straight line or an arc depend-
ing on office practice.
On details, text can be placed within the detail if 
large open spaces are part of the drawing. It is prefer-
able to keep text out of the drawing. Text should be 
aligned to enhance clarity and can be either aligned 
mm
Description
Use
0.13
Extra fine
Very fine detail
0.18
Fine
Material indications, surface marks, hatch lines and patterns
0.25 
Thin
1/8" (3 mm) annotation, setback, and grid lines
0.35
Medium
5/32" to 3/8" (4 mm to 10 mm) annotation, object lines, property lines
0.50
Wide
7/32" to 3/8" (4 mm to 10 mm) annotation, edges of interior and exterior eleva-
tions, profiling cut lines
0.70
x-wide
1/2" to 1" (13 mm to 25 mm) annotation, match lines, borders
1.00
xx-wide
Major titles underlining and separating portions of designs
1.40
xxx-wide
Border sheet outlines and cover sheet line work
2.00
xxxx-wide
Border sheet outlines and cover sheet line work
TABLE 3-3 Common Lineweights and Uses 
ARCHITECTURAL OFFICES USE MANY
STYLES OF LETTERING.
S O M E  T E X T  I S  E L O N G AT E D .
SOME OFFICES USE A COMPRESSED STYLE.
NO MATTER THE STYLE THAT IS USED,
IT MUST BE EASY TO READ.
FIGURE 3-15 Common text font variations found on construc-
tion drawings.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
57
left or right. Figure 3-13 shows a detail with good text 
placement. The final consideration for text placement 
is to decide on layer placement. Text should be placed 
on a layer with a major group code of ANNO. Minor 
group codes include: 
KEYN (keynotes)
LEGN (legends and 
schedules)
NOTE (general notes)
NPLT (non-plotted 
text)
REDL (redline)
REVS (revisions)
SYMB (symbols) 
TEXT (local notes)
TTLB (border and title 
block)
Types of Text
Text on a drawing is considered to be a title, general 
discipline notes, reference keynotes, or local notes. 
Titles are used to identify each drawing such as FIRST 
FLOOR PLAN. Single-level structures do not need a 
number to identify the floor plan, but all floors above 
the first floor in a multilevel building should be identi-
fied sequentially upward. General notes can refer to an 
entire project or to a specific drawing within a project. 
Reference keynotes are used to identify drawing items and 
reference the item to specific portions of the specifica-
tions. Local notes refer to specific areas of a project such 
as the notes in Figures 3-12 and 3-13. Small amounts of 
local notes should be placed using the TEXT command. 
The MTEXT command should be used to place large 
amounts of text. 
Much of the text used to describe a drawing can 
be standardized and placed in a wblock or template 
drawing. In school, you might develop a template 
for each class. In a professional office, a master tem-
plate can be developed for the discipline, and other 
templates can be developed for each type of drawing 
associated with the subset. General notes associated 
with a floor plan can be typed once and saved; the 
layer containing the notes can be frozen, thawed 
when needed, and then edited using the DDEDIT 
command to make minor changes based on specific 
requirements of the job. General notes can also be 
saved as a block and stored with attributes that can 
be altered for each usage.
General Notes 
Depending on the size of the project, three types of 
general notes can be found on commercial projects, 
including: 
● General notes—These are notes that apply to the 
entire project including all subsets within the project. 
These notes are located on the G-subset of drawings 
(General drawings sheet types). These notes are typi-
cally developed by the architectural team and then 
coordinated with other consultants to avoid repeti-
tive notes and conflicts.
● General discipline notes—These are notes that 
apply only to a specific subset of the drawings, such 
as the general structural notes, general architectural 
notes, or general mechanical notes. General disci-
pline notes should be placed on the first or 0-series 
sheet of each subset, so that the general architectural 
notes will be placed on sheet A-001. Any notes found 
in the general discipline notes should not be repeated 
on sheets within the subset.
● General sheet notes—General sheet notes provide 
sheet-specific information. They should be placed 
sequentially in a note block that is located adjacent 
to the title block in grid 6 (see Figure 3-7). 
Reference Keynotes
Reference keynotes are used to identify objects in a 
drawing and to relate those drawing objects to specific 
sections in the written specifications. Keynotes can 
either be referenced to the specifications using CSI 
MasterFormat numbers or to a note block placed on 
the same sheet as the drawing containing the reference. 
6 x 12
6 x 12
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
6 x 12
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
6 x 12
6 x 12
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 10
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
8 x 8
FIGURE 3-16 Text should be placed so that it is parallel to 
the bottom or right border. Text used to describe structural 
material is usually placed parallel to the member being 
described. Specifications for posts and columns are usually 
placed at a 45° angle.

58 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Reference keynotes should be placed in grid 6 adjacent 
to the title block (see Figure 3-7). 
To reference an object to the specifications, the key-
note contains a root, suffix, and modifier. For instance, 
the vapor barrier represented in a footing detail must 
be referenced. Using a reference keynote, a notation 
such as
07 27 16.A01 – VAPOR BARRIER 
could be placed in the detail to explain the vapor barrier. 
Figure 3-17 explains each portion of the reference note. 
These elements, along with the use of the ATTRIBUTES 
command can be used to link a detail to the specifica-
tions, spreadsheats, product lists, and cost data sheets 
through database links.
A simplified keynote can be as simple as a number 
referenced to a drawing object. Referenced keynotes 
explaining the number in the drawings should be listed 
sequentially in a note block that is placed below the 
general discipline or general sheets notes. Figure 3-18 
shows an example of simple referenced notes.
SUFFIX MODIFIER - OPTIONAL
SUFFIX -  USER-DEFINED SINGLE 
ALPHA CHARACTER: DO NOT USE 
DECIMAL POINT - SEPARATES 
KEYNOTE FORMAT
ROOT - USE THE SAME SPECIFICATION NUMBER 
USER-DEFINED TWO-DIGIT NUMBER.
ROOT FROM SUFFIX.
THE LETTERS I OR O.
THAT REFERENCES THE ITEM.
FIGURE 3-17 Components of referenced keynotes based on 
the National CAD Standards. The root specifies the specification 
section number corresponding to the section number location 
where the material is specified. The suffix consists of letters that 
allow multiple references to the same specification section. The 
suffix modifiers are optional numbers that allow the creation of 
additional suffixes.
FIGURE 3-18 Simple referenced keynotes can be used to conserve space and enhance clarity. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
59
Local Notes
Each drawing contains annotations referred to as  local 
notes that are used to explain the drawing compo-
nents. Because drawings such as a section often contain 
common notes, local notes can be placed in the tem-
plate drawing as a block. These notes can be thawed, 
moved into the required position, and edited as needed. 
This can greatly reduce drafting time and increase 
drafting efficiency. The MIRRTEXT command should 
also be adjusted when you work with sections or other 
drawings that are created using the MIRROR command. 
A MIRRTEXT variable setting of 0 will flip a drawing 
while leaving the text readable.
Title Block Text 
A title block similar to Figure 3-19 is a key part of every 
professional drawing template. It is generally placed 
along the right side of the sheet. Although each com-
pany uses a slightly different design, several elements 
are found in most title blocks, including:
● Designer identification block including space for:
❍ Office logo and office name, address, phone and 
fax numbers, Web site, and e-mail address
❍ A professional stamp
● Project identification block including space for: 
❍ Client/project name
❍ Building name
❍ Construction phase
❍ Project logo
● Issue block including space for: 
❍ Phase issue dates
❍ Addendum issue dates
❍ Revision issue dates
● Management block including space for:
❍ Drawing preparer’s project number
❍ Owner’s contract number
❍ CAD drawing file number
❍ Drawn by
❍ Checked by
❍ Project number
● Sheet title block defining the sheet contents
● Sheet identification block defining the sheet number
This text is usually created on a layer such as ANNO 
TTLB (title block), the black text in Figure 3-19, and 
should not be altered. Other text must be altered for 
each project. This would include the information 
DESIGNER
IDENTIFICATION
BLOCK
PROJECT
IDENTIFICATION
BLOCK
ISSUE BLOCK
MANAGEMENT 
BLOCK
TITLE SHEET
BLOCK
SHEET 
IDENTIFICATION 
BLOCK
FIGURE 3-19 A title block is a key component of every profes-
sional CAD template. Key elements include the company informa-
tion, key client information, and drawing origination information. 
Courtesy Gisela Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architects & Associates, Inc.

60 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
required for each of the titles that were just listed. 
Contents would include information such as:
● Sheet number—The page identifier based on the 
position within the drawing set, such as A-201.
● Date of completion—The date of completion is 
placed in this box.
● Revision dates—A date is not placed in this box 
unless the project has been revised after the initial 
printing of the project. Some offices place a date in 
this box only when the project is revised after the 
permit is issued.
● Client name—Typically a client name, or project 
title, is provided.
● Sheet contents—A drawing name such as MAIN 
FLOOR PLAN.
● Project number—The number representing this 
project within the architect’s office is placed in 
this box.
● Drawn by—The CAD technician’s initials are 
placed in this box to identify the drawing 
originator.
● Checked by—The initials of the person who approved 
the drawing for release are placed in this box.
This text is usually created on a layer such as 
ANNO TTLB TITL and must be altered as each sheet 
is completed.
Revision Text
An alternative to marking the revision date in the title 
block is to provide a revision column where changes in 
the drawing are identified and recorded. This method 
is used for large or complex projects. The date of each 
revision is listed in the order that they are made next 
to a letter or number. The letter is then placed next to 
the drawing revision, which is surrounded by a revi-
sion cloud. Figure 3-20 shows a partial floor plan that 
includes a revision.
Lettering Height and Scale Factor 
Earlier in this chapter, the scale factor required to make 
line segments the desired size when plotted was consid-
ered. Similar factors can also be applied to text height to 
produce the desired 1/8" high text when plotting is fin-
ished. If you’re working with AutoCAD 2008 or newer, 
the 2D drawing and annotation workspace can be used 
to automatically adjust the text height and scale factor. 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
DRUG
DRUG
PATIENTS
PATIENTS
ROOM    
ROOM    
ROOM    
ROOM    
PATIENTS
PATIENTS
ROOM    
ROOM    
PATIENTS
PATIENTS
LAB   
LAB   
STORAGE
STORAGE
ROOM    
ROOM    
OFFICE    
OFFICE    
DOCTOR'S
DOCTOR'S
H.C. TOILET
H.C. TOILET
TOILET
TOILET
10'-9"
10'-9"
8'-7"
8'-7"
40'-0"
40'-0"
14'-5"
14'-5"
8'-8 1/2"
8'-8 1/2"
8'-8 1/2"
8'-8 1/2"
8'-2"
8'-2"
6'-6"
6'-6"
A
A
A3.1
A3.1
3
A5.1
A5.1
2
A
3
5
5
5
5
6
3
3
4
2
C
7'-11"
7'-11"
3'-8 1/2"
3'-8 1/2"
LC
LC
LC
LC
5'-0"
5'-0"
4'-8 1/2"
4'-8 1/2"
4'-0"
4'-0"
8'-11"
8'-11"
10'-9-1/2"
10'-9-1/2"
4'-9"
4'-9"
5'-0 1/2"
5'-0 1/2"
3'-10 1/2"
3'-10 1/2"
6'-9"
6'-9"
4'-2"
4'-2"
1'-6"
1'-6"
10'-4"
10'-4"
4'-0"
4'-0"
8'-10"
8'-10"
5'-2"
5'-2"
3'-6"
3'-6"
9'-0"
9'-0"
10'-6"
10'-6"
1'-7"
1'-7"
1
1
22" x 30" CRAWL ACCESS
22" x 30" CRAWL ACCESS
PROVIDE DRAFTSTOP
PROVIDE DRAFTSTOP
1/2" GYP. BD. WITHIN
1/2" GYP. BD. WITHIN
EAVE ABOVE
EAVE ABOVE
FURN.
FURN.
W.H
W.H
SIM.
SIM.
CONSTRUCTION.
CONSTRUCTION.
FIRE RATED
FIRE RATED
ONE HOUR 
ONE HOUR 
LC
LC
VFY. R.O.
VFY. R.O.
PULL DN. STAIR
PULL DN. STAIR
REF.
REF.
1'-6"
1'-6"
9'-6"
9'-6"
5'-5"
5'-5"
FIGURE 3-20 Changes can be highlighted on a drawing by using a revision cloud. Changes should be noted in the title block (see 
Figure 3-19) along with an explanation of what was revised listed in a revision schedule. Revisions should be noted on the sheet 
where they apply. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
61
If you’re using an older release of AutoCAD, you’ll need 
to adjust the text as the text is placed in the drawing. 
To determine the required text height for a drawing, 
multiply the desired height (1/8") by the scale factor. 
The text scale factor is the reciprocal of the drawing 
scale. For drawings at 1/4" = 1'–0", this would be 48. 
By multiplying the desired height of 1/8" (0.125) × 48 
(the scale factor), you see that the text should be 6" tall. 
Quarter-inch-high lettering should be 12" tall. You’ll 
notice that the text scale factor is always twice the line 
scale factor. Other common text scale heights can be 
seen in Table 3-2. 
MANAGING ARCHITECTURAL 
DIMENSIONS 
In addition to the visual representation and the text used 
to describe a feature, dimensions are needed to describe 
the size and location of each member of a structure. 
Figure 3-20 shows a floor plan and the dimensions used 
to describe the location of walls, doors, and windows. In 
this chapter you will be introduced to:
● Basic principles of dimensioning.
● Guidelines for placing dimensions on plan views and 
on drawings showing vertical relationships.
Future chapters will introduce dimensioning guide-
lines specific to each type of drawing.
Dimensioning Components 
Dimensioning features include extension and dimen-
sion lines, text, and line terminators. Each type of line 
was introduced earlier as linetypes were examined. 
These features should be set as described below using 
the DIMSTYLE command of AutoCAD. The proper 
location of extension lines can be seen in Figure 3-21. 
Two different types of linetypes may be used for exten-
sion lines. Solid lines are used to dimension to the 
exterior face of an object, such as a wall or footing. A 
centerline is used to dimension to the center of wood- 
or steel-framed walls or the center of other objects. 
Figure 3-22 shows examples of each. The exact location 
of dimension lines will vary with each office, but dimen-
sion lines should be placed in such a way as to leave 
room for notes, but still close enough to the features 
being described so that clarity will not be hindered. 
Guidelines for placement will be discussed later in this 
chapter. 
Dimension Text
Dimension text is expressed as feet and inches using 
the feet and inch symbols, with a dash placed between 
the foot and inch numbers. A distance of twelve feet 
six inches would be expressed as 12'–6". If a whole 
number of feet is to be specified, such as ten feet, 
10'–0" is preferred over 10'. If a dimension less than 
one foot is to be specified, do not use a zero as a 
placeholder for feet. Six inches is usually expressed as 
6" rather than 0'–6". When fractions must be repre-
sented, side-by-side (e.g., 1/4") listings are preferred 
by most professionals rather than stacked fractions 
(e.g., 1/2") because side-by-side fractions require less 
space between lines of text.
The text for dimensions is placed above the 
dimension line, and centered between the two 
extension lines. On the left and right sides of the 
EXTENSION LINE
ARCHITECTURAL TICK (LINE TERMINATOR)
DIMENSION TEXT
DIMENSION LINE
EXTENSION LINE OFFSET
EXTENSION LINE EXTENSION
FIGURE 3-21 Although office style for some of the features 
may vary, dimensions are composed of the dimension text, a 
dimension line, extension lines, and line terminators.
CENTER OF 
FACE OF WALLS
OBJECTS
FIGURE 3-22 Continuous extension lines are used to dimen-
sion to the edge of a surface such as an exterior wall, or the 
edge of a concrete or concrete block wall. Centerlines are used 
to dimension to the center of interior wood or steel stud walls, 
to the center of openings, or to the center of circular or cylindri-
cal objects.

62 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
structure, text is placed above the dimension line. 
Text is rotated so that the text can be read from the 
right side of the drawing page using what is called 
aligned text. Examples of each placement can be 
seen in Figure 3-20. On objects placed at an angle 
other than horizontal or vertical, dimension lines 
and text are placed parallel to the oblique object. 
Often not enough space is available for the text to be 
placed between the extension lines when small areas 
are dimensioned. Although options vary with each 
office, several alternatives for placing dimensions in 
small spaces can be seen in Figure 3-23.
Terminators
The default method for terminating dimension lines at 
an extension line is with a thickened tick mark (archi-
tectural tick). Other common options include a dot, a 
thin tick mark, or an arrow. Each terminator can be 
viewed in the Dimension Style display of the Dimension 
Style Manager of AutoCAD. 
Dimension Placement 
Construction drawings requiring dimensions typically 
consist of plan views, such as the floor, foundation, and 
framing plans, and drawings showing vertical relation-
ships, such as exterior and interior elevations, sections, 
details, and cabinet drawings. No matter the drawing 
type, dimensions should be placed on a layer titled * 
ANNO DIMS. The * represents the letter of the proper 
originator such as A or S. ANNO represents annotation, 
and DIMS represents dimensions.
Plan Views
Consideration about dimensions in plan view can be 
divided into the areas of exterior and interior dimen-
sions. Whenever possible, dimensions should be placed 
outside of the drawing.
Exterior Dimensions Exterior dimensions for wood- 
and steel-frame structures are expressed from the 
outside edge to the outside edge of another exterior 
wall. These dimensions are grouped based on what 
information they provide. Exterior dimensions are 
usually placed using the following groupings, start-
ing from the outside and working in toward the 
residence: 
● Overall dimension—Placed on all sides of the struc-
ture from outer edge to outer edge.
● Major jogs—Placed from outer edge to outer edge of 
jogs in the structure so that the dimensions add up to 
the overall dimension. 
● Wall to wall—Placed to extend from a known 
location such as the edge of a major jog, to one or 
more unknown locations (interior walls), and then 
ending at a known location (the opposite end of a 
major jog). When describing the location of inte-
rior walls, the extension line extends to the center 
of the wall.
● Wall to openings—Placed to extend from a known 
wall location, to one or more openings, and ending 
at a known wall location so that the sum of these 
dimensions adds up to the sum of a wall-to-wall 
dimension.
Each of these dimensions can be seen in Figure 3-24.
Additional examples will be given in chapters related 
to specific types of drawings. Most offices start by 
placing an overall dimension on each side of the 
structure that is approximately 2" from the exte-
rior wall. Moving inward, with approximately 1/2" 
between lines, are dimension lines used to describe 
major jogs in exterior walls, the distance from wall to 
wall, and the distance from wall to window or door 
to wall. 
Two different systems are used to represent the 
dimensions between exterior and interior walls. 
Engineering firms tend to represent the distance from 
exterior edge to center of interior wood walls using 
methods shown in Figures 3-20 and 3-24. CAD draft-
ers working in an architect’s office tend to represent 
5'-6"
5'-6"
5'-0"
5'-0"
6"
6"
5'-0"
5'-0"
5'-6"
5'-6"
6"
6"
5'-0"
5'-0"
5'-6"
5'-6"
6"
6"
5'-0"
5'-0"
6"
6"
FIGURE 3-23 Common placement of dimension text. The 
desired location for text is to place the dimension text between 
the extension lines. When the dimension text is to be placed 
at the end of the dimension line, the text is placed beside 
the extension line, and the dimension is extended below the 
dimension text. If the space to be dimensioned has a dimension 
on each side, the dimension for the small space is placed above 
or below the desired space, and a leader line points from the 
dimension text to the space to be described. Another option to 
describe a small space is to “bend” one of the extension lines to 
provide room for the dimension text.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
63
the distance from edge to edge of walls as seen in 
Figure 3-25. In Figure 3-25, each side of the walls is 
dimensioned. A common alternative is to dimension only 
to one face of the wall, rather than both sides. Concrete 
walls are dimensioned to the edge by both disciplines. 
Interior Dimensions The three main considerations in 
placing interior dimensions are clarity, grouping, and 
coordination. Dimension lines and text must be placed 
so that they can be read easily and so that neither inter-
feres with other information that must be placed on a 
drawing. Information should also be grouped together 
as seen in Figure 3-20, so that construction workers 
can find dimensions easily. More importantly, interior 
dimensions must be placed so that they match corre-
sponding exterior dimensions. 
Vertical Dimensions
Unlike the plan views which show horizontal rela-
tionships, the elevations, sections, and details require 
dimensions that show vertical relationships. As seen in 
Figure 3-26, these dimensions originate at a line that 
represents a specific point, such as the finish grade, a 
finish floor elevation, or a plate height.
Metric Dimensioning
Structures dimensioned using metric measurement are 
defined in millimeters. Large distances may be defined 
in meters. When all units are given in millimeters, 
the unit of measurement requires no identification. 
For instance, a distance of 2440 millimeters would be 
written as 2440. Dimensions other than millimeters 
should have the unit description by the dimension 
such as 24 m. 
WALL TO 
OVERALL DIMENSION
OPENING
MAJOR JOGS
WALL TO WALL
LINE 1
LINE 2
LINE 3
LINE 4
FIGURE 3-24 Dimensions are grouped using overall, major 
jogs, wall to wall, and wall to openings. Dimensions are placed 
so that the sum of the dimensions in line 1 (wall to opening) 
will add up to the corresponding dimension in line 2 (wall to 
wall). The sum of the dimensions in line 2 will add up to the 
corresponding dimension in line 3 (major jogs), and the sum of 
the dimensions in line 3 will add up to the corresponding sum 
in line 4 (the overall).
FIGURE 3-25 Some architectural firms dimension from edge 
to edge of all walls. An alternative to defining both sides of 
each wall is to dimension only one side of each wall.
3" CLR
5'-0"
8" MIN.
1 1/2"
CLR
6"
3/4" = 1'-0"
T.S. 6 x 6 x 1/4" 
 STEEL COLUMN
3" x 6" x 3/8" 
 SIDE P
12" x 12" x 3/4" 
 BASE P
4- 1/2"Ø x 10"
A.B.  ON 8"
GRID W/ 2 1/2"
PROJECTION
3/4" TIE RODS &
 TURNBUCKLES
#4Ø @ 6" O.C.
EA. WAY 3" UP
#4Ø VERT. @ 
9" O.C. W/ 
12" O.C. STAGGER
 SEAMS 180°
2" CLR. 
3
5/16
1/4
1" MORTAR 
3/8
BASE
# 3Ø HORIZ. @ .
L
L
8
S-6
S-6
COL./ FTG.
COL./ FTG.
FIGURE 3-26 Elevations, sections, and details each require 
dimensions to show vertical and horizontal relationships. 
Courtesy Gisela Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architects & Associates, Inc.

64 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Dimension Variables
One of the best features of a template drawing is the abil-
ity to store dimension variables so that they do not have 
to be set with each new drawing. Dimension variables 
can be combined and saved as a style and then altered 
using the Dimension Style Manager. The manager can 
be used to control the lines and arrow type, text height, 
color and placement, the relationship of the text to 
the dimension lines, and the units used for the dimen-
sions. The Lines and Arrows tab of the Dimension Style 
Manager should be used to establish the dimension line 
criteria of the template drawing. This would include 
setting the color, usage, lineweight, offset, and exten-
sion of the extension and dimension lines. This tab also 
controls the choice of line terminators to be used for 
the template. 
MANAGING DRAWINGS 
AT MULTIPLE SCALES
One of the most valuable computer skills needed to 
complete commercial drawing projects is the ability 
to combine drawings to be plotted at multiple scales. 
Because of its importance, a brief review will be pro-
vided. Drawing sheets can be assembled for plotting 
using layouts and viewports. Each time you enter a 
layout, you’re working with a floating viewport. The 
viewport allows you to look through the paper and see 
the drawing created in model space and to display the 
drawing in the layout for plotting. An unlimited amount 
of viewports can be created in paper space, but only 64 
viewports can be visible at once. Because floating view-
ports are considered objects, drawing objects displayed 
in the viewport cannot be edited. For objects to be edited 
within the viewport, model space must be restored. You 
can toggle between model space and a floating viewport 
by choosing either the Model or Layout tab, depending 
on which one is inactive. Double-clicking in a floating 
viewport will also switch the display to model space.
Note: Remember, while editing in model space in a 
layout, you risk changing the drawing setup. This 
feature should be used only by experienced AutoCAD 
users or when in the initial setup of the view inside of 
the viewport.
Most professionals work in model space and arrange 
the final drawing for output in paper space. While 
working in a layout, with the viewport in paper space, 
any material added to the drawing will be added to the 
layout, but not shown in the model display. This will 
prove useful as the final plotting layout is constructed.
Creating a Single Floating Viewport 
Floating viewports provide an excellent means 
of assembling multiscaled drawings for plotting. 
Figure 3-27 shows a sheet containing four details for 
a condominium project that are assembled for plotting 
using multiple viewports. These details range in scale 
from 1/2" = 1'–0" to 1" = 1'–0". This sheet of details 
cannot be easily assembled without the use of multiple 
viewports. The process for creating multiple viewports 
will be similar to the creation of one viewport. The 
following example will demonstrate the steps used to 
prepare the section and three details shown in Figure 
3-27 for plotting. The section will be displayed at a 
scale of 1/4" = 1'–0", two of the details will be dis-
played at a scale of 3/4" = 1'–0", and the stair section 
will be displayed at a scale of 1/2" = 1'–0". The follow-
ing discussion will walk you through the process of 
creating multiple viewports in a template and inserting 
multiple drawings. For this discussion, the INSERT 
command will be used.
Displaying Model Space Objects 
in the Viewport
The easiest method to display multiple drawings at 
multiple scales is by inserting each of the drawings to 
be plotted into the template in model space. With the 
details arranged in one drawing, similar to Figure 3-27, 
switch to the desired layout. Use the following steps to 
display the drawings in multiple viewports: 
1. In the layout, click the Paper button on the status 
bar to toggle the drawing to model space. Use the 
Zoom All option to enlarge the area of model space 
to be displayed in the existing viewport. Each of the 
four drawings will be displayed, but each will be at 
an unknown scale.
2. First select the largest drawing. In this example, the 
viewport for the section will be adjusted first.
3. Activate the Viewport toolbar.
4. Set the scale of the viewport to the appropriate value 
for displaying the section using the Viewport Scale 
Control menu on the Viewport toolbar. For this 
example, a scale of 1/4" = 1'–0" was used.
5. Click the Model button on the status bar to return to 
paper space in your current layout.
6. New viewports will need to be created to display the 
other details at different scale factors. Refer to the 
section “Creating Additional Viewports.” Once all of 
the drawings to be plotted have been displayed in a 
viewport with the proper scale factor, you are ready 
to plot.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
65
WALL SECTION
WALL SECTION
SIM.CONC.
SIM.CONC.
NO SLAB @
NO SLAB @
*NOTE:
NOTE:
2x6 PR.TR. > w/
2x6 PR.TR. > w/
w/ 1/2"Ø x10" A.B.
w/ 1/2"Ø x10" A.B.
@ 2'-0" O.C.
@ 2'-0" O.C.
#3 BARS
#3 BARS
@ 24" O.C.
@ 24" O.C.3"
3"
18"
18"
4" CONC. FLR.
4" CONC. FLR.
FREE DRAINING
FREE DRAINING
BACKFILL
BACKFILL
2x4 PR.TR. FURRING
2x4 PR.TR. FURRING
STRIPS @ 24" O.C.
STRIPS @ 24" O.C.
#4 BARS
#4 BARS
@ 18" O.C. VERT.
@ 18" O.C. VERT.
@ 24" O.C. HORZ.
@ 24" O.C. HORZ.
2"
2"
CLR
CLR
4" CONC. FLR.
4" CONC. FLR.
8"
8"
(2) #5 BARS
(2) #5 BARS
CONTIN.
CONTIN.
15"
15"
7"
7"
#3 BARS
#3 BARS
@ 36" O.C.
@ 36" O.C.
3"
3"
18"
18"
(2) COATS
(2) COATS
ASPHALT
ASPHALT
EMULSION
EMULSION
30# FELT OR 
30# FELT OR 
OTHER APPRVD.
OTHER APPRVD.
FILTER MATER'L
FILTER MATER'L
OVER RIVER
OVER RIVER
RUN GRAVEL
RUN GRAVEL
4"Ø PERF.
4"Ø PERF.
FOOTING DRAIN
FOOTING DRAIN
SEE FRAMING
SEE FRAMING
PLANS FOR
PLANS FOR
DETAILS
DETAILS
6
1
SCALE:             3/4" = 1'-0"
SCALE:             3/4" = 1'-0"
WALL SECTION
WALL SECTION
6
2
SCALE:             3/4" = 1'-0"
SCALE:             3/4" = 1'-0"
6"
6"
10"
10"
"   =   1' - 0"
"   =   1' - 0"
HEADER
HEADER
4x8 (min.)
4x8 (min.)
& CEILING
& CEILING
ALL WALLS
ALL WALLS
GYP. BD. ON 
GYP. BD. ON 
}" TYPE 'X'
}" TYPE 'X'
2x6 LEDGER
2x6 LEDGER
CARRIAGES
CARRIAGES
(3) 2x12 STAIR
(3) 2x12 STAIR
1x8 RISERS
1x8 RISERS
RIP TO SIZE
RIP TO SIZE
11/4"x12" TREADS
11/4"x12" TREADS
TREADS.
TREADS.
ABOVE TOE OF
ABOVE TOE OF
HANDRAIL @ 34"
HANDRAIL @ 34"
2x8 LANDING JSTS.
2x8 LANDING JSTS.
@ 16" o.c.
@ 16" o.c.
SCALE :                                1/2          
SCALE :                                1/2          
2x4 P.T.
2x4 P.T.
FURRING
FURRING
OVER (2) P.T.
OVER (2) P.T.
2x8 SLEEPERS
2x8 SLEEPERS
RIPPED TO FIT
RIPPED TO FIT
4" CONC. FLOOR
4" CONC. FLOOR
OPEN TO
OPEN TO
BEYOND
BEYOND
(OPTIONAL)
(OPTIONAL)
8'-11/8"
8'-11/8"
(14) RISERS @ 7 5/8" (±1/8") = 8'-11"
(14) RISERS @ 7 5/8" (±1/8") = 8'-11"
3'-0"
3'-0"
(11) TREADS @ 10" (±1/2") = 9'-2"
(11) TREADS @ 10" (±1/2") = 9'-2"
15"x7"
15"x7"
8"
8"
2'-10"
2'-10"
BUILDING SECTION
BUILDING SECTION
KITCHEN
KITCHEN
DINING
DINING
MASTER
MASTER
RECREATION RM.
RECREATION RM.
BEDRM. 3
BEDRM. 3
BEDRM. 4
BEDRM. 4
OPTION RM.
OPTION RM.
WEEP HOLES @ 24" o.c.
WEEP HOLES @ 24" o.c.
4" BRICK VENEER
4" BRICK VENEER
FLASHING
FLASHING
16"
16"
7"
7"
30# A.S. FELT OVER 1/2" CDX
30# A.S. FELT OVER 1/2" CDX
PLYW'D. OVER 2x4 STUDS @
PLYW'D. OVER 2x4 STUDS @
16" o.c.
16" o.c.
4" CONC.
4" CONC.
GARAGE SLAB
GARAGE SLAB
1"    CLEAR
1"    CLEAR
@ 24" o.c.
@ 24" o.c.
2x8 CLG. JSTS.
2x8 CLG. JSTS.
6
A
SCALE :                1/4"  =  1"-0"
SCALE :                1/4"  =  1"-0"
2 x 10 FLOOR JOISTS @ 16"  o.c.
2 x 10 FLOOR JOISTS @ 16"  o.c.
@ 16" o.c.
@ 16" o.c.
2x6 STUDS
2x6 STUDS
@ 16" o.c.
@ 16" o.c.
2x6 STUDS
2x6 STUDS
2 x 8 CEILING JOISTS @ 24" o.c.
2 x 8 CEILING JOISTS @ 24" o.c.
2 x 12 RAFTERS @ 24" o.c.
2 x 12 RAFTERS @ 24" o.c.
 12
 12
8
2 x 4 STUDS @ 16" o.c.
2 x 4 STUDS @ 16" o.c.
4" CONC. FLOOR SLAB
4" CONC. FLOOR SLAB
1'-0"
1'-0"
1'-0"
1'-0"
15"x7"
15"x7"
8"
8"
15"x7"
15"x7"
8"
8"
STAIR  SECTION
STAIR  SECTION
FIGURE 3-27 Details assembled for plotting using multiple viewports can be used to display drawings at varied scales.

66 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Adjusting the Existing Viewport
Once the desired drawing is inserted into the viewport, 
the size of the viewport can be altered if the entire 
drawing can’t be seen. To resize the viewport, move the 
cursor to touch the viewport and activate the viewport 
grips. Select one of the grips to make it hot, and then use 
the hot grip to drag the window to the desired size. The 
drawing of the section has now been inserted into the 
template and is ready to be plotted at a scale of 1/4" = 
1'–0". The display would resemble Figure 3-28.
Creating Additional Viewports
Use the following steps to prepare additional viewports: 
1. Set the current layer to Viewport.
2. Select Single Viewport from the Viewport toolbar.
3. Select the corners for the new viewport. Although 
you should try to size the viewport accurately, it can 
be stretched to enlarge or reduce its size once the 
scale has been set.
The results of this command can be seen in 
Figure 3-29.
Altering the Second Viewport
As a new viewport is created, the display from the exist-
ing viewport will be displayed in the new viewport as 
well. Use the following steps to alter the display.
 1.  Click the Paper button on the status bar to toggle 
the drawings to model space.
 2.  Make the new viewport the current viewport by 
placing the cursor in the viewport and single-
clicking.
 3.  Use the Zoom All option to display all of the model 
contents in the second viewport.
 4.  Set the viewport scale to the appropriate value for 
displaying the section. For this example, a scale of 
3/4" = 1'–0" will be used to display the wall section.
 5.  Use the PAN command to center the wall section 
in the viewport.
 6.  Click the Model button on the status bar to toggle 
the drawings to paper space.
 7.  Select the edge of the viewport to display the view-
port grips.
VIEWPORT 1
FIGURE 3-28 The appropriate scale for plotting can be set as drawings are inserted into a viewport. The size of the viewport can be 
adjusted if the entire drawing can’t be seen.

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
67
 8.  Make a grip hot and shrink the viewport so that 
only the wall section is shown.
 9.  Use the MOVE command to move the viewport to 
the desired position in the template.
10. Save the drawing for plotting.
The drawing should now resemble Figure 3-30. 
Once the viewport for the wall section has been 
adjusted, additional viewports can be created. Once all 
of the desired details have been added to the layout, the 
viewport outlines can be frozen. Freezing the viewports 
will eliminate the line of the viewport being produced as 
the drawing is reproduced. The finished drawing, with 
the viewports frozen, will resemble Figure 3-31.
WORKING IN A MULTIDOCUMENT 
ENVIRONMENT
An alternative to using template drawings to store 
frequently used styles, settings, and objects is to move 
objects and information between two or more drawing 
files. Just as you can have several programs open on 
your desktop at once and rapidly switch from one pro-
gram to another, AutoCAD allows you to have several 
drawings open at the same time. Objects or drawing 
properties can be moved between drawings using CUT, 
COPY, PASTE, object drag and drop, the Property 
Painter, and concurrent command execution.
When working with multiple drawings open, remem-
ber the following:
● Any one of the open drawings can be made active.
● Any one of the open drawings can be maximized or 
minimized to ease viewing, or all can be left open and 
you can switch from drawing to drawing as needed.
● You can start a command in one drawing, switch to 
another drawing and perform a different command, 
and then return to the original drawing and complete 
the command in progress. As you return to the origi-
nal drawing, single-click anywhere in the drawing 
area, and the original command will be continued.
● Each drawing is saved as a separate drawing file, inde-
pendent of the other open files. You can close a file and 
not affect the contents of the remaining open files.
VIEWPORT 1
VIEWPORT 2
FIGURE 3-29 If a new viewport is created, the display from the original viewport will be displayed in the new viewport.

68 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Using the CUT, COPY, 
and PASTE Commands
AutoCAD allows drawings, objects, and properties to be 
transferred directly from one drawing to another using 
the CUT, COPY, and PASTE commands. Each com-
mand can be performed using the EDIT menu, by key-
board, or by shortcut menu. CUT will remove objects 
from a drawing and move them to the clipboard. Once 
cut, the object can be placed in a new drawing with 
PASTE. COPY allows an object to be reproduced in 
another location. The object to be copied is reproduced 
in its new location with the PASTE command. As the 
object is copied to the new drawing, so are any new 
layers, linetypes, or other properties associated with the 
objects. Some options follow:
● Copy with Base Point—This option of the shortcut 
menu is similar to the Copy option. With this option, 
before you select objects to copy, you’ll be prompted 
to provide a base point. This option works well when 
objects need to be inserted accurately.
● Paste as Block—The Paste as Block option can be 
used to paste a block into a different drawing. It 
functions similarly to the Paste command. Select 
the objects to be copied in the original drawing and 
select the Copy command. Selected objects do not 
need to be a block, because the command will turn 
them into a block. Next activate the new drawing and 
right-click to select the Paste as Block option. The 
copied objects are now a block.
● Paste to Original Coordinates—This option can 
be used to copy an object in one drawing to the 
exact same location in another drawing. The com-
mand could be useful in copying an object from 
one apartment unit to the same location in another 
unit. The command is active only when the clip-
board contains AutoCAD data from a drawing 
other than the current drawing. Selecting an object 
to be copied starts the command sequence. The 
sequence is completed by making another draw-
ing active and then selecting the Paste to Original 
Coordinates option.
FIGURE 3-30 Use the PAN command to move the drawings so that the desired information is centered in the viewport. Once 
centered, adjust the size of the viewport so that only the desired material is displayed.
VIEWPORT 1
VIEWPORT 2
RESIZED AND RELOCATED

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
69
Creating Drawings Using DesignCenter
One of the best uses for DesignCenter is for adding 
content from the palette into a new or existing draw-
ing. Information can be selected from the palette or 
from FIND, and then dragged directly into a drawing 
without opening the drawing containing the original. 
DesignCenter can be used to attach external referenced 
drawings and to copy layers between drawings.
● Inserting Blocks—DesignCenter provides two meth-
ods for inserting blocks into a drawing. Blocks can 
be inserted using the default scale and rotation of the 
block, or the block parameters can be altered as the 
block is dragged into the new drawing. 
● Attaching Referenced Drawings—DesignCenter can 
be used to attach a referenced drawing using similar 
steps used to attach a block and provide the param-
eters. 
● Working with Layers—DesignCenter can be used to 
copy layers from one drawing to another. Typically, 
a template drawing containing stock layers can be 
used when creating new drawing files. This option 
of DesignCenter is useful when you’re working 
with drawings created by a consulting firm and 
the drawing needs to conform to office standards. 
DesignCenter can be used to drag layers from a tem-
plate, or any other drawing, into the new drawing 
and ensure drawing consistency. 
● Accessing Favorite Contents—As with most pro-
grams, DesignCenter allows frequently used sources 
to be stored for easy retrieval. The final section of this 
chapter will explore methods of adding shortcuts, dis-
playing, and organizing your favorite drawing tools.
MANAGEMENT OF DRAWING 
FILES AND FOLDERS
Throughout this chapter you have explored methods of 
managing the drawing environment. The final point to 
be considered in this chapter is file management. Don’t 
assume that because you can save a file that you can 
manage files. Effective file management is an essential 
aspect in the design and production of a complicated 
drawing project. The method used to organize draw-
ing files will vary depending on existing office practice 
FIGURE 3-31 With each of the viewports frozen, the assembled drawing components are ready for plotting. 

70 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
and the size of the structure. This chapter is intended to 
provide you with a method of organizing your drawing 
files while in school and to give you an understand-
ing of some of the common methods that offices use 
to organize their computer files. Consideration will be 
given to common drawing storage methods, the naming 
of drawing folders and files, methods of storing draw-
ing files, and methods of maintaining drawing files. It is 
important to remember that when you leave school and 
enter an office, it is rarely the drafter’s role to come into 
an office and develop a new filing system. It will be your 
job as a new employee to learn the existing system and 
make your work conform to your employer’s standards.
Storage Locations for Drawing Files
If you are a network user, your instructor or network 
administrator must provide you with a user name or 
account number before you can access or store infor-
mation on a network. Once you have access, you will 
be given a folder that is located on the network server. 
Network servers should not be used for long-term stor-
age, but they do provide an excellent storage location for 
active drawing projects. Many design firms place active 
drawing files in folders that can be accessed by anyone 
on the network, ensuring that each member of the 
design team is working on the most current file without 
having to pass a diskette between team members.
Networks can also be configured to allow access 
over the Internet to consulting firms. A CAD techni-
cian working for the structural engineer can be allowed 
access to the floor plan created by the architectural firm, 
ensuring the electronic transfer of the most up-to-date 
drawing files between offices.
Your school or office administrator will determine 
where you will save your drawing files. Most users save 
their projects at about 15-minute intervals on the hard 
drive. At the end of a drawing session, the file is saved in 
your folder on the network and to a diskette. Diskettes 
and fixed drives are often used for the day-to-day stor-
age of drawing files because of their access speed. Once 
the drawing session or project is completed, it can be 
stored on a CD, Zip or Jaz disk; to a dedicated hard 
drive; or to a tape cartridge where it is less subject to 
damage or the risk of being overwritten. Access to this 
final storage site is generally restricted to project manag-
ers to ensure file safety.
Naming Project Folders
You were exposed to creating folders in an introduc-
tory computer class, but their importance can’t be 
overlooked as you work on large commercial projects. 
An efficient CAD technician will create folders using 
Windows Explorer to aid filing. It is also wise to divide 
your folder into subfolders. This might include sub-
folders based on specific classes that you’re enrolled 
in, different types of drawings, or different projects. 
Many small offices keep work for each client in separate 
folders or disks with labels based on the client name. 
Drawings are then saved by contents such as floor, 
foundation, elevation, sections, specs, or site. Some 
offices assign a combination of numbers and letters to 
name each project. Numbers are usually assigned to 
represent the year the project is started, as well as a job 
number with letters representing the type of drawing. 
For example, 0953FLR would represent the floor plan 
for the fifty-third project started in 2009. 
You’re honing your CAD and commercial drawing 
skills at a time when the construction industry is totally 
connected by the Internet. Plans that were once trans-
ported between offices by messengers are now shared 
between offices electronically.
Because of the need by so many firms to work with a 
set of drawings, an efficient file-naming system is essen-
tial. Most architectural and engineering offices use file 
names based on National CAD Standards (NCS) guide-
lines. The NCS recommends keeping folder names short 
and simple by restricting folder names to eight charac-
ters even though your operating system allows much 
longer names. Names are generally based on the client 
name. Subfolders are then used to clarify the contents 
of the main folder. The first level of subfolders recom-
mended by the NCS is folders that describe the various 
design stages. Common stages and names include:
Folder Name 
Drawing Phase
1 PREDES 
Programming and predesign 
2 SCHEM 
Schematic design 
3 DESDEV 
Design development
4 CONDOC 
Construction documents
5 CONTRAC 
Contract submittal 
6 RECORD 
Record documents
7 FACMAN 
Facility management
The use of an organized filing system based on 
the drawing phase provides a consistent location for 
each document as it progresses through the construc-
tion cycle as well as simplifies the management of all 
documents that will be required for a structure. Specific 
documents can be easily identified for file searches 
speeding file transfers, backups, and distribution. The 
use of folders based on job phase also provides a useful 
reminder to save and back up a project as it reaches 
each milestone. 

Chapter 3: Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings 
71
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to 
help you keep your CAD skills current.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.beamchek.com  
AC Software, Inc.
www.ansys.com  
Ansys, Inc.
www.asme.org 
ASME Technical Journal 
List
www.autodesk.com  
Autodesk
www.autodesk.com/archdesktop Autodesk Architectural 
Desktop product informa-
tion
www.pointa.autodesk.com  
Autodesk Point A
www.autodesk.com/revit 
Autodesk Revit product 
information
www.thebluebook.com 
The Bluebook of Building 
and Construction 
www.csinet.org 
Construction Specifications 
Institute
www.eaglepoint.com  
Eagle Point Software 
Incorporated
www.graphisoft.com  
Graphisoft
www.miscrosoft.com/office/visio Microsoft Visio
www.nibs.org 
National Institute of 
Building Sciences
www.rasterex.com  
Rasterex
www.strucalc.com 
StruCalc 7.0 developed 
by Cascade Consulting 
Associates
www.metric.org 
U.S. Metric Association
www.nationalcadstandard.org 
U.S. National CAD 
Standards
KEY TERMS
Architect’s scale
CAD Layer Guidelines
Civil engineering scale
Construction Specifications 
Institute (CSI)
Drawing area modules
General discipline notes
General notes
General sheet notes
Hard conversions
Layer
Layer, Major group name
Layer, Minor group name
Layer, Status code
Layout
Linetypes
Metric drawing scale
Notes, General
Notes, General discipline
Notes, Local
Notes, Reference keynotes
Notes, General Sheet
Soft conversions
Template drawings
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
If math is required to answer a question, show your work.
Question 3-1 Define aligned dimensioning text.
Question 3-2 Describe and give an example of a specific note.
Question 3-3 List six items typically included in a title 
block.
Question 3-4 Using the AutoCAD Help menu, list some of 
the benefits of the PURGE command. When should it be 
used?
Question 3-5 What is a template drawing?
Question 3-6 List the two types of measurement units typi-
cally associated with construction drawings.
Question 3-7 Show an example of how dimension numerals 
less than 1' are lettered.
Question 3-8 How can external referencing be used within a 
set of construction drawings?
Question 3-9 Show an example of how dimension numerals 
greater than 12" are lettered.
Question 3-10 List the seven major groups of layer names 
recommended by the NCS.
QUESTIONS
Applying AutoCAD Tools to Commercial Drawings
CHAPTER 3 TEST

72 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Question 3-11 How are the overall dimensions on frame 
construction placed?  
Question 3-12 Explain the advantage of using simplified ref-
erence keynotes in place of local notes.
Question 3-13 List three types of general notes found on 
construction drawings and describe their purpose.
Question 3-14 Explain the advantage of using reference 
keynotes.
Question 3-15 Explain how dimension lines should be 
placed relative to the object being described.
Question 3-16 Describe the information provided in each 
line of dimensions when four lines of dimensions are 
provided on a plan view. Start the description with the 
outside line and work in.  
Question 3-17 Other than plotting, what advantages do lay-
outs provide?
Question 3-18 You’ve adjusted the width for line weight, 
but your drawing does not reflect the change. Why not?
Question 3-19 List the major groups of layer names recom-
mended by the AIA and explain the purpose of each.
Question 3-20 You’ve created a second viewport, but the 
contents of the first viewport are displayed. How can this 
be corrected?
Question 3-21 Why would the construction industry be 
interested in converting to metric measurement?
Question 3-22 What are the basic units of length used with 
the metric system?
Question 3-23 List and describe two methods of converting 
numbers to metric.
Question 3-24 List examples of each conversion method for 
a 4 × 12 beam.
Question 3-25 What metric scale should be used to draw a 
floor plan so that it would resemble 1/4" = 1'–0"?
Question 3-26 In addition to altering a drawing, explain 
how a revision is noted on a drawing.
Question 3-27 List the exact ratio and preferred scale for the 
following scales.
a) Full size 
b) 3" = 1'–0" 
c) 1 1/2" = 1'–0" 
d) 1" = 1'–0" 
e) 3/4" = 1'–0" 
f) 1/2" = 1'–0" 
g) 3/8" = 1'–0" 
h) 1/4" = 1'–0" 
 i) 3/16" = 1'–0" 
j) 1/8" = 1'–0" 
k) 3/32" = 1'–0" 
l) 1/16" = 1'–0" 
m) 1/32" = 1'–0" 
n) 1" = 10'–0" 
o) 1" = 20'–0" 
p) 1" = 30'–0" 
q) 1"=40'–0" 
r) 1" = 60'–0"
Question 3-28 Convert the following dimensions using hard 
conversions.
a) 1/2"  
f) 12" 
b) 3/4"  
g) 16" 
c) 2"  
h) 2'–6" 
d) 4"  
i) 4'–0" 
e) 9"  
j) 10'–0"
Question 3-29 Convert the following dimensions using soft 
conversions.
a) 1/2"  
f) 12" 
b) 3/4"  
g) 16" 
c) 2"  
h) 2'–6" 
d) 4"  
i) 4'–0" 
e) 9"  
j) 10'–0"
DRAWING PROBLEMS
For each problem below, create a title block using your school 
name as the company name along with other recommended 
contents. Use a 1/2" wide margin on the top, right, and bottom 
of the page. Use a 1 1/2" margin on the left side. Establish 
measurement units and angle measurements suitable for an 
architectural drawing.
Problem 3-1 Create a drawing template for a drawing using 
1/4" = 1'–0" using D-size material.
Problem 3-2 Create a template drawing for site plans drawn 
at a scale of 1" = 50'–0" using D-size material.
Problem 3-3 Create a template drawing for architectural 
drawings using metric features. Assume a scale of 1:50 
will be used.
Problem 3-4 Create a drawing template for plotting at 
3/4" = 1'–0", using D-size material. Create drawing 
modules assuming five rows and six columns. Place the 
module information on a non-plotting layer. 

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
73
73
As a new CAD technician, you’ll not be expected to 
make decisions regarding the building code and how it 
will affect a structure. To advance beyond an entry-level 
technician, you must have an understanding of how the 
building code affects each structure you’re working on. 
To help you become proficient at using the building 
code, this chapter will explore:
● The major contents of model codes.
● Basic considerations in using the building code, 
including:
❍ Determining the occupancy group of the structure. 
❍ Determining the building location on the site.
❍ Determining the allowable floor area.
❍ Determining the allowable building height.
❍ Determining the construction type.
● Applying the building code to the drawings.
● Working on structures with mixed occupancies.
● Determining the number and location of building 
exits.
EXAMINING MODEL CODES
Most construction is governed by building codes. Rather 
than writing their own codes, most cities adopt model 
building codes. The first and most important purpose of 
a building code is to protect human life. The building 
code does this by regulating the building’s structural 
integrity, exit patterns, height, fire resistance, total size, 
and number of occupants.
Formerly, there were three model building codes 
used in the United States—the Uniform Building Code 
(UBC), National Building Code (NBC), and Standard 
Building Code (SBC).
These three codes have become one, the International 
Building Code (IBC). As of January 2008, 47 states 
and Washington D.C. have adopted one or more of 
the different International codes. The IBC is basi-
cally, but not totally, a performance-based code that 
describes the desired results, not the exact method 
used to achieve those results. The members of the 
three code groups listed above developed the IBC. 
They combined their extensive knowledge to produce 
a comprehensive and well-researched model code to 
be used by the nation and beyond. They have also 
gone a step further and have incorporated (by refer-
ence) recommendations from other organizations that 
are experts in their own fields such as the American 
Concrete Institute (ACI), the Steel Joist Institute (SJI), 
and American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). This 
allows the code to be kept current with input from 
very qualified sources. The disadvantage is that not all 
the information you might need is actually contained 
in the code that you purchase. You may need to pur-
chase standards from the sources listed in the code. 
Addresses for each major contributing organization 
can be found in the Additional Reading section at the 
end of the chapter. 
The International Building Code is part of a family 
of codes and books that includes mechanical, fire, and 
residential. Other portions of the 2009 international 
codes include: fuel gas, energy conservation, private 
sewage disposal, performance for buildings and facili-
ties, property maintenance, zoning, existing buildings, 
and Wildland-Urban Interface.
There are also handbooks, interpretive manuals, and 
learning aids available for each model code. The inter-
pretive manuals are very useful in helping achieve an 
understanding of the intent of the code.
The building code has an influence over every aspect 
of the project. Its influence extends from the very begin-
ning of design, by controlling the location, size, and 
construction type of the building, through engineering 
and the working drawing phase. Familiarity with the 
code and an understanding of the intent of its sections 
are important attributes for any member of the team 
putting a project together.
The code should be used as a tool, just as a keyboard 
and mouse are. It should be at your workstation and 
referred to frequently. The code book should be marked 
in and tabbed so that information such as frequently 
4
Introduction to the International 
Building Code

74 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
needed tables and formulas can be easily found. If possi-
ble, purchase the loose-leaf version of the code so that it 
will be easier to add updates and local amendments, as 
well as your own comments, formulas, and notes. The 
IBC Handbook of Fire and Life Safety, which explains 
nonstructural aspects of the code, is another excellent 
source of information.
Note: Visit the Web site for your local building 
department and the International Code Council 
Web site. This edition was published in the spring of 
2009. You’ll need to verify with your local building 
department to determine if the new edition has been 
adopted.
SUBJECTS COVERED 
BY THE MODEL CODES
The IBC is broken down into 35 chapters and 11 appen-
dices, as listed below.
CHAPTERS
 1.  ADMINISTRATION 
 2.  DEFINITIONS 
 3.  USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
 4.  SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED 
ON USE AND OCCUPANCY 
 5.  GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS 
 6.  TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION 
 7.  FIRE-RESISTANT-RATED CONSTRUCTION 
 8.  INTERIOR FINISHES 
 9.  FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
10. MEANS OF EGRESS 
11. ACCESSIBILITY 
12. INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT 
13. ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
14. EXTERIOR WALLS 
15.  ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP 
STRUCTURES 
16.  STRUCTURAL DESIGN 
17.  STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL 
INSPECTIONS 
18.  SOIL AND FOUNDATIONS 
19.  CONCRETE 
20.  ALUMINUM 
21.  MASONRY 
22.  STEEL 
23.  WOOD 
24.  GLASS AND GLAZING 
25.  GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER 
26.  PLASTIC 
27.  ELECTRICAL 
28.  MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 
29.  PLUMBING SYSTEMS 
30.  ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS 
31.  SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION 
32.  ENCROACHMENT INTO THE PUBLIC RIGHT-
OF-WAY 
33.  SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION 
34.  EXISTING STRUCTURES 
35.  REFERENCED STANDARDS 
APPENDICES
 A. EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS 
 B. BOARD OF APPEALS
 C. GROUP U—AGRICULTURE BUILDINGS 
 D. FIRE DISTRICTS 
 E.  SUPPLEMENTARY ACCESSIBILITY 
REQUIREMENTS 
 F.  RODENT-PROOFING 
 G.  FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION 
 H.  SIGNS 
 I.  PATIO COVERS 
 J.  GRADING
 K. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
     (ELECTRICAL)
General Construction Requirements 
To become familiar with the code, start by reading 
the chapters that discuss general building limitations 
of the code. Chapter 6 of the code discusses types 
of construction as classified by the model codes. 
Construction types are numbered from I to V. Type I 
is the most fire-resistive, providing the most protection 
from fire for the occupants of the structure. Type V 
construction provides the least fire resistance, enabling 
the use of materials that may be less expensive, but 
also allow a greater risk of fire. Each construction 
type has restrictions on the structural frame, exterior 

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
75
walls, interior walls, openings in walls, stair construc-
tion, and roof construction. The construction type 
will be used later in this chapter to calculate allowable 
building size. Figure 4-1 lists the fire-resistance rating 
for various building components, for each construc-
tion type.
Safety Requirements
Once you feel comfortable with general guidelines 
that govern placement and types of structures that are 
allowed in a specific area, read Chapters 7 through 12 
of the code:
● Chapter 7, FIRE-RESISTANT-RATED CONSTRUC-
TION, deals with the materials required to obtain a 
specific fire rating and will be covered in Chapter 12 
of this text.
● Chapter 8, INTERIOR FINISHES, primarily deals 
with flame spread and smoke classification of interior 
finishes such as wallpaper and carpet.
● Chapter 9, FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS, contains 
information about fire suppression and detection sys-
tems, and smoke control and venting. Plans for fire 
sprinkler systems and fire-detection systems are usu-
ally prepared by consultants specializing in this field. 
Wet and dry standpipes are frequently located by 
the project architect. Standpipes are systems that fire 
hoses connect to. Dry standpipes are dry until a fire 
truck connects to them and pumps water through 
them. The code specifies when these systems are 
required and gives criteria for locating them.
● Chapter 10, MEANS OF EGRESS, addresses exits 
and is one of the most important chapters for a space 
planner to understand. Although the technician is 
not usually responsible for the placement of walls, 
knowledge of code requirements will aid in under-
standing the building design. Placement of corridors 
and exits will be discussed later in this chapter.
● Chapter 11, ACCESSIBILITY, contains requirements 
for disabled access into and throughout a structure 
and are discussed in Chapter 5 of this book. 
FIGURE 4-1 The fire resistance of structural elements must be considered as the project is designed. The architect will determine 
the required rating for each element using Table 601 from the IBC. The designer must then devise a way to achieve that rating. 
Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. 
www.iccsafe.org.

76 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Chapter 12, INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT, contains 
minimum requirements for light and ventilation, 
including natural, artificial, and mechanical types. 
It also discusses minimum room sizes and ceiling 
heights.
Building Systems
Several chapters in the code describe roof, wall, and 
floor systems. The primary focus of Chapter 15, 
ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES, 
describes roof coverings. Minimum roof slope and 
maximum exposure to the weather are outlined with 
tables similar to Figure 4-2. The fire classification of the 
roof, as shown in Figure 4-3, is also discussed as well as 
roof flashing and roof drainage.
Chapter 16, STRUCTURAL DESIGN, lists loads 
and loading conditions that a building must be 
designed to resist. The chapter is primarily intended 
for the engineer, but knowledge of the loads acting 
FIGURE 4-2 The primary focus of Chapter 15 of the IBC is roof coverings. Table 1507.9.8 of the IBC shows the allowable exposure for 
different lengths and types of wood shakes on a 4 in 12 or greater roof pitch. The table will guide the project designer as specifica-
tions are developed for roof materials. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. 
Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.
FIGURE 4-3 Roofs are classified for their ability to resist fire. Different building types are required to have different classifications of 
roofs for fire safety reasons. Table 1505.1 shows this requirement. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. 
International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
77
on each portion of the structure will add to the 
technician’s understanding of the project. Figure 4-4 
shows required live loads for which different types 
of occupancies must be designed. Chapter 13 of this 
text will explore how the engineer makes use of this 
information in designing the structure. Snow loads, 
wind loads, and earthquake loads will be discussed 
later in this chapter as you are introduced to how 
the architect begins the preliminary design of a 
structure.
FIGURE 4-4 How the structure will be used will determine the live loads that must be designed for by the structural engineer. 
Live loads are an estimate of the load that will be imposed by such things as the occupants, furniture, and equipment. If architects 
think that these loads might be exceeded, they should inform the engineers. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. 
Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.
(continued)

78 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Chapter 18, SOIL AND FOUNDATIONS, describes 
foundations and retaining walls. Foundation inves-
tigations, which are usually done by a soils testing lab, 
are discussed. Requirements for standard foundations, 
such as minimum thickness of foundation walls (see 
Figure 4-5) and allowable foundation loads are also 
addressed. A substantial portion of this chapter covers 
the design of pile foundations. Chapters 11 and 24 of 
this text will explain how each of these systems affects 
a CAD drafter.
Building Materials
Once you feel at ease with the guidelines of building 
systems, work through the chapters that deal with 
specific types of materials. Wood is one of the most 
common materials of light construction and is cov-
ered in Chapter 23 of the IBC. Although you may be 
familiar with parts of these chapters from experience 
with residential construction, commercial construc-
tion will require a greater depth of understanding. This 
chapter has a lot of technical design information for 
the engineer, but it also has many tables and standard 
construction provisions that can be used by the techni-
cian. Chapters 7 and 8 of this text will explore wood, 
engineered lumber, and timber construction methods.
Chapter 22 of the IBC, STEEL AND ITS REFERENCE 
STANDARDS, is a very technical chapter intended for 
the engineer involved with the structural steel. Chapter 
19 of the IBC, CONCRETE AND ITS REFERENCE 
STANDARDS, is also very complex material. That chap-
ter sets the rules for the use of concrete and discusses 
highly technical subjects such as concrete mixes and 
seismic performance of concrete. Minimum required slab 
thickness, formwork, and durability are also addressed. 
An example of an important piece of information for the 
CAD drafter is shown in Figure 4-6. This is a portion of 
a table showing the minimum requirements for covering 
steel reinforcing with concrete. Unfortunately, this table 
is no longer contained directly in the code. The code has 
made reference to a document published by ACI, in this 
case ACI 318 Section 7.5, so you will need access to that 
document to obtain all of the appropriate information 
for dealing with concrete. This information is critical to 
developing proper details for reinforced concrete con-
struction. Chapters 9 and 11 of this text will introduce 
materials and construction methods generally associated 
with steel and concrete construction.
Note: Chapter 35, REFERENCED STANDARDS, 
provides a list of the standards referenced throughout 
the building code. See the Additional Reading section 
at the end of this chapter for a partial list of these 
resources. 
FIGURE 4-4 (continued) How the structure will be used will 
determine the live loads that must be designed for by the 
structural engineer. Live loads are an estimate of the load that 
will be imposed by such things as the occupants, furniture, 
and equipment. If architects think that these loads might be 
exceeded, they should inform the engineers. Courtesy 2009 
International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. 
International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights 
reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
79
Structural design of masonry construction is addressed 
in IBC Chapter 21, MASONRY. Required reinforcing, 
grout and mortar strength, and construction with glass 
block and screen block are examined. Each of these sub-
jects will be discussed in Chapter 10 of this text.
IBC Chapter 24, GLASS AND GLAZING, deals 
with structural requirements for safety glass and 
glass. It covers vertical and sloped glazing as well as 
unusual uses for glass such as glass handrails and 
racquetball courts. 
FIGURE 4-5 Table 1805.5(2) from the IBC shows the required reinforcing for masonry foundation walls of different heights with 
different unbalanced backfill heights. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. 
Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

80 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
USING THE CODE 
To effectively use the code during the initial design 
phase, five basic classifications of the building must be 
determined:
● Occupancy group
● Location on the site
● Floor area
● Height or number of stories
● Construction type 
There is no set order for determining these clas-
sifications when designing a building. The starting 
point depends on what is already known about the 
project.
Occupancy Classification
A good way to begin checking a project for code 
compliance is to determine what occupancy clas-
sification the building will fall into. Basic occupancy 
classifications are listed in IBC Chapter 3, USE AND 
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION. The IBC defines 10 
major occupancy classifications, and then breaks these 
classifications into subclassifications. All uses within a 
building must be categorized as one of these subclas-
sifications as shown in Table 4-1. Remember that the 
following list is a summary of an entire chapter of the 
IBC, it is not all-inclusive; there are exceptions listed in 
the code. Two other things to consider when determin-
ing occupancy: 
● If a use is not listed then it must be classified in the 
group that the occupancy most nearly resembles. 
● Buildings may have more than one occupancy clas-
sification.
Location on the Property
Zoning ordinances will have a significant impact on 
where the building is located on the property. Where 
the building is located on the lot will also have an 
impact on the construction of the building. The loca-
tion of the building in relationship to other buildings 
or the lot lines is very important in regard to fire safety 
and will affect the requirements for the fire resistance 
of exterior walls and the openings in those walls. The 
closer two buildings are located together, the more 
likely it is that a fire in one will damage the other. 
Larger space between buildings will also provide 
greater access for fire fighting equipment. The code has 
provisions for increasing the allowable size of a build-
ing when large yards are provided. For the purpose of 
area increases, a yard includes adjacent public streets, 
alleys, and other similar areas. Yards on adjacent lots 
do not count.
Figure 4-7 (Section 506 of IBC) contains the formu-
las for calculating the positive impact of large yards
around the building on the allowable size of the building. 
FIGURE 4-6 Common recommended reinforcing steel coverage. Drafters must complete details that must meet or exceed minimum 
concrete cover for steel reinforcing.  The code requirements for coverage of steel reinforcement are contained in section 7.7 of ACI 
318 (referenced by, but not included in the current edition of the IBC).  
RECOMMEND MINIMUM CONCRETE COVER
CONCRETE EXPOSURE
MINIMUM
COVER
Inches
1. Concrete cast against and
    permanently exposed to earth
2. Concrete exposed to earth or weather
      No. 6 through No. 18 bar
      No. 5 bar, W31 or D31 wire, and smaller
3. Concrete not exposed to weather or in
    contact with ground
      Slabs, walls, joists:
      No. 14 and No. 18 bars
      No. 11 bar and smaller
    Beams, columns:
      Primary reinforcement, ties, stirrups, spirals
   Shells, folded plate members:
      No. 6 bar and larger
      No. 5 bar, W31 or D31 wire, and smaller  
3
2
1 1/2
1 1/2
1 1/2
3/4
3/4
1/2

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
81
Assembly occupancies (A) represent buildings used for public assembly purposes such as theaters and churches, including but not limited to:
A-1 
 Structures used for the production and viewing such as motion picture theaters, symphony and concert halls, and television studios that 
have live audiences.
A-2 
 Structures used for consuming food and drink such as banquet halls, nightclubs, restaurants, and bars.
A-3 
 Structures used or intended for worship, recreation, or amusement; and assembly uses not listed elsewhere such as amusement arcades, art 
galleries, bowling alleys, places of religious worship, community halls, courtrooms, dance halls (without food and drink), funeral parlors, gymna-
siums, indoor swimming pools without spectator seating, libraries, museums, and pool halls.
A-4 
 Structures used or intended for viewing indoor sporting events and activities such as arenas, skating rinks, swimming pools, and tennis courts.
A-5 
 Structures used for viewing outdoor sporting events and activities such as amusement park structures, bleachers, grandstands, and stadiums.
Business occupancies (B) represent buildings used for nonhazardous business, such as an office building or buildings that provide the following 
services: 
Animal hospitals, banks, barber or beauty shops, car washes, civic administration, outpatient clinics, dry cleaners and laundry, educational occupancies 
above the twelfth grade, laboratories, car showrooms, post offices, offices offering professional services such as an architect, engineer, physician, or 
attorneys.
Education occupancies (E) represent buildings used for educational purposes by six or more occupants through the twelfth grade including day care. 
Factory occupancies (F) represent buildings used for industrial factories, including but limited to the following uses:
F-1 
 Factory uses that involve moderately hazardous uses that are not classified as H, such as aircraft, appliances, bakeries, bicycles, cam-
eras, canvas, clothing, electronics, food processing, furniture, leather products, millwork, plastic products, shoes, textiles, tobacco, 
and cabinet making.
F-2 
 Factory uses that involve low hazardous uses that involve the manufacturing of noncombustible materials such as beverages containing up 
to 12% alcohol, brick, ceramics, foundries, glass products, gypsum, ice, and metal products.
Hazardous occupancies (H) represent buildings involving highly hazardous occupancies, such as areas where large volumes of flammable liquids or 
highly toxic materials are stored or used including:
H-1 
Buildings containing materials that pose a detonation hazard.
H-2 
Buildings that contain a deflagration or accelerated burning hazard.
H-3 
Buildings that contain materials that readily support combustion or a physical hazard.
H-4 
Buildings that contain health hazards such as corrosives and toxic or highly toxic materials.
H-5 
Semiconductor fabrication facilities.
Institutional occupancies (I) represent buildings for institutional uses where people have restricted movement due to physical health or age or because 
they are being detained. 
I-1 
 Uses such as residential board and care, assisted living facilities, halfway houses, group homes, social rehabilitee facilities, alcohol or drug 
centers, and convalescent facilities.
I-2 
 24-hour medical care facility uses such as hospitals, nursing homes, mental hospitals, and detoxification facilities.
I-3 
 Building used by people who are under constraint such as prisons, jails reformatories, correction centers, and prerelease centers.
Mercantile occupancies (M) represent buildings used for sales of merchandise such as department stores and markets, gas stations, retail or whole-
sale stores.
Residential occupancies (R) represent buildings used for single or multifamily residential usage.
R-1 
 Residential occupancies containing sleeping units primarily for short-term stays such as hotels and motels.
R-2 
 Multiple residential uses for long-term stays such as apartment houses, boarding houses, convents, dormitories, hotels, and vacation time-
share properties.
R-3 
 Single- or two-unit residences or care facilities with no more than 5 people for less than 24 hours and congregate living facilities with less 
than 16 people.
R-4 
 Residential care or assisted living facilities with more than 5 but not more than 16 occupants plus staff.
Storage occupancies (S) classify buildings used for storage of moderate- and low-hazard materials 
S-1 
Storage of moderate-hazard materials, such as those products produced in an F-1 manufacturing plant.
S-2 
Storage of low-hazard materials, such as aircraft hangars and those products produced in an F-2 manufacturing plant.
Utility occupancies (U) are miscellaneous structures such as agriculture buildings, aircraft hangars accessory to a one- or two-family residence, barns, 
carports, fences more than 6’ high, grain silos accessory to a residential occupancy, greenhouses, livestock shelters, private garages, retaining walls, sheds, 
stables, tanks, and towers. 
TABLE 4-1 Occupancy Classifications of the IBC

82 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 4-7 The size of a structure can often be increased because of the number and size of yards, or the use of fire sprinklers. The 
formulas provided by the IBC in Section 506 can be used for calculating the allowable building size, taking yards and sprinklers into 
account. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights 
reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
83
With the increase in the size of yards, fire safety is 
increased and therefore the code allows larger buildings 
to be built.
It might be beneficial to increase the size of a yard 
to avoid required fire-resistive construction. Columns 
3 and 4 of Figure 4-8 (Table 602 of IBC) call for fire-
resistive walls when yards become less than a given size. 
Openings in walls, such as doors and windows, may 
need to be fire rated (protected) when they open onto 
small yards. This is discussed in IBC Chapter 7, FIRE-
RESISTANT-RATED CONSTRUCTION.
Allowable Floor Area, Height and 
Number of Stories, Type of Construction
Allowable floor area, height and number of stories, 
and construction type are three factors that need to 
be worked out together. After the building has been 
laid out on the site, you will usually have a building 
footprint determined. The number of stories needed to 
achieve the required size of the building for the project 
can then be determined.
The next challenge is to find an allowable way to 
construct the building. The code will classify a build-
ing according to the materials it is built with. Buildings 
made of wood frame construction in general are not 
allowed to be as large or as tall as buildings built of 
concrete and steel, because wood is not as stable and 
permanent as steel and concrete. Buildings that have 
their structural members protected from fire are allowed 
to be larger and taller than buildings without such fire 
protection. Referring to Figure 4-1, it can be seen that 
construction types with an “A” following are required to 
be more fire-resistant than those with a “B.” Type III-A 
is required to be more fire-resistant than Type III-B. The 
code has tables that specify allowable areas for a variety 
of construction types. These values will be different for 
each occupancy classification. Figure 4-9 shows the 
square footage allowed by the IBC for each occupancy 
group and each construction type. According to that 
table, a “B” occupancy of Type III-A construction has 
a basic allowable area of 28,500 square feet. If the “B” 
occupancy is built of Type III-B construction its basic 
allowable area is only 19,000 square feet. Why would 
anyone build with Type III-B construction instead of 
Type III-A construction? Because Type III-B is less 
expensive to build than Type III-A.
Notice that the allowable building sizes listed above 
were referred to as “basic allowable area.” These values 
are a starting point, a basic building area. The basic 
allowable building area can be increased based on the 
size of the yard around the building and if fire sprinklers 
are added, as described in Figure 4-7.
APPLYING THE CODE
The information that has just been described can be 
applied to the site plan in Figure 4-10. The building is 
to be a professional office building, two stories high, 
with 30,000 square feet on each floor. Table 4-1, which 
is a summary of IBC Section 304, lists office buildings 
as a Type B occupancy. Now it must be determined how 
FIGURE 4-8 In addition to the fire-resistance ratings shown in Figure 4-1, exterior walls are required to have fire-resistance ratings 
based on the building occupancy classification, construction type, and the fire separation distance per Table 602. The fire-separation 
distance is the distance to a real or imaginary property line. If the building faces public open space such as a street, the distance can 
be measured to the centerline. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced 
with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

84 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 4-9 The basic size and height of a structure is affected by the fire resistance of the materials used. The architect must consider 
the materials of construction very early in the design process. Type I-A construction is the most restrictive construction, meaning that 
materials used are the least likely to burn. Type V-B is the least restrictive construction, allowing materials that have a high risk of fire 
damage to be used. Table 503 shows the basic or tabular value for the allowable area of a building based on the construction type and 
occupancy. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All 
rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
85
to achieve 30,000 square feet per floor. Referring to 
Figure 4-9 (Table 503) under B, it can be seen that only 
Type I-A, Type I-B, Type II-A, and Type-IV construc-
tion have large enough basic allowable areas for this 
building. These types of construction are relatively 
expensive; therefore, less costly answers should be 
explored. As mentioned earlier, the basic allowable 
area can be increased by installing fire sprinklers and 
by having large yards around the building.
Based on Figure 4-7 (Section 506 of the IBC), the 
building size can be increased if it has enough of its 
walls fronting on yards larger than 20' (6100 mm). The 
building in Figure 4-10 has 452' of wall facing a yard 
larger than 20' (212' [192+20] of south walls +150' 
of east wall +90' of west wall). In the second formula 
shown in Figure 4-7, 452 will be F. The building has a 
total of 724' of exterior wall (perimeter). In the formula, 
724 will be P. 
Note: When considering the size of yards for increas-
ing the allowable building area, there is often confu-
sion about how much of the yard may be used when 
a yard faces a street or when the yard is between 
two buildings on the same lot. Often designers and 
building officials try to use the assumed property 
line that is established for measuring the distance to 
openings. This assumed property line is not used for 
yard as applied to area increases. Yards between two 
buildings on the same lot are measured from build-
ing to building. You get to use the entire yard width. 
For yards facing streets, you may use the entire yard 
on your site plus the entire width of the street. Not 
just to the centerline, but the entire street.
Once the values for F and P have been determined, 
the sizes of the three yards that are being used for the 
area increase need to be examined. If the building meets 
the following criteria per IBC Sections 506.1 and 507, 
then the maximum yard that can be used is 60'; other-
wise the maximum yard that can be used is 30'. 
1. The building is one-story, is not sprinklered, and the 
occupancies are limited to F-2 or S-2 occupancies.
2. The building is one-story, is sprinklered, is limited to 
B, F, M, or S occupancy; or is one-story, sprinklered, 
A-4 occupancy, not of Type V construction.
3. The building is two-story and is limited to B, F, M, or 
S occupancies.
FIGURE 4-10 The site plan for a proposed structure can be useful in visualizing construction requirements.

86 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
4. An A-3 occupancy building of Type II construction 
that is sprinklered, does not have a stage other than 
a platform, is within 21" of grade, and has all exits 
accessible.
5. Some buildings containing a limited amount of H 
occupancies (see IBC Sections 507.8 and 507.9).
6. An E occupancy one-story building meeting the 
requirements of IBC 507.10.
7. For motion picture theaters and covered malls, see 
IBC 507.11 and 507.12.
A two-story non-sprinklered office building is lim-
ited to the 30' maximum yard. All of the yards that are 
greater than 20' are also greater than 30' so in the second 
formula of Figure 4-7, 30 will be W. The calculations in 
Figure 4-11 show that the basic allowable area can be 
increased by 37%.
Now go to Table 503 (Figure 4-9) and look at the 
available options. By multiplying the allowable area 
of a Type V-B building by 1.37, a 12,330 square foot 
area is allowed (9000 × 1.37); with Type V-A, 24,660 
square feet are allowed. Neither of the numbers is large 
enough. Using the same process with Types III-B and 
II-B results in 26,030 and 31,510, respectively. Type 
II-B is large enough. Type III-A is also large enough at 
39,045 sq ft. There are now six construction types from 
which to choose.
Another option for increasing the allowable area of 
the building is to install a fire sprinkler system. This 
option has several other benefits, such as allowing 
longer dead-end corridors and unrated corridors. The 
first formula in Figure 4-7 gives the maximum allowable 
area after considering yard increases and fire sprinkler 
increases. This formula looks rather complicated at first, 
but it really is not that difficult to use. To determine 
If   , W must first be determined. In this example the max-
imum value of 60' may be used because Section 506.2.1 
has an exception. This exception references Section 
507. This building meets the conditions described in 
Section 507.4 (the requirement for 60' yards on all sides 
is waved by section 506.2.1). Because one of the yards 
is less than 60', a weighted average calculation must be 
used. Figure 4-12 illustrates the calculation for the least 
restrictive construction method, Type V-B construc-
tion. Because this example results in an area greater 
than what is needed, it will not be necessary to work 
out the allowable area for any other construction type. 
Using a spreadsheet to solve this formula allows you to 
explore several solutions in a very short period of time. 
A spreadsheet has been provided on the Student CD 
in the Resource Material/Chapter 4 folder. Try using it 
with Figure 4-10. If you do not use the west yard, you 
will actually get a larger allowable area.
Reading Figure 4-8 (Table 602 of the IBC) for a B 
occupancy classification, it can be seen that walls facing 
a yard smaller than 10' (6100 mm) will have to be built 
of fire-resistive construction no matter what construc-
tion type the building is. This means that the north wall 
of the building will have to be fire-resistive. A portion of
the west wall will have to be fire-resistive for many 
If = [F/P-0.25]W/30
F = 452
P = 724
W = 30
 
Divide 724 into 452
If = [452/724-0.25] 30/30
 
Divide 30 into 30
 
The answer rounded to 2 decimal places is
 
close enough
If = [.62-0.25]1
 
Work inside the brackets
If = [.37]1
 
Multiply .37 x 1
If = .37
FIGURE 4-11 The basic allowable area of a building may be 
increased if unoccupied yards of greater than 20’ are provided 
around the building. The formula is from Figure 4-7. The values 
entered are based on the building in Figure 4-10.
Wall yard smaller than allowed maximum for calculations x width of yard
Weighted Average for W = (90 x 36 + 362 x 60) / 452
Perimeter facing yards greater than 20’ – length shown above
 
W = ( 3240 + 21720) / 452
 
W = 24960 / 452
 
W = 55.22
Allowable Area
Aa = At + [At x  If] + [At x  Is]
At = 9000 from Figure 4.9 for a B occupancy of Type V-B construction
If  = [452 / 724 -0.25] 55.22 / 30 = .6890
Is = 2 From Figure 4.7 506.3 for a multi story building
Work inside the brackets first
Aa = 9000 + [9000 x .6890] + [9000 x 2]
 
 
 
 
Aa = 9000 + [6201] + [18000]
 
 
Aa = 33201
FIGURE 4-12 The basic allowable area of a building can also 
be increased if fire sprinklers are installed. The formula is from 
Figure 4-7. The values entered are based on the building in 
Figure 4-10.

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
87
construction types but not for Type V-B. Chapter 12 
of this text will introduce methods to achieve specific 
fire ratings. The east wall of the building will not have 
to be fire-resistive (unless a fire rated construction type 
is chosen for the entire building) even though it is only 
8' (3050 mm) from the property line, because one half 
of the street can be counted as part of the yard (the 
entire width of the street is counted for yard increases). 
Openings on the north side of the buildings will be 
allowed, but they must be fire-resistive (protected). This 
is controlled by IBC Section 704.8. Portions of the west 
wall will have restrictions on openings. The restrictions 
on both the north and west walls will vary with the con-
struction type chosen. Again, unrestricted unprotected 
openings are allowed on the east side of the building 
because one half of the street may be used as a part of 
the required yard.
MIXED OCCUPANCY
Buildings often contain more than one occupancy 
classification. This complicates their design in several 
ways. If an 8000 square foot community hall is to be 
provided on the lower floor of the office building just 
examined, you will have a building with both a B and 
an A3 occupancy. Referring to Figure 4-13 (Table 508.4 
of the IBC), it can be determined that a two-hour fire 
separation between the two occupancies is required 
if the building is not sprinklered. A one-hour wall is 
required if the building is sprinklered. This means that 
the walls surrounding the community hall and the floor 
ceiling assembly over the community hall will have to 
be constructed to resist a fire for at least two hours in a 
non-sprinklered building and one hour in a sprinklered 
building. Note that there are provisions in the code to 
build without occupancy separation walls. There are 
descriptions of various fire-resistive constructions in 
the codes and in other sources. Chapter 12 of this text 
further explores options for creating fire assemblies. If 
the entire building is built to the requirements of the 
more restrictive M occupancy, the area separation wall 
is not required.
Determining Mixed Occupancy Size
One of the other aspects affected by mixed occupancy 
is the allowable area of the building. The building’s 
allowable size is not as apparent as with a single occu-
pancy type. In the previous example, using Figure 4-10, 
the community hall is an A3 occupancy and the office 
FIGURE 4-13 When there will be more than one type of occupancy classification in a building, the required separation of common 
walls and floor systems must be determined using IBC Table 508.4. Please note that there are exceptions in the code that eliminate 
the requirement for occupancy separation. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code 
Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

88 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
portion of the building is a B occupancy. Each of these 
occupancies has a different basic allowable area for 
every construction type. The allowable area for each 
of the occupancy classifications needs to be calculated. 
The sum of the ratios of the actual areas to the allowable 
areas may not exceed 1.
Looking over the formula in Figure 4-12, the only 
variable that changes is At, the tabular area or basic 
allowable area. To check the building to see if Type V-B 
construction still works, rework the formula using an 
At of 8000 from Figure 4-9 for an A-3 occupancy. The 
result will be an allowable area of 22,134 for Type V-B 
construction.
The formula for calculating the sum of the ratios 
of the actual areas to the allowable areas is shown in 
Figure 4-14. The actual area for the B occupancy with 
22,000 square feet (30,000 – 8000) is divided by the 
allowable area of 33,201 equals 0.663. The actual area 
of the A-3 occupancy of 8000 divided by the allowable 
area of 22,134 equals 0.361. The sum of 0.663 plus 
0.361 is greater than 1 (see Figure 4-14), so Type V-B 
construction is not acceptable. A higher classification of 
construction will need to be used. Going through the 
same steps for Type III-B construction proves that it will 
work, as shown in Figure 4-14.
EXITS
After the basic exterior shape of the building has been 
determined, you will begin to fill it with rooms. One of 
the most important steps in this process is to determine 
the exit path. The number and size of the exits will be 
determined in most cases by the number of occupants 
in the building and the occupancy classification.
The number of occupants in the building is not 
necessarily determined by the number of people an 
architect says will be in the various rooms. Room occu-
pancy is determined by a ratio of the room area to the 
code specified area per person, as shown in Figure 4-15 
(IBC Table 1004.1.1), or by the number of occupants 
that are to use the room, whichever is greater. In some 
cases, the number of fixed seats in the room determines 
the number of occupants. Theaters and churches are 
examples of spaces where the number of occupants 
is determined by the number of seats. In most other 
spaces, the area of the room is divided by the factor 
shown in column 2 of IBC Table 1004.1.1 (Figure 4-15) 
to determine the number of occupants.
After determining the number of occupants in the 
building, the number and width of the required exits 
can be determined. Figure 4-16 (IBC Table 1015.1) lists 
the IBC requirements for two exits under most condi-
tions. Three exits are required if the building has 501 
to 1000 occupants; four exits are required for 1001 and 
more occupants. 
The location of the exits is also an important factor. 
If more than one exit is required, the code requires 
at least two of the exits to be separated by a distance 
equal to or greater than one-half of the diagonal of the 
area served (one-third of the diagonal in a sprinklered 
building), as shown in Figure 4-17. Dead-end corridors 
over 20' (6100 mm) in length in a non-sprinklered 
building for most occupancies (see Figure 4-17) are 
not allowed. The length of a dead-end corridor can be 
 Mixed occupancy
  actual area 1               actual area 2              actual area 3      
allowable area 1         allowable area 2         allowable area 1  
check for Figure 4-10 with a 8000 sq ft art gallery
Type V-B construction
22,000        8,000        
33,201        22,134 
Type III-B construction
25,000         8,000        
65,534        32,767  =  .381 + .153 = .534 ≤  OK
  
=  .663 + .361 = 1.024  this is greater than 1 and is not OK
≤ 1
+
+
+
+
FIGURE 4-14 The formula for computing the allowable area of a building containing more than one occupancy classification is 
shown along with a sample calculation. This calculation uses information from Figures 4-10 and 4-12.

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
89
FIGURE 4-15 The number of occupants in a space is usually 
calculated on a square footage basis when fixed seats are not 
installed. This table lists the maximum number of square feet 
that it can be assumed one person occupies for various uses. This 
is important for determining exit requirements. Sometimes this 
is important for determining the occupancy classification of a 
space. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. 
Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permis-
sion. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.
FIGURE 4-16 If a large number of people occupy a space, 
more than one exit will be required. For example, a Type B 
occupancy with an occupancy load of 50 or less would require 
only one exit. If the floor area were increased to allow more 
than 50 occupants, two exits would be required. The number 
of occupants is determined by dividing the square footage 
of the room by the values shown in Figure 4-15. When there 
are more that 500 occupants, additional exits are required. 
Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. 
Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permis-
sion. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.
MAXIMUM DIAGONAL OF AREA SERVED (MDAS)
MINIMUM OF 1/2 MDAS
20'-0"
MAX.
FIGURE 4-17 If more than one exit from a building is 
required, the exits will need to have proper separation. For 
non-sprinklered buildings, exits will need to be separated by 
a distance equal to a minimum of one-half of the maximum 
diagonal of the area served. In a sprinklered building this dis-
tance may be reduced to one-third of the maximum diagonal. 
The code limits the length of dead-end corridors when two or 
more exits are required. For all occupancies except for some 
I-3 occupancies, the dead end cannot exceed 20’ (6100 mm) in 
length for a building without fire sprinklers. The dead end may 
extend to 50’ for B and F occupancies in a building with fire 
sprinklers.

90 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
extended to 50' (15,240 mm) for some occupancies 
if the building is fully sprinklered. If the exits are not 
reasonably separated, there is a chance that a fire might 
block both exits, denying people an escape route. If the 
occupants of a building run down a long dead-end cor-
ridor, they will lose valuable time retracing their steps 
to get out of the building. If the exits are wide enough, 
people will be able to flow through them rapidly in an 
emergency.
Determining Exits
A single-story non-sprinklered building with 35,000 
square feet of office space and a 900 square foot confer-
ence room will be considered. Figure 4-15 states that 
for the purpose of calculating exits, one occupant for 
every 100 square feet for business uses and one occu-
pant for every 15 square feet of an assembly area with 
tables and chairs can be used. Dividing 35,000 by 100 
results in 350 occupants for the office area, and divid-
ing 900 by 15 results in 60 occupants for the conference 
room, for a total of 410 occupants. Per Figure 4-18 
(Section 1005.1 of the IBC), the code requires 0.2" 
of exit width for every occupant. Multiplying 0.2" by 
410 equals 82" (6'–10") of required exit. This building 
requires only two exits but two 3'–0" doors will not 
provide ample exit width. This means that if only two 
exits are provided, a 3'–0" door at one exit and a 4'–0" 
door or a pair of 3'–0" doors at the other exit would 
seem to be acceptable. Making one of the doors wider 
than the other is not always an option. The code states 
that when more than one exit is required, if one of the 
exits is blocked, it can not reduce the available exit 
width by more than half. With a 3' and a 4' door, if the 
4' door is blocked, more than 50% of the exit would be 
blocked. In this case, both exits would need to be at 
least 3'-6" wide.
There are minimum requirements in the code for 
hall and door widths. Three-foot-wide exit doors are 
required for most conditions. In some cases, corridors 
as narrow as 36" are acceptable but most conditions 
require 44" as a minimum. Stairways have required 
minimum widths and a required minimum width per 
occupant.
THE CODE AND COMPUTERS
As you can see, using the code can be a lot of work. 
There is a lot of flipping back and forth between chap-
ters. A thorough code check is important to the safety of 
the building’s occupants. As your familiarity of the code 
increases, its use will become easier. You will remember 
what areas of the code to check. It is important that you 
check the code thoroughly, rather than try to commit 
it completely to memory, because the code is revised 
every three years. Your memory may dredge up an out-
dated version of the code section.
There are computer-based code-checking systems 
available for each of the model building codes. These 
range from a simple computerized checklist to a com-
prehensive analyst program. These programs can greatly 
speed up code checking and increase your confidence in 
the adequacy of your design.
FIGURE 4-18 Once the number of exits has been determined, Section 1005 of the IBC can be used to determine the exit width for 
every occupant to be served. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced 
with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
91
ADDITIONAL READING
The International Building Code and Commentary 
Volume I and II have excellent illustrations and inter-
pretations of the code. The following Web sites can 
be used as a resource to help you keep current with 
changes in building codes. All four sites are sources 
for the 2009 IBC, as well as the other code listed with 
their names. They are sources for interpretive manuals 
and training.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.iccsafe.org  
International Code Council
The following is a partial listing of the sites referred to in 
IBC Chapter 35, REFERENCED STANDARDS. See the 
IBC for additional references.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.aamanet.org 
American Architectural 
Manufacturers Association
www.aci-int.org 
American Concrete 
Institute
www.afanda.org 
American Forest and Paper 
Association
www.aisc.org  
American Institute of Steel 
Construction
www.aitc-glulam,org 
American Institute of 
Timber Construction 
www.steel.org 
American Iron and Steel 
Institute
www.ansi.org 
American National 
Standards Institute
www.asce.org 
American Society of Civil 
Engineers
www.asme.org 
American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers
www.astm.org 
ASTM International
www.aws.org 
American Welding Society
www.awpa.org 
American Wood-Preservers 
Association
www.apawood.org 
APA—The Engineered 
Wood Association
www.pwgsc.gc.ca.cgsb 
Canadian General 
Standards Board
www.cedarbureau.org 
Cedar Shake and Shingle 
Bureau
www.gypsum.org 
Gypsum Association
Traditionally, building codes address how the environment 
affects a structure. Stresses resulting from gravity, wind, 
snow, water, and seismic activity have always been a 
major concern of the model codes. The Green Building 
Standard now addresses how the building affects the 
environment. The International Code Council (ICC) and the 
National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) have jointly 
developed the National Green Building Standard that 
promotes the flexibility of green building practices and 
provides a common national benchmark for builders and 
designers. The standards are the first to be accredited by 
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Although 
primarily aimed at residential construction, the standard 
does apply to multifamily construction. The standard 
requires designers and builders to address features in six 
categories including: 
Design considerations
• 
Land conservation
• 
Water conservation
• 
Material resource conservation 
• 
Energy conservation
• 
Indoor and outdoor air quality
• 
In addition to setting construction standards,ratings 
for bronze, silver, gold, and emerald certification levels are 
provided in an effort to reduce negative environmental 
impacts and to promote positive environmental impacts.
In addition to the Green Building Standard, the ICC 
and the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) have 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding between the 
two organizations in order to further green building 
practices. Because green code development is such a 
fluid area, it is imperative that you constantly monitor 
the Web sites of the ICC, USGBC, ANSI, and NAHB for 
the most current information on green building and 
developing codes. The address for each site is listed at 
the end of this chapter.
EASY BEING GREEN

92 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
www.iso.org 
International Standards 
Organization
www.masonrysociety.org 
Masonry Society
www.naamm.org 
National Association 
of Architectural Metal 
Manufacturers 
www.nahb.org 
National Association of 
Home Builders
www.ncma.org 
National Concrete Masonry 
Association
www.nfpa.org 
National Fire Protection 
Association
www.post-tensioning.org 
Post-Tensioning Institute
www.pci.org 
Precast Prestressed 
Concrete Institute
www.mhia,org 
Rack Manufacturing 
Institute (Material 
Handling Industry)
www.spri.org 
Single-Ply Roofing 
Institute
www.steeljoist.org 
Steel Joist Institute
www.seinstitute.org 
Structural Engineers 
Institute 
www.tpinst.org 
Truss Plate Institute
www.ul.com 
Underwriters Laboratories 
www.usgbc.org 
United States Green 
Building Council 
www.wdma.com 
Window and Door 
Manufacturers Association
www.wirereinforcementinstitute.org
 
Wire Reinforcement, Inc.
KEY TERMS
Allowable floor area 
Basic allowable area 
Construction type 
Hazardous materials  
Occupancy classification 
Occupancy, Assembly  
Occupancy, Business 
Occupancy, Education 
Occupancy, Factory 
Occupancy, Hazardous 
Occupancy, Institutional 
Occupancy, Mercantile 
Occupancy, Mixed
Occupancy, Residential 
Occupancy, Storage 
Occupancy, Utility 
Introduction to the International Building Code
CHAPTER 4 TEST
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Answer the questions according to the code that governs your 
area. If math is required to answer a question, show your work.
Question 4-1 What occupancy classification would a 10-unit 
apartment building be?
Question 4-2 What occupancy classification would a cloth-
ing store be?
Question 4-3 In a building that requires occupancy separa-
tion, what fire separation is required between a B and an 
H-3 occupancy using the IBC? Between an A-2 and an E?
Question 4-4 What is the basic allowable area of an H-4 
occupancy in a Type V building? In a Type III building?
Question 4-5 What is the most important purpose of the 
model code?
Question 4-6 Use the drawing below and the IBC to deter-
mine the maximum size allowed for a one-story building 

Chapter 4: Introduction to National Building Code 
93
without a fire sprinkler system. Assume an occupancy of 
E, and a building type of II-A.
Question 4-7 What is the maximum allowable size for the 
building in question 4-6 if the building is provided with a 
fire sprinkler system and is of Type II-B construction?
Question 4-8 How far do the exits need to be separated if 
the maximum diagonal of the building is 85' and the 
building is sprinklered?
Question 4-9 Use Figure 4-10 and assume that there is no 
street on the east side of the property so that the distance 
from the building to the property line is 8'. What is the 
value of If  if the building is non-sprinklered?
Question 4-10 Use the information in question 4-9. How 
large can the building be if it is used for a Type M occu-
pancy and made of Type III-A construction?

94
5
Access Requirements for People 
with Disabilities
Just as with the building code, as a new CAD techni-
cian you will not be expected to apply the Americans 
with Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines to the design of 
a structure. However, to advance beyond an entry-level 
position, you must understand the basic concepts pre-
sented in the ADA. To help you become proficient at 
using the standards, this chapter will explore the ADA 
as it is intended to address the requirements of new 
construction regarding:
● Parking requirements.
● Methods of egress.
● Restrooms and bathing facilities.
● Requirements based on occupancy.
Note: The United States Access Board published 
changes to the 1994 edition of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act in 2009 at a date that was too late 
to be addressed in this text. Verify current ADA 
requirements at the ADA home page at the following 
address: http://www.ADA.gov.
The Americans with Disabilities Act, otherwise 
known as the ADA, is a federal law requiring all new 
public accommodations and commercial facilities to 
be accessible and usable by people with disabilities. 
This landmark law was driven by the fact that medical 
and scientific technology has allowed people to survive 
previously fatal conditions and live on with significant 
disabilities. The ADA gives these citizens a better chance 
to live productive and fulfilling lives. 
This law has had a significant impact on building 
and site design. It does not guarantee people with dis-
abilities access to every square foot of every new build-
ing, but it does greatly increase the building space they 
can utilize in a comfortable and convenient manner. 
Access is required to the ground floor of almost every 
nonresidential building, and it is required to all floors 
of most public and medical buildings and buildings 
over three stories in height. Make note that public 
buildings include retail stores, restaurants, theaters, 
and other privately owned buildings that the general 
public utilizes. Public buildings also include public-
owned facilities such as libraries and courthouses.
The ADA addresses both new and existing struc-
tures. Some existing public facilities are now required 
to remove some barriers. Other facilities are required to 
remove barriers when they remodel or do an addition. 
In both cases the term readily achievable is used, which 
means that it would be easy to do, not creating an undue 
hardship. The ADA provides several alternative solu-
tions for accessible facilities in existing buildings. These 
alternative solutions and the term readily achievable do 
not apply to new construction. This chapter will only 
address the access requirements for new construction.
ADA ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES 
FOR BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES
The ADA addresses the requirements of people with 
disabilities. Many of the requirements are to accommo-
date people in wheelchairs, but the ADA also addresses 
the problems of the elderly, the blind, the hearing 
impaired, and those with other forms of physical dis-
abilities. It is important to realize that the ADA may not 
be the only set of regulations governing access. Several 
states had access laws prior to the ADA that might still 
be in effect with requirements more stringent than 
those of the ADA. The requirements of the ADA do not 
necessarily provide the ideal or optimum conditions for 
people with disabilities, only the minimum acceptable 
requirements. Meeting ADA requirements does not 
excuse the designer from meeting the requirements of 
any other governing building code.
The primary concerns addressed by the ADA are 
access to the building, access to the building spaces it 
contains, and the use of facilities such as restrooms, 
drinking fountains, and telephones. A specific outline of 
ADA requirements, Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings 
and Facilities, is available at www.access-board.gov.
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Special parking spaces must be provided for people 
with disabilities. This parking must be relatively flat 
(2% maximum slope in every direction including 
diagonally) and must be located as close as possible 

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
95
to the entrance of the building. There must be an 
accessible walkway from the parking space to the 
building. The parking spaces must be marked with 
the international symbol of accessibility shown in 
Figure 5-1.
Parking spaces must be of a size adequate to accom-
modate the special needs of people with disabilities. 
At least one space needs to be 8' (2438 mm) wide 
with an 8' (2438 mm) wide loading space or 11' (3350 
mm) wide with a 5' (1525 mm) wide loading space to 
accommodate a van with a wheelchair lift, as shown in 
Figure 5-2. Other parking spaces for disabled drivers are 
required to provide only a 5' (1525 mm) wide loading 
space to allow a wheelchair to be brought alongside a 
car. The minimum vertical clearance for parking spaces 
for the disabled is 8' (2438 mm). If there is a curb at the 
parking space, there will be a need for a curb ramp, as 
shown in Figure 5-3.
The CAD technician will have to show the proper 
size and number of parking spaces on the site plan 
based on the criteria listed in Table 5-1.
Parking details will normally be stock details stored 
as wblocks or contained on a standard sheet with other 
ADA details. Site grades can influence the location of 
accessible parking spaces. The space must be on an 
accessible route of travel and meet rigid requirements 
for slope in both directions. The required slope of the 
parking space and the accessible path of travel will 
need to be coordinated with the civil engineer for the 
project.
METHODS OF EGRESS
Many of the ADA requirements deal with access to 
and throughout a structure. Major areas to be consid-
ered by the design team include walks and hallways, 
ramps, stairs, elevators, lifts, areas of rescue assis-
tance, and doors.
Walks and Hallways
There must be an accessible route from public trans-
portation, parking spaces, loading zones, and the 
public sidewalk to the building. The route shall 
lead to a primary building entrance, not a service 
entrance, and must be at least 36" wide (915 mm). 
A wider route of 48" (1220 mm) is recommended so 
that someone walking can pass a wheelchair. Turns 
in the walk or hall must be able to accommodate a 
wheelchair, as shown in Figures 5-4a and 5-4b. If the 
route is less than 60" wide (1525 mm), there must 
(a)
Proportions
International Symbol of Accessibility
(b)
Display Conditions
International Symbol of Accessibility
(c)
International TDD Symbol
(d)
International Symbol of Access
for Hearing Loss
International Symbols
FIGURE 5-1 All parking spaces for the disabled must be marked with the international symbol for accessibility. Other symbols used 
to designate special provisions include the telecommunication device for the deaf (TDD) and hearing loss symbols. Courtesy Federal 
Register/Vol. 56 No.144/July 26, 1991.
Accessible Route
60 min
252 min
Van Accessible Space at End Row
1525
2440
6400
96 min
2440
96 mn
2440
96 min
36
915
FIGURE 5-2 Normal parking spaces for the disabled must 
have a 5' (1525 mm) wide loading space. Van spaces are 
required to have an 8' (2438 mm) wide loading space. The 
parking space itself is required to be 8' (2438 mm) wide, 
although some jurisdictions may require the parking space to 
be wider. The loading space must be on the passenger side 
of the car unless it is shared by two parking spaces. Courtesy 
Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

96 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Adjoining slope shall
not exceed 1:20
Slope = Y:X
where X is a level plane
Street
Measurement of Curb Ramp Slope
Built-Up Curb Ramp
10
36 min
typ.
1
Walk
X
Y
Flared side
If X is less than 48 in.
then the slope of the flared side
shall not exceed 1:12
(b)
Side of Curb Ramps
(a)
Flared Side
Returned Curb
10
1
X
X
Planting or other
nonwalking surface
FIGURE 5-3 Curb ramps must be provided to get from the parking space to the adjacent walk (path of travel). These ramps may not 
project into the required parking space. The path of travel must not go sideways across the ramp or the 2% allowable cross fall will be 
exceeded. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
36 min
915
36 min
915
48 min
1220
36 min
915
90 Degree Turn
(a)
48 min
1220
Turn around an Obstruction
(b)
42 min
1065
42 min
1065
NOTE: Dimensions shown apply when X < 48 (1220)
1/4 max
6.5
Changes in Levels
(c)
1/4 to 1/2
6.5-13
2
1
Changes in Levels
(d)
FIGURE 5-4 Turns in a walk or hallway must be carefully planned. Changes in levels of more than 1/4" but not exceeding 1/2" must 
be sloped. Abrupt changes of more than 1/2" are not allowed. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
97
be a 60" × 60" (1525 × 1525 mm) minimum wide 
passing space located no further than 200' (60, 960 
mm) apart. The route must have a minimum vertical 
clearance of 80" (2030 mm). The surface of the route 
must be slip-resistant and must also be a reasonably 
firm surface (no plush carpet or pad, etc.). Projections 
along the access route could be hazardous to the visu-
ally impaired. Therefore projections are limitations, as 
shown in Figure 5-5.
Changes in level along the accessible route of up 
to 1/2" (13 mm) shall be per Figures 5-4c and 5-4d. 
Changes in elevation of more than 1/2" (13 mm) must 
be via curb ramp, elevator, or lift. If the walk slopes 
more than 5% (1 in 20) in the direction of travel, it is 
considered a ramp and shall comply with the require-
ments of a ramp. The cross slope, the sideways slope of 
the path of travel route, may not slope more than 1 in 
50, or 2%.
CAD technicians must draw the walks to their proper 
width and destination and assure proper maneuvering 
Total Parking in Lot
Required Minimum Number 
of Accessible Spaces
  1 to 25
1
 26 to 50
2
 51 to 75
3
 76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1000
2% of total
1001 or more
20 plus 1 for each 100 sq. ft. or 
fraction over 1001
TABLE 5-1 Required Minimum Number of Handicapped 
Spaces Based on Total Parking
Based on the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards
Lobby
4 max
100
Higher than 27
685
80 min
2030
Any amount
Clear width
27 or below
685
27 max
685
Cane range
FIGURE 5-5 There are limitations placed on projections along the path of travel to protect the visually impaired. Courtesy Uniform 
Federal Accessibility Standards.
(continued)

98 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Carpet Pile Thickness
1/2 max
13
Gratings
1/2 max
13
Predominant direction
of traffic
Long dimension
perpendicular to
route of travel
Grating Orientation
CANE
DETECTION
AREA
(c–1)
Overhead Hazards
Protect shaded
area from
cross-traffic
Free-Standing Overhanging Objects
(c)
27
685
80
2030
27 max
685
Elevation
Greater than 12
305
Greater than 12
305
Plan
12 max
305
Plan
Object Mounted on Posts or Pylons
This overhang can be
greater than 12 (305)
because no one can
approach the object from
this direction
Elevation
12 max
305
Cane range
Cane hits post or pylon
before person hits object
Greater than 27
685
FIGURE 5-5 (continued) There are limitations placed on projections along the path of travel to protect the visually impaired. Courtesy 
Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
Additional protection not
required between wing walls
Example of Protection around Wall-Mounted Objects and Measurements of Clear Widths
Protruding objects hanging
on wall with leading edges
above 27 (685)
Wing walls down
to floor
Any
dimension
Corridor or other
circulation space
24 max
610
4 max
160
32 min
clear width
36 min clear
continuous
passage
point passage

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
99
space for turns. Slope of walks, both in the direction of 
travel and cross fall, must be coordinated with the civil 
engineer. If ramps or stairs are required, they need to 
be properly detailed to meet the requirements outlined 
in the following sections. Most offices will have stan-
dard details, reflecting the requirements of the ADA 
that can be referenced to cover many of the conditions 
that occur on a site or within the accessible route in 
the building.
Ramps
Curb ramps, as the name implies, are intended to make 
the transition through the change in level caused by a 
normal curb. These ramps shall be a minimum of 36" 
(915 mm) wide and shall be sloped as shown in Figure 
5-3. Curb ramps are required to have a detectable warn-
ing at their top edge, as shown in Figure 5-6. Curb ramps 
do not require handrails or guardrails.
Other ramps are usually longer than curb ramps. 
Like a walk, ramps are required to be a minimum of 
36" (915 mm) wide. It is desirable to make the ramps 
wider, especially if this is also the primary access for 
people who are not disabled. Any access route having 
a slope of 1 in 20 (5%) or greater is considered to be a 
ramp. A ramp should be as shallow a slope as possible 
and may not exceed a slope of 1 in 12 (8.33%). The 
maximum change in height between landings is 30" 
(760 mm). Level landings are required at each end of 
a ramp. They must be at least as wide as the ramp and 
be 60" (1525 mm) long in the direction of travel (see 
Figure 5-7). If the ramp changes direction, the landing 
must be 60" × 60" (1525 × 1525 mm) minimum. If 
there is a doorway on the landing, all requirements for 
maneuvering at a door must be met. The requirements 
for maneuvering at doors are discussed later in this 
chapter.
Guardrails must be provided on the open side of 
a ramp, as shown in Figure 5-8. Unless adjacent to 
a seating area, ramps rising more than 6" (150 mm) 
require a handrail on both sides. The handrail shall be 
constructed per Figure 5-9, projecting 1 1/2" (38 mm) 
clear of the wall and extending 12" (300 mm) beyond 
the ends of the ramp, except for a continuous inside 
handrail on a switchback or dogleg ramp as shown in 
Figure 5-10. The handrail shall be continuous and be 
mounted 34" to 38" (860 to 960 mm) above the ramp 
surface.
Required ramps frequently fail to receive proper 
attention during the design stage. Total rise must be 
considered and, if the ramp must rise over 30" (760 
mm), a landing must be inserted. Landings at changes 
in direction must be properly sized. Ramps and landings 
take up a surprising amount of room. It is important to 
Front edge of sidewalk
Planting
Sideslope
36" min
8.33%
max
2%
max
Grooving Detail
Warning Strip
Approx. 3/4" on flat portion
approx. 1 1/2" on sloped
portion of ramp
1/4"
1/4"
See groove det. below
1 in 8
48"
min
FIGURE 5-6 Ramps must have a detectable warning at their top edge to warn the visually impaired of their presence. Courtesy Uniform 
Federal Accessibility Standards.

100 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
60 min
72 min
see note
as req'd
as req'd
72 min
60 min when no door swings
onto landing
when door swings onto
landing 42 min plus
door width
NOTE: Max horiz distance of each ramp
and run vary. See section 3306(d) 1.
All ramps must meet handrail and curb
requirements.
as required
60 min
see note
60 min
see note
72 min
60 min when no door swings
onto landing
when door swings onto
landing 42 min plus
door width
60 min when no door swings
onto landing
when door swings onto
landing 42 min plus
door width
72 min
as required
60 min
see note
60 min
see note
72 min
intermediate turning
landing
NOTE: Max horiz distance of each ramp
and run vary. See section 3306(d) 1.
All ramps must meet handrail and curb
requirements.
NOTE: Max horiz distance of each ramp
and run vary. See section 3306(d) 1.
All ramps must meet handrail and curb
requirements.
Ramp Landing at Door
door width plus 42"
60 min
24" min exterior and 18" min
interior beyond the strike
edge of a gate or door on 
the side toward which it 
swings
Ramp with Intermediate
Switch-back Platform
FIGURE 5-7 Landings are required on ramps when they slope more than 30", turn corners, or have doors entering on them. Courtesy 
Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
101
analyze the total amount of room needed early in the 
drawing process so that any deficiencies can be cor-
rected with minimum effort.
Stairs
Stairways serving a floor that is not otherwise acces-
sible to people with disabilities shall meet the follow-
ing conditions in addition to the requirements of the 
building code. Treads shall be a uniform width not 
less than 11" (280 mm) and risers shall be a uniform 
height not to exceed 7". When nosings are provided, 
they shall be constructed as shown in Figure 5-11. 
Stairways shall not have open risers. Open risers can 
be confusing to people with poor sight and can be 
a problem for cane use by the blind. Handrails shall 
be provided, measuring 34" to 38" (865 to 965 mm) 
high on both sides of a stair, and shall be constructed 
as shown in Figures 5-10 and 5-11. Handrails shall be 
continuous and uninterrupted by newel posts or other 
obstructions. For additional information on stairs, see 
Chapter 21.
12 min
305
12 min
305
Wall
34–38
865–965
Curb
<27
685
Vertical guardrail
Railing with extended platform
Examples of Edge Protection and Handrail Extension
Elevations
Sections
36 min
915
36 min
915
36 min
915
36 min
915
12 min
305
2 min
50
FIGURE 5-8 Guardrails are required on the open side of a ramp. Handrails are required on both sides of a ramp. Courtesy Uniform 
Federal Accessibility Standards.

102 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Elevators
An elevator is usually the easiest way to provide access 
to upper floors when access is required above the 
ground floor. If an elevator is installed, it must meet the 
ADA requirements whether the elevator was required 
or not. Every floor that the elevator serves is accessible 
and will need to meet access requirements whether 
they were otherwise required or not. The elevator must 
be automatic and have proper call buttons, car control, 
illumination, door timing, and a reopening device as 
shown and called for in Figure 5-12. The elevator floor 
is a part of the access route so it must be similar to the 
floor described in walks and hallways. The shape and 
size of the elevator must be such that it is usable by 
a wheelchair, as shown in Figure 5-13. Much of the 
drawings required for elevators are done by the eleva-
tor manufacturer or supplier. The CAD technician’s 
responsibility is normally limited to details concerning 
interior finishes of the elevator.
Lifts
Platform or wheelchair lifts may be used in place of a 
ramp or elevator in some instances. If they are used, 
they must allow for unassisted entry, operation, and 
exit. They must also meet elevator and escalator safety 
requirements.
FIGURE 5-9 Handrails at ramps and stairs are required to have a shape that is easy to grip and have a sufficient clearance from adja-
cent surfaces to allow for easy access. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
Handrail
Handrail
(b)
(e)
1¼–1½
32–38
1½
38
1¼–1½
32–38
1½
38
1¼–1½
32–38
1½
38
(a)
Handrail
Handrail
(c)
1¼–1½
32–38
1½
38
Handrail
(d)
1¼–1½
32–38
1½
38
1½
38
18 min
455

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
103
UP
12 min
305
12 min
305
A
A
Y
X
X
X
Y
Y
Less than 27
(b)
Elevation of Center Handrail
(a)
Plan
Stair Handrails
(c)
Extension at Bottom of Run
Extension at Top of Run
(d)
NOTE: X is the 12 in minimum handrail extension required at each top riser.
Y is the minimum handrail extension of 12 in plus the width of one tread that
is required at each bottom riser. 
FIGURE 5-10 Stair handrails at ramps and stairs are required to have extensions at their top and bottom. Courtesy Uniform Federal 
Accessibility Standards.
FIGURE 5-11 The size of nosing is limited. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

104 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Areas of Rescue Assistance
Elevators do not provide a good means of exit from 
a building in an emergency situation such as a fire. 
This presents a substantial exit problem when an 
elevator is the means of access to the building. People 
with disabilities have been given a way of getting into 
the building but no way of getting out. The solution 
to this problem is an area of rescue assistance where 
people with disabilities can wait safely until rescue 
crews come to their aid. This area must be on or near 
the exit route so that the rescue crew has quick and 
easy access to its occupants. The space needs to be out 
of the normal exit flow so that its occupants do not 
interfere with the exiting of others and must provide 
a smoke-free and fire-safe environment. There must 
be a two-way communication system between the 
rescue area and the main entrance to the building area 
so that rescue workers can verify that someone needs 
their assistance or the people with disabilities can cry 
for help.
The area of rescue assistance must provide a mini-
mum of two 30" × 48" (760 × 1200 mm) areas. 
These areas can be located on a stairway landing with 
a smoke-proof enclosure, on an exterior exit balcony 
located adjacent to an exit stairway, or in a one-hour 
fire-rated corridor immediately adjacent to an exit 
enclosure. They can be located in an elevator lobby 
that is separated from the balance of the building by 
two-hour fire-resistive construction when the elevator 
shaft is properly pressurized. They can also be located 
on a stairway landing within an exit enclosure that is 
vented to the exterior and separated from the rest of the 
building by a one-hour door. There must be at least one 
30" × 48" (760 × 1200 mm) rescue location for each 
200 occupants of the building. The stairway serving 
the rescue area must have 48" (1220 mm) minimum 
between the handrails to allow room for someone to be 
carried down the stairs. 
The project designer determines the location of the 
areas of rescue assistance. It is the technician’s job to 
detail the areas and coordinate with the proper con-
sultants. Fire and smoke protection must be properly 
detailed. Mechanical ducts must be properly dampered. 
A damper is a device that closes the duct so that smoke 
is not blown into the space through the mechanical 
42
1065
5
125
29
735
72 min
1830
A
B
CL
CL
60
1523
CL
NOTE: The automatic door reopening device is activated if
an object passes through either line A or line B. Line A and
line B represent the vertical locations of the door reopening
device not requiring contact.
Hoistway and Elevator Entrances
FIGURE 5-12 An elevator must be automatic and have proper 
call buttons, car control, illumination, door timing, and a 
reopening device to meet the demands of ADA requirements. 
Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
80 min
2030
36 min
915
(a)
54 min
1370
51 min
1291
68 min
1730
51 min
1291
54 min
1370
36 min
915
Minimum Dimensions of Elevator Cars
(b)
FIGURE 5-13 Minimum dimensions of elevator cars must be 
considered in the initial building design. Courtesy Uniform Federal 
Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
105
system. Electrical devices such as communication sys-
tems that are provided in the rescue area must also be 
detailed throughout the drawings.
Doors
People with disabilities must have access to all areas on 
floors that are required to be accessible. At least one door 
to each space must meet the following requirements: 
● Doors must provide a minimum of 32" (810 mm) 
clear in the 90° position as shown in Figure 5-14. 
This normally requires a 36" (915 mm) door. 
● Doors must open with one hand and without requir-
ing a tight grip, tight pinching, or twisting of the 
wrist. This normally requires lever-operated door 
handles, push-type mechanisms, or U-shaped han-
dles. Note that this requirement also applies to slid-
ing and pocket doors. 
● The hardware may not be mounted more than 48" 
(1220 mm) above the floor. Interior hinged doors, 
sliding doors, and folding doors must open with a 
maximum force of 5 pounds (2.3 kg). This is impor-
tant with regard to automatic closing devices. It is 
recommended that doors have a 10" (255 mm) high 
kickplate on the bottom.
Maneuvering space at doors shall be as shown in 
Figures 5-15a and 5-15b. The required width in front 
of doors can have an influence on hall or corridor 
widths. Doors also have a required clear width on the 
swing side. This can affect widths of halls and alcoves 
when doors are located at their ends. Assuring that 
these clearances are provided is often the responsibil-
ity of the technician. If a door is placed in a manner 
that does not allow for the required clearances, the 
technician should point this out to the designer so that 
the proper adjustments to the design may be made.
RESTROOMS AND BATHING 
FACILITIES
The ADA requires at least one restroom to be accessible 
to people with disabilities for each sex, per accessible 
floor. In some cases a unisex restroom can satisfy this 
requirement. The door to the restrooms must meet 
all door requirements shown in Figure 5-15, includ-
ing the distance between doors at the vestibule. All 
fixtures intended for people with disabilities shall be 
on an accessible route. This means that there must be 
adequate access to the fixtures, and the restroom must 
have room for a wheelchair to maneuver. Figure 5-16 
32 min
815
32 min
815
32 min
815
32 min
815
32 min
815
(a)
Detail
(d)
Folding Door
(c)
Sliding Door
(e)
Maximum Doorway Depth
Clear Doorway Width and Depth
24 min
610
(b)
Hinged Door
FIGURE 5-14 Minimum clear doorway width and depth. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

106 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Pull Side
Pull Side
Push Side
Push Side
Pull Side
Push Side
(a)
Front Approaches—Swinging Door
(b)
Hinge Side Approaches—Swinging Door
(c)
Latch Side Approaches—Swinging Door
NOTE: X = 12 in (305 mm) if door has
both a closer and latch.
NOTE: Y = 48 in (1220 mm) minimum
if door has both a closer and latch.
NOTE: Y = 48 in (1220 mm) minimum
if door is closer.
NOTE: All doors in alcoves shall comply with the clearances for front approaches.
Maneuvering Clearances at Doors
NOTE: Y = 54 in (1370 mm) minimum
if door is closer.
NOTE: X = 36 in (915 mm) minimum, if
Y = 60 in (1525 mm); X = 42 in (1065 mm)
minimum if Y = 54 in (1370 mm).
X
X
X
Y
Y
60 min
18 min, 24 preferred
1525
48 min
1220
455
54 min
1370
24 min
610
X
24 min
610
42 min
1065
Y
42 min
1065
Y
48 min
1220
FIGURE 5-15 To allow for easy maneuvering, the area near a door must be considered. The size and shape of the maneuvering space 
varies depending on the direction from which the door is approached. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
(continued)

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
107
54 min
1370
24 min
X
610
48 min
1220
48 min
1220
42 min
1065
42 min
1065
48 min
1220
(f)
Latch Side Approach—Sliding Doors and Folding Doors
(d)
Front Approach—Sliding Doors
and Folding Doors
(e)
Slide Side Approach—Sliding Doors
and Folding Doors
NOTE: All doors in alcoves shall comply with the clearances for front approaches.
Maneuvering Clearances at Doors
Two Hinged Doors in Series
FIGURE 5-15 (continued) To allow for easy maneuvering, the area near a door must be considered. The size and shape of the maneu-
vering space varies depending on the direction from which the door is approached. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

108 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
shows the minimum acceptable maneuvering space. 
A preferred maneuvering configuration is shown in 
Figure 5-17.
Toilet Stalls 
At least one toilet stall in each restroom shall meet 
the requirements shown in Figure 5-18a. These stalls 
may be reversed to allow for either a left- or right-
handed approach. Alternate stall placement such as 
the layout shown in Figure 5-18b is not allowed in 
new construction. If a restroom contains six or more 
stalls, in addition to the standard accessible stall, 
one of these stalls must be at least 36" (915 mm) 
wide with a door that swings outward. The front 
and one side partition of the stall must be at least 9" 
(230 mm) above the floor unless the stall is longer 
than 60" (1525 mm). A single-person restroom with
a toilet and a sink without a stall shall meet the 
requirements shown in Figure 5-19. Details that 
show the door swing in relationship to the stalls 
should be provided to insure that required clear-
ances are maintained.
The toilet or water closet shall be 17" to 19" (430 
to 485 mm) to the top of the toilet seat. Stalls for 
wall-mounted toilets can be 3" (75 mm) shorter than 
those for floor-mounted toilets. Grab bars, shown in 
Figure 5-18, shall meet the requirements illustrated 
in Figure 5-9e. The toilet-paper dispenser shall be 
19" to 36" (485 to 915 mm) above the floor.
Urinals
If urinals are provided, at least one shall meet 
the following requirements: It shall be stall-type or 
wall-hung with an elongated rim at a maximum of 
17" (430 mm) above the floor. A clear floor space of 
30" × 48" (815 × 1220 mm) shall be provided in 
front of the urinals. This clear space can overlap the 
accessible route. Partitions that do not project beyond 
the rim can be installed with 29" (740 mm) minimum 
clearance.
60 min
1525
60 min
1525
(a)
60 in (1525 mm)—Diameter Space
12 min
36 min
915
12 min
36 min
915
60 min
1525
(b)
T–Shaped Space for 180° Turns
FIGURE 5-16 Restrooms and other tight spaces must have adequate turning space for a wheelchair.  Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility 
Standards.
Space Needed for Smooth U–Turn in a Wheelchair
78 min
1965
60 min
1525
FIGURE 5-17 The preferred wheelchair turning space exceeds 
the minimum required turning radius. Courtesy Uniform Federal 
Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
109
4 max
100
4 max
100
12 max
305
52 min
1320
56 min
1420
56 min
1420
36 min
915
36 min
915
40 (42) min
1015 (1065)
59 min
1500
59 min
1500
54 min
1370
54 min
1370
66 min
1675
69 min
1745
42 min
1065
42 min
1065
12 max
305
12 max
305
12 max
305
12 max
305
32 min
815
32 min
815
36
915
48 min
1220
17–19
430–485
18
455
18
455
18
455
18
455
32 min
alternate
door location
clear
floor
space
w. wall mounted w.c.
w. flr. mounted w.c.
w. wall mounted w.c.
w. flr. mounted w.c.
w. wall mounted w.c.
w. flr. mounted w.c.
(a)
Standard Stall
(a-1)
Standard Stall (end of row)
alternate
toilet paper
(b)
Alternate Stalls
(c)
Rear wall of Standard Stall
(d)
Side Walls
42 min latch
approach only,
other approaches
48 min
42 min latch
approach only,
other approaches
48 min
815
36 min
915
32 min
815
36 min
915
60 min
1525
60 min
1525
33–36
840–915
33–36
840–915
19 min
485
6 max
150
Toilet Stalls
FIGURE 5-18 The requirements for toilet stalls. The alternate stall sizes shown in (b) are not allowed in new construction. Courtesy 
Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

110 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Lavatories and Mirrors
If lavatories and mirrors are provided, at least one 
shall meet the following requirements: Lavatories and 
mirrors shall conform to the requirements shown in 
Figure 5-20. The clear space can overlap the accessi-
ble route. Hot water and drainpipes under lavatories 
shall be insulated or otherwise configured to protect 
against contact. There shall be no sharp or abrasive 
surfaces under the lavatories. Faucets shall be oper-
able with one hand and without requiring a tight 
grip, tight pinching, or twisting of the wrist. They 
shall be operable with a maximum force of 5 pounds 
(2.3 kg). Lever-operated, push-type, and electrically 
operated faucets are examples of acceptable designs. 
If self-closing valves are used, the faucet shall remain 
open for at least 10 seconds.
Bathtubs
If bathtubs are provided, at least one shall meet the 
requirements: 
● Provide seats, grab bars, and clear space in front of 
the tub, as shown in Figure 5-21. 
● Doors shall not swing into the required clear space. 
Grab bars shall be placed per Figure 5-9e. 
● Faucets shall have controls as described above for
lavatories and shall be located as shown in 
Figure 5-21. 
Clear Floor Space at Water Closets
42 min
1065
36 min
915
36 min
915
lav
lav
Clear
floor
space
48 min
1220
48 min
1220
48 min
1220
18
min
455
18
min
455
18
455
18
455
18
455
56 min
1420
66 min
1675
56 min
1420
Clear
floor
space
Clear
floor
space
(a)
(b)
Side Wall
Grab Bars at Water Closets
Back Wall
17–19
420–485
36 min
915
33–36
840–915
12 min
305
12 min
305
12
305
36 min
Toilet
paper
54 min
1370
42 min
1065
19 min
485
33–36
840–916
FIGURE 5-19 Design standards for a single toilet that is not in a stall. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
111
● The seat must be securely mounted. See “Handrails, 
Grab Bars, and Tub and Shower Seats” later in this 
chapter for the structural requirements of the seat 
and grab bars. 
● Tub enclosures may not obstruct the controls or 
transfer onto the seat.
● Enclosures shall not have tracks mounted on the rim 
of the tub.
Shower Stalls
If shower stalls are provided, at least one shall meet the 
following requirements: 
● Shower stalls for hotels, motels, and other transient 
lodging facilities shall be provided as shown in 
Figure 5-22. 
● All other accessible showers shall be the size and 
shape shown in Figure 5-23. Doors shall not swing 
into the required clear space.
● Seats shall be located between 17" and 19" (430 
and 485 mm) above the floor and shall be per 
Figure 5-24. 
When a seat is provided for in the 30" × 60" (760 × 
1525 mm) shower configuration, it shall fold down and 
be located on the wall adjacent to the controls. This will 
allow a wheelchair to roll into the shower or a person 
to use the built-in seat and be able to reach the controls. 
See Figure 5-21 and Figure 5-9e for grab bar locations. 
See “Handrails, Grab Bars, and Tub and Shower Seats” 
later in this chapter for the structural requirements of 
the seat and grab bars.
Faucets shall have controls as described previously 
for lavatories and the controls shall be located as shown 
in Figure 5-25. Tub enclosures may not obstruct the 
controls or restrict transfer onto the seat. Shower spray 
units are required to be attached to a minimum hose 
length of 60" (1525 mm). They are required to be 
mounted in such a manner as to be usable as a hand-
held unit or a wall-mounted unit. If an unmonitored 
shower site is subject to vandalism, a fixed shower head 
mounted 48" (1220 mm) above the floor can be used in 
lieu of a hand-held unit.
Curbs are not allowed at the entry to a 30" × 60" 
(760 × 1525 mm) shower. If a curb is installed at a 
36" × 36" (915 × 915 mm) shower, it may not be 
higher than 1/2" (13 mm). The requirement not to 
have a curb or to have a very small curb means that 
the structural floor must be recessed at the shower to 
accommodate the slope of the shower floor.
Toilet Room Accessories
At least one paper towel dispenser, air hand dryers, 
toilet seat cover dispensers, and other similar fixtures 
in each restroom shall be located from 48" to 54" 
(1220 to 1370 mm) from the floor, as shown in 
Figure 5-26. Wall-mounted accessories need to be 
detailed for height and reach limit. Check the approach 
to accessories to verify whether front or side reach 
limits should be used.
Medicine Cabinets
If medicine cabinets are provided, they shall be located 
with a usable shelf no higher than 44" (1120 mm) 
above the floor. They shall have an accessible floor 
space in front of them.
9 min
230
27 min
685
29 min
735
34 max
865
40 max
1015
6 max
150
17 min
430
48 min
1220
17 min
430
30 min
760
19 max
485
knee
clearance
toe
clearance
clear
floor
space
depth
8 min
205
Lavatory Clearances
Clear Floor Space at Lavatories
FIGURE 5-20 Placement and clearances at lavatories and mir-
rors. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

112 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Shower controls
Shower head
Drain
SYMBOL KEY:
Clear Floor Space at Bathtubs
(b)
With Seat at Head of Tub
(a)
With Seat in Tub
60 min
1525
75 min
1905
Back
60 min
1525
Foot
Seat
Seat
Seat
Head
30 min
760
48 min
1220
30 min
760
lav
lav
lav
15
380
Clear
floor
space
Clear
floor
space
Clear
floor
space
24 min
610
24 min
610
12 max
305
12 max
305
12 max
305
24 min
610
24 max
610
48 min
1220
15
max
380
Back
Back
Foot
Foot
Head
Head
Seat
33–36
840–915
33–36
840–915
9
230
9
230
Control
area
Control
area
(a)
With Seat in Tub
(b)
With Seat at Head of Tub
Grab Bars at Bathtubs
FIGURE 5-21 Required sizes and locations of bathtubs and grab bars. Note that lavatories may protrude into the required clear space 
for a tub. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
113
Handrails, Grab Bars, and Tub 
and Shower Seats
Handrails and grab bars shall be 1 1/4" to 1 1/2" (32 
to 38 mm) in diameter or a shape that provides an 
equivalent gripping surface and shall have a 1 1/2" (38 
mm) clear space between them and adjacent surfaces, 
as shown in Figure 5-9. Handrails, grab bars, and the 
surface behind them shall be free of sharp edges. Edges 
shall have a minimum radius of 1/8" (3 mm).
Grab bars and shower seats shall be capable of safely 
supporting a 250 lb (113 kg) load at any point. This 
will require a secure surface for mounting on and secure 
(a)
(b)
Drain
36
915
16 min
330
27 max
685
lav
Roll-In Shower with Folding Seat
60 min
1525
Side
30 min
716
36 min
915
24 min
610
Side
36 min
FIGURE 5-22 A roll-in shower with folding seat. The configurations in this figure are required for shower stalls in hotels, motels, and 
other transient lodging. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
Shower Size and Clearances
36
915
27 min
685
Side
Side
36
915
36 min
915
36 min
915
30 min
716
60 min
915
48 min
1220
Control wall
Seat
wall
lav
Back
(b)
(a)
36 in by 36 in
(915 mm by 915 mm) Stall
30 in by 60 in
(760 mm by 1525 mm) Stall
FIGURE 5-23 Minimum shower size and clearances for showers in facilities other than those listed in Figure 5-22. Courtesy Uniform 
Federal Accessibility Standards.

114 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
mounting brackets. Standard details should be devel-
oped to illustrate the required attachment. Grab bars 
may not rotate within their fittings.
Fixtures
The effect of ADA on drinking fountains, telephones, 
tables, and counters should be considered in the design 
process.
Drinking Fountains
At least half the drinking fountains provided on an 
accessible floor shall meet the requirements illustrated 
in Figure 5-27. These drinking fountains must also have 
a proper water flow direction and height. Because of 
the water flow requirements, it is important to choose a 
drinking fountain or water cooler that is certified by the 
manufacturer to meet ADA requirements. There must 
also be drinking fountains at a height appropriate for 
those people who cannot stoop over.
23 max
582
16 max
330
1-1/2 max
38
1-1/2 max
38
15 max
full depth of stall
305
Shower Seat Design
FIGURE 5-24 Required shower seat dimensions. Courtesy 
Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
NOTE: Shower head and control area may be on back (long) wall (as shown) or on either side wall.
(b)
30 in by 60 in (760 mm by 1525 mm) Stall
(a)
36 in by 36 in (915 mm by 915 mm) Stall
Grab Bars at Shower Stalls
18
455
27 max
685
18
455
18
455
48 max
1220
48 max
1220
38 max
965
38 min
965
33–36
control
area
control
area
Control Wall
Side
Side
Back (long)
Seat Wall
Back
840–915
33–36
840–915
33–36
840–915
33–36
840–915
FIGURE 5-25 Minimum requirements for grab bars in showers and required control location. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
115
17–19
equipment permitted in shaded area
(a)
Spout Height and Knee Clearance
(c)
Free-Standing Fountain or Cooler
(d)
Built-In Fountain or Cooler
Drinking Fountains and Water Coolers
not to exceed
fountain depth
(b)
Clear Floor Space
430–485
30 min
760
17–19
430–485
48 min
1220
24 max
610
8 max
205
6 max
150
9 min
230
48 min
1220
30 min
760
48 min
1220
27 min
685
30 min
760
36 max
915
FIGURE 5-27 Requirements for placement of a drinking fountain. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
FIGURE 5-26 Mounting guidelines for bathroom accessories. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
required
towels
controls
cups
vending
(a)
Forward Reach Possible
(b)
Side Reach Possible
preferred
required
towels
controls
cups
vending
preferred
48 max
1220
15 min
380
54 max
1370
9 min
230

116 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Telephones
If public telephones are provided, at least one shall meet 
the following requirements: The telephone shall be 
installed as shown in Figure 5-28. It shall be hearing-aid 
compatible and have push-button controls. The cord 
shall be at least 29" (735 mm) long.
Tables and Counters
If fixed tables and counters are provided, 5% of 
them must be designed for the disabled, as shown 
in Figure 5-29. Their height shall be between 28" 
and 34" (710 and 865 mm). The knee space shall be 
a minimum of 27" (430 mm) high, 30" (760 mm) 
wide, and 19" (485 mm) deep.
REQUIREMENTS BASED 
ON OCCUPANCY
Design parameters are also established based on the 
usage of a structure. Occupancies addressed by the 
ADA include assembly areas, restaurants and cafeterias, 
medical care facilities, business and mercantile, librar-
ies, and transient lodging.
Assembly Areas
Assembly areas such as theaters and auditoriums shall 
provide seating for people with disabilities as follows:
Capacity of Seating 
in Assembly Areas
Number of Required 
Wheelchair Locations
4 to 25 
1 
26 to 50 
2 
51 to 300 
4 
301 to 500 
6 
501 or more
6 + 1 for each 100 spaces 
(or portion thereof) 
These spaces shall conform to the shape shown in 
Figure 5-30. These seating locations shall be distributed 
*
*
48 min
1220
30 min
760
30
760
6 min
150
54 max
1370
48 max
1220
24 max
610
20 max
510
more than 24
610
20 max
510
48
1220
48
1220
27 or below
685
30 max
760
10 max
255
27 or below
685
Elevation
Elevation
see plans
optional
post and
base
Plan
Plans
(b)
Forward Reach Required
*Height to highest operable
parts which are essential to
basic operation of telephone.
(a)
Side Reach Possible
Any width
FIGURE 5-28 If public telephones are provided, as least one must meet these minimum standards for placement. Courtesy Uniform 
Federal Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
117
in such a manner as to provide the disabled with a 
choice of admission prices and line of sight. Seating 
must be accessible and adjacent to at least one compan-
ion fixed seat. When the seating capacity exceeds 300, 
wheelchair spaces shall be provided in more than one 
place. Removable seats can be temporarily placed in 
wheelchair spaces. In addition to the wheelchair spaces, 
1% of all fixed seats must be aisle seats with no armrest 
on the aisle side.
Accessible viewing positions can be clustered for 
bleachers, balconies, and other areas having sight lines 
that require slopes of greater than 5%. Equivalent acces-
sible viewing positions can be located on levels having 
accessible egress.
Restaurants and Cafeterias
Where tables or counters are provided for dining or 
drinking, 5% shall be accessible as described in the 
previous section “Tables and Counters.” Where food 
or drink is served at counters higher than 34" (865 
mm), a 5' (1525 mm) section shall be provided match-
ing the requirements of Figure 5-29 or at a table in the 
same area. Seating for people with disabilities should 
be distributed in smoking and nonsmoking areas. All 
dining and drinking areas, except some mezzanines, 
shall be accessible. This includes raised, sunken, and 
outside areas. Raised platforms such as those provided 
for the head table at a banquet shall be accessible to the 
30
760
30
760
30
760
36
915
36
915
19
485
19
485
30
760
30
760
19
485
48
1220
42
accessible path of travel
1065
48
1220
48
1220
FIGURE 5-29 If fixed tables are provided, a minimum of 5% must meet ADA standards. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
66 min
1675
(a)
(b)
Forward or Rear Access
Side Access
66 min
1675
60 min
1525
48 min
1220
FIGURE 5-30 Assembly areas such as theaters and auditoriums must provide seating for people with disabilities based on ADA stan-
dards.  Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

118 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
disabled. Mezzanines that are not in an elevator-serviced 
building are not required to be accessible if they meet 
the following conditions:
● They are smaller than 33% of the area of the acces-
sible area.
● The same level of service and decor is available in the 
accessible area.
● The accessible area is not limited to the disabled only.
Food-service lines shall be as shown in Figure 5-31. If 
self-service shelves are provided, they shall be within the 
reach range of the disabled as shown in Figure 5-32.
Medical Care Facilities
This section covers medical facilities where a patient 
might stay for a period of 24 hours or more. All public- 
and common-use areas are required to be accessible to 
people with disabilities. In general-purpose hospitals, 
psychiatric facilities, and detoxification facilities, 10% 
of the patient bedrooms and toilets are required to be 
accessible. In hospitals and rehabilitation facilities that 
specialize in treating conditions that affect mobility, all 
patient bedrooms and toilets are required to be acces-
sible. At least 50% of patient bedrooms and toilets shall 
be accessible in long-term care facilities and nursing 
homes. Entrances to these facilities shall be covered and 
shall incorporate a loading zone per Figure 5-33.
Doors to accessible bedrooms in acute-care hospitals 
shall be exempted from the requirements for maneuver-
ing space at the latch side of the door if the door is at 
least 44" (1120 mm) wide. Accessible bedrooms shall 
have a maneuvering space per Figure 5-17, and a 36" 
(915 mm) wide access route around three sides of the 
bed. Where patient toilets or bathrooms are provided, 
they shall meet the requirements discussed earlier in 
“Restrooms and Bathing Facilities.”
Business and Mercantile
A 36" (915 mm) portion of the counter shall be pro-
vided at a maximum height of 36" (915 mm) in retail 
stores where counters have cash registers, at ticket 
counters, at teller stations in a bank, and at registra-
tion counters in hotels and motels. In lieu of this 
requirement, an auxiliary counter with a maximum 
height of 36" (915 mm) can be provided in close 
proximity to the main counter. Accessible checkout 
aisles shall be provided per Table 5-2 unless the selling 
space is less than 5000 square feet. When there is less 
than 5000 square feet of selling space, one accessible 
checkout aisle shall be provided.
Security bollards or similar devices used to prevent 
the removal of shopping carts from the store shall not 
prevent access or egress to people in wheelchairs. An 
alternate entry that is equally convenient to that pro-
vided for the ambulatory population is acceptable.
FIGURE 5-32 Minimum sizes for food-service areas. 
Food Service Lines
36" min
42" preferred
34" max
Access Aisle at Passenger Loading Zones
240 min
6100
60 min
1525
FIGURE 5-33 Loading zones for patients at a medical facility. 
This space is required to be covered. Courtesy Uniform Federal 
Accessibility Standards.
Total Checkout Aisles 
of Each Design
Minimum Number of 
Accessible Checkout Aisles 
of Each Design
1–4
1
5–6
2
8–15
3
More than 15
3 + 20% of additional aisles
TABLE 5-2 Checkout Aisles.
Side reach 46 in max
over obstructions
Tableware Area
FIGURE 5-31 Guidelines for tableware areas in food-service 
facilities.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
119
Libraries
In reading and study areas, at least 5% of fixed seating, 
tables, and study carrels shall meet the requirements for 
tables and counters. At least one lane at each checkout 
area shall meet the requirements for counters with 
cash registers, as described previously in “Business and 
Mercantile.” Card catalogs and magazine displays shall 
comply with Figure 5-34 and stacks shall comply with 
Figure 5-35.
Transient Lodging
All public- and common-use areas in hotels, motels, 
inns, boarding houses, dormitories, resorts, and other 
similar lodging places are required to be accessible. A 
portion of the sleeping rooms or suites is required to 
be accessible per Table 5-3. The roll-in shower required 
by this table shall conform to Figure 5-23. Accessible 
rooms or suites shall be dispersed among the various 
classes of accommodations. Selection can be limited 
to rooms for multiple occupancies if they are offered 
at single-occupancy prices for people with disabilities 
needing single occupancy.
Accessible rooms shall be on an accessible route. 
They shall have maneuvering space as shown in 
Figure 5-16. There shall be a 36" (915 mm) space 
on both sides of a single bed or a 36" (915 mm) 
space between two beds. In accessible suites, the 
living rooms, dining areas, covered parking areas, 
one bathroom, and one sleeping area shall be acces-
sible. Balconies and terraces shall be accessible unless 
higher thresholds or a change in level is necessary to 
protect the unit from wind or water damage (equiva-
lent facilities must be provided). If storage cabinets 
are provided, at least one type of each shall be con-
structed per Figure 5-36.
(a)
Shelves
(b)
Closets
21 max
535
21 max
535
9 min
380
48 max
1220
48 max
1220
Adjustable range
FIGURE 5-36 Guidelines for construction of storage cabinets in accessible sleeping rooms or suites at hotels, motels, inns, boarding 
houses, dormitories, resorts, and other similar lodging places. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
Card Catalog
36 min
915
18 min
455
54 max – 48 preferred
1370            1220
FIGURE 5-34 Standards for placement of card catalogs or other 
freestanding displays. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
Stacks
36 min
915
FIGURE 5-35 Placement requirements for book stacks in a 
library. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

120 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Kitchens and wet bars, when provided, shall have 
counters no higher than 34" (865 mm) and at least 50% 
of the cabinets and refrigerator/freezer space shall be 
within the reach range shown in Figures 5-37 and 5-38. 
The space shall be designed to allow for the operation 
of cabinet and appliance doors so that all cabinets and 
appliances are accessible and usable.
Rooms shall be provided per Table 5-4 for the hear-
ing impaired, in addition to the rooms required for 
the disabled by Table 5-3. Rooms or suites required 
to accommodate persons with hearing impairments 
shall have auxiliary visual devices to alert occupants of 
danger and phone calls. Phones shall have volume con-
trols and an electrical outlet within 4' (1220 mm) of the 
telephone connection.
Number of Rooms
Accessible
Roll-In Showers
1 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
1
76 to 100
4
1
101 to 150
5
2
151 to 200
6
2
201 to 300
7
3
301 to 400
8
4
401 to 500
9
4 + 1 for each addi-
tional 100 over 400
TABLE 5-3 Required Accessible Rooms Based on the Total Number 
of Rooms Based on Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
(a)
High Forward Reach Limit
48
1220
48
1220
30
760
48
1220
15 min
380
48
1220
48
1220
30
760
(b)
Maximum Forward Reach over an Obstruction
Forward Reach
Z
Z
X
X
Y
NOTE: X shall be ≤ 25  in (635 mm); Z shall be ≥ X. When X < 20 in (510 mm), then Y shall be 48 in (1220 mm)
maximum. When X is 20 to 25 in (510 to 635 mm), then Y shall be 44 in (1120 mm) maximum.  
FIGURE 5-37 Kitchens and wet bars, when provided, shall have counters no higher than 34" (865 mm) and at least 50% of the 
cabinets and refrigerator/freezer space shall be within the specified reach range. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

Chapter 5: Access Requirements for People with Disabilities 
121
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to 
help get additional information about the ADA and to 
keep you current with changes.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.access-board.gov/adaag/html/adaag.htm
 
Federal Government 
ADA Accessibility 
Guidelines for Buildings 
and Facilities
www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm
 
Federal Government ADA
30
760
10 max
255
(a)
Clear Floor Space
Parallel Approach
48
1220
10 max
255
30
760
(b)
High and Low
Side Reach Limits
54
1370
9
230
Maximum Side Reach over Obstruction
Side Reach
(c)
30
760
24
610
34 max
865
46
1170
FIGURE 5-38 Design standards for side reach. Courtesy Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.
Number of Rooms
Accessible Rooms
  1 to 25 
1
 26 to 50
2
 51 to 75
3
 76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1000
2% of total 
1001 and over
20 + 1 for each 100 over 1000
TABLE 5-4 Number of Rooms to Accommodate the Hearing 
Impaired Based on Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

122 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
KEY TERMS
Accessible route
Areas of rescue assistance
Curb ramps
Methods of egress
Access Requirements for People with Disabilities
CHAPTER 5 TEST
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
If math is required to answer a question, show your work.
Question 5-1 Does a two-story office building require an 
elevator for people with disabilities?
Question 5-2 What is the minimum width required for a 
single van-accessible parking space?
Question 5-3 What is the minimum depth required for a 
disabled-accessible toilet space?
Question 5-4 What is the maximum slope of a walkway (in 
the direction of travel) before it becomes a ramp?
Question 5-5 What is the maximum allowable cross fall (the 
slope perpendicular to the direction of travel) in decimals 
of a foot for a 4'–0" wide accessible route?
Question 5-6 What is the maximum height allowed for a 
single run of a ramp?
Question 5-7 Why are laws providing access for the disabled 
more important today than they might have been 60 
years ago?
Question 5-8 What is the minimum length of a 26" high ramp?
Question 5-9 What is the required height of a toilet seat?
Question 5-10 Explain the difference between the mini-
mum turning room and the desired turning room for a 
180° turn.
Question 5-11 Give two reasons why an access route should 
be wider than the required 36".
Question 5-12 Define a public building within the scope of 
ADA.
Question 5-13 What aids does the ADA require for the hear-
ing impaired?
Question 5-14 What is the maximum height of a stair riser 
and the minimum length of a stair tread?
Question 5-15 List three types of physical disabilities 
that must be considered as the plans for a structure are 
developed.

Building Methods and Materials 
of Commercial Construction
Section 2


Section 2 will examine common commercial construc-
tion materials including wood, timber, engineered prod-
ucts, steel, concrete, and concrete blocks. Regardless of 
the materials being connected, the type of connection 
is of the utmost importance to the structural integrity 
of a building. Connections must be fast, economical, 
and safe. The connection of materials is critical if each 
element is being used to transfer gravity or lateral loads, 
or the forces of uplift from one member to another. 
Structural connectors are specified on the framing 
plans, wall sections, and specific details. This chapter 
will introduce common connectors as well as standard 
methods of representing each type of fastener. Topics to 
be explored include:
● Structural connectors used with wood and engi-
neered products including adhesives, nails, staples, 
power-driven anchors, screws, and prefabricated 
metal connectors.
● Structural connectors used with large wood members 
including bolts, timber connectors, and prefabricated 
metal connectors.
● Welded connections.
● Representing structural connectors and other materi-
als in details.
STRUCTURAL CONNECTORS USED 
WITH WOOD AND ENGINEERED 
PRODUCTS
Wood, timber, and engineered wood products are usu-
ally held together by the use of adhesives, nails, staples, 
and screws.
Adhesives
Adhesives are a key ingredient in the building indus-
try. Materials such as plywood, OSB, I-joists, and 
laminated beams all depend on adhesives. Adhesives 
are also used within the structure to strengthen 
wood framing connections. Subflooring is often glued 
to floor joists to stiffen the floor system and help 
eliminate squeaking. Gusset plates for light trusses 
are often glued at chord and web connections to 
strengthen joints. Adhesives are also used to attach 
plastic piping and finishing materials such as panel-
ing, moldings, and countertops. Structural adhesives 
should be specified in the written specifications, the 
framing plan, and specific details.
Nails
Nails are often used for the fabrication of wood-to-
wood members when their thickness is less than 
1 1/2" (40 mm). Thicker wood assemblies are nor-
mally bolted. The type and size of a nail to be used, 
as well as the placement and nailing pattern, will all 
affect the strength of the joint. Consideration should 
be given to how and where nailing specifications will 
be placed.
Types of Nails
Nails specified by engineers in the calculations for 
framing include common, deformed, box, and spikes. 
Most nails are made from stainless steel, but copper 
and aluminum are also used. Figure 6-1 shows typi-
cal types of nails used for construction. Only nails 
used for structural purposes will be considered at 
this time. A common nail is used for most rough 
framing applications. Common nails have a single 
head, smooth shank, and diamond tip. Box nails are 
slightly thinner and have less holding power than 
common nails. Box nails are used because they gener-
ate less resistance in penetration and are less likely to 
split the lumber. Box nails come in sizes up to 16d. 
Spikes are nails larger than 20d. For further explana-
tion on the measurements of nails, see the upcoming 
section “Nail Sizes.” Nailing specifications are found 
throughout the written specifications, on framing 
plans, and in details.
Nail Components
Nails consist of a head, shank, and tip. The head and the 
shank are often specified by the engineer in the calcula-
tions to meet a specific need.
6
Making Connections
125

126 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Head The head of most nails used for framing is 
usually a flat round head. Siding and wood trim are 
typically installed with nails that have a small cylin-
drically shaped head. Nails intended for easy removal 
typically have two heads—a lower head approxi-
mately 3/8" (10 mm) below the upper head. The nail 
is driven in until the first head makes contact, and 
the second head protrudes for future removal. Boards 
used for concrete forms are often nailed with double-
headed nails.
Shank Nails are specified by the length of the shank. 
The shank of a nail is the body of a nail. It is usually 
smooth, but ribs or deformations can be added to the 
shank to increase holding power. Deformations are 
typically placed perpendicular to the length of the shaft. 
If material is removed from the shank, a valley is cre-
ated. Fluted nails have valleys that spiral around the 
length of the shank.
Tip The tip of most nails has a diamond-shaped point, 
but a chiseled point or a flat tip can be used. The sharper 
the tip, the less damage done to the surrounding wood 
fiber, resulting in greater resistance to withdrawal. A  
pilot hole can be predrilled to further reduce wood 
damage and further increase holding strength. Notes 
for predrilling are often found on architectural drawings 
where appearance is critical.
Finish The type of finish of the nail depends on how 
the nail is manufactured and how it will be used. Most 
nails have a smooth finish and are referred to as bright 
finished nails. Nails that are tempered by a heating pro-
cess have a slightly blue finish. A resin coating called 
a cement finish can be applied to a nail to increase the 
holding power of the nail. A zinc coating is added to 
nails to increase the holding power and to increase 
resistance to corrosion. Zinc-coated or galvanized nails 
reduce the stains that result on siding when uncoated 
nails are used. If a special finish is required, it is typically 
added as a footnote to the nailing schedule or placed in 
the written specifications.
Nail Sizes
Nail sizes are described by the term penny, which is 
represented by the symbol d and used to describe 
standard nails from 2d through 60d. Penny is a weight 
classification of nails, which compares the number 
of pounds of nails per 1000 nails. For example, 1000 
8d nails weigh 8 pounds. Figure 6-2 shows common 
sizes of nails. Nails are required to penetrate into the 
supporting member by half the depth of the support-
ing member. If two 2 × (50×) members are being 
attached, a nail would be required to penetrate 3/4" 
(20 mm) into the lower member. The engineer will 
determine the nail size to be specified, and then the 
size, spacing, and quantity of nails to be used are speci-
fied in structural details.
RING SHANK
ASPHALT SHINGLE NAIL
ASPHALT SHINGLE NAIL
WOOD SHINGLE FACE NAIL
ENAMELED FACE NAIL FOR
INSULATED SIDING, SHAKES
NAIL FOR APPLYING 
SIDING TO PLYWOOD
NAIL FOR APPLYING 
ROOFING TO PLYWOOD
DULPEX-HEAD NAIL
TRUSSED RAFTER NAIL
POLE-CONSTRUCTION NAIL
FLOORING NAIL
UNDERLAY FLOOR NAIL
DRYWALL NAIL
ROOFING NAIL WITH
NEOPRENE WASHER
ROOFING NAIL WITH
NEOPRENE WASHER
FIGURE 6-1 Common types of nails used in construction.
4"
3 1/2"
2 1/2"
1 1/2"
SIZE
20d
16d
12d 10d
8d
7d
6d
5d
4d
3d
2d
3"
2"
1"
FIGURE 6-2 Standard nail sizes. 

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
127
Nailing Specifications
Nails smaller than 20d are typically specified by the 
penny size and spacing. They are used for continuous 
joints such as a plate attached to a floor system. An 
example of a nailing note found on a framing plan or 
detail would be as follows:
3 × 6 DFPT SILL W/ 20d's @ 4" o.c.
meaning that a 3 × 6 Douglas Fir pressure-treated sill 
is to be attached to another member with 20 penny (4" 
long) nails placed at 4-inch spacing.
Nails are specified by a quantity and penny size for 
repetitive joints, such as a joist-to-sill connection. The 
specification on a detail would simply read (3)-8d’s and 
point to the area in the detail where the nails will be 
placed. Depending on the scale of the drawing, the nails 
may or may not be shown. Specifications for spikes are 
given in a similar manner to nails, but the penny size is 
replaced by the spike diameter.
Most wood-frame projects include a schedule based 
on the International Building Code (IBC) drawing 
requirements. Figure 6-3 shows the IBC schedule for 
specifying the method, quantity, and size of nailing 
to be used. Nails are generally not specified in details 
if the connection is listed in the nailing schedule. 
Specifications are often given for the location of nails 
to the end or edge of a piece of lumber. If nails are too 
close to the edge or end of a piece of lumber, splitting 
will occur. Minimum edge distances are often included 
in the nailing specifications to reduce wood failure.
Nailing Placement
Nailing placements are described by the manner in 
which they are driven into the members being con-
nected. Common methods include face, end, toe, and 
blind nailing. Figure 6-4 shows each method of driv-
ing nails. The type of nailing to be used is determined 
by how accessible the head of the nail is during 
construction and the type of stress to be resisted. 
The engineer will specify if nailing other than that 
recommended by the nailing schedule of the prevail-
ing code is to be used. Nails that are required to resist 
shear are strongest when perpendicular to the grain. 
Nails that are placed parallel to the end grain, such 
as end nailing, are weakest, and tend to pull out as 
stress is applied. Common nailing options are listed 
below.
● Face nailing is the process of driving a nail through 
the face or surface of one board into the face of 
another. Face nailing is used in connecting sheath-
ing to rafters or studs, in nailing a plate to the floor 
sheathing, or in nailing a let-in brace to a stud.
● End nailing is the process of driving a nail through 
the face of one member into the end of another 
member. A plate is end-nailed into the studs as a wall 
is assembled.
● Toe nailing drives a nail through the face of one 
board into the face of another. With face and end 
nailing, nails are typically driven in approximately 90°
to the face. Toe nailing drives the nail at approximately 
a 30° angle. Rafter-to-top-plate or header-to-trimmer 
connections are examples of toe-nailed joints.
● Blind nailing is used where it is not desirable to see 
the nail head. Attaching wood flooring to the sub-
floor is done with blind nailing. Nails are driven at 
approximately a 45° angle through the tongue of the 
flooring and hidden by the next piece of flooring.
Nailing Patterns
Nails for sheathing and other large areas of nailing often 
refer to nail placement along an edge, boundary, or field 
nailing. Figure 6-5 shows an example of each location. 
Edge nailing refers to nails placed at the edge of a sheet 
of plywood. Field nailing refers to nails placed into the 
supports for a sheet of plywood excluding the edges.  
Boundary nailing is the nailing at the edge of a specific 
area of plywood.
Staples
Power-driven nails have greatly increased the speed 
and ease at which nails can be inserted. As technology 
advanced, staples started to replace nailing for some 
applica tions. Staples are most often used for connect-
ing asphalt roofing and attaching sheathing to roof, 
wall, and floor supports. Required size and spacing of 
staples is listed in the IBC Nailing Schedule.
Power-Driven Anchors
Metal anchors can be used to attach wood or metal to 
masonry. They range from 1/4" to 1/2" (6 to 13 mm) 
diameter, in lengths from 3/4" to 6" (20 to 150 mm).  
Power-driven anchors are made from heat-treated steel 
and inserted by a powder charge from a gun-like device. 
They are typically used where it would be difficult 
to insert the anchor bolts at the time of the concrete 
pour. Anchors can also be used to join wood-to-steel 
construction.
Screws
Screws are often specified for use in wood connections 
that must be resistant to withdrawal. Three common 

128 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 6-3 A nailing schedule can be used to describe common wood connections. Any connection listed in the schedule does not 
need to have the required nailing specified in a detail. The schedule is usually placed on a sheet containing other general discipline notes.

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
129
screws are used throughout the construction industry. 
Each is identified by its head shape (see Figure 6-6).
● Flathead (or countersunk) screws are typically spec-
ified in the architectural drawings for finish work 
where a nail head is not desirable.
● Roundhead screws are used at lumber connections 
where a nail head is tolerable. Roundhead screws are 
also used to connect lightweight metal to wood. Both 
flathead and roundhead screws are designated by a 
gauge that specifies a diameter in inches, the length 
in inches, and a head shape. A typical specification 
for a 3" long flathead wood screw with a diameter of 
#10 might read as follows:
#10 × 3" F.H.W.S.
● Lengths of screws range from 1/4" to 6" (6 to 150 mm).
● Lag screws have a hexagon- or square-shaped head 
designed to be tightened by a wrench rather than a 
screwdriver. Lag screws are used for lumber connec-
tions 1 1/2" (40 mm) and thicker. Lag bolts are avail-
able in lengths from 1" to 12" (25 to 300 mm) with 
diameters ranging from 1/4" to 1 1/4" (6 to 30 mm).
A pilot hole that is smaller than the screw size is 
often provided to aid in the placement of screws and to 
reduce wood splitting. A washer is used with a lag bolt 
to guard against crushing wood fibers near the bolt. 
A pilot hole that is approximately three-fourths of the 
shaft diameter is often specified to reduce wood damage 
and increase the resistance to withdrawal.
FACE  NAILING
TOE  NAILING
END  NAILING
BLIND  NAILING
FIGURE 6-4 Four methods of placing nails.
PLYWOOD SPECIFICATION 
BOUNDARY OF BLOCKED
ROOF - 4" NAILING
PANEL EDGES @ BLOCKED EDGE 
 6" NAILING.
UNBLOCKED AREA
 6" NAILING
INTERMEDIATE
 PANEL SUPPORTS
 12" O.C. NAILING
FIGURE 6-5 Nail specifications often refer to placement as 
edge, boundary, and field or intermediate nailing.

130 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Metal Framing Connectors
Premanufactured metal connectors by companies such 
as Simpson Strong-Tie are used at many wood connec-
tions to strengthen nailed connections. Joist hangers, 
post caps, post bases, and straps are some of the most 
common lightweight metal hangers used with wood 
construction. Each is shown in Figure 6-7. Each con-
nector comes in a variety of gauges of metal, ranging 
from 12 to 16 gauge, with sizes to fit a wide variety 
of lumber. Metal connectors are typically specified on 
the framing plans, sections, and details by listing the 
model number and type of connector. A metal connec-
tor specification for connecting (2)- 2 × 12 joists to a 
beam would be:
HHUS212-2TF JST. HGR
The supplier is typically specified in the written spec-
ifications or in a general note such as the following:
ALL METAL HANGERS AND CONNECTORS TO BE 
SIMPSON STRONG-TIE COMPANY, INC. OR EQUAL.
Depending on the connection, the nails or bolts used 
with the metal fastener may or may not be specified. If 
no specification is given, it is assumed all nail holes in 
the connector will be filled. If bolts are to be used, they 
will normally be specified with the connector, based on 
the manufacturer’s recommendations. Nails associated 
with metal connectors are typically labeled with the 
letter n instead of d. These nails are equal to their d 
counterpart, but the length has been modified by the 
manufacturer to fit the metal hanger.
STRUCTURAL CONNECTORS USED 
WITH LARGE WOOD MEMBERS
Just as with lumber connections, large wood members 
such as beams, headers and girders, and timber con-
nections must also be able to resist the stress placed on 
them. Bolts, metal connectors, and timber connectors 
are the most common methods of connecting timbers.
Bolts and Washers
Bolts used in the construction industry include anchor 
bolts, carriage bolts, and machine bolts. Each can be 
seen in Figure 6-8. Washers are used under the head 
and nut for most bolting applications. Washers keep 
the head and nut from pulling through the lumber and 
reduce lumber damage by spreading the stress from 
the bolt across more wood fibers. Typically a circular 
washer, specified by its diameter, is used.
Anchor Bolts
An anchor bolt is an L-shaped bolt that is inserted 
into concrete and used to bolt lumber to the concrete 
(Figure 6-8a). The short leg of the L is inserted into 
the concrete and provides resistance from withdrawal. 
The upper end of the long leg is threaded to receive a 
CROSS
PHILLIPS
ROBERTSON
SLOT
HEAD  SHAPES
HEAD  PROFILES
FLAT
COUNTERSUNK
OVAL
ROUNDHEAD
METAL SCREWS  
WOOD SCREWS
LAG
BOLT
LAG
BOLT
BOLT
LAG
FIGURE 6-6 Common types of screws used in construction.
FIGURE 6-7 A wide variety of metal connectors are used to 
strengthen wood connections. Courtesy Simpson Strong-Tie Co., Inc.

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
131
nut. A 2" (50 mm) washer is typically used with anchor 
bolts. Anchor bolts can be abbreviated on the structural 
drawings with the letters A.B., along with a specifica-
tion including the size of the member to be connected, 
the bolt diameter, length, embedment into concrete, 
spacing, and washer size. A typical note might resemble 
the following:
2 × 6 DFPT SILL W/ 5/8"Ø × 12" A.B. @48" O.C. W/ 2" Ø
WASHERS. PROVIDE 9" MINIMUM EMBEDMENT.
When anchor bolts are used to attach lumber to the 
side of a concrete wall, a specification is usually given to 
stagger the bolts in relation to the edge of the lumber to 
be attached as well as the bolt spacing. A typical specifi-
cation might resemble:
3 ×12 DFPT LEDGER W/ 3/4" Ø × 8" A.B. @ 32" O.C.
STAGGERED 3" UP/DN WITH 2" Ø WASHERS.
Carriage Bolts
A carriage bolt is used for connecting steel and other 
metal members as well as timber connections. Carriage 
bolts (Figure 6-8b) have a rounded head with the lower 
portion of the shaft threaded. Directly below the head, 
at the upper end of the shaft is a square shank. As the 
shank is pulled into the lumber, it will keep the bolt 
from spinning as the nut is tightened. Diameters range 
from 1/4" to 1" (6 to 25 mm) with lengths typically 
available to 12" (300 mm).
The specification for a carriage bolt will be similar 
to an anchor bolt except for the designation of the 
bolt type.
Machine Bolts
Bolts with a hexagonal head and a threaded shaft are 
described as machine bolts (M.B.). Machine bolts 
(Figure 6-8c) are divided into the classifications of 
unfinished or high-strength bolts. Common bolts are 
made from A-307 low-carbon steel and are used for 
attaching steel-to-steel, steel-to-wood, or wood-to-wood 
connections. Common bolts are often used in steel 
joints to provide a temporary connection while field 
welds are completed. Bolts are assumed to be common 
unless high-strength bolts are specified and are referred 
to with a note such as:
USE (3)-3/4" Ø × 8" M.B. @ 3" O.C. W/ 1 1/2" Ø WASHERS.
The strength of bolts will be called out in a gen-
eral note on the framing plans or on pages of details 
containing bolted connections. Although the engineer 
will determine the bolt locations based on the stress 
to be resisted, bolts for wood members are usually 
placed:
● 1 1/2" (40 mm) from an edge parallel to the grain
● 3" (75 mm) minimum from the edge when perpen-
dicular to the grain
● 1 1/2" (40 mm) from the edge of steel members
● 2" (50 mm) from the edge of concrete
The pilot hole for the bolts in wood is usually not 
specified but is assumed to be 1/16" (2 mm) bigger than 
the bolt shaft. If an elongated hole is used to allow slight 
movement for field adjustment, the hole and the bolt 
will be specified with a note such as:
3/4" Ø × 8" M.B. THRU 7/8" × 1 1/2" SLOTTED 
HOLE W/ 2" Ø WASHER EA. SIDE.
High-Strength Bolts
Bolts used for connecting timber and structural steel are 
referred to as high-strength bolts and come in several 
common compositions. These bolts are manufactured 
with an ASTM (American Society for Testing Materials) 
or Institute of Steel Construction Specifications grading 
number on the head. Common specifications used in 
commercial construction include the following:
● A-325 high-strength steel bolts, which come in three 
classifications:
❍ Type 1 bolts are made from medium-carbon 
steel in sizes from 1/2" to 1 1/2" (13 to 40 mm) 
diameter.
❍ Type 2 bolts are made from low-carbon steel in 
sizes of 1/2" to 1" (13 to 25 mm) diameter.
❍ Type 3 bolts are made of weathering steel. 
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
FIGURE 6-8 Common bolts used in construction: (a) anchor 
bolt; (b) carriage bolt; (c) machine bolt; (d) drift bolt (threaded 
rod); (e) expansion bolt; (f) toggle bolt; (g) turnbuckle and 
threaded rods.

132 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● A-490 high-strength, medium-carbon steel bolts
● A-441 high-strength, low-alloy steel bolts
● A-242 corrosion-resistant high-strength low-alloy 
steel bolts
High-strength bolts are usually specified to be tight-
ened with a pneumatic impact wrench. Chapter 9 will 
discuss steel requirements and specifications.
Miscellaneous Bolt Types
Several other types of bolts are used for special construc-
tion circumstances. These include studs, drift bolts, expan-
sion bolts, and toggle bolts. 
● Studs are bolts that have no head. A stud is welded 
to a steel beam so that a wood plate can be bolted to 
the beam.
● Drift bolts (Figure 6-8d) are steel rods that have been 
threaded.
● Threaded rods can be driven into one wood member 
with another member bolted to the threaded protru-
sion. Threaded rods can also be used to span between 
metal connectors on two separate beams (as seen in 
Figure 6-9) or to connect concrete panels. Threaded 
rods are also used with steel construction to provide 
lateral support (see Figure 6-10).
● Expansion bolts are used for connecting lumber to 
masonry. Expansion bolts have a special expanding 
sleeve (Figure 6-8e) that will expand once inserted 
into a hole to increase holding power.
● Toggle bolts have a nut that is designed to expand 
once inserted through a hole, so that it cannot be 
removed. Toggle bolts (Figure 6-8f) are used where 
one end of the bolt may not be accessible due to con-
struction parameters.
Timber Connectors
Timber connections are often reinforced by metal rings, 
plates, and disks that are embedded into each piece of 
lumber at the joint to resist sliding. The engineer will 
determine the size and number of connectors per joint 
based on the stress that must be resisted. A groove is 
typically precut into adjoining pieces of timber to hide 
the metal connector. The connector is placed between 
the members to be joined and forced into the groove as 
bolts are tightened. A toothed ring is forced into each 
member by pressure, usually from hammering. Shear 
plates are set in pairs to join lumber. The face of a shear 
plate is set flush with each timber to be joined and then 
bolted together.
Metal Framing Connectors
Premanufactured metal connectors made by companies 
such as Simpson or Tyco are used at many timber-to-
timber connections to strengthen nailed connections. 
Beam hangers, post caps and bases, and straps are 
some of the most common metal connectors used with 
timber construction. Examples of premanufactured 
connectors can be seen in Figure 6-11. These connec-
tors are usually made from metal, ranging from 3 to 7 
FIGURE 6-9 Framing anchors connected by drift bolts or metal 
straps are often used to tie structural members of one level to 
those of another level. In this detail, an HD5A anchor with a 
5/8" diameter bolt will be used to tie the wood wall to the steel 
girder.
FIGURE 6-10 A drift bolt and turnbuckle are used to provide 
lateral support between steel columns. Courtesy Megan Jefferis.

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
133
gauge. Timber connectors are often held in place by 
bolting rather than nailing because of the heavy loads 
being carried. Figure 6-12 shows a detail specifying a 
premanufactured metal connector and the required 
nailing.
Because the hanger is premanufactured, the drafter 
must only specify the size of the hanger and the required 
nailing or bolting size and quantity. The location of 
bolts is not required because the holes for them are 
predrilled. Metal connectors are typically specified 
on the framing plans, sections, and details by listing 
the model number and type of connector, just as with 
lightweight metal connectors. When seen in end view, 
the metal connector is represented by pairs of parallel 
diagonal lines.
If premanufactured connectors are not available 
that can support the required loads, the engineer must 
design a steel connector to be fabricated for a specific 
joint. These connectors are assembled in a shop and 
shipped to the job site. The CAD technician will need 
to specify the material, welds, and exact bolt locations. 
Figure 6-13 shows an example of a fabricated metal 
connector. Chapter 9 will explore the use of steel.
WELDED STEEL CONNECTIONS
Steel connections are typically bolted and welded. 
Carriage and machine bolts described earlier in this 
chapter are used to make the initial connection as 
steel members are positioned. Once all members of 
a specific portion of the structure are positioned and 
squared, the connections are welded to provide the 
required strength.
Welding is the method of providing a rigid connec-
tion between two or more pieces of steel. Through the 
process of welding, metal is heated to a temperature 
6"
3"
3GA
W
"
11 
4
"
1
2"
HGLBA
HGLB
GLST
Typical HCSTR4
Installation
CC
5"
1 
2
"
21 
2
"
21 
2
3 
4
"
11 
4
"
1 
4
"
1 
4
"
1 
4
"
1 
4
"
1 
4
"
41 
4
"
1 
4
"
3 
16
PW
DEFORMED
BAR
"× 12"
3"
PD
W1
1
"
1 
2
1
"
1 
4
1
"
1 
4
1
3"
4"
3"
L
H1
W2
"
5
2"
3 
4
B
CARRYING
BEAM
CARRIED BEAM
"
1 
2
2
FIGURE 6-11 Common premanufactured metal connectors. Courtesy Simpson Strong-Tie Co., Inc.
FIGURE 6-12 A beam-to-beam detail representing premanu-
factured metal hangers does not require dimensions to locate 
hangers’ nails or bolts.

134 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
high enough to cause melting of metal. The parts that 
are welded become one, with the welded joint actually 
stronger than the original material. Welding offers better 
strength, better weight distribution of supported loads,
and a greater resistance to shear or rotational forces 
than a bolted connection. There are many other weld-
ing processes available to the industry, but the most 
common welds in the construction field are shielded 
metal arc welding, gas tungsten arc welding, and gas 
metal arc welding. In each case, the components to be 
welded are placed in contact with each other, and the 
edges are melted to form a bond. Additional metal is 
also added to form a sufficient bond.
Welds are specified in details similar to Figure 6-14. 
A horizontal reference line is connected to the parts to 
be welded by an inclined line with an arrow. The arrow 
touches the area to be welded. It is not uncommon to 
see the welding line bend to point to places that are 
difficult to reach. The welding symbol may also have 
more than one leader line extending from the reference 
line. Information about the type of weld, the location of 
the weld, the welding process, and the size and length 
of the weld is specified on or near the reference line. 
Figure 6-15 shows a welding symbol and the proper 
location of information.
Welded Joints
The way that steel components intersect greatly influ-
ences the method used to weld the materials together. 
The welding method and the joint to be used are often 
included in the specification. Common joints include 
butt, lap, tee, outside corner, and edge joints. Examples 
of each joint are illustrated in Figure 6-16.
Types of Welds
The type of weld is distinguished by the weld shape 
and/or the type of groove in the metal components that 
receive the weld. Welds specified on structural and 
architectural drawings include fillet, groove, and plug 
welds. The methods of joining steel and the symbol for 
each type can be seen in Figure 6-17.
The most common weld used in construction is a 
fillet weld. A fillet weld is formed at the internal corner 
of two intersecting pieces of steel. The fillet can be 
applied to one or both sides and can be continuous or a 
specified length and spacing. Five other welds common 
to construction are specified by the shape of the metal 
to be joined.
● A square groove weld is applied when two pieces 
with perpendicular edges are joined end to end. The 
spacing between the two pieces of metal is called 
the root opening. The root opening is shown to the 
left of the symbol.
FIGURE 6-13 Metal connectors that are to be fabricated 
require all steel sizes and hole locations to be specified and 
dimensioned.
FIGURE 6-14 Welds are specified in details by the use of spe-
cialized symbols pointing to the area to be welded.

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
135
FINISH SYMBOL
GROOVE ANGLE; INCLUDED
ANGLE OF COUNTERSINK
FOR PLUG WELDS
LENGTH OF WELD
PITCH (CENTER TO CENTER
SPACING) OF WELDS
FIELD WELD SYMBOL
ARROW CONNECTING REFERENCE
LINE TO ARROW SIDE MEMBER OF
JOINT
WELD ALL AROUND SYMBOL
REFERENCE LINE
CONTOUR SYMBOL
EFFECTIVE THROAT
DEPTH OF PREPARATION; SIZE OR
STRENGTH FOR CERTAIN WELDS
SPECIFICATION, PROCESS,
OR OTHER REFERENCE
TAIL
(TAIL OMITTED
WHEN REFERENCE
IS NOT USED.)
BASIC WELD SYMBOL
OR DETAIL REFERENCE
NUMBER OF SPOT OR
PROJECTION WELDS
ELEMENTS IN THIS 
AREA REMAIN AS
SHOWN WHEN TAIL
AND ARROW ARE
REVERSED.
ROOT OPENING; DEPTH OF FILLING
FOR PLUG AND SLOT WELDS
(BOTH      SIDES)
(ARROW
SIDE)
(OTHER
SIDE)
F
A
R
L-P
S(E)
(N)
T
FIGURE 6-15 Common locations of each element of a welding symbol. Courtesy American Welding Society.
A.  FILLET
B.  SQUARE
C.  V-GROOVE
D.  U-GROOVE
E. J-GROOVE
FIGURE 6-17 The type of weld specified by the engineer is 
based on the shape of the material being welded. Common 
shapes of materials to be welded are shown with the symbol 
used to represent the weld.
TEE
LAP
BUTT
OUTSIDE
CORNER
EDGE
FIGURE 6-16 Types of welded joints are named for the inter-
sections of the two mating pieces of steel.

136 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● A V-groove weld is applied when each piece of steel 
to be joined has an inclined edge that forms the shape 
of a V. The included angle, as well as the root open-
ing, is often specified.
● A beveled weld is created when only one piece of 
steel has a beveled edge. An angle for the bevel and 
the root opening is typically given.
● A U-groove weld is created when the groove between 
the two mating parts forms a U.
● A J-groove weld results when one piece has a per-
pendicular edge and the other has a curved grooved 
edge. The included angle, the root opening, and the 
weld size are given for both types of welds.
Welding Location
Welds specified on the structural drawings may be 
done in a shop away from the job site, and the com-
ponents are then shipped, ready to be installed. For an 
item that can be easily shipped such as a metal beam 
connector, shop assembly is less expensive and more 
efficient.
For large components that must be assembled at 
the job site, the welding is said to be field welded. 
Two symbols used to refer to a field weld are shown 
in Figure 6-18. When field welds are specified, 
the engineer may require that these welds are to 
be inspected by a representative of the engineer in 
addition to the inspection provided by the building 
department. The drafter will need to provide a speci-
fication beside each welding detail indicating the 
need for special inspection.
Weld Placements
The placement of the welding symbol in relation to the 
reference line is critical in indicating where the actual 
weld will take place. Options include this side, other side, 
and both sides. Figure 6-19 shows the effects of placing a 
fillet weld symbol on the reference line. The distinction 
of symbol placement can be quite helpful to the drafter 
if adequate space is not available on the proper side of 
the detail to place a symbol. The welding symbol can be 
placed on either side of the drawing and the relation-
ship to the reference line can be used to clarify the exact 
location.
All Around
The all around symbol is used to indicate that a weld 
is to be placed around the entire intersection. A circle 
placed at the intersection of the leader and reference 
line indicates that a feature is to be welded all around. 
Figure 6-14 shows a column-beam intersection joined 
with welds requiring an all-around-weld.
Weld Length and Increment
If a weld does not surround the entire part, the length 
and spacing of the weld should be indicated beside the 
weld symbol. The number preceding the weld symbol 
indicates the size of the weld. When weld sizes are 
expressed in millimeters, they should be designated in 
1-millimeter increments up to 8 mm, 2-millimeter incre-
ments from 8 to 20 mm, 5-millimeter increments from 
20 to 40 mm, and 10-millimeter increments beyond 40 
mm. The number following the weld symbol indicates 
the length each weld is to be, and the final size indicates 
the spacing of the weld along a continuous intersection 
of two mating parts.
REPRESENTING STRUCTURAL 
CONNECTORS AND OTHER 
MATERIALS IN DETAILS
Throughout this chapter you have been introduced 
to the methods of joining wood, timber, engineered 
wood products, and steel members to other structural 
FIELD WELD
SYMBOLS
(PREFERRED)
FIGURE 6-18 The welding symbol can be used to distinguish 
if the weld will be performed on-site or off-site by the use of 
a small flag or a solid circle placed at the intersection of the 
leader line.
a.
b.
c.
FIGURE 6-19 The welding symbol can be used to describe the 
relationship of the weld to the materials being welded by the 
placement of the symbol to the line: (a) symbol below the line 
means the weld occurs on this side of the material; (b) symbol 
above the line means the weld is to be placed on the other side; 
(c) symbol placed on each side of the reference line means the 
weld is to occur on both sides of the material.

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
137
members. The final portion of this chapter will intro-
duce you to the skills needed to assemble the details 
where these connection methods will be specified. 
Chapter 3 introduced basic considerations for general 
drawing layouts. This chapter will introduce skills 
specific to creating details.
Drawing and Editing Details
Details are enlargements of specific areas of a structure 
and are typically drawn where several components 
intersect. Details can provide an exterior view of a spe-
cific portion of a project that lies parallel to an imagi-
nary viewing plane or show the interior of materials as 
if an imaginary cutting plane had cut them. Figure 6-20 
shows an example of a partial section of a hillside struc-
ture built on a piling foundation. Figure 6-21 shows two 
details that relate to the larger drawing in Figure 6-20. 
The larger drawing shows major intersections of mate-
rial but does not allow specific materials to be specified 
clearly. This chapter will provide an introduction to the 
considerations for editing and drawing construction 
details. 
Stock Details
Most offices have a library of stock details. These are 
details of repetitive items such as footings that remain 
the same for most of the buildings drawn by the office. 
Common stock foundations might include:
● 1-level concrete slab with stud walls—bearing
● 1-level concrete slab with stud walls—nonbearing
● 1-level concrete slab with steel stud walls—bearing
● 1-level concrete slab with steel stud walls—nonbearing
● 1-level concrete slab with concrete block walls— 
bearing 
The same details would typically exist for two-level 
construction, and for wood-framed floor systems if 
appropriate for the area of construction or construc-
tion type. Using a computer, the typical detail can be 
drawn, with all the required dimensions, notations, 
and tables to describe various sizes based on loads or 
depth. Once complete, the detail can be stored in the 
office library for future use. For future projects, the 
detail can be inserted or referenced into the project and 
edited as needed. The first detail may take a few hours 
13
8
SIMILAR
11
3
13
9
14
1
SIMILAR
13
1
SIMILAR
13
5
13
5
SIMILAR
13
2
FIN. FLOOR
91.00
FIN. FLOOR
100.00
 TURNBUCKLE
3/4"Ø ROD &
STEEL BRACE
T.S. 4 X 4 X 1/4"
STEEL PILES
HP 8 X 36 
CONC. PIERS
24"Ø x 60" DEEP 
W 16 X 67
W 16 X 67
W 16 X 45
W 16 X 45
2 X 12 F.J. @ 16" O.C.
2 X 12 F.J. @ 16" O.C.
1/4"                       1'-0"
SECTION  G-G
3
11
SIMILAR
FIGURE 6-20 This partial section for a hillside structure is used to show the shape of the structure in one specific place. The details 
shown in Figure 6-21 provide information about specific material intersections.

138 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
to complete, but only a few minutes of editing time is 
required for use in future projects. 
Inserting and editing details is a common job for 
a new CAD technician. Figures 3-5a and 3-5b show 
details that were created by editing the master details. 
To successfully complete a drawing, consideration 
must be given to the plotting scale, material represen-
tation, layering, lineweights, symbols, annotation, and 
dimensions. Many of these topics were introduced in 
Chapter 3, but additional information must be consid-
ered as details are edited or constructed for use on a 
sheet containing multiple details.
Plotting Scales To make the details easier to read, they 
have become somewhat standardized in several areas, 
including scales and alignment. Details are drawn at a 
scale of 1/2" = 1'–0" through 3" = 1'–     0" (1:16 through 
1:4), depending on the complexity of the intersection. 
The choice of scale in drawing sections will be influ-
enced by:
1. Size of the area where the detail is to be placed.
2. Purpose of the detail.
The placement of the detail as it relates to other 
drawings should have only a minor influence on the 
scale. It may be practical to put a detail in a blank 
corner of a drawing, but don’t let space dictate the 
scale. The most important factor should be the purpose 
of the detail. A scale must be chosen for plotting that 
will allow each material to be clearly represented. 
Representing and Locating Materials
The size of the detail to be drawn will dictate the amount 
of information to be displayed, and how the material will 
be represented. The smaller the plotting scale, the less 
information will be presented, and the fewer number of 
linetypes will be used. In addition to using larger plot-
ting scales, details require more attention to line con-
trast and the use of more varied lineweights than other 
types of drawings. Careful consideration must also be 
given to how materials will be represented.
Adding Layers
Before details can be started, layers need to be created 
to separate information by material and by lineweight 
and linetypes. Layers should start with a prefix of DETL 
and information should be named with a modifier listed 
in Appendix C. Subnames of ANNO, DIMN, FOOT, 
OUTL, and SYMB will always be needed. As with any 
other drawing, create additional layers as needed to 
ensure that only layers that will be used are added to 
the drawing. 
Using Line Contrast
Although standards will vary in each office, details will 
often require a minimum of four different lineweights 
FIGURE 6-21 Details provide information about a specific area of a structure. These details are referenced to the drawing in 
Figure 6-20.

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
139
to provide contrast between materials. Unfortunately, 
there is no standard of “always use this lineweight.” The 
lineweights that are used will vary depending on the 
plotting scale of the detail, and the materials that must 
be represented. The use of 0.0 (default) for thin lines 
and 0.60 lines will serve as a starting point for all details 
to provide contrast for thin and thick lines. When draw-
ing foundation detail, a thickness of 0.90 can be used to 
represent the outline of concrete, and a weight of 1.00 
can be used to represent the finished grade. 
Note: The goal of any detail is to clearly represent 
material. Because there is no set standard for lin-
eweight, draw a few lines using varied lineweights, 
and then make a test plot. Line thickness should be 
thick enough to provide contrast, but not so thick 
that lines bleed into other objects.
Once the lineweights have been selected, a method for 
assigning lineweights will need to be established. Two 
common methods for assigning lineweights include:
1 Assign and name layers such as THIN, THICK, VERY 
THICK, and MEGA THICK.
2 Assign layer names based on materials such as 
WOOD, STEEL, CONCRETE, or SOIL. Lineweights 
can then be assigned to objects on those layers using 
the PROPERTIES command. See the guidelines for 
naming layers on the student CD.
The office where you work will determine the cor-
rect method of assigning lineweights. When plotting, 
grayscale can be used to provide contrast to existing and 
new materials by assigning gray to existing materials 
and black to new materials.
Representing Materials in Details
The method used to represent each material will vary 
depending on the scale that is used. Different methods 
are also used to represent continuous materials that are 
cut by the cutting plane or intermittent materials that 
lie beyond the cutting plane. Although the method of 
representing materials may vary with each office, it is 
critical that each material be distinguished from other 
materials to provide drawing clarity. Common materials 
shown in sections are shown in Figure 6-22. It is also 
important not to spend more time than necessary detail-
ing materials. If a product is delivered to the site ready to 
be installed, minimal attention representing the product 
is required. If a component must be constructed at the 
job site, the drawings must provide enough information 
for all of the different tradespeople who are depending 
on the drawings.
a.
b.
c. 
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.
p. 
q.
r.
s.
t.
u.
v.
FIGURE 6-22 Common symbols for representing materials 
in sections and details. Materials include: (a) wood-framed 
wall; (b) small-scale masonry; (c) double wythe brick wall; (d) 
concrete masonry units; (e) steel tubes; (f) steel I or W shapes; 
(g) poured concrete walls; (h) batt insulation; (j) rigid insula-
tion; (k) small-scale plywood; (l) large-scale plywood; (m) soil; 
(n) gravel; (p) wood and timber in end view (blocking and two 
methods of showing continuous members); (q) small-scale steel 
shapes in end view; (r) large-scale steel shapes in end view; (s) 
laminated timbers in end view; (t) wood member supported by 
metal hanger in side view on a laminated member in end view; 
(u) solid-web trusses in side and end views; and (v) open-web 
trusses in side and end views.

140 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Wood, Timber, and Engineered Products
Notice in Figure 6-21 that thin lines represent the 
materials that lie beyond the cutting plane and thick 
lines represent materials cut by the cutting plane. On 
small-scale details, lumber and timber products can be 
drawn using their nominal size. Thin materials such as 
plywood in Figure 6-22k may have to be exaggerated 
so that they can be clearly represented. The actual size 
of lumber and timber should be represented. Thick 
lines represent the shape of trusses perpendicular to 
the cutting plane. When parallel to the cutting plane, 
the chords and webs can be represented by thin lines 
similar to Figure 6-22v.
In addition to using thick lines to outline members 
shown in end views, several methods can be used to 
represent the material. Figures 6-22p and 6-22s show 
common methods to represent materials such as plates, 
ledgers, and beams. Plywood, sheet rock, and other fin-
ishes are represented by hatch patterns similar to those 
shown in Figures 6-22a, 6-22k, and 6-22l. 
Steel
The size of the detail will affect how sectioned steel 
members are represented. At small scale, a solid, thick 
line represents the desired shape of steel members (see 
Figure 6-22q). As the scale increases, pairs of lines can 
represent the desired shape of sectioned members. Pairs 
of thin lines (ANSI32) represent sectioned steel with a 
hatch pattern consisting of pairs of parallel diagonal lines 
(see Figure 6-22r). Thin lines representing the nominal 
thickness are used to represent steel columns, beams, or 
trusses that are beyond the cutting plane. Steel trusses 
are represented in a similar method to wood trusses. 
Unit Masonry
Methods of representing brick and masonry prod-
ucts vary as the scale of the drawing increases. In 
small-scale sections, units are typically hatched with 
diagonal lines and no attempt is made to represent 
cavities or individual units. As the size of the draw-
ing increases, individual units are represented, as well 
as cavities within the unit and grouting between the 
units. Individual hatch patterns are used to differen-
tiate between the masonry unit and the grout. Steel 
reinforcing can be represented by either a hidden or 
continuous polyline. Figures  6-22b, 6-22c, and 6-22d 
show an example of a wall section, representing unit 
masonry and brick veneer. Chapter 10 will provide 
additional guidelines for representing masonry.
Concrete
The edges of poured members are represented by thick 
lines and a hatch pattern consisting of dots and small 
triangles (see Figure 6-22g). Chapter 11 will provide 
additional guidelines for representing poured concrete 
products.
Glazing 
Glass is represented in details by a single line or pairs 
of lines depending on the drawing scale. In small-scale 
details, glass is generally represented by thin lines 
with little attention given to intersections between the 
glazing and window frames. As the drawing scale is 
increased, the detail shown when representing the glass 
and the frame also increases. Figure 3-11 shows glazing 
in its frame.
Insulation
The type of insulation will dictate how it is drawn. Batt 
insulation is generally represented as shown in Figure 
6-22h. Depending on the complexity of the detail, the 
insulation may be shown across its entire drawing, 
or may be shown in only one portion of the drawing. 
When only a portion of the insulation is drawn, notes 
must be placed that clearly define the limits of the insu-
lation. Rigid insulation can be represented as shown in 
Figure 6-22j, and can be shown using the same consid-
erations as batt insulation. As the scale increases, insula-
tion should be shown throughout the entire detail.
Locating Materials with Dimensions
Both vertical and horizontal dimensions may be placed 
on details. On small-scale drawings, the use of dimen-
sions depends on the area being represented. The job 
captain will generally provide the exact dimensions for 
inexperienced technicians on a check print. As techni-
cians gain experience, they are expected to determine 
required sizes based on similar circumstances of previ-
ous projects, or from other areas of the project.
Vertical Dimensions
Vertical heights can be represented using standard 
dimension methods presented in Chapter 3 or they 
can be represented by elevation symbols from a known 
point. Each type of dimension is usually placed on the 
outside of the drawing. Dimensions are generally given 
from the bottom of the sole plate, from the top of the 
top plate, or from the edge of a beam to the material 
being referenced. 
Horizontal Dimensions
The use of horizontal dimensions in details varies 
greatly based on the material being represented. When 
provided, horizontal dimensions are generally located 
from grid lines to the desired member. Exterior wood 
and concrete members should be referenced to their 

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
141
edge. Interior wood members are referenced to a cen-
terline. Interior concrete members are referenced to an 
edge. Steel members are referenced to their centers. The 
distance for roof overhangs and balcony projections also 
may be placed in details. 
Drawing Symbols
Details use symbols that match those of the floor, roof, 
and elevation drawings to reference material. Symbols 
that might be found on a detail included:
● Grid markers
● Elevation markers
● Section markers
● Detail markers
Examples of each are shown in Figure 6-23. Grid 
markers should match, in both size and style, those 
used on other drawings so the details can be easily 
matched to other drawings. Elevations that are specified 
on the floor plan and elevation drawings should also be 
referenced to related details by use of a datum line or an 
elevation placed over a leader line. 
Each detail is referenced to other drawings by a detail 
marker, which defines the page the detail is drawn on, 
and what is being viewed. A reference such as 3 over 
A–700 would indicate that the detail is drawing number 
3 on page A–700. 
Drawing Annotation
Annotation on details is used to specify materials and 
explain special installation procedures. As with other 
drawings, notes may be either placed as local or keyed 
notes. Most offices use local notes with a leader line that 
connects the note to the material. Local notes should 
be aligned to be parallel to the drawing to aid the print 
reader. The smaller the scale, the more generic the notes 
should be. For instance, on a small-scale detail, rein-
forcement might be specified as:
HORIZONTAL REBAR - SEE REINFORCING SCHEDULE.
This information would be referenced by complete notes 
in a detail drawn at a larger scale. A second method of 
specifying materials is to use the MasterFormat number-
ing system to reference materials. Using this system, the 
reinforcement specified above might be specified as:
03 20 00 A 
Drawing Process
Because no two details are alike, one step-by-step pro-
cess cannot be used for their layout. Every CAD techni-
cian should have a logical method of attacking drawing 
layout, however. A common method of layout would 
be as follows: 
1. Draw the materials to be represented. 
2. Detail each material. 
3. Dimension required components. 
4. Place all required notes. 
A detail should generally be started by drawing 
the major component to be represented. Figure 6-24 
shows the layout for a beam-column-foundation con-
nection with the three major components represented. 
The detail was started by representing the foundation 
because it is used to support the column. Once the major 
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
FIGURE 6-23 Symbols used on details are common to other 
drawings and include (a and b) elevation markers; (c) cutting 
plane; (d) detail reference marker; and (e) grid marker.
FIGURE 6-24 Details are started by drawing the outlines of 
major construction materials.

142 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
shapes were defined, specific details such as straps and 
bolt holes were added as shown in Figure 6-25. The 
drawing process was completed by adding varied line-
weights and hatch patterns to represent each material. 
See Figure 6-26.
With all material drawn, dimensions should be added. 
Any feature that is to be fabricated must be dimensioned. 
Any feature that is premanufactured does not need to be 
dimensioned. Place dimensions so that smaller dimen-
sions do not cross over larger dimensions. On large-scale 
drawings, dimensions can be placed within clear spaces 
of the detail. Never place dimensions in the component 
if clarity will be compromised.
Notes should be placed to reference all material rep-
resented in the detail. Care should be taken not to repeat 
information specified in the architectural drawings or 
within the specifications. Generally, sizes should be 
specified in dimension form rather than as a note. When 
a print reader scans a drawing looking for information, 
numerals on dimension lines are easier to visualize 
than numbers placed within fields of text. Text should 
be placed using the guidelines given in Chapter 2.
Information presented in a note should be placed using 
the following format:
Size, component name, information required 
to fabricate or install.
Although the information cannot be completed 
at this time, a detail title, scale, and reference bubble 
should also be placed as the text is being provided. 
Figure 6-27 shows the completed detail.
DRAWING CRITERIA FOR 
COMPLETING DETAILS
As you progress through Section 2, you will find draw-
ing problems at the end of each chapter. These details 
will be related to the projects drawn in Sections 3 and 
4, and may require referencing sketches in other chap-
ters to gain additional information. Use the following 
assumptions to complete the details found in each 
chapter in Sections 2, 3, and 4. These “assumptions” 
should be considered as company standards. 
Warning: Submitting drawings that do not meet 
the following minimum standards may earn you 
the wrath of your supervisor, slow your progress 
in achieving a pay raise, or lead to your dismissal. 
Remember these are minimum standards. Your 
drawings should exceed them.
● Unless your instructor gives you other instructions, 
complete the following details and save them as 
FIGURE 6-25  Once major shapes have been defined, specific 
details should be added.
FIGURE 6-26  Line quality and hatch patterns are added to 
improve drawing quality.

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
143
wblocks. Skeletons of most details can be found on 
the student CD. Use these drawings as a base to com-
plete the assignment.
● Show all required views to describe each connection. 
Provide the fewest number of views to completely 
describe the specified connection.
● Draw each detail at a minimum scale of 3/4" = 1'– 0" 
unless noted. Adjust all scale, lineweight, text, and 
dimension factors as required.
● Show and specify all connecting materials based on 
local standards. Base nailing on IBC standards unless 
your instructor tells you otherwise. 
● Specify all material based on common local practice. 
● Represent structural wood members that the cutting 
plane has passed through with bold lines.
● Use separate layers for wood, concrete, text, and 
dimensions.
● Use dimensions for locations where possible, instead 
of notes.
● Provide annotation to specify that all metal hangers 
are to be provided by Simpson Strong-Tie Company 
or equal. Obtain the needed catalog from a local sup-
plier or from the company’s Web site.
● Assume all trusses are to be provided by Weyer-
haeuser. Verify all truss sizes from tables found on their 
Web site.
● Hatch each material with the appropriate hatch 
pattern.
● Use an appropriate architectural text font to label and 
dimension each drawing as needed. Refer to Sweets 
Catalogs, vendor catalogs, or the Internet to research 
needed sizes and specifications.
● Keep all text 3/4" minimum from the drawing, and 
use an appropriate architectural style leader line to 
reference the text to the drawing.
● Provide a detail marker, with a drawing title, scale, 
and problem number below each detail.
● Assemble the details required by your instructor into 
an appropriate sheet for plotting. Arrange the draw-
ings using the guidelines presented in Chapters 2 
and 3.
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource 
to help you keep current with changes in building 
materials.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.americanfasteners.com 
American Fastener 
Technology Corporation
www.astm.org 
 ASTM International
www.americanwelding.com 
American Welding 
Services, Inc.
www.aws.org  
American Welding 
Society
www.atlasfasteners.com 
Atlas Fasteners for 
Construction
www.boltdepot.com 
Bolt Depot
www.grabberman.com 
Grabber Construction 
Products
www.boltproducts.com 
Metric Bolts
www.nailpower.com 
Nail Power (construction 
adhesives)
FIGURE 6-27 The completed detail with annotation and 
dimensions provided.

144 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
www.nutsandbolts.com 
Nuts and Bolts Fasteners
www.portlandbolt.com 
Portland Bolt and 
Manufacturing Company
www.screw-products.com  
Screw Products
www.strongtie.com  
Simpson Strong-Tie 
Company, Inc.
www.stainless-fasteners.com 
Stainless Fasteners
www.spfa.org  
Steel Plate Fabricators 
Association
KEY TERMS
Bolt, anchor
Bolt, carriage
Bolt, drift
Bolt, expansion
Bolt, high-strength
Bolt, machine
Bolt, toggle
Detail, stock
Details
Field welded
Nail, box
Nail, common
Nailing, blind
Nailing, boundary
Nailing, end
Nailing, face
Nailing, field
Nailing, toe
Penny
Pilot hole
Power-driven anchors
Screw
Screw, flathead
Screw, lag
Screw, roundhead
Spikes
Stud
Threaded rods
Weld, beveled
Weld, fillet
Weld, V-groove
Making Connections
CHAPTER 6 TEST
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of additional chapters in this 
text, vendor catalogs, or seeking out local suppliers. 
Question 6-1 List two common uses for adhesives in the 
construction industry.
Question 6-2 What type of nail is most typically used for 
wood framing?
Question 6-3 What would cause a nail to have a bluish finish?
Question 6-4 How long is an 8-penny nail?
Question 6-5 Based on the IBC, how will a rafter be con-
nected to a plate?
Question 6-6 Describe the difference between the terms 
boundary, edge, and field.
Question 6-7 List the nailing the IBC recommends for 
securing 3/4" plywood to the floor joists.
Question 6-8 List two common uses for roundhead screws.
Question 6-9 What purpose does a washer serve when used 
with a bolt or a screw?
Question 6-10 A 3/4" diameter anchor bolt is going to be 
used to join a 3 × 8 ledger to a concrete wall. What size 
hole should be provided in the ledger?
Question 6-11 List the names of the following bolts and 
provide information common to the bolt specification for 
using A.B., C.B., and M.B. regardless of the material being 
attached. 
Question 6-12 List five pieces of information that might be 
included in an anchor bolt specification.
Question 6-13 What allows a carriage bolt to be tightened?
Question 6-14 Why do steel members need to be bolted if a 
weld is going to be used to attach the members?
Question 6-15 List the types of steel from which high-
strength bolts are typically made.
Question 6-16 How is a split-ring connector used to hold 
timber together?
Question 6-17 List two major suppliers of timber connectors.
Question 6-18 Give the gauge of a Simpson HD5A hold-
down anchor.
Question 6-19 What are the most common methods of con-
necting large steel shapes to each other?
Question 6-20 What is the CAD technician’s role regarding 
the connection of webs to the top and bottom chords of 
a truss?
Question 6-21 List the three possible locations for placing a 
weld and give the symbol that represents each location.
Question 6-22 List five types of joints where welds can be 
applied.

Chapter 6: Making Connections 
145
Question 6-23 Sketch the symbol for a 3/16" fillet weld, 
applied to the other side, all around a column, and 
applied at the job site.
Question 6-24 Sketch the symbol used for a 1/4" × 3" long 
V-groove weld applied to this side.
Question 6-25 Sketch the symbol for a 1/8" field, fillet weld 
on both sides.
Question 6-26 What is a stock detail, and when would it be 
used?
Question 6-27 What factors influence the scale of a detail?
Question 6-28 What is a cutting plane, and how does it 
relate to a section?
Question 6-29 How far should nails penetrate into the sup-
porting member?
Question 6-30 What are computer-related items that must 
be considered prior to starting a detail?
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Unless your instructor provides other instructions, use the 
“Drawing Criteria for Completing Details” section presented 
earlier in this chapter to complete the following details. Save 
each drawing as a wblock. 
• 
Open the appropriate detail on the student CD and save the 
file to an appropriate storage device. 
• 
Materials are currently located on the 0 layers. Create layers 
based on the National CAD Standards and move each 
drawing component to the appropriate layer.
• 
Assume plotting in monochrome, but assign a different color 
to each material and drawing component to help you track 
each item.
• 
Assign lineweights as required to materials that will add 
clarity to the drawing.
• 
Provide hatch patterns as necessary to define each material. 
• 
Edit the detail as required to meet the minimum standards 
above.
Problem 6-1 Slab footing—1-level
Problem 6-2 CMU wall—1-level footing
Problem 6-3 Truss /stud wall—soffited eave
Problem 6-4 Truss /CMU wall—open eave
Problem 6-5 Raft /CMU wall—open eave
 
Edit the specified problem to create the following details:
Problem 6-6 Edit problem 6-1 to show a 2 × 6 stud wall 
supported on a two-story footing. Show the 15" wide 
footing extending 18" into the natural grade. 
Problem 6-7 Edit problem 6-2 to reflect an 8" deep foot-
ing and a 5" thick concrete slab. Provide vertical wall 
steel with a 48" spacing, and horizontal steel with a 16" 
spacing.
Problem 6-8 Edit problem 6-3 to reflect a 3/12 pitch and a 
36" overhang.
Problem 6-9 Edit problem 6-4 to reflect an enclosed soffit 
matching the soffit in problem 6-3.
Problem 6-10 Edit problem 6-5 to reflect an 8' high stud 
wall with double top plates and a truss roof framed to 
match the roof in problem 6-3.

146
7
Wood and Timber Framing Methods
Wood products are a major material of construction for 
light commercial projects. Wood construction materi-
als include sawn lumber and timber that is directly 
cut from trees. To effectively work with drawings that 
reflect either type of lumber construction, a technician 
must have a thorough understanding of the materials 
and terminology of lumber construction. This chapter 
will explore:
● Uses of wood in light construction.
● The terms that describe wood used in light con-
struction.
● Wood framing.
● Timber.
● Heavy timber.
USES OF WOOD IN LIGHT 
CONSTRUCTION
Wood products are a valuable building resource because 
of their many green qualities. Products made from fast-
growth trees, recycled materials, and especially engi-
neered products reduce the demand for old-growth 
lumber products. Engineered wood products will be 
explored in Chapter 8. The use of wood in commercial 
projects is limited in some types of commercial projects 
by the loads that must be supported and the greater need 
to protect the occupants of the structure from fire. The 
use of wood is restricted by the International Building 
Code (IBC) based on the size of the structure and the 
occupancy of the structure. Multifamily housing proj-
ects, individual retail sales establishments, and office 
structures are common uses of wood construction.
Building Code Restriction of Wood
Chapter 4 introduced the effect of codes on the selection 
of building materials. Wood construction with no special 
covering is considered Type V-B. Notice in Figure 4-9 
that a wood office structure (B occupancy) has a height 
restriction of two stories and an allowable basic area of 
9000 square feet per floor. Chapter 12 will introduce 
materials that can be used to upgrade wood construc-
tion to a more fire-resistant type of construction. As 
materials are substituted to increase the fire resistance to 
Type III-B, the height can be increased to four levels 
and the size is increased to 19,000 square feet per floor. 
Because more products must be used to enclose the 
wood frame and protect it from fire, the use of wood is 
typically not an economical choice for framing materials 
in structures that demand greater fire safety. Not only 
is the size of each floor restricted by the type of construc-
tion, but the number of floors allowed is limited.
Loading Limitations
Notice from Figure 4-9, a Type V-B office structure has 
a basic allowable height of two levels. The use of Type 
III-B construction increases the basic allowable height 
to four floors, or a maximum of 55' high (16, 784 mm). 
The size and height of a structure will also dictate the 
selection of building products because of the loads that 
will be generated. The IBC restricts non-engineered 
wood bearing walls to a maximum of 10' (3050 mm) 
in height. Walls designed by an architect or engineer 
can exceed this limit based on specific load studies. 
Codes also require vertical wood wall members to be a 
minimum of 2 × 6 (50 × 150) if more than one floor 
level and roof level is being supported. In addition to the 
loads generated from gravity, the structure must resist 
lateral loads. Loads imposed on a mid-rise or high-rise 
structure from wind, seismic activity, and overturning 
are typically too severe to be resisted by wood structures 
at an economical price. Because of its flexibility, avail-
ability, and economic features, wood is a popular build-
ing material. Natural beauty and warmth make wood 
the material of choice for many low-level structures 
similar to Figure 7-1.
LUMBER TERMINOLOGY
An understanding of common wood terminology is 
essential to work efficiently on details and other draw-
ings representing wood construction. The terms wood, 
lumber, and timber are often used interchangeably, but 

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
147
each has its own distinct meaning. Wood is the material 
that forms the trunk of trees. Lumber is produced as a 
result of milling wood by sawing, resawing, and plan-
ing. This would include materials of 2" and 4" (50 and 
100 mm) thickness and 4", 6", 8", 10", 12", and 14" 
(100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 350 mm) depths. Several dif-
ferent terms based on the nominal size of the lumber 
are used to describe lumber. These terms include the 
following:
● Rough lumber is lumber that has only been sawn, 
edged, and trimmed on each of its four longitudinal 
surfaces.
● Dressed lumber is lumber that has been planed on 
one side (S1S), two sides (S2S), or a combination of 
sides and edges (S1S1E), (S1S2E), or (S4S).
● Boards are wood products that are less than 2" 
(50 mm) thick but are wider than 2" (50 mm).
● Structural lumber is lumber that is 2" (50 mm) thick 
or wider nominal but less than 5" (130 mm) wide for 
use where working stresses are required.
● Dimension lumber is lumber that is 2" (50 mm) 
thick but less than 5" (130 mm) thick and is at least 
2" (50 mm) wide.
● Timber is lumber that is 5" (130 mm) or thicker and 
5" (130 mm) or wider.
● Millwork is a term used to describe products made of 
wood such as door and window frame components, 
trim, mantels, and moldings.
Lumber and timber are milled from  softwoods, which 
are needle-bearing trees such as firs, pines, and spruces. 
Millwork is typically made from hardwoods, which 
come from leaf-bearing trees such as oak and maple. 
It is important to remember that the terms hardwood 
and softwood do not refer to the hardness or softness of 
the wood but to the leaf or needle. Some softwoods are 
harder than some hardwoods and vice versa.
Wood Structure
Each year of growth is marked by a new layer of 
wood being added to the outer layer of the tree. This 
new growth is reflected by the addition of a growth 
ring each year. The size of the ring is affected by the 
growth conditions for that year. Short, dry growing 
seasons result in less growth and smaller rings, while 
larger rings result from warmer, moist weather. Each 
growth ring is also divided into two portions. The inner 
portion of the growth ring represents the growth in 
springtime. This wood is usually lighter in color and 
the wood is composed of large thin-walled cavities. The 
outer portion of each ring represents summer growth. 
This portion of the ring is a darker color and is denser 
wood. Growth rings can be seen in the ends of lumber 
and timber.
The rate of growth affects the strength of wood. 
Wood with narrow growth rings typically has higher 
strength ratings than wood with wider rings. Wood with 
a high proportion of summer growth is stronger than 
spring-growth wood. The grading of wood for structural 
purposes takes into account the rate of growth and the 
proportion of spring to summer wood.
Wood Grain
Grain is used to describe the pattern of wood fibers in 
wood products. Wood that has slow growth will have 
narrow rings and is said to be close grain. Coarse grain 
is used to describe wood with wide rings. Lumber grain 
is also referred to as straight grain or cross grain. These 
terms relate to the direction of the wood fibers in rela-
tion to the sides of a piece of lumber and are not related 
to the growth rings. Straight grain lumber has a grain 
pattern that runs parallel to the piece of lumber. The 
grain of cross grain lumber runs at an angle to the edge 
of the lumber.
FIGURE 7-1 Both hardwoods and softwoods can be found in 
this design by Sandy and Babcock, AIA. Photo by Jeremiah 
O. Bragstad. Courtesy California Redwood Association.

148 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Moisture Content
Building codes and the engineering specifications set 
limits for the moisture content of lumber to be used 
throughout the project. Before wood can be used as a 
lumber product, it must be dried. Freshly cut wood is 
described as green wood. Green wood contains water 
within each cell, known as free water. Green wood 
also contains moisture within the walls of each cell, 
which is referred to as absorbed water. As wood dries, 
the moisture within the cell evaporates first. As the 
evaporation of free water is completed, the absorbed 
water begins to evaporate. The completion of free-
water evaporation is called the fiber saturation point, 
and results when approximately 25% to 30% of total 
moisture content has been removed. Once the fiber 
saturation point is reached, wood will begin to shrink 
and the strength will be increased. Wood dried to a 5% 
moisture content can range from two to three times its 
original strength in bending and crushing strength. A 
trade-off to the increase in strength is an increase of 
splitting along the grain.
Removal of moisture from wood also increases 
its resistance to fungus. Moisture content of wood is 
expressed as a percentage and is determined by divid-
ing the original weight by the oven-dried weight. Dry 
lumber is defined as lumber that has a moisture con-
tent of 19% or less and is represented by the symbol 
S-Dry. The International Building Code considers 
wood with moisture content higher than 19% to be 
green lumber.
Units of Measurement 
Lumber is measured in nominal units expressed as 
board feet. One board foot is equal to 1" thick, 12" 
wide, and 12" long (25 × 300 × 300 mm). Lumber less 
than 1" (25 mm) thick is considered to be 1" (25 mm) 
thick. The number of board feet in a piece of lumber 
is determined by multiplying the nominal thickness in 
inches by the nominal width in feet by the length in feet. 
The nominal size of a piece of wood is larger than the 
actual size. Comparable sizes of nominal, seasoned, and 
dry wood are shown in Table 7-1.
Standard lengths of lumber come in 2' (600 mm) 
increments starting in 4' (1200 mm) long material. Most 
lumberyards stock lumber in sizes from 8' through 20' 
(2400 through 6100 mm). Lumber in lengths of 22' 
(6700 mm) is available in some sizes.
Grading
Because different species of wood have such a wide 
variety of qualities, lumber must be graded to be certain 
that the structural requirements of the building code are 
met. Grading is the process of specifying the strength of 
a certain species of wood after it has been sawn, planed, 
and seasoned. Wood can be inspected by either visual 
or mechanical methods. Visual grading occurs when 
lumber is sawn at a mill. With visual inspection meth-
ods, wood is evaluated by ASTM standards in coopera-
tion with the U.S. Forest Products laboratory. Structural 
lumber that is tested nondestructively by machine and 
graded is referred to as mechanically evaluated lumber 
(MEL). Graded lumber will be stamped with a grad-
ing symbol that represents the quality, species, use, 
strength, and grading authority. Grading usually takes 
into account the size of knots or holes and their loca-
tion, the size and location of splits, and the amount 
of warp in a piece of lumber. Most lumber is visually 
graded and given a designation of select structural, no. 
1, no. 2, no. 3, construction, standard, utility, or stud. 
Wood is also divided into three classifications depend-
ing on how the lumber is to be used and its size. These 
classifications are as follows:
Dimensional—Dimensional lumber is either 2" or 4" 
(50 or 100 mm) thick and 2" (50 mm) wide and is 
used for joists or planks.
Beams and stringers—Lumber that has a nominal 
size of 5" × 8" (130 × 200 mm) or larger and is 
graded for strength in bending when loaded on the 
narrow face.
Nominal 
Seasoned 
Dry
1" (25 mm) 
25/32" (20 mm) 
3/4" (19 mm) 
2" (50 mm) 
19/16" (40 mm) 
1 1/2" (38 mm) 
3" (75 mm) 
29/16" (65 mm) 
2 1/2" (64 mm) 
4" (100 mm) 
39/16" (90 mm) 
3 1/2" (65 mm)
Nominal 
Seasoned 
Dry
2" (50 mm) 
19/16" (40 mm) 
1 1/2" (38 mm) 
4" (100 mm) 
39/16" (90 mm) 
3 1/2" (89 mm) 
6" (150 mm) 
5 5/8" (143 mm) 
5 1/2" (140 mm) 
8" (200 mm) 
7 1/2" (191 mm) 
7 1/4" (184 mm) 
10" (250 mm) 
9 1/2" (241 mm) 
9 1/4" (235 mm) 
12" (300 mm) 
11 1/2" (292 mm) 
11 1/4" (286 mm) 
14" (350 mm) 
13 1/2" (343 mm) 
13 1/4" (337 mm) 
16" (400 mm) 
15 1/2" (394 mm) 
15 1/4" (387 mm) 
TABLE 7-1 Comparable Sizes of Nominal, Seasoned, and Dry 
Wood (Metric Sizes Given as Hard Conversions)
Board Thickness
Face Width 

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
149
Posts and timbers—Lumber that is square or nearly 
square in cross section with a nominal size of 5" × 5"
(130 × 130 mm) or larger and graded for use as 
a post or column or other uses in which bending 
strength is not important.
WOOD FRAMING
Wood-frame construction is often referred to as stick 
construction because the frame is made by adding one 
stick at a time. Most accurately known as western plat-
form framing, the framing system is widely used through-
out the United States. Framing members are typically 2" 
(50 mm) thick and spaced at 12", 16", 19.2", and 24" 
(300, 400, 490, and 600 mm) o.c. Use of 24" (600 mm) 
spacing is limited to one-level bearing walls with roof 
framing members directly aligned with the studs. The 
length of the vertical members is determined by the dis-
tance from floor to floor. Figure 7-2 shows an example of 
western platform construction for a two-story structure. 
Engineered lumber products are used throughout west-
ern platform construction to replace naturally grown 
lumber products. These products will be discussed in 
the next chapter. In order to understand the drawings 
involved with commercial construction, knowledge of 
common framing terms is essential. These terms include 
those used for floor, wall, and roof construction.
Floor Construction
It is important to remember that most lower floor sys-
tems used with commercial construction are concrete 
slabs. Wood floors are used in cooler, damper areas of 
the country to frame the lower floor system for multi-
family dwellings. Concrete floors and foundations will 
be covered in Chapters 10 and 24. Basic terms used 
to describe ground-level wood floor systems include 
mudsill, floor joist, girder, and rim joist. Each can be 
seen in Figure 7-3. Joist, rim joist, and blocking are 
also used to describe upper floors framed with wood 
members.
Mudsills
The first piece of wood that comes in contact with the 
concrete foundation is the mudsill. It is also referred to 
as a base plate or sill in different areas of the country. 
In order to be protected from moisture in the concrete, 
the mudsill is required by code to be pressure-treated 
or made from foundation-grade cedar or redwood. 
A 2 × 6 (50 × 150) is typically used for a mudsill. This 
is specified on the foundation plan with a note and 
shown on foundation details.
Anchor Bolts
The mudsill is bolted to the foundation with anchor 
bolts to resist uplifting and sliding. Anchor bolts are 
L-shaped bolts ranging in size from 1/2" to 3/4" (13 to 19 
mm) diameter for most applications. Maximum spacing 
of anchor bolts allowed by code is 6'–0" (1800 mm) o.c. 
FIGURE 7-2 Western platform construction for a multifamily 
structure. Courtesy Southern Forest Products Association.
 FLOOR JOISTS
SILL
MUDSILL 
& ANCHOR 
STEM
FOOTING
STUDS
FLOOR SHEATHING
RIM JOIST
WALL
BOLTS
SOLID BLOCKING
GUSSET
 FLOOR JOIST
FOOTING
STUDS
FLOOR SHEATHING
CRAWL SPACE
WALL SHEATHING
SHEATHING
SOLID BLOCK
GIRDER
POST
CONC. PIER
GUSSET
SILL
SOLID BLOCK
MUD SILL &
STEM WALL
ANCHOR BOLTS
FIGURE 7-3 Conventional floor framing methods consist of 
floor joists supported by a mudsill resting on the concrete 
stem wall. Girders are used to support the joists if the distance 
between the stem walls exceeds the span rating of the joists. 

150 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
with a minimum length of 10" (250 mm). The loads to 
be resisted will affect the size and spacing of the bolts. A 
2" (50 mm) diameter washer is placed beneath the nut 
to keep the mudsill from lifting off the bolts when forces 
of uplifting are applied. In seismic zones, metal anchors
or straps similar to those shown in Figure 7-4 will also 
be specified on the foundation and framing details.
Girders
Once the mudsill is in place, the girders can be set. 
Girders are beams used to support floor joists as they 
span across the foundation. Girders are supported by 
the foundation stem wall, and by wood posts at the 
interior of the floor system. A minimum bearing sur-
face of 1 1/2" (38 mm) is required by code to support 
a girder resting on a wood support, and a 3" (75 mm) 
bearing surface is required if the girder is resting on 
concrete. The floor joists typically rest on top of the 
girder. A girder can also be set so that the top of the 
girder aligns with the top of the floor joists. When 
a girder is set level with the joists it is called a flush 
girder. When set level with the floor joists, the weight 
of the joists must be supported by metal hangers. 
Girders are typically made from 4× or 6× (100× or 
150×) members but they can also be constructed by 
2× (50×) members joined together. If only two mem-
bers are required to form the girder, they can be nailed 
together. If three or more 2× (50×) members are to be 
used, they must be bolted together with bolts that pass 
through the girder. Where supports need to be kept 
to a minimum, laminated wood beams called glu-lams 
can be used for girders. Chapter 8 will explore the use 
of laminated beams in construction. Steel girders are 
often used where foundation supports must be kept to a 
minimum. When steel girders are used, steel floor joists 
are also typically used. Steel framing methods will be 
introduced in Chapter 9. Regardless of the type of girder 
used, the width and depth are determined by the load to 
be supported and the span to be covered. 
Posts
Wood posts are a common method used to support 
girders. As a general rule of thumb, a 4 × 4 (100 × 100) 
post is typically used below a 4" (100 mm) wide girder, 
and a 6 × 6 (150 × 150) wide post is used below a 6" 
(150 mm) wide girder. Post sizes vary based on the load 
and the height of the post. Solid wood posts are limited 
by code to a maximum height-to-depth ratio (l/d). That 
is the quotient resulting from the length or height of 
the column expressed in inches, divided by the width 
of the column. It cannot exceed 50. This is referred to 
as the slenderness ratio. Wood posts and columns fall 
into three different categories based on their slenderness 
ratio. Short columns fail in crushing and long columns 
fail in bending. For intermediate columns, the failure 
mode is indeterminate. The engineer will determine the 
required size and connectors to be used. 
Posts that provide a bearing surface of 1 1/2" (38 
mm) minimum are required by code to support a wood 
member. Because a wooden post will draw moisture 
out of the foundation, it must rest on 55# felt, although 
sometimes an asphalt shingle is used. If the post is 
subject to uplift or lateral forces, a metal post base or 
strap may be specified by the engineer to firmly attach 
the post to the concrete. Chapter 8 will explore posts 
made from engineered products. Steel columns can also 
be used to support girders. Columns are typically rect-
angular, round, or in the shape of an I. Chapter 9 will 
discuss the use of steel in construction.
Floor Joists
With the mudsills and girders in place, the framing 
crew can set the floor joists in place. Floor joists  are 
the structural members used to support the subfloor 
or rough floor with a maximum span of approxi-
mately 20' (6100 mm). The exact span will depend 
on the size, spacing, and load to be supported. Floor 
joists range in size from 2 × 6 to 2 × 14 (50 × 150 to 
50 × 360) and are typically spaced at 12", 16", 19.2", 
or 24" (300, 400, 490, or 600 mm) o.c. The spacing 
depends on the load to be supported and distance 
the joist will span. Floor joists made of engineered 
lumber or trusses are also common. These materials 
will be discussed in Chapter 8. Regardless of the mate-
rial, floor joists are typically shown and specified on 
the appropriate framing plan and in framing details. 
Figure 7-5 shows an example of a detail that a CAD 
FIGURE 7-4 Metal anchors such as this HD5A hold-down 
anchor by Simpson Strong-Tie are often used to bond wood 
framing members to the foundation. Courtesy Matthew Jefferis.

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
151
drafter would be expected to complete to represent 
western platform floor construction. 
When a bearing wall is to be supported by floor joists 
that are parallel to the wall, building codes require the 
floor joists directly below the wall to be doubled as a 
minimum standard, and they often require the loads 
to be analyzed. Because of the decreasing supply and 
escalating price of sawn lumber, each of the national 
wood manufacturers has developed several alternatives 
to sawn lumber for floor joists. These alternatives will 
be introduced in Chapter 8.
Floor Bracing 
Because of the height-to-depth proportions of a joist, it 
will tend to roll over onto its side as loads are applied. 
To resist this tendency, a rim joist or blocking is used 
to support the edge of each joist at its exterior edge. A 
rim joist (sometimes referred to as a band or header) is 
aligned with the outer face of the foundation and muds-
ill. Sometimes a rim joist will be set around the entire 
perimeter and then end-nailed to the perpendicular 
floor joist. Solid blocking, an alternative to a rim joist, is 
a block of wood used to span between two floor joists to 
transfer lateral loads. The International Building Code 
requires blocking between floor joists at a maximum 
spacing of 10' (3400 mm) and beneath any bearing walls 
resting on the floor. Solid blocking is also placed to help 
provide support for plumbing lines and HVAC ducts, 
as seen in Figure 7-6. Lightweight metal cross bracing 
can be substituted for blocking to resist lateral loads in 
floor joists if the blocking is not required for a fire-stop. 
Floor blocking is specified in the written specifications 
and will be shown in the framing details.
Blocking is also used to provide added support to the 
floor sheathing. Often, walls will be reinforced to resist 
lateral loads. These loads are, in turn, transferred to the 
foundation through the floor system and are resisted by 
the diaphragm. A diaphragm is a rigid plate that acts 
similar to a beam and can be found in the roof, wall, or 
floor system. In a floor diaphragm, 2 × (50×) blocking 
FIGURE 7-5 A detail for a floor framed with standard floor joist construction. Note that the distance between the girder and the stem 
wall has been greatly reduced. 
FIGURE 7-6 Blocking is used to provide stiffness to floor joists 
and to resist lateral loads. Courtesy Benny Molina-Manriquez.

152 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
is typically laid on edge between the floor joists to allow 
the edges of plywood panels to be supported. Nailing 
all edges of a plywood panel allows the design load 
to be resisted to be greatly increased over unblocked 
diaphragms. The engineer will determine the size and 
spacing of nails and blocking required, and the CAD 
technician will make the notations on details similar 
to Figure 7-7. Refer to Chapter 8, “Engineered Lumber 
Products,” for other subflooring options. 
Floor Sheathing
Floor sheathing is installed over the floor joists to form 
the subfloor. The subfloor provides a surface for the 
walls to set on. Plywood laid perpendicular to the floor 
joist is usually used for the subfloor. Plywood ranging 
from 1/2" to 1 1/8" (13 to 30 mm) thick with an APA 
(Engineered Wood Association formerly the American 
Plywood Association) grade of EXP 1 or 2, EXT, STRUCT 
1 EXP 1, or STRUCT 1 EXT is typically used for floor 
sheathing. EXT represents exterior grade, STRUCT 
represents structural, and EXP represents exposure.
Plywood is also printed with a number to represent the 
span rating, which represents the maximum spacing 
from center to center of supports. The span rating is 
listed as two numbers separated by a slash (for example, 
32 /16). The first number represents the maximum rec-
ommended spacing of supports if the panel is used for 
roof sheathing and the long dimension if the sheathing 
is placed across three or more supports. The second 
number represents the maximum recommended spac-
ing of supports if the panel is used for floor sheathing 
and the long dimension of the sheathing is placed across 
three or more supports. Sheathing will be specified by 
the engineer in the calculations and must be specified in 
the written specifications, the wall sections, and specific 
details.
Floor Underlayment
Once the subfloor has been installed, an underlayment 
for the finish flooring is laid. The underlayment to the 
finish flooring is not installed until the roof, doors, and 
windows have been installed, making the structure 
weather tight. The underlayment provides a smooth 
surface on which to install the finished floor and is 
usually 3/8" or 1/2" (10 or 13 mm) APA underlay-
ment GROUP 1, EXPOSURE 1 plywood, hardboard, 
or wafer board. Hardboard is referred to as medium- or 
high-density fiberboard (MDF or HDF) and is made 
from wood particles of various sizes that are bonded 
together with a synthetic resin under heat and pres-
sure. APA STURD- I-FLOOR rated plywood 19/32" to 
13/32" (15 to 30 mm) thick can be used to eliminate 
the underlayment.
Framed Wall Construction
Walls are framed using a sole plate, studs, and a top 
plate. Walls are assembled in a horizontal position on 
the floor and then tilted into place. Exterior and load-
bearing walls are usually assembled and located first. 
Interior nonbearing walls are usually assembled after 
the shell of the structure is completed.
Studs
Studs are the vertical members of the wall and are 
typically spaced at 16" or 24" (400 or 600 mm) o.c. 
Occasionally, a spacing of 12" (300 mm) or smaller 
may be used, depending on the loads to be resisted. 
Typically, 2 × 4's or 2 × 6's (50 × 100's or 50 × 150's) 
are used to frame walls, but 2 × 8's (50 × 200's) or 
larger can be used to support larger loads or hide other 
structural members such as a steel column within the 
wall. Stud-length lumber can be cut to either 88 5/8", 92 
5/8", or 96" (2250, 2350, or 2440 mm) long material. If 
a suspended ceiling is to be used, walls are often framed 
at 10' (3400 mm) or taller to allow for HVAC ducts and 
lighting fixtures.
Walls over 10' (3400 mm) high must be blocked 
at mid-height. Individual studs are not shown in plan 
view, but their location and spacing is indicated on the 
framing plan by the use of annotations.
FIGURE 7-7 Blocking and special nailing patterns are often 
shown throughout framing drawings by a CAD technician. 
Courtesy Dean Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect and Associates, Inc.

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
153
Wall Sheathing
In addition to transferring loads downward, studs are 
also used to support the interior and exterior wall 
materials. Interior material is typically 1/2" or 5/8" (13 
or 16 mm) gypsum board for most light construction 
projects. Exterior coverings are supported by 3/8" or 
1/2" (9 or 13 mm) thick plywood in colder regions. 
Plywood sheathing should be APA rated EXP 1 or 2, 
EXT, STRUCT 1, EXP 1, or STRUCT 1 EXT. Fiberboard 
or 1/2" (50 mm) OSB can also be used for sheathing in 
place of plywood (see Chapter 8). Composite products 
such as fiber-reinforced gypsum panels are also used 
for sheathing interior and exterior walls. In temper-
ate regions, unless sheathing is required for structural 
reasons, the exterior siding can be applied to the studs. 
In either case, a vapor barrier such as Tyvek is applied 
to the exterior side of the studs prior to installing the 
exterior siding. Gypsum board can be added to the 
exterior side of an exterior wall to increase the fire rating 
of the wall, as described in Chapter 12. Sheathing size 
and nailing is usually specified on the framing plans but 
is not shown. Sheathing is shown and specified in sec-
tions, framing details, and the written specifications.
Bracing
In temperate regions, and where sheathing is not 
required to resist lateral loads, the studs can be kept in 
a vertical position by the use of a let-in brace. A let-in 
brace is a board that is placed in a diagonal position 
across the studs. Typically, a 1 × 4 or 1 × 6 (25 × 100 
or 25 × 150) is placed in a notch that is placed in the 
studs so that the brace is flush with the exterior face of 
the studs. A metal strap, which lies diagonally across the 
studs, can usually be substituted for the let-in brace. 
The IBC typically requires the brace or strap to cross a 
minimum of three studs and tie into the top and bottom 
plates of the wall. If plywood siding rated APA STURD-
I-WALL is used, no underlayment or let-in braces are 
required. Bracing is shown on a framing plan. Let-in 
braces are shown on the framing plan and occasionally 
shown on the exterior elevations.
Sole Plate
The sole plate or bottom plate supports the studs and is 
used to help disperse the weight of the wall across the 
floor. The sole plate is also used to help hold the wall 
together as it is moved into its vertical position. A 2× or 
3× (50× or 75×) is usually used for a sole plate.
The size is dictated by the loads to be supported and 
the material used for the finished floor. If a lightweight 
concrete is to be used over the plywood subfloor, the 
plate may be thicker and made from pressure-treated 
material. Figure 7-8 shows a detail of a wall constructed 
with a double sole plate. The upper sole plate holds 
the studs together, and the lower sole plate is pressure-
treated and protects the wall from the moisture in the 
concrete floor. The sole plate is end-nailed into the studs 
while the wall is horizontal, and then nailed to the floor 
system. The sole plate is nailed into the floor sheath-
ing and the rim joist below the exterior walls and into 
solid blocking or double joists below interior partitions. 
Nailing is specified in details or by a nailing schedule. 
Special nailing that is required to transfer lateral loads 
through the sole plate to the floor system is specified 
by the engineer in the calculations and indicated on 
the framing plan in a method similar to Figure 7-9, or 
shown in framing details.
Top Plate
The top plates are the horizontal members used at the 
top of a wall to tie the studs together and to provide a 
bearing surface for the roof or upper floors. Two top 
plates are required for bearing walls. The lower plate 
is used to tie walls to each other. The upper top plate 
must lap the lower plate at splices by 48" (1200 mm). 
The upper plate can be omitted if the single plate is 
tied together by a steel strap at each splice. As seen 
in Figure 7-10, both plates can be eliminated and sub-
stituted with a flush header, if the header is connected 
to the top plate at each end by a steel strap. Although 
FIGURE 7-8 Blocking is used to provide stiffness to a floor, 
resist lateral loads, and provide support to plumbing lines. 
Courtesy Ginger Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect and Associates, Inc.

154 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
this situation is not typically used, it allows an opening 
to be set at its highest position in a wall. Top plates are 
usually shown on wall sections. A flush header is usu-
ally specified on the framing plan and in the framing 
details.
Framing Components for Wall Openings
Several additional terms need to be understood to frame 
an opening in a wall. These terms include header, trim-
mer, king stud, subsill, and jack stud. Each component 
can be seen in Figure 7-11. These components are rep-
resented on framing details and sections.
Header
A header is the horizontal piece of lumber used to sup-
port the loads over an opening in a wall. When a hole is 
framed for a door or window, one or more studs must 
be omitted. A header carries the weight that the missing 
studs would have carried. Headers are usually the same 
width as the studs they replace. Headers can be made 
from sawn lumber, engineered lumber, or steel. The 
load to be supported and the span will usually dictate 
which material is used. The size of the header is speci-
fied on the framing plan as well as in the sections and 
specific details.
Header Supports The header is supported at each end 
by a trimmer. It is like a regular stud except that it has 
been cut shorter to fit beneath the header. A trimmer 
can be made from one or more 2×'s (50×'s), or one 
4× (100×), depending on the loads to be supported. 
In addition to supporting the weight of the header, a 
trimmer provides a nailing edge for the door or window 
frame, as well as the interior and exterior finish materi-
als. A king stud is normally the same length and size as 
other full studs and is placed beside the trimmer to help 
resist the tendency of the trimmer to bend under its 
load. The king stud also provides stability from lateral 
pressure applied to the side of the header, which causes 
a hinge point at the header-trimmer connection (see 
Figure 7-12). Single trimmers and king studs are not 
specified on the framing plan. Larger or double trim-
mers and king studs that are required to support the 
header are specified on the framing plan. King studs 
and trimmers may also be shown on the framing details 
if connections are required from one level to another 
level, as shown in Figure 7-13.
Subsill
The subsill is a horizontal support placed between the 
trimmers to support the lower edge of a window. The 
subsill will be the same width as the studs it is replac-
ing. The subsill is supported on jack studs, which are 
studs that are less than full height. Neither compo-
nent is typically shown on the framing plan, but they 
are often shown in the architectural and structural 
details.
Roof Construction
Wood roof framing includes both conventional and 
truss framing methods. Truss construction will be 
considered in Chapter 8 as engineered products are 
examined. Each framing method has its own special 
terminology, but many terms also apply to both types of 
FIGURE 7-9 Blocking and special nailing patterns are often 
shown throughout drawings by a drafter. 
FIGURE 7-10 Standard wall construction uses a double top 
plate on the top of a wall. A header can be set level with the 
top of the top plate if a metal strap is used to tie the header to 
the top plate. The strap can be placed beside or on top of the 
header depending on the design of the engineer.

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
155
FORCE
FIGURE 7-12 King studs are placed beside the trimmers to 
support the header to resist lateral pressure.
FIGURE 7-13 To resist seismic activity, king studs and trimmers 
are often required to be anchored to members of lower levels.
FLOOR SHEATHING
RIM JOIST
(2) TOP PLATES
JACK STUDS
HEADER
TRIMMERS
KING STUDS
SUBSILL
JACK STUDS
SOLE PLATE
FLOOR SHEATH.
RIM JOIST
(2) -TOP PLATES
HEADER
ROUGH
OPENING
BUILT-UP POSTS TO
SUPPORT LOAD FROM 
ABOVE
UPLIFT TIE MAY
BE REQUIRED TO
RESIST SEISMIC
OR WIND LOADS
EXTRA BLOCKING
TYP. REQD.
UNDER EA. POST
STUDS
FIGURE 7-11 Construction components of a wall opening include a header, trimmer, king stud, subsill, and jack stud.

156 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
construction. Roof terms common to conventional and 
trussed roofs include eave, cornice, eave blocking, baffle, 
fascia, ridge, sheathing, finished roofing, flashing, and roof 
pitch. Each is illustrated in Figure 7-14. Each compo-
nent is usually shown in sections and framing details.
Common Roof Terms
The eave is the portion of the roof that extends beyond 
the walls. The cornice is the covering that is applied to 
the eaves. A common method of enclosing the eave is 
shown in Figure 7-14. When a cornice is provided, a 
vent must be provided to allow cool air into the attic 
or rafter space. When the eave is not enclosed, an eave 
block or bird block must be provided to keep birds and 
small animals from entering the space between the 
framing members. The block also keeps the spacing of 
framing members uniform and provides an even termi-
nation to the top of the siding. To allow cool air into 
the attic or rafter space, a vent must be provided in the 
bird blocking. To keep roof insulation from plugging 
the eave vent, a baffle is placed between the insulation 
and the vent. Baffles are typically a piece of scrap wood 
or plywood.
The fascia is a trim board made from 1× or 2× 
(25× or 50×) material that is used to hide the rafter or 
truss tails. The fascia is often 2" (50 mm) deeper than 
the members it hides and runs parallel to the wall and 
perpendicular to the roof framing members. The fascia 
also serves as a support to a gutter in wetter climates, 
although gutters are available that replace the fascia. 
The fascia is shown on the elevations, sections, and 
framing details. At the opposite end of the roof framing 
member is the ridge. The ridge is the highest part of a 
roof and is formed by the intersection of the rafters or 
the top chords of a truss.
Roof sheathing is used to cover the structural members 
and provide a base for the exterior finishing material. 
Either solid or skip roof sheathing is used, depending 
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
FIGURE 7-14 Common methods of eave construction.

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
157
on the type of roofing material to be used and the area 
of the country where the structure will be built.
Solid sheathing is typically 1/2" (13 mm) thick CDX 
plywood with span ratings of 24/16, 32/16, 40/20, and 
48/24. OSB is also used in many areas of the country 
for roof sheathing that is not over an exposed eave. 
Because the material at the eave will be affected by 
moisture, CCX plywood or 1" (25 mm) T & G lumber 
must be used.
Skip sheathing is used on sloped roofs to support 
tile or cedar shake roofing. In warm, temperate climates 
1 × 4's (25 × 100's) at 7" (180 mm) o.c. are placed 
directly over the roof framing members, as seen in 
Figure 7-15. In cool, damp climates the skip sheathing 
is applied over continuous plywood sheathing. Once 
the skip sheathing is in place, 15# building paper is 
applied as a base for the finished roofing. The finished 
roofing is the weather protection system and includes 
materials such as built-up hot asphalt, asphalt and 
fiberglass shingles, cedar shakes, concrete and clay tile, 
sprayed and poured concrete, foam, and metal panels. 
Chapter 18 will review each roofing material and the 
information that must be specified on the architectural 
and structural drawings.
Two other considerations of roof design are pitch 
and span. Each is illustrated in Figure 7-16. Pitch is 
used to describe the slope of the roof and is listed in 
terms of rise over run. A 3/12 roof will rise 3" for each 
12" horizontal run. The type of roofing material and the 
local building code will affect the minimum and maxi-
mum pitch to be used. A minimum pitch of 1/4" per 
12" is required for flat roofs with a built-up hot asphalt 
roof. A 3/12 pitch is the minimum slope recommended 
by most manufacturers for other roofing materials with-
out requiring special waterproofing materials under the 
finished roofing. Pitch is specified on the elevations, 
sections, details, and roof plan.
Span is used to determine the horizontal run of a 
piece of lumber or truss. Span is the horizontal distance 
from the interior edge of the required bearing points.
Conventionally Framed Roof Terms
Conventional or stick framing involves the use of 
wood members placed in repetitive fashion one 
board at a time. Key terms to be understood and 
represented on the structural drawings include raf-
ters, ridge board, and ceiling joist. Each component is 
shown in sections and framing details. Ceiling joists, 
rafters, and rafter/ceiling joists are also shown on the 
appropriate framing plan.
Rafters
Rafters are the inclined members used to support the 
weight of the finished roofing. Rafters are typically 
spaced at 24" (600 mm) o.c.; however, 12", 16", and 
19.2" (300, 400, and 490 mm) spacings are also used. 
The span, rafter size, and material being supported will 
determine the spacing. Rafters are typically 2× (50×) 
material with depths ranging from 6" to 12" (150 to 300 
mm). Just as with floor joists, engineered products can 
also be used for rafters. The engineer will determine the 
type and size of the rafter, based on the span and the 
material to be supported. The location of the rafter in 
the roof will affect the name of the rafter. Figure 7-17 
shows several different terms given to rafters based on 
their use in the roof frame.
A notch called a bird’s mouth is cut into a sawn 
rafter where the rafter is to be supported on a wall or 
beam. The bird’s mouth increases the bearing surface 
of the rafter and spreads the weight of the roof evenly 
over the wall. A bird’s mouth is not specified within 
the drawings but is placed by normal construction 
practice. A bird’s mouth is not placed in engineered 
materials. The materials are often required to sit on 
a top plate that has been cut to provide an inclined 
surface.
FIGURE 7-15 Skip or spaced sheathing is used under shakes 
and tile roofs.
5
12
RIDGE BOARD
PITCH SYMBOL
OVERHANG
TOTAL SPAN
RUN
RISE
FIGURE 7-16 Roof dimensions needed for construction.

158 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Roof Support
The ridge board is a horizontal board placed at the 
ridge to support the rafters. The ridge board is typi-
cally 2" (50 mm) deeper than the rafters. The ridge 
board does not support the weight carried by the 
rafters but provides a bearing surface to transfer force 
from a rafter to an opposing rafter. The ridge board is 
supported by a 2× (50×) brace that rests on a bear-
ing wall. The brace resists any downward force and is 
usually a 2× (50×) member placed at 48" (1200 mm) 
o.c. The ridge brace must be within 45° of vertical to 
effectively transfer weight downward. A purlin can be 
used to reduce the span of a rafter. A purlin is placed 
below the rafter and supported by a purlin brace. The 
purlin is usually the same size as the rafters being sup-
ported. A purlin brace transfers the weight from the 
rafter and purlin into a bearing wall. A purlin brace 
must be set within 45° of vertical. If no bearing wall is 
near, a strongback can be used to support the weight 
from the rafters. A strongback is a beam placed in or 
above the ceiling to support roof weight. Each of these 
roof components is illustrated in Figure 7-18. Each 
term is specified in the sections.
The lower end of a rafter is nailed to the top plate of 
a wall while the upper end rests against the ridge. The 
natural tendency of the rafter is to rotate downward 
around the fixed lower end of the rafter. The downward 
rotation is resisted by the rafter on the opposite side 
of the ridge. If the rafter cannot rotate downward, the 
force of the rafter will attempt to force the bearing walls 
outward. This outward thrust of the rafters is resisted by 
a ceiling joist. Ceiling joists (C.J.) rest on the top plate 
of the wall and span between the bearing walls. The 
connection of the ceiling joist to the top plate and the 
rafters is necessary to keep the roof from sagging and 
the walls from separating. In addition to resisting the 
outward force of the rafters, ceiling joists also provide 
support for the finished ceiling.
If the forces of outward thrust are great enough, a 
collar tie may be added to the upper third of the roof. 
A collar tie attaches to two opposing rafters and is used 
to resist the outward force of the rafters. The collar tie 
is usually the same size as the rafters, but the engineer 
will determine exact sizes based on the spans and loads 
supported by the rafters. Ceiling joists and collar ties are 
illustrated in Figure 7-18.
COMMON RAFTERS
HIP JACK RAFTERS
HIPS
RIDGE
VALLEY RAFTERS
TOP PLATES
HIP
VALLEY
FIGURE 7-17 Roof members in conventional construction.
RIDGE
COLLAR TIES @ 48" O.C.
CONTINUOUS PURLIN
PURLIN BLOCK
PURLIN BRACE
AT 48" O.C.
CEILING JOISTS
45˚
MAX.
FIGURE 7-18 Common roof supports include purlins, purlin 
blocks, and purlin braces.

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
159
Vaulted Ceilings
The size of a rafter must be increased to support both 
the weight of the roof and the finished ceiling if a roof 
is to be vaulted. The rafters used with a vaulted ceiling 
are called rafter/ceiling joists. Rafter/ceiling joists (raft./
C.J.) must be of sufficient size to contain the required 
insulation and still provide a minimum of 2" (50 mm) 
of air space above the insulation for ventilation. Rigid 
insulation or foam sandwich panels can be installed 
over the rafter/ceiling joists as an alternative method 
of placing the insulation. Because of the weight to be 
supported and the lack of interior supports, the rafter/
ceiling joists will be supported by a ridge beam rather 
than just a ridge board. Because there are no ceiling 
joists to resist the outward force from the rafter/ceiling 
joists on the bearing walls, the rafters must be securely 
anchored to the ridge beam. Figure 7-19 shows two 
common methods of attaching the rafter/ceiling joists 
to the ridge beam. In areas subject to high winds or 
seismic activity, the lower end of the rafter/ceiling joist 
will be connected to the top plate with a metal angle. 
This angle helps to form a secure bond between the 
roof and wall. 
Roof Openings
If an opening is to be framed in the roof, a header and 
trimmers will need to be specified. Each can be seen in 
Figure 7-20. A header at the roof level consists of two or 
more members nailed together to support the rafters at 
the upper and lower edges of the opening. The headers 
are usually the same size as the rafters. The trimmers 
consist of two or more rafters nailed together to support 
the sides of the opening.
TIMBER FRAMING
In addition to standard uses of wood in western plat-
form construction, timber is often used for the struc-
tural framework of a building. Timber construction 
is used for both appearance and structural reasons. 
The term timber is used to describe wood members 
that are 5" (130 mm) and thicker, although 6" (150 
mm) is typically the smallest size used. Timber con-
struction is used to form many types of commercial 
structures because it affords large expanses of glass in 
the exterior shell. Timber has excellent structural and 
fire-retardant qualities. In a fire, timber will char on 
the exterior surfaces but will maintain its structural 
integrity long after an equally sized steel beam would 
have failed. Components of timber framing include 
posts, beams, and planks. In addition to framing plans 
showing the size of the components, details of con-
nections are of utmost importance with timber con-
struction. Figure 7-21 shows an example of a framed 
structure using timber construction.
SOLID BLOCK
RAFTER/CEIL. JOIST
A METAL STRAP IS
REQUIRED TO KEEP RAFTERS
FROM SEPARATING
EXPOSED RIDGE BEAM
RIDGE BEAM
RIDGE BEAM
FLUSH RIDGE BEAM
RAFTER/CEIL. JOIST
METAL JOIST HANGERS
KEEP ROOF FROM
SEPARATING
FIGURE 7-19 Common connections between the ridge beam 
and rafters include resting the rafters on the ridge, or hanging 
the rafters from the beam with metal hangers.
FIGURE 7-20 Framing around an opening in the roof requires 
the use of headers and trimmers.
RIDGE BOARD
RAFTER
DOUBLE TRIMMER
DOUBLE HEADER
ISOMETRIC
PLAN
RAFTERS
DOUBLE TRIMMER
DOUBLE HEADER

160 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Common Components
Timber can be used in place of traditional studs or roof 
framing members. Instead of using 2" (50 mm) studs at 
a 16" or 24" (400 or 600 mm) spacing, vertical supports 
are provided by posts for which the location is based 
on the design needs of the structure. Post size typically 
ranges from 5 × 5 to 12 × 12 (130 × 130 to 300 × 300 
mm). Wood posts larger than 12 × 12 (300 × 300 mm) 
are available, but they are not often used, for economic 
reasons. Posts larger than 8 × 8 (200 × 200 mm) are 
typically laminated from solid material or from a com-
bination of lumber and plywood. Horizontal beams are 
used to span between the post and other beams. Beam 
size is determined by the engineer based on the span 
and loads to be supported. Usually, 1 1/8" (30 mm) 
APA STURD-I-FLOOR 48 T & G plywood is used to 
span between beams. Two-inch (50 mm) T & G planks 
can also be used as a floor material but the exact size 
must be based on the live loads to be supported.
Representing Members on Drawings
The size and location of posts and beams are speci-
fied on the framing plan. Posts are represented using 
linetypes similar to those used to represent walls. Post 
size is often specified using diagonal text, so that the 
specification will be clear. Beams are represented with 
dashed or centerlines. Text to describe the beam is 
normally placed parallel to the beam or in a schedule. 
Figure 7-22 shows methods of specifying beams and 
posts on a framing plan.
Decking is typically specified in details and sec-
tions. Details showing the connection of post to 
foundation, post to beams at floor and roof levels, 
beam to beam, and decking to beams, are typically 
required. Figure 7-23 shows a beam-to-beam con-
nection detail. Beams that are drawn in end view 
can be drawn using different methods, as shown in 
Figure 7-24. At a scale of 3/4" = 1'–0" or larger, the 
x is usually placed to help define the beam. The x is 
FIGURE 7-21 Timber is often used to frame a structure for its 
appearance and resistance to fire. Courtesy Timberpeg.
FIGURE 7-22 Wood beams can be shown in plan view by pairs 
of dashed lines that represent the beam width, or by a polyline. 
Polylines of continuous, center, or dashed linetypes will be 
used according to office practice.
FIGURE 7-23 A beam-to-beam connection detail.

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
161
also used to represent the end view of a continuous 
member such as a beam. One diagonal line is used 
to represent the end view of noncontinuous mem-
bers such as blocking placed between beams. Many 
offices use a thick line around the beam perimeter to 
help distinguish beams.
HEAVY TIMBER
Heavy timber construction is similar to timber con-
struction, except for the size of the members used. 
The IBC restricts the size of the members that can be 
used to achieve a heavy timber fire rating. The rating 
is referred to as a Type IV-HT in the occupancy tables 
of the IBC. In addition to limiting the size of members 
used, heavy timber construction eliminates the con-
cealed spaces associated with western platform con-
struction. Space between rafters, joists, or studs that is 
concealed by the interior finish is eliminated, leaving 
the framing members and the exterior shell exposed 
to the interior. Post size for an HT rating requires 
the use of 8 × 8 (200 × 200) minimum to meet the 
fire-resistance requirements of the building code. If 
no floor loads are supported, and the beam does not 
extend below the floor line, a post with a minimum of 
6" wide × 8" deep (150 × 200 mm) may be used. If a 
laminated arch (see Chapter 8) is used to support floor 
loads, it may not be smaller than 8" (200 mm) in any 
direction. Laminated arches that do not support floor 
loads may be as small as 4" in width and 6" (100 × 150 
mm) in depth. The IBC requires beams to be a mini-
mum of 6" (150 mm) wide and 10" (250 mm) deep to 
provide sufficient fire protection for a floor with a Type 
IV-HT rating. Beams 6" (150 mm) wide and 8" (200 
mm) deep are the minimum allowed to support roof 
loads. Floor decking must be a minimum of 3" (75 
mm) deep planks with an overlay of 1" (25 mm) T & G
plywood laid crosswise. Floor decking must main-
tain a 1/2" (13 mm) space between wall members to 
allow for swelling and shrinkage. Roof decking must 
be a minimum of 2" (50 mm) thick T & G planks. A 
double layer of 1" (25 mm) boards may also be used if 
joints are staggered.
Heavy Timber Representation
The size and location of posts and beams are specified 
on the framing plan using methods similar to other 
timber callouts. Details showing the connection of post 
to foundation, post to beams at floor and roof levels, 
beam to beam, and decking to beams, are required just 
as with other types of timber construction. Figure 7-25 
shows a drawing created by a CAD technician to repre-
sent a beam-to-beam connection.
Timber Trusses
Similar in shape to conventional trusses (see Chapter 8), 
trusses can be formed of timber. Heavy timber trusses 
used to support floor loads must have members that 
are a minimum of 8" (200 mm) nominal in any direc-
tion. Connections of truss components are typically 
achieved by using bolted or ringed connectors (see 
Chapter 6). Depending on the type and amount of load 
to be resisted, plates similar to a gusset can be used at 
each web-to-chord connection. Figure 7-26 shows an 
example of a timber truss used to frame the roof of a 
condominium.
a.
b.
c.
d.
FIGURE 7-24 Beam representation in end view, for details 
drawn at a scale of 3/4"= 1'–0" or larger: (a) end grain; (b) con-
tinuous beam; (c) noncontinuous beam, blocking; (d) laminated 
beam (see Chapter 8).
FIGURE 7-25 Heavy timber is referred to as type IV-HT by the 
IBC and consists of sawn components that are 8" × 8" (200 × 
200 mm) or larger.

162 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to help 
you keep current with changes in building materials.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.afandpa.org 
American Forest and Paper 
Association
www.ahardbd.org  
American Hardboard 
Association
www.alsc.org 
American Lumber 
Standards Committee, Inc.
www.awc.org 
American Wood Council
www.apawood.org 
APA—The Engineered 
Wood Association
www.bc.com  
Boise Cascade Corporation
www.canadianforestry.com 
Canadian Forestry 
Association
www.csa.ca  
Canadian Standards 
Association
www.cwc.ca  
Canadian Wood Council
www.fscus.org 
Forest Stewardship 
Council
www.gp.com  
Georgia-Pacific 
Corporation
www.thegbi.org 
Green Building Initiative
www.hpva.org  
Hardwood Plywood and 
Veneer Association
www.internationalpaper.com 
International Paper (high-
performance building 
products)
www.nafb.org 
National Frame Building 
Association
www.nlga.org 
National Lumber Grades 
Authority
When you think of wood, you might be tempted to think 
of the depletion of old-growth timber by large money-
grabbing corporations. That would be a mistake. Each 
major lumber supplier is very involved in developing 
lumber and timber products from sustainable forests. Two 
nonprofit organizations provide green building ratings 
systems for commercial wood and timber construction in 
the U.S. market. These national organizations are the:
U.S. Green Building Council that publishes the LEEDS 
• 
(Leadership in Energy and Environment Designs for 
New Standards®) green guidelines.
Green Building Initiative
• 
TM that features the Green 
Globes®.
Architects and builders use these standards to gain 
green certification for their projects. In contrast, the 
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) provides certification 
for entire forests. The term certified forest products 
refers to those products originating in a forest that 
an independent third party has certified to be well-
managed and sustainable. Forest certification validates 
on-the-ground operations employing the best 
management practices at a specific forest to ensure 
the long-term health of the total forest ecosystem. The 
only ratings available that meet the criteria established 
by the Certified Forest Products Council are those 
of the Forest Stewardship Council. FSC standards 
were developed by representatives of conservation 
groups, the timber industry, economic development 
organizations, and the general public. A forestry 
operation that meets FSC standards protects forest 
ecosystems, water quality, wildlife habitats, and local 
communities. To ensure the integrity of the certification, 
the wood and fiber from certified forests are tracked 
through the commercial chain from logging sites to 
retailers and to the end user.
EASY BEING GREEN
FIGURE 7-26 In spite of its expense, timber is often used to 
frame trusses for its appearance. Courtesy Aaron Jefferis.

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
163
www.sfpa.org  
Southern Forest Products 
Association
www.southernpine.com 
Southern Pine Council
www.usgbc.org 
U.S. Green Building 
Initiative
www.westernwoodstructures.com 
 
Western Wood Structures, 
Inc.
www.weyerhaeuser.com  
Weyerhaeuser
KEY TERMS
Board feet
Boards
Ceiling joists
Certified forest products
Cornice
Diaphragm
Eave
Fascia
Floor joists
Girders
Hardwoods
Header
Heavy timber construction
King stud
Lumber, beams and stringers
Lumber, dimension
Lumber, dressed
Lumber, post and timbers
Lumber, rough
Lumber, structural
Millwork
Mudsill
Pitch
Purlin
Rafters
Ridge board
Rim joists
Size, actual
Size, nominal
Skip sheathing
Softwoods
Sole plate
Span
Strongback
Studs
Studs, jack
Subsill
Timber
Top plates
Trimmer
Wood construction
Wood, green
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. If math is required to answer a question, 
show your work.
Question 7-1 How wide are girders with a conventional 
floor system?
Question 7-2 List four common materials suitable for beams 
and girders.
Question 7-3 What is the advantage of providing blocking at 
the edge of a floor diaphragm?
Question 7-4 What are the common span ratings for ply-
wood suitable for roof sheathing?
Question 7-5 What grades of plywood are typically used for 
floor sheathing?
Question 7-6 List eight qualities typically given in an APA 
wood rating.
Question 7-7 List six methods of planing lumber.
Question 7-8 What is the difference between timber and 
lumber?
Question 7-9 Describe the two portions of a growth ring 
and explain their significance to strength.
Question 7-10 How would lumber with a moisture content 
of 20 be rated?
Question 7-11 What is the dry face width of a 2 × 12?
Question 7-12 What is the difference between a king stud 
and a trimmer?
Question 7-13 List four types of rafters.
Question 7-14 What is the common spacing of skip 
sheathing?
Question 7-15 Explain the meaning of the numbers 6/12 in 
relation to a roof.
Wood and Timber Framing Methods
CHAPTER 7 TEST

164 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Question 7-16 Explain the difference between a ridge, ridge 
board, and a ridge beam.
Question 7-17 List two common methods of resisting the 
outward thrust of a rafter.
Question 7-18 List three advantages of using timber con-
struction.
Question 7-19 At what size do sawn posts become uneco-
nomical and difficult to guarantee quality?
Question 7-20 What properties make heavy timber con-
struction more fire-resistant than western platform 
construction?
Question 7-21 What is the minimum size of a post used to 
support floor loads using heavy timber?
Question 7-22 What are the minimum sizes allowed for 
timber trusses?
Question 7-23 What is the maximum allowable square foot-
age and height for an office building constructed of heavy 
timber?
Question 7-24 Use the Internet to research and list the 
names of five national lumber suppliers.
Question 7-25 Use the Internet and visit five Web sites that 
deal with timber. Order information related to timber 
framing.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Unless your instructor gives other instructions, use the mini-
mum standards presented in the Chapter 6 section, “Drawing 
Criteria for Completing Details,” to complete the follow-
ing details. Skeletons of most details can be found on the 
student CD. Use these drawings as a base to complete the 
assignment. 
Problem 7-1 Draw a detail with a front view showing 
double 2 × 6 trimmers and king studs resting on a 
2 × 6 plate, 3/4" CD APA 42/20 T & G floor sheath-
ing, 2 × 12 F.J. at 12" o.c. with solid blocking, resting 
on another 2 × 6 stud wall. Use double solid blocking 
under each post. Support the trimmers and king stud 
with a 4 × 6 post below. Use a Simpson Strong-Tie 
Company HD5A hold-down anchor and specify all 
bolt sizes.
Problem 7-2 Draw a detail showing a 6 × 14 DFL #1 beam 
resting on a 4 × 6 post. Select a metal cap that can resist 
3500 pounds in uplift.
Problem 7-3 Show a 2 × 8 DFL rafter at 24" o.c. with a 12"
overhang supporting 1/2" plywood sheathing, and com-
position shingles at a 6/12 pitch resting on (2) - 2 × 6 
top plates resting on 2 × 6 studs at 16" o.c. Use 2 × 6 
ceiling joists at 16" o.c. and specify a 1 × 6 fascia. 
Problem 7-4 A 3" × 12" DFPT ledger will be connected to 
a concrete wall with a 5/8" diameter × 8" A.B. bolts at 
24" o.c. staggered 3" u/d. Simpson Strong-Tie Company 
U210 hangers will be used to support 2 × 12 DFL #1 
joist at 16" o.c. The joist will support 3/4" standard-grade 
plywood sheathing. Provide a 4" cant strip (see Chapter 
18) at the rafter/wall intersection.
Problem 7-5 Draw a detail showing an 8 × 8 post connect-
ing to concrete with an appropriate column base to resist 
6000# in uplift.
Problem 7-6 Draw a detail showing an 8 × 8 post supporting 
an 8 ×16 header. Use a suitable CC cap to connect the 
beams to the post and suitable hangers to provide support 
for 6 × 12 purlins 48" o.c. supporting 5000# max. 
(1 on each side and perpendicular to the 8 × 16.)
Problem 7-7 Draw a side and front view showing a 6 × 6 
post hidden in a 2 × 6 stud wall on the upper floor and 
resting on a 2 × 6 / 3 × 6 base plates. The lower plate is 
to be DFPT. The plates will rest on 1 1/8" plywood, and 
2 × 12 DFL #2 floor joists at 12" o.c. The lower wall 
will be framed out of 2 × 6 studs with a double top plate. 
A 6 × 6 post will be placed directly below the upper 
post. A hold-down anchor that can resist at least 7000 
pounds in uplift will be required.
Problem 7-8 Using Figure 7-22, draw a detail to show the 
beam-to-beam connections. Assume the use of wood 
walls and that the roof weighs 50 psf, and determine the 
load that will be on each beam to determine the required 
load that will be on each required hanger. This should 
include details for: 
 
7-8-1 – 8 × 14 bm / 6 × 8 post at wall
 
7-8-2 – 8 × 14 bm / 8 × 8 post
 
7-8-3 – 6 × purlin / 8 × 14 beam
 
7-8-4 – 6 × purlin to 4 × 6 post in wall
 
7-8-5 – 6 × 8 rafters to purlins
Problem 7-9 Draw a plan view for a 32' × 60' structure 
framed with 2 × 6 studs at 16" o.c. at a scale of 
1/8" = 1'–0". Place an 8 × 16 ridge beam in the 
center of the structure 16' from the side walls. 
Specify an 8× wood post at 20' intervals along this 
beam with 6 × 8 posts at the ends. Show splices in 
the ridge beam 24" from the post so that the center 
beam is 16' long. Use an 8 × 12 deep beam for the 
center span of the ridge beam. 
Hang 6 ×12 purlins at 15'–0" o.c. on each side of 
the ridge beam and 6 × 12 subpurlins at 12' o.c. 
Hang 2 × 6 rafters at 24" o.c. between each purlin with 
appropriate hangers. Show enough of the roof framing 
to represent the framing patterns. Provide grids to rep-
resent each wall and post so that four vertical and three 
horizontal grids are provided. Specify the location of all 
members. Use a schedule wherever possible. Assume 
the sheet to be S-501.
Problem 7-10 Draw details to represent all of the post-to-
beam and beam-to-beam connections represented in 
problem 7-9. Assume the sheet to be S-101. Place all 
details in a logical order based on Chapter 2 and place 

Chapter 7: Wood and Timber Framing Methods 
165
detail reference numbers by each detail and on the fram-
ing plan. Possible details would include, but are not 
limited to:
 
7-10-1—Ridge to wall
 
7-10-2—Ridge to post
 
7-10-3—Ridge to ridge
 
7-10-4—Beam to beam 
 
7-10-5—Beam to purlin
 
7-10-6—Purlin to rafter
If all of the details fit, they may be placed on the same 
page as the framing plan. If all will not fit, place the 
details on sheet S-501.

166
8
Engineered Lumber Products
Engineered wood products are a major material of 
construction for light commercial projects. Engineered 
components range from products made from the saw-
dust generated as sawn lumber products are milled to 
products created using sawn lumber. These products 
may serve the same function as their sawn counterparts, 
but their benefits to the environment are unsurpassed. 
This chapter will explore the use of:
● Engineered materials such as oriented strand board, 
laminated veneer lumber, and parallel strand lumber.
● Engineered building components such as studs, 
joists, and I-joists.
● Laminated beams.
● Open-web trusses.
ENGINEERED MATERIALS
Engineered wood products similar to those in Figure 8-1
are divided into two major categories including 
structural composite lumber and laminated beams. 
Structural composite lumber (SCL) includes ori-
ented strand lumber (OSL), laminated veneer lumber 
(LVL), and laminated strand lumber (LSL). These 
materials are created by layering dried and graded 
wood veneers or flakes with waterproof adhesive into 
blocks of material known as billets and then curing 
these layers in a controlled process. SCL is available in 
various thicknesses and widths and is easily worked 
in the field using conventional construction tools. 
Laminated beams are beams made from conventional 
2× (50× mm) materials that are glued together to 
construct beams that are larger in size and length than 
natural sawn beams.
Oriented Strand Board
Oriented strand board (OSB) or wafer board is a 
common alternative to traditional plywood. Produced 
in huge, continuous mats, OSB is a solid-panel product 
of consistent quality with no laps, gaps, or voids. OSB is 
made from three or more layers of small strips of wood 
that that are arranged in cross-oriented layers, similar 
to plywood. The exterior layers of strips are parallel to 
the length of the panel, and the core layers are laid in 
a random pattern. The wood is then saturated with a 
waterproof binder and compressed under heat. This 
results in a structural engineered wood panel that shares 
many of the strength and performance characteristics of 
plywood. Common uses of OSB include roof, wall, and 
floor sheathing; as web material for solid wood I-joists; 
and as the structural covering for structural insulated 
panels (SIPs). Figure 8-2 shows the use of OSB for floor 
sheathing and in I-joists.
Laminated Veneer Lumber
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL) is made from ultra-
sonically graded Douglas fir veneers that are lami-
nated with exterior-grade adhesives under heat and 
pressure, with all grains parallel to one another. LVL 
is primarily used for joists and rafters, hip and valley 
rafters, headers, beams, posts, and the flange material 
for I-joists. LVL is produced in widths ranging from 
1 3/4" to 3 1/2" (45 to 90 mm) and depths ranging 
from 5 1/2" to 18" (140 to 450 mm). Lengths are 
generally available up to 60' (18,000 mm). Posts made 
of laminated veneer range in sizes from 3 1/2" to 7" 
(90 to 180 mm), and are being used increasingly for 
their ability to support loads. LVL joists are designed 
for single- or multispan uses that must support heavy 
loads. Materials made of LVL offer the superior per-
formance and durability of other engineered products 
and are superior to their sawn wood counterparts. 
Figures 8-3 and 8-4 show the use of an LVL beam to 
support engineered joists. 
Parallel Strand Lumber
Parallel strand lumber (PSL) is laminated from 
veneer strips peeled from the outermost sections of fir 
and southern pine. Veneers are dried to control the 
moisture content before being chopped into strands. 
The strands are then aligned to be parallel to each 
other, coated with resin, and compressed and heated. 
Typically used for beams, headers, studs, posts, and 

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
167
millwork components, widths include 3 1/2", 5 1/4", 
and 7" (90, 130, 180 mm), with depths ranging from 
7" to 18" (180 to 460 mm). 
ENGINEERED COMPONENTS 
Engineered products are those products made from 
structural composite lumber. Major construction prod-
ucts include studs, posts, and I-joists. Other common 
engineered products made from lumber products 
or a combination of engineered products include 
laminated beams, as well as open-web floor and roof 
trusses.
Studs and Posts
Engineered studs are made from short sections of 
stud-grade lumber that have had the knots and splits 
removed. Quick-growing, small-diameter aspen and 
yellow poplar are often used instead of the more tra-
ditional materials used with sawn lumber. Sections of 
wood are joined together with 5/8" (16 mm) finger 
joints. Engineered studs in 2 × 4 or 2 × 6 (50 × 100 
Engineered lumber products provide many environmentally 
friendly materials for the construction industry, providing 
efficient use of the available resources. Engineered 
wood products can be manufactured from fast-growing, 
underutilized, and less expensive wood species and 
from by-products from other production processes. This 
includes the use of sawdust, small chips, and unusable 
bits of wood created from cutting logs. Lumber can also 
be recycled and reused to make some engineered wood 
products. By using many of the production scraps from 
making sawn lumber products to make engineered 
wood, many of the natural defects found in wood are 
eliminated, making the engineered material stronger than 
natural lumber.
Another important factor that makes engineered 
material an earth-friendly product is the energy 
efficient methods by which they are manufactured. 
Based on statistics provided by the APA, when 
compared to the amount of energy required to 
produce 1 ton of cement, glass, steel, or aluminum to 
1 ton of wood product, the manufacture of engineered 
wood products takes:
5 times less energy than the energy required to 
• 
produce 1 ton of cement; 
14 times less energy than the energy required to 
• 
produce 1 ton of glass;
24 times less energy than the energy required to 
• 
produce 1 ton of steel; 
126 times less energy than the energy required to 
• 
produce 1 ton of aluminum. 
EASY BEING GREEN
FIGURE 8-1  Because of the strength, cost, and availability, 
environmentally friendly engineered lumber products are a key 
component of most Type IV and V commercial projects. This 
intersection shows the use of a glued-laminated beam (right), a 
laminated veneer lumber (LVL) beam (center), and I-joists made 
from oriented strand board (OSB). Courtesy Katja Poschwatta.
FIGURE 8-2 Oriented strand board (OSB) is used for the 
floor decking and the solid-web floor joists. Courtesy APA—The 
Engineered Wood Association.

168 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
or 50 × 150) are available in standard lengths of 
8', 9', and 10' (2440, 2740, and 3400 mm) lengths, 
but lengths up to 48' (14 400 mm) can be ordered. 
Laminated veneer and PSL studs are also available. 
Depending on the manufacturer, notches are gen-
erally not allowed. Sheathing must be provided in 
place of a let-in brace if engineered studs are used. 
Engineered posts similar to those in Figure 8-5 are 
being used increasingly for their ability to support 
loads. Engineered posts are available in 3 1/2", 5 1/4", 
and 7" (90, 135, and 180 mm) widths and depths, in 
lengths up to 24' (7200 mm).
I-Joists 
I-joists are a high-strength, lightweight, cost-efficient 
alternative to sawn lumber. I-joists form a very quiet 
floor system because they are exceptionally stiff and 
uniform in size, have no crown, and do not shrink. 
I-joists come in depths ranging from 9 1/2" to 37" (240 
to 940 mm) and are suitable for spans up to approxi-
mately 40' (12,000 mm). I-joists are able to span greater 
distances than comparably sized sawn joists. Webs can 
be made from plywood or (OSB). Figure 8-6a shows 
examples of solid-web I-joists. Figure 8-6b shows a 
truss made with I-joists connected to a glu-lam beam. 
Holes can be placed in the web to allow for HVAC 
ducts and electrical requirements based on the manu-
facturer’s specifications. Figure 8-7 shows an example 
of a detail drawn by a CAD technician to represent 
I-joists.
FIGURE 8-3 A laminated veneer lumber (LVL) beam. Courtesy 
APA—The Engineered Wood Association.
FIGURE 8-4 The top and bottom chords of the solid-web floor 
joists and the beam that supports the floor joists are made of 
laminated veneer lumber (LVL). Courtesy APA—The Engineered 
Wood Association.
FIGURE 8-5 Engineered posts made of SCL and laminated 
products are used for many projects because of the appear-
ance, strength, and fire-resistance. Courtesy APA—The Engineered 
Wood Association.

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
169
FIGURE 8-6a Solid-web I-joists are available in a variety of 
depths and lengths. Courtesy APA—The Engineered Wood Association.
FIGURE 8-6b Solid-web floor joists supported by metal hang-
ers are attached to a laminated beam. Courtesy Pavel Adi Sandu.
FIGURE 8-7 Drawings representing trusses and I-joists are often provided by the manufacturer, but a CAD technician will be required 
to edit and label the detail to meet specific aspects of each project. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

170 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
LAMINATED BEAMS
Because of the strength limitations of solid wood 
and limited availability, glued-laminated beams, often 
referred to as glu-lams, are made from sawn lumber 
that is glued together under pressure to form a beam 
that is stronger than its lumber counterpart. Increased 
length is gained by laminating lumber that is spliced 
together with scarf or finger joints. Laminated timber 
is often used for structural framing materials because 
of its increased strength over sawn lumber, and because 
of its beauty (see Figure 8-8). Laminated beams are 
made from dry lumber, which offers a much higher 
level of dimensional stability than sawn lumber. The 
use of dry lumber virtually eliminates cracking, twist-
ing, warping, and shrinking. Because of their increased 
size, laminated beams are installed with mobile con-
struction equipment but can be set using conventional 
hand tools.
Common Sizes
Laminated beams are made from 2× (50×) material in 
4", 6", 8", 10", 12", 14", and 16" (100, 150, 200, 250, 
300, 350, and 400 mm) widths. Wider beams are avail-
able by special order. Once the members are laminated, 
the beams are planed to their finish size.
Laminated timber comes in finished widths as shown 
in Table 8-1 below.
Depths for simple beams range from 3" to 84" (75 to 
2300 mm) in 1 1/2" (38 mm) increments. One of the 
features of laminated timbers is that beams do not have 
to conform to these standard sizes, but can be laminated 
to specific sizes to fit the design criteria. Figure 8-9a 
shows the properties of standard laminated beam sizes. 
These beams all have their wide face parallel to the X-X 
axis. Laminated beams are available with their wide 
face parallel to the Y-Y axis but these are uncommon. 
Straight beam sizes are available through most lumber-
yards, and custom shapes are shipped directly from the 
manufacturer. 
Grading
As well as being graded by each of the major building 
codes, laminated timbers are graded by the American 
Institute of Timber Construction (AITC). Standards are 
set to provide minimum standards for production, qual-
ity control, inspection, and certification of performance.
Fiber Bending
Figure 8-9b shows a partial listing of design values 
for laminated timber. Although the engineer will 
determine all required beam sizes, it is important to 
understand some of the specifications, so that lami-
nated timbers can be properly specified on the struc-
tural drawings. Notice the first beam listed in column 
1 of Figure 8-9b is a 24F-V4. The 24F relates to the 
design value in bending, represented in column 3. In 
design formulas, this value is usually represented by 
the symbol fb. Common values listed by most lumber 
manufacturers include 1600, 2000, 2200, and 2400. 
The higher the value, the more units of stress that can 
be resisted, and the stronger the beam. The value to be 
Nominal 
Width
Western 
Species
Southern 
Pine
 3 
 2 1/8 
2 1/8 
 4 
 3 1/8 
3 or 3 1/8 
 6 
 5 1/8 
5 or 5 1/8 
 8 
 6 3/4 
 6 3/4 
10 
 8 3/4 
 8 1/2 
12 
10 3/4 
10 1/2 
14 
12 1/4 
12 
16 
14 1/4 
14
TABLE 8-1 Finished Widths for Laminated Timber (in Inches)
FIGURE 8-8 Laminated beams are often used for their 
strength, beauty, and the wide variety of shapes available. 
Courtesy American Institute of Timber Construction.

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
171
used will depend on the type of lumber to be used and 
will be selected by the engineer.
Grading Method
The second portion of the specification represents 
the method used to grade the beam. The letters V or 
E may be used to describe the grading procedure. V 
represents wood that has been visually inspected and 
E specifies that electronic methods of nondestructive 
testing have been used. The number that follows the 
ratings specification represents a specific combination 
of grades and species of material to be used to form 
the beam.
FIGURE 8-9a Common sizes and properties of laminated beams. Courtesy American Institute of Timber Construction.

172 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Material
Column 2 of Figure 8-9b represents the type or types 
of material to be laminated together using abbrevia-
tions such as DF/HF. Common abbreviations include:  
DF  Douglas Fir 
DFS  Douglas Fir South 
HF  Hem Fir 
WW  Soft woods 
ES  Eastern Spruce 
AC  Alaska Cedar 
CSP  Canadian Spruce Pine 
SP  Southern Pine 
In the specifications, the first group of letters rep-
resents the species of wood used for the outer lamina-
tions, and the second letters represent the species used 
for the beam core or inner layers.
Appearance
In addition to the number/letter grading, beams are 
also described by their appearance. Common grades 
FIGURE 8-9b A partial listing of design values for laminated timbers. Courtesy American Institute of Timber Construction.

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
173
include industrial, architectural, and premium. These 
terms apply to the exposed surfaces of the laminated 
member and regulate items such as growth character-
istics, inserts, wood fillers, and surfacing operations. 
These ratings in no way affect the structural quality of 
the beam. For beams that will not be exposed, indus-
trial grades are typically specified. Architectural-grade 
beams can be used in exposed situations, but minor 
flaws in the beams will be seen. Premium-grade beams 
are intended for high-visibility uses where no flaws are 
desired.
Finish
Laminated beams can be finished similar to their wood 
counterparts. Sealers, stains, and paint products are 
common finishing products. Surface sealers are used 
to resist soiling, to help control grain separation, and 
to reduce moisture absorption. In addition to the finish 
that can be applied at the job site, the laminator can 
also apply preservative treatments. Water-borne salt 
chemicals or oil-borne chemicals are used to treat indi-
vidual pieces of lumber prior to lamination. Oil-based 
products such as creosote can be used to treat beams 
after gluing.
Specifications
The specifications required for a laminated beam on a 
drawing differ from those of a sawn beam. Laminated 
beams are referenced on the framing plans, sections, 
and details, with complete information given in 
the project manual that accompanies the drawings. 
Common information included for a laminated beam 
specification on a framing plan includes the beam 
size, beam type, grade, and the type of material used 
to form each layer. A typical specification would 
resemble:
5 1/8 × 13 1/2 PURLIN DF/HF 2400 fb – V5.
In addition to the information specified on the 
drawing beside the beam, the appearance, grade, and 
information about the finish are specified in the written 
specifications. A typical notation for laminated beams 
would resemble:
ALL LAMINATED BEAMS TO BE INDUSTRIAL 
APPEARANCE UNLESS NOTED.
Drawing Representation
Laminated beams are represented in plan view just as 
sawn beams are with the required text parallel to the 
beam. Figure 8-10 shows an example of referencing 
laminated beams on a framing plan. Depending on the 
complexity of the plan, a schedule can be used to list 
the specifications for laminated timbers. If a schedule 
is used, a beam symbol is placed near the beam so that 
appropriate material can be easily referenced. Notice 
FIGURE 8-10 Laminated beams are represented similar to 
the method used to represent wood beams. As plans become 
more complicated, schedules are often used to maintain 
drawing clarity.

174 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
that many of the specifications are given in a general 
note. Sections and details may only refer to the beam 
size, grade, and material.
Similar to the use of sawn lumber, laminated beams 
will require the use of many details to explain con-
nection. Typically, details showing beam-to-beam, 
beam-to-post, truss-to-beam, or rafter-to-beam con-
nections, and column-to-support connections are 
required. When the end of a beam is represented in 
a detail, the lamination lines should be shown as at 
D in Figure 7-24. When the beam is seen in a side 
view, the lam lines should be represented with thin 
light lines. This can be done using an AutoCAD plot 
style such as Grayscale instead of Monochrome. 
Figure 8-11 shows an example of a beam-to-beam 
connection.
Beam and Framing Types
Laminated beams can be configured into almost 
any shape to meet the criteria of the design team. 
Common shapes include straight, cambered, and 
arched. Figure 8-12 shows the common shapes into 
which laminated beams are fabricated.
Single Span
Single-span laminated beams similar to those in 
Figure 8-13 are used to span between two or more 
FIGURE 8-11 Laminated beam representation in detail. When the end of a beam is represented, the outline of the beam is repre-
sented by a thick line surrounding the lamination lines.  When the beam is seen in a side view, the lam lines should be represented 
with thin light lines.
FIGURE 8-12 Common shapes of laminated beams. 

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
175
supports for large openings. Laminated beams are 
referenced as shown in Figure 8-10. Because of 
their structural capabilities, laminated beams can 
span much larger distances than similarly sized sawn 
beams. Figure 8-14 shows a comparison of sawn, lami-
nated, steel, and LVL beam sizes. Just as with sawn 
beams, the spacing of laminated beams is based on the 
strength of the beam being considered, as well as the 
strength of the material being supported. The architec-
tural team will dictate the use of timber or steel, based 
on the design criteria.
Cantilevers
A cantilever is a beam that extends past its supports 
(see Figure 8-15). Although sawn lumber can be can-
tilevered, laminated members are much more likely 
to be cantilevered because of the greater distances 
they typically span. The cantilever is used to decrease 
the loads on the center of the beam, by increasing the 
downward action on the ends of the beam. As the 
ends of the beam are forced downward, the center is 
forced up, which reduces its natural tendency to sag. 
Figure 8-16 compares the reactions of a single-span 
beam and a cantilevered beam. This loading pattern is 
often used on timber roofs forming a panelized roof 
framing system.
Panelized Framing
A panelized floor or roof system typically is composed 
of beams placed in parallel patterns with a spacing of 
approximately 20' to 30' (6100 to 9100 mm). Smaller 
beams called purlins are used to span between the 
beams. A spacing of 8' (2400 mm) is typically used 
for purlins. Joists of 2" or 3" (50 or 75 mm) width 
lumber are used to span between the purlins and sup-
port the floor or roof sheathing. Figure 7-22 shows 
an example of how a panelized roof constructed of 
timber is referenced on a framing plan. Figure 8-17 
shows a roof panel being lifted into place. Figure 8-18 
shows common details for beam connections for a 
panelized roof.
Curved Beams
As loads and spans are increased, a camber or small 
curve is built into the beam. The camber, which is 
also known as a crown, is built into beams to allow for 
the natural deflection that occurs in a beam as loads 
are applied. The size of the curve will depend on the 
length of the beam and the size of the material used to 
fabricate the beam. Laminated beams can be curved 
so that the beam can be used in domes. Figure 8-19 
shows the curved beams used to form a roof. As seen 
in Figure 8-20, beams can be curved and formed into 
almost any shape to meet the design criteria of the 
architectural team.
Arches, Vaults, and Domes
Arches, vaults, and domes have been used for centu-
ries to span large areas. Arches come in many shapes 
and can be thought of as structural ribs with a skin 
placed between them. Vaults and domes can be either 
a ribbed structure with a skin between ribs, or they 
can be created as a shell. When they are created in 
a shell form, concrete is most often the material of 
choice.
Arches Timber, steel, or concrete can be used to 
form an arch. Common arch shapes include circular 
or elliptical. The most common arches in construc-
tion include the fixed arch, a two-hinged arch, and a 
three-hinged arch. Each can be seen in Figure 8-21. 
Fixed arches are typically associated with smaller 
spans, and two- and three-hinged arches are used 
for long spans. There are no real hinges used with 
arches. The number of hinges refers to the point 
where forces causing rotation are resisted by the 
connection method. A two-hinge arch uses one 
beam to form the required arch. A three-hinged arch 
uses two beams to complete the arch to be formed. 
Triple-hinged arches are often used to provide a roof 
structure for arenas and convention centers. As with 
other types of wood construction, intersections of 
FIGURE 8-13 A single-span beam is a beam that spans 
between two supports and supports a uniform load at all 
points of the beam. The laminated beam supports OSB 
solid-web trusses. Courtesy Georgia-Pacific Corporation. All rights 
reserved.

176 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 8-14 A comparison of single-span laminated beams to wood steel beams and LVL beams.

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
177
structural members must be specified on the framing 
plans and details. Figure 8-22 shows an arch founda-
tion connection.
Vaults Vaults similar to Figure 8-23 are produced by 
placing arches next to each other to form elongated 
shapes. Figure 8-24 shows other common methods 
of constructing arches. When adjacent arches are 
placed perpendicular to their planes, a ribbed ceiling 
as found in most European cathedrals is constructed. 
Vaults can be constructed between rectangular shapes 
in plan view.
Domes When an arch is rotated around itself at its 
crown, a dome is formed. A dome structure will form 
a circular shape in plan view. Figure 8-25 shows an 
example of a dome framed with timber.
OPEN-WEB TRUSSES 
Although truss construction is considered nonconven-
tional framing, most upper-level floors and roofs of 
commercial structures are framed with trusses. A truss 
is a premanufactured component made up of triangular 
shapes arranged in a single plane used to span large 
distances. Because of the triangular shapes, loads will 
result in stress at the intersection of members in either 
compression or tension. Loads are spread throughout 
the truss so that the ends of the chords are usually 
the only portions of the truss that require support. If a 
truss is used to frame a roof, then rafters, ceiling joists, 
purlins, and braces are eliminated for that portion of 
FIGURE 8-15 A cantilevered beam is a beam that extends past 
its supports. An HCA hinge connector by Simpson Strong-Tie 
Company is used at the cantilevered end of the large beam 
to support a smaller glu-lam beam. Each beam is supporting 
open-web floor trusses. Courtesy LeRoy Cook.
UNIFORM LOAD
BEAM
SIMPLE  BEAM
REACTION TO LOAD
REACTION TO LOAD
UNIFORM LOAD
BEAM
UNIFORM LOAD
CANTILEVERED BEAM
WITH SUPPORTED BEAMS
AT EACH END.
BEAM
FIGURE 8-16 Beam reactions of simple and cantilevered 
beams. A simple beam will sag in the center. If each end of the 
beam is extended past its supports, the loads on the end of the 
beam force the center of the beam upward, helping to resist 
the tendency to sag in the center.
FIGURE 8-17 A panelized floor or roof system is typically 
composed of beams placed in parallel patterns with a spacing 
of approximately 20' to 30' (6100 to 9100 mm). Smaller beams 
called purlins are used to span between the beams. This roof 
uses open-web trusses to span between larger open-web 
beams, with wood purlins spanning between the larger purlins. 
Courtesy APA—The Engineered Wood Association.

178 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 8-18 A beam-to-column and a beam-to-beam connection. The cantilevered beam supports the smaller beam by use of a 
metal support called a saddle.
FIGURE 8-19 Curved beams used to form a school roof. 
Courtesy APA—The Engineered Wood Association.
FIGURE 8-20 Laminated beams with an irregular curve used 
to form the roof of a hockey arena. Courtesy APA—The Engineered 
Wood Association.
FIGURE 8-21 Common arches.
FIXED  ARCH
 ONE-HINGE ARCH
 TWO-HINGE ARCH
 THREE-HINGE ARCH

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
179
the structure. Trusses and conventional framing sys-
tems can be combined in the same structure to form 
irregular shapes.
Truss Terms
Major components of a truss include the top and 
bottom chords, the webs, and gussets. Figure 8-26 
shows common truss components. The top chords of a 
truss are the members that support the loads from the 
finished roofing material. The bottom chord is the lower 
FIGURE 8-22 An arch-to-foundation detail.
FIGURE 8-23 Vaults are produced by placing arches next 
to each other to form elongated shapes. Courtesy APA—The 
Engineered Wood Association.
ONE-CENTERED ARCHES
TWO-CENTERED ARCHES
THREE-CENTERED
ARCH
ARCHES
FOUR-CENTERED
FLAT
TWO-CUSPED 
CORBEL
ARCH
ARCH
ARCH
FIGURE 8-24 Common methods of constructing arches.
FIGURE 8-25 A lamella frame is a dome framed from a 
series of perpendicular ribs. Courtesy American Institute of Timber 
Construction.

180 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
member of a truss and is typically a horizontal member. 
The webs are the interior members that transfer the 
loads between the top and bottom chords. Because a 
roof truss is formed as a single component, no ridge 
board or beam is required for support at the ridge. A 
block is placed between individual trusses to maintain 
a uniform spacing, to resist the tendency of the trusses 
to fall sideways, and to provide a nailing surface for the 
roof sheathing. Components of trusses are not specified 
on the structural drawings but are shown on the draw-
ings supplied by the manufacturer.
The spacing of the trusses will determine the size 
of the chords and webs. Common spacing for trusses 
includes 24" and 32" (600 and 800 mm) o.c. and 
allows the chords and webs to be made of 2× (50×) 
material. As the spacing of the trusses increases 
beyond 32" (800 mm) o.c., timber or steel is used to 
frame the trusses. A gusset is a side plate that is often 
used at the intersection of a chord to a web to form a 
secure connection. On trusses framed from 2× (50×) 
material, the gusset is typically a lightweight metal 
plate. The truss manufacturer determines the size of 
the gusset and other truss components. A structural 
engineer designs the components of a timber-framed 
truss. Review Chapter 7 for examples of timber trusses. 
Although not actually a component of the truss, a truss 
clip or hurricane tie is a critical element in attaching a 
roof truss to its bearing surface to resist uplift and seis-
mic motion. A clip is also used with floor trusses that 
cantilever past their support wall so that wind does 
not cause uplift. The type and size of the clip will be 
determined by the engineer, based on the amount of 
uplift to be resisted. The clip can be specified by a note 
on the framing plan and is also represented in details 
showing the truss bearing points.
Open-Web Floor Trusses 
Open-web trusses are a common alternative to using 
2× (50×) sawn lumber for floor joists and rafters. In 
addition to being able to support greater loads over 
longer spans, open-web trusses allow for easy rout-
ing of HVAC ducts and electrical conduit. Open-web 
trusses are typically spaced at 24", 32", or 48" (600, 
800, or 1220 mm) for light commercial floors. Depths 
range from 14" to 60" (360 to 1520 mm) depending 
on the manufacturer and material used to fabricate 
the truss. Open-web trusses are typically available for 
floor spans of up to approximately 60' (18,300 mm) 
depending on the load to be supported. Figure 8-27 
shows open-web trusses supported by an LVL beam. 
Sawn lumber is typically used for the chords and webs, 
but trusses are available with LVL chords and tubular 
steel with a diameter of approximately 1" (25 mm) for 
the webs. Depending on the usage, open-web trusses 
may be top- or bottom-chord bearing. Rarely are both 
chords bearing. 
When drawn in section or details, wood webs are 
drawn as any other wood member. Webs made of 
TOP CHORD
BOTTOM CHORD
WEBS
CONNECTORS
CLIP
CLEAR SPAN (INSIDE TO INSIDE)
TRUSS 
TRUSS
BLOCKING
TOP CHORD
BOTTOM CHORD
WEBS
TJL /TJW 
SERIES FLOOR
TRUSSES
FIGURE 8-26 Standard truss components.
FIGURE 8-27 Open-web floor trusses supported by an LVL 
header.

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
181
tubular steel are typically represented with a bold 
centerline drawn at a 45º angle. The exact angle is deter-
mined by the manufacturer and is usually unimportant 
to the detail. As the span or load on the joist increases, 
the size and type of material used is increased. When 
drawing sections showing open-web trusses, it is 
important to work with the manufacturer’s details to 
find exact sizes and truss depth. Figure 8-28 shows 
common methods of placing the top chord. The CAD 
technician will need to carefully study the details 
provided by the manufacturer to ensure proper usage. 
Most truss manufacturers supply electronic copies of 
common truss connections that can be used for a base 
to complete the truss-to-wall detail.
Common Types of Roof Trusses
Figure 8-29 shows common truss shapes used in 
wood-frame commercial construction. Each type of 
truss shown with parallel chords can be built with an 
inclined top chord to facilitate roof design and water 
drainage without altering the design of the truss. It is 
important to remember that the exact number of webs 
will vary for each application and will be determined 
by the span of the truss. Whatever the configuration 
of the truss, it is shown on the framing plan as seen in 
Figure 8-30.
A fink or standard truss in Figure 8-29a is used to 
frame a gable roof for projects such as multifamily 
dwellings and retail sales outlets. The top chord is 
always inclined, but the interior webs can be arranged 
in different configurations to allow for storage space in 
the center of the truss (see Figure 8-29b and 8-29c). 
The openness of the modified fink can be useful for 
attic storage as well as a location for HVAC equipment. 
A camber, which is a curve, can also be built into the 
bottom chord (see Figure 8-29d) to assist in support-
ing loads.
Similar to a fink truss are howe and pratt trusses 
(Figure 8-29e and 8-29g). Each of the trusses can be 
framed with an inclined top chord or a partially inclined 
top chord with a horizontal chord (Figure 8-29f and 
8-29h). The inclined chords are used for framing roofs, 
and the horizontal top chords are typically used for 
floor framing. The difference between pratt and howe 
trusses lies in the arrangement of the webs and the 
method of transferring loads throughout the truss. The 
partial flat top chord can be used to form hip roofs (see 
Chapter 18). Pratt trusses can also combine inclined 
and flat bottom chords, as seen in Figure 8-29j, to form 
a camelback pratt truss. Other flat top chord trusses 
include warren trusses (see Figure 8-29k). Warren 
trusses are typically used for floor trusses. The top chord 
can be slightly inclined for use as roof trusses that are 
especially useful in dry climates where roof drainage is 
not heavy. A transverse bent style truss (Figure 8-29l) 
has top chords with two slightly inclined top chords to 
facilitate drainage.
A scissor truss has top and bottom chords that are 
inclined, allowing for a vaulted ceiling to be framed. 
The bottom chord usually must be at a minimum of 
two pitches less than the top chord. If the top chord is 
to be set at a 6/12 pitch, the bottom chord cannot be 
steeper than a 4/12 pitch. This guideline can vary as the 
chords and webs are strengthened. Figure 8-29m shows 
a scissor truss with equal interior pitches. A scissor truss 
can be combined with a standard truss to create a flat 
ceiling with a vaulted area as shown in Figure 8-29n. 
As the configuration of the scissor truss is altered, the 
intersections between flat and inclined bottom chord 
members may require support from interior walls or 
beams. Additional bearing points of the truss are also 
based on the span.
BLOCKING
TJL/TJW
BLOCKING
TJM/TJH
LAID FLAT
ON EDGE
FIGURE 8-28 Truss chords are typically framed with a 2× 
(50×) or by engineered material supported by a metal bracket. 
Engineered chords are typically set to be 3 1/2" (90 mm) tall.

182 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
A mono truss (Figures 8-29 and 8-30) resembles half 
of a standard truss. The mono truss has an inclined and 
horizontal chord as well as one vertical exterior web. 
Mono trusses can be used to blend a one-level structure 
into a two-level structure, or they can be altered to have 
a dual pitch as illustrated in Figure 8-29. The short, 
steep top chord works well to support solar collectors 
in temperate climates. In large structures such as facto-
ries or warehouses, mono trusses are often combined to 
form a sawtooth truss.
Because of the triangular patterns that are used to 
form a truss, the overall configuration of trusses is 
almost unlimited. One additional truss that may be 
specified on a framing plan is a girder truss. A girder 
STANDARD
GABLE END
CANTILEVERED
STUB
MONO
ATTIC
BROKEN
PITCH
GAMBREL
HEADER
a.  FINK
b.  FAN  FINK
c.  MODIFIED
FINK
d.  CAMBERED
e.  HOWE
f.  HOWE
g. - PRATT
h.  PRATT
j.  CAMEL-BACK
PRATT
k.  WARREN
l.  TRANSVERSE
BENT
m.      SCISSOR
n.  STD./SCISSORS
p.  BOWSTRING
HIP
DUAL PITCH
FIGURE 8-29 Common shapes and types of trusses.

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
183
truss is a stronger version of any of the shapes previ-
ously mentioned, and it is used to support the weight 
of other trusses. A girder truss allows interior support 
walls to be removed by providing the support for other 
trusses. Figure 8-30 shows a framing plan using trusses 
set perpendicular to each other. The girder truss lies 
between the two areas of trusses. The trusses that are 
perpendicular to the girder truss are hung from the 
girder truss by metal hangers. Figure 8-31 shows an 
example of a detail of the intersection of a girder truss 
with other trusses. Notice that the void area that results 
in the roof between the trusses is filled in with conven-
tional framing material.
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource 
to help you keep current with changes in building 
materials.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.aitc-glulam.org 
American Institute of 
Timber Construction
www.bcewp.com  
Boise Cascade Engineered 
Wood Products
www.forestdirectory.com  
Directory of Products, 
Wood Science and 
Marketing
www.iwpawood.org  
International Wood 
Products Association
www.lpcorp.com  
Louisiana-Pacific 
Corporation
www.strongtie.com  
Simpson Strong-Tie 
Company, Inc.
www.sfpa.org  
Southern Forest Products 
Association
CANTILEVERED TRUSSES @ 24" O.C.
CANTILEVERED TRUSSES @ 24" O.C.
STD. TRUSSES  @ 24" O.C.
STD. TRUSSES  @ 24" O.C.
STD. TRUSSES @ 24" O.C
STD. TRUSSES @ 24" O.C
GIRDER   TRUSS
GIRDER   TRUSS
HIP TRUSSES @ 24" O.C.
HIP TRUSSES @ 24" O.C.
3 PANEL 
WINDOW
SKYWALL
HEADER
HEADER
TRUSS
TRUSS
STUB   TRUSSES
STUB   TRUSSES
@ 24"  O.C.
@ 24"  O.C.
LIMIT OF FULL  TRUSSES
LIMIT OF FULL  TRUSSES
LIMIT OF HIP TRUSSES
LIMIT OF HIP TRUSSES
6'-0" TYPICAL
VERIFY EXACT SIZE
W/ MANUFACTURER
@ 24" O.C.
@ 24" O.C.
VALLEY  TRUSSES 
VALLEY  TRUSSES 
@ 24"  O.C
@ 24"  O.C
GIRDER TRUSS
GIRDER TRUSS
GIRDER TRUSS
GIRDER TRUSS
STUB TRUSSES @ 24" O.C.
STUB TRUSSES @ 24" O.C.
STD. TRUSSES  @ 24" O.C.
STD. TRUSSES  @ 24" O.C.
MONO TRUSSES
MONO TRUSSES
FIGURE 8-30 Standard, valley, girder, header, stub, cantile-
ver, hip, and mono trusses can be used to form different roof 
shapes. Each type of truss needs to be represented on the roof 
framing plan.
FIGURE 8-31 A girder truss used to support other trusses.

184 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
www.southernpine.com  
Southern Pine Council
www.tfguild.org  
Timber Framers Guild
www.timberpeg.com  
Timberpeg
www.trimjoist.com  
TrimJoist Engineered 
Wood Products
www.wwpa.org 
Western Wood Products 
Association
www.ilevel.com 
Weyerhaeuser 
www.woodtruss.com 
Wood Truss Council of 
America
KEY TERMS
Camber
Cantilever
Chord
Engineered studs
I-joists
Laminated beams
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL)
Oriented strand board (OSB)
Panelized framing
Parallel strand lumber (PSL)
Structural composite 
lumber (SCL)
Truss, open-web
Webs
Engineered Lumber Products
CHAPTER 8 TEST
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Use the appropriate charts from this chapter when possible. 
Some answers may require the reference material from the 
Simpson Strong-Tie or Weyerhaeuser Web sites. If math is 
required to answer a question, show your work.
Question 8-1 Define the following abbreviations: PSL, OSB, 
LVL, MDF, EXP, HDF, APA, EXT, and STRUCT.
Question 8-2 List common types of web materials that can 
be used in solid and open-web trusses.
Question 8-3 What two elements are applied to wood to 
make engineered wood products?
Question 8-4 List the common sizes of engineered wood 
studs.
Question 8-5 What resists uplift when a truss roof system is 
used?
Question 8-6 If an 8/12 pitch is used for a scissor truss, 
what is the maximum pitch for the bottom chord?
Question 8-7 List five types of laminated beams and show 
sketches of how they could be used in a structure.
Question 8-8 List six common finished widths of laminated 
beams.
Question 8-9 A laminated beam is to be 24-V5. What are 
the options for materials?
Question 8-10 For question 8-9, if the fir option is used, 
what will be the value for E?
Question 8-11 For question 8-9, if the option other than fir 
is used, what is the category listed in column 6 of Figure 
8-9b, and what is the value?
Question 8-12 A plan calls for a 6 × 14 DFL #1 floor beam 
or equal. Give the laminated beam and steel beam sizes 
that can be substituted for the sawn beam.
Question 8-13 List two alternatives for placing annotation 
when describing laminated beams on a framing plan.
Question 8-14 List seven types of information typically 
specified for a laminated beam and then provide an 
example of a beam specification.
Question 8-15 What would be the depth of beams with 9, 
15, and 24 laminations?
Question 8-16 List and explain the eight symbols typically 
used to describe the materials used to fabricate laminated 
beams.
Question 8-17 What grade of laminated beam should be 
used for a beam that will be in a highly visible location?
Question 8-18 Why is it possible, given an equal length and 
load, to use a smaller cantilevered beam rather than a 
single-span beam?
Question 8-19 What is a hinge as the term relates to arches?
Question 8-20 Describe how a panelized roof is made.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Unless your instructor provides other instructions, use the mini-
mum standards presented in the Chapter 6 section, “Drawing 
Criteria for Completing Details,” to complete the following 

Chapter 8: Engineered Lumber Products 
185
details. Skeletons of most details can be found on the student 
CD. Use these drawings as a base to complete the assignment.
Problem 8-1 Draw a detail showing a truss with a 4/12 roof 
pitch (assume 2 × 6 chord material) resting on 2 × 4 
studs at 16" o.c. Cover the interior with 1/2" gypsum 
board and the exterior side of the wall with 3/4" exterior 
stucco or CD-EIFS. Specify a concrete tile roof.
Problem 8-2 Draw a detail showing a scissor truss with 
a 6/12 roof pitch (assume 2 × 4 chord material and a 
3/12 pitch for the bottom chord) resting on 2 × 6 studs 
at 16" o.c. Cover the interior with 1/2" gypsum board 
and the exterior side of the wall with horizontal beveled 
siding over 1/2" gypsum board and 1/2" OSB. Specify a 
26-gauge metal roof over 3/4" plywood sheathing.
Problem 8-3 Draw the required details to show 9 1/2" deep 
TJI-110 @ 24" o.c. floor trusses resting on a 9' high 2 × 6 
stud wall. Provide an LVL rim joist at the exterior end of 
the trusses at the top of the support wall. Show a 6 × 10 
DFL # 1 window header in the wall with the bottom of 
the header set at 7'–0" high. Show 7/8" stucco over 1/2" 
plywood on the exterior side. Show 1 1/2" concrete over 
55# felt over 1 1/8" plywood subfloor. Frame an upper 
wall with 2 × 4 studs at 16" o.c. with (2) sills (2 × 4 over 
3 × 4). Specify that the lower pressure-treated plate is 
nailed w/ 20d’s at 4" o.c. Use break lines so that the full 
height of each wall is not drawn.
Problem 8-4 Draw a detail showing 18" deep TJL floor 
trusses resting on each side of a 10' high, interior wall 
framed with 2 × 6 studs. Provide solid blocking between 
the trusses at the top of the support wall. Show a 6 × 12 
door header in the wall with the bottom of the header set 
at 7'–0" high. Show 1/2" gypsum board on each side of 
the wall. Show 1 1/2" concrete over 55# felt over 1 1/8" 
T & G plywood subfloor. 
Problem 8-5 Complete the following detail showing a 6 3/4" 
× 15"  beam supporting 16" deep TJM trusses at 48" o.c. 
along each side of the beam. Use the manufacturer’s spec-
ifications to show top chord bearing with butted trusses.
Problem 8-6 A 3 × 12 DFPT ledger will be connected to 
a 2 × 6 stud wall per nailing schedule. The wall is to 
extend 30" minimum above the finish roofing and cap 
with standard plates, and with 26-gauge flashing. Use the 
ledger to support TJW 18 trusses at 24" o.c. The trusses 
will support 5/8" standard-grade plywood sheathing and 
a hot mopped roof. Provide a 4" cant strip at the truss/
wall intersection. Cover the exterior sides of the wall with 
1/2" plywood covered with 7/8" exterior stucco. Cover 
the interior side of the wall with 1/2" gypsum board that 
extends to the ledger and provide a suspended ceiling 
that provides 12" clearance below the trusses.
Problem 8-7 Draw a detail showing  (2) -8 3/4 × 22 1/2 glu-
lam resting on a 6 × 8 post. Use a column cap sufficient 
to hold 4000# in uplift.
Problem 8-8a Draw details showing an 8 3/4 × 22 1/2 glu-
lam that cantilevers 6' past the 8 × 8 post. 
Problem 8-8b Support a 8 3/4 × 16 1/2 beam. Draw the 
beam-to-beam connection based on the following 
assumptions: 
a) The center of all bolts are to be 1 1/2" from the edge 
of steel, with 3" minimum spacing.
b) All welded connections to be 5/16" fillet connections.
c) Side plates to be made from 5/16" × 8" wide steel.
d) Base and top plates to be 3/4" × 9 5/8" × 8 1/4" steel.
e) 3 1/2" wide × 5/16" side strap with (2)-3/4" diam-
eter M.B. Bolts to be a minimum of 10" from beam 
splice. Length based on bolt placement. Place the 
centerline of straps 4" up from bottom, 3" down 
from top.
Problem 8-9 Draw a plan view for a 48' × 60' structure 
framed with 2 × 6 studs at 16" o.c. at a scale of 1/8" = 
1'–0". Place a 6 3/4" × 16 1/2" ridge beam in the center 
of the structure 24' from the sidewalls. Specify 6 × 6 
wood posts at 20' intervals along this beam with 4 × 6 
posts at the ends hidden in the walls. Specify 4 × 6 or 
4 × 4 post at each beam/wall intersection (hide in wall). 
Show splices in the ridge beam 48" from the post so 
that the center beam is only 12' long. Use a 13 1/2" deep 
beam for the center span.
 
Hang 5 1/8 × 15 glu-lam beams at 15'–0" o.c. on each 
side of the ridge beam. Hang 3 1/8 × 13 1/2 glu-lams 
at 8'–0" o.c. between each 15" glu-lam. Support these 
beams with (2) -2 × 6 at each wall. Hang 2 × 6 rafters 
at 24" o.c. between each 13 1/2" glu-lam with appro-
priate hangers. Show enough of the roof framing to 
represent the framing patterns. Provide grids to repre-
sent each wall and post so that four vertical and three 
horizontal grids are provided. Specify the location of all 
members. Use a schedule wherever possible. Assume the 
sheet to be S-502.
Problem 8-10 Draw details to represent the post-to-beam 
connections and all beam-to-beam connections repre-
sented in problem 8-9. Assume the sheet to be S-503. 
Place all details in a logical order based on Chapter 2 and 
place detail reference numbers by each detail and on the 
framing plan. Possible details would include, but are not 
limited to:
8-10-1 BF—Ridge to wall
8-10-2 BF—Ridge to post
8-10-3 BF—Ridge to ridge
8-10-4 BF—Purlins to ridge
8-10-5 BF—Rafter to purlins
If all the details fit, they may be placed on the same 
page as the framing plan. If they will not all fit, place the 
details on sheet S-503.

186
9
Steel Framing Methods and Materials
Steel is used throughout the construction industry in 
many sizes, shapes, and types of construction. This 
chapter will explore steel and the many metals and 
metal alloys used throughout the construction of a 
structure and describe common methods of represent-
ing these materials in the drawing set. Subjects to be 
explored include:
● Steel in construction.
● Types of metal and alloys.
● Lightweight steel framing members such as steel 
studs, joists, open-web joists, and decking.
● Metal buildings.
● Multilevel steel frames.
The type of metal or steel that is used will affect 
the type of framing used, the design of the struc-
ture, and what the CAD technician is required to 
place on the architectural and structural drawings. 
Four of the most common uses of metal and steel 
in construction include the use of steel framing 
members, metal buildings, specialty structures such 
as space frames, and steel rigid frames. Figure 9-1 
shows examples of four uses of steel in a multilevel 
structure.
STEEL IN CONSTRUCTION
Although a CAD technician will not specify the con-
tents of the steel on the structural drawings, knowl-
edge of the contents helps a technician understand the 
steel used throughout a structure. Steel is a metal made 
from various elements, but it consists of approximately 
98% iron. The other major element in steel is carbon. 
Although steel is composed of a maximum of only 
1.5% carbon, it is carbon that controls the stiffness 
and hardness of steel. Steel is classified by its carbon 
content. The carbon contents of various steels refer-
enced on structural drawings based on the American 
Society of Testing Materials International (ASTM) are 
as follows:
Category of Steel
Carbon Content (%)
Low-carbon steel
0.06 – 0.30 
Medium-carbon steel
0.30 – 0.50 
High-carbon steel
0.50 – 0.80 
In addition to carbon and iron, steel contains phos-
phorus and sulfur. Both are limited because they affect 
the brittleness of the steel. Brittle steel tends to crack as 
loads are applied. Common elements such as silicon, 
manganese, copper, nickel, chromium, tungsten, molyb-
denum, and vanadium are also added to steel. These ele-
ments comprise a very small percentage of the chemical 
composition of steel but affect qualities such as strength, 
hardness, and corrosion resistance. The elements used 
for making steel are strictly controlled by the ASTM.
Structural Steel
Varied amounts of elements will produce different types 
of steel. Strength, hardness, corrosion resistance, brittle-
ness, and ductility are specified on the drawings. They 
are all controlled by varying the elements introduced 
into steel. Before examining various types of steel, it is 
important to realize how steel reacts to stress induced 
from a load. Although the engineer will determine the 
strength of steel to be used, the CAD technician must 
understand the values that are contained in the calcula-
tions. Figure 9-2 shows the stages that a low-carbon 
steel member will go through as it resists a load.
● In the elastic range, a member resisting a load will 
deflect, but maintain its structural integrity. This area 
corresponds to the modulus of elasticity of a wood 
member.
● The yield point is the measurement of stress in a 
material, which corresponds to the limiting value of 
the usefulness of the material. Once steel is stressed 
past its yield point, it will not return to its original 
shape or size. The yield point is represented by the 
letters Fy in beam formulas and is placed in the 

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
187
written specifications. The higher the yield point, the 
less ductile the steel.
If a material is ductile, it has a great ability to bend 
before breaking. Materials that are supported by a 
beam that has gone past its yield point may crack, but 
the beam itself will not actually fail. Once the stress 
has entered the work hardening range, steel actually 
increases its stress-carrying capability. As the steel 
deforms, the internal structure of the steel is dislocated, 
which makes it harder for future dislocations to occur.
The final stage in resisting stress is when the member 
reaches its ultimate tensile strength or breaking point. 
Once the ultimate tensile strength has been exceeded, 
the beam will cause structural failure.
Structural steels are identified on structural drawings 
by their ASTM designation number. Common numbers 
and their metric equivalent used for construction include 
A-36 (A36M), A-242 (A242M), A-441 (A441M), A-529 
(A529M), A-572 (A572M), and A-588 (A588M).
ASTM A-36—Steel with the designation ASTM A-36 
is the most widely used structural steel. It is a mild-
carbon steel with a yield point of 36 ksi (36,000 
pounds per square inch) (250 MPa).
ASTM A-242—Steel with a designation of ASTM 
A-242 represents a high-strength, low-alloy steel 
with a yield point of 50 ksi (345 MPa). It has limited 
amounts of carbon and manganese, which increase 
its welding capabilities. It is also used where self-
weathering is required because of its high resistance 
to corrosion. A-242 steel has four times the atmo-
spheric corrosion resistance of carbon steel without 
copper.
ASTM A-441—ASTM A-441 is high-strength, weld-
able, low-alloy structural manganese vanadium steel. 
Its yield point is 42 ksi (290 Mpa).
ASTM A-529—A-529 steel is high-strength carbon 
steel with a minimum yield point of 42 ksi (290 Mpa).
With the addition of 0.02% copper to the content, 
A-529 steel achieves twice the atmospheric corrosion 
resistance of A-36 steel.
ASTM A-572—A-572 and A572M is high-strength, 
low-allow Columbium-Vanadium structural steel. 
ASTM A-588—A-588 is high-strength, low-alloy steel
with a minimum yield point of 50 ksi (345 Mpa). 
It is often referred to as weathering steel because it 
is left unpainted. It has greater durability, lighter 
weight and is four times greater in weather resis-
tance than A-36 steel. Self-weathering steel is used 
for exposed steel structures such as access bridges 
or other exposed areas where maintenance would 
be costly.
Common Steel Shapes
Steel on the structural drawings can be divided into 
structural shapes, plates, bars, and cables. Each has its 
own distinctive use, shape, and specifications that must 
be understood by the drafter to complete the draw-
ings. The standard designations of structural shapes 
of steel adopted by the American Institute of Steel 
Construction include W, S, M, C, MC, L, WT, and MT. 
These common shapes are illustrated in Figure 9-3. 
Figure 9-4 shows several of these common shapes as 
well as common methods of representing bolting and 
welding information.
FIGURE 9-1 Many multilevel structures include steel for the 
frame, trusses, decking, and wall studs. Courtesy Jordan Jefferis.
ULTIMATE
STRENGTH
YEILD 
POINT
PLASTIC
RANGE
WORK
HARDENING
RANGE
ELASTIC
RANGE
Fv
Fy
STRESS
FIGURE 9-2 Typical reactions to stress in mild-carbon steel.

188 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Wide Flange
The W or wide-flange steel seen in Figure 9-5 is used 
for columns and beams. It has the cross-sectional shape 
of the letter I and is composed of two horizontal sur-
faces called flanges, and a vertical surface called the 
web. W-shaped members are relatively narrow when 
compared to their depth and are used for beams and 
girders. Shapes that are closer to square are generally 
used for columns. W-shaped steel comes in a minimum 
depth of 4" with a weight of 7.5 pounds per linear foot 
(plf) (100 mm–0.01 kg/mm), and a maximum depth 
of 48" and a weight of 848 plf (1200 mm–1.26 kg/
mm). An S-shaped beam, sometimes called an I-beam 
or American standard beam, has a narrower flange 
than a W-shape and has a slope of 1/6 for the inner face 
of the flange. Sizes range from a minimum of 3" deep 
with a weight of 5.7 plf (75 mm–0.008 kg/mm) to 24" 
with a weight of 120 plf (610 mm–0.18 kg/mm). The 
FIGURE 9-3 Common steel shapes in construction: (a) wide 
flange; (b) I-beam or American standard beam; (c) M shape; 
(d) channel; (e) angle; (f) tee; (g) tubes; (h) bars; ( i) plates.
FIGURE 9-4 Common shapes are often represented in detail as well as bolt and weld size, location, and spacing. Courtesy Jim Ellsworth.

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
189
M designation refers to miscellaneous shapes that can’t 
be classified as a W or S shape.
A W-beam or S-beam can be represented on a fram-
ing plan as illustrated in Figure 9-6. The specification 
for the beam can be placed parallel to the beam or rep-
resented with a reference symbol and referred to a beam 
schedule using the same procedures used for sawn and 
laminated beams. If a schedule is used, separate sched-
ules should be used for timber and steel beams because 
they will come from different suppliers. When steel 
products thicker than 1/8" (3 mm) are represented in 
end view in a section or detail, they are crosshatched 
with pairs of parallel lines at a 45° angle, as shown in 
Figure 9-7.
Wide-flange members are specified by numbers rep-
resenting the approximate depth and the weight of the 
beam. For example, the W 18 × 46 beam in Figure 9-7
has an actual depth of 18.06" (460 mm). Other char-
acteristics can be seen in Figure 9-8, a sample of a 
steel table published by the American Institute of Steel 
Construction. CAD drafters will have to refer to tables 
like these to gain the information needed to draw accu-
rate details. The actual flange and web thickness are 
usually slightly exaggerated so that the beam can be 
easily seen.
Channels
A channel is shaped like half of an American standard 
beam (Figure 9-3d). Channels are represented by the 
letters C for a standard channel and MC for miscel-
laneous shapes. Standard shapes range in size from 3" 
and 4.1 plf (76 mm–0.006 kg/mm) to 18" deep and 
58 plf (460 mm–0.09 kg/mm). The inner face of each 
flange has a slope matching that of an S-shaped beam. 
Channels are represented on the plan views similar to a 
W-beam. The text is placed parallel to the channel and 
numbers are used to represent the approximate depth 
and pounds per linear foot of beam. A typical specifica-
tion would resemble:
C 12 × 20.7
FIGURE 9-5 Wide-flange steel used for beams and columns. 
FIGURE 9-6 Representing steel beam and columns in plan 
view. Steel members should be represented in a schedule to 
keep the framing plan uncluttered.

190 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Angle
An angle is a piece of steel that has a 90° bend in it
(Figure 9-3e). Angles may have legs of equal or unequal 
length. Equal length angles range from 1 × 1 × 1/8"/
0.80 plf to a maximum of 8 × 8 × 1 1/8"/56.9 plf (25 ×
25 × 3/0.009 kg/mm to 200 × 200 × 29/0.08 kg/ mm). 
Angles are represented by the letter L followed by num-
bers representing the height of each leg followed by 
the thickness. The weight is usually not specified, but 
a length may be specified after the thickness is listed. A 
typical specification would resemble:
L 6 × 6 × 3/8 × 10'–0"
Angles with unequal leg lengths range in size from 
1 3/4 × 1 1/4/1.23 to 8 × 6 × 1/44.2 plf (45 × 45 × 
32/0.002 kg/ mm to 200 × 160 × 25/0.07 kg/mm).
When a wide-flange beam is used to support 
another wide-flange beam, an L is typically welded 
to the supporting beam and bolted to the beam being 
supported. Figure 9-9 shows angles used to support 
wide-flange beams. Figure 9-7 shows an angle used in 
a beam-to-beam connection. A CAD drafter would be
expected to draw similar details using bolting and 
welding procedures introduced in Chapter 6. If a wood 
member is to be joined to a steel beam, it is typically 
done by welding bolts with no heads—called studs—to 
the flange or web of the steel member. The studs are 
then used to bolt a wood plate or ledger to the beam. 
Plates are wood members bolted to the top of a web to 
support wood joists and facilitate nailing. Ledgers are 
wood members that are bolted to the flange of a steel 
beam. Wood joists can then be hung from the ledger 
with a metal hanger. The engineer will determine the 
size and spacing of the studs based on the type and 
amount of loads to be resisted, as well as the size of 
the weld used to connect the stud to the steel beam. 
Figure 9-10 shows an example of a top plate bolted to 
a beam with a stud.
Tees
A tee (Figure 9-3f) has a cross-sectional area shaped like 
the letter T. Often referred to as structural tees, they are 
made from cutting the web of wide-flange or American 
standard beams in half. The size of the tee is based on 
the beam that it is cut from and is represented by the let-
ters WT, ST, or MT followed by the height and weight 
of the tee. The specification for a tee would resemble:
WT 12 × 38
Steel Tubes and Columns
Steel columns or pipes are hollow circular shapes of
steel used to support loads ( Figure 9-3g). Steel tubes
are hollow square or rectangular shapes of steel.
Figure 9-11 shows both tubes and steel base and 
gusset plates, which provide support to steel beams 
and bracing rods. Square tubes are available in sizes 
ranging from 2 × 2 to 10 × 10 (50 × 50 to 250 × 
250 mm) with the wall thickness ranging from 3/16" 
to 5/8" (5 to 16 mm) thick. Rectangular tubes range 
from 2 × 3 to 8 × 12 (50 × 75 to 200 × 300 mm) 
with a wall thickness of 3/16" to 1/2" (5 to 13 mm). 
Circular steel columns range from 1/2" to 12" (13 to 
300 mm) with wall thickness ranging from 0.216" to 
0.50" (5 to 13 mm) thick.
Tubes and columns are shown in plan view just as a 
wood post would be represented. When seen in a section 
or detail, the interior surface of the tube is represented 
by a hidden line as shown in Figure 9-12. The actual 
wall thickness is usually slightly exaggerated so it can be 
easily seen. Square and rectangular tubes are specified on 
drawings by the letters TS followed by the overall size 
and thickness. A tube specification would resemble:
TS 4" × 4" × 3/8" or TS 4" × 1/4"
Round columns are specified by the nominal diam-
eter, and a specification of standard, extra strong, or 
double extra strong. A pipe would be specified as:
TS STD. 4" DIA. PIPE
Chapter 22 will include a further discussion of steel 
columns and tubes.
FIGURE 9-7 When drawn in end view in details, steel members 
are crosshatched with pairs of diagonal lines (AutoCAD hatch 
pattern Ansi32).

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
191
FIGURE 9-8 CAD technicians often need to research the sizes of steel shapes to complete details. Courtesy American Institute of Steel 
Construction.

192 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 9-9 An angle is a piece of steel with a 90° bend. Angles 
are often used to bolt together two intersecting beams. 
FIGURE 9-10 Studs (bolts with no heads) are welded to a 
steel member to allow a wood plate to be bolted to the top of 
a steel beam. The plate provides a nailing surface so that other 
wood members can be attached. If the wood member is bolted 
to the side of the beam (to the flange) the wood member is 
called a ledger.
FIGURE 9-11 Steel tubes, columns, rods, and plates are 
used to transfer loads into the foundation. Courtesy Zachary 
Jefferis.
FIGURE 9-12 In the side view of a detail, steel tubes are drawn 
similar to wood and timber posts. The interior surface of a steel 
column is represented by a hidden line in order to distinguish a 
steel tube from a wood column.

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
193
Bars
Steel bars (Figure 9-3h) are solid members available 
in circular, square, and flat shapes that are used to pro-
vide reinforcing to other members. Bars are often used 
for lateral bracing, or as hangers to support horizontal 
members. Figure 9-11 shows round bars used to stabi-
lize a column. Steel is classed as a bar if it is less than 
8" (200 mm) wide. Bars are specified in 1/8" (3 mm) 
increments for thickness and 1/4" (6 mm) increments 
for widths (Figure 9-3h). Depending on the shape, bars 
will be specified on drawings in one of three possible 
methods: 
Square bar 
1" SQ. BAR 
Flat 
2" × 3/8" BAR 
Round 
1" DIA. BAR 
See Chapters 10 and 11 for information about bars 
used for masonry and concrete reinforcing. Threaded bar-
sused for fastening devices were discussed in Chapter 6.
Plates
A plate (Figure 9-3i) is a flat piece of steel 8" (200 mm) 
or wider ranging in thickness from 1/2" to 2" (13 to 
50 mm) thick. Common uses of plates include top, 
base, gusset, end, stiffener plates, or as part of a fabri-
cated hanger.
● A top plate provides a bearing surface for a steel 
beam resting on a column (see Figure 9-11). The 
plate is welded to the top of the column, and the 
beam to be supported is bolted and welded to 
the plate.
● A base plate provides support for a column resting 
on another steel member or for a column resting on 
concrete. Figure 9-12 shows a detail of a column 
welded to a base plate, with the plate attached to the 
concrete with anchor bolts.
● A gusset plate is a plate added to an intersection of 
structural members to provide support and stiffness. 
Figures 9-11 and 9-12 show a gusset plate used to 
provide a welding surface for the diagonal steel cable 
or tube.
● An end plate is used to provide an attachment sur-
face at the end of a W or similar shaped beam.
● The flanges of a W-beam are often reinforced by a 
stiffener plate to provide support for members that 
are to be hung from the beam.
● Fabricated angles for beam hangers similar to 
Figure 9-13 can be constructed from flat steel 
plates.
A plate is referenced by its size followed by its thick-
ness. A typical callout would resemble:
12 × 12 × 3/8 PL
Cable
Cables can be used in place of solid bars for lateral brac-
ing because of their high resistance to forces in tension. 
A cable can be used to form an X between two parallel 
members. The cable is tightened by a turnbuckle placed 
at a convenient place in the cable span. Cable diameters 
range from 1/2" to 3 5/8" (13 to 90 mm). When speci-
fied on plans, cable smaller than 1" (25 mm) diameter 
is specified by giving the diameter and safe working 
stress limits of the cable. Larger cable sizes are specified 
by providing the diameter, the number of strands, and 
the number of wires per strand. Figure 9-14 shows an 
example of specifying cables on a framing plan.
FIGURE 9-13 Steel plates used to fabricate a beam hanger. 
FIGURE 9-14 Representing steel columns and support cables 
in plan view.

194 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
TYPES OF METAL AND ALLOYS
Some of the most common alloys used in construc-
tion include aluminum, stainless steel, copper, lead, 
and tin.
Aluminum
Aluminum is lightweight, noncorrosive, a good heat 
conductor, and very strong for its weight. Common uses 
of aluminum are roofing material, moldings, window 
mullions, and window frames. The architectural draw-
ings often include details similar to Figure 9-15 to show 
how the aluminum window frame will intersect with 
the structural shell. Adding one or more elements to 
aluminum improves both the hardness and strength of 
aluminum. The Aluminum Association classifies alumi-
num alloys using a series code number. If a specific class 
of aluminum is to be used it would be referenced in the 
project manual. Classes include: 
2000 series 
adds copper 
3000 series 
adds manganese 
4000 series 
adds silicone 
5000 series 
adds magnesium 
Aluminum alloys are used for such products as roof 
and siding panels, trim, nails, structural members such 
as truss webs or space frames, railings, electrical wiring, 
and door and window frames.
Stainless Steel
Stainless steel is used where appearance and main-
tenance are a priority for both interior and exterior 
uses. It has a nonstaining finish and is used for kitchen 
equipment for food establishments, elevator and door-
way trim, or other metal products subject to abuse or 
in need of a high polish. Stainless steel is usually speci-
fied on drawings by a gauge number, grade, type, and 
finish. Material to be made from stainless steel that is 
3/16" (5 mm) or thicker or widths of greater than 10" 
(250 mm), is specified as a plate. Material that is thin-
ner than 3/16" (5 mm) and wider than 24" (600 mm) 
is referred to as a sheet. Material that is less than 3/16" 
(5 mm) thick and less than 24" (600 mm) wide is clas-
sified as a strip.
Grades
Two grades of stainless steel can be included in the writ-
ten specifications of a drawing. These include austenitic 
and ferritic grades.
● Austenitic grades of stainless steel have the highest 
corrosion resistance and contain both chromium and 
nickel. This grade is nonmagnetic.
● Ferritic grades are always magnetic. Both ferritic and 
austenitic grades can be hardened by heat treatment.
Types
Although there are more than forty types of stainless 
steel, only five types are used in the construction indus-
try. Each type is established by the American Iron and 
Steel Institute and given a designation number. The five 
common types of stainless steel used in construction 
and their uses include: 
FIGURE 9-15  An aluminum window frame in detail. Courtesy 
Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, AIA.

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
195
Finish
In addition to the grade and type of stainless steel, a 
finish is often specified in the project manual. Common 
finishes include: 
Finish of Stainless Steel
Characteristics
No. 2D Special 
A frosty matte finish 
No. 4 
A dense, bright, highly 
reflective finish 
No. 6 
A soft satin finish, moder-
ately reflective 
No. 7 
Highly reflective finish
Copper
Copper is used throughout the construction industry 
for its ability to conduct electricity and its resistance to 
corrosion. Copper is used for electrical wiring, pipes 
for fresh water supply, sheet metal panels for roofing, 
shingles, gutters, and flashing.
Lead
Although not widely used throughout the construction 
of a structure, lead is used for flashing as well as spe-
cialty items such as shower pans or other areas that are 
required to be watertight. Lead is also used in hospitals 
and labs for protection from X rays and for plating to 
provide a resistance to acid.
Tin
Tin is very resistant to corrosion. The major use of tin 
is as a coating for sheet metal used for roofing or siding 
panels.
LIGHTWEIGHT STEEL FRAMING
Lightweight steel products are used throughout the 
framing of many structures that require increased 
fire protection over Type V construction. Common 
uses of steel include studs, joists, trusses, decking, 
and lath.
Steel Studs
Steel studs are often used to help meet the requirements 
of Types I, II, and III construction. Depending on the 
covering material, steel studs can achieve fire ratings 
of between one and three hours (see Chapter 12). Steel 
studs offer lightweight, noncombustible, corrosion-
resistant framing for interior partitions and interior and 
exterior load-bearing walls up to five stories in height. 
Steel products also offer greater dimensional stability 
and a level surface without problems such as attack by 
termites, rotting, shrinkage, splitting, or warping associ-
ated with wood construction.
Studs are designed for rapid assembly and are 
predrilled for electrical and plumbing conduits (see 
Figure 9-16). The standard 24" (600 mm) spacing 
reduces the number of studs required by about one-
third when compared with traditional wood framing. 
Stud width ranges from 3 5/8" to 10" (90 to 250 mm) 
but can be manufactured in any width. Stock lengths 
include 8', 9', 10', 12', and 16' (2400, 2700, 3100, 3700, 
and 4900 mm), with custom lengths typically available 
up to 40' (12,200 mm). Studs are made of steel, ranging 
from 12 to 25 gauge, with a yield point of 40 ksi. The 
engineer selects the gauge to be used based on the loads 
to be supported and the usage. The shape of the studs 
varies with the load to be supported. Figure 9-17 shows 
common shape and size variations of studs used for 
bearing and nonbearing walls.
Steel studs are mounted in a channel at the top and 
bottom of the wall. This channel serves a similar func-
tion to the plates and sill of wood-frame construction. 
Type of Stainless Steel
Uses
Type 301 
Used for structural applications such as door frames.
Type 302 
Used for architectural applications of stainless steel such as exterior paneling, false columns, soffits, 
fascias, and gutters.
Type 304 
Has a lower carbon content than type 302 stainless steel. Used for many of the same 
applications.
Type 316 
Molybdenum is added to provide a high resistance to atmospheric corrosion.
Type 430 
Used for interior applications. Resistance to corrosion is less than type 302.

196 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
The material used for channels typically has a yield 
point of 33 ksi. Horizontal bridging may be placed 
through the predrilled holes in the studs and then 
welded to the stud to serve the same function as block-
ing in a stud wall.
Stud Specifications
Section properties and steel specifications vary among 
manufacturers; therefore, the material to be specified 
on the plans will vary. Specific catalogs developed by 
the Metal Stud Manufacturers Association should be 
consulted to determine the structural properties of 
the desired stud. The architect or engineer determines 
the size of stud to be used, but the drafter often needs 
to consult vendor materials to completely specify the 
studs. As a minimum, the gauge and usage are specified 
on the framing plan, details, and sections. If a manufac-
turer is to be specified, the callout will include the size, 
style, gauge, and manufacturer of the stud. An example 
of a steel stud specification would read:
362SJ20 STEEL STUDS BY UNIMAST
Steel Joists
Steel joists offer the same benefits over their wood coun-
terparts, just as steel studs do. Joists are available in 3 
5/8", 4", 6", 7 1/4", 8", 9 1/4", 10", 11 1/2", 12", and 
13 1/2" (90, 100, 150, 185, 200, 235, 250, 290, 305, 
and 340 mm) depths. The gauge and yield point for 
joists are similar to these values for studs. Many joists 
are manufactured so that a joist may be placed around 
another joist, or nested. Nested joists allow the strength 
of a joist to be greatly increased without increasing the 
size of the framing members. A nested joist is often used 
to support a bearing wall above the floor. If a post is to 
be supported by a metal joist, a steel stiffener plate can 
be placed between the flanges of the joist at the bearing 
point to prevent bending of the web. Joists are available 
FIGURE 9-16 Steel studs are designed for rapid assembly and 
are predrilled for electrical and plumbing materials. Courtesy 
Matthew Jefferis.
SJ STUDS
SJ JOIST
SN STUD
1 3/4"
1 3/4"
1 3/8"
3 5/8", 4"
6", 7 1/4", 8", 9 1/4"
11 12/",  13 1/2"
3 5/8", 4, 6, 8"
2", 2 1/2"
SW STUDS 
3 5/8", 4", 6", 8"
10", 12"
CR RUNNER
SIZE VARIES TO 
MATCH STUD
& JOIST
FIGURE 9-17 Common sizes and shapes of steel studs and 
channels.

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
197
in lengths up to approximately 40' (12 200 mm) depend-
ing on the manufacturer.
Open-Web Steel Joists
Open-web steel joists are manufactured in the same 
configurations as open-web wood trusses. In compari-
son to their wood counterparts, open-web steel joists 
offer the advantage of being able to support greater 
loads over longer spans with less dead load than solid 
members. Figure 9-18 shows an example of light steel 
trusses used to support floor loads. These joists are usu-
ally made of small angles, round bars, or tees, in depths 
ranging from 8" to 72" (200 to 1800 mm).
Open-web joists are referred to by their series 
number, which defines their use. The Steel Joist Institute 
(SJI) designations include K, LH, and DLH. All sizes 
listed below are based on SJI specifications for steel 
joists. K series joists are parallel-web members that 
range in depth from 8" to 30" (200 to 760 mm) in 2" 
(50 mm) increments, for spans up to approximately 
60' (18 300 mm). LH (long span) and DLH (deep long 
span) series of joists are made from steel with a yield 
point of 50 ksi. Depths range from 18" to 48" (460 to 
1200 mm) for LH series and from 52" to 72" (1320 to 
1830 mm) for DLH series joists. Spans range up to 96' 
(29 300 mm) for LH series joists to up to 144' (43 900 
mm) for DLH joists.
Steel joists are specified on the framing plans, struc-
tural details, and sections by providing the approximate 
depth, the series designation, the chord size, and the 
spacing. An open-web steel joist specification would 
resemble:
14K4 OPEN-WEB STEEL JOIST AT 32" O.C.
Just as with a wood truss, span tables are available 
to determine safe working loads of steel joists. The 
engineer determines the truss to be used, but the CAD 
drafter is often required to find information to complete 
the truss specification.
Steel Decking
Corrugated steel decking is supported by steel chan-
nels or open-web joists used for most lightweight floor 
systems (see Figure 9-18). Decking is produced in a 
variety of shapes, depths, and gauges. Common shapes 
are shown in Figure 9-19. Common rib depths include 
1 1/2", 3", and 4 1/2" (40, 75, and 115 mm) deep with 
lengths available up to 30' (9000 mm). The engineer 
determines the required rib depth based on the load to 
be supported and the lateral load to be resisted. Steel 
decking is attached to the framing system with screws 
or welds. Decking is covered with a minimum of 1 1/2" 
(40 mm) of concrete above the ribs to provide the fin-
ished floor. Decking is specified in the project manual 
and in sections and details by giving the manufacturer, 
type of decking, depth, and gauge. A typical specifica-
tion would resemble:
METAL DECKING TO BE VERCO, TYPE ‘N’, 
3"–20GA. GALV. DECKING
Steel Lath
Galvanized metal lath in 27" × 96" (690 × 2440 mm) 
sheets are typically used for backing for plaster, gypsum 
lath, fiberboard, or similar plaster bases used to cover 
steel products. Other metal products include drywall 
clips, drywall corner bead, wire, and screws.
METAL BUILDINGS
Prefabricated or rigid-frame buildings are common in 
many areas of the country because they provide fast erec-
tion time compared with other types of construction. 
FIGURE 9-18 Steel open-web beams and trusses are often 
used to support floor and ceiling loads. Steel decking is typi-
cally placed over the trusses to provide support for concrete 
floors. Courtesy Megan Jefferis.
1 1/2" DEEP  NARROW  RIB
2"  DEEP WIDE RIB
3" DEEP  WIDE  RIB
FIGURE 9-19 Common corrugated steel decking shapes.

198 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
The frame, roof, and wall components are standard-
ized and sold as modular units with given spans, wall 
heights, and lengths, to reduce cost and eliminate 
wasted materials.
Figure 9-20 shows a steel-framed structure being 
erected.
Typical Components
The structural system is made up of a frame that sup-
ports the walls, roof, and all externally applied loads. 
There are several different types of structural systems 
used. The two most common shapes are shown in
Figure 9-21. Frame members are normally made from 
plate and bar stock with a yield point of 50 ksi (345 Mpa).
The size of members is determined by engineers work-
ing for the fabricator. Tapering of members allows the 
minimum amount of material to be used, while still 
maintaining the required area to resist the loads to be 
supported. End plates are welded or bolted to each end 
of the vertical members. The plate at the base is pre-
drilled to allow for bolting the steel to the concrete sup-
port (see Figure 9-22). The plate at the top of the frame 
is used to bolt the vertical to the inclined member. The 
vertical wall member is bolted to what will become the 
inclined roof member to form one rigid member. This 
frame member is similar to the three-hinged laminated 
arch discussed in Chapter 8.
The wall system is made of horizontal girts attached 
to the vertical frame. Usually, the girts are a channel or a 
Z that is welded to the frame. Girts are typically welded 
to the outer flange of the frame, but they can also be 
welded between the frames if the wall thickness must 
be kept to a minimum. Girts are shown in Figure 9-23.
FIGURE 9-20 A rigid-frame structure consists of the frame, 
girts, and metal siding. Courtesy David Jefferis.
FIGURE 9-21 Common shapes of fabricated metal frames.
FIGURE 9-22 Predrilled end plates are welded to the top and 
bottom of each portion of the frame. Courtesy Michael Jefferis.
FIGURE 9-23 Steel girts are installed between the frame to 
support metal siding. Courtesy Gisela Smith.

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
199
Metal siding is screwed to the girts to complete the 
wall. The roof is made with steel purlins spaced at 
24", 32", 48", or 60" (600, 800, 1200, 1500 mm) o.c. 
Purlins provide support for the roofing material. The 
spacing of the purlins depends on the sheet metal used 
to complete the roof. Both the roof and wall frames are 
reinforced with steel cable ×-bracing to resist lateral 
loads.
Representation on Drawings
The engineering team working with the fabricator will 
complete the structural drawing required to build the 
structure. This includes drawings showing exact loca-
tions of all framing members and connections similar 
to those shown in Figure 9-24. Figure 9-25 shows an 
example of a section for a steel structure.
MULTILEVEL STEEL FRAMES
Because of their ability to span large distances, steel is 
used to frame large sports and assembly arenas, exhi-
bition centers, and multilevel structures. Multilevel 
structures are built in tiers consisting of vertical col-
umns, horizontal girders, and intermediate support 
beams.
Multilevel structures framed with steel are similar to 
the elements of post-and-beam timber construction.
Framing Plans
As with other methods of construction, plans are 
required to show the location and size of each column, 
girder, beam, and joist. Columns are usually W-shaped 
but M and S shapes are also used. Steel columns are 
shown on the framing plan by representing the proper 
shape, the location from center to center, and a specifi-
cation for the size and strength to be used. Steel columns 
are typically placed in two-story sections. Although 
smaller columns can be used on upper levels because of 
decreased loads to be supported, column size is typically 
kept uniform to make splicing easier. Splices are usually 
kept about 24" (600 mm) above a floor level so that the 
connection can be made without interfering with the 
girder-to-column connection. The load to be supported 
and the method used for lateral bracing will affect how 
the columns are attached. With W shapes, a steel plate 
is often added to the outer edge of each column flange 
to provide stiffness at the connection. On rectangular 
shapes, the columns can be directly attached with no 
side plate. Tube steel (TS) can be used for columns for 
heights below three stories depending on the loads to 
be supported. Steel studs are used to frame between 
vertical supports but are not load-bearing when used in 
conjunction with steel columns.
Girders are also normally formed from W shapes 
because of the ease of making connections. Intermedi-
ate beams may be W, S, M, or C shapes. Depending 
on the loads to be supported, girders can be built up 
to increase the bearing capacity. A built-up girder can 
be composed of standard shapes or fabricated from 
steel plates. Figure 9-26 shows common methods of 
built-up girders based on American Institute of Steel 
Construction (AISC) standards. On the framing and 
floor plans, girders are usually represented by a single 
line placed between, but not touching, the columns 
that will be used for support. The size and spacing of 
the girders are typically specified. Steel joists and deck-
ing covered with lightweight concrete can be used to 
span between intermediate beams to form floor and 
roof levels. Reinforced concrete slabs are also used to 
span between intermediate support beams and will be 
discussed in Chapter 11. An example of a steel framing 
plan can be seen in Figure 9-27.
Detail Drawings
Details are required to show each intersection of struc-
tural members and the connection method of various 
materials to the steel frame. Details showing the con-
nections of structural materials will be referenced on 
the framing plan and sections. Welded joints and bolts 
are used almost exclusively for steel frames. Bolting 
and welding methods and symbols were introduced in 
Chapter 6. Common types of connections can be seen 
in Figure 9-28.
FIGURE 9-24 The framing plan for a prefabricated metal 
building.

200 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 9-25 A rigid frame seen in section.

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
201
Exterior Coverings
Materials such as glass, stone, marble, granite, brick, 
and precast concrete panels are used to face steel struc-
tures. Units can be assembled at the job site or preman-
ufactured and shipped to the site. Panels typically have 
steel connection plates that can be welded to the steel 
frame. Lightweight insulated sheet metal panels are also 
used for an exterior covering. Tempered glass panels set 
in metal frames are a major exterior covering. Details for 
connecting the exterior coverings to the frame must also 
be provided. Details similar to Figure 9-29 are typically 
referenced on the floor plan and elevations.
Trusses
In addition to the steel trusses already mentioned to 
support floor and roof loads, steel can be used to form 
trusses that act as a girder, such as the girder trusses in 
Figure 9-1. When steel shapes are combined to form a 
truss, CAD drafters working with the engineering team 
will draw the details to specify the shapes to be used 
and the types of connections. Figure 9-30 shows an 
example of the detail required for the trusses shown in 
Figure 9-1.
A
D
B
C
FIGURE 9-26 Built-up steel girders based on the American 
Institute of Steel Construction recommendations.
FIGURE 9-27 Steel joist, columns, and rods shown on a framing plan. Courtesy Van Domelen / Looijenga/McGarrigle / Knauf Consulting 
Engineers.

202 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Space Frames
Three-dimensional trusses are used to cover large areas 
of open space. Figure 9-31 shows an example of the use 
of a space frame for supporting the exterior shell of a 
structure. CAD drafters working under the supervision 
of the architect, the structural engineer, and the fabrica-
tor will be involved in the detailing of space frames.
FIGURE 9-28 A detail of a steel column and beam showing 
both welded and bolted connections. Courtesy Van Domelen /
Looijenga / McGarrigle / Knauf Consulting Engineers.
Steel is considered a sustainable product because it is 
completely recyclable, and when compared to other 
materials, requires relatively low amounts of energy to 
produce. The steel industry has made immense efforts 
in the last few decades to limit environmental pollution 
that used to be associated with its production. Energy 
consumption and carbon dioxide emissions have 
been greatly reduced during the production process. 
But the main sustainable qualities of steel come from 
its compliance with two key concepts introduced in 
Chapter 1, which were to reduce and recycle. Steel-
framed construction greatly reduces the support 
members required when compared to other building 
materials. The use of steel reinforcing also allows for 
a reduction of other products such as concrete. Steel 
qualifies for Leadership in Energy and Environmental 
Design (LEED) credits because of the high recycle rate of 
steel building products. According to the Steel Recycling 
Institute, steel is the most widely recycled material in 
North America. This is largely because it is economically 
advantageous to do so. It is cheaper to recycle steel than 
to mine iron ore and then go through the production 
process to form new steel. Steel does not lose any of 
its inherent physical properties during the recycling 
process, and has drastically reduced energy and material 
requirements than refinement from iron ore. 
EASY BEING GREEN
FIGURE 9-29 Details showing the connections of the exterior 
skin to the structural skeleton. Courtesy Van Domelen / Looijenga/
McGarrigle / Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
203
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to help 
you keep current with changes in building materials.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS  
ORGANIZATION
www.aluminum.org  
The Aluminum 
Association, Inc.
www.aisc.org  
American Institute of Steel 
Construction
www.steel.org  
American Iron and Steel 
Institute
www.astm.org  
American Society for 
Testing and Materials
www.cssbi.ca 
Canadian Sheet Steel 
Building Institute
www.cfsei.com 
Cold-Formed Steel 
Engineers Institute
www.copper.org  
Copper Development 
Association
www.worldsteel.org 
International Iron and Steel 
Institute
www.lgsea.com  
Light Gauge Steel 
Engineers Association
www.mbma.com  
Metal Building 
Manufacturers 
Association
www.metalroofing.com 
Metal Roofing Alliance
www.steelframingalliance.com 
North American Steel 
Framing Alliance
www.ssina.com  
Specialty Steel Industry of 
North America
www.sdi.org 
Steel Deck Institute 
www.steelframing.org 
Steel Framing Alliance
www.steeljoist.org  
Steel Joist Institute
www.steellinks.com  
Steel links search engine
www.recycle-steel 
Steel Recycling Institute
www.steelroofing.com 
Steel Roofing
www.ssma.com 
Steel Stud Manufacturers 
Association
www.unimast.com 
Unimast, Incorporated 
(lightweight steel framing 
solutions)
www.ussteel.com 
United States Steel
FIGURE 9-30 Steel trusses are often used to form a beam for long spans with smaller trusses set perpendicular to provide intermediate 
support similar to a panelized framing system used with wood members. Courtesy Van Domelen / Looijenga / McGarrigle  / Knauf Consulting Engineers.
FIGURE 9-31 Three-dimensional trusses referred to as space 
frames are formed from lightweight metal. Courtesy MERO 
Structures, Inc.

204 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. 
Question 9-1 What are the two major elements in steel?
Question 9-2 What element must be controlled to keep steel 
from being brittle?
Question 9-3 If steel is in its elastic stage, is it safe to use 
and how will it react to a load?
Question 9-4 What happens to steel as it is stretched past its 
yield point?
Question 9-5 What organization governs the designations of 
structural steel?
Question 9-6 What are the five most common steel designa-
tions used in the construction industry?
Question 9-7 Describe the most common type of steel used 
in the construction industry in terms of its ASTM desig-
nation, yield point, and its maximum carbon content for 
all shapes.
Question 9-8 List nine common shapes of steel used in con-
struction.
Question 9-9 What does the ultimate tensile strength of 
steel represent?
Question 9-10 What are the components, cross-sectional 
shape, and the minimum size and weight of a W shape?
Question 9-11 List the area and size descriptions of a 
W16 × 50 in decimal inches.
Question 9-12 What information should be given when a 
channel is specified on a drawing?
Question 9-13 List the three common shapes of steel tubes 
and their range in sizes.
Question 9-14 What is the difference in size between a bar 
and a plate?
Question 9-15 List common alloys used throughout the 
construction of a structure.
Question 9-16 What material is required to specify steel 
studs on a drawing?
Question 9-17 What is the common depth of steel joists?
Question 9-18 What information about steel joists must be 
specified on a drawing?
Question 9-19 What are the major components of the walls 
and roof of a metal-framed structure?
Question 9-20 Use the Internet to list and visit five Web 
sites related to steel framing. Explain how these sites are 
related to your class projects.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Skeletons of most of these details can be accessed from the 
student CD. Use the drawings on the CD to complete the 
required views. Use scale factors suitable for plotting each 
detail at a scale of 3/4"  1'–0" minimum. Label all material with 
generic notes that can be altered with each use. Select all sizes 
based on material found in Sweets Catalogs, Sweet Spot, vendor 
catalogs, or Web sites. Save each detail as a wblock. Make the 
following assumptions to complete details 9-1 through 9-5 
unless told otherwise by your instructor. 
• 
Assume all floor joists to be approximately 10" deep.
• 
Assume all wall studs to be approximately 4" wide.
• 
Place a note with each detail to reference the framing plan 
for all joists, stud and beam sizes, and spacings.
Problem 9-1 Draw a side and end view showing a steel 
stud wall supporting floor joists. Use a runner track that 
matches the depth of the joists and second runner track 
that matches the studs. 
Problem 9-2 Show a generic end view of the joist/
foundation intersection. Show and specify a runner track 
attached to the foundation attached to an 8" wide 
concrete stem wall with an L-shaped foundation clip 
anchor. 
● Attach the anchor to the stem wall with 1/2" diameter 
kwik bolt with 2 1/4" minimum embedment. Attach 
KEY TERMS
American standard beams
Angle
Channel
Ductile
Elastic range
Flange
Ledgers
Plate (wood)
Plate (steel)
Plate, base
Plate, end
Plate, gusset
Plate, stiffener
Plate, top
Steel bars
Steel columns
Steel tubes
Tee
Web
Wide flange
Yield point
Steel Framing Methods and Materials
CHAPTER 9 TEST

Chapter 9: Steel Framing Methods and Materials 
205
the anchor to the runner track using (6) 5/8" #10-16 
(super-tite) or equal screws.
● Show floor joists w/a web stiffener at the joist/stem 
wall intersection.
● Provide 3/4" plywood sheathing screwed to the 
joists. 
Problem 9-3 Show a view of floor reinforcement where floor 
joists rest on a steel wide-flange beam. Show and specify 
the following materials:
● Attach the floor to the support beam using # 91 
anchor clips at each side of each joist. 
● Use a 36" long joist stiffener centered over the support 
beam. 
● Attach stiffener to joists with 1/4" –14 × 3/4" long 
screws, 2" o.c. placed 1 1/2" up/down along joist/joist 
stiffener.
Problem 9-4 Draw a side and end view to show typical 
wall reinforcement. Provide a horizontal runner track 
on one side of the wall studs. Notch the track flanges 
to lap studs. Attach the runner track to the studs using 
(2) # 1/4" dia. × 3/4" screws at each stud. Provide 1/2" 
gypsum board over each side of the studs. Do not show 
the top or bottom of the studs.
Problem 9-5 Draw the side and end view showing a 7' high 
opening over a typical window or door in a 10' high wall. 
Specify the following materials:
● 4" wide studs with a top track.
● Use back-to-back joists attached w/(2) # 10 × 5/8" 
screws @ 12"o.c. over the opening.
● Provide a stiffener plate at each end of the joists used 
as a header over the opening.
● Provide nested jamb studs at each end of the 
header.
● Uses cripple studs @ 16" o.c. below the header with 
runner tracks at the top/bottom of the studs.
● Attach the runner track at the bottom of the studs 
to the jamb studs. Note on the drawing that the 
runner is to be 8" longer than the opening. Clip 
the flanges of the track 4" from each end bent at 
the clipped flange to attach to the nested joist studs 
with (4) #10-16 × 5/16.
Problem 9-6 Draw the end view of each typical steel shape 
with appropriate hatching and save each shape as a 
wblock, named for the specific shape.
Guidelines for problems 9-7 through 9-15. Unless your instruc-
tor gives other instructions, complete the following details 
using the guidelines presented in “Drawing Criteria for 
Completing Details” of Chapter 6. Skeletons of most of these 
details can be accessed from the student CD. Adjust all scale 
factors as required. Use these drawings as a base to complete 
the assignments:
• 
Show all required views to describe each connection.
• 
Draw each detail at a scale of 1" = 1'–0" unless noted.
• 
Provide a plan view of each plate that contains bolts to show 
the bolt to column relationship. If bolts do not fit in their 
specified location, submit a sketch showing your proposed 
bolt location to your engineer prior to changing the engi-
neer’s design.
Problem 9-7 Show a plan view showing two steel columns 
in a 2 × 6 stud wall. Show the columns as 36" from 
center to center. Specify TS 5 × 5 × 3/8" columns of 
ASTM A500, grade B steel. Cover the exterior side of the 
wall with 7/8" exterior plaster over 5/8" metal lath with 
5/8" Type X gyp board on exterior side of the stud cavity 
containing the steel columns.
Problem 9-8 Show a W12 × 22 with a 3 × 6 DFL #1 top 
plate with 1 " minimum overhang on each side with a 5/8"
diameter 4" stud anchor at 32" o.c. welded to top flange 
with a 3/16" field fillet weld. Hang 2 × 12 DFL #1 floor 
joists at 12" o.c. from the top plate with an appropriate 
hanger for supporting 1300 lbs. Cover the bottom of the 
floor and beam with 7/8" exterior stucco over 3/8" metal 
lath using connections similar to Figure 12.18. Provide 
1 1/2" lightweight concrete flooring over 3/4" T & G 
plywood subfloor.
Problem 9-9 Show a W12 × 30 supporting steel joist. Weld 
a 925SJ16 floor joist at 16" o.c. to the top flange with 
a 1/8" × 3" field fillet weld at each side. Provide a web 
stiffener plate where the joists rest on the beam and weld 
with fillet weld. Cover the bottom of the floor and beam 
with 7/8" exterior stucco over 3.4# metal lath. Provide 
1 1/2" lightweight concrete flooring over 3/4" T & G 
plywood subfloor.
Problem 9-10 Show a W14 × 120 supporting TJL24 joists 
at 32" o.c. support on a 3 × 6 DFPT sill w/5/8" Ø studs 
@ 32" o.c. welded to the top flange with a 1/8" field 
fillet weld.
Problem 9-11 Use the attached sketch to complete the 
required drawing. Use a TS 4 × 4 × 3/16" column to 
support a W16 × 31 beam with a 1/4" end stiffener 
plate welded with a 3/16" fillet weld. Rest beam on 
a 5 1/2" × 11" × 1/2" steel cap plate with (2)-7/8" 
diameter bolts to beam and weld plate to column 
with 3/16" fillet weld, all around. Provide TS 4 × 4 × 
3/16" chevron (diagonal brace) welded to 14 × 11 × 
3/8" gusset plate welded to column and cap plate with 
3/16" fillet weld at all contact points.
● Provide a plan view showing the relationship of the 
bolts, the column, and the gusset plate.
● Bolt 3 × 4 DFL #1 top plate with a 5/8"Ø stud anchor 
at 32" o.c. staggered welded to top flange with a 3/16" 
field fillet weld. 
Set a 6 × 12 DFL #1 beam level with the top plate and 
support beam with a 5 × 7 × 7 ga. steel bucket connec-
tion with a 5/8" diameter M.B. 1 1/2" down and in from 
edge. Weld bucket to end plate w/1/8" fillet all around. 
Tie beam to plate with MST27 strap by Simpson Strong-
Tie Company.

206 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 9-12 Use the attached sketch and a scale of 1 1/2" = 
1'–0" to complete the required drawing. Use a TS 5" × 
5" × 3/8" column to support a W18 × 76 beam bolted to 
11" × 10" × 1 1/4" steel cap plate w/ (4) 5/8" Ø machine 
bolts to beam and weld plate to column with 3/16" fillet 
weld-all-around. Butt W18 × 97 beam into left side and 
W18 × 60 on right. Support each with (2)-4 × 3 1/2 × 
12 × 1/4" angles welded to W18 × 76 with 1/4 × 11 1/2" 
fillet weld and (4)-3/4"Ø machine bolts through 4" leg 
through WF. Set bolts 1 1/2" from angle edge @ 3" o.c. 
Set the top bolt 4 1/2" down from top flange.
 
Use a scale of 3/4" = 1'–0" to draw the following details. 
Base nailing on International Building Code (IBC) stan-
dards unless your instructor tells you otherwise. Specify 
all material based on common local practice. Show and 
specify all connecting materials. Show a front and side 
view or a side and top view to describe each connection.
Problem 9-13 A 6" × 6" × 3/8" steel column will be sup-
ported by a 3/4" × 10" × 10" base plate. Set on a 1" 
mortar base. Use a 3/16" fillet weld-all-around to form 
the connection. The plate will be attached to a concrete 
footing using (4)-3/4" dia. × 12" A.B. laid out on a 7" 
grid that is laid out diagonally to the column.
Problem 9-14 Show a 3 × 6 DFL #1 sill supported on a 
W12 × 30. Use 3/4"Ø stud anchors at 36" o.c. stag-
gered 1 1/2" from plate edge. Use a 1/8" fillet, field weld 
all around. Use 2"Ø washers. Provide 2 × 12 DFL #1 
floor joist @ 16" o.c. to the plate. Provide solid block-
ing between the floor joist, and provide 3/4" std. grade 
plywood nailed with 10d @ 4"/8" o.c. to support 1 1/2" 
lightweight concrete over 55 # felt.
Problem 9-15 Show a 6" × 6" × 3/16" steel column with a 
Simpson Co. HL46 angle welded on two opposing sides 
with a 3/16" fillet weld-all-around in the field. Support 
a 5 1/8 × 15 glu-lam beam on each angle w/ 1/4" clear 
between the column and the beam. Bolt the beam to the 
angle using lag screws per the manufacturer’s size recom-
mendations. Use a Simpson Co. MST 27 strap on each 
side of the beams, bolted to each beam and welded to the 
steel column with a 1/8" × 3" long fillet field weld. Place 
the strap so that minimum recommended sizes for bolt 
placement in the strap will be met for wood and steel. 
Review Chapter 6 for minimum clearances required for 
placement.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
207
207
10
Unit Masonry Methods and Materials
Masonry products have been in use for thousands of 
years because of their durability and aesthetic quali-
ties. They provide an environmentally friendly use of 
clay, water, and other natural resources used in their 
construction, as well as excellent life-cycle cost analysis. 
Masonry construction consists of setting building mate-
rials in a bed of mortar. Brick, stone, glass, and concrete 
masonry units (CMUs) are the materials commonly 
used in masonry construction. 
This chapter examines methods of construction 
typically used with brick and concrete masonry units. 
Topics to be explored include: 
● Brick construction.
● Concrete masonry construction.
● Steel reinforcement.
● Mortar and grout.
BRICK CONSTRUCTION
Bricks are made in various colors and textures by press-
ing different types of clay, shale, and a combination of 
oxides in a mold of a desired shape and size. Brick is usu-
ally produced in red, brown, and gray tones. Common 
surfaces include smooth, water or sand struck, scored, 
wire-cut, combed, and roughened. Bricks can also be 
finished with a ceramic glaze—providing a polished 
finished in any color. The International Building Code 
(IBC) relies on information provided by the American 
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) for most 
technical information related to clay and shale masonry 
units. Key standards include:
ASTM C34 
 Structural clay load-bearing wile tile
ASTM C56 
 Structural clay nonload-bearing wile 
tile
ASTM C62 
 Building brick—solid masonry units 
made from clay or shale
ASTM C126 
 Ceramic-glazed structural clay facing 
tile
ASTM C212 
Structural clay facing tile
ASTM C216 
 Facing brick—solid masonry units 
made from clay or shale
ASTM C652 
 Hollow brick—hollow masonry 
units made from clay or shale
ASTM C1088 
Solid units of thin veneer brick
ASTM C1405   Glazed brick—single-fired solid brick 
units
Brick Types
Bricks are produced in solid, cored, and hollow units. 
Cored units are considered to be solid if a minimum of 
75% of the cross-sectional area is solid. A brick is con-
sidered to be hollow if it has at least 25%, but not greater 
than 60% void areas. Vertical cores are placed in bricks 
to reduce the weight of the brick.
Common or building brick is most widely used in 
the construction industry. Face brick is produced to 
standards that indicate units in specific sizes, textures, 
and colors. Other types of brick used in construction 
include the following:
● Adobe brick is made from a mixture of natural clay 
and straw that is placed in molds and dried in 
the sun. These units require protection from rain 
and subsurface moisture unless a moisture-proofing 
agent is added.
● Back-up brick is inferior units used in applications 
where they can’t be seen, for example, behind face 
brick.
● Economy brick is a brick with nominal dimensions of 
4" × 4" × 8" (100 × 100 × 200 mm).
● Engineered brick is a brick with nominal dimensions 
of 4" × 3.2" × 8" (100 × 80 × 200 mm).
● Fire brick is brick with a high resistance to high tem-
perature, used for the facing material of the firebox of 
a fireplace.
● Hollow bricks are masonry units of clay or shale 
that are cored in excess of 25% of the gross cross-
sectional area.

208 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Jumbo brick is a generic term indicating a brick larger 
in size than the standard. Some producers use this 
term to describe oversized brick of specific dimensions.
● Norman brick is a brick whose nominal dimensions 
are 4" × 2 2/3" × 12" (100 × 66 × 300 mm).
● Paving brick is masonry units with a hard, dense 
surface used for floor applications.
● Roman brick is brick whose nominal dimensions are 
4" × 2" × 12" (100 × 50 × 300 mm).
The type of brick to be used is normally indicated 
by the drafter on the floor and elevations as well as in 
written specifications. The surface of the brick to be 
exposed is also often specified. Each surface of a unit 
has a specific name, as shown in Figure 10-1. The sur-
face name is often referred to in written specifications 
to determine which surface will be displayed or cut. For 
some applications, the mason must cut units to meet the 
design criteria. Common methods of cutting brick are 
illustrated in Figure 10-2.
Brick Quality
Strength, appearance, and durability determine the 
quality of brick. The quality is specified in the written 
specifications. Common brick is classified into three 
grades, determined by the weather conditions it will be 
required to withstand. 
● Grade SW is for severe weather conditions, which 
include heavy rains or sustained below-freezing 
conditions. 
● Grade MW is for moderate weather conditions for 
use in areas with moderate rainfall and some freezing 
conditions.
● Grade NW is for use in areas with negligible weath-
ering from minimal rainfall and above-freezing tem-
peratures.
Face brick is rated for durability of exposure and is 
available in grades SW and MW. It is also identified 
by the ASTM specifications, which dictate the range 
allowed in size, texture, color, and structural quality. 
● Grade FBA brick is nonuniform in size, color, and 
texture. 
● Grade FBS brick allows for variations in mechanical 
perfection with a wide range of color variation. 
● Grade FBX has the highest degree of mechanical 
perfection and is the most controlled for color 
variation.
Hollow brick is classified by SW or MW as well as by 
factors that affect its appearance. 
● Graded HBA is nonuniform in size, color, and 
texture. 
● Grade HBS is more controlled than HBA brick but 
allows for some size variation and a wide color 
range. 
● Grade HBX has the highest degree of mechanical 
perfection with the least variation in size and the 
smallest range in color.
Brick Sizes
To effectively control the cost in using brick and to
minimize labor, structures using masonry units 
should conform to the size of the unit being used. 
Bricks vary in size not only because of the variety 
of bricks made, but also because of shrinkage in the 
drying process.
Modular bricks were developed to regulate the 
coursing dimensions. An economy-8 modular brick 
FACE
BED
END
SIDE
CULL
BED
SURFACES OF A BRICK
FIGURE 10-1  Each surface of a brick is named to indicate how 
it is to be positioned.
HALF
THREE-QUARTER
QUARTER CLOSED
KING CLOSER
QUEEN CLOSER
SPLIT
FIGURE 10-2  Brick can be cut into various shapes based on 
the pattern used to position each unit.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
209
is 3 1/2" high and 7 1/2" long laid with 1/2" joints. 
It will produce courses exactly 4" high and 8" long. 
Brick sizes are controlled by the Standard Guide for 
Modular Construction of Clay and Concrete Masonry 
Units (ASTM document E835/E835M). This docu-
ment establishes metric dimensions for clay and con-
crete products based on the basic building module 
of 100 mm. Many common brick sizes are within a 
millimeter or two of metric module sizes and nearly 
all can fit within a 100 mm module vertically by 
using 10 mm joint widths. Verify the exact size of 
masonry units and their availability with local sup-
pliers. Common nominal sizes of standard bricks are 
listed in Table 10-1.
Brick Shapes and Placement
Common shapes of brick are shown in Figure 10-3. 
One of the most popular features of brick is the wide 
variety of positions and patterns that can be created. 
These patterns are achieved by placing bricks in various 
positions relative to one another. The position in which 
the brick is placed will alter what the brick course is 
called. Figure 10-4 illustrates common brick positions 
and their names. Figure 10-5 shows examples of how 
these patterns would be represented. Common patterns 
for laying masonry units are illustrated in Figure 10-6. 
The brick pattern is represented and specified on the 
elevation.
Wall Construction
Bricks can be placed in any of the positions shown 
in Figures 10-4 and 10-6 to form a wall, as well as a 
variety of bonds and patterns. Masonry units are laid 
in rows called courses and in vertical planes called 
wythes. Figure 10-7 shows an example of single-
wythe construction with the temporary supports still 
in place. Single-wythe walls are made with structural 
SOLDIER COURSE
STRETCHER 
COURSE
LAID
RUNNING
BOND
ROWLOCK COURSE
FIGURE 10-5  Brick patterns are represented and specified in 
exterior elevations.
STANDARD
BULL NOSE
DOUBLE BULL 
INTERNAL 
EXTERNAL
NOSE
OCTAGON
BULL NOSE
INTERNAL
OCTAGON
 COVE 
HOLLOW 
STRUCTURAL
BOND
BRICK
BEAM 
HEADER
BRICK
CORES
 FROG
CELLS
FIGURE 10-3  Standard brick shapes.
HEADER
COURSE
ROWLOCK
COURSE
SAILOR
COURSE
SOLDIER
COURSE
SHINER
COURSE
STRETCHER
COURSE
FIGURE 10-4  Names of common brick placement patterns.

210 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Unit Name 
Size (in.)
Actual Size 
(mm)
Actual Metric 
Size (mm)
Modular Metric 
Vertical Coursing
Modular 
width
3 1/2" 
89 
90
3:8" 
Metric modular
height
2 1/4"
57
57
3:200 mm
length
7 1/2"
190
190 
Engineer 
width 
3 1/2"
 89 
 90 
5:16" 
Modular 
height 
2 3/4" 
 70 
 70 
5:400 mm 
length 
7 1/2" 
190 
190 
Roman 
width 
3 1/2"
 89 
 90 
4:8" 
height 
1 5/8" 
 41 
 40 
4:200 mm 
length 
11 1/2" 
292 
290
Norman 
width 
3 1/2" 
 89 
 90 
3:8" 
Metric Norman 
height 
2 1/4" 
 57 
 57 
3:200 mm 
length 
11 1/2" 
292 
290 
Engineer 
width 
3 1/2" 
 89 
 90 
5:16" 
Norman 
height 
2 3/4" 
 70 
 70 
5:400 mm 
length 
 11 1/2" 
292 
290 
Utility 
width 
3 1/2" 
 89 
 90 
2:8 
Metric Jumbo 
height 
3 1/2" 
 89 
 90 
5:400 mm 
length 
11 1/2" 
292 
290 
Standard 
width 
3 5/8" 
 92 
 90 
3:16" 
height 
2 1/4" 
 57 
 57 
3:200 mm 
length 
8" 
203 
200 
*Engineer 
width 
3 5/8" 
 92 
5:16" 
Standard 
height 
21 3/16" 
 71 
 70 
5:400 mm 
length 
8" 
203 
*King 
width 
3" 
 76 
5:16" 
height 
2 3/4" 
 70 
 70 
5:400 mm 
length 
9 5/8" 
245
TABLE 10-1 Common Nominal Masonry Unit Sizes (Courtesy Construction Metrication)
Note: Bricks identified with an * are not a modular unit in either inch-pound or the metric system. Vertical coursings are based on 9 to 11 mm 
mortar joint, depending on the brick height.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
211
bricks (see Figure 10-3) with steel reinforcing placed 
per local codes to resist lateral loads. Brick walls 
normally consist of two wythes, with a 2" to 3" air 
space between each wythe. This type of construction 
is referred to as a cavity wall. Rigid foam insulation 
can be placed against the inner wythe to increase the 
R-value of the wall. If the space is filled with grout, it 
is called a grouted cavity wall. Reinforcing steel can be 
placed in the air space between wythes and then sur-
rounded by solid grout.
If the wythes are connected, the wall is referred 
to as a solid wall. A bond is the connection between 
the wythes to add stability to the wall so that the entire 
assembly acts as a single structural unit. It can be 
made by either wire ties or by masonry members. The 
Flemish and English bonds of Figure 10-8 are the most 
common methods of bonding two wythes together. 
The Flemish bond consists of alternating headers and 
stretchers in each course. (A course of masonry is one 
unit in height.) An English bond consists of alternat-
ing courses of headers and stretchers. In each case the 
header spans between wythes to keep the wall from 
separating. The bonding course is usually placed at 
every sixth course.
The cavity between wythes is typically 2" (50 mm) 
wide and creates approximately a 10" (250 mm) wide 
wall with masonry exposed on both the exterior and 
interior surfaces. The air space between wythes pro-
vides an effective barrier to moisture penetration to 
the interior wall. Weep holes must be provided in the 
lower course of the exterior wythe to allow moisture to 
escape. Rigid insulation can be applied to the interior 
wythe to increase the insulation value of the air space in 
cold climates. Care must be taken to keep the insulation 
from touching the exterior wythe so that moisture is not 
transferred to the interior. Metal ties are embedded in 
mortar joints at approximately 16" (400 mm) to tie each 
pair of the wythes together.
If a masonry wall is to be used to support a floor, a 
space one wythe wide will be left to support the joist 
similar to Figure 10-9a. For a single-wythe wall, the 
structural member can be supported on a full wythe, 
and a queen closer is used to create a cavity for the 
structural member (see Figure 10-9b). Joists are usu-
ally required to be strapped to the wall so that the 
wall and floor will move together under lateral stress. 
The strap will be specified on the framing plan and 
the details. The end of the joist must be cut on an 
angle. This cut is called a fire cut and will be specified 
in the details. If the floor joists were to be damaged 
by fire, the fire cut will allow the floor joist to fall out 
of the wall, without destroying the wall. A fire cut is 
shown in Figure 10-10.
STACKED BOND
8x16 UNITS
STACKED BOND
 4x16 UNITS
STACKED BOND
STACKED BOND VER.
SCORED UNITS
STACKED BOND
8x16 & 4x16 
UNITS
8x16 & 4x16 
UNITS
STACKED BOND
8x16 UNITS
COMMON BOND
4x16 UNITS
COMMON BOND
UNITS
8x16  & 4x16
COURSED ASHLAR
8x16 & 4x16 
8x16, 8x8, 
8x16 & 8x8
UNITS
UNITS
COURSED ASHLAR
RANDOM ASHLAR
COURSED ASHLAR
4x16, & 4x8 UNITS
8x16 & 4x16
UNITS
FIGURE 10-6  Common patterns for placing masonry units.
FIGURE 10-7 A single-wythe masonry wall can be constructed 
of structural brick with steel reinforcing. Masonry units over 
openings are temporarily supported by wood members until 
the grout can cure and achieve its full strength. Courtesy Sara 
Jefferis.

212 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Brick is very porous and absorbs moisture easily. 
Some method must be provided to protect the end of 
the joist from absorbing moisture from the masonry. 
The end of the joist is wrapped with 55# felt and set 
in a 1/2" (13 mm) air space. The interior of a masonry 
wall also must be protected from moisture. A layer of 
hot asphaltic emulsion can be applied to the inner side 
of the interior wythe and a furring strip can be attached 
to the wall. In addition to supporting sheet rock or plas-
ter, the space between the furring strips can be used to 
hold batt or rigid insulation.
An alternative method of attaching a floor to a brick 
wall is with the use of a pressure-treated ledger bolted 
 
FACE BRICK
METAL TIES
COMMON BRICK
WYTHE
WYTHE
FACE BRICK
WYTHE
FLEMISH BOND
WYTHE
COMMON BRICK
HALF BRICK
COMMON BRICK
ENGLISH BOND
WYTHE
FACE BRICK
WYTHE
ENGLISH BOND
METAL TIES
ENGLISH BOND
FLEMISH BOND
FIGURE 10-8  Brick walls can be reinforced by using metal ties 
or by placing brick bonds to connect each wythe. Common 
bonds include the Flemish and English.
 FLOOR
 JOIST
FOOTING
SILL
FIGURE 10-9a  If a masonry wall is to be used to support a 
floor, a space one wythe wide will be left to support the joists.
FIGURE 10-9b Floor or roof framing members can be sup-
ported on a full brick, whereas a half-brick is used to hide the 
end of the structural member. Courtesy Tereasa Jefferis.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
213
to the wall with the bolts tied to the wall reinforcing. 
The joists are connected to the ledger with metal hang-
ers. Figure 10-11 shows an example of the use of a 
ledger. When a roof-framing system is to be supported 
on masonry, a pressure-treated plate is usually bolted 
to the brick in a manner similar to the way a plate is 
attached to a concrete foundation.
Figure 10-12 shows how roof members are typically 
attached to masonry.
Brick Joints
The joints between each course of brick must be speci-
fied on the construction drawings. Common methods 
of finishing the mortar in joints are illustrated in 
Figure 10-13. In addition to the type of joint being 
specified for decorative purposes, joints must also be 
used to relieve stress in the wall. Walls longer than 200' 
(60,960 mm) or walls in a building having two or more 
wings must have expansion joints. An expansion joint 
is a seam placed in a wall to relieve cracking caused by 
expansion or contraction. Rather than causing random 
cracks throughout the brick, the stress is relieved in 
the expansion joint. Two common methods of con-
structing an expansion joint in brick walls are shown 
in Figure 10-14.
FLOOR  JOISTS
METAL STRAP
FIRE  CUT IN
FLOOR  JOISTS
FIGURE 10-10  A fire cut is placed in floor and roof members 
to prevent wall damage in case of a fire.
LEDGER &
ANCHOR BOLTS
HORIZ. BOND BEAM
METAL HANGER
FLOOR  JOIST
SOLID GROUT ALL 
STEEL CELLS
FIGURE 10-11  A double-wythe brick wall with the floor 
system supported by a wood ledger that is bolted to the wall.
LEDGER &
ANCHOR BOLTS
HORIZ. BOND BEAM
RAFTERS
2x P.T. PLATE
W/ ANCHOR BOLT
CEILING JOISTS
FIGURE 10-12  Roof trusses are attached to a masonry wall 
using a ledger or by resting on a pressure-treated plate.

214 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Brick Reinforcement
Load-bearing masonry walls must be reinforced. The 
architect or engineer will determine the size and spac-
ing of the rebar to be used based on the loads to be 
supported and the stress from wind or seismic loads. 
Rebar specifications will be discussed later in this 
chapter.
Most brick walls are reinforced with a wire reinforce-
ment pattern similar to those shown in Figure 10-15. 
The IBC requires wire that meets ASTM-A82 specifica-
tions. Depending on the manufacturer, wire is usually 8 
or 9 gauge or 3/16" diameter. Welded wire reinforcement 
and wire ties do not change size for metric use. The 
engineer will specify the required type and size based 
on the vertical loads to be supported, and the seis-
mic and wind loads will affect the placement. Wire 
reinforcement similar to that shown in Figure 10-15
is usually placed continuously in horizontal mortar 
joints at six-course intervals. The top course and the first 
two courses above and below any wall opening should 
WEATHERED
ROUND
FLUSH
"V"-SHAPED
STRIPPED
RAKED
TROWELED
BEADED
SQUEEZED OR
RODDED
EXTRUDED
MASONRY JOINTS (INTERIOR USE OR 
THAT DO NOT SHED WATER
MASONRY JOINTS WHICH SHED WATER
OR EXTERIOR USE IN DRY CLIMATES)
FIGURE 10-13  Common methods of finishing mortar joints.
ELASTIC JOINT
SEALANT
METAL TIES
16" O.C. VERT.
PREMOLDED
COMPRESSIBLE
FILLER
FELT TO
BUILDING
BREAK BOND
COVER PLATE
(OPTIONAL)
COLUMN
CONCRETE
ELASTIC
JOINT
ANCHORS
FLEXIBLE
SEALANT
FILLER
PREMOLDED
COMPRESSIBLE
JOINT
SEALANT
16" O.C. VET.
METAL TIES
EXPANSION JOINT IN 
EXPANSION JOINT IN 
STRAIGHT BRICK WALL
CONCEALED COLUMN
FIGURE 10-14  Two methods of constructing expansion joints 
to relieve cracking in masonry walls.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
215
be reinforced in all walls. The reinforcement should 
extend 24" (600 mm) minimum beyond each side of 
the opening. The cavity space between wythes is filled 
with grout and normally reinforced with vertical and 
horizontal steel. Steel reinforcement will be introduced 
later in this chapter.
Brick Veneer Construction
Using brick veneer over a wood, steel, or concrete 
masonry load-bearing wall allows the amount of brick 
required to be cut in half, greatly reducing the cost 
of construction. Care must be taken to protect the 
wood or steel frame from moisture in the masonry. 
Brick is installed over a 1" (25 mm) air space and a 
15# layer of felt is applied to the framing. The veneer 
is attached to the framing with 26-gauge metal ties 
at 24" (600 mm) o.c. along each stud. Figure 10-16 
shows an example of how masonry veneer is attached 
to a wood- or steel-frame wall. Masonry can also be 
attached to a steel frame as shown in Figure 10-17. 
When the flange is parallel to the masonry, straps 
measuring approximately 2" × 7" × 1/8" (50 × 180 ×
3 mm) are used to bond the masonry to the steel. 
When the web is parallel to the masonry, 16-gauge 
straps are typically used to connect the masonry to 
the steel frame.
CONCRETE MASONRY CONSTRUCTION
Concrete masonry units (CMUs) similar to Figure 
10-18 provide a durable, economical building material 
with excellent structural and insulation values. The IBC 
relies on information provided by the ASTM for most 
technical information related to CMUs. Key standards 
include:
ASTM C55 
Concrete brick
ASTM C73 
Calcium silicate face brick
ASTM C90 
Load-bearing concrete masonry units
ASTM C744 
 Prefaced concrete and calcium silicate 
masonry units
CMU walls are usually single-wythe, but they may 
be combined with a wythe of decorative stone or brick. 
Figure 10-19 shows standard wall construction. The 
IBC does not allow concrete block walls to exceed 35' 
(10,700 mm) in height between diaphragms. CMUs can 
1 WIRE TRUSS
2 WIRE TRUSS
2 WIRE TRUSS W/ TAB
2 WIRE LADDER
3 WIRE LADDER
FIGURE 10-15  Standard wire reinforcement patterns for 
masonry walls.
PLYWOOD 
SUBFLOOR
STUDS
SHEATHING
VAPOR BARRIER
METAL TIES
BRICK VENEER
CONCRETE 
FOOTING
STEM WALL
RIM JOIST
SILL
FLOOR JOIST
MUDSILL
FIGURE 10-16  Brick is attached to wood or steel stud walls by 
the use of metal ties placed on each stud. 
METAL TIES
STEEL COLUMNS
FIGURE 10-17  Brick can be attached to a steel skeleton by the 
use of metal ties that attach to the steel column.

216 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
be waterproofed with clear waterproof sealers, cement-
based paints can be used as the exterior finish, or the 
walls can be covered with stucco. Pressure-treated wood 
furring strips can be attached to the interior side of the 
block to support sheet rock, or the interior surface can 
be left exposed. Concrete blocks are also used for below-
grade construction, which is discussed in Chapter 24.
Grades
Four classifications are used to define concrete blocks 
for construction. These include hollow, load-bearing 
(ASTM C90), solid load-bearing (ASTM C145), and 
nonload-bearing blocks (ASTM C129) that can be 
either solid or hollow blocks. Solid blocks must 
be 75% solid material in any cross-sectional plane. 
Blocks are also classified by their weight as normal, 
medium, and lightweight blocks. The weight of the 
block is affected by the type of aggregate used to form 
the unit. Normal aggregates such as crushed rock 
and gravel produce a block weight of between 40 and 
50 lbs (18 and 23 kg) for an 8" × 8" × 16" block. 
Lightweight aggregates include coal cinders, shale, 
clay, volcanic cinders, pumice, and vermiculite. Use 
of a lightweight aggregate will produce approximately 
a 50% savings in weight. Walls made of CMUs are 
able to qualify for up to a four-hour fire rating. The 
type of aggregate used in the block and the thickness 
of the block dictate the fire rating. Blocks made with 
pumice in a minimum of 6" (150 mm) wide units 
produce a four-hour rating.
Common Sizes
CMUs come in a wide variety of patterns and shapes. 
In the United States, the standard module for concrete 
FIGURE 10-18  Although labor intensive, concrete masonry 
units provide a durable, economical building material that pro-
vides excellent structural and insulation values. Courtesy Janice 
Jefferis.
FOOTING
LEDGER &
ANCHOR BOLTS
HORIZ. BOND BEAM
@ WALL MID-HEIGHT
SOLID GROUT ALL 
STEEL CELLS
EA. FLOOR
BOND BEAM @ 
METAL HANGERS
I-JOISTS
CONCRETE SLAB
HORIZ. BOND BEAM
ANCHOR BOLTS
LEDGER &
OVER GRAVEL FILL
OVER FURRING
INTERIOR FINISH 
STIFFNER
PLATE
REINFORCEMENT
SLAB TIE
REINFORCEMENT
FIGURE 10-19  Standard concrete block wall construction. 
Walls are reinforced with steel rebar that is placed in solid grout 
to strengthen the wall. Extra steel referred to as a bond beam is 
typically placed where each floor or roof intersects the wall, at 
the mid-height between each floor, and at the top of the wall.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
217
masonry units is 4 inches. Standard inch-pound blocks 
are manufactured to 4", 6", 8", 10", and 12" nominal 
widths, 4" and 8" heights, and 8" and 16" lengths. The 
most commonly used sizes are 8" and 16" blocks with 
8 × 8 × 16 the industry standard. Each dimension of a 
concrete block is actually 3/8" smaller to allow for a 3/8" 
mortar joint in each direction.
Metric Block Sizes
The size of metric block will depend on whether the 
block size is based on soft or hard conversion. Soft con-
version requires no physical change in product size. An 
8 × 8 × 16 would be relabeled as a 203 × 203 × 406. 
This relabeling of inch-pound block is referred to as a 
soft conversion. A designer working with a 4" design 
module would now be working with a design module 
of 101.6.
With hard metric conversion, masonry blocks are 
manufactured to metric specifications based on a 100 
mm module. Hard metric conversion requires the use 
of new molds to produce blocks that are 200 × 200 ×
400 mm. This requires block manufacturers to pur-
chase new block molds, maintain dual inventories, and 
develop ways of distinguishing between similar looking 
metric and inch-pound blocks during storage and ship-
ping. Metric (hard) blocks are manufactured to nominal 
dimensions of 100, 200, 250, and 300 mm widths, 100 
and 200 mm heights, and 200 and 400 mm lengths. 
Actual dimensions are 10 mm smaller than the nomi-
nal size to allow for the vertical and horizontal mortar 
joints. A designer would now be working with a design 
module of 100.
Metric Layout
The designer and the CAD drafter must take care 
in planning and drawing a CMU structure. Severe 
problems will result if the hard conversion metric 
blocks are used in a building designed with soft metric 
dimensions and vise versa. With soft conversion, a 
4" module will be 101.6 mm or 1.6% larger than a 
100 mm block. This may seem unimportant, but 
the difference of 1.6 mm (approximately 1/16") will 
accumulate to become 3.2 mm (1/8") in 8 inches, 6.4 
mm (1/4") in 16" and 19.2 mm (3/4") in 48 inches. 
This size difference will be huge in a wall of several 
hundred feet. Because concrete block is too big to fit 
within the standard 100 mm module without changing 
all block sizes, federally funded block structures can be 
drawn in either inch/pound or metric sizes. The U.S. 
Congress allows the use of either inch-pound blocks 
or metric blocks for federal construction projects. The 
National Concrete Masonry Association makes the 
following recommendations for those involved in the 
design of a metric structure: 
1. The architect should verify the availability of the size 
and type of building components before establishing 
if the design is to be based on soft or hard conver-
sions.
2. Hard conversions should be used only when all com-
ponents are readily available in metric modular sizes 
from multiple suppliers.
3. Soft metric design should be used when hard metric 
components are not readily available.
4. Soft metric structures should be designed in inch-
pound units and then all dimensions should be con-
verted to their metric equivalents.
5. If hard metric design methods are to be used, special 
consideration should be given to the use of custom 
7.5" (190.5 mm) high units and the placement of 
openings.
Figure 10-20 shows the difference in layouts between 
hard and soft conversions for horizontal and vertical 
coursings.
Modular Block Layout
To minimize cutting and labor cost, concrete block 
structures should be kept to their modular size. 
When using the standard 8" × 8" × 16" (200 × 
200 × 400 mm) CMU, structures that are an even 
number of feet long should have dimensions that 
end in 0" or 8". For instance, walls that are 24'–0" or 
32'–8" long are each modular. Walls that are an odd 
number of feet should end with 4". Walls that are 
3'–4", 9'–4", and 15'–4" are modular, but a wall that 
is 15'–8" requires blocks to be cut.
Common Shapes 
In addition to the exterior patterns, concrete blocks also 
come in a variety of shapes, as shown in Figure 10-21.
Individual blocks are manufactured with two or three 
cores. Solid blocks are also manufactured. Two-core 
concrete blocks reduce heat conduction by approxi-
mately 4%, have more space for mechanical pipes and 
conduits, and weigh about 4 lbs (1.8 kg) less than a 
three-core block. These cores also allow for the place-
ment of steel reinforcement bars, although steel-
reinforcing mesh—similar to the mesh used for brick—
can also be used. Reinforcement is discussed later in 
this chapter.
Concrete blocks come in a variety of surface finishes. 
A standard block has a smooth but porous finish. The 
texture of the block can be modified by changing the 

218 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
coarseness of the aggregate used to make the block. Grid 
face or scored face blocks are made with seams cut into 
the block, so that they resemble 8" × 8" × 8" (200 ×
200 × 200 mm) blocks rather than 16" (400 mm)
blocks. Seams are also available at 4" (100 mm) o.c. 
Blocks are also available with a raised or recessed geo-
metric shape pressed into the face.
Masonry Representation
Brick and concrete block are represented on plan views 
with bold lines used to represent the edges of the 
masonry. Thin lines for hatching are placed at a 45° 
angle to the edge of the wall using approximately 0.125 
spacing. The AutoCAD ANSI31 hatch pattern is the 
common method of hatching masonry. The type, size, 
and reinforcement are specified in note form but are 
not represented on the drawings (see Figure 10-22). If 
brick and concrete block walls are to be represented, the 
hatch patterns are placed at opposing angles.
The size and location of concrete block walls are 
dimensioned on the floor plan. Concrete block is 
dimensioned from edge to edge of walls, as shown in 
Figure 10-23. Openings in the wall are also located by 
dimensioning to the edge. The scale of the drawing 
affects the drawing method used to represent masonry 
shown in sections and details. At scales under 1/2" = 
1'–0", the wall is usually drawn just as in plan view. 
At larger scales, details typically reflect the cells of the 
HARD METRIC SIZES
INCH-POUND SIZES
SOFT METRIC SIZES
STORY HEIGHT
9.5 mm (3/8")
JOINTS
STANDARD SOFT
METRIC UNITS
9.5 mm (3/8")
STORY HEIGHT
JOINTS
CUSTOM  (7.5") SOFT
METRIC UNITS
FIGURE 10-20  A comparison of hard and soft metric conver-
sions for horizontal and vertical coursings.
DOUBLE
CORNER
STRETCHER
( 3 CORE )
CORNER
BULL  NOSE
SOLID TOP
FULL  CUT
HEADER
HALF  CUT
HEADER
LINTEL
HALF
CORNER
STRETCHER
 ( 2 CORE)
JAMB
BOND BLOCK
PILASTER BLOCKS
BOND BLOCK
FIGURE 10-21  Standard shapes of concrete masonry units.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
219
block. Figure 10-24 shows methods of representing 
concrete block in cross section.
Figure 10-25 shows an example of a section and 
the notes that usually accompany concrete block 
construction.
When CMUs have to support loads from a beam, 
a pilaster is placed in the wall to carry the loads. A 
pilaster is a thickened area of wall used to support grav-
ity loads or to provide lateral support to the wall when 
the wall is to span long distances. Figure 10-26 shows 
a detail showing the size and thickness of a pilaster. 
Figure 10-22 shows how a pilaster is represented in 
plan view.
Details similar to Figure 10-27 are required to show 
reinforcement connections at each intersection and 
where different materials are joined to the blocks. This 
will require the drafter to draw wall-to-footing, wall-
to-slab, wall-to-wall, wall-opening, and wall-to-roof 
details. When a wood floor or roof is to be supported 
by the block, a ledger is bolted to the block. Holes 
are punched in the block to allow an anchor bolt to 
FIGURE 10-22  Representing masonry units in plan view. 
CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS
FIGURE 10-23  Structural brick and concrete masonry units 
are dimensioned from exterior face to exterior face. Brick 
veneer is not dimensioned in plan view. The drafter should 
take great care to maintain modular sizes as masonry walls are 
dimensioned. 
UNREINFORCED
MASONRY
REPRESENTING CMUs
IN SECTION & DETAIL
FIGURE 10-24  Methods of representing CMUs in sections and 
details.
FIGURE 10-25  Representing brick and CMUs in detail. Courtesy 
G. Williamson Archer A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.

220 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
penetrate into the cell, where it is wired to the wall rein-
forcing. The block is reinforced and the bolt and rebar 
are held in place by filling the entire cell with grout. 
Figures 10-28a and 10-28b show details for wood and 
steel floor connections to a block wall. Care must be 
taken to tie the ledger bolts into the wall reinforcement, 
as well as securely tying the floor joist to the ledger. 
Figure 10-28c shows a ledger attached to a CMU wall 
with beam hangers in place. 
The same procedure must be followed when a roof 
is tied into a wall. In addition, methods of keeping the 
intersection waterproof must be implemented. The 
roofing is usually extended up the wall over a cant strip 
that is covered with metal flashing, which sheds water 
from the joint. Figure 10-29 shows examples of how the 
roof intersections are represented in detail. Figure 10-30 
shows examples of common mortar wall caps that are 
used to protect the top of the masonry from moisture.
STEEL REINFORCEMENT
Masonry units are excellent for resisting forces from 
compression, but they are poor for resisting forces in 
tension. Steel is excellent for resisting forces of tension, 
but it tends to buckle under forces of compression. The 
combination of these two materials forms an excellent 
unit for resisting great loads from lateral and vertical 
FIGURE 10-26  Construction detail of a concrete block pilaster.
FIGURE 10-27  Details are required to show intersections with 
each material to be used as well as intersections of floor and 
roof systems. Courtesy G. Williamson Archer A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
221
forces. Reinforced masonry structures are stable because 
the masonry, steel, grout, and mortar bond together 
so effectively. Loads that create compression on the 
masonry are transferred to the steel. By careful place-
ment of the steel, the forces will result in tension on the 
steel and be safely resisted.
FIGURE 10-28a Connecting a floor system to a masonry wall. 
Courtesy G. Williamson Archer A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.
FIGURE 10-28b Connecting a floor system to a masonry wall 
using a pressure-treated ledger.
FIGURE 10-28c A pressure-treated ledger attached to a CMU 
wall. Metal hangers have been attached in preparation for 
installation of floor beams. Courtesy Janice Jefferis.
FIGURE 10-29  The method used to waterproof the wall/roof 
intersection must be represented in detail as well as the written 
specifications.

222 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Reinforcing Bars
Placing steel in the masonry creates a wall known as 
reinforced masonry construction. An intersecting hori-
zontal and vertical grid of concrete reinforced with steel 
runs throughout a concrete block wall, forms the frame 
for a structure. Although wire mesh similar to that used 
with brick can be used in concrete block, steel reinforc-
ing bars are the most common method of reinforcing 
concrete block. The IBC sets specific guidelines for the 
size and spacing of rebar based on the seismic zone of the 
construction site. Reinforcement is specified by the engi-
neer throughout the calculations and sketches based on 
the building code and the Portland Cement Association 
(PCA) and the Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute 
(CRSI) guidelines, and it must be accurately represented 
by the drafter. 
Rebar Sizes and Shapes
Reinforcing bars can be either smooth or deformed. 
Smooth bars are primarily used for joints in floor slabs. 
Because the bars are smooth, the concrete of the slab 
does not bond easily to the bar. This allows the con-
crete to expand and contract. Bars used for reinforcing 
masonry walls are usually deformed similar to those 
shown in Figure 10-31 so that the concrete will bond 
more effectively with the bar. This prevents slippage as 
the wall flexes under pressure.
The deformations are small ribs that are placed 
around the surface of the bar. Deformed bars range in 
size from 3/8" to 2 1/4" (10 to 57 mm) diameter. Bars 
are referenced on plans by a number rather than a size. A 
number represents the size of the steel in approximately 
1/8" increments. Steel reinforcing bars conform to ASTM 
A615M standards for metric reinforcing bars. This ASTM 
standard specifies that reinforcing bars for metric projects 
are to be listed by their soft metric conversion sizes. This 
standard also governs the size and the physical charac-
teristics of rebar. Steel may be either grade 40, with a 
minimum yield strength of 40 ksi (275 MPa), or grade 
60, with a minimum yield strength of 60 ksi (415 MPa). 
Common bar sizes of steel are shown in Table 10-2.
Steel Placement
Reinforcing steel is required in all masonry walls in 
seismic zones C, D, E, and F. Wall reinforcing is held 
FIGURE 10-30 Common masonry wall caps.
Traditional Bar Size
Nominal Diameter in Inches
Nominal Diameter in Millimeters
Soft Metric Size
# 3 
0.375 
 9.5 
# 10 
# 4 
0.500 
12.7 
# 13 
# 5 
0.625 
15.9 
# 16 
# 6 
0.750 
19.1 
# 19 
# 7 
0.875 
22.2 
# 22 
# 8 
1.000 
25.4 
# 25 
# 9 
1.128 
28.7 
# 29 
# 10 
1.270 
32.3 
# 32 
# 11 
1.410 
35.8 
# 36 
# 14 
1.693
43.0 
# 43 
# 18
2.257 
57.3 
# 57
TABLE 10-2 Common Bar Sizes and Dimensions of Steel 
FIGURE 10-31 Common deformed steel reinforcing patterns.

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
223
in place with wire ties and by filling each masonry 
cell containing steel with grout. When exact locations 
within the cell are required by design, the steel is wired 
into position, so that it can’t move as grout is added to 
the cell. The placement of steel varies with each applica-
tion, but steel reinforcement is placed on the side of the 
wall that is in tension.
Because an aboveground wall will receive pressure 
from each side, masonry walls have the steel centered 
in the wall cavity. For cantilevered retaining walls, steel 
is placed near the soil side of the wall. For full-height 
retaining walls anchored at the top and bottom, the steel 
is placed near the side that is opposite the soil. The loca-
tion of steel in relation to the edge of the wall must be 
specified in the wall details.
Vertical Reinforcing
Figure 10-32 shows the vertical steel placed in a CMU 
column. Vertical reinforcing is required in walls at 
48" (1200 mm) o.c. with a maximum spacing of 24" 
(600 mm) if stacked bond masonry is used. IBC requires 
a vertical piece of steel to be placed within 16" from each 
end of a wall. Vertical steel can be represented in details 
similar to Figures 10-19, 10-24, or 10-26. Additional 
vertical reinforcing is usually required at the edges of 
openings in walls to serve the same function as a post 
in wood construction. For small loads, two vertical bars 
in the same cell may be sufficient. As loads increase, the 
size of the vertical bond and the number of bars used 
will increase. Horizontal ties are normally added when 
four or more vertical bars are required to keep the bars 
from separating. Figure 10-33 shows an example of a 
reinforced doorjamb.
Horizontal Reinforcing
Figure 10-34 shows the horizontal wall steel extending 
from a joint in a masonry wall. Horizontal reinforce-
ment is approximately 16" (400 mm) o.c., but the exact 
spacing depends on the seismic or wind loads to be 
resisted and is designed by the engineer for each specific 
use. In addition to the horizontal steel required by the 
building code, extra steel is placed at the midpoint of 
a wall between each floor level (see Figures 10-19 and 
10-28b). Generally, two bars are placed at the midpoint 
FIGURE 10-32  Vertical steel placed in a CMU column with 
horizontal ties placed to keep the vertical steel from separating. 
Courtesy Tom Worcester.
FIGURE 10-33 In addition to the required wall steel, concrete 
block beside wall openings requires special reinforcement. Vertical 
reinforcing beside the opening is held in place by horizontal ties.
FIGURE 10-34 Steel reinforcing can be seen extending from 
this masonry wall. Courtesy Richard Schmitke.

224 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
of each wall level, forming a reinforced area referred to as 
a bond beam. Extra reinforcing is also added where each 
floor or roof level intersects the wall. A 16" deep bond 
beam with two pieces of steel at the top and bottom is a 
standard method of constructing the bond beam at floor 
and roof levels. An 8" deep bond beam with two pieces 
of steel is also placed at the top of concrete block walls. 
Another common location for a bond beam is over the 
openings for doors and windows. Figure 10-35 shows a 
detail representing the reinforcing required over a door 
opening. The exact depth, quantity of rebar, and ties will 
be specified by the engineer based on the load to be sup-
ported and the span of the bond beam.
Steel Overlap 
Because of the limits of construction, steel must often be 
lapped to achieve the desired height or length. In-line 
steel bars are lapped and wired together so that indi-
vidual bars will act as one. Depending on the loads to 
be resisted, the engineer may require laps to be welded. 
The amount of lap required at steel intersections can be 
found in the details or in the written specifications of 
the drawings. Where the information is placed depends 
on the complexity of the project. In a typical wall sec-
tion, the lap is not represented. The intersection of a 
wall at the foundation, for example, is a typical place 
where steel is lapped. The lap is shown in these details 
because the reinforcing steel must consist of two sepa-
rate bars. Figures 10-26 and 10-36 show details with the 
lapped steel. The L-shaped bar extends from the footing 
into the wall, and the second piece of steel for the wall 
is tied to the foundation steel to form a secure bond 
between the wall and the foundation. The engineer 
usually places a note in the calculations indicating the 
desired overlap of steel to be specified by the drafter. 
If the engineer specifies the use of #5 bar with a 36-di-
ameter lap, the drafter would need to show the steel 
overlapping 23" (0.065 diameter × 36 [required lap] = 
23") on the drawing. Laps of steel based on diameter are 
listed in Table 10-3.
Steel Bends and Hooks
A bend allows steel reinforcement to be continuous at a 
corner. A hook ties intersecting members to each other. 
For example, the horizontal steel in a footing may be 
hooked around the vertical steel in an intersecting foot-
ing to ensure that the horizontal can’t move in a lateral 
direction. Unless the engineer has provided a detail, 
hooks and bends should be detailed to match the mini-
mum standards set by the Concrete Reinforcing Steel 
Institute (CRSI). Figure 10-37 shows the minimum 
FIGURE 10-36  Representing steel placement and overlaps in 
details.
FIGURE 10-35  Concrete block over wall openings requires 
special reinforcement. Above an opening, horizontal steel is 
held together with vertical ties. 

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
225
Number of 
Diameters 
SIZE OF BAR
#3
#4 
#5 
#6 
#7 
#8 
#9 
#10
 #11
20 
 6 
10
13 
15
18
20 
23 
26 
29
22
 8 
11
14 
17
20
22 
25 
28 
32
24
 9 
12
15 
18
21
24 
28 
31 
34
30
11 
15
19 
23
27
30 
34 
39 
43
32
12 
16
20 
24
28
32 
37 
41 
46
36
14 
18
23 
27
32
36 
41 
46
51
40
15 
20
25
30
35
40 
46 
51
57
48
18 
24
30 
36
42
48 
55 
61 
68
wTABLE 10-3 Inches of Lap Corresponding to the Number of Bar Diameters
FIGURE 10-37  Minimum standards for reinforcement hooks. Courtesy Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute, Schaumberg, IL.

226 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
standards for hooks and bends. The location and length 
of the hook is normally placed on the details and in the 
specifications.
Rebar Representation
The CAD technician needs to specify the quantity of bars, 
the bar size by number, the direction the steel runs, and 
the grade on the drawings where steel is referenced. On 
drawings such as the framing plan, walls are drawn, but 
the steel is not drawn. Steel specifications are generally 
included in the wall reference as shown in Figure 10-22. 
When shown in section or detail, steel is represented by 
a bold line, which can be solid or dashed depending on 
office practice. A solid circle represents steel when it is 
shown in end view. The AutoCAD DONUT command 
is effective for drawing rebar in end view. Make sure the 
FILL command is ON, and that the interior diameter 
value has been set to zero. Guidelines for representing 
reinforcing steel in detail include the following:
● On drawings plotted at a scale smaller than 3/4" = 
1'–0", a constant symbol size is used to represent 
various steel bar sizes. With larger scaled details, 
variations in bar sizes can be represented.
● Steel is often drawn at an exaggerated size so that 
it can be seen more clearly. Rebar should not be so 
small that it blends with the hatch pattern used for 
the grout, or so large that it is the first thing seen in 
the detail.
Figures 10-24 through 10-28c show common exam-
ples of representing steel in detail. The direction the 
steel is to be laid is specified to add clarity to the draw-
ing. Steel direction is specified using the terms vertical, 
horizontal, or diagonal. Occasionally the letters E.W. or 
E/W are used to indicate that the steel is running each 
way. This might include the horizontal and vertical steel 
placed using uniform spacing in a wall, or steel placed 
in each direction in a horizontal mat in a foundation. 
Notes that are placed on the drawing might include:
#5 Ø VERT @ 48" O.C.
#5 Ø HORIZ @ 32" O.C. 
(3) - #5 Ø DIAG. @ EA. CORNER
#5 Ø  @ 32" O.C. E.W.
(8) - #5 Ø E.W. 3" UP FROM BTM.
When hooks or ties are represented in a detail, they 
should be shown to extend past the steel they are sur-
rounding, as shown in Figure 10-26 or 10-36. Spacing 
of ties often varies within a detail such as a pilaster or 
column. A specification such as
#3 TIES  @ 8/16" O.C.
indicates that the ties are to be a #3 diameter with spac-
ings of 8" and 16". The pattern is then shown in a detail 
similar to Figure 10-36. Notice that the three bars at the 
top and bottom are placed at 8" spacings and the bars in 
the middle of the column are spaced at 16" o.c.
Locating Steel 
Dimensions are required to show the location of the 
steel from the edge of the masonry. The engineer may 
provide a note in the calculations such as
(7)– #5 HORIZ. @ 3" UP/DN.
Although this note could be placed on the draw-
ings exactly as is, a better method is shown in Figure 
10-36. The quantity and size of the steel are specified 
in the detail, but the locations are placed using sepa-
rate dimensions. This requires slightly more work on 
the part of the technician, but the visual specifications 
will be less likely to be overlooked or misunderstood. 
Depending on the engineer and the type of stress to 
be placed on the masonry, the location may be given 
from edge of masonry to edge of steel or from edge 
of masonry to center of steel. The term clear or CLR 
is added to the dimension to describe the steel loca-
tion. Figure 10-36 shows examples of each method 
of locating concrete. In addition to the information in 
the details, steel is also referenced in the written spec-
ifications. The written specifications detail the grade 
and strength requirements for general areas of the 
structure such as walls, floors, columns, or retaining 
walls. Figure 10-38 shows an example of steel speci-
fications that accompany a small office structure. See 
Chapter 11 for additional types of steel reinforcing 
used with other types of concrete construction.
MORTAR AND GROUT
Mortar used to bond masonry products and steel is com-
posed of portland cement, sand, lime, and clean water. 
Other materials can be added to the mix to increase its 
ability to bond to masonry units and steel. Mortar mix 
is normally governed by ASTM C144. The strength of 
the mortar is of critical importance to the strength of the 
masonry wall and is specified on the architectural draw-
ings and the written specifications. Types M and S are 
most often used for exterior walls and are suitable for 
walls above or below grade. Type N or S mortar is nor-
mally used for load-bearing walls, while type O mortar 
is used for nonbearing walls. The mortar is specified 
by the engineer in the calculations and specified by the 
drafter in the masonry wall details.
In addition to the strength and makeup of the 
mortar, the type of joint is usually specified. Joints used 

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
227
with masonry units are similar to the joints used with 
brick construction and are shown in Figure 10-13.
Grout is composed of the same components as 
mortar, but the grading is slightly different. Grout is 
specified as fine or coarse and governed by ASTM C33. 
Specifications are placed on the drawings or in the 
project manual to control the proportions of elements 
in grout. 
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to 
help you keep current with changes in unit masonry.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS  
ORGANIZATION
www.ambrico.com  
American Brick Company
www.concrete.org 
American Concrete 
Institute 
www.astm.org  
ASTM International
www.bia.org  
Brick Industry Association
www.confast.com  
Concrete Fastening 
Systems, Inc.
www.crsi.org  
Concrete Reinforcing Steel 
Institute
www.nibs.org/MetricNews 
Construction Metrication
www.masonryresearch.org 
Council for Masonry 
Research
www.generalshale.com  
General Shale Brick
www.imiweb.org  
The International Masonry 
Institute
www.maconline.org  
Masonry Advisory Council
www.masonrydetails.com 
MasonryDetails.com
www.masonryinstitute.org  
Masonry Institute of 
America
www.masonrysociety.org  
The Masonry Society
www.masonrystandards.org 
Masonry Standards Joint 
Committee
www.ncma.org  
National Concrete Masonry 
Association
www.lime.org 
National Lime Association
www.portcement.org  
Portland Cement 
Association
www.rmmi.org 
Rocky Mountain Masonry 
Institute 
www.brick-wscpa.org 
Western States Clay 
Products Association
FIGURE 10-38  Written specifications for steel reinforcing, and 
concrete block for a multilevel office structure are often placed 
with the structural drawings. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/
McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

228 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Clay, adobe, and concrete masonry units are key 
components of green building and sustainable design. 
Brick is made primarily from clay and shale, two of 
the most abundant natural resources. In addition to 
using readily available resources, brick manufacturing 
incorporates many sustainable practices of its own and 
has captured great production efficiencies that reduce 
its environmental impact. Brick also contributes to 
sustainable design through its long life span, energy 
efficiency, durability, recycled content, local availability, 
acoustic insulation, low construction waste, and potential 
for reuse. 
Adobe is a natural building material common to the 
U.S. Southwest. Made from soil that has suitable sand 
and clay content and then air-dried in the sun, adobe 
bricks typically have extremely low greenhouse gas 
emissions and embodied energy. Most commercially 
available adobe bricks are “stabilized” with cement or 
asphalt additives, but adobe bricks are very commonly 
made on-site without stabilizers. 
Like many conventional products, CMUs can be a green 
product by the manner in which they are produced, by the 
amount of material used, or the efficiency they provide 
to the finished structure. Some blocks earn Leadership in 
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) green points by 
using post-industrial recycled content such as fly ash or 
ground blast-furnace slag to produce the blocks. CMUs 
are also available with specially designed expanded 
polystyrene insulation inserts that reduce the use of 
natural materials, and increase the energy performance 
of the block. Other concrete products provide superior 
energy performance by using innovative web designs. 
Many CMUs feature reduced material use by way of a 
finished exterior face such as split-faced block, or other 
decorative patterns that allow fewer materials to be used 
in the production process. 
EASY BEING GREEN
KEY TERMS
Bond
Bond beam
Brick
Brick veneer
Cavity wall
Concrete masonry units (CMUs)
Course
Deformations
Expansion joint
E / W
Hook
Lap
Ledger
Masonry construction
Mortar
Rebar
Solid wall 
Tie
Wythe, double
Wythe, single

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
229
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. If math is required to answer a question, 
show your work.
Question 10-1 A structure is to be 33'–8" wide, and cov-
ered with baby Roman brick. Is the structure modular? 
Explain your answer.
Question 10-2 Explain the difference between a course and 
a wythe.
Question 10-3 A wall is to be built of Roman bricks, approx-
imately 12'–0" high. How high must the wall be to be 
modular?
Question 10-4 List two common methods of bonding 
wythes together.
Question 10-5 List the two most common methods of 
masonry bonds.
Question 10-6 What minimum code is wire reinforcement 
required to meet?
Question 10-7 Use local vendor catalogs to find a suitable 
connector for attaching masonry veneer to steel stud 
framing.
Question 10-8 List four classifications of CMUs.
Question 10-9 What factors dictate the fire rating of a block 
wall?
Question 10-10 List the approximate spacing of concrete 
block reinforcement.
Question 10-11 Explain the guidelines for the length of 
modular walls.
Question 10-12 What is the name of the piece of wood that 
attaches to the side of concrete block walls to support 
wood framing? To the top of concrete block?
Question 10-13 Explain how beams are supported with 
masonry walls.
Question 10-14 What do the numbers of rebar correspond to?
Question 10-15 What would be the benefit of having 
smooth rebar?
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Unless your instructor gives other instructions, complete 
the following details using the guidelines presented in 
“Drawing Criteria for Completing Details,” in Chapter 6 and 
save them as wblocks. Skeletons of most of these details 
can be accessed from the student CD. Adjust all scale factors 
as required. Use these drawings as a base to complete the 
assignments:
• 
Unless noted, all wall construction is to be 8" × 8" × 16" 
CMU.
• 
Reinforce all CMU walls with #5 rebar at 16" o.c. horizontal 
and 48" o.c. vertical unless otherwise noted. 
• 
Specify in each detail that all steel cells are to be solid 
grouted, or provide a general note to cover all details 
assigned to the page.
• 
Show a bond beam (2 - #5); at the mid-height of each wall; at 
the top of all walls (4-#5); and at the intersection of all roof 
and floor construction to the CMU wall (4 - #5). Unless noted, 
specify all steel to be centered and all steel cells to be solid 
grouted.
• 
Where L-shaped reinforcing is specified, assume a continu-
ous bar of equal diameter to the L is to be placed at the bend 
in the L to keep the L from pulling away from the footing or 
wall.
• 
For details showing masonry at the foundation level, pro-
vide 3/16" (4.8 mm) diameter weep holes at a maximum 
spacing of 33" (838 mm) o.c.
• 
For details showing masonry at the roof level, provide a cant 
strip similar to Figure 10-29, and a masonry wall cap similar 
to Figure 10-30.
• 
Show and specify all connecting materials base nailing on 
IBC standards unless your instructor tells you otherwise. 
Specify all material based on common local practice.
• 
Assemble the details required by your instructor into an 
appropriate template sheet for plotting.
Problem 10-1 Draw a detail to represent a brick veneer wall 
on an 18" × 8" concrete footing for a two-level apart-
ment project. Reinforce the footing with (1)-#5, 3" up 
from the bottom. Form the stem wall with CMUs. Use 
a 2 × 6 DFPT sill supporting 2 × 8 floor joist, support-
ing 3/4" ply floor sheathing, and 2 × 6 studs at 16" o.c. 
Cover the wall with brick veneer over 1/2" wafer board 
and Tyvek. Specify the appropriate connection of the 
brick to the wall.
Problem 10-2 Show standard trusses with a 24" overhang, 
and a 4/12 pitch supported by a 2 × 6 DFPT plate w/ 
5/8" A.B. @ 36" o.c. Support the trusses on a reinforced 
CMU wall. 
Problem 10-3 Show an 8" × 16" wide footing 18" into the 
grade to support CMUs. Show a 5" concrete slab at grade 
level on gravel fill. Thicken the slab to 10" × 10" at the 
edge and show a #5 × 24" × 12" L @ 48" o.c. from wall 
to slab. Reinforce the footing with (2)-#5 continuous, 3" 
Unit Masonry Methods and Materials
CHAPTER 10 TEST

230 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
up from the bottom of the footing. Show a #5 × 12" long 
L projecting from the footing into the wall. Extend the 
footing steel far enough into the wall to get a 24-diameter 
lap. See Table 11-1 for minimum concrete coverage and 
placement of foundation steel.
Problem 10-4 Show an 8" × 16" bond beam for a door 
header in an 8" block wall. Use (4)-#6 horizontal bars 
continuous with #3 ties at 24" o.c. Provide #5 vertical at 
48" o.c. and #5 @ 24" o.c. horizontal.
Problem 10-5 Show a plan view of a wall opening. Reinforce 
the last three cells of the wall with (2)-#5 vertical rebar. 
Tie with #3 ties at 24" o.c. Specify horizontal steel to be 
#5 at 16" o.c. with standard hook around the #5 at 24" 
o.c. vertical steel.
Problem 10-6 Show the intersection of a wood floor 
and a block wall formed from 8" × 8" × 16" CMUs. 
Use a 3 × 12 DFPT ledger with 3/4" diameter ×12" 
anchor bolts @ 32" o.c. staggered 2" up/dn, support-
ing 2 × 12 DFL #1 joists @ 16" o.c. with appropriate 
metal hangers. Reinforce the wall with #5 @ 32" o.c. 
vertical and #5 @ 16" o.c. horizontal. Provide an 
8" × 16" deep bond beam w/ (4)-#5 @ ledger. Bolt a 
3" high × 4" wide × 3/8" plate above floor joists with 
3/4" diameter machine bolt at 48" o.c. and connect 
an 18-gauge Simpson strap capable of resisting 1000 
# floor loads below 3/4" plywood sheathing. Weld the 
strap to the wall plate with 1/8" fillet field weld.
Problem 10-7 Draw a similar detail to problem 10-6 with 
the joists parallel to the wall at 16" o.c. Use 5/8" diameter 
anchor bolts at 48" o.c. staggered 2" up/dn. In addition 
to the minimum wall steel, provide an 8 × 8" deep bond 
beam with (2)-#5 @ ledger. Provide solid blocking at 48" 
o.c. for 48" out from wall. Bolt a 3" high × 4" wide × 
3/8" plate above floor joist with 1/2" diameter × 8"
anchor bolts at 48" o.c. and connect 1 1/2" × 48" × 
3/16" strap below 3/4" plywood sheathing. Weld the 
strap to the wall plate with 1/8" fillet field weld and nail 
the strap to blocks with (48)-10d nails.
Problem 10-8 Show a plan view of a 16" × 16" pilaster. 
Reinforce with (8)-#5 vertical 2 1/2" clear of outside 
face. Tie with #4 horizontal at 16" o.c. Show typi-
cal wall reinforcement on each side of the pilaster, 

Chapter 10: Unit Masonry Methods and Materials 
231
with the horizontal steel required for the wall passing 
through the pilaster. 
Problem 10-9 Show a side view of the pilaster drawn in 
problem 10-8. Use an appropriate GLB beam seat to hold 
a 6 3/4 × 15 fb 2400 glu-lam beam and support 9000# 
@ 375 psi minimum. Weld the seat to wall reinforcement 
with 1/8" fillet. Specify beam bolting based on the manu-
facturer of the seat.
Problem 10-10 Show a 3 × 12 DFPT ledger with 3/4" dia. 
A.B. @ 32" o.c. staggered 2" up/dn supporting TJW 24 
open-web truss joist @ 32" o.c. Reinforce wall w/ #5 @ 
32" o.c. vertical and #5 @ 16" o.c. horizontal. Reinforce 
the wall at the ledger with (4)-#5 in an 8" × 16" bond 
beam. Bolt a 4" high × 6" wide × 1/2" plate above 
trusses with 1/2" × 8" diameter A.B. @ 64" o.c. and 
connect Simpson Company MST27 @ 64" o.c. Connect 
the strap to the plate with 1/8" fillet field weld. Show a 
30" high parapet above the roof trusses and cap with a 
double-sloping masonry cap. Show a 6" wide cant strip 
covered with 24-ga. flashing and built-up roofing.
Problem 10-11 Draw a CMU wall with brick veneer resting 
on a 20" wide × 12" footing that extends 18" minimum 
into natural grade. Provide (3)-#5 continuous 3" up from 
the bottom of the footing and a #5 × 24 × 6" bend @ 
48" o.c. Extend to the steel with a minimum of 20 diam-
eter lap. Reinforce the wall with #5 at 48" o.c. vertical 
and #5 at 24" o.c. horizontal steel. Provide a 4" concrete 
slab over 4" gravel fill. Reinforce the slab with WWM. 
Attach the brick veneer to the CMU with metal ties at 
24" o.c. each direction.
Problem 10-12 Use the attached sketch to draw a section 
view showing an 8" wide × 48" maximum high retain-
ing wall that will be on each side of a recessed loading 
dock. The retaining wall ranges in height from 16" to 
48", depending on its position in the loading dock. 
Support the wall on a 12" deep footing that tapers from 
30" to 54" (as the wall gets higher, the footing gets 
wider). Show the footing extending from 8" to 12" on 
the soil side. Place a 4" diameter French drain at the 
base of the wall placed in an 8" × 24" × 3/4" gravel 
bed. Extend the wall 6" min above the finish grade. 
Show a 5" thick slab reinforced with W12/12 × 4/4 
mesh 3" from top surface over 4" gravel fill. Reinforce 
the footing with grade 40, #5 at 8" o.c. each way 3" up/
down. Show a grade 60, #5 at 10" o.c. × 24" L extend-
ing from the footing, with a 40Ø lap to the vertical wall 
steel. Reinforce the wall with grade 60, #5 at 16" o.c. 
each way, 2" clear of wall.
Problem 10-13 Edit detail 10-2 to show a 6" wide wall sup-
porting roof trusses with a 4/12 pitch. Cover the exterior 
side of the CMU wall with brick veneer with ties at 24" 
o.c. each way. Provide 1× furring strips on the interior 
side of the wall to support 1/2" gypsum board.
Problems 10-14a and 10-14b Edit detail 10-10 to show the 
intersection of a floor to a CMU wall. Reinforce the wall 
with #5 at 48" o.c. vertical and #5 at 24" o.c. horizontal. 
Reinforce the wall at the ledger with (4)-#5 in an 8 × 16 
bond beam. Attach a 3 × 12 DFPT ledger placed with 
the top of the ledger set at 10'–6" above the finished floor 
level. Attach the ledger to the wall with 3/4" Ø × 12" 
anchor bolts at 24" o.c. staggered 2" up/down. Use the 
ledger to support TJM 28 open-web floor joists at 32" 
o.c. Attach the trusses to the ledger as per manufactur-
ers specifications. Bolt a 4" high × 6" wide × 1/2" plate 
above the trusses with 1/2" diameter anchor bolts at 64" 
o.c. and connect Simpson Company MST36 @ 64" o.c. 
 
Edit this detail to show the use of Simpson HD2A on 
each side of trusses at 96" o.c. Drill the truss at the job 
site to allow for (2)-5/8" diameter bolts to pass through 
the truss. The bolts are to be a minimum of 16" from the 
end of the truss chord. Provide 5/8" anchor bolts for each 
anchor to wall in addition to ledger bolting.
Problem 10-15 Combine details 10-3 and 10-10 to create a 
partial wall section. Set the top of ledger at 12"–0" above 
the finish floor. Provide (2)-#5 at 48" o.c. horizontal and 
(2)- #5 horizontal at the wall top.

232
11
Concrete Methods and Materials
Concrete is the most versatile material used in the con-
struction industry. In its liquid or plastic state, its shape 
is limited only by the limitations of the materials used 
to create the forms that mold it. It can be finished in 
a variety of colors, textures, and finishes to withstand 
the most severe weather conditions. Because concrete 
comes to the construction site in a plastic state, it is 
subject to change during the construction process. 
This requires on-site control and inspections to ensure 
that all of the engineer’s specifications have been met. 
Engineering specifications often include information 
on how to mix, transport, prepare forms, place, rein-
force, finish, and cure concrete so that all design values 
can be achieved. More so than with any other material, 
the CAD drafter must pay strict attention to detailing 
concrete to ensure the building materials will provide a 
strong, durable construction method. This chapter will 
introduce: 
● The physical properties of concrete.
● Types of concrete construction.
● Reinforcement placement and specifications.
● Floor systems.
● Walls.
● Beams.
● Columns.
● Joints in concrete.
● Conduit.
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF CONCRETE
Concrete can be greatly altered depending on the mate-
rials and proportions of materials used to make the 
concrete. The methods of pouring, setting, and curing 
will be affected by the weather at the site where concrete 
is poured, the temperature, the rate of placement, and 
the size of the area to be poured. All of these factors 
can affect the appearance, strength, and weight of the 
finished concrete. Most of the qualities of concrete are 
governed by ACI 318 (American Concrete Institute) 
standard, which the engineer will specify to govern the 
quality best suited to the project. Although the contrac-
tor is responsible for verifying that the standards of the 
mix and pouring procedures are met, knowledge of 
concrete and the pouring process will help the drafter 
better understand the contents of the specifications and 
details being provided.
Concrete Materials
Concrete is a mixture of portland cement, aggregate, 
miscellaneous additives called admixtures, and water, 
and it is cast while in a plastic or liquid state (see 
Figure 11-1). The written specifications in the draw-
ings and in the project manual specify the proportions 
of the mixture and the conditions under which they 
can be used.
Cement
Portland cement is a mixture of lime, silica sand, iron 
oxide, and alumina. When mixed with clean water, this 
mixture will harden and set into the form in which it is 
molded. Portland cement is usually required to conform 
to ASTM C150, which is the standard specification for 
portland cement. Five types of portland cement are used 
in the construction industry.
● Type I is referred to as standard or normal cement. 
Common uses include beams, columns, and floor 
slabs.
● Type II cement is used in localities where a strong 
resistance to sulfate is not required. It is used pri-
marily for members that require a lower heat of 
hydration, such as large footings or foundations. The 
hydration process will be discussed as the water mix-
ture is considered. Type II cement has a lower early 
strength than Type I cement. A cement designated 
Type I/II meets the specifications for both Type I and 
Type II and may be used where either is specified.
● Type III cement achieves a high early strength, which 
continues to accelerate as it cures. Type III cement 
has the same strength after one day that Type I
cement has after three days. After 28 days, Type I 
and III cements will have achieved about the same 

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
233
strength. Type III cement is often used for precast 
concrete and for cold-weather pours because of its 
high heat hydration. This quality also makes Type III 
cement unsuitable for use with large pour members.
● Type IV cement is used for massive pour construction 
and is generally considered low-heat cement. Type 
IV cement is excellent where cracking must be kept 
to a minimum.
● Type V cement is used in areas that will be exposed 
to water and high amounts of sulfate content.
Water
The amount of water is an important element in making 
concrete. The quantity to be used must be specified on 
the working drawings. Potable water that is drinking-
water quality and free of oils or excessive amounts of 
acid or alkali must be used. Although water from a 
municipal water supply is usually adequate, water must 
conform to ASTM C94 Standard Specification for Ready-
Mixed Concrete. In addition to controlling the water in 
the mix, the engineer may provide specifications for the 
soaking of the forms prior to use, as well as methods of 
keeping the concrete damp during the early stages of 
the curing process.
When water is added to cement, a chemical reaction 
known as hydration takes place, causing a bonding of the 
molecules. As the mixture begins to harden, it releases 
heat in a process known as heat of hydration. Methods 
of controlling the rate of evaporation of water from the 
exposed surfaces, and hydration within the concrete, 
are often specified by the engineer and must be included 
in the written specification for the job. Control of the 
amount of water affects not only the hydration but also 
the workability of the concrete. Excess water is held to a 
minimum to keep the concrete from becoming porous. 
This keeps cracks from developing, in addition to limit-
ing voids in the concrete.
Aggregates
Although the aggregates do not affect the chemical pro-
cess that causes the cement to harden, they are controlled 
in the specifications because they play an important role 
in the quality of concrete. Sand, gravel, and crushed 
rock are used for the aggregates in the concrete mix. 
Aggregates should be rounded, insoluble, clean, and 
free of dust or other substances so that the cement paste 
can bond to the aggregate. It is also important that the 
aggregate not contain elements that will chemically react 
when added to water or cement. Aggregate materials are 
divided into fine and coarse aggregates based on the size 
of the material used. Fine material is usually sand, but 
rocks small enough to pass through a 1/4" (6 mm) sieve 
are also used. Anything that will not pass through a 
No. 4 sieve is considered coarse aggregate.
The aggregate for most construction is between 3/4" 
and 1 1/2" (20 and 40 mm) washed gravel or crushed 
stone conforming to ACI 318–3.3. The ACI does not 
allow the size of the aggregate to exceed 1/5 of the pour 
width between forms; 1/3 of the slab depth; or 3/4 of 
the clear rebar spacing. The aggregate can be altered, 
affecting the weight of the mixture. Aggregate will be 
discussed further in the “Lightweight Concrete” section 
of this chapter. The drafter needs to note the ingredi-
ents, proportions, or the size of the aggregate specified 
by the engineer on the drawings or in the written speci-
fications.
Admixtures
Any substance other than cement, water, or aggregates 
that is added to concrete to affect its workability, accel-
erate its setting time, or alter its hardness is known as an 
admixture. Admixtures are listed in the written specifi-
cations for concrete drawings and are used to increase 
FIGURE 11-1 Construction methods, reinforcement, 
and placement must all be considered as the drawings 
that detail concrete structures are completed. Courtesy 
Constructionphotographs.com.

234 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
early strength, increase ultimate strength, accelerate or 
retard setting time, or increase workability. ACI 318-3.6 
governs chemical admixtures. Common admixtures 
include hydrated lime, calcium chloride, and kaolin. 
When calcium chloride is added to the water, concrete 
with a fast setting time is produced. This concrete is 
known as high-early-strength concrete. A high degree 
of strength is obtained quickly, allowing for protection 
from rain or freezing conditions. High-early-strength 
concrete allows for rapid removal of forms that can be 
reused again, further reducing the cost of construction. 
The engineer or contractor determines the admixtures 
required for the mix, based on expected weather condi-
tions at the time of the pour, and the set speed.
Air-Entrained Concrete
Air can be injected into the water before it is added to 
the mixture, forming microscopic air bubbles in the 
mix. Air-entrained concrete meeting ASTM 360 and 
C33 is effective for resisting deterioration that results 
from contraction and expansion caused by freezing 
and thawing. Adding air to the cement mixture also 
improves its workability and lowers the tendency for 
mixture separation. Air-entrained concrete is identified 
as Types IA, IIA, and IIIA and is used in ways similar to 
its non-air-containing counterpart. The air bubbles that 
form in the hardened concrete provide space for expan-
sion of moisture during freezing conditions.
Mixture Ratios
The ratio of the concrete mix is very important to the 
setting, curing, and ultimate strength of the concrete. 
A common ratio for concrete is 1:2:4, which repre-
sents 1 part of cement, 2 parts of sand, and 4 parts of 
gravel. Other common mixes are 1:3.75:5, and 1:2.5:3. 
Concrete is usually specified by its batch weight, giving 
a ratio of water to cement (w/c) stated in pounds. If a 
batch of concrete contains 200 pounds of water and 500 
pounds of cement, the w/c would be:
200/500 = 0.40 (lb of water per lb cement)
The ACI limits the water/cement ratio based on the 
desired strength and the air content. The engineer will 
specify the exact proportions of water to cement to 
be used to achieve the highest strength and maintain 
a workable mixture. If too much water is added, the 
strength and durability of the concrete will be compro-
mised. The strength of concrete is measured in terms of 
its ultimate compressive strength in pounds per square 
inch (psi) or megapascals (MPa) and represented by the 
symbol F’c. A concrete with a compressive strength of 
2500 psi is referred to as 2500 pound concrete. Because 
of the variations in producing concrete, the working 
stress of concrete is used for design purposes. The design 
strength is established by the engineer and is based on a 
portion of the ultimate strength and expressed as a frac-
tion of F’c. Concrete is considered to reach its ultimate 
compression strength at 28 days after pouring based 
on ASTM C192, but concrete actually continues to get 
harder at a very slow rate. Forms are typically removed 
after approximately seven days.
Concrete Testing
To determine if concrete meets the requirements of the 
engineer, testing can be done on the slump, compres-
sive strength, and air content of the concrete. A slump 
test determines the consistency and workability of con-
crete in its plastic state. This test can be performed at 
the mixing site or at the job site, with results specified 
by ASTM C143. 
The ultimate compressive unit strength of the con-
crete (F’c) is tested by taking samples of the concrete 
in its plastic state. Concrete samples are placed in 6" 
diameter × 12" long molds. The concrete is allowed 
to harden and is tested at various stages of the curing 
process. Cores are generally tested at days 3, 7, and 28, 
to see the amount of compression that can be resisted. 
If the test results fall below the design values intended 
for the concrete, the engineer will need to determine if 
the pour is suitable for design conditions. Careful plan-
ning by the engineer and quality control at the mixing 
site typically provide concrete well above the minimum 
design value.
TYPES OF CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION
Common methods of concrete construction include 
plain, reinforced, prestressed, precast, prefabricated, 
lightweight, thin shell, and pneumatically applied con-
crete. With each method, the engineer will provide 
calculations and sketches for the drafter to complete the 
finished drawing.
Plain Concrete
Concrete that contains no reinforcement, or contains 
less reinforcement than the minimum requirements of 
ACI 318, is considered plain concrete. Plain concrete 
must have a minimum compressive strength of 2500 
psi (17.24 MPa) and is used primarily for foundations 
and slabs of office structures. Unreinforced walls are 
required by code to be a minimum of 5 1/2" (140 mm) 
thick, and slabs must be a minimum of 3 1/2" (90 mm) 
thick. Walls must be connected at each floor and roof 
level. The engineer will determine the exact thickness 

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
235
of the concrete member based on the amount of loads 
to be resisted.
Reinforced Concrete
Concrete is extremely strong in resisting loads that 
cause compression, but very weak at resisting forces 
that cause tension. Reinforced concrete contains steel 
reinforcement to increase the tensile strength of the 
concrete. Typically the concrete reinforcement is rebar 
(introduced in Chapter 10). The bond of the concrete 
to the surface of the reinforcing bars and the resistance 
provided by the deformations make the concrete and 
steel act as one material. Figure 11-2 shows an example 
of reinforced concrete construction. Welded wire fabric 
is also used to reinforce concrete and to carry stress from 
tension. Methods of reinforcement specific to concrete 
construction will be introduced later in this chapter.
Prestressed Concrete
Most concrete members are stressed by loads that cause 
bending. To resist the forces of bending, members are 
frequently prestressed. Thin horizontal members such 
as beams and slabs are most likely to be prestressed to 
resist tension in the member. In reinforced construction, 
the reinforcing steel carries all of the forces of tension. 
In prestressed construction, the entire concrete member 
is effective at resisting the forces of tension. Prestressed 
members are used for pilings, columns, wall panels, 
floor slabs, and roof panels. The stressing is applied by 
placing high-strength steel reinforcing bars or cables 
that have been stretched. The bars can be stretched 
prior to the concrete being poured in a process called 
pretensioning. Steel can also be stretched after the con-
crete has been poured and hardened around the steel for 
a process called post-tensioning.
In pretensioning, high-strength stranded steel wires 
are stretched into position before the concrete is poured. 
After the concrete is poured and allowed to harden, the 
tension on the wires is released. As the steel contracts 
and attempts to regain its original shape, the wires con-
duct compressive forces throughout the concrete. The 
compression in the concrete helps prevent cracking 
from deflection and allows the size of the member to be 
reduced when compared to nonstressed members.
In the post-tensioning process, large-diameter steel 
rods or cables are placed in conduit that is embedded 
within the concrete, with one end of the steel anchored 
into the concrete. After the concrete has hardened, the 
steel is stretched by hydraulic jacks (Figure 11-3) and 
then attached to the concrete so that the steel remains 
under tension. Post-tensioned reinforcing is often used 
for elevated slabs for parking garages; residential or 
commercial buildings; and residential foundations, 
walls, and columns. The use of post-tensioned reinforc-
ing can result in thinner concrete sections, longer spans 
between supports, stiffer walls to resist lateral loads, and 
stiffer foundations to resist the effects of shrinking and 
FIGURE 11-2 The forming of reinforced concrete columns for 
a structure. Reinforced concrete contains steel reinforcement, 
referred to as rebar, to resist forces that cause tension in the 
concrete. Courtesy Dick Schmitke.
FIGURE 11-3 Concrete can be reinforced by placing tension 
on steel cables within a concrete member. When the cables are 
tensioned after the concrete has cured, the process is referred 
to as post-tensioning. Courtesy Portland Cement Association.

236 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
swelling soils. Concrete that is put into compression 
has the added advantage of creating slabs and walls that 
have fewer visible cracks that can allow the passage of 
moisture and termites. 
Precast Concrete
Precast concrete members are cast and cured in an 
off-site location and then transported to the job site. 
Figure 11-4 shows an example of a precast floor panel 
being positioned. When a large number of identical 
units are to be built, time, money, and space at the job 
site are saved when members are cast off-site. Members 
can be built ahead of time and shipped as needed to 
the construction site. Beams, columns, and small wall 
panels are usually precast. Panels are normally welded 
to the building frame at the top and bottom of the panel, 
allowing multilevel structures to be built one floor at a 
time. Figure 11-5 shows the connection of precast con-
crete panels attached to the structural steel frame.
Prefabricated Concrete Units
Prefabricated concrete units are formed at the job 
site and then lifted into place. This form of construc-
tion is also known as tilt-up construction in many 
parts of the country. Tilt-up construction is usually 
used for large single-level structures. Large industrial 
complexes or retail sales outlets represent ideal uses 
of concrete tilt-up structures. Wall panels are cast in 
a horizontal position over the floor slab or in a bed 
of sand. Once they have cured, they are lifted into 
place by a crane similar to the panels in Figure 11-6. 
FIGURE 11-4 Precast concrete members can be cast and ten-
sioned off-site and then positioned as needed. Courtesy Portland 
Cement Association.
FIGURE 11-5 Precast concrete panels can be welded to a steel 
skeleton. Courtesy Sam Griggs.
FIGURE 11-6 Concrete wall panels can be cast in a horizontal 
position over the floor slab and lifted into place by a crane once 
they have cured. Courtesy Gisela Smith.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
237
Panels can be attached to precast columns, welded to 
adjacent panels similar to Figure 11-7, or attached to 
the structural skeleton. Panel construction requires a 
plan view similar to Figure 11-8 showing the location 
of each panel; elevations similar to Figure 11-9, show-
ing the location of each opening and placement of 
the reinforcing steel; and details to show typical con-
nections such as panel-to-panel, panel-to-foundation, 
slab-to-panel, and roof-to-panel. An example of the 
intersection of two beams to a wall can be seen in 
Figure 11-10. Precast panels will be discussed further 
in the section on methods of wall construction later 
in this chapter.
Lightweight Concrete
Concrete weighs approximately 150 pounds per cubic 
foot (2400 kg/m3). The weight can be lessened depend-
ing on the aggregate used or chemicals that are injected 
into the mix. Lightweight concrete is classified in three 
groups according to the unit weight per cubic foot:
● The lightest concrete has a unit weight of between 20 
and 70 lb/ft3 (320 and 1120 kg/m3) and is classed as 
insulating lightweight concrete. Because its compres-
sive strength is usually below 1000 psi (6.9 MPa), it 
is not used as a structural material, but as a protective 
covering for fireproofing. It is frequently poured over 
a wood or steel decking to form a floor.
● Structural lightweight concrete has a weight of up to 
115 lb/ft3 (1840 kg/m3) with a compressive strength 
of 2000 psi (13.8 MPa).
● Semi-lightweight concrete has a unit weight of from 
115 to 130 lb/ft3 (1840 to 2080 kg/m3). Its ultimate 
strength is comparable to that of normal concrete.
Thin Shell
Thin-shell or eggshell construction can be used to form 
3D structures made of one or more curved slabs or 
folded plates. Concrete as thin as 2 1/2" (65 mm) thick 
with a compressive strength of 3000 psi (20.7 MPa) can 
be used to form the shell. The strength of the shell is 
achieved by the shape of the concrete into which it is 
molded. In addition to the material saved in the roof, 
less material is needed for supporting walls, columns, 
and foundations due to the reduced weight of the roof. 
Arcs or barrels, hyperbolic paraboloid domes, and 
folded plates are common shapes used for thin-plate 
construction because of their inherent strengths; but 
there are many variations that can be achieved with 
these basic shapes.
FIGURE 11-7 Concrete panels are connected to each other by 
the use of steel plates that are set into the concrete and welded 
to each other. Courtesy Zachary Jefferis.
FIGURE 11-8 Precast members are often identified on the 
floor plan or a separate panel plan. The numbers in the hexa-
gons refer to a specific concrete panel shown in a drawing 
similar to Figure 11-9. Courtesy Ginger M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith 
Architect & Associates, Inc.

238 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Shotcrete
Portland cement or plaster that is applied with a com-
pressed air gun is considered shotcrete or pneumatic 
concrete. Shotcrete is extremely dense and strong. It 
tends to have a high resistance to weathering and is 
an excellent waterproofing material because of its low 
absorption rate.
REINFORCEMENT PLACEMENT 
AND SPECIFICATIONS
As with masonry products, deformed steel bars and 
welded wire mesh are the major reinforcing materials of 
concrete construction. Concrete reinforcement patterns 
and specifications are usually more complicated than 
masonry construction.
Reinforcing Bars
Steel bars having the same characteristics as those 
used with masonry are used to reinforce concrete con-
struction, although the CAD technician will need to 
be mindful of different configurations, spacings, and 
clearances. Steel reinforcing is required to meet the 
ASTM standards listed in the International Building 
Code (IBC). Nondeformed bars can be used for spiral 
reinforcing of columns and must conform to ASTM 
standards. Structural steel shapes, steel pipes, and 
steel tubing are also used for concrete reinforcement 
and must meet the specifications of ASTM required 
by the code. The engineer will select the standard to 
be met, and the drafter will place the required stan-
dards on the concrete drawings and written specifica-
tions. Figure 11-11 shows the reinforcing notes that 
FIGURE 11-9 An elevation is drawn for each member to show size, shape, location of openings, and required reinforcing steel. 
Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
239
supplement the drawings for the tilt-up structure used 
throughout this text.
Unlike masonry construction, reinforcement in 
poured concrete also requires the use of bolsters and 
chairs to maintain a uniform positioning. Each is 
made from steel or plastic wire, but protective coatings 
or a galvanized finish can be applied to steel wires. The 
finish is often specified in the written specifications 
that accompany the drawings. Figure 11-12a shows 
several common types of supports that are designed 
to place the steel in the desired finished position.
Figure 11-12b shows their placement. Bolsters come 
in lengths up to 10' (3000 mm) and are designed to 
hold the lower steel-reinforcing mat in position. Chairs 
are designed to hold upper-level pieces of steel in posi-
tion within a slab. These members are not specified on 
the structural drawings but are referenced on fabrica-
tion drawings. A minimum of 1" (25 mm) is required 
by the IBC/ACI 318-7.6 between parallel layers of rein-
forcing, and each layer must be staggered so parallel 
members do not align. The spacing of steel mats must 
be specified on the structural drawings using methods 
similar to Figure 11-13.
Welded Wire Fabric
Wire fabric, or mesh as it is sometimes called, is laid in 
perpendicular patterns and is used for reinforcement of 
floor, wall, and roof slabs. Wire meshes are required to 
meet ASTM standards of the IBC or of those specified by 
the engineer. Patterns are made in one-way rectangular 
and two-way square patterns. 
One-way mesh is made of heavy longitudinal wires 
that are spaced from 2" to 16" (50 to 400 mm) apart. A 
lighter tie wire is spaced from 1" to 18" (25 to 460 mm)
apart and welded at each intersection. Common wire 
fabric dimensions can be seen in Figure 11-14. The 
specification of 6 × 18-W8 × D4 represents welded 
wire fabric with a spacing of 6" × 18" using No. 
8-gauge smooth wire for the longitudinal wires with 
No. 4-gauge tie wires. The letter D can be substituted 
for the W to represent deformed wire. The wire mesh 
is represented by a thick line and specified in detail as 
seen in Figure 11-13. A distance from either the top or 
bottom of the slab must be provided. Two-way wire 
fabric is arranged in a square pattern with equal sized 
wires used in each direction. The designation and 
FIGURE 11-10 Details of connections for each concrete member are drawn to detail reinforcement and attachment methods. 
Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

240 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
representation is similar to one-way wire. A 6 × 6-W8 ×
W8 represents welded wire mesh made with a 6" 
spacing with No. 8-gauge wires. Figure 11-15 shows 
the use of welded wire fabric for a foundation slab. 
WWM is represented by a thick line with an X placed 
along the line to represent the spacing of the grid. 
Note: When locating the mesh, the engineer will pro-
vide a dimension from either the top or bottom of the 
slab. Don’t alter this dimension. It may be tempting 
to change a dimension for a 5" slab that reads 2" CLR 
of TOP, to be 3" CLR of BTM because of space limi-
tation for placing the dimensions. The engineer has 
referenced the dimension from the critical surface. 
Don’t change it. 
Reinforcement Coverage
Steel reinforcing bars are typically placed as close 
as possible to the outer edge of the member being 
reinforced to resist the forces of tension and to resist 
surface cracking. The distance between the outer 
edge of the steel and the outside edge of the concrete 
member is referred to as the cover. The engineer will 
specify exact requirements for coverage, based on 
the requirements for weather, fire protection, and the 
space required to develop a bond between the concrete 
and the steel to develop adequate bending resistance 
within the component being detailed. The drafter 
should specify the distance, as shown in Figure 11-16. 
Depending on the experience level of the drafter, the 
engineer may not always provide a specification for 
coverage, intending the minimum recommended cov-
erage to be followed. These minimum standards can 
be seen in Table 11-1.
REINFORCING:
1.  ALL REINFORCING STEEL TO BE ASTM A615 GRADE 60
   EXCEPT TIES, STIRRUPS AND DOWELS TO MASONRY TO
   BE GRADE 40.  WELDED WIRE FABRIC SHALL CONFORM 
   TO ASTM A-185 AND SHALL BE 6x6-W1.4 x W1.4 WWF MATS.
2.  FABRICATE AND INSTALL REINFORCING STEEL 
   ACCORDING TO THE "MANUAL OF STANDARD PRACTICE 
   FOR DETAILING REINFORCED CONCRETE STRUCTURES"
   ACI STANDARD 315,
3.  PROVIDE 2'-0" x 2'-0" CORNER BARS TO MATCH
   HORIZONTAL REINFORCING IN POURED-IN-PLACE WALLS
   AND FOOTINGS AT ALL CORNERS AND INTERSECTIONS.
4. SPLICES IN WALL REINFORCING SHALL BE LAPPED 30
   DIAMETERS (2'-0" MINIMUM) AND SHALL BE STAGGERED 
   AT LEAST 4'-0" AT ALTERNATIVE BARS.
5.  ALL OPENINGS SMALLER THAN 30" x 30" THAT DISRUPT
   REINFORCING SHALL HAVE AN AMOUNT OF REINFORCING
   EQUAL TO THE AMOUNT DISRUPTED PLACED BOTH SIDES
   OF OPENING AND EXTENDING 2'-0" EACH SIDE OF 
   OPENING.
6.  PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING REINFORCING AROUND WALL
   OPENINGS LARGER THAN 30" x 30":
     A. (2) #5 OVER OPENING x OPENING WIDTH PLUS
        2'-0" EACH SIDE.
     B. (2) #5 UNDER OPENING x OPENING WIDTH PLUS
        2'-0" EACH SIDE.
     C. (2)  #5 EACH SIDE OF OPENING x FULL STORY HEIGHT.
     D. PROVIDE 90 DEGREE HOOK FOR BARS AT 
        OPENINGS IF REQUIRED EXTENSION PAST OPENING
        CANNOT BE OBTAINED.
7.  PROVIDE (2) #4 CONTINUOUS BARS AT TOP AND BOTTOM 
   AND AT DISCONTINUOUS END OF ALL WALLS.
8.  PROVIDE  (2) #5 x OPENING DIMENSION PLUS 2'-0" EACH
   SIDE AROUND ALL EDGES OF OPENINGS LARGER THAN
   15" x 15"  IN STRUCTURAL SLABS AND PLACE (1)
   #4 x 4'-0" AT 45 DEGREES TO EACH CORNER.
9.  PROVIDE DOWELS FROM FOOTING TO MATCH ALL
   VERTICAL WALL, PILASTER, AND COLUMN REINFORCING
   ( POURED-IN-PLACE COLUMNS AND WALLS ).  LAP 30
   DIAMETERS OR 2'-0" MINIMUM.
10.  ALTERNATE ENDS OF BARS 12" IN STRUCTURAL SLABS
   WHENEVER POSSIBLE.
11.  ALL WALL REINFORCING TO BE PLACED IN CENTER OF 
   WALL UNLESS SHOWN OTHERWISE ON THE DRAWINGS.
FIGURE 11-11 Many building departments require reinforce-
ment specifications to be placed with the structural drawings 
rather than in the project manual. Courtesy H.D.N. Architects A.I.A.
Concrete Exposure  
Minimum Cover (inches /mm)
Concrete cast against and permanently exposed to earth 
3/75 
Concrete exposed to earth or weather: 
 No. 5 bars, W31 or D31 wire and smaller 
1 1/2 /38
 No. 6 through No. 18 bars 
2 /50
Concrete not exposed to weather or in contact with ground slabs, walls, and joists: 
 No. 11 bars and smaller 
3/4 /20 
 No. 14 and No. 18 bars 
1 1/2 /38 
Beams and columns: 
 Primary reinforcement, ties, stirrups, and spirals 
1 1/2 /38
Shells, folded plate members: 
 No. 5 bar, W31 or D31 wire and smaller 
3/4 /20 
 No. 6 bars and larger 
1/2 /13
TABLE 11-1 Minimum Concrete Coverage Recommendations

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
241
SYMBOL
BAR SUPPORT
ILLUSTRATION
TYPE OF SUPPORT
STANDARD SIZES
Slab Bolster
3/4, 1, 11/2, and 2 inch heights in 5 ft.
and 10 ft. lengths
1, 11/2, 2; over 2" to 5" heights in  
increments of 1/4" in lengths of 5 ft.
3/4, 1; 11/2, and 13/4" heights
Same as SB
Same as BB
4, 5, and 6 inch widths and 3/4, 1,
and 11/2 inch heights
2 to 15 inch heights in increments of 
1/4 in.
2 to 15 inch heights in increments of 
1/4 in.
Same as HC in 5 foot and 10 foot lengths
Up to 5 inch heights in increments 
of 1/4 in.
14" span. heights
—1" through + 31/2" vary 
in 1/4 increments
Same as CHC
Slab Bolster Upper
Beam Bolster Upper
Individual Bar Chair
Joist Chair
Individual High Chair
High Chair for
Metal Deck
Continuous High Chair
Continuous 
High Chair Upper
Continuous High 
Chair for Metal
Deck
Joist Chair Upper
Beam Bolster
SB
SBU*
BB
BBU*
BC
JC
HC
HCM*
CHC
CHCU*
CHCM*
JCU**
   * Available in Class 3 only, except on special order.
* * Available in Class 3 only, with upturned or end bearing legs.
HEIGHT
TOP OF SLAB
* 4 or 1/2"
MIN
5"
5"
8"
8"
2 1/2"
2 1/2"
2 1/2"
2 1/2"
14"
3/4"
FIGURE 11-12a Typical supports used to hold reinforcing in the correct position relative to each other, and the edge of the concrete. 
Courtesy Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute, Schaumberg, IL.

242 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 11-12b Reinforcing bars are tied to other rebar with 
thin pieces of wire. The groups of rebar (mats) are lifted above 
what will become the face of the panel by the use of plastic 
chairs.  Courtesy LeRoy Cook.
FIGURE 11-13 The spacing of steel mats must be specified 
on the structural drawings. Steel that is parallel to the cutting 
plane is shown as a thick line. Steel that is perpendicular to the 
cutting plane is represented using a solid circle placed using 
the DONUT command of AutoCAD. The size of the rebar should 
be enhanced so that it can be seen easily, but not to the point 
that it becomes a distraction. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/
McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.
Side overhangs may be varied as required and do
not need to be equal. Overhang lengths limited only 
by overall sheet width.
LONGITUDINAL
WIRE
TRANSVERSE
WIRE
Longitudinal
wire spacing
Transverse
wire spacing
Longitudinal
wire size
Transverse
wire size
End overhangs – The sum of the end overhangs should equal 
one transverse wire space. Unless otherwise specified, each 
end overhang equals one-half of a transverse space.
6 × 12—W16 × W8
LENGTH
OVERALL WIDTH
WIDTH
FIGURE 11-14 Material referenced for welded wire fabric. Courtesy American Concrete Institute.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
243
FLOOR SYSTEMS
Concrete floor systems are typically constructed as cast-
in-place, one- and two-way reinforced slab systems, or 
as lift systems.
Cast-in-Place Floors
Cast-in-place floor systems can be formed over a wood 
or steel decking. Wood is a common forming material 
for cast-in-place reinforced slabs. Concrete is placed 
over wood decking for the floor system for many busi-
ness, retail sales, or apartment structures. The concrete 
is typically 1 1/2" (40 mm) thick. Steel decking like the 
decking in Figure 11-17 (introduced in Chapter 9) is 
a common method of supporting concrete floor slabs 
for occupancies that must support heavier floor loads. 
Ribbed decking is welded to steel trusses or beams that 
provide the support for the floor system. Ribs with a 
depth of 1 1/2", 3", or 4 1/2" (40, 80, or 115 mm) are 
most often used for floor slabs. Figure 11-18 shows an 
example of a poured-in-place floor system.
FIGURE 11-15  Welded wire fabric used to reinforce a con-
crete slab. The mesh is resting on plastic chairs to provide 
the proper elevation from the bottom of the slab. Courtesy 
Constructionphotographs.com.
FIGURE 11-16 Specifying reinforcement coverage in details. Key information to be provided includes the size, spacing, and place-
ment relative to the edge of the concrete. The method used to hold the reinforcement in place is referenced in the project manual. 
Courtesy KPFF Consulting Engineers.

244 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
One-Way Reinforced Floor Systems
Self-supporting concrete slabs are often used with 
larger commercial construction projects. A one-way 
reinforced concrete floor system consists of a slab 
supported by parallel reinforced concrete beams sup-
ported on reinforced-concrete columns. This system 
of construction is normally considered feasible for 
slabs spanning from 10' to 35' (3000 to 10 500 mm). 
Figure 11-19 shows an example of a one-way floor 
system. Intermediate beams placed at right angles to the 
main support beams can also be used for longer spans 
or heavier loads. A versatile system called a one-way 
joist or one-way ribbed floor uses narrow beams at close 
repetitive spacing. Joists are typically limited to a mini-
mum width of 4" (100 mm) with a maximum spac-
ing of 30" (750 mm) clear. The depth of the slab can 
range from 1 1/2" to 3" (38 to 75 mm) depending on 
the span with the minimum depth of the joist required 
to be three times the depth of the slab. The floor slab 
and support beams are poured to make a monolithic 
structure. Monolithic is used to describe the process of 
pouring several components in one pour so that all units 
act as one. The system is usually constructed using metal 
forms to construct voids between the joists. The system 
also can be constructed using precast, pretensioned floor 
units. Figure 11-20 shows examples of common precast 
floor shapes. Figure 11-21 shows an example of a precast 
floor panel, and Figure 11-22 shows an example of a 
detail drawn to show support for floor panels.
Two-Way Reinforced Floor Systems
As the name implies, the two-way reinforced concrete 
floor system has major slab reinforcement running 
FIGURE 11-19 One-way slab and one-way joist floor systems.
FIGURE 11-18 A detail for a cast-in-place floor system placed 
over metal decking. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/
Knauf Consulting Engineers. 
FIGURE 11-17 A common method of supporting concrete 
floor slabs for occupancies that must support heavier floor 
loads is the use of ribbed steel decking ranging in depth from 
1 1/2” to 4 1/2” (40 to 115 mm) welded to beams or trusses.
Courtesy Lee Gleason.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
245
in two directions. Figure 11-23 shows three common 
methods of forming a two-way system. With each 
system, columns are usually placed in square patterns. 
In its simplest form (at top in Figure 11-23), a solid 
slab is placed over the support columns. This method 
of construction would be suitable for floors with light 
loads such as apartment or small office structures. A 
flat plate with internal two-way reinforcing (at middle 
in Figure 11-23) can be placed over the columns to 
support the slab loads and better distribute lateral loads 
from the floor into the column. The plate allows the 
overall depth of the floor to remain thin, while still pro-
viding ample area to resist shear forces. Shear is created 
in the floor slab as the gravity loads try to push the slab 
downward, forcing the post to punch a hole in the slab. 
The plate can be further reinforced by placing a crown 
at the top of the column. The crown allows necessary 
depth to help transfer lateral loads from the slab into 
the column while still keeping the slab thickness to a 
minimal depth.
As loads increase, beams are placed below the slab 
and supported on reinforced columns at the inter-
section of the beams (at bottom in Figure 11-23). 
Beams can either be precast or formed in monolithic 
construction. A fourth method of two-way reinforce-
ment is called a waffle-flat-plate system. A two-way 
HOLLOW CORE SLABS
BOX GIRDER
COLUMNS AND PILES
CHANNEL SLAB
SINGLE TEE
DOUBLE TEE
"I" GIRDER
"F" SECTION
INVERTED 
"T" BEAM
FIGURE 11-20 Common precast shapes.
FIGURE 11-21 Precast concrete hollow-core slab units. Courtesy 
Portland Cement Association.
FIGURE 11-22 The connection of hollow-core floor slabs with 
supporting columns. Courtesy H.D.N. Architects A.I.A.

246 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
grid of narrow beams is placed below the slab, with 
a void formed by metal pans placed below the slab. 
Figures 11-24a and 11-24b show examples of a waffle-
flat-plate slab system and typical section. Common 
spacing of the cores ranges from 20" to 30" (500 to 
750 mm) with a joist width of 4", 5", and 6" (100, 
125, or 150 mm) typical. The joist depth ranges in 2" 
(50 mm) increments from 6" to 14" (150 to 350 mm)
depending on the load, span, and manufacturer of the 
metal pan. Most heavy metal pans can be removed after 
the concrete has cured—allowing reuse. Lightweight 
metal pans can be left in place and then covered with a 
layer of metal lath to support a finish coat of plaster.
Lift Slabs
With the lift-slab method of construction, floor slabs for 
a multilevel structure are poured on the ground, one 
above another. Support columns are fabricated prior 
to pouring the slabs, and the slabs, ranging in thick-
ness from 6" to 10" (150 to 250 mm) deep, are formed 
around the columns. The depth is determined by the 
spacing of supports and the loads to be supported. Once 
the slabs have cured, the slabs are lifted into place by 
hydraulic jacks and fastened to supporting columns. 
This system is used primarily for what are classed as 
lightweight loads, encountered in large-scale office 
structures, apartments, or dormitories.
Walls
Concrete walls can either be poured in the vertical or 
horizontal position. Walls taller than 10' (3000 mm), 
FLAT SLAB
FLAT SLAB
FLAT PLATE
WITH BEAMS
WITH DROP PANELS
FIGURE 11-23 Three standard methods of constructing two-
way floor systems include flat slab, flat slab with drop panels, 
and flat plate with beams.
FIGURE 11-24a The forming of a waffle-flat-plate system. 
Fiberglass forms are placed over temporary wood supports 
until the concrete is poured and cured.
FIGURE 11-24b A waffle-flat-plate system is a common 
method of forming a two-way floor system. Courtesy Portland 
Cement Association.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
247
which can’t easily be formed with plywood, are typi-
cally poured in a horizontal position and lifted into 
place.
Poured-in-Place Concrete Walls
Poured-in-place walls are formed by placing plywood 
forms in the desired shape, as shown in Figures 11-25a 
and 11-25b. Figure 11.25c shows an example of a detail 
used to explain cast-in-place concrete. Reinforcing is 
wired into position when one side of the form has been 
installed. Once the reinforcing has been placed in its 
proper location, the forms can be completed. Metal ties 
are used to keep the forms in their proper alignment. 
Some types of ties remain in the wall; others are removed 
and leave a small V-shaped indentation in the wall. The 
indentation can either be left exposed or hidden with 
mortar. Notes in the written specifications will indicate 
how tie holes will be treated after tie removal. Methods 
for placement of concrete are also typically provided. 
Figure 11-26 shows how poured walls are represented 
in plan views.
FIGURE 11-25a Poured-in-place walls are formed by placing 
plywood forms in the desired shape. Courtesy Megan Jefferis. 
FIGURE 11-25b  A poured-in-place wall after the forms are 
removed. Courtesy Aaron Jefferis.
FIGURE 11-25c A detail showing the attachment of a precast 
beam to a cast-in-place wall.

248 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Tilt-Up Walls
Casting concrete wall units in a horizontal position and 
lifting them into position is an economical method of 
concrete construction. Figure 11-27 shows a precast 
wall being lifted into position. The casting surface is 
usually the concrete floor slab of the structure. A liquid 
bond breaker is sprayed over the floor slab to prevent the 
wall slab from bonding to the floor. Door and window 
openings are framed in the wall prior to pouring.
Concrete walls must be a minimum width of 4" 
(100 mm). The minimum required steel reinforcing is 
based on a percentage of the wall thickness. Thinner 
walls normally have a single layer of horizontal and 
vertical steel at the center of the wall. Thicker walls 
normally have a double layer of horizontal and verti-
cal steel with each mat placed as close to the surface 
as coverage standards will allow. Frequently there is 
a horizontal bar referred to as a chord bar, placed near 
the roof diaphragm. The chord bars in each panel are 
joined together by welding a transfer angle from panel 
to panel, as shown in Figure 11-28. These angles tie all 
the panels together to resist horizontal forces from the 
roof diaphragm.
The engineer determines the required wall thickness 
and steel reinforcement, which the drafter must reflect 
on the floor framing plans similar to Figure 11-8,
and wall details. Precast concrete construction requires 
details showing the reinforcement of panels similar to 
Figure 11-9, connection of panels to each other, place-
ment and reinforcement of openings similar to Figure 
11-10, anchors for connecting members, as well as 
fabrication and erection methods.
Figure 11-29a shows an example of a fabrication 
drawing for placing panel attachments for lifting. 
Figure 11-29b shows steel placed in the wall to resist 
the stress that the wall will encounter as it is lifted into 
place, as well as the stresses that must be resisted over 
the life of the structure.
FIGURE 11-26 A floor plan for a multilevel structure framed with stacked concrete columns and cast-in-place concrete walls. Courtesy 
KPFF Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
249
FIGURE 11-27 Precast concrete walls are poured on top of 
the floor slab, lifted into place, and welded to adjoining panels. 
Courtesy Constructionphotographs.com.
FIGURE 11-28 A connection detail for wall panels. Courtesy Van 
Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.
2 PICK POINTS
4 PICK POINTS
FIGURE 11-29a Details provided by the concrete fabricator 
are required to explain each step of the forming and moving 
process. This detail shows the connection points for lifting two 
specific types of concrete panels. Courtesy Jim Ellsworth.
FIGURE 11-29b Extra steel is placed by each wall opening to 
resist the stress that the wall will encounter as it is lifted into 
place as well as the stresses that must be resisted over the life 
of the structure. Courtesy LeRoy Cook.

250 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
BEAMS
All structural members are subject to bending stresses, 
which result in forces of compression, tension, and 
shear within the member. The surface nearest the load 
is in compression and the surface away from the load 
is in tension. Concrete beams require details to locate 
the placement, size, and quantity of steel needed to 
resist the forces causing bending. Because the side 
of the beam closest to the load is not considered to 
be resisting any tension, steel can often be omitted. 
The beam shape can be altered from rectangular to 
T-shape to increase the compression surface and 
decrease the tension surface. If a beam is continuous 
over a support, the surface in tension will change to 
the upper surface over the support. Bars from the 
lower surface are often bent on an angle to reinforce 
the top surface of the beam as it passes over a support, 
as seen in Figure 11-30.
Horizontal and vertical shear stresses also tend to 
make a beam fail. As seen in Figure 11-30, these forces 
can be resisted by bending some of the top bars down-
ward, to form an angle. In addition to the shear forces 
being resisted at the end of the beam, more steel is added 
to the bottom of the center of the beam to resist forces 
causing bending. Another method of resisting the shear 
forces is with the use of stirrups, which are U-shaped 
rebar, hung from the compression bars around the ten-
sion bars.
COLUMNS
Columns must withstand heavy compression loads. As 
the height of the column increases, stress from rotation 
and bending must also be resisted by the column. To 
reduce the size of the concrete, and reduce cracking, 
steel reinforcement is added to a column near the sur-
face. In its simplest form, a poured concrete column can 
be square, rectangular, or round, with steel reinforce-
ment placed in an arrangement similar to the reinforce-
ment patterns in Figure 11-31.
Vertical steel is placed near the surface of the column 
and then tied with horizontal ties at approximately 8" 
to 12" (200 to 300 mm) intervals to restrict spreading of 
the steel. Figure 11-32 shows common methods used 
for column reinforcement.
Circular Columns
Circular columns are formed in premanufactured 
fiber tubes. Because of the difficulty of making circu-
lar ties to reinforce the vertical steel in the field, cir-
cular columns are reinforced with continuous spiral 
hoops that wrap around the vertical steel. These 
hoops can be shipped to a job site or bent at the site 
with special equipment. Spiral reinforcing steel is 
often used for square columns (see Figure 11-31) 
because it is better than individual ties at resisting 
loads. Spiral reinforcing for cast-in-place concrete is 
FIGURE 11-30 Details are required to show steel placement in continuous concrete beams. Courtesy Kahlil Sabbagh, Kenneth D. Smith 
Architect & Associates, Inc.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
251
required by the IBC/ACI 318-7.6 to be a minimum 
of No. 3 bar with a minimum spacing of 1" (25 mm) 
and a maximum spacing of 3" (75 mm). Columns 
with an irregular shape are used throughout the 
construction industry. Details will need to be drawn 
of each column to clarify the placement of reinforce-
ment and ties.
Bundled Bars
Small bars of steel are often bundled in groups to form 
larger members that can be used to reinforce concrete 
as seen in Figure 11-33. When steel is wired or welded 
together, the bundle of rebar acts as one unit. The IBC / 
ACI 318-7.7.4 limits bundle bars to the following:
● Four pieces of equal-sized rebar per bundle.
● Laps in individual bundles in flexural members must 
terminate at different points with a minimum of 40 db
(bar diameters) stagger.
● Concrete-beam bundles are limited to the use of 
No. 11 or smaller bars.
Composite Columns
As the need to resist greater loads is increased, columns 
are reinforced with solid steel shapes. A composite 
column uses a steel tube filled with concrete in the 
center of the column, surrounded with reinforced con-
crete around the outer surface (at left in Figure 11-34). 
The metal core is not allowed to account for more than 
20% of the total area of the column. A minimum of 3" 
(75 mm) of clearance between the core and the spiral 
steel must be provided.
VERT. STEEL
HORIZ. TIES  
16" O.C.
VERT. STEEL
EVENLY SPACED
SPIRAL  TIE
@ 6" O.C 
FIGURE 11-31 Steel reinforcement is made from ties placed 
perpendicular to, or in a spiral pattern around the main rein-
forcing steel.
TIES
TIES OR
 SPIRIAL
TIES
HOOPS
TIED CORNER
COLUMNS
TIED WALL
COLUMN
COMPOSITE
COLUMN 
CAST-IRON 
CORE
FIGURE 11-32 Standard placements of steel reinforcement for 
irregularly shaped columns.
WIRE TIE
STEEL TIE
FIGURE 11-33 Steel bars can be bundled in groups to form 
larger members by the use of wire ties or welding.

252 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Combination Columns
A combination column is a column with a steel shape 
such as a W encased in wire mesh and surrounded in 
concrete. Common types of composite columns can be 
seen in Figure 11-34. The mesh must be a minimum 
of 4 × 8/W1.4 × W1.4 with the 8" wires parallel to 
the axis of the column. Typically 2 1/2" (65 mm) of 
concrete is required to surround the column. Both com-
posite and combination columns are used for the lower 
floors of multilevel structures. The steel is used as part 
of the concrete support system rather than just reinforc-
ing the concrete.
JOINTS IN CONCRETE
Concrete tends to shrink approximately 0.66" per 
100' (16.7 mm/30 500 mm) as the moisture in the 
mix hydrates and the concrete hardens. Concrete also 
expands and shrinks throughout its life based on the 
temperature and the moisture in the supporting soil. 
This can cause the floor slab and other concrete mem-
bers to crack. Control, construction, and isolation 
joints are placed in concrete floor and wall assemblies 
to help control possible cracking. Each can be seen in 
Figure 11-35. The engineer will specify the type of joint 
to be used as well as where it will be located, and how 
it will be constructed. Joint locations in slabs are speci-
fied on the slab-on-grade and foundation plans. These 
drawings will be explored in Chapter 24. Details similar 
to Figure 11-36 show the type of joint to be used and 
are typically placed with or near the slab plan. Joints 
in walls are normally specified on the elevations or on 
panel elevations for tilt-up structures.
Control Joints
Control joints, or contraction joints, are joints that are 
placed in concrete members to allow for movement 
resulting from temperature change, shrinkage, or defor-
mation. As the slab contracts during the initial drying 
process, tensile stress is created in the lower surface of 
the slab as it rubs against the soil. The friction between 
the slab and the soil causes cracking, which can be 
controlled by control or contraction joints. Control 
joints are sawn, formed, or tooled partially through 
the concrete. By placing the joint partially through a 
FIGURE 11-34 Placement of steel reinforcement for composite 
columns.
CONTROL
JOINT
ISOLATION
JOINT
CONSTRUCTION
JOINT
FIGURE 11-35 Common types of joints used for concrete floor 
slabs and for other structural concrete members.
FIGURE 11-36 A control joint is placed partially through a 
slab or wall to allow stress to be relieved in the joint. An isola-
tion joint is placed completely through a concrete member to 
allow for expansion and contraction. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns 
Architects, P.C.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
253
slab or wall, structural stability and water tightness 
are maintained. The joint weakens the surface of the 
concrete slightly, causing any cracks that develop from 
movement to occur along the control joint. These joints 
do not prevent cracking, but they do control where the 
cracks will develop in the slab. 
Control joints are usually one-third of the slab depth.
The American Concrete Institute (ACI) suggests con-
trol joints be placed a distance in feet equal to about 
2 1/2 times the slab depth. For a 5" (125 mm) slab, joints 
would be placed at approximately 12.5' (3800 mm)
intervals. The engineer will provide specific locations 
based on the soil conditions at the job site. The location 
of control joints should be represented by a line and 
specified by a note referenced to the joint. The spacing 
and method of placement can be specified in the gen-
eral notes placed with the foundation plan for simple 
projects, on the slab-on-grade plan if required, or in the 
specifications within the project manual.
Control joints are also placed in concrete walls. The 
roughness of the cracks that develop and the reinforc-
ing steel keep the wall from moving independently 
once cracks occur. The joint is usually about one-third 
the depth of the wall or structural member. The engi-
neer determines the size of joints and where they are 
to be placed, based on the size of the member and the 
loads that it will be subjected to. Joints are placed at a 
maximum of 20' (6000 mm) intervals in walls unless 
the wall contains multiple openings. Other guidelines 
based on the American Concrete Institute are shown in 
Table 11-2.
Joints are typically provided within 10' to 15' (3000 
to 4500 mm) of building corners. For multistory struc-
tures, joints are often centered above an opening. To 
induce cracking in the control joint, one-half of the 
horizontal reinforcement is often stopped at the joint. 
Documentation by the engineer will specify any spe-
cial treatment of steel reinforcing as well as the loca-
tion of each joint. Although the engineer may specify 
the location of joints in a note within the structural 
calculations, the CAD technician should physically 
represent the joint on the drawings rather than merely 
placing a note.
Wall Height 
Recommended 
Vertical Control Joint 
Spacing
2–8 ft (610–2440 mm)
3 × the wall height 
8–12 ft (2440–3660 mm) 
2 × the wall height 
>12 ft (3660 mm) 
equal to the wall height
TABLE 11-2 Recommended Joint Spacing
Isolation Joints
Isolation or expansion joints are used to separate a floor 
slab or wall panel from adjacent structural members 
so that stress cannot be transferred from one member 
to another and cause cracking. These joints will fully 
penetrate through the member and allow for expansion 
of the concrete caused by moisture or temperature. 
Isolation joints are typically between 1/4" to 1/2" (6 to 
13 mm) wide and are placed at intersections of mem-
bers such as walls to slabs, or at stress points within 
a slab. Isolation joints should be drawn and specified 
using methods similar to those used to represent control 
joints. Figure 11-37 shows a partial slab-on-grade plan 
with isolation joints placed between slabs. Isolation 
joints are also provided around each column base so 
that forces causing the column to rotate will not affect 
the slab. This joint also allows for settling of the column 
footing due to normal shrinkage.
Care must be taken when representing mesh in 
details that show the intersections of slabs. As a gen-
eral rule, smooth steel dowels are often placed across 
the joint to allow lateral movement of the joint and to 
prevent out-of-plane movement. No mesh should be
allowed to cross the joint because the mesh would 
restrict expansion and contraction. Figures 11-38a and 
11-38b show a slab floor joint placed around a concrete 
pedestal. Material used for the filler at the joint is also 
specified in the joint detail. The exterior side is usu-
ally caulked with a weather-resistant caulking that will 
remain flexible. The caulking is placed over a flexible 
gasket material to further seal the seam.
Construction Joints
Joints provided to facilitate the construction process are 
referred to as construction joints, or as keyed or pour 
joints. Construction joints are located where one day’s 
placement will end, or when slab construction must 
be interrupted long enough that new concrete will not 
bond with old concrete. The joint is made to provide 
support between the two slabs. The key is a beveled 
edge that is about one-fifth of the slab thickness in 
depth, and one-tenth of the slab thickness in width. The 
method used to form the joint must be specified with 
information about other joint types. 
Because the crew placing the concrete determines 
the location, these joints are not shown on the drawings. 
Based on the specifications of the engineer, the drafter 
does need to show the reinforcement that will extend 
into the next phase of work. Construction joints in 
floors, beams, and girders are restricted to the middle 

254 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 11-37 Representing joints on a concrete slab-on-grade plan. Courtesy David Ambler, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 11-38a The concrete slab is poured over the pier 
that provides support for the steel column. Gravel fill will 
be placed over the pier and a small slab will be poured to 
provide the finished flooring. The new slab will be isolated 
from the floor slab so that any movement of the column will 
not damage the floor slab. Courtesy Sandy Clark, Divine Designs & 
Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 11-38b Representing joints in detail. Courtesy Gisela 
Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
255
third of the span. Horizontal construction joints are 
usually placed in vertical members for each floor level. 
Vertical joints are usually located at corners, pilaster, or 
column edges, or on other elements where they will be 
hidden.
CONDUIT
In addition to the structural considerations of planning 
and drawing the floor slabs and walls, provision must 
also be made for providing conduits for the passage 
of electrical, plumbing, and heating, ventilation, air-
conditioning (HVAC) ducts. Plastic or fiber conduit is 
fastened to the reinforcing material to allow for passage 
of electrical wiring and plumbing lines. Copper and 
aluminum should not be connected to reinforcement 
because of electrolysis. The engineer is responsible for 
determining the size and location of all penetrations 
into concrete members, and the drafter details and 
specifies the required material. Care must be taken to 
avoid using aluminum conduit or piping in concrete 
unless the member has been coated to prevent a reac-
tion with either the concrete or steel. The IBC / ACI 
318-6.3 limits the material, size, and placement of the 
conduit. Restrictions include the following:
● Conduits or pipes in a column can’t displace more 
than 4% of the surface area of the column.
● The outer diameter of the conduit can’t be greater 
than one-third the thickness of the member it 
passes through without the approval of the building 
department.
Concrete is an environmentally friendly product in all 
stages of its life span, from raw material production to 
demolition. Key benefits of concrete products include 
resource efficiency, life span, thermal mass, and afterlife. 
The predominant raw material for the cement in concrete 
is limestone, the most abundant mineral on earth. 
Concrete can also be made with fly ash, slag cement, and 
silica fume, all waste by-products from power plants, steel 
mills, and other manufacturing facilities. 
Concrete is ordered and placed as needed and does 
not need to be trimmed or cut after installation. Wash 
water is frequently recycled using trucks equipped with 
devices that collect wash water and return it to the drum 
where it can be returned to the ready-mix concrete 
plant for recycling. Extra concrete is often returned 
to the ready-mix plant where it is recycled or used to 
make jersey barriers or retaining wall blocks; or it can be 
washed to recycle the coarse aggregate.
Precast structural and architectural concrete products 
are friendly to the environment because they have 
optimized geometries, and they reduce environmental 
damage on the construction site compared with pouring 
concrete on-site. Waste from overage is also eliminated 
through precasting at a plant. Through aeration, the 
weight of precast concrete components is reduced by up 
to one-third while improving its insulation value. Some 
panels are cast with integral foam insulation. 
Insulating concrete forms (ICFs) provide a labor-
efficient means of making insulated poured-concrete 
walls, floors, and roof decks. ICFs are permanent forms 
that are left in place after the concrete has cured. Most 
of these products are made from expanded polystyrene 
(EPS) foam produced with a non-ozone-depleting 
blowing agent. Some ICFs are made from a composite 
of wood waste or EPS beads and portland cement. The 
environmental advantages of ICF walls include higher 
R-values, and their use can result in reduced concrete 
content compared with conventionally formed concrete 
walls. 
Once concrete is made, it provides durable, long-
lasting structures that will not rust, rot, or burn. Life 
spans for concrete building products can be double 
or triple those of other common building materials. 
Concrete structures are not only long-lasting; they 
are efficient. Structures built with concrete walls, 
foundations, and floors are highly energy efficient 
because of their ability to absorb and retain heat. With 
careful planning, occupants can significantly cut their 
heating and cooling bills and install smaller-capacity 
HVAC equipment.
Once a concrete structure has served its purpose, 
the usefulness of the concrete can continue. After a 
concrete structure has served its original purpose, the 
concrete can be crushed and recycled into aggregate 
for use in new concrete, or used as backfill. Recycling 
concrete from demolition projects can result in 
considerable savings because it saves the costs of 
transporting concrete to the landfill and eliminates 
the cost of disposal. Crushed concrete may be reused 
as an aggregate in new portland cement or any other 
structural layer. Generally it is combined with a virgin 
aggregate when used in new concrete. However, 
recycled concrete is more often used as aggregate in a 
sub-base layer.
EASY BEING GREEN

256 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Conduit can’t be spaced closer than three conduit 
diameters or widths on center.
● The conduit must be of a size that will not require 
the cutting of the reinforcement. Conduit can be con-
sidered as replacing structurally in compression the 
displaced concrete under the following conditions:
❍ The conduit must not be exposed to rusting or 
other deterioration.
❍ The conduit is uncoated or galvanized iron or steel 
with a minimum thickness of schedule 40 steel.
● The conduit has a nominal interior diameter of 2" 
(50 mm) maximum with a minimum spacing of 3 
diameters on center.
When placed in below-grade concrete or concrete that 
will be exposed to weather conditions, the conduit must 
have a minimum of 1 1/2" (40 mm) of concrete cover. 
Conduit not exposed to either condition requires only 
a 3/4" (19 mm) cover. Whenever possible, electrical, 
plumbing, and HVAC lines and equipment are placed in 
the space below the floor slabs for a suspended ceiling.
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource 
to help you keep current with changes in concrete 
materials.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.aci-int.org  
American Concrete 
Institute
www.archprecast.org 
Architectural Precast 
Association
www.concretenetwork.net  
Concrete Information and 
Resources
www.cmpc.org  
Concrete Masonry 
Promotions Council
www.concretenetwork.com 
ConcreteNetwork.com 
www.crsi.org  
Concrete Reinforcing Steel 
Institute
www.concretethinker.com 
Concrete Thinking for a 
Sustainable World
www.iccsafe.org 
Concrete Manual
www.ncma.org 
National Concrete Masonry 
Society
www.precast.org  
National Precast Concrete 
Association
www.nrmca.org 
National Ready Mixed 
Concrete Association
www.cement.org 
Portland Cement 
Association
www.post-tensioning.org  
Post-Tensioning Institute
www.pci.org 
Precast / Prestressed 
Concrete Institute
www.rrc-info.org.uk  
Reinforced Concrete 
Council
www.soils.org  
Soil Science Society of 
America
www.tilt-up.org 
Tilt-Up Concrete 
Association
www.wirereinforcementinstitute.org
 
Wire Reinforcement 
Institute 
KEY TERMS
Admixture
Aggregate 
Bolsters
Bundled bars
Chairs
Combination column
Composite column
Concrete, air-entrained
Concrete, high-early-strength
Concrete, lightweight
Concrete, plain
Concrete, post-tensioning
Concrete, precast
Concrete, prefabricated
Concrete, prestressed
Concrete, pretensioning
Concrete, reinforced
Coverage
Heat of hydration
Joint, construction
Joint, control
Joint, isolation
One-way reinforced concrete 
floor systems
Portland cement
Potable water
Two-way reinforced concrete floor 
systems
Welded wire fabric

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
257
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. If math is required to answer a question, 
show your work.
Question 11-1 List six areas that are often addressed by 
concrete specifications to ensure that all design values 
are met.
Question 11-2 What standard controls portland cement?
Question 11-3 What Type of cement should be specified if 
an early high strength is needed?
Question 11-4 What type of cement should be used for 
large pour members requiring low heat of hydration?
Question 11-5 What is Type IV cement used for?
Question 11-6 Define “potable water.”
Question 11-7 List elements that should be kept from water 
to be used for concrete.
Question 11-8 What two qualities of concrete will the water 
affect?
Question 11-9 What size aggregate is used for most con-
struction projects?
Question 11-10 List three guidelines required by the IBC for 
sizing aggregate.
Question 11-11 List two methods of describing the contents 
of a concrete mixture.
Question 11-12 What does the water/cement ratio affect?
Question 11-13 When will concrete mixed to ASTM C192 
standards reach its ultimate strength?
Question 11-14 List and briefly describe the eight major 
areas of concrete construction.
Question 11-15 What does ASTM A-36 cover?
Question 11-16 What is the minimum spacing between par-
allel strands of rebar?
Question 11-17 How are perpendicular strands of rebar held 
in place?
Question 11-18 What holds the upper layer of a double-
layered rebar mesh?
Question 11-19 Describe the note: W6 ×12 10/10.
Question 11-20 Define “monolithic.”
Question 11-21 What keeps tilt-up wall panels from stick-
ing to the floor slab?
Question 11-22 Describe general steel requirements for 
tilt-up walls thicker than 10 inches.
Question 11-23 Describe two methods of reinforcing round 
columns.
Question 11-24 Describe the difference between a compos-
ite and a combination column.
Question 11-25 List and describe three types of concrete 
joints.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Unless your instructor gives you other instructions, com-
plete the following details using the guidelines presented in 
“Drawing Criteria for Completing Details,” in Chapter 6 and 
the additional guidelines listed below. Skeletons of most of 
these details required for this chapter can be accessed from 
the student CD.  
ADDITIONAL DRAWING GUIDELINES
• 
Unless noted, all wall construction is to be poured concrete.
• 
Unless noted, specify all walls to be 6" thick 4000 psi con-
crete with grade 60, #5 bars at 10" o.c. each way.
• 
Note that all steel is to extend to be within 2 inches of wall 
edges. Steel is to be 2" clear of exterior wall surface. Place 
unspecified steel per minimum specifications listed in this 
chapter.
Problem 11-1 Use the following sketch to draw a section 
view showing TJW/36 open-web trusses at 32" o.c. inter-
secting a tilt-up concrete wall. Wall steel will be shown 
in other details, so no steel will be shown in this detail. 
Support the trusses on a 3 × 12 DFPT ledger bolted 
with 3/4"Ø × 8" anchor bolts placed at 48" o.c. through 
1/8" × 2"Ø washers staggered 3" up/down. Provide 2 × 
4 solid blocking between the trusses at the ledger and 
anchor each block with a Simpson Co. A-35 at each end 
of each block.
Provide a 3/4" × 4" (high) × 3" steel plate bolted to 
the wall with 5/8" × 4" M.B. at each third truss. Weld a 
MST27 strap to plate with 1/8" fillet field weld. Nail the 
strap to the truss as per the manufacturer’s specifications. 
Cover the roof with 5/8" plywood sheathing. Use the 
information presented in problem 10-10 to waterproof 
the roof/wall intersection.
Concrete Methods and Materials
CHAPTER 11 TEST

258 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 11-2 Use the following sketch to draw a section 
view showing a wall panel intersecting a 30" × 12" 
deep concrete footing that extends 18" into the natu-
ral grade. No steel needs to be drawn in the wall and 
footing. Reference the architectural drawings for steel 
location.
Show the base of the footing extending 18" into the natu-
ral grade. Show a 3" × 3" × 9" deep sleeve at 48" o.c. 
Support the wall on 1" nonshrink grout with 7/8" diam-
eter × 14" structural connector by Richmond or equal 
centered in wall and footing.
Problem 11-3 Use the attached sketch and a scale of 
1/4" = 1'–0" to draw an elevation of a concrete wall 
panel. Show a portion of the wall detailing the follow-
ing steel placement for the interior panel centered in 
the wall using:  
● Grade 60, #5 @ 10" o.c. vertical.  
● Grade 40 #4 bars @ 12" o.c. horizontal.
● Extend all wall steel to within 2" clear of panel edge. 
Place grid symbols as indicated.  
Draw an additional detail of each panel opening using 
a scale of 1/2" = 1'–0" to locate and represent steel. 
Reference these details on the original elevation. 
Reinforce each opening with additional steel placed 
1" clear of the interior face and 1 1/2" clear of doorway 
opening each side:
● (3)-grade 60, #6 @ 8" o.c. vertical bars beside each 
opening. 
● (3)-grade 60, #4 @ 10" o.c. horizontal above and 
below each door.
● Grade 40, #4 @12" o.c. × 36" vertical above and 
below door. 
● Reinforce each corner with (2)-grade 60, #5 × 36" 
diagonal bars at 8" o.c. Place the first diagonal bar 
at the intersection of the vertical and horizontal 
reinforcing.
Problem 11-4 Use the following sketch to draw a section 
view showing a slab-to-wall intersection at a doorway. 
Show a 5" thick slab. Use W12 × 12 4/4 mesh 3" down 
from top of the slab. Provide a 3" wide × 3/4" × 3/4" 
chamfer in the slab at door. Provide a 1/4" × 1 1/4" fiber 
isolation joint between slab and the wall. Thicken the 
slab to 10" × 10" wide at the wall and reinforce with 
(2)-#7 @ 6" o.c. continuous.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
259
Problem 11-5 Use the following sketch to draw a section view
showing an 8" wide × 48" maximum high retaining wall. 
Support on a 14" deep footing that tapers from 30" to 54". 
Show the footing extending 8" to 12" at soil side, with a 
4" diameter French drain in 8" × 24" × 3/4" gravel bed. 
Extend the wall 6" min. above the finish grade. Show a 5" 
thick slab reinforced with W12/12 × 4/4 mesh 3" from 
top surface over 4" gravel fill. Reinforce the footing with 
grade 40, #4 @ 8" o.c. each way 3" up/dn. Show a grade 
60, #5 @ 10" o.c. × 24" L into footing, with a 40Ø lap to 
the vertical wall steel. Reinforce the wall with grade 60, #5 
@10" o.c. each way, 2" clear of wall.
Problem 11-6 Use the following sketch and a scale of 1" = 
1'–0" to draw a section view showing a 14" × 14" × 60"
high pedestal (from top of footing /top of pedestal). Show 
a 5" thick slab with W12 × 12  /4 × 4 mesh 3" from top 
surface with a 1/4" × 1 1/4" fiber filled isolation joint 
filled with a neoprene backer bead level with the top of 
the pedestal. Support the pedestal on a 14" × 6'–6" × 
6'–6" concrete footing. Reinforce the footing with: 
● Grade 40, #5 @12" o.c. each way 3" up from bottom. 
● Grade 40, #4 @ 8" o.c. each way 2" down from top. 
● Extend the (8)-grade 60, #5 × 6" leg in the footing 
into the pedestal and lap with the pedestal steel with a 
20 diameter lap. 
Reinforce the pedestal with:
● (8)-grade 60, #5 vertical 1 1/2" clear of face. 
● Tie vertical pedestal steel with #3 @ 1 1/2" up/dn. @ 
5/10" o.c. per sketch.
● Provide (4)-3/4" dia. × 16" A.B. on an 8" pattern with 
a 2 1/2" minimum projection.
Show a plan view of the pedestal and footing and indicate 
that the pedestal is rotated 45º to the footing.
Problem 11-7 Use the following sketch and a scale of 1" = 
1'–0" to draw a section and plan view showing the inter-
section of wall panels. Use (2)-3/4"ø × 2 1/2" coil inserts 
through 1" diameter holes in an 11"h × 10"w × 1/2"
plate. Inserts to be 1 1/2" minimum from plate edge 
and 3" minimum from concrete edge. Attach the edge of 

260 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
the plate to 3" × 13" × 1/2" plate embedded into con-
crete panel with 3" minimum edge clearance. Provide 
(2)-3/4"ø × 3" studs at 8" o.c. centered and welded to 
back of the 13" plate with 1/8" fillet all around weld. 
Provide 1 1/2" plate overlap and weld with 1/4" fillet 
weld. Place the connectors at 60" o.c. along each wall 
joint. Seal the exterior side of the wall with neoprene 
sealant and 3/4" backer bead.
Problem 11-8 Draw a section view of an 18" wide × 36" 
deep concrete beam. Reinforce the beam with: 
● (6)-grade 60, #8 horizontal 3" up from bottom. 
● (4)-#6 horizontal bars 2" down from top. 
Wrap the horizontal steel with #4 ties at 12" o.c. and 
stagger each lap 180º. Ties to be 1 1/2" minimum clear of 
the beam face.
Problem 11-9 Draw a section view showing a wall framed 
with 2 × 8 studs at 16" o.c. resting on 7 1/2" × 12" deep 
stem wall. Cover the wall with 2 layers of 5/8" type X 
gypsum board on each side, with joints laid perpendicu-
lar to each other. Attach the wall sill to the stem wall 
with 3/4" diameter × 12" anchor bolts through a 2 × 8 
DFPT sill with 2"Ø washers at 48" o.c. 
Support the stem wall on a 24" × 36" deep concrete foot-
ing. Provide a 5" concrete slab at each side of the stem wall 
that is 6" below the top of the stem wall. Thicken the slab 
as required to rest on the footing. Reinforce the slab with: 
● W12 × 12/ 4 × 4 mesh 3" from top surface. 
● Provide a 1/4" × 1 1/4" fiber filled isolation joint with 
a neoprene backer bead. 
● Place (2)-grade 60, #5 horizontal rebar 3" up/down in 
stem wall.
Reinforce the footing with the following:
● (6)-grade 60, #5 rebar × 20'–6" long (approximately) 
with standard hook, 3" up and 1 1/2" down. 
● Grade 40, #3 ties at 16" o.c. with 2" clear of sides, 
stagger all ties 180º. 
● Grade 40, #3 ties at 12" o.c. around upper stem wall 
steel to lower footing steel.
Problem 11-10 Draw a section and a plan view of a 
16" diameter concrete column. Also provide a 
plan view of the steel base plate that supports the 
steel T.S. at the foundation. Set the base plate at 
45° to the foundation and the steel column. The 
foundation is to be 16" deep × 36" square and 
extend 24" in the natural grade. Reinforce the 
foundation with:
● Grade 60, #6 horizontal bars each way at 8" o.c. 1 1/2" 
down from top. 
● Provide grade 60, #7 bars each way at 6" o.c. 3" up 
from the bottom. 
● Provide (8)-#6 × 18" leg in the foundation extending 
into the concrete column with a 20 diameter lap to 
vertical steel.
A concrete column is to be centered on the foundation. 
Reinforce the column with: 
● (8)-grade 60, #6 vertical bars evenly spaced.
● Wrap the vertical steel with a grade 40, #4 spiral tie at 
6" o.c. 2" clear of exterior face.
● Provide a T.S. 6" × 6" × 3/8" column centered in 
the concrete supported on an 11" × 11" × 1/2" base 
plate. 
● Weld the column to the base plate with a 3/16" fillet 
weld, all around. 
● Attach the base plate to the foundation with (4)-3/4" ×
12" anchor bolts 1 1/2" clear of plate edge. 
Problem 11-11 Use a suitable scale to draw an enlarged 
elevation of the reinforcing steel for an 8' × 8' door 
opening in a concrete tilt-up wall panel. Place the door 
2'–0" from the panel edge and 4'–10" from the bottom 
of the panel. Unless noted, all steel is to be 1" clear of 
the exterior face. Steel to be 1 1/2" clear of the edges of 
the opening.
● Use (3)-grade 60 #5 Ø @ 10" o.c. vertical bars on each 
side of the door. Extend each piece to within 2" clear 
of the top and bottom of the panel.
● Use (3)-grade 60 #5 Ø @ 8" o.c. horizontal bars above 
and below the opening.
● Use grade 40 #5 Ø @ 10" o.c. × 36" long vertical bars 
above and below the opening.
● Provide (2)-grade 40, #5 × 48" diagonal rebar 2" clear 
of each corner, and 10" o.c.

Chapter 11: Concrete Methods and Materials 
261
Problem 11-12 Draw a section using one of the listed sizes 
and reinforcement patterns that can be used to show 
six different widths. Each footing is to be 14" deep with 
rebar that is 3" up from the bottom of the footing and 2" 
clear of each edge. All steel is to be ASTM A615 grade 
40. Dimension the width of the footing with a letter to 
represent each of the following sizes. Create a table to 
represent the following sizes and reinforcing:
Width 
Reinforcing
20” × 20” 
(3)-#5 Ø rebar each way 
22” × 22” 
(3)-#5 Ø rebar each way 
24” × 24” 
(4)-#5 Ø rebar each way 
32” × 32” 
(5)-#5 Ø rebar each way 
34” × 34” 
(5)-#5 Ø rebar each way 
36” × 36” 
(6)-#5 Ø rebar each way
Problem 11-13 Draw a section view of a joint in a 5" thick 
concrete slab over 4" gravel fill. Provide 12 × 12/6 × 6 
WWM centered in the slab. Provide a 1/4" fiber isolation 
slab joint with neoprene joint sealant over a 3/8" backer 
bead. Keep the mesh 2" minimum clear of the slab joint. 
Reinforce the joint with #6 Ø × 18" smooth rebar with 
a paper shield placed at 18" o.c. placed 2" clear of the 
bottom of the slab.
Problem 11-14 Draw a section view of a perimeter joint in a 
5" thick slab that is 48" from a 6" exterior concrete tilt-
up wall. Place the slab over 4" gravel fill. Provide 12 ×
12/6 × 6 WWM centered in the slab. Provide a 1/4" fiber 
isolation slab joint with neoprene joint sealant over a 3/8" 
backer bead. Keep the mesh 2" minimum clear of the 
slab joint. Reinforce the joint with #6 Ø × 36" smooth 
rebar with a paper shield placed at 15" o.c. placed 2" 
clear of the bottom of the slab. Tie the slab to the wall 
with a 3/4" Ø × 24" long coil rods at 45" with 3" wall 
penetration and 2" clear of the bottom of the slab.
Problem 11-15 Use the attached sketch to draw plan and 
elevation views of a concrete tilt-up panel corner joint. 
Use a 4" × 15" × 3/8" steel plate inserted flush into a 
panel 3 1/2" from the panel joint. Attach (2)-3/4" Ø stud 
anchors at 9" o.c. centered on the plate and attached with 
1/8" fillet weld, all around into the panel.
Provide (2)-3/4"Ø × 2 3/4" long coil inserts at 9" o.c. 
Use a 4" × 8" × 10"h × 3/8" angle with (2)-1" Ø holes, 
1 1/2" from each plate edge to allow connection to the 
coil inserts. Lap this plate over the recessed 4" × 15" × 
3/8" plate with a 1 1/2" minimum lap and weld at the 
job site with 3/16" fillet weld. Provide connection plates 
1'–0" from top and bottom of each panel and at 6'–0" o.c. 
maximum along panel joint.

262 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 11-16 Draw a plan and section view of a 6" × 6" 
× 3/16" T.S. column resting on a 16" square concrete 
pedestal. Support the column on a 12" × 12" × 1/2" 
base plate on 1" dry pack with (4)-3/4" Ø × 15" A.B. in 
a 9" grid. Bolts to have a 3" projection through the slab. 
Attach the T.S. column to the base plate with 3/16" fillet 
weld, all around.
Problem 11-17 Use the following sketch to draw a plan and 
section view of a 6 3/4" × 43 1/2" laminated beam inter-
secting a concrete tilt-up wall. Support the beam with 
(2)-9" × 10" × 15 1/2" × 5/16" angles. Bolt the angles 
to the wall with (6)-3/4" Ø × 4 1/8" taper bolts at each 
angle and use (2)-3/4" Ø × 9" A307 bolts with standard 
washers through the beam. Provide a 7/8" bearing plate 
welded to angles with 5/16" fillet welds.
Problem 11-18 Edit problem 10-6 to be suitable for a 
6" wide tilt-up wall.
Problem 11-19 Edit problem 10-7 to be suitable for a 
6" wide tilt-up wall.
Problem 11-20 Edit problem 10-10 to be suitable for 
a 6" tilt-up wall.

Chapter 12: Fire-Resistive Construction 
263
263
12
Fire-Resistive Construction
The International Building Code (IBC) has many 
requirements for incorporating fire-resistive construc-
tion in a portion of a building. Shafts, hallways or 
corridors, parapets, exterior walls, and structural com-
ponents have to be of fire-resistive construction under 
some conditions. Sometimes entire buildings have to 
be built of fire-resistive construction. Some buildings 
must not only be fire-resistive, but they must also be 
built entirely of noncombustible materials such as steel 
or concrete.
The most common methods of fire protection are 
covering wood or metal members with gypsum board or 
plaster, encasing metal members in concrete, and spray-
ing metal beams and posts with fire-resistant materials. 
This chapter will explore:
● Objectives of fire protection.
● Methods of protecting materials including:
❍ Walls.
❍ Wall openings.
❍ Columns.
❍ Parapet walls.
❍ Floor and ceiling assemblies.
❍ Shafts.
❍ Roof and ceiling assemblies.
❍ Heavy timber.
❍ Fire-stops.
OBJECTIVES OF FIRE PROTECTION
The primary reasons that the code requires fire pro-
tection is to protect human lives and property (the 
building). The code attempts to do this by:
● Protecting structural members from damage by fire 
and therefore preventing a structural collapse.
● Containing the fire and preventing it from spread-
ing to other portions of the structure or to other 
structures.
● Limiting the amount of fuel available to the fire.
Fire Resistance
Fire resistance is measured in time. If an assembly (see 
assembly below) is able to resist fire for an hour, it is a 
1-hour assembly. The code generally discusses 1-, 1 1 / 2-,
2-, 3-, and 4-hour assemblies.
Fire-Resistive Assembly
An example of a fire-resistive assembly is shown in 
Figure 12-1. This particular assembly is for an interior 
metal stud wall and is rated for 2-hour fire protection. 
The wall has two layers of gypsum board on each side, 
which must be of a certain type and thickness and must 
be installed in a specific way. Detailed instructions for 
installation, such as direction of layers and method of 
attachment, and so on, are usually called out in the 
specifications (see Chapter 14). Metal studs used in an 
assembly must also meet certain requirements of width, 
gauge, and spacing. All of the parts must be in place (for 
example, gypsum board must be on both sides of the 
studs) to be a fire-resistive assembly. Figure 12-2 shows 
two examples of a 1-hour floor/ceiling assembly.
Product manufacturers hire testing labs to per-
form tests on assemblies using their products. The 
results of these tests are published by organizations 
such as National Fire Protection Association and 
Underwriters’ Laboratories. A list of these assemblies 
is available in Chapter 7 of the IBC, from the Gypsum 
Association, and from other building-related organiza-
tions. If manufactured joists are to be used on a project, 
the joist manufacturer can often supply the architec-
tural team with the necessary report to draft details 
and specifications for the assembly. Building codes 
usually contain the necessary information for detailing 
a lumber assembly.
METHODS OF PROTECTING 
STRUCTURAL MEMBERS
The method of protecting an assembly varies depend-
ing on its location in the building, its location 
relative to the property lines, and the construction 

264 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
material that is being protected. The code lists 
assembly requirements for walls, floor and ceiling 
assemblies, roof and ceiling assemblies, columns, 
shafts, corridors, and wall openings. The code also 
lists requirements for penetrations through each of 
these assembly types.
Protective Wall Materials
The material used to form the wall will affect the fire 
resistance of the assembly. The code addresses concrete, 
masonry, wood, and steel assemblies. The location of 
the wall will also affect the construction. 
Concrete
Concrete is a fire-resistive material; therefore, concrete 
walls are automatically fire-resistive. The amount of 
fire resistance provided by a concrete wall is a func-
tion of the type of concrete used and the thickness of 
the wall, as shown in Figure 12-3. In this chart the 
four columns on the right show the required thick-
ness of concrete necessary for 1-, 2-, 3-, or 4-hour 
fire resistance. Five types of concrete and masonry 
products are listed. It is important to know what kind 
of concrete is to be used in the area where the project 
is to be constructed so that the proper thickness of 
concrete can be specified.
Masonry
Masonry is also a naturally fire-resistive material and 
its resistance depends on its thickness and the type 
of masonry used, as shown in Figures 12-4 and 12-5. 
Figure 12-4 deals with hollow masonry units. The table 
refers to minimum equivalent thickness of these units. 
As stated in the notes below the chart, the equivalent 
thickness is the average thickness of the solid material 
in the unit. This number can be obtained from the con-
crete block manufacturer.
Fire ratings are listed from 0.50 or one-half hour to 
four hours. The chart lists the minimum equivalent 
thicknesses required to achieve these fire ratings for five 
different types of material that hollow concrete masonry 
units can be made of. Figure 12-5 shows the fire resis-
tance of other types of masonry units.
Wood and Metal
With the exception of heavy timber that was discussed 
in Chapter 7, wood is not considered a fire-resistive 
material. Steel by itself is never considered to be fire-
resistive because it weakens and softens under relatively 
FIGURE 12-1 A fire-resistive assembly for an interior metal 
stud wall rated for 2-hour fire protection. Courtesy Robin Smith, 
Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 12-2 Two methods of creating 1-hour fire-rated 
floor assemblies. Courtesy Jamie Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & 
Associates, Inc.

Chapter 12: Fire-Resistive Construction 
265
FIGURE 12-3 The amount of fire resistance produced by a concrete wall is a function of the wall thickness and the type of concrete 
used. This partial table [720.1.(2)] contains footnotes that are important to its use. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 
2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

266 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
low temperatures. When these materials are used for 
studs in a wall, any necessary fire resistance is achieved 
by covering the studs with a fire-resistive material such 
as type X gypsum board. There are many variations 
to fire assemblies for steel and wood stud walls. Good 
sources for these assemblies are the code, the Gypsum 
Association’s Fire Resistance Design Manual, and The 
Plaster Resource Manual.
Wall Openings
Fire-resistance rated walls and structural members are 
built for two primary reasons. The first is to prevent 
structural collapse that would occur if the building 
were to burn down. The second is to prevent the 
spread of fire into other areas of the building or to 
other buildings. When the purpose of the fire-resistant 
FIGURE 12-4 Table 721.3.2 of the International Building Code can be used to determine the fire resistance for hollow masonry units. 
Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. 
www.iccsafe.org.
FIGURE 12-5 Table 721.4.1(1) of the International Building Code can be used to determine the fire resistance for masonry walls. 
Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. 
www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 12: Fire-Resistive Construction 
267
assembly is to prevent the spread of fire and smoke, 
openings in that wall must receive special treatment. 
If openings were to remain open during a fire, the 
purpose of the wall would be defeated by smoke and 
fire pouring through the opening. If a window or door 
in the opening were to be readily destroyed by heat or 
if it were easy to break, the purpose of the wall would 
also be defeated. For this reason, doors and windows 
installed in firewalls to contain fire and smoke must 
meet certain requirements. Door and window assem-
blies must carry labels stating that they have been tested 
and have passed fire and/or smoke tests. Different fire-
wall ratings and types require different ratings for open-
ings. These assemblies are usually labeled as 20-minute, 
3/4-hour, 1-hour, 1 1/2-hour, 2-hour, 3-hour, or 4-hour 
assemblies. A fire-rated door assembly consists of a fire-
rated and labeled door and frame, proper hinges, and 
a closing device. The closing device will either be self-
closing or automatically closing, as required by the code.
Frequently, a fire resistant separation has an opening 
that needs to remain open all of the time. The opening 
at a counter between a manufacturing F-2 or Storage 
S-2 from offices is one example of this type of condition. 
The code defines the cafeteria as an assembly area, and 
as such there must be a fire-separation wall between the 
cafeteria and the kitchen, which is a very likely place for 
a fire to start. Figure 12-6 shows such an opening. In the 
case of a fire, a sensing device would cause a fire door 
to automatically roll down and meet the countertop to 
close off the opening and prevent the spread of smoke 
and fire. This is an example of an automatic closing 
device. Swinging doors are frequently equipped with 
self-closing devices.
In all cases, the amount of opening that is allowed 
in a fire-rated wall is limited by area. In some cases, 
such as an exterior wall that is close to the property 
line, openings are prohibited altogether. An example 
of a fire-rated wall with limited openings is a fire-
wall,  a wall that separates portions of a building to 
form separate buildings. These firewalls are allowed 
to have a maximum size of 120 square feet in a non-
sprinklered building. The aggregate width of all open-
ings shall not exceed 25% of the length of the wall in 
each story. 
Columns
Columns are normally wrapped with gypsum board, 
plaster, or sprayed with a fire-protective coating. 
Figures 12-7 and 12-8 show protected columns. The 
amount of protection required for a steel column 
depends on the weight of the steel member. In general, 
two layers of gypsum board provide 2-hour protec-
tion for a lightweight column and 3-hour protection 
for a heavy column (Figure 12-8). The minimum 
weight required for the steel column will be listed 
in the assembly specifications from the testing lab. 
Coordination with the structural engineer is neces-
sary to achieve the necessary protection in the most 
economical manner.
Another consideration for fire protection at columns 
is that they are frequently subject to impact from cars, 
people, carts, forklifts, and other moving objects. The 
material that provides the fire protection for columns 
will frequently need to be protected from such impact. 
This can be accomplished in several ways: Barriers can 
be placed between the column and the traffic, the fire-
resistive material can be covered by another material 
such as sheet metal, or the column can be set upon a 
concrete pedestal.
FIGURE 12-6 Fire-rated doors with a closing device that is activated by heat or smoke are used at openings that need to remain 
open for normal business operations.

268 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Corridors
Corridors are frequently required to be fire rated in 
order to protect the occupants of a building while they 
exit. All corridors serving H occupancies are required to 
be 1-hour fire rated. Corridors serving A, B, E, F, M, S, 
and U occupancies are required to be 1-hour fire rated 
if the building is not sprinklered and the corridor serves 
more than 30 occupants. R occupancies with more than 
10 occupants are required to have a 1/2-hour fire-rated 
corridor. I-1 and I-3 occupancies are required to have 
a 1-hour corridor, whereas I-2 and I-4 occupancies are 
not. When the corridor is required to be fire rated, walls 
are required to be of 1-hour construction. Corridor ceil-
ings are required to be constructed, as they would be for 
a 1-hour floor/ceiling assembly. The doors opening onto 
these fire-rated corridors are required to be 20-minute 
assemblies.
The basic concept here is to give the occupants of a 
building an exit path that is safe from fire and smoke. 
This requires that the doors be tightly sealed and that 
any penetrations such as air-conditioning ducts be 
properly treated. Air-conditioning ducts serving these 
corridors will normally be required to have fire and 
smoke dampers installed in them. A fire and smoke 
damper is a device that shuts off the air duct when 
fire or smoke is detected so that smoke is not pumped 
into the corridor from other areas of the building. 
Figures 12-9 through 12-11 illustrate basic principles 
FIGURE 12-7 Details must be drawn to represent how 
columns will be fire protected.
FIGURE 12-8 One or more layers of Type X gypsum board, or 
sprayed-on fire-protective coating can be used to provide fire 
protection for steel columns.
FIGURE 12-9 A 1-hour fire-rated corridor constructed with 
wood walls and 5/8" Type X gypsum board. Courtesy Dean K. 
Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architects & Associates, Inc.

Chapter 12: Fire-Resistive Construction 
269
in designing fire-rated corridors. All three examples are 
for buildings that can be built of combustible construc-
tion and are not otherwise fire-rated. Buildings that are 
required to be fire-rated or that are required to be con-
structed of noncombustible construction will require 
slightly different details.
Figure 12-9 shows a section of a typical fire-rated 
corridor. The walls (fire partitions) are constructed as 
typical 1-hour walls with 2 × 4 studs and 5/8" type 
X gypsum board. These walls extend all the way up 
to the underside of solid wood floor joists and require 
solid blocking to extend from the top of the walls to the 
underside of the floor sheathing. The undersides of the 
floor joists have gypsum board installed as if they were 
a part of a 1-hour floor/ceiling assembly. Fireproofing 
methods may be slightly different if the floor joists 
are trusses instead of solid wood members. A 1-hour 
surface is not required on the upper side of the floor 
joists. A non-fire-rated ceiling may be installed below 
the fire-rated ceiling if it is noncombustible or made of 
fire-retardant treated wood. Ducts that serve the cor-
ridor and penetrate the fire-rated wall or ceiling must 
have fire and smoke dampers. Ducts that penetrate the 
optional ceiling do not require fire and smoke dampers. 
In each of the systems shown in Figures 12-9 and 12-11, 
ducts that do not serve the corridor may pass through 
the fire-rated assemblies if they are constructed of a 
minimum of 26-gauge metal.
Another way to construct a fire-rated corridor is to 
build a tunnel as shown in Figure 12-10. In this case 
FIGURE 12-10 A fire-rated corridor constructed with walls that 
do not extend to the underside of the floor joists. Courtesy Dean 
K. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architects & Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 12-11 Construction of a fire-rated corridor with floor 
joists that are not suitable for receiving a ceiling. Courtesy Dean K. 
Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architects & Associates, Inc.

270 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
the corridor walls do not extend to the underside of 
the floor joists. A ceiling is built across the top of the 
walls. This ceiling is constructed exactly as required for 
a 1-hour wall, with a fire-resistive finish on both sides 
of the ceiling joists. This system offers advantages if the 
structural floor system is not suitable to receive a ceil-
ing finish or if mechanical systems need to pass over 
the corridor.
Figure 12-11 combines some elements of the pre-
vious two systems. It has a lower fire-rated ceiling 
surface for cases where the floor joists are not suitable 
to receive a ceiling. The walls must extend to the floor 
joists and solid blocking must extend from the top of 
the wall to the underside of the floor sheathing. On 
the outside of the corridor, the fire-resistive wall finish 
extends to the underside of the floor joists. In the cor-
ridor, the fire-resistive wall finish need only extend to 
the fire-resistive ceiling.
Parapet Walls
Many fire-rated walls are required to have a parapet, 
a portion of the wall extending above the roof. The 
parapet is required to be as fire-resistive as the lower 
portion of the wall. It is required to extend at least 30" 
above the roof. If the roof slopes at a rate greater than 2 
in 12 toward the parapet, the parapet will be required to 
extend a minimum of 30" above the highest point of the 
roof within the distance that fire protection of openings 
would be required.
Exterior walls that are required to be fire protected 
are often required to have a parapet, but there are 
many exceptions to this rule such as when the wall 
terminates into a 2-hour roof assembly or when the 
wall is far enough away from the property line that 
protected openings are not required. Firewalls are 
usually required to have a parapet. Occupancy sepa-
ration walls, also referred to as fire barriers, do not 
require parapets.
Figures 12-12 and 12-13 are fire-resistive parapet 
details. Take note of the continuation of the fire-
resistive material. In Figure 12-12, a solid wood ledger 
forms part of the fire-resistive materials. In Figure 12-13,
the parapet wall sits on top of the roof sheathing. 
This is a design that is frequently avoided, because 
the parapet has to be braced to prevent it from being 
pushed over by wind or other forces. Figure 12-14 
shows a concrete wall with a parapet. This detail could 
easily be altered to apply to masonry. Note that for 
all required parapets if the roofing material is com-
bustible, it must stop 18" minimum from the top of 
the wall and a noncombustible material such as sheet 
FIRE-RESISTIVE 
EXTERIOR MATERIAL
FIRE-RESISTIVE
INTERIOR MATERIAL
FIRE-RESISTIVE
INTERIOR MATERIAL
FIGURE 12-13 Fire-rated braced parapet wall.
FIRE-RESISTIVE
INTERIOR FINISH
FIRE-RESISTIVE
EXTERIOR MATERIAL
SOLID WOOD MEMBER
FIGURE 12-12 Fire-rated parapet constructed with a balloon-
framed wall.

Chapter 12: Fire-Resistive Construction 
271
metal must be added in this portion of the wall. In the 
case of a concrete or masonry wall it would not be 
necessary to add anything to the upper 18" of the wall 
for fire protection.
Floor/Ceiling Assemblies
Floors and ceiling assemblies are typically constructed 
from concrete, wood, or metal.
Concrete
A structural concrete floor can be a floor/ceiling fire 
assembly if it is the proper thickness. Figure 12-15 is a 
table from the IBC that shows required thicknesses for 
these assemblies. If the concrete is something other than 
a slab with a uniform thickness, its equivalent thickness 
can be calculated. A method of calculating equivalent 
thickness is shown in Figure 12-16. The concrete pro-
vides the necessary protection for both the floor side 
and ceiling side of the assembly. A suspended ceiling is 
frequently placed below the concrete to conceal utilities 
such as air-conditioning ducts, plumbing, and electrical 
lines. In most cases the suspended ceiling is not consid-
ered part of the fire assembly.
Wood and Metal
If wood or metal is used for the structural system, it 
must be protected by other materials to achieve a fire 
rating. The upper drawing in Figure 12-2 is an example 
of protection provided for a wood floor assembly. The 
floor assembly is built using factory-built wood I-joists 
for structural support. A thin layer of lightweight con-
crete is poured over a plywood subfloor. The concrete 
serves as protection on the floor side of the assembly. In 
the lower example, open-web steel joists are used and 
the concrete is poured over fluted metal sheathing. 
Both floor assemblies shown in Figure 12-2 provide 
fire protection on the ceiling side of the structural mem-
bers with a layer of Type X gypsum wallboard. When 
I-joists are used to support the floor, the gypsum board 
FLASHING SHEET NAILED
TO WALL AT 6" O.C.
CAP SHEET
ROOFING PLY/PLIES-EXTEND
2" ABOVE TOP OF CANT
APPROPRIATE BASE SHEET
3" MIN.
CANT STRIP
ROOFING SUBSTRATE
PRIME ALL CONC.
SURFACES TO
RECEIVE ROOFING
AND ALLOW TO DRY
STRIP, FULLY ADHERED
** 30" MIN. PARAPET
7" MIN
** 18" MIN.
NON COMBUSTABLE
'FRY' SPRINGLOCK FLASHING SYSTEM
(TYPE SM-SURFACE MOUNTED)
** REQUIRED AT FIRE
   RATED WALLS ONLY
FIBERGLASS
REINFORCING
STRIP
INSTALLED PER MANUFACTURE’S
RECOMMENDATIONS
FIGURE 12-14 Concrete fire-rated parapet.
TYPE OF MATERIAL
Siliceous aggregate concrete
Carbonate aggregate concrete
Sand-lightweight concrete
Lightweight concrete
Insulating concretea
Air spaceb
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.02 kg/m3.
a. Dry unit weight of 35 pcf or less and consisting of cellular, perlite, or vermiculite concrete.
b. The Rn
0.59 value for one 1/2" to 3 1/2" air space is 3.3. The Rn
0.59 value for two 1/2" to 3 1/2" air spaces is 6.7. 
c. The fire-resistance rating for this thickness exceeds 4 hours.
11/2
21/2
2
5.3
5.5
6.5
6.6
9.3
–
6.5
7.1
8.2
8.8
13.3
–
3
9.5
10.4
12.8
13.7
18.3
–
4
13.0
14.0
18.1
19.1
26.5c
–
8.1
8.9
10.5
11.2
16.6
–
31/2
11.3
12.0
15.5
16.5
23.1
–
41/2
14.9
16.2
20.7
21.9
Note c
–
51/2
18.8
20.3
26.0c
27.8c
Note c
–
61/2
22.8
24.7
Note c
Note c
Note c
–
5
16.9
18.1
23.3
24.7
Note c
–
6
20.7
21.9
Note c
Note c
Note c
–
7
25.1
27.2c
Note c
Note c
Note c
–
VALUES OF Rn0.59 FOR USE IN EQUATION 7-4
THICKNESS OF MATERIAL (inches)
FIGURE 12-15 The type of concrete and the thickness affects the fire resistance of a floor assembly based on Table 721.2.1.2(1) of 
the IBC. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights 
reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

272 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
is attached directly to the bottom chord of the joists. 
When open-web steel joists are used, the gypsum board 
is fastened to metal furring channels that are wire tied 
to the bottom chord of the truss. Both details require 
coordination with the structural engineer to ensure that 
the trusses meet depth and spacing requirements for the 
selected fire assembly. The type of lightweight concrete 
used will vary depending on whether the concrete will 
be the wear surface (exposed) or not. Another factor for 
selecting the type of lightweight concrete is the type of 
activity taking place on the floor. Office floors do not 
receive the same wear and tear that an industrial area 
would. An industrial area would require stronger light-
weight or regular concrete with a tougher wear surface 
than an office area.
Both details in Figure 12-2 will depend on additional 
information in the specifications for proper gypsum 
board application such as the direction that each layer 
of gypsum wallboard is to be laid, and the type and 
spacing of drywall screws for each layer. Other materials 
that could be used effectively to provide fire protection 
are plaster or a suspended ceiling system. When using 
steel joists, the ceiling is sometimes omitted. When this 
is done, a fire-protective coating is sprayed on the joists 
and the underside of the deck. Three basic types of coat-
ings are used to protect structural steel: The least expen-
sive types of fireproofing are cementitious and sprayed 
mineral fibers, which are rough and somewhat uneven 
and meant to be hidden. The third type is intumescent 
paint. This material looks like ordinary paint but when 
it is exposed to heat, it swells or expands to form a thick 
protective layer. This type of fireproofing is expensive 
and is rarely used unless the structural steel is to be left 
exposed to make an architectural statement.
Shafts
Vertical shafts extending through floors can play a key 
part in aiding the spread of fire. A shaft can act like a 
chimney, pulling smoke and fire from floor to floor. 
For this reason, the construction of any shaft that pen-
etrates through more than one floor is highly regulated 
by the model codes. Openings into shafts that extend 
through more than one floor are required to have fire 
and smoke dampers, devices that close off the open-
ing when fire or smoke is detected. The shaft itself 
FIGURE 12-16 Calculation method for fire-rating equivalent thickness of ribbed concrete based on Table 721.2.2.1 of the IBC. 
Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. 
www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 12: Fire-Resistive Construction 
273
can be constructed like a wall. Optionally there are 
numerous assemblies available specifically for shafts. 
The Gypsum Association’s Fire Resistance Manual lists 
several of them.
Roof/Ceiling Assemblies 
When working with the roof, a floor/ceiling assem-
bly is selected and the materials above the rafters are 
replaced with appropriate roofing materials, as shown 
in Figure 12-17. The roofing materials are required to 
be fire retardant. A fire-retardant roof is categorized 
by the code as being either a Class A or Class B roof 
assembly. Class A roof assemblies are capable of passing 
a test for severe fire exposure. Class B roof assemblies 
are capable of passing a test for moderate fire exposure. 
Most conditions for a nonresidential building can be 
satisfied with a Class B roof. The typical built-up roof 
shown in Figure 18-15 could be Class A or B depend-
ing on its exact makeup. Other typical Class A roofing 
materials are concrete, slate, clay, and roofing materials 
listed by their manufacturer as passing ASTM E 108 for 
severe fire exposure. Other Class B roofing materials 
include metal sheets, metal tiles, and roofing materials 
listed by their manufacturer as passing ASTM E 108 for 
moderate fire exposure. 
Beams
Metal beams that project outside the floor/ceiling or 
roof/ceiling assemblies are required to have their own 
fire protection. Steel beams are normally wrapped 
with gypsum board or plaster, or sprayed with a fire-
protective coating. Figure 12-18 shows an example of 
a beam that extends below the rated ceiling and needs 
its own fire protection. Wood beams are frequently 
large enough to be considered heavy timber and 
would not have to be protected. Concrete beams are 
considered to be fire protected if the reinforcing steel 
is adequately covered. 
Penetrations
Fire-resistive surfaces will normally have to be pen-
etrated to allow for the installation of building equip-
ment such as electrical, HVAC, and plumbing. These 
penetrations must be properly dealt with in order to 
preserve the integrity of the fire-resistive system.
Plumbing Plumbing penetrations can be minimized by 
keeping plumbing off of fire-rated walls. If this is not 
possible, metal piping will probably have to be used in 
lieu of plastic. The pipe will not normally completely fill 
the hole it goes through. The area between the pipe and 
the wall material will have to be filled with an approved 
fire-stop material.
HVAC Ductwork for heating and air-conditioning fre-
quently has to penetrate firewalls and ceilings, as shown 
in Figures 12-9, 12-10, and 12-11. The duct penetration 
itself is not usually a problem if it is constructed of the 
proper gauge of metal. It is the air register (outlet) or 
return air (inlet) register that presents the problem. 
These openings into the ductwork normally remain 
open at all times. Fire and/or smoke dampers are 
required at these openings. Fire dampers are required 
in walls that separate occupancies. Fire and smoke 
CLASS 'B' BUILT-UP ROOFING
PLYWOOD ROOF SHEATHING
WOOD JOISTS PER STRUCT. DWGS.
5/8" TYPE X GYPSUM BOARD
FIGURE 12-17 Fire-rated roof assembly.
FIGURE 12-18 Fire-protected floor beams. Courtesy Sharon 
Chambliss, Divine Designs & Associates, Inc.

274 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
dampers are required in rated corridors. A fire and 
smoke damper is an air register that has a closing device 
that is activated by a heat and smoke sensor. A fire 
damper is connected to a device that senses heat only. 
An example of a fire damper is shown in Figure 12-19. 
The requirements for fire dampers are shown in Figure 
12-20. When a fire is detected, the openings to the ducts 
are automatically closed. This prevents the spread of fire 
and smoke through the HVAC system.
Electrical Electrical fixtures create more wall and 
ceiling penetrations than any other building system. 
These penetrations of wall or floor/ceiling assemblies 
normally require special consideration and detailing. 
Figures 12-21 and 12-22 illustrate some of these con-
siderations when nonmetallic wiring is used. These 
examples apply to wiring for televisions, phones, com-
puters, and sound systems, as well as electrical wiring. 
Wiring passing through walls framed with wood, 
FIGURE 12-19 Fire dampers come in several shapes and sizes and must be carefully chosen from vendor catalogs. Reproduced from 
Dampers and Louvers catalog. Courtesy Venco Products.

Chapter 12: Fire-Resistive Construction 
275
engineered lumber, or steel studs should be placed in 
a metal conduit as shown in a Figure 12-21. Note that 
the metal conduit extends 5' beyond the firewall in each 
direction to reduce the likelihood of fire entering and 
passing through the conduit. Electrical convenience 
outlets that are recessed into firewalls also require spe-
cial detailing, as shown in Figures 12-21 and 12-22.
One of the most common electrical penetrations of a 
fire-resistive assembly is a drop-in light fixture in a fire-
rated suspended ceiling system. Figure 12-23 illustrates 
methods of preserving the integrity of the fire-rated 
ceiling at lighting fixtures in a suspended ceiling. The 
methods illustrated in this figure have been carefully 
tested by an approved testing laboratory.
Heavy Timber
Under some conditions, the code will allow heavy 
timber construction to be substituted for fire-rated 
construction. Thick and deep wood beams, thick post, 
and thick floor or roof sheathing can be left unprotected 
under this condition. The code describes the minimum 
dimensions required for a wood member to be con-
sidered heavy timber (see Chapter 7). The minimum 
required size varies for a vertical member (post) and 
a horizontal member (beam). Thick wood members 
will char on the outside but not burn through for an 
extended period of time. In a fire, the outside of the post 
or beam will be charred and become structurally use-
less. The inner portion of the wood will remain sound 
and have adequate strength to keep the structure from 
collapsing.
FIGURE 12-20 Fire dampers have different ratings based 
on the ratings of the assembly they are to penetrate. Courtesy 
2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. 
International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. 
www.iccsafe.org.
TOTALLY ENCLOSED, FLUSH
MOUNTED APPROVED BOX (TYP.)
APPROVED STEEL CONDUIT
SEAL CONDUIT TO CABLE OR
WIRE W/ WALLBOARD COMPOUND,
OR EQUAL @ ENDS. (TYP)
SEAL ALL PENETRATIONS
       CONDUIT MAY EXTEND LESS
THAN 5'-0" OUTSIDE OF THE
FIRE-RESISTIVE SEPARATION IF
IT TERMINATES IN A TOTALLY
ENCLOSED, APPROVED BOX.
5'-0"
TYPICAL 
    FIRE-RESISTIVE SEPARATION WALL
    W/ MEMBRANE EACH SIDE.
5'-0"
TYPICAL 
NONMETALLIC SHEATHED
CABLE OR WIRE (TYP.)
WOOD OR STEEL FRAME, 
ONE- OR TWO-HOUR FIRE-RESISTIVE 
SEPARATION WALL
FIGURE 12-21 Electrical penetrations in fire-resistive walls 
must be carefully considered based on their location to the 
wall. Courtesy Julie Searls, Divine Designs & Associates, Inc.
WOOD OR STEEL FRAME, 
ONE- OR TWO-HOUR FIRE-RESISTIVE 
SEPARATION WALL @ INTERSECTION W/
FIRE-RATED OR NON FIRE-RATED WALLS
FIRE STOPPING @ 
10'-0" O.C. MAX.
FLUSH-MOUNTED,
TOTALLY ENCLOSED
APPROVED BOX.
SHEATHED CABLE
OR WIRE (TYP.).
MUST BE FLUSH-MOUNTED 
TOTALLY ENCLOSED,
APPROVED BOX IF LOCATED
WITHIN 5'-0" OF 
SEPARATION WALL.
NONMETALLIC
INTERSECTING WALLS W/
NONCOMBUSTIBLE
SHEATHING EQUAL TO
1/2" GYPSUM WALLBOARD
EACH SIDE.
CONT. BLOCKING
(DBL STUDS) IN
LIEU OF EXTENDING
MEMBRANE THRU
INTERSECTING 
WALLS.
FIGURE 12-22 Electrical penetrations of fire-resistive walls 
must be carefully detailed in the architectural drawings. This 
type of installation can also be used with steel-framed walls if 
the membranes are continuous through the intersecting walls. 
Courtesy Terrel Broiles, Divine Designs & Associates, Inc.

276 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Fire and Draft Stops
Long, concealed spaces such as attics or crawl spaces 
can aid the spread of fire, especially in combustible 
construction. For this reason the code requires these 
concealed spaces, both horizontal and vertical, to be 
blocked off at certain points and intervals. Figure 12-24 
shows a typical draft stop at a floor ceiling space. The 
draft stops are intended to prevent fire from spreading 
from one part of the structural system to another.
Spaces between the ceiling and the floor above in a 
non-sprinklered building of combustible construction 
need to be divided into controlled areas by draft stops. An 
attic must be divided up in a similar manner. Allowable 
areas for the space between the ceiling and the floor in 
nonresidential occupancies are limited to a maximum of 
1000 square feet; attics have a limit of 3000 square feet. 
Figure 12-25 shows an example of a draft stop above a 
suspended ceiling system. If the floor or attic space is 
properly sprinklered, draft stops are not required.
3"
12"
Fire and Sound Accessories
Light Fixture Protection for Fire-Rated Ceilings
Box assembly
exposed suspension
Tandem light
fixture detail
Vented-box assembly
23
"
3/4
47
7"
6"
"
3/4
"
5/8
"
3/4
18"
FIGURE 12-23 Fire-rated assemblies need special treatment 
at penetrations. This figure shows some ways to maintain a fire 
rating when a light fixture penetrates a fire-rated suspended-
ceiling system. Courtesy United States Gypsum Company.
DRAFTSTOP
FIRESTOP
FIRESTOP
DRAFTSTOP
FIGURE 12-24 Fire and draft stops. Courtesy Ginger M. Smith, 
Kenneth D. Smith Architects & Associates, Inc.
Drop T-bar Acoustical Floor-
Ceiling Assembly
Floor-Ceiling Assembly in
Multifamily Dwellings, Motels,
Hotels
Draft stop
Tenant separation
Draft stopping
FIGURE 12-25 Draft stops at suspended ceilings. Reproduced from Wood Frame Design. Courtesy Western Wood Products Association.

Chapter 12: Fire-Resistive Construction 
277
ADDITIONAL READING
The International Building Code and Commentary Volume I
and II have excellent illustrations and interpretations of 
the code that is available at www.iccsafe.org. The follow-
ing Web sites can be used as a resource to help you find 
additional information.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.astm.org 
ASTM International
www.pacificfirelab.com 
Chilworth Pacific Fire
www.contegointernational.com Contego International
www.gypsum.org  
Gypsum Association (The 
entire Fire Resistance 
Design Manual is available 
on-line at this Web site.)
www.firefree.com 
International Fire Resistant 
Systems, Inc.
www.paintooritect.com 
International Fireproof 
Technology, Inc.
www.nailor.com 
Nailor Industries
www.nfpa.org  
National Fire Protection 
Association
www.ul.com 
Underwriters’ Laboratories
KEY TERMS
Draft stop
Fire damper
Fire resistance
Fire-resistive assembly
Firewall
Parapet
Smoke damper
Fire-Resistive Construction
CHAPTER 12 TEST
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Question 12-1 What is fire-resistive construction trying to 
protect?
Question 12-2 Describe three ways that fire protection of a 
structural member is achieved.
Question 12-3 How thick must a solid brick wall be in order 
to be rated as a 4-hour firewall?
Question 12-4 What special consideration would be given 
to the fire protection of a steel column in a parking 
garage?
Question 12-5 What is a fire damper?
Question 12-6 What are the two primary purposes of a 
firewall?
Question 12-7 What is the primary purpose of a 20-minute 
fire door?
Question 12-8 What function does the parapet serve on a 
firewall?
Question 12-9 Wood burns and metal does not; but, in a 
fire-resistive building, an 8" × 8" wood post might not 
have to be protected from fire while an 8" steel column 
would. Explain why.
Question 12-10 Use the drawing on the student CD in the 
RESOURCE MATERIAL/CHAPTER 12 file to identify 
the six figures from this chapter that are referenced in the 
building section.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the drawing guidelines and criteria presented in Chapters 2 
and 6 to complete the following drawings.
Problem 12-1 Draw and label a parapet detail for a con-
crete block wall located 1' from a property line. Use 
orthographic projection and include appropriate callouts 
on the detail, assuming that there will be specifications 
accompanying the working drawings. Make sure that the 
surface materials within the top 18" of the parapet are 
noncombustible.
Problem 12-2 Using Figure 12-7 as a guide, draw and label 
a detail showing a W 18 × 40 steel column with 2-hour 
fire protection. Use and specify the following materials:
● Use a base layer of 5/8" Type X gypsum board applied 
around the column and held in place with paper 
masking tape.

278 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Provide a second layer of 5/8" Type X gypsum 
board applied over first coat, held in place with 
paper masking tape.
● Provide a face layer of either:
❍ No. 24 MSG galvanized steel column covering 
consisting of two L-shaped sections with snap-lock 
sheet steel joints.
❍ No. 22 MSG galvanized steel column covers consist-
ing of two L-shaped sections with lap joints fastened 
with No. 8 × 1/2" sheet metal screws at 12" o.c.
Problem 12-3 Use figure 12-7 as a guide to draw and label 
a detail showing a 6" × 6" × 3/8" steel column with 
1-hour fire protection. Use and specify the same material 
options that are used to protect the steel in 
problem 12-5.
Problem 12-4 Use the drawing on the student CD to com-
plete a detail that will supplement the structural draw-
ings, and show a 1-hour wood stud exterior wall within 
12" of a property line. In addition to noting standard 
construction materials, specify the following minimum 
fire-protection materials:
● A 2 × 4 stud parapet wall. Extend the parapet wall 
30" minimum above the finished roofing materials.
● Protect the parapet wall that extends above the fin-
ished roofing with 3/8" plywood and exterior stucco 
to match the exterior.
● Cap the top of the parapet wall with (2) 2 × 4 top 
plates and flash the top of the wall with 26 g.i. coping.
● Cover the exterior sides of the wall with 7/8" cement 
plaster w/ metal lath attached to studs with 6d 
common nails at 7" o.c. driven to 1" minimum pene-
tration and bent over. Plaster mix to be 1:4 for scratch 
coat, and 1:5 for brown coat. By volume cement to 
sand per IBC Table 720.1(2) item #15-1.2 & 1.3. 
Provide a stucco screed where the stucco meets the 
finished roofing. 
● Provide 3/8" plywood sheathing per structural draw-
ings over both sides of 2 × 6 studs with (2) 2 × 6 
studs with 10' high plate supporting TJM30 @ 24" o.c. 
(show trusses parallel to wall).
● Provide 2 × nailer where roof sheathing intersects 
the wall.
● Cover the interior side of the wall with 5/8" Type X 
gypsum board that extends to the bottom of the roof 
sheathing.
● Provide wall insulation appropriate for your area.
Problem 12-5 Use problem 9-7 as a base and the drawing 
on the student CD to show an exterior wall that con-
tains (2) 5" × 5" × 3/8" T.S. columns that are approxi-
mately 45" apart (outside to outside). Frame the wall 
with 2 × 6 studs at 16" o.c. with one stud on the out-
side edge of each column so that the total wall length is 
48" from exterior face of stud to exterior face of stud. 
Wrap the wall with (2)-layers of 5/8" Type X gypsum 
board covered with 7/8" exterior plaster applied as per 
problem 12-4.

Preparing Architectural 
and Civil Drawings
Section 3


Buildings should stand up. They should remain stand-
ing regardless of the forces applied to them. Not many 
would argue with these statements. There have been 
a few exceptions to this principle over the years, such 
as the houses of Japan that were made of bamboo and 
paper. They were designed to be lightweight so that 
when they fell over, due to the shaking of an earth-
quake, no one was hurt; the occupants just put the 
pieces back together. This is not a practical approach 
for today’s factories or office buildings. This chapter 
will explore: 
● Common loads that affect structures.
● How loads are distributed throughout structures. 
● The process engineers follow to determine the loads 
to be resisted.
● The effects of seismic and wind forces on a structure.
● General design consideration for horizontal forces.
LOADS AFFECTING STRUCTURES
Buildings must be designed to meet several types of 
loads including:
● Dead loads
● Live loads
● Environmental loads
Some buildings need to resist dynamic loads, which 
are loads imposed by a moving object such as a car. The 
information in this chapter is intended to broaden your 
knowledge of how loads affect the structures you will 
be drawing. The chapter is not intended to make you an 
engineer. It is not essential that CAD technicians have 
an understanding of loads, but it is very helpful. If the 
CAD drafter can visualize how a load affects the build-
ing and can follow that load’s path from its origin to the 
foundation, it will help the technician visualize condi-
tions that need to be detailed on the plans. The way 
that building components are put together may have 
a major impact on how the structure behaves. As an 
example, hanging a load off the side of a column instead 
of directly on top of the column would introduce a ten-
dency to bend, referred to as bending moment, into the 
column that it might not have been designed for. CAD 
technicians can better serve as a safeguard for the engi-
neer and the designer with an understanding of how 
loads are distributed into the foundation. 
Dead Loads 
The weights of building materials such as rafters, roof-
ing materials, floor materials, and walls are referred 
to as dead loads. Dead loads are determined by the 
actual weight of the materials from which the building 
is constructed. Asphalt roof shingles and the layers of 
felt under them have a given weight. The weight of air-
conditioning units can be readily found in the manu-
facturer’s literature. Plywood, framing lumber, glass, 
and gypsum board all have a given weight. The weights 
of these materials are readily available from manufac-
turer’s literature or reference books, similar to the table 
seen in Figure 13-1. These materials are frequently 
combined into commonly used assemblies as shown in 
Figure 13-2. Loads from the materials are considered to 
be in place for the life of the building.
Live Loads
Buildings need to resist changing vertical loads from 
people, furniture, machinery, and other similar features, 
which are called live loads. Live loads are the loads 
determined by the use and occupancy of the building 
and are therefore much less exacting than dead loads. 
They are not static, but rather, constantly changing. 
Live loads are spelled out by the building code. At 
the floor, live loads are based on occupancy type (see 
Chapter 4) as shown in Figures 4-4a and 4-4b. Live 
loads are approximations. The live load on a roof may 
assume that a worker is carrying a load of roofing mate-
rial across it. The live load on a ceiling may assume 
that someone is crawling across it to fix an electrical 
connection. People may be packed tightly on a balcony, 
watching a performance below. Building codes do not 
13
Structural Considerations 
Affecting Design
281

282 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
 
WEIGHTS OF BUILDING MATERIALS
Material
PSF
Material
PSF
Ceilings
 
Plywood Sheathing
Acoustical tile
1.0
   3/8"
1.1
Channel suspended 
1.0
   1/2"
1.5
1/2" gypsum board
2.2
   5/8"
1.8
5/8" gypsum board
2.8
   3/4"
2.2
   1"
3.0
Decking
 
1 1/8"
3.3
2"
4.4
Roofing
 
Floor Finishes
 
Asbestos, corrugated 1/4"
3.0
Asphalt tile
2.0
15 lb felt
0.85
Brick pavers
10.0
3 ply and gravel
5.5
Ceramic tile 3/4"
10.0
4 ply and gravel
6.0
Concrete (lightweight per in.)
10.0
5 ply and gravel
6.5
Concrete (reinforced per in.)
12.0
 
 
Hardwood 1"
4.0
Shingles
 
Linoleum
2.0
Asphalt
2.0
Marble
30.0
Asbestos cement
4.0
Subfloor per in. of depth
3.0
Book tile 2"
12.0
Quarry tile 3/8"
5.0
Book tile 3"
20.0
Terrazzo 1"
13.0
Cement tile
16.0
Vinly asbestos tile
1.3
Clay tile
14.0
Wood floor joists 12" O.C. 16" O.C.
Fiberglass
0.5
2 × 66.0
5.0
Ludowici
10.0
2 × 86.0
6.0
Roman
12.0
2 × 107.0
6.0
Slate 1/4"
10.0
2 × 128.0
7.0
Spanish
19.0
Wood 
3.0
Insulation
 
 
Rigid 1"
1.5
Walls
Fiberboard 1"
2.0
4" glass block
18.0
Foam board per in.
0.2
Glass 1/4" plate
3.3
Poured in place
2.0
Window (glass, frame, sash)
8.0
 4" batts
1.7
Glazed tile
18.0
 6" batts
2.5
Gypsum board 1/2"
2.2
10" batts
4.5
Gypsum board 5/8"
2.8
Marble
15.0
FIGURE 13-1 Standard weights of common building materials.
(continued)

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
283
try to anticipate every conceivable live load condition. 
A laborer working on the roof, loading a wheelbarrow 
full to the brim with heavy material may cause a failure. 
The engineer and architect need to anticipate unusual 
loads that may occur in the building they are designing, 
such as a room full of heavy file cabinets. They may 
need to design for loads beyond those called for in the 
code. Live loads are a judgment call by the code and by 
the professional.
Environmental Loads
Buildings also need to resist vertical environmental 
loads from snow and rain, and be able to support 
vertical loads from their own weight. Buildings must 
be able to resist horizontal environmental loads from 
wind, soil, flooding, and earthquakes. Six basic envi-
ronmental loads are addressed in the code. They are 
snow loads, rain loads, wind loads, soil lateral loads, 
flood loads, and earthquake loads. Snow loads and 
rain loads act vertically on the building. The other 
environmental loads act laterally or horizontally on 
the building.
Snow Loads
Snow creates a live load. Snow loads vary greatly across 
the country. Some areas experience heavy snowfall, 
whereas others don’t have any snow. A typical snow 
load map is shown in Figure 13-3. The snowfall in one 
area may be substantially different from the snowfall 
a few miles down the road. The shape of a structure 
may cause increased localized loading from snowdrifts. 
Specific design loads for snow should be obtained from 
the local building department.
Rain Loads
There are conditions where rainwater will be allowed to 
accumulate on the roof of a building. If this condition 
exists then the structure must be designed to support 
the weight of the water. Roofs that are very flat (less 
than 1/4" per foot) are assumed to pond water. Because 
of this, their structure must be designed to support 
water. When roofs need roof drains, they must also have 
 
WEIGHTS OF BUILDING MATERIALS
Material
PSF
Material
PSF
Masonry 4" thick unless noted
Limestone 
55.0
Brick
38.0
Terra-cotta tile
25.0
 
Stone
55.0
Concrete block
Plaster 1"
8.0
4" hollow
30.0
Plaster 1" w/wood lath
10.0
6" hollow
42.0
Porcelain enamel, steel
3.0
6" hollow
55.0
Stucco 7/8"
10.0
Hollow clay tile
18.0
For more exact weights, see manufacturers’ specifications.  
Hollow gypsum tile
13.0
wFIGURE 13-1 (continued) Standard weights of common building materials.
FIGURE 13-2 Weight of typical assemblies.

284 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
overflow drains located 2" above the roof as shown in 
Figure 18-30. These overflow drains are provided to 
drain water off the roof if the primary drain is clogged. 
The roof structure must be designed to support the 
water that would accumulate if the primary drain were 
clogged. 
Earth Pressure
Retaining walls are designed to resist the lateral force 
from soil piled up against the wall. As seen in Figure 13-4,
restrained or full-height retaining walls, which are tied 
to a diaphragm at their top, act like a beam spanning 
between the ground and the floor or roof of the building. 
The floor or roof diaphragm must be designed to resist 
the loads that the retaining wall will transfer to it. As seen 
in Figure 13-5, partial-height retaining walls, which are 
not connected to a diaphragm at their top, resist loads by 
cantilevering off their footings. The footing transfers the 
horizontal load from the earth they are retaining into the 
soil below. The further the footing extends from the wall 
the less the pressure is on the soil below. 
The earth produces a relatively static load against 
the wall. It is assumed to act like a fluid with a weight 
FIGURE 13-3 A ground snow load chart and the local building department must be consulted to determine design snow loads. 
Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. 
www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
285
of about one-third its actual weight, or about 30 pounds 
per cubic foot (4.71 Kn/m3) but it is subject to change. 
Soil is heavier when it is wet. Different soil types absorb 
water differently. In order to minimize the effects of 
moisture, efforts are made to remove the water. This is 
done by installing a drain line behind the wall, as shown 
in Figure 13-4, or by letting the water flow through 
weep holes at the base of the wall, shown in Figure 13-6.
The pressure also changes when another load, such as a 
car in Figure 13-7, or the footing for a building is placed 
on top of the earth, as in Figure 13-8. This type of load-
ing is called a surcharge.
Load Design Considerations
Buildings are not designed to withstand every conceiv-
able force. If they were, they would not be affordable. 
Buildings are designed to resist all dead loads and all 
FIGURE 13-4 Restraining walls act like a beam spanning 
between each floor level. The lateral load of the soil causes the 
“beam” to bend in the middle.
FIGURE 13-5 Retaining walls resist loads by cantilevering 
from the footing. Forces from the exposed side of the wall are 
not considered because they are much smaller than the forces 
caused by the pressure of the soil on the wall.
FIGURE 13-6 To minimize the effect of water on the soil load, 
a weep hole is placed in the bottom of the retaining wall.
FIGURE 13-7 The pressure resisted by a wall is altered 
when a load is supported by the soil. The load is transferred 
through the soil to the wall, causing a condition referred to 
as a surcharge.

286 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
anticipated live loads and dynamic loads. They are 
designed to resist most anticipated lateral forces with 
no damage. They should perform well, but some non-
structural damage may occur under severe conditions 
such as very high winds or moderate earthquakes. 
Under the most severe storm or earthquake condi-
tions, the building might have structural problems 
beyond repair, but it should not fail in such a manner 
as to cause loss of life. Details should be designed to 
be ductile, that is, to give rather than fail suddenly and 
explosively. Examples of ductile details are given in 
other chapters of this book.
LOAD DISTRIBUTION
The contractor builds the building from the ground 
up. The engineer and CAD technician need to work 
in the opposite direction. Starting from the top of the 
building, the live loads, dead loads, and lateral loads 
are collected. Members are designed to support those 
loads. These members then transfer their loads to 
other members until the load is transferred into the 
ultimate supporting member—the earth. The primary 
reason for the structural portion of plans is to illustrate 
this transfer. Load transfers are depicted on the draw-
ings in plan views, sections, and details. Figure 13-9 
shows a simple two-story structure that will be exam-
ined throughout this chapter. You will follow the loads 
depicted in this figure, from the roof to the soil.
Roof
The roof shown in Figure 13-9 has two uniformly loaded 
joist spans, one of 40' and one of 20'. Because these are 
simple-span members, they will send half their load to 
each end. This means that the center wall carries half 
the total load (30'), and this load is transferred down to 
the floor joists below. The left exterior wall carries 20' 
of roof load and the right exterior wall carries 10' of roof 
load. Note that adding overhangs and balconies changes 
the reaction at each end of a joist or beam.
Floor
At the middle floor, the left exterior wall supports the 
20' of roof load discussed above, plus the load of the 
wall above and 10' of floor load. The right exterior wall 
is a bit more complicated. It supports 10' of roof load as 
discussed above, 20' of floor load and the wall above. 
The right wall also receives a point load from the center 
wall. The point load consists of the weight of the wall 
and the roof it supports. Because this wall falls at the 
center of the 40' floor joist span, the floor joists transfer 
half the weight of the point load to the right wall and 
half to the center support on the lower floor.
The center support at the lower floor for the floor 
above is a beam and three columns. Just like the right 
exterior wall, the beam receives loads from the center 
wall above, half the wall load and half the roof load, 
supported by the wall. It also receives half the left floor 
joist load (10') and half the right joist load (20').
Foundation
The continuous left footing receives the weight of the 
left exterior wall, plus all of the loads supported by the 
wall. The continuous right footing does the same. It 
receives all the loads the right exterior wall supports, 
plus the load of the right wall. The center support is 
not continuous and does not have a continuous footing 
under it. The beam transfers the loads from above and 
its own weight to the post. These posts then transfer 
their loads to pier footings. The weight of the footing 
will need to be considered along with the other loads to 
arrive at a total load to be supported by the soil.
Soil
All loads are eventually transferred into the earth or 
the soil. To determine the footing size, the engineer 
will need to know the bearing value of the soil. The 
building code provides a table giving allowable bearing 
FIGURE 13-8 Loads from the footing surcharge the wall 
below a point extending at a 45° angle from the bottom of 
the building footing.

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
287
values in pounds per square foot for various soil types. 
These values can be used without a soils report, but this 
is seldom the wise thing to do unless you are support-
ing very light loads. A soils investigation and perhaps 
a geological investigation should be done. To make a 
soils report, a civil engineer must do a soils investigation 
at the building site. The engineer first visits the site to 
obtain soil samples at various depths and locations on 
the site. These soil samples are then taken to a soils lab, 
tested, and classified. After this is done, the soils engi-
neer will prepare a soils report. A good soils report will 
contain, among other things, soil bearing values and 
construction design recommendations. There will be 
recommendations for minimum footing width, depth, 
and reinforcing; slab thickness, underlayment, and rein-
forcing; and paving materials. The report will also give 
equivalent fluid pressure, and friction coefficient values 
for designing retaining walls, expansive soils informa-
tion, and grading recommendations. The equivalent 
fluid pressure is a simplified way to measure the force 
that the earth will exert on the wall. The friction coef-
ficient value measures the resistance of the footing 
DRYWALL 
LIVE LOAD = 70#
LIVE LOAD = 16#
ROOF ASSEMBLY
PER FIG 13-2a
PLASTERED EXTERIOR
WALL
FLOOR ASSEMBLY
PER FIG 13-2c
roof load to wall
20 x 37#
floor load to wall
10 x 98#
29.5  x 18#
wall load to footing
= 740#
= 980#
= 531#
2251#
total load to footing
610 + 980 + 1960 = 3550# per lin. ft.
total load to post and beam
10  x 11# =110#   per lin. ft.
wall load to floor joist
10 x 98# = 980#  per lin. ft.
20 x 37# = 740#  per lin. ft.
floor load to post and beam wall
roof load to wall
LEFT WALL
CENTER PIER
10 x 37# = 370#  per lin. ft.
20 x 98# = 1,960#  per lin. ft.   
wall load to post and beam
740/2 + 340/2 + 110/2 = 610# per lin. ft.
assume post and beam weigh 400# 
total load from post to pier
(3550 x 15) + 400 = 53,650#
COLUMN
BEAM
COLUMN
PER FIG 13-2b
FIGURE 13-9 Transferring loads to the soil. The calculations shown in this figure will be used to determine the loads on the left and 
center footings.

288 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
sliding across the soil. Usually values for the bearing 
capacity of the soil at most building sites will be higher 
than the 1000 pounds the code allows to be assumed 
without using a report, but not always. The soil might 
be uncompacted fill or alluvial soil (soil deposited by a 
stream). In these cases, corrective measures would have 
to be taken. The site might have to be regraded and 
compacted before it is suitable to support a building, 
or the building might have to be supported by piles or 
caissons. For the following examples, it will be assumed 
that the soils report gives a value of 1500 psf for the 
allowable soil bearing value and a minimum footing 
depth of 18".
DETERMINING LOADS
The balance of this chapter will provide an introduction 
to compiling loads. Before the actual loads are exam-
ined, the technician must again be reminded that deter-
mining the loads is the responsibility of the engineer. 
The CAD technician’s role is to carefully specify all of 
the engineer’s calculations.
Footing Calculations—Left Wall
The loads for the left wall transfer straight down, so 
they are relatively simple to calculate. The footing 
will be supporting roof loads, floor loads, and wall 
loads. The roof weighs 37 pounds per square foot (per 
Figure 13-2a, 17 lbs D.L. + 20 lbs L.L.). Multiplying 
37 lbs by 20', the portion of the roof loading the left 
wall equals 740 pounds per lineal foot. 
The second floor weighs 98 pounds (per Figure 13-2c,
28 lbs D.L. + 70 lbs L.L.). Multiplying 98 pounds by 
10', the portion of the floor loading the left wall equals 
980 pounds per lineal foot. 
The wall is 29.5' tall (6 + 10 + 3.5 + 10) and 
weighs 18 pounds per square foot (see Figure 13-2b). 
Multiplying the height by the weight per square foot 
results in a weight of 531 pounds per lineal foot. 
The total load to the top of the footing per lineal 
foot is: 
Roof load
  740 lbs
Floor load 
  980 lbs
Wall load
  531 lbs
Total load
2251 lbs
The soil also has to support the load of the footing. 
The exact size of the footing is not yet known, but you 
can calculate how much it will weigh per square foot. 
If this weight is then subtracted from the soil bearing 
value, the weight of the footing can then be ignored for 
the rest of the calculation. Assume the footing will be 18" 
thick, and the weight of the concrete is 150 pounds per 
cubic foot. Using Figure 13-10, it can be seen that the 
footing will weigh 225 pounds (1.5 × 150) per square 
FIGURE 13-10 Weight of concrete footings. Courtesy Ginger M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc. 

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
289
foot. This weight of the concrete can be subtracted 
from the soil bearing value, leaving a value of 1275 psf 
(1500 – 225). Dividing the 2251-pound load to the top 
of the footing by the remaining soil bearing value of 
1275 pounds results in a required footing width of 1.77' 
or 1'–9 1/4". Because this would not be a convenient size 
to trench, a 2' wide footing would probably be specified 
for this condition.
Footing Calculation—Center Support
The loads for this support are not as simple to calcu-
late because the loads are not stacked directly above 
the pier. 
The roof will transfer 1110 pounds {37 lbs × [(40/2) +
(20/2)]} to the interior stud wall. The center wall weighs 
110 pounds (11 lbs × 10'). The wall transfers its weight 
and the weight of the roof load, a total of 1220 pounds, 
to the floor joists.
Floor joists on the right side of the center support 
beam transfer half the load from the wall above to the 
right exterior wall and half, 610 pounds, to the center 
beam. The floor itself weighs 2940 pounds {98 lbs × 
[(20/2) + (40/2)]}. This means that the floor joists 
transfer 3550 pounds per lineal foot to the center beam. 
Assuming that the post and beam weigh 400 pounds, 
53,650 pounds [400 + (3550 × 15)] will be transferred 
to the pier footing. 
Next, subtract the weight per square foot of the pier 
from the soil bearing value. As shown in the previ-
ous example, the weight of an 18" deep footing is 225 
pounds per square foot. Subtracting this value from the 
allowable soil bearing value of 1500 pounds leaves an 
adjusted value of 1275 pounds per square foot. Dividing 
the load of 53,650 pounds by the adjusted soil bear-
ing value gives a value of 42.08 square feet. Using the 
square root of this number will determine the size of a 
square pier. This results in a pier size of 6.48 feet square. 
A pier measuring 6.5 feet square would likely be speci-
fied for this condition.
THE EFFECTS OF SEISMIC AND WIND 
FORCES ON A STRUCTURE
So far only vertical loads have been explored. Forces 
that push sideways are somewhat less obvious. These 
sideway forces are referred to as lateral forces. Every 
building experiences lateral forces. The two most 
common sources of lateral forces are seismic forces that 
result from earthquakes and wind. Buildings must be 
constructed to resist these forces as well as the vertical 
forces discussed in earlier in this chapter. The build-
ing code contains maps like those in Figures 13-11
and 13-12 to classify the intensity of wind and earth-
quake forces that are likely to occur in various parts 
of the country. Rather than use this map, engineers 
frequently use the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Web 
site, which lets them obtain information on a specific 
zip code area. The code also contains minimum design 
requirements to resist these forces.
Earthquakes
Earthquakes happen without warning and last for a very 
short period of time, perhaps 10 to 20 seconds. A shift 
in the Earth’s crust sets off shock waves that shake and 
rattle buildings. Most earthquakes in North America 
occur in California and Alaska, but they have occurred 
in other parts of the continent. The code contains maps, 
similar to the snow load and wind speed maps, showing 
the expected ground motion caused by an earthquake 
(see Figure 13-11). The shock wave from an earthquake 
causes a building to move laterally and vertically. It is 
assumed that the weight of the building and normal 
design for vertical forces will take care of the vertical 
motion, so vertical forces are generally ignored in seis-
mic design. The lateral movement is very dramatic. It is 
not a constant or uniform force. It shakes the building 
back and forth with different intensities. The type of 
structure (solid masonry, moment-resisting frame, and 
so on) and the nature of the soil under the building are 
major factors in the effect that an earthquake will have 
on a building.
Buildings are not designed to be earthquake proof. 
They are designed to be earthquake resistant. Protect-
ing the people inside the building is more important 
than protecting the building itself. It is better for a 
building to twist and bend in a severe earthquake than 
it is for it to suddenly break apart. With this in mind, 
engineers try to design connections that will bend or 
stretch rather than snap. This type of connection is 
called a ductile connection. Ductile connections give 
the building a better chance of remaining standing 
during and after an earthquake and give the building’s 
occupants a better chance of evacuating. The building 
may be as useless as if it had collapsed, but fewer lives 
will be lost.
Wind Loads
Every portion of the world has wind, and wind patterns 
are far more predictable than earthquakes. There are 

290 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 13-11 A map showing the maximum considered earthquake motion for the western portion of the United States. Courtesy 
2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. 
www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
291
warning systems in place for high-wind conditions. 
Even so, hurricanes and tornadoes are very destruc-
tive forces. Because destructive wind events happen 
for a longer period of time and over a larger portion 
of North America, they cause a much greater loss of 
life and property than earthquakes. Figure 13-12 is 
a partial wind speed map of the United States. It has 
wind contour lines ranging from 90 to 150 miles per 
hour.
Wind causes both horizontal and vertical movement 
that must be considered by the engineer. The verti-
cal forces are called uplift. As seen in Figure 13-13,
uplift is generally caused in one of two ways. Wind 
blowing into a structure through an opening increases 
FIGURE 13-12 A map showing the basic wind speeds for the eastern portion of the United States. Courtesy 2009 International Building 
Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

292 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
the pressure and tries to lift the roof. The wind blowing 
across the top of a structure creates a negative pres-
sure that tries to lift or suck the roof off its supports. 
Both these vertical forces require that the roof be firmly 
anchored to the supporting elements. Figure 13-14 
shows uplift connections for wall/floor members that 
are designed to transfer the uplift force into the foot-
ing. Horizontal wind forces are treated in very much 
the same manner as seismic forces. Wind speeds can 
reach as high as 200 miles per hour in a hurricane and 
600 miles per hour in a tornado. As with earthquakes, 
buildings are not designed to withstand the worst wind 
event without damage but are designed to protect 
human life.
GENERAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
FOR HORIZONTAL FORCES
Figure 13-15a shows an open-frame stud wall with a 
lateral force pushing on it as indicated by the arrows. 
If the joints between the top plate and the studs are 
not stiff enough, the wall will try to fold into a paral-
lelogram as shown in Figure 13-15b. If the wall is stiff 
enough to resist these forces but is not anchored well 
FIGURE 13-13 Uplift is caused by wind blowing into the struc-
ture and attempting to lift the structure, or by creating a nega-
tive pressure as it blows over the structure attempting to suck 
the roof off the structure. Courtesy Jamie Smith, Kenneth D. Smith 
Architect & Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 13-14 Hold-down connections for wall/floor mem-
bers that are designed to transfer the forces of uplift into the 
foundation. Courtesy Dean K. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & 
Associates, Inc.

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
293
to the foundation, it will tend to slide along the foun-
dation or will try to lift up and turn over, as shown in 
Figure 13-15c.
The wall can be stiffened by applying a rigid sheath-
ing such as the plywood shown in Figure 13-16a or by 
adding diagonal straps or wood let-in braces as shown 
in Figure 13-16b. A wall with rigid sheathing is called a 
shear wall. Figure 13-17 shows a typical wood framed 
plywood shear wall. An alternative material could be 
used for the wall, such as concrete block that makes 
a rigid solid wall as shown in Figure 13-16c, or a steel 
rigid frame as shown in Figure 13-16d. Figure 13-18 
shows a shear wall made of steel studs and straps. 
Two connections the CAD technician would need to 
complete to explain the wall construction are shown in 
Figure 13-19.
Stiffening the wall is only a part of the solution. The 
wall must also be tied to the foundation with anchor 
bolts or similar devices to prevent sliding, as shown in 
Figures 13-17 and 13-18. Shear walls also need adequate 
weight at the end to prevent overturning. The footing 
itself may be heavy enough to prevent overturning, or 
a pier may need to be added to the end of the wall, as 
shown in Figure 13-16a. Special bolting, called hold-
downs, that are shown in Figures 7-4, 13-17, 13-18, 
and 13-19, may be needed on the end of the wall to 
firmly tie the wall to the footing. The end of a wall may 
also be held down by a load being applied to the top 
FIGURE 13-15 (a) Lateral forces acting on a wall. (b) Lateral 
forces will try to flatten or turn the wall into a parallelogram, 
or (c) lift and rotate the wall. Courtesy Robin Smith, Kenneth D. Smith 
Architect & Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 13-16 Shear wall examples. Shear walls can be made 
of many materials including (a) studs and plywood, (b) studs 
with diagonal strapping, or (c) masonry. A steel rigid frame (d) 
serves the same function as a shear wall. Shear walls depend on 
weight from the foundation below or roof and floor loads from 
above to keep them from lifting and rotating.

294 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
of the wall such as a header, shown in Figure 13-16b. 
Figures 13-15 and 13-16 show the lateral force acting 
in one direction. This is never the actual case. Wind 
loads or seismic loads can come from any direction. 
For engineering design purposes, the lateral forces are 
calculated as if they act perpendicular to the building’s 
surfaces. The building must be designed to resist lateral 
forces from all sides. Figure 13-20 shows a tall, thin, and 
very rigid wall that resists a large lateral force. The wall 
has hold-down bolts on each side of it and is anchored 
to a footing that projects beyond the wall on each side. 
This extended footing would have extra reinforcing 
steel encased in the concrete and is called a grade beam. 
The grade beam will resist overturning by changing the 
leverage point and by adding weight.
Collecting and Resisting Loads
So far, we have talked about the wall resisting loads, 
but where do the loads come from? It isn’t from the 
wind blowing on the narrow end of the wall itself. 
Figure 13-21 shows a simple building with the wind 
blowing on one of the long sides of the building. The 
wall acts as a beam with a uniform load and transfers 
half the wind load to the ground. The other half of the 
wind load is transferred to the roof. Figure 13-22 is the 
same building with the wind-loaded wall removed for 
clarity. The arrows indicate the portion of the wind 
load that was transferred to the roof. This load pushes 
sideways on the roof.
The roof is made rigid in one of several ways, 
such as: 
● A layer of plywood nailed to the joists. 
● Metal decking welded to open-web steel joists.
● Cable X bracing attached to metal rigid frames.
FIGURE 13-18 Similar to its wood counterpart, a steel stud 
shear wall must show the reinforcement method, each framing 
member required for the assembly, as well as the connection 
methods. Attachment methods generally include the use of 
screws, bolts, and welded connections. Courtesy Dean K. Smith, 
Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 13-17 A plywood shear wall detail must show and 
specify the size and type of the wall reinforcement as well as 
any extra framing members that must be provided, and the 
methods to be used to attach each feature. Attachment meth-
ods generally include gluing, nailing, and bolting. Courtesy Dean 
K. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
295
or by another method similar to these. A rigid roof 
surface is called a roof diaphragm and is discussed in 
more detail later in this chapter. It is very similar to a 
shear wall, except that it is a horizontal surface instead 
of a vertical surface. A roof diaphragm acts like a beam 
FIGURE 13-19 Steel stud shear wall assemblies will often 
require the CAD technician to assemble and edit stan-
dard details to explain each connection in the shear wall 
assembly. Courtesy Ginger M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & 
Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 13-20 Lateral forces transfer from the wall to the foot-
ing and apply pressure to the soil.
FIGURE 13-21 Lateral forces put pressure on the walls and try 
to bend them.
FIGURE 13-22 Lateral forces are transferred from walls to the 
roof causing the roof diaphragm to bend. The roof diaphragm 
transfers the forces back to the perpendicular walls and then to 
the footings.

296 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
spanning sideways, with the shear walls below acting 
as the reaction points. The lateral force is acting as a 
uniform load applied sideways to the roof. The lateral 
forces try to bend the roof diaphragm. The roof dia-
phragm acts like a uniformly loaded beam, and resists 
the lateral force, and in doing so it transfers the forces 
into the shear walls. It has a horizontal reaction at each 
end that is transferred to the walls. If the lateral force 
were to push on the narrow wall shown in Figure 13-23,
it would try to bend the roof diaphragm in the other 
direction, as shown in Figure 13-24. The loads are easier 
to resist in this direction because the beam formed by 
the roof diaphragm is deeper and the walls that the load 
is transferred to are longer.
Diaphragms
Floor and roof diaphragms act like a beam to resist the 
forces transferred to them by the walls. The engineer 
will calculate the magnitude of this force and specify 
a system to resist that force. If plywood is used for the 
sheathing, its ability to resist the forces is dependent 
on the grade and thickness of the plywood, the size 
and spacing of the supporting members, whether or 
not the edges of the plywood are blocked, the pat-
tern the plywood is laid in, and the type, size, and 
spacing of the nails. Figure 13-25 is a table from the 
International Building Code (IBC) that gives these 
values. According to this table, 15/32" Structural 1 
plywood laid per case 3 and nailed to 3 × 6 joists 
with a single row of 10d nails at
● 4" o.c. at the diaphragm boundary
● 4" o.c. at continuous panel edges parallel to the load
● 6" o.c. at all other panel edges 
would be capable of resisting 480 pounds per square 
foot. Figure 13-26 shows common placement patterns 
for placing plywood over framing members.
Diaphragm values for metal decks are available from 
their manufacturer. Metal sheathing is either welded 
or screwed to its supporting member. Frequently, 
metal decks have concrete poured in them to add 
rigidity. Concrete floors and roofs make excellent 
diaphragms.
Chord Forces 
As discussed earlier, a floor or roof diaphragm acts 
like a horizontal beam. When the diaphragm bends as 
shown by the dotted lines in Figure 13-22, one side of 
the diaphragm is in compression and the other side is 
in tension. The plywood and framing members on the 
compression side normally need no reinforcing, but 
tension on the far side is trying to tear the diaphragm 
apart, and the individual pieces of sheathing on the 
diaphragm need to be held together. The diaphragm 
is held together by using a chord. A chord is a con-
tinuous piece of material, or several pieces joined 
together, that resists the forces of tension. Chords are 
normally made of steel. Chords may be in the roof or 
FIGURE 13-23 Lateral forces on the short wall of a building are 
generally easier to resist because they are transferred into the 
long walls.
FIGURE 13-24 The loads are easier to resist in this direction 
because the beam formed by the roof diaphragm is deeper 
than that shown in Figure 13-22 and the wall that the load is 
transferred to is longer.

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
297
FIGURE 13-25 Allowable stress for wood floor and roof diaphragms. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. Reproduced with 
permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

298 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
in the wall that the roof attaches to. Figure 13-27
shows a chord that is made of reinforcing steel cast 
into a tilt-up wall panel. The walls are stood up and 
a piece of angle iron is welded to the chord bars to 
join them together so that they act as one continu-
ous piece. In a concrete block structure, the bond 
beam at the top of the wall shown in Figure 13-28
acts as the chord. The reinforcing steel in the upper 
bond beam is lapped in the wall so that it acts as one 
continuous piece. Figure 13-29 shows a block wall 
with two #5 bars acting as a chord where the floor 
ledger attaches to the wall. This figure also shows the 
edge nailing of the plywood that is used to transfer 
the diaphragm loads into the ledger and the bolting 
required to transfer the diaphragm loads from the 
ledger to the wall.
Shear Walls
Shear walls may be made of many different materials. 
Common materials are concrete, concrete block, brick, 
and plywood placed over a wood or lightweight steel 
frame. Shear walls are tied to the floor or roof diaphragm 
above. They transfer the loads from this diaphragm to 
the foundation. In a multistory building, shear walls 
transfer loads to shear walls below and then into the 
FIGURE 13-26 Sheathing and framing configurations. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International 
Code Council. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
299
foundation. It is important that the wall be adequately 
tied to the diaphragm above and the footing below. 
Lateral loads on the shear wall try to lift one end of 
the wall and footing, while pushing down on the other 
end of the wall and footing, as shown in Figure 13-20. 
The footing must be sized to support the lateral loads 
from the shear wall as well as the normal vertical loads. 
Frequently, these walls will be extended to the floor 
sheathing or roof sheathing, as shown in Figure 13-30.
This allows both the plywood floor diaphragm and 
the plywood shear panel to be nailed to the top plate 
to transfer lateral loads from the diaphragm to the 
shear wall.
Concrete
Tilt-up concrete walls often have additional steel 
added at each end. A void is left at the bottom of the 
panel that is also open to the inside face of the panel. A 
steel bar is left exposed in this pocket. Reinforcing steel 
is placed in the footing that projects above the top of 
the footing and up into the void in the panel. The steel 
in the footing must be placed very precisely so that it 
closely aligns with the steel in the panel when the panel 
is tilted up and put in the proper location. A piece of 
angle iron is placed in the void and welded to the 
reinforcing steel projecting from the footing and to the 
reinforcing steel that was left exposed in the panel, as 
shown in Figure 13-31. By connecting the reinforcing 
steel in the panel to the reinforcing steel in the footing, 
the lateral or overturning forces in the panel will be 
transferred to the footing.
Concrete Block
Concrete block shear walls have vertical steel placed 
closer together than a typical CMU wall and all of the 
cells may be required to be solid grouted. All the verti-
cal steel must be connected to steel extending from the 
footing. The steel from the footing laps the steel in the 
wall and the concrete grout transfers the loads from one 
bar to the other.
Wood Shear Walls
Plywood is nailed to one or both sides of the studs 
that form the shear wall. If the plywood is nailed to 
both sides of a wall, the studs need to be thicker than
the normal 2" (50 mm) nominal size so that the 
nails penetrating from both sides do not split the 
stud. Figure 13-32 shows values for particleboard 
shear walls for different thickness and nailing condi-
tions. The code has similar tables for plywood and 
plaster.
FIGURE 13-27 A chord in a tilt-up wall. A chord keeps the 
edges of diaphragms from tearing apart when the diaphragm 
tries to bend. Courtesy Dean K. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & 
Associates, Inc.

300 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 13-28 A chord in concrete block walls is formed using rebar set in mortar. Courtesy the Concrete Masonry Association of California 
and Nevada.
A typical hold-down detail that might be used at 
each end of a shear wall is shown in Figure 13-14. 
A manufactured bracket such as a Simpson Strong-
Tie hold-down anchor with tested values is attached 
to the stud and into the foundation. The bolt is cast 
into the footing as the concrete is poured, and then 
the bracket is attached to the post as the framing is 
completed.

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
301
Braced Frames
Braced frames made of steel are frequently used 
instead of shear walls as forces increase. They consist 
of vertical, horizontal, and diagonal members form-
ing triangles. Figure 13-33 shows two examples of 
braced frames. Figure 13-34 shows typical braced 
frame details.
FIGURE 13-29 Diaphragm transfer to block wall. Courtesy Gisela 
Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 13-30 Diaphragm transfer to stud wall. Courtesy Gisela 
Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 13-31 Hold-down to foundation detail, tilt-up. 
Courtesy Dean K. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.

302 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 13-32 Shear wall table. Courtesy 2009 International Building Code, copyright © 2009. Washington, DC. International Code Council. 
Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. www.iccsafe.org.
FIGURES 13-34 Details explaining braced frame connections must be drawn including (a) brace-to-beam, and (b) brace-to-column 
connections. Courtesy Dean K. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
ECCENTRIC DIAGONAL
BRACING
CONCENTRIC CHEVRON
BRACING
FIGURE 13-33 Braced frame construction features either 
eccentric or concentric bracing.
(a)
(b)

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
303
Moment Frames
Moment frames are made of steel members and 
depend on a very rigid connection of the horizon-
tal members to the vertical members. Figure 13-35 
illustrates a connection that a CAD technician would 
be required to draw to represent a bolted connec-
tion. A similar connection can be accomplished with 
rivets or by welding. When connected, the members 
all act as one. Lateral forces induce bending in the 
horizontal and vertical members, as illustrated in 
Figure 13-36.
Drags
When buildings have irregular shapes, as shown in 
Figure 13-37, there is frequently a need to transfer or 
drag the forces from a floor or roof diaphragm into 
the shear wall. This can be done through a beam or 
joist. A drag is a beam that is attached to the edge of a 
diaphragm to transfer lateral loads from the diaphragm 
into a shear wall or braced frame. The beam must 
then be fastened to the shear wall in a secure manner. 
Figure 13-38 is a typical detail showing the drag and 
the attachment to the shear wall. The bracket has 
steel rebar welded to it and extending back into the 
concrete wall to transfer the loads. Bolts through the 
bracket and the beam transfer the load to the beam. 
The roof diaphragm is securely fastened to the beam 
with nails.
DRAG
BEAM
SHEAR 
WALL
FIGURE 13-37 When a building has an irregular shape, loads may 
need to be transferred into shear walls by use of a drag beam.
FIGURE 13-36 Vertical and lateral forces acting on a moment 
frame. 
FIGURE 13-35 Moment connection details are carefully 
designed to be ductile. If the connection fails under extreme 
conditions, it is designed to give way gradually, not suddenly. 
Courtesy Ginger M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.

304 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
ADDITIONAL READING
Two additional resources include The IBC Handbook-
Structural provisions and Soils, Earthwork, and Foundations: 
A Practical Approach. Both can be obtained at www.
iccsafe.org. In addition, the following Web sites can be 
used as a resource to help obtain additional information 
about structural issues.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.asdipsoft.com 
Advanced Design 
International Programs
www.acec.org/programs/case.htm Council of American 
Structural Engineers
www.scitation.aip.org 
Journal of Structural 
Engineering
www.gostructural.com 
SDS/2 Design Data
www.strucalc.com 
StruCalc Design 
Software
www.seaint.prg  
The Structural 
Engineers Association—
International
FIGURE 13-38 A drag to shear wall connection detail. The 
beam must be firmly attached to the shear wall and floor or 
roof diaphragm must be firmly attached to the beam. Courtesy 
Ginger M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
If math is required to answer a question, show your work.
Question 13-1 What type of load does a desk produce on a 
floor?
Question 13-2 What is the wind speed in Detroit?
Question 13-3 What live load is produced by the occupants 
of a restaurant?
Question 13-4 What term is used to define a load placed on 
top of the soil and transferred into a retaining wall?
 Question 13-5 How much weight is transferred to the top 
of the footing at the right wall in Figure 13-9?
Question 13-6 What is the actual psf transferred to the 
soil for the left wall of the structure examined in this 
chapter?
KEY TERMS
Braced frames
Chord
Drag
Equivalent fluid pressure
Friction coefficient
Lateral forces
Load’s path
Loads, dead
Loads, dynamic
Loads, horizontal environmental
Loads, live
Loads, static
Moment frames
Retaining walls
Roof diaphragm
Shear wall
Structural Considerations Affecting Design
CHAPTER 13 TEST

Chapter 13: Structural Considerations Affecting Design 
305
Question 13-7 What is the significance of triangles in braced 
frames?
Question 13-8 What causes seismic forces? In what direc-
tion do they try to move a structure?
Question 13-9 What does a hold-down do?
Question 13-10 How can 640 pounds per foot be 
resisted if 15/32" Structural 1 plywood is used for 
a roof diaphragm?
Question 13-11 What is the difference between a case 1 and 
a case 5 roof diaphragm?
Question 13-12 Why are weep holes provided at the bottom 
of retaining walls?
Question 13-13 What is a drag?
Question 13-14 What is the importance of a chord?
Question 13-15 What is a moment frame?

306
14
Project Manuals and 
Written Specifications
Construction documents consist of the data needed 
to build a structure and are used to clearly convey 
the intentions of the owner, the architectural team, 
and each consultant involved with the project. 
Written specifications provide a method of supple-
menting the working drawings regarding the quality 
of materials to be used and labor to be supplied. The 
drafter needs to remember that both the drawings 
and the written specifications are legal documents 
that must be very carefully researched and prepared. 
Both may someday be used in a court of law as a 
standard for quality for a specific structure. To help 
you gain an understanding of the written docu-
ments that support the drawings, this chapter will 
explore:
The goal of specifications.
 
●
Specification placement.
 
●
Using the Construction Specification Institute (CSI) 
 
●
MasterFormat.
Types of specifications.
 
●
Writing specifications.
 
●
EXPLORING WRITTEN 
SPECIFICATIONS
The construction drawings and written specifications 
must be compatible so that the project can be accurately 
bid and built. They must be clear in order to avoid 
misinterpretation. The drawings visually define the 
relationships between materials, products, and systems 
within the structure by showing the location and size of 
each element. Drawings should show the following:
Location of materials, fixtures, and equipment.
 
●
Sizes, quantities, and the physical relationship between 
 
●
elements.
Dimensions to pinpoint the size and location of each 
 
●
material and component.
The size, type, finish, and hardware associated with 
 
●
rooms, windows, and doors. 
Written specifications express the requirements in 
words. Specifications describe the following:
The quality and type of material.
 
●
Required gauge, size, or capacity of material and 
 
●
equipment.
The quality of workmanship.
 
●
Methods of fabrication.
 
●
Methods of installation.
 
●
Test and code requirements. 
 
●
Specifications provide information regarding the 
quality of materials and workmanship, methods of 
installation, the desired performance to be achieved at 
completion, and how performance is to be measured. 
The drafter must understand the role of each type of 
specification to fully understand notations that are 
placed on the drawings. This includes knowledge of 
placement, formats, and types of specifications.
SPECIFICATION PLACEMENT
The specifications for a project are either found in a 
project manual or placed on one or more sheets of 
the construction drawing. The American Institute of 
Architects (AIA) recommends that the documentation 
for every project contain a project manual. In order to 
reduce cost, many owners request the architect to sub-
stitute less detailed specifications into the drawings than 
are found in a project manual. Projects that are funded 
by federal, state, or municipal money are required to 
have a project manual.
Specifications within the 
Construction Drawings
Many owners of small, privately funded projects opt for 
specifications that are less specific than those found in a 
project manual. These specs are placed on one or more 
sheets of the construction drawings. Many engineering 
firms place the written specifications for structural mate-
rial within the drawings to meet building department 

Chapter 14: Project Manuals and Written Specifications 
307
requirements and to establish minimum standards 
for construction materials. Examples of the drawing 
specifications that are part of the steel structure used 
throughout this text are shown in Figure 14-1. See the 
student CD in the RESOURCE MATERIAL/CHAPTER 14
file for the complete specification.
Project Manual
The term specs has often been used by contractors and 
their subcontractors to refer to the written specifications 
that are used to supplement the plans. The terms project 
manual and drawings have become more representa-
tive of the contents of each aspect of the construc-
tion documents. The project manual contains many 
documents related to a specific construction project 
in addition to the written specifications. The manual 
is produced by the combined efforts of the owner, the 
architect, and a representative for each of the consult-
ing engineers involved with the project. Several por-
tions are developed under the supervision of attorneys. 
A project manual often contains the following separate 
GENERAL STRUCTURAL NOTES
CODE REQUIREMENTS:
Conform to the IBC 2006 edition, as amended by the state of Oregon.
TEMPORARY CONDITIONS: 
The contractor shall be responsible for structural stability during construction. The structure shown on the drawings has been designed for 
stability under the final configuration only.
EXISTING CONDITIONS:
All existing conditions, dimensions, and elevations are to be field verified. The contractor shall notify the architect of any significant discrep-
ancies from that shown on the drawing.
DESIGN CRITERIA:
Design was based on the strength and deflection criteria of the 2006 IBC. In addition to the dead loads, the following loads and allowables 
were used for design, with live loads reduced per IBC.
 
Roof: - 25 PSF L.L.(snow drift as shown on plans.
 
Floors: Retail - 75 PSF L.L.
 
Allowable soil bearing pressure: 2000, 2500 PSF (per soils report) Retaining walls: 40 PCF (equivalent fluid pressure) 
 
Wind: 80 MPH - Exposure B
 
Earthquake design is based on the following: 
 
Z = 0.30, I = 1.0, C = 2.75, Rw = 6 
 
Design and detailing based on criteria for SEISMIC ZONE C.
SUBMITTALS:
Shop drawings shall be submitted to the architect prior to fabrication and construction for all structural items including the following: 
Concrete mix designs, concrete and masonry reinforcement, embedded steel items, structural steel, glued laminated members, and 
 
●
prefabricated wood joist.
If the shop drawings differ from or add to the design of the structural drawings, they shall bear the seal and signature of a structural 
 
●
engineer, registered in the state of Oregon. Any changes to the structural drawings are the subject of review and acceptance of the 
architect.
Design drawings, shop drawings, and calculations for the design and fabrication of items that are designed by others including: 
 
●
Prefabricated wood joist, skylights, window wall and all other glazing systems, and seismic restraints for mechanical, plumbing, electrical, 
equipment, machinery, and associated piping shall bear the seal and signature of a structural engineer, registered in the state of Oregon 
and shall be submitted to the architect prior to fabrication.
Calculations are to be included for all connections to the structure, considering localized effects. Design is to be based on the require-
 
●
ments of the 2000 IBC for the following: 
❍ Earthquake zone C 
❍ Wind zone 80 MPH, 
❍ Exposure B 
Field engineered details, developed by the contractor, that differ from or add to the structural drawings shall bear the seal and signature 
 
●
of a structural engineer registered in the state of Oregon and shall be submitted to the architect prior to construction.
FIGURE 14-1 Structural specifications governing major components of the skeleton of a structure may be placed in the project 
manual or on the structural drawings. Courtesy KPFF Consulting Engineers.

308 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
documents that cover a specific portion of the con-
struction process:
Invitation to bid.
 
●
Instructions to bidders.
 
●
Bid form.
 
●
Bond form.
 
●
Form of agreement.
 
●
General conditions of the contract for construction.
 
●
Supplementary conditions.
 
●
Specifications.
 
●
Addenda.
 
●
Each document is a legal contract in itself, which 
as a whole constitutes the project manual. Whenever 
possible, AIA forms for each document should be used 
because they are well known to the construction indus-
try. These documents have been tested and interpreted 
in the courts and are widely understood by the con-
struction industry.
Invitation to Bid
An invitation to bid is a summary of the bidding and 
construction procedures for a project. It is usually about 
one page in length and is used to advise potential bid-
ders about the existence of a project. If a contractor has 
already been secured for the project prior to bidding, 
an invitation is not a part of the project manual. On 
privately funded projects, based on the request of the 
owner, the architect may mail the invitation to a few 
selected contractors known to have a proven track 
record of success with this type of project. On publicly 
funded projects, laws require the invitation to be pub-
lished in a prescribed form in a newspaper.
Instruction to Bidders
The purpose of the instruction to bidders is to tell each 
bidder the format to be used for the reviewing of bids. 
The AIA standard form provides information about the 
bidding process and procedure including the following:
Definitions.
 
●
Bidder’s representations.
 
●
Bidding documents.
 
●
Bidding procedures.
 
●
Consideration of bids.
 
●
Post-bid information.
 
●
Performance bond and payment bond.
 
●
Form of agreement between owner and contractor.
 
●
Bid Forms 
The purpose of a bid form is to provide a uniform pre-
sentation of the cost associated with the construction 
project. The bid form provides blank lines where the 
bidder is to insert the price for specific portions of 
the project. Using a uniform bid form limits bidders 
in the use of exclusions and substitutions, which often 
make it unclear what costs the bid actually covers.
Bond Forms
A bond is a legal document, which assures that the 
contractor will provide the goods or services repre-
sented in the contract agreement. Three types of bonds 
used in the construction industry include a bid, perfor-
mance, and a labor and materials payment bond. A bid 
bond provides assurance that a contractor will sign the 
contract if the firm is awarded the bid. A performance 
bond is posted by the winning bidder as a guarantee that 
the firm will complete the job and not become defunct 
during the process. The labor and material payment bond 
is posted by the winning bidder as a guarantee that all 
bills for material and labor used for this project will be 
paid by the contractor.
Form of Agreement
The Form of Agreement is a legal contract that includes 
the who, what, how much, and when of the project. 
These aspects of the project are usually represented in 
the following five elements of the agreement:
Identification of the parties involved.
 
●
Statement of the work to be performed.
 
●
Statement of the consideration.
 
●
Time of performance.
 
●
Signatures of the parties involved.
 
●
General Conditions of the Contract 
for Construction
This document specifies the relationship of each 
party who signed the contract and how the contract 
will be administered. The AIA format of general con-
ditions includes the following 14 categories oversee-
ing the contract:
General provisions.
 
●
Owner.
 
●
Contractor.
 
●
Administration of the contract.
 
●
Subcontractors.
 
●
Construction by owner or by separate contractors.
 
●
Changes in work.
 
●
Time.
 
●
Payments and completion.
 
●
Protection of persons and property.
 
●
Insurance and bonds.
 
●

Chapter 14: Project Manuals and Written Specifications 
309
Uncovering and correction of work.
 
●
Miscellaneous provisions.
 
●
Termination or suspension of the contract.
 
●
Supplementary Conditions
The general conditions are used to address elements 
that are common to all construction. The supplemen-
tary or special conditions are used to address the ele-
ments that are found only within a specific project. 
The supplementary conditions are written to address 
portions of the project that are special to that specific 
project that do not fit into the preceding section of the 
contract.
Specifications
Although only one of many documents, the written 
specifications constitutes the bulk of a project manual; 
it is this portion of the project manual that affects the 
drafter. Depending on the size of the project and the 
firm, an experienced drafter may be required to alter or 
update specifications. Every drafter involved with the 
project needs to be aware of the contents of the written 
specifications so that the drawings and the specs can 
be coordinated. The following sections of this chapter 
address this aspect of the project manual.
Addenda
Although not always used, addenda can be used to 
amend the contract during the bidding process but prior 
to the awarding of the contract. Changes issued after 
the contract has been awarded are referred to as change 
notices or change orders and are not considered in this 
chapter.
CSI MASTERFORMAT
Several formats have been used to write specifica-
tions during the last 50 years. An alphabetical listing 
of materials, listings based on the order of use, and 
hundreds of personal styles were common prior to the 
development of the standard for today’s construction 
industry. First published in 1963, most construction 
specifications are now written according to the 2004 
MasterFormat system  published by the Construction 
Specification Institute (CSI) in the United States, and by 
Construction Specifications Canada (CSC) in Canada. 
This system consists of five groups, five major sub-
groups, and fifty divisions. The two major groups include 
Procurement and Contract Requirements (00) and the 
Specifications groups. The five major subgroups and their 
divisions include: General requirements (Division 01), 
Facility Construction (Divisions 02-19), Facility Services 
(Divisions 20-29), Site and Infrastructure (Divisions 
30-39), and Process Equipment (Divisions 40-49). These 
listings can be used for production, distribution, filing, 
and retrieval of construction documents. Each major 
division of the MasterFormat is related to a major group-
ing of the construction process. The major listings and 
their divisions for MasterFormat include the following: 
Procurement and Contracting Requirements Group
Division 00  
 Procurement and contract-
ing requirements 
Specifications Group
Division 01 
General requirements
Facility Construction Subgroup
Division 02  
Existing conditions
Division 03  
Concrete 
Division 04  
Masonry 
Division 05  
Metals 
Division 06  
 Wood, plastics, and 
composites
Division 07  
 Thermal and moisture 
protection 
Division 08  
Openings 
Division 09  
Finishes 
Division 10  
Specialties 
Division 11  
Equipment 
Division 12  
Furnishings 
Division 13  
Special construction 
Division 14  
Conveying equipment 
Divisions 15 through 19  Reserved for future 
expansion
Facility Service Subgroup
Division 20 
Reserved
Division 21 
Fire suppression
Division 22 
Plumbing
Division 23  
 Heating, ventilating, and 
air-conditioning
Division 24 
Reserved
Division 25 
Integrated automation
Division 26 
Electrical
Division 27 
Communications
Division 28 
 Electronic safety and 
security
Division 29 
Reserved
Site and Infrastructure Subgroup
Division 30 
Reserved
Division 31 
Earthwork
Division 32 
Exterior improvements

310 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Division 33 
Utilities
Division 34 
Transportation
Division 35 
 Waterway and marine 
construction
Division 36 through 39 
 Reserved for future 
expansion
Process Equipment Subgroup
Division 40 
Process integration
Division 41 
 Material processing and 
handling equipment
Division 42 
 Process heating, cooling, 
and drying equipment
Division 43 
 Process gas and liquid 
handling, purification, and 
storage equipment
Division 44 
 Pollution control 
equipment
Division 45 
 Industry-specific manufac-
turing equipment
Division 46 
Reserved
Division 47 
Reserved
Division 48 
 Electrical power generation
Division 49 
Reserved
Notice that numbers are placed in order, but many 
unassigned numbers are available for individual proj-
ects. These same divisions are used in the Sweets Catalogs 
as well as most other vendor material. Each division is 
in turn divided into numbered sections represented by 
six-digit numbers that are explained in Table 14-1. The 
numbers consist of three pairs of numbers, with each 
pair defining a level of specificity. The first pair of num-
bers represents the division number; in this case divi-
sion 03 is Concrete. The second pair of numbers (11) 
represents second-level headings, in this case Concrete 
Forming. The third pair of numbers represents third-
level headings, in this case the 13 represents Structural 
Cast-in-Place Concrete Forming. An optional fourth 
pair of numbers (.19) can be used if greater specificity is 
required. The number 03 11 13.19 represents Falsework. 
Additional pairs of numbers and letters can be added for 
user-defined numbers. Figure 14-2 shows the listings for 
Section 03 11 00. See the CSI MasterFormat Web site for 
a complete listing of each division. See the student CD 
in the RESOURCE MATERIAL/CHAPTER 14 file for the 
complete specification.
Parts of a Division
In addition to the five subgroups, and the fifty divisions, 
specifications can be further divided into three subsec-
tions that deal with general, materials, and execution.
Part One
1.02 
 Part One, General deals with the scope 
of a section by describing work, related 
definitions, quality control, submittals, 
shop drawings, guarantees, and war-
ranties. Common components of the 
Level
Sample CSI Number
Meaning
 1
03 11 13
Division number representing major construction division (e.g., Concrete)
 2
03 11 13
Second-level heading representing major subsections (e.g., Concrete Forming)
 3
03 11 13
Third-level heading representing minor sub-subsections (e.g., Structural Cast-in-
Place Concrete Forming)
 4
03 11 13.19
Optional modifier (e.g., Falsework)
L5
03 11 13.19.12ABC
User-defined modifiers
TABLE 14-1 CSI Numbering Format
DIVISION 03—CONCRETE 
03 00 00 
Concrete
03 01 00 
Maintenance of Concrete
03 05 00 
Common Work Results for Concrete
03 06 00
Schedules for Concrete
03 08 00 
Commissioning Concrete
03 10 00 
Concrete Forming and Accessories 
03 11 00
Concrete Forming
03 11 13 
Structural Cast-In- Place Concrete Forming
03 11 13.13
Concrete Slip Forming
03 11 13.16
Concrete Shoring
03 11 13.19 
Falsework
03 11 23
Permanent Stair Forming
03 15 00 
Concrete Accessories
FIGURE 14-2 Division and subdivision listing for Division 3 of 
the CSI MasterFormat. Note that Section 03 11 has an expanded 
listing to show the third-level heading. See the CSI Web site for 
a complete listing of all headings and their subheads.

Chapter 14: Project Manuals and Written Specifications 
311
General section include the following: 1.01 
Summary References 
1.03 
Definitions 
1.04 
System descriptions 
1.05 
Submittals 
1.06 
Quality assurance 
1.07 
Delivery, storage, and handling 
1.08 
Project and conditions 
1.09 
Sequencing and scheduling 
1.10 
Warranty 
1.11 
Maintenance
Part Two
The Materials section describes materials, products, and 
equipment that are to be used. Common components of 
the Materials section include the following: 
2.01 
Manufacturers 
2.02 
Materials 
2.03 
Manufactured units 
2.04 
Equipment 
2.05 
Components 
2.06 
Accessories 
2.07 
Mixes 
2.08 
Fabrication 
2.09 
Source quality control
Part Three
Execution describes the method that is to be used to 
install materials or products specified in Part Two, and 
how work is to be performed. Common components of 
the Execution section include the following: 
3.01 
Examination 
3.02 
Preparation 
3.03 
Erection/Installation/Application 
3.04 
Field quality control 
3.05 
Adjusting 
3.06 
Cleaning 
3.07 
Demonstration 
3.08 
Protection 
3.09 
Schedules 
Figure 14-3 shows a partial listing for the three-part 
specification for Exterior Insulation and Finish System 
(EIFS) for the structure shown in Chapters 16 and 17. 
See the student CD in the RESOURCE MATERIAL/
CHAPTER 14 file for the complete specification. Keep 
in mind that the following are the specifications for 
only one component of the structure. Each component 
of the structure is listed in the project manual using 
the three-part system. Components are placed within 
the manual according to their CSI number. Notice 
that at the start of each page of the specifications, the 
job number, project name, CSI section number, the 
component name, and the page number of the section 
are listed.
TYPES OF SPECIFICATIONS
Regardless of where the specifications are contained, six 
common methods are used to present technical specifi-
cations. These methods are cash allowance, descriptive, 
open, performance, proprietary, and reference speci-
fications. A construction document can contain each 
type of specification and should not be limited to one 
specific type.
Cash Allowance Specifications
Cash allowance specifications are used when the 
information regarding quality or quantity has not been
determined. These specifications can be found in a 
project manual or within the working drawings. The 
cash allowance temporarily replaces drawings for a spec-
ified portion of work and instructs all bidders to plan for 
a specified amount of money to cover that work. This 
money is then dispersed under the architect’s direction 
when the work is completed.
This type of specification often handles finish items 
such as hardware, carpeting, and lighting fixtures. 
Although exact quantities can be determined from the 
drawings, the owner may wish to determine quality at a 
later date in the building process.
Cash allowances are also used because the owner 
may not know who will occupy the structure. For 
example, a structure can be built for the intended use of 
medical professionals. Because there is such diversity in 
the profession, individual occupants will have specific 
needs. These needs can best be met by cash allowances. 
When cash allowances are given, information should 
include the dollar amount of the allowance, installa-
tion methods, and the method of measuring cost to be 
applied against the allowance. When work covered by 
the allowance is complete, savings can be credited to the 
contractor or owner. If allowance costs are exceeded, 
the contractor is usually entitled to charge additional 
fees. An example of a cash allowance specification is 
shown in the example below:
Allow $6500.00 for wall brackets and hanging 
incandescent fixtures. All other fixtures indicated 
on drawings to be included in bid.

312 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Descriptive Specifications
Descriptive specifications are the most detailed type of 
specification and are used when the architect assumes 
total responsibility for the performance of a system. 
Descriptive specifications are exclusively used within a 
project manual and describe the method of assembly, 
physical properties, installation, arrangement, or any 
other category of information needed to fulfill the man-
ufacturer’s requirements, or owner’s demands for a spe-
cific system. The specification for EIFS in Figure 14-3
is an example of a descriptive specification.
Performance Specifications
Specifications that define the desired results of a prod-
uct or system are referred to as performance specifica-
tions. Using this type of specification, the exact makeup 
of individual components is not described, allowing 
suppliers maximum input. Performance specifications 
describe the conditions or parameters a product or 
system must function in, as well as the method of mea-
surement to be used to judge compliance. An example of 
a performance specification can be seen in Figure 14-4. 
See the student CD in the RESOURCE MATERIAL/
CHAPTER 14 file for the complete specification. 
Proprietary Specifications
Specifications that call for materials by their trade name 
and model name are referred to as proprietary specifica-
tions. Individual products, specific pieces of equipment, 
or entire systems can be referenced using this method. 
Material provided by the manufacturer’s literature forms 
the basis for the specification that can be found in both 
project manuals and drawing specifications.
8712   CCC Wilsonville    Section 07240 
Page 1
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEM 
Part 1—General
1.1 WORK INCLUDED
A. Provide field applied exterior insulation and finish system as indicated on Drawings and specified herein.
1.2 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
A. Structural Requirements: Deflection of exterior wall substrate shall not exceed L/240 or L/360.
B. Substrate Requirements: Substrates shall be as indicated on the Drawings.
1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE
A. Manufacturer’s Qualifications:
1. Manufacturer shall have successful performance history over at least five (5) years in the local geographic area.
2. Manufacturer shall have established ongoing design and specification assistance to Architects and Engineers.
3.  Manufacturer shall have established ongoing contractor applicator training programs for at least five (5) years in local 
geographic area.
4. Manufacturer shall have established warranty program and a five (5) warranty on this Project.
5. Manufacturer shall have full-scale fire test reports and documentation of IBC compliance.
6. Manufacturer shall have resident Field Technical Service personnel.
7. Manufacturer shall attend job site preapplication conference and provide inspection of work in progress and completed work.
8. Manufacturer shall have local inventory of products.
B. Applicator’s Qualifications:
1. Applicator shall be licensed, bonded, and insured.
2.  Applicator shall have successful performance history with Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems over at least five (5) years in the 
local geographic area.
3. Applicator shall be trained and approved by manufacturer for at least five (5) years.
4. Applicator shall have an established ongoing training program for workmen, including manufacturer’s training.
FIGURE 14-3 Written specifications that are several hundred pages long are a major component of a project manual. The specifica-
tion contained on the following pages is the specification for one component. Each fixture, unit, and system in the structure must be 
specified. Courtesy Ron Lee, Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 14: Project Manuals and Written Specifications 
313
Proprietary specifications may be written in either 
a closed or open form. Closed or sole source specifica-
tions require that only one specific manufacturer be 
allowed to supply the desired product. Closed specifi-
cations are often used on renovations where a specific 
product is required to match existing conditions. An 
example of a proprietary specification can be seen 
in the specification 3.4 B for finish hardware in the 
example below:
Open or equal bid specifications allow for substitu-
tions of products that are deemed to be equal by the 
architect. With an open specification, the architect may 
name several acceptable products, allowing the contrac-
tor or owner to choose based on availability or price. 
Typically, the specification names a minimum of three 
products that could be used when in a project manual. 
Although the names of three products are listed, the 
qualifications for only one of the three are listed. When 
placed within the drawings, the phrase “or equal” or 
“accepted substitute” is sometimes used to allow the 
contractor to submit names of products judged to meet 
the project requirements. 
Reference Specifications
A minimum standard for quality or performance can be 
established by using a reference specification. Typically 
used in conjunction with other types of specifications, 
reference specifications refer to minimum levels of qual-
ity established by recognized testing authorities such 
as UL (Underwriters Laboratories), ASTM (American 
Society for Testing and Materials), ANSI (American 
National Standards Institute), ACI (American Concrete 
Institute), and ICBO (International Conference of 
Building Officials). Specifications should include a date 
to ensure the latest standard is used and should also ref-
erence which portions of the standard are to be applied. 
An example of a reference specification can be seen in 
the specification for custom casework in the example 
below:  
SECTION 07 90 00—CAULKING 
Part 1—General 
1.01 SUMMARY
A.  The purpose of the caulking work is to provide a positive barrier against penetration of air and moisture at the joints between items 
where caulking is essential to continued integrity of the barrier.
B. Comply with governing codes and regulations.
1.02 MATERIALS
A.  Caulking material shall be properly selected to resist the type of abuse it will receive. It shall have expansion and contraction char-
acteristics suitable to the installed conditions. Use only material that is best suited to the installation and is so recommended by 
the caulking material manufacturer.
B.  Provide sealants in colors suitable for the location. Colors are to be selected from the manufacturer’s standards.
1.03  INSTALLATION
A.  Beginning work means acceptance of substrates.
B.  Install caulking in strict accordance with the manufacture’s recommendations. Caulking bead shall be true to line and surface, of 
uniform width and smooth, solid and slightly below the surface or adjacent materials.
C.  Cure and protect sealants as directed by the manufacturer. Replace or restore damaged sealants. Clean adjacent surfaces.
D.  Caulking is to be protected from the work of other trades during and after installation.
FIGURE 14-4 A performance specification describes the conditions or parameters a product or system must function in.
3.4 MANUFACTURERS
A.  Hinges: Stanley (Specification base), McKinney, Hagger, 
or accepted substitute.
B.  Locks and Latchsets: Russwin, no other substitutions.
C.  Exit Devices: Von Duprin or accepted substitute.
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
Part 2 Products 
2.1 MATERIALS 
A.  Lumber: Transparent finished wood AWI Premium 
grade as indicated in Section 100 in AWI Quality 
Standards.
B.  Plywood: APA, PS 1 for softwood. PS 1-71 and Industry 
Standard, I.S1 for hardwood 5 ply minimum.
C.  Particleboard: Mat-formed wood particleboard, CS 
236-66, Type 1-B-2 except 2-B-2 for sink countertops and 
similar moisture exposed work, 45-pound density, 3/8" 
to 1 1/4" thick, Duraflake by Willamette Industries.
D.  Fasteners: Nails, staples, and screws to comply with 
Section 400 in AWI Quality Standards.
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

314 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
WRITING SPECIFICATIONS
Specifications are written by an architect, engineer, or 
professional writer with expertise in legal and archi-
tectural matters. Rarely is a drafter involved with the 
actual writing of specifications. Many smaller offices 
have master sets of specifications, which can be edited 
for similar projects. These masters can serve as a core 
set of specifications that are edited for each project, 
saving hours of labor. A senior drafter is often required 
to update the master specs to meet the requirements 
of the current project. A wide variety of software pro-
grams are also available to aid in writing specifications. 
Programs typically offer several options and allow the 
user to pick the options that meet the needs of the 
project.
The Relationship of Drawings 
to Specifications
A key to good construction documentation is to remem-
ber the goal of each portion of the documentation. 
Drawings present pictures of the structure and give the 
size, form, location, and arrangement of various compo-
nents by use of lines, symbols, and text.
Specifications provide written descriptions of type 
and quality of materials; labor and components; and 
methods of testing, fabricating, and installing compo-
nents within the structure. Each form should comple-
ment the other without repeating information.
Drawings should be used to depict the physical 
 
●
relationship.
Specifications should be used to show the quality and 
 
●
types of material in the structure.
Duplication between the drawings and specs—
unless it is exact word for word—can lead to contradic-
tion, misunderstanding, and a court date. Word-for-word 
duplication is redundant and harmful to productivity. 
Because many privately funded projects do not have a 
project manual, duplication throughout the drawings is 
often used to avoid misunderstandings.
The drawings and the specs should be developed 
together to achieve a balanced relationship. At the 
onset of a project, someone on the architectural team 
is usually assigned the task of keeping a checklist 
for the project. The checklist generally includes a 
schedule of what drawings are required, and what will 
appear on each drawing, related schedules, or what 
needs to appear in the specifications. Material that is 
added to the preliminary spec list can then be noted 
on the plans by the drafter in a shortened note form. 
For instance, a wall can be described in a detail or sec-
tion as an 8" concrete wall. The project manual would 
contain the specifications for the type of concrete, 
how it is to be mixed, when it can be poured, and 
numerous other features about quality. It is impera-
tive that the drafter be well informed about material 
placed in the project manual so that materials can be 
adequately described. Figure 14-5 shows a detail of 
the EIFS that depends on the specifications seen in 
Figure 14-3. Structural drawings done by an engineer-
ing team tend to be more redundant in callouts to 
meet the demands of the building department. Figure 
14-6 shows an example of a steel detail that is placed 
with the specifications. The written specifications can 
be seen in Figure 14-1.
Writing Metric Symbols and Names
Dimensions and sizes found in the specifications 
should never be expressed in dual units. The same units 
found throughout the drawings should be expressed 
throughout the specifications to reduce dimensioning 
time, lessen the chance of conversion errors, and elimi-
nate confusion. If units are to be expressed in metric, 
all sizes should be listed in millimeters except for large 
distances associated with the site drawings. Notations 
describing area should be expressed in square meters, 
FIGURE 14-5 Drawings and specifications should be devel-
oped together so that information is not duplicated. This detail 
relies on the information contained in Figure 14-3. Courtesy 
Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 14: Project Manuals and Written Specifications 
315
and expressions of volume should be expressed in 
cubic meters. Fluid measurements should be expressed 
as liters. Loads that have traditionally been expressed 
as pounds per square foot (psf) should be expressed as 
kilograms per square meter (kg/m2) or kilonewtons per 
square meter (kN/m2).
Kilograms per square meter should be used for 
expressing floor loads because most live and dead loads 
are measured in kilograms. Many engineers use kilo-
newtons per square meter (kN/m2) or their equivalent, 
megapascals (MPa), for structural calculations.
Additional guidelines for expressing metric units 
 
●
within specifications can be found on the student CD 
in Appendix B. 
Additional information on metric conversions can be 
obtained from the following: 
Construction Metrication Council (This council is 
no longer active; however, findings and previous 
newsletters are available through NIBS.)
National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS)
1090 Vermont Ave. NW
Suite 700
Washington, DC 20005-4905
1-202-289-7800
Web site: nibs@nibs.org 
American Institute of Architects 
AIA Bookstore 
1735 New York Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20006 
1-800-242-3847
Web site: www.aia.org
American National Standards Institute, Inc.
25 W. 43rd St. 
New York, NY 10036 
1-212-642-4900
Web site: www.ansi.org
FIGURE 14-6 Because of building department requirements for 
drawings, structural drawings often duplicate information con-
tained in written specifications. The drafter must carefully coor-
dinate both parts of the project. Courtesy KPFF Consulting Engineers.
By some estimates, approximately 20% of the 
greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to global 
warming are attributed to the building sector. This 
is due to a combination of factors including energy 
usage, the continued creation of impervious surfaces, 
and construction debris generation. Green, sustainable 
building techniques, incorporating products that 
are friendly to the environment coupled with the 
right kind of maintenance, can help reduce this 
trend and ultimately contribute to the creation of 
environmentally, financially, and socially sustainable 
communities. 
When writing specifications, select products that not 
only meet the needs of the project, but that are Leadership 
in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certified. Use 
the tools provided by the Life Cycle Cost Analysis (LCCA) 
to select products and materials that offer the most cost-
effective design alternatives for the project while providing 
the best possible alternatives for the project and for those 
who will use and be impacted by the project.
EASY BEING GREEN

316 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. 
Question 14-1 What are the two common locations for 
specifications and what are the major differences between 
the two systems?
Question 14-2 What areas of information should drawings 
describe?
Question 14-3 Why is duplication in the drawings and 
specifications a possible problem?
Question 14-4 What types of information should the specifi-
cations include?
Question 14-5 List common documents that are typically 
part of the project manual.
Question 14-6 Name and describe the common format for 
writing specifications within a manual.
Question 14-7 How are the major divisions of the CSI 
system broken down?
Question 14-8 Describe the three major portions of a speci-
fication written to meet the CSI format.
Question 14-9 Describe the CAD technician’s role in the 
writing of specifications.
Question 14-10 List and describe the five major methods of 
writing a specification.
Construction Specifications Institute 
99 Canal Center Plaza
Suite 300
Alexandria, VA 22314-1791
1-800-689-2900
Web site: www.csinet.org
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to help 
you keep current with changes in writing specifications.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.aiaonline.com  
American Institute of 
Architects
www.ansi.org  
American National 
Standards Institute
www.buildinggreen.com 
BuildingGreen.com (green 
products listed by CSI 
divisions) 
www.nibs.org 
Construction Metrication 
Council
www.csc-dcc.ca  
Construction Specifications 
Canada
www.csinet.org  
Construction Specifications 
Institute
www.reedfirstsource.com 
First Source
www.greenformat.com 
GreenFormat
www.masterformat.com 
MasterFormat
www.pcea.org  
Professional Construction 
Estimators Association of 
America, Inc.
www.scip.com  
Specifications Consultants 
in Independent Practice
KEY TERMS
Addenda
Bid form
Bond 
Form of Agreement
General Conditions of the 
Contract
Instruction to bidders
Invitation to bid
MasterFormat system
Project manual
Specifications
Specifications, cash allowance
Specifications, descriptive
Specifications, performance
Specifications, proprietary
Specifications, reference
Supplementary conditions
Project Manuals and Written Specifications
CHAPTER 14 TEST

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
317
317
Every project to be built requires one or more drawings 
and a legal description to describe the construction site. 
This chapter will explore the use of:
Legal descriptions.
 
●
Common types of land drawings including a vicinity 
 
●
map, site plans, and grading plans.
Common drawing steps required to complete a site 
 
●
plan and site-related drawings.
The site plans that will be started in problems 15-3 
through 15-6 will serve as the building sites for the proj-
ects that will be started in Chapter 16 and completed in 
the remaining chapters. Even if you are not required to 
draw a site plan for your class project, remember that 
there may be information on the site plan that will be 
needed to complete future drawings.
LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS
For legal purposes, each piece of land is outlined by a 
description of the property known as a legal description.
The legal description may be given in several forms, such 
as a metes and bounds system, a rectangular system, or 
a lot and block system. The type of description to be used 
depends on the contour of the area to be described or the 
requirements of the municipality reviewing the plans.
Metes and Bounds
A metes and bounds description is also referred to as 
a long description. A copy of the description can be 
obtained from a title company or the assessor’s office. 
A complete description can be added to the site plan or 
attached to the drawings on a separate sheet of paper. 
This system provides a written description of the prop-
erty in terms of measurements of distance and angles of 
direction from a known starting point. The known start-
ing point is referred to as the true point of beginning in a 
legal description. The true point of beginning is usually 
marked by a steel rod or by a bench mark established 
by the U.S. Geological Society, (USGS). This is referred 
to as a monument.
Metes
The metes are measured in feet, yards, rods, or sur-
veyor’s chains. A rod is equal to 16.5 feet (5000 mm) 
or 5.5 yards. A chain is equal to 66 feet (20,100 mm) 
or 22 yards. Directions are given from a monument 
such as a bench mark established by the USGS or an 
iron rod set from a previous survey. This location is 
known as the point of beginning, and may be several 
hundred feet away from the property to be described. 
Directions are given from the point of beginning to a 
specified point on the perimeter of the property to 
be described. Directions are then given to outline the 
property with all distances set in units of feet expressed 
in one-hundredth of a foot rather than the traditional 
feet and inches normally associated with construction. 
Metric units should be expressed in either millimeters 
or meters. Centimeters are not used on construction 
drawings.
Bounds
The boundaries of property are described by bearings,
which are angles referenced to a quadrant on a com-
pass. Figure 15-1 shows the four possible quadrants 
and descriptions of lines within a quadrant. Bearings 
are always described by starting at north or south and 
turning to the east or west. Bearings are expressed in 
angles, minutes, and seconds. Each quadrant of the 
compass contains 90°, each degree contains 60 minutes,
and each minute can be divided into 60 seconds. A 
degree is represented by the ° symbol, a minute is rep-
resented by the ' symbol, and seconds are represented 
by the " symbol. Bearings are used to describe the 
angular location of a property line. Some properties are 
also defined by their location to the centerline of major 
streets. When property abuts a body of water such as a 
creek or river, a boundary in angles may not be given 
and the property boundary is defined by the center 
point of the body of water. A metes and bounds legal 
description would resemble the description shown in 
the following example:
A tract of land situated in the Southeast quarter of 
the Northeast quarter of Section 17, T3S, R1W of the 
15
Land Descriptions and Drawings

318 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
These divisions of land are described as the great land 
surveys. As the initial division of land was started, 
the first six principal meridians were numbered. The 
last numbered meridian passes through Nebraska, 
Kansas, and Oklahoma. All subsequent meridians are 
defined by local names. The great land surveys were 
further divided by surveys that define land by town-
ships and sections.
Townships
Baselines and meridians are divided into six-mile 
square parcels of land called townships. Each town-
ship is numbered based on its location to the prin-
cipal meridian and base line. Horizontal tiers are 
numbered based on their position above or below the
base line.
Vertical tiers are defined by their position east or 
west of the principal meridian. Township positions can 
be seen in Figure 15-4. The township highlighted in 
Figure 15-4 would be described as Township No. 2
North, Range 3 West because it is in the second tier 
north of the base line and in the third row west of the 
principal meridian. The name of the principal meridian 
would then be listed. This information is abbreviated as 
T2NR3W on the site plan.
Sections
Land within townships is broken down into one-mile 
square parcels known as sections. Sections are assigned 
numbers from 1 to 36 (as shown in Figure 15-5) begin-
ning in the northeast corner of the township. Each 
section is further broken down into quarter sections.
Each section contains 640 acres or 43 560 square 
feet. Quarter sections are broken down as seen in 
Figure 15-6 using divisions of quarters, and quarters 
Willamette Meridian, Clackamas County, Oregon, 
being more particularly described as follows, to wit. 
Beginning at the 5.8 inch iron rod at the Southwest 
corner of the Southeast quarter of the Northeast 
quarter of said Section 17; thence North 0°06'10" 
East along the West line of the Southeast quarter of 
the Northeast quarter, 322.50'; thence leaving said 
West line North 89°38'15" East 242.00 feet; thence 
South 0°06'10" West parallel with said West line 
of the Southeast quarter of the Northeast quarter, 
50.00 feet, thence North 89°38'15" East 310.74 feet
to the Westerly right of way line of Bell Road No. 
113; thence South 3°31' East along said Westerly 
right of way line, 272.91 feet to a 5/8 inch iron 
rod; thence leaving said Westerly right of way line, 
South 89°38'15" West 569.97 feet to the point of 
beginning.
This description would be listed on legal docu-
ments describing the property as well as the site 
plan. Figure 15-2 shows the land described by the 
legal description. A short description of the property 
should be copied exactly onto the site.
Rectangular Systems 
Many areas of the country refer to land based on its loca-
tion by latitude and longitude. Parallels of latitude and 
meridians of longitude were used by the U.S. Bureau of 
Land Management in states that were originally defined 
as public land states. As the land was divided, large 
parcels of land were defined by what are known as basic 
reference lines. There are 31 pairs of standard lines in the 
continental United States and three in Alaska. Principal 
meridians and base lines can be seen in Figure 15-3.
FIGURE 15-1 Bearings are referenced by quadrants on a com-
pass that begin by looking either north or south and turning to 
look either east or west.
75º
26º 
50º 
80º 13' 27"
W
N
S
E
N 26º E
N 15º W
S 80º 13' 27" W
S 50º E
FIGURE 15-2 The parcel of land described by the metes and 
bounds legal description listed above.

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
319
or halves of quarters. These small segments can be 
further broken down into quarters or halves again.
Specifying the Legal Description
The legal description, based on the rectangular system, 
lists the portion of the land to be developed described 
by its position within the section, the section, the 
FIGURE 15-3 Principal meridians and basic reference lines are used to divide land in the continental United States.
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
125
120
115
110
MT.DIABLO 
SAN BERNARDINO 
MONTANA MER 
SALT LAKE 
SALT RIVER MER. 
NEW MEXICO PRINCIPAL 
CIMARRON MER. 
INDIAN M. 
3RD PRINCIPAL  
MER. 
5TH PRINCIPAL MER. 
MICHIGAN  
MER. 
BASE LINE
B.L.
B.L.
B.L.
B.L.
B.L.
B.L. BASELINE
BASELINE
BASELINE
BASE      LINE
BASE LINE
BASE LINE
BASE LINE
HUMBOLDT M.
WILLAMETTE        MER.
BOISE MERIDIAN
WIND RIVER M.
BASE LINE
BASE LINE
BASE LINE
BASE LINE
BASE LINE
BASE       LINE
BASE LINE
BASE L.
BASE LINE
BASE LINE
BASE LINE
BASE         LINE
BASE LINE
GILA AND 
NAVAJO MER.
 
UTE 
MER. 
UINTA M. 
BLACK HILLS M. 
6TH PRINCIPAL 
4TH PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN 
2ND PRINCIPAL M.  
1ST P.M. 
ELLICOTT'S 
LINE 
WASHINGTON 
TALLAHASSEE 
ST HELENA M. 
LOUISIANA MER. 
HUNTSVILLE M. 
ST STEPHENS M. 
CHOCHAW M. 
CHICHASAW
 
MER. 
FIGURE 15-4 A township is a six-mile square portion of land 
that is defined by its position to a principal meridian and a 
baseline. The indicated township is referred to as T2NR3W 
because it is in the second tier north of the baseline and three 
columns west of the principal meridian.
NUMBERS
TOWNSHIP
NUMBERS
E
W
S
N
BASE-
PRINCIPAL 
T2N R3W
MERIDIAN
LINE
N
E
W
S
T2N
R2W
1 MILE
SQUARE
6 MILES
SQUARE
6
7
18
19
30
31
5
8
17
20
29
32
4
9
16
21
28
33
3
10
15
22
27
34
2
11
14
23
26
35
1
12
13
24
25
36
FIGURE 15-5 Land within a township is divided into 36 one-
mile square portions called sections.

320 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
township, and the principal meridian. A typical legal 
description resembles the following description: 
The Southeast one quarter, of the Southwest one 
quarter of the Southwest one quarter of Section 31, 
Township No. 2 North, Range 3 West of the San 
Bernardino meridian, City of El Cajon, in the state 
of California.
On the site plan, the CAD technician often abbrevi-
ates this into a legal description as follows:
THE SE 1/4, OF THE SW 1/4 OF THE SW 1/4, 
S31, T2N, R3W, SAN BERNARDINO MERIDIAN,
EL CAJON, CALIFORNIA.
Because the method of describing quarters of quar-
ters of quarters can become confusing, many munici-
palities have gone to a labeling system using letters. 
Quarter sections are labeled as A, B, C, or D. Quarter 
sections are further divided into quarters by the letters 
A, B, C, or D. The northeast quarter of the northeast 
quarter would then be listed as Parcel AA. This method 
of land description works especially well in areas where 
the land contour is fairly flat. In areas with irregular 
land shapes, the rectangular land description can be 
linked with a partial metes and bounds description to 
accurately locate the property.
Lot and Block
This system of describing land is usually found within 
incorporated cities. Most states require the filing of a 
subdivision map that defines individual lot size and 
shape as land is being divided. Each lot is defined on a 
subdivision map by a length and angle of each property 
line as well as a legal description. On older subdivi-
sion maps, land is divided into areas based on neigh-
borhood, called subdivisions. The subdivision is then 
divided into blocks based on street layout. The block is 
further divided into lots. On newer maps, most munici-
palities assign a number to a parcel of land that corre-
sponds to either a tax account or a map number. Lots 
FIGURE 15-6 A section can be further broken into quarter sections (the NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4) and then divided again into a quarter 
of a quarter section (the NW 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4) and then divided one more time into quarters (the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of 
the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4). 
SW 1/4 
160 ACRES
W
E
N
S
N 1/2 NE 1/4
80 ACRES
N 1/2 SE 1/4 NE 1/4
20 ACRES
N 1/2  N 1/2 SE 1/4
40 ACRES
N 1/2  S 1/2  NE 1/4 SE 1/4
10 ACRES
S 1/2  S 1/2  NE 1/4 SE 1/4
10 ACRES
N 1/2  SE 1/4  SE 1/4
5 ACRES
SE 1/4  SE 1/4  SE 1/4 SE 1/4
2.5 ACRES
SW 1/4  SE 1/4  SE 1/4 SE 1/4
2.5 ACRES
NW 1/4
SE 1/4
SE 1/4
10 AC
SW 1/4
SE 1/4
SE 1/4
10 AC
NE 1/4
SE 1/4
SE 1/4
10 AC
W 1/2
SW 1/4
NE 1/4
20 AC
E 1/2
SW 1/4
NE 1/4
20 AC
S 1/2 SE 1/4 NE 1/4
20 ACRES
S 1/2 NW 1/4 SE 1/4
20 ACRES
NW 1/4 NW 1/4
40 ACRES
NE 1/4 NW 1/4
40 ACRES
SW 1/4 NW 1/4
40 ACRES
SE 1/4 NW 1/4
40 ACRES
SW 1/4 SE 1/4
40 ACRES

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
321
can be irregularly shaped or rectangular. The shape of 
the lot is often based on the contour of the surrounding 
land and the layout of streets. A typical legal descrip-
tion for a lot and block description would resemble the 
following description:
LOTS NO. 1, 2, AND 3 OF MAP #17643 
OF THE CITY OF BONITA, COUNTY 
OF SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA.
LAND DRAWINGS
The most common drawing for describing property 
is the site plan. The site plan is started in conjunction 
with the floor plan, although it probably will not be fin-
ished until other architectural drawings are completed. 
With the property boundaries drawn, the preliminary 
design for the floor plan can be inserted into the site 
plan. Preliminary designs for access and parking can 
then be determined, and adjustments to both the site 
and floor plans can be made.
The size of the project and the complexity of the 
site will dictate the drawings required to describe site-
related construction, who will develop the needed 
drawings, and when they will be developed. In addition 
to the site plan, a demolition plan, topography, grading, 
landscape, sprinkler, freshwater, and sewer plan may be 
required to describe the alterations to be made to the 
site. On simple construction projects, all of these plans 
can be combined into one site plan. This plan would 
typically be the first sheet of the architectural draw-
ings and labeled A-1. For most projects, the site-related 
drawings precede the architectural drawings and are 
listed as civil drawings (C-1 or L-1). 
The size and complexity of the project will determine 
who will draw the project. On most projects, each of the 
site-related drawings will be prepared by a CAD drafter 
working for a civil engineer, surveyor, or landscape 
architect and then given to the architect to be incorpo-
rated into the working drawings. On simple projects, a 
CAD technician working for the architect or engineer 
may complete the drawings under the supervision of a 
landscape architect or a civil engineer.
Vicinity Map
A vicinity map is used to show the area surrounding the 
construction site. It is placed near the site plan and is 
used to show major access routes to the site. This could 
include major streets, freeway on and off ramps, sug-
gested routes for large delivery trucks, and rail routes. 
The drafter should prepare a vicinity map showing 
an area that reflects the size of the project. If building 
components primarily come from the surrounding 
area, the map needs to reflect only the immediate 
construction area. If materials come from several 
different cities or states, the area of the vicinity map 
should be expanded to aid drivers who may not be 
familiar with the area. Figure 15-7 shows an example 
of a vicinity map.
COMMON SITE PLAN ELEMENTS
The site plan for a commercial project is the basis for 
all other site-related drawings. It shows the layout and 
size of the property, the outline of the structure to be 
built, north arrow, ground and finish floor elevations, 
setbacks, parking and access information, and informa-
tion about utilities. The results of engineering studies 
and soils reports related to the site will be summarized 
on the site plan.
Common Linetypes
The shape of the construction site is drawn based on 
information provided by the legal description or subdi-
vision map. Common lines found on site-related draw-
ings and the AutoCAD linetype used to represent them 
include:
Property lines—PHANTOM2 or PHANTOMX2.
 
●
Outlines of the building footprint—CONTINUOUS.
 
●
FIGURE 15-7 A vicinity map is used to show the surrounding 
area and major access routes to the proposed construction site.

322 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Centerlines of access roads or easements—CENTER, 
 
●
CENTER2, or CENTERX2. 
Edges of easements and building setbacks—
 
●
DASHED, DASHED2, DASHEDX2, HIDDEN, HIDDEN2, 
or HIDDENX2. 
Utility lines—a dashed or hidden pattern. Each line 
 
●
is labeled with a G (gas), S (sewer), W (water), 
P (power), or T (communications) to denote its usage. 
Specifications must also be provided to distinguish 
between existing utilities and those that the contrac-
tor is expected to provide. The location of each utility 
referenced to the property should also be provided.
Figure 15-8 shows a partial site plan for a small com-
mercial structure and the appropriate linetypes. 
Sidewalks, patios, stairs, and parking outlines are 
typically represented by a continuous linetype, with 
each item properly labeled.
Representing the Structure
The structure to be built must be accurately repre-
sented and easily distinguishable from the property and 
utilities. Common methods of representing a structure 
include the use of a polyline to define the perimeter 
and a hatch pattern such as ANSI31 or ANSI37 to fur-
ther highlight the structure. This method can be seen 
in Figure 15-8. Many firms attach the floor into the 
site plan using the XREF command. This offers the 
advantage of an up-to-date site plan each time the draw-
ing is opened. This can be especially important if the 
footprint of the structure is altered or door locations 
are moved. If the project consists of more than one 
structure, either a building number or name should 
be used to identify each building. The method used 
to identify each building on the site plan should cor-
respond to the title placed with the floor, framing, and 
FIGURE 15-8 Varied linetypes and line widths are used to represent materials on a site plan.

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
323
foundation plans. The use of the structure should also be
specified within the outline of the structure with titles 
such as PROPOSED 2-LEVEL OFFICE STRUCTURE. 
Consideration must also be given by the drafter to 
accurately distinguish between portions of the struc-
ture that are in contact with the ground and those that 
are supported on columns.
Commercial projects often include structures that 
are to be demolished to make way for the new project. 
These structures must be accurately located and distin-
guished from new construction. A separate demolition 
plan similar to Figure 15-9 may also be used to supple-
ment the site plan.
Parking Information
Information about access, areas to be paved, parking 
spaces, ramps, and walkways must be shown on the 
site plan. Because requirements vary from city to city, 
the drafter must verify requirements for each project. 
Continuous lines are used to represent each parking 
and paving component with the exception of the cen-
terline of access roads. Many offices hatch concrete 
walkways with a random pattern of dots so they can 
be easily distinguished from asphalt paving areas. In 
addition to each parking space being represented, 
parking areas should be represented using a method 
FIGURE 15-9 When existing structures or other features must be demolished to make way for a proposed project, they can be indi-
cated on a site plan or a separate demolition plan will be provided. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.






Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
329
Common Site Plan Details
The details required for a site plan vary widely from 
office to office and will vary based on the complexity 
of the construction. Common areas requiring details 
on a site plan include lighting supports, sign supports, 
parking barriers, parking painting details, sidewalks, 
curbs, and decorative walls. Figure 15-17 shows an 
example of common site details. Each is considered a 
standard detail and could be stored as a wblock in a file 
labeled as \PROTO\SITE\ (dwg file name) that is edited
for specific job requirements. The engineer or project
coordinator will generally note for the drafter the 
details that should be inserted into the site plan, and 
the drafter is expected to compile and edit the details 
to match project requirements.
COMPLETING A SITE PLAN
The software that is used to create the site drawings will 
greatly affect how the drawing is created. The following 
discussion assumes the use of AutoCAD or “AutoCAD 
vanilla” as many professionals refer to the software. 
AutoCAD works well for simple projects or in the hands 
FIGURE 15-16 A site plan for a structure that will have supplemental drawings. See Figures 15-9 and 15-26 for additional site infor-
mation. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

330 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
of skilled CAD users. But there is a better way. The 
use of AutoCAD Civil 3D or AutoCAD Land Desktop 
can greatly increase the productivity of a skilled CAD 
operator. AutoCAD works with drawing geometry; 
AutoCAD Civil 3D is a model builder. As the site plan 
is created using Civil 3D, information is stored that will 
automate the development of the plan, profiles, and 
data management for site-related projects. 
If you’re creating drawings using AutoCAD Civil 3D 
the general steps will be the same, but the procedure 
will be much easier because of the automation provided 
by the software. The site plan can be completed using 
AutoCAD by following these steps:
 1.  Working from a plat map or metes and bounds legal 
description, lay out the shape of the site.
 2.  Establish the center of all access roads.
FIGURE 15-17 Typical details can be stored as wblocks and 
inserted into a drawing as needed. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, 
Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
 3.  Locate all public sidewalks, easements, and curb-
cuts for driveways.
 4.  Locate the proposed structure from preliminary 
floor plans as well as required setback distances.
 5.  Define all paved areas and locate all required park-
ing spaces, drainage swales, and catch basins.
 6. Draw all utilities.
 7. Draw all walkways and ramps.
 8. Draw required planting areas.
 9. Draw any required signage.
10.  Draw other human-made features that are specific 
to this site, such as trash enclosures, furniture, 
benches, flagpoles, retaining walls, and fencing.
Steps 1 through 10 can be seen in Figure 15-18. 
Once all human-made items have been drawn, each 
should be dimensioned. Place dimensions by locating 
major items first. Dimensions can be placed by using 
the following order: 
11.  Dimension and list bearings of each property 
surface.
12.  Dimension the location of the structure to the 
property.
13.  Dimension the minimum required yard setbacks.
14.  Dimension the footprint of the structure.
15.  Dimension the locations of streets, public sidewalks, 
and easements.
16.  Dimension all paved areas as well as individual 
parking spaces and catch basins.
17.  Dimension all utility locations where they enter 
the site.
18.  Dimension all other miscellaneous human-made 
features.
Steps 11 through 18 can be seen in Figure 15-19.
With all features drawn and located, add any spe-
cial symbols necessary to describe the material being 
used. Typically, this would include hatching concrete 
walkways with a dot pattern. Other symbols to be 
added might include property corner markers, a north 
arrow, elevation markers, catch basins, fire hydrants, 
or clean-outs.
The next stage of completing the site plan is to 
provide notations to define all human-made features 
that have been added to the site. Care should be 
taken to distinguish between existing material and 
material that is to be provided. Occasionally, exist-
ing material to be removed from the site must also 

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
331
be specified. Notes that should be included on a site 
plan are as follows: 
19.  Specify proposed building use and square footage.
20. Include finished floor elevations.
21. Include the legal description.
22.  Specify all streets, public walkways, curbs,
and driveways.
23. Describe all utilities.
24.  Describe all paved areas and specific parking 
areas.
25.  Describe specific features that have been added to 
the site, including furniture, flagpoles, retaining 
walls, fencing, and planting areas.
26.  Add details to show construction of human-made 
items.
27.  Add general notes to describe typical construction 
requirements.
28. Specify a drawing title and scale.
Figure 15-20 shows a completed site plan.
RELATED SITE DRAWINGS
In addition to the site and demolition plans, several 
related drawings could accompany a set of working 
drawings. Related drawings include a topography plan, 
grading plan, paving plan, site utility plan, landscap-
ing plan, and sprinkler plan. A topography plan shows
FIGURE 15-18 Steps 1 through 10 can be used to establish the basic parameters of the site plan.

332 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
the existing contour of the construction site. This plan 
is normally prepared by a licensed surveyor based on 
notes from a field survey or by a civil engineer. It is 
based on existing municipal drawings describing the 
site, on measurements taken by the surveyor, or by 
aerial photographic methods. Once the shape of the 
site is prepared, the results of the field survey are 
translated onto the drawing by a drafter working for 
a civil engineer. A grading plan is used to show the 
finished configuration of the building site. A grading 
plan for major projects is designed and completed 
under the direction of a civil engineer. A landscaping 
plan similar to Figure 15-21 is completed by drafters 
working for a landscape architect. On small projects, 
drafters working for the architectural team may com-
plete the project under the supervision of the project 
architect. In arid climates, a sprinkler plan similar to 
Figure 15-22 will be required to maintain landscap-
ing. The same team that provides the landscape plan 
usually completes the sprinkler drawing. Because the 
landscape and sprinkler drawings usually fall under 
the supervision of the landscape architect, procedures 
for creating these drawings will not be presented in 
this chapter.
FIGURE 15-19 Steps 11 through 18 can be used as guidelines to locate parking and other human-made components as well as 
providing their locations.

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
333
Topography Plans
Figure 15-23 shows an example of a sketch provided 
to reflect the existing surface elevations. A grid is 
drawn to represent each known elevation location. 
Notice the six elevations in the northwest corner 
of the survey. Between grid 69.41 and 76.44, seven 
contour lines are required to represent the change of 
elevation. It can be assumed the contours fall at an 
even spacing because the surveyor did not change the 
distance between grids to reflect a rise or depression. 
Six contour lines are required between grids 69.74 
and 75.58, and eight contour lines are required to 
reflect the change in elevation between grids 69.41 
and 77.49.
Once the distance between grids has been divided 
into the required divisions, points of equal elevation 
can be connected, as seen in Figure 15-24a. The use of a 
polyline aids in finishing the drawing. As the distance 
between contour lines decreases, the land becomes 
steeper. As the distance between contour lines increases, 
the land becomes flatter. The topography plan must be 
completed before accurate estimates of soil excavation 
or movement can be planned.
FIGURE 15-20 The completed site plan includes notes and dimensions to describe all human-made features of the project.

334 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Contour Lines and Symbols
Once the known elevations have been converted to 
contour lines, the lines can be curved and altered to 
provide clarity. Unlike the real contour of the site, 
in the initial layout stage, the lines run from point 
to point and have distinct directional change at 
each known point. These angular contour lines can 
be curved using the Fit Curve option of the PEDIT 
command. PEDIT leaves each vertex in its exact 
location but changes the straight line to a curved line.
The Width option of the PEDIT command can also
be used to alter the width of the contour lines. 
Most offices use varied lineweights to help distin-
guish between contours. Depending on the spacing 
of the contours, lines representing every 5' or 10' 
(1500/3000 mm) are usually highlighted and labeled 
as shown in Figure 15-24b.
Grading Plans
The grading plan shows the finished configuration 
of the building site. On simple plans, the finished 
grades will be placed over the existing grades, or the 
proposed grades can be shown separately from the 
existing grades. Figure 15-25 shows an example of 
a simple grading plan. On simple projects, a drafter 
working for the architectural team may complete the 
grading plan. A drafter working for the civil engineer 
translates preliminary designs by the architectural 
team and the topography drawings into the finished 
drawings. The grading plan shows the finished con-
tour lines, areas of cut and fill, building footprint, 
and the outline of parking areas, walkways, patios 
and steps, catch basins, and drainage provisions. 
Figure 15-26 shows a portion of a grading plan.
FIGURE 15-21 A landscaping plan is usually completed by CAD drafters working for a landscape architect. On small projects, CAD 
technicians working for the architectural team may complete the project under the supervision of the project architect.

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
335
FIGURE 15-22 In arid climates, a sprinkler plan will be required to maintain landscaping. The same team that provides the landscape 
plan usually completes the sprinkler drawing. Courtesy Matthew Jefferis.
FIGURE 15-23 Existing topography is determined from spot 
grades determined by the survey team. These elevations can 
then be placed in a drawing provided by the civil engineer that 
lists the known elevation at specific points at the site.
76.44
75.58
69.41
69.74
77.49
69.41
FIGURE 15-24a Once known elevations are located, lines 
representing a specific elevation can be placed. Grades can be 
determined by estimating the rise or fall between two known 
points. Because lines for grades 70 through 76 occur in the 
upper left grid, the distance between the two points is divided 
to represent each elevation.
70
75
75
80
80
75
69
70
80
70
69
76.44
75.58
69.41
69.74
77.49
69.41

336 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
70
75
80
FIGURE 15-24b Dashed lines are used to represent existing 
contours. The angular contour lines of Figure 15-24a were 
curved using the Fit Curve option of the PEDIT command.
FIGURE 15-25 A simple grading plan showing the existing grades, spot elevations, piling locations, and the finish floor level of each 
portion of the hillside office.
Common Land Terms
The height of land above a given point is referred to 
as its elevation. The elevation can be referenced to sea 
level, a USGS bench mark, or to some predominant 
feature near the job site. Land in its unaltered state is 
considered to be the natural grade. Finish grade refers 
to the shape of the ground once all excavation and 
movement of earth has been completed. Earth that is 
moved is referred to as cut or fill material. Cut mate-
rial is soil that is removed so that the original elevation 
can be lowered. Fill material refers to soil that is added 
to the existing elevation to raise the height. The point 
that represents the division between cut and fill is 
referred to as daylight. The civil engineer determines 

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
337
FIGURE 15-26 The grading plan is usually prepared by CAD drafters working for a civil engineer. The architectural team completes 
the design based on the work of the civil engineer. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

338 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
the finish elevation of floor levels and major areas of 
concern. It is then typically the drafter’s job to indicate 
the extent of cut and fill material based on the desired 
angle of repose.
Angle of Repose
The angle of the cut or fill bank that is created is referred 
to as the angle of repose. The municipality that governs 
the construction project determines the maximum 
angle of repose based on the soil type. For fill banks, 
a common angle of repose is often set at a 2:1 angle. 
For every two units of horizontal measurement, one 
vertical unit of elevation change can occur. A common 
angle for cut banks is 1.5:1. The engineer specifies 
variations in the angle of repose that will be allowed 
near footings or retaining walls to minimize loads that 
must be supported.
Representing Contours
If the new and existing contours are to be combined 
on one plan, care must be taken to distinguish between 
contours. Thin dashed lines often represent existing 
contours. New contours can be represented by thick-
ened continuous lines, as seen in Figure 15-25, or by 
dashed lines, as seen in Figure 15-26. Note that the 
bank symbol can be added to the contours to further 
highlight new banks that will be created. The angle 
of the new bank should also be specified on the grad-
ing plan. In addition to the lines used to represent 
contours, key information that must be placed on a 
grading plan includes:
Critical spot elevations to assure proper drainage to 
 
●
catch basins and other discharge points.
Sizes of new drainage facilities with control grades.
 
●
Spot elevations at the corners and points adjacent to 
 
●
the building entrances.
Grading Plan Details
Details are often required to show the construction of 
drainage materials and retaining walls. Figure 15-27 
shows an example of each. Both types of details are 
wblocks, which would be edited by the drafter, based on 
project requirements specified by the engineer.
FIGURE 15-27 Retaining walls are often referenced and drawn on the grading plan. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf 
Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
339
Site selection and development is a key area of green 
construction. The LEED rating system awards credits for 
sustainable sites in several areas. Areas of site-related 
work and relevant CSI division numbers for future 
research include:
Erosion and Sedimentation Control—This area of site 
• 
development addresses methods of construction in 
ecologically sensitive areas including: 
07—Thermal and moisture protection 
• 
31—Earthwork 
• 
32—Exterior improvements 
• 
33—Utilities 
• 
Urban Redevelopment—The efficiency of trans-
• 
portation to and from a structure can greatly affect 
the environment. This area of the LEED rating system 
allows credit for the transportation considerations 
of a project that influence the location and various 
land-use features on the measure of energy use. The 
primary focus of this credit is on energy usage and 
the associated environmental impacts of energy use 
such as pollution. Measures to reduce transportation 
energy use can have very significant ancillary 
benefits relating to water runoff, urban heat island 
mitigation, and habitat protection, while creating 
more vibrant, livable communities. 
Brownfield Redevelopment—An important strategy 
• 
for protecting prime agricultural land, open space, 
and woodlands against the forces of sprawl is to 
build within existing urban areas on previously 
disturbed sites. Many abandoned sites suffer 
the scars of use in a time when environmental 
controls were unknown or unheeded. Their soil 
and groundwater may be contaminated with toxic 
heavy metals, petrochemicals, and soil gases. 
Such gases include methane from decomposing 
organic matter or landfills, hydrocarbons from 
underground fuel spills, pesticides that have been 
used around buildings, and other volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs). A LEED credit can be gained by 
recycling, or reusing these abandoned structures 
or sites.
Alternative Transportation—Studies by 
• 
Environmental 
Building News have shown that an average commercial 
office building in the United States built to American 
Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers (ASHRAE) 90.1-2004 energy standards 
uses more than twice as much energy in getting 
workers to and from work as the building uses in its 
operation. A LEED credit is awarded for a wide range 
of strategies regarding land-use planning in relation 
to transportation, which can significantly reduce the 
transportation energy intensity of a building. 
See CSI Section 12—Furnishings for products 
• 
related to this category.
Reduced Site Disturbance—This area of the LEED 
• 
rating system provides credit for designing and 
building structures that work with landscapes 
rather than against nature. This area of the 
standard deals with the protection of trees during 
site work, restoration of wetlands, selection of 
environmentally responsible landscape materials, 
and infiltration strategies for storm water manage-
ment. Relevant areas of CSI for research related to 
this area include:
07—Thermal and moisture protection
• 
31—Earthwork
• 
32—Exterior improvements
• 
Storm Water Management—The environmental 
• 
impact of oil and other chemicals that collect in 
parking lots can be severe. In many developed 
areas, storm water runoff is the single largest source 
of water pollution. For most municipalities, that 
means these chemicals will usually make their way 
into streams, rivers, and lakes. This section offers 
LEED credit for how effectively runoff is controlled 
and cleaned. Key areas of CSI for research related to 
this area include:
07—Thermal and moisture protection
• 
10—Specialties
• 
22—Plumbing
• 
31—Earthwork
• 
32—Exterior improvements
• 
33—Utilities
• 
Landscape and Exterior Design to Reduce Heat 
• 
Islands—This area of LEED offers credits for methods 
of reducing the heating and cooling loads placed on 
a structure. Key areas considered in the standards 
include products that add to the ability of a structure 
to reflect heat, and products that aid in keeping the 
heat they produce. Products range from reflective 
paints to green roofs (see Chapter 18). Relevant areas 
of CSI for research related to this area include:
06—Wood, plastics, and composites
• 
07—Thermal and moisture protection
• 
10—Specialties
• 
32—Exterior improvements
• 
EASY BEING GREEN
(continued)

340 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
ADDITIONAL READING
The following Web sites can be used as a resource to 
help you keep current with changes in professional 
design careers.
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.oars97.com 
AbTech Industries (Clean 
water solutions)
www.itsrecycled.com 
American Recycled 
Plastics, Inc. (Landscaping 
products)
www.clivusmultrum.com 
Clivus Multrum, Inc. 
(Water conservation)
www.contechstormwater.com 
Contech Stormwater 
Solutions
www.curbappealmaterials.com 
Curb Appeal Materials 
(Landscaping products)
www.ernstseed.com 
Ernst Conservation Seeds 
www.hancor.com 
Hancor (Storm water con-
trol)
www.weathertrak.com 
HydroPoint Data Systems 
(Water management)
www.invisiblestructures.com 
Invisible Structures, Inc. 
(Storm water management)
www.nedia.com 
Nedia Enterprises (Erosion 
control)
www.nesea.org 
Northeast Sustainable 
Energy Association
Light Pollution Reduction—Although you may think 
• 
that light pollution only affects your ability to look 
up and see the night sky, light pollution is wreaking 
havoc in certain natural systems such as sea turtle 
nesting in Florida and migrating birds and sycamore 
trees in urban parks. Not just related to animal 
habitat, there are some who suggest that human 
health is affected by lack of darkness. This area of 
the LEED standard provides credits for dealing with 
light pollution because light pollution is really often a 
matter of poor planning and wasted energy. Through 
proper planning and usage, additional green benefits 
can be gained by reducing the amount of electricity 
that must be generated. Relevant areas of CSI for 
research related to this area include:
01—General requirements
• 
26—Electrical
• 
KEY TERMS
Angle of repose
Bank indicator
Bearings
Boundaries
Catch basin
Cut
Daylight
Elevations
Fill
Finish grade
Legal description
Legal description, metes
and bounds
Metes
Sections
Site plans
Swale
Townships
Vicinity map

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
341
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. If math is required to answer a question, 
show your work.
Question 15-1 What is a monument as it relates to a site 
drawing?
Question 15-2 List four units of measurement that might be 
referred to in a legal description.
Question 15-3 What two directions are used to commence 
a bearing?
Question 15-4 What would the following designation repre-
sent on a site plan? 100.67'S37° 30'45"W
Question 15-5 What would the following designation repre-
sent on a site plan? S28AA, T3S, R1E
Question 15-6 List three components of a legal description 
commonly used for incorporated areas.
Question 15-7 List two common sources of site drawings.
Question 15-8 List and describe three methods of organiz-
ing site-related files for a small commercial project.
Question 15-9 Explain the difference between a topography 
plan and a grading plan.
Question 15-10 What is the purpose of a vicinity map?
Question 15-11 Sketch examples of linetypes to represent 
the following materials: property line, centerline, ease-
ment, sewer, water line, parking stop, and curb edge.
Question 15-12 List and describe two common hatch pat-
terns that can be used to highlight a building.
Question 15-13 List the minimum size requirements for a 
compact, full, and handicapped parking space that is 
perpendicular to the access route.
Question 15-14 List two common methods of removing 
rainwater from a site.
Question 15-15 Give an example of how the top of a wall 
with an elevation of 100.67' resting on a footing sup-
ported by soil with an elevation of 95.75' would be speci-
fied on a site plan.
Question 15-16 Sketch a bank indicator representing a 
slope.
Question 15-17 How are existing and new grades typically 
represented on a plan?
Question 15-18 Describe the process of changing field 
sketches to a topography map.
Question 15-19 What is an angle of repose?
Question 15-20 Give the common proportions of cut and 
fill banks.
Question 15-21 Verify with a local zoning department the 
minimum size requirement for a compact, full, and hand-
icapped parking space that is parallel to the access route.
Question 15-22 Determine with the local zoning agency 
the required back-out space for perpendicular parking 
spaces.
Question 15-23 Determine with the local zoning depart-
ment the legal description of three prominent structures 
in your area.
Question 15-24 Obtain a land map and legal description 
from a local title company of the property your school is 
built on.
Question 15-25 Interview a local landscape architect, civil 
engineer, and landscape contractor to assess the drafting 
opportunities in your area and to obtain examples of 
the types of drawings local professionals expect drafters 
to draw.
Question 15-26 Take a minimum of 15 photographs repre-
senting the installation or completion of work specified 
on a site, grading, landscape, and sprinkler plan.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Note: The skeleton of each drawing problem can be found on 
the student CD in the DRAWING PROBLEMS/CHAPTER 15 folder. 
Use these drawings as a base to complete the assignment. 
These base drawings are to be used as a guide only. Keep in 
mind that the technician who started these drawings was fired. 
It is your responsibility to ensure that all objects in a drawing 
meet the minimum company standards. 
Minimum Drawing Standards
Unless your instructor provides other instructions, 
draw the site plan that corresponds to the floor plan 
that will be drawn in Chapter 16, using appropriate line 
and scale factors for plotting at the designated scale. Use 
appropriate drawing methods to represent and label all 
material. Provide the following minimum materials for 
each site plan:
● Unless a specific scale is provided for a project, estab-
lish drawing parameters to allow for the plotting of 
the drawing at the largest scale possible on a D size 
template.
Land Descriptions and Drawings
CHAPTER 15 TEST

342 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Specify all material based on common local practice. 
● Use separate layers for each major feature, text, and 
dimensions. Create a layer titled MISC for random 
features.
● Provide dimensions to locate all features.
● Hatch materials such as landscaping, walkways,
and the proposed structure with the appropriate 
hatch pattern.
● Use an appropriate architectural text font to label and 
dimension each drawing as needed. Refer to Sweets 
Catalogs, vendor catalogs, or the Internet to research 
needed sizes and specifications.
● Keep all text 3/4" minimum from the object being 
described, and use an appropriate architectural style 
leader line to reference the text to the drawing.
● Provide a detail marker, with a drawing title, scale, 
and problem number below each problem.
● Provide and number the specified parking spaces. 
Areas in front of all overhead doors (coordinate with 
the floor plan in the next chapter) to be marked 
“loading zone, no parking.”
● Insert the standard notes from the student CD/
RESOURCE MATERIAL/CHAPTER 15 into your 
site plan. Unless your instructor gives you other 
instructions, edit the notes to meet your specific 
project and your area of the country.
● Assume all utilities to be in the street unless noted at 
the following distances from the property line: 
❍ Storm sewer 3'
❍ Sewer 6'
❍ Water 15'
❍ Telephone 18'
❍ Specify a clean-out 24" from structure in the 
sewer line
❍ Specify that all utilities are to be underground
● Establish swales to provide drainage to catch basins 
that drain to the storm sewer.
● Assume 24'-wide curbcuts with streets to be 40' from 
property line to the centerline with a 5'-wide sidewalk 
located 3' from the property line.
● Provide 14'-high light standards to light all public 
parking areas.
● Use the site and the legal description provided with 
each project. Create a vicinity map for your project 
assuming that it will be built at the current location of 
your school. If a legal description is not provided, call 
a title company in your area and order a plat map for 
a local business.
The site drawings for projects 15-3 through 15-6 
are related to the projects drawn in the balance of 
Sections 3 and 4, and will require referencing sketches 
in other chapters to gain additional information. Use 
the following assumptions to complete the details found 
in each chapter in Section 2, 3, and 4. These “assump-
tions” should be considered as company standards. 
Warning: Submitting drawings that do not meet the
following minimum standards may earn you the 
wrath of your supervisor, slow your progress in achiev-
ing a pay raise, or lead to your dismissal. Remember 
these are minimum standards. Your drawings should 
exceed them.
Correcting Drawing Errors
As you progress through the projects contained in 
Chapters 15 through 24, you will find that some por-
tions of the drawings do not match things that have 
already been drawn. Each project has errors that will 
need to be solved. The errors are placed to force you 
to think in addition to draw. Most of the errors are so 
obvious that you will have no trouble finding them. 
If you think you have found an error, do not make 
changes to the drawings until you have discussed the 
problem and possible solutions with your engineer 
(your instructor).
Order of Drawing Precedence
As a CAD drafter, you will need to sort through conflict-
ing information. It is your responsibility to coordinate 
the material that you draw with other drawings for your 
selected project. To sort through conflicts, use the fol-
lowing order of precedence: 
1. Written changes given to you by the engineer (your 
instructor) as change orders. 
2. Verbal changes given to you by the engineer (your 
instructor). 
3. The engineer’s calculations (written instruction in 
the text). 
4. Sketches provided by the engineer (sketches pro-
vided in each of the following chapters). 
5. Lecture notes and sketches provided by your 
instructor. 
6. Sketches that you make to solve problems; verify 
alternatives with your instructor. 
Problem 15-1 Vicinity Map. Draw a vicinity map of your 
school showing major access routes and important land-
marks within a five-mile radius.
Problem 15-2 Legal Descriptions. Use the following 
description to draw and label a site plan that could be 
plotted at a scale of 1/8" = 1'–0". 
 
Beginning at a point that is the NE corner of the G.M. 
Smith D.L.C., which lies 250 feet north of the centerline 

Chapter 15: Land Descriptions and Drawings 
343
of N.E.122 street which is in Section 1ab, Township 6 
North, Range 1 West of Los Angeles County, California 
thence South 225.00 feet to a point which is the South-
west corner of said property, thence North 85.00 feet 
1°25'30" West along the easterly edge which lies along 
N.E. Sweeney Drive (25' to street centerline) to the 
Northwest property corner, thence 140.25 feet South 
89°15'00" East, thence South 85.25 feet 1°25'30" East, 
thence westerly along the North boundary of N.E. 122 
street to the true point of beginning.
Problem 15-3 Site Plan. Use the attached sketch to draw a 
site plan to be plotted at a scale of 1" = 10'–0". The lot 
is 120' × 110' and is Lot 4 and 5 of Arrowhead Estates, 
Rapid City, South Dakota.
 
The project fronts onto Sioux Parkway with 36' from the 
property line to centerline of the roadway. Tee water to 
the property 75' east of the westerly property line from a 
main line 30' south of the property line. Provide a water 
shutoff valve in the garage of each unit. Access city sewer 
line, which is 25' south of the property with a new line 
25' east of the westerly property line. Provide a clean-
out in the lower planting strip of each unit. Provide a 
continuous drainage grate across each driveway. Set each 
drain 3" below the finish floor level at each door. Provide 
a 7.5' wide easement along the northerly property line for 
a telephone easement. Provide each unit with a fenced 
yard. Dimension each unit as needed and specify all 
grades. Interpolate as needed to determine the grades for 
each corner of the structure.
Problem 15-4 Site Plan. Use the attached drawing to com-
plete the site plan. Provide a minimum of 13 parking 
spaces including (1)-handicapped space, and a maximum 
of (3)-8 × 16 compact spaces. Provide an 8 × 8 × 6 foot 
high enclosed trash area with double wood gates.
 
Use the following legal description to complete the 
project:
Beginning at a point, which is the Southeast corner of 
the Stark D.L.C., which is in section 34AA, Township 
5 South, Range 2 East of San Diego County, California. 
East 13.72 chains to a point, which is the Southwest 
corner of the said property. Thence 120.00' North 16º 
20' West to the Northwest corner; thence 125.00' North 
73º 35' East; thence 120.00' South 16º 25' East; Thence 
+/– 125'.00 back to the true point of beginning. 
Problem 15-5 Site Plan. Use the attached drawing to com-
plete the required site plan. Coordinate the parking areas 
between door openings and ensure that no overhead 
doors will be blocked by public parking. Provide curved 
corners on all planting curbs. Locate each catch basin 
centered in each driveway.
Problem 15-6 Site Plan. Use the attached drawing to com-
plete the required site plan. Coordinate the parking areas 
between door openings and ensure that no overhead 
doors will be blocked by public parking. Provide curved 
corners on all planting curbs. Locate each catch basin 
centered in each driveway. The elevation marked 14.90' 
on the east property line is 41' from the north property 
line. Show grade lines for each 1' grade interval.
Problem 15-7 Topography. Use the attached drawing to 
lay out the represented grades. Draw the site plan using 
a scale of 1" = 10'–0". Show grades at 1' intervals and 
highlight contours every 5'.

344
16
Floor Plan Components, 
Symbols, and Development
The floor plan forms the core of the architectural work-
ing drawings and is typically the first drawing created 
as the drawing set is being developed. Information on 
the floor plan will impact nearly every other drawing in 
the architectural and structural drawings. A floor plan
is created by passing a horizontal cutting plane through 
the walls at approximately five feet above the floor level 
and removing the upper portion of the structure. This 
process is repeated for each level of a structure to reveal 
the locations of all prominent items for that specific 
level. The floor plan also serves as a basis for the draw-
ing of the ceiling, framing, mechanical, plumbing, and 
electrical plans. Key elements shown on the floor plan 
include the walls, doors, windows, and cabinets. This 
chapter will explore:
Floor plan development.
 
●
Floor plan components including walls, windows, 
 
●
doors, openings, plumbing symbols, and interior 
equipment.
Placing dimensions and the changes required when 
 
●
dimensioning light-framing, timber, masonry, and 
concrete construction.
Placing drawing annotations including door, window, 
 
●
and finish schedules.
Drawing symbols including north arrows; grade, 
 
●
section, detail, and elevation markers; and wall con-
struction symbols.
Steps for completing a floor plan.
 
●
Floor plan related drawings including space plans 
 
●
and reflected ceiling plans.
Layering. 
 
●
FLOOR PLAN DEVELOPMENT
Initially, the floor plan is developed as a schematic 
drawing by the architect to meet the design needs of the 
client. This plan is initially sketched on either graph or 
sketch paper to define the arrangement of basic shapes. 
Figure 16-1 shows an example of a preliminary floor 
plan. Once the best possible solution is determined, the 
plan is refined and drawn to scale. Depending on the 
office structure, and the skill of the drafter, this may be 
the first involvement of a drafter in the development of 
the floor plan. Generally, a senior drafter or designer 
who will head the project draws the preliminary floor 
plans for presentation to the client, planning com-
missions, and review boards. Figure 16-2 shows an 
example of the preliminary drawing of the floor plan. 
During this stage of development, the floor plan and 
other preliminary drawings are given to other consult-
ing firms for preliminary input on structural, mechani-
cal, and plumbing considerations. Keep in mind that as 
the preliminary drawings are prepared, the floor plan is 
developed in conjunction with the elevations, site and 
roof plans, and sections.
Although the preliminary floor plan may be drawn 
first, as each of the other preliminary drawings is devel-
oped, changes may be required for the floor plan.
Once input from the owner, review boards, and other 
consultants has been compiled, the floor plan to be used 
for the construction drawings can be started. This plan 
is usually completed by a drafter or a team of drafters, 
depending on the size and complexity of the structure 
to be drawn. The floor plan will become a reference for 
all other architectural drawings. Figure 16-3 shows a 
completed floor plan.
Drawing Scales
The size and complexity of the project and the paper 
size to be used dictate the scale to be used to draw the 
floor plan. The paper size usually remains standard 
within an office, with all projects typically drawn on 
24" × 36" or 30" × 42" material. The architect gener-
ally sets the scale of the floor plan for an inexperienced 
drafter. On small structures, a scale of 1/4" = 1'–0" is 
used. On large simple structures, scales of 1/8" = 1'–0" 
(1:50) or 1/16" = 1'–0" (1:200) are common. Scales 
of 3/16" = 1'–0", 3/32" = 1'–0", or 1/16" = 1'–0" are 
used for large structures with detailed areas of the plan 
enlarged to scales such as 1/4" = 1'–0", 3/8" = 1'–0", 
or 1/2" = 1'–0". Because of the few choices of metric 
scales, large metric structures typically must be divided 
into zones and spread over two or more drawing sheets. 

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
345
Scales of 1:50 or 1:20 can be used for enlarged metric 
plans. Examples of enlarged floor plans can be seen later 
in this chapter. In selecting a scale, the floor plan must 
be drawn at a scale that is large enough to reflect neces-
sary details of the structure. For large projects, the floor 
plan is often drawn in segments with the use of a key 
plan and match lines.
Key Plans and Match Lines
A key plan is a very small-scale floor plan that shows 
the overall footprint of the structure, with specific areas 
of the structure divided into zones. A key plan is used 
when a structure is too large to fit on one sheet or if 
a specific portion of the structure is to be enlarged to 
show details that are too complex for the scale used 
to show the balance of the structure. The key plan can 
be placed anywhere on the drawing sheet that space 
allows, but should always be placed in the same loca-
tion throughout the drawing set. Figure 16-4 shows a 
key plan for an office structure. Breaking the floor plan 
into zones allows a larger scale to be used than would be 
possible if the structure was drawn as a whole unit.
When the entire floor plan is not shown on one sheet, 
a match line must be provided to show how the portions 
of the floor plan relate to each other. Figure 16-5 shows 
Zone B of the structure shown in Figure 16-4. When the 
drawings are assembled, care should be taken to always 
use the same order of placing zoned drawings within 
the drawing set. On multilevel drawings, if the main 
floor level is divided into east and west zones, all levels 
should be divided into east and west zones.
FLOOR PLAN COMPONENTS
One of the key roles of a floor plan is to show the 
location and materials used to construct the walls, 
windows, doors, cabinets, and the dimensions and 
special symbols. Although the symbols are similar to 
those used in residential drafting, a wider variety of 
wall materials must be represented on commercial con-
struction drawings.
FIGURE 16-1 A sketch is developed by the architect to plan 
the development of the floor plan.
FIGURE 16-2 The architect's rough sketch is converted to a preliminary floor plan by a project manager or senior drafter. Courtesy 
Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

346 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Walls
Walls are the vertical members of a structure and can be 
used to meet each of the three goals of a building com-
ponent. Although walls are typically vertical to accom-
modate windows and doors, International Building 
Code (IBC) defines walls as any portion of the structure 
angled at 60° or greater to be considered a wall. Walls 
can be constructed of single units forming a framework, 
as with wood and steel studs, or may be monolithic 
units, as with concrete walls. Walls are classified as 
either exterior or interior and bearing or nonbearing 
walls. The IBC also refers to shear, faced, parapet, fire, 
party, and retaining walls.
Exterior Walls
Exterior walls help form the basis for the skin of the 
structure. The architectural team draws the wall loca-
tions to meet the needs of the client. The structural team 
FIGURE 16-3 A completed floor plan often requires the efforts of several CAD technicians. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 16-4 Floor plans that are too large to fit on one sheet 
can be broken into several components. A key plan is used to 
indicate where the portion being viewed fits into the overall 
plan. The floor plan representing portion B can be found in 
Figure 16-5. Courtesy Chris DiLoreto, DiLoreto Architects, LLC.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
347
is responsible for detailing the construction of these 
walls. These walls may be required to:
Restrict heat loss in winter but allow air flow in 
 
●
summer.
Contain interior humidity, while repelling exterior 
 
●
humidity.
Allow for view and access to the outdoors, or totally 
 
●
restrict access for security reasons.
Welcome guests and inhabitants while keeping 
 
●
intruders out. 
Exterior walls will be the recipient of external forces 
from wind and rain and must be capable of transferring 
this force to the shell of the structure or to the lateral 
bracing system. Although it is the architect’s responsi-
bility to design an exterior covering to protect the struc-
ture, the CAD technician should have an understanding 
of these forces to understand how the structure resists 
the forces. An understanding of the forces that affect the 
building will provide meaning to the drawings that the 
drafter is required to complete. Exterior walls are typi-
cally permanent in nature, but they may be either bear-
ing or nonbearing. The building codes consider walls 
that separate the structure from interior courtyards as 
exterior walls. Exterior walls are represented on all of 
the plan views of the project, and are specified on the 
floor plan. The framing plan shows specific measures 
that must be taken to build each wall and connect it to 
the frame of the structure. Framing plans are discussed 
in Chapter 22.
Interior Walls
Interior walls, or partitions as they are sometimes 
called, are used to define space. They may be bearing 
or nonbearing, fixed or removable. Walls that form 
hallways, enclose elevator shafts, surround bathrooms, 
or surround a specific tenant space in an office complex 
are examples of fixed partitions. Fixed walls and load-
bearing partitions will be represented on each plan view. 
Their finish will be specified on the floor plan and mate-
rials used for their construction will be specified on the 
FIGURE 16-5 Zone B of the key plan shown in Figure 16-4. Courtesy DiLoreto Architects, LLC.

348 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
framing plans. Walls within a specific office or tenant 
space are examples of partitions that are movable and 
nonbearing. Many designs will not locate the interior 
partitions of an office. This allows the future tenant to 
design the exact placement based on individual needs. 
Interior walls are drawn in a similar manner to exterior 
walls constructed of the same material, and they are 
generally the responsibility of the architectural team.
Bearing Walls
Bearing walls are defined by the building code as walls 
that support compression loads transferred from floors, 
roofs, or other bearing walls. The IBC provides the fol-
lowing definitions of bearing walls:
A wall made of wood or steel studs is a bearing wall 
 
●
if it supports more than 100 pounds (1459 N/m) per 
lineal foot of superimposed load. 
Any masonry or concrete wall that supports more 
 
●
than 200 pounds (2119 N/m) per lineal foot of super-
imposed load is considered a bearing wall. 
Any wall that is more than one story in height is 
 
●
considered a bearing wall, even if it supports only its 
own weight. 
Bearing walls are shown by the architectural and 
structural teams on the floor and framing plans.
The structural team is usually responsible for detail-
ing the construction of the bearing walls. Chapters 13
and 22 discuss distribution of loads to walls and 
weights of common building materials. Chapters 19 
and 23 discuss methods of drawing wall sections to 
show the construction of bearing walls.
Nonbearing Walls
One-story walls that support only their own weight, 
or that support less than the acceptable lower limits 
of bearing walls, are considered nonbearing walls. 
Exterior nonbearing walls are often referred to as 
curtain walls. A load-bearing post or column may 
be contained in a nonbearing wall without requir-
ing the wall to support any loads other than its own. 
Nonbearing walls are not shown on the framing plan. 
A drafter working with the architectural team usually 
completes details showing the construction of non-
bearing walls.
Shear Walls
In addition to supporting loads that are transferred 
down through the structure to the foundation, shear 
walls are used to resist lateral (horizontal) forces trans-
ferred through the structure. These forces may come 
from wind, snow, or seismic activity. Lateral forces 
attempt to change a rectangular wall into a parallelo-
gram. Although shown on a floor plan like any other 
wall, the components that make up a shear wall are 
specified on the framing plan. The engineer deter-
mines which walls will be required to be strength-
ened to resist lateral forces. Drafters working with 
the structural team are responsible for specifying the 
materials on the framing plan and details. Chapter 22
further explains construction and representation of 
shear walls.
Faced Walls
A faced wall is a wall framed with either wood or steel 
studs and covered with masonry. The masonry facing 
may be either on the interior or exterior of the wall. 
The two faces must be joined to move as one unit. 
Figure 16-6 shows a wall detail used to explain the 
construction. The architectural team is usually respon-
sible for locating the face material and for detailing the 
connection to the structural frame.
Parapet Walls
Introduced in Chapter 12, a parapet is a wall that 
extends above the roofline. A parapet wall is typically 
used to hide mechanical equipment located on low-
pitch roofs (as seen in Figure 16-7), or to provide fire 
FIGURE 16-6 Details are used to show how exterior finishes 
are attached to the skeleton. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & 
Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
349
protection to the roof from other structures and vice 
versa. Locations are determined during the design stage 
by the architectural team. CAD technicians working 
with the architectural team are responsible for locat-
ing parapet walls on the roof and roof framing plans. 
Details showing the construction of parapet walls are 
also usually part of the architectural drawings.
Fire Walls
Chapters 4 and 12 introduce occupancies and fire con-
struction requirements. A fire wall is a wall that has 
a specific fire rating and can resist the spread of fire 
for a specific amount of time due to the materials that 
were used to construct the wall. For example, a wood 
stud wall covered with a layer of 5/8" (16 mm) type 
X gypsum board on each side has a 1-hour fire resis-
tance rating. A wall covered with two layers of 5/8" (16 
mm) type X gypsum board on each side has a 2-hour 
fire rating. A steel beam protected with 2" (50 mm)
of carbonate or lightweight concrete has a 4-hour fire 
rating. Table 720.1.1 of the IBC provides a comprehen-
sive listing of common methods of protecting struc-
tural materials with various building materials. The 
Gypsum Association also has a comprehensive listing 
of methods of protecting wood and steel members from 
fire. Materials used to achieve a specific fire rating are 
typically specified on the floor plan by the architectural 
team. Details similar to Figure 16-8 are used to specify 
the fireproofing methods.
Party Walls
The wall used to separate adjoining residential units 
of an apartment or condominium project is referred to 
as a party wall. Generally, a party wall is constructed 
of two rows of parallel studs that are arranged in such 
a manner that sounds from one side of the wall will 
not transfer to the other side. The IBC defines a party 
wall as any wall located on a lot line between adja-
cent buildings that is used for joint service between 
the two buildings. Any such wall is required to have 
2-hour minimum fire protection. Party walls are rep-
resented on each plan view, and specified on the floor 
plan. Except for the thickness, they will resemble any 
other wood or steel framed wall. Figure 16-9a shows 
common arrangements for placing the studs used to 
form a party wall. Figure 16-9b shows a typical section 
for a 2-hour fire-rated party wall.
Retaining Walls
A retaining wall is a masonry wall designed to resist 
lateral displacement of soil or other materials. Retaining 
walls are shown on the floor and framing plans if they 
extend above the floor level, but they are always repre-
sented on the foundation plan. Wall locations can be 
determined by the architectural team or a civil engi-
neer. Details showing the construction of the wall are 
grouped with other concrete details by the engineering 
team. Figure 16-10 shows an example of an internal 
retaining wall completed by an architectural firm.
Representing Walls 
The drafter is required to specify and distinguish each 
type of wall based on office standards for the construc-
tion crew. Walls are shown in plan view by pairs of bold 
FIGURE 16-7 A parapet wall is used to hide roof-mounted 
equipment or to provide fire protection from structures on 
adjacent properties. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 16-8 Details are used to show methods of protecting 
a structure from the spread of smoke and fire. Courtesy Architects 
Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

350 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
parallel lines. The distance between the lines is deter-
mined by the type of material being represented.
Common materials used for walls were introduced 
in Chapters 7 through 11. Several types of walls can be 
seen on the plan shown in Figure 16-11. A wall legend 
similar to Figure 16-12 is usually provided to show 
what each pattern represents. If demolition or remod-
eling is required to be represented on the floor plan, 
additional symbols must also be used to distinguish 
between material to be removed and new construction. 
A separate floor plan similar to Figure 16-13 is typically 
used to represent material that must be used.
Windows
The drawing scale to be used and the type of struc-
ture affect the method used to represent the windows 
on a floor plan. Thin lines are used to represent the 
glass, sill, and jamb. Multifamily residential projects 
often use window symbols similar to those used 
with residential construction. Common symbols are 
shown in Figure 16-14. Many commercial projects 
use fixed glass set in an aluminum frame, referred to 
as storefront windows. Storefront windows can be 
represented in plan view as seen in Figure 16-15. The 
scale that is used to represent the floor plan alters the 
exact appearance of storefront windows. Figure 16-16 
shows three common methods used to represent store-
front windows, based on the scale of the floor plan.
In addition to representing the window in plan 
view, specifications and details are required to indicate 
the size, material, and installation of all windows. The 
FIGURE 16-9b A section of the party wall is required to show 
methods of construction. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.
FIGURE 16-9a A party wall is constructed of two rows of paral-
lel studs that are arranged in such a manner that sounds from 
one side of the wall will not transfer to the other side.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
351
size and type of the window are usually represented 
in a window schedule. A circle is placed by each 
window on the floor plan, with a letter or number 
placed in the symbol to reference the window to the 
schedule. The use of schedules is discussed later in 
this chapter. Window details are provided to repre-
sent how the window jamb, sill, and head attach to 
the wall. Figure 16-17 shows an example of a typical 
window detail referenced to the floor plan. Detail 
symbols are discussed later in this chapter.
Doors
Many of the same types of door symbols used on resi-
dential drawings are also used on commercial drawings. 
Common door symbols can be seen in Figure 16-18. 
Swinging doors are normally shown open 90° to the 
wall they are in. A thin line, thick line, or pairs of thin 
lines can be used to represent the door. The line that 
represents the door swing is drawn with a thin line. 
For doors that swing in two directions, the secondary 
FIGURE 16-10 Retaining wall details are used to show how soil loads are resisted. Drafters working for the architect, structural 
engineer, or civil engineer can complete the details depending on where the wall is located. Walls that are part of the structure 
are generally detailed by the architectural team based on the designs of the structural engineer. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & 
Lee, A.I.A.

352 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 16-11 The floor plan can be used to represent different wall material. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
353
direction is often shown using thin dashed lines. As 
with windows, doors are also represented in schedules, 
specifications, and details. Hexagons with either a letter 
or a number are also used to key doors on the floor plan 
to the door schedule. The same symbol used to key win-
dows to the schedule should never be used for doors. If 
numbers are used to represent windows, letters should 
be used to key doors to the door schedule. In structures 
with a large number of rooms, the door may also be 
referenced to a specific room.
Openings
In addition to doors and windows, relites, transoms, 
skylights, archways, cased openings, and pass-throughs 
must be represented and specified, and detail symbols 
must be placed on the floor plan. Relites, or sidelights 
as they are often called, are windows that are mounted 
beside a door. They are drawn as a window on the floor 
plan, but they may be referenced with the door symbol 
or given a separate symbol and treated as a window. A 
transom is a window placed above a doorway. They are 
not drawn on the floor plan but are referenced with a 
separate symbol placed beside the door symbol.
Skylights are often drawn as a square or rectangle on 
the floor plan with either a thin dashed or continuous 
line depending on office preference. On a simple plan, 
the specifications to describe the skylight can be placed 
on the floor plan. On complicated plans, skylights are 
referenced to a schedule that explains the size, type, 
and manufacturer. Details that show how the skylight is 
installed are referenced on the roof plan. An archway is 
a wall opening that usually has no trim. A cased opening 
is an opening in a wall that has trim similar to a door-
jamb but has no trim for door stops. A pass-through is 
an opening in a wall that does not go all the way to the 
floor. It may be trimmed or untrimmed.
Floors
The floor system provides the horizontal surface for 
each level of the structure. Some occupancies such 
as theaters or assembly halls have a sloping floor to 
enhance viewing or sound reproduction. In multilevel 
structures, the floor of an upper space is also part of the 
ceiling of the lower level. The architectural team deter-
mines the shape and limits of the floor. The structural 
team designs the necessary supports and the material to 
construct the floor system. If the floor is carefully con-
nected to supporting walls, the floor system can also 
be used to resist lateral loads from the walls. The shape 
and levels of the floor are shown and specified on the 
floor plan.
FIGURE 16-12 Wall legends are often used to explain 
the symbols used on a floor plan. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns 
Architects, P.C.

354 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 16-13 Dashed lines often represent existing construction that must be removed. When removal is extensive, a separate 
demolition plan is provided. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
355
Construction of the floor is shown on the framing 
plans and in the sections and details. Each can be cre-
ated as a wblock and inserted as needed.
Changes in Floor Elevation
Steps, stairs, and ramps are common methods of chang-
ing elevation that must be shown on the floor plan. 
Each is represented on the floor plan by thin lines. 
Steps represent the change in elevation between two 
or more levels of the same floor. A ramp is an inclined 
floor that connects two different floor elevations on 
the same floor level. An elevated stage within a room 
would be an example of where steps or a ramp would 
be used to travel from one level to another. In addition 
to representing the steps, specifications are placed on 
the plan to indicate the number and maximum rise and 
minimum run of the steps. Ramps or inclined floors are 
generally represented on the floor plan, as shown in 
Figure 16-19. Ramps should include elevations of each 
floor level serviced by the ramp or provide the rise and 
run in slope of the ramp.
Stairs represent the change in elevation between two 
or more different floors and require the use of two or 
more floor plans to show the complete stair. Because 
stairs connect two different floor levels, the lower por-
tion of the stair is shown on the lower floor and the 
upper portion of the stair is shown on the upper floor. 
Figure 16-20 shows how a straight stair run can be 
represented on a floor plan. Each step is represented by 
SMALL SCALE  > 1/16"
LARGE SCALE  < 1/2"
MEDIUM SCALE
FIGURE 16-16 The drawing scale will affect the detail used to 
represent glazing.
FIGURE 16-15 Representing storefront glazing in plan view.
FIGURE 16-17 Window details explain how the window and 
finish materials are to be placed and are referenced to the floor 
plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 16-14 Windows can be represented on a floor plan 
using several common symbols.
TYPICAL  DOOR  STYLES
EXTERIOR
INTERIOR
PAIR
SLIDING
OVERHEAD
BI-FOLD
BI-PASS
FOLDING
POCKET
FIGURE 16-18 Representing doors in plan view.

356 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
thin lines that are spaced a distance equal to the run. 
At each edge of the stairs, a thin line should be drawn 
to represent the handrail. If walls do not surround the 
stairs, thin lines should be used to represent the guard-
rail, which would surround the stairs on the upper 
floor. If the stair has a landing in the run, it should be 
represented on each floor plan showing the stair, as 
seen in Figure 16-21. Showing the landing and the next 
few steps establishes a visual reference point in placing 
FIGURE 16-19 Ramps and sloping floors and their heights 
should be represented and specified on the floor plan. Courtesy 
Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 16-20 Representing stairs on a floor plan. Courtesy G. 
Williamson Archer A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.
FIGURE 16-21 If a stair has a landing between floors, it must 
be represented on each floor plan level that the stair serves. 
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
357
the landing. On structures with more than three levels 
of stacked stairs, the landing shown on each floor plan 
represents the landing that is above that floor, except for 
the uppermost floor plan. A stair for a four-level struc-
ture can be seen in Figure 16-22.
Plumbing Symbols
Plumbing symbols are added to the floor plan by 
the use of blocks. The type of structure greatly influ-
ences the plumbing fixtures that must be represented 
on the floor plan. An apartment may show common 
items such as tubs, showers, toilets, lavatories, sinks, 
spas, and pools. A warehouse may require drinking 
fountains, lavatories, toilets, urinals, and equipment 
specific to a particular occupancy. Figure 16-23 shows 
plumbing symbols that may be represented on the floor 
plan. Although the symbols are self-explanatory, many 
firms label each fixture on the floor plan and show each 
fixture in the interior elevations. Figure 16-24 shows a 
bathroom for an office structure. Methods used to draw 
interior elevations will be discussed in Chapter 20. The 
cabinet elevations that would accompany the plan can 
be seen in Figure 20-8.
Interior Equipment and Furnishings
The complexity of the structure, the drawing scale, and 
the amount and type of cabinets affect where interior 
equipment and furnishings are shown. Cabinets and 
other interior furnishing supplied by the contractor 
can be shown on a floor plan, a space plan, or a fixture 
schedule. Common materials that are represented as the 
interior furnishings include the following:
Built-in cabinets.
 
●
Base cabinets and countertops, upper cabinets.
 
●
Shelves, display racks, and display counters.
 
●
FOURTH FLOOR
THIRD FLOOR
SECOND FLOOR
FIRST FLOOR
FIGURE 16-22 Stairs for a multilevel structure must represent 
each run direction.
FIGURE 16-23 A wide range of plumbing fixtures may need to 
be represented on the floor plan, depending on the occupancy. 
Common symbols are available from third-party vendors.

358 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Mechanical equipment such as water heaters, wash-
 
●
ers and dryers, cooking equipment, heating or cool-
ing units, condensers, and compressors.
Electrical equipment such as cash registers, commu-
 
●
nications equipment, or computer workstations.
Built-in furnishings such as seating or benches.
 
●
Special equipment specific to the occupancy such 
 
●
as churches, schools, restaurants, medical facilities, 
malls, or theaters. 
Blocks for some features are available from third-
party vendors, but most blocks must be developed by
the drafter and stored for future use. Thin lines are
used to represent the item being drawn. The method 
and the detail used to represent each item are affected 
by the scale of the floor plan. The complexity used 
to show a feature can be reduced if the item is 
manufactured and must be installed rather than fabri-
cated according to the working drawings. Features that 
must be installed are often represented on an enlarged 
floor plan. Features that must be fabricated at the job 
site must be explained by a detail, which must be refer-
enced on the floor plan.
Enlarged Floor Plans
Enlarged scale floor plans are used to provide sup-
port information to specific areas of the main floor 
plan. Stairwells, toilet rooms, elevator shafts, kitchens, 
mechanical and electrical rooms, and rooms that feature 
large amounts of equipment are typically represented on 
a floor plan as well as the enlarged floor plan. All items 
mentioned in the preceding section that are shown on 
the floor plan can be represented on an enlarged floor 
FIGURE 16-24 Because the floor plan of a bathroom generally must show special finishes and all fixtures, an enlarged plan of the 
area is often provided. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns Architects, P.C.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
359
plan. Although features are shown on both plans, the 
annotation to describe features should be placed only 
on the enlarged plan. Information that should be dupli-
cated on both the small and the enlarged floor plans 
includes room name and numbers, partition types, and 
column grids. To indicate that an enlarged plan has 
been drawn, a dashed line similar to Figure 16-11 is 
placed on the floor plan around the room or area to be 
described. Figures 16-21 and 16-24 show examples of 
enlarged floor plans.
PLACING DIMENSIONS 
Dimensions are used on the floor plan to locate walls, 
windows, doors, and interior features. Not all windows, 
doors, and interior furnishings have dimension lines to 
locate them if they can be located by their position to a 
known wall. The material being represented will affect 
the method of placing dimensions. Refer to Chapter 3 
for a review of basic dimensioning concepts and place-
ment guidelines. In addition to those guidelines, consid-
eration should be given to the effect the material has on 
the dimension style.
Light-Frame Dimensions
Light-frame structures constructed of wood or steel studs 
are usually dimensioned by following the four dimen-
sion groupings presented in Chapter 3. Dimensions are 
placed on each side of the structure as follows:
The outer line defines the overall limits of the 
 
●
structure.
The next line of dimensions is used to describe 
 
●
changes in shape or major jogs. The changes are 
dimensioned from the exterior face of the material 
used to build one wall to the exterior face of the next 
wall. The extension line is sometimes labeled with 
text parallel to the extension line that reads F.O.S. or 
F.S., representing the face of stud.
The third line of dimensions represents the distance 
 
●
from the edge of exterior walls to the center (edge for 
some architectural offices) of interior walls.
Used to locate openings, the fourth line of dimensions 
 
●
extends from a wall to the center of the openings.
Figure 16-25 shows dimensioning methods for a 
light-frame structure.
Masonry Dimensions
Structures made of concrete block, poured concrete, or 
tilt-up concrete are dimensioned using line placement 
methods similar to those in light-frame construction. 
Differences include the following:
Masonry walls are always dimensioned to edge and 
 
●
never to center.
Openings for doors and windows are also dimen-
 
●
sioned from edge rather than from center.
FIGURE 16-25 Dimensions must be provided to locate every 
feature. Each successive line of dimensions must add up to the 
dimension on the line above it. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates 
& Lee, A.I.A.

360 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
When the structure is made from concrete block, all 
dimensions should be based on 8" (200 mm) modules. 
Wall lengths that are measured in an odd number of feet 
should always end in a 4" (100 mm) increment such 
as 15'–4". To be modular, even-numbered distances 
will always end in 0" or 8" increments, such as 8'–0" 
or 10'–8". Interior light-frame walls are dimensioned 
to their centers as previously described. Figure 16-26 
shows an example of common dimensioning practices 
for a masonry structure.
Structures made from poured concrete are dimen-
sioned in similar fashion to concrete block but do not 
need to conform to the 8" (200 mm) module. Tilt-up 
concrete walls are dimensioned from edge to edge of 
each panel or from one grid point to the next grid on 
the architectural drawings. Figure 16-27 shows how 
concrete tilt-up walls can be dimensioned. Notice that 
openings in the walls are not located on the floor plan. 
The drawings for a tilt-up structure will include an 
elevation of each panel showing exact panel sizes as 
well as the size and location of each opening. Details 
are typically provided to define the exact space between 
panels.
Steel and Timber Dimensions
In addition to the four types of dimensions used with 
other materials, structures framed with steel or timber 
require dimensions to determine the grid placement 
of the vertical columns. The grid shows the location 
of each vertical column and is placed after the overall 
dimensions have been placed. Once the structural shell 
has been erected, other dimensions can be used to locate 
walls and openings in the skeleton. Walls are typically 
referenced back to the grid line of the structural mate-
rial. Figure 16-28 shows a floor plan for a structure 
framed of steel.
PLACING DRAWING ANNOTATION
The use of local notes to specify materials on the floor 
plan was introduced in Chapter 3 and has been men-
tioned throughout this chapter. Material that must be 
identified by notation should be identified after dimen-
sions are placed so that the text does not interfere 
with dimension placement. Text can be referenced to 
the item being described by the use of a leader line as 
seen in Figure 16-29. The leader line should be kept 
as close to the feature as possible, without crowding 
the text or other features. If a note is lengthy, a short-
ened version can be placed on the drawing to identify 
the feature, with the complete specification given in a 
general note.
FIGURE 16-26 Dimensions for locating masonry should always 
be in modular sizes unless the project manager provides other 
instructions.  Courtesy Wil Warner.
FIGURE 16-27 Concrete tilt-up structures are dimensioned 
from panel joint to panel joint or from grid to grid. Courtesy Dean 
M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
361
Many professionals place general notes on the floor 
plan to ensure the compliance of the code that governs 
construction and to clarify all construction. These gen-
eral notes can be placed beside the floor plan or on a 
separate specification page that is included with the 
working drawings. When a material is specified in a 
general note, a shortened version of the note should still 
be given on the floor plan to denote the accurate loca-
tion of the specified material. A useful order for placing 
text on a drawing would be:
1. Room titles 
2. Component identification 
3. General notes 
4. Drawing titles
Schedule Notations
Schedules are used on most architectural and struc-
tural drawings to reduce the information that must 
be placed in and around the drawing. Schedules add 
clarity to a drawing by removing notations and plac-
ing the notations either at the edge of the floor plan or 
on another sheet. Common schedules associated with 
floor plans include door, window, finish, hardware, 
and appliance schedules. Symbols used on the floor 
FIGURE 16-28 Structural steel and timber framing require dimensions to represent each member of the skeleton. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, 
Ettlin Architects.
FIGURE 16-29 Referencing local notes to material on the floor 
plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

362 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
plans can be seen in Figure 16-30. Text used in the 
schedule is approximately 1/8" (3 mm) high, with titles 
within the schedule slightly larger. For example, a title 
such as Door Schedule is generally about 1/4" (6 mm)
high in a bold text font. Lines should be placed 
between each entry in the schedule to increase clar-
ity, with a minimum of half the height of the lettering 
provided to avoid crowding.
Door Schedules and Symbols
A door is referenced on the floor plan to a schedule 
by the use of a hexagon containing a number (see 
Figure 16-30a). The text representing the door symbol 
is typically 1/8" (3 mm) high in a 1/4" (6 mm) hexagon. 
Depending on office procedure, the number may either 
be sequential or related to the room containing the door.
With sequential numbering, the main entry door 
 
●
is usually assigned the number 1. Other doors may 
be numbered in the order in which they would 
be encountered if you were to walk through the 
building.
An alternative to sequential numbering would be to 
 
●
assign 1 to the main entry door, 2 to the next exterior 
door encountered walking around the perimeter of 
the structure and so on. Once all exterior doors are 
referenced, interior doors can be referenced based on 
size and type.
Interior doors are often listed in the schedule from 
largest to smallest for each specific type. Doors can also 
be assigned a number based on the location of the door. 
If you were in a hallway and needed to represent a door 
going into office 102, the door would receive a symbol 
of 102. The number is assigned based on the room 
number on the secure side of the door. If more than one 
door enters office 102 from the hall, the doors could be 
referenced as numbers 102a and 102b.  
Typically, doors are assigned a door symbol on a 
print of the floor plan. A rough draft of the schedule is 
established prior to placing the information on the floor 
plan and schedule. The architect will assign the type of 
doors to be used and the drafter will develop the sched-
ule based on company policy. Although material will 
vary depending on the occupancy and complexity of a 
structure, a schedule will normally contain information 
related to:
The reference number.
 
●
The width, height, and thickness.
 
●
Door type and UL rating.
 
●
Door and frame material.
 
●
Door and frame finish.
 
●
References for details showing the jamb, header, and 
 
●
threshold construction.
Notations to clarify door operation, location, or 
 
●
construction. 
Figure 16-31 shows a portion of the door schedule, 
the notes, and door drawings for the doors on the floor 
plan that will be developed at the end of the chapter. 
Doors need to be detailed using details similar to 
Figure 16-32 to show how the door frame relates to 
the exterior finish and the skeleton of the structure. 
Details showing door installation should be placed on 
or near the sheet containing the floor plan.
Window Schedules and Symbols 
The use of a window schedule varies with each office, 
depending on the type of window to be installed and the 
amount of detailing provided. On the structure used 
a.  DOOR
    SYMBOL
b.  WINDOW
   SYMBOL
c. INTERIOR REFERENCE
SYMBOL
FLOOR (#1)
  ROOM (#2) 
FLOOR
BASE
WALL
CEIL
d. FINISH SYMBOLS
WALL
TYPE
FURRING
TYPE
WALL
HEIGHT
e. WALL  CONSTRUCTION
   MARKER
FIGURE 16-30 Symbols are often used by an office to explain 
materials referenced to schedules.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
363
throughout this chapter, no window schedule is pro-
vided. Sizes would be determined based on the dimen-
sions provided on the floor plan (see Figure 16-25);
the exterior elevations; and jamb, header, and sill 
details. Figure 16-33 shows a portion of the exterior 
elevations that references the height and construc-
tion details. If a window schedule is used, it should 
include:
The reference letter.
 
●
The width and height.
 
●
Type of window.
 
●
Type of glass to be used.
 
●
Frame material and finish.
 
●
Fire rating.
 
●
References for details showing the jamb, header, 
 
●
horizontal and vertical mullions, and sill con-
struction.
Notations to clarify operation, location, or con-
 
●
struction.
FIGURE 16-31 A door schedule supplemented with elevations and notes can be used to keep door information off the floor plan. 
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

364 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Figure 16-34 shows an example of a window sched-
ule with drawings to represent the type of windows.
Finish Schedules
The finish schedule typically includes information 
concerning:
The room number and name.
 
●
Columns for the floor, base, each wall, and the 
 
●
ceiling.
Wall height.
 
●
Notations to clarify materials. 
 
●
Figure 16-35 shows an example of a finish sched-
ule. This schedule represents each room with a specific 
number, and then provides a legend of finishes below 
the schedule. Another common format is to have a 
column to represent each finish, and provide a check 
in a box of required finishes. This schedule format 
would require six columns for the floor to represent 
each material. Notice in Figure 16-35 that the wall 
columns are referenced to N, S, E, and W. Several walls 
also have notations for two types of materials on the 
same wall.
Interior Reference Symbols
Interior reference markers like those in Figure 16-30c 
are used to reference interior elevations to the floor 
plan. A 3/8" to 1/2" (9 to 13 mm) diameter circle is used 
to identify each detail. The circle with an arrow is placed 
in the room to indicate which direction the marker is 
referencing. Four arrows can be placed around the circle 
to represent each wall of the room. If an arrow is not 
placed on a specific side of a circle, this indicates that no 
elevation is to be drawn for that wall. The page number 
where the detail is drawn is placed in the circle. Each 
arrow is numbered to represent a specific elevation. 
Interior elevations will be discussed in Chapter 20.
Interior Finish Symbols 
To supplement the interior elevations, the use of finish 
symbols like the symbol in Figure 16-30d referenced to 
a finish schedule can be used to specify interior finishes. 
When several options for construction material must 
be specified, finish symbols can be used to add clarity. 
No matter what the symbol, it is typically placed near 
the room title or room number. Within the symbol, 
references for the floor, base, wall, and ceiling material 
should be given. This information is then specified in a 
finish schedule.
FIGURE 16-32 Details showing door information must be 
referenced to the floor plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates 
& Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 16-33 Information for windows for a simple structure 
can often be shown on the elevations rather than the floor 
plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
365
DRAWING SYMBOLS
Symbols are added to drawings to add clarity, eliminate 
notations, and to cross reference materials from one 
drawing to another. Symbols that must be shown on a 
floor plan include the north arrow, grid markers, sec-
tion markers, detail markers, cabinet reference symbols, 
elevation symbols, and finish symbols. Because there 
are many variations to symbols used on the floor plan, a 
legend should be included with the floor plan. 
North Arrow
A north arrow should be placed on the floor plan, as 
well as every other plan view to help orient the struc-
ture to the site. The north arrow should be simple and 
is typically placed in a circle measuring between 3/4" 
and 1" (20 and 25 mm) diameter. The symbol is often 
placed near the drawing title. North is placed at the top 
of the page if possible, although it can be rotated to the 
right side of the drawing sheet because of project and 
sheet size limitations. The symbol can be used to desig-
nate true north, magnetic north, and plan north. True 
north points to the North Pole, whereas magnetic north 
is a compass point deviating slightly from true north. 
Magnetic north is rarely indicated on plans, and should 
be shown relative to true north when represented. 
Plan north provides a reference to north that has been 
rotated to be parallel to the grid used to define the struc-
ture. True north can be indicated if the orientation is 
skewed by use of a north reference arrow. Examples of 
each are shown in Figure 16-36a.
Grid Markers
Grids are used to provide reference points established 
at a uniform distance throughout the project. Grid 
markers are used to reference each major change in 
shape of the structure, as well as structural columns, 
load-bearing walls, shear walls, and other structural ele-
ments that lie along a selected grid size. The size of the 
grid will vary with each project based on the module 
used to design the structure. Grid lines are also used as 
the basis for locating dimensions. A 3/8" to 1/2" (9 to 13 
mm) diameter circle is typically used to represent the 
grid and column lines of a structure. A medium-width 
centerline extends from the circle through the drawing. 
Either 1/8" (3 mm) high text or numbers are used to 
FIGURE 16-34 A window schedule is used to keep the floor plan from becoming cluttered. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns Architects, P.C.

366 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
define each grid. To place vertical grid symbols, follow 
these guidelines:
Place the grid symbol at the top end of the grid 
 
●
lines. 
Use sequential numbers to define the grid with 1 on 
 
●
the left side of the grid.
Use numbers such as 3.5 to define items that are 
 
●
placed at the midpoint of grids 3 and 4. 
Use the following guidelines for placing horizontal 
grid symbols:
Place grid markers on the right end of the grid line.
 
●
Use sequential letters, starting with A
 
●
 at the bottom 
of the grid, progressing through the alphabet for 
grids moving toward the top of the grid.
To avoid confusion with the numbers 1
 
●
 or 0, do not 
use the letters I or O. 
Use a letter followed by a number, such as B.5, to 
 
●
represent a column that lies midway between grids.
Figure 16-36b shows an example of grid reference 
symbols. Figure 16-28 and all of the other floor plans in 
this chapter show the use of grid markers. Grids should 
remain the same as each type of plan view is developed 
and for multiple levels of a structure. One exception 
to this guideline is a building with walls that step back 
from each other as the building rises in height. For 
example, on the architectural drawings, as the height 
progresses and the size of the building decreases, some 
grids will be deleted. A lower floor that had grids A 
through H may require only grids C through H on the 
upper levels due to decreased width. On the structural 
FIGURE 16-35 A finish schedule is used to group information relating to interior finishes and keep the floor plan uncluttered. Courtesy 
Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
367
drawings for the same project, each grid from lower 
floors must be shown on each level, even if no columns 
or walls are in that portion of the grid. 
The placement of grids will depend on the major 
building material for the project. Common grid loca-
tions based on material include:
For structures framed using wood, composite, or 
 
●
steel studs, grids should be placed to align with the 
exterior face of exterior walls, and through the center 
of interior partitions, posts, or columns. 
For buildings framed using steel columns with cur-
 
●
tain walls, grids are typically placed to represent the 
center of the column.
For buildings constructed of concrete masonry units 
 
●
(CMUs) or poured concrete, grids should be placed 
to align with the exterior face of exterior walls, and 
through the center of interior partitions and columns. 
The grid lines for poured concrete may be placed on 
the interior side of the exterior walls if the majority of 
the interior features will correspond better to the grid 
lines.
Section Markers
Section markers and section lines are used to indicate 
where each building and wall section is cut. A 5/8" 
(16 mm) diameter circle with 1/8" (3 mm) text should 
be used to identify the section. A bold phantom line 
is used to indicate where the cutting plane has passed 
through the structure. An arrow is placed around the 
circle to indicate the viewing direction. As seen in 
Figure 16-36c, the circle is divided into two portions, 
with a letter representing the section placed over the 
page number. Chapters 19 and 23 will discuss methods 
for drawing sections.
Detail Markers
Detail markers are used to reference construction details 
to the floor plan. A 5/8" (16 mm) diameter circle with 
1/8" (3 mm) text should be used to identify each detail. 
A thin line is used to reference where the detail occurs. 
The circle referencing the detail is divided into two por-
tions, with a number representing the detail placed over 
the page number. Figure 16-36d shows an example of a 
detail marker and the detail it represents.
Elevation Symbols
An elevation symbol is used to represent changes in 
height of a specific material. On plan views, the symbol 
consists of the elevation placed above a horizontal line, 
which is connected to the material by an inclined line 
with an arrow terminator. An elevation symbol can be 
seen in Figure 16-36e. Elevation symbols are used on 
floor, framing, site, and foundation plans, and on exte-
rior elevations. Figure 16-19 shows examples of eleva-
tions referenced to a floor plan. Chapters 17, 19, and 
23 introduce elevation symbols used to specify vertical 
locations on elevations, sections, and details.
Wall Construction Symbols
A final symbol that may be shown on the symbol legend 
is a symbol for wall construction. When required, this 
symbol will reference several details of wall construc-
tion to a specific wall represented on a floor plan. Figure 
16-30e shows one option for creating a wall construc-
tion symbol. This particular symbol references several 
wall details, which are shown in Figure 16-37.
COMPLETING A FLOOR PLAN
The software that is used to create the floor plan will 
greatly affect how the drawing is created. The fol-
lowing discussion assumes the use of AutoCAD (or 
“AutoCAD vanilla” as many professionals refer to the 
software). AutoCAD works well for simple projects 
or in the hands of skilled CAD users. But there is a 
a. NORTH ARROWS
b. GRID MARKERS
c.  SECTION
MARKER
d.  DETAIL
     MARKER
e. ELEVATION
   REFERENCE
FIGURE 16-36 Standard symbols used throughout floor plans. 

368 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
better way. The use of AutoCAD Revit can greatly 
increase the productivity of a skilled CAD operator. 
AutoCAD works with drawing geometry; AutoCAD 
Revit is a parametric model builder. As the floor plan 
is created using Revit, information is stored that will 
automate the creation of stairs, elevations, sections, 
the roof plan, and other key elements of a drawing set. 
Even within the floor plan, common elements such as 
doors, windows, room information, annotation, and 
dimensions are affected by the software that is used to 
place them. Using Revit, information about a space is 
compiled so that labels can be placed based on infor-
mation that was provided as the room was created. 
Likewise for doors and windows, schedules are cre-
ated based on information provided as the symbol is 
inserted into the drawing. For the balance of Sections 
3 and 4, drawing procedures will be given assuming 
that AutoCAD is being used to create the drawings. 
If you’re creating drawings using AutoCAD Revit or 
AutoCAD Architecture, the general steps will be the 
same, but the procedure will be much easier because 
of the automation provided by the software.
The floor plan can be completed using AutoCAD by 
using the following steps: 
 1.  Determine the scale to be used and establish the 
required DIMVARS, LTSCALE, and text scale fac-
tors. If AutoCAD 2008 or newer is to be used, 
use the Annotative feature to determine all scaling 
features. 
 2.  Establish all layers and assign colors and linetypes. 
Save these settings in a template for future projects. 
 3.  Draw all exterior walls.
 4. Draw all interior walls. 
 5.  Draw all openings. Include windows, doors, arch-
ways, skylights, and pass-through openings.
 6. Draw all required stairs, steps, and ramps. 
 7. Draw all built-ins. 
 8. Draw all required plumbing symbols. 
 9.  Draw all required equipment and interior fur-
nishings. 
10.  Draw all required hatch patterns. 
The floor plan should now resemble the floor 
plan shown in Figure 16-38. With all required items 
drawn, the dimensions can be completed using the 
following steps:
11.  Draw all grid lines. 
12.  Place all overall dimensions. 
13.  Dimension all major jogs. 
14.  Dimension all walls that intersect an exterior wall. 
15.  Dimension all openings in the exterior walls. 
16.  Dimension all interior walls. 
The floor plan with completed dimensions will now 
resemble Figure 16-39. The plan can be completed by 
adding required symbols and written specifications.
FIGURE 16-37 Symbols referencing wall construction should 
be placed on or near the floor plan. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns 
Architects, P.C.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
369
17.  Place a title and scale below the drawing. 
18.  Draw a north arrow. 
19.  Provide identification text in each grid symbol. 
20.  Provide room names and numbers. 
21.  Provide all door and window symbols. 
22.  Locate anticipated section and detail markers. 
Additional symbols can be completed as the sec-
tions and details are drawn.
23.  Locate partition type and interior elevation 
symbols. 
24.  Specify all elevation changes. Include changes in 
floors required for various materials.
25.  Draw all required finish and wall construction 
symbols. 
26.  Draw a schedule to reference all symbols used on 
the floor plan. 
27.  Show and provide text to identify all features that 
are not represented in a schedule such as the ter-
mination of floor materials within a room, plumb-
ing fixtures, fire equipment, floor drains, built-in 
casework, shelving lockers, benches, kitchen case-
work and equipment; openings in the floor such as 
shafts for dumbwaiters, mechanical shafts, electri-
cal shafts, and HVAC shafts; atria, stairs, and escala-
tors; overhead features such as balconies, skylights, 
beams, and roof overhangs.
28.  List all general notes required to explain the floor 
plan. 
29.  Provide all material necessary to complete the title 
block. 
The complete floor plan will now resemble the plan 
shown in Figure 16-40.
SPACE PLANS
When large amounts of interior furnishing must be rep-
resented on the floor plan, the plan can often become 
unclear. Many firms represent interior furnishing on 
a separate plan called a space plan. This plan uses the 
walls and openings shown on the floor plan as a base, 
but does not show the other material typically associ-
ated with a floor plan. The space plan shows all specialty 
items such as interior built-ins as well as movable fur-
nishings such as shelving, display cabinets, book racks, 
sales counters, display cases, and seating. Equipment 
specific to the occupancy such as dental chairs, turn-
stiles, or examination tables is also represented on space 
plans. Figure 16-41 shows an example of a space plan 
for a small theater.
REFLECTED CEILING PLANS
A reflected ceiling plan shows the ceiling of a specific 
level of a structure. The floor plan is created by the cut-
ting plane passing through the walls five feet above the 
FIGURE 16-38 The floor plan showing walls, openings, cabinets and built-ins, and plumbing fixtures. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates 
& Lee, A.I.A.

370 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
floor, allowing the viewer to see the floor. The ceiling 
plan is a mirror image of the ceiling, which is the source 
of the drawing title. Acoustical ceilings supported by 
wires are typically used on commercial structures to hide 
the structural material. These ceilings are often referred 
to as T-bar ceilings, because of the lightweight metal 
frames that support the ceiling tiles. A reflected ceiling 
plan shows the location, starting point, and type of mate-
rial used to form the ceiling. The plan may also show the 
location of light panels and ceiling-mounted heat regis-
ters. These features may also be shown on a separate plan 
supplied by the mechanical engineer. Other features that 
should be shown on a reflected ceiling plan include:
References to ceiling-related details such as ceiling 
 
●
edge conditions, expansion control joints, seismic 
joints, and lighting coves. 
Ceiling material indications including the extent of 
 
●
materials if more than one material is used. 
Exit lights, light fixtures, sprinkler heads, supply and 
 
●
return grills, smoke detectors, speakers, and related 
dimensions to explain these features.
FIGURE 16-39 A floor plan with completed dimensions. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
371
Ceiling access panels to meet the needs of the 
 
●
mechanical and electrical trades.
Skylights and roof hatches with related dimensions.
 
●
Plenum barriers.
 
●
Elements located above the ceiling that require specific 
 
●
locations such as fire-rated horizontal enclosures, 
catwalks, disappearing stairs, and HVAC equipment.
Below are some final guidelines for drawing reflected 
ceiling plans.
Do not show door swings or openings unless the 
 
●
opening extends to the ceiling.
Do not reference building or wall sections on this 
 
●
plan.
Figure 16-42 shows an example of a reflected ceiling 
plan and examples of the symbol legend and notes that 
explain construction.
LAYERING
Because the floor plan is used as a base for so many 
different drawings, careful thought should be given 
to layering as the drawing file is being established. 
Walls, windows, doors, built-in cabinets, and plumbing 
FIGURE 16-40 A completed floor plan with notations and symbols. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

372 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
symbols are represented on other drawings that use the 
floor plan as a drawing base. All other material must be 
placed on a layer that can be frozen so that it will not be 
displayed. Chapter 3 introduced the American Institute 
of Architects (AIA) formats for defining layers. A partial 
list of recommended layer names is provided on the 
student CD in the APPENDIX folder. These names should 
be used to represent walls, doors, glazing, floor informa-
tion, ceiling information, interior and exterior elevations, 
details, and reflected ceiling plan information.
Because of the wide variety of structures that will be 
drawn, each office usually establishes its own variation 
of the AIA system for naming layers. On complex struc-
tures, instead of having one layer for all walls, layers may 
be established for full-height, partial-height, curtain, and 
movable walls. Each of the eight major areas of the floor 
plan should be further divided as the floor plan grows 
more complicated. Added layers might include layers for 
furniture, area calculations, and occupancy information.
In addition to layer names that define information 
within the drawing, specific layers that describe the 
drawing should also be established. This includes layers 
to contain information that will be placed in the title 
block, dimensions, symbols, hatching symbols, sched-
ules, and enlarged floor plans. The AIA and the National 
CAD Standard (NCS) have a complete list of modifiers 
available, which should be consulted as drawing stan-
dards are established.
FIGURE 16-41 A space plan showing interior furnishings can be created using the base of the floor plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, 
Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
373
FIGURE 16-42 A reflected ceiling plan can be created from the base layers of a floor plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

374 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Key elements shown on a floor plan include walls, 
windows, doors, openings, plumbing fixtures, cabinets, 
and finishing materials. These are also key areas to be 
considered when planning for sustainable construction. 
Energy credits from five Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design (LEED) categories can be 
represented on the floor plan. Following each of these 
five categories of LEED credits is a list of CSI sections 
that contain materials, fixtures, and equipment related 
to each credit. As you read through the five categories, 
you’ll notice that many of the CSI listings are found 
in more than one credit category. That’s important to 
realize because the factors that make a structure green 
are woven through all facets of the project. The floor plan 
and the related plans such as the mechanical, plumbing, 
and electrical plans are used to specify information 
related to gaining LEED credits. Information to be shown 
on the other related floor plans includes credits for:
Innovation and Design Process—This LEED category 
• 
represents two credits that rate the design process of 
a structure including the certification, standards, and 
codes that regulate green construction.
Water efficiency—dealing with innovative waste 
• 
water technologies and water reduction. Relevant 
areas of CSI for research related to this area include:
11 – Equipment
• 
22 – Plumbing
• 
32 – Exterior improvements
• 
33 – Utilities
• 
44 – Pollution control equipment
• 
Indoor Environmental Quality—This far-reaching LEED 
• 
category covers two prerequisites and eight credits. 
Prerequisites include minimum indoor air quality (IAQ) 
performance and the control of tobacco and other 
chemical pollutants. Eight LEED credits are given for 
the areas of interior finishing materials, furnishing, 
plumbing fixtures, HVAC equipment, and electronic 
safety and security equipment. Relevant areas of CSI 
for research related to this area include:
01 – General requirements
• 
09 – Finishes
• 
11 – Equipment
• 
12 – Furnishings
• 
22 – Plumbing
• 
23 – Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning
• 
28 – Electronic safety and security
• 
32 – Exterior improvements
• 
33 – Utilities
• 
44 – Pollution control equipment
• 
Energy and Atmosphere—This LEED category 
• 
represents three prerequisites and six 
credits that rate the energy efficiency of a 
structure. Prerequisites include energy and 
atmosphere, minimum energy performance, and 
chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) reduction in HVAC & R 
equipment. Credits are given for optimizing energy 
performance, renewable energy, eliminating HCHCs 
and halons, green power, and management and 
verification methods. The scope of this category can 
be seen by the number of relevant areas of research 
related to this credit. CSI sections and subjects 
include:
01 – General requirements
• 
03 – Concrete
• 
04 – Masonry
• 
05 – Metals
• 
06 – Woods, plastics, and composites
• 
07 – Thermal and moisture protection
• 
08 – Openings
• 
09 – Finishes
• 
10 – Specialties
• 
11 – Equipment
• 
12 – Furnishings
• 
13 – Special construction
• 
22 – Plumbing
• 
23 – Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning
• 
26 – Electrical
• 
27 – Communications
• 
28 – Electronic safety and security
• 
32 – Exterior improvements
• 
33 – Utilities
• 
35 – Waterway and marine construction
• 
42 – Process heating, cooling, and drying 
• 
equipment
44 – Pollution control equipment
• 
Material and Resources—This LEED category 
• 
represents one prerequisite and seven credits 
that rate the energy efficiency of a structure. The 
prerequisite for this section relates to the storage 
and collection of recyclables. Credits are available for 
the area of reuse, construction waste management, 
resource reuse, recycle content, use of local and 
regional materials, and certified wood. Relevant 
areas of CSI for research related to this area include:
01 – General requirements
• 
02 – Existing conditions
• 
03 – Concrete
• 
04 – Masonry
• 
EASY BEING GREEN
(continued)

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
375
ADDITIONAL READING
The list of links to floor-related information is 
too lengthy to include here. Rather than listing 
individual sites, use your favorite search engine to 
research products from the CSI categories listed in 
the previous section. Other key areas to research 
include wall materials, window materials, glazing, 
doors, skylights, plumbing fixtures, cabinets, and 
furnishing.
05 – Metals
• 
06 – Woods, plastics, and composites
• 
07 – Thermal and moisture protection
• 
08 – Openings
• 
09 – Finishes
• 
10 – Specialties
• 
11 – Equipment
• 
12 – Furnishings
• 
23 – Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning
• 
26 – Electrical
• 
32 – Exterior improvements
• 
33 – Utilities
• 
34 – Transportation
• 
35 – Waterway and marine construction
• 
KEY TERMS
Floor plan
Key plan
Partitions
Reflected ceiling plan
Storefront windows
Walls, bearing
Walls, curtain
Walls, faced
Walls, fire
Walls, nonbearing
Walls, parapet
Walls, party
Walls, shear
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. If math is required to answer a question, 
show your work.
Question 16-1 List three types of floor plans, explain their 
origin, and state which plan a drafter is most likely to 
work on.
Question 16-2 List five common drawing scales for a floor 
plan.
Question 16-3 List three common drawing scales appropri-
ate for drawing an enlarged floor plan.
Question 16-4 A floor plan for a large office structure needs 
to be drawn but it will not fit on the specified vellum 
size. Without reducing the scale, how can the plan be 
completed?
Question 16-5 List two drawing symbols that must be added 
to the floor plan described in question 16-4.
Question 16-6 List five categories of information that must 
be shown on the floor plan.
Question 16-7 List five categories of exterior dimensions.
Question 16-8 Describe two common types of notes found 
on a floor plan.
Question 16-9 List the dimension commands that would be 
useful for dimensioning a rectangular building.
Question 16-10 Describe the relationship between a floor 
plan and a reflected ceiling plan.
Question 16-11 Use graph paper and make a sketch of the 
floor plan of your drafting lab showing the dimensions of 
all walls and openings.
Floor Plan Components, 
Symbols, and Development
CHAPTER 16 TEST

376 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Question 16-12 Use graph paper and make a sketch of the 
floor plan of your drafting lab and show the layout of all 
furniture and equipment.
Question 16-13 Use graph paper and make a sketch of the 
floor plan of your drafting lab and show a reflected ceil-
ing plan of your drafting lab.
Question 16-14 Contact architectural offices or contrac-
tors in your city and collect blueprints of five structures. 
Compare differences in drawing techniques between 
these drawings.
Question 16-15 Visit five construction sites, and with the 
permission of the superintendent, photograph the con-
struction of wood, concrete block, concrete tilt-up, poured 
concrete, steel studs, and steel-frame construction.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the reference material from preceding chapters, 
local codes, and vendor catalogs to complete one of the 
following projects. Unless other instructions are given 
by your instructor, draw the floor plan that corresponds 
to the site plan that was drawn in Chapter 15. Skeletons 
of the plans can be accessed from the student CD in the 
DRAWING PROJECTS/CHAPTER 16 folder. Use these 
drawings as a base to complete the assignment with the 
following assumptions:
● Use appropriate symbols, linetypes, dimensioning 
methods, and notations to complete the drawing. 
● Determine any unspecified sizes based on material or 
practical requirements. 
● Unless specified, select a scale appropriate to plot-
ting on D-size material and determine LTSCALE and 
DIMVARS or use the Annotative feature of newer 
releases of AutoCAD.
Note: The sketches in this chapter are to be used as 
a guide only. As you progress through the floor plan 
you will find that some portions of the drawings do 
not match things that have been drawn on the site 
plan. Each project has errors that will need to be 
solved. The errors are placed to force you to think in 
addition to draw. Most of the errors are so obvious 
that you will have no trouble finding them. If you 
think you have found an error, do not make changes 
to the drawings until you have discussed the prob-
lem and possible solutions with your engineer (your 
instructor).
Information is provided on drawings in Chapters 
17 through 24 relating to each project that might 
be needed to make decisions regarding the floor 
plan. Chapter 22 will be especially helpful in com-
pleting the basic layout of the floor plan. You will 
act as the project manager and will be required to 
make decisions about how to complete the project. 
Any information not provided must be researched 
and determined by you unless your instructor (the 
project architect and engineer) provides other 
instructions. 
RESOLVING DRAWING CONFLICTS
When conflicting information is found, information from pre-
ceding chapters should take precedence. If conflicting informa-
tion is found, use the following order of precedence: 
1. Written changes given to you by the engineer (your instruc-
tor) as change orders. 
2. Verbal changes given to you by the engineer (your instruc-
tor).  
3. The engineer’s calculations (written instruction in the text). 
4. Sketches provided by the engineer (sketches provided in 
each of the following chapters). 
5. Lecture notes and sketches provided by your instructor. 
6. Sketches that you make to solve problems; verify alterna-
tives with your instructor.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS
Use the attached drawings, the drawings provided on 
the student CD, and the information provided with 
other related problems in Chapters 15 through 24 to 
complete the required building floor plan for the project 
that was started in Chapter 15.
Warning: Submitting drawings that do not meet 
the following minimum standards may earn you 
the wrath of your supervisor, slow your progress 
in achieving a pay raise, or lead to your dismissal. 
Remember these are minimum standards. Your 
drawings should exceed them.
● Draw the building floor plan at the largest scale pos-
sible to fit on D-size material. 
● Establish grids based on the NCS guidelines presented 
in the reading assignment for individual projects.
● Adjust all scale, lineweights, text, and dimension fac-
tors as required for the selected scale.
● Specify all material based on common local practice. 
● Provide access that complies with the information 
provided in Chapters 4 and 5.
● Use separate layers for each major drawing compo-
nent based on the recommended AIA guidelines pre-
sented on the student CD.
● Use dimensions to locate features as required by 
common practice.
● Provide annotation to specify all materials. 
● Assume all trusses are to be provided Weyerhaeuser. 
Verify all truss sizes from tables found on their 
Web site.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
377
● Hatch materials with the appropriate hatch pattern 
when appropriate.
● Use an appropriate architectural text font to label and 
dimension each drawing as needed. 
● Refer to Sweets Catalogs, vendor catalogs, or the 
Internet to research needed sizes and specifications.
● Use schedules when possible to keep the drawing 
from being cluttered.
● Provide section and elevation markers for the related 
drawings from Chapters 17 through 23.
● Provide a drawing title, scale, and problem number 
below each detail.
Problem 16-1 Four-Unit Condominium—Wood or Metal 
Framing, Trussed Roof. Use the drawing and the 
DRAWING PROJECTS/ CHAPTER 16/16.1.PDF file on 
the student CD to complete a building floor plan for 
each level. The building is to contain four units that 
match the layout shown on the site plan. Each end unit 
is to have a bay window with center units to have flat 
glass. Place all required annotation in one unit, electrical 
information in another unit, and place all required unit 
dimensions in another unit. A separate unit is to be com-
pleted at a later time to be used for showing all framing 
material, which will be discussed in Chapter 22. Specify 
all door and window sizes using a schedule.
Problem 16-2 Retail Sales: Concrete Block, Wood Frame, 
Truss Roof. In addition to the minimum standards pre-
sented in the general directions, use the following draw-
ings to complete the floor plan for the retail sales outlet 
using the following criteria: 
● All exterior walls are 8" × 8" × 16" CMUs. 
❍ The south and east walls are to have a 4" brick 
veneer. 
❍ The west wall should have an attractive block or 
pattern because it will be visible. 

378 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
❍ The north wall will be hidden by an existing struc-
ture on adjoining property. 
❍ The interior side of masonry walls, except those in 
the inventory and parts department, and all interior 
walls are to be covered with sheet rock. 
● Interior walls are to be 2× studs. 
● Panel the office and sales areas. 
● All windows are to be 84" high storefront. 
● Exterior doors to be 3' × 7' double swinging tempered 
glass with a solar tint. 
● Provide a sign over each pair of exterior doors 
to note that they are to remain unlocked during 
business hours. Use 32" wide doors throughout 
interior.
Problem 16-3 Concrete Block Warehouse. Material: con-
crete block, light-frame construction, panelized roof. Use 
the attached drawing to complete the floor plan for the 
concrete block warehouse to be used by a factory direct 
furniture company. Determine the occupancies of each 
portion of the structure and any required fire ratings. No 
matter the rating, a 1-hour fire wall is required at grid 5 
to meet future plans. In addition to the minimum stan-
dards presented in the general directions, your solution 
should meet the following minimum criteria:
● Use 32' wide grids (typically located to the inside of 
the CMU walls) referenced to meet NCS guidelines. 
● Construct the warehouse and office walls using 8" 
CMUs. Represent the pilasters that are specified on the 

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
379
framing plan. Reference the pilaster details in Chapter 
22 for the required size. 
● Provide for two rows of 6" × 6" × 3/16" steel col-
umns running north/south. 
❍ Provide one column on each side of the fire wall 
for a total of 10 columns. 
● Provide a 1-hour fire wall framed with 2 × 6 studs 
between the display and storage area at grid 5. Specify 
the doors located in this wall to be 1-hour rated.
● Draw an enlarged floor plan of the sales/staff area. 
Show a sales counter in the sales area, as well as room 
for some floor display and public access.
❍ Install counters in the staff room to allow for a 
stove, refrigerator, and double sink.
❍ Provide two bathrooms near the sales/display area 
with one that is open to the public. Provide a 3" 
diameter floor drain for each bath.
● In the sales/display area, halls, bathrooms, and staff 
room, provide for a suspended ceiling that is 9' above 
the floor. Verify that a minimum distance of 18" 
will be provided above the suspended ceiling to the 
bottom of any structural members to provide space for 
HVAC ductwork.
● Provide a unisex bathroom in the storage area with its 
own water heater, lavatory, toilet, and urinal. 
Mezzanine
● Plan for a mezzanine floor system to be placed above 
the display area. Assume 12' from finish floor of the 
display area to finish floor of the mezzanine.
● The west portion of the upper floor will be 
used as office space and will have a suspended 
ceiling at 8'. 
● Provide 84" high storefront windows on the south 
and west sides that align with the windows on the 
lower floor. 
● Provide 84" high × 15' ± storefront windows in the 
northwest corner of the mezzanine.
● Provide one unisex bathroom (sink and toilet only) 
for staff only. Place the bathroom so that the piping 
can share the same wall with the bath below in the 
storage area. The east portion of the upper floor will 
be used for lightweight storage with a minimum 
height of 9' to framing members. 
● Research and specify an 8' × 8' service eleva-
tor capable of lifting 4000 pounds that will not 
interfere with the roof framing. Submit copies of 
vendor material showing requirements for the 
elevator to your instructor prior to completing 
the floor plan.
● Design two sets of stairs to provide access to the 
mezzanine. The stair serving the northeast stair will 
require a landing to serve a 3' × 7' 1-hour fire door.
Alternate Office/Staff Layout
● Design and draw the bathrooms somewhere in the 
staff area, providing all information for their instal-
lation. Specify all other interior information for the 
office/staff areas to be provided by the tenant. If your 
instructor allows this option to be used:
❍ Do not provide a slab in the office area when the 
foundation plan is completed.
❍ Do not show any interior walls or doors unless 
they are required for the construction of the 
bathrooms.
❍ Specify all doors and windows as indicated in the 
exterior walls.
● Provide for a suspended ceiling in the display, sales, 
and break rooms 9' above the floor. Verify that a 
minimum distance of 18" will be provided above the 
suspended ceiling to the bottom of any structural 
members to provide space for HVAC ductwork.
● Provide a unisex bathroom in the storage area with its 
own water heater, lavatory, toilet, and urinal. 
Door and Glazing Requirements 
Provide a pair of glass doors to provide access from the exte-
rior into the sales area, with as much glass as code allows 
on the south and west walls. Provide windows or sky-
lights for the break room. Provide the following openings 
while maintaining modular sizes.
● Provide a pair of 3'–0" × 7'–0" steel doors to provide 
access from the sales area into the display area, and 
provide a large area of glass on the south and west 
sides of the sales office.
● Provide approximately 10' wide × 84" high storefront 
glass on the west and south walls of the display areas. 
● Provide (1)-3'–0" exterior steel door on the north wall 
of the display area. 
● Provide (3)-8' overhead doors in the loading dock 
that is 48" below the storage/display finish floor and 
(4)-11' × 11' overhead steel roll-up doors and (1)-3' 
door in the west wall of the storage area. 
● Provide (1)-8' × 8' roll-up door and (1)-3' door, both 
with 1-hour ratings to provide access from the display 
to the storage area.
● Provide (4)-22" × 48" skylights per each grid over the 
storage area. 
Loading Dock
● Provide a loading dock on the north side of the build-
ing, centered on the (3) service doors. The dock is to 
be 48" below the storage/display finish floor. Parking 
on the site plan will need to be coordinated with the 
loading dock.   
❍ Indicate a 36" high rail made of 1 1/2" Ø steel 
where the wall exceeds 30" above the slab in the 
loading dock.

380 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
381
Problem 16-4 Tilt-Up Warehouse. Material: concrete tilt-up, 
truss roof. Use the attached drawing to complete the floor 
plan for the concrete tilt-up warehouse to be used by a 
cabinet manufacturer. Part of the structure will be used by 
the sales staff for display, and for assembly and storage of 
units to be delivered to the job site. Although there will 
be no hazardous manufacturing on-site, varnish and other 
types of stains will be applied to cabinets on-site in the 
northeast portion of the storage area. Determine the occu-
pancies of each portion of the structure and any required 
fire ratings. No matter the rating, a 1-hour fire wall is 
required at grid F to meet future plans. In addition to the 
minimum standards presented in the general directions, 
your solution should meet the following minimum criteria:
● Draw a floor plan showing all walls, openings, and 
columns at a scale of 3/32" = 1'–0". 
● Construct the exterior walls of the warehouse and 
office using 6" thick concrete panels. 
❍ The east/west walls of the warehouse are to be 
constructed of four panels that are approxi-
mately 24.3' wide and extend the full width of 
the building (97').
❍ The north/south wall joints to match grids.
❍ Dimension the location of all openings in the con-
crete walls on separate panel elevations that will be 
completed later using information in Chapter 23.
● Lay out the warehouse using 24' grids from west/east.
● Assume all interior wood walls will be 2 × 4 stud 
walls. Use 2 × 6 studs for the fire wall at grid F.
● Provide a row of 6" × 6" × 3/16" TS columns to be 
located along grid 3 at the following locations: 
❍ Column 1: 12' to the west of grid J.
❍ Column 2: @ grid H.
❍ Column 3: 12" to the east of grid F.
❍ Column 4: 12" to the west of grid F.
❍ Column 5: 24' to the west of grid F.
❍ Column 6: 24' to the west of grid F, 24' north 
of grid 3.
● Place a wall running e/w 32' north of the south side 
of the storage area to divide the storage and display 
areas. Cover the display side of the wall with 1/2" 
gypsum board.
● Provide a unisex bathroom in the shop area with its 
own water heater, lavatory, toilet, and urinal. 
Sales/Office Area
Design a 48' × 70' office structure on the west end of the 
structure centered on grid 3. Use this area for a sales area 
on the northeast side with a sales counter between the 
reception area placed in the northwest corner as well as 
room for some floor display and public access.
● Provide two offices on the west side, two bath-
rooms, and a break room in the balance of this area. 
Bathrooms should have easy access to the display/
storage area and the break room and must be available 
for public access. 
● Provide for a gas water heater. All heating and cooling 
units will be roof-mounted.
● Assume the use of a suspended ceiling to be at 9' 
above the floor. 
❍ Verify that a minimum distance of 18" will be pro-
vided above the suspended ceiling to the bottom of 
any structural members to provide space for HVAC 
ductwork.
● Draw an enlarged floor plan of the office area at a 
scale of 1/4" = 1'–0".
❍ Install counters in the break room to allow for a 
stove, refrigerator, and double sink.
❍ Provide two bathrooms near the sales/display area. 
One must be open to the public. Provide a 3" 
diameter drain for each bath.
❍ One of the bathrooms should have easy access to 
the break room.
● The display area is to have a 9'–0" suspended ceiling. 
● The lower storage area will be used for storage of all 
chemical materials. 
Alternate Office/Staff Layout
Design and draw the bathrooms somewhere in the staff area, 
providing all information for their installation. Specify 
all other interior information for the office/staff areas to 
be provided by the tenant. If your instructor allows this 
option to be used:
● Do not provide a slab in the office area when the foun-
dation plan is completed.
● Do not show any interior walls or doors unless they 
are required for the construction of the bathrooms.
● Specify all doors and windows as indicated in the 
exterior walls.
Mezzanine
A mezzanine floor system is to be placed above the display/
storage areas. Assume 12' from finish floor of the display 
area to finish floor of the mezzanine.
● The area over the lower storage area will be used for 
storage of lightweight assembled units. 
● The north portion of the upper floor will be used as 
office space and will have a suspended ceiling at 8'. 
❍ Verify that a minimum distance of 18" will be pro-
vided above the suspended ceiling to the bottom of 
any structural members to provide space for HVAC 
ductwork.
● Provide one unisex bathroom (sink and toilet only) 
for staff only that will be above the bathroom located 
in the display area. 
● The south portion of the upper floor will be used for 
lightweight storage. 

382 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Research and specify an 8' × 8' service elevator capa-
ble of lifting 4000 pounds that will not interfere with 
the roof framing. Submit copies of vendor material 
showing requirements for the elevator to your instruc-
tor prior to completing the floor plan.
● Provide at least one 42" wide stairway to this area. 
Verify with local codes to see if more are required.
Doors and Glazing Requirements
● Provide (2)-8'–0" × 8'–0" overhead doors in display 
area and  (3)-11'–0" × 12'–0" overhead doors in load-
ing dock.  
● Provide an 8'–0" roll-up door, and a 3'–0" metal door in 
the tilt-up wall between the display and the sales areas. 
● Provide (1) 3'–0" metal door between the storage area 
and the break rooms. 
● Provide (1) 8' metal roll-up door in the wall at grid F 
centered in bay and another door on the south section 
of wall F from storage area to storage area. 
● Provide (1) 3' × 7' personnel door near each roll-up 
door in the storage areas. 
● Provide 7'–0" high storefront glass in the north and 
west sides of the display area.
❍ Provide for 24" minimum width panel support 
beside each opening or limit openings to 10'–0" 
maximum width at panel edge if glass is to extend 
to the corner. 
● Provide a pair of 3'–0" × 7'–0" glass entry doors from 
the exterior into the sales area.
● Provide 84" high storefront glazing along the north 
and west walls of the sales area.
● Storefront windows in each office would be nice but 
not required. 
● At the mezzanine level, provide 84" high storefront 
windows along the north and west sides. Windows on 
the north wall to extend to align with the east edge of 
the west door on the lower floor.
● Provide (4)-22" × 48" skylights per each grid over the 
shop and upper-level office areas. 
Loading Dock
● Provide a loading dock on the north side of the build-
ing, centered on the storage area.
❍ The three doors must be centered on the dock. 
❍ The 3' door should not be in the loading dock.
❍ Indicate a 36" high rail made of 1 1/2" Ø steel 
where wall extends 30" above slab in the loading 
dock.

Chapter 16: Floor Plan Components, Symbols, and Development 
383

384
17
Orthographic Projection and Elevations
Elevations are the portions of architectural drawings 
that show the exterior of the structure. In addition to 
showing the exterior shapes and finishes of a structure, 
these drawings also show vertical relationships of the 
material shown in the plan views. Figure 17-1 shows 
an example of an exterior elevation. This chapter will 
explore:
Elevations within the drawing set.
 
●
Principles of orthographic projection.
 
●
Drawing projection of major shapes, roof shapes, 
 
●
grades, openings, and common materials.
Steps for completing exterior elevations.
 
●
ELEVATIONS WITHIN 
THE DRAWING SET
The architectural team draws the exterior elevations as 
part of the preliminary designs. In conjunction with the 
floor and site plans, the elevations are initially developed 
as sketches to investigate the shapes, materials, and rela-
tionship of the structure to the site. The front and one 
side elevation are typically drawn, but other elevations 
may be provided for complex structures. Major materi-
als used to protect the structure from the elements are 
represented and briefly noted. Shades and shadows, 
landscaping, vehicles, and people may be shown to add 
a sense of reality. Figure 17-2 shows an example of a 
preliminary elevation. Although a drafter may not draw 
the preliminary elevations, these drawings will be useful 
later as a reference, when drawing the elevations that 
will be a part of the working drawings. Elevations are 
generally placed after the floor plans within the archi-
tectural drawings on sheets labeled A-2.
PRINCIPLES OF ORTHOGRAPHIC 
PROJECTION
Elevations are drawn using a drawing system called 
orthographic projection. This drawing system assumes 
a structure is placed within a glass box, so that each 
surface of the structure is parallel to a surface of the 
glass box. Each surface of the glass box is referred 
to as a picture plane. Each surface of the structure 
parallel to a picture plane is then presumed to be 
projected to the surface of the glass box. The box is 
then unfolded to produce the front, right side, rear, 
left side, top, and bottom views. The top view is not 
shown with the elevations but will be used to form the 
roof plan, which is discussed in Chapter 18. Rather 
than having a bottom view of the structure, the floor 
and foundation plans are used to show the outline of 
the structure.
Required Elevations
An elevation of each side of the structure is required 
to accurately represent construction. Although each 
parallel surface of the structure is projected to a picture 
plane, the distance of surfaces from the picture plane is 
very difficult to represent. An elevation of each surface 
is required to represent changes in shape and varied 
distance from the picture plane. With the comparison 
between two or more elevations, a structure can be 
clearly explained.
A minimum of four elevations are required to 
explain exterior materials for a structure. When a 
structure has an irregular shape such as a U shape, 
parts of the building are hidden in the basic four eleva-
tions. An elevation of each surface should be drawn, as 
shown in Figure 17-3. If a structure has walls that are 
not at 90° to each other, as shown in Figure 17-4, these 
walls will not be parallel to a picture plane and will 
be distorted when shown in an elevation. To elimi-
nate this distortion, the structure is rotated within 
the “glass box” so that each surface of the structure is 
seen in true projection. Only the portion of the struc-
ture parallel to the viewing plane is shown, with the 
balance of the structure seen in another view. Match 
lines are used to relate each portion of the elevation 
to related parts. Figure 17-5 shows an example of an 
irregularly shaped structure with elevations drawn to 
eliminate distortion.

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
385
Elevation Scales
Elevations are typically drawn at the same scale as the 
floor plan. Matching the scales allows the elevations 
to be drawn by using the floor plan or plans to project 
horizontal distances for walls, openings, and roof pro-
jections. Some offices provide elevations at a smaller 
scale to show the basic shape of the structure, with an 
enlarged set of elevations to provide details for con-
struction. Figure 17-6 shows a small-scale elevation.
DRAWING PROJECTION
Exterior elevations can be easily constructed by using 
the floor, roof, and grading plans, as well as the pre-
liminary sections, to project needed information. 
If the plan views are combined in one drawing file, 
required layers can be thawed for viewing to produce 
a base drawing from which to project the elevations. 
A wblock of the required layers should be created so 
that the floor plan is not accidentally damaged. This 
wblock can be copied and rotated to allow each sur-
face to be projected. Figure 17-7 shows an example of 
how elevations can be projected from a wblock using 
AutoCAD.
Drawing Major Building Shapes
With the wblock created to project walls and openings, 
lines should be established to represent each finish floor, 
the upper and lower limits of the windows and doors, 
FIGURE 17-1 Elevations are used to show the materials used to protect the skeleton from the elements, and to show vertical rela-
tionships. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.
FIGURE 17-2 A preliminary drawing created by the project manager is often given to a drafter to help in the creation of an elevation. 
Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

386 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
the ceiling, roof, and the top of any rails, balconies, or 
walls. The elevation should be projected by drawing 
surfaces closest to the picture plane first and then draw-
ing each receding surface. Drawing all surfaces prior to 
attempting to show any openings will aid in the projec-
tion. Figure 17-8 shows the projection for major shapes 
of an elevation.
Projecting Roof Shapes
The shape of the roof must be determined from pre-
liminary elevations and sections. For structures that 
have shapes other than a flat roof, the roof plan must 
be drawn before the elevations can be completed. The 
overhangs of the roof should be included in the wblock 
used to project the elevations. The roof shape is estab-
lished by projecting the limits of overhangs from the 
floor plan down to the elevations. The pitch of the roof 
and the height of bearing walls can be determined from 
preliminary sections. Figure 17-9 shows the projection 
of the roof to the base drawing.
Drawing Grades
As the elevations are started, major shapes of a struc-
ture can be established from the finished floor line. 
To complete the elevations, the structure must be 
referenced to the site by showing the finished grade 
elevations. Most architects use a bold line to represent 
the finished grade. Many firms place a small break in 
the ground line at each surface change and use a pro-
gressively smaller line to represent increasing distance 
of the surface to the picture plane. For relatively flat 
sites, the grade can be determined based on the type 
of foundation to be used. For structures with concrete 
slabs, the finished floor must be a minimum of 8" (200 
mm) above the finished grade. For sloping sites, the 
ground needs to be established by using the grading 
plan. The grading plan shows the finished floor eleva-
tion and spot grades for each corner of the structure. By 
starting at the floor line, the drafter can measure down 
the required distance to establish the ground line speci-
fied on the grading plan. Once grades are determined, 
PLAN
FRONT
REAR
RIGHT SIDE
RIGHT COURTYARD
LEFT COURTYARD
LEFT SIDE
FIGURE 17-3 An elevation should be drawn to show each side of a structure. Structures with irregular shapes will require an eleva-
tion of each hidden surface.

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
387
the outline of exterior footings can be drawn using a 
dashed-line pattern. Figure 17-10 shows a grading plan 
for a structure and the resulting ground line and foot-
ings on the elevation.
Drawing Windows, Doors, and Skylights
Once each major shape has been projected, doors and 
windows can be drawn matching the specifications 
from the floor plan or window schedule. Typically, 
each window is inserted as a block from a reference 
library that has already been established. If you must 
create your own blocks, create a block of each type 
of window to be used and store the block on a disk 
in a directory labeled \PROTO\ELEV\WIN####. Text 
describing the size or type of window, such as sldg, fix, 
or awn can be inserted in place of the ####. The size 
can be altered by stretching the block once it has been 
inserted into the drawing and exploded. This results 
in slight distortions.
Figure 17-11 shows examples of several styles of 
window blocks for use on commercial drawings. The 
exact location of the block can be determined by pro-
jecting the opening from the floor plan.
Door locations can be projected from the floor plan 
in the same manner as a window. Door styles should 
be confirmed with the door schedule. As door blocks 
are inserted, be sure that the sill of the door aligns 
with the finish floor. Figure 17-12 shows a sample of 
the wide variety of doors available from third-party 
vendors.
3
3
3
5
6
5
6
5
6
4
4
4
2
2
2
1
1
1
LINES OF SIGHT
PROJECTORS
PERPENDICULAR
TO PLANE OF
PROJECTION
PLANE OF PROJECTION
FORESHORTENED
ORTHOGRAPHIC VIEW
OF SURFACE 1, 2, 3, 4
TRUE SHAPE ORTHOGRAPHIC
VIEW OF SURFACE 2, 3, 5, 6
PLANE OF PROJECTION
ORTHOGRAPHIC VIEW
FIGURE 17-4 Walls that are not parallel to the picture plane 
will be distorted.
LEFT SIDE
FRONT
FIGURE 17-5 When walls are not parallel to the picture plane, the elevation should be broken by a match line and an elevation using 
true orthographic projection should be drawn.

388 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 17-6 Elevations drawn at small scale do not show all materials and depend on details or enlarged elevations to explain 
material placement. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
SIDE ELEVATION
BACK ELEVATION
SIDE ELEVATION
FRONT ELEVATION
FIGURE 17-7 With a wblock created from the floor plan, the elevations can be projected easily. Place elevations side by side to proj-
ect horizontally. Once the elevations are completed, they can be moved into other positions for plotting.
FIGURE 17-8 The elevations can be started by projecting 
major shapes shown on the floor plans.
FIGURE 17-9 Once the major shapes have been outlined, the 
roof can be projected.

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
389
When an opening must be projected in an inclined 
wall or roof surface, the opening will not be seen in its 
true shape because it is not parallel to the picture plane. 
Inclined materials must be projected from an elevation 
or section where the inclined surface shows as a line 
rather than a plane. Figure 17-13 shows an example of 
projecting a skylight on an inclined roof.
Material Representation
The method of representing materials varies depend-
ing on the scale of the drawing, the type of material, 
and which elevation is being represented. As the 
scale of the drawing increases, so should the amount 
FIGURE 17-10 If the site is not level, the finished floor and grade elevations must be projected. Elevations taken from the site or 
grading plan can be used to establish the finish grade by using the finished floor line as a base and offsetting the required distance 
for each point.
FIXED
FIXED/AWNING
STOREFRONT
SLIDING OR
CASEMENT
SINGLE OR
DOUBLE HUNG
FIGURE 17-11 Common types of windows can be created 
and stored as a block. The size can be adjusted as the block is 
inserted into the drawing.
MULTIFAMILY ENTRY DOORS
METAL ENTRY DOORS
GLASS ENTRY DOORS
FIGURE 17-12 Doors can be stored as blocks by type or 
material.

390 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
of detail to represent each material. The drafter should 
be careful not to spend too much time showing a 
material in elevation that will be completely detailed 
in a detail. The elevation should have enough detail to 
accurately represent materials and surfaces, but not to 
the point of wasting time or disk space. Figure 17-14 
shows methods of representing glass in elevations. The
front elevation is generally the only elevation that has 
materials represented throughout the entire elevation. 
Other elevations show just enough of the material to 
accurately represent the material. Figure 17-15 shows 
an example of representing materials in elevations.
Using AutoCAD Hatch Patterns 
Materials are often represented by using a hatch pattern 
created by AutoCAD or a third-party vendor. Common 
hatch patterns used to represent materials in elevations 
can be seen in the elevations presented throughout 
SIDE
FRONT
FLAT-GLASS SKYLIGHT
THE FLAT-GLASS SKYLIGHT CAN BE
DRAWN AS A RECTANGLE. SPECIFY
SIZE AND MANUFACTURER.
DOUBLE-DOMED SKYLIGHT
SIDE
FRONT
A DOUBLE-DOMED SKYLIGHT SHOULD
HAVE A SLIGHTLY CURVED SURFACE
TO REFLECT THE CURVED PLASTIC.
SPECIFY SIZE AND MANUFACTURER.
FIGURE 17-13 Materials to be represented on an inclined 
surface must be projected from the surface where the material 
shows its true size.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
FIGURE 17-14 The representation of glass and other materials 
should be influenced by the drawing scale. Methods used to 
represent glass include: (a) clear, (b) simple representation, (c) 
dot, (d) solid line, and (e) solid fill.
FIGURE 17-15 Representing materials in elevation. Roofing and masonry can be represented using AutoCAD hatch patterns. The 
siding can be represented using the ARRAY or COPY commands.

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
391
this chapter. Drafters typically encounter problems in 
scaling the hatch pattern and defining the extents of 
the pattern placement when working with the HATCH 
command. If AutoCAD 2008 or newer is used, the 
Annotative feature of the HATCH command can be 
used to control the pattern scale. For older versions of 
AutoCAD, inserting a hatch pattern is often a matter 
of trial and error in picking the scale pattern. For a 
pattern to be used accurately, it should fit the scale of 
the drawing. Figure 17-16 shows an elevation with a 
variety of hatch patterns that have been applied with 
good use of scaling.
Dimensioning
Chapter 3 introduced basic concepts to consider as 
structures are dimensioned. The use of dimensions 
varies for each office and depends on the complexity 
of the structure. Typically, the height from floor to 
ceiling is indicated on the elevations. Other dimen-
sions that may be specified on the elevations include 
the following:
Floor to floor for multilevel structures.
 
●
Floor to rails at balconies or aboveground decks.
 
●
Window height and size.
 
●
Height and width exterior finishes.
 
●
Roof pitches.
 
●
Figure 17-17 shows an example of a fully dimen-
sioned elevation.
Elevation Symbols
Elevations often use symbols to keep the drawing 
uncluttered. Common symbols include the following:
Finished floor lines.
 
●
Match lines.
 
●
Grid line markers.
 
●
Elevation symbols.
 
●
Section markers.
 
●
Detail markers. 
 
●
Floor and ceiling lines can be represented by a 
long-short-long pattern. If a horizontal siding is 
used, the floor line should be represented with a 
thick line so that it can be easily distinguished from 
the siding. 
If the elevation must be split because of length, a 
match line should be placed in the same location that 
was used on the floor plan. Grid lines should be placed 
on the elevation to match those used on the floor plan. 
Because the elevation is seen from the exterior of the 
structure, and the floor plan is seen when looking down 
on the structure (as shown in Figure 17-18), the grid 
lines will be opposite on the elevations to what they are 
on the floor plan.
FIGURE 17-16 Materials can be created in AutoCAD by using 
hatch patterns, inserting blocks, or by using the ARRAY and 
OFFSET commands. Courtesy H.D.N. Architects, A.I.A.

392 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Heights that are specified or dimensioned on the 
elevation are usually highlighted by an elevation 
symbol, as shown in Figure 17-19. Section markers 
like those used on the floor plan are placed on the 
elevations. The same symbol and location should be 
identical to that of the floor plan. Detail markers to 
represent exterior treatment, window or door con-
struction, and special construction are also referenced 
on the elevation. Detail symbols are like those used on 
the floor plan. Figure 17-19 shows an example of the 
use of each of these symbols.
Elevation Notations
Each material represented on the elevation should 
be specified by a note or detail using the procedures 
described in Chapter 3. Notes can be either a local note 
referenced to the material by a leader line, or a general 
note. When general notes are used, a short reference 
should be specified on the elevation. Many offices use 
notes with a reference symbol, which can be placed in 
the elevation to maintain clarity in the drawing. Notes 
should be carefully worded to avoid discrepancies with 
the specifications.
Layering
Using the guidelines presented in Chapter 3, the mate-
rials represented on the elevations should be sepa-
rated by layers. Most offices use titles that start with 
A-ELEV and are followed by an appropriate modifier 
to describe layer contents. Modifiers that describe the 
contents or use vary for each office. Suggested modifi-
ers based on National CAD Standards (NCS) are listed 
on the student CD in Appendix C. Other common 
methods of naming layers include names based on the 
type of line to be used or the weight of the line when 
plotted. Layer names such as FINE, LIGHT, MED, 
HEAVY, DASH, FLOOR, or CONTINUOUS, describe 
FIGURE 17-18 Although most drafters understand the basics of orthographic projection, the elevations might be drawn backward
if the floor plan is not properly rotated.
FIGURE 17-17 Dimensions should be placed and identified 
to clearly specify all vertical relationships. Courtesy Architects 
Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
393
the contents in general terms but may not be specific 
enough to adequately separate material for plotting.
COMPLETING ELEVATIONS
The elements that make up elevations have been pre-
sented throughout this chapter. These components 
will be combined to complete the front elevation that 
matches the structure presented throughout Chapter 
16. The software that is used to create the floor plan will 
greatly affect how the drawing is created. The follow-
ing discussion assumes the use of AutoCAD. If you’re 
creating elevations using AutoCAD Revit or AutoCAD 
Architecture, the general steps will be the same, but the 
procedure will be much easier because of the automa-
tion provided by the software.
 1.  Freeze all material on the floor plan except for layers 
that contain the walls, exterior openings, roof out-
lines, and grades. Make a wblock of this drawing 
and save it as ELEV BASE.
 2.  Close the current FLOOR file and open the ELEV 
BASE file. 
 3.  Establish layers for dimensions, text grids, out-
lines, roofs, doors, and windows with a prefix of 
A-ELEV. 
 4.  Make three additional copies of the FLOOR wblock 
and rotate them for projection for each elevation 
similar to the layout presented in Figure 17-7.
 5.  Project lines from the floor plans to represent the 
limits of each exterior wall. 
 6.  Draw a line to represent the finish floor line for each 
level. 
 7.  Establish lines to represent the tops of all walls, rails, 
and the bottoms of all footings and below-grade 
construction. 
 8.  Use preliminary drawings to establish the roof slope 
and draw the required inclined roof pitches. 
 9.  Draw all gutters, downspouts, and scuppers.
10.  Draw all skylights, roof-mounted equipment, equip-
ment screens, ladders, and penthouses that project 
above the parapet walls.
11.  Represent all building identification graphics and 
surface-mounted signage.
The drawing should now resemble Figure 17-20.
12.  Establish lines to represent the top and bottom of 
all openings.
13.  Project the locations of all exterior openings from 
the floor plans. 
14.  Use appropriate layers to insert blocks for all doors 
and windows. 
15.  Locate all dock bumpers.
16.  Use appropriate layers to provide hatch patterns 
to represent the type and extent of all exterior 
materials.
FIGURE 17-19 Annotation is provided by the use of local notes. Dimensions can be expressed using traditional dimension methods 
or by the use of elevation symbols. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

394 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
17.  Draw any site-related elements such as retaining 
walls or loading docks.
18.  Draw all light fixtures.
19.  Represent all control and expansion joints for con-
crete masonry structures.
The elevation should now be completely drawn and 
should resemble Figure 17-21. Although only one ele-
vation is shown, all elevations should be drawn as each 
stage is completed. The elevations can be completed by 
using the following steps:
20.  Provide all grid and match lines and their 
notations.
21. Label all floor, rail, ceiling, and rooflines. 
22.  Dimension for all floor-to-floor, floor-to-rails, and 
window heights so that your drawing resembles 
Figure 17-22.
23.  Provide notations to specify all exterior materials 
that were drawn in steps 6 through 19. 
24.  Provide all required general notes. 
25.  Provide building section markers and reference 
markers and notations for all required details. Detail 
markers are added as the details are drawn.
26. Provide a title and scale. 
The completed front elevations should now resemble 
Figure 17-23. The completed elevations for the entire 
structure are shown in Figure 17-24.
Key elements shown on elevations include exterior 
wall finishing materials, roof materials, windows, doors, 
skylights, and finishing materials. These products primarily 
earn LEED credits from the Materials and Resources 
division. Information to be shown on the exterior 
elevations includes credits from the following categories: 
Resource Reuse—This credit is earned for the use of 
• 
materials that are salvaged from previous building 
sites for reuse. Common materials for reuse include 
concrete and wood siding. Relevant areas of CSI for 
research related to this area include:
03 – Concrete
• 
09 – Finishes
• 
Recycled Content—This credit is earned for the use of 
• 
materials that are recycled or contain a high amount 
of recycled materials. Relevant areas of CSI for research 
related to this area include:
04 – Masonry
• 
06 – Woods, plastics, and composites
• 
07 – Thermal and moisture protection
• 
08 – Openings
• 
09 – Finishes
• 
Local/Regional Materials—This credit is earned 
• 
for the use of materials that are produced near 
the construction site to minimize damage to the 
environment by transportation-related factors. 
This allows the use of a product that may not be 
usually be considered to be “green,” but the product 
does receive credit for reducing damage from 
transportation. 
Rapidly Renewable Materials—This credit is earned 
• 
for the use of biobased materials, biocomposites, and 
biofibers. Areas of CSI that will be useful for research 
related to this area include:
03 – Concrete
• 
04 – Masonry
• 
06 – Woods, plastics, and composites
• 
07 – Thermal and moisture protection
• 
08 – Openings
• 
09 – Finishes
• 
10 – Specialties
• 
Certified Wood—This credit is earned for the use 
• 
of materials such as lumber products originating in 
certified forests. Areas of CSI that will be useful for 
research related to this area include:
01 – General requirements
• 
03 – Concrete
• 
06 – Woods, plastics, and composites
• 
07 – Thermal and moisture protection
• 
08 – Openings
• 
09 – Finishes
• 
EASY BEING GREEN

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
395
FIGURE 17-20 The structure presented in Chapter 16 is used to project each of the major shapes. Although only one elevation is 
being presented, a drafter would be required to represent each surface. Figure 17-24 shows the entire structure. Courtesy Architects 
Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 17-21 Once major shapes have been created, windows, doors, and trim patterns can be represented. Courtesy Architects 
Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

396 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Structural Elevations
Structures made of site-poured concrete, wood or steel 
frame, or tilt-up concrete panels often require structural 
elevations as well as the exterior elevations. Figure 17-25
shows an example of the structural elevation that corre-
sponds to Figure 16-5. Various types of structural eleva-
tions and guidelines for completing them are covered in 
Chapter 23.
ADDITIONAL READING
Links to exterior siding related information are too 
numerous to list here. Rather than listing individual 
Web sites, use your favorite search engine to research 
products from the CSI categories listed in wall materi-
als, window materials, glazing, doors, siding, skylights, 
plumbing fixtures, cabinets, and furnishing.
FIGURE 17-22 With all materials drawn, annotations describing materials and construction methods can be placed. Courtesy Architects 
Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
397
FIGURE 17-23 The completed elevation. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

398 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 17-24 The elevation page layout for the entire structure. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
399
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. 
Question 17-1 An elevation is too long to fit on the paper 
that is being used. How can this elevation be drawn?
Question 17-2 What process is used to draw elevations?
Question 17-3 List the drawings that may be needed to 
draw exterior elevations.
Question 17-4 Describe how irregularly shaped structures 
should be handled for exterior elevations.
Question 17-5 Describe the differences in material represen-
tation for the front and other elevations.
Question 17-6 What materials are typically dimensioned on 
elevations?
Question 17-7 Describe symbols that are typically placed on 
elevations.
Question 17-8 List the complete layer names for the fol-
lowing materials: concrete footings, grid numbers and 
letters, window glazing, detail and section markers, and 
roof materials.
FIGURE 17-25 Structural elevations are drawn to show how major components of the skeleton relate to each other. Chapter 23 dis-
cusses the relationship of structural elevations to the other structural drawings. Courtesy DiLoreto Architects, LLC.
Orthographic Projection and Elevations
CHAPTER 17 TEST

400 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Question 17-9 A structure will have several sliding win-
dows but each will have a different size. How can the 
window be easily inserted for each application?
Question 17-10 In drawing a structure on a sloping site, 
what should be used as the base point?
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the reference material from preceding chapters, 
local codes, and vendor catalogs to complete one of the 
following projects. Unless your instructor gives other 
instructions, draw the elevations that correspond to 
the floor plan that was drawn in Chapter 16. Skeletons 
of the elevations for problems 17-3 through 17-6 can 
be accessed from the student CD in the DRAWING 
PROBLEMS/CHAPTER 17 folder. Use these drawings 
as a base to complete the assignment. Use appropriate 
symbols, linetypes, dimensioning methods, and nota-
tions to complete the drawing. Determine any unspeci-
fied sizes based on the material presented in Sections 
3 and 4. Unless specified, select a scale appropriate to 
plotting on D-size material that matches the scale of the 
floor plan drawn in Chapter 16. Determine LTSCALE, 
DIMVARS, and all other drawing factors as needed.
Note: The sketches in this chapter are to be used as a 
guide only. As you progress through the elevations 
you will find that some portions of the drawings do 
not match things that have been drawn on the floor 
plan. If you think you have found an error, do not 
make changes to the drawings until you have dis-
cussed the problem and possible solutions with your 
engineer (your instructor).
Information is provided on drawings in Chapters 
15 through 24 relating to each project that might be 
needed to make decisions regarding the structure. You 
will act as the project manager and will be required to 
make decisions about how to complete the project.
Any information not provided must be researched 
and determined by you unless your instructor 
(the project architect and engineer) provides other 
instructions. When conflicting information is found, 
information from preceding chapters should take 
precedence.
Problem 17-1 Draw blocks to represent a plain glass door, 
a pair of glass doors, and a solid metal personnel door. 
Save each block with an appropriate name.
Problem 17-2 Draw a block to represent a sliding, single-
hung, and fixed window. Save each block with an appro-
priate name.
Problem 17-3 Using the site plan drawn in Chapter 15, the 
floor plan drawn in Chapter 16, and the drawing below 
of an exterior and an interior unit, draw the required 
elevations. Use the following materials:
● 300# composition shingles
● Horizontal siding with a 6" exposure over 1/2" wafer 
board and Tyvek
● 1 × 3 corner trim 
● 1 × 6 fascias and barge rafters 
Provide notes to specify all exterior materials, and provide 
grid lines to match the floor plan. Alter exterior materials 
and window sizes and shapes to provide an alternative 
front elevation using a Spanish style, and another front 
elevation providing a very traditional style.

Chapter 17: Orthographic Projection and Elevations 
401
Problem 17-4 Draw the required elevations to represent 
the retail sales outlet. In addition to showing the 
8" × 8" × 16" grade A concrete blocks, show a 
brick veneer over the south and east walls. Use 26 
gauge metal roofing installed as per manufacturer’s 
specifications.
Problem 17-5 Use the floor and site plan to draw each of 
the elevations for this structure. Use horizontal cedar 
siding with a 6" exposure over 1/2" wafer board at the 
roof awning. Cover the south and west office walls with 
EIFS. Design a decorative pattern to enhance the west 
elevation of the warehouse. A sign displaying the com-
pany name and logo should also be prominent on the 
north wall.

402 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 17-6 Use the floor and site plan to draw each of 
the elevations for this structure. Use 26 gauge (ga.) metal 
roofing for the projected roof. Use a combination of a 
grooved inset into each panel and a painted band on all 
walls to minimize the building height.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
403
403
The roof plan is used to show the shape, the roofing
materials, the direction of slope, and the drainage 
method of each roof surface. Although many com-
mercial structures have a roof with a slight slope, each 
of the shapes traditionally associated with light-frame 
construction can also be used with smaller commercial 
structures. This chapter will explore:
Roof pitch and its effect on the roof shape.
 
●
Roof materials.
 
●
Common roof components.
 
●
Methods of completing a low-sloped roof plan.
 
●
Methods of completing a high-sloped roof plan.
 
●
The roof plan is the part of the architectural draw-
ings developed to show a top view of the structure in 
orthographic projection. An example of a roof plan is 
shown in Figure 18-1. On high-sloped roofs, the roof 
plan is developed with other preliminary drawings to 
help the clients visualize how the structure will look. 
On low-sloped roofs, a roof plan may not be started 
until the working drawings are started. On simple 
structures, the plan may be drawn at a small scale such 
as 1/8" = 1'–0" (1:100) or smaller. On more compli-
cated structures, the roof plan is drawn at the same size 
as the floor plan, and divided into sections by match 
lines that match the floor plan and elevations. The con-
struction of the roof is represented on a roof framing 
plan similar to Figure 18-2. The roof framing plan is 
part of the structural drawings, which will be discussed 
in Chapter 22.
ROOF PITCH
Pitch is a ratio of the vertical rise to the horizontal 
run used to describe the angle of the roof slope. Pitch 
is described in units comparing horizontal run to the 
vertical rise. The slope may be measured in inches, 
millimeters, feet, or any other unit as long as the same 
unit is used for each measurement. The slope will be 
shown on the sections and elevations. The direction and 
intersections between roof surfaces must be shown on 
the roof plan, but the pitch is not represented. The angle 
equivalents for representing each pitch can be seen in 
Table 18-1.
Low-Sloped Roofs
Low-sloped roofs are divided into two categories by 
the IBC. The IBC requires a minimum of 1/4"/12" 
(2% slope) for drainage. Manufacturers of roofing 
material typically consider low-sloped roofs to be 
those with less than a 2:12 pitch (17% slope). A 
second category of material can be used for roofs with 
pitches that range from 2 1/2:12 (21% slope) to 4:12 
(33% slope). Because of the size of many commercial 
structures, a flat, low-sloped roof is the only practical 
shape that can be used economically. The method of 
framing the roof will depend on the size of the struc-
ture and the arrangement of space. For a structure 
Roof 
Pitch Angle
1:12 
4°30' 
2:12 
9°30' 
3:12 
14°0' 
4:12 
18°30' 
5:12 
22°30' 
6:12 
26°30' 
7:12 
30°0' 
8:12 
33°45' 
9:12 
37°0' 
10:12 
40°0' 
11:12 
42°30' 
12:12 
45°0'
TABLE 18-1 Common Angles for Drawing Roof Pitches
18
Roof Plan Components and Drawings

404 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
composed of a single space, a single-slope shed roof 
similar to Figure 18-3 can be used. In locations that 
do not receive much rain, any water collected on the 
roof may be allowed to drain off the low edge of the 
roof directly to the ground. In moister regions, water 
will be diverted to one or more collection points and 
then removed from the roof by a series of drains. Water 
removal methods are discussed later in this chapter.
Many low-sloped roofs are surrounded by para-
pet walls, which are exterior walls that extend above 
the roof. Parapet walls are provided for low-sloped 
roofs to hide mechanical equipment from public view. 
Depending on the location of the structure relative to 
the property line, building codes require a minimum 
of a 30" (750 mm) high parapet wall regardless of the 
pitch. This is to protect the roof from a fire on adjoining 
property, or vice versa. The parapet wall location and 
height must be specified on the roof plan. Wall con-
struction is specified in details similar to Figure 18-4, 
which must be referenced to the roof plan. The parapet 
wall creates a dam effect, trapping water on the low side 
of the roof. Lightweight metal called flashing is used to 
protect each wall/roof intersection from water seepage. 
To protect from water penetration when two different 
materials meet, flashing is also used on the tops of para-
pet walls and at each penetration of the roof. The type 
FIGURE 18-1 A roof plan is drawn to show the contours of the top level of a structure and is considered the top view in orthographic 
projection. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
405
and gauge of the metal and the type of lap are specified 
on the roof details.
A cant strip is a small block of wood or other 
material that is placed below the roofing material 
where the parapet wall intersects the roof. The cant 
strip provides support to the flashing and roofing. As 
shown in Figure 18-4, the cant is cut to provide an 
inclined surface to slope water away from the intersec-
tion. The cant strip is not always specified on the roof 
plan, but is generally referenced in details similar to 
Figure 18-4. As the length of the structure increases, a 
single direction slope can still be used, but additional 
measures are required to distribute rainwater. As the 
distance between roof drains is increased, the cant 
strip is replaced by a cricket. A cricket or saddle is 
a small “fake roof” built to divert water. The cricket 
is built over the roof on its low side to divert water 
to roof drains. It can be constructed of plywood or 
sheet metal depending on the size. Figures 18-3 and 
18-5 show an example of a roof framed with crickets. 
Smaller crickets are also framed on the upper edge of 
any roof penetrations such as skylights and chimneys. 
An alternative to framing crickets is to alter the slope 
of the entire roof by using a framing system typically 
referred to as a butterfly roof. With a single-sloped 
roof, framing members hang from a ledger that is 
FIGURE 18-2 The roof framing plan for the structure shown in Figure 18-1. The plan is used to show the structural materials used to 
construct the roof. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

406 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 18-3 Simple structures often use a single-slope roof to direct water off the roof. 
FIGURE 18-4 A parapet wall that surrounds the roof must be 
referenced on the roof plan with construction methods show-
ing the intersection in details, which are referenced to the roof 
plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
attached to the exterior wall. The ledger is parallel to 
the floor. With a butterfly roof, the ledger is set on 
an incline, which provides additional slope to what is 
normally considered a flat roof. Figure 18-6 shows the 
outline of a butterfly roof in elevations. Figure 18-7 
shows an example of a butterfly roof plan.
High-Sloped Roofs
High-sloped roofs are generally considered to be any 
roof with greater than a 4:12 pitch (33% slope). Many of 
the roof shapes found in residential construction are also 
used in light construction and small commercial uses. 
The most common high-sloped roof shapes include 
mansard, gable, hip, Dutch hip, and gambrel roofs.
Mansard
A mansard roof is an inclined roof that is used to cover 
one or more full stories of a structure. A partial mansard 

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
407
FIGURE 18-5 A cricket is a false roof built over the main roof that is used to divert water to roof drains. Courtesy StructureForm Masters, Inc.

408 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
can be used as a visual screen, as a shading device, or 
as a decoration to break up a parapet wall. Figure 18-8 
shows examples of full and partial mansard roofs in 
elevation. Figure 18-9 shows an example of represent-
ing a mansard on a roof plan. When shown on the roof 
plan, the mansard must be located by dimension and 
referenced to construction details.
Gable
A gable roof is a roof formed by two intersecting roof 
planes and can be found on both low- and high-sloped 
structures. When the roof is formed between equal-
height walls, with equal-pitched roof planes, the inter-
section of the roof planes will be located at the midpoint 
between the supporting walls. The intersection of the 
roof planes is referred to as the ridge and represents 
the highest point of the roof. The ridge is parallel to 
the floor. The ridge location will be shown on the roof 
plan and located on the roof framing plan. Figure 18-10 
shows an example of a gable roof.
Hip
A hip roof is formed by four intersecting roof planes. 
When a hip roof is formed on a square structure, the 
roof will intersect at a point. When a hip is framed on 
a rectangular-shaped structure, a ridge will be formed 
halfway between the long walls of the structure. A hip is 
an inclined roof member that forms an external corner 
between two intersecting planes of a roof. A valley is 
an inclined roof member that forms an internal corner 
FIGURE 18-6 The ledger that supports the roof framing mem-
bers at the wall can be inclined to divert water to roof drains. 
Courtesy Wil Warner.
FIGURE 18-7 By using inclined ledgers like those shown in Figure 18-6, water can be diverted to roof drains. Notice that in addi-
tion to the ridge in the center of the structure, smaller ridges and valleys are formed along the walls at grids B and C created by the 
inclined ledgers. 

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
409
between two intersecting planes of a roof. Both hips and 
valleys are common to high-sloped roofs and are shown 
in Figure 18-11.
Dutch Hip
A Dutch hip, sometimes referred to as a Dutch gable 
roof, is a combination of a gable and a hip roof. A wall 
is placed parallel to the short support wall at the roof 
level. This wall is used to form a break in the roof plan, 
as shown in Figure 18-12. The roof pitch and desired 
effect determine the location of the wall. Figure 18-13 
shows a Dutch hip represented on a roof plan.
FIGURE 18-9 The walls and sloped roofs of the mansard must 
be reflected on the roof plan.
PARTIAL
MANSARD
FULL
MANSARD
FIGURE 18-8 A partial mansard roof can be used on low-
sloped roofs to hide mechanical equipment or to provide 
shade for windows. A full mansard can also be used to hide 
roof-mounted materials or to visually reduce the height of a 
structure.
RIDGE 
RIDGE
VALLEY
VALLEY
FIGURE 18-10 The major shapes of a gable roof include the 
ridge, valley, and hips. The walls perpendicular to each ridge 
are referred to as gable end walls.
RIDGE 
HIP
HIP
HIP
HIP
HIP
HIP
RIDGE
VALLEY
FIGURE 18-11 The shapes of a hip roof include ridges, hips, 
and valleys. A hip roof provides a protective overhang on all 
sides of the structure.
FASCIA
GABLE END WALL
HIP ROOF
SIDING
FIGURE 18-12 A Dutch hip roof combines features of a hip 
and gable roof. The plane of the hip is terminated before it 
reaches the ridge, and a gable wall is built at the roof level.
RIDGE 
HIP
HIP 
HIP
VALLEY
HIP
HIP
RIDGE
VALLEY
FIGURE 18-13 Representing a Dutch hip roof on a roof plan.

410 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Gambrel
A gambrel roof is formed by two different roof levels. 
The upper portion is a gable roof, and the lower por-
tion is a steep-shed roof. The ridge and the limits 
of each roof plane must be shown on the roof plan. 
Figure 18-14 shows a gambrel roof plan.
ROOF MATERIALS
The type of material used for weather protection must 
be specified on the roof plan. Common roofing mate-
rials include single-ply and built-up roofs, shingles, 
metal slate, and tile roofs. Many roof materials are also 
described by their weight per square. A square of roof-
ing is equal to 100 square feet (9.3 m2).
Single-Ply Roofs
Single-ply roofs can be applied as a thin liquid or 
sheet made from Ethylene Propylene Diene Monomer 
(EPDM), which is an elastomeric or synthetic rubber 
material. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC), chlorosulfonated 
polyethylene (CSPE) and polymer-modified bitumens 
are also used. These materials are designed to be applied 
to roof decks with a minimum pitch of 1/4:12 (2% slope). 
In liquid form, these materials can be applied directly to 
the roof decking with a roller or sprayer to conform to 
irregular-shaped roofs.
Single-sheet roofs are rolled out and bonded together 
to form one large sheet. The sheet can be bonded to the 
roof deck by mechanical fasteners. Some applications 
are not attached to the roof deck and are held in place 
by gravel material that is placed over the roofing mate-
rial to provide ballast. A typical specification for a single-
ply roof would specify the material, the application 
method, and the aggregate size. Many firms also specify 
a reference for the material to be installed according 
to the manufacturer’s specification. Details are also 
typically supplied to show how roof intersections and 
sheet seams will be flashed similar to Figure 18-4.
Built-Up Roofs
Built-up roofs consist of two or more layers of 
bituminous-saturated roofing felt, cemented together 
with bitumen and surfaced with a cap sheet, mineral 
aggregate, or similar surfacing material. The bitumen 
material used to bond the layers together is usually tar 
or asphalt. In addition to the roofing felts and bitu-
mens, a gravel surfacing material is used to protect the 
exposed surface from abrasions. Built-up roof systems 
can be applied over any type of roof deck and are suit-
able for low- or high-sloped roofs. Generally, they are 
to be applied to roofs with a minimum pitch of 1/4:12 
(2% slope) but less than a 2:12 pitch (17% slope). 
Figure 18-15 shows the process for applying a built-up 
roof system.
Composition Shingles
Composition or asphalt shingles come in a variety of 
colors and patterns. Standard shingles come in a 12" 
× 36" (300 × 900 mm) size and are divided into 
three tabs, with a weight based on the square footage 
HIP
HIP
RIDGE
FIGURE 18-14 Representing a gambrel roof plan.
ROOF  DECK
GRAVEL
TOPPING
ROOFING PITCH
SEAL  COAT
ROOFING
PITCH BASE COAT 
FELT
FIGURE 18-15 The construction of a four-ply roof over a con-
crete roof deck.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
411
weight. Three-tab composition shingles have a weight 
of 235 pounds per square and are installed over 15# 
felt. Shingles divided into random widths and thick-
nesses with a weight of 300 pounds per square are also 
available. Composition shingles are designed for use 
on roofs with a minimum pitch of 2:12 (17% slope). 
Underlayment requirements vary depending on the roof 
pitch and the design wind speed.
Wood Shingles
Wood shingles are applied to roofs with a 3:12 pitch 
(25% slope) or greater over 1 × 4 or 1 × 6 (25 × 100 
or 25 × 150) spaced sheathing and 15# felt. In areas 
of the country where the average daily temperature in 
January is 25°F (–4°C) or less, wood shingles must be 
applied over special underlayment. Wood shingles laid 
in cold climates must be installed over two layers of 
underlayment cemented together or over a self-adher-
ing polymer modified bitumen sheet laid over plywood 
sheathing for the first 24" (610 mm) from the eave edge. 
An additional layer of 15# felt is placed between each 
row of shingles. Wood shakes are thicker and have a 
rougher texture than shingles. Wood shakes are applied 
in a similar manner as a shingle but must be applied 
to roofs with a 4:12 pitch (33% slope) or greater. Both 
wood shakes and shingles can be chemically treated for 
fire resistance. Shingles made from masonite are also 
available. Masonite shingles simulate wood shakes and 
provide a fire-resistant material.
Seamed Metal
A sheet metal roof made of copper, zinc alloy, or galva-
nized or coated stainless steel is a common alternative 
for a commercial roof when a 3:12 or greater pitch (25% 
slope) is used. A pitch as low as 1/4:12 (2% slope) can 
be used, depending on the type of seam used to join 
the metal sheets. Figure 18-16 shows common seam 
methods. When specified on the roof plan, the metal 
gauge, panel size, material, and seam pattern must be 
specified.
Corrugated Metal
Corrugated steel sheets can be used for either siding 
or roofing material. Metal sheets in either rounded or 
angular bent patterns similar to Figure 18-17 are avail-
able and can be installed on roofs with a pitch of 3:12 
(25% slope) or greater. In addition to steel, panels are 
also available in aluminum, galvanized steel, fiberglass, 
and corrugated structural glass. When specified, the 
manufacturer, material, the panel size and weight, 
required lap, finish, and fastening method must be 
placed on the plans. Details of installation are also refer-
enced to the roof plan.
Tile
Tile roofing can be clay, concrete, or metal units that 
overlap to form the weather protection. Tiles come in 
a variety of patterns, colors, and shapes and are usually 
installed on roofs having a pitch of 3:12 or greater. Tile 
can be installed over either solid or spaced sheathing. 
Attachment methods will vary depending on the pitch 
and the maximum basic wind speed. On the roof plan, 
the manufacturer, style, color, weight, and application 
method must be specified.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
FIGURE 18-16 Examples of metal seams include: (a) double 
lock standing seam, (b) wood batten seam, (c) wood batten 
ridge seam, (d) prefabricated standing seam, (e) prefabricated 
batten seam, and (f) ridge seam.
1 1/8" - 2 1/4" DEEP  
1 1/2 - 2"  DEEP 
1 3/4" -2" DEEP  
3/4" - 1" DEEP  
FIGURE 18-17 Standard corrugated and ribbed roofing 
patterns.

412 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
COMMON ROOF PLAN COMPONENTS
Although the plan of a low-sloped roof looks different 
from a high-sloped roof plan, many of the components 
are the same. Common components include changes in 
roof shape, roof openings, drainage methods, notations, 
and dimensions.
Changes in Shape
Changes in roof shape are shown on the roof plan with 
continuous object lines. A ridge, hip, and valley are the 
most common changes of roof shape.
Locating Ridges
The ridge between equal-pitched planes formed from 
equal-height walls can be located by determining the 
midpoint between the two supporting walls. When 
the walls are an unequal height, or a sawtooth roof is 
formed with unequal roof pitches, a section will need to 
be drawn so that the ridge location can be projected in 
the roof plan, as shown in Figure 18-18.
When two gabled structures intersect each other, the 
intersection of the ridges needs to be determined. With 
equal pitches over each portion of the structure, the por-
tion that is widest will have the highest ridge. The ridge 
over the narrower portion of the structure will intersect 
the highest gable at a point where both roofs are of equal 
height. This point can be determined by drawing a line 
to represent the valley formed between the two planes. 
The valley will always be formed at an angle that is 
one-half the angle formed between the two intersecting 
walls. Figure 18-19 shows the intersection of two roofs 
of unequal widths and the merging of the ridge lines.
Representing Valleys
When one gable or hip roof intersects another gable 
roof, a valley is created. If the two intersecting roof 
planes are at an equal pitch, the line representing the 
valley is drawn on the roof plan at an angle that is one-
half the angle formed by the intersecting support walls.
For perpendicular support walls, the valley is rep-
resented by a line drawn at a 45° angle on the roof 
plan, as shown in Figure 18-11. When the intersecting 
roof planes are at unequal pitches, sections must be 
drawn to determine where the valley will be created. 
Figure 18-20 shows an example of determining the 
intersection of two ridges with different heights and 
pitches. When the intersecting roof planes are not 
perpendicular to each other and are over portions of 
the structure with different widths, the ridges, valleys, 
and hips must be determined using sections, as seen 
in Figure 18-21.
EQUAL PITCH
RIDGE CENTERED
UNEQUAL PITCH
RIDGE  OFF CENTER
FIGURE 18-18 When roof pitches are unequal, the location of 
the ridge on the roof plan must be projected from sections.
RIDGE B
RIDGE A
A
B
A
A
B
FIGURE 18-19 The intersection of two roofs that are not 
perpendicular to each other. The hip and valley will be paral-
lel to each other and will be formed at an angle that is equal 
to one-half the angle formed between the two intersecting 
support walls.
FIGURE 18-20 When intersecting roofs are at different pitches, 
the ridge intersection and valleys must be projected from an 
elevation or section.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
413
The intersection of two gables that are supported by 
walls with different heights must often be represented 
on a roof plan. Using the roof pitch, the drafter must 
determine the distance the lower roof will require to 
rise to an equal height on the upper roof. Figure 18-22 
shows the intersection of an entry portico roof framed 
with 12' (3700 mm) high support walls, the main roof 
framed with 10' (3000 mm) high walls, and each roof 
framed with a pitch of 6:12 (50% slope).
Roof Openings 
Each penetration of the roof is usually shown on the 
roof plan. Major openings shown on the roof plan 
include skylights, chimneys, vent pipes, and openings 
for HVAC ducts.
Skylights
Individual skylights are shown on the roof plan by 
a rectangle that represents the size of the skylights. 
On inclined roofs, the true size of the skylight will be 
altered because of the roof angle. An X is sometimes 
placed in the skylight to accent its location. Figure 18-23 
shows an example of how skylights are represented and 
specified on a roof plan. On plans with a large number 
of skylights, the size and type of each skylight can be 
shown in a schedule similar to Figure 18-24. Large sky-
light units need to be represented by a method that dis-
tinguishes the skylight from the roof. The hatch pattern 
used to represent the skylight varies for each office, but 
it must be represented in a symbol schedule attached 
to the roof plan. In addition to showing the location, 
the method of protecting the opening from water must 
also be shown. The waterproofing method is shown in 
details similar to Figure 18-25, which are referenced on 
the roof plan.
Chimneys
A fireplace is common in many multifamily units and 
business occupancies such as restaurants and small 
offices. Chimneys are represented on the roof plan accord-
ing to their type. Masonry and metal chimneys in wood 
chases are represented as a rectangle with an X through it. 
Metal chimneys are represented by a circle, which repre-
sents the required diameter of the chimney. Figure 18-11 
shows a method of representing chimneys. 
Plumbing and Mechanical Penetrations
Because of the risk of leaking, plumbing vents are 
shown on many low-pitched roofs. Circles or squares, 
depending on their shape, represent vents and exhaust 
flues. Their location is determined by their location on 
the floor plan and is generally not located by dimensions 
on the roof plan. Details such as those in Figure 18-26 
are referenced to the roof plan to show waterproofing 
methods. Because openings for mechanical equipment 
must be shown on the roof framing drawing, they may 
or may not be shown on the roof plan. The location of 
equipment is generally shown and specified in relation 
to surrounding walls or screens on the roof plan. Both 
the screens and curbs for mounting the equipment 
should be referenced on the roof plan as shown in 
Figure 18-27.
Roof Drainage
Once the shape of the roof is indicated, the next priority 
is to show how water will be diverted from the surface. 
B
A
B
A
FIGURE 18-21 Projecting the intersection of roofs of different 
widths.
4'-0" 
LINE OF 10'-0" 
LINE OF 12'-0"
HIGH PLATE
HIGH PLATE
FIGURE 18-22 The slope of the roof must be known when 
drawing the intersection of two different roofs supported on 
walls of differing heights. With a 6:12 pitch, a horizontal dis-
tance of 48" (1200 mm) is required to reach the starting height 
of the upper roof. By offsetting the 10' (3000 mm) wall 48" 
(1200 mm), the valley between the two roofs can be located 
from the point where the 12' (3600 mm) high wall intersects 
this 48" (1200 mm) offset.

414 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
In order to outline drainage, the slope indicators, eleva-
tion markers, drains, and overflow drains must all be 
shown to indicate how water will be removed from the 
roof. Each is shown in Figure 18-23.
Slope Indicators
A slope indicator is an arrow that indicates the flow of 
water on the roof. Arrows are generally placed so that they 
point away from the ridge to the low points of the roof.
Elevation Markers 
Once the slope has been indicated, the elevation of 
the roof must be shown. Elevations for the roof are 
FIGURE 18-23 A completed roof plan for a single-slope roof. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 18-24 On plans with a large number of skylights, a 
schedule can be used to improve clarity. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns 
Architects, P.C.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
415
represented with symbols similar to those used on the 
floor and site plans. Elevations for the roof are typically 
given from either the finished floor level or from the 
height of the ridge. The base point for the elevations 
should be indicated on the roof plan in either a legend or 
in general notes. Figures 18-23 and 18-28 show exam-
ples of elevations that are based on the finished floor. 
When elevations are given from the ridge, the height 
of the finished roof at the ridge is usually referred to as 
elevation 00. All other points are expressed as heights 
relative to the ridge. Points lower than the ridge will 
have negative numbers, and points above the ridge are 
represented by positive numbers. Heights are deter-
mined by multiplying the distance by the desired slope. 
For instance, with the minimum roof pitch, a ridge 
30'–0" from a wall will require 7.5" (30' × 0.25") of fall 
to properly shed water. Figure 18-29 shows an example 
of elevations based on the ridge height.
Gutters
The roof system is designed to direct water from the 
ridge downward. For sloped roofs built in areas of 
the country that receive large amounts of rain, gut-
ters are placed on the low edge of the roof to collect 
the water. The gutter has a slight slope to direct water 
to a downspout. The downspout transfers the water 
from the roof level to the grade level. Depending on 
the area of the country and the rain to be dispersed, 
gutters may be connected to a dry well or to a storm 
FIGURE 18-25 Details showing the construction and mount-
ing of skylights must be referenced on a low-sloped roof plan. 
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 18-26 Details showing the waterproofing of roof pen-
etrations are an important addition to a roof plan. Courtesy H.D.N. 
Architects, A.I.A.
FIGURE 18-27 Details showing the construction and water-
proofing of curbs for mechanical equipment must be referenced 
to the roof plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

416 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 18-28 A completed roof plan for a shed roof with multiple slopes for drainage. Roof elevations are based on their height 
above the finish floor level. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
417
sewer. The location of the gutter is specified on the roof 
plan but not drawn. The location, size, and material of 
the downspouts should be indicated on the roof plan. 
Construction of the gutter and downspouts is shown in 
details similar to Figure 18-30.
Overflow Drains and Scuppers
Low-sloped roofs that are enclosed by a parapet wall 
trap water on the low side of the roof. Drains are placed 
in the roof to remove water from the roof wherever the 
water cannot run over the edge of the roof. A cricket is 
used to direct water to the drains in a method similar to 
that shown in Figure 18-5. Where drains are required, 
an overflow drain must also be provided to drain water 
from the roof in case the drain becomes blocked. The 
overflow drain must be the same size and be installed 2" 
(50 mm) above the roof drain. The drain directs water 
to a downspout, which in turn transports water to the 
waste disposal system. The overflow drain is connected 
to a separate drain that often connects to a hole in the 
wall. Water flowing from this drain indicates that the 
drainage system requires maintenance.
An opening in the parapet wall is an alternative to 
providing drains and overflow drains. A funnel-like col-
lector called a scupper is placed on the outside of the 
hole to funnel water from the roof to a downspout. A 
scupper can be represented on the roof plan as shown 
in Figure 18-7 and would be shown in details similar to 
those in Figure 18-31.
Diverters
For structures built in areas of the country that receive 
only small amounts of rain, water is often allowed to 
flow over the edge of the roof directly to the ground. 
To keep water from dripping onto walkways at entries, 
a metal strip called a diverter is placed on the roof. The 
diverter is placed so that it will direct water on the roof 
to an area where no one will be splashed. A bed of 
gravel is generally placed on the ground below the low 
point of the diverter to decrease the chance of erosion. 
A diverter can be represented on the roof plan as shown 
in Figure 18-32.
Annotation
As with other drawings, annotation must be placed 
on the roof plan to specify the material that has been 
drawn. Much of the material that will need to be speci-
fied has been presented throughout this chapter. Where 
possible, local notes can be used to identify each mate-
rial. If space does not allow for the entire specification 
to be placed in or near the drawing, an abbreviated 
portion of the note should be placed by the object, 
and the complete note should be provided in a listing 
of general notes. To add clarity to the drawing, keyed 
FIGURE 18-29 Roof elevations based on the height of the 
ridge (grid B) of the roof. Heights shown on the walls at grids A 
and C represent a height that is below the ridge line.
FIGURE 18-30 A detail showing the mounting of a roof drain. 
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

418 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
notes can be used to reference general notes to the plan. 
Specifications should be provided to specify all changes 
in shape, roof material, equipment, and openings.
Dimensions
Although the roof plan is not used to construct the 
roof, dimensions should be provided on the roof plan 
to locate material that is located on the roof. Base 
dimensions should be provided to locate each grid, just 
as with the floor plan and elevations. Equipment should 
also be dimensioned. On sloped roofs, overhang dimen-
sions should be provided. Anything that is located on 
another plan is often not dimensioned on the roof plan. 
Figures 18-5, 18-7, 18-23, and 18-28 show examples of 
dimensions placed on roof plans.
Common Items to be Represented 
on a Roof Plan
When preparing to complete a roof plan, several common 
features must be represented and specified including:
The extent and location of each change in roof shape 
 
●
and roof crickets.
The extent and direction of fall to each roof drain, 
 
●
downspout, and splash block. 
Overflow drains and scuppers.
 
●
Penthouse and required walking surfaces, changes in 
 
●
roof material, and roofing control and seismic joints.
Roof-mounted features such as antennas, lightning 
 
●
arresters, and HVAC equipment. Coordinate the 
material on the roof plan with supplemental draw-
ings such as mechanical and electrical drawings.
Roof penetrations, skylights, and roof-mounted wall 
 
●
screens.
Roof access and ladders.
 
●
Reference to details for any roof material listed above.
 
●
COMPLETING A LOW-SLOPED 
ROOF PLAN
The convenience store shown in Chapter 16 will be used 
to show the process for drawing a low-sloped roof. The 
architect’s sketch shown in Figure 18-33 will be used 
as a guide to complete the roof plan. Use layers based 
on the NCS found in Appendix C on the student CD to 
complete the drawing.
 1. Using the sketch, draw the exterior walls. 
 2. Draw the outline of the mansard roof. 
FIGURE 18-31 Details showing the construction of a scupper 
through a concrete parapet wall. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, 
Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
26 GA. G.I.
METAL DIVERTER
FIGURE 18-32 In areas with minute amounts of rainfall, a 
metal diverter can be installed on the roof to drain water away 
from doorways.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
419
 3.  Draw the drain, overflow drains, and scuppers 
based on the architect’s specifications. 
 4.  Draw the cricket on the inside of the north para-
pet wall. 
 5.  Draw required 48" × 48" × 4" high curbs for HVAC 
equipment. 
 6. Draw required skylights. 
With all necessary materials drawn, the roof plan will 
resemble Figure 18-34. The plan can be completed by 
using the following steps: 
 7. Draw all grid lines. 
 8. Provide overall dimensions. 
 9. Dimension the mansard. 
10. Dimension all openings. 
11. Dimension each skylight. 
The roof plan is now dimensioned and will resemble 
Figure 18-35. The drawing can be completed by adding 
the required notations: 
12. Place the title and scale below the drawing.
13.  Specify all materials that can be grouped as general 
notes.
14. Draw the north arrow.
15. Provide identification text for each grid symbol.
16. Locate and specify all elevations. 
17. Specify all changes in roof shape. 
18. Specify all drainage devices. 
19. Specify all roof-mounted equipment. 
20. Specify all roof openings. 
21. Draw detail markers for anticipated details.
The completed roof plan is shown in Figure 18-3. 
A similar structure with a ridge at grid B and a but-
terfly roof is shown in Figure 18-36. This structure can 
be drawn using steps similar to those used to draw the 
single-sloped roof. Once the walls and mansard have 
been drawn, the ridge should be located. Because the 
architect has specified that three sets of drains are to be 
located on grids A and C, the roof can be divided into 
four quadrants to locate the butterfly.
The roof pitch for points 3 and 5 should be deter-
mined prior to determining the height at the drains. 
FIGURE 18-34 The drawing of the basic roof components 
based on the sketch in Figure 18-33.
FIGURE 18-33 A sketch developed by the architect or project 
manager is used by the drafter to develop a roof plan.
FIGURE 18-35 Adding dimensions for each feature.

420 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Using a pitch of 1/4:12", the slope from B-3 to C-3 
requires a 10" drop. The distance from C-3 to C-4 is 
28 feet, which would require an additional drop of 7". 
Using the same materials that were used for the struc-
ture in Figure 18-4, the completed roof plan would 
resemble the structure in Figure 18-7.
COMPLETING A HIGH-SLOPED 
ROOF PLAN
A light-framed retail outlet will be used to show the 
process for drawing a high-sloped roof. The architect’s 
sketch shown in Figure 18-37 will be used as a guide 
to complete the roof plan. Use layers based on the NCS 
found in Appendix C on the student CD to complete 
the drawing.
 1.  Using the sketch, draw the exterior walls. Assume 
the north and west walls to be 30" parapet walls for 
property line protection.
 2.  Draw all changes in roof shape. 
 3.  Draw the roof overhangs. 
 4.  Draw the drain, overflow drains, scuppers, and 
downspouts based on the architect’s specifications. 
 5.  Draw the cricket on the inside of the north parapet 
wall. 
 6.  Draw required skylights. 
With all necessary materials drawn, the roof plan will 
resemble Figure 18-38. The plan can be completed by 
using the following steps: 
 7.  Draw all grid lines. 
 8.  Provide overall dimensions. 
 9.  Dimension all overhangs. 
10.  Dimension all openings. 
11.  Dimension the skylights. 
12.  Place the title and scale below the drawing. 
13.  Draw the north arrow. 
14.  Provide identification text for each grid symbol. 
15.  Locate and specify all elevations. 
16.  Specify all changes in roof shape. 
17.  Specify all drainage devices. 
18.  Specify any roof-mounted equipment. 
19.  Specify all roof openings. 
20.  Draw detail markers for anticipated details. 
FIGURE 18-37 The architect’s sketch for a high-pitched gable 
roof.
FIGURE 18-36 The architect’s sketch for a butterfly roof.
FIGURE 18-38 The drawing of basic roof shapes and 
components.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
421
As you think of energy efficient roof systems, you might 
quickly think of gardens of flowers or freshly mown 
lawns. This image is typically referred to as a green 
roof. The term green roof is generally used to describe 
a roof system consisting of some type of vegetation 
growing in soil, planted over a waterproof membrane, 
a root barrier, and drainage and irrigation systems. 
This type of roof system has become popular in many 
applications such as municipal buildings, including 
industrial facilities, offices, and other commercial 
property. In Europe, they are widely used for their 
storm water management and energy savings potential, 
as well as their aesthetic benefits. Although popular, 
this green roof system is far from the only type of 
sustainable roof system. 
Two other categories of roofing are available to 
the design team to gain Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design (LEED) credits. Cool roofs and 
sustainable roofs can be used to make a structure more 
earth friendly. A cool roof is a roof that features highly 
reflective materials. It can be something as simple as 
finishing the roof by painting it with a coating of light-
colored water sealant. In the same way that white 
clothing helps keep you cool in the summertime, white 
roofs reflect sunlight and heat. More high-tech cool 
roofs feature special light-colored, reflective membranes 
that reflect heat from the roof surface to keep the 
building cool.
Although not as flashy as a garden roof, asphalt, 
clay, and composition shingles can be just as green if 
produced and installed to meet certain criteria. To be 
considered sustainable, a roofing system must meet 
five key criteria in the areas of energy, environment, 
endurance, economics, and engineering.  
Energy—High-performance roofing materials are 
• 
available that can be a powerful asset in reducing 
energy consumption and forming an energy efficient 
roof. When used with appropriate insulation on low-
sloped or flat roofs, high-emissivity products can: 
Reduce building energy consumption by up to 40%.
• 
Improve insulation performance to reduce winter 
• 
heat loss and summer heat gain.
Preserve the efficiency of rooftop air-conditioning 
• 
and potentially reduce HVAC capacity requirements. 
Decrease the effects of urban heat islands and 
• 
related urban air pollution. 
Environment—A roof system is generally considered 
• 
to be friendly to the environment if it is designed, 
constructed, maintained, rehabilitated, and demolished 
with an emphasis throughout its life cycle on using 
natural resources efficiently and preserving the global 
environment. This would include roofing materials 
that are produced, applied, and reused using methods 
that comply with LEED guidelines.
Endurance—The amount of time a product can be 
• 
used before being replaced is a key feature in its LEED 
certification. Endurance for a roofing component 
is typically measured in terms of reliability, water 
absorption, wind and fire resistance, maintenance, 
and repair. No matter how green a roof is, it still has to 
protect the building for years in all types of weather. 
Economics—While some types of roofing may 
• 
have lower initial costs, the true costs of a roofing 
system are measured over its total life cycle. These 
include maintenance and repair costs, energy 
savings, and tear-off and disposal costs. The total 
cost of a product through its entire life cycle must 
be considered rather than just the initial cost during 
building construction to gain LEED credits. This is a 
very important criterion for building owners: High-
performance roofing systems must be economical if 
they are to become viable, real-world options.
Engineering—Smart, coordinated engineering is 
• 
not only the essential enabler for the other E’s of 
high-performance roofing materials, it is the key to 
whole-building design. The roofing products must be 
considered in relation to all other products that are 
used to form the exterior shell of the structure.  
As you work with the design team to meet the goals 
of the five E’s, key elements shown on a roof plan include 
finishing roof materials, skylights, drainage systems, and 
mechanical equipment. Each product earns LEED credits 
primarily from the Materials and Resources division. 
Information to be shown on the roof plan includes 
credits primarily from CSI Section 07—Thermal and 
moisture protection. Specific areas to research include:  
07 31 13 – Asphalt shingle
• 
s 
07 31 16 – Metal shingle
• 
s 
07 31 19 – Mineral fiber cement shingles
• 
07 31 26 – Slate shingles
• 
07 31 29 – Wood shingles and shakes
• 
07 31 33 – Plastic and rubber shingles
• 
07 32 13 – Clay roof tiles
• 
07 34 00 – Building integrated photovoltaic roofing
• 
07 41 00 – Roof panels
• 
EASY BEING GREEN

422 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
The completed roof plan is shown in Figure 18-39.
ADDITIONAL READING
Links to roof-related information are too numerous 
to list here. Rather than listing individual Web sites, 
use your favorite search engine to research products 
from the CSI categories listed above as well as the fol-
lowing headings: roofing materials, skylights, green 
roofs, green roofing, green roofing construction, green 
roofing design, and green roofing technology. A few 
helpful sites as you develop your own database of links 
include:
 
COMPANY/
ADDRESS 
ORGANIZATION
www.asla.org/land/050205/greenroofcentral.html  
American Society of 
Landscape Architects 
www.epa.gov/hiri/strategies/greenroofs.html  
Environmental Protection 
Agency
www.greengridroofs.com 
Green Grid Roofs
www.greenroofs.com  
GreenRoofs.Com (Green 
Roof Council Newsletter)
www.greenroofs.org  
Green Roofs for Healthy 
Cities
www.greenroof.org  
ZinCo
KEY TERMS
Cant strip
Cricket
Dutch hip
Gable roof 
Gambrel roof 
High-sloped roofs 
Hip roof 
Low-sloped roofs 
Mansard roof 
Pitch 
Square 
FIGURE 18-39 The completed high-pitched gable roof.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
423
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. 
Question 18-1 Why are flat roofs used for a majority of 
commercial projects?
Question 18-2 List two reasons for using parapet walls.
Question 18-3 At what angle does the building code con-
sider a roof a steep roof?
Question 18-4 What is the difference between a cricket and 
a cant strip?
Question 18-5 What is typically used to bind together layers 
of a built-up roof?
Question 18-6 List the weight per square foot for the two 
common types of composition shingles.
Question 18-7 Describe how the ridge of a sawtooth roof is 
located.
Question 18-8 Describe the angle used to represent a valley 
between two intersecting portions of a structure when 
represented on a roof plan.
Question 18-9 How should skylights be specified on a roof 
plan?
Question 18-10 List two methods of determining elevations 
on a roof plan.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the reference material from preceding chapters, 
local codes, and vendor catalogs to complete one of the 
following projects.
Unless your instructor provides other instructions, 
draw the roof plan that corresponds to the floor plan 
that was drawn in Chapter 16. Skeletons of the roof 
plan for problems 18-1 through 18-4 can be accessed 
from the student CD in the DRAWING PROBLEMS/
CHAPTER 18 folder. 
Use these drawings as a base to complete the assign-
ment. Use appropriate symbols, linetypes, dimension-
ing methods, and notations to complete the drawing. 
Determine any unspecified sizes based on material or 
practical requirements. Unless specified, select a scale 
appropriate to plotting on D-size material and deter-
mine LTSCALE and DIMVARS.
Information is provided on drawings in Chapters 15
through 24 relating to each project that might be 
needed to make decisions regarding the roof plan. 
You will act as the project manager and will be 
required to make decisions about how to complete 
the project. Any information not provided must 
be researched and determined by you unless your 
instructor (the project architect and engineer) pro-
vides other instructions. When conflicting informa-
tion is found, information from preceding chapters 
should take precedence.
Minimum Standards
Your completed drawings should meet or exceed the 
following minimum standards unless noted:
● Create the necessary layers to keep the roof 
information stacked above, but separated from, 
the floor plan. Freeze all material not required by 
the roof plan.
● Note that all downspouts are to be connected to a 
storm sewer connection separate from site drainage.
● Roof and overflow drains are to be general-
purpose type with nonferrous domes and 
4" drains. Overflow drains to be set 2" above 
drain inlet and shall be connected to drain lines 
independent of roof drains.
● Scuppers to be 4" high and 7" wide with 4" rectangular 
corrugated downspouts. Provide a 6" × 9" conductor 
head at the top of each downspout.
● Flat roofs to have 400 pounds of pea gravel over a 
4-ply built-up roof.
● Locate the following elevations for problems 18-2, 
18-3, and 18-4:
❍ Each corner of the parapet wall.
❍ Each end of the ridge.
❍ Each corner of the roof.
❍ The roof at each drain location.
● Inclined roofs to have 26-ga. metal roofing.
Problem 18-1 Draw a roof plan for the four-unit complex 
using the following parameters:
● The roof is to be built at a pitch of 12:12 and will be 
covered with 300# composition shingles. 
● For the two interior units, provide a 4' minimum 
covered entry deck. 
Roof Plan Components and Drawings
CHAPTER 18 TEST

424 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● The gable end walls are to have a 12" overhang. 
● Exterior units will have a 24" overhang. All units will 
have a 6" overhang as it projects over lower units. 
● Form a 24" high maximum cricket over the roof 
between units to divert water to scuppers and 
downspouts. 
● Provide five scuppers and downspouts on each gable 
end wall. Provide a continuous gutter on the outer 
walls of each outer unit and connect to a downspout. 
● Provide a 12:12 roof over each bay with a continuous 
gutter connected to a downspout located where it will 
not be seen.
Problem 18-2 Draw a roof plan using the following 
parameters: 
● Provide a double-shed roof with the ridge formed by 
a beam running east/west centered over the 4" × 4" 
steel column. 
● Establish the ridge 13'–0" above the finished floor. 
● Provide a slope of 1/4:12 with all elevations listed 
from the finish floor.
● Place three scuppers and downspouts on the front and 
rear and establish cant strips to provide drainage to 
each roof drain. 
● Provide continuous gutters on the mansard surround-
ing the main roof. 
❍ Project the mansard 6' from the edge of the block 
wall. 
● Provide a 4" curb for roof-mounted heating and air-
conditioning equipment.
❍ Curb to be installed by general contractor, based 
on sizes supplied by the HVAC supplier. 
● Show (4)-22" × 48" double-domed skylights equally 
spaced over the parts and inventory areas and one 
centered over the break area.
Problem 18-3 Design a roof plan for the structure started in 
problem 16-3. Coordinate this plan with the framing plan 
and adjust all heights to provide the minimum ceiling 
heights specified earlier. Use the following parameters to 
complete the drawings:
● Provide a ridge along the beam placed over the west 
row of columns (grid C) from 1 to 7.
❍ Use a double-shed system over the warehouse and 
provide a slope with a minimum of 1/4:12 to grids 
A and F.
● Provide four drains on each side of the warehouse. 
● Use a double-shed roof over the office area sloping from 
a ridge beam placed at grid C.5 between grids 7 and 8.
❍ Establish the warehouse ridge to be 30" below the 
parapet wall but maintain minimum ceiling heights 
specified with the floor plan.
● Place a drain at grid B dependent on glazing place-
ment, and a second drain at grid E7.5. 
● Provide (4)-22" × 48" skylights per each grid over the 
mezzanine.

Chapter 18: Roof Plan Components and Drawings 
425
Problem 18-4 Serve as the project manager and design a 
butterfly roof plan for this structure. Coordinate this plan 
with the framing plan and adjust all heights to provide 
the minimum ceiling heights specified earlier. Use the 
following parameters to complete the drawings:
● Provide a ridge over the warehouse at grid 3 from 
C to K.
❍ Provide five drains on each side of the warehouse. 
(Divide the warehouse roof between grids 1C-K 
and 5C-K into four equal parts. Place a drain at 
each of the three points that were just located as 
well as in each corner.)
Locate the midpoint between each drain along 
 
■
grids 1 and 5. These points will establish the 
high point of the ledger. Provide a minimum 
slope of 1/4:12 from the ridge to ledger high 
points on grids 1 and 5.
Provide an additional minimum slope of 1/4:12 
 
■
from the ledger high points to each of the drains 
along grids 1 and 5. This will place the drains 
at a low point and cause water to flow from the 
ridge to the drain.
● Provide a ridge over the office area at grid 3 from grids 
A to C. 
❍ Provide a minimum slope of 1/4:12 from the ridge 
to grids 2 and 4. 
❍ Provide one drain at grid 2 placed dependent on 
glazing placement, and one drain at grid B-4.
❍ Provide a minimum slope of 1/4:12 along the 
ledger to the drains. Use a layout similar to the one 
over the warehouse. 
● Establish each ridge so that it is 30" below the parapet 
wall. Maintain the minimum ceiling heights specified 
with the floor plan.  
● Label the following elevations:
❍ Each corner of the parapet wall.
❍ Each end of the ridge.
❍ Each corner of the roof.
❍ The roof at each high ledger point.
❍ The roof at each drain location.
● Provide (4)-22" × 48" skylights per each grid over the 
mezzanine.

426
19
Drawing Sections
Building sections are drawn to show the vertical rela-
tionships of materials represented on each of the plan 
views and the exterior elevations. Exterior elevations 
show the material that will be used to shield the struc-
ture from the weather. Sections show the materials used 
to construct the walls, floors, ceilings, and roof compo-
nents, and their vertical relationships to each other. This 
chapter will explore:
Section origination.
 
●
Types of sections.
 
●
Section development.
 
●
The major drawing considerations when drawing 
 
●
sections.
Steps for completing a section.
 
●
SECTION ORIGINATION
Building sections are the result of passing a viewing 
plane through a structure to reveal the construction 
methods being used. Material that is in front of the 
viewing plane cannot be seen. Material that is behind 
the viewing plane is projected to the plane and repro-
duced in the section. Another method of visualizing 
a section is to think of the viewing plane as a giant 
saw that slices vertically through a structure and 
divides it into two portions. One portion is removed 
to allow viewing of the portion that remains. Using 
the saw analogy, the viewing plane is referred to as 
a cutting plane. The location of the cutting plane is 
shown on the floor plan using symbols similar to 
those shown in Figure 19-1. Notice that with each 
symbol, an arrow is included to indicate which por-
tion of the structure is being viewed. Figure 19-2 
shows an example of a floor plan with section mark-
ers. Figure 19-3 shows the section that is specified 
by the section marker 1/A12. Notice that material 
the cutting plane passes through on the floor plan 
is represented on the section. Material in the back-
ground such as doors, windows, and cabinets is also 
usually shown.
TYPES OF SECTIONS
Full sections, partial sections, and details may be used 
to represent a structure. Each has a specific use in 
representing how walls are constructed and how they 
intersect with floor and roof systems.
Full or Building Sections
Full sections are the views that result from passing 
the cutting plane through the entire structure. Full 
sections are meant to give an overall view of a specific 
area of the structure and may be either longitudinal or 
transverse. A longitudinal section is produced when the 
cutting plane is parallel to the long axis of the struc-
ture. It is generally perpendicular to most structural 
materials used to frame the roof, ceiling, and floor sys-
tems. Because the framing members are perpendicular 
to the cutting plane, they are seen as if they had been 
cut. Figure 19-4 shows an example of a longitudinal 
section.
A transverse section is produced when the cutting 
plane is parallel to the short axis of the structure, and it 
is often referred to as a cross section. The cutting plane 
for a transverse section is usually parallel to the materi-
als used to frame the roof, ceiling, and floor systems 
and generally shows the shape of the structure better. 
Figure 19-5 shows a transverse section for a structure 
formed from precast concrete.
No matter the type of section, a building section 
should include the following components:
Columns and grid lines to match the lines used on 
●
the floor plan.
Other building section references that intersect the 
 
●
building section.
Room names and numbers of the areas cut by the 
 
●
cutting plane.
Floor-to-floor dimensions. (The National CAD 
 
●
Standards [NCS] recommends against the use of 
elevations.)
Finish elevations.
●

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
427
Ceilings and partitions that are cut by the cutting 
 
●
plane.
Major materials, symbols, and lists of abbreviations.
 
●
Partial Sections
A partial section is a section that does not go com-
pletely through the structure and can be used to 
show construction materials that are not seen in 
other sections. Figure 19-6 shows an example of 
a partial section that is referenced to the section 
shown in Figure 19-4. Partial sections are used to 
show only a specific area of the structure, whereas 
other sections are used to define the balance of the 
structure.
A partial section can also be used to show construc-
tion materials of a specific wall. When a section is used 
to show one specific wall, it is also referred to as a wall 
section. Wall sections can be referenced to the floor plan 
or to other sections. Figure 19-7 shows a wall section. 
Wall sections are drawn at a larger scale than a full 
section and are drawn to provide information on one 
specific type of wall.
Detailed or Wall Sections
Full and partial sections are often drawn at a scale 
that cannot adequately display the needed detail of 
all materials. Detailed sections are drawn to provide 
clarity for a small area, such as the intersection of 
the floor system to a wall. Sections, wall sections, 
and details can be thought of as different stages of 
the ZOOM command in AutoCAD. With each zoom, 
a smaller area is seen, but each material in the dis-
play increases in size. Details provide more specific 
information about a smaller area than seen in other 
types of sections. Figure 19-8 shows an example of 
a detail that is referenced to the section shown in 
Figure 19-6.
Wall sections should include the following com-
ponents by both drawing representation and written 
specifications: 
Exterior wall types at a scale that allows the full 
 
●
height of the wall to be represented without the use 
of break lines, whenever possible.
Exterior and interior finishes and materials.
 
●
Finish grades.
 
●
Floor levels and floor-to-floor dimensions.
 
●
Profiles of built-in equipment.
 
●
FIGURE 19-1 The location of a section is shown on the floor 
and framing plans by use of a cutting plane. The upper letter 
represents a specific section. The bottom number represents 
the page where the section can be found.
FIGURE 19-2 Cutting plane representation on a floor plan. 
Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

428 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 19-3 Section 1/A12 represented on the floor plan in Figure 19-2 shows the major parts of the building skeleton. Details that 
explain construction are referenced to the section and the floor plan. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
429
FIGURE 19-4 This longitudinal section, specified on the floor plan in Figure 16-3, was produced by passing the cutting plane parallel 
to the long axis of the structure. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 19-5 This transverse section, specified on the floor plan in Figures 16-3 and 16-11, was produced by passing the cutting 
plane parallel to the short axis of the structure. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

430 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Section/Elevations
Although not as common as other types of sections, a 
section can be combined with elevations to explain con-
struction of a structure. Section/elevations can be either 
full or partial views. Figure 17-25 shows an example 
of a structural elevation that superimposes struc-
tural material over the exterior elevation. Figure 19-9
shows a structural section of the same area shown in 
Figure 17-25.
SECTION DEVELOPMENT
Sections are part of both the preliminary and archi-
tectural drawings. Depending on the type and com-
plexity of the structure, the engineering team may 
also provide sections to explain how the building is 
constructed. Chapter 23 will explore the use of struc-
tural sections.
FIGURE 19-6 A partial section shows construction features 
of one specific area. This section is an enlargement of the stair 
shown in Figure 19-4. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 19-7 A wall section can be used to show typical con-
struction for a project. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
431
Preliminary Drawings
A section is one of the preliminary drawings developed 
by the design team to represent the typical shape of 
the structure to the client. Once the creative options 
of the structure have been explored in the preliminary 
elevations, the architect generally develops sections 
to explore possible construction techniques. A senior 
drafter may occasionally develop the section using 
rough sketches developed by the architect. In the 
design stage, the section is not intended to accurately 
represent materials, but to show the shape of the struc-
ture, major areas of openings such as windows and 
skylights, and the vertical relationships of the struc-
ture. Walls, floors, and roof systems are represented 
by solid black lines, which represent thickness rather 
than specific construction methods. Materials in the 
background are represented by thin lines, or may not be 
shown at all. The distances between floor and ceiling, 
or overall heights, can be shown to represent heights 
critical to the design. Elevation symbols can be used in 
place of dimensions to specify heights. Figure 19-10 
shows an example of a preliminary section.
To help the print reader relate to the section, room 
names are specified with large text, and important mate-
rials are represented with smaller text. A title and scale 
should be placed below the drawing. The actual size of 
the text will vary depending on the size and complexity 
of the structure. People, plants, automobiles, or other 
items that will help to identify the use are also placed 
in the section. Sun angles or shading can be placed to 
help define how the structure will relate to the site and 
environment.
FIGURE 19-8 Detail sections are drawn to provide clarity to 
small areas. The detail is referenced to the section shown in 
Figure 19-6. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 19-9 Drawing techniques of sections and elevations can be combined to show the relationship of the structural skeleton to 
other materials. See Figure 17-25 to compare the elevation for the same area. Courtesy Charles J. Conlee P.E., Conlee Engineers, Inc.

432 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 19-10 A preliminary section is one of the first drawings completed to show the client the vertical relationship of materials. 
Figure 19-3 shows this drawing in its completed form. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
433
Sections in the Architectural Drawings
A CAD drafter will often convert the preliminary section 
into the drawing that will be part of the working draw-
ings. The preliminary section and other sketches devel-
oped by the design team, as well as a print of the floor 
plan with the desired cutting planes, are usually given 
to the technician to indicate which sections should 
be completed. For experienced CAD technicians, the 
architect will depend on the drafting team to determine 
the required sections. Junior drafters will typically not 
be involved with the initial drawing of the sections but 
will usually be introduced to sections by adding infor-
mation to the drawing base from check prints.
Section Scales
The number of sections to be drawn is determined by 
the complexity of the structure. The size of each section 
is determined by the complexity and material used for 
construction. Full sections are generally drawn at the 
same size as the floor plan. Wall sections are usually 
drawn at a scale of 3/8" = 1'–0" (1:20) or larger. A scale 
of 1/2" = 1'–0" (1:20) or larger is used to represent 
materials shown in detail.
Details should be drawn at a scale that will be suffi-
cient to show the detail of all materials in the area being 
represented. Generally, a scale of 3/4" = 1'–0" (1:10) or 
larger should be used. Common scales used for details 
and their closest metric counterpart include 1" = 1'–0", 
1 1/2" = 1'–0", and 3" = 1'–0" (1:5). The scale used for 
wall sections and details is often determined by blocks, 
which are on file in the office library. Figure 19-11 shows 
an example of a party wall that is stored as a block and 
then inserted into the drawing set. Once inserted into the 
drawing base, the section can be edited to meet specific 
conditions of the job.
MAJOR SECTION DRAWING 
COMPONENTS
Whether the sections are part of the preliminary, archi-
tectural, or structural drawings, consideration needs to 
be given to several key areas when creating the draw-
ings. The CAD technician will need to consider how 
materials are to be represented, how to place dimen-
sions, how and which symbols are appropriate for the 
drawing, how text is placed, and if and how blocks can 
be used.
Material Representation
The method used to represent each material will vary 
depending on the scale that is used to create the section. 
FIGURE 19-11 Sections that are used repeatedly such as this 
2-hour fire wall can be stored as a wblock and inserted and 
edited to meet the demands of similar multifamily projects. 
Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

434 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Similar methods that were presented in Chapter 6 for 
representing material in details can be used to repre-
sent materials in large-scale sections. Most sections 
however are drawn at such a reduced size that hatch-
ing patterns are not used. Sections are used to show 
the general shape of the structure, and as a reference 
map to explain how details relate to the structure. It is 
also important not to spend more time than necessary 
detailing materials. If a product is delivered to the site 
ready to be installed, minimal attention to represent-
ing the product is required, but attention to installing 
the product is necessary. If an item in a detail must be 
constructed at the job site, the drawings must provide 
enough information for all the different trades depend-
ing on the drawings.
Wood, Timber, and Engineered Products
Figure 19-12 shows a section for a wood-framed medi-
cal facility. Notice that thin lines are used to represent 
studs placed beyond the cutting plane, and the plates 
are represented by polylines. On small-scale sections, 
the lumber and timber products can be drawn using 
their nominal size. The sizes of thin materials such as 
plywood are exaggerated so that they can be clearly 
represented. Trusses perpendicular to the cutting 
plane can be represented by polylines showing the 
shapes of the truss, similar to those in Figure 19-4. 
When parallel to the cutting plane, trusses can be rep-
resented by a thin line, which represents the chords 
and webs, similar to Figure 19-3. See Figure 6-22 for 
methods of representing other common wood mem-
bers in sections.
Steel
The size of the drawing will affect how sectioned steel 
members are represented. At small scale, steel members 
are generally represented by a solid, thick polyline that 
represents the desired shape. As the scale increases, pairs 
of parallel lines are used to represent sectioned steel 
structural components. Steel trusses are represented 
in a manner similar to wood trusses. Figure 19-13
shows a wall section formed with steel products. See 
Figure 6-22 for common methods of representing steel 
components, and Chapter 9 for a complete description 
of steel products.
Unit Masonry
Methods of representing brick and masonry products in 
section were introduced in Chapters 6 and 10. Masonry 
units in small-scale sections are typically hatched with 
diagonal lines with no attempt to represent individual 
units or cavities. As the scale of the section increases, 
individual units, as well as cavities within the unit, and 
grouting between the units are represented. Individual 
hatch patterns are used to differentiate between the 
masonry unit and the grout. Steel reinforcing can be 
represented by either a hidden or continuous polyline. 
Figure 19-14 shows an example of a wall section, repre-
senting unit masonry and brick veneer. 
Concrete
Chapters 6 and 11 introduced the use of concrete 
and methods for representing concrete in section 
views. Thick lines are used to represent the edges 
of poured-in-place or precast concrete members. 
FIGURE 19-12 A partial section of a wood-framed structure. 
Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
435
A hatch pattern consisting of dots and small triangles 
is used to further define the concrete from other 
materials. Figure 19-15 shows an example of a wall 
section for a precast structure. Because of the com-
plexity of concrete construction, the section depends 
on many details to show construction of each con-
crete member. Large-scale sections and details such 
as Figure 19-16 are usually part of the structural 
drawings and show individual cavities, grouting, and 
caulking materials.
FIGURE 19-13 Steel materials seen in section. Courtesy Peck, 
Smiley, Ettlin Architects.
FIGURE 19-14 Unit masonry and brick seen in section. Courtesy 
G. Williamson Archer, A.I.A., Archer & Archer P.A.

436 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 19-15 Precast concrete panels in section with keyed notes. Courtesy H.D.N. Architects, A.I.A.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
437
Glass
A single thin line or pairs of thin lines are used to rep-
resent glass in section drawings. Little attention is given 
to intersections between the glazing and window frames 
in section drawings. Details similar to Figure 19-17 are 
used to describe head, jamb, and sill construction. 
Placing Dimensions on Sections
Dimensions are an important element of full, partial, 
and wall sections. Both vertical and horizontal dimen-
sions may be placed on sections, whereas partial sections 
and details generally show only vertical dimensions. 
Vertical Dimensions
Vertical heights in section views are represented using 
the methods that were introduced in Chapters 3 and 6 
for placing dimensions on details. Figure 19-7 shows 
an example of using standard dimension placement. 
Figures 19-3 and 19-6 show another common method 
of specifying elevations above a specific surface. For 
wood-frame structures, vertical dimensions are gener-
ally given from the bottom of the sole plate to the top of 
the top plate. This dimension also provides the height 
from the top of the floor sheathing to the bottom of 
the framing member used to frame the next level. A 
common alternative is to provide a height from the top 
of the floor sheathing to the top of the next level of floor 
sheathing. Other common vertical exterior dimensions 
include the following:
Steel decking: from the top of decking.
 
●
Steel stud walls: from plate to top of channel.
 
●
Structural steel: to top of steel member.
 
●
Masonry units: to top of unit with distance and 
 
●
number of courses provided.
Concrete slab: from top of slab or panel. 
 
●
FIGURE 19-16 Details drawn by the structural team supple-
ment the sections drawn by the architectural team. Courtesy Van 
Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.
FIGURE 19-17 Glass is shown in details as intersections between 
glazing and other finishing materials are represented. Courtesy 
Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

438 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
The project manager will generally provide exact 
dimensions for inexperienced drafters on a check print. 
Experienced drafters are expected to be able to deter-
mine and specify the required heights using preliminary 
drawings, or similar construction projects.
Once the major shapes of the structure have been 
defined, dimensions should be provided to define open-
ings, floor changes, or protective devices. Openings 
are located by providing a height from the top of the 
floor decking or sheathing to the bottom of the header. 
Changes in floor height and the height of landings are 
dimensioned in a similar manner as changes in height 
between floor levels. Inclined floors can be defined 
using a slope indicator, similar to the method of defin-
ing roof pitch. The slope can also be defined by pro-
viding a vertical dimension to define the total height 
difference between floor levels. Other common interior 
dimensions that should be provided include the height 
of railings, partial walls, balconies, planters, and decora-
tive screens. When possible, interior dimensions should 
be grouped together.
Horizontal Dimensions
The use of horizontal dimensions on full sections varies 
greatly depending on each office. When provided, hori-
zontal dimensions should be placed so that:
They are located from grid lines to the desired 
 
●
member.
Exterior wood and concrete members are referenced 
 
●
to their edge. 
Interior wood members are referenced to a centerline. 
 
●
Interior concrete members are referenced to an edge.
 
●
Steel members are referenced to their centers. 
 
●
The distance for roof overhangs and balcony projec-
tions may also be placed on sections. Figure 19-3 shows 
the use of horizontal dimensions on a full section.
Drawing Symbols
Sections use symbols that match those of the floor, 
roof, and elevation drawings to reference material. 
Symbols that might be found on the section include the
following:
Grid markers.
 
●
Elevation markers.
 
●
Section markers.
 
●
Detail markers.
 
●
Room names and numbers. 
 
●
As the skills for drawing details were introduced 
in Chapter 6, examples of each symbol were given. 
Visuals of each symbol can be seen in the examples 
placed throughout this chapter as well. Each section 
is referenced to other drawings by a section marker, 
which defines the page the section is drawn on, and 
which section is being viewed. A reference such as 1 
over A–500 would indicate that the section is drawing 
number 1 on page A–500. The smaller the scale used 
to draw the section, the more likely section and detail 
markers are used to reference other drawings to the 
section. Detail markers are especially prevalent on sec-
tions to provide enlarged views of intersections.
Drawing Notations
Lettering on each type of section is used to specify 
material and explain special insulation procedures. As 
with other drawings, notes may be either placed as local 
or keyed notes. Most offices use local notes with a leader 
line that connects the note to the material.
Local notes should be aligned to be parallel to the 
section to aid the print reader. On full sections, notes 
need to be placed neatly throughout the entire draw-
ing. Wherever possible, notes should be placed on the 
exterior of the building. For wall sections, aligned notes 
can greatly add to drawing neatness. The smaller the 
scale, the more generic the notes tend to be on a sec-
tion. For instance, on a full section, roofing that might 
be specified as:
MEMB. ROOFING SYSTEM OVER RIGID 
INSUL. OVER PLYWD. SHTG.
would be referenced by complete notes for the roofing, 
insulation, and plywood in the roofing details. Related 
notes should be grouped together within the same area 
of a section. The contents of notes will also be affected 
by the project manual, which is discussed in Chapter 14. 
As with other types of drawings mentioned in previous 
chapters, the Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) 
MasterFormat reference number can be used on a section 
to reference products. The roofing membrane specified 
in the note above would resemble:
ROOFING MEMBRANE – 07 52 19
The rigid insulation and plywood sheathing speci-
fied in the note above would require additional similar 
notations.
Blocks
Software such as AutoCAD Revit or AutoCAD Architec-
ture can be a great aid in developing sections from 
information provided as the floor plan was created. 
With these programs, sections are generated automati-
cally from plan views using the same colors, layers, and 
linetypes of the plan views. The software, based on the 

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
439
material selected, automatically assigns hatch patterns. 
Annotation can also be assigned based on common 
assemblies created using CSI guidelines. If a section is to 
be created using AutoCAD, careful planning can greatly 
reduce the CAD technician’s job as sections are pre-
pared. By planning and sketching the required sections, 
repetitive features can be drawn once and copied to 
other sections. Because of the similarities of many struc-
tures, common intersections can be drawn and stored as 
a wblock. These wblocks can be inserted into a drawing 
with all required notations, symbols, and dimensions, 
greatly reducing drawing time. Assembling and con-
necting drawing blocks can be an efficient method of 
creating a section, rather than drawing the section line 
by line. Figure 19-18 shows an example of a footing 
and roof detail for a concrete block structure. These 
details can be inserted into a drawing base and moved 
the proper distance to reflect the distance from floor 
to roofing as seen in Figure 19-19. Once a wall section 
has been created, the MIRROR command can be used 
to create the opposite wall, which can then be moved 
the appropriate distance to represent the total width 
of the building. Blocks of details showing a truss to a 
laminated beam and a column to footing were inserted 
at the center and connected to each other. The section 
can then be completed by stretching the slab from one 
detail to another, and by drawing the truss. The com-
pleted section, shown in Figure 19-20, required very 
little actual drawing because of the use of wblocks. For 
students, access to block libraries is limited. For that 
reason, the following explanation of drawing sections 
will assume no use of blocks.
COMPLETING A SECTION 
A CAD technician will need a floor plan, foundation 
plan, grading plan, roof plan, exterior elevations, and 
preliminary sections to complete the building sections. 
For relatively flat lots or if spot grades are indicated on 
the elevations, the grading plan is not required.
 1.  Place a cutting plane on the floor plan to determine 
the view to be created. The following guidelines 
will be used to draw section A/A-7 for the structure 
represented in Figures 16-3 and 16-11.
 2.  Create a separate block of the floor plan, which can be 
used to project the section. Do not use the floor plan.
 3.  Establish horizontal lines to represent the finished 
floor, ceiling, and roof levels. 
 4.  Project lines representing each wall cut by the cut-
ting plane from the floor plan into the drawing area.
 5.  Project lines to represent each column and beam 
cut by the cutting plane from the floor plan into the 
drawing area. 
 6.  Using the foundation and grading plans, establish 
the foundation locations. 
 7.  Establish a line to represent the finish grade location.
 8.  Using elevations on the roof or exterior elevations, 
establish the height of all exterior walls.
FIGURE 19-18 Stock details such as these footing and truss 
details can be joined together to form a partial wall section. 

440 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
The projection of the section should now resemble 
Figure 19-21. The section can be completed using the 
following steps:
 9.  Trim all projection lines to form the outline of the 
section. 
10.  Use the elevations on the roof plan to establish the 
pitch of the trusses. 
11.  Use vendor catalogs to determine the depth of the 
trusses, and draw the roof trusses. 
12.  Draw the finished roofing system above the trusses. 
13.  Draw all beams and ledgers required to support the 
trusses. 
Figure 19-22 shows the development of the section. 
Once the base of the section is complete, detail can now 
be added to the drawing using the following steps:
14.  Draw any required ceilings. 
15.  Show any interior walls. 
16.  Show any false ceilings. 
17.  Show all material used to complete the roof and 
floor systems. 
The entire section cut by the cutting plane has now 
been drawn and should resemble Figure 19-23. The 
following steps can be used to complete the drawing:
18.  Show materials that lie beyond the cutting plane. 
19.  Provide grid lines and specifications.
20.  Provide horizontal reference lines and elevations. 
21.  Show detail markers for areas to be enlarged. 
Although detail specifications are provided in this 
example, they can’t usually be provided until the 
entire drawing is drawn.
22.  Show all room names and numbers. 
23.  Place all required notes based on the architect’s 
specifications. 
24.  Place a title and scale below the drawing. 
The completed section should now resemble 
Figure 19-5.
Layer Guidelines for Sections and Details
Separation of material by layer and color can greatly aid 
in the development of a section. A prefix of A-SECT is 
recommended by the NCS guidelines. Modifiers can be 
used to define materials. Many firms divide modifiers 
by materials such as CONC, CBLK, BRK, STL, WD, or 
PTWD. See Chapter 3 for layer naming guidelines and 
Appendix C on the student CD for a list of common 
layer names used on sections.
FIGURE 19-19 A wall section completed by joining stock 
details.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
441
FIGURE 19-20 Full sections can be created by combining blocks and partial sections. 

442 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
ADDITIONAL READING
Links for the materials represented on sections are 
too numerous to list here. Rather than listing indi-
vidual sites, use your favorite search engine to research 
products from the following CSI categories: founda-
tions, footers, and slabs; structural systems and com-
ponents; sheathing; exterior trim and finish; roofing; 
windows; doors; insulation; flooring; floor coverings; 
and interior trims and finishes.
FIGURE 19-21 Initial layout steps for projecting a section from a wblock of the floor plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
443
FIGURE 19-22 The addition of materials that lie beyond the cutting plane. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 19-23 Drawing the major shapes of the structure and projection of all ceilings and detailing of each floor and opening. 
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
KEY TERMS
Partial section
Transverse section

444 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Drawing Sections
CHAPTER 19 TEST
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. 
Question 19-1 What drawings might be required to draw a 
full section?
Question 19-2 Explain the difference between a full and a 
wall section.
Question 19-3 List two types of full sections and explain the 
differences.
Question 19-4 What relates the section to the floor plan?
Question 19-5 Briefly describe two methods of completing 
a section.
Question 19-6 List guidelines for selecting the scale for a 
section, wall section, and a detail.
Question 19-7 Describe two common methods of describing 
vertical heights.
Question 19-8 List common symbols associated with 
sections.
Question 19-9 Explain variations in notes between a section 
and a detail.
Question 19-10 Explain the various roles a drafter will play 
in the development of sections.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the reference material from preceding chapters, local 
codes, and vendor catalogs to complete one of the fol-
lowing projects. Unless your instructor provides other 
instructions, draw the sections that correspond to the 
floor plan that was drawn in Chapter 16. Skeletons for 
problems 19-1 through 19-4 can be accessed from the 
student CD in the DRAWING PROJECTS  /CHAPTER 19
folder. Use these drawings as a base to complete the 
assignment. Use appropriate symbols, linetypes, dimen-
sioning methods, and notations to complete the draw-
ing. Determine any unspecified sizes based on material 
or practical requirements. Unless specified, select a scale 
appropriate to plotting on D-size material and deter-
mine LTSCALE and DIMVARS.
You will act as the project manager and will be 
required to make decisions about how to complete the 
project. By now you’re far enough into this structure 
to realize that no one drawing problem contains all 
of the information needed to complete the problem. 
Chapters 15, 16, 17, 18, 22, and 24 have informa-
tion that will be required to complete the problems 
provided in this chapter. Study each of the drawing 
problems related to the structure prior to starting a 
drawing problem. Any information not provided must 
be researched and determined by you unless your 
instructor (the project architect and engineer) pro-
vides other instructions. When conflicting informa-
tion is found, information from preceding chapters 
should take precedence. Use the Web site for Simpson 
Strong-Tie for all metal connectors, and use trusses 
based on the framing plan and information on the 
Weyerhaeuser Web site.
Although most of the information required to com-
plete the sections can be found by searching other 
related problems, some of the drawings will require 
you to make a decision on how you would solve a 
particular problem. Make several sketches of possible 
solutions based on examples found throughout this text 
and submit them to your instructor prior to completing 
each drawing with missing information.
Use the floor plans provided in Chapter 16 to com-
plete the following sections. Decide on an appropriate 
scale to complete the drawing. Refer to the details in 
Chapter 23 for information that may be helpful in com-
pleting the sections.
Place the necessary cutting plane and detail bubbles 
on the floor plan to indicate each drawing.
Note: Keep in mind as you complete these drawings 
that the finished drawing set may contain more sec-
tions and in some cases hundreds of more details 
than you are being asked to draw. Some of the 
required details will be introduced in later chapters. 
Other details that would be required for the build-
ing department or the construction crew will not be 
drawn due to the limitations of space and time.
Problem 19-1 Using the floor plan drawn in problem 16-1, 
complete the following drawings:
● A section cutting through each unit, showing the 
elevation change for each floor level at a scale of 
1/4" = 1'–0". 
● A wall section of a party wall at a scale of 
1/2" = 1'–0". 
● A detail of each retaining wall at a scale of 
3/4" = 1'–0".

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
445
Minimum Project Standards
Your completed drawings should meet or exceed the 
following minimum standards unless noted:
● Dimension each major material and provide unit 
dimensions, floor-to-floor heights, and elevations.
● Use the partial section and details to completely spec-
ify required materials.
● The lower level of each unit is to have a 4" concrete 
slab and 8'–0" high walls; the main and upper floors 
are to have 9'–0" ceilings.
● Frame the roof using standard roof trusses. Use stan-
dard/scissor trusses to provide a vaulted ceiling over 
the master bedroom.
● Use 2 × 6 studs at 16" o.c. for exterior walls and 2 × 
4 studs at 16" o.c. for interior walls.
● Use Figure 19-11 as a guide, and design a fire wall 
that reflects the change in elevation for each unit 
based on local codes for your area. Use solid blocking 
in the upper wall of the party wall opposite the top 
plate for the lower wall.
● Select and specify TJIs or open-web trusses suitable to 
span from party wall to party wall.
● Support the exterior wall at the upper end of the proj-
ect on an 8" wide × 8' high concrete retaining wall 
supported on a 12" × 16" wide footing. Reinforce the 
wall with #5 bars at 18" o.c. E.W. steel to be 2" clear 
of interior side of wall.

446 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 19-2a Use the floor plan created for Problem 16-2, 
the drawing above, and Figure 19-20 as a guide to draw 
a full section of the structure at a scale of 3/8" = 1'–0". 
Run the cutting plane north/south through the cantile-
vered roof and the storefront glass of the display area. 
Reference and draw the indicated details. Specify the fol-
lowing heights: 
Top of storefront glass 8'–0" 
Suspended ceiling 9'–6" 
Top of 2 × 6 stud wall 11'–0" 
Top of ledger at north wall 12'–0" 
Top of masonry wall 16'–0" minimum
Minimum Project Standards
Your completed drawings should meet or exceed the 
following minimum standards unless noted:
● Block walls to be 8 × 8 × 16 grade A concrete 
blocks with #5 vertical at 36" o.c. and #5 at 
24" o.c. horizontally.
● Provide (2)-#5 bond beams at 48" o.c. Use (4)-#5 at 
top of wall. Solid grout all steel cells.
● Support walls as per the foundation drawings in 
Chapter 24. 
● Use (2)-#5 rebars in an 8" × 8" bond beam at ledger 
height. 
❍ Provide (2)-#5 continuous rebar in the footing 2" 
clear of the bottom and extend a #5 × 36" L from 
the footing to the wall with a 6" toe. 
❍ Space footing steel to match the wall steel.
● Provide a slab as per foundation plan.
● Use an 8 3/4" × 28 1/2" glu-lam for the ridge. 
Determine the location of the ridge based on the loca-
tion of the steel column and pilaster on the floor plan. 
● Although the location of the pilaster must remain 
modular, the centerline of the beam should be placed 
at an even number of feet from each wall if possible. 
Edit the dimensions on the floor plan as required.
● See the roof framing plan to determine the required 
truss size and spacing.
● Support the roof trusses on 3 × 12 DFPT ledger with 
3/4" diameter A.B. at 24" o.c. staggered 3" up/down 
with 2" diameter washers. Use (4)-#5 rebars in 8 × 16 
bond beam at ledger height. Provide a 3 × 12 DFPT 
ledger for the walls parallel to the trusses. Attach to 
the wall with 5/8" diameter × 10" A.B. at 36" o.c. 
staggered 3" up/down with 2" diameter washers.
❍ Use 3 × 4 blocking between trusses with an appro-
priate “A” clip from block to ledger. 
❍ Use an MST strap capable of resisting 2700# of 
tension stress. Place the strap over the top chord of 
trusses at 8'–0" o.c. 
● Weld the strap to a 3" × 4" × 1/4" steel plate with 
1/8" fillet weld topside only. Weld (2)-3/4" × 6" studs 
to the backside of the plate and weld with 1/8" fillet 
welds all around. 
● Use 4× ripped cant strip to support 26 gauge flashing 
at all wall/roof intersections. Use the following draw-
ings to complete the following details.
Use the materials specified in the minimum stan-
dards, and the materials specified in Chapters 22 and 23 
to complete this drawing.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
447
Problem 19-2b Draw and label an enlarged wall section 
(bearing wall) showing the roof/wall intersection and 
wall construction. See Chapters 22 and 23 for addi-
tional information that may be required to complete 
this drawing.
Problems 19-3a through 19-3d Use the floor plan from 
problem 16-3 to complete the required drawings. Use 
the parameters outlined below and on the drawings 
that follow to complete the required sections. Use 
the framing plans in Chapter 22 to determine all 
beam sizes. 
Minimum Project Standards
Your completed sections should meet or exceed the fol-
lowing minimum standards unless noted:
● Roofing to be 4-ply built-up asphaltic fiberglass 
class A roofing over 5/8" 42/20 interior APA 
plywood with exterior glue roof sheathing 
laid perpendicular to purlins. Stagger the 
sheathing seams at each purlin. Nail with 10d 
common nails @ 4" o.c. at all panel edges and 
blocked areas, @ 6" o.c. at all supported panel 
edges @ unblocked areas, and at 12" o.c. at all 
intermediate supports. 
❍ Use MST 27 straps at 8'–0" o.c. to tie the trusses to 
the wall ledger.
● Walls to be 8" × 8" × 16" grade A concrete blocks 
reinforced with #5 verticals at 32" o.c. and #5 hori-
zontal @ 24" o.c. with (2)-#5 @ 48" o.c. 
❍ Provide 8" × 16" bond beam with (4)-#5 at each 
roof and floor ledger, at midpoints between floor, 
and at top of all walls.
❍ Provide an 8" × 16" bond beam over openings in 
the walls up to 10' wide and support with (4)-#5 
horizontal bars with #3 ties @ 24" o.c. Provide an 
8" × 24" bond beam over openings in the walls 
greater than 10' wide and support with (6)-#5 hori-
zontal bars with #3 ties at 24" o.c. 
● Support the walls of the office and warehouse as per 
the specifications in Chapter 24. All footings to extend 
18" into natural grade.
● Provide a 4" thick slab for the office area and a 5" 
thick slab in the warehouse.

448 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 19-3a Use the architectural and structural drawings 
in Chapter 16 through 24 to complete the required sec-
tion through the office area.
Problem 19-3b Use attached drawings and the balance 
of the architectural and structural drawings to complete 
the required section through the warehouse and mezza-
nine area.
Problem 19-3c Use the drawings provided for problem 
19-3b and the balance of the architectural and structural 
drawings to complete the required section through the 
warehouse with no mezzanine.
Problem 19-3d Use the architectural and structural 
drawings to complete the required longitudinal 
section through the office, warehouse, and 
mezzanine.
Problems 19-4a through 19-4d Use the floor plan 
from problem 16-4 along with the following 
drawings to complete the required sections. Use 
the framing plans in Chapter 22 to determine all 
beam sizes. 
Minimum Project Standards
Your completed sections should meet or exceed the fol-
lowing minimum standards unless noted:
● Roofing to be 4-ply built-up asphaltic fiberglass class 
A roofing over 5/8" 42/20 interior APA plywood with
exterior glue roof sheathing laid perpendicular to
 trusses. Stagger seams at each truss. Nail with 10d
common nails at 4" o.c. at all panel edges and blocked
areas, at 6" o.c. at all supported panel edges at unblocked 
areas and at 12" o.c. at all intermediate supports. 
❍ Use MST 27 straps @ 8'–0" o.c. to tie the trusses to 
the wall ledger, and to tie the blocking (nonbearing 
walls at diaphragm) to ledger. Align straps at ridge 
with wall straps (see framing plans).
● All concrete walls are to be 6" thick with steel rein-
forcement as per the panel elevations in Chapter 23. 
Use trusses based on the sketches provided with the 
framing plans.
● Provide a concrete slab for the office and warehouse 
areas based on the foundation drawings.

Chapter 19: Drawing Sections 
449
Problem 19-4a Use the balance of the architectural and 
structural drawings to complete the required section 
through the office area.
Problem 19-4b Use the attached drawing and the balance of 
the architectural and structural drawings to complete the 
required partial section through the warehouse and mez-
zanine area.
Problem 19-4c Use the drawings provided for problem 
22-4b and the balance of the architectural and structural 
drawings to complete the required partial section through 
the warehouse with no mezzanine.
Problem 19-4d Use the architectural and structural draw-
ings to complete a longitudinal section through the 
office, warehouse, and mezzanine.

450
20
Interior Elevations
Interior elevations are drawn to show the shape and 
finishes of the interior of a structure in a similar method 
that was used to draw the exterior elevations. Interior 
elevations similar to Figure 20-1 are drawn whenever 
a wall has features that are built into the wall. The 
complexity of the structure and office practice affect 
the method used to present materials in elevation. This 
chapter will explore:
The placement of interior elevations within the 
 
●
drawing set. 
Types of interior drawings.
 
●
Minimum drawing content.
 
●
The drawing sequence for interior elevations.
 
●
ELEVATIONS WITHIN 
THE DRAWING SET
Except for a few features that are critical to the design of 
a structure, interior elevations are generally not a part of 
the preliminary elevations. Features such as an elaborate 
fireplace or intricate entry that is related to the design 
would be included in the preliminary design. Interior 
elevations are usually drawn after all other architectural 
drawings have been started. The floor plan, exterior 
elevations, and sections do not have to be complete 
before the interior elevations are started, but the basic 
arrangement of materials must be fairly well-established 
before the interior elevations can be started. Once basic 
shapes have been defined and the architectural team is 
progressing with the working drawings, the design team 
can now plan the arrangements of interior features by 
making preliminary drawings. Once approved by the 
client, these drawings can be completed by the CAD 
technician.
Referencing Interior Elevations
Interior elevations are based on the position of mate-
rials that are shown on the floor plan. Elevations are 
referenced to the floor plan by the use of a title or a 
symbol. Titles such as North Lobby Elevation can be 
used to reference an elevation to a floor plan if only a 
few elevations need to be drawn. An elevation symbol 
should be placed on the floor plan where any possibil-
ity of confusion exists. Figure 20-2 shows an example 
of an elevation symbol represented on a floor plan 
and Figure 20-3 shows the corresponding elevation. 
Although interior elevations are referenced to the 
floor plan, their location in the architectural drawings 
will vary greatly. Interior elevations can be placed on 
a sheet containing any other architectural drawing, as 
space allows. Every effort should be made to keep all 
interior elevations on the same sheet. Because they are 
referenced to the floor plan and they are similar to the 
exterior elevations, interior elevations for a very simple 
project are often placed on one of these drawings. For 
projects such as a commercial kitchen, or other rooms 
with multiple interior features, a separate sheet is 
required to show the interior elevations. Sheets of inte-
rior elevations are often placed immediately behind 
the exterior elevations (the 200 numbered sheets) or 
with the enlarged drawings (the 400 numbered sheets) 
in the drawing set. Regardless of where they are placed 
within the drawings, the location of interior elevations, 
like other drawings, should be clearly indicated in the 
table of contents, which is contained on the title page. 
See Chapter 2 for a review of title pages and drawing 
placement.
Drawing Projection
Interior elevations are similar to the exterior eleva-
tions in that they are drawn using orthographic projec-
tions based on a viewing plane. In theory, a viewing 
plane is placed on the floor plan parallel to each wall 
containing material that must be explained. Objects 
are then projected onto the plane to create a two-
dimensional view of the wall. The location of the 
viewing plane is indicated on the floor plan by using 
the reference symbol. Objects parallel to the viewing 
plane are projected to the viewing plane just as with 
exterior elevations. In drawing the interior elevations, 
in addition to using the floor plan to determine the 
shape, the sections can be used to determine interior 

Chapter 20: Interior Elevations 
451
heights. Base cabinets are often 36" (900 mm) high, 
with upper cabinets typically placed 18", 24", or 30" 
(450, 600, or 750 mm) above the lower counters. 
Because cabinet placement and sizes are so dependent 
on the equipment that will be installed in the cabi-
nets, the drafter should rely on vendor catalogs and 
drawing standards such as Time Saver Standards and 
Architectural Graphic Standards.
TYPES OF ELEVATIONS
The material shown in an interior elevation will vary 
depending on the complexity of the structure. Generally, 
elevations can be grouped into the categories of wall 
elevations and cabinet elevations.
Wall Elevations
Wall elevations can show an entire wall or a partial wall. 
All materials that are built into or mounted on the wall 
should be shown. This includes showing special finishes 
as well as items such as automated teller machines, fire 
extinguishers, drinking fountains, and phone stalls, 
similar to the elevation shown in Figure 20-4. The 
elevation becomes a source to reference details simi-
lar to those shown in Figure 20-5, which can be used 
to explain construction of the enclosures as well as 
mounting of equipment. Wall elevations are also used 
for defining the limits of interior finishes. Figure 20-6 
shows an example of the lobby of a two-story structure 
and the various materials used to cover the structural 
frame.
Cabinet Elevations
Perhaps the most common use of interior elevations is 
to show the cabinets, appliances, grab bars, and plumb-
ing fixtures used in bathrooms and kitchens. Nearly 
every structure drawn contains at least one bathroom 
FIGURE 20-1 Interior elevations are drawn whenever a 
wall has features that must be built or installed as part of 
the construction contract. Courtesy Ned Peck, Peck, Smiley, Ettlin 
Architects.
ELEVATION
REFERENCE
SYMBOLS
FIGURE 20-2 Elevation reference symbols should be placed 
to define the elevations to be drawn and their location. Courtesy 
Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 20-3 The elevation referenced to the floor plan shown 
in Figure 20-2. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

452 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
that requires elevations. Figure 20-7 shows the eleva-
tion for a simple washroom and standard details that 
accompany the elevation to ensure minimum allow-
ances to meet both the model code and Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. Figure 20-8 shows 
the elevation of each wall of the bathroom shown in 
Figure 16-24.
For multifamily occupancies, a CAD technician 
working with the architectural team draws an eleva-
tion of each wall showing kitchen and bathroom 
cabinets and fixtures. Drawings must show each 
fixture and all door and drawer locations of the 
adjoining cabinets. Figure 20-9 shows the bath and 
kitchen elevations for a unit in a multilevel apartment 
FIGURE 20-5 Interior elevations created using orthographic and isometric drawing methods are used to show construction of 
specialized cabinets. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns Architects, P.C.
FIGURE 20-4 An interior elevation is used to show the location of all special equipment. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns Architects, P.C.

Chapter 20: Interior Elevations 
453
complex. Elevations for each unit are provided. When 
a cooking area is used to serve the public, the supplier 
of the kitchen equipment generally develops the eleva-
tions for the kitchen equipment. Figure 20-10 shows 
the floor plan developed for a commercial kitchen. In 
addition to the cabinet drawings, many plans include 
drawings that show specialty equipment to be used in 
the kitchen. CAD drafters working for a consulting 
firm specializing in interior fixtures draw these draw-
ings. Several of the specialty drawings can be found in 
Chapter 2. Figure 20-11 shows the interior elevations 
for this kitchen. Generally, drawings for specialty 
equipment are placed separate from the interior draw-
ings and are placed in a section of the drawings titled 
Food Service (FS). The location of these drawings is 
listed in the table of contents.
FIGURE 20-6 Interior elevations are used to define the limits of interior finishes. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.
FIGURE 20-7 Elevations are used to ensure that all minimum standards of the building code and the ADA are met. Courtesy DiLoreto 
Architects, LLC.

454 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 20-8 Because of the large amount of fixtures, equipment, and special finishes, an elevation for a bathroom can become 
quite complex. The corresponding floor plan for this elevation can be seen in Figure 16-24. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 20-9 The elevations for a multifamily complex will often resemble the elevations drawn for a single-family residence. Courtesy 
H.D.N. Architects, A.I.A.

Chapter 20: Interior Elevations 
455
Cabinet Sections 
A third type of interior drawing that may be provided 
is an interior section. An interior section is used to 
show construction methods and materials of interior 
built-ins. Cabinet sections should be provided when 
the built-in is fabricated at the job site. When cabinets 
are built off-site, the cabinet supplier often develops 
the drawings required for cabinet construction, and 
submits them to the architectural team for approval. 
When required, the drafter must be careful to clearly 
define each material that will be used. Figure 20-12 
shows a cabinet section and common methods of 
representing thin materials.
MINIMUM DRAWING CONTENTS 
No matter the type of interior drawings that are pro-
vided, several basic types of information should be 
provided. Based on the National CAD Standards (NCS), 
minimum drawing contents include:
Access panels for all features specified on the electri-
 
●
cal or mechanical plans.
Changes in wall materials. If more than one material 
 
●
is to be placed on a wall, the extent of the material 
should be drawn and dimensioned.
Dimensions—all vertical specifications, and any 
 
●
horizontal dimensions that are not represented on 
plan views.
FIGURE 20-10 The kitchen for a commercial complex is far more detailed than that of a multifamily project and requires additional 
drawings from subcontractors. The corresponding floor plan for this kitchen can be seen in Figure 2-5. Use the grids to help coordi-
nate the two plan views. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns Architects, P.C.

456 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 20-11 The kitchen specialty drawings specified on the plan in Figure 20-10 include elevations showing the installation of all 
equipment. Courtesy Halliday Associates.

Chapter 20: Interior Elevations 
457
Door heights and locations.
 
●
Grid lines.
 
●
Large pipe and duct penetrations.
 
●
Mounting heights and locations of all equipment and 
 
●
fixtures.
Outlets such as data, power, telephone, and other 
 
●
miscellaneous outlets that will affect casework, 
equipment, or placement of other key interior 
features.
Coordination of each interior drawing with interior 
 
●
and equipment drawings.
Choosing a Drawing Scale 
The complexity of the materials to be drawn determines 
the scale used to complete the cabinet elevations and 
details. A scale of 1/4" = 1'–0" (1:50) is often used for 
elevations, but both smaller and larger scales can be 
found on professional examples. In choosing the draw-
ing scale, the technician must be able to show sufficient 
detail to meet the demands of the drawings. If the draw-
ings are to be used to represent premanufactured mate-
rials, a drawing using a small scale showing little detail 
can be used. If the drawings are used to construct the 
item, a scale sufficient to show all detail must be used. 
Scales for construction elevations are often drawn at a 
scale of 3/4" or 1/2" = 1'–0" (1:20). Details are usually 
drawn at a scale of 1" = 1'–0" or larger (1:10).
Material Representation
The symbols that are used to represent materials in sec-
tions and details are also used to represent material drawn 
in cabinet details. Continuous lines represent materials 
that are represented in elevation, with varied thickness. 
Thick lines usually represent the floor, walls, and ceiling, 
which define the view to be seen. On L-shaped cabinets, 
the line that represents the drawing limits will follow the 
contour of the cabinets when a cabinet is shown in end 
view. Figure 20-13 shows the outline of a room with 
FIGURE 20-12 Cabinet sections are used to show the con-
struction of specialty equipment. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, 
Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 20-13 Common components used in interior eleva-
tions, such as appliances, can be stored as blocks and inserted 
into drawings as needed. Courtesy H.D.N. Architects, A.I.A.

458 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
L-shaped cabinets. Common features represented in the 
elevations, such as the range, dishwasher, and refrigera-
tor, are usually inserted as blocks.
Cabinetry
The outline of cabinets and the lines representing 
doors, drawers, and exposed shelves are thin, continu-
ous lines. A single thin, dashed line is used to represent 
shelves that are hidden behind doors. On larger scale 
drawings, pairs of continuous lines are used to repre-
sent shelves. Knobs and handles can be represented by 
a short, thick line or a circle, to show the approximate 
style of hardware. Hinges are not usually shown, but 
door swings are represented by continuous or dashed 
lines in the shape of a V, drawn through the door. The 
point of the V represents the hinged side of the door. 
Figure 20-13 shows an elevation of cabinets with door 
swings represented. 
When drawn in section, doors, drawers, and hard-
ware can be represented as shown in Figure 20-12. The 
location of partitions for public toilet stalls should be 
represented on the elevations. Thin continuous lines 
can be used to represent walls that are perpendicular 
to the viewing plane. Doors can be omitted to show the 
location of toilets, or they can be represented by thin 
dashed lines to show the direction of swing. Figure 20-8 
shows the location of premanufactured toilet partitions.
Plumbing Fixtures
Because of the repetitive nature of elevations, plumbing 
symbols should be represented by user or third-party 
blocks. Cabinet-mounted lavatories and sinks can be 
represented by hidden or continuous lines to define 
the outline of the unit. Fixtures built into a counter 
can be drawn using the same methods as for a cabinet-
mounted unit. Wall-mounted and pedestal lavatories 
are drawn using thin continuous lines to represent the 
outline and some detailing of the unit. Figures 20-7, 
20-8, 20-9, and 20-13 show examples of sinks and 
lavatories in elevation. Figure 20-14 shows a detail of a 
counter-mounted sink.
Thin lines are used to represent water closets and 
urinals, showing the basic components of the fixture. 
Blocks should be developed to show both a front and 
side view of each unit. Figure 20-15 shows common 
methods of representing water closets and urinals. A 
thin continuous line should be used to represent the 
outlines of tubs and showers, with the interior shape rep-
resented by dashed lines. When the unit is perpendicular 
to the viewing plane, both the outline and the interior 
shape are shown with continuous lines. Figure 20-9 
shows examples of tubs. The drawings should show the 
location of all grab bars near each unit.
FIGURE 20-14 Details are often required to show how cabi-
nets will be constructed and how fixtures will be installed. 
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
BIDET
TOILET
WALL MOUNTED
TOILET
URINALS
FLOOR MOUNTED
TOILET
FIGURE 20-15 Plumbing fixtures common to architectural 
drawings. Courtesy Berol Rapidesign.

Chapter 20: Interior Elevations 
459
Appliances
Kitchen appliances are represented by a box that 
outlines the shape or by a detailed representation. 
The detailed representation should not be drawn to 
represent an exact model, but a generic representa-
tion. Figures 20-9 and 20-13 show cabinet elevations 
with a stove and a refrigerator. These appliances can be 
easily recognized but are not of a specific unit. In creat-
ing blocks, show doors or drawers that open and the 
general location of control features, but avoid spending 
time adding features that do not aid in installation.
Special Equipment
The occupancy of the structure dictates what equip-
ment is required. Equipment for fire protection, drinking 
fountains, telephone stalls, mirrors, paper towel dispens-
ers, access ladders, and building directories should all 
be represented on the elevations. Vendor specification 
can be an excellent source for obtaining information for 
drawing the needed feature. Many equipment suppliers 
will provide disk copies of their products, similar to the 
blocks shown in Figure 20-16.
Drawing Notations
The materials represented in elevation require both 
written and dimensional clarification. Notations must 
be added to each elevation to clearly define objects that 
have been drawn. As with sections, the larger the draw-
ing scale, the more detailed the specifications should 
be. Information to be specified on the elevation is pro-
vided by the architect’s preliminary drawings and check 
prints, and by consultation with Time Saver Standards 
or Architectural Graphics Standards. Vendor specifica-
tions should also be consulted to determine complete 
specifications. In addition to notations specifying each 
material, many cabinet elevations contain complete 
specifications to provide instructions for mounting and 
installation of each material to be used.
Vertical dimensions should be provided to locate 
the limits of all counter heights, cabinets, special 
equipment, and soffits that are not specified on the sec-
tions. Horizontal dimensions are used to locate special 
equipment from grid lines. Horizontal dimensions are 
also used to locate divisions in cabinets as shown in 
Figure 20-17. Cabinets and specialty items are generally 
referenced to a grid line or to a wall that is referenced 
to a grid. Although no numbers have been given for the 
dimensions shown in Figure 20-17, the cabinetmaker 
will determine the exact size required to make four 
equally spaced units, based on the finished dimen-
sions of the construction site. When the architect does 
not specify dimensions in the preliminary drawings, 
FIGURE 20-16 Special equipment is often supplied by vendors 
or in libraries available from third-party suppliers. Courtesy Berol 
Rapidesign.
FIGURE 20-17 Vertical dimensions must be supplied for all 
material or equipment that will be installed. Horizontal dimen-
sions can be omitted if they have been placed on a plan view. 
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

460 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
the CAD drafter should provide dimensions based on 
common practice, building and ADA codes, and sup-
plier recommendations.
DRAWING SEQUENCE
Figure 20-18 shows a portion of the floor plan for 
two rooms from the educational complex shown in 
Figures 16-38 and 16-40. This unit is used for com-
pleting the cabinets for these rooms. Assume that they 
are 36" base cabinets, with the bottom of the upper 
cabinets set at 4'–6" and the top at 7'–0" above the 
floor. Common steps in completing an interior eleva-
tion include:
 1.  Establish a viewing plane on the floor plan to indi-
cate the needed elevations. 
 2.  Use a block of the floor plan to project the outline 
of all walls that enclose the elevations. 
 3.  Establish grid lines on the elevations. 
 4.  Establish a line to represent the finish floor. 
 5.  Use the building sections to determine the heights 
of all ceilings and openings that are parallel to the 
viewing plane. 
 6.  Draw the outline of each cabinet shape. 
The initial layout should resemble Figure 20-19.
 7.  Insert blocks to represent each appliance. 
 8.  Draw doors and shelves in the upper cabinets. 
 9.  Draw doors and swings, drawers, toe kicks, and 
backsplash required for the lower cabinets. 
10.  Draw all equipment such as sinks, breadboards, 
and fixtures. 
11.  Draw all required interior finishes. 
The cabinet elevations should now resemble 
Figure 20-20.
12.  Draw and label each grid line. 
13.  Provide horizontal dimensions to locate cabinets to 
each grid line. 
14.  Place all horizontal dimensions, locating the edge of 
cabinets and door locations. 
15.  Place all vertical dimensions, locating all the heights 
of all cabinets and equipment.
16.  Place notes to specify all materials and equipment. 
17.  Reference any required details. 
18.  Provide titles and drawing scales. 
The completed elevations are shown in Figure 20-21.
Layer Guidelines for Interior Elevations
When cabinet drawings are placed on a separate sheet, 
the drawing file is generally named I-ELEV-####. The 
owner’s name or the job number should be substituted 
FIGURE 20-19 The initial layout of interior elevations.
FIGURE 20-18 The cabinets can be projected from a block of 
the floor plan, or drawn by following the dimensions on the plan.

Chapter 20: Interior Elevations 
461
for ####. Cabinet elevations should be placed on layers 
with a prefix of A-ELEV if they are being placed in 
drawing files that contain other drawings. Modifiers 
such as APPL, CABS, CNTR, EQIP, HDWR, or PLMB 
can be used to describe layers such as appliances, 
cabinets, counters, equipment, hardware, and plumbing 
fixtures. Cabinets that are placed in their own .dwg file 
can have a wider variety of file names. Many profes-
sional firms label interior elevations based on linetype 
or usage. Layer titles such as FINE, HEAVY, and LIGHT 
can be used to define linetypes. Titles such as BORDER, 
TEXT, and DIMEN can be used to describe both the 
drawing contents and general drawing information. 
Suggested layer names based on NCS can be found on 
the student CD in Appendix C. 
ADDITIONAL READING
Links for the materials represented on the interior 
elevations are too numerous to list here. Rather than 
listing individual sites, use your favorite search engine 
to research products from the following Construction 
Specifications Institute (CSI) categories: interior finish 
and trim, paints and coatings, caulks and adhesives, 
plumbing, lighting, electrical, appliances, furniture, and 
furnishings.
FIGURE 20-20 Layout of the major cabinet components.
FIGURE 20-21 The completed elevations for kitchen cabinets.

462 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. 
Question 20-1 What drawings are required to draw the inte-
rior elevations?
Question 20-2 Describe placement of the interior elevations 
within the drawing set.
Question 20-3 List three common sources for cabinet 
and equipment specifications required for cabinet 
drawings.
Question 20-4 Describe two methods of referencing cabinet 
drawings to other drawings.
Question 20-5 Describe the selection of scales for cabinet 
drawings.
Question 20-6 To what are horizontal dimensions on cabi-
net elevations referenced?
Question 20-7 What is the common height of a base and 
upper cabinet?
Question 20-8 What is the goal of a cabinet section?
Question 20-9 List two methods of showing the direction of 
door swings.
Question 20-10 List three types of interior drawings.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the reference material from preceding chapters 
and vendor catalogs to complete one of the follow-
ing projects. Unless your instructor provides other 
instructions, draw the elevations that correspond to 
the floor plan that was drawn in Chapter 16. Because 
of the wide range of design latitude within each prob-
lem, no skeletons for the problems are provided on 
the student CD. You will act as the project manager 
and will be required to make decisions about how 
to complete the project. Study each of the drawing 
problems related to the structure prior to starting a 
drawing problem. Any information not provided must 
be researched and determined by you unless your 
instructor (the project architect and engineer) pro-
vides other instructions. Develop the base drawing to 
complete the assignment using the following mini-
mum criteria:
● Use appropriate symbols, linetypes, dimensioning 
methods, and notations to complete the drawing. 
● Determine any unspecified sizes based on material or 
practical requirements. 
● Unless specified, select a scale appropriate to plot-
ting on D-size material and determine LTSCALE and 
DIMVARS. 
● Place the necessary viewing plane symbols on the 
floor plan to indicate each drawing.
● Use a 3" toe space unless noted.
Problem 20-1a Use the floor plan from problem 16-1 to 
draw the elevations for the kitchen. Use the following 
guidelines to complete the drawings:
● Drop the ceiling to 8'–0" high in the kitchen and indi-
cate the limits of the lowered ceiling on the floor plan.
● Draw the base cabinets with a 36" high ceramic tile 
counter with a full splash.
● Draw the bar behind the sink as 42" high and expand 
the width to 15" wide.
● Provide 18" clearance between the countertop and the 
upper cabinets.
● Amend the floor plan to show the upper cabinets to 
be over the stove and provide a range hood with 30" 
clearance to the cabinet.
● Provide a bank of drawers on the nook side of the 
sink.
● Provide an area for tray storage on the bathroom side 
of the stove with the balance of the base cabinets to 
have 4" deep drawers over doors.
● Provide a breadboard over a drawer between the 
refrigerator and the stove.
Problem 20-1b Design three different elevations for the fire-
place in the family room. Use entirely different styles and 
materials, and include the doors and windows on each 
side for each elevation.
Problem 20-1c Draw an elevation of the master bathroom 
cabinets including the linen closet.
The linen closet is to have shelves above (2)-12" deep 
drawers. The vanity countertop is to be 32" high plastic 
laminate with a 4" backsplash. Provide a mirror from the 
backsplash to 6'–0" above the floor.
Problem 20-2 Use the floor plan created for problem 16-2 
to design and draw the elevation for an oak cabinet with 
Interior Elevations
CHAPTER 20 TEST

Chapter 20: Interior Elevations 
463
shelves along the north wall of the office that meets the 
following parameters:
● The lower 36" is to have 4" deep drawers over doors. 
● Shelves are to be on rollers. 
● Part of the lower cabinet should include rollout draw-
ers (behind the doors) suitable for legal-size filing.
● The upper portion should include shelves for books 
and a stereo system.
Problem 20-3 Use the floor plan in problem 16-3 and design 
and draw an elevation of the cabinets in the break room.
Problem 20-4 Design a 24" deep storage cabinet from floor 
to ceiling along the north wall of the lower storage area 
that meets the following parameters:
● The 20 feet closest to the warehouse area will be used 
to store flammable materials and should be lockable. 
● Ten feet of the cabinet should be divided into lockable 
storage units for employees. 
● The balance of the area will be used for general stor-
age and should have a base cabinet with enclosed 
shelves, a plastic laminate countertop at 36" high with 
a 4" backsplash, and upper shelves behind doors.

464
21
Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings
Changes in floor elevation are accomplished by using 
a ramp, stairs, elevator, escalators, or a combination 
of each. Although the architect is responsible for the 
design, a CAD technician should be familiar with the 
code requirements and vendor drawings associated with 
each method of changing floor levels. This chapter will 
introduce the drawings required for:
Ramps.
 
●
Stairs.
 
●
Major stair materials.
 
●
Drawing representation.
 
●
Elevator drawings.
 
●
Escalator drawings.
 
●
RAMPS
A ramp is an inclined surface that connects two different 
floor levels. Design and construction are regulated by 
both the building code and Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA) requirements. (See Chapter 5 for a review 
of ADA requirements.) Chapter 16 introduced ramp 
representation on the floor plan. This chapter addresses 
code requirements, methods of representation on draw-
ings, and common sections and details that a drafter is 
required to work with.
Code Requirements
Ramps are classified by International Building Code 
(IBC) based on usage. Ramps that are used in an aisle 
for an exit from a structure must also meet the exit 
requirements that were presented in Chapter 12. This 
chapter focuses on code requirements for ramps that 
are used to achieve a change in floor levels.
Minimum Ramp Sizes
The IBC requires ramps to have a minimum width equal 
to the required width for the corridor and a minimum 
clear width of 36" (900 mm) for the ramp and clear 
width between the handrails. Handrails are allowed to 
project into the required ramp width a maximum of 
4 1/2" (114 mm) on each side provided the minimum 
clear width of 36" (914 mm) is maintained. Any deco-
rative trim or other features may project a maximum 
of 1 1/2" (40 mm) on each side. The rise of ramps is 
restricted to 30" (762 mm) total with a maximum slope 
of 1 vertical unit per each 8 horizontal units, or a 12.5% 
slope. Ramps used as a means of egress are restricted 
to a maximum slope of 1 vertical unit per each 12 
horizontal units, or an 8% slope. The cross-slope of a 
ramp, measured perpendicular to the direction of travel, 
cannot be greater than 1 vertical unit per each 48 hori-
zontal units (2% slope). If a door swings over an egress 
ramp, the door when opened in any position cannot 
reduce the width of the ramp to less than 42" (1067 
mm). A minimum of 80" (2032 mm) headroom must 
be provided above a ramp.
Landings
Except in non-accessible Group R-2 and R-3 units, a 
landing with a length of 60" (1525 mm) measured in 
the direction of the ramp is required at the top and 
bottom, points of turning, doors, and the entrance and 
exit of all ramps. Group R-2 and R-3 units can have a 
landing with a minimum length of 36" (914 mm). The 
landing width must be as wide as the widest ramp that 
connects to the ramp. The slope of a landing cannot 
be greater than 1 vertical unit per each 48 horizontal 
units (2% slope).
Railings, Handrails, and Curbs
With the exception of ramps in aisles that serve seating, 
ramps with a rise greater than 6 inches (152 mm) must 
have a handrail on both sides of the ramp. The hand-
rail must be between 34" and 38" (864 and 965 mm)
in height. The rail must extend horizontally 12" 
(305 mm) past the top and bottom of the ramp. For 
round rails, the handgrip portion of the rail must be 
between 1 1/4" and 2" (32 and 51 mm) wide and 
must be smooth with no sharp corners. Rails must 
project 1 1/2" (38 mm) clear from walls to provide 
hand space. To prevent dropping off the ramp edge, 
a curb or barrier must be provided at the floor 
or ground surface of the ramp and landing. The 

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
465
curb must be constructed to prevent the passage of a 
4" diameter sphere. Guards must be provided in 
accordance with IBC section 1013.
Ramp Representation
The width and length of a ramp can be represented on 
the floor plan using thin lines. The angle can be repre-
sented by listing either the slope or the elevation of each 
end, as seen in Figure 21-1. The slope and construction 
method must be represented by means of a section or 
detail that is referenced to the floor plan. Figure 21-2 
shows an example of a ramp detail.
STAIRS
Stairs are a primary method of changing floor levels 
in a multilevel structure. To effectively work with the 
architect’s stair drawings, the CAD drafter must be 
familiar with common terms, layout methods, and code 
requirements.
Stair Terminology
The exact terminology for stair construction may vary 
in different parts of the country. Figure 21-3 shows 
each of the common components of a stair that must be 
represented by a drafter. The layout of a stair is dictated 
by the rise and run.
The 
 
●
rise is the vertical distance from one floor level 
to the next.
The 
 
●
run is the total length required to form the stairs.
The total rise is made up of individual 
 
●
risers, which 
are the vertical portion of a step. The height of a riser 
is measured from one step to the next.
The 
 
●
tread is the horizontal portion of a step. The 
length of a tread is measured from the face of the riser 
at the rear of the tread to the nosing at the front-end 
of a tread.
The 
 
●
nose is the front edge of a step. Nosing is mate-
rial that is added to the nose of the tread for decora-
tion and to provide a slip-resistant surface. The type 
and design of nosing varies depending on the mate-
rial used to build the stair. Nosings usually project 
approximately 1 1/8" (28 mm) past the riser.
FIGURE 21-1 A ramp is an inclined floor surface used to con-
nect two different floor elevations that are often represented 
on the floor and site plans. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns Architects, P.C.
FIGURE 21-2 Sections or details should be drawn to explain ramp angle, construction methods, and railings. Courtesy Michael & Kuhns 
Architects, P.C.

466 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
A 
 
●
stringer provides support for the tread and riser. 
In some areas of the country, it is referred to as a car-
riage or stair jack. The stringer may be placed below 
or beside the risers.
The 
 
●
headroom for stairs is the vertical distance above 
the stair measured from the tread nosing to any 
obstruction above the stair. 
Figure 21-4 shows the relationship of the stringer 
to the tread for various materials. The stringer termi-
nates at a floor level or at an intermediate platform 
called a landing. Landings are inserted into long stair 
runs to provide users with a resting point, or as a 
means of changing the direction of the run. In multi-
level structures, stair landings are often stacked above 
each other. 
To provide stability to the user, a handrail must 
extend 12" (300 mm) past the upper riser. The lower 
end of the rail must continue to slope for the depth 
of one tread beyond the bottom riser. The number of 
handrails required is based on the width of the stairs 
and is discussed later in this chapter. The handrail on 
the open side of a stair terminates at a newel post.
A 
 
●
newel post is a large, fancy post used to provide sup-
port at the end of a railing. The handrail is connected 
to the open side of the stair by a vertical baluster.
A 
 
●
guardrail is the railing that is placed around stairs 
to protect people from falling from the floor into the 
stairwell.
A 
 
●
stairwell is the vertical shaft where the stairs are to 
be placed. The design of the baluster connection to 
the stair and floor systems is of great importance for 
the safety of the stair users.
Depending on the height of the structure, the occu-
pancy, and fire-resistive construction used, stairs may 
need to be separated from the balance of the structure 
by an enclosed stairwell. To control the spread of smoke 
and flames throughout a structure, access to stairwells 
is restricted by doors that must have a minimum 
1-hour fire rating. Review Chapter 12 for fireproofing 
of stairwells.
Stair Types
Depending on the material used, stairs may either be 
open or enclosed. Stairs framed with wood, steel, or 
TOTAL  RUN
RISER
TREAD
GYPSUM  BOARD
FIRE RETARDANT
UNDER  STAIR
TOTAL  RISE
( FINISH FLOOR TO FINISH FLOOR )
USABLE SPACE
STRINGERS
SOLID BLOCKING
& STAIR
FOR FLOOR
SUPPORT
RAIL HEIGHT
IN BACK GROUND
LINE OF GUARD RAIL
KICKBLOCK
6'-8" MINIMUM
ABOVE NOSING
38" MAXIMUM
34" MINIMUM
HANDRAIL
VERTICAL RAILS
(TYP. 4" CLEAR MAX.)
(36" TYP.)
INDIVIDUAL
RUN
INDIVIDUAL
RISE
(TYPE 'X') @ ALL
FIGURE 21-3 Common stair terms.
FIGURE 21-4 Depending on the occupancy and the type of 
construction, stair treads may be directly supported by the 
stringer, placed between the stringers, or be above the stringer 
and supported by metal brackets.

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
467
precast concrete risers on a steel stringer can be framed 
as open stairs with no riser. Each of these materials 
can also be used to form enclosed stairs. Stairways that 
serve as the only access to another floor cannot be open 
because of ADA restrictions. The method of framing is 
not represented in plan view but is shown in sections 
and details. In addition to the type of riser construction, 
the configuration of the run can also be altered to meet 
design needs.
Straight stair runs are the most economical to build. 
 
●
If space for the run is limited, a landing can be 
inserted into the run and the direction of the run can 
be altered. L- and U-shaped stairs are two common 
variations to a straight run.
An L-shaped stair contains a 90° bend in the total 
 
●
run. The change in direction occurs at a landing, 
which may be placed in any portion of the run. A 
U-shaped stair causes the user to make a 180° turn 
at a landing. The landing can be placed at any point 
of the run, but it is usually placed at the midpoint so 
that each run is of equal length.
A curved or circular stairwell can be used to enhance 
 
●
the design of an entry. Curved stairways are formed 
by using one or more radii to form the stair. Curved 
stairs have wedge-shaped treads.
A 
 
●
spiral stair is a stair that has a circular form in plan 
view with treads that radiate about a central support 
column. Spiral stairs can be used only within an 
individual unit or an apartment that serves an area 
less than 250 square feet (23 m2) and serves less than 
five occupants.
Figure 21-5 shows an example of how each type of 
stair is represented on a floor plan.
Minimum Code Design Requirements
Any stairs having two or more risers (except stairs 
used exclusively to service mechanical equipment) are 
regulated by the IBC and the ADA. A drafter must be 
familiar with these codes so that drawings and details 
are accurate.
Required Sizes for Straight-Run Stairs
The IBC specifies minimum sizes for the width, height, 
individual rise and run, and the headroom for stair 
construction.
Required Width—Stairways serving an occupant load 
of less than 50 can be a minimum of 36" (914 mm) 
wide. Stairs serving 50 or more occupants must be a 
minimum of 44" (1118 mm) wide.
Required Riser Height—4" (102 mm) minimum and 
7" (178 mm) maximum measured vertically between 
the leading edges of adjacent treads. For dwelling 
units in Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies, and for 
Group U occupancies that are accessory to a Group 
R-3 occupancy, or accessory to individual units in 
Group R-2 occupancies, the maximum rise can be 
increased to 7 3/4" (197 mm). 
Maximum Stair Rise—A landing must be provided 
for every 12' (3658 mm) of vertical rise.
Required Tread Depth—11" (279 mm) minimum 
measured horizontally between the vertical planes 
of the foremost projection of adjacent treads and at 
right angles to the tread’s leading edge. For dwelling 
units in Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies, and for 
Group U occupancies that are accessory to a Group 
R-3 occupancy, or accessory to individual units in 
Group R-2 occupancies, the minimum tread depth 
can be reduced to 10" (254 mm).
Landing—A landing equal in length and width to 
the width of the stair must be provided at the top 
and bottom of a stairway. If a landing is provided in 
the stair span, the length of the landing measured 
in the direction of travel must be equal to the width 
of the stair run but is not required to exceed 48" 
(1219 mm).
Tread and Landing Slope—The walking surface of a 
tread or ramp cannot be greater than 1 vertical unit per 
each 48 horizontal units (2% slope) in any direction.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 21-5 Common stair types include: (a) straight, 
(b) L-shaped with a landing at any point of the run, 
(c) U-shaped with a landing at any point of the run, and 
(d) spiral. The occupancy load and the type of construction 
limit the use of spiral stairs.

468 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Required Headroom—Stairways must be designed 
so that a minimum height of 80" (2032 mm) is pro-
vided. The minimum allowable headroom is to be 
measured vertically from a plane parallel and tangent 
to the stairway nosing to any obstruction.
Circular, spiral, and winding stairs must meet other 
code requirements in addition to the requirements for 
straight stairways.
Curved Stairs
Curved stairs can be used for an exit as long as the 
minimum tread run is 11" (279 mm) when measured 
at a point 12" (305 mm) from the narrow end of the 
tread (6" [152 mm] for dwelling units in Group R-2). 
The minimum tread depth shall not be less than 10" 
(254 mm) at the narrow end. The smallest radius 
used to lay out the stairway curve cannot be less than 
twice the width of the stair. Curved stairs that do not 
have a uniform radius are considered winders by the 
building code.
Winders
Winders can be used as a means of egress only within 
dwelling units unless they comply with the dimensional 
criteria and requirements of curved stairs. When used, 
a required width for the run of 11" (279 mm) is pro-
vided at a point 12" (305 mm) from the narrowest 
portion of the stair. Winders also must be a minimum 
of 6" (152 mm) at the narrowest portion of the tread. 
Required tread sizes are shown in Figure 21-6.
Spiral Stairs
The tread of a spiral stair must provide a clear walk-
ing area of 26" (660 mm) from the outer edge of the 
supporting column to the inner edge of the handrail. A 
minimum run of 7 1/2" (191 mm) must be provided at 
a point 12" (305 mm) from the narrowest portion of the 
tread. The maximum rise for spiral stairs cannot exceed 
9 1/2" (241 mm) and minimum headroom of 78" (1981 
mm) must be provided. Figure 21-7 shows the mini-
mum tread requirements for a spiral stair.
Rail Design
The placement of handrails and guardrails must be con-
sidered as stair drawings are completed.
Handrails
Handrails must be provided on each side of the stair 
run. Common exceptions include stairs in aisles used 
to serve seating areas, stairways within dwelling units, 
and spiral stairs. An intermediate handrail must be 
provided for wide stairs so that no portion of the width 
required for egress is more than 30" (762 mm) of a 
handrail. Handrails must be between 34" and 38" (864 
and 965 mm) high above the nosing of treads or land-
ings. Handrails are required to extend horizontally 12" 
(305 mm) past the top riser and continue to slope for 
the depth of one tread beyond the bottom riser. The 
guidelines used for placing handrails by ramps also 
apply for stairs.
Guardrails
Guardrails are required at non-enclosed floor areas 
that are 30" (762 mm) above the ground or another 
floor level. Guardrails are not required on the load-
ing side of loading docks, on the auditorium side of 
stages, or around service pits that are not accessible to 
REQUIRED
WIDTH
12"
305mm
FIGURE 21-6 Tread requirements for a curved stair.
7 1/2" MIN.
190mm
26" CLEAR
660mm
12" CLEAR
305mm
FIGURE 21-7 Tread requirements for a spiral stair.

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
469
the public. Guardrails must be 42" (1067 mm) high, 
except for rails serving occupancies in Group R-3, 
and within individual dwelling units in group R-2. 
Guards on the open side of stairways in these two occu-
pancies are allowed to be between 34" to 38" (864 to 
965 mm) high. Intermediate railings in a guardrail must 
be designed so that a 4" (102 mm) diameter sphere 
cannot pass through any openings up to a height of 
34" (864 mm). Openings in the railing above 34" to 
42" (864 to 1067 mm) can be designed using a 4 3/8" 
(111 mm) sphere. The triangular opening formed by 
the riser, tread, and the bottom rail at the open side of 
the stairway must be designed so that a 6" (533 mm) 
diameter sphere cannot pass through the opening. 
Railings for industrial occupancies that are not open 
to the public can be designed so that a 21" (533 mm) 
sphere will not pass through the railing.
Lateral Load Design for Railings Railings must be 
able to withstand the pressure of people pushing or 
pulling on the rail. The IBC requires rails to resist 
a lateral load of 50 plf (0.73 kN/m2) applied in any 
direction. Rails are also required to resist a single con-
centrated load of 200 pounds (0.89 kN) applied from 
any direction to any portion of the railing. For Group 
I-3, F, H, and S occupancies that are not accessible to 
the general public and have an occupant load of less 
than 50, the minimum load the rail is required to resist 
can be reduced to 20 plf (0.29 kN/m2). For guardrails 
in one- and two-family dwellings, the rail is required 
to resist only the concentrated load. These loads must 
be transferred down through balusters into the floor 
or stair system. Both the connectors used to attach bal-
usters and the material they are connected to must be 
strong enough to resist the loads to be supported and 
to resist the tendency to twist as the loads are applied. 
Figure 21-8 shows an example of a detail used to show 
the connection of a railing to the floor system.
Determining Required Rise and Run
The total rise and run of a stair is based on the legal 
requirements for the rise and run of each tread. If the 
floor-to-floor height is 9'–6" and a rise of 7" is used, 
17 risers will be required. This is determined by divid-
ing 114" (the total height) by 7" (the maximum rise). 
Although the answer is 16.28, this must be rounded 
up to 17 risers. The actual riser height of 6.70" can be 
determined by dividing 114 inches by 17. The number 
of treads is always one less than the number of risers. 
This stair would require 17 risers and 16 treads. If a run 
of 11 inches is used, the total run would be 176 inches 
(16 treads × 11").
STAIR MATERIAL
The occupancy and type of construction dictate the 
material used to form the stairs. Wood, timber, steel, 
concrete, or a combination of steel and concrete is used 
to form the stairs.
Wood
Wood stairs are made by using 2 × 12 or 2 × 14 (50 
× 300 or 50 × 350) stringers. One-inch (25 mm) tread 
FIGURE 21-8 Details must be drawn to show how the handrail 
and guardrail will be constructed. This railing is designed for 
use in an industrial area that is not open to public use. Courtesy 
Scott R. Beck, Architect.

470 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
material or 3/4" (19.1 mm) plywood can be used to 
form the treads. Nonslip surfacing material must be 
used for both the treads and the risers. If carpet is used 
as the finish material, the riser should be set on an angle. 
Figure 21-9 shows a detail of a stair made of wood. 
The stringer is supported by a metal hanger, which is 
connected to a header in the floor system. Where the 
stringer rests on the floor platform, a metal angle or a 
kicker block is used to keep the stringer from sliding 
across the floor. A block of 2× (50×) material is placed 
between the stringers at midspan to minimize stringer 
vibrations and to reduce the spread of fire through the 
chase formed between the stringers. Figure 21-10 shows 
an example of a wood-framed stair.
Timber
Timber can be used to form open stairs. A 3 × 12 (75 
× 300) or larger is used for the stringer. The size of the 
stringer must be determined based on the span and load 
to be supported. Stringers are attached to the floor plat-
form by use of a metal angle at each end of the stringer. 
Treads are generally made of 2" or 3" (50 or 75 mm) 
material and are attached to the stringer by use of a 
metal angle or let into the stringer. Figure 21-11 shows 
examples of each method of attachment. Figure 21-12 
shows an example of a stair using timber construction.
Steel
Steel stairs are found in many types of commercial and 
light industrial construction because of the need for 
noncombustible construction. Steel stairs can be built 
similar to wood stairs, using a channel as the stringer 
and steel plates for the risers and treads. Stringers 
are attached to each floor system by the use of a steel 
angle. Handrails are generally made of 1 1/4" diam-
eter metal pipe and are supported on metal uprights 
called balusters. Balusters are welded to the channel 
stringer. Figure 21-13 shows a portion of a steel stair. 
As shown in Figure 21-14, steel treads can be made in 
several configurations. For exterior applications, plates 
forming a grating or made from extruded metal are 
used to shed water. Metal is also used to form a pan 
to support concrete steps. The combination of a metal 
frame and concrete steps is quite common in many 
FIGURE 21-9 Although typically drawn as a vertical riser in 
a small-scale section, a riser covered with carpet is generally 
inclined and must be represented in detail. Courtesy Architects 
Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 21-10 A wood-framed stair in section for a multilevel 
office complex. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 21-11 Timber treads may be supported by a metal 
angle or let into the stringer.

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
471
office structures. Figure 21-15 shows an example of 
a stair framed with steel and concrete. Figure 21-16 
shows examples of details required to supplement the 
section.
Concrete
Because of their high cost, concrete stairs are used in 
only the most restrictive fire rating situations. When 
used, the stairs are designed as an inclined one-way 
slab with an irregular upper surface. Concrete stairs can 
be cast after the wall and floor systems have been cast, 
or at the same time. Drawings for concrete stairs are 
generally done by CAD drafters working for the engi-
neering team. Figure 21-17 shows an example of a stair 
formed using concrete. Reinforcing details can be seen 
in Figure 21-18. Concrete stairs similar to Figure 21-19 
are formed at grade.
DRAWING REPRESENTATION 
The CAD technician will generally be required to work 
with stairs in plan views, sections, and details.
Plan Views
Stairs and the line work used to represent them were 
first introduced in Chapter 16. The stairway must be 
shown on the floor plan before details and sections 
can be started. The sections must be planned however, 
before the floor plan can be drawn. Using directions 
from earlier in this chapter, the number of risers and 
treads must be determined. When drawing a stair that 
goes to another level on the same floor, the entire run of 
the stair is shown. Figure 21-20 shows an example of a 
stair going up to an intermediate floor level. For a stair 
that extends between two full floors, the lower portion 
of the stair is shown on the main floor plan, and the 
upper end is shown on the second floor plan, as shown 
in Figure 21-21.
In planning the layout of the stairs on the floor plan, 
the required width, tread length, and number of risers 
must be known. Using a height of 9'–6" from floor to 
floor, it is determined that 17 risers and 16 treads are 
required with an overall run of 176". The layout of the 
stair on the floor plan can be completed by using the 
following steps:
1. Draw a line to represent the width of the stair. 
2. Start at the upper floor landing, and place a line to 
represent the ending point. The length of the run can 
be determined as illustrated in Figure 21-22.
STEEL PLATE TREAD
STEEL 
STRINGERS
STEEL 
SUPPORT
FIGURE 21-13 A steel plate stair.
FIGURE 21-12 A stair section for a timber stair in a Group R-3 
occupancy.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 21-14 Steel treads can be made from (a) bar grating, 
(b) steel plates with a textured surface, (c) concrete treads sup-
ported by a steel pan, and (d) precast concrete treads with a 
steel mounting plate.

472 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 21-15 A stair section for a multilevel steel stair. The plan view is shown in Figure 21-23. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
473
FIGURE 21-16 Details for construction of a steel stair. Courtesy Dean Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.
3. Use either OFFSET or ARRAY to show enough 
treads to establish the pattern. The run should be 
terminated with a short break line at the end of 
the run.
4. Represent the handrail by a line offset into the stairs 
approximately 1". There is no need to accurately rep-
resent the actual rail offset on the floor plan because 
it will be included in the stair details.
5. Label the rails, floor above, the direction of travel, 
and the number of risers per flight. Figure 21-21 
shows the completed lower floor plan. A similar pro-
cess can be used to draw the upper portion of the run 
on the upper floor plan.
For structures with U-shaped or other shaped stairs, 
the layout process is similar. Remember, on multilevel 
stairs the highest and lowest floor levels show only one 

474 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
run. Middle floors show runs going both up and down. 
Figure 21-23 shows how multilevel stairs would be 
represented. Notice that the stair going up is always on 
the same side of the stair and the upper run is opposite 
the lowest run.
Drawing Stair Sections
Stair sections are typically drawn at a scale of 1/4" = 
1'–0", 3/8" = 1'–0", or 1/2" = 1'–0". The space available, 
the detail to be shown, and the amount of related details 
to be used affect the selection of the scale. If the stair is 
to be premanufactured, only drawings required to attach 
the stair are supplied. Straight steel, concrete, and com-
bination stairways are drawn using similar methods and 
should represent the following items in section:
Draw the stair section so that it is referenced to a 
 
●
reference grid whenever possible.
When drawing enlarged plan views of stairs, place 
 
●
the lowest floor level at the sheet, with each upper 
level placed vertically above it in order.
FIGURE 21-17 Sections showing the construction of a concrete stairway. Background information is often shown to help the print 
reader relate the section to the structure. Courtesy G. Williamson Archer, A.I.A., Archer & Archer, P.A.

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
475
FIGURE 21-18 The details for the stair shown in Figure 21-17. Courtesy G. Williamson Archer, A.I.A., Archer & Archer, P.A.
FIGURE 21-19 A concrete stairway formed at grade. Courtesy 
Scott R. Beck, Architect.
FIGURE 21-20 When a stair serves two different levels of 
the same floor, both ends of the stair run are shown in the 
plan view.

476 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Place stair sections adjacent to the corresponding 
 
●
enlarged plan view whenever possible.
Show and dimension the size and number of treads, 
 
●
risers, and headroom. 
Show details of handrail and guardrail construction.
 
●
Show details showing the construction of each tread, 
 
●
riser, and landing.
Show and dimension the location of fire hose cabi-
 
●
nets that are located in stairwells.
Show and specify the space below the stairs and the 
 
●
first landing to indicate fire protection.
Indicate a ladder and roof hatch if located in the 
 
●
stairwell. If the roof access is through a pent-
house, include the penthouse in the stair section 
and show a curb at the access door to the adja-
cent roof.
The section for the stair shown in Figure 21-21 can 
be completed by using the following steps:
 1.  Draw a line to represent each floor level. 
 2.  Establish a line to represent the edge of the upper 
floor. 
 3.  Establish a line to represent the total run. 
 4.  Draw lines to represent the required number of 
treads and risers. 
 5.  Draw a line to represent where each tread and riser 
will be placed. 
 6.  Draw a line through the nose of the lowest tread to 
the nose of the highest tread. 
 7.  Offset the line just drawn to represent the bottom 
side of the stringer. The drawing should now resem-
ble Figure 21-24.
 8.  Use the line drawn in step 7 to determine where the 
stringer intersects the floor framing. Use this point 
to locate the stair support. In this example, (2)-2 × 
12 floor joists are used with metal hangers to the 
floor joist and the stringer.
 9.  Using the grid that was established in step 4, draw a 
tread and a riser similar to Figure 21-25. 
10.  Using the COPY command with a running OSNAP 
of INT, copy the tread and riser to reproduce the 
required number of treads. 
11.  Eliminate all layout lines. 
12.  Provide a 2× kick block at the toe of the stair and 
blocking at the midspan of the stringer.
13.  Show required finish material on the bottom side 
of the stringer and floor system so that the stair 
resembles Figure 21-26. 
14.  Locate required guardrails and handrails. 
15.  Provide dimensions to represent the following 
sizes:
Total rise and run
 
●
Individual rise and runs
 
●
Required headroom
 
●
Handrail and guardrail heights 
 
●
FIGURE 21-21 When a stair serves two different floors, only 
one end of the run is shown on each floor plan.
44"
14'-8" = TOTAL  RUN
(16 x 11" = 176)
FIGURE 21-22 The stair plan is started by determining and 
representing the limits and width of the stair.

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
477
16.  Use leaders to label each size and component used 
to make the stair. Material represented in a detail 
does not have to be completely specified.
Notice the lack of notes in each of the professional 
examples throughout this chapter and the dependence 
on details for a clear explanation of construction.
17. Place a title and scale below the drawing. 
18.  Place required detail tags to locate related details to 
the section. 
The completed stair section should resemble 
Figure 21-27.
Drawing Stair Details
Stair details should be drawn at a scale appropriate to
the detail that must be shown. Scales ranging from 
3/4" = 1'–0" to 3" = 1'–0" (1:20 to 1:5) are typically 
used for stair details. Material typically shown in detail 
includes:
Stringer-to-upper-floor-system connection.
 
●
Stringer-to-lower-floor-system connection.
 
●
Baluster-to-stringer connection.
 
●
Stringer-to-tread connection. 
 
●
FIGURE 21-23 When a stair serves more than two levels, the drafter must coordinate each run so that it does not interfere with the 
headroom of other stairs in the run. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

478 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Figure 21-18 shows several of the supplemental 
details for the stair drawn in Figure 21-15. Each is a 
stock detail edited to meet the specific needs of this 
stair. Because of the scale used for details, it is important 
to use varied lineweights and appropriate hatch patterns 
to accent each material used.
ELEVATOR DRAWINGS
The elevator manufacturer provides the bulk of the 
drawings required to install elevators. The responsi-
bility of CAD drafters working with the architectural 
team is to accurately represent the shaft size and loca-
tion on each plan view based on the design of the 
architect. Figure 21-28 shows how an elevator can 
be represented on enlarged floor plans. Sections and 
FIGURE 21-24 A stair section is started by defining the limits 
and representing each finished floor level. The distance from 
floor to floor is divided by the number of risers. The distance 
representing the run is divided by the number of treads.
FIGURE 21-25 Once a grid for the stair has been determined, 
individual treads and risers can be drawn.
FIGURE 21-26 The layout is completed by adding rails, sup-
port walls, and required supports.
FIGURE 21-27 A completed stair section. The absence of 
notation is allowed because of the use of four details to further 
explain construction.

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
479
details similar to Figure 21-29 need to be drawn and 
should represent: 
The door and elevator height. 
 
●
Vertical heights between floors around the elevator 
 
●
shaft.
The depth of the elevator pit, sump pump, and shaft 
 
●
vent, or the height of the elevator loft.
Enlarged details of the pit ladder, door head and sill, 
 
●
slab edge, pit ladder, and vent placement.
Wall clearances based on the manufacturer’s require-
 
●
ments.
The elevator pit is the area below the lowest floor 
required to provide clearance for the elevator and 
the shaft mechanism. The elevator loft is provided at 
the upper end of the shaft for the same purpose. The 
drafter needs to work very closely with specifications 
supplied by the manufacturer to detail required sizes 
for the elevator. If the elevator is custom designed, 
the interior elevations of the car are drawn so that the 
interior of the elevator matches the building interior. 
These elevations should be placed on the same sheet as 
other elevator information and not placed with other 
interior elevations.
ESCALATOR DRAWINGS
The manufacturer of the escalator provides the bulk of 
the drawings required to install escalators. The respon-
sibility of CAD drafters working with the architectural 
team is to accurately represent the width, length, and 
location on each plan view based on the design of the 
architect.
ADDITIONAL READING
Links for the materials represented on the stair and ramp 
drawings are too numerous to list here. Rather than list-
ing individual sites, use your favorite search engine 
to research products from the following Construction 
Specifications Institute (CSI) categories: wood, steel, 
concrete, interior finish and trim; paints and coatings; 
caulks and adhesives. 
FIGURE 21-28 The shaft for an elevator must be coordinated 
with the supplier and carefully detailed on each floor. Courtesy G. 
Williamson Archer, A.I.A., Archer & Archer, P.A.

480 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 21-29 The sections necessary to supplement the stair shown in Figure 21-28. Courtesy G. Williamson Archer, A.I.A., Archer & Archer, P.A.

Chapter 21: Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings 
481
QUESTIONS
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. If math is required to answer a question, 
show your work.
Question 21-1 What restrictions govern stairs and ramps?
Question 21-2 When are ramps required to have a 
handrail?
Question 21-3 Can a handrail be mounted to a bracket that 
will extend three inches from the support wall?
Question 21-4 What is the maximum riser height allowed 
by the IBC for a stairway serving an office? An upper 
floor of an apartment?
Question 21-5 When is a guardrail required?
Question 21-6 What is the required spacing of the balusters 
of a guardrail?
Question 21-7 What is the minimum width required for a 
spiral stair tread?
Question 21-8 Determine the total run and the number of 
risers and treads required for an office structure with 
11'–0" from floor to floor.
Question 21-9 List five common materials used for treads.
Question 21-10 Describe two methods of attaching a wood 
tread to its support.
Question 21-11 Why are the drafter’s responsibilities limited 
when specifying an elevator?
Question 21-12 List details that typically accompany a stair 
section.
Question 21-13 What elevator drawings is a drafter usually 
required to work on?
Question 21-14 What information must be specified for an 
escalator?
Question 21-15 What is the minimum information that 
should be labeled on a stairway on a floor plan?
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the reference material from preceding chapters, 
local codes, and vendor catalogs to complete one of the 
following projects.
Unless your instructor provides other instructions, 
draw the stair sections that correspond to the floor plan 
that was drawn in Chapter 16. No skeletons for these 
problems are available on the student CD. You will need 
to generate the required drawings from scratch using 
appropriate symbols, linetypes, dimensioning methods, 
and notations to complete the drawing. Determine any 
unspecified sizes based on material or practical require-
ments. Unless specified, select a scale appropriate to 
plotting on D-size material and determine LTSCALE 
and DIMVARS.
Although most of the information required to com-
plete a project can be found by searching other related 
problems, some of the problems will require you to 
make a decision on how you would solve a particu-
lar problem. Make sketches of possible solutions and 
submit them to your instructor prior to completing each 
problem.
● Place the necessary cutting plane on the floor plan to 
indicate each drawing.
● All heights listed can be assumed to be from finish 
floor to finish floor.
● Save each drawing as a wblock with a name that accu-
rately reflects the contents.
Problem 21-1 Draw a ramp that will connect two differ-
ent floor levels in a warehouse that are not open to the 
public. The ramp will be a total of 30" high. Determine 
the required length. Assume a 5" thick concrete slab, 
and thicken the intersection of the top and bottom of 
the ramp to 10" × 20". Reinforce the slab with (3)-#5ø 
bars continuous throughout the ramp, 2" up from 
the bottom of the slab. Use (2)-#5 bars at the top and 
bottom of the ramp (at the thickened areas) 1 1/2" 
KEY TERMS
Guardrail
Handrail
Ramp
Rise
Risers
Run
Stairwell
Stringer
Tread
Ramp, Stair, and Elevator Drawings
CHAPTER 21 TEST

482 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
clear of the footing bottom. Use #5 @ 24" o.c. for the 
length of the ramp.
Problem 21-2 Draw a U-shaped stair to be used in an office 
structure with 10'–0" from floor to floor. Determine the 
total required run for each flight and the rise and run for 
each tread. Use steel stringers, rails, and balusters, and a 
metal pan to support each riser. Use the drawings in this 
chapter to determine material sizes unless your instructor 
provides other instructions.
Problem 21-3 Draw a straight-run stair to be used in 
an office structure with 12'–0" from floor to floor. 
Determine the total required run for each flight and 
rise and run for each tread. Use open wood treads with 
laminated stringers. Use the examples in this chapter for 
selecting materials.
Problem 21-4 Draw a section for a stair to be used in a 
town house unit of an apartment complex. The lower 
floor will be a concrete slab and the upper floor will 
be framed with 2 × 12 floor joists with 3/4" plywood 
and 1 1/2" concrete deck. Assume a total rise of 9'–0". 
Determine the required number of treads, risers, and 
the total run. Frame the stair using (3)-2× material for 
the stringers. Select appropriate material for treads and 
risers.
Problem 21-5 Draw the required stairs for the structure 
that was started in Chapter 15. If suitable, use one of 
the blocks created in problem 1-3 as a base drawing 
and edit as required. Provide details to show stringer-
to-floor, tread-to-stringer, and stringer-to-baluster 
connections.

Preparing Structural Drawings
Section 4

This page intentionally left blank 

In Chapter 2 you were introduced to the drawings that 
make up a set of construction drawings. The drawings 
used to build the frame of a structure are the structural 
drawings. This chapter will explore:
The drawings generally included with the structural 
 
●
drawings. 
Framing plans including the CAD skills that are 
 
●
required, common features, and representation of 
materials on a framing plan.
Steps for drawing the framing plans for floor levels 
 
●
and the roof level.
Understanding the major concepts contained on 
these drawings and how the drawings are integrated 
into the entire set of construction drawings is a must for 
drafting a set of plans.
STRUCTURAL DRAWINGS
The same types of drawings used to present the 
architectural information can be used to present 
structural information. These include plan views, 
elevations, sections, details, schedules, and written 
specifications. Structural plan views include fram-
ing plans of the roof level and each floor level. This 
chapter discusses each of the framing plans, and sub-
sequent chapters introduce the remaining structural 
drawings.
The area of the country you are in, the type of 
building to be erected, and the occupancy of the 
structure dictate what materials are to be used. 
Common materials used to form the shell of the 
structure include sawn lumber, heavy timber, poured 
concrete, and concrete block are represented on the 
framing plan. With the exception of concrete block, 
each of these materials can be used to frame the 
roof and floor systems represented on the framing 
plan. Typically, several of these materials may be 
incorporated into the framework and reflected in the 
framing plan.
FRAMING PLANS
The base layers of the floor plan are used to create the 
framing plans. Figure 16-38 shows the base layers of 
the floor plan that are displayed when starting a fram-
ing plan. For a very simple project similar to problem 
16-1, framing information can be placed on the floor 
plan and separated from the architectural information 
by the use of layers. The framing plan for a simple 
project can also be started by making a copy of the 
floor plan to serve as a base for the framing plan so that 
two completely separate drawings are used to show 
the floor and framing information. The most common 
method of developing the framing plan is for the 
architectural team to supply an electronic copy of the 
floor plan that contains the basic elements of the floor 
plan to the structural engineer. CAD drafters work-
ing under the supervision of the engineer will use the 
structural calculations and drawings supplied by the 
architectural team to complete the project. Structural 
material can then be attached to the architectural base 
drawings using the INSERT or XREF commands. If a 
large complex is being drawn, the plan may be divided 
into zones and placed on two or more sheets. If zones 
are used, they must always match those used for the 
architectural drawings.
Using the mathematical calculations and sketches 
prepared by the engineering team, CAD technicians 
draw the framing plans. Figure 22-1 shows a portion 
of a framing plan. Framing plans are drawn for each 
level of the structure. For a one-level structure, the 
material used to frame the roof system is shown on a 
plan that resembles the roof plan. Because the framing 
for the first-level floor is shown on the foundation, no 
framing plan is required. For a multilevel structure, a 
plan is provided for each level. A three-level structure 
requires plans for the lower, second, and upper levels. 
Plans are arranged within the drawing set from the 
ground level to the roof, reflecting how the structure 
will be built. The lowest level of the structure is rep-
resented on the foundation plan, followed by succeed-
ing floor levels. Framing plans are drawn working 
22
Drawing Framing Plans
485

486 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
from the top of the structure down to the ground, 
so that the location for beams and supports is better 
understood.
The main goal of the framing plan is to represent the 
location and size of framing members such as beams, 
joists or trusses, posts and columns, and bracing that 
resists the stresses applied to the structure. These are 
the major elements that make up the skeleton of a 
structure and transfer the weight of vertical loads to the 
supporting foundation. Framing plans are also used to 
show the materials that are used to resist the horizon-
tal stress from forces caused by wind, flooding, and 
seismic activity. Information regarding nailing, bolting, 
and welding to resist these stresses is also found on the 
framing plan. 
Using CAD Skills for Framing Plans
The framing plan should be used to specify the loca-
tions and the materials used to resist the forces of 
rotation, uplift, and shear. Just as with other drawings, 
these features can easily be placed using AutoCAD com-
mands such as LAYER, ARRAY, COPY, DIM, TEXT, 
WBLOCK, and ATTRIBUTE, as well as features such as 
DesignCenter.
Layers
The complexity of the structure dictates how the fram-
ing plan will be arranged. On a simple structure such as 
a retail sales outlet, the framing plan could be included 
with other plan views and separated by different layers. 
With proper planning, information can be divided into 
layers to define each plan view contained in the drawing 
file. If the architectural and structural drawings are kept 
in the same file, the CAD drafter must carefully separate 
each layer using names based on the National CAD 
Standards (NCS) guidelines. Recommended names are 
presented in Appendix C on the student CD. Prefixes 
such as S-FRAM can be used to define material on the 
framing plan, with modifiers such as BEAM, JOIS, and 
ANNO used to further define materials stored on the 
framing plan.
Larger structures are also more likely to involve sev-
eral firms to complete the plans. Each firm must have 
a copy of the base floor plan file to add its material. A 
separate framing plan can be created by making a block 
of the walls and columns of the floor plan. Information 
specific to the framing plan can now be added to this 
drawing, and the drawing file is then stored as a new 
drawing file. By adding information to a copy of the 
floor plan using the external reference (XREF) com-
mand, changes can be made to the floor plan, and the 
framing plan will be updated automatically.
Inserting Blocks and Assigning Attributes
Once the method of creating the framing plan has been 
determined, information specific to the framing plan 
can be added. Repetitive information should be created 
as a block and inserted or referenced into the drawing 
base. Items such as grids, detail and section markers, 
and drawing symbols should be created as a block and 
inserted with ATTRIBUTE to control page and detail 
numbers. An alternative to inserting common features 
FIGURE 22-1 A plan is drawn of each level of a structure to 
show all materials needed to construct the skeleton. Courtesy 
Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
487
is to store them in a template on appropriate layers and 
thaw them as needed.
COMMON FEATURES SHOWN 
ON A FRAMING PLAN
Regardless of the material used, framing plans have 
many common features. Because of the large amount 
of information that needs to be placed on the framing 
plan, it is important for the CAD technician to develop 
the framing plan in a logical order.
Bearing Walls and Support Columns
Using the walls and columns drawn for the floor plan 
is the most efficient way to create the framing plan. 
This can be done by using either the BLOCK or XREF 
method. All items shown on the floor plan that are not 
directly related to forming or supporting the structure 
should be removed from the drawing to be used to 
create the framing plan. Figure 22-2 shows the base 
floor plan used to draw the framing plan for an apart-
ment complex. The right unit shows the information 
required for the floor plan and the left unit shows the 
framing plan for the structure.
Locations for Each Beam
Once the drawing base has been prepared, support 
beams should be drawn. Start with major beams and 
work to intermediate beams and then to purlins. As 
beams are labeled, text is typically placed parallel to 
the member using the methods presented in Section 
2 and Figure 22-2. Beams can also be specified using 
a schedule as shown in Figure 22-3. Notes to specify 
columns are placed on an angle to help distinguish the 
post or column from other building materials. Beams 
and related material should be placed on layers sepa-
rate from the base material with a layer name such as S 
FRAM BEAM.
Dimensions
The floor plan contains all the dimensions needed to 
locate walls and other key architectural features. The 
framing plan typically contains the dimensions to 
locate the grids to help the print reader gain an overall 
sense of the building size without having to go to the 
architectural drawings, as well as the dimensions to 
locate each structural component. Figure 22-4 shows 
an example of dimensions on a framing plan. Methods 
for dimensioning structural members vary based on the 
material to be used. These methods are explored later 
in this chapter after other key framing components 
have been introduced. Regardless of the material used, 
dimensions locating structural material should be refer-
enced to a wall, column, or grid that is already located 
on the floor plan.
Thought should also be given to other drawings that 
require dimensioning. The overall and grid dimensions 
on the floor plan will be the same for the framing plan. 
The majority of dimensions on the lowest framing level 
are often the same as the dimensions on the foundation 
plan. Placing the dimensions on several layers can aid 
in dimensioning the overall project. A layer such as S 
FRAM DIMN EXT can be used to contain all exterior 
dimensions that will be needed on all drawings to be 
dimensioned. A layer such as S FRAM DIMN INT1 
could be used for all dimensions that are specific to the 
first level.
Local Notes
Notes on the framing plan should be placed using the 
guidelines presented in Chapter 16 for placing notes 
on a floor plan. Many items on the framing plans will 
be specified but not drawn. This includes items such as 
shear panels, hold-down anchors, or metal ties, which 
can be noted as shown in Figure 22-5. Types of notes 
specific to each material will be explored later in this 
chapter. A layer name such as S FRAM ANNO can be 
used to separate framing text from other material.
Drawing Tags
In addition to showing major materials, framing plans 
are used as a reference map to coordinate the structural 
elevations, sections, and details. Tags relating the eleva-
tions to the framing plan resemble those introduced 
in Chapter 16. Detail markers are placed on the fram-
ing plan to show the location of details that relate to 
the framing plan, just as they were on the floor plan. 
Tags should be placed on a layer separate from other 
tags, with a title such as S FRAM SYMB. The section 
and detail tags can be inserted before the detail or sec-
tion is actually drawn, but the attributes for page and 
detail numbers cannot be defined until the entire job is 
near completion. Detail and section tag numbering is 
explained in Chapter 2.
General Notes
Lengthy notes that specify materials should be placed 
as a general note to keep the framing plan uncluttered. 
When this is done, an abbreviated version of the note 
should be placed on the drawing, and referenced to the 
full note in the framing notes. An example of this form 
of notation would be:  
Abbreviated note: 
5/8" PLY ROOD SHEATH. SEE NOTE 1.

488 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 22-2 For simple structures, and for multiunit structures, the framing information can be placed in one unit so that the floor 
plan remains uncluttered. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
489
FIGURE 22-3 The specifications for a beam should be written parallel to the beam it describes or placed in a schedule. Because this 
is a fairly simple structure, information for the laminated beams and trusses has been placed in the same schedule. As structures 
become more complex, separate schedules for steel, laminated, sawn lumber beams, and trusses should be provided.

490 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
General note:
ALL ROOF SHEATHING TO BE 5/8" APA 32/16 
INTERIOR GRADE WITH EXTERIOR GLUE. LAY FACE 
GRAIN PERPENDICULAR TO JOIST AND STAGGER ALL JOINTS. 
USE 10d COMMON NAILS  6" O.C.  BOUNDARY 
AND EDGES. USE 10D COMMON NAILS  10" O.C. 
 FIELD UNLESS NOTED.
General notes should be set on layers with prefixes 
specific to the building level being represented. A layer 
name such as S FRAM TEXT can be used to store gen-
eral notes.
Representing Wood and Timber 
on Framing Plans
Before specifics can be given to describe the drawing 
process for a framing plan, the material used to form 
the roof or floor system must be considered. The type of 
material used influences what is shown on the framing 
plan. Chapters 7 and 8 introduced the common uses for 
wood, engineered lumber, and timber in construction. 
Major materials shown on a framing plan representing 
wood materials include studs, post, sawn and glu-lam 
beams, joists, engineered joists, trusses, and plywood. 
Shear walls, diaphragms, and drag struts must be speci-
fied on framing plans with wood members. Figure 22-6 
shows an example of a framing plan for a wood-framed 
office structure.
FIGURE 22-4 Dimensions are typically not placed on the fram-
ing plan except to describe grid locations and beams or col-
umns that are not shown on the floor plan. Courtesy Van Domelen/
Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.
FIGURE 22-5 Annotation is required to explain all materials 
shown on the framing plan. Annotation is also used to specify 
materials such as shear panels, which are not drawn but must 
be referenced. Courtesy Ginger M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & 
Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 22-6 The framing plan for a hillside wood-framed 
office structure. Because the back side of the office is 16’ off the 
ground, walls must be stiffened to resist wracking.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
491
Walls
Stud walls and wood posts appear on the framing 
plan just as they do on a floor plan. Walls that have 
special construction such as an extra base or top 
plate or plywood panels for resisting shear need to be 
noted and detailed based on the engineer’s calcula-
tions. Figure 22-6 shows the locations of several dif-
ferent shear walls. Shear walls and metal hangers can 
be specified by local notes and explained in a detail 
similar to Figure 22-7.
Shear Walls
Shear walls were introduced in Chapters 13 and 16 as 
a means of resisting and transferring lateral forces from 
wind, snow, or seismic activity through the structure. 
Shown on a floor plan like any other wall, the compo-
nents used to resist the lateral forces must be specified on 
the framing plan. The engineer determines which walls 
will be strengthened to resist lateral forces and CAD 
drafters are responsible for specifying the materials on 
the framing plan. The materials used to strengthen the 
wall are usually not drawn, but are specified in local 
notes or in a schedule. Special connectors, straps, or 
hold-down anchors required to reinforce construction 
are specified in details that are referenced to the fram-
ing plan. Figure 22-8a shows an example of how a shear 
wall can be represented on a framing plan. Figure 22-8b 
shows the resulting bracing installed in a structure to 
resist lateral forces.
Beams
Sawn, engineered, and laminated beams are represented 
by thin dashed lines as shown in Figure 22-9. Beams 
are located by dimensions from the edge of an exterior 
wood or masonry wall and from the center of wood 
interior walls to the center of the beam. When a beam 
cantilevers past a supporting post, the end of the beam 
should be dimensioned from the end to the center of 
the supporting post. The locations of main support 
columns and beams should be dimensioned from the 
exterior face of exterior walls or from grid lines. The 
CAD technician’s job is to provide dimensions that 
define the locations of each beam and column based on 
the design of the engineer. CAD technicians working 
for the lumber fabricator or truss manufacturer use the 
information provided on the framing plan to produce 
drawings that indicate exactly how the prefabricated 
material will be constructed, as well as precise measure-
ments for how it will be cut.
Joists and Trusses
Joists or trusses can each be represented on framing 
plans using two techniques. Figure 22-10 shows a 
symbol that can be used on simple structures to locate 
the direction and member to be used. The joist symbol 
can be created as a block with attributes that can be 
altered for each application. Many offices show all of the 
required framing members except where other informa-
tion cannot be clearly displayed. Figure 22-11 shows 
a typical method of representing framing members. 
Details that are required to show how forces will be 
transferred from the roof or floor system through walls 
to other areas of the structure must be referenced on 
the framing plan. Structures framed with wood typically 
require details showing beam-to-beam, beam-to-wall, 
joist-to-beam, and joist-to-wall connections. These can 
be referenced as shown in Figure 22-11, to represent a 
cutting plane or a view.
Structural Steel Framing Systems
Steel framing can be either a moment frame as shown in 
Figure 22-12 or a rigid frame as shown in Figure 22-13. 
Each system is introduced in Chapter 13. Each system 
has its own unique material to be shown on a framing 
plan.
FIGURE 22-7 Drawings showing that intersections between 
building systems must be detailed to explain construction 
methods. Courtesy Dean K. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & 
Associates, Inc.

492 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 22-8a A wide variation in presentation methods is used to represent beams. Two common methods include a single line or 
double lines representing the width of the beam. Courtesy Ginger M. Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & Associates, Inc.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
493
Moment Frames
Figure 22-14 shows an example of a framing plan 
using structural steel to form the major support system. 
Common steel materials were introduced in Chapter 9. 
The most common shapes to support major loads are 
typically M-, S-, and W-shaped steel beams.
Rectangular and circular steel columns as well as 
W shapes are used as vertical supports. Steel angles, 
tees, and channels are often used to support intermedi-
ate loads. Steel cables are used to resist lateral, wind, 
and seismic loads. Just as with structures framed with 
wood, framing plans reflecting steel-framed structures 
are formed using a base drawing that is similar to the 
floor plan. CAD drafters prepare the plan using the 
engineer’s sketches and calculations, as well as refer-
ence manuals published by AISC such as the Manual 
FIGURE 22-8b Steel beams and bracing from detail F3/S5 
specified on the framing plan shown in Figure 22-8a. Courtesy 
Janice Jefferis.
FIGURE 22-9 A wide variation in presentation methods is used 
to represent beams. Two common methods include the use of 
a thick single line, or double lines representing the width of the 
beam. The complexity of the structure and office practice deter-
mine which method is used.
FIGURE 22-10 On simple plans, one symbol can be used to 
represent the span and spacing of repetitive members.
FIGURE 22-11 Most structural drawings show the majority of 
repetitive members to avoid confusion during the construction 
process. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

494 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
of Steel Construction and Structural Steel Detailing. The 
engineer provides sketches and specifications for the 
selection and location of materials, as would be pro-
vided for wood-framed structures. CAD technicians 
working for the steel fabricator produce drawings pro-
viding exact measurements of each piece of steel to be 
fabricated.
Columns and Beams On the framing plan, steel 
columns are typically represented by a thick line and 
are dimensioned from center to center of columns. 
Exterior columns are dimensioned from the face of 
the exterior shell to the center of the column. Beams 
may be represented by centerlines, solid lines, or 
hidden lines and are located using centerline dimen-
sions from one member to the next. Figure 22-15 
shows how steel columns and beams can be specified 
and dimensioned.
Steel framing members are specified using meth-
ods similar to those used with wood members. On 
complicated plans, framing members are labeled 
using tables to help the print reader understand the 
location and quantity required for construction. Steel 
columns should be represented in a table separate 
from beams to provide better clarity. Beams of dif-
ferent materials should also be kept in separate beam 
tables. Depending on the complexity of the structure, 
a separate plan can be provided for vertical supports 
and horizontal steel to provide clarity. Figure 22-16 
shows a piling plan for the hillside office structure 
shown in Figure 22-6. Figure 22-17 shows the beam 
plan for the lower floor of the same structure. Steel 
framing often requires the elevation of a specific 
member to be shown on the plan. The height above a 
specific point, or surface, such as a finish floor level, 
is noted near the beam or listed in the table specifying 
the member size.
Decking Steel decking is often used to form a dia-
phragm in horizontal surfaces. Poured concrete floors 
placed over the steel deck can also be used to provide 
rigidity. Steel cables and turnbuckles, steel rods, or 
steel tubing is used between major supports to resist 
sheer and rotational stresses. Figure 22-18 shows an 
example of how the reinforcing steel is specified on a 
framing plan.
Rigid Frames
Rigid framing or prefab methods were introduced 
in Chapter 9. Members that make up the frame are 
typically W shapes, but both S and M shapes are also 
FIGURE 22-12 Steel is often used to form the skeleton 
using connections referred to as a moment frame. Courtesy 
Mike Jefferis.
FIGURE 22-13 Many single-story steel industrial buildings 
are built using a framing system referred to as a rigid frame. 
Courtesy David Jefferis.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
495
FIGURE 22-14 The framing plan for a steel structure. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

496 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 22-15 Representing beams and columns on a framing plan. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
497
used, depending on the size and spacing of the frame. 
Horizontal members that span between the frame are 
primarily channels, but angles and tees are also used. 
Figure 22-19 shows the framing plan for an industrial 
building framed with a rigid steel frame. Frame and 
intermediate members are located based on center-
line locations. Support between members is usually 
developed by the use of steel cables. Framing eleva-
tions similar to Figure 22-20 are drawn to show the 
locations of members used to form the shell supports. 
Chapter 23 explains how the elevations are drawn. A 
structure framed using rigid-frame methods is drafted 
using methods similar to those used to draw a steel-
framed structure.
Precast Concrete Framing Systems 
Precast concrete structures similar to those in Figure 22-21 
offer exceptional strength and resistance to seismic 
stresses as well as a high degree of fire safety. Concrete 
is also widely used because it can be cast into almost 
any shape. Concrete structures require drawings to 
represent the walls, beams, and columns for each spe-
cific level. Depending on the complexity of the project, 
framing plans for concrete structures can be divided 
into column, beam, wall, and floor and roof plans. CAD 
FIGURE 22-16 A portion of the piling plan for the hillside 
office shown in Figure 22-6.
FIGURE 22-17 Because one crew sets the beams and a sepa-
rate crew drives the pilings, each is placed on a separate plan.
FIGURE 22-18 Representing reinforcing steel on the framing 
plan. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting 
Engineers.

498 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 22-19 The roof plan for a rigid-frame structure.
FIGURE 22-20 The elevation for a steel structure shows where 
each member of the skeleton will be placed.
FIGURE 22-21 Precast and poured-in-place concrete offers 
exceptional strength and resistance to seismic forces and a 
high degree of fire safety. These floor and wall assemblies 
are used to support a multilevel sports facility. Courtesy Janice 
Jefferis.
Concrete Tilt-Up Plans 
Forming walls with precast concrete panels, similar to 
those shown in Figure 22-22, is a common method of 
construction. The tilt-up plan must show the location 
of each panel as well as the members that are used to 
form and support the floor or roof framing. The panel 
plan is used to reference the location of each panel 
and resembles Figure 22-23. Panels are dimensioned 
from center of joint to center of joint, and from edge 
to edge. Notice in Figure 22-23 that panel 21 has a 
length of 19'–11 1/2" from center to center, with a 
distance of 1/2" required at each end between panels. 
On simple structures, this information can be placed 
on the floor or roof plans without the use of a separate 
plan, with specific information for the construction 
of each panel shown in a panel elevation similar to 
Figure 22-24.
DRAWING A FRAMING PLAN
Rarely is a CAD technician given the task of drawing 
a framing plan from its inception. Remember that a 
drafter is a person who draws the ideas of another in a 
clear, logical manner. As a new employee in a company, 
technicians receive the information they need to draw a 
concrete framing plan from the architectural drawings 
and the engineer’s sketches and calculations. Walls 
are located to their edges, and columns are located to 
their center in a method similar to that used in steel 
structures.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
499
FIGURE 22-24 An elevation of each panel must be created to explain construction methods. An alternative to drawing each panel 
is to show an elevation of each face of a simple structure. Chapter 23 will present additional information used to explain materials on 
the framing plan. Courtesy Charles J. Conlee, P.E., Conlee Engineers, Inc.
FIGURE 22-22 Precast concrete panels are poured on the 
ground and then lifted into position once they have cured. 
Drawings similar to the elevations shown in Chapter 23 must 
show the materials used to construct each panel as well as the 
location of each panel. Courtesy Janice Jefferis.
FIGURE 22-23 A panel plan can be used to locate where each 
panel fits into a structure. Some offices reference elevations 
to the floor plan. Courtesy Ginger Smith, Kenneth D. Smith Architect & 
Associates, Inc. 

500 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
you may be working with a marked-up print, adding 
information to the framing plan. Experienced CAD 
technicians with an understanding of how the company 
is organized usually work from the engineer’s calcula-
tions to complete the framing plan. 
The use of an engineer’s calculations is introduced in 
Chapter 2. Typically the information that the engineer 
requires to be placed on the plan is highlighted so that 
the technician can easily understand the calculations. It 
is the technician’s responsibility to place on the draw-
ings everything that is highlighted in the calculations.
Roof Framing Plans
The shape of the roof affects how the drawing is started. 
Framing plans for a steep-pitched roof can be drawn 
using the roof plan as a base. Roof plans for structures 
with a low-sloped roof can use the floor plan for the 
drawing base.
Drawing Low-Sloped Roof Framing Plans
The structure drawn in Figures 16-38 and 18-28 will be 
used throughout this example.
 1.  Use the floor plan base drawing to create the roof 
framing plan. Freeze all material except the outline 
of exterior walls, interior bearing walls, and open-
ings in each.
The base plan should now resemble Figure 22-25.
 2. Thaw or draw all grid lines and markers. 
 3. Draw and specify all beams. 
FIGURE 22-25 The roof plan can be started by using the base plan used to develop the floor plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & 
Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
501
 4. Draw and specify all openings. 
 5. Draw and specify the outline of all roof projections. 
 6.  Provide dimensions to locate all beams, openings, 
and overhangs not dimensioned on the floor or 
roof plan. 
The roof plan should now resemble Figure 22-26.
 7. Locate and specify all trusses. 
 8.  Place all local and general notes specified by the 
engineer. 
 9. Place all detail and section markers. 
10. Place a title and scale below the drawing. 
The completed drawing should now resemble 
Figure 22-27.
Drawing High-Sloped Roof Framing Plans
The plans for a high-sloped roof can be completed using 
methods similar to those used for a low-sloped roof. The 
steel structure shown in Chapter 9 and Figures 18-1 and 
22-15 will be used as the example.
 1.  Use the floor plan base drawing to create the roof 
framing plan. Freeze all material except the out-
line of exterior walls, interior bearing walls, and 
columns. This particular plan includes a dashed 
FIGURE 22-26 Using the base plan supplied by the architectural team, the structural team adds beams and trusses. Courtesy Van 
Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

502 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 22-27 The completed roof plan with all materials, dimensions, and annotation. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf 
Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
503
line to represent supports indicated on the archi-
tectural drawings that will support the overhang 
(see Figure 22-28).
 2. Thaw or draw all grid lines and markers. 
 3. Draw and specify the outline of all overhangs. 
 4.  Draw and specify all changes in roof shape such as 
ridges, hips, and valleys. 
The base plan should now resemble Figure 22-29.
 5.  Draw and specify all primary beams and their 
elevations. 
 6. Draw and specify all openings. 
 7. Locate and specify all trusses (see Figure 22-30).
 8. Locate and specify all bracing and cross bracing.
 9.  Provide dimensions to locate all beams, openings, 
and overhangs not dimensioned on the floor or 
roof plan. 
10.  Place all local and general notes specified by the 
engineer.
11. Place all detail and section markers. 
12. Place a title and scale below the drawing. 
FIGURE 22-28 The base drawings for a high-sloped roof plan. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

504 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
The completed drawing should now resemble 
Figure 22-31.
Floor Framing Plans
A floor framing plan is started using methods similar to 
those that were used to draw the roof framing plan. The 
structure shown in Figure 16-3 and 18-23 will be used 
as the example.
 1.  Use the floor plan base drawing to create the fram-
ing plan. Freeze all material except the outline of 
exterior walls, interior bearing walls, and openings 
in each. Thaw or draw all grid lines and markers.
The base plan should now resemble Figure 22-32.
 2.  Draw and specify interior columns. 
 3.  Draw the centerline locations for the primary and 
intermediate beams.
 4.  Draw and specify the outline of all projections of 
upper floors (Figure 22-33).
 5.  Label each beam and provide elevation specifications. 
 6.  Dimension the locations of each wall, column, 
beam, opening, and overhang not dimensioned on 
the floor plan. 
 7.  Place detail markers at each beam-to-beam, beam-
to-wall, or column connection. 
FIGURE 22-29 The layout of major shape changes in the roof. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
505
 8.  Draw and label each joist or truss span for each area 
of the structure. 
 9.  Place detail markers at each joist-to-beam and joist-
to-wall connection. 
10. Locate common section markers. 
11.  Place all local and general notes specified by the 
engineer. 
12. Place a title and scale below the drawing.
The completed drawing should now resemble 
Figure 22-34.
Drawing a Framing Plan for Concrete
The drawing procedure for a concrete frame is similar 
to that used for a steel framing plan. Steps for complet-
ing the drawing include the following: 
 1.  Use the floor plan base drawing to create the fram-
ing plan. Freeze all material except the outline of 
exterior walls, interior bearing walls, grids, and 
openings in each. 
The base plan should resemble Figure 22-35.
 2. Draw and specify interior columns. 
FIGURE 22-30 The specification of major structural supports. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

506 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 22-31 The completed high-sloped roof. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
507
 3.  Draw the centerline locations for each beam not 
located at a grid line. 
 4.  Draw major primary support beams and then draw 
intermediate beams. 
 5.  Label each beam and provide elevation specifications.
 6. Locate panel indicators.
 7.  Place detail markers at each beam-to-beam and 
beam-to-wall or column connection.
 8.  Dimension the locations of each wall, column, and 
beam. 
 9. Locate elevation and section markers. 
10.  Provide all general notes and grid designations. 
11. Place a title and scale below the drawing. 
The completed drawing should now resemble 
Figure 22-36.
Layer Guidelines for Framing Plans
Separation of material by layer and color can greatly 
aid in the development of framing plans. A prefix 
of S-FRAM is recommended by the NCS guidelines. 
Modifiers can be used to define materials. Many firms 
divide modifiers by materials such as CONC, CBLK, 
BRK, STL, WD, or PTWD. See Chapter 3 for layer 
naming guidelines; also refer to Appendix C on the 
student CD for a list of common layer names used on 
sections.
FIGURE 22-32 A base drawing supplied by the architect for the layout of a framing plan. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.

508 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 22-33 The layout of major structural materials. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
509
FIGURE 22-34 The completed framing plan. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

510 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 22-35 The base floor plan for a precast concrete structure. Courtesy H.D.N. Architects A.I.A.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
511
FIGURE 22-36 The completed framing plan for a precast concrete structure. Courtesy KPFF Consulting Engineers.
ADDITIONAL READING
Links for the materials represented on the framing 
plans are too numerous to list here. Rather than listing 
individual sites, use your favorite search engine to 
research products from the following Construction 
Specifications Institute (CSI) categories: wood, steel, 
concrete, and tilt-up concrete. 

512 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Drawing Framing Plans
CHAPTER 22 TEST
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers.
Question 22-1 List the common scales used to draw a fram-
ing plan.
Question 22-2 Describe the major differences between a 
steel frame and a steel rigid frame structure.
Question 22-3 What is the main goal of a framing plan?
Question 22-4 What is a diaphragm, and how does it affect 
a framing plan?
Question 22-5 What type of details will typically be 
referenced on a framing plan for a heavy timber 
structure?
Question 22-6 What are two common uses for tables on a 
framing plan for a steel-framed structure?
Question 22-7 How is the elevation of a steel beam typically 
referenced on a framing plan?
Question 22-8 How are precast concrete panels typically 
attached to the foundation?
Question 22-9 A concrete component is listed as a 155. 
What type of structural member would it be?
Question 22-10 List possible layer titles that could be used 
to divide information on a framing plan.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the reference material from preceding chapters, 
local codes, and vendor catalogs to complete one of 
the following projects. Unless your instructor provides 
other instructions, draw the framing plan that corre-
sponds to the floor plan that was drawn in Chapter 16. 
Skeletons of the plans and details can be accessed from 
the student CD/DRAWING PROJECTS /CHAPTER 22 
folder. Use these drawings as a base to complete the 
assignment.
● Use appropriate symbols, linetypes, dimensioning 
methods, and notations to complete the drawing.
● Create the needed layers to keep major groups of 
information separated.
● Provide complete dimensions to locate all walls, col-
umns, and beams not represented on the floor plan.
● Determine any unspecified sizes based on material or 
practical requirements.
● See Chapter 23 for details related to the plan views 
created in this chapter. Place a detail reference bubble 
on the framing plan to represent only the details that 
you or your team will draw. Some generic information 
for materials such as straps that are specified in the 
details may need to be specified on the framing plans. 
Coordinate the information in Chapters 22 and 23 to 
ensure that all information is placed on the structural 
drawings.
● Unless specified, select a scale for the framing plan 
that matches the scale of the floor plan. Determine 
required LTSCALE and DIMVARS settings.
Note: The sketches in this chapter are to be used as a 
guide only. You will find that some portions of the 
drawings do not match things that have been drawn 
on other portions of the project. Each project has 
errors that will need to be solved. If you think you 
have found an error, do not make changes to the 
drawings until you have discussed the problem 
and possible solutions with your engineer (your 
instructor).
Information is provided on drawings in Chapters 
16 through 24 relating to each project that might 
be needed to make decisions regarding the framing 
plan. You will act as the project manager and will be 
required to make decisions about how to complete 
the project. Any information not provided must 
be researched and determined by you unless your 
instructor (the project architect and engineer) pro-
vides other instructions. When conflicting informa-
tion is found, information from preceding chapters 
should take precedence. Use the order of precedence 
introduced in Chapter 15.
Unless noted, all shear panels are to be 1/2" ply-
wood with 8d nails @ 4" o.c. @ edge and 8d nails @ 
8" o.c. in field. Use (2)-2× studs or a 4× post at each 
end of shear panel and an appropriate Simpson Co. 
strap or tie to the lower floor or foundation.
Problem 22-1 Framing Plans. Draw the framing plan for 
each level of the condominium started in problem 16-1. 
One unit should contain all framing information for the 
entire floor level.
● Frame the upper level with standard roof trusses.
● Use combination standard/scissor trusses to form a 
vaulted ceiling over the master bedroom.

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
513
● Select and specify appropriate solid-web truss joists to 
span the width of the unit for each floor system.
● Use (2)-2 × 12 headers for all openings unless noted.
● Use 2 × 8 joists to frame each deck and support with 
a 5 1/8" × 13 1/2" glu-lam beam at the outer edge 
of each deck. Support each beam on a 2 × 6 wall 
between units.
● Use a 5 1/8" × 13 1/2" glu-lam for the header over the 
garage door.
Use the framing elevations from Chapter 23 as a guide and 
specify all shear walls and metal straps on each framing 
plan as well as the elevations and foundation plan.
● The front and rear walls are to be full height shear 
walls for all units.
● The wall between the kitchen/bathroom on the main 
floor is also to be a shear wall.
● Place a 5 1/8" × 10 1/2" glu-lam beam in the garage 
ceiling below the shear wall for all units.
Note: Use the sample calculations posted on the 
student CD in the REFERENCE MATERIAL folder 
to specify material that is not specified in the follow-
ing problems.
Problem 22-2a Framing Plan. Use the floor plan that was 
created in Chapter 16 as a base to create the framing plan 
for this structure. Freeze all of the architectural informa-
tion and create the required layers to add the structural 
materials. Provide dimensions to locate all walls and 
openings. Use the information presented in problem 
22-2b to complete this drawing and the details to be 
completed in Chapter 23.
Problem 22-2b Roof Plan. Use the attached drawing to 
complete the roof framing plan for the structure started 
in problem 16-2. Coordinate this plan with the details 
associated with problem 23-2.
● Use 8 3/4" × 28 1/2" glu-lam beams for the east side 
of the steel column. Use an 8 3/4" × 24" glu-lam 
beam for the west side of the steel column.
● Use 6 3/4" × 12" beams over the two smaller win-
dows on the south and northeast side, and a 6 3/4" × 
24" beam over the opening on the south end of the 
east side.
● Use a 6 3/4" × 18" beam over the windows on the 
south end of the east wall.
● Specify each ledger on the framing plan as per speci-
fications given for problems 19-2a, 19-2b, and 23-2a 
through 23-2j. 
● Use TJL65/18 open-web trusses @ 32" o.c. See the 
Weyerhaeuser Web site (www.ilevel.com). 
● Provide 3 × 4 solid blocking between each truss at 
each bearing point and attach blocks to ledger w/ A34 
each end to ledger. 
❍ Use H3 hurricane ties to each side of each truss. 
● Use 5/8" APA group 1 interior ply with exterior glue 
roof sheathing. Lap plywood seams at 24" o.c. 
Problem 22-3a Roof Plan. Use the drawing on the next 
page to complete the roof framing plan for the structure 
started in problem 16-3. See the details for problem 23-3 
for additional information. Use the plywood roof sheath-
ing per problem 22-2.
Roof Beams
All beams to be DF/HF, V-5, Fb 2400 unless noted. 
Listed spans refer to distance from the column to the 
indicated cantilever.
Beam 1: 6'–4" into span 2–3  
Use 6 3/4" × 34 1/2" 
Beam 2:  
 
 
Use 6 3/4" × 27" 
Beam 3: 6'–4" into grid 3  
Same size as beam 1 
Beam 4:  
 
 
Same size as beam 2 
Beam 5: +8'   
 
Same size as beam 1 
Beam 6: Grid B + 30'   
Use 6 3/4" × 31 1/2" 
Beam 7:  
 
 
 Use TJI HS90/20 truss 
@ 8'–0" o.c.
Beam 8:  
 
 
 Use 2 × 6 purlins @ 
24" o.c.

514 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
515
Problem 22-3b Mezzanine Floor Framing. Use the draw-
ings below as a base to develop the framing plan for the 
mezzanine level started in problem 16-3. Assume the 
use of 1 1/8" plywood floor sheathing. Develop a beam 
schedule for framing members. Use DF/HF, V-5, Fb 2400 
beams unless noted:
Beam 1: 
Span 32'  Use 6 3/4" × 37 1/2"
Beam 2:  Span 32'  Use TJI HS90/28" I-joist at 24" o.c.
Problem 22-4a Roof Plan. Use the on the next page 
drawing to complete the roof framing plan for the 
structure started in problem 16-4. Develop a beam 
schedule for the roof framing. 
Roof Beams
Make the following assumptions unless noted:
All beams to be DF/HF, V-5, Fb 2400 unless noted.
Listed spans assume 36' column spacing plus cantilevers.
Listed spans refer to distance from the column to the 
indicated cantilever.
Beam 1:  
8'–0" east of grid I  
Use 6 3/4" ×31 1/2" 
Beam 2:  
8'–0" east of grid H  
Use 6 3/4" × 21"
Beam 3:  
8'–0" east of H to F  
Same as beam 1 
Beam 4:  
12'–0" east of D to F  
Use 6 3/4" × 24" 
Beam 5:  
16'–0" east of D to C  Same as beam 1 
Beam 6:  
48'–0" clear span  
Use 6 3/4" × 34 1/2"
Beam 7:  
48'–0" clear span  
 Use TJI HS90/18 
trusses @ 32" o.c.
Beam 8:  
35'–0" clear span  
 Use TJI HS90/16 
trusses @ 32" o.c.
Roof Blocking
Provide 3 × 4 solid blocking between trusses at each 
end of the warehouse structure. 
● Blocks to extend a minimum of 36' (and modular 
based on truss locations) from each end wall and to be 
placed at 48" o.c. 
● Bond last truss of blocking pattern w/ (2)-Simpson 
HD-2 hold-down anchors.

516 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing

Chapter 22: Drawing Framing Plans 
517
Problem 22-4b Mezzanine Floor Plan. Use the drawings 
on this page and complete the framing plan for the mez-
zanine level started in problem 16-4. Develop a beam 
schedule for framing members. Use DF/HF, V-5, Fb 2400 
beams unless noted. Listed spans refer to grids on fram-
ing plan.
Mezzanine Floor Framing
Use 1 1/8" floor sheathing.
Beam 1:  
Span 36' 
Use 6 3/4" × 37 1/2" 
Beam 2:  
Span 24'  
Use 6 3/4" × 30" 
Beam 3:  
Span 24'  
Use TJI HS90/24 @ 32" o.c.
Beam 4:  
Span 16' 
Use TJI HS90/24 @ 32" o.c.
Beam 5:  
Span 32'  
Use TJI HS90/24 @ 24" o.c.

518
23
Drawing Structural 
Elevations and Sections
Chapters 16 and 19 introduced the drawing of eleva-
tions and sections used in architectural drawings. 
Similar drawings can also be used in structural drawings 
to describe structural materials. Structural elevations are 
generally associated with structural steel and concrete 
tilt-up construction. Structural sections can be used 
with any type of building material to show complicated 
framing intersections. To help you understand the CAD 
technician’s role in creating these drawings, this chapter 
will explore:
The purpose of structural steel elevations.
 
●
Poured concrete elevations.
 
●
Concrete tilt-up elevations.
 
●
Key concepts for drawing structural sections, 
 
●
including:
❍ Drawing scales.
❍ Drawing placement.
❍ Representing materials.
STRUCTURAL STEEL ELEVATIONS
Three common types of elevations are used to explain 
structural steel. Elevations can be used to show the ver-
tical relationship of major framing members shown on 
the framing plans without showing any architectural 
information. Figure 23-1 shows an example of the 
steel skeleton for a warehouse. This type of elevation 
FIGURE 23-1 Structural elevations show the shape of the skeleton. Courtesy Charles J. Conlee, P.E., Conlee Engineers, Inc.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
519
provides a vertical reference for materials shown along 
one specific grid line on the framing plans. Several 
elevations can be created depending on the complex-
ity of the structure. Details similar to Figure 23-2 are 
referenced to the elevation to explain construction.
Elevations can also be used to show how the steel 
framework relates to the architectural members of the 
structure. Figure 23-3 shows an example of this type of 
elevation. Notice that this drawing shows similarities to 
both a structural elevation and an architectural section. 
Details for structural information are referenced to the 
elevation.
A third type of steel elevation is used to show 
major steel components similar to the truss shown in 
Figure 23-4. This type of elevation is used to fabri-
cate a component off-site. The drawing shows major 
structural components as well as connection details 
similar to Figure 23-5.
POURED CONCRETE ELEVATIONS
The elevations for poured concrete are similar to those 
used for structural steel. Drawings show the location of 
structural beams and columns along a specific grid in 
FIGURE 23-2 Details are keyed to structural sections to explain 
connections. Courtesy Charles J. Conlee, P.E., Conlee Engineers, Inc.
FIGURE 23-3 Structural elevations can be used to show how the framework relates to the architectural members. Courtesy Charles J. 
Conlee, P.E., Conlee Engineers, Inc.

520 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 23-4 Structural elevations can be used to show how a structural system is constructed. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/
McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.
FIGURE 23-5 Construction details are used to supplement 
structural elevations. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/
Knauf Consulting Engineers.
the structure, as shown in Figure 23-6. In addition to 
describing distances between members, the elevation 
also serves as a reference map for listing beam sizes and 
for connection details similar to Figure 23-7. Elevations 
can also be more specific and show only specific types 
of construction, similar to the column elevations shown 
in Figure 23-8, as well as the size, shape, and reinforcing 
of specific members.
CONCRETE TILT-UP ELEVATIONS
Elevations for a tilt-up structure are used to show the 
size, shape, opening locations, and reinforcing for 
each panel of a structure. Elevations are drawn for 
tilt-up construction using two common formats. The 
format used depends on the size and complexity of 
the structure. Each method is usually referenced on 
the title page by the name panel elevation. One method 
of showing the construction of panels is to show an 
entire face of a structure similar to the architectural 
elevations. A scale of 1/8" or 1/4" = 1'–0" is often 
used to draw panel elevations. Structural elevations 
similar to Figure 23-9 show the components required 
to construct the panels. The panel elevations are 
drawn as if you are standing inside the building, 
looking out. Elevations are drawn showing the inside 
surface, because what will become the exterior surface 
is against the slab that is used to form the panels. 
Dimensions showing the size of all panels and the 
size and locations of all openings should be provided. 
Because of the small scale, reinforcing steel patterns 

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
521
FIGURE 23-6 Elevations for poured concrete show the location of each column and beam. Courtesy KPFF Consulting Engineers.

522 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 23-7 Details must be drawn to show how each column and beam will be constructed. Courtesy KPFF Consulting Engineers.
are referenced by note but not shown on these draw-
ings. Individual steel required for openings is shown 
in schedules or details similar to Figure 23-10 and 
referenced to the elevations.
An alternative to drawing all of the panels along 
one grid line as a whole unit is to draw each panel 
as an individual panel elevation, similar to the panel 
seen in Figure 23-11. Using this method, a large-scale 
elevation is drawn of each panel. The scale depends 
on the size of the panel and the complexity of the 
reinforcing pattern to be represented. One elevation 
can be used to describe several panels if they are 
exactly the same in every respect. If any variation 
exists, an elevation of each panel must be drawn. A 
detail is typically included within each panel elevation 
to show and specify typical reinforcing steel. Special 
steel required to reinforce each opening is drawn 
and specified on each panel elevation. Panels can be 
referenced to other drawings by referring to the grids 
located at each end of the panel. Panels can also be 
referenced to the framing plan by using an elevation 
reference symbol. This method is similar to the way 
interior drawings are referenced to the floor plan (see 
Chapter 16).
Details similar to Figure 23-12 are referenced to each 
type of panel elevation to show typical corner and joint 
details. In addition to showing whole panels, eleva-
tion of smaller panels, called spandrels are also usually 
provided. Spandrels are concrete panels that are not full 
height, located over or between areas of glazing. When 
spandrels are required for a project, an elevation should 
be provided to specify reinforcing steel. Details similar 
to Figure 23-13 are typically required to show both 
reinforcing steel within the panel and restraining steel 
at connections.
STRUCTURAL SECTIONS
The engineering team draws sections to show the 
vertical relationship of major material intersections. 
When drawn, the section would be created using the 
same guidelines used to create architectural sections. 
Although referred to as sections on the project title 
page, structural sections are usually details of a spe-
cific area rather than of an entire wall, or a portion 
of the structure. The structural drawings detail how 
each component is to be constructed or connected to 
other materials. The architectural drawings are used 
to show how each component relates to others in size 
and location. The same guidelines used to construct 
architectural details should be used to draft structural 
details. See Chapters 3 and 6 for a review of linetypes 
and hatch patterns typically used with sections and 
details.
Drawing Scales
The scale used to create structural sections and details 
depends on the intent of the detail. The senior drafter 
typically provides a sketch and indicates the required 
scale for a new CAD technician to follow. When 
determining the size for a detail, the smallest compo-
nent to be represented should determine the drawing 
scale. Use a scale that allows the smallest member to 
be shown clearly. Common scales used for structural 

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
523
FIGURE 23-8 Schedules and elevations are typically used to explain column and beam construction. Courtesy KPFF Consulting Engineers.

524 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 23-9 Panel elevations can be drawn of an entire face of a structure. Courtesy Bill Berry, Berry-Nordling Engineers, Inc.
FIGURE 23-10 Steel required to reinforce openings can be 
represented in a schedule to keep the drawings uncluttered. 
Courtesy Bill Berry, Berry-Nordling Engineers, Inc.
FIGURE 23-11 An individual elevation can be drawn for each 
panel. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting 
Engineers.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
525
details and the closest metric counterparts include the 
following:
In/ft Scale 
Metric
3/4" = 1'–0" 
1:20 
1" = 1'–0" 
1:10 
1 1/2" = 1'–0" 
(no common scale) 
3" = 1'–0" 
1:5 
When several details are to be drawn that relate to 
the same component, each should be drawn at the same 
scale if space permits.
When scales smaller than 3/4" = 1'–0" (1:20) are 
used, structural materials are sometimes drawn at their 
nominal size of 6" × 12" (150 × 300 mm) rather than 
their actual size 5 1/2" × 11 1/2" (140 × 292 mm). 
Structural details drawn at a scale of 3/4" (1:20) and 
larger should always represent materials with their 
actual sizes. Review Section 2 for various material sizes. 
FIGURE 23-12 No matter which method is used to represent 
the panels, details must be drawn to represent each panel 
intersection. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf 
Consulting Engineers.
FIGURE 23-13 Reinforcing steel details are required to be 
drawn for individual panels. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/
McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

526 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Although the use of computers enables CAD drafters 
a very high degree of drawing accuracy, some compo-
nents of a detail may be drawn out of scale for drawing 
clarity. In small-scale drawings, thin materials such as 
plywood, sheet rock, or steel plates may be represented 
thicker than they really are to add clarity. Care should 
be taken as components are enlarged so that their size 
remains consistent when compared to other material. 
Figure 23-14 shows examples of enlarging materials 
for clarity.
Drawing Placement
Structural sections and details should be drawn as 
close as possible to where they are referenced on 
the drawing. The CAD technician needs to place the 
details so that they conform to the job layout estab-
lished by the engineer. Whenever possible, details 
should be drawn so that common features such as 
walls, floors, or rooflines are aligned. This is especially 
true if details are not placed in individual detail boxes. 
Aligning the top of the slab in each detail adds clarity 
to the total page layout. When individual detail boxes 
are used, an attempt should still be made to group 
details so that similar items can be aligned. Although 
similar features cannot always be aligned, the box out-
lines provide an order and drawing clarity.
Representing Materials
The drafter’s main consideration when drawing sec-
tions or details is to clearly distinguish between materi-
als. Section 2 and Chapters 6 and 19 give examples of 
how construction materials are represented in section 
views and details. The amount of detail to be drawn 
is determined by the scale that will be used to plot the 
drawing. As the drawing scale increases, the complexity 
of material representation should also increase. As the 
detail zooms in on a smaller area, drawing representa-
tion should also increase.
Figure 23-15 shows an example of a foundation detail 
showing six materials. Using standard hatch patterns, 
the soil, gravel fill, concrete, steel reinforcing, grout, 
and structural steel can each be quickly identified. Even 
FIGURE 23-14 Small materials such as bolts or plywood are 
often enlarged so that they can be clearly seen. Courtesy Van 
Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.
FIGURE 23-15 A key to good detailing is to use varied 
lineweights, linetypes, and hatch patterns to distinguish 
between materials.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
527
though a continuous line is used to represent the shape 
of the structural steel, concrete, and reinforcing, each can 
be easily distinguished because of varied line widths and 
the use of hatch patterns. Care should be taken to keep 
the size of the hatch pattern from becoming ineffective. 
Using too large a pattern will not provide the repetition 
needed to distinguish the pattern. Too small a pattern 
will have the same effect as using the FILL command.
ADDITIONAL READING
Links for the materials represented on the structural 
details and elevations are too numerous to list here. 
Rather than listing individual sites, use your favorite 
search engine to research products from the follow-
ing CSI categories: wood, steel, concrete, and tilt-up 
concrete. 
Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections
CHAPTER 23 TEST
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. 
Question 23-1 What types of drawings typically require 
structural elevations?
Question 23-2 What is the purpose of structural steel eleva-
tions?
Question 23-3 What is the advantage of drawing individual 
panel elevations for concrete tilt-up construction?
Question 23-4 What is a spandrel?
Question 23-5 How can a CAD technician decide if some-
thing should be dimensioned?
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Use the reference material from preceding chapters, 
local codes, and vendor catalogs to complete one of 
the following projects. Unless other instructions are 
given by your instructor, complete the project that cor-
responds to the floor plan that was drawn in Chapter 
16. Skeleton drawings for most of the problems can 
be accessed from the student CD in the DRAWING 
PROJECTS/CHAPTER 23 folder. Use these drawings 
as a base to complete the assignment. Use appropriate 
symbols, linetypes, dimensioning methods, and nota-
tions to complete the drawing. Determine any unspeci-
fied sizes based on material or practical requirements. 
Unless specified, match the scale of the floor plan and 
use appropriate LTSCALE and DIMVARS settings.
You will act as the project manager and will be 
required to make decisions about how to complete the 
project. Study each of the drawing problems related 
to the structure prior to starting a drawing problem. 
Any information not provided must be researched and 
determined by you unless your instructor (the project 
architect and engineer) provides other instructions. 
When conflicting information is found, information 
from preceding chapters should take precedence. Make 
several sketches of possible solutions based on exam-
ples found throughout this text and submit them to 
your instructor prior to completing each problem with 
missing information. Place the necessary cutting plane 
and detail bubbles on the framing plan to indicate each 
drawing.
Note: Keep in mind as you complete these drawings 
that the finished drawing set may contain more sec-
tions and in some cases hundreds of details more 
than you are being asked to draw. Other details that 
would be required for the building department or 
the construction crew will not be drawn due to the 
limitations of space and time.
Warning: The instructions for each problem are 
written in common textbook English. Although it 
may not be evident, every attempt has been made to 
use proper grammar in the following detail specifi-
cations. In order to help students who may not be 
familiar with construction methods have a better 
chance of successfully completing the details, expla-
nations have been written using proper English. 
This is not the case with calculations written by 
an engineer. The engineer is concerned with using 
computer programs that analyze building stresses, 
and a calculator to run math formulas, and not 
with the English skills that were learned in college. 
That’s why you’ll have a job, to sort through the 
engineer’s math formulas, determine what needs 

528 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
to be specified, and place that information on the 
working drawings in the proper format. That means 
placing information in short concise statements. To 
do that, you’ll need to translate statements such as 
the following:
● Provide 3" × 5/16" side straps on each side of the 
beam, placed so that the centerline of the bolts 
that pass through the straps are 4" up from the 
bottom of the beam and 3" down from the top of 
the beam. 
Part of your job is to condense these state-
ments into short notes that clearly explain the 
intended process. This would include placing 
notes such as:
3" × 5/16" side straps ea. side 
and drawing dimensions that show the strap 4" up 
from the bottom of the beam, and 3" down from 
the top of the beam. The results of this one note 
can be seen in Figure 23-16. 
Remember, your goal is to place a large amount 
of information in a small space, while maintaining 
clarity in the communication between the engi-
neer and the construction worker. To do this, use 
abbreviations when possible to conserve drawing 
space. 
Problem 23-1 Use the drawing as a guide and complete a 
framing elevation for the front, rear, and interior shear 
walls of the condominium started in project 16-1.
● Front wall—upper floor: On exterior face of wall 
use 1/2" c-d exterior plywood Structural II or 
better with 8d @ 4" o.c. at all edges and 8d @ 
6" o.c. at field.
● Front wall—middle and lower floor: Same plywood 
as above, applied to interior and exterior surfaces of 
wall.
● Front straps—vertical: 
❍ Upper to middle floor—Use an MST48 strap over 
double top plates with (48)-10d nails at the exte-
rior face of each opening. 
❍ Middle to lower floor—Use a MST60 strap over 
double top plates with (60)-10d nails on the inte-
rior and exterior sides of wall. 
❍ Lower to foundation—Use HD-7A anchor on each 
vertical support at each side of each opening.
● Attach to foundation with 3/4" A.B. with 12" embed-
ment, through 3× plate. Bolt to vertical supports as 
per manufacturer’s specifications. Use 5/8" × 12" 
anchor bolts at 16" o.c. for plate to foundation. Use 
(3)-3/4" hammer driven bolts × 4 1/2" long at end of 
shear wall into 4’ high retaining wall.
● Front straps—horizontal: Block between studs for all 
horizontal straps as plates from one unit are tied into 
the wall system of the next unit. Use MST60 with 10d 
nails at each plate level.
● Rear wall—upper floor: Use plywood as per front 
wall with nailing at 6" and 12" spacing.
● Rear wall—middle floor: Use plywood per the upper 
floor applied to the interior and exterior face of wall at 
each unit.
● Rear wall—lower floor: Use plywood as per the upper 
floor applied to the exterior face only.
● Rear straps—vertical: 
❍ Upper to middle floor—Use LSTA36 with (24)-10d 
nails. 
❍ Middle to lower floor—Use MSTI48 with (48)-10d 
nails.
● Rear straps—horizontal: Use LSTA21 at top plate, 
and LSTA36 at all other plates for this wall.
● Interior wall—upper floor: Use 3/8" ply with nails at 
4" and 6" spacing one side only. Use 3× studs at each 
end of shear wall. Use HD2A with 5/8" bolts as per the 
manufacturer’s specifications to each end post to each 
post located in wall below.
● Interior wall—middle floor: Use plywood as per the 
wall above, applied to each side of wall. Use 4× studs 
each end of shear wall. Place a 4× post below the 
post in wall above. Use HD2A with 5/8" bolts as per 
the manufacturer’s specifications. Use a 1/2" × 4" × 
9" steel plate on bottom side of glu-lam beam for bolt 
attachment.
● Interior wall—lower floor: Place 5 1/2" × 10 1/2" 
glu-lam beam below the shear wall above. Support the 
beam on 4 × 6 post with EPC caps and appropriate 
bolts at each end of the beam. Attach the post to foun-
dation with an appropriate CB column base.
Note: Use the sample calculations posted on the 
student CD in the REFERENCE MATERIAL folder 
to specify material that is not specified in the follow-
ing problems.
FIGURE 23-16 CAD technicians will need to translate engi-
neering notes into clear communication for those who will be 
reading the plan.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
529

530 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 23-2 In addition to the sections created in problem 
19-2, create details to show the beam-to-wall, beam-to-
column, truss-to-beam, and truss-to-ledger connections 
for the structure started in problem 16-2. Assemble the 
sections and details from Chapter 19 and this chapter 
into the fewest number of sheets as possible. Assign and 
coordinate detail numbers and place each number on the 
framing plan created in Chapter 22.
● Use the framing plan to determine all beam and truss 
sizes and locations. Specify the size of each in each 
detail. 
● Select appropriate GLB steel beam seats for the beam 
at each pilaster and detail each connection.
● Use a 3" × 4" × 3/8" steel plate with an MST27 strap 
at the top of each beam to attach the beam to the wall. 
Attach the MST straps per drawing 23-2e.
● Use drawing 23-2f as a guide to detail the support for 
the beam to steel column.
● Refer to the framing plan to verify required truss sizes. 
Use the Weyerhaeuser Web site (www.ilevel.com) 
to determine required connections for the open-web 
trusses. 
Problem 23-2a.1 Draw and label a detail showing the bear-
ing wall/truss intersection based on the general construc-
tion guidelines of problem 23-2. 
Problem 23-2a.2 Draw and label a detail showing the non-
bearing wall/truss intersection based on the general con-
struction guidelines of problem 23-2. 
Problem 23-2b Draw a detail to show the connection of the 
trusses to the ridge beam. 
● Use an MST48 strap at every other truss placed across 
the top of the truss chords. 
● Place a solid block between trusses along the ridge. 
❍ Anchor the blocks to the ridge beam with an A35 
anchor at each end of each block, placed on oppo-
site sides of the block.
Problem 23-2c Draw a detail to show the truss-to-column 
bracing. Provide 2 × 4 braces @ each truss at each side 
of column set at a 45° maximum angle from vertical. 
Provide (2)-3 × 4 blocks between each brace at equal 
spacing along the brace and a 3 × 4 nailer where the 
brace intersects the trusses. Use an appropriate U-hanger 
to support the brace at the beam.
Problem 23-2d Draw a detail showing the connection 
of the glu-lam beam to concrete block. Use a suitable 
glu-lam beam seat based on the load to be supported at 
each pilaster. Bolt the beam to the GLB seat as per manu-
facturer’s specifications. 
● Tie the leg of the beam seat to a #5 × 24" rebar with 
1/8" fillet weld, both sides of bar to plate. 
● Tie the 24" rebar into the steel used to reinforce the 
pilaster. 
● At the upper end of the beam, bolt a 3" × 4" × 3/8" 
steel plate to the wall.
● Provide (1)-3/4" × 6" stud welded with 1/8" fillet 
welded all around to back side of plate extending into 
the block wall and tied into the wall steel. 
● Weld an MST27 strap on each side of the beam to the 
front side of plate to support glu-lam. 
❍ Weld the straps to the end plate with 1/8" fillet 
weld on each outer side of the strap. 
❍ Place the centerline of straps at 3" from the top of 
the beam.
Problem 23-2e Draw a detail showing the connection of 
the glu-lam beam over the storefront windows to the 
concrete block wall. Use a suitable glu-lam beam seat 
based on the load to be supported for the south and east 
walls at windows. Tie the GLB seat to wall steel with 
1/8" welds. Bolt the beam to the seat as per the manufac-
turer’s specifications. At the upper end of the beam, bolt 
a steel plate to the wall using detail 23-2d as a guide. 
Place the centerline of straps at 3" down from the top of 
the beam.
Problem 23-2f Draw a detail showing the connection of 
the ridge beam to the 4" × 4" × 5/16" steel column. 
Select a suitable CC column cap and weld to the 
column with 3/16" fillet weld all around. Specify bolts 
recommended by the manufacturer for the cap-to-beam 
connection. Provide a 3" × 27" × 5/16" steel strap 
with the centerline of (4)-3/4" M.B. 4" down from the 
top of the beam, centered over the beam splice at the 
column.
Problem 23-2g Draw a detail showing the plan view of the 
16" × 16" pilaster construction. Reinforce the pilaster 
with (8)-#5 vertical bars with #3 horizontal ties @ 16" 
o.c. Specify that the laps in the ties are to be staggered 
180°. 
Problem 23-2h Draw a detail showing a plan view of rein-
forcement for the block wall at each opening. Use (6)-#5 
verticals (2 per cell) with #3 ties at 16" o.c. horizontally. 
Show normal wall steel in other cells.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
531
Problem 23-3a Use the attached drawings to detail the 
required roof connections for the roof framing plan 
that was started in problem 22-3a (and problem 16-3). 
Choose a scale suitable for clearly showing the required 
information. Keep in mind that the information in the 
attached drawings is incomplete and may contain errors. 
Refer back to the order of precedence to accurately com-
plete the following drawings.
● Use the framing plan to determine all beam and 
truss sizes and locations. Specify the size of each in 
each detail.
● Use MST37 straps to tie the trusses to wall, and 
MST27 straps to tie the purlins to the ledger. 
❍ Use 8'–0" spacing for each. 
● Assume that the walls are reinforced with #5 Ø @ 16" 
o.c. horizontal and #5 Ø @ 36" o.c. vertical.
● Assume all welds are 3/16" fillet welds unless noted.
Roof Ledgers
● Use 3 × 12 DFPT ledger with 3/4" Ø anchor bolts at 
32" o.c. at grids A and G. 
❍ Stagger bolts 3" up/down.
❍ At splices in the ledger at grids A and G use (2)-3" 
× 144" × 3/16" straps with (8)-3/4" bolts 2" from 
ends and 20" o.c. and 10" from splice. 
❍ Place straps 3" down from top of ledger and 3 1/2" 
from center to center. 
● Space bolts at 60" o.c. at grids 1 and 7, staggered 
3" up/down.
❍ At splices at walls 1 and 7 use (3)-3/16" × 3" 
× 24" straps at 3 1/2" o.c. with 4 bolts per strap 
placed 2" from strap end, and 6" o.c.
Problem 22-3a.1 Beam to Wall. (Place lower portion
of this detail with the balance of the mezzanine details.) 
● Support the upper beam on 16" × 16" pilaster, and 
the lower beam on 16" × 24" pilaster.
❍ Detail the upper portion of pilaster (22-3a.1.a) to 
match problem 23-2g. 
❍ Detail the lower portion of the pilaster (22-3a.1.b) 
with (10)-#5 Ø vertical bars, with #3 Ø horizontal 
ties @ 16" o.c. Provide 3/4" clear for each beam to 
block wall. 

532 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Provide fire-cut to glu-lams and 6× solid block to wall. 
● Connect beams to the wall with MST27 each side of 
beam, 3" down from the top of the beam. 
❍ Weld the straps to 4" × 6 7/8" × 3/8" steel plate 
w/ 1/8" fillet weld. 
❍ Bolt the plate to the wall with (2) -1/2" Ø × 6" 
studs. Weld the stud to the plate w/ 1/8" fillet weld, 
all around. 
● Provide (4)-#5 Ø × 36" in the wall behind plate. Use 
Simpson Company GLB beam seat. Specify bolting as 
per the manufacturer recommendations. Tie the beam 
seat bolts to the vertical wall steel.
Problem 23-3a.2 Beam to Beam with Saddle. See framing 
plan for the range of beam sizes.
● Support the beam with 6 7/8" × 7 1/4" × 7/8" bearing 
plates at the top and bottom. Dap the top plate into 
the beam. 
● Provide 5/16" × 7" wide side plates to each side of the 
beam.
❍ Weld side plates to top/bottom plates with 5/16" 
fillet weld.
❍ Provide 5/16" × 3" high straps on each side of the 
beam at the top and bottom of the side plates. 
Attach the straps to the beam with (3)-3/4" Ø 
 
■
bolts @ 3" o.c. 
Set bolts 4 1/2" up/down from the beam edges, 
 
■
with the first bolt set 8" from the beam splice, 
and the third bolt set 1 1/2" from the strap end.
❍ Attach straps to side plate with 5/16" fillet weld.
Problem 23-3a.3 Beam to Beam at Fire Wall. 
● Frame the wall with 2 × 6 studs @ 16" o.c. with hori-
zontal solid blocking placed @ 10' maximum intervals.
● Provide 3 × 6 top pl. with 2 × 6 × 1 deep counter 
bore for 5/8" Ø × 6" bolts at 32" o.c. with 2" Ø wash-
ers through (2)-2 × 6 top plates.
● Provide 3 × 6 continuous nailer at each side of top 
plate, with metal hangers for blocking.
● Support the glu-lam beams on each side of the wall 
with appropriate CCO connector to 6 × 6 TS column. 
❍ Center each column 12" from center of stud wall. 
❍ Provide 3/4" clearance between the beam and 
the gypsum board. Use 3/8" fillet for the CCO to 
column connections. 
● Provide an MST48 strap, 3" down from the bottom of 
the top plates, centered on the wall.
● Provide 5/8" type X gypsum board between the 
trusses, 60" out from wall minimum to cover the 2 × 
6 purlins.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
533
Problem 23-3a.4 Beam to Column. 
● Support each glu-lam on 6 7/8" × 20" × 7/8" bearing 
plate welded to TS column with 3/8" weld. 
● Provide (4)-9" × 20" × 5/16" side plates with 
(2)-3/4" Ø bolts to each beam. 
❍ Place bolts 2" down, 2" in from upper edge of the 
side plate, and 3" o.c. Provide standard washers.
Problem 23-3a.5 I-Joist to Beam. 
● Select a suitable HIT joist hanger and specify the 
required connection for trusses to each laminated 
beam. 
● Provide an MST48 @ 8'–0" o.c. from truss/truss over 
the top of the beam.
Problem 23-3a.6 I-Joist/Ledger—Perpendicular. 
● Provide 3 × 12 DFPT ledger w/ 3/4" Ø bolts @ 32" 
o.c. staggered 3" up/down. 
● Connect the trusses to the ledger with HB1430 
hangers. 
❍ Select suitable hangers for the rafters-to-purlin 
connection.
❍ Reinforce the wall w/8" × 16" bond beam at the 
ledger. 
● Provide 3" × 4"h × 5/8" plate with (2)-3/4" Ø × 4 
1/8" studs, attached w/ 1/8" fillet weld. 
● Weld an MST37 to the plate w/1/8" fillet weld @ 
8'–0" o.c.

534 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 23-3a.7 Purlin/Ledger–Parallel. 
● Provide 3 × 12 DFPT ledger with 3/4" Ø bolts @ 60" 
o.c. staggered 3" up/down. 
● Reinforce the wall at the ledger w/ a two-course deep 
bond beam.
● Provide 3" × 4"h × 5/8" plate at each truss to bind 
the truss to the wall/ledger. 
❍ Attach the plate to the wall with (1)-3/4" Ø × 4 
1/8" stud. 
❍ Provide an MST27 strap at each truss/plate.
Attach the plate to the strap with 1/8" fillet weld. 
 
■
● Select suitable U hangers for the rafters-to-truss 
connection. 
Problem 23-3a.8 Purlin/I-Joist. Determine the gravity load 
to be supported by each 2× purlin and select suitable PF 
hangers.
Problem 23-3a.9 Ledger Splice—Bearing Wall. See the 
roof/floor ledger notes and establish a detail to show floor 
and roof usage.
Problem 23-3a.10 Ledger Splice—Nonbearing Wall. See 
the roof/floor ledger notes and establish a detail to show 
floor and roof usage.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
535
Problem 23-3b Use the attached drawings to detail the 
required connections for the mezzanine floor framing 
plan that was started in problem 22-3b (and problem 
16-3). Choose a scale suitable for clearly showing the 
required information. Assume the use of 1 1/8 tongue-
and-groove plywood with nailing per the roof sheath-
ing. Keep in mind that the information in the attached 
drawings is incomplete and may contain errors. Refer 
back to the order of precedence to accurately complete 
the following drawings.
Floor Ledgers
Use 4 × 12 DFPT ledgers with 3/4" Ø anchor bolts 
at 24" o.c. at grids A and F and placed at 48" o.c. at 
grid 7. Stagger all bolts 3" up/down. At splices in ledger 
at grids A and F use (2)-144" long × 3" straps with 
(10)-3/4" Ø bolts 1 1/2" from ends and 15" o.c. and 
10 1/2" minimum from splice. Place straps 3" down 
from top of ledger and 3 1/2" from center to center. 
At splices at wall 7, use (3)-3/16" × 3" × 36" straps at 
3 1/2" o.c. with four bolts per straps placed 1 1/2" from 
strap end, and 6" o.c.
Problem 23-3b.1 Beam to Column. 
● Support the glu-lam beam on a 3/4" × 9" × 6 7/8" 
bearing plate. 
● Provide a 7/16" × 9" × 15" side plate on each side of 
the beam. Lap the side plates over the side of the base 
plate. 
● Provide a 7/16" × 15" × 7 3/4" end plate. 
● Weld the side plates to the base and end plate with 
3/8" fillet welds. 
❍ Weld the base plate to the 6" × 6" × 3/16" column 
with 3/8" fillet weld, all around.
❍ Bolt the side plates to the beam with (2)-3/4" bolts 
placed at 3" o.c., 2" down, and 2" from edge of side 
plates.
● Provide a 9" × 9" × 3/4" gusset plate on each side of 
the column to support the base plate. Weld with 1/4" 
fillet welds.  
● Provide a 24" × 3" × 1/4" strap @ each side of the 
beam with (1)-3/4" Ø bolt through the beam, 3" 
down from top of the beam, 2" from the end 
of strap. 
❍ Weld the side of the strap to the column with a 
1/8" fillet weld.  
Problem 23-3b.2 Beam to Fire Wall. 
● Use detail 23-3b.1 as a guide for weld, plates, straps, 
gusset, and bolting sizes. 
● Complete the fire wall detail to match detail 23-3a.3.  
● Provide a 12" × 3" × 1/4" strap @ each side of 
the beam with (1)–3/4" Ø bolt through the beam, 
3" down from top of the beam, 2" from the end 
of strap. 
● Support the flooring at the fire wall with a 3 × 12 
ledger attached to the stud wall with 5/8" Ø lag bolts 
at each stud, staggered 2" up/down.

536 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 23-3b.3 I-Joist to Beam. Use an appropriate HIT 
hanger to connect the I-joists to the glu-lams.
Problem 23-3b.4 I-Joist to Ledger—Perpendicular. See the 
floor ledger section at the start of the mezzanine notes 
to specify the ledger size and bolting. Use an appropriate 
HIT hanger, to connect the I-joists to ledger. Connect the 
assembly to the wall similar to detail 23-3a.6.
Problem 23-3b.5 I-Joist to Ledger—Parallel. 
● See the wall sections for steel locations. 
● See the floor ledger notes to specify ledger size and 
bolting. 
● Use an appropriate hanger to connect the blocking 
between the ledger and the truss. Connect the assem-
bly to the wall similar to detail 23-3a.7.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
537
Problem 23-3b.6 Ledger Splice—Bearing Wall. 
● Use a 4 × 12 ledger with bolting as per detail 
23-3a.9.
Problem 23-3b.7 Ledger Splice—Nonbearing Wall. 
● Use a 4 × 12 ledger with bolting as per detail 
23-3a.10.
Problem 23-4 Use the attached drawings to detail the 
required roof connections for the roof framing plan 
that was started in problem 22-4a (and problem 
16-4). Choose a scale suitable for clearly showing the 
required information. Assume all welds to be 3/16" 
fillet unless noted. Submit preliminary drawings to 
your instructor prior to completing the drawings. Keep 
in mind that the information in the attached drawings 
is incomplete and may contain errors. Refer back to 
the order of precedence to accurately complete the fol-
lowing drawings. Use the framing plan to determine 
all beam and truss sizes and locations. Specify the size 
of each in each detail. 
Problem 23-4a.1 Beam to Wall. For grids 3C and 3K (3A 
and 3C similar @ sales). Use the attached drawings to 
complete the following details:
Lower Connector
● Provide 1/4" minimum clear from the beam to the 
wall. Support the glu-lam beam on a 6 7/8" × 10" × 
3/4" base plate.
● Provide 10" × 10" × 16"h × 5/16" angle placed 
on each side of beam, and weld to the base plate 
w/ 5/16" fillet. 
● Provide (3)-3/4" Ø bolts through the angles and 
beam, placed 2" minimum from the top of the plate 
and 2" from the outer plate edge. Place the other 
(2) bolts at 5" o.c.
● Provide (6)-3/4" Ø × 4 1/2" taper bolts to the 6" 
tilt-up wall to each side angle in 2 columns, placed at 
5" o.c. Place taper bolts 3" down from plate edge and 
at 5" o.c.
Upper Connector
● Provide an 8" × 4" × 1/2" × 3"h angle on each side 
of beam, 4 1/2" down from the top of beams. 
❍ Place (1)-3/4" Ø bolt in a 13/16" × 1 7/8" slotted 
hole in 8" leg of the angle, through the beam to the 
opposite angle.
❍ Bolt the angles to the wall w/ 3/4" Ø × 4 1/2" taper 
bolts.
Problem 23-4a.2 Beam to Column Grid 3. Use 
Figure 23-3a.4 as a guide to complete this detail.
● Support the glu-lams resting on a 6 7/8" × 22" × 7/8" 
base plate. 
● Provide a 10"h × 22" × 5/16" side plate on each side 
of the beam, welded to the base plate with 1/4" fillet.
● Weld base plate to the column w/ 1/4" fillet. Provide 
(4)-3/4" Ø bolts through the beam. Place bolts 1 5/8" 
minimum from the plate edges and at 3" o.c.
Problem 23-4a.3 Beam to Beam with Saddle.  
● Support the beam on 7/8" × 6 7/8" × 8" long top and 
base plates. 
❍ Dap (cut into the beam) the top plate into the top 
of the beam. 
● Attach 5/16" × 8" side plates on each side of the beam 
to the top and bottom plates.

538 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Provide 3" × 5/16" side straps on each side of the 
beam, placed so that the centerline of the bolts that 
pass through the straps are 4" up from the bottom of 
the beam and 3" down from the top of the beam. 
● Use (3)-3/4" Ø × 8 bolts through the straps and beam 
@ 3" o.c., and 1 1/2" from end of strap.
❍ Bolts are to be 8" minimum from the beam splice. 
● Attach the straps to the side plates with 5/16" × 3" 
fillet and back welds.
Problem 23-4a.4 Beam to Beam at Fire Wall. Grid 3F. 
● Use an appropriate CCO column cap to connect the 
glu-lams to the 6 × 6 TS columns.
❍ Connect the CCO to the columns with 3/8" fillet 
weld, all around.
● Center the columns so that they are 12" o.c. from the 
center of the 2 × 6 fire wall. 
❍ Protect the wall with 2 layers of  5/8" type X 
gypsum board each side.
❍ Provide 3 × 6 top plate over (2)-2 × 6 plates. 
Match the bolt placement per detail 23-3a.3.
● Provide 3/4" minimum clearance between the ends of 
the beams to the gypsum board.
● Protect the roof on each side of the wall with 5/8" 
type X gypsum board on bottom side of the truss top 
chords for 60" minimum on each side of the wall. 
❍ Provide 2 × 4 solid block @ 24" o.c. between top 
chords to support the blocking.
● Label unspecified materials per detail 23-3a.3.
Problem 23-4a.5 Truss to Beam, Grid 3.
● In addition to truss clips supplied by the manufac-
turer, provide 2 × 4 solid blocking between the 
trusses on the top of the beam. 
❍ Anchor the blocks to the glu-lam beams with A35 
anchors on each end of block. 
● Provide MST48 straps at 48" o.c. that align with the 
straps at roof/wall intersection.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
539
Problem 23-4a.6 Truss to Beam at Column. Grids 3D+12', 
3H, and 3J+12'. Use the drawing created in problem 
23-4a.5 as a base to complete this drawing.
● Provide 2 × 4 brace at 32" o.c. placed at 45° for a 
minimum distance of (2) truss spaces on each side 
of column. 
● Attach the braces to the beam with U24 hangers, 
placed 2" up from bottom of beam.
❍ Block the upper end of the brace with 3 × 4 × 10' 
minimum long continuous nailer attached to the 
bottom of the top chord of the trusses with (2)-16d 
nails at each truss.
❍ Provide 3 × 4 solid block equally spaced along 
the braces and nailed to the brace with (5)-16d 
nails. 
● Provide 2× blocking above the beam between the 
trusses per detail 23-4b.5. Provide an MST60 strap 
from truss to truss over the beam.
Problem 23-4a.7 Truss to Beam at Diaphragm Edge.
● At the edge of roof blocking used to form the 
roof diaphragm (36' minimum out from the 
walls at grids C/K), provide (2) Simpson Company 
HD-2 anchors (total of 4) placed on each side of 
the truss. 
❍ Attach the anchors to the truss with (2)-5/8" × 4 
1/2" bolts through the trusses.
❍ Locate the anchors so that that the bolt closest to 
the splice is 8" minimum from the truss splice.  
❍ Provide a 5/8" Ø ×16" bolt across the splice from 
anchor to anchor. 
● Provide solid blocking between the trusses similar to 
detail 23-4a.5. Maintain 6" minimum space from the 
blocking anchors to the end of block.
Problem 23-4a.8 Truss to Ledger—Perpendicular. Grids 
1 and 5. 
● Provide 3 × 12 DFPT ledger attached to the wall with 
3/4" Ø ×10" anchor bolts placed at 32" o.c.
❍ Stagger the bolts along the ledger so that the bolts 
are 3" up/down from the ledger edges. 
● Provide 3" × 4"h × 5/8" plate placed at 8'–0" on 
center in line with the trusses. 
❍ Attach the plate to the wall w/ 3/4" Ø 4 1/8" power-
driven bolts. 
● Weld an MST37 strap to the plate with 1/8" fillet 
welds and attach to the trusses per the manufacturer’s 
nailing instructions. 
● Provide 2× blocking placed above the ledger between 
trusses per detail 23-4a.5.

540 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 23-4a.9 Truss to Ledger—Parallel. Grids A, C 
(both sides), and K. 
● Provide 3 × 12 DFPT ledger w/ 3/4" Ø bolts placed at 
60" o.c. staggered 3" up/down.
● Select suitable U-hangers to connect the solid blocking 
to the trusses. 
● Provide a 3" × 4"h × 5/8" plate w/ 3/4" Ø × 4 1/8" 
power-driven bolt. 
● Weld an MST27 strap to the plate with 1/8" fillet weld 
@ 8'–0" o.c.
● Use detail 23-3a.6 as a guide for unlisted materials.
Problem 23-4a.10 Ledger Splice—Bearing Wall. Grids 1, 2, 
4, and 5. 
● Use the roof ledger notes from problem 22-4a to com-
plete a detail for the ledgers to show floor and roof 
usage for bearing conditions. 
● Use detail 23-3b.9 as a base to complete the drawing.
Problem 23-4a.11 Ledger Splice—Nonbearing Wall. Grids 
A, C (both sides), and K. 
● Use the roof ledger notes from problem 22-4b to com-
plete a detail for the ledgers to show floor and roof 
usage for nonbearing conditions. 
● Use detail 23-3b.10 as a base to complete the drawing.
Problem 23-4a.12 Truss/Beam—Trusses. Grid 3. Use the 
drawing created in problem 23-4a.5 as a base to complete 
this drawing. 
● Provide 2 × 4 solid blocking laid flat between the 
trusses. Provide MST48 straps at each 48" o.c. Align 
with straps at wall. 
Problem 23-4a.13 Truss/Beam—Trusses Perpendicular. 
Grids 2 and 4. Use the drawing created in problem 
23-4a.8 as a base to complete this drawing. 
● Provide 3 × 12 DFPT ledger w/ 3/4" Ø bolts at 32" 
o.c. staggered 3" up/down. 
● Provide 3" × 4"h × 3/4" plate w/ 3/4" Ø × 4 1/8" 
power-driven bolts. 
● Weld MST37 to plate w/ 1/8" fillet weld @ 8'–0" o.c. 
● Provide 2 × 4 blocking laid flat between the trusses.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
541
Problem 23-4a.14 Truss/Ledger—Tresses—Parallel. Grids 
A and C. Use the drawing created in problem 23-4a.9 as 
a base to complete this drawing. 
● Provide 3 × 12 DFPT ledger with 3/4" Ø bolts at 60" 
o.c. staggered 3" up/down. 
● Select suitable U hangers for the solid blocking. 
● Provide 3" × 4"h × 3/4" plate with a 3/4" Ø × 4 
1/18" power-driven bolt. 
● Weld MST27 to plate w/ 1/8" fillet weld @ 8'–0" o.c.
Problem 23-4b Use the following specifications to complete 
the required floor connections. Choose a scale suitable 
for clearly showing the required information. Use the 
appropriate drawing from problem 23-3 as a guide for 
unlisted information. Keep in mind that the information 
in the attached drawings is incomplete and may contain 
errors. Refer back to the order of precedence to accu-
rately complete the following drawings.
Floor Ledgers
● Use 4 ×12 DFPT ledger with 3/4" Ø anchor bolts at 
24" o.c. at grids 1 and 5. 
● Staggered bolts 3" up/down, spaced at 48" o.c. at 
grid C. 
● At splices in ledger at grids 1 and 5 use (2)-144" 
long × 3" straps with 3/4" bolts 1 1/2" from ends 
and 20" o.c. 
● Place straps 3" down from top of ledger and 3 1/2" 
from center to center. 
● Use (3)-MST48 straps at 3 1/2" o.c. at splices at wall C 
with (8) bolts per strap.
Problem 23-4b.1 Beam to Column—Floor.
Lower Connection
● Provide 1/4" clear between the beam and the end plate.
● Support the glu-lam beam with a 3/4" × 9" × 6 7/8" 
bearing plate. 
● Provide a 7/16" × 9" × 15" side plate that laps each 
side of the base plate. 
● Provide a 7/16" × 15" × 6 7/8" end plate. 
❍ Weld side plates to the base and end plates, and 
to 6 × 6 column with 3/8" fillet welds at each 
connection.
● Bolt the side plates/beam with (4) 3/4" bolts that 
are 1 1/2" down from the top of the side plate, and 
1 1/2" in from edge of plate and 3" o.c. 
● Provide a 9" × 9" × 3/4" gusset with 1/4" fillet weld 
each side to CCO/TS.
Upper Connection
● Provide an 8" × 3" × 6 7/8" U × 7/16" strap w/ 
(1)-3/4" Ø bolt through the beam and U strap.
❍ Place the centerline of the bolt/strap 3" down from 
top of beam. 
❍ Set bolts 1 1/2" from end of strap.
● Weld the side of the U-plate to the TS w/ 3/16" fillet 
weld. 

542 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 23-4b.2 Beam to Wall. See detail 23-4a.1. Copy 
and edit the roof beam/wall detail as required to reflect 
floor the conditions.
Problem 23-4b.3 Beam to Fire Wall. Use detail 23-3b.2 as a 
guide to complete a detail for this structure. 
Lower Connection
● Weld the side plates to the base and end plate to 6 × 
6 column with 3/8" fillet welds. 
● Provide (2)-3/4" bolts through the side plates and 
beam that are 2" down, and 2" from edge of side plate 
and 3" o.c. 
● Provide an 9" × 9" × 3/4" gusset with 1/4" fillet weld 
on each side of the gusset plate to the CCO/TS.
Upper Connection
● Provide a 3" × 12" × 1/4" strap at each side of beam 
with (1)-3/4" Ø bolt through beam.
❍ Place the bolt 3" down from top of beam, and 2" 
from end of strap.
❍ Weld the strap to the TS with 3/8" fillet weld at top 
and bottom of strap, each side.  
● Weld the side of the plate to the TS with 3/8" fillet 
weld at each.  
Problem 23-4b.4 Truss to Beam.  Grids 3C to F. 
● Provide 2 × 4 solid block laid flat between the 
trusses. 
● Provide an MST37 strap at 96" o.c. Align the wall 
straps with the ledger straps.
Problem 23-4b.5 Truss to Wood Wall. Grid 3+16' between 
C to F. 
● Extend 1/2" sheet rock to from the floor to 10' above 
the floor and show suspended ceiling on the display 
side. 
● Provide 2 × 4 solid block laid flat between the trusses 
over (2)-2 × 4 top plates.
● Provide an MST37 at 96" o.c. Align the wall straps 
with the ledger straps.
Problem 23-4b.6 Truss to Ledger—Perpendicular. Grids 1 
and 5. Use the drawing created in problem 23-4a.13 as a 
base to complete this drawing. 
● Provide 4 × 12 DFPT ledger w/ 3/4" Ø bolts at 24" 
o.c. staggered 3" up/down. 
● Provide 3" × 4"h × 3/4" plate with 3/4" Ø × 4 1/8" 
power-driven bolts. 
● Weld an MST37 strap to plate w/ 1/8" fillet weld at 
8'–0" o.c. 
● Provide 2 × 4 blocking laid flat between the 
trusses.

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
543
Problem 23-4b.7 Truss to Ledger—Parallel. Grid C (similar 
to detail 23-4a.14). 
● Provide 4 × 12 DFPT ledger with 3/4" Ø bolts @ 48" 
o.c. staggered 3" up/down. 
● Provide a 3" × 4"h × 3/4" plate w/ 3/4" Ø × 4 1/8" 
power-driven bolt. 
● Weld an MST27 strap to the plate with 1/8" fillet weld 
at 8'–0" o.c. 
● Provide 2 × 4 blocking between the ledger and the 
truss @ 8'–0" o.c. 
● Select suitable U hangers for the block. 
Problem 23-4b.8 Truss to Fire Wall. 
● Provide 3 × 12 DFPT ledger over 5/8" gypsum board. 
● Provide solid blocking in the wall behind the ledger.
Problem 23-4b.9 Ledger Splice—Bearing Wall. 
● Use the floor ledger notes to complete this detail. 
● Establish a detail to show floor and roof usage. See 
detail 23-3b.6.
Problem 23-4b.10 Ledger Splice—Nonbearing Wall. See 
floor ledger notes. Establish a detail to show floor and 
roof usage. See detail 23-3b.7.
Problem 23-5 Panel Elevation. Draw the north and west 
panel elevations for the main structure drawn in problem 
16-4. Specify that the office elevations will be separate 
elevations.See the foundation and site plans to deter-
mine the depth of the foundation below the finish floor. 
Refer to the student CD in the RESOURCE MATERIAL/
GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS folder for additional infor-
mation related to the concrete panels. Break out a section 
of the panel to display:
● Grade 60 #5 Ø vertical bars at 10" o.c. 
● Grade 40 #4 Ø horizontal bars at 12" o.c. 
● Steel centered in the wall and extended to be within 
1 1/2" of all panel edges.
Specify that all panels are to be 6" thick, 4000 psi concrete 
with an exposed finish.
Problem 23-6 Using the guidelines for the panels on prob-
lem 23-5a and 5b, design and draw the panel elevations 
for the panels located on the south and east walls of 
the main warehouse. Refer to the student CD in the 
RESOURCE MATERIAL/GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS 
folder for additional information related to the con-
crete panels. Show and dimension all openings. Verify 
foundation locations with information provided in 
Chapter 24.
Problem 23-7 Panel Elevation. Use the attached draw-
ing, information in problem 23-5, and the following 
information to complete a panel elevation for panel 
1-E-D. Refer to the student CD in the RESOURCE 
MATERIAL/GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS folder for 
additional information related to the concrete panels. 
Provide dimensions for the entire panel as well as for 
each opening. In addition to the normal steel, specify 
the following reinforcing steel to be 1" clear of the 
exterior panel face: 
● (2)-grade 40, #5 Ø × 48" diagonal steel bars at each 
corner of each door 2" clear of opening and 8" o.c. 
● In addition to the typical wall steel, for 3'–0" × 
7'–0" door:
❍ Provide (2)-grade 60, #6 Ø at 6" o.c. vertically for 
full height of panel. 
❍ Provide (2)-horizontal grade 40, #5 Ø × 7' long 
rebar at each corner of the door at 8" o.c. 
● For the 8'–0" door: 
❍ Provide (2)-grade 40, #5 Ø vertical bars at 8" o.c. 
on each side of door, extending the full panel 
height.

544 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
❍ Use (3)-grade 60, #4 Ø horizontal bars at 12" o.c. 
above and below door. 
❍ Extend horizontal steel 24" past each side of 
door. 
Problem 23-7 Using the guidelines for the panels on prob-
lem 23-3a or 23-3b, design and draw the panel eleva-
tions for the panels located on grids 1, 2, 4, 5, and A, C, 
and K for this structure. Refer to the student CD in the 
RESOURCE MATERIAL/GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS 
folder for additional information related to the con-
crete panels. Show and dimension all openings. Verify 
foundation locations with information provided in 
Chapter 24.
Problem 23-8 Use the drawings provided as a guide to 
complete the details required to explain construc-
tion of the shear wall referenced in problems 23-8a 
through 23-8e. Details 23-8f and 23-8g do not relate 
to detail 23-8a. For each detail, provide a plan view of 
each plate to locate bolting patterns. Use information 
in problems 23-8b through 23-8g to complete each 
drawing.
Problem 23-8a Draw an elevation of the steel bracing system 
used in a wall using a scale of 1/4" = 1'–0". Assume a 
distance of 12'–0" from center to center of columns, and 
10'–0" from floor to floor. 
Problem 23-8b Beam/Beam/Column. Support the W18 × 
50 beam from the elevation presented in problem 23-3a 
on a 7 1/2" × 9 × 1/2" steel cap plate bolted to beam 
with 2 machine bolts. 
● Weld the plate to a TS 5" × 5" × 3/16" steel tube 
column with 3/16" fillet all around weld. 
● Hang a W16 × 26 from the beam with 6" × 9" × 
5/16" steel connection plate welded to the W18 × 50 
with 1/4" fillet with 2" return at the top and bottom. 
❍ Bolt the plate to the W16 × 26 beam with (3)-3/4" 
Ø machine bolts through plate and web. 
❍ Bolts to be 1 1/2" from each edge and 3" o.c.
❍ Set top bolt 5" down from the top flange. 
Provide a note to indicate that all bolts are to be A325-N 
high-strength bolts and require special inspection.
Problem 23-8c Column/Foundation. Use the 5" × 5" × 
3/16" steel tube column from the elevation presented in 

Chapter 23: Drawing Structural Elevations and Sections 
545
problem 23-8a welded to the base plate with 5/16" fillet 
welds all around at field. 
● The plate is to be a 12" × 12" × 7/8" steel base plate 
on 1" dry pack with (4)-1 1/8" × 18" long anchor 
bolts into footing. 
❍ Base plate bolts to be 15/16" minimum from the 
edge of plate. 
● Below the base plate weld a 1 1/2" × 4" × 12" long 
shear plate with 1/2" × 12" fillet weld each side. 
❍ Set shear plate in 3 1/2" × 5 1/2" deep × 18" long 
keyway filled with dry pack.
● Provide a 5" × 5" × 1/4" steel tube brace between 
each steel column. 
❍ Weld the brace to the base and the column with a 
3/8" fillet weld all around. 
❍ Provide a 14" × 10" × 3/8" steel gusset plate. 
Extend the gusset plate 1/2" past the backside of 
the column. 
❍ Weld the plate to the column with a 1/4" × 9" 
fillet weld on the back and side of the column. 
❍ Weld the plate to the brace with a 3/8" × 3 1/2" 
fillet weld on each side.
Problem 23-8d Beam/Beam/Column. Use a TS 5" × 5" × 
1/4" column from the elevation presented in problem 
23-8a to support a W16 x 50 beam bolted to a 9 1/2" 
× 24" × 1 1/4" steel cap plate with (2)-5/8" diameter 
machine bolts.  
● Weld the beam to the plate with a 3/16" fillet weld. 
● Butt the W16 × 26 beams into each side of the 
W16 × 50 and support on the cap plate. 
● Provide a 12" × 4" × 3" angle (not shown) each side 
of each W16 ×26 beam, and bolt to the supported 
beam with (4) 5/8" Ø bolts at 3" o.c. and 1 1/2" from 
each edge.
❍ Weld each angle to the carrier beam with 3/16" × 
12" fillet weld. 
● Bolt each beam flange with (4)-A325N high-strength 
bolts to the plate at 3" o.c., 1 1/2" from the end of the 
beam. 
● Weld the plate to column with 5/16" fillet weld all 
around. 
● Provide a 14" × 10" × 3/8" gusset plate and weld the 
gusset plate to the column and base plate with 1/4" × 
9" fillet weld on each side. 
● Weld the TS 5" × 5" × 1/4" steel tube brace to the 
column with 3/16" fillet and 1/4" × 6" fillet on each 
side of the gusset.
Problem 23-8e Column/Plate. Use a 10" × 10" × 7/8" 
steel base plate with (4) 3/4" Ø × 18" anchor bolts into 
foundation. Set bolts at 1 9/16" minimum from the edge 
of the plate. Weld the column to the plate with 1/4" fillet 
weld all around. Set the plate on 1" dry pack.

546 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 23-8f Steel Beam Support. Support a W16 × 26 
beam on a 5 1/2" × 7" × 1" steel cap plate bolted to the 
beam with (2) 3/4" Ø machine bolts. 
● Weld the plate to the TS 3 1/2" × 3 1/2" × 1/4" steel 
tube column with a 3/16" fillet weld all around. 
● Hang the W12 × 22 from the beam with (2)-1 1/2" ×
3 1/2" × 1/4" × 5 1/2" long steel angles with 2 machine 
bolts through the 3 1/2" legs and W12 × 22. 
● Weld the angles to the W16 × 26 with 5/16" fillet 
weld.
Problem 23-8g Beam/Beam/Column. Support the W12 × 
22 on a 5 1/2" × 7" × 3/4" steel cap plate welded to a 3" 
diameter steel pipe column. 
● Bolt the beam to the plate with (2) 3/4" Ø machine 
bolts, 1 1/2" from the edges. 
● Provide a 1/4" steel stiffener plate welded all around. 
● Weld a 5" × 9" × 7" gauge bucket connector to the 
end plate with a 3/16" fillet weld all around to support 
(2)-2 × 14. 
● Set the 2 × 14 flush with a 3× plate connected to the 
steel beam.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
547
547
All structures are required to have a foundation to resist 
gravity and lateral loads. The foundation must also be 
designed to resist forces from floodwaters, wind, freez-
ing, and seismic activity. The loads from the structure 
must be spread throughout the soil that surrounds 
the foundation. This chapter will explore the basic 
information needed to complete foundation drawings 
including:
Soil characteristics such as texture, moisture content, 
 
●
freezing, and compaction that must be considered 
prior to designing the foundation.
Major components of various types of foundations.
 
●
Types of floor systems that may need to be repre-
 
●
sented on the foundation drawings.
Common types of foundation drawings including 
 
●
slab and foundation plans. 
Drawing steps for completing foundation plans 
 
●
including concrete slabs, floor joists, and post-and-
beam floor systems.
Common methods of spreading the loads of the 
structure into the soil, common types of foundations, 
and concrete and wood floor systems are introduced in 
this chapter, as well as methods of drawing the plans to 
show the structural systems to be used.
SOIL CONSIDERATIONS
Before the foundation drawings are considered, the type 
of soil at the construction site must be determined. A 
soils engineer tests the soil for its strength, the effect of 
moisture on the soil-bearing capacity, compressibility, 
liquefaction, and expansiveness. Soil samples are taken 
from holes bored in representative areas of the site. 
Using the findings of the soils engineer, the structural 
engineer can design a foundation to resist the loads of 
the proposed structure.
Soil Texture
The texture of the soil influences each aspect of 
foundation design. Soil texture refers to the granular 
composition of the soil and influences the bearing capac-
ity. The bearing capacity of soil depends on its composi-
tion and the moisture content. The IBC lists five basic 
classifications for soil. Soils and their allowable bearing 
pressure include the following: 
Soil Classification
Allowable Bearing 
Pressure
Crystalline bedrock 
12,000 psf (574.8 kPa) 
Sedimentary and foliated rock 
4000 psf (191.6 kPa) 
Sandy gravel and gravel 
3000 psf (143.7 kPa) 
Sand and silty sand 
2000 psf (95.8 kPa) 
Clay and sandy clay 
1500 psf (47.9 kPa) 
Structures built on low-bearing capacity soils require 
footings that extend into stable soil, or footings that are 
spread over a wide area. Both options will be discussed 
later in this chapter.
Settlement
Settlement of soil will occur as the loads of the struc-
ture are placed on the footing. Settlement is caused by 
reduction of space between soil grains. Granular soils 
have fewer void areas and suffer only slight compac-
tion as loads are applied. Clay-based soil has a larger 
percentage of voids than sandy soil and compacts more 
under loads. Clay soils tend to compact over long peri-
ods of time because any moisture that is trapped during 
construction cannot move easily through the clay. A 
properly designed foundation takes into account the 
type and depth of soil, so that the effects of settlement 
are not seen throughout the structure. The foundation 
must be designed so that settlement is evenly distrib-
uted throughout the foundation. This is accomplished 
by designing the structure so that the loads are distrib-
uted into uniform types of soil.
Moisture Content
The amount of water the foundation will be exposed 
to, as well as the permeability of the soil, must also be 
24
Foundation Systems and Components

548 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
considered in the design of the foundation. As the soil 
absorbs water it expands, causing the foundation to 
heave. The amount of rain and the type of soil can also 
cause the foundation to heave. The evaporation rate of 
soil is also of great importance in the design of commer-
cial foundations, because many are formed by the use of 
an on-grade concrete slab.
Unless the site has been properly prepared, the slab 
can trap large amounts of moisture. In areas that receive 
little rain, the contrast between the dry soil under the 
slab and damp soil beside the foundation provides a 
tendency for heaving to occur at the edge of the slab. If 
the soil beneath the slab experiences a change of mois-
ture content after the slab is poured, the center of the 
slab can heave.
The heaving can be resisted by reinforcing provided 
in the foundation and throughout the floor slab, and 
by proper drainage. Surface and groundwater must be 
properly diverted from the foundation to maintain the 
soil’s ability to support the building loads. Proper drain-
age also minimizes water leaking into the crawl space or 
basement, reducing mildew or rotting. The IBC requires 
the finish grade to slope away from the foundation at 
a minimum slope of 1 vertical unit per 20 horizontal 
units (5% slope) for a distance of 10' (3048 mm). For 
arid climates, the IBC allows the slope to be reduced to 
1 vertical unit per 48 horizontal units.
Gravel or coarse-grain soils can be placed beside the 
foundation to increase percolation. Because of the void 
spaces between grains, coarse-grain soils are more per-
meable and drain better than fine-grain soils. In damp 
climates, a drain is often required beside the foundation 
at the base of a gravel bed to facilitate drainage of water 
from the foundation. As the amount of water is reduced 
in the soil surrounding the foundation, the lateral loads 
imposed on the foundation are reduced. The weight of 
the soil becomes increasingly important as the height 
of the foundation wall is increased. Foundation walls 
enclosing basements should be waterproofed. Asphaltic 
emulsion is often used to prevent water penetration 
into the basement. Floor slabs placed below grade are 
required to be placed over a vapor barrier.
Freezing
Because water expands as it freezes, the depth of the 
frost level must be considered in the design of the foun-
dation. Expansion and shrinking of the soil causes heav-
ing in the foundation. As the concrete expands with the 
soil, the foundation can crack. As the soil thaws, water 
not absorbed by the soil can cause the soil to lose much 
of its bearing capacity, causing further cracking of the 
foundation. In addition to the geographic location, the 
soil type also affects the influences of freezing. Based 
on the recommendations of the soils engineer and 
requirements of the building department, the structural 
engineer provides detailed information to the drafter to 
ensure that the foundation extends below the depth of 
the deepest expected frost penetration. Specifications 
are typically included to ensure that concrete is not 
poured during severe weather conditions, so that excess 
moisture is not trapped under the foundation.
Soil Elevation
The height of the soil above a known point is referred 
to as its elevation. Construction sites often include 
soil that has been brought to or moved onto the site. 
Terms that the drafter is required to specify on plans 
include natural grade, existing grade, finished grade, 
excavation, fill, backfill, and compacted fill. Each is 
shown in Figure 24-1. The height of soil in its undis-
turbed condition is called the natural grade. The use 
of the term natural grade assumes that the soil has 
never been disturbed. The depth of the foundation is 
generally based on the depth into the natural grade. 
The existing grade is the result of adding or removing 
COMPACTED
FILL
SAND FILL
CONCRETE
SLAB
BACKFILL
FINISH
GRADE
NATURAL
GRADE
CUT  ( SOIL REMOVED)
FILL MATERIAL
(SOIL ADDED)
DAYLIGHT
LINE OF NATURAL GRADE
FIGURE 24-1 Terms associated with the placement of soil 
include natural grade, cut and fill material, and the daylight 
point. Fill can be further described as uncompacted and 
compacted.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
549
soil from the site prior to the start of construction. Soil 
that was moved to the site as access roads were placed 
is an example of soil that forms the existing grade. 
Finished grade is used to define the height of the soil 
after all work at the site has been completed. The fin-
ished grade may be higher or lower than the natural 
grade, depending on the project design.
The removal of soil from a construction site is known 
as excavation. Figure 24-2 shows a site that has been 
excavated, and the forming of the foundation. Because 
the foundation must be placed below the maximum 
penetration level of frost, soil must be moved to provide 
a stable base for the foundation. Soil is also removed 
from the site to alter the contour of the finished grade. 
A bank created by excavation is referred to as a cut bank. 
The engineer provides specifications controlling the 
slope of banks adjacent to the structure.
Soil that is placed over the natural grade is called fill 
material. Once the foundation system has been formed 
and the floor system is in place, soil is placed in the foot-
ing trench to create the finished grade. This fill mate-
rial, which is placed against the foundation, is called 
backfill. Fill can be either uncompacted or compacted. 
Uncompacted fill is soil that is brought to a site to raise 
the elevation of the natural grade. Although the fill 
may be leveled after it is placed, no special care is given 
to compact the material. Uncompacted fill material is 
unusable for supporting the loads from a structure. 
Where uncompacted fill is found at the building site, 
the foundation must be placed so that it is bearing on 
the natural grade. Compacted fill is soil that is added to 
the site in a very systematic method to ensure its load-
bearing capacity.
Soil Compaction
Fill material can be compacted to increase its bearing 
capacity. Compaction is typically accomplished by 
vibrating, tamping, rolling, or by adding a temporary 
weight. Three major ways to compact soil include the 
following:
Static force
 
●
—A heavy roller presses soil particles 
together.
Impact force
 
●
—A ramming shoe repeatedly strikes 
the ground at high speed.
Vibration
 
●
—High-frequency vibration is applied to 
soil through a steel plate. 
Each of these methods reduces the number of air 
voids contained between grains of soil. Proper com-
paction lessens the effect of settling and increases the 
stability of the soil, which will in turn increase the 
load-bearing capacity. The effects of frost damage are 
minimized in compacted soil because penetration of 
water into voids in the soil is minimized. A soils or 
geotechnical engineer specifies the requirements for soil 
excavation and compaction. The CAD technician’s job 
is to place the specification of the engineer clearly on 
the plans.
TYPES OF FOUNDATIONS
The structure to be supported, the type of soil, and the 
contour of the site affect the type of foundation to be 
used. Common methods of forming the foundation 
include spread footings, pilings, and piers. The type of 
foundation used affects the type of floor system used. 
The drafter represents both the foundation and floor 
system on the foundation drawings.
Continuous or Spread Footings
The most common type of foundation used in light 
commercial structures is a continuous or spread foot-
ing. This type of footing consists of a footing and a 
stem wall. Each is typically made of poured concrete, 
although concrete blocks can be used for the stem wall. 
Dashed lines are often used to represent the outline of 
the footing. The width of the footing should be dimen-
sioned on the foundation plan, and the depth is usually 
specified in a note. Figure 24-3 shows examples of 
each component as it would be represented in details, 
FIGURE 24-2 Once a site has been excavated to the desired 
elevation, foundation forms and reinforcing steel can be 
placed. Courtesy Sara Jefferis.

550 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
sections, and on a foundation plan. A footing is the base 
of the foundation system and is used to disperse loads 
over the soil. Figure 24-4 shows common sizes for foun-
dation components based on the IBC.
Footing Reinforcement
When the footing is placed near expansive soil, the 
bottom of the footing will bend, placing the footing in 
tension. Steel is placed in the bottom of the footing to 
resist the forces of tension in concrete. This reinforc-
ing steel or rebar is usually not shown on the founda-
tion plan but is specified in a note that gives the size, 
quantity, and spacing of the steel. Only rebar that is #5 
diameter or larger is considered as reinforcing, with the 
use of smaller steel considered as plain (nonreinforced) 
concrete. See Chapter 10 for a review of reinforcing steel 
sizes and numbers. Steel rebar may be smooth, but most 
uses of steel require deformations to help the concrete 
bind to the steel.
Stem Walls
The stem wall is the vertical portion of the founda-
tion that brings the foundation up above the finished 
grade. The stem wall can be represented by continu-
ous lines and is usually centered on the footing. Most 
municipalities require the wall to extend 6" (150 mm) 
above the finished grade. The material used to construct 
the foundation and the wall affects how they are joined 
together. Common stem wall materials include poured 
concrete and concrete blocks. When both are made of 
concrete, they can be formed separately or in one pour. 
Figure 24-5 shows common methods of forming con-
crete foundations. The exact shape used depends on the 
location of the footing to the property line, and the type 
of floor system to be used.
If the footing and stem wall are formed separately, a 
keyway is formed in the footing by placing a 2 × 4 in 
the wet concrete. Once the concrete has set, the 2 × 4 
is removed, leaving an indentation in the footing. When 
the stem wall is poured, the concrete fills in the keyway. 
The interlocking nature formed by the keyway helps the 
wall resist lateral pressure from the soil.
An L-shaped piece of steel is normally placed in the 
footing to increase the bond with the wall. The seis-
mic zone, the loads to be supported, and the height 
PLAN VIEW
SECTION VIEWS
LINE  OF  FOOTING
STEM
WALL
STEM
WALL
STEM
WALL
MONOLITHIC
CONCRETE
SLAB
CONCRETE
BLOCK
POURED
CONCRETE
FIGURE 24-3 Representation of common foundations in plan 
and section views.
A
B
A
B
6"
C
D
BUILDING
HEIGHT
1 STORY
2 STORY
3 STORY
FOOTING
WIDTH
A
12"/300 mm          6"/150 mm    
15"/375 mm          8"/200 mm   
18"/450 mm         10"/250 mm   
WALL
WIDTH
B
 6"/150 mm           12"/300 mm
6"/150 mm           18"/450 mm
 8"/200  mm          24"/600 mm
2 STORY
3 STORY
1 STORY
C
HEIGHT
BUILDING
FOOTING
HEIGHT
D
DEPTH INTO
UNDISTURBED
SOIL
FIGURE 24-4 Minimum required footing and stem wall sizes 
based on the 2009 International Building Code. Sizes in column B 
and D are based on common practice for light frame construc-
tion and must be determined by the engineer in accordance 
with Section 1809.7 and 8 of the IBC and local soil conditions.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
551
of the wall determine whether reinforcing is to be
used. When the engineer requires steel to be shown, the 
drafter is typically required to dimension the size, spac-
ing, and placement of the steel in details. Although the 
steel from the footing to the wall is not shown on the 
foundation plan, it is often specified in a note referenced 
to the stem wall. The short leg of the rebar is referred to 
as the toe and is usually placed below a continuous piece 
of steel in the footing. The extension of the footing steel 
into the stem wall must also be specified on the footing 
details. The distance that the stem wall steel overlaps 
the extended footing steel is referred to as the lap. Lap 
is often critical in the resistance of lateral pressure. 
Figure 24-6 shows an example of a foundation detail.
Stepped Walls and Foundations
When the construction site is not level, the founda-
tion must be stepped with the height of each portion 
of the stem wall adjusted to provide a level base for 
the floor system. The top of the stem wall will also 
change heights at each change in floor, but it must 
remain level. The bottom surface of the footing is 
allowed to have a slope not exceeding one vertical unit 
in each 10 horizontal units (10% slope). The footing 
can be stepped in order to change the elevation of the 
top surface of the footing, or where the surface of the 
ground slopes more than one vertical unit in each 10 
horizontal units (10% slope). If wood studs are used 
to frame between the stem wall and the floor system, a 
minimum length of 14" (360 mm) is required.
Veneer Support
If a masonry or stone veneer is to be used, the foot-
ing width must be altered to support the veneer. The 
thickened footing width needs to be represented and 
specified on the foundation plan as well as in a detail 
showing construction. Figure 24-7 shows common 
methods of supporting the veneer and how it would 
VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT
REINFORCEMENT
POSITION AS VERTICAL
SIZE, SPACING, AND
WITH DOWELS OF EQUAL
ANCHOR WALL TO FOOTING
KEYWAY
FIGURE 24-5 A keyway or reinforcing steel can be used to tie 
the stem wall to the foundation to resist lateral loads.
FIGURE 24-6 Details drawn by CAD drafters working with the 
engineering team show foundation construction. Each detail is 
referenced to the foundation drawings and sections.
PLAN VIEWS
SECTION VIEWS
MONOLITHIC
CONCRETE
SLAB
CONCRETE
BLOCK
POURED
CONCRETE
FIGURE 24-7 If brick veneer is to be used, the support must be 
represented on the foundation plan and sections.

552 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
be represented on a foundation plan. If cultured stone 
products are used, no extra footing support is required.
Anchor Bolts
The type of floor system to be used affects how the 
top of the stem wall is constructed. An anchor bolt is 
placed at the top of the stem wall while it is wet to bond 
a wood floor system to the stem wall. If concrete blocks 
are used to form the stem wall, the cells containing the 
reinforcing steel and the anchor bolt are filled with 
solid grout (see Chapter 11). An anchor bolt is set in 
the edge of a concrete slab to bond the wall system to 
the concrete. The engineer determines the spacing of 
anchor bolts based on the amount of lateral, seismic, 
and uplift loads that must be resisted. Minimum sizes 
of bolts allowed by code include a diameter of 1/2" (13 
mm), a length of 10" (250 mm), with a 7" (180 mm) 
penetration into the concrete. Bolts are to be placed 
through a pressure-treated mudsill and held in place 
by a nut resting on a 2" (50 mm) diameter washer. 
Spacing is not to exceed 6'–0" (1800 mm). In many 
parts of the country, the mudsill must be protected 
from termites by use of a metal guard placed between 
the plate and the top of the stem wall. The anchor 
bolts, termite shield, and mudsill are not drawn on the 
foundation plan. These items are specified in the foun-
dation general notes and are represented and specified 
in foundation details. When a concrete slab is to be 
placed over compacted fill, steel is often placed in the 
stem wall, which will extend into the slab. This steel 
must be shown on both the foundation plan views and 
the details of the wall/slab intersection.
Metal Connectors 
Metal connectors are often used to connect the wall or 
floor system to the foundation system, to transfer loads 
caused from wind and seismic forces. Three common 
metal anchors represented on foundation drawings 
include column connectors, hold-down anchors, and 
metal angles. Each is shown in Figure 24-8. The engi-
neer determines the size and location of any metal 
connectors, and the CAD technician is required to 
represent these on the foundation plan and details. 
Figure 24-9 shows common methods of representing 
metal connectors.
Beam Support
If the stem wall is to support a wood floor system, a 
method of supporting floor beams must be provided. 
A cavity called a beam pocket can be built into the wall 
FIGURE 24-8 Metal anchors and straps are often shown on the foundation plan. They help transfer loads from the skeleton into the 
foundation. Three of the most common include (left) column base, (middle) hold-down anchor, and (right) framing straps. Courtesy 
Simpson Strong-Tie Co., Inc.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
553
to provide support for beams. A 3" (75 mm) bearing 
surface must be provided for a wood beam resting on 
concrete with a 1/2" (13 mm) air space on all sides 
of the beam. Beams resting in a beam pocket must be 
wrapped with 55# felt to protect the beam from mois-
ture in the concrete. A metal hanger can be used in 
place of a beam pocket. Figure 24-10 shows examples 
of each method of beam support.
Foundation Access 
When the stem wall is to support a wood floor system, 
a method of access must be provided to the space 
below the floor system, which is called the crawl 
space. Access for most occupancies must be provided 
from through the stem wall using a 30" × 18" (750 ×
450 mm) minimum access hole. The IBC allows access 
is through the floor for some R occupancies using a 
22" × 30" (560 × 750 mm) access panel. It floor access 
is used it must be shown on the floor plan. The access 
should be placed out of traffic routes, for example in 
an area such as a closet. The drafter should verify that 
floor beams shown on the foundation plan will not 
interfere with the access hole.
Foundation Ventilation
Vents must be installed in the stem wall to allow air to 
circulate in the crawl space. Vents are required to pro-
vide a minimum of 1 sq ft for each 150 sq ft (0.67 m2)
of crawl space unless the exceptions in Section 
1203.3.2 are met. Vents should be placed within 
approximately 3'–0" (900 mm) of each foundation 
corner and should be spaced at approximately 10'–0" 
(3000 mm) o.c. Consideration should be given to 
door placement so that vents are not placed where 
doors or steps will be located. Vents also should not 
be placed below a beam pocket. Figure 24-11 shows 
how the crawl access and vents can be represented 
and specified on a foundation plan.
Stem Wall Insulation
In colder regions of the country, 2" (50 mm) rigid 
insulation is used to insulate the stem wall. Insulation 
can be placed on either side of the stem wall. If the 
FIGURE 24-9 Metal anchors and ties must be specified on the 
foundation plan. Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.
FIGURE 24-10 A girder can be supported by the use of a 
metal hanger or by a recess placed in the stem wall.
FIGURE 24-11 Foundation access and vents must be repre-
sented on the foundation plan if a wood floor system is used.

554 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
insulation is placed on the exterior side of the wall, 
heat from the structure will be retained in the con-
crete. When placed on the exterior side of the stem 
wall, the insulation should extend down past the 
bottom of the foundation. Exposed insulation must 
be protected from punctures, which can usually be 
done by placing a protective covering such as 1/2" (13 
mm) concrete board over the insulation. Figure 24-12 
shows a common method of placing insulation on the 
exterior side of the wall.
Alternative Wall Materials
Many companies have developed alternative products 
for forming the stem wall. Blocks made of expanded 
polystyrene foam (EPS) or other lightweight mate-
rial can be stacked into the desired position and fit 
together with interlocking teeth. EPS block forms can 
be assembled in a much shorter time than traditional 
form work and remain in place to become part of the 
finished wall. Reinforcing steel can be set inside the 
block forms in patterns similar to traditional block 
walls. Once the forms are assembled, concrete can 
be pumped into the forms using any of the common 
methods of pouring. The finished wall has an R-value 
of between R-22 and R-35 depending on the manu-
facturer. Figure 24-13 shows a foundation being built 
using EPS forms.
Masonry Wall Support
Masonry and precast concrete construction eliminate 
the need for a stem wall because the wall is supported 
directly on the footing. The reinforcing for the masonry 
FLASHING
PROTECTION
 BOARD
RIGID 
 INSULATION
SILL
 SEAL
RIGID 
 INSULATION
GASKET MATERIAL
MONOLITHIC SLAB 
PROTECTED
INSULATION
MONOLITHIC SLAB
PROJECTED
WALL FRAMING
ISOLATED SLAB
WITH SUB-SLAB
INSULATION
PROJECTED
WALL FRAMING
PROTECTED
INSULATION
FND. WALL
UNPROTECTED
FLASHING
PROTECTION
 INSULATION
 BOARD
RIGID 
 INSULATION
RIGID 
 INSULATION
RIGID 
BATT
 INSULATION
 TYPICAL
PROTECTION
 BOARD
FIGURE 24-12 The location of foundation/floor insulation 
varies depending on the type of floor framing system to be 
used. When placed on the exterior side of the stem wall, the 
insulation must be protected from punctures.
FIGURE 24-13 Forms made of EPS are available for construct-
ing the stem wall. Forms remain in place and insulate the 
structure. EPS forms can also be used to form the entire exterior 
walls of the structure. Courtesy American Polysteel Forms.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
555
wall is connected to the steel that extends from the 
footing. Figure 24-14 shows wall details for brick and 
concrete block walls. Precast wall panels are fastened 
directly to the footing, and soil is backfilled directly 
against the panel. Figure 24-15 shows a footing prepared 
for a precast panel. When this type of construction is 
used, a separate slab plan and foundation plan are gener-
ally drawn. Each is introduced later in this chapter.
Retaining Walls
A retaining or basement wall is typically made of 8" (200 
mm) poured concrete or concrete block and is assumed 
to be anchored at the top and bottom by a floor system. 
Common widths include 6" and 8" (150 and 200 mm) 
but the width will vary depending on the loads to be 
resisted and the height of the wall. Because of the height, 
the lateral pressure tends to bend the wall inward, plac-
ing the soil side of the wall in compression and the 
side away from the soil in tension (see Figure 24-16). 
To resist the tension, the engineer specifies reinforcing 
based on the height of the wall, the soil pressure, and 
the seismic zone. Figure 24-17 shows an example of a 
partial-height retaining wall detail. The wall will appear 
on a foundation plan just as any other stem wall. The 
detail would be referenced to the foundation plan. Some 
method of waterproofing the wall is also generally noted 
on the foundation plan. Typically, walls are covered 
with at least two layers of bituminous waterproofing 
material or by fiber-reinforced asphaltic mastic.
Anchorage
Anchor bolts are placed in the retaining wall by a method 
similar to that used for stem walls. The spacing of bolts 
is generally much closer for a retaining wall because 
of the greater loads to be resisted. Because the floor 
FIGURE 24-14 Varied line quality and hatch patterns should 
be used to represent masonry products and reinforcement in 
foundation details. Courtesy David Jefferis.
FIGURE 24-15 Representing the intersection of a precast con-
crete panel with the foundation. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/
McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.
PRESSURE
STEEL 
REIN-
FORCING
SOIL 
WHEN THE WALL 
BOWS, THE OUTSIDE 
FACE IS IN 
THE INSIDE FACE IS
IN TENSION.
COMPRESSION AND
FIGURE 24-16 Soil pressure bows a wall inward when the wall 
is anchored to a floor at the top and bottom. Because concrete 
has poor tensile strength, steel must be placed near the side in 
tension to help resist the soil load.

556 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
systems are used to resist the soil loads, a metal angle 
is often used to securely bond the floor joists to the top 
of the wall. The anchor bolts and angles are specified in 
annotation on the foundation plan and shown in details. 
When the floor joists are parallel to the retaining wall, 
blocks are typically placed between floor joists near the 
wall edge to transfer lateral pressure on the wall to the 
floor system. This blocking would be drawn and noted 
on the foundation plan and represented in a detail simi-
lar to Figure 24-18.
Footings
The footing for a one-story retaining wall is typically 
16" (400 mm) wide. The engineer will determine the 
exact footing size based on the loads to be supported 
and the soil-bearing pressure. The footing width should 
be drawn and dimensioned using the same methods 
used to describe other foundation footings. To reduce 
soil pressure, a drain is placed in a gravel bed at the 
base of the retaining wall to remove water from the soil 
(see Figure 24-17). The gravel allows water to perco-
late down to the drain and be diverted away from the 
foundation. The drain can be shown on the foundation 
plan, as in Figure 24-19, or it may be represented in a 
note and not shown.
Cantilevered Retaining Walls
When a structure is built on a sloping site, the retaining 
wall may not be required to extend the full height from 
FIGURE 24-17 A retaining wall is represented on the founda-
tion plan using the same methods used to describe a stem wall. 
Details must be referenced to the plan to show wall construc-
tion. Courtesy Peck, Smiley, Ettlin Architects.
FIGURE 24-18 If a retaining wall is to be placed parallel to 
wood floor joists, solid blocking is often required between the 
joists to stiffen the floor system. Required blocking should be 
specified on the foundation plan and details.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
557
the foundation to the first floor level. A wall that is not 
supported at both ends by a floor system is referred 
to as a cantilevered retaining wall. Although less soil 
is retained than with a full-height wall, as shown in 
Figure 24-20 because the wall is not anchored at the 
top, it has a greater tendency to bend and create a 
hinge point. To resist the soil pressure, a wider foot-
ing must be used. The width of the footing is based 
on the height of the wall and is determined by the 
engineer. Figure 24-21 shows two methods of placing 
the footing in relationship to the wall. Depending on 
the height of the wall, or the angle of repose of the soil 
being retained, a key may be placed on the bottom of 
the footing. As shown in Figure 24-22, the key is the 
rectangular or square portion of concrete placed on 
the bottom side of the footing to resist lateral pressure. 
The width of the wall and the footing must be repre-
sented and specified on the foundation. The key is not 
drawn or referenced on the foundation plan. A detail 
must be referenced on the foundation plan to show 
the reinforcing, footing and wall size, and the key size 
and location.
FIGURE 24-19 A foundation drain may be represented on the 
foundation plan, or it may be referenced in general notes.
SOIL
PRESSURE
TENSION
PRESSURE
SOIL
COMPRESSION
IF THE WALL AND FOOTING
CONNECTION IS RIGID,
THE WHOLE FOUNDATION
WILL BE TURNED OVER.
FIGURE 24-20 When the top of a retaining wall is not 
anchored to the floor system, lateral pressure causes the 
wall to rotate inward.
FIGURE 24-21 Lateral pressure resisted by the wall is trans-
ferred to the foundation. The foundation in the upper example 
transfers loads to the soil below the wall. The foundation in the 
lower example resists the lateral loads by the weight of the soil 
above the foundation.

558 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Interior Supports 
Stem walls and footings are used to support the exterior 
portion of the structure. Interior load-bearing walls over 
concrete floors are supported on continuous footings. 
Bearing walls resting on a wood floor system or col-
umns or posts on a concrete floor system are supported 
by a beam supported on repetitively spaced spot con-
crete footings called piers. Piers and continuous interior 
footings should be drawn with the same linetype used 
to draw exterior footings.
Figure 24-23 shows interior footings for concrete 
floor systems. Piers are also used to provide increased 
bearing values to exterior footing. Piers can be formed 
by using preformed or framed forms, or by excavation. 
Common shapes include:
When placed under a stem wall, piers are usually 
 
●
square or rectangular. 
When used to support interior loads on a floor 
 
●
system, piers are often round. 
Piers that are too close together to form their full 
 
●
shape are often poured as a rectangle.
The pier depth is usually the same depth required 
for the exterior footing, with the diameter based on the 
load to be supported and the soil-bearing pressure. Piers 
are usually required to be recessed into the soil to resist 
lateral movement. In areas subject to seismic activity, a 
piece of rebar or a metal post base may be required to 
bond the support post to the pier. Blocking or a metal 
strap can also be provided to add stability to the post-
to-beam connection. Figure 24-24 shows the piers of a 
wood floor assembly in section and plan views.
Grade Beams
A grade beam can be used in place of a footing to 
provide added support for a foundation placed over 
unstable soil. An example of a grade beam is shown in 
Figure 24-25. The grade beam is similar to a beam that 
supports loads over an opening in the structure. The 
grade beam is placed below the stem wall and spans 
between stable supports, which may be concrete foot-
ings resting on stable soil or pilings. The depth and 
reinforcing required for a grade beam are determined 
by the engineer and are based on the loads to be sup-
ported. A grade beam resembles a footing when drawn 
on a foundation plan. Steel reinforcing may be specified 
FOUNDATION
FOOTING
KEY
SOIL
PRESSURE
WALL
KEYWAY
FIGURE 24-22 When lateral pressure is too great for the 
footing to withstand, the surface area of the footing can be 
enlarged by adding a key.
FIGURE 24-23 Piers and continuous footings should be drawn 
with the same linetypes used to represent exterior footings. 
Courtesy Architects Barrentine, Bates & Lee, A.I.A.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
559
by notes and referenced to details rather than on the 
foundation plan.
Pedestals
A pedestal is a poured concrete column that is built on 
top of a footing to extend through fill material up to a 
concrete floor level (see Figure 24-26). Pedestals are 
often used to provide support for posts or columns so 
FIGURE 24-24 A pier can be used to reinforce a stem or retain-
ing wall when loads to be supported exceed the bearing capac-
ity of the foundation. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/
Knauf Consulting Engineers.
FIGURE 24-25 In unstable soil, the stem wall can be reinforced 
and treated as a beam spanning between piers. Courtesy Tereasa 
Jefferis.
FIGURE 24-26 The pedestal supporting the steel column 
extends from the footing, through the fill material that will be 
placed to support the floor. Notice the steel that extends from 
the pedestal into the future floor slab. Courtesy Donna Sweeney.

560 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
that loads on the vertical member are not transferred 
into the floor system. Figure 24-27 shows how a pedes-
tal and a pedestal schedule are represented on a founda-
tion plan. Figure 24-28 shows an example of a pedestal 
detail that is referenced to the foundation plan.
Pilings
A piling is a type of foundation system that uses beams 
placed between columns to support loads of a structure. 
The columns may extend into the natural grade or be 
supported on other material that extends into stable 
soil. Piling foundations are typically used:
On steep hillside sites where it may not be feasible to 
 
●
use traditional excavating equipment.
Where the loads imposed from the structure exceed 
 
●
the bearing capacity of the soil.
On sites subject to flooding or other natural forces that 
 
●
might cause large amounts of soil to be removed. 
Coastal property and sites near other bodies of water 
subject to flooding often use a piling foundation to keep 
the useable space above the floodplain level.
When a structure is to be built above grade using a 
piling system, a support beam is typically placed under 
or near each bearing wall. Beams are supported on a 
grid of vertical supports that extends down to a stable 
layer of rock or dense soil. Beams can be steel, sawn or 
laminated wood, or prestressed concrete. Vertical sup-
ports may be concrete columns, steel tubes or beams, 
wood columns, or a combination of each material. 
When pilings are used for work at or below grade, 
concrete and steel are typically used to support the 
structure. Pilings can be several hundred feet in length. 
The engineer may require the depth to be based on 
the soil resistance measured as the pile is driven, or a 
FIGURE 24-27 The pedestal shown in Figure 24-26 can be 
seen in plan view with the supporting footing shown with 
dashed lines. When a wide variety of pedestals are to be used, a 
schedule can be used to specify reinforcing patterns and sizes. 
Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.
FIGURE 24-28 Details must be drawn to show the construc-
tion of a pedestal and referenced on the foundation plan. 
Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
561
minimum depth to solid rock based on the soils report. 
The desired depth is placed in the foundation notes by 
the drafter.
For shallow pilings, a hole can be bored and poured 
concrete with steel reinforcing can be used. Figure 24-29
shows an example of a detail for a poured concrete 
piling. If the vertical support is required to extend 
deeper than 10' (3000 mm), a pressure-treated timber 
or steel column can be driven into the soil. Timber 
pilings that are above the water table must be pressure 
treated and are typically coated with creosote to extend 
their lifetime.
Steel Pilings
As the depth of the piling increases, or where layered 
soil conditions prevent wood from being used, steel 
H-sections can be used for subgrade pilings. Steel is 
typically called for when the design requires the piling 
to be driven into solid rock. The pilings in Figure 24-30
were driven into stable soil and then capped with a 
base plate. From this platform, steel columns were 
welded to the plate to provide a support system for 
the structure. Figure 24-31 shows the components of 
FIGURE 24-29 Reinforced concrete pilings can be used for 
shallow pilings to provide support for the foundation.
FIGURE 24-30 Steel pilings are often used to provide a stable 
base for a structure. A steel plate is welded to the top of the 
piling to provide support to a column or beam. The rectan-
gular tube is used to span between pilings at the hinge point 
between the piling and support column. Courtesy Michael Jefferis.
FIGURE 24-31 Representing pilings in plan view. Depending 
on the complexity of the structure, pilings may be shown on 
the foundation plan or on a separate piling plan.

562 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
a piling plan for a hillside office structure. Notice, in 
addition to the vertical columns and horizontal beams, 
diagonal steel cables are placed between the columns 
to resist lateral and rotational forces. In addition to 
resisting gravity loads, piling foundations must be able 
to resist forces from uplift, lateral force, and rotation. 
Figure 24-32 shows a detail of a steel piling founda-
tion that is used to support steel columns above grade. 
Notice that the engineer has specified a system that 
uses braces approximately parallel to the ground to 
stabilize the top of the pilings from lateral loads. These 
braces are not shown on the foundation plan but are 
specified on the elevations, sections, and details.
Concrete Pilings
Pilings formed of precast and poured concrete are used 
for many structures as loads and heights are increased, to 
reduce forces causing uplift and overturning. Concrete 
pilings are also used in sandy soils to increase the soil 
friction of the pile. Concrete pilings offer excellent resis-
tance to uplift. Reinforced precast concrete piles can be 
driven into the soil just like wood or steel pilings. Pilings 
can also be pretensioned, just as a vertical column to 
add to the strength of the piling. Figure 24-33 shows 
examples of common pile shapes.
Cast-in-Place Concrete Pilings
A steel shell can be used to place cast-in-place con-
crete pilings. The shell is driven into the ground to the 
required depth and concrete is poured into the shell. 
Shell lengths up to 40' (12,200 mm) can be driven with 
other sections welded or threaded together as the pile 
is driven. Reinforcing can be wired into position in the 
shell prior to the concrete being placed in the pilings. 
Pilings can also be created by forming the hole by using 
a steel tube and then withdrawing the tube. The con-
crete conforms to the shape of the soil and increases the 
bonding strength over a steel-encased concrete pile. The 
method used to place the concrete can also greatly affect 
the strength of the piling. If the steel casing is removed, 
concrete can be pumped under pressure, which will 
force the soil around the concrete to compress. As the 
soil compresses, the concrete forms an enlarged or bul-
bous tip at the end of the piling, which increases both 
the bearing and withdrawal strength.
TYPES OF FLOOR SYSTEMS
The most common floor system for commercial struc-
tures is an on-grade slab. Other types of floor systems 
used with commercial and light industrial construction 
include pretensioned slabs, slabs built below grade level, 
and slabs built on pilings. As building loads and height 
increase, the depth of the foundation must also increase. 
Typically, a piling foundation is used to provide stabil-
ity. Multifamily applications and small construction 
projects in damp areas often use wood floor systems 
using joist or post-and-beam framing techniques sup-
ported on a concrete foundation.
FIGURE 24-32 Details showing the connections of the piling, 
support plates, and reinforcing must be referenced in the plan 
view. Courtesy Aaron Jefferis.
STRAIGHT
TAPERED
BELL
SHAPED
FIGURE 24-33 Common shapes for deep depth cast-in-place 
concrete pilings.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
563
On-Grade Slabs
A concrete slab provides a firm floor system with little 
or no maintenance and generally requires less material 
and labor than wood floor systems. The floor slab can 
be poured as an extension of the foundation wall and 
footing as shown in Figure 24-34 in what is known 
as monolithic construction. Other common methods 
of pouring slabs are shown in Figure 24-35. The IBC 
requires slabs to be a minimum of 3 1/2" (90 mm), but 
design factors for commercial and industrial structures 
often require slabs of 5" to 6" (125 to 150 mm) in 
thickness. Keep in mind that plain (nonreinforced) 
concrete slabs are only used as a floor system and 
not to transmit vertical loads. If load-bearing walls or 
columns are to be supported by the slab, reinforcing 
must be placed in the slab, a footing placed beneath 
the slab, or both may be required depending on the 
loads to be supported. Figure 24-23 shows common 
methods of supporting floor slabs at bearing walls. If a 
column is to be supported, piers can be placed below 
the slab as seen in Figure 24-24. The edge of the slab is 
represented on the foundation drawings by a continu-
ous line.
Changes in Floor Elevation
The floor level is often required to change elevation to 
meet the design needs. A stem wall is formed between 
the two floor levels and should match the required 
width for an exterior stem wall. The lower slab is typi-
cally thickened to a depth of 8" (200 mm) to support 
the change in elevation. Figure 24-36 shows how a 
lowered slab can be represented on the foundation 
plan. Figure 24-37 shows common methods of chang-
ing floor elevations with a concrete slab, which would 
be shown in details referenced to the foundation plan. 
The step often occurs at what will be the edge of a wall 
when the framing plan is complete. Great care must be 
taken to coordinate the dimensions of a floor plan with 
SIDE  VIEWS
SEISMIC CONDITIONS.
ON THE SOIL TYPE AND
BE REQUIRED DEPENDING
REINFORCEMENT MAY 
PLAN  VIEWS
TO RESIST CRACKING
OPTIONAL WIRE MESH
FIGURE 24-34 Common methods of monolithic construction 
for on-grade concrete floor systems.
PLAN VIEWS
SIDE VIEWS
FIGURE 24-35 Common methods of construction for on-grade 
concrete floor systems using two or more pours.
FIGURE 24-36 Representing changes of floor level on a 
foundation plan. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf 
Consulting Engineers.

564 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
those of the foundation plan, so that walls will match 
the foundation step.
Slab Joints 
Joints in concrete include control, isolation, and con-
struction joints. Each was introduced in Chapter 11. 
Control joints must be shown on the foundation based 
on the engineer’s calculations or recommendations by 
the American Concrete Institute (ACI). The engineer 
will provide specific locations based on the soil con-
ditions at the job site. The location of control joints 
should be represented by a line and specified by a note 
referenced to the joint. The spacing and method of 
placement can be specified in the general notes placed 
with the foundation plan for simple projects, on the 
slab-on-grade plan if required, or in the specifications 
within the project manual.
Isolation or expansion joints are used to separate a slab 
from adjacent structural members so that stress cannot 
be transferred into the slab and cause cracking. These 
joints should be drawn and specified on the foundation 
plan using methods similar to those used to represent 
control joints. Construction or keyed joints are made to 
provide support between two slabs. The method used to 
form the joint must be specified with information about 
other joints, but these joints are not shown on the draw-
ings because the concrete crew determines the location 
based on concrete delivery and work schedules.
Slab Preparation and Placement
The slab may be placed above, below, or at grade level. 
Slabs placed above grade were considered in Chapter 
11. Slabs built below grade are used in basement or 
subterranean construction. When used at grade level, 
the slab is placed 8" (200 mm) above grade level unless 
it is protected by a retaining wall. Approximately 8" to 
12" (200 to 300 mm) of topsoil is removed to provide 
a stable, level building site. Excavation usually extends 
several feet beyond the building footprint to allow for 
the operation of excavating equipment needed to trench 
for the footings. Once forms for the footings have been 
set, compacted fill material can be placed to support the 
slab. The slab is placed on a 4" (100 mm) minimum 
base of compacted sand or gravel fill to provide a level 
base for the pouring of the slab. The fill is not drawn 
on the foundation plan, but the material and required 
depth is specified on the foundation plan.
Slab Reinforcement
When the slab is placed on more than 4" (100 mm) 
of uncompacted fill, welded wire fabric similar to that 
shown in Figure 24-38 should be specified to help 
the slab resist cracking. The engineer will specify the 
spacings and sizes of welded wire fabric (WWF) to be 
identified on the foundation plan. Steel reinforcing bars 
can be added to a floor slab to prevent bending of the 
slab due to expansive soil. Whereas mesh is placed in a 
FIGURE 24-37 Changes in floor level must be shown in detail and referenced to the foundation plan. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/
McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
565
slab to limit cracking, steel reinforcement is placed in a 
grid pattern near the surface of the concrete in tension 
to resist bending (see Figure 24-39). The amount of 
concrete placed around the steel is referred to as cover-
age. Proper coverage strengthens the bond between the 
steel and concrete and also protects the steel from cor-
rosion or fire. If steel is required to reinforce a concrete 
slab, footing, or pier, the engineer will determine the 
size, spacing, coverage, and grade of bars to be used. 
Generally, steel reinforcement is not shown on the 
foundation plan but is specified by a note.
Moisture Protection 
The slab is required to be placed over 6 mil polyeth-
ylene sheet plastic to protect the floor from ground 
moisture. When a plastic vapor barrier is to be placed 
over gravel, sand should be specified to cover the gravel 
fill to avoid tearing the vapor barrier. The vapor barrier 
is not drawn but is specified with a note on the founda-
tion plan.
Slab Insulation
Depending on the risk of freezing, some municipalities 
require the concrete slab to be insulated to prevent heat 
loss. The insulation can be placed under the slab if it is 
not placed on the outside of the stem wall. When placed 
under the slab, a 2" × 24" (50 × 600 mm) minimum 
rigid insulation material is usually required to insulate 
the slab. An isolation joint is typically provided between 
the stem wall and the slab to prevent heat loss through 
the stem wall. Figure 24-12 shows common methods 
of insulating the intersection of the floor and stem wall. 
Insulation is not shown on the foundation plan but is 
represented by a note and specified in details referenced 
to the foundation plan. Figure 24-40 shows plumbing 
FIGURE 24-38 Welded wire fabric is placed in concrete slabs 
that are poured over fill material to help resist cracking. Courtesy 
Jordan Jefferis.
FIGURE 24-39 Slab reinforcement should be specified on the 
foundation plan and shown in details.
FIGURE 24-40 HVAC and plumbing lines that are required to 
be placed prior to the foundation must be indicated on a plan. 
The information is often provided by drafters working for con-
sulting engineers. Courtesy Margarita Miller.

566 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
installation, which must be placed under the slab prior 
to the pouring of the slab. Information supplied by 
consulting engineers needs to be incorporated into the 
foundation plan by the drafter to show required HVAC, 
electrical, and plumbing. Figure 24-41 shows a founda-
tion plan referencing plumbing drains. Although piping 
runs are often not shown, terminations such as floor 
drains are shown, specified, and located on the founda-
tion drawings.
Radon Protection
Structures built in areas of the country identified by 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as having 
high radon levels need to be protected from the cancer-
causing gas. A common method of reducing the buildup 
of radon can be achieved by placing a 4" (100 mm) PVC 
vent pipe in the gravel fill covered with 6 mil polyeth-
ylene sheathing. Any joints, cracks, or penetrations in 
the floor slab must be caulked. The vent is run under 
the slab until it can be routed up through the framing 
system to an exhaust point that is a minimum of 10' 
(3000 mm) from other openings in the structure and 
12" (300 mm) above the roof. The piping should be 
indicated on the foundation drawings and coordinated 
with other drawings to show electrical wiring for instal-
lation of a fan located in the vent stack, and a system 
failure warning device.
Post-Tensioned Concrete Reinforcement
The methods of reinforcement mentioned thus far are 
used when it is assumed that the slab will be poured 
over stable soil. Post-tensioning of slabs extends the 
range of where slabs can be placed. This method of 
construction was developed for reinforcement of slabs 
that were poured at ground level and then lifted into 
place for multilevel structures. Adopted for use on at-
grade slabs, post-tensioning allows concrete slabs to be 
poured over expansive soil.
For design purposes, a concrete slab is considered 
to be a wide, shallow beam that is supported by a con-
crete foundation at the edge. While a beam may sag at 
the center due to loads and gravity, a concrete slab can 
either sag or bow depending on soil conditions such as 
excessive moisture differential, freezing, or expansive 
soil. Because concrete is very poor at resisting stress 
from tension, the slab must be reinforced with a mate-
rial such as steel, which has a high tensile strength. 
Steel tendons with anchors can be extended through 
the slab as it is poured. Usually between 3 and 10 days 
after the concrete has been poured, hydraulic jacks 
stretch these tendons. The tendon force is transferred 
to the concrete slab through anchorage devices at the 
ends of the tendons. This process creates an inter-
nal compressive force throughout the slab, increas-
ing the slab’s ability to resist cracking and heaving. 
Post-tensioning usually allows for a thinner slab than 
normally would be required to span over expansive 
conditions, the elimination of other slab reinforcing, 
and the elimination of most slab joints. Two common 
methods of post-tensioning used for slabs are the flat 
slab and the ribbed slab methods.
Post-Tensioned Flat Slabs
The flat slab method of post-tensioning uses steel ten-
dons ranging in size from 3/8" to 1/2" (9.5 to 13 mm) 
in diameter. Maximum spacings recommended by the 
Post-Tensioning Institute (PTI) for tendons include the 
following:
Tendon Diameter 
Spacing
3/8" (9.5 mm)  
5'–0" (1500 mm) 
7/16" (11 mm)  
6'–0" (1800 mm) 
1/2" (13 mm)  
9'–0" (2700 mm) 
The engineer determines the exact spacing and size 
of tendons based on the loads to be supported and the 
strength and conditions of the soil. When required, the 
FIGURE 24-41 Changes in the foundation caused by HVAC 
ducts and plumbing lines such as this floor drain should be 
indicated on the foundation plan.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
567
tendons can be represented on the foundation plan as 
seen in Figure 24-42. Details also need to be provided to 
indicate how the tendons will be anchored, and to show 
the exact locations of the tendons.
Figure 24-43 shows an example of a tendon detail 
that would be referenced to the foundation drawings. 
In addition to representing and specifying the steel 
throughout the floor system, the drafter needs to spec-
ify the engineer’s requirements for the strength of the 
concrete at 28 days, the period when the concrete is to 
be stressed, as well as what strength the concrete should 
achieve before stressing. This information is generally 
placed in the specifications in a project manual.
Post-Tensioned Ribbed Slabs
A second method of post-tensioning an on-grade floor 
slab is with the use of concrete ribs or beams placed 
below the slab. These beams reduce the span of the slab 
over the soil and provide increased support. The engi-
neer determines the width, depth, and spacing of the 
ribs based on the strength and condition of the soil and 
the size of the slab. Figure 24-44 shows an example of a 
beam detail that a drafter would be required to draw and 
reference on the foundation plan to show the reinforc-
ing specified by the engineer. Figure 24-45 shows an 
example of how these beams could be represented on 
the foundation plan.
Wood Floor Systems over a Crawl Space
Floor systems built over a crawl space are usually made 
using western platform or post-and-beam construction 
methods. Wood framing methods were introduced in 
FIGURE 24-42 Post-tensioned concrete slabs can be used 
when the slab must be placed over unstable soil.
PLASTIC HIGH CHAIR
TENDON-SPECIFY DIAMETER,
 STRENGTH, AND DEPTH
ANCHOR-SPECIFY
 DEPTH AND
 COVERAGE
FIGURE 24-43 Details showing tendon locations must be 
referenced to the slab plan.
FIGURE 24-44 A rib can be placed below a post-tensioned slab to provide increased slab support.

568 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Chapters 7 and 8, as wood construction was considered. 
This chapter considers only how wood and timber are 
drawn on the foundation plan.
Western Platform Framing
Floor joists similar to those in Figure 24-46 are used 
to span between the stem walls in western platform 
construction. The material size and spacing must be 
represented on the foundation plan. Figure 24-47 
shows methods of representing floor joists on a foun-
dation plan. The floor joists rest on top of the mudsill, 
which is supported by the stem wall (see Figure 24-48). 
Figure 24-49 shows other common methods of sup-
porting floor joists.
When the distance between stem walls is too great 
for the floor joists to span, a girder is used to support 
the floor joists. Unless the floor joists are designed to 
support concentrated loads, a girder must also be placed 
under interior bearing walls that are not supported 
by stem walls. A beam pocket or hanger supports the 
girder at the stem wall and, by a post and pier, provides 
support as it spans across the foundation. In areas where 
seismic activity must be planned for, the girder must be 
attached to the post, and the post must be attached to 
the supporting concrete pier. Figure 24-47 shows the 
representation of girders, post, and piers on the founda-
tion plan. Connections from girder to post and post to 
pier are not shown on the foundation plan but are speci-
fied by notes referenced to the pier.
Floor sheathing is nailed to the floor joists to provide 
the rough floor. The engineer sizes the subfloor depend-
ing on the spacing of the floor joists and the floor loads 
that must be supported. The floor sheathing is not 
represented on the foundation plan but is specified in a 
FIGURE 24-45 Support ribs for a post-tensioned slab must be 
shown and located on the foundation plan.
FIGURE 24-46 Western platform construction methods are 
used on many light commercial structures because of the 
system’s many economical features. Courtesy Zachary Jefferis.
FIGURE 24-47 Representing materials of a western platform 
floor system on the foundation plan. Common members that 
should be shown include the stem walls, footings, girders, piers, 
floor joists, floor overhangs, vents, crawl access, and metal 
anchors or straps.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
569
general note. Figure 24-50 shows some common meth-
ods used to frame changes in floor height. If a stem wall 
is required, it must be represented on the foundation 
plan just as an exterior stem wall and footing would be 
represented. If the change is made over a girder, a line-
type different from the line used to represent the girder 
should be used to represent the floor edge. Figure 24-51 
shows methods of representing elevation changes on 
the foundation plan.
Post and Beam
Post-and-beam construction is used on small commer-
cial and multifamily projects in areas of the country 
where cold or dampness is a consideration. Rather 
than having floor joists span between the stem walls, 
a series of beams is used to support the subfloor, as 
shown in Figure 24-52. Beams are typically 4 × 8 
(100 × 200) spaced at 48" (1200 mm) on center with 
supports placed at 8'–0" (2400 mm) along the beam. 
This pattern is based on the use of 4 × 8 (100 × 200) 
sheets of plywood but the exact girder type, size, and 
spacing are affected by the loads to be supported. A 
post-and-beam floor system is well suited to projects 
that have very few interior bearing walls. As seen in 
Figure 24-53, additional girders must be placed under 
interior bearing walls that do not align with the normal 
placing of girders.
Once the mudsill is bolted to the foundation wall, 
girders can be placed so that the top of the girder is 
level with the top of the mudsill. Girders are supported 
just as with western platform construction. Plywood 
with a thickness of 1 1/8" (28.5 mm) and an APA rating 
of STURD-I-FLOOR 2-4-1 with an exposure rating of 
EXP-1 is generally used for the subfloor. Two-inch (50 
mm) thick material such as 2 × 6 (50 × 150) T & G 
boards laid perpendicular to the beams can also be used 
for the subfloor. The strength and quality of the floor 
is greatly increased when the subfloor is glued to the 
support beams, eliminating squeaks, bounce, and nail 
popping.
Party Wall and Fire Wall Support
Regardless of the material used to form the floor system, 
care must be taken with special walls such as fire and 
party walls to ensure the wall will function as it is 
designed. Because unprotected material cannot pass 
FIGURE 24-49 Alternative methods of supporting floor joists 
for masonry walls.
FIGURE 24-48 A detail showing the intersection of the floor 
system to the foundation must be referenced to the foundation 
plan.

570 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
through a fire wall, extra support is required to be repre-
sented on the foundation plan to support beam termina-
tions at a fire wall. Figure 24-54 shows construction of a 
2-hour wall for a warehouse.
A party wall typically requires complete separation 
for adjacent units to help control vibrations. For a wood 
floor, this requires girders to support each portion of the 
wall. Figure 24-55 shows two options for framing the 
intersection of a party wall and the floor.
FOUNDATION DRAWINGS
Two types of drawings can be used to represent the 
information used to construct the floor and foundation 
systems. A slab-on-grade plan is usually drawn when the 
FIGURE 24-50 Common methods of framing changes in floor 
elevation using western platform construction methods.
FIGURE 24-51 Representing changes in floor elevation on the 
foundation plan with a joist floor system.
FIGURE 24-52 A post-and-beam floor system is often used 
for multifamily construction projects in damp climates. Courtesy 
Floyd Miller.
FIGURE 24-53 Representing a post-and-beam floor system on 
the foundation plan. Members that should be shown include 
the stem walls, footings, girders, piers, vents, crawl access, and 
metal anchors or straps.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
571
walls of the structure extend from the footing. Masonry 
and precast concrete panel construction are examples 
of structures where the wall would rest directly on the 
footing, eliminating the need for a stem wall. In each 
case, the walls of the structure determine the limits of 
the floor. The locations of walls that form the perimeter 
of the structure are placed on the floor plan. The slab-
on-grade plan is used to show the shape of the floor 
slab. Interior walls are shown on the floor plan and not 
on the slab plan. The slab plan is used to show only 
items necessary to construct the floor. Figure 24-56 
shows an example of a slab-on-grade plan. The process 
for completing this plan is given later in this chapter.
A foundation plan is used to supplement the slab-
on-grade plan. Only material used to represent the 
actual foundation is shown. Because the stem walls (the 
concrete panels) are shown on the slab-on-grade plan, 
they are not shown on the foundation plan. The founda-
tion plan is used to show the size, shape, location, and 
elevation of all footings. Because no other level is rep-
resented, the outline of the footings and piers is drawn 
using continuous lines.
Figure 24-57 shows the foundation plan that would 
accompany the slab plan shown in Figure 24-56. The 
process for completing this type of foundation plan is 
given later in this chapter.
When a monolithic slab/foundation is poured, 
it is represented in one foundation plan, similar to 
Figure 24-58. Western platform and post-and-beam 
floor systems are also represented on the foundation 
plan rather than having two separate plans. Material 
above grade is generally drawn using continuous lines, 
FIGURE 24-54 Fire walls shown on the floor plan often require 
special construction that must be referenced to the foundation 
plan. This detail shows the support for the columns that are 
used to support the roof beams that are interrupted by the fire 
wall.
FIGURE 24-55 A party wall is a wall framed between two sep-
arate dwelling units. Intersections of party walls and the floor 
system must be referenced to the foundation plan. Courtesy Scott 
R. Beck, Architect.

572 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 24-56 The placement of slabs and slab joints is often separated from the foundation plan to provide clarity. A slab-on-grade 
plan shows only an on-grade concrete floor system. Courtesy LeRoy Cook.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
573
FIGURE 24-57 When a slab-on-grade plan is provided, the foundation plan shows only the footings. This foundation plan is for the 
structure shown in Figure 24-63. Courtesy LeRoy Cook.

574 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
and material below grade such as footings and piers 
is usually drawn using dashed lines. Information to 
complete each type of foundation is presented in this 
chapter. Before considering differences, it is important 
to consider similarities between each type of plan.
Symbols
Grid markers, elevation symbols, and a north arrow 
are the symbols typically associated with foundation 
drawings. The grid and north arrow can be thawed 
FIGURE 24-58 A foundation plan combining the slab and foundation plan. Courtesy Bill Berry of Berry-Nordling Engineers, Inc. and Thomas 
J. Kuhns, A.I.A., Michael & Kuhns Architects, P.C.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
575
from other drawings. Elevation symbols should match 
symbols used for other drawings. Elevation symbols 
often include an elevation on both the top and bottom 
of the line, as shown in Figure 24-59. When more than 
one elevation is given per symbol, a schedule should 
be included with the drawing to define each label. 
Elevation labels used on foundation drawings include 
the following: 
Elevation Label
Definition
BOF 
Bottom of footing 
BOW
Bottom of wall 
FF 
Finish floor 
TOF 
Top of footing 
TOG 
Top of grate 
TOW 
Top of wall
Schedules
Just as with other drawings, schedules are an effec-
tive method of presenting foundation information. 
Separate schedules are often used to represent foot-
ings, piers, pilasters, beams, and repetitive framing 
members. Reference symbols that clearly represent the 
material to be specified should be used. Continuous 
footings could be represented by a symbol such as 
F-1 or F-6, with piers represented by P-1 or P-8. 
Many schedules include listings for the symbol, the 
quantity, size, and required reinforcing. Reinforcing 
can be divided into separate columns for upper and 
lower mats, as well as required hairpin size and spac-
ing. Figures 24-27 and 24-57 each provide examples 
of the use of schedules to keep the foundation draw-
ing uncluttered. Spot footing schedules often include 
additional listings for elevation, pedestal height, and 
pedestal reinforcing.
Annotation
As with other plan views, foundation drawings require 
the use of local and general notes to specify all materials. 
Most notes should be placed using the same consid-
eration that was used to place notes on other framing 
plans. More so than with other drawings, specifica-
tions controlling work quality and material are usually 
placed with the foundation plan. Figure 24-60 shows an 
example of the notes typically associated with a founda-
tion plan.
Dimensioning
The method of dimensioning is as important as the 
lines and symbols used to represent the foundation 
material. Line quality for dimensions and extensions 
should match that used for the floor or framing plans. 
Jogs in the foundation are dimensioned using the same 
methods used on the floor plan. Most of the dimensions 
for major shapes will be exactly the same as the corre-
sponding dimensions on the floor plan. The foundation 
plan can be drawn in the same drawing file as the floor 
plan. This allows the overall dimensions for the floor 
plan to be displayed on the foundation plan if different 
layers are used to place the dimensions. Layers such as 
A BASE DIM, A FLOR DIM, and S-FND DIMEN help 
differentiate between dimensions for the floor and foun-
dation. If the drawings are to be in separate files, the 
dimensions from the framing plan can be referenced to 
the foundation drawings.
FIGURE 24-59 Representing changes in elevation on 
the foundation plan may be referenced to the top of 
slab (TOS), top of footing (TOF), or bottom of footing 
(BOF). Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf 
Consulting Engineers.

576 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
A different method is used to dimension the inte-
rior walls of a foundation than is used on a floor plan. 
Foundation walls are dimensioned from face to face 
rather than face to center, as on a floor plan. Footing 
widths are dimensioned from center to center. Figures 
24-9, 24-17, 24-36, 24-56, 24-57, and 24-58 provide 
examples of placing dimensions on the slab-on-grade 
and foundation plans.
Layer Guidelines for Foundation Plans
As with other drawings, the layers used to draw the 
foundation drawings should be carefully considered. 
Typically, a prefix of S FND or S SLAB can be used to 
separate the drawing from other drawings that may be 
contained in the drawing file. Layers such as GRIDS and 
BASE DIM created for other drawings can be thawed 
and used with the foundation drawings. Common layer 
names based on NCS guidelines can be found in the 
Appendix on the student CD. 
DRAWING FOUNDATION PLANS
The foundation plan should be drawn at the same scale 
and in the same orientation as the floor and framing 
plans. The plan can best be drawn by thawing the floor 
plan layers, which show the exterior walls and the inte-
rior load-bearing walls.
Concrete Slab
A concrete slab can be completed by using the follow-
ing steps.
 1.  Thaw the layers containing the exterior walls and 
interior bearing walls. 
 2.  Using a running OSNAP of INT, draw the outline of 
the slab to match the outline of the exterior walls. 
 3.  Draw a centerline to represent all interior bearing 
walls.
 4.  Block out for any openings in the stem wall such as 
those required for garage doors. 
 5.  Draw a support ledge if brick veneer is to be used. 
 6.  Draw the outline of the exterior footings. 
 7.  Draw the outline of all interior continuous footings.
The base of the foundation plan has now been drawn 
and should now resemble Figure 24-61.
 8.  Mark the center of all posts and columns, and draw 
pedestals or the spot footings to support them.
 9.  Thaw all grid lines and markers. 
10.  Draw all control joints and changes in floor level. 
11.  Draw all metal connectors. 
12.  Draw any plumbing work. 
13.  Draw any HVAC ductwork.
14.  Draw any required electrical conduit runs and slab 
penetrations. 
The foundation plan should now resemble Figure 
24-62. Use the following steps to place the needed 
dimensions.
15.  Thaw the base dimension layer to provide overall 
dimensions for each side of the structure. 
16.  Thaw dimensions used on the floor plan or provide 
dimensions to locate each jog in the foundation. 
17.  Dimension the location of all interior continuous 
footings. 
18.  Dimension the size and location of any changes in 
slab elevation. 
19.  Dimension all metal connectors. 
FIGURE 24-60 General notes can be used to organize informa-
tion related to the foundation plan. Notes are often divided into 
separate divisions including concrete, reinforcing steel, soil, and 
framing lumber. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf 
Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
577
20.  Dimension the location to the centers of all spot 
piers. 
21.  Dimension the location of any required piping, 
ductwork, or electrical conduit.
The major features of the drawing have now been 
dimensioned. The foundation plan should now resem-
ble Figure 24-63. The drawing can be completed by 
adding all required text and detail markers: 
22.  Describe the concrete slab, fill material, vapor bar-
rier, and insulation. 
23.  Describe all footing and stem wall sizes. 
24.  Describe all required mudsills, ledgers, and anchor 
bolts. 
25.  Describe all metal straps, anchors, and connectors. 
26.  Describe all required changes in elevation. 
27.  Describe all footings and pedestals. 
28.  Place any general notes specified by the engineer. 
29.  Place a title and scale below the drawing. 
The completed foundation plan should now resem-
ble Figure 24-64. Similar procedures could be used to 
draw a post-tensioned concrete slab foundation.
FIGURE 24-61 The base drawing for a concrete slab foundation plan should show the support for each bearing wall and column. 
Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

578 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 24-62 The foundation plan with grids and slab joints added. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
579
FIGURE 24-63 Placement of dimensions to locate interior and exterior features. Courtesy Van Domelen/Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf 
Consulting Engineers.

580 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 24-64 The completed foundation plan with local and general notes, detail markers, and schedules. Courtesy Van Domelen/
Looijenga/McGarrigle/Knauf Consulting Engineers.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
581
Floor Joists
A foundation plan for a structure framed with floor 
joists can be completed by using the following steps.
 1.  Thaw the layers containing the exterior walls and 
interior bearing walls. 
 2.  With OSNAP set to ON, draw the outline of the 
stem wall to match the outline of the exterior walls. 
 3.  Use the OFFSET command to reproduce the inte-
rior side of the stem walls. Use TRIM and FILLET 
to clean up each intersecting corner.
 4.  Draw a centerline to represent all interior bearing 
walls. 
 5.  Use the engineer’s specifications or determine the 
sizes for all girders to be placed under load-bearing 
walls. 
 6.  Block out openings in the stem wall such as those 
required for garage doors. 
 7.  Draw a support ledge if brick veneer is to be used. 
 8.  Draw the outline of the exterior footings. 
 9.  Draw all interior piers. 
The base of the foundation plan has now been drawn 
and should resemble Figure 24-65.
10.  Thaw all grid lines and markers created for other 
plan views. 
11.  Mark the center of all exterior posts or columns, 
and draw the spot footings for each. 
12.  Draw floor joist indicators. 
13.  Draw all changes in floor level. 
14.  Draw all metal connectors. 
15.  Draw all vents. 
16.  Draw a crawl access. 
The foundation plan should now resemble Figure 
24-66. Use the following steps to place the needed 
dimensions.
17.  Thaw the base dimension layer to provide overall 
dimensions for each side of the structure. 
18.  Thaw dimensions used on the floor plan or provide 
dimensions to locate each jog in the foundation. 
19.  Dimension all openings in the stem wall. 
20.  Dimension the location of all girders.
21.  Dimension the location of all interior piers. 
22.  Dimension the size and location of any changes in 
slab elevation. 
23.  Dimension the location of all metal connectors.
FIGURE 24-65 The base plan for a joist floor system. Courtesy 
Scott R. Beck, Architect.
FIGURE 24-66 Adding required columns, anchors, vents, and 
access. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

582 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
The major features of the drawing have now been 
dimensioned. The foundation plan should now resem-
ble Figure 24-67. The drawing can be completed by 
adding all required text.
24.  Place notes, detail markers, and dimensions to 
describe all footing and stem wall sizes. 
25.  Place notes and detail markers to describe all 
required mudsills, ledgers, and anchor bolts. 
26.  Place notes, detail markers, and dimensions to 
locate and describe all metal straps, anchors, and 
connectors. 
27.  Place notes to describe all vents, wall openings, and 
the crawl access. 
28.  Describe all girders, post, and piers. 
29.  Place notes to describe all joist types, size, and 
spacing. 
30.  Place notes to describe all required changes in 
elevation. 
31.  Place notes to describe the crawl space covering. 
32.  Place notes to describe all special blocking. 
33.  Place any general notes specified by the engineer. 
34.  Place a title and scale below the drawing.
The completed foundation plan should now resem-
ble Figure 24-68. A similar procedure could be used to 
draw a structure supported on pilings instead of piers.
Post and Beam
A foundation plan for a structure framed with a post-
and-beam floor system can be completed by using the 
following steps.
 1.  Thaw the layers containing the exterior walls and 
interior bearing walls. 
 2.  Use OSNAP to draw the outline of the stem wall to 
match the outline of the exterior walls. 
 3.  Use the OFFSET command to reproduce the inte-
rior side of the stem walls. Use TRIM and FILLET 
to clean up each intersecting corner.
 4.  Draw a centerline to represent all interior bearing 
walls. 
 5.  Use the engineer’s specifications or determine the 
sizes for all girders to be placed under load-bearing 
walls. 
 6.  Layout all girders required for the floor support. 
 7.  Block out for any openings in the stem wall such as 
those required for garage doors. 
 8.  Draw a support ledge if brick veneer is to be used. 
 9.  Draw the outline of the exterior footings. 
10.  Draw all interior piers for all girders. 
The base of the foundation plan has now been drawn 
and should resemble Figure 24-69.
11.  Thaw all grid lines and markers. 
12.  Mark the center of all exterior posts or columns, 
and draw the spot footing for each.
13.  Draw all changes in floor level. 
14.  Draw all metal connectors. 
15.  Draw all vents.
16.  Draw a crawl access. 
The foundation plan should now resemble Figure 
24-70. Use the following steps to place the needed 
dimensions.
17.  Thaw the base dimension layer to provide overall 
dimensions for each side of the structure. 
18.  Thaw dimensions used on the floor plan or provide 
dimensions to locate each jog in the foundation. 
FIGURE 24-67 Placement of interior and exterior dimensions. 
Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
583
FIGURE 24-68 The completed foundation plan. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

584 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 24-70 Adding required columns, anchors, vents, and 
access. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.
FIGURE 24-69 The base plan for a post-and-beam foundation. 
Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
585
19.  Dimension all openings in the stem wall. 
20.  Dimension the location of all girders.
21.  Dimension the location of all interior piers.
22.  Dimension the size and location of any changes in 
slab elevation. 
23.  Dimension the location of all metal connectors.
The major features of the drawing have now been 
dimensioned. The foundation plan should now resem-
ble Figure 24-71. 
The drawing can be completed by adding all required 
text and detail markers: 
24.  Describe all footing and stem wall sizes. 
25.  Describe all required mudsills, ledgers, and anchor 
bolts. 
26.  Place notes and dimensions to locate and describe 
all metal straps, anchors, and connectors. 
27.  Place notes to describe all vents, wall openings, and 
the crawl access. 
28.  Describe all girders, posts, and piers. 
29.  Describe all required changes in elevation. 
30.  Place notes to describe the crawl space covering. 
31.  Place notes to describe all special blocking. 
32.  Place any general notes specified by the engineer. 
33.  Place a title and scale below the drawing. 
The completed foundation plan should now resem-
ble Figure 24-72.
ADDITIONAL READING
Links for the materials represented on the foundation 
plan and related details are too numerous to list here. 
Rather than listing individual sites, use your favorite 
search engine to research products from the follow-
ing CSI categories: steel, concrete, masonry, existing 
conditions, and earthworks. You can also do a general 
search of subjects such as foundations, footings, rein-
forcing steel, pilings, soil compaction, grading, and 
drainage. Another excellent source of information is 
the book Soils, Earthwork and Foundations, A Practical 
Approach available at the ICC bookstore at www.
iccsafe.org.  
FIGURE 24-71 Placement of interior and exterior dimensions. 
Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

586 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
FIGURE 24-72 The completed foundation plan. Courtesy Scott R. Beck, Architect.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
587
KEY TERMS
Beam pocket
Cantilevered retaining wall
Crawl space
Excavation
Existing grade
Finished grade
Footing
Grade beam
Heaving
Monolithic construction
Natural grade
Pedestal
Piers 
Piling
Settlement 
Soil-bearing capacity
Soil texture 
Stem wall
Answer the following questions with short complete state-
ments. Type the chapter title, question number, and a short 
complete statement for each question using a word processor. 
Some answers may require the use of vendor catalogs or seek-
ing out local suppliers. 
Question 24-1 Describe the difference between fill, backfill, 
uncompacted, and compacted fill.
Question 24-2 List four classifications used to describe soil 
texture, and describe the bearing capacity of each.
Question 24-3 What is the main cause of settlement?
Question 24-4 What problem does excess moisture in the 
soil cause?
Question 24-5 What type of soil is most susceptible to the 
effects of freezing?
Question 24-6 What are the names and sizes of the two 
components that make up a spread footing for a two-
story structure?
Question 24-7 What is the minimum size of reinforcing 
steel recognized by most codes?
Question 24-8 What is the required distance a stem wall 
must extend above the finish grade?
Question 24-9 List two methods of resisting lateral pressure 
applied to a stem wall.
Question 24-10 Describe the requirements for stepping a 
footing.
Question 24-11 How is masonry veneer typically supported 
on an exterior footing?
Question 24-12 Describe a method of transferring lateral 
loads to the floor system when joists are parallel to the 
retaining wall.
Question 24-13 Why is the spacing for anchor bolts usually 
different for stem walls and retaining walls?
Question 24-14 What is the minimum bearing required for 
a girder resting on concrete?
Question 24-15 List two methods of attaching a wood floor 
to a masonry wall.
Question 24-16 How is a cantilevered retaining wall differ-
ent from a retaining wall?
Question 24-17 List two methods of providing support for a 
concrete slab floor.
Question 24-18 What is the purpose of a grade beam?
Question 24-19 Why are interior piers for wood floors 
required to be recessed in the excavated grade?
Question 24-20 Describe the difference between a piling and 
a pedestal.
Question 24-21 What two methods are used to determine 
the depth a piling is to be driven?
Question 24-22 What is the advantage of having a bulbous 
piling?
Question 24-23 What type of joint would be provided if 
enough time to pour a slab were not available?
Question 24-24 What is coverage and why is it important?
Question 24-25 List and describe two methods of post-
tensioning a concrete slab.
DRAWING PROBLEMS
Draw the following details in generic form for future 
use in a library. Use a scale suitable for showing materi-
als typically associated with the detail. Required details 
can then be amended for use with a specific foundation 
plan. Skeletons of the plans and details can be accessed 
from the student CD in the DRAWING PROJECTS/
CHAPTER 24 folder. Use these drawings as a base 
to complete the assignment. Unless your instructor 
provides other instructions, use the drawing criteria 
Foundation Systems and Components
CHAPTER 24 TEST

588 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
presented in Chapter 6 to complete the details and save 
them as blocks. 
● Open the appropriate detail on the student CD and 
save the file to an appropriate storage device. 
❍ Use appropriate symbols, linetypes, dimension-
ing methods, and notations to complete the 
drawing.
❍ Unless specified, select a scale appropriate to dis-
play the required material and determine LTSCALE 
and DIMVARS.
● Materials are currently located on the 0 layers. Create 
layers based on the National CAD Standards and 
move each drawing component to the appropriate 
layer.
● Assume plotting in monochrome, but assign a differ-
ent color to each material and drawing component to 
help you track each item.
● Provide hatch patterns as necessary to define each 
material. 
● Show general reinforcing for all CMU construction 
based on Chapter 10.
● Show, specify, and provide details for slab joints based 
on specific problem instructions and the recommen-
dations based on the American Concrete Institute 
(ACI) presented in Chapter 11. 
● Provide annotation to clearly describe all materi-
als. Use generic notes to describe trusses, rafters, 
floor joists, and other common members by refer-
encing the appropriate framing plan for the size 
and spacing.
❍ As you insert generic details into a specific foun-
dation drawing, coordinate with the appropriate 
foundation, and provide job-specific sizes instead 
of generic references.
● Assume all slabs to be 5" minimum thick unless noted 
over 0.006 black vapor barrier, 1" sand fill, and 4" 
gravel fill. Reinforce slab with # 10" × # 10" – 4 × 4 
WWM, 2" up.
● Provide (2)-#5 Ø rebar in each foundation footing (1 
each 2" up/down). 
● Anchor plates to stem walls with 1/2" Ø anchor bolts 
@ 48" o.c. unless noted.
● Anchor 3× ledgers to walls with 5/8" Ø anchor bolts 
@ 32" o.c. staggered 2 up/down. Use appropriate 
Simpson hanger to attach the floor joist. 
Edit the detail as required to meet the minimum standards 
above.
Details
Problem 24-1 Draw a footing suitable for a two-story office 
building with a concrete slab and 2 × 6 stud walls.
Problem 24-2 Draw a foundation detail suitable for a one-
level concrete block structure with a concrete slab floor 
system. Thicken the floor slab to 10" thick at the footing/
wall intersection.
Problem 24-3 Edit the detail created in problem 24-2 to 
show a one-level concrete block structure with brick 
veneer and a concrete slab floor system. Edit the footing 
to be 20" wide.
Problem 24-4 Draw a foundation detail suitable for a one-
level 8" CMU wall system with a 2× wood joist floor 
system supported by a 3× ledger. 

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
589
Problem 24-5 Draw a detail to support a 2× exterior 
two-level bearing wall with a post-and-beam floor 
for the lower floor system with beams parallel to the 
stem wall.
Problem 24-6 Edit the detail created in problem 24-5 
to represent a two-level post-and-beam floor with 
beams perpendicular to the stem wall. Support the 
beams with metal hangers, without the use of beam 
pockets.
Problem 24-7 Draw a detail to represent a nonbearing party 
wall resting on a concrete slab that is thickened to 12" × 
12". Assume the use of 2 × 4 studs at 16" o.c. with 1" 
clear between walls. Attach the wall plate to the slab with 
power-activated studs.
Problem 24-8 Use the detail created in problem 24-7 as a 
guide to represent a nonbearing party wall resting on 
parallel wood beams. Use 2 × 4 studs at 16" o.c. with 1" 
clear between walls. Support each wall on 4× beams on 
wood posts on an 18" wide footing. Place beams parallel 
to the party wall.

590 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 24-9 Use Figure 24-18 as a guide to draw a CMU 
retaining wall for an 8'–0" high wall supporting 12" deep 
floor joists resting on a 2 × 6 DFPT sill. Edit the detail to 
show a second detail representing floor joists parallel to 
the wall. Edit these two drawings to reflect poured con-
crete construction.
Problem 24-10 Use the information in the specifications on 
the student CD and the attached drawings to complete a 
drawing of a 24" × 14" deep footing to support a 6" wide 
precast concrete panel. Show a 3" × 3" × 9" slot at 60" 
o.c. for panel supports in the footing filled with non-
shrink grout. Show the wall resting on 1" nonshrink 
grout. Use the Internet, Sweets Catalogs, or local vendor 
material to specify a structural connector that is suitable 
for concrete panels. 
Plan Views—General Directions
Unless your instructor provides other instructions, 
complete the foundation drawings that correspond 
to the floor plan that was drawn in Chapter 16. Use 
the attached drawings, the drawings provided from 
the DRAWING PROBLEMS/CHAPTER 24 folder 
on the student CD, and the information provided with 
other related problems in Chapters 15 through 23 to 
complete the required building foundation draw-
ings. Use the following minimum standards to com-
plete the required drawings:
● Draw the required plan(s) at the same scale used to 
create the floor plan. 
● Show grids based on the floor plan layout.
● Adjust all scale, lineweights, text, and dimension fac-
tors as required for the selected scale.
● Specify all material based on general specifications 
located on the student CD or on common local 
practice. 
● Use separate layers for each major drawing compo-
nent based on the recommended NCS guidelines pre-
sented on the student CD.
● Use dimensions to locate all walls, footings, piers, 
anchors, and other structural materials.
● Provide annotation to specify all materials. 
● Hatch materials with the appropriate hatch pattern 
when appropriate.
● Use an appropriate architectural text font to label and 
dimension each drawing as needed. 
● Refer to Sweets Catalogs, vendor catalogs, or the 
Internet to research needed sizes and specifications.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
591
● Use schedules when possible to keep the drawing 
from being cluttered.
● Provide section and detail markers for the related 
drawings from Chapters 17 through 23 that your team 
has drawn.
● Provide a drawing title, scale, and problem number 
below each plan view.
Note: The sketches in this chapter are to be used as a 
guide only. You will find that some portions of the 
drawings do not match things that have been drawn 
on other portions of the project. You will act as 
the project manager and will be required to make 
decisions about how to complete the project. Any 
information not provided must be researched and 
determined by you unless your instructor (the proj-
ect architect and engineer) provides other instruc-
tions. When conflicting information is found, use 
the order of precedence presented in Chapter 15 to 
determine the solution to drawing conflicts. If you 
think you have found an error, do not make changes 
to the drawings until you have discussed the prob-
lem and possible solutions with your engineer (your 
instructor). Information is provided on drawings in 
Chapters 15 through 23 relating to each project that 
might be needed to make decisions regarding the slab 
or foundation plan. 
Problem 24-11 Foundation Plan. Use the partial drawing on 
the next page of the foundation plan as a guide to draw 
a foundation plan showing a concrete slab floor for each 
unit of the four-unit condominium started in problem 
15-1. Place the slabs over crushed rock or compacted 
sand and suitable slab insulation for your area. Use 3500 
psi concrete for the garage floor slab and slope the garage 
floor to the 9'–0" door openings. Use 5/8" Ø anchor bolts 
embedded 10" at 48" o.c. for all walls unless noted. 
● Use a bolt spacing of 16" o.c. on the south walls. 
Specify and locate all hold-down anchors and straps 
that were specified on the framing plans.
● Use a 16" wide × 12" deep footing under the 8' high 
retaining wall at the east wall of the project. 
● Show an 8" wide retaining wall in the northeast 
corner of each unit.
● Represent a stem wall and footing under the wall 
between the garage and storage area.
❍ Use a similar footing under the wall supporting the 
stairs. 
● Use a 24" × 24" × 12" deep pier at each corner of 
each deck with a CB66 column base for a 6 × 6 post.
Note: Use the sample calculations posted on the 
student CD in the REFERENCE MATERIAL folder 
to specify material that is not specified in the follow-
ing problems.

592 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
593
Problem 24-12 Foundation Plan. Use the attached drawing, 
the details created in Chapters 23 and 24, the general 
specifications found on the student CD, and the follow-
ing guidelines to complete the foundation plan for the 
structure started in problem 15-2. Use a 5" thick slab 
reinforced with 12" × 12"/4 × 4 WWM, 2" up from the 
bottom of the slab. Place the slab over 4" crushed rock 
or compacted sand. Use 3000 psi concrete for the floor 
slab and 3500 psi for footings. Specify and provide details 
(from this or Chapter 10) as required:
● Show an expansion joint that is 48" in from each exte-
rior wall, suitable slab insulation for your area, and a 
soil-bearing value of 2500 psf.
● Use 12" deep piers placed below the continuous foot-
ings to support the pilasters. 
● Use a 4'–9" sq. × 15" deep pier under the steel 
column. 
❍ Support the column on a 14" square pilaster set at 
45° to the footing. Provide a suitable joint to isolate 
the slab from the pilaster. 
● Use 21" sq. × 12" deep piers on each side of the small 
opening on the south wall, and 30" square piers on 
each side of the large openings on the south wall. 
● Specify that all footings are to extend a minimum of 
18" into the natural grade.
Insert details 10, 11-13, 11-14, and 11-16 on or near the slab 
plan and reference each to the plan. Edit the required 
details to match this structure and complete per area 
requirements.
Problem 24-13a Slab-on-Grade Plan. Use the floor plan cre-
ated in Chapter 16, the attached drawing, the general 
specifications on the student CD, and the criteria below to 
complete the slab-on-grade plan. Show a 5" concrete floor 
slab (4" @ office) for the structure started in problem 15-3. 
Show all openings in block walls as per the floor plan. 
● Specify the slab height based on the site plan started in 
Chapter 15.

594 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
● Use 12" × 12" / 4 × 4 WWM 2" up from the bottom 
of the slab.
● Place the slab over 4" crushed rock or compacted 
sand.
● Use 3500 psi concrete for the floor slab. Specify target 
strengths for concrete to be in accordance with ACI 
318 requirements for reinforced concrete. 
● Specify steel reinforcement to be American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) A615 grade 40 smooth 
rebar at all joints.
● Support each column on an 11" × 11" × 1/2" steel 
base plate. 
❍ Attach the column to the plate with 1/4" fillet weld. 
❍ Support the plate on 1" dry pack and use (4) 3/4" Ø 
bolts located on a 6 1/2" grid. 
● Support the column on a 14" square pedestal, set at 
45° to grid C/D. 
❍ Provide a 1/4" fiber joint to isolate the slab from 
the pedestal. 
● Provide suitable joints between each pedestal and 
between the pedestals and outer walls.
● Provide expansion joints 48" in from each exterior wall 
and one expansion joint @ grid D of the sales area.
● Provide a 3" diameter floor drain and a sloped floor 
for each bathroom with a 1/8"/12" slope.
Note: A detail symbol such as 13c refers to the detail 
to be drawn in problem 24-13c. A reference such as 
11-16 refers to the intersection described in problem 
11-16. Detail symbols that contain no letter will need 
to be designed by you.
Problem 24-13b Foundation Plan. Use the attached drawing to 
complete a foundation plan for the structure started in prob-
lem 15-3. Show all openings in block walls as per floor plan. 
● Use 3500 psi concrete for the footings and pedestals with 
each extending 24" minimum into the natural grade.
❍ Specify target strengths for concrete to be in accor-
dance with ACI 318 requirements for reinforced 
concrete.
● Specify steel reinforcement to be ASTM A615 grade 40 
deformed bars unless noted 1 1/2" clear of each surface. 
● Draw and specify the following footings: 
a. 24" × 12" deep with 3/4" Ø × 10" A.B. @ 48" o.c.
b. 16" × 8" deep with 5/8" Ø 10" A.B. @ 48" o.c.
c. 42" × 15" deep with (4)-#5 Ø continuous
d. 36" × 15" deep with (4)-#5 Ø continuous
e. 24" × 15" deep with (4)-#5 Ø continuous
f. 16" × 12" deep with (2)-#5 Ø continuous
g. Thicken slab to 15" × 18" deep

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
595
Problem 24-13c Column Support. Draw and specify 
the following piers on the foundation plan and 
create a schedule to reflect the following sizes and 
reinforcement:
 1.  6'–0" × 6'–0" × 18" deep (5)-#8 Ø each way at the 
top/bottom
 2.  1'–6" × 4'–0" × 12" deep pier unreinforced 
 3.  8'–4" × 8'–4" × 18" deep pier with (7)-#8 Ø each 
way located at the top/bottom
 4.  6'–6" × 5'–6" × 18" deep pier with (6)-#6 Ø each 
way located at the top/bottom
 5.  4'–9" × 4'–9" × 14" deep pier with (6)-#5 Ø each 
way located at the bottom only
 6.  9'–4" × 9'–4" × 18" deep pier with (8)-#8 Ø each 
way located at the top/bottom
 7.  7'–3" × 7'–3" × 18" deep pier with (6)-#8 Ø each 
way located at the top/bottom
 8.  3'–3" × 3'–3" × 14" deep pier with (5)-#5 Ø each 
way located at the bottom only
 9.  6'–9" × 6'–9" × 14" deep pier with (6)-#8 Ø each 
way located at the top/bottom
10.  4'–6" × 4'–6" × 14" deep pier with (5)-#6 Ø each 
way at the bottom only. Provide for each end of 
beam over office area.
Insert details 11-4, 11-5, 11-6, 11-13, 11-14, and 11-16 on 
or near the slab plan and reference each to the plan. Edit 
the required details to match this structure and complete 
per area requirements.
Problem 24-13d Loading Dock Section. Create a section 
showing a 32' minimum long loading dock. 

596 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Note: Use the attached sketch for problem 24-14f to 
create a section showing CMU construction.
● The dock is to be a maximum depth of 48" where the 
wall intersects the structure.
● Slope the loading dock slab away from the structure 
with a slope of 1/4" per 12" for distance of 12'. 
● At the edge of the sloped slab (12' from structure) 
locate a polyester drain covered with a cast iron grate. 
❍ Thicken the slab at the drain to 18" deep. 
● Provide a 5" sloped slab from the drain to general 
grade of approximately 20' in length.
❍ Thicken the upper edge of the slab at the dock 
entry and reinforce per attached calculations. 
Problem 24-13e Loading Dock Cross-Section. Draw a detail 
or edit an existing detail from an earlier chapter to show 
a section of a 4' maximum high retaining wall resting on 
a 14" deep footing. Use detail 11-5 as a guide.
● Taper the footing from a maximum width of 54" to 
30" as the wall height decreases. 
● Reinforce footing w/ #5 Ø rebar @ 10" o.c. each way/
top and bottom placed 2" down, and 3" up. 
● Reinforce wall w/ #5 Ø @ 16" o.c. both ways. 
● Provide #5 Ø × 16" (into wall) × varies into wall and 
footing. 
● Solid grout all wall steel cells.
● Reinforce the footing with # 4 Ø bars at 8" o.c. each 
way, 2" up/down.
Problem 24-14a Slab Plan. Use the attached drawing to 
complete the slab-on-grade plan showing a 5" concrete 
floor slab (4" in office/sales area) for the structure started 
in problem 15-4.
● Use 3500 psi concrete for the floor slab. 
❍ Specify target strengths for concrete to be in accor-
dance with ACI 318 requirements for reinforced 
concrete. 
❍ Specify steel reinforcement to be ASTM A615 grade 
40 smooth rebar at all joints.
❍ Use 12" × 12"/4 × 4 WWM 2" up from the 
bottom of the slab. 
❍ Place the slab over 4" crushed rock or compacted 
sand. 
● Show all openings in concrete walls as per the floor 
plan and panel elevations. 
● Specify the slab height based on the site plan started in 
Chapter 15.
● Support each column on a 14" square pedestal set at 
45° to grid 3. 
❍ Provide a 1/4" fiber isolation joint to isolate the 
slab from the pedestal. 
❍ Provide suitable joints between each pedestal and 
between the pedestals and outer walls.
● Provide joints at grid 3 running east/west at each 
column at grids 1 to 5, and joints running east/west @ 
grid 3+24' and 5+24'. 
● Provide an expansion joint that is 48" in from each 
exterior wall.
● Provide a 3" diameter floor drain and a sloped floor 
for each bathroom with a 1/8"/12" slope.
● Provide 3/4" diameter L structural connection inserts 
w/ 3/4" Ø × 25" steel inserts @ 60" o.c. in all portions 
of the slab where footings are 6'–0" or deeper below 
the finish floor.
● See foundation plan for footing elevations.
Insert details 11-2, 11-4, 11-5, 11-6, 11-13, 11-14, and 11-16 
on or near the slab plan and reference each to the plan. 
Edit as required.
Note: A detail symbol such as 13c refers to the detail 
to be drawn in problem 24-14c. A reference such as 
11-16 refers to the intersection described in problem 
11-16. Detail symbols that contain no letter will need 
to be designed by you.

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
597
Problem 24-14b Foundation Plan. Use the attached drawing 
to complete the foundation plan for the structure started 
in problem 15-4.
● Use 3500 psi concrete for the footings and pedestals 
with each extending 18" minimum into the natural 
grade using the bottom of footing elevations. 
● Specify target strengths for concrete to be in accor-
dance with ACI 318 building code requirements for 
reinforced concrete.
● Specify steel reinforcement to be ASTM A615 grade 
40 deformed bars unless noted, 2" clear of each 
surface.

598 
Commercial Drafting and Detailing
Problem 24-14c Typical Foundation Detail. Draw and 
specify the following footings on the foundation plan 
and create a detail and a schedule to reflect the fol-
lowing sizes and reinforcement. Set the footing steel 
3" up from the bottom of the footing. Set the anchor 
sleeves per the wall panel specifications provided on 
the student CD.
Draw and specify the following footing: 
a. 24" × 14" deep with (3)-#5 Ø 
b. 20" × 14" deep with (2)-#5 Ø 
c. 42" × 14" deep with (5)-#6 Ø 
d. 36" × 14" deep with (4)-#6 Ø 
e. 34" × 14" deep with (3)-#5 Ø 
f. 22" × 14" deep with (2)-#5 Ø 
g. Thicken slab to 15" × 12" deep from top of slab with 
(2)-#4 Ø 
h. 15" × 36" deep grade beam similar to problem 11-8. 
Thicken the slab to 8" deep and reinforce with (2) 
continuous #5 Ø, 2" up from the bottom of the slab. 
Reinforce the grade beam with (5) #8 Ø at bottom and 
balance of steel per problem 11-8. 
Problem 24-14d Pedestal/Piers. Draw and specify the fol-
lowing piers on the foundation plan and create a detail 
and a schedule to reflect the following sizes and rein-
forcement:
Draw and specify the following piers.
1. 7'–9" × 7'–9" × 18" deep (5)-#8 Ø E.W. / top/bottom
2. 9'–6" × 9'–6" × 18" deep (8)-#8 Ø E.W./ top/bottom
3. 6'–6" × 6'–6" × 14" deep (7)-#6 Ø E.W./ top/bottom
4. 3'–9" × 3'–9" × 14" deep (4)-#6 Ø E.W./ bottom only 
5. 5'–3" × 5'–3" × 14" deep (6)-#5 Ø E.W./ bottom only

Chapter 24: Foundation Systems and Components 
599
Edit the drawing created in problem 11-6 as required to 
show the pedestal that will be required to span from the 
footing to the top of the slab. Use the pier elevations 
provided on the foundation plan in combination with 
the slab elevation based on the site plan to determine 
the height of the pedestals, and reflect each pedestal 
height in the schedule. In addition to the information 
provided with problem 11-6, use the information pro-
vided in the general specifications that are located on 
the student CD.
Problem 24-14e Pedestal at Fire Wall. Use the drawing 
created in problem 24-14d and the information provided 
in the general specifications on the student CD to create 
a detail showing the reinforcing and the location of the 
pedestals at grid F3 on the foundation plan. 
Problem 24-14f Loading Dock Section. Create a section 
showing a 32' minimum long loading dock. Use the fol-
lowing criteria to complete the drawing:
● Use the elevations provided on the site and foundation 
plans to establish the required dock depth. 
● Use the detail created in problem 11-2 to reference the 
bottom of the wall where the loading dock intersects 
the structure.
● Use the detail created in problem 11-4 to reference the 
top of the wall where the loading dock intersects the 
structure.
● Use the guidelines presented in problem 24-13d and 
the information in the general specifications found on 
the student CD as a guide to complete the drawings.
Problem 24-14g Loading Dock Cross-Section. Use the rel-
evant information provided in problem 24-13e and the 
drawing created in problem 11-5 to show a section of a 
4' maximum high retaining wall resting on a 14" deep 
footing. 

600
Index
A
AAC (autoclaved aerated 
concrete) blocks, 14
Access, foundation, 553
Accessibility. See Americans with 
Disabilities Act
Accessibility symbols, 95f
ACEC (American Consulting 
Engineers Council), 10
ACI (American Concrete 
Institute), 73, 253, 564
Acoustical ceilings, 370
ADA. See Americans with 
Disabilities Act
Addenda, 20, 34
Adhesives, 125
Admixtures, 233–234
Adobe brick, 207
Aggregates, 233
AIA (American Institute of 
Architects), 9, 48, 306
AIBD (American Institute of 
Building Design), 7
Air-entrained concrete, 234
AITC (American Institute of 
Timber Construction), 170
Aligned text, 62
Allowable area, 83, 85–87, 88f
Alternative Transportation credit, 
LEED rating system, 339
Aluminum, 194
Aluminum Association, 194
American Concrete Institute 
(ACI), 73, 253, 564
American Consulting Engineers 
Council (ACEC), 10
American Design Drafting 
Association, 7
American Institute of Architects 
(AIA), 9, 48, 306
American Institute of Building 
Design (AIBD), 7
American Institute of Timber 
Construction (AITC), 170
American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI), 52, 91
American Society for Testing and 
Materials. See ASTM
American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE), 10
American Society of Heating, 
Refrigerating, and 
Air-Conditioning Engineers, 
Inc. (ASHRAE), 10
American Society of Interior 
Designers (ASID), 7
American Society of Landscape 
Architects, Inc., 9
American standard beam, 188
Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA)
additional reading, 121
methods of egress
doors, 105
elevators, 102
hallways, 95–99
lifts, 102–104
ramps, 99–101
rescue assistance areas, 
104–105
stairs, 101–102
walks, 95–99
overview, 94
parking requirements, 94–95
ramps, 464
requirements based on 
occupancy
assembly areas, 116–117
business, 118
cafeterias, 117–118
libraries, 119
medical care facilities, 118
mercantile, 118
restaurants, 117–118
transient lodging, 119–121
restrooms and bathing facilities
bathtubs, 110–111
fixtures, 114–116
lavatories, 110
mirrors, 110
overview, 105–108
shower stalls, 111
toilet room accessories, 
111–114
toilet stalls, 108
urinals, 108–110
Anchor bolts, 127, 130–131, 
149–150, 552
Angle measurement, 48
Angle of repose, 338
Angles, steel, 190, 192f
ANNO (annotation) code, 49
ANNO DIMS layer, 62
ANNO TTLB (title block) 
layer, 59
Annotation
door schedules and 
symbols, 362
finish schedules, 364–365
foundation drawings, 575
overview, 141, 360–361
roof plans, 417–418
schedule notations, 361–362
site plans, 326
window schedules and 
symbols, 362–364
Annotation (ANNO) code, 49
ANSI (American National 
Standards Institute), 52, 91
Arches, 175, 177, 353
Architects
areas of study, 8
educational requirements, 8
employment opportunities, 9
overview, 7–8
Architects’ First Source for 
Products, 26
Architect’s scales, 50
Architectural drawings, 19, 23. 
See also Drawings
Architectural Graphics Standards, 
451, 459
Architectural scales, 55t
Architectural-grade beams, 173
ARRAY command, 390f–391f, 
473, 486
ASCE (American Society of Civil 
Engineers), 10
ASHRAE (American Society of 
Heating, Refrigerating, and 
Air-Conditioning Engineers, 
Inc.), 10
ASID (American Society of 
Interior Designers), 7
Asphaltic emulsion, 548
Assembly areas, ADA 
requirements, 116–117
Associates, 9
ASTM (American Society for 
Testing and Materials)
bolt standards, 131–132
brick standards, 207
CMU standards, 215
steel standards, 186–187
ATTRIBUTES command, 58, 
486–487
Auditoriums, seating for 
disabled, 117f
Austenitic grades, 194
AutoCAD ANSI31 hatch pattern, 
218
AutoCAD tools
additional reading, 71
dimensions, 61–64
drawing environment, 39–45
files and folders, 69–70
hatch patterns, 390–391
influences of, 38–39
multidocument environment, 
67–69
software, 3
templates
border, 45–47
drawing area, 46–47
layers, naming, 48–50
limits, 48
linetypes, 52–55
lineweight, 55
metric system, 50–52
scales, 50
title blocks, 45–47
units of measurement, 
47–48
text
common features of, 56
height of, 60–61
overview, 55–56
placement of, 56–57
scale, 60–61
types of, 57–60
viewports, 64–67
Autoclaved aerated concrete 
(AAC) blocks, 14
B
Backfill, 549
Back-up brick, 207
Baffles, 156
Balusters, 470
Bank indicators, 327
Bar chair (BC) support, 241f
Bars, steel, 193
Base plan, 584f
Base plates, 149, 193
Base Point option, 68
Bathing facilities, ADA guidelines
bathtubs, 110–111
counters, 116
fixtures, 114–116
grab bars, 113–114
handrails, 113–114
Note: Page numbers referencing figures are italicized and followed by an “f.” Page numbers referencing tables are italicized and followed by a “t.”

Index 
601
medicine cabinets, 111–113
mirrors, 110
overview, 105–108
shower stalls, 111
tables, 116
tub and shower seats, 113–114
Bathtubs, ADA guidelines, 
110–111
Batt insulation symbol, 139f
BB (beam bolster) support, 241f
BBU (beam bolster upper) 
support, 241f
BC (bar chair) support, 241f
Beam bolster (BB) support, 241f
Beam bolster upper (BBU) 
support, 241f
Beam pockets, 553
Beams
bearing walls and support 
columns, 487
concrete, 250
moment frames, 494
reaction to loads, 177f
support for, 552–553
timber, 491
wood, 491
Beams and stringers lumber 
classification, 148
Beam-to-beam connection 
detail, 160f
Beam-to-beam detail, 133f
Bearing walls, 348, 487–490
Beveled welds, 135–136
Bid bonds, 308
Bid forms, 308
Bidding stage, 19, 308
Bird block, 156
Bird’s mouth, 157
Blind nailing, 127, 129f
Blocking, 151–152, 180
Blocks, inserting repetitive 
features as, 69, 438–439, 
486–487
Blocks, masonry. See Masonry
Blocks, street layout, 320–321
Board feet, 148
Boards, defined, 147. See also 
Wood
BOCA (National Building 
Code), 73
BOF (bottom of footing), 327, 575f
Bolsters, 239
Bolts
anchor, 127, 130–131, 
149–150, 552
carriage, 131
drift, 131f, 132
expansion, 131f, 132
high-strength, 131–132
machine, 131
Bond beam brick, 209f
Bond beams, 216, 224
Bond forms, 308
Bonds, 211
Borders, drawing, 45–47
Both sides option, 136
Bottom chords, 179–180
Bottom of footing (BOF), 327, 575f
Bottom plates, 153
Boundary nailing, 127
Bounds, 317–318
Box nails, 125
Braced frames, 300–301, 303f
Braced parapet walls, 
fire-rated, 270f
Bracing, 151–153
Break lines, 53–54
Brick. See also Masonry
joints, 213–214
placement of, 209
quality of, 208
reinforcement of, 214–215
shapes of, 209
sizes of, 208–209
types of, 207–208
veneer construction, 215
wall construction, 209–213
Bright finished nails, 126
Brownfield Redevelopment credit, 
LEED rating system, 339
Building brick, 207
Building dimensions, 325. 
See also Dimensions
Building materials. See also names 
of specific materials
green construction, 12–13
model codes, 78–80
weights, 282f–283f
Building sections, 426–427. See 
also Sections
Building shapes, 385–386
Building systems, model codes 
for, 76–78
Built-up roofs, 410
Built-up steel girders, 201f
Bundled bars, 251
Butt joints, 135f
C
Cabinet and fixture drawings, 23, 
25f, 458, 460f–461f
Cable, steel, 193
CAD technicians. See Drafters
Cafeterias, ADA requirements, 
117–118
Calculations
footing, 288–289
influence of AutoCAD on, 38
working with, 23–26
Camber, 175, 181
Camelback pratt trusses, 181
Cant strips, 405
Cantilevered retaining walls, 
556–558
Cantilevers, 175, 177f
Careers
additional reading, 15–16
architects, 7–9
CAD technicians, 4–7
designers, 7
employment opportunities, 3
engineers, 9
interior designers, 7
related fields, 11–12
Carriage bolts, 131
Cased openings, 353
Cash allowance specifications, 
311–312
Cast-in-place concrete pilings, 562
Cast-in-place floors, 243–244
Catch basins, 327
Cavity walls, 211
CCA wood preservative, 13
Ceiling joists, 157–159
Ceilings
acoustical, 370
fire-resistive construction, 
271–275
reflected ceiling plans, 
369–371, 373f
vaulted, 159
Cells brick, 209f
Cement, 232–233
Cement finish, 126
Cementitious coating, 272
Centerlines, 53, 61f
Certified forest/wood products, 
13, 162
Certified Wood credit, LEED 
rating system, 394
Chairs, 239
Change notices/orders, 309
Channels, steel, 189–190
CHC (continuous high chair) 
support, 241f
CHCM (continuous high chair for 
metal deck) support, 241f
CHCU (continuous high chair 
upper) support, 241f
Chimneys, 413
Chlorosulfonated polyethylene 
(CSPE), 410
Chord bars, 248
Chord forces, 296–299
Chords, 179–180, 296–297, 300f
Circular columns, 251–252
Circular stairs, 468
Civil drawings, 21–23
Civil engineering scale, 50
Civil engineers, 10
Clay, 547
Client name box, 60
Close grain lumber, 147
Closed specifications, 313
CMUs. See Concrete masonry 
units; Masonry
Coarse grain lumber, 147
Codes. See Model codes
Collar ties, 157
Column bases, 552f
Columns
concrete, 250–252
fire-resistive construction, 
267–268
moment frames, 494
steel, 190–192
support, 487–490
Combination columns, 252
Commercial site plans, 22f
Commercial structures, 3
Common brick, 207
Common nails, 125
Compaction, soil, 549
Composite columns, 251–252
Composition shingles, 410–411
Computers, model codes and, 
90–91. See also AutoCAD 
tools
Concrete
additional reading, 256
beams, 250
columns, 250–252
conduit, 255–256
coverage recommendations, 
240t
fire-resistive construction, 
264, 271
floor systems, 243–246, 
505–507
joints, 252–255
materials, 232–234
mixture ratios, 234
precast framing, 497–498
reinforcement of, 238–243
representing in drawings, 140, 
434–437
shear walls, 300
stairs, 471
testing, 234
types of, 234–238
walls, 246–249
Concrete blocks, 218f, 300
Concrete fire-rated parapets, 271f
Concrete footings, weight, 288f
Concrete masonry units (CMUs). 
See also Masonry
grades of, 216
overview, 215–216
representing in drawings, 
218–220
shapes of, 217–218
sizes of, 216–217
Concrete masonry units 
symbol, 139f
Concrete pilings, 562
Concrete Reinforcing Steel 
Institute (CRSI), 222, 224
Concrete slabs, 576–580
Concrete stairways, 474f–475f
Concrete tilt-up construction, 
360f, 498, 520–522
Conduit, concrete, 255–256
Connections
additional reading, 143–144
details
annotation, 141
criteria for completing, 
142–143
drawing, 137–139
locating materials with 
dimensions, 140–141
overview, 136–137
process, 141–142
representing materials in, 
139–140
symbols, 141
used with engineered products, 
125–130
used with large wood 
members, 130–133
used with wood, 125–130
welded steel, 133–136

602 
Index
Conserving water, 14
Construction documents, role of 
drafter, 19
Construction joints, 253–255
Construction Metrication 
Council, 50, 315
Construction phase, role of 
drafter, 19–20
Construction Specifications 
Canada (CSC), 309
Construction Specifications 
Institute (CSI), 11, 40, 
309–311, 438
Contaminants, 15
Continuous extension lines, 61f
Continuous footings, 549–550
Continuous high chair (CHC) 
support, 241f
Continuous high chair for metal 
deck (CHCM) support, 241f
Continuous high chair upper 
(CHCU) support, 241f
Contours, 334, 338
Contract drawings, 20
Control joints, 252–253
Conventional floor framing, 149f
Cool roofs, 421
Copper, 195
COPY command, 68–69
Corbel arches, 179f
Cores brick, 209f
Cornices, 156
Corridors, fire-resistive 
construction, 268–270
Corrugated metal roofs, 411
Counters, ADA guidelines, 116
Countersunk screws, 129
Courses, brick, 209
Cove header brick, 209f
Cover, 240
Coverage, 240, 565
Crawl spaces, 567–569
Crickets, 405, 417
Cross grain lumber, 147
CRSI (Concrete Reinforcing Steel 
Institute), 222, 224
Crystalline bedrock, 547
CSC (Construction Specifications 
Canada), 309
CSI (Construction 
Specifications Institute), 
11, 40, 309–311, 438
CSPE (chlorosulfonated 
polyethylene), 410
CTLTSCALE command, 55
Curb ramps, 96f
Curtain walls, 348
Curved beams, 175
Curved stairways, 467
Cut banks, 549
CUT command, 68–69
Cut material, 336
Cutting planes, 53, 141f, 426
D
Date of completion box, 60
Daylight, 336
DDEDIT command, 57
Dead loads, 281
Decking, 197, 494
Deformations, 222
Descriptive specifications, 312
Design development, role of 
drafter, 19
DesignCenter feature, 69
Designers, 7
Detail markers, 141f, 367
Detail references, 34, 141f
Detailed sections, 427–430, 431f
Details
annotation, 141
creating, 141–142
criteria for completing, 
142–143
drawing, 138–139
grading plans, 338–340
locating materials with 
dimensions, 140–141
overview, 136–137
placement of, 29–33
representing materials in, 
139–140, 199–203
site plans, 329
stairs, 477–478
symbols, 141
Diaphragm transfers, 302f
Diaphragms, 151, 296
Dimension lines, 54
Dimension Style Manager 
feature, 64
Dimensional lumber, 147–148
Dimensions
bearing walls and support 
columns, 487
components of, 61–62
elevations, 391
foundation drawings, 
575–576
light-frame, 359
locating materials with, 
140–141
masonry, 359–360
placement of, 62–63, 579f
roof plans, 418
in sections, 437–438
site, 324–326
steel, 360
timber, 360
variables, 64
DIMSTYLE command, 61
Disabled people. See Americans 
with Disabilities Act
Discipline designators, 48–49
Diverters, 417
Domes, 177
DONUT command, 225
Doors
ADA guidelines, 105, 
106f–108f
elevations, 387–389
floor plans, 351–353
schedules, 362
Double-wythe brick walls, 
139f, 213f
Draft stops, 276
Drafters
additional reading, 35–36
calculations, 23–26
codes, 27–28
drawings, 20–23, 28–34
educational requirements, 5
employment opportunities, 5–7
entry-level, 4–5
project coordination, 34
revisions, 34–35
role in common office 
practice, 18–20
senior, 5
vendor catalogs, 26–27
Drags, 302–304
Drainage
roof, 413–417
site plans, 327
Drawing area, 46–47
Drawing area modules, 46
Drawing coordination, 34
Drawing sets, 20–21, 384
Drawings. See also Details; 
Elevations; Sections
annotation, 141
architectural, 23
cabinet and fixture, 23
civil, 21–23
drawing sets, 20–21
electrical, 23
external referenced, 40–42
of land, 321
layouts, 44–45
mechanical, 23
organization of, 20
placement of, 28–34
plumbing, 23
ramps, 465
relationship to written 
specifications, 314
representing materials in
AutoCAD hatch patterns, 
390–391
concrete, 434–437
concrete masonry units, 
218–220
engineered products, 434
glass, 437
laminated beams, 
173–174
metal buildings, 199
overview, 433–434
reinforcing bars, 226
steel, 434
timber, 160–161, 434
unit masonry, 434
wood, 434
stairs, 471–478
structural, 23
symbols, 141
types of, 20
views, 42–44
walls, 349–350
Drawn by box, 60
Dressed lumber, 147
Drift bolts, 131f, 132
Drinking fountains, ADA 
guidelines, 114–115
Ductile, 187, 286
Dutch hip roofs, 409
Dynamic loads, 281
E
Earth pressure, 284–285
Earthquakes, 289
Eaves, 156
Economy brick, 207
Edge joints, 135f
Edge nailing, 127
EDIT menu, 68
Educational requirements
for architects, 8
for CAD technicians, 5
for engineers, 10
for interior designers, 7
Egress, ADA guidelines
doors, 105
elevators, 102
hallways, 95–99
lifts, 102–104
ramps, 99–101
rescue assistance areas, 
104–105
stairs, 101–102
walks, 95–99
Elastic range, 186
Electrical drawings, 23
Electrical engineers, 10
Electrical penetrations, fire-resistive 
construction, 274–275
Elevation
defined, 336
on-grade slabs, 563–564
referencing, 141f, 326–327, 575
soil, 548–549
symbols, markers and 
labels, 367
Elevations
additional reading, 
396–399, 527
combined with sections, 430
completing, 393–396
concrete tilt-up, 520–522
drawing
building shapes, 385–386
dimensioning, 391
grades, 386–387
layering, 392–393
notations, 392–393
representing materials in, 
389–391
roof, 386, 414–415
skylights, 387–389
symbols, 391–392
windows, 387–389
within drawing sets, 384
poured concrete, 519–520
principles of, 384–385
structural, 396
structural steel, 518–519
Elevators
ADA guidelines, 102
drawings, 478–479
entrances, 104f
shafts, 469f
Eliminating pesticide 
treatments, 14

Index 
603
Employment opportunities
for architects, 9
for CAD technicians, 5–7
in commercial design and 
drafting, 3
End nailing, 127, 129f
End plates, 193
Energy, 14
Energy and Atmosphere credit, 
LEED rating system, 374
Energy Star standards, 14
Engineered products
additional reading, 183–184
beams, 491
brick, 207
components of, 167–169
connections
adhesives, 125
metal framing connectors, 130
nails, 125–127
power-driven anchors, 127
screws, 127–130
staples, 127
laminated beams
appearance of, 172–173
fiber bending, 170–171
finish of, 173
grading method, 171–172
grading of, 170
material, 172
representing in drawings, 
173–174
sizes of, 170
specifications, 173
types of, 174–177
lumber, 13, 166–167
open-web trusses
floor, 180–181
overview, 177–179
roof, 181–183
terminology, 179–180
representing in drawings, 
140, 434
Engineers, 9
English bond, 211
Enlarged floor plans, 358–359
Entry-level CAD technicians, 4–5
Environment. See Green 
construction
Environmental loads
rain, 283–284
snow, 283
wind, 289–292
Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), 566
EPDM (ethylene propylene diene 
monomer), 410
EPS (expanded polystyrene) 
foam, 255, 554
EQIP (equipment) code, 49
Equal bid specifications, 313
Equivalent fluid pressure, 287
Erosion and Sedimentation 
Control credit, LEED rating 
system, 339
Escalator drawings, 479
Ethylene propylene diene 
monomer (EPDM), 410
Excavation, 549
Exclusions, 308
Execution section, 311
Existing grades, 548–549
Exits, 88–90. See also Egress, 
ADA guidelines
Expanded polystyrene (EPS) 
foam, 255, 554
Expansion bolts, 131f, 132
Expansion joints, 213
Extension lines, 54
Exterior coverings, 201
Exterior dimensions, 62–63
Exterior walls, 346–347
External octagon brick, 209f
External reference (XREF) 
command, 40–42, 486
External referencing, 40–42, 328
F
Face brick, 208
Face nailing, 127, 129f
Faced walls, 348
Factored load method, 28
Fascia, 156
Favorite Contents feature, 69
FBA grade brick, 208
FBS grade brick, 208
FBX grade brick, 208
Ferritic grades, 194
Fiber bending, 170–171
Fiber saturation point, 148
Fiberboard, 153
Fiber-reinforced gypsum 
panels, 153
Field nailing, 127
Field welds, 136
Files
naming, 70
overview, 69–70
site plans, 328
storage locations for, 70
FILL command, 527
Fill material, 336, 549
FILLET command, 118–119
Fillet welds, 134–135
Finish
of laminated beams, 173
of nails, 126
of stainless steel, 195
Finish grade, 336, 549
Finish schedules, 364–365, 366f
Finish symbols, 362f
Finished roofing, 157
Finks, 181
Fire brick, 207
Fire cuts, 211, 213f
Fire dampers, 268, 273, 275f
Fire-resistive construction
additional reading, 277
ceilings, 271–275
columns, 267–268
corridors, 268–270
fire and draft stops, 276
floor assemblies, 271–272
heavy timber, 275–276
model codes, 28
objectives of, 263
overview, 263–264
parapet walls, 270–271
roof assemblies, 273–275
shafts, 272–273
wall materials, 264–266
wall openings, 266–267
Fire stops, 276
Fire wall support, 569–570
Fire walls, 349
Fit Curve option, 334
Fixed arches, 178f
Fixed partitions, 347
Fixtures, ADA guidelines, 114–116
Flanges, 188
Flashing, 404
Flat arches, 179f
Flathead screws, 129
Flemish bond, 211
Floating viewports. 
See Viewports
Floor (FLOR) code, 49
Floor diaphragms, 297f
Floor plans
additional reading, 375
annotation, 360–365
completing, 367–369
components of
doors, 351–353
enlarged floor plans, 358–359
floors, 353–357
furnishings, 357–358
interior equipment, 357–358
openings, 353
overview, 345
plumbing symbols, 357
walls, 346–350
windows, 350–351
development of, 344–345
dimensions, 359–360
layering, 371–375
reflected ceiling plans, 369–371
space plans, 369
symbols, 365–367
Floors
anchor bolts, 149–150
bracing, 151–152
concrete, 243–246
fire-resistive construction, 
271–272
on floor plans, 353–357
framing plans, 504–507
girders, 150
joists, 150–151
load distribution, 286
mudsills, 149
open-web trusses, 180–181
posts, 150
sheathing, 152, 568
types of
on-grade slabs, 563–566
overview, 562
party wall and fire wall 
support, 569–570
post-tensioned concrete 
reinforcement, 566–567
wood floor systems over 
crawl spaces, 567–569
underlayment, 152
Fluted nails, 126
Folders
naming, 70
overview, 69–70
storage locations for, 70
Foliated rock, 547
Fonts, 56f. See also Text
Footings, 288–289, 550
Forces. See Loads and forces
Forest Stewardship Council 
(FSC), 13, 162
Form of Agreement, 308
Foundations
additional reading, 585
drawings and plans
annotation, 575
concrete slab, 576–580
dimensioning, 575–576
floor joists, 581–582
layers, 576
overview, 570–574
schedules, 575
symbols, 574–575
load distribution, 286
soil considerations, 547–549
types of
continuous footings, 
549–550
grade beams, 558–559
interior supports, 558
pedestals, 559–560
pilings, 560–562
retaining walls, 555–558
stem walls, 550–555
Four-centered arches, 179f
Four-ply roofs, 410f
Framing
steel
additional reading, 203
lightweight, 195–197
metal buildings, 197–199
multilevel, 199–203
shapes of, 187–193
structural steel, 186–187
types of metal and alloys, 
194–195
timber
components of, 160–161
overview, 159–160
representing in drawings, 
160–161
trusses, 161–162
wood
additional reading, 162–163
components of, 152–154
floor construction, 149–152
roof construction, 154–159
terminology, 146–149
uses of, 146
wall openings, 154
Framing plans
additional reading, 511
drawing
floor framing plans, 504–507
layers, 507–511
overview, 498–500
roof framing plans, 500–504
steel components, 201f

604 
Index
Framing plans (continued)
example of, 43f
features on, 487–491
structural drawings, 485
using CAD skills for, 486–487
Framing straps, 552f
FREEZE setting, 328
Freezing, soil, 548
Friction coefficient value, 287
Frog brick, 209f
FSC (Forest Stewardship 
Council), 13, 162
Full scale, 50
Full sections, 426–427, 441f
Furnishings, 357–358
G
Gable roofs, 408
Galvanized nails, 126
Gambrel roofs, 410
General notes, 57, 487–490
Girder trusses, 182–183
Girders, 149f, 150
Girts, 198f
Glass, 390f, 437
GLAZ (glazing) code, 49
Glazing, 140
Glued-laminated beams 
(glu-lams), 150, 167f
Grab bars, ADA guidelines, 110f, 
112f, 113–114
Grade beams, 294f, 558–559
Grades
of laminated beams, 170–172
of stainless steel, 194
of wood, 148–149
Grading plans
angle of repose, 338
details, 338–340
drawing, 386–387
overview, 334–335
representing contours, 338
terminology, 336–338
Grain, wood, 147
Gravel, 547
Gravel symbol, 139f
Great land surveys, 318
Green construction
contributing to environment, 
14–15
LEED
credits, 339–340, 374–375, 
394
overview, 12
masonry, 228
materials, 12–13
overview, 6
reducing impact, 13–14
removing materials, 13
Green roofs, 421
Green wood, 148
Grid face blocks, 218
GRID layer, 576
Grid markers, 141f, 365–367
Grout, 226–227
Grouted cavity walls, 211
Growth rings, 147
Guardrails, 99, 466, 468–469
Gusset plates, 180, 193
Gutters, 415–417
H
Half shape brick, 208f
Hallways, ADA guidelines, 95–99
Handles, cabinetry, 458
Handrails, 99, 101, 113–114, 468
Hard conversions, 51, 217
Hardboard, 152
Hardwoods, 147
HATCH command, 391
HBA grade brick, 208
HBS grade brick, 208
HBX grade brick, 208
HC (high chair) support, 241f
HCA hinge connectors, 177f
HCM (high chair for metal deck) 
support, 241f
HDF (high-density fiberboard), 152
Header supports, 154
Headers, 154, 159
Headroom, stair, 466
Heads, nail, 126
Heat of hydration, 233
Heaving, 548
Heavy timber, fire-resistive 
construction, 275–276. 
See also Timber
Height
building, 83
text, 60–61
Hidden lines, 52–53
High chair for metal deck (HCM) 
support, 241f
High chair (HC) support, 241f
High-density fiberboard 
(HDF), 152
High-early-strength concrete, 234
High-performance windows, 14
High-sloped roofs
completing plans, 420–422
Dutch hip, 409
framing plans, 501–504
gable, 408
gambrel, 410
hip, 408–409
mansard, 406–408
High-strength bolts, 131–132
Hinges, cabinetry, 458
Hip roofs, 408–409
Hold-down connections, 292f, 
293, 552f
Hollow brick, 207–209
Hooks, 224–226
Horizontal coursings, 218f
Horizontal dimensions
locating materials with, 
140–141
in sections, 438
Horizontal forces
chord forces, 296–299
collecting and resisting, 
294–296
defined, 283
diaphragms, 296
overview, 292–294
shear walls, 299–304
Horizontal steel reinforcement, 
223–224
Howe trusses, 181
HVAC penetrations, fire-resistive 
construction, 273–274
Hydration, 233
I
IBC. See International Building 
Code
IBC Handbook, 74, 82f
I-beams, 188
ICC (International Code 
Council), 91
ICFs (insulating concrete forms), 
14, 255
I-joists, 167f, 168–169
Illuminating Engineering Society of 
North America (IESNA), 10
Illustrators, 11
Impact force compression, 549
Indoor Environmental Quality 
credit, LEED rating 
system, 374
Industrial structures, 3
Innovation and Design 
Process credit, LEED 
rating system, 374
INSERT command, 485
Inspectors, 11–12
Institutional structures, 3
Insulating concrete forms (ICFs), 
14, 255
Insulating lightweight 
concrete, 237
Insulation
foundation, 553–554
on-grade slabs, 565–566
representing in drawings, 140
Interfirst II project, 8f
Interior architects, 8
Interior designers, 7
Interior dimensions, 63
Interior elevations, 25f
Interior equipment, 357–358
Interior reference symbol, 362f
Interior walls, 347–348
Internal bull nose brick, 209f
Internal octagon brick, 209f
International Building Code (IBC)
fire resistance, 263
overview, 50–51, 73
ramps, 464
steel reinforcing, 238
walls, 346
wood, 127, 146
International Code Council 
(ICC), 91
Interns, 9
Intumescent paint, 272
Invitations to bid, 308
Isolation joints, 253
J
Jack studs, 154
JC (joist chair) support, 241f
JCU (joist chair upper) 
support, 241f
J-groove welds, 135–136
Job captains, 5
Joints
brick, 213–214
concrete, 252–255
on-grade slabs, 564
Joist chair (JC) support, 241f
Joist chair upper (JCU) 
support, 241f
Joists
floor, 150–151, 581–582
open-web, 197
steel, 196–197
timber, 491
wood, 491
Jumbo brick, 208
K
Key plans, 345
Keyed joints, 253
Keyways, 550
King closer shape brick, 208f
King studs, 154
Kitchen cabinets, 458, 460f–461f
Kitchens, commercial, 455f
Knobs, cabinetry, 458
L
Labor and material payment 
bonds, 308
Lag screws, 129
Lamella frame, 179f
Laminated beams
appearance of, 172–173
fiber bending, 170–171
finish of, 173
grading of, 170–172
material, 172
overview, 166
representing in drawings, 
173–174, 491
shapes of, 174f
sizes of, 170, 171f
specifications, 173
types of, 174–177
Laminated strand lumber 
(LSL), 166
Laminated timbers symbol, 139f
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL) 
beams, 166, 167f–168f
Land
additional reading, 340
dimensions, 325
drawings of, 321
legal descriptions of, 317–321
related site drawings
grading plans, 334–340
overview, 331–332
topography plans, 333–334
site plans
annotation, 326
completing, 329–331
details, 329
development of, 327–328
elevation and swale, 
326–327
linetypes, 321–322
parking information, 323–324

Index 
605
representing structure, 
322–323
setting parameters, 328–329
site dimensions, 324–326
Landings, stair, 466
Landscape and Exterior Design to 
Reduce Heat Islands credit, 
LEED rating system, 339
Landscape architects, 8
Landscaping plans, 334f
Lap joints, 135f
Laps, 224, 551
Large-scale plywood symbol, 139f
Large-scale steel shapes 
symbol, 139f
Lateral forces, 289, 295f–296f, 
304f, 557
Laterals, 327
Lath, steel, 197
Lavatories, ADA guidelines, 110
LAYER command, 486
Layers
adding, 138
DesignCenter feature, 69
elevations, 392–393
floor plans, 371–375
foundation drawings, 576
framing plans, 486, 507–511
naming, 48–50
sections, 440–442
Layouts, 44–45
LCCA (Life Cycle Cost 
Analysis), 315
Lead, 195
LEADER command, 55
Leader lines, 54–55
LEED (Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design)
credits, 339–340, 374–375, 394
overview, 12
Legal descriptions, of land
lot and block, 320–321
metes and bounds, 317–318
rectangular systems, 318–320
Let-in braces, 153
Libraries, ADA requirements, 119
Life Cycle Cost Analysis 
(LCCA), 315
Lift slabs, 246
Lifts, ADA guidelines, 102–104
Light Pollution Reduction credit, 
LEED rating system, 340
Light-frame dimensions, 359
Lightweight concrete, 237
Lightweight steel framing, 
195–197
Limits, template, 48
LIMITS command, 48
Line contrast, 138–139
Lines and Arrows tab, 64
Linetypes
break lines, 53–54
centerlines, 53
commercial projects, 53f
construction drawings, 52f
cutting plane lines, 53
dimension lines, 54
extension lines, 54
hidden lines, 52–53
leader lines, 54–55
object lines, 52
phantom lines, 54
scales, 55
section lines, 53
site plans, 321–322
Lineweight, 55, 56t
List-processing language (LISP) 
routines, 4
Live loads, 281–283
Loading limitations, wood, 146
Loads and forces
additional reading, 305
dead loads, 281
design considerations, 285–286
determining, 288–289
distribution of, 286–288
earth pressure, 284–285
environmental, 283–284, 
289–292
environmental loads, 283–284, 
289–292
horizontal forces
chord forces, 296–299
collecting and resisting, 
294–296
diaphragms, 296
overview, 292–294
shear walls, 299–304
live loads, 281–283
seismic forces, 289
vertical forces on moment 
frames, 304f
Local notes, 57, 59, 487
Local/Regional Materials credit, 
LEED rating system, 394
Longitudinal sections, 426, 429f
Lot and block system, 320–321
Low-sloped roofs, 403–406, 
418–420, 500–501
L-shaped stairs, 467
LSL (laminated strand lumber), 
166
LTSCALE command, 52, 55
Lumber, defined, 146–147. See 
also Wood
LVL (laminated veneer lumber) 
beams, 166, 167f–168f
M
Machine bolts (MB), 131
Magnetic north, 365
Maintenance, reducing, 14
Major group names, 49
Major jogs dimensions, 62
Managers, 9
Mansard roofs, 406–408
Manual of Steel Construction and 
Structural Steel Detailing, 
493–494
Masonry
additional reading, 227
brick, 207–215
CMUs, 215–220
dimensions, 359–360
fire-resistive construction, 264
grout, 226–227
mortar, 226–227
representing in drawings, 
390f, 434
steel reinforcement of, 220–226
Masonry wall caps, 222f
Masonry wall support, 554–555
Match lines, 345
Material and Resources credit, 
LEED rating system, 
374–375
Materials section, 311
MB (machine bolts), 131
MDF (medium-density 
fiberboard), 152
Mechanical drawings, 23
Mechanical engineers, 10
Mechanical penetrations, 413
Mechanically evaluated lumber 
(MEL), 148
Medical care facilities, ADA 
requirements, 118
Medicine cabinets, ADA 
guidelines, 111–113
Medium-density fiberboard 
(MDF), 152
MEL (mechanically evaluated 
lumber), 148
Memorandum of 
Understanding, 91
Meridians, 319f
Metal anchors, 552f
Metal connectors, 552
Metal construction. See also Steel 
framing
components of, 198–199
fire-resistive construction, 
264–266, 271–272
overview, 197–198
representing in drawings, 199
Metal framing connectors, 130, 
132–133
Metes and bounds, 317–318
Metric Guide for Federal 
Construction, 50
Metric system
basic units, 50–51
CMUs, 217
conversion factors, 51
dimensioning, 63
paper and scale sizes, 52
representing in drawings, 52
scales, 51
symbols and names, 314–316
Mild-carbon steel, 187f
Millwork, 147
Minimally processed products, 13
Minor group names, 49
MIRROR command, 59, 439
Mirrors, ADA guidelines, 110
MIRRTEXT command, 59
Mixed occupancy, 80, 87–88
Mixture ratios, concrete, 234
Model codes
additional reading, 91–92
applying, 83–87
computers and, 90–91
examining, 73–74
exits, 88–90
mixed occupancy, 87–88
ramps, 464–465
restrictions on wood, 146
stairs, 467–468
subjects covered by, 74–80
using, 27–28, 80–83
Model makers, 11
Model space objects, 64–65
Modification drawings, 20
Moisture content
soil, 547–548
wood, 148
Moisture protection, on-grade 
slabs, 565
Moment frames, 301–302, 304f, 
493–494
Mono trusses, 182
Monolithic construction, 244, 
563, 571
Mortar, 226–227
MTEXT command, 57
Mudsills, 149, 193
Multifamily complexes, 454f
MULTILEADER command, 55
Multilevel steel framing, 199–203
Multiple viewports, 64–67
MW grade brick, 208
N
NAHB (National Association of 
Home Builders), 91
Nails
components of, 125–126
patterns, 127
placement of, 127
schedule, 128f
sizes of, 126
specifications, 127
types of, 125
Naming
files and folders, 70
layers, 48–50
National Association of Home 
Builders (NAHB), 91
National Building Code 
(BOCA), 73
National building codes. See 
Model codes
National CAD Standards (NCS), 
20, 40, 48, 70, 455
National Council for Interior 
Design Qualification 
(NCIDQ), 7
National Institute of Building 
Sciences (NIBS), 48, 315
Natural grade, 336, 548
NCIDQ (National Council 
for Interior Design 
Qualification), 7
NCS (National CAD Standards), 
20, 40, 48, 70, 455
Nested joists, 196
Newel posts, 466
NIBS (National Institute of 
Building Sciences), 48, 315
Nominal masonry unit sizes, 210t
Nonbearing walls, 348
Nonpolluting products, 14–15

606 
Index
Norman brick, 208
North arrow, 365
Nosings, 103f, 465
Notations
elevations, 392–393
sections, 438
NW grade brick, 208
O
Object lines, 52
Occupancy, ADA requirements 
based on, 116–121
Occupancy classification, 80, 81t
One-centered arches, 179f
One-hinge arches, 178f
One-hour walls, 87
One-way joist systems, 244
One-way mesh, 239
One-way reinforced floor systems, 
244
One-way ribbed floor systems, 
244
On-grade slabs, 563–566
Open bid specifications, 313
Openings, on floor plans, 353. See 
also Doors; Windows
Open-web joists, 197
Open-web trusses, 177–183
Open-web trusses symbols, 139f
Oriented strand board (OSB), 
166, 167f
Oriented strand lumber 
(OSL), 166
Orthographic projection. See 
Elevations
OSB (oriented strand board), 
166, 167f
OSL (oriented strand 
lumber), 166
OSNAP command, 476, 576, 
581–582
Other side option, 136
Outside corner joints, 135f
Overall dimensions, 62
Overflow drains, 417
P
Page designators, 21
Page numbers, assigning, 34
PAN command, 68f
Panel elevations, 520
Panel plans, 499f
Panelized floors, 177f
Panelized framing, 175
Paper sizes, 52
Parallel strand lumber (PSL), 
166–167
Parapet walls, 270–271, 
348–349, 404
Parking
ADA guidelines, 94–95, 97t
site plans, 323–324
Partial sections, 427, 430f, 434f
PARTIALOAD command, 42
PARTIALOPEN command, 42
Partitions, 347
Party wall support, 569–570
Party walls, 349–350
Pass-throughs, 353
Paste as Block option, 68
PASTE command, 68–69
Paste to Original Coordinates 
option, 68
Paving brick, 208
PCA (Portland Cement 
Association), 222
Pedestals, 559–560
PEDIT command, 334
Performance bonds, 308
Performance specifications, 312
Permit stage, role of drafter, 19
Pesticide treatments, 14
Phantom lines, 54
Picture planes, 384
Pilasters, 219
Pilings, 497f, 560–562
Pilot holes, 126, 129
Pitch, roof
high-sloped, 406–410
low-sloped, 403–406
overview, 157
Plain concrete, 234–235
Plates
base, 149, 193
end, 193
gusset, 180, 193
sole, 153
steel, 193
stiffener, 193
top, 153–154, 193
wood, 190, 192f
Platform lifts, 102
Plumbing drawings, 23, 357
Plumbing penetrations, 273, 413
Plywood shear wall detail, 294f
Pollution, preventing, 14
Polycarbonate, 13
Polymer-modified bitumens, 410
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 13, 410
Portland cement, 232
Portland Cement Association 
(PCA), 222
Post and beam framing, 569, 
570f, 584f
Posts, 150, 167–168
Posts and timbers lumber, 149
Post-tensioned concrete 
reinforcement, 566–567
Post-tensioning, 235
Post-Tensioning Institute 
(PTI), 566
Potable water, 233
Pour joints, 253
Poured concrete elevations, 
519–520
Poured concrete walls 
symbol, 139f
Poured-in-place concrete walls, 
247–248
Power-driven anchors, 127
Pratt trusses, 181
Precast concrete framing, 236, 
497–498, 510f–511f
Prefabricated concrete units, 
236–237
Preliminary drawings, 18, 431–432
Premanufactured metal 
connectors, 133f
Premium-grade beams, 173
Pressure-treated ledgers, 221f
Prestressed concrete, 235–236
Pretensioning, 235
Preventing pollution, 14
Principals, 9
Procurement drawings, 20
Professional careers. See Careers
Project managers, 5
Project manuals, 307–309. See 
also Written specifications
Project number box, 60
Projecting roof shapes, 386
Proprietary specifications, 312–313
PSL (parallel strand lumber), 
166–167
PSLTSCALE command, 55
PTI (Post-Tensioning 
Institute), 566
Public structures, 3
Purlins, 158, 175
PVC (polyvinyl chloride), 13, 410
Q
Quarter closed shape brick, 208f
Queen closer shape brick, 208f
Quick growth products, 13
QUICK LEADER command, 55
R
Radon protection, 566
Rafters, 157–159
Rain loads, 283–284
Ramps
ADA guidelines, 99–101
additional reading, 479
model code, 464–465
overview, 355
representing in drawings, 465
Rapidly Renewable Materials credit, 
LEED rating system, 394
Readily achievable, 94
Rebar (reinforcing bars), 213, 
222–226, 238–239
Rectangular land systems, 
318–320
Recycled content, 13
Recycled Content credit, LEED 
rating system, 394
Reduced Site Disturbance credit, 
LEED rating system, 339
Reference keynotes, 57–58
Reference lines, 319f
Reference specifications, 313
Referenced drawings, 69
Reflected ceiling plans, 
369–371, 373f
Reinforced concrete, 235
Reinforced precast concrete 
piles, 562
Reinforcement
of concrete
coverage, 240–243
reinforcing bars, 238–239
welded wire fabric, 239–240
of on-grade slabs, 564–565
Reinforcement hooks, 225f
Reinforcing bars (rebar), 213, 
222–226, 238–239
Reliability, 5
Relites, 353
Renewable energy, 14
Required elevations, 384–385
Rescue assistance areas, ADA 
guidelines, 104–105
Resource drawings, 20
Resource Reuse credit, LEED 
rating system, 394
Restaurants, ADA requirements, 
117–118
Restrooms, ADA guidelines
drinking fountains, 114–115
grab bars, 113–114
handrails, 113–114
lavatories, 110
medicine cabinets, 111–113
mirrors, 110
overview, 105–108
tables and counters, 116
telephones, 116
toilet stalls, 108
urinals, 108–110
Retaining walls
anchorage, 555–556
cantilevered, 556–558
details, 351f
footings, 556
grading plan, 338f
overview, 284, 285f, 349
Revision dates box, 60
Revisions, 34, 60
Revit Architecture, 3
Ribs, 567f
Ridge beams, 159
Ridge board, 158
Ridges, roof, 408, 412
Rigid frames, 198f, 200f, 494–497
Rigid insulation symbol, 139f
Rim joists, 151
Rise and run, 469
Rise over run, 157
Risers, stair, 101, 465
Rods, 192f
Roll-in showers, 113f
Roman brick, 208
Roof diaphragms, 284, 295–296, 
297f–298f
Roof openings, 159, 413
Roof plans
additional reading, 422
components of, 412–418
high-sloped, 406–410, 420–
422, 501–504
low-sloped, 403–406, 418–420, 
500–501
materials, 410–411
rigid-frame structure, 498f
Roof sheathing, 156
Roof supports, 158
Roofs
fire-resistive construction, 
273–275
load distribution, 286
openings, 159

Index 
607
open-web trusses, 181–183
overview, 154–156
rafters, 157–158
representing in drawings, 390f
supports, 158
terminology, 156–157
vaulted ceilings, 159
Root, keynote, 58f
Root opening, 134
Rough lumber, 147
Roundhead screws, 129
Rowlock course, 209f
Runs, stair, 465
S
Saddles, 178f, 405, 417
Safety requirements, 75–76
Sailor course, 209f
Salvaged products, 12–13
Sand, 547
Sandy clay, 547
Sandy gravel, 547
Sawn beams, 491
Sawtooth trusses, 182
SB (slab bolster) support, 241f
SBC (Standard Building 
Code), 73
SBU (slab bolster upper) support, 
241f
Scales
architect’s, 50
civil engineering, 50
elevation, 385
floor plans, 344–345
linetype, 55
managing multiple, 64–67
metric, 51–52
plotting, 138
sections, 433, 522–526
text, 60–61
Schedules
door, 362
finish, 364–365
foundation drawings, 575
notations, 361–362
window, 362–364
Scissor trusses, 181
SCL (structural composite 
lumber), 166
Scored face blocks, 218
Screws, 127–130
Scuppers, 417
Seamed metal roofs, 411
Section lines, 53
Section markers, 367
Sections
additional reading, 
442–443, 527
completing, 439–442
development of
in architectural drawings, 
433
blocks, 438–439
dimensions, 437–438
material representation, 
433–437
notations, 438
overview, 430
preliminary drawings, 
431–432
symbols, 438
origination of, 426
stairs, 474–477
structural, 522–527
types of, 426–430
Sections, land parcel, 318–319
Sedimentary rock, 547
Seismic forces, 289
Self-weathering steel, 187
Semi-lightweight concrete, 237
Senior CAD technicians, 5
Settlement, soil, 547
Shafts, fire-resistive construction, 
272–273
Shanks, nail, 126
Shear walls, 293, 299–304, 
348, 491
Sheathing, 152–153, 156, 568
Sheet contents box, 60
Sheet number box, 60
Sheet type designator, 20
Shiner course, 209f
Shop drawings, 19
Shotcrete, 238
Shower seats, ADA guidelines, 
113–114
Shower stalls, ADA guidelines, 111
Siding, 390f
Sills, 149
Silty sand, 547
Single span laminated beams, 
174–175
Single-ply roofs, 410
Single-slope roofs, 414f
Single-wythe masonry walls, 211
SIPs (structurally insulated 
panels), 14
Site plans
annotation, 326
completing, 329–331
details, 329
development of, 327–328
dimensions, 324–326
elevation and swale, 326–327
linetypes, 321–322
parking information, 323–324
representing structure, 
322–323
setting parameters, 328–329
SJI (Steel Joist Institute), 73, 197
Skip sheathing, 157
Skylights, 353, 387–389, 
413, 414f
Slab bolster (SB) support, 241f
Slab bolster upper (SBU) 
support, 241f
Slab-on-grade plans, 570, 
572f–573f
Slenderness ratio, 150
Slope indicators, 414
Slump test, 234
Small-scale drawings, 526
Small-scale masonry symbol, 139f
Small-scale plywood symbol, 139f
Small-scale steel shapes 
symbol, 139f
Smoke dampers, 268
Snow loads, 283, 284f
Soft conversions, 51, 217
Softwoods, 147
Soil
compaction, 549
elevation, 548–549
freezing, 548
load distribution, 286–288
moisture content, 547–548
settlement, 547
texture, 547
Soil symbol, 139f
Soldier course, 209f
Sole plates, 153
Sole source specifications, 313
Solid blocking, 151
Solid walls, 211
Solid-web floor joists, 169f
Solid-web I-joists, 169f
Solid-web trusses symbols, 139f
Space frames, 202–203
Space plans, 369, 372f
Spandrels, 522
Spans, 157
Specifications, defined, 306
Specifications writers, 11
Spiral reinforcing steel, 250
Spiral stairs, 467–468
Split shape brick, 208f
Spread footings, 549–550
Sprinkler plan, 335f
Square groove welds, 134–135
S-shaped beams, 188
Stainless steel, 194–195
Stairs
ADA guidelines, 101–102
additional reading, 479
changes in elevation, 355
drawings
details, 477–478
sections, 474–477
views, 471–474
guardrails, 468–469
handrails, 468
materials, 469–471
model code, 467–468
rise and run, 469
terminology, 465–466
types of, 466–467
Stairwells, 466
Standard Building Code (SBC), 73
Standard Guide for Modular 
Construction of Clay and 
Concrete Masonry Units, 209
Standpipes, 75
Staples, 127
Static force compression, 549
Static loads, 284
Status codes, 50
Steel framing
additional reading, 203
dimensions, 360
elevations, 518–519
lightweight, 195–197
metal buildings, 197–199
moment frames, 493–494
multilevel, 199–203
overview, 491–492
representing in drawings, 
140, 434
rigid frames, 494–497
shapes
angles, 190, 192f
bars, 193
cable, 193
channels, 189–190
columns, 190–192
overview, 187–188
plates, 193
tees, 190
tubes, 190–192
wide flange, 188–189
stairs, 470–471
structural steel, 186–187
symbols, 139f
types of metal and alloys, 
194–195
Steel Joist Institute (SJI), 73, 197
Steel plate stairs, 471f
Steel Recycling Institute, 202
Steel reinforcement, of masonry
bends, 224–226
hooks, 224–226
locating, 226
overlap, 224
overview, 220–221
placement of, 222–224
reinforcing bars, 222
representing in drawings, 226
shapes, 222
sizes, 222
Steel stud shear wall 
assemblies, 295f
Steel treads, 471f
Steel tubes symbol, 139f
Stem walls, 549, 550–555
Stepped walls and 
foundations, 550
Steps, 355
Stick construction, 149
Stiffener plates, 193
Stirrups, 250
Stock details, 137
Storefront windows, 350
Stories, number of, 83
Straight grain lumber, 147
Straight-run stairs, 467–468
Stretcher course, 209f
Stringers, stair, 466
Strongbacks, 158
Structural brick, 209f
Structural composite lumber 
(SCL), 166
Structural connections. See 
Connections
Structural drawings, 19, 23, 
24f, 485
Structural engineers, 9
Structural lightweight 
concrete, 237
Structural lumber, 147
Structural steel. 
See Steel framing
Structural support 
specifications, 505f

608 
Index
Structurally insulated panels 
(SIPs), 14
Structure, wood, 147
Studs, 132, 152, 167–168, 190, 
195–196
Subdivisions, 320
Subsills, 154
Substitutions, 308
Suffixes, 58f
Supplemental drawings, 20
Support columns, 487–490
Surcharges, 285f
Sustainable roofs, 421
SW grade brick, 208
Swale, 326–327
Sweets Catalogs, 26
Symbols
detail markers, 367
door, 362
elevation, 367, 391–392
foundation drawings, 574–575
grid markers, 365–367
interior finish, 364–365
interior reference, 364
north arrow, 365
overview, 141
plumbing, 357
section markers, 367
in sections, 438
topography plans, 338–340
wall construction, 367
window, 362–364
T
Tables, ADA guidelines, 116
Tags, drawing, 487
T-bar ceilings, 370
TDD (telecommunication device 
for the deaf) symbol, 95f
Technical staff, 9
Tee joints, 135f
Tees, steel, 190
Telecommunication device for 
the deaf (TDD) symbol, 95f
Telephones, ADA guidelines, 116
Templates
border, 45–47
drawing area, 46–47
layers, naming, 48–50
limits, 48
linetypes, 52–55
lineweight, 55
metric system, 50–52
scales, 50
title blocks, 45–47
units of measurement, 47–48
Tendons, 566
Terminators, 62
Text
common features of, 56
dimension, 61–62
height of, 60–61
overview, 55–56
placement of, 56–57
scale, 60–61
types of, 57–60
TEXT command, 57
Text scale factor, 61
Texture, soil, 547
Theaters, 117f
Thin shell concrete, 237–238
This side option, 136
Threaded rod bolts, 131f, 132
Three-centered arches, 179f
Three-dimensional drawings, 
38–39
Three-dimensional trusses, 203f
Three-hinge arches, 175, 178f
Three-quarter shape brick, 208f
Ties, 211
Tile roofs, 411
Tilt-up walls, 248–249, 300f, 498
Timber
beams, 491
connectors
bolts, 130–132
metal framing, 132–133
timber, 132
defined, 146–147
dimensions, 360
fire-resistive construction, 
275–276
framing
components of, 160–161
overview, 159
plans, 490–491
representing in drawings, 
160–161
joists, 491
representing in drawings, 140, 
161, 434
shear walls, 491
stairs, 470
symbol, 139f
trusses, 161–162, 491
walls, 491
Time Saver Standards, 451, 459
Tin, 195
Tips, nail, 126
Title block (ANNO TTLB) 
layer, 59
Title blocks, 45–47, 59–60
Title pages, 21f
Titles, 57
Toe nailing, 127, 129f
Toes, rebar, 551
TOF (top of footing), 575f
Toggle bolts, 131f, 132
Toilet stalls, ADA 
guidelines, 108
Top chords, 179
Top of footing (TOF), 575f
Top of slab (TOS), 575f
Top of wall (TW), 327
Top plates, 153–154, 193
Topography plans, 333–334
TOS (top of slab), 575f
Townships, 318
Transient lodging, ADA 
requirements, 119–121
Transoms, 353
Transverse bent style 
trusses, 181
Transverse sections, 426, 429f
Treads, 101, 465, 468f
Trimmers, 154, 159
True point of beginning, 317
Trusses
open-web
floor, 180–181
overview, 177–179
roof, 181–183
terminology, 179–180
steel, 201–202
timber, 161–162, 491
wood, 491
Tub seats, ADA guidelines, 
113–114
Tube steel (TS), 190–192, 199
Turnbuckles, 131f
TW (top of wall), 327
Two-centered arches, 179f
Two-cusped arches, 179f
Two-hinge arches, 175, 178f
Two-way reinforced floor 
systems, 244–246
Tyvek, 153
U
UBC (Uniform Building Code), 
73
UDS (Uniform Drawing 
Standard), 40
U-groove welds, 135–136
Ultimate tensile strength, 187
Uncompacted fill, 549
Underlayment, floor, 152
Uniform Building Code (UBC), 
73
Uniform Drawing Standard 
(UDS), 40
Uniform Federal Accessibility 
Standards, 120t–121t
Unit masonry, 140. See also 
Masonry
United States Access Board, 94
Units of measurement, 47–48, 
148
Uplift, 291–292
Urban planners, 8
Urban Redevelopment credit, 
LEED rating system, 339
Urinals, ADA guidelines, 108–110
U.S. Green Building Council 
(USGBC), 91
U-shaped stairs, 467
V
Valleys, roof, 408, 412–413
Vaulted ceilings, 159, 177
Vendor catalogs, 5, 26–27
Veneer construction, 215
Veneer support, 550
Ventilation, foundation, 553
Vertical coursings, 218f
Vertical dimensions, 63, 140, 
437–438
Vertical forces, 304f
Vertical steel reinforcement, 223
V-groove welds, 135–136
Vibration compression, 549
Vicinity maps, 321
VIEW command, 42, 44f
Viewports, 45f, 64–67
Views
creating, 42–44
placement of dimensions in, 
62–63
stairs, 471–474
Virtual reality, 11
Visual grading, 148
Volatile organic compound 
(VOC) emissions, 13
W
Waffle-flat-plate system, 245
Walks, ADA guidelines, 95–99
WALL (walls) code, 49
Wall caps, 222f
Wall legends, 353f
Wall openings, 154, 266–267
Wall sections, 427–430
Wall sheathing, 153
Wall to openings dimensions, 62
Wall to wall dimensions, 62
Walls
bearing, 348, 487–490
brick, 209–213
concrete, 246–249
exterior, 346–347
faced, 348
fire, 349
fire-resistive construction, 
264–266
interior, 347–348
markers, 362f
nonbearing, 348
parapet, 270–271, 348–349, 
404
party, 349–350, 569–570
representing in drawings, 
349–350
retaining, 349
shear, 293, 299–304, 348, 491
symbols, 367
timber, 491
wood, 491
Walls (WALL) code, 49
Warning of contaminants, 15
Warning strips, ramp, 99f
Warren trusses, 181
Washers, 130–132
Waste by-products, 13
Water
in concrete, 233
conserving, 14
Water coolers, 115f
Water Efficiency credit, LEED 
rating system, 374
Weathering steel, 187
Webs, 180
Weep holes, 285f
Welded steel connections, 
133–136
Welded wire fabric (WWF), 235, 
239–240, 564
Western platform framing, 149, 
568–569
Wheelchair accessibility, 108f–
109f
Wheelchair lifts, 102
Wide flanges, 188–189

Index 
609
Width option, 334
Wind loads, 289–292
Winders, 468
Windows
drawing, 387–389
floor plans, 350–351
schedules, 362–364
symbol, 362f
Wire reinforcement 
patterns, 215f
Wood
additional reading, 162–163
beams, 491
connectors
adhesives, 125
bolts, 130–132
metal framing, 130, 132–133
nails, 125–127
power-driven anchors, 127
screws, 127–130
timber, 132
fire-resistive construction, 
264–266, 271–272
framing
floor construction, 149–152
plans, 490–491
roof construction, 154–159
wall construction, 152–154
wall openings, 154
joists, 491
representing in drawings, 
140, 434
shear walls, 300, 491
stairs, 469–470
staples, 127
symbol, 139f
terminology, 146–149
timber framing, 159–162
trusses, 491
uses of, 146
walls, 491
Wood floor systems over crawl 
spaces, 567–569
Wood plates, 190, 192f
Wood shingles, 411
Wood-framed wall symbol, 139f
Work hardening range, 187
Working drawings, 38
Working stress method, 28
Written specifications
additional reading, 316
CSI MasterFormat, 309–311
exploring, 306
metric symbols and names, 
314–316
placement of, 306–307
project manuals, 307–309
relationship of drawings 
to, 314
types of, 311–313
W-shaped steel, 188
WWF (welded wire fabric), 235, 
239–240, 564
Wythes, 209
X
XREF (external reference) 
command, 40–42, 486
Y
Yellow pages, 26
Yield point, 186
Z
ZOOM command, 42

This page intentionally left blank 

StudyWare™ to Accompany
Minimum System Requirements 
Operating systems: Microsoft Windows 2000 w/SP 4, Windows XP w/SP 2, Windows Vista w/SP 1
 
●
Processor: Minimum required by Operating System
 
●
Memory: Minimum required by Operating System 
 
●
Screen resolution: 800 
 
●
× 600 pixels 
CD-ROM drive
 
●
Macromedia Flash Player 9. The Macromedia Flash Player is free, and can be downloaded from 
 
●
http://www.adobe.com/products/flashplayer/
Setup Instructions 
1. Insert disc into CD-ROM drive. The StudyWare™ installation program should start automatically. If it does not, 
go to step 2.
2. From My Computer, double-click the icon for the CD drive.
3. Double-click the setup.exe file to start the program.
Technical Support
Telephone: 1-800-648-7450
8:30 A.M.-5:30 P.M. Eastern Time
E-mail: delmar.help@cengage.com
StudyWare™ is a trademark used herein under license.
Microsoft® and Windows® are registered trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation.
Pentium® is a registered trademark of the Intel Corporation.

IMPORTANT! READ CAREFULLY: This End User License Agreement (“Agreement”) sets forth the conditions by which Cengage Learning 
will make electronic access to the Cengage Learning-owned licensed content and associated media, software, documentation, printed materials, 
and electronic documentation contained in this package and/or made available to you via this product (the “Licensed Content”), available to 
you (the “End User”). BY CLICKING THE “I ACCEPT” BUTTON AND/OR OPENING THIS PACKAGE, YOU ACKNOWLEDGE THAT YOU 
HAVE READ ALL OF THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, AND THAT YOU AGREE TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS, CONDITIONS, AND ALL 
APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF THE LICENSED CONTENT. 
1.0 SCOPE OF LICENSE
1.1 Licensed Content. The Licensed Content may contain portions of modifiable content (“Modifiable Content”) and content which may 
not be modified or otherwise altered by the End User (“Non-Modifiable Content”). For purposes of this Agreement, Modifiable Content 
and Non-Modifiable Content may be collectively referred to herein as the “Licensed Content.” All Licensed Content shall be considered 
Non-Modifiable Content, unless such Licensed Content is presented to the End User in a modifiable format and it is clearly indicated that 
modification of the Licensed Content is permitted.
1.2 Subject to the End User’s compliance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement, Cengage Learning hereby grants the End User, a 
nontransferable, nonexclusive, limited right to access and view a single copy of the Licensed Content on a single personal computer system 
for noncommercial, internal, personal use only. The End User shall not (i) reproduce, copy, modify (except in the case of Modifiable 
Content), distribute, display, transfer, sublicense, prepare derivative work(s) based on, sell, exchange, barter or transfer, rent, lease, loan, 
resell, or in any other manner exploit the Licensed Content; (ii) remove, obscure, or alter any notice of Cengage Learning’s intellectual 
property rights present on or in the Licensed Content, including, but not limited to, copyright, trademark, and/or patent notices; or (iii) 
disassemble, decompile, translate, reverse engineer, or otherwise reduce the Licensed Content. 
2.0 TERMINATION
2.1 Cengage Learning may at any time (without prejudice to its other rights or remedies) immediately terminate this Agreement and/or sus-
pend access to some or all of the Licensed Content, in the event that the End User does not comply with any of the terms and conditions 
of this Agreement. In the event of such termination by Cengage Learning, the End User shall immediately return any and all copies of the 
Licensed Content to Cengage Learning.
3.0 PROPRIETARY RIGHTS 
3.1 The End User acknowledges that Cengage Learning owns all rights, title and interest, including, but not limited to all copyright rights 
therein, in and to the Licensed Content, and that the End User shall not take any action inconsistent with such ownership. The Licensed 
Content is protected by U.S., Canadian and other applicable copyright laws and by international treaties, including the Berne Convention 
and the Universal Copyright Convention. Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be construed as granting the End User any ownership 
rights in or to the Licensed Content.
3.2 Cengage Learning reserves the right at any time to withdraw from the Licensed Content any item or part of an item for which it no longer 
retains the right to publish, or which it has reasonable grounds to believe infringes copyright or is defamatory, unlawful, or otherwise 
objectionable.
4.0 PROTECTION AND SECURITY
4.1 The End User shall use its best efforts and take all reasonable steps to safeguard its copy of the Licensed Content to ensure that no unau-
thorized reproduction, publication, disclosure, modification, or distribution of the Licensed Content, in whole or in part, is made. To the 
extent that the End User becomes aware of any such unauthorized use of the Licensed Content, the End User shall immediately notify 
Cengage Learning. Notification of such violations may be made by sending an e-mail to infringement@cengage.com. 
5.0 MISUSE OF THE LICENSED PRODUCT
5.1 In the event that the End User uses the Licensed Content in violation of this Agreement, Cengage Learning shall have the option of electing 
liquidated damages, which shall include all profits generated by the End User’s use of the Licensed Content plus interest computed at the 
maximum rate permitted by law and all legal fees and other expenses incurred by Cengage Learning in enforcing its rights, plus penalties.
6.0 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CLIENTS 
6.1 Except as expressly authorized by Cengage Learning, Federal Government clients obtain only the rights specified in this Agreement and 
no other rights. The Government acknowledges that (i) all software and related documentation incorporated in the Licensed Content is 
existing commercial computer software within the meaning of FAR 27.405(b)(2); and (2) all other data delivered in whatever form, is 
limited rights data within the meaning of FAR 27.401. The restrictions in this section are acceptable as consistent with the Government’s 
need for software and other data under this Agreement.

7.0 DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES AND LIABILITIES
7.1 Although Cengage Learning believes the Licensed Content to be reliable, Cengage Learning does not guarantee or warrant (i) any informa-
tion or materials contained in or produced by the Licensed Content, (ii) the accuracy, completeness or reliability of the Licensed Content, 
or (iii) that the Licensed Content is free from errors or other material defects. THE LICENSED PRODUCT IS PROVIDED “AS IS,” 
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY OF ANY KIND AND CENGAGE LEARNING DISCLAIMS ANY AND ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESSED 
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT SHALL CENGAGE LEARNING BE LIABLE FOR: INDIRECT, SPECIAL, PUNITIVE OR CONSEQUENTIAL 
DAMAGES INCLUDING FOR LOST PROFITS, LOST DATA, OR OTHERWISE. IN NO EVENT SHALL CENGAGE LEARNING’S 
AGGREGATE LIABILITY HEREUNDER, WHETHER ARISING IN CONTRACT, TORT, STRICT LIABILITY OR OTHERWISE, EXCEED 
THE AMOUNT OF FEES PAID BY THE END USER HEREUNDER FOR THE LICENSE OF THE LICENSED CONTENT. 
8.0 GENERAL
8.1 Entire Agreement. This Agreement shall constitute the entire Agreement between the Parties and supercedes all prior Agreements and 
understandings oral or written relating to the subject matter hereof. 
8.2 Enhancements/Modifications of Licensed Content. From time to time, and in Cengage Learning’s sole discretion, Cengage Learning may 
advise the End User of updates, upgrades, enhancements and/or improvements to the Licensed Content, and may permit the End User to 
access and use, subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, such modifications, upon payment of prices as may be established 
by Cengage Learning.
8.3 No Export. The End User shall use the Licensed Content solely in the United States and shall not transfer or export, directly or indirectly, 
the Licensed Content outside the United States.
8.4 Severability. If any provision of this Agreement is invalid, illegal, or unenforceable under any applicable statute or rule of law, the provision 
shall be deemed omitted to the extent that it is invalid, illegal, or unenforceable. In such a case, the remainder of the Agreement shall be 
construed in a manner as to give greatest effect to the original intention of the parties hereto. 
8.5 Waiver. The waiver of any right or failure of either party to exercise in any respect any right provided in this Agreement in any instance 
shall not be deemed to be a waiver of such right in the future or a waiver of any other right under this Agreement.
8.6 Choice of Law/Venue. This Agreement shall be interpreted, construed, and governed by and in accordance with the laws of the State of 
New York, applicable to contracts executed and to be wholly preformed therein, without regard to its principles governing conflicts of law. 
Each party agrees that any proceeding arising out of or relating to this Agreement or the breach or threatened breach of this Agreement 
may be commenced and prosecuted in a court in the State and County of New York. Each party consents and submits to the nonexclusive 
personal jurisdiction of any court in the State and County of New York in respect of any such proceeding.
8.7 Acknowledgment. By opening this package and/or by accessing the Licensed Content on this Web site, THE END USER ACKNOWLEDGES 
THAT IT HAS READ THIS AGREEMENT, UNDERSTANDS IT, AND AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS. IF 
YOU DO NOT ACCEPT THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, YOU MUST NOT ACCESS THE LICENSED CONTENT AND RETURN 
THE LICENSED PRODUCT TO CENGAGE LEARNING (WITHIN 30 CALENDAR DAYS OF THE END USER’S PURCHASE) WITH 
PROOF OF PAYMENT ACCEPTABLE TO CENGAGE LEARNING, FOR A CREDIT OR A REFUND. Should the End User have any 
questions/comments regarding this Agreement, please contact Cengage Learning at Delmar.help@cengage.com.

