
Communicate!
Kathleen S. Verderber
Northern Kentucky University
Rudolph F.  Verderber
Distinguished Teaching Professor of Communication,
University of Cincinnati
Deanna D. Sellnow
University of Kentucky
13
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

© 2010, 2008 Wadsworth, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright 
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored or used in any form 
or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not 
limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web 
distribution, information networks, or information storage and retrieval 
systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 
United States Copyright Act, or applicable copyright law of another 
jurisdiction, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
International Student Edition: 
ISBN-13: 978-0-495-90172-3
ISBN-10: 0-495-90172-5
Cengage Learning International Oﬃ  ces
Communicate!, Thirteenth Edition
Kathleen S. Verderber, Rudolph
F. Verderber, and Deanna Sellnow
Senior Publisher: Lyn Uhl
Executive Editor: Monica Eckman
Senior Development Editor: Greer Lleuad
Assistant Editor: Rebekah Matthews
Editorial Assistant: Colin Solan
Media Editor: Jessica Badiner
Marketing Manager: Bryant Chrzan
Marketing Coordinator: Darlene Macanan
Marketing Communications Manager: 
Christine Dobberpuhl
Senior Project Manager, Editorial 
Production: Rosemary Winﬁ eld
Senior Art Director: Linda Helcher
Senior Print Buyer: Justin Palmeiro
Text Permissions Editor: Katie Huha
Production Service: Elm Street Publishing 
Services
Text Designer: Rokusek Design
Photo Manager: Dean Dauphinais
Cover Designer: Linda Kuhn
Cover Image: © enjoynz, © Talex,
© rangepuppies, © illustrious
Compositor: Integra Software Services
Pvt. Ltd.
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Printed in Canada
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 13 12 11 10
Asia
cengageasia.com
tel: (65) 6410 1200
Australia/New Zealand
cengage.com.au
tel: (61) 3 9685 4111
Brazil
cengage.com.br
tel: (011) 3665 9900
India
cengage.co.in
tel: (91) 11 30484837/38
Latin America
cengage.com.mx
tel: +52 (55) 1500 6000
UK/Europe/Middle East/Africa
cengage.co.uk
tel: (44) 207 067 2500
Represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
nelson.com
tel: (416) 752 9100 / (800) 668 0671
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions 
with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United 
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local oﬃ  ce at 
www.cengage.com/global.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd. 
For product information: www.cengage.com/international.
Visit your local oﬃ  ce: www.cengage.com/global.
Visit our corporate website: www.cengage.com.
Disclaimer: Availability of resources may diﬀ er by region. Check with your local Cengage Learning representative for details.

iii
 
Brief Contents
Contents   iv
Preface   xiii
PART 
I 
FOUNDATIONS OF COMMUNICATION
Chapter 
1 
Communication Perspectives 
1
Chapter  
2 
Perception of Self and Others 
23
Chapter 
3 
Communicating Verbally 
47
Chapter  
4 
Communicating Nonverbally 
66
Chapter  
5 
Listening and Responding 
87
PART  
II 
INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION
Chapter  
6 
Communicating Across Cultures 
111
Chapter  
7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
133
Chapter  
8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships: 
Providing Emotional Support, Managing Privacy, and 
Negotiating Conﬂ ict 
157
Appendix 
 
Interviewing 
185
PART  
III 
GROUP COMMUNICATION
Chapter  
9 
Communicating in Groups 
207
Chapter  
10 
Problem Solving in Groups 
224
PART  
IV 
PUBLIC SPEAKING
Chapter  
11 
Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
250
Chapter  
12 
Organizing Your Speech 
275
Chapter  
13 
Adapting Verbally and Visually 
304
Chapter  
14 
Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
332
Chapter  
15 
Informative Speaking 
363
Chapter  
16 
Persuasive Speaking 
388
References   419
Index   430

iv 
Brief Contents   iii
Preface   xiii
PART 
I 
FOUNDATIONS OF COMMUNICATION 
Chapter 
1 
Communication Perspectives 
1
The Communication Process 
3
Participants 
3
Messages 
3
Context 
4
Channels 
5
Interference (Noise) 
5
Feedback 
7
A Model of the Basic Communication Process 
8
Communication Settings 
8
Communication Principles 
10
Communication Has Purpose 
10
Communication Is Continuous 
11
Communication Messages Vary in Conscious Thought 
11
Communication Is Relational 
11
Communication Is Guided by Culture 
12
Communication Has Ethical Implications 
14
Communication Is Learned 
15
Increasing Our Communication Competence 
15
Develop Communication Skills Improvement Goals 
18
Chapter 
2 
Perception of Self and Others 
23
The Perception Process 
24
Attention and Selection 
24
Organization of Stimuli 
25
Interpretation of Stimuli 
26
Perceptions of Self: Self-Concept and Self-Esteem 
26
Forming and Maintaining a Self-Concept 
26
Developing and Maintaining Self-Esteem 
28
The Inﬂ uence of Gender and Culture on Self-Perceptions 
30
Changing Self-Perceptions 
31
Accuracy and Distortion of Self-Perceptions 
31
The Effects of Self-Perceptions on Communication 
34
Contents

v
 
Contents 
Presenting Self to Others 
35
Self-Monitoring 
36
Social Construction of Self 
36
Perception of Others 
37
Observing Others 
38
Using Stereotypes 
38
Emotional State 
39
Perceiving Others’ Messages 
40
Improving the Accuracy of Social Perceptions 
41
Chapter 
3 
Communicating Verbally 
47
The Nature and Purposes of Language 
48
Purposes of Language 
49
The Relationship Between Language and Meaning 
49
Cultural and Gender Inﬂ uences on Language Use 
51
Improving Language Skills 
52
Use Clear Language 
52
Use Language That Makes Your Messages Memorable 
55
Use Linguistic Sensitivity 
58
Chapter 
4 
Communicating Nonverbally 
66
Characteristics of Nonverbal Communication 
68
Types of Nonverbal Communication 
69
Use of Body: Kinesics 
69
Use of Voice: Vocalics 
71
Use of Space: Proxemics 
73
Use of Time: Chronemics 
75
Self-Presentation Cues 
76
Guidelines for Improving Nonverbal Communication 
79
Sending Nonverbal Messages 
79
Interpreting Nonverbal Messages 
82
Chapter 
5 
Listening and Responding 
87
What Is Listening? 
88
Types of Listening 
88
Appreciative Listening 
89
Discriminative Listening 
89
Comprehensive Listening 
90
Empathic Listening 
90
Critical Listening 
90

vi 
Contents
Steps in the Listening Process 
91
Attending 
91
Understanding 
93
Remembering 
97
Evaluating 
98
Responding 
100
Conversation and Analysis 
102
PART 
II 
INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION 
Chapter 
6 
Communicating Across Cultures 
111
Culture and Communication 
112
Intercultural Communication 
112
Dominant Cultures and Co-Cultures 
113
Cultural Identity 
116
Identifying Cultural Norms and Values 
117
Individualism–Collectivism 
117
Uncertainty Avoidance 
121
Power Distance 
121
Masculinity–Femininity 
122
Barriers to Effective Intercultural Communication 
123
Anxiety 
123
Assuming Similarity or Difference 
123
Ethnocentrism 
124
Stereotypes and Prejudice 
125
Incompatible Communication Codes 
126
Incompatible Norms and Values 
127
Intercultural Communication Competence 
127
Adopt Correct Attitudes 
127
Acquire Knowledge About Other Cultures 
128
Develop Culture-Speciﬁ c Skills 
129
Chapter 
7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
133
Types of Relationships 
134
Acquaintances 
134
Friends 
136
Close Friends or Intimates 
137
Disclosure and Feedback in Relationship Life Cycles 
141
The Open Pane 
141
The Secret Pane 
142
The Blind Pane 
142
The Unknown Pane 
142
Communication in the Stages of Relationships 
143
Beginning Relationships 
143
Developing Relationships 
144

vii
 
Contents 
Maintaining Relationships 
145
Deteriorating and Dissolving Relationships 
148
Dialectics in Interpersonal Relationships 
149
Relational Dialectics 
149
Managing Dialectical Tensions 
151
Conversation and Analysis 
152
Chapter 
8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships: Providing 
Emotional Support, Managing Privacy, and Negotiating Conﬂ ict 
157
Comforting Messages 
158
Skills for Comforting 
158
Gender and Cultural Considerations in Comforting 
160
Managing Privacy and Disclosure in Relationships 
161
Effects on Intimacy 
164
Expectations of Reciprocity 
164
Information Co-Ownership 
165
Guidelines and Communication Strategies for Disclosure 
165
Communication Strategies for Managing Privacy 
171
Negotiating Different Needs, Wants, and Preferences in Relationships 
172
Communicating Personal Needs, Wants, and Preferences: Passive, 
Aggressive, and Assertive Behavior 
173
Cultural Variations in Passive, Aggressive, and Assertive Behavior 
174
Managing Conﬂ ict in Relationships 
176
Styles of Conﬂ ict 
176
Guidelines for Collaboration 
178
Conversation and Analysis 
179
Appendix 
 
Interviewing 
185
Structuring Interviews 
186
The Interview Protocol 
186
Effective Questions 
187
Order and Time Constraints in Interview Protocols 
188
Guidelines for Conducting Information Interviews 
189
Doing Research About Interviewees 
189
Conducting an Information Interview 
190
Conducting Employment Interviews 
191
Preparing for the Interview 
191
Conducting the Interview 
191
Interviewing Strategies for Job Seekers 
192
Applying for the Job 
192
Electronic Cover Letters and Résumés 
194
Preparing to Be Interviewed 
196
Guidelines for Job Interviewees 
197

viii
 
Contents
Conversation and Analysis 
198
Following Up After the Interview 
200
Strategies for Interviews with the Media 
200
Before the Interview 
201
During the Interview 
201
PART 
III 
GROUP COMMUNICATION 
Chapter 
9 
Communicating in Groups 
207
Characteristics of Healthy Groups 
208
Healthy Groups Have Ethical Goals 
208
Healthy Groups Are Interdependent 
210
Healthy Groups Are Cohesive 
210
Healthy Groups Develop and Abide by Productive Norms 
210
Healthy Groups Are Accountable 
212
Healthy Groups Are Synergetic 
213
Stages of Group Development 
213
Forming 
213
Storming 
214
Norming 
214
Performing 
214
Adjourning 
214
Types of Groups 
215
Families 
215
Social Friendship Groups 
216
Support Groups 
216
Interest Groups 
217
Service Groups 
217
Work Groups 
217
Evaluating Group Dynamics 
219
Chapter 
10 
Problem Solving in Groups 
224
The Problem-Solving Process 
225
Step One: Identify and Deﬁ ne the Problem 
226
Step Two: Analyze the Problem 
226
Step Three: Determine Criteria for Judging Solutions 
227
Step Four: Identify Alternative Solutions 
228
Step Five: Evaluate Solutions and Decide 
229
Step Six: Implement the Agreed-Upon Solution 
230
Shared Leadership 
230
Task Roles 
230
Maintenance Roles 
231
Procedural Roles 
232

ix
 
Contents 
Making Meetings Effective 
235
Guidelines for Meeting Leaders 
235
Guidelines for Meeting Participants 
238
Conversation and Analysis 
239
Communicating Group Solutions 
242
Written Formats 
242
Oral Formats 
243
Virtual Reports 
243
PART 
IV 
PUBLIC SPEAKING 
Chapter 
11 
Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
250
Identify Topics 
252
List Subjects 
252
Brainstorm and Concept Map for Topic Ideas 
253
Analyze the Audience 
254
Identify Audience Analysis Information Needs 
254
Gather Audience Data 
255
Analyze the Setting 
257
Select a Topic 
258
Write a Speech Goal 
259
Identify Your General Goal 
259
Phrase a Speciﬁ c Goal Statement 
259
Locate and Evaluate Information Sources 
261
Personal Knowledge, Experience, and Observation 
262
Secondary Research 
262
Primary Research 
264
Evaluate Sources 
265
Identify and Select Relevant Information 
267
Factual Statements 
267
Expert Opinions 
268
Elaborations 
268
Draw Information from Multiple Cultural Perspectives 
269
Record Information 
269
Prepare Research Cards 
269
Cite Sources in Speeches 
270
Chapter 
12 
Organizing Your Speech 
275
Developing the Body of the Speech 
276
Determining Main Points 
276
Writing a Thesis Statement 
279

x 
Contents
Outlining the Body of the Speech 
280
Selecting and Outlining Supporting Material 
284
Preparing Section Transitions and Signposts 
286
Creating the Introduction 
287
Gaining Attention 
287
Establishing Listener Relevance 
289
Stating the Thesis 
290
Establishing Your Credibility 
290
Setting a Tone 
290
Creating a Bond of Goodwill 
291
Crafting the Conclusion 
291
Summary 
292
Clincher 
292
Listing Sources 
294
Reviewing the Outline 
296
Chapter 
13 
Adapting Verbally and Visually 
304
Adapting to Your Audience Verbally 
305
Relevance 
305
Common Ground 
306
Speaker Credibility 
307
Information Comprehension and Retention 
309
Adapting to Cultural Differences 
312
Adapting to Audiences Visually 
315
Types of Presentational Aids 
316
Criteria for Choosing Presentational Aids 
323
Designing Effective Presentational Aids 
323
Methods for Displaying Presentational Aids 
326
Posters 
326
Whiteboards or Chalkboards 
326
Flip Charts 
327
Handouts 
327
Document Cameras 
328
CD/VCR/DVD Players and LCD Projectors 
328
Computer-Mediated Slide Show 
328
Chapter 
14 
Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
332
Public Speaking Apprehension 
333
Symptoms and Causes 
333
Managing Your Apprehension 
334
Characteristics of an Effective Delivery Style 
336
Use a Conversational Style 
336
Be Animated 
336
Effective Use of Your Voice 
337
Speak Intelligibly 
337
Use Vocal Expressiveness 
338

xi
 
Contents 
Effective Use of Your Body 
341
Facial Expressions 
341
Gestures 
342
Movement 
342
Eye Contact 
343
Posture 
343
Poise 
343
Appearance 
344
Delivery Methods 
345
Impromptu Speeches 
346
Scripted Speeches 
346
Extemporaneous Speeches 
346
Rehearsal 
346
Preparing Speaking Notes 
347
Handling Presentational Aids 
347
Recording, Analyzing, and Reﬁ ning Speech Delivery 
349
Criteria for Evaluating Speeches 
351
Sample Informative Speech 
353
Chapter 
15 
Informative Speaking 
363
Characteristics of Effective Informative Speaking 
364
Intellectually Stimulating 
364
Relevant 
365
Creative 
365
Memorable 
366
Address Diverse Learning Styles 
367
Methods of Informing 
368
Description 
368
Deﬁ nition 
369
Comparison and Contrast 
369
Narration 
370
Demonstration 
370
Common Informative Speech Frameworks 
371
Process Speech Frameworks 
371
Expository Speech Frameworks 
372
Sample Informative Speech 
379
Chapter 
16 
Persuasive Speaking 
388
How We Process Persuasive Messages: 
The Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) 
389
Writing Persuasive Speech Goals as Propositions 
390
Types of Persuasive Goals 
390
Tailoring Your Proposition to Your Audience 
391

xii
 
Contents
Developing Arguments (Logos) That Support Your Proposition 
393
Finding Reasons to Use as Main Points 
393
Selecting Evidence to Support Reasons 
394
Types and Tests of Arguments 
395
Avoiding Fallacies in Your Reasons and Argument 
397
Increasing Audience Involvement Through Emotional Appeals (Pathos) 
398
Cueing Your Audience Through Credibility (Ethos): Demonstrating Goodwill 
400
Motivating Your Audience to Act Through Incentives 
401
Using Incentives to Satisfy Unmet Needs 
401
Creating Incentives That Outweigh Costs 
403
Organizational Patterns for Persuasive Speeches 
403
Statement of Reasons 
404
Comparative Advantages 
404
Criteria Satisfaction 
404
Refutative 
405
Problem-Solution 
405
Problem-Cause-Solution 
406
Motivated Sequence 
406
Sample Persuasive Speech  
409
REFERENCES 419
INDEX 
431

xiii
 
Preface
We are delighted to welcome Deanna D. Sellnow, Ph.D., to the author team 
for Communicate! A proven textbook author, Dr. Sellnow is the Gifford Blyton 
Endowed Professor and Director of Undergraduate Studies in Communication at 
the University of Kentucky. Her scholarly interests include instructional communi-
cation, educational assessment, popular culture, and gender communication. 
A past president of the Central States Communication Association, she has 
taught a wide variety of communication courses and enjoys directing basic 
communication courses. Dr. Sellnow’s voice blends well with ours, as her writing 
has an appealing conversational quality that keeps the reader’s interest. While 
the contributions she has made to this book will not be evident to those of you 
who are reading the book for the ﬁ rst time, those of you familiar with Dr Sellnow’s 
work will recognize and  appreciate her inﬂ uence. We look forward to a long and 
successful collaboration.
To Students
Congratulations! You are beginning to study communication, a subject that is impor-
tant and useful to you in all parts of your life. When you want to establish or improve 
a relationship, when you need to work with others on a group project for class or for 
a cause you support, or when you are required to make a presentation at work, your 
success will depend on how effective you are at communicating in those settings.
Most of you have probably never studied communication formally. Rather, you’ve 
learned the communication skills and strategies you use every day informally, in your 
home and from your friends. By taking this communication course and learning tested 
communication skills, you’ll strengthen your existing abilities and improve your rela-
tionships. You can improve the likelihood that your group project is successful by 
understanding the predictable patterns of group process and communication. And you 
can more effectively overcome stage fright and give better presentations when you 
have studied public speaking and know how to plan and deliver a formal speech. So 
again, we say, congratulations! You’ll ﬁ nd that this course will be instantly relevant to 
your day-to-day living. We are conﬁ dent that by the end of this term you will be glad 
you spent your time and money on it.
The textbook you’re reading, Communicate!, was one of the ﬁ rst college texts 
about human communication. A lot has changed since Rudy wrote that ﬁ rst edition. 
Over the years we have worked to make sure that students, like you, have a book that 
is easy and enjoyable to read and learn from. We have also worked hard to make sure 
that the information, theories, and skills discussed and relevant to the real relation-
ships and communication situations you face. So every three years we examine the 
book in light of how the world has changed. Just ten years ago, cell phones were not in 
wide use, texting wasn’t a verb, many social networking sites and YouTube didn’t exist, 
and “to twitter” simply meant to speak excitedly about something. Despite these huge 
changes in the way we communicate, this textbook is as up-to-date and useful as the 
ﬁ rst edition was because we work hard to make sure that the information we present 
reﬂ ects what it takes to be an effective communicator today.

xiv
 
Preface
Communicate! is written with six speciﬁ c goals in mind:
 1. To explain important communication concepts, frameworks, and theories that 
have been consistently supported by careful research so that you can understand 
the conceptual foundations of human communication.
 2. To teach speciﬁ c communication skills that research has shown facilitate effective 
relationships.
 3. To describe and encourage you to adopt the ethical frameworks that can guide 
competent communication.
 4. To increase awareness of how culture affects communication practices.
 5. To stimulate critical and creative thinking about the concepts and skills you learn.
 6. To provide tools for practice and assessment that enable you to monitor how well 
you are learning communication concepts and skills.
So we hope you will read and enjoy this textbook and that it will be a resource you 
will want to maintain in your personal library. We appreciate it when students who are 
using our text take time to share their reactions to the book with us. So we encour-
age you to email us with questions, comments, and suggestions. Our email address is 
Communicate.Authors@cengage.com.
To Instructors
Thank you for considering and using Communicate! We are grateful for the colleagues 
who have used previous editions of this text and to those of you who are considering 
using this edition. We believe that the revisions we have made will surprise and delight 
those of you who have used Communicate! in the past. We also believe that those of 
you who are looking for a different textbook will ﬁ nd Communicate! is precisely the 
learning tool that will encourage your students to read and think about the important 
role of communication in their lives.
As we prepared this edition, we were acutely aware of how our students’ lives 
are changing and how these changes are inﬂ uencing their learning process and the 
nature of communication in their lives. So we have revised the text with these new 
realities in mind while at the same time retaining the hallmarks that have made this 
textbook useful to students and instructors in the past. And, as with every new edi-
tion, we have incorporated the suggestions of colleagues who use the text, and we’ve 
reviewed the latest scholarship so that this new edition reﬂ ects what users want and 
what recent scholarship has discovered about human communication. In the sections 
that follow, we detail what’s new and highlight the continuing features that have made 
Communicate! a perennial favorite with both students and faculty.
New to This Edition
• Pop Comm! articles, found in each chapter, highlight how the communication 
concepts addressed in this book play out in popular culture. Each article demon-
strates the universal and omnipresent role of communication in our culture and 
how communication practices change and evolve. Many articles spotlight how 
the uses of new technologies are changing basic communication processes. Topics 
include online mourning, the ghostwriting of online dating proﬁ les, managing 
privacy on social networking sites, the dark side of online social groups, and the 
persuasive messages of infomercials.
• Relevant Communicate! pedagogy has been revamped to facilitate active learning 
and assessment. Chapter-opening questions prompt students to consider what 

xv
 
Preface 
they already know and to engage with the main ideas of each chapter as they 
read (pre-assessment). Review questions in the margins throughout the chapters 
and activities at the ends of chapters encourage students to think critically about 
what they’re learning (formative assessment). And end-of-part and online quizzes 
help students determine how well they’ve absorbed chapter content (summative 
assessment).
• New and updated examples throughout the text highlight student-friendly topics, 
such as pop culture and new technologies.
• Chapter 1, “Communication Perspectives,” now includes a section on communi-
cation settings that distinguishes among intrapersonal, interpersonal, small group, 
and public communication.
• Chapter 2, “Perception of Self and Others,” introduces the important role media 
images play in distorting one’s self-perception, the relationship between self- 
perceptions and communication apprehension, and how perception is shaped via 
images constructed on social networking sites such as Facebook and MySpace.
• Reﬂ ecting the fact that today we rely heavily on computer-mediated communica-
tion, Chapter 4, “Communicating Nonverbally,” includes a discussion of how 
nonverbal messages that clarify meaning and convey emotions can be communi-
cated in online environments.
• Because listening and responding is a foundational element of communica-
tion in any setting, we moved the discussion of this topic forward to Chapter 5, 
“Listening and Responding,” in Part I of the book. This chapter now includes a 
section on the types of listening, which distinguishes among appreciative, dis-
criminative, comprehensive, empathic, and critical listening purposes. In addition, 
we added a section on responding effectively to public speakers in the form of 
speech critiques.
• Chapter 6, “Communicating Across Cultures,” has been updated to reﬂ ect what 
we know today about dominant cultures and co-cultures, including the distinction 
among sex, gender, and sexual orientation.
• For this edition, we have reworked the two interpersonal chapters, which now focus, 
ﬁ rst, on understanding relationships and, second, on speciﬁ c skills. Chapter 7, 
“Understanding Interpersonal Relationships,” walks readers through the types 
of interpersonal relationships, the role of disclosure and feedback in relationship 
life cycles, communication in the various relationship stages, and the dialectical 
tensions inherent in interpersonal relationships. In Chapter 8, “Communication 
Skills in Interpersonal Relationships,” we describe communication skills for 
comforting, managing the competing urges between self-disclosure and privacy 
management, and conﬂ ict management styles.
• Many instructors have indicated that they simply don’t have time to teach the 
chapter on interviewing in their courses. Still, because we believe effective inter-
viewing skills are so important, we have retained the content in the form of an 
internal appendix, “Interviewing.” So, even if teachers cannot include the con-
tent in their courses, students can still beneﬁ t from learning about it on their own. 
The content of this appendix has been reﬁ ned so that it ﬁ rst focuses on developing 
good questions and then proposes some guidelines for conducting both informa-
tion and employment interviews. Tips for presenting oneself in employment and 
media interviews are also discussed.
• The unit on group communication has been extensively revised. For this edition, 
Chapter 9, “Communicating in Groups,” focuses on understanding the character-
istics of groups, stages of development, different types of groups, and guidelines 
for communicating effectively in groups. In Chapter 10, “Problem Solving in 

xvi
 
Preface
Groups,” we focus speciﬁ cally on the nature of effective problem solving, includ-
ing leadership, member responsibilities, and formats for sharing results with 
others.
• As in the previous edition, the unit on public speaking continues to describe the 
process for preparing and presenting public speeches using the Speech Plan Action 
Steps. The chapters in this part include many important revisions. Chapter 11, 
“Developing and Researching a Speech Topic,” now includes a discussion of 
concept mapping as a means by which students can generate topic ideas. In 
Chapter 12, “Organizing Your Speech,” we added narrative order as a method for 
arranging main points. Chapter 13, “Adapting Verbally and Visually,” includes a 
section about addressing diverse learning styles when adapting to an audience. In 
addition, we expanded the discussion of visual aids to include guidelines for using 
audio and audiovisual presentational aids. And Chapter 14, “Overcoming Speech 
Apprehension by Practicing Delivery,” offers an expanded discussion of public 
speaking apprehension and ways to overcome it.
• New to Chapter 15, “Informative Speaking,” are a discussion of learning styles as 
they relate to effective informative speaking, revised informative speech critique 
forms, and a new sample student speech, “Understanding Hurricanes.”
• Finally, in Chapter 16, “Persuasive Speaking,” we have expanded our discussion 
of reasoning fallacies to include the either-or and straw person fallacies, we have 
expanded the discussion of organizational patterns to include both the refutative 
and  problem-cause-solution patterns as options, and we offer a new sample stu-
dent speech, “Sexual Assault Policy a Must,” which uses the motivated sequence 
pattern.
Hallmark Features
• Communication Skill boxes provide a step-by-step guide for each of the com-
munication skills presented in the text. Each of these boxes includes the deﬁ nition 
of the skill, a brief description of its use, the steps for enacting the skill, and 
an example that illustrates the skill. A convenient tear-out chart at the begin-
ning of the book provides a summary of all the Communication Skill boxes. The 
Skill Building activities, adjacent to each Communication Skill box, reinforce 
and provide an immediate opportunity for students to practice the skills. Students 
can complete these activities online and then compare their answers with models 
provided by the authors.
• Conversation and Analysis communication scenarios offer print and video 
exemplars of important concepts. Transcripts of these conversations appear in the 
text and online—students can download the transcripts to use for note taking as 
they view the videos. Once they have analyzed the conversation by answering a 
series of critical-thinking questions, they can compare their assessments with the 
authors’.
• The principles of effective speech making are organized into ﬁ ve Speech Plan 
Action Steps, presented in Chapters 11–14. The activities that accompany each of 
these action steps guide students through an orderly process that results in better 
speeches. Communicate!’s online resources provide students with the opportunity 
to view examples of each activity prepared by other students and to complete 
many of the action steps with Speech Builder Express. (See the section Student 
Resources for more about these online resources.)

xvii
 
Preface 
• Sample student speeches appear in the text, each accompanied by an audience adap-
tation plan, an outline, and a transcript and analysis. Two of the three sample speeches 
in this edition are new. Students can use their online resources to view videos of these 
speeches, see the transcript and two different kinds of outlines and sample note cards, 
prepare their own critiques, and compare their critiques to the authors’.
• In Parts I and II, Communicate On Your Feet speech assignments encourage 
students to begin building their public-speaking skills immediately while also 
addressing the needs of instructors who assign prepared speeches throughout the 
course. In Part IV, these assignments correspond to the speech types discussed in 
Chapters 15–16. In this edition, we have added a number of new assignments so 
that each chapter now includes at least one.
• Exercises that were called “Observe and Analyze” and “Test Your Competence” 
in previous editions are now called Skill Learning Activities and are grouped 
at the ends of chapters. Some of these exercises challenge students to observe 
events related to concepts they are learning, use the theories and concepts from 
the chapter to analyze what happened, and, in some cases, improve what occurred 
by applying the communication skills they’ve learned. Other activities provide 
opportunities for students to self-evaluate or practice speciﬁ c skills. Students can 
use their online resources to complete these activities and download worksheets 
and data collection forms.
• Self-Reviews appear at the end of each part to encourage students to commit 
to improving their skills in interpersonal, group, and public communication. 
In accord with the ﬁ ndings of learning motivation research, students have the 
opportunity to inventory their current skill levels and set speciﬁ c goals for skill 
improvement. The Self-Reviews can be completed online and, if requested, emailed 
to the instructor.
• Diverse Voices articles give voice to the communication experiences of people 
from a wide range of social and cultural backgrounds. Each article, which presents 
the personal thoughts and experiences of the writer on topics related to chapter 
concepts, helps students understand and appreciate the relationship between cul-
ture and communication. Six of these articles are new to this edition.
• What Would You Do? A Question of Ethics boxes are short case studies that 
appear near the end of chapters. These cases, several of which are new to this 
edition, present ethical challenges and require students to think critically, sorting 
through a variety of ethical dilemmas faced by communicators. Conceptual 
material presented in Chapter 1 lays groundwork for the criteria on which students 
may base their assessments, but each case focuses on issues raised in a speciﬁ c 
chapter.
Teaching and Learning Resources
Communicate! is accompanied by a full suite of integrated materials that will make 
teaching and learning more efﬁ cient and effective. Note to faculty: If you want your 
students to have access to the online resources for this book, please be sure to order 
them for your course. The content in these resources can be bundled with every new 
copy of the text or ordered separately. If you do not order them, your students will not 
have access to the online resources.
Availability of resources may differ by region. Check with your local Cengage Learning representative for details.

xviii
 
Preface
Student Resources
• The Premium Website for Communicate! provides students with one-stop access to 
all the integrated technology resources that accompany the book. These resources 
include Speech Builder Express™ 3.0, InfoTrac College Edition, interactive versions 
of the Skill Learning activities, interactive video activities, Web Resources links, 
and self-assessments. All resources are mapped to show both key discipline learn-
ing concepts as well as speciﬁ c chapter learn lists.
• The Communicate! interactive video activities feature the Conversation and 
Analysis communication scenario clips presented in the text so students can see 
and hear how the skills they are studying can be used to create effective conversa-
tions in various circumstances. Students can answer the critical-thinking questions 
that accompany each video and then compare their answers to the authors’. This 
online resource also features videos of the sample informative and persuasive stu-
dent speeches included in the book. Each speech is accompanied by a transcript, a 
preparation outline and a speaking outline, note cards, a speech critique checklist, 
and critical-thinking questions.
• Many of the Speech Plan Action Steps can be completed with the Speech Builder 
Express 3.0 organization and outlining program. This interactive Web-based 
tool coaches students through the speech organization and outlining process. By 
completing interactive sessions, students can prepare and save their outlines—
including a plan for visual aids and a works cited section—formatted according 
to the principles presented in the text. Text models reinforce students’ interactive 
practice.
• InfoTrac College Edition with InfoMarks. This virtual library features more than 
18 million reliable, full-length articles from 5,000 academic and popular periodicals 
that can be retrieved almost instantly. They also have access to InfoMarks—stable 
URLs that can be linked to articles, journals, and searches to save valuable time 
when doing research—and to the InfoWrite online resource center, where students 
can access grammar help, critical-thinking guidelines, guides to writing research 
papers, and much more.
• Speech StudioTM Online Video Upload and Grading Program improves the learn-
ing comprehension of public speaking students. This unique resource empowers 
instructors with a new assessment capability that is applicable for traditional, 
online, and hybrid courses. With Speech Studio, students can upload video ﬁ les 
of practice speeches or ﬁ nal performances, comment on their peers’ speeches, and 
review their grades and instructor feedback. Instructors create courses and assign-
ments, comment on and grade student speeches with a library of comments and 
grading rubrics, and allow peer review. Grades ﬂ ow into a gradebook that allows 
instructors to easily manage their course from within Speech Studio.
•  A Guide to the Basic Course for ESL Students can be bundled and is designed to 
assist the nonnative speaker. The Guide features FAQs, helpful URLs, and strategies 
for accent management and speech apprehension.
•  Service Learning in Communication Studies: A Handbook is an invaluable resource 
for students in the basic course that integrates, or will soon integrate, a service-
learning component. This handbook provides guidelines for connecting service-
learning work with classroom concepts and advice for working effectively with 
agencies and organizations. It also provides model forms and reports and a direc-
tory of online resources.
Availability of resources may differ by region. Check with your local Cengage Learning representative for details.

xix
 
Preface 
Instructor Resources
• The Instructor’s Resource Manual with Test Bank by Katrina Bodey, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, changes from the twelfth edition to the thirteenth edition, 
sample syllabi, chapter-by-chapter outlines, summaries, vocabulary lists, suggested 
lecture and discussion topics, classroom exercises, assignments, and a comprehen-
sive test bank with answer key and rejoinders. In addition, this manual includes 
the Spotlight on Scholars boxes that were in the textbook in past editions. These 
boxes feature the work of eight eminent communication scholars, putting a face on 
scholarship by telling each scholar’s “story.” These boxes can be  used as discussion 
starters, as enrichment for students who are interested in communication scholar-
ship, or in any other way instructors would like to  integrate them into the course. 
Available online only. Access at the Communicate! Instructor Companion Website.
• Special-Topic Instructor’s Manuals. Written by Deanna Sellnow, University of 
Kentucky, these three brief manuals provide instructor resources for teaching pub-
lic speaking online, with a service-learning approach, and with a problem-based 
learning approach that focuses on critical thinking and teamwork skills. Each 
manual includes course syllabi; icebreakers; information about learning cycles 
and learning styles; and public speaking basics such as coping with anxiety, out-
lining, and speaking ethically.
• The Teaching Assistant’s Guide to the Basic Course, based on leading communi-
cation teacher training programs, covers general teaching and course management 
topics as well as speciﬁ c strategies for communication instruction—for example, 
providing effective feedback on performance, managing sensitive class discus-
sions, and conducting mock interviews.
• The PowerLecture CD-ROM contains an electronic version of the Instructor’s 
Resource Manual, ExamView® Computerized Testing, and predesigned Microsoft 
PowerPoint presentations. The PowerPoint presentations contain text and images 
and can be used as they are or customized to suit your course needs.
• Communication Scenarios for Critique and Analysis on Video and DVD include 
the communication scenarios included in the Communicate! interactive videos as 
well as additional scenarios covering interpersonal communication, interviewing, 
and group communication.
• Launch your lectures with ABC News DVDs: Human Communication, Interpersonal 
Communication, and Public Speaking. Footage from Nightline, World News Tonight, 
and Good Morning America provides context and real-life examples of communica-
tion theories and practices. Footage includes discussion of dozens of communication 
topics—including family “virtual visitation,” cell phone spam, and professional non-
verbal communication—as well as signiﬁ cant speeches by public ﬁ gures.
• The BBC News and CBS News DVDs: Human Communication, Interpersonal 
Communication, and Public Speaking, provide footage of news stories that relate 
to current topics in human and interpersonal communication, and footage of 
famous historical and contemporary public speeches, as well as clips that relate to 
current topics in speech communication. Available Spring 2010.
• The Student Speeches for Critique and Analysis on Video and DVD offer a 
variety of sample student speeches, including those featured in the Communicate! 
interactive videos, that your students can watch, critique, and analyze on their 
own or in class. All of the speech types are included, as well as speeches featuring 
nonnative English speakers and the use of visual aids.
Availability of resources may differ by region. Check with your local Cengage Learning representative for details.

xx
 
Preface
• ABC News DVD: Speeches by Barack Obama. This DVD includes nine famous 
speeches by President Barack Obama, from 2004 to the present day, including his 
speech at the 2004 Democratic National Convention; his 2008 speech on race, 
“A More Perfect Union”; and his 2009 inaugural address. Speeches are divided into 
short video segments for easy, time-efﬁ cient viewing. This instructor supplement 
also features critical-thinking questions and answers for each speech, designed to 
spark class discussion.
• The Media Guide for Interpersonal Communication provides faculty with media 
resource listings focused on general interpersonal communication topics. Each 
listing provides compelling examples of how interpersonal communication con-
cepts are illustrated in particular ﬁ lms, books, plays, Web sites, or journal articles. 
Discussion questions are provided.
Availability of resources may differ by region. Check with your local Cengage Learning representative for details.

xxi
 
Preface 
Acknowledgments
This thirteenth edition of Communicate! has beneﬁ tted from the work of many people 
we would like to recognize.
First, we thank our colleagues who reviewed the book and offered their insights 
and suggestions including Karen Anderson, University of North Texas; Thomas Bovino, 
Suffolk County Community College; Jon Croghan, Northwestern State University; 
Sheryl Davis, Kaiser University; James Floss, Humboldt State University; Thomas 
Gaines, Johnson & Wales University; King Godwin, Grambling State University; Daria 
Heinemann, Kaiser University; Tracey Holley, Tarleton State University; Keri Keckley, 
Crowder College; Nancy Levin, Palm Beach Community College; and Charlotte Toguchi, 
Kapiolani Community College.
We also want to thank Zach Leitch, Debbie Sellnow, and Rick Sellnow, who read 
the previous edition of this text and suggested where examples needed to be updated 
so that today’s 21st-century students would ﬁ nd illustrations they could relate to.
We are fortunate to have the best editorial team in Communication Studies today. 
We are grateful for the support of Lyn Uhl, our senior publisher; Monica Eckman, 
executive editor; Colin Solan, editorial assistant; Jessica Badiner, media editor; Bryant 
Chrzan, marketing manager; Christine Dobberpuhl, marketing communications man-
ager; Rosemary Winﬁ eld, senior content product manager; Linda Helcher, art director; 
Kristin Jobe, project manager at Elm Street Publishing Services; Barbara Armentrout, 
copy editor; Rokusek Design, designer; Dean Dauphinais, permissions acquisitions 
manager for images; Raquel Sousa, photo researcher; and Margaret Chamberlain-
Gaston, permissions acquisitions manager for text. We give special thanks to Rebekah 
Matthews, assistant editor, who in addition to her usual duties helped us write the new 
Pop Comm! feature. As always, we are indebted to Greer Lleuad, senior development 
editor, who is simply the best in the business. We trust and respect her opinions and 
advice unconditionally. We simply could not have done this book without her.
We also thank our families for their continued patience, understanding, and support.
Finally, we thank God for the many ways that our lives have been blessed. We 
hope this book helps readers glimpse what Martin Buber called the “I-Thou” respect 
and love that we believe God planned us to have in our human relationships.
Kathleen S. Verderber
and 
Deanna D. Sellnow


Communication Perspectives
Questions you’ll be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• How does the communication process work?
• What characterizes each of the communication settings you will study in 
this course?
• What are the basic principles of communication?
• What major ethical issues face communicators?
• What is communication competence and what can you do to achieve it?
• What is communication apprehension and how does it relate to 
communication competence?
Mimi and Marcus ﬁ nished talking with the ﬁ fth car salesperson.
“From what I could understand, most of the basic features we need are about 
the same,” said Mimi. “So, for me, it comes down to who we feel most comfortable 
with.”
“Yeah, that’s pretty much the way I see it. And from that standpoint, I’d pick 
Carrie,” Marcus responded.
“She really seemed nice, didn’t she?” asked Mimi. “She seemed friendly and—
unlike Paul—she talked to both of us, not just you.”
Marcus replied, “She talked about features, price, and ﬁ nancing options that 
were tailored to our speciﬁ c needs—unlike Dempsey, who spent most of his time 
talking about luxury features that cost more than we can afford.”
1
Martin Barraud/Getty Images

2 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
Mimi added, “Yeah, and Gloria was so disorganized . . . ”
“And she was so focused on getting through her presentation that she didn’t 
even notice when you tried to ask a question!” Marcus interjected.
“I sort of liked Steve,” Mimi continued, “but when we suggested that the price 
range he was quoting was out of our budget, he wasn’t much help. Once he got 
off his ‘script,’ he seemed lost.”
“Well,” Marcus replied, “not only did Carrie offer a car with features we can use 
and a ﬁ nancing plan we can afford, she also led me to believe that we could call 
her with questions later about when and where to service our vehicle.”
“OK,” Mimi said as she nodded. “So we agree; we’re buying our car from 
Carrie!”
Why was Carrie successful? Was it the car she was promoting or her specialized 
expertise in the automobile business? Not necessarily. From this conversation, it 
appears that Carrie’s success was due to her ability to communicate with Mimi 
and Marcus. Carrie’s success is not unusual. Time and time again, studies have 
concluded that, for almost any job, employers seek oral communication skills, team-
work skills, and interpersonal abilities (College learning for the new global century, 
2008; Hansen & Hansen, 2007; Young, 2003). For example, an article on the role 
of communication in the workplace reported that in engineering, a highly technical 
ﬁ eld, speaking skills were very important for 72 percent of the employers surveyed 
(Darling & Dannels, 2003, p. 12). A survey by the National Association of Colleges 
and Employers (Koncz, 2008) reported the top 10 personal qualities and skills that 
employers seek from college graduates. The number one skill was communication, 
including face-to-face speaking, presentational speaking, and writing. Other skills 
ranked in the top 10 that you will learn about and practice in this course include 
teamwork skills (number three), analytical skills (number ﬁ ve), interpersonal skills 
(number eight), and problem-solving skills (number nine). The employers also said 
these very skills are, unfortunately, the ones many new graduates lack. So this 
course can signiﬁ cantly increase your ability to get a job and be successful in your 
chosen career.
How effectively you communicate with others is important not only to your ca-
reer, but also to your personal relationships. Your ability to make and keep friends, to 
be a good family member, to have satisfying intimate relationships, to participate in 
or lead groups, and to prepare and present speeches depends on your communication 
skills. During this course, you will learn about the communication process and have 
an opportunity to practice basic communication skills that will help you improve your 
relationships.
In this chapter, we begin by explaining the process of communication. Next, we 
describe several communication settings and how we’ll address improving commu-
nication skills for them in this book. From there, we describe several fundamental 
principles of communication. Finally, we discuss communication competence, the 
role managing communication apprehension plays in achieving it, and a strategy for 
improving your communication skills.

3
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
The Communication Process
Communication is the process of creating or sharing meaning in informal conversa-
tion, group interaction, or public speaking. To understand how this process works, we 
begin by describing its essential elements: participants (who), messages (what), context 
(where), channels (how), interference (distractions), and feedback (reaction).
Participants
The participants are the individuals who assume the roles of senders and receivers 
during an interaction. As senders, participants form and transmit messages using ver-
bal symbols, visual images, and nonverbal behavior. As receivers, they interpret the 
messages that have been transmitted to them.
Messages
Messages are the verbal utterances, visual images, and nonverbal behaviors to which 
meaning is attributed during communication. To understand how messages are created 
and received, we need to understand meanings, symbols, encoding and decoding, and 
form (organization).
Meanings
Meanings include the thoughts in your mind as well as the interpretations you make 
of another’s message. Meanings are the ways participants make sense of messages. It is 
important to realize that meanings are not transferred from one person to another, but 
are created together in an exchange. Some communication settings enable participants 
to verify that they have shared meanings; in other settings this is more difﬁ cult. For 
instance, if Sarah says to Tiffany that many female celebrities are unhealthily under-
weight, through the exchange of verbal messages, they can together come to some degree 
of understanding of what that means. But if Sarah is giving a speech on the subject to an 
audience of 200 people, Tiffany’s ability to question Sarah and negotiate a mutual mean-
ing is limited. If Sarah shows a slideshow of before-and-after photographs of some of the 
celebrities she is referring to, she can make the meaning clear even for a large audience.
Symbols
To express yourself, you form messages made of verbal symbols (words), nonverbal 
cues (behaviors), and visual images. Symbols are words, sounds, and actions that rep-
resent speciﬁ c ideas and feelings. As you speak, you choose word symbols to express 
your meaning. At the same time, you also use facial expressions, eye contact, gestures, 
and tone of voice—all symbolic, nonverbal cues—in an attempt to express your mean-
ing. Your listeners make interpretations or attribute meaning to the messages they 
receive. When you offer your messages through a variety of symbols, the meaning you 
are trying to convey becomes clearer.
Encoding and decoding
Encoding is the process of putting your thoughts and feelings into words, nonverbal 
cues, and images. Decoding is the process of interpreting another’s message. Ordinarily 
you do not consciously think about either the encoding or the decoding process. Only 
when there is a difﬁ culty, such as speaking in a second language or having to use an 
easier vocabulary with children, do you become aware of encoding. You may not think 
about decoding until someone seems to speak in circles or uses unfamiliar technical 
words and you have difﬁ culty interpreting or understanding what is being said. Have 
you ever taken a course where the instructor used lots of unfamiliar technical words? 
If so, how did that affect the decoding process for you?
communication
the process of creating 
or sharing meaning in 
informal conversation, 
group interaction, or public 
speaking.
participants
individuals who assume the 
roles of senders and receivers 
during an interaction.
messages
verbal utterances, visual 
images, and nonverbal 
behaviors to which 
meaning is attributed during 
communication.
meanings
thoughts in our minds and 
interpretations of others’ 
messages.
symbols
words, sounds, and actions 
that are generally understood 
to represent ideas and 
feelings.
encoding
the process of putting our 
thoughts and feelings into 
words and nonverbal cues.
decoding
the process of interpreting 
another’s message.
How does the 
communication 
process work?

4 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
Form (Organization) 
When the meaning we wish to share is complex, we may need to organize it in sections 
or in a certain order. Message form is especially important when one person talks with-
out interruption for a relatively long time, such as in a public speech or when reporting 
an event to a colleague at work. Visual images also need to be organized and in good 
form if they are to aid understanding.
Context
The context is composed of the (1) physical, (2) social, (3) historical, (4) psychological, 
and (5) cultural situations in which a communication encounter occurs, including what 
precedes and follows what is said. According to noted German philosopher Jürgen 
Habermas, the ideal speech situation is impossible to achieve, but considering its con-
texts as we communicate with others can move us closer to that goal (Littlejohn & 
Foss, 2007 p. 335). The context affects the expectations of the participants, the mean-
ing these participants derive, and their subsequent behavior.
Physical context
The physical context includes the location, the environmental conditions (tempera-
ture, lighting, and noise level), the distance between communicators, and the time 
of day. Each of these factors can affect the communication. For instance, the mean-
ing shared in a conversation may be affected by whether it is held in a crowded 
company cafeteria, an elegant candlelit restaurant, over the telephone, or on the 
Internet.
Today, more and more of our communication exchanges occur in technologically 
mediated spaces. When you call someone on your cell phone, for instance, you are 
in different physical places and your conversation will be inﬂ uenced by the physi-
cal contexts each of you occupy as well as by the quality of your phone connection. 
Moreover, the messages and meaning are affected by whether the technology used is 
synchronous or asynchronous. Synchronous technologies allow us to exchange mes-
sages in real time, while asynchronous technologies allow delays between sending, 
receiving, and responding to messages. Telephone calls are synchronous, and voice 
mail messages and e-mail are typically asynchronous. Instant messages (IMs) and text 
messages may be either synchronous or asynchronous.
Social context
The social context is the nature of the relationship between the participants. Whether 
communication takes place among family members, friends, acquaintances, work 
associates, or strangers inﬂ uences what and how messages are formed, shared, and 
interpreted. For instance, most people change how they interact when talking with their 
parents or siblings as compared to how they interact when talking with their friends.
Historical context
The historical context is the background provided by previous communication epi-
sodes between the participants. It inﬂ uences understandings in the current encounter. 
For instance, suppose one morning Chad tells Shelby that he will pick up the rough 
draft of a paper they had given to their professor for feedback to help prepare the ﬁ nal 
manuscript. When Shelby joins Chad for lunch in the cafeteria, she says, “Did you 
get it?” Another person listening to the conversation would have no idea what the 
it is. Yet Chad quickly replies, “It’s on my desk.” Shelby and Chad would understand 
each other because the content of their previous conversation provides the context for 
understanding what “it” is in this exchange.
context
the setting in which 
communication occurs, 
including what precedes and 
follows what is said.
physical context
a communication 
encounter’s location, 
environmental conditions 
(temperature, lighting, noise 
level), distance between 
communicators, seating 
arrangements, and time of 
day.
social context
the nature of the relationship 
that exists between the 
participants.
historical context
the background provided 
by previous communication 
episodes between the 
participants that inﬂ uence 
understandings in the current 
encounter.

5
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
Psychological context
The psychological context includes the moods and feelings each person brings to the 
interpersonal encounter. For instance, suppose Corinne is under a lot of stress. While 
she is studying for an exam, a friend stops by and pleads with her to take a break and 
go to the gym with her. Corinne, who is normally good-natured, may explode with an 
angry tirade. Why? Because her stress level provides the psychological context within 
which she hears this message and it affects how she responds.
Cultural context
The cultural context includes the values, beliefs, orientations, underlying assumptions, 
and rituals prevalent among people in a society (Samovar, Porter, & McDaniel, 2007). 
Culture penetrates into every aspect of our lives, affecting how we think, talk, and 
behave. Each of us belongs to many cultural groups, though we may differ in how much 
we identify with each group. Mina, for example, was born in Taiwan but was raised in 
Boston, where she attended Chinese elementary school. She is also a college student 
and a Democrat. Each of these groups helps characterize her cultural setting. When two 
people from different cultures interact, misunderstandings may occur because of the 
cultural variations between them. For example, the role of a “good student” in many 
Asian cultures typically means being quiet, respectful, and never challenging others’ 
views, but the good-student role in U.S. classrooms often includes being talkative, 
assertive, and debating the views expressed by others. The Pop Comm article in this 
chapter describes how the cultural ritual of mourning is changing in the U.S.A.
Channels
Channels are both the route traveled by the message and the means of transportation. 
Messages are transmitted through sensory channels. Face-to-face communication has 
three basic channels: verbal symbols, nonverbal cues, and visual images. Technologically 
mediated communication uses these same channels, though nonverbal cues such as 
movements, touch, and gestures are  represented by visual  symbols like emoticons (textual 
images that symbolize the sender’s mood, emotion, or facial expressions) and acronyms 
(abbreviations that stand in for common 
phrases). For example, in a  face-to-face inter-
action, Barry might express his frustration 
about a poor grade on an assignment by ver-
bally noting why he thought the grade was 
unfair, by visually showing the assignment 
along with the grading criteria for it, and by 
nonverbally raising his voice and shaking 
his ﬁ st. In an online interaction, he might 
insert a frowning-face emoticon (/) or the 
 acronym “POed” to represent those nonverbal 
behaviors.
Interference (Noise)
Interference (noise) is any stimulus that 
hinders the process of sharing meaning. 
Interference can be physical or psychological.
Physical 
interference 
includes 
the 
sights, sounds, and other stimuli in the envi-
ronment that draw people’s attention away 
from intended meaning. For instance, while a 
psychological context
the mood and feelings 
each person brings to a 
conversation.
cultural context
the values, attitudes, beliefs, 
orientations, and underlying 
assumptions prevalent 
among people in a society.
channel
both the route traveled by the 
message and the means of 
transportation.
interference (noise)
any stimulus that interferes 
with the process of sharing 
meaning.
physical interference
sights, sounds, and other 
stimuli in the environment that 
draw people’s attention away 
from intended meaning.
Did you know that 2.5 billion 
text messages are sent each 
day in the United States?
Leland Bobbe/Photonica/Getty images

6 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
friend is giving you instructions on how to work the new MP3 player, your attention 
may be drawn away by the external noise of your favorite TV show, which is on in the 
next room. External noise does not have to be a sound, however. Perhaps, while your 
friend is giving instructions, your attention is drawn momentarily to an attractive man 
or woman. Such visual distractions are also physical interference.
Psychological interference includes internal distractions based on thoughts or feel-
ings and can fall into two categories: internal noise and semantic noise. Internal noise 
refers to the thoughts and feelings that compete for attention and interfere with the com-
munication process. If you have ever tuned out the lecture your professor is giving and 
tuned into a daydream or a past conversation, then you have experienced internal noise. 
Semantic noise refers to the distractions aroused by certain symbols that take our atten-
tion away from the main message. If a friend describes a  40-year-old secretary as “the 
girl in the ofﬁ ce,” and you think girl is an odd and condescending term for a 40-year-old 
psychological 
interference
internal distractions based on 
thoughts, feelings, or emotional 
reactions to symbols.
internal noise
thoughts and feelings 
that compete for attention 
and interfere with the 
communication process.
Mourning in the United 
States, 21st-Century Style
Mourning is a universal human communica-
tion activity. It is the process of celebrating the 
life of someone while grieving his or her death. 
Mourning rituals and traditions vary by culture 
and religion and change over time. So it is not 
surprising that mourning in the United States 
in the 21st century is adapting past practices to 
modern life.
Mourning rituals include norms for how the 
body of the deceased is dealt with, burial and 
commemorative rituals, symbols of mourning, 
and comforting practices. In the past, personally 
washing, dressing, and preparing the body for 
burial enabled mourners to present the deceased 
as they would like the person to be remembered. 
Burial and commemorative rituals gave family, 
friends, and the larger community an oppor-
tunity to gather, exchange memories of the 
deceased, comfort those closest to the deceased, 
and receive comfort in return. Graves were 
places where those close to the deceased could 
go to “talk” to the departed and recall memories. 
Family members would often withdraw into their 
homes for a period of time to grieve. Friends and 
community members would visit with the fam-
ily in their home during this intense period of 
mourning. Those closest to the person who had 
died chose or were expected to wear symbols of 
their status as mourners. Mourning clothes and 
tokens served as signals to others in the commu-
nity that the person so dressed was in mourning 
and should be accorded extra gentleness.
Today, in the U.S.A. most families do not per-
sonally prepare the body of their loved one for burial 
Pop Comm!
CHIP EAST/Reuters/Landov

7
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
woman, you might not even hear the rest of what your friend has to say. Whenever we 
react emotionally to a word or a behavior, we are experiencing semantic noise.
Feedback
Feedback is the reactions and responses to a message that indicate to the sender whether 
and how that message was heard, seen, and interpreted. In face-to-face communica-
tion, we can express feedback verbally through words or nonverbally through body 
language. In online interactions, we can express feedback verbally through words or 
nonverbally through emoticons and acronyms. We continuously give feedback when we 
are listening to another, if only by paying attention, giving a confused look, or showing 
signs of boredom. Or we may give direct verbal feedback by saying, “I don’t understand 
the point you are making” or “That’s a great comment you just made.” In online interac-
tions, we might use an acronym like CC (I understand) or WDYM (What do you mean?).
semantic noise
distractions aroused by certain 
symbols that take our attention 
away from the main message.
feedback
reactions and responses to 
messages.
or wear special mourning clothes. Increasingly, one 
or more members of the family may honor their 
loved one by preparing a commemorative Web 
page that memorializes the life of the departed. Web 
sites such as Legacy.com, MyDeathSpace.com, and 
Memory-Of.com have been around for over a decade 
to facilitate the creation of interactive online memo-
rials. An article in The Boston Globe recounted the 
story of Shawn Kelley who created a “moving trib-
ute” to his brother Michael, a National Guardsman 
killed in Afghanistan. The 60-second video features 
a slide show of Michael growing up, from a toddler 
to a clean-cut teen, while quiet classical music plays 
softly and a voice-over recounts Michael’s attributes 
and interests. Shawn reported that it made him feel 
good to be able to “talk” about his brother, and over 
a year later he was still visiting the site to watch the 
video and to view the messages left by family mem-
bers and friends (Plumb, 2006). Today the rituals 
traditionally associated with funerals and memorial 
services such as eulogies, visitations, and expres-
sions of condolence now often take place online.
Interactive memorial Web sites also have 
become a “place” where mourners can “visit” with 
their departed loved one and connect with other 
mourners, activities that traditionally occurred 
at a funeral or memorial service. Most Web sites 
that host memorial Web pages allow visitors to 
leave messages of condolence, share stories about 
the deceased, and leave messages directed to the 
deceased. Denise McGrath, a mother who created 
“R.I.P. Tony,” a memorial Web page for her teen-
age son on MySpace explained that it was “just a 
place for his friends to go” (Plumb, 2006). Today 
Legacy.com hosts over 50,000 permanent memo-
rials and reports being visited by over 10 million 
users each month (Plumb, 2009).
The somber mourning clothes of past genera-
tions have given way to newer ways of marking 
oneself as in mourning. Today family members 
and friends may wear T-shirts imprinted with 
pictures of the deceased. This practice is most 
common when the departed is young and died a 
violent death. According to Montana Miller, pro-
fessor of popular culture at Bowling Green State 
University, the tradition of wearing commemora-
tive t-shirts originated with West Coast gangs in 
the early 1990s (Moser, 2005).
Not only are people using T-shirts to signal 
mourning, but they are also designing decals to 
place on cars and bikes to memorialize those who 
have died. In a highly mobile society, decals are 
visual markers that can not only memorialize 
a loved one who has died but can also connect 
mourners to others who have suffered a similar 
loss. When one 17-year-old was shot and killed, 
hundreds of people in his town put memorial 
decals in their car windows. Four years later the 
young man’s mother reported that seeing those 
decals continued to help her with her grieving 
process (Moser, 2005).
Although we may no longer personally pre-
pare the dead for burial or wear somber formal 
mourning clothes, we still need to connect and 
communicate with others as we grieve, and we 
continue to evolve new methods for doing so.

8 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
Participants
Decoder
Encoder
Meaning
Encoder
Decoder
Meaning
Context
Noise
Noise
Noise
S
e
n
di
ng
 C
ha
n
n
e
l 
F
e
e
d
b
a
c
k 
C
h
a
n
n
e
l 
A Model of the Basic Communication Process
Figure 1.1 illustrates the communication process between two people. In the minds 
of these people are meanings, thoughts, and feelings that they intend to share. 
These thoughts and feelings are created and shaped by the people’s values, culture, 
environment, experiences, occupation, sex, interests, knowledge, and attitudes. To 
communicate a message, the sender encodes thoughts and feelings into messages that 
are sent using one or more channels.
The receiver decodes or interprets the symbols in an attempt to understand the 
speaker’s meaning. This decoding process is affected by the receiver’s total ﬁ eld of 
experience—that is, by all the same factors that shape the encoding process. Feedback 
completes the process so that the sender and receiver can arrive at a similar under-
standing of the message.
The model depicts the context as the area around the participants. This may include 
the physical, social, historical, psychological, and cultural contexts that permeate all 
parts of the process. Similarly, the model shows that during conversation physical and 
psychological interference (noise), including internal and semantic distractions, may 
interfere at various points and therefore affect the people’s ability to arrive at similar 
meanings. As you might imagine, the process becomes more complex when more than 
two people are conversing or when someone is speaking to a large and diverse audience.
Communication Settings
The basic communication process describes how meanings are shared and in this 
course you will learn skills that will help you communicate effectively regardless 
communication setting
the different communication 
environments within which 
people interact, characterized 
by the number of participants 
and the extent to which 
the interaction is formal 
or informal; also called 
communication contexts.
intrapersonal 
communication
the interactions that occur in 
a person’s mind when he or 
she is talking with himself or 
herself.
Skill Learning Activity 1.1
Figure 1.1
A model of communication 
between two individuals
What characterizes 
each of the 
communication 
settings discussed 
in this book?

9
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
of the type of interaction you are experiencing. But there are also important skills 
to learn that are speciﬁ c to a particular communication setting. Communication 
 settings differentiate interactions based on the number of participants and the 
extent to which the interaction is characterized by formal or informal exchanges. 
Also called communication contexts by some scholars these classiﬁ cations describe 
the different communication environments within which we interact. (Littlejohn & 
Foss, 2008, pp. 52–53). In this book, you will learn skills that will help you in 
intrapersonal settings, interpersonal settings, small group settings, and public com-
munication settings.
Intrapersonal communication refers to the interactions that occur in your mind 
when you are talking with yourself. While we may occasionally think out loud, we 
usually don’t  verbalize our internal dialog. When you sit in class and think about what 
you’ll do later that day, you are communicating intrapersonally. Similarly, when you 
send yourself a reminder note as an e-mail or text message, you are communicat-
ing  intrapersonally. A lot of our intrapersonal communication occurs subconsciously 
(Kellerman, 1992). When we drive into the driveway “without thinking,” we are 
communicating intrapersonally on a subconscious level. The study of intrapersonal 
communication often focuses on its role in shaping  self-perceptions and in managing 
communication apprehension, that is, the fear associated with communicating with 
others (McCroskey, 1977). Our study of intrapersonal communication will focus on 
self-talk as a means to improve your self-concept and self-esteem and, ultimately, 
your communication  competence in a variety of situations.
Interpersonal communication is characterized by  informal interaction between 
two people who have an identiﬁ able relationship with each other (Knapp & Daly, 2002). 
Talking to a friend between classes, visiting on the phone with your mother, texting 
or chatting online with your brother, and comforting someone who has suffered a loss 
are all examples of interpersonal communication. In Part 
II, our study of interpersonal communication includes the 
exploration of how we develop, maintain, improve, or end 
our relationships with others. We will also focus on listen-
ing and responding to others with empathy and on sharing 
personal information.
Small group communication typically involves three 
to 20 people who come together to communicate with one 
another (Beebe & Masterson, 2006; Hirokawa, Cathcart, 
Samovar, & Henman, 2003). There are many kinds of small 
groups; examples include a family, a group of friends, a 
group of classmates working on a project, and a manage-
ment team in the workplace. Small group communication 
can occur in  face-to-face settings, as well as online through 
electronic mailing lists, discussion boards, and blogs. In Part 
III, our study of small groups focuses on the characteris-
tics of effective groups, ethical and effective communication 
in groups, leadership, problem-solving, conﬂ ict, and group 
presentations.
Public communication is communication delivered to 
audiences of more than 20 people. Public communication 
includes public speeches and other types of mass com-
munication that you may experience live, in person, or on 
a delayed or mediated basis. For example, when President Barack Obama deliv-
ered his inaugural address some people were there, others watched on TV or the 
interpersonal 
communication
informal interaction between 
two people who have an 
identiﬁ able relationship with 
each other.
small group 
communication
two to 20 people who 
participants come together 
for the speciﬁ c purpose of 
solving a problem or arriving 
at a decision.
public communication
one participant, the speaker, 
delivers a prepared message 
to a group or audience who 
has assembled to hear the 
speaker.
How might the conversation 
of these people differ if they 
were in the library working on 
a class project?
Karen Kapoor/Getty Images

10
 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
Internet at the time he spoke, and still others have experienced his speech after 
Inaugural Day by viewing it in the form of televised snippets or via a Web site such 
as YouTube. The Internet is also becoming the medium of choice for posting job 
ads and résumés, for advertising and buying products, and for political activism. 
In Part IV, our study of public communication will focus on preparing, practic-
ing, and delivering effective oral presentations in both  face-to-face and virtual 
environments.
Communication Principles
Principles are general truths. Understanding the principles of communication is impor-
tant as you begin your study because they will provide a foundation for practicing 
and improving your communication skills. In this section, we discuss seven generally 
agreed-upon principles: communication has purpose, communication is continuous, 
communication messages vary in conscious thought, communication is relational, 
communication is guided by culture, communication has ethical implications, and 
communication is learned.
Communication Has Purpose
When people communicate with each other, they have a purpose for doing so. The 
purpose may be serious or trivial, and they may or may not be aware of it at the time. 
Here we list ﬁ ve basic purposes for communicating that we’ll be addressing throughout 
the book.
 1. We communicate to develop and maintain our sense of self. Through our inter-
actions, we learn who we are, what we are good at, and how people react to how 
we behave.
 2. We communicate to meet our social needs. Just as we need food, water, and shel-
ter, so too do we, as social animals, need contact with other people. Two people 
may converse happily for hours, chatting about inconsequential matters that nei-
ther remembers afterward. Still, their communication has functioned to meet the 
important need simply to talk with another human being.
 3. We communicate to develop and maintain relationships. Not only do we get to 
know others through our communication with them but, more importantly, we 
develop relationships with them—relationships that grow and deepen or stagnate 
and wither away. For example, when Beth calls Leah to ask whether she’d like to 
join her for lunch to discuss a project they are working on, her purpose actually 
may be to resolve a misunderstanding they’ve had because she wants to maintain 
a positive relationship with Leah.
 4. We communicate to exchange information. Some information we get through 
observation, some through reading, some through media, and a great deal through 
direct communication with others, whether face-to-face, via text messaging, or 
online through e-mail and social networking sites such as Facebook and MySpace. 
Whether we are trying to decide how warmly to dress or whom to vote for in the 
next election, all of us have countless exchanges that involve sending and receiv-
ing information.
 5. We communicate to inﬂ uence others. It is doubtful that a day goes by in which 
you don’t engage in behavior such as trying to convince your friends to go to a 
particular restaurant or to see a certain movie, to persuade your supervisor to alter 
your schedule, or to convince an instructor to change a grade.
Skill Learning Activity 1.2
Skill Learning Activity 1.3
What are the 
fundamental 
principles of 
communication?

11
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
Communication Is Continuous
Because communication is nonverbal and visual as well as verbal, we are always send-
ing behavioral messages from which others draw inferences or meaning. Even silence 
communicates if another person infers meaning from it. Why? Because your nonverbal 
behavior represents reactions to your environment and to the people around you. If 
you are cold, you shiver; if you are hot or nervous, you perspire; if you are bored, 
happy, or confused, your face or body language probably will show it. Not only that, 
we are continuously sending and receiving multiple messages when we communicate 
with others. For example, as you talk with your friend about where to go on spring 
break, both of you are simultaneously sending and receiving multiple verbal and non-
verbal messages to each other. As skilled communicators, we need to be aware of the 
explicit and implicit messages we are constantly sending to others.
Communication Messages Vary in Conscious Thought
Recall that sharing meaning with another person involves encoding and decoding verbal 
messages, nonverbal cues, and even visual images. Our messages may (1) occur spontane-
ously, (2) be based on a “script” we have learned or rehearsed, or (3) be carefully constructed 
based on our understanding of the unique situation in which we ﬁ nd ourselves.
Many of our messages are spontaneous expressions, spoken without much con-
scious thought. For example, when you burn your ﬁ nger, you may blurt out, “Ouch!” 
When something goes right, you may break into a broad smile.
At other times, our messages are scripted, phrasings that we have learned from 
our past encounters and judge to be appropriate to the present situation. Many of 
these scripts are learned in childhood. For example, when you want the sugar bowl but 
cannot reach it, you may say, “Please pass the sugar,” followed by “Thank you” when 
someone complies. This conversational sequence comes from your “table manners 
script,” which may have been drilled into you at home. Scripts enable us to use mes-
sages that are appropriate to the situation and are likely to increase the effectiveness 
of our communication. One goal of this text is to acquaint you with general scripts (or 
skills) that can be adapted for use in your communication encounters across a variety 
of relationships, situations, and cultures.
Finally, our messages may be carefully constructed to meet the unique requirements 
of a particular situation. Constructed messages are those that we put together with care-
ful thought when we recognize that our known scripts are inadequate for the situation.
Communication Is Relational
In any communication setting, in addition to sharing content meaning, our messages 
also reﬂ ect two important aspects of our relationships: immediacy and control.
Immediacy is the degree of liking or attractiveness in a relationship. For instance, 
when José passes Josh on campus he may say, “Josh, good to see you” (a verbal 
expression of friendliness); the nonverbal behavior that accompanies the words may 
show Josh whether José is genuinely happy to see him or is only expressing recogni-
tion. For instance, if José smiles, has a sincere sound to his voice, looks Josh in the 
eye, and perhaps pats him on the back or shakes hands ﬁ rmly, then Josh will recognize 
these signs of friendliness. If, however, José speaks quickly with no vocal inﬂ ection 
and with a deadpan facial expression, Josh will probably perceive the comment as 
impersonal communication offered merely to meet some social expectation.
Control is the degree to which one participant is perceived to be more domi-
nant or powerful. Thus, when Tom says to Sue, “I know you’re concerned about 
spontaneous expressions
messages spoken without 
much conscious thought.
scripted messages
phrasings learned from past 
encounters that we judge to 
be appropriate to the present 
situation.
constructed messages
messages put together with 
careful thought when we 
recognize that our known 
scripts are inadequate for the 
situation.
immediacy
the degree of liking or 
attractiveness in a relationship.
control
the degree to which one 
participant is perceived to be 
more dominant or powerful.

12
 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
the budget, but I’ll see to it that 
we have money to cover every-
thing,” his words and the sound 
of his voice may be saying that he 
is “in charge” of ﬁ nances—that he 
is in control. How Sue responds 
to Tom determines whether, on 
this issue, she submits to his per-
ception of control. If Sue says, 
“Thanks, I know you have a bet-
ter handle on ﬁ nances than I do,” 
then she accepts that on this issue, 
she is willing to submit to Tom at 
this time. A few days later, if Tom 
says to Sue, “I think we need to 
cut back on credit card expenses 
for a couple of months,” and Sue 
responds, “No way! I need a new 
suit for work, the car needs new tires, and you promised we could replace the couch,” 
then the nature of the relationship will require further discussion.
Communication Is Guided by Culture
Culture may be deﬁ ned as systems of knowledge shared by a relatively large group 
of people. It includes a system of shared beliefs, values, symbols, and behaviors. How 
messages are formed and interpreted depends on the cultural background of the par-
ticipants. We need to look carefully at ourselves and our communication behavior; as 
we interact with others whose cultural backgrounds differ from our own, so we don’t 
unintentionally communicate in ways that are culturally inappropriate or insensitive 
and thereby undermine our relationships. In addition to national and ethnic culture we 
also need to be sensitive to the sex, age, class, and sexual orientation of our listeners.
Failure to take those differences into account when we interact can also lead us to behave 
insensitively.
Throughout the history of the United States, we’ve experienced huge migrations 
of people from different parts of the world. According to the New York Times Almanac 
(Wright, 2002), at the turn of the 21st century, people of Latin and Asian descent con-
stituted 12.5 percent and 3.8 percent, respectively, of the total U.S. population. About 
2.4 percent of the population regards itself as multiracial. Combined with the approxi-
mately 13 percent of our population that is of African descent, these four groups 
account for nearly 32 percent of the total population. According to the U.S. Census 
Bureau, this ﬁ gure is predicted to rise to nearly 50 percent by 2050.
According to Samovar, Porter, and McDaniel (2007) “a number of cultural com-
ponents are particularly relevant to the student of intercultural communication. These 
include (1) perception, (2) patterns of cognition, (3) verbal behaviors, (4) nonverbal 
behaviors, and the inﬂ uence of context” (p. 13). Because cultural concerns permeate all 
of communication, in each chapter of this book we will point out when the concepts 
and skills you are learning are viewed differently by cultural groups other than the 
dominant American one. In the Diverse Voices feature found in many chapters, authors 
explain how they or their culture views a concept presented in the text. In this chapter, 
Harlan Cleveland describes how the diverse peoples in the United States have learned 
to live together.
culture
systems of knowledge shared 
by a relatively large group of 
people.
Web Resource 1.1
What message about 
immediacy and control do 
wedding couples send as 
they feed each other cake? 
Power in relationships is 
inﬂ uenced by both verbal 
and nonverbal messages.
© Michael Keller/CORBIS

13
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
Lessons from American Experience
by Harland Cleveland
The late Harland Cleveland was president of the 
University of Hawaii and the World Academy of Art 
and Science. In this selection, Cleveland explains how 
Hawaii, the most diverse of our 50 states, achieves eth-
nic and racial peace. He argues that the Hawaiian 
experience is no different from the experience of 
immigrants to the mainland; the ability to tolerate 
diversity is not unique in the world.
We Americans have learned, in our short but 
intensive 200-plus years of history as a nation, 
a ﬁ rst lesson about diversity: that it cannot be 
governed by drowning it in “integration.”
I came face-to-face with this truth when, just 
a quarter of a century ago, I became president 
of the University of Hawaii. Everyone who lives 
in Hawaii, or even visits there, is impressed by 
its residents’ comparative tolerance toward each 
other. On closer inspection, paradise seems based 
on paradox: Everybody’s a minority. The toler-
ance is not despite the diversity but because of it.
It is not through the disappearance of ethnic 
distinctions that the people of Hawaii achieved a 
level of racial peace that has few parallels around 
our discriminatory globe. Quite the contrary. The 
glory is that Hawaii’s main ethnic groups man-
aged to establish the right to be separate. The 
group separateness, in turn, helped establish the 
rights of individuals in each group to equality 
with individuals of different racial aspect, ethnic 
origin, and cultural heritage.
Hawaii’s experience is not so foreign to 
the transatlantic migrations of the various 
 more-or-less white Caucasians. On arrival in 
New York (passing that inscription on the Statue 
of Liberty, “Send these, the homeless, tempest-
tossed, to me”), the European immigrants did not 
melt into the open arms of the white Anglo Saxon 
Protestants who preceded them. The reverse was 
true. The new arrivals stayed close to their own 
kind; shared religion, language, humor, and dis-
criminatory treatment with their soul brothers 
and sisters; and gravitated at ﬁ rst into occu-
pations that did not too seriously threaten the 
earlier arrivals.
The waves of new Americans learned to tol-
erate each other—ﬁ rst as groups, only thereafter 
as individuals. Rubbing up against each other in 
an urbanizing America, they discovered not just 
the old Christian lesson that all men are brothers, 
but the hard, new, multicultural lesson that all 
brothers are different. Equality is not the product 
of similarity; it is the cheerful acknowledgement 
of difference.
What’s so special about our experience is the 
assumption that people of many kinds and colors 
can together govern themselves without deciding 
in advance which kinds of people (male or female, 
black, brown, yellow, red, white, or any mix of 
these) may hold any particular public ofﬁ ce in the 
pantheon of political power.
For the twenty-first century, this “cheerful 
acknowledgement of differences is the alter-
native to a global spread of ethnic cleansing 
and religious rivalry.  The challenge is great, 
for ethnic cleansing and religious rivalry are 
traditions as contemporary as Bosnia and 
Rwanda in the 1990s and as ancient as the 
Assyrians.
In too many countries, there is still a basic 
(if often unspoken) assumption that one kind of 
people is anointed to be in general charge. Try 
to imagine a Turkish chancellor of Germany, an 
Algerian president of France, a Pakistani prime 
minister of Britain, a Christian president of 
Egypt, an Arab prime minister of Israel, a Jewish 
president of Syria, a Tibetan ruler of Beijing, 
anyone but a Japanese in power in Tokyo. Yet 
in the United States during the twentieth cen-
tury, we have already elected an Irish Catholic as 
president, chosen several Jewish Supreme Court 
justices, and racially integrated the armed forces 
right up to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff . . . .
Diverse Voices

14
 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
Communication Has Ethical Implications
In any encounter, we choose whether or not to communicate ethically. Ethics is a set 
of moral principles that may be held by a society, a group, or an individual. Although 
what is considered ethical is a matter of personal judgment, various groups still expect 
members to uphold certain standards. These standards inﬂ uence the personal decisions 
we make. When we choose to violate the standards that are expected, we are viewed 
to be unethical. Here are ﬁ ve ethical standards that inﬂ uence our communication and 
guide our behavior.
 1. Truthfulness and honesty mean refraining from lying, cheating, stealing, or 
deception. “An honest person is widely regarded as a moral person, and honesty 
is a central concept to ethics as the foundation for a moral life” (Terkel & Duval, 
1999, p. 122). Although most people accept truthfulness and honesty as a stan-
dard, they still confess to lying on occasion. We are most likely to lie when we are 
caught in an ethical dilemma, a choice involving an unsatisfactory alternative. An 
example of an ethical dilemma would be a boss asking us if our coworker arrived 
to work late today and knowing that telling the truth would get the coworker ﬁ red.
 2. Integrity means maintaining a consistency of belief and action (keeping promises). 
Terkel and Duval (1999) say, “A person who has integrity is someone who has strong 
moral principles and will successfully resist the temptation to compromise those prin-
ciples” (p. 135). Integrity, then, is the opposite of hypocrisy. A person who had prom-
ised to help a friend study for the upcoming exam would live up to this promise even 
when another friend offered a free ticket to a sold-out concert for the same night.
 3. Fairness means achieving the right balance of interests without regard to one’s 
own feelings and without showing favor to any side in a conﬂ ict. Fairness 
implies impartiality or lack of bias. To be fair to someone is to listen with an open 
mind, to gather all the relevant facts, consider only circumstances relevant to the 
decision at hand, and not let prejudice or irrelevancies affect how you treat others. 
For example, if two of her children are ﬁ ghting, a mom is exercising fairness if she 
listens openly as the children explain “their side” before she decides what to do.
 4. Respect means showing regard or consideration for others and their ideas, 
even if we don’t agree with them. Respect is not based on someone’s afﬂ uence, 
job status, or ethnic background. In a classroom, students show respect for oth-
ers by attentively listening to another student’s speech even when the main point 
 violates their political or religious position.
ethics
a set of moral principles that 
may be held by a society, a 
group, or an individual.
ethical dilemma
a choice involving two 
unsatisfactory alternatives.
What ethical 
issues face 
communicators?
I wouldn’t dream of arguing that we 
Americans have found the Holy Grail of cultural 
diversity when, in fact, we’re still searching for it. 
We have to think hard about our growing plural-
ism. It’s useful, I believe, to dissect in the open 
our thinking about it, to see whether the lessons 
we are trying to learn might stimulate some use-
ful thinking elsewhere. We still do not quite know 
how to create “wholeness incorporating diver-
sity,” but we owe it to the world, as well as to 
ourselves, to keep trying.
Reﬂ ective Questions
 1. To what degree to you think America has 
moved forward since Harland Cleveland 
offered these statements?
 2. Name some speciﬁ c examples to support 
your opinion.
Excerpted from Harland Cleveland, “The Limits to Cultural 
Diversity,” in Intercultural Communication: A Reader (12th ed.), 
eds. Larry A. Samovar, Richard E. Porter, and Erwin R. McDaniel 
(Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2009), pp. 431–434. Reprinted by 
permission of the World Future Society.

15
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
 5. Responsibility means being accountable for one’s actions and what one says. 
Responsible communicators recognize the power of words. Messages can hurt and 
messages can soothe. Information is accurate or it may be faulty. A responsible 
communicator would not spread a false rumor about another friend.
In our daily lives, we often face 
ethical dilemmas and must sort 
out what is more or less right 
or wrong. In making these deci-
sions, we usually reveal our 
ethical standards. At the end of 
each chapter of this book, the 
feature What Would You Do? 
A Question of Ethics will ask 
you to think about and resolve 
an ethical dilemma that relates 
to that chapter’s content. Your 
instructor may use these as a 
vehicle for class discussions, or 
you may be asked to prepare a 
written report.
Communication Is 
Learned
Just as you learned to walk, so 
too you learned to communicate. 
But talking is a complex under-
taking. You may not yet have learned all of the skills you will need to develop 
healthy relationships. Because communication is learned, you can improve your 
ability. Throughout this text, we identify communication skills that can help you 
become a more competent communicator.
Increasing Our Communication 
Competence
Communication competence is the impression that communicative behavior is 
both appropriate and effective in a given situation (Spitzberg, 2000, p. 375). 
Communication is effective when it achieves its goals; it is appropriate when 
it conforms to what is expected in a situation. We create the perception that 
we are competent communicators through the verbal messages we send, and the 
nonverbal behaviors and visual images that accompany them. Competence is an 
impression or judgment that people make about others. Because communication 
is at the heart of how we relate to each other, one of your goals in this course 
will be to learn strategies to increase the likelihood that others will view you as 
competent.
Perceptions of competence depend, in part, on personal motivation, knowledge, 
and skills (Spitzberg, 2000, p. 377). Motivation is important because we will only 
be able to improve our communication if we are motivated—that is, if we want to. 
People are likely to be more motivated if they are conﬁ dent and if they see  potential 
Web Resource 1.2
communication 
competence
the impression that 
communicative behavior 
is both appropriate and 
effective in a given situation.
Just as children learn how to 
behave from their parents, 
so too do they learn to 
communicate. What speciﬁ c 
communication behaviors 
can you identify that you 
learned at home?
© George Simian/CORBIS
What is 
communication 
competence, and 
what can you do 
to achieve it?

16
 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
rewards. Knowledge is important because we must know what is involved in in-
creasing  competence. The more knowledge people have about how to behave in a 
given situation, the more likely they are to be able to develop competence. Skill is 
important because we must know how to act in ways that are consistent with our 
communication knowledge. Skills are goal-oriented actions or action sequences 
that we can master and repeat in appropriate situations. The more skills you have, 
the more likely you are to be able to structure your messages effectively and ap-
propriately.
In addition to motivation, knowledge, and skills, credibility and social ease are 
important components of communication competence. Credibility is a perception 
of a speaker’s knowledge, trustworthiness, and warmth. Listeners are more likely 
to be attentive to and inﬂ uenced by speakers they see as credible. Social ease 
means managing communication apprehension so you do not appear nervous or 
anxious. To be seen as a competent communicator, it is important that you can 
speak in a style that conveys conﬁ dence and poise. Communicators that appear 
apprehensive are not likely to be regarded as competent, despite their motivation 
or knowledge.
Although most people think of public speaking anxiety when they hear the 
term communication apprehension (CA), there are actually four different forms of 
CA. Generally speaking, communication apprehension is “the fear or anxiety as-
sociated with real or anticipated communication with others” (McCroskey, 1977, 
p. 78). The four speciﬁ c types are traitlike CA, audience-based CA, situational CA, 
and context-based CA. If you experience traitlike communication apprehension, 
you feel anxious in most speaking situations. About 20 percent of all people expe-
rience traitlike CA (Richmond and McCroskey, 2000). If you experience audience-
based communication apprehension, you feel anxious about speaking only with a 
certain person or group of people. Situational communication apprehension is a 
short-lived feeling of anxiety that occurs during a speciﬁ c encounter, for example, 
during a job interview. Finally, context-based communication apprehension is anxi-
ety only in a particular situation, for example, when speaking to a large group of 
people. All these forms of communication anxiety can be managed effectively in 
ways that help you convey social ease when communicating with others. Through-
out this book, we will offer strategies for managing communication apprehension 
in various settings.
The combination of our motivation, knowledge, skills, credibility, and social ease 
leads us to perform effectively in our encounters with others. The rest of this book is 
aimed at helping you increase the likelihood that you will be perceived as competent. 
In the pages that follow, you will learn about theories of interpersonal, group, and 
public speaking that can increase your knowledge and your motivation. You will also 
learn how to perform speciﬁ c skills, and you will be provided with opportunities to 
practice them. Through this practice, you can increase the likelihood that you will be 
able to perform these skills when needed.
credibility
a perception of a speaker’s 
knowledge, trustworthiness, 
and warmth.
social ease
communicating without 
appearing to be anxious or 
nervous.
communication 
apprehension
fear or anxiety associated 
with real or anticipated 
communication with others.
What is 
communication 
apprehension 
and what can you 
do to manage it 
effectively?
Peanuts: © United Feature Syndicate, Inc.

17
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
Introduce a Classmate
The Assignment
Following your instructor’s directions, partner with someone in the class. 
Spend some time talking with this person, getting to know him or her, so 
that next class period you can give a short 2-minute speech introducing 
your partner to the rest of the class.
Questions to Ask
 1. What is your background? (Where were you born and raised? What 
is the makeup of your family? What else do you want to share about 
your personal background?)
 2. What are you majoring in and why?
 3. What are some of your personal and professional goals after 
college?
 4. What are two personal goals you have for this class and why?
 5. What is something unique about you that most people probably 
don’t know?
Speeches of Introduction
A speech of introduction is given to acquaint a group with someone they 
have not met. We make short “speeches” of introduction all the time. When 
a friend from high school comes to visit for a weekend, you introduce her 
to your friends. Not only will you tell them her name, but you will probably 
mention other things about her that will make it easy for your friends to talk 
with her. Likewise, a store manager may call the sales associates together 
in order to introduce a new hire. The manager might mention the new 
team member’s previous experience, interests, and other items of infor-
mation that will make it easy for the team to respect, help, and become 
acquainted with the new employee.
Speeches of introduction also often precede formal addresses. The 
goal of the introducer is to establish the credibility of the main speaker 
by letting the audience know the education, background, and expertise 
of the speaker related to the topic of the speech and to build audience 
interest. The introducer usually concludes by identifying the topic or title of 
the address.
Speech to Introduce a Classmate
Because your classmate will not be giving a formal address after you 
 introduce him or her, we suggest you organize your speech as follows:
 1. The introduction: Start with an attention catcher—a statement, 
story, or question tied to something about the speaker that will pique 
 audience curiosity. Then offer a thesis and a preview of main points, 
which can be as simple as “I’m here today to introduce [name of per-
son] to you by sharing something about his personal background, 
personal and professional goals, and something unique about him.”
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet

18
 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
Develop Communication Skills Improvement Goals
To get the most from this course, we suggest that you write personal goals to improve 
speciﬁ c skills in your own interpersonal, group, and public communication repertoire.
Before you can write a goal statement, you must ﬁ rst analyze your current commu-
nication skills repertoire. After you read each chapter and practice the skills described, 
select one or two skills to work on. Then write down your goal statement in four parts.
 1. State the problem. Start by stating a communication problem that you have. For 
example: “Problem: Even though some of my group members in a team-based 
class project have not produced the work they promised, I haven’t spoken up 
because I’m not very good at describing my feelings.”
 2. State the speciﬁ c goal. A goal is speciﬁ c if it is measurable and you know when 
you have achieved it. For example, to deal with the problem stated above, you 
might write: “Goal: To describe my disappointment to other group members about 
their failure to meet deadlines.”
 3. Outline a speciﬁ c procedure for reaching the goal. To develop a plan for reach-
ing your goal, ﬁ rst consult the chapter that covers the skill you wish to hone. Then 
translate the general steps recommended in the chapter to your speciﬁ c situation. For 
example: “Procedure: I will practice the steps of describing feelings. (1) I will iden-
tify the speciﬁ c feeling I am experiencing. (2) I will encode the emotion I am feeling 
accurately. (3) I will include what has triggered the feeling. (4) I will own the feeling 
as mine. (5) I will then put that procedure into operation when I am talking with my 
group members.”
 4. Devise a method of determining when the goal has been reached. A good goal 
is measurable, and the fourth part of your goal-setting effort is to determine your 
minimum requirements for knowing when you have achieved a given goal. For 
example: “Test for Achieving Goal: I will have achieved this goal when I have 
described my disappointment to my group members about missed deadlines.”
At the end of each section, you will be challenged to develop a goal statement 
related to the material presented. Figure 1.2 provides another example of a communi-
cation improvement plan, this one relating to a public speaking problem.
 2. The body: Group the information you plan to share under two to four 
main points. For example, your ﬁ rst main point might be “personal back-
ground,” your second main point “personal and professional goals,” 
and your third main point “something unique.” Then offer two or three 
examples or stories to illustrate what you learned regarding each main 
point. Create a transition statement to lead from the ﬁ rst main point to 
the second main point, as well as from the second main point to the 
third main point. These statements should remind listeners of the main 
point you are concluding and introduce the upcoming main point. For 
example, “Now that you know a little bit about [name of person]’s per-
sonal background, let’s talk about his personal and professional goals.”
 3. The conclusion: Ideally, in your conclusion, you’ll remind listeners of 
the name of the classmate you introduced and the two to four main 
points you discussed about him or her. Then, end with a clincher—a 
short sentence that wraps the speech up by referring to something 
you said in the speech (usually in the introduction) that will encour-
age listeners to want to know him or her better.

19
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
Figure 1.2
Communication 
improvement plan
Problem: When I speak in class or in the student senate, I often ﬁ nd myself burying 
my head in my notes or looking at the ceiling or walls.
Goal: To look at people more directly when I’m giving a speech.
Procedure: I will take the time to practice oral presentations aloud in my room. 
(1) I will stand up just as I do in class. (2) I will pretend various objects in the room 
are people, and I will consciously attempt to look at those objects as I am  talking. 
(3) When giving a speech, I will try to be aware of when I am looking at my audi-
ence and when I am not.
Test for Achieving Goal: I will have achieved this goal when I am maintaining eye 
contact with my audience most of the time.
A Question of Ethics
Molly has just been accepted at Stanford 
University and calls her friend Terri to tell her 
the good news.
MOLLY: Hi Terri! Guess what? I just got accepted 
to Stanford Law School!
TERRI [Surprised and disappointed]: Oh, cool.
MOLLY: Thanks—you sound so enthusiastic!
TERRI: Oh, I am. Listen, I have to go—I’m late for 
class.
MOLLY: Oh, OK. See you.
The women hang up, and Terri immediately calls 
her friend Monica.
TERRI: Monica, it’s Terri.
MONICA: Hey, Terri. What’s up?
TERRI: I just got some terrible news—Molly got 
into Stanford!
MONICA: So, what’s wrong with that? I think it’s 
great. Aren’t you happy for her?
TERRI: No, not at all. I didn’t get in, and I have 
better grades and a higher LSAT score.
MONICA: Maybe Molly had a better application.
TERRI: Or maybe it was what was on her 
application.
MONICA: What do you mean?
TERRI: You know what I mean. Molly’s black.
MONICA: Yes, and . . . ?
TERRI: Don’t you see? It’s called afﬁ rmative 
action.
MONICA: Terri, give it a rest!
TERRI: Oh, please. You know it, and I know it. She 
only got in because of her race and because 
she’s poor. Her GPA is really low and so is 
her LSAT.
MONICA: Did you ever stop to think that maybe 
she wrote an outstanding essay? Or that they 
thought the time she spent volunteering in 
that free legal clinic in her neighborhood 
was good background?
TERRI: Yes, but we’ve both read some of her 
papers, and we know she can’t write. Listen, 
Monica, if you’re black, Asian, American 
Indian, Latino, or any other minority and 
poor, you’ve got it made. You can be as stu-
pid as Forrest Gump and get into any law 
school you want. It’s just not fair at all.
MONICA [Angrily]: No, you know what isn’t fair? 
I’m sitting here listening to my so-called 
friend insult my intelligence and my ethnic 
background. How dare you tell me that the 
only reason I’ll ever get into a good medical 
school is because I’m Latino. Listen, honey, 
I’ll get into medical school just the same way 
What Would You Do?

20
 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
Summary
We have deﬁ ned communication as the process of creating or sharing meaning, 
whether the setting is informal conversation, group interaction, or public speaking. 
The elements of the communication process are participants, messages, context, chan-
nels, interference (noise), and feedback.
Our communication is guided by at least seven principles. First, communication 
is purposeful. Second, communication is continuous. Third, communication messages 
vary in degree of conscious encoding. Messages may be spontaneous, scripted, or 
constructed. Fourth, communication is relational, deﬁ ning the power and affection 
between people. Fifth, communication is guided by culture. Sixth, communication 
has ethical implications. Ethical standards that inﬂ uence our communication include 
truthfulness, integrity, fairness, respect, and responsibility. And seventh, interpersonal 
communication is learned.
A primary issue in this course is competence—we all strive to become better com-
municators. Competence is the perception by others that our communication behavior is 
appropriate and effective. It involves a desire to improve our communication, increasing 
our knowledge of communication, identifying and attaining goals, being able to use 
various skills, and presenting ourselves as credible and conﬁ dent communicators. Skills 
can be learned, developed, and improved, and you can enhance your learning this term 
by writing goal statements to systematically improve your own skill repertoire.
that Molly got into law school—because of my 
brains, my accomplishments, and my ethical 
standards. And based on this conversation, it’s 
clear that Molly and I are way ahead of you.
Describe how well each of these women followed 
the ethical standards for communication dis-
cussed in this chapter.
Adapted from “Racism,” a case study posted on the Web site 
of the Ethics Connection, Markkula Center for Applied Ethics, 
Santa Clara University. Retrieved from http://www.scu.edu/
ethics/practicing/focusareas/education/racism.html.  Used 
with permission.
Now that you have read Chapter 1, use your 
Premium Web site for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
Communicate! Active Online Learning

21
 
Chapter 1  Communication Perspectives 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment in the body of the chapter.
Key Terms
channel (5)
communication (3)
communication apprehension (16)
communication competence (15)
communication setting (8)
constructed messages (11)
context (4)
control (11)
credibility (16)
cultural context (5)
culture (12)
decoding (3)
encoding (3)
ethical dilemma (14)
ethics (14)
feedback (7)
historical context (4)
immediacy (11)
interference (noise) (5)
internal noise (6)
interpersonal communication (9)
intrapersonal communication (8)
meanings (3)
messages (3)
participants (3)
physical context (4)
physical interference (5)
psychological context (5)
psychological interference (6)
public communication (9)
scripted messages (11)
semantic noise (7)
social context (4)
social ease (16)
small group communication (9)
spontaneous expressions (11)
symbols (3)
Skill Learning Activities
1.1: Identifying Elements of the Communication 
Process (8)
For the following interaction, identify the contexts, 
participants, channels, message, interference (noise), 
and feedback:
Maria and Damien are meandering through the 
park, talking and drinking bottled water. Damien 
ﬁ nishes his bottle, replaces the lid, and tosses the 
bottle into the bushes at the side of the path. Maria, 
who has been listening to Damien talk, comes to a 
stop, puts her hands on her hips, stares at Damien, 
and says angrily, “I can’t believe what you just did!” 
Damien blushes, averts his gaze, and mumbles, 
“Sorry, I’ll get it—I just wasn’t thinking.” As the ten-
sion drains from Maria’s face, she gives her head a 
playful toss, smiles, and says, “Well, just see that it 
doesn’t happen again.”
 1. Contexts
 a. Physical______________________________
 b. Social________________________________
 c. Historical_____________________________
 d. Psychological__________________________
 2. Participants_______________________________
 3. Channels_________________________________
 4. Message__________________________________
 5. Interference (Noise)________________________
 6. Feedback_________________________________
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Web site 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Chapter 1.
1.2: Communication over the Internet (10)
The Internet has thoroughly revolutionized 
communication over the last 20 years. Consider the 
advantages and disadvantages of communicating 
via the following Internet-based mediums: e-mail, 
newsgroups, Internet chat, social networking sites, 
social messaging services (e.g., Twitter), and blogs. 
Spend some time evaluating these mediums if you 
are not already familiar with them. Enter your 
thoughts into a two-column table, with advantages 
in the ﬁ rst column and disadvantages in the  second. 
Did your analysis produce any discoveries that sur-
prised you?

22
 
Chapter 1 
Communication Perspectives
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the table provided in your Premium Web site for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Chapter 1.
1.3: Communication Functions (10)
Keep a log of the various communications you 
have today. Tonight, categorize each episode by one 
of the ﬁ ve functions it served. Each episode may 
serve more than one function. Were you surprised 
by the variety of your communication in such a rela-
tively short period?
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the log sheet provided in your Premium Web site for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Chapter 1.
Web Resources
1.1: Proﬁ le of Foreign-Born Population (12)
Read more about the U.S. foreign-born popu-
lation at the U.S. Census Bureau Web site. This site 
provides reports, data tables, and other information 
about people living in the United States who were not 
U.S. citizens at birth.
1.2: Ethics Connection (15)
Learn more about ethics at the Markkula Center for 
Applied Ethics at Santa Clara University, a forum for 
research and discussion on ethical issues in American 
life. The Center’s site features information about ethics 
in business, health care and biotechnology, education, 
government and public policy, and technology.

Perception of Self and Others
Questions you’ll be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• How does the perception process work?
• What is a self-concept, and how is it formed and maintained?
• What is self-esteem, and how is it developed and maintained?
• How might culture or gender inﬂ uence our perceptions of self?
• How can our perceptions of self change?
• How can our perceptions of self become distorted?
• How do perceptions of self affect our communication with others?
• What inﬂ uences our perceptions of others?
• What can we do to improve the accuracy of our perceptions of others?
As Dwayne and Miguel leave their Spanish literature class on the ﬁ rst day of the 
semester, Dwayne comments: “I give up! This course is going to be impossible—I 
don’t want to take it.”
“Really?” replies Miguel. “I thought the course sounded interesting. The 
professor was funny, and I really liked how we could choose our own paper 
topic.”
“But did you see what we’re reading?” asks Dwayne. “We’ve got four books to 
read—with a test over each book, and then we’re supposed to write a paper!”
“But the books look pretty interesting,” replies Miguel. “They’re novels and 
some even have movies based on them. And because the professor seems to 
know what he’s talking about—I mean he was born and educated in Spain—he’ll 
probably be able to tell us a lot about Spain.”
2
Hristo Shindov(RM)/Jupiter Images

24
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
“Right,” says Dwayne, “but I’m taking four other courses that look pretty tough. 
I like Spanish, but four books and a paper!”
Have you had this kind of disagreement with a friend after a ﬁ rst day of class? How 
do we come to have different takes on the same event? As we analyze this con-
versation, we can see that Dwayne focuses on the time requirements and workload 
in the class whereas Miguel focuses on what he can learn. They attended the same 
class but carried away different perceptions. Because much of the meaning we share 
with others is based on our perceptions, this chapter begins with a discussion of 
the perception process before moving into perceptions of self, perceptions of oth-
ers, and how these perceptions inﬂ uence and are inﬂ uenced by our communication 
with others. We end by offering suggestions for improving the accuracy of your 
perceptions.
The Perception Process
Perception is the process of selectively attending to information and assigning mean-
ing to it (Gibson, 1966). At times, our perceptions of the world, other people, and 
ourselves agree with the perceptions of others. At other times, our perceptions are sig-
niﬁ cantly different from the perceptions of other people. For each person, perception 
becomes reality. What one person sees, hears, and interprets is real and considered true 
to that person. Another person who may see, hear, and interpret something entirely 
different from the same situation will regard that different perception as real and 
true. When your perceptions are different from those with whom you interact, sharing 
meaning becomes more challenging. So how does perception work? Essentially, your 
brain selects some of the information it receives from your senses (sensory stimuli), 
organizes the information, and then interprets it.
Attention and Selection
Although we are subject to a constant barrage of sensory stimuli, we focus 
attention on relatively little of it. To help clarify, consider how many televi-
sion channels you watch regularly compared to the number of channels offered. 
Why? Your choices of sensory stimuli depend in part on your needs, interests, and 
expectations.
Needs
We are likely to pay attention to information that meets our biological and psycho-
logical needs. When you go to class, how well you focus on what is being discussed is 
likely to depend on whether you believe the information is relevant to you. Your brain 
communicates intrapersonally by asking such questions as, “Will what I learn here 
help me in school, in the work world, in my personal life?”
Interests
We are likely to pay attention to information that pertains to our interests. For 
instance, you may not even recognize that music is playing in the background until 
you suddenly ﬁ nd yourself listening to some old favorite. Similarly, when you are 
perception
the process of selectively 
attending to information and 
assigning meaning to it.
How does the 
perception process 
work?

25
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
really attracted to a person, you are more likely to pay attention to what that person 
is saying. Likewise, when you get an e-mail from someone you don’t like, don’t recog-
nize, or that appears to be spam, you might simply delete it.
Expectations
Finally, we are likely to see what we expect to see and to miss information that violates 
our expectations. Take a quick look at the phrases in the triangles in Figure 2.1. If you 
have never seen these triangles, you probably read “Paris in the springtime,” “Once in 
a lifetime,” and “Bird in the hand.” But if you re-examine the words, you will see that 
what you perceived was not exactly what is written. Do you now see the repeated words? 
It is easy to miss the repeated word because we don’t expect to see the word repeated.
Organization of Stimuli
Even though our attention and selection process does reduce the number of stimuli 
our brain must process, the number of stimuli we attend to at any one moment is still 
substantial. Our brains arrange these stimuli so that they make sense according to 
organizing principles such as simplicity and pattern.
Simplicity
If the stimuli we attend to are very complex, the brain simpliﬁ es the stimuli into 
some commonly recognized form. Based on a quick look at what someone is wearing, 
how she is standing, and the expression on her face, we may perceive her as a busi-
ness executive, a doctor, or a soccer mom. Similarly, we simplify the verbal messages 
we receive. For example, after an hour-long performance review in which his boss 
described four of Tony’s strengths and two areas for improvement, Tony might say to 
Jerry, his coworker, “Well, I’d better shape up or I’m going to get ﬁ red!”
Pattern
A pattern is a set of characteristics used to differentiate some things from others. For 
example, when you see a crowd of people, instead of perceiving each individual, you 
may focus on a characteristic of sex and “see” men and women, or you may focus on 
age and “see” children, teens, adults, and seniors. In our interactions with others, we 
try to ﬁ nd patterns that help us organize and respond to their behavior. For example, 
each time Jason and Bill encounter Sara, she hurries over to them and begins an ani-
mated conversation. Yet when Jason is alone and runs into Sara, she barely says “Hi.” 
After a while, Jason may detect a pattern to Sara’s behavior. She is warm and friendly 
when Bill is around and not so friendly when Bill is absent. Based on this pattern, 
Jason may construe Sara’s friendly behavior as ﬂ irting with Bill.
pattern
a set of characteristics used to 
differentiate some things from 
others.
Paris 
in the
the springtime
Once
in a
a lifetime
Bird
in the
the hand
Figure 2.1
A sensory test of expectation

26
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
Interpretation of Stimuli
As the brain selects and organizes the information it receives from the senses, it also 
interprets the information by assigning meaning to it. Look at these three sets of num-
bers. What do you make of them?
A. 631 7348
B. 285 37 5632
C. 4632 7364 2596 2174
In each of these sets, your mind looks for clues to give meaning to the numbers. 
Because you use similar patterns of numbers every day, you probably interpret A as a 
telephone number. How about B? A likely interpretation is a Social Security number. 
And C? People who use credit cards may interpret this set as a credit card number.
Our interpretation of others’ behavior in conversation affects how we interact with 
them. If Jason believes that Sara is only interested in Bill, he may not participate in 
conversations that she initiates.
In the remainder of this chapter, we apply this basic information about perception 
to the study of perceptions of self and others as they inﬂ uence and are inﬂ uenced by 
communication.
Perceptions of Self: Self-Concept 
and Self-Esteem
Self-concept and self-esteem are the two perceptions of self that have the greatest 
impact on how we communicate. Self-concept is your self-identity (Baron, Byrne, 
& Brascombe, 2006). It is the mental image that you have about your skills, your 
abilities, your knowledge, your competencies, and your personality. Self-esteem 
is your overall evaluation of your competence and personal worthiness (based on 
Mruk, 1999, p. 26). In this section, we describe how you come to understand who 
you are (self-concept) and how you evaluate yourself (self-esteem). Then we exam-
ine what determines how well these self-perceptions match others’ perceptions of 
you. Finally, we discuss the role self-perceptions play when you communicate with 
others.
Forming and Maintaining a Self-Concept
Our self-concept is essentially our identity, that is, who we think we really are. We develop 
our self-concept based on our experiences and others’ reactions and responses to us.
Personal experiences
One way we form our self-concept is through our interpretation of our personal experi-
ences regarding our skills, abilities, knowledge, competencies, and personality. Positive 
experiences shape our self-concept in positive ways. For example, if you perceive that 
it is easy for you to talk in front of a group of people because you don’t feel anxious 
when doing so, you may conclude that you are a “natural” public speaker.
We place a great deal of emphasis on our ﬁ rst experience with a particular phe-
nomenon, particularly if it is a negative one. For instance, if you get anxious and draw 
a blank while giving a speech for the ﬁ rst time, you may conclude you are a poor 
public speaker. If additional experiences produce similar results, this ﬁ rst perception 
will be strengthened. Even if the ﬁ rst experience is not immediately repeated, you will 
probably need more than one contradictory experience to change the original negative 
perception.
interpret
assigning meaning to 
information. 
self-concept
your self-identity.
self-esteem
your overall evaluation of your 
competence and personal 
worthiness.
What is a self-
concept and how 
is it formed and 
maintained?

27
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
Reactions and responses of others
Our self-concept is also formed and maintained by how others react and respond to us 
(Rayner, 2001, p. 43). Other people’s comments serve to validate, reinforce, or alter our 
perception of who and what we are. For example, if during a trip to Cancun, your best 
friend tells you, “You’re really an excellent planner,” you may decide this comment ﬁ ts 
your image of who you are. Such comments are especially powerful in affecting our self-
concept if we respect the person making the comment. And the power of such comments 
is increased when the praise is immediate rather than delayed (Hattie, 1992, p. 251).
Our self-concept begins to form early in life, and information we receive from 
our families shapes our self-concept (Demo, 1987). One of the major responsibilities 
that family members have is to talk and act in ways that will help develop accurate 
and positive self-concepts in other family members. For example, the mom who says, 
“Roberto, your room looks very neat. You are very organized,” or the brother who 
comments, “Kisha, the $20 you lent to Tomika really helped her out. You are very gen-
erous,” is helping Roberto or Kisha to recognize important parts of their personalities.
Unfortunately, in some families, members do not fulﬁ ll these  responsibilities. 
Sometimes family members do real damage to each other’s self-concepts. Communicating 
blame, name-calling, and repeatedly pointing out another’s  shortcomings are particu-
larly damaging. What are some characteristics of your  self-concept and in what speciﬁ c 
ways did your family members help shape it?
As we interact with others and with the media, we not only develop an under-
standing of who we are, but we also form an ideal self-concept, which is what we 
would like to be. For example, although Jim may know that he is really not naturally 
athletic, in his ideal self-concept he is a jock. So he plays intramural basketball on 
his dorm team, hangs out at the gym, and tries to befriend the university scholarship 
athletes. The Pop Comm! article in this chapter describes how products are marketed in 
order to appeal to our ideal self-concepts.
Skill Learning Activity 2.1
ideal self-concept
what you would like to be
Our family members shape 
our self-concept. Can you 
recall a time when someone 
in your family praised you for 
something you had done? Is 
that something you still consider 
yourself to be good at?
David Young-Wolff/PhotoEdit

28
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
Marketing Self-Concept 
Individuality
In 2005 it was “I am what I am.” In 2007 it was 
“There are two people in everyone.” And in 2008 
it was “Your move.” Recognize the campaigns? 
Each was part of Reebok’s global effort to position 
itself as the brand that “celebrates individuality, 
and supports those who choose to do things their 
way”1 All three campaigns used celebrity endors-
ers—from sports ﬁ gures to hip hop artists—to 
convince young consumers that the number two 
sneaker maker should be their brand.
Using celebrities to endorse a product is 
nothing new. For years advertisers have used 
celebrities because they know that doing so 
is effective at persuading us to buy a product. 
Research has found that when we see the celeb-
rity as being “like us” or like how we would like 
to believe we are, we listen and are persuaded. In 
other words, when the celebrity’s image ﬁ ts our 
self-concept or our ideal self-concept, then we 
will choose the same product that the celebrity is 
using.2 So world-class sports ﬁ gures, musicians, 
and other pop culture icons appear in commer-
cials in order to sell the product to those of us 
who identify with the celebrity.
Recently, marketers have expanded this 
approach by paying celebrities to be seen in pub-
lic wearing or using their products. If we think we 
are savvy and not susceptible to overt advertise-
ments, we may be persuaded by seeing a celebrity 
with whom we identify using particular product 
in a situation that appears more real. Tiger Woods 
usually wears clothes with Nike’s logo. But he 
doesn’t buy those clothes; they are given to him 
and he has to wear them as part of his multi-
million-dollar endorsement contract with Nike. 
Nevertheless, today countless young men and 
women sport attire adorned with the distinctive 
“swoosh” label of Nike.
What makes the Reebok campaigns differ-
ent, however, is that the ads suggest that people 
wear a Reebok product not because they identify 
with the celebrity but because they are assert-
ing their individuality. In a telephone interview 
with USA Today, tennis star Andy Roddick, who 
appeared in Reebok’s 2005 “I am what I am” 
commercials, explained, “Every other sport-
ing goods commercial is about buying the shoe 
to become something you’re not. This is about 
being yourself.”3 In the same article, rap artist 50 
Cent, another celebrity featured in this campaign, 
said, “The experiences I have been through in my 
life have shaped my character. The Reebok ads 
are just another opportunity for me to express 
myself. Love it or hate it, I am what I am.”4
The “I am what I am” campaign depicted celeb-
rities’ comfort with their self-images and called on 
consumers to be comfortable with who they are. 
In contrast, the “There are two people in every-
one” campaign was designed to convince people 
to embrace their individuality in all of its diversity. 
Pop Comm!
Developing and Maintaining Self-Esteem
You’ll recall that our self-esteem is our positive or negative evaluation of our self-
concept. Our self-esteem is rooted in our values and develops over time as a result of 
our experiences. Self-esteem is not just how well or poorly we do things (self-concept) 
but also the importance or value we place on what we do well or poorly (Mruk, 1999, 
p. 27). For instance, Chad believes he is good with kids (self-concept). But if he doesn’t 
believe that nurturing children is a valuable attribute for a man to have, then this 
characteristic is unlikely to help him have positive self-esteem and may even hurt his 

29
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
self-esteem. High self-esteem requires both the perception of having a characteristic 
and a belief that the characteristic is valuable. Our self-esteem can affect the types 
of relationships that we form and who we form them with. For example, research 
has shown that a person who has high self-esteem is more likely to be committed 
to a partner who perceives him or her very favorably, whereas a person with low 
self-esteem is more likely to be committed to a partner who perceives him or her less 
favorably (Leary, 2002, p. 130). In both cases, the individual ﬁ nds a partner who rein-
forces their own self-perceptions, but the low self-esteem person ends up reinforcing 
a negative self-image.
Print, video, and Web-based ads showcased two 
distinctively different sides of the celebrity endors-
er’s personality. Basketball superstar Yao Ming is 
also an avid conservationist, and NBA star Allen 
Iverson is a working dad. Not only did the cam-
paign use the typical advertising media, but it also 
included a Web site (www.2ineveryone.com) where 
visitors could view the videos of the celebrities 
and interact by identifying the two people inside 
of them: “Each one of us is made up of different 
ideas, passions, and interests. We believe it’s time 
to stop glorifying extremes. We don’t need to be 
deﬁ ned by one thing. We’re free to embrace the 
2 people inside of us. So tell us, what 2 are you?” 
This campaign’s message is “Wear Reebok prod-
ucts and embrace your duality.”
Reebok’s 2008 campaign, “Your move,” 
shows celebrities doing what they do best and 
challenges people to live in ways that are true to 
themselves. In the words of one ad:
So what will it be? All play or have to work for it? Fame? 
Fortune? The love of the game or maybe a little slice of both? 
It’s time to exercise your free will. Do you break records or 
make them? Play to win or for the hell of it? Whisper? Scream 
your face off? Or let actions speak louder than words? . . . The 
only thing you need to ﬁ t into is your own skin. . . . The ball, as 
they say, is in your court . . . . So what will it be? “Just doing it” 
because someone else said so or living life according to your 
own rulebook? Your move.5
Again, the ads used celebrities showing what 
they do best and then inviting consumers to make 
“Your move.”
Although the success of most celebrity 
endorsements depends on consumers identify-
ing with some aspect of the celebrity’s image, 
Reebok is positioning its celebrity marketing 
on “celebrating the distinct qualities that make 
people who they are—their unique points of 
view, their individual style, and their remark-
able talents and accomplishments.”6 So when 
you wear Reebok products, you’re not saying 
that you think you’re like Allen Iverson or Yao 
Ming. Instead, you’re saying that, like Allen or 
Yao, “I am what I am.” An interesting way to sell 
shoes, don’t you think?
1Reebok (n.d.). Reebok Marketing. Retrieved from http://
corporate.reebok.com/en/about_reebok/faq_section
/marketing/default.asp
2See, for example, Onkvisit, S., & Shaw, J. (1987). Self-concept 
and image congruence: Some research and managerial 
implications. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 4(1), 13–23; 
Solomon, M., Bamossy, G., & Askegaard, S. (2002). Con-
sumer Behaviour: A European Perspective (2nd ed.). Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Financial Times.
3McCarthy. 
M. 
(2005) 
New 
theme 
for 
Reebok. 
USATODAY.com. Retrieved from http://usatoday.com
/money/advertising/2005-02-09-reebok-usat_x.htm
4Ibid.
5Reebok (n.d.). Reebok Your Move campaign. YouTube. 
Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com
/watch?v = IK_5TwmvuWo
6Reebok. (n.d.). Reebok’s positioning. About Reebok. 
 Retrieved from http://corporate.reebok.com/en/about
_reebok/default.asp
Why is self-esteem 
important to 
communication?

30
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
The Inﬂ uence of Gender and Culture on Self-Perceptions
A person’s culture has a strong inﬂ uence on the self-perception process (Samovar, 
Porter, & McDaniel, 2009). In individualistic cultures, such as the United States, 
people stress the self and personal achievement. In individualistic cultures, people 
care about self-concept, self-esteem, and self-image. In fact, all the information 
thus far in this chapter reﬂ ects an individualistic perspective of perception, self-
concept, and self-esteem. In an individualistic culture, you tend to think ﬁ rst of 
what is best for yourself when making a decision, such as taking a new job. You 
might move far away from family for the job. At work, we want to be paid, judged, 
and promoted based on our own work rather than how the group is performing. 
In collectivist cultures, such as China, groups and social norms tend to be more 
important than individuals. People are expected to be interdependent and to see 
themselves in terms of the group. Notions of self-concept and self-esteem have 
little meaning in collectivist cultures. In a collectivist culture, your decision about 
taking a new job would likely be made collectively by your family. Your salary, 
performance evaluations, and promotions would naturally be based on how well 
the entire group, team, or department was functioning. We should note, however, 
that these generalizations are not absolutes. As more people raised in individualistic 
cultures and in collectivist cultures live and work together, a blending of values is 
beginning to emerge.
Similarly, generally speaking, men and women may be socialized to view them-
selves differently and to value who they are based on whether their characteristics 
or behaviors correspond to or chal-
lenge the characteristics or behaviors 
expected of their sex in their culture. 
There are norms of what it means to 
be “feminine” and what it means to be 
“masculine” in any culture. The cultural 
expectations for your gender inevitably 
inﬂ uence your self-perceptions. In the 
past, boys in the United States were 
taught to base their self-esteem on their 
achievements, status, and income, and 
girls learned that their culture valued 
their appearance and their relationship 
skills, so boys and girls formed their 
self-perceptions based on how well 
they met these  criteria (Wood, 2007).
Today in the United States these 
deﬁ nitions of “appropriate” charac-
teristics and behaviors for males and 
females are becoming less rigid, but 
they do still exist and are promoted 
incessantly in popular culture. Consider 
television sitcoms like Two and a Half 
Men, Everybody Loves Raymond, and According to Jim, for example. Such programs 
continue to portray women as the “natural” caregivers for the family, and when men 
attempt a caregiver behavior, they make a mess of the situation. Think about your fam-
ily experiences growing up. How do they compare? Similarly, in terms of appearance, 
you only need to ﬂ ip through the pages of any fashion magazine to see the narrowly 
deﬁ ned perception of “beauty” for women. If you read Christy Haubegger’s story, “I’m 
Can you think of a television 
program that depicts men 
rather than women as the 
caregivers?
How might culture 
or gender inﬂ uence 
our perception of 
self?
Web Resource 2.1
CBS /Landov

31
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
Not Fat, I’m Latina,” in the Diverse Voices feature, you’ll learn about her reaction to 
cultural perceptions about appearance.
Changing Self-Perceptions
Self-concept and self-esteem are enduring characteristics, but they can be changed. At 
times, comments that contradict your current self-perception lead you to slowly change 
it. Certain situations seem to expedite this process, for example, when you experience 
a profound change in your social environment. When children begin school or go to 
sleep-away camp; when teens start part-time jobs; when young adults go to college; 
or when people begin or end jobs or relationships, become parents, or grieve the loss 
of someone they love, they are more likely to absorb messages that are at odds with 
their current self-perceptions.
Therapy and self-help techniques can assist us when we want to alter our self-concept 
and improve our self-esteem. In his analysis of numerous research studies, Christopher 
Mruk (1999) found that self-esteem is increased through “hard work and practice, prac-
tice, practice—there is simply no escaping this basic existential fact” (p. 112).
So why is this important to communication? Because our self-esteem affects with 
whom we choose to form relationships, how we interact with them, how we participate 
when we are in small groups, and how comfortable we feel when we are called on to 
present a speech. Essentially, improving your perception of self will improve how you 
interact with others and improving how you interact with others will improve your 
self-perception.
Accuracy and Distortion of Self-Perceptions
The accuracy of our self-concept and self-esteem depends on the accuracy of our 
own perceptions and how we process others’ perceptions of us. All of us experi-
ence success and failure, and all of us hear praise and criticism. If we are overly 
attentive to successful experiences and positive responses, our self-concept and 
self-esteem may become inﬂ ated. If you’ve seen the Disney classic Beauty and the 
Beast, Gaston is a prime example of one with an inﬂ ated perception of self. We tend 
to describe such individuals as “arrogant,” “pompous,” “haughty,” or “snobbish.” 
Who have you known that you might describe in this way? Do you enjoy interact-
ing with them? Conversely, if we perceive and dwell on failures and give little value 
to our successes, or if we only remember the criticism we receive, our self-concept 
and our self-esteem may be deﬂ ated. Winnie the Pooh’s friend Eeyore, the donkey, 
who is always “having a bad day,” is an example of one with a deﬂ ated sense of 
self. We tend to describe such individuals as “depressed,” “despondent,” “sullen,” 
or “gloomy.” Who have you known that you might describe in this way? Do you 
enjoy interacting with them? In neither case does their self-concept or self-esteem 
accurately reﬂ ect who they are.
Incongruence, the gap between our inaccurate self-perceptions and reality, is a 
problem because our perceptions of self are more likely than our true abilities to affect 
our behavior (Weiten, 1998, p. 491). For example, Raul may actually possess all the 
skills, abilities, knowledge, competencies, and personality characteristics for effective 
leadership, but if he doesn’t perceive that he has these characteristics, he won’t step 
forward when leadership is needed. Unfortunately, individuals tend to reinforce their 
self-perceptions by behaving in ways that conform to their perceived self-perceptions. 
The inaccuracy of a distorted picture of oneself is magniﬁ ed through self-fulﬁ lling 
prophecies, ﬁ ltering messages, and reliance on media images.
How can our 
perceptions of self 
change?
Web Resource 2.2
How can our 
perceptions of self 
become distorted?
incongruence
the gap between our 
inaccurate self-perceptions 
and reality.

32
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
Self-fulﬁ lling prophecies
A self-fulﬁ lling prophecy is a false perception of a situation or characteristic or skill 
that leads to behaviors that perpetuate that false perception as true (Merton, 1968). 
Self-fulﬁ lling prophesies may be self-created or other-imposed.
Self-created prophecies are predictions you make about yourself. We often talk our-
selves into success or failure. For example, researchers have found that when people expect 
rejection, they are more likely to behave in ways that lead others to reject them (Downey, 
Freitas, Michaelis, & Khouri, 2004, p. 437). So Aaron, who sees himself as unskilled in 
establishing new relationships, says to himself, “I doubt I’ll know anyone at the party—
I’m going to have a miserable time.” Because he fears encountering strangers, he feels 
awkward about introducing himself and, just as he predicted, spends much of his time 
standing around alone thinking about when he can leave. In contrast, Stefan sees himself 
as quite social and able to get to know people easily. As a result, he looks forward to the 
party and, just as he predicted, makes several new acquaintances and enjoys himself.
self-fulﬁ lling prophecy
a false perception of a 
situation or characteristic or 
skill that leads to behaviors 
that perpetuate that false 
perception as true.
Diverse Voices
I’m Not Fat, I’m Latina
by Christy Haubegger
“Beauty is in the eye of the beholder.” But when you 
are a “large” person, whether your size enhances or 
detracts from your own or others’ perceptions of your 
beauty may depend on your cultural group.
I recently read a newspaper article that reported 
that nearly 40 percent of Hispanic and African 
American women are overweight. At least I’m 
in good company. Because according to even 
the most generous height and weight charts 
at the doctor’s office, I’m a good 25 pounds 
overweight. And I’m still looking for the 
panty-hose chart that has me on it (according 
to Hanes, I don’t exist). But I’m happy to report 
that in the Latino community, my community, 
I fit right in.
Latinas in this country live in two worlds. 
People who don’t know us may think we’re fat. 
At home, we’re called bien cuidadas (well cared 
for). I love to go dancing at Cesar’s Latin Palace 
here in the Mission District of San Francisco. At 
this hot all-night salsa club, it’s the curvier bod-
ies like mine that turn heads. I’m the one on the 
dance ﬂ oor all night while some of my thinner 
friends spend more time waiting along the walls. 
Come to think of it, I wouldn’t trade my body for 
any of theirs.
But I didn’t always feel this way. I remember 
being in high school and noticing that none of 
the magazines showed models in bathing suits 
with bodies like mine. Handsome movie heroes 
were never hoping to ﬁ nd a chubby damsel in 
distress. The fact that I had plenty of attention 
from Latino boys wasn’t enough. Real self-esteem 
cannot come from male attention alone.
My turning point came a few years later. 
When I was in college, I made a trip to Mexico, 
and I brought back much more than sterling-sil-
ver bargains and colorful blankets.
I remember hiking through the awesome 
ruins of the Mayan and Aztec civilizations, 
which created pyramids as large as the ones 
in Egypt. I loved walking through the temple 
doorways, whose clearance was only 2 inches 
above my head, and I realized that I must be a 
direct descendant of those ancient priestesses 
for whom those doorways had originally been 
built.
For the ﬁ rst time in my life, I was in a place 
where people like me were the beautiful ones. 

33
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
Self-esteem has an important effect on our self-perception and, thus, on the proph-
ecies we make. For instance, people with low self-esteem attribute their successes to 
luck, and so they prophesy that they will not repeat them whereas people with positive 
self-esteem see their successes as self-created, so they prophesy that they will repeat 
them (Hattie, 1992, p. 253).
The prophecies others make about us also affect our perception of self and behavior. 
For example, when teachers act as if their students are bright, students buy into this expec-
tation and learn more as a result. Likewise, when teachers act as if students are not bright, 
students may “live down” to these imposed prophecies and fail to achieve. A good exam-
ple takes place in the popular book Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. A prophesy 
was made that suggested Harry Potter would vanquish the Dark Lord (Voldemort). So the 
Dark Lord sets out to kill Harry Potter. Dumbledore explains to Harry that the prophecy is 
only true because the Dark Lord believes it. Still, because the Dark Lord will not rest until 
he kills Harry, it becomes inevitable that Harry will, in fact, have to kill Voldemort (or vice 
versa). Have you ever experienced a self-fulﬁ lling prophecy based on what others have 
said? How did that inﬂ uence your self-concept and self-esteem?
And I began to accept, and even like, the 
body that I have.
I know that medical experts say that Latinas 
are twice as likely as the rest of the population to 
be overweight. And yes, I know about the health 
problems that often accompany severe weight 
problems. But most of us are not in the danger 
zone; we’re just bien cuidadas. Even the research-
ers who found that nearly 40 percent of us are 
overweight noted that there is a greater “cultural 
acceptance” of being overweight within Hispanic 
communities. But the article also commented on 
the cultural-acceptance factor as if it were some-
thing unfortunate, because it keeps Hispanic 
women from becoming healthier. I’m not so con-
vinced that we’re the ones with the problem.
If the medical experts were to try to get to 
the root of this so-called problem, they would 
probably ﬁ nd that it’s part genetics, part enchi-
ladas. Whether we’re Cuban American, Mexican 
American, Puerto Rican, or Dominican, food 
is a central part of Hispanic culture. While our 
food varies from fried plantains to tamales, what 
doesn’t change is its role in our lives.
You feed people you care for, and so if you’re 
well cared for, bien cuidada, you have been fed 
well. I remember when I used to be envious of a 
Latina friend of mine who had always been on the 
skinny side. When I conﬁ ded this to her a while 
ago, she laughed. It turns out that when she was
growing up, she had always wanted to look 
more like me. She had trouble getting dates with 
Latinos in high school, the same boys I dated. 
When she was little, the other kids in the neigh-
borhood had even given her a cruel nickname: la 
seca, “the dry one.” I’m glad I never had any of 
those problems.
Our community has always been accepting 
of us well-cared-for women. So why don’t we 
feel beautiful? You only have to ﬂ ip through a 
magazine or watch a movie to realize that beau-
tiful for most of this country still means tall, 
blond, and underfed. But now we know it’s the 
magazines that are wrong. I, for one, am going 
to do what I can to make sure that mis hijas, my 
daughters, won’t feel the way I did.
Reﬂ ective questions
 1. To what degree do you think these percep-
tions of weight for women continue to exist 
in the dominant American culture?
 2. What are some reasons it continues to be the 
norm?
 3. What can we do to embrace a variety of body 
types as beautiful for women?
Reprinted from Christy Haubegger, “I’m Not Fat, I’m Latina,” 
in Readings for Diversity and Social Justice: An Anthology 
on Racism, Anti-Semitism, Sexism, Heterosexism, Ableism, and 
Classism, eds. M. Adams, W. J. Blumenfeld, R. Castañeda, H. W. 
Hackman, M. L. Peters, & X. Zúñiga (New York: Routledge, 
2000), pp. 242–243.

34
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
Filtering messages
A second way that our self-percep-
tions can become distorted is through 
the way we ﬁ lter what others say to 
us. We are prone to pay attention 
to messages that reinforce our cur-
rent self-image, whereas messages 
that contradict this image may not 
“register” or may be downplayed. 
For example, suppose you prepare 
an agenda for your study group. 
Someone comments that you’re a 
good organizer. If you spent your 
childhood hearing how disorganized 
you were, you may not really hear 
this comment, or you may down-
play it. If, however, you think you 
are good at organizing, you will pay 
attention to the compliment and 
may even reinforce it by respond-
ing, “Thanks, I’m a pretty organized 
person. I learned it from my mom.”
Media images
A third way our perceptions of self can become distorted is through verbal and visual 
images we see in the media such as on television, in the movies, and in popular maga-
zines. Social learning theory suggests that we strive to copy the characteristics and 
behaviors of the characters portrayed as perfect examples or “ideal types” (Bandura, 
1977). Persistent media messages of violence, promiscuity, use of profanity, bulked-up 
males, and pencil-thin females have all been linked to distorted perceptions of self 
among viewers. One particularly disturbing study found that before TV was widely 
introduced on the Paciﬁ c Island of Fiji, only 3 percent of girls reported vomiting to 
lose weight or being unhappy with their body image. Three years after the intro-
duction of TV, that percentage had risen to 15 percent, and an alarming 74 percent 
reported being too big or too fat (Becker, 2004). Unfortunately, distorted body image 
perceptions lead to low self-esteem and, sometimes, to self-destructive behaviors such 
as anorexia and bulimia.
The Effects of Self-Perceptions on Communication
Just as our self-concept and self-esteem affect how accurately we perceive ourselves, 
so too do they inﬂ uence our communication by moderating competing internal mes-
sages in our self-talk, inﬂ uencing how we communicate about ourselves with others, 
and affecting communication apprehension.
Self-perceptions moderate how we talk to ourselves.
Self-talk (intrapersonal communication) is the internal conversations we have with 
ourselves. A lot of these conversations are also about ourselves. People who have 
high self-esteem are more likely to engage in positive self-talk, such as “I know I can 
do it” or “I did really well on that test.” People with low self-esteem are more likely 
to overemphasize negative self-talk or, ironically, they may overinﬂ ate their sense of 
self-worth to compensate and tell themselves they are good at everything they do.
How do 
perceptions of 
self affect our 
communication 
with others?
How do media portrayals 
of “ideal” male and female 
ﬁ gures distort self-perception?
self-talk
the internal conversations we 
have with ourselves.
Archives du 7eme Art/Photos 12/Alamy

35
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
Self-perceptions inﬂ uence how we talk about ourselves with others.
If we feel good about ourselves, we are likely to communicate positively. For instance, 
people with a strong self-concept and higher self-esteem usually take credit for their 
successes. Likewise, people with healthy self-perceptions are inclined to defend their 
views even in the face of opposing arguments. If we feel bad about ourselves, we are 
likely to communicate negatively by downplaying our accomplishments.
Why do some people put themselves down regardless of what they have done? 
People who have low self-esteem are likely to be unsure of the value of their contri-
butions and expect others to view them negatively. As a result, people with a poor 
self-concept or low self-esteem may ﬁ nd it less painful to put themselves down than to 
hear the criticism of others. Thus, to preempt the likelihood that others will comment 
on their unworthiness, they do it ﬁ rst.
Self-perceptions affect communication apprehension.
Perhaps one the most unfortunate consequences of a poor self-concept and low self-
esteem is a heightened level of communication apprehension. People who harbor fear 
about speaking with others (whether in one-on-one situations, with certain individuals 
or groups, or in public speaking situations) tend to engage in negative self-talk that 
leads to a self-fulﬁ lling prophesy (Richmond & McCroskey, 1995). Even as a young 
child, Tina was told by friends, family members, and teachers that she was shy. By 
the time she reached adolescence, she feared going to social events because she “knew 
nobody would talk to her” and she feared giving speeches because she “would cer-
tainly fail.” The negative self-talk that leads to communication apprehension can be 
reversed by replacing negative self-talk with positive self-talk.
For more detailed information about how to manage communication appre-
hension, go to your Premium Web site for Communicate!, click on “Chapter Learn 
Lists” in the left-hand menu, select the Chapter 2 resources, and click on “Managing 
Communication Apprehension.”
Presenting Your Self-Concept
The Assignment
On a piece of paper, write down ten terms that describe your self-concept. 
Then create a short poem, rap, cheer, or song using those terms to present 
who you see yourself as. Perform it for the class. The presentation should 
take less than 2 minutes to perform.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
Presenting Self to Others
Your self-concept and self-esteem are the “true” perceptions of what you think of 
yourself. But when we interact with others, most of us mask some of who we really 
think we are so that we can meet or violate others expectations. As a result we cre-
ate different “selves” to present in different situations and with different people. How 
differently you present yourself across different social situations and relationships 
depends on how actively you self-monitor.

36
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
Self-Monitoring
When people are in social situations or relationships, they can feel vulnerable. So they 
analyze and make predications about the situation or relationship and decide how to 
behave. Self-monitoring is an internal process of being aware of yourself and how you 
are coming across to others. It involves being sensitive to other people’s expressions 
and reactions (feedback) and using this information in deciding how to act and what 
roles to play. In other words, it is a process of observing, analyzing, and regulating your 
own behavior in relation to the response of others (Gangestad & Snyder, 2000). Self-
monitoring is an internal thought process, so others probably don’t know that you are 
monitoring and making choices about how to act. Think of the times when you con-
sciously monitored how you were coming across in a situation. If you have ever been in 
an unfamiliar situation and made a ﬂ ip remark that was met with stares or glares, you 
may have said to yourself, “Wow, that was a stupid thing to say! Let, me see if I can ﬁ x 
it.” Then, based on this self-monitoring, you are able to make a repair.
People differ in when and how carefully they self-monitor. Some people are very 
cautious and are always vigilant in monitoring situations and relationships. Other 
people are careful to self-monitor when they perceive themselves to be in a risky or 
new situation, but are less attentive in situations or relationships that they perceive as 
safer. A few people seem unable to self-monitor. As a result, they tend to say and do 
the wrong things because they are not paying attention to how they are coming across. 
You may know someone who seems to always say the wrong thing or act inappropri-
ately. The saying “Think before you speak” is really a call to self-monitor.
We are most likely to self-monitor when we are in a new relationship or an unfa-
miliar situation. Because we are not sure of how to act in an unfamiliar situation, there 
is more uncertainty and more analysis about how to present ourselves. When we are 
communicating in an unfamiliar situation, we may be saying to ourselves things like 
“Why did I make that silly remark? It sounded lame” or “Well, that seemed to go over 
well.” Even in familiar and comfortable situations, skilled communicators do some 
self-monitoring by remaining attentive to the feedback they are receiving from others.
Social Construction of Self
While our self-concept and self-esteem are “true” perceptions that we have of our-
selves, our self-monitoring enables us to decide what role we want to play and what 
persona we want to assume in a certain situation or relationship. As a result, we 
present different personas in response to different situations and relationships, and 
we change ourselves in the process. We socially construct ourselves through the roles 
we enact. A role is a pattern of learned behaviors that we use to meet the perceived 
demands of a particular context. For instance, think of your behavior when enacting 
the role of “sibling” while talking with your sister or brother or the role of “employee” 
at your job. How is what you say and do different in these contexts than when you are 
interacting with your classmates or your professor?
Do you have a MySpace or Facebook page? Think of the time and effort you spent 
creating that “self.” Does it accurately reﬂ ect all of who you are? Or did you pick and 
choose what you would present to those who would view your page? The Internet allows 
you to experiment with a wide variety of roles. Some users experiment with gender and 
age switching or pretend to have a different job. The ethics of intentionally misrepresent-
ing oneself in cyberspace is problematic because the people with whom you interact have 
no way to verify the accuracy of your persona. Nonetheless, many people engage in inten-
tional deception, and child predators are a particular problem. In real life, as in cyberspace, 
we choose what parts of ourselves we allow others to see not only by what we talk about 
self-monitoring
the internal process of 
observing, analyzing, and 
regulating your own behavior 
based on your analysis of 
the situation and others’ 
responses to you.
Skill Learning Activity 2.2
role
a pattern of learned 
behaviors that people use to 
meet the perceived demands 
of a particular context.
Skill Learning Activity 2.3
Web Resource 2.3

37
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
but also by how we behave, and we 
alter who we are to ﬁ t the situation 
and the relationship.
Let’s look at the different 
 personas or selves that Ashley 
enacts over a few days. As a restau-
rant server, Ashley is very polite, 
helpful, agreeable, and attentive to 
others. She does not talk about her-
self much or use profanity. She is 
conﬁ dent, moves quickly, and cares 
about being efﬁ cient and produc-
tive. When Ashley goes out with 
her friends after work, she is more 
casual and less concerned about 
time. She is louder and more bois-
terous, talks about herself more, 
occasionally swears, and gets into 
heated debates of issues and ideas. 
When Ashley visits her grand-
mother, she behaves in a more 
childlike way: She never uses pro-
fanity, is careful to observe social politeness, is careful not to mention topics that may 
offend her grandmother, and listens more than she talks. Online, Ashley may present a 
party-girl image through a personal proﬁ le, photos, and listings of favorite activities, 
or she may assume totally different identities through avatars in multiplayer games. 
Ashley will enact other selves when she is at school, when she babysits her  ﬁ ve-year-old 
niece, when she is on a date, and with her rock-climbing partners. Which is Ashley’s real 
self? They all are because our when she is “self” is created in the interactions we have 
with others. We begin this process at birth and continue it throughout our lives.
Perception of Others
As we encounter new people, or as we experience new situations in our ongoing 
relationships, most of us feel somewhat to profoundly anxious. Questions such as: 
Do we have anything in common? Will others accept and value us? Will we be able 
to get along? How will our partner react to this new situation? etc. can raise our 
anxiety levels and so it is natural that we search for ways to alleviate it. This process 
of monitoring the social environment to learn more about self and others is called 
uncertainty reduction (Littlejohn & Foss, 2007). As people interact, they gain infor-
mation and form impressions of others. For example, when Nicole and Justin meet 
for the ﬁ rst time at a party, they probably pay much attention to how each other 
looks, because that’s the only source of information they have about each other at 
ﬁ rst. Then they ask each other questions about their majors, jobs, hobbies, interests, 
and people they both may know. This small talk helps them gain information in order 
to ﬁ nd things they have in common. The more they learn about each other and ﬁ nd 
commonalities, the less uncertain they are about each other. These perceptions will be 
reinforced, intensiﬁ ed, or changed as their relationship develops. The factors likely to 
inﬂ uence perceptions of others include our observations of their physical characteris-
tics and social behaviors, our interpretation of their messages, our use of stereotyping, 
and our emotional state.
uncertainty reduction
the process of monitoring the 
social environment to learn 
more about self and others.
What inﬂ uences 
our perceptions of 
others?
If you have a Facebook or 
MySpace account, how does 
your proﬁ le picture and status 
information inﬂ uence how 
others might perceive you?
Chris Jackson/Getty Images

38
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
Observing Others
Can you recall being shown a photo of someone you had not met? What impres-
sions did you form on the basis of that photo alone? Recall meeting someone for the 
ﬁ rst time and forming an impression based on how he or she acted in that situation. 
Did your impression change once you got to know that person better? Our initial 
social perceptions or ﬁ rst impressions of others are usually made from our observa-
tions of how they look and act. We often judge people to be friendly, intelligent, or 
“cool” based on how physically attractive we ﬁ nd them (Aronson, 1999, p. 380). And 
these impressions can inﬂ uence how we act toward them. For this reason, women in 
business are advised to wear a suit with pumps or ﬂ ats as a way of increasing the 
likelihood that they will be perceived as credible and move ahead in their ﬁ eld (“How 
to Dress,” 2008).
Likewise, ﬁ rst impressions are also made on the basis of how someone acts. If, on 
the ﬁ rst day of class, a fellow student strikes up conversations with the strangers sit-
ting near him, makes humorous remarks in class, and gives the best self-introduction 
in a class activity, you are likely to form the impression that he is conﬁ dent, extro-
verted, and friendly. Similarly, if you try to strike up a conversation with someone 
at a party, and the person gives short yes-or-no answers to your questions, you may 
perceive the person to be unfriendly and dull.
We make similar judgments about people we meet online. We use the proﬁ le and 
other pictures that people post, as well as the nicknames they use for themselves, the 
personal information they disclose, and the timeliness of their responses to perceive 
what they are like. Today, potential employers can make judgments about job appli-
cants based on impressions gleaned from the applicants’ home pages, proﬁ les, and 
even the e-mail address they provide. For example, an employer may make different 
inferences about the character of an applicant whose e-mail address is realhottie@
hotmail.com than one whose e-mail address is more generic.
Sometimes we make judgments of other people based on implicit personality 
theories (Asch, 1946), which are assumptions about which physical characteris-
tics and personality traits or behaviors are associated with one other (Michener & 
DeLamater, 1999, p. 106). Because your own implicit personality theory connects 
certain traits, you might assume that a person has a whole set of characteristics, 
traits, and behaviors when you have actually observed only one. When you do this, 
your perception is based on the halo effect (Thorndike, 1920). For instance, Heather 
sees Martina personally greeting and welcoming every person who arrives at the 
meeting. According to Heather’s implicit personality theory, this behavior is a sign 
of the characteristic of warmth. She further associates warmth with goodness, and 
goodness with honesty. As a result, she perceives that Martina is good and honest, 
as well as warm.
In reality, Martina may be a con artist who uses her warmth to lure people into 
a false sense of trust. This example demonstrates a “positive halo” (Heather assigned 
Martina positive characteristics), but we also use implicit personality theory to inac-
curately impute negative characteristics. Given limited amounts of information, we ﬁ ll 
in details and come up with a “negative halo.” The tendency to do so leads to another 
factor that inﬂ uences our perception of others, stereotyping.
Using Stereotypes
One perceptual shortcut that we use in forming our initial perceptions of others is ste-
reotyping. A stereotype is “a generalization, usually exaggerated or oversimpliﬁ ed and 
often offensive, used to describe or distinguish a group” ( “Stereotype,” 2005). Because 
implicit personality theories
assumptions about which 
physical characteristics and 
personality traits or behaviors 
are associated with one 
another.
halo effect
to generalize and perceive 
that a person has a whole 
set of characteristics when 
you have actually observed 
only one characteristic, trait, or 
behavior.
stereotypes
generalizations, usually 
exaggerated or oversimpliﬁ ed 
and often offensive, use to 
describe or distinguish a 
group.

39
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
it is human nature to name, label, and organize in order to make sense of the stimuli 
we encounter, we develop generalized perceptions about groups we come in contact 
with personally or learn about through media portrayals. Subsequently, any number 
of perceptual cues—skin color, style of dress, a religious medal, gray hair, a loud voice, 
an expensive car, and so on—can lead us to apply the characteristics associated with 
a stereotype. A professor may see a student’s purple spiked hair and numerous tat-
toos and assume the student is a rebel who will defy authority, slack off on classroom 
assignments, and seek attention. In reality, this person may be a polite, quiet, serious 
honor student who aspires to graduate school. According to B. J. Hall (2002), we don’t 
form most of the stereotypes we use from our personal experience. Instead we learn 
them from family, friends, coworkers, and media. So we adopt stereotypes before we 
have any personal proof. And because stereotypes guide what we perceive, they can 
lead us to attend to information that conﬁ rms them and to overlook information that 
contradicts them.
Unfortunately, stereotyping can lead to prejudice and discrimination. According to 
Hall (2002), prejudice is “a rigid attitude that is based on group membership and pre-
disposes an individual to feel, think, or act in a negative way toward another person or 
group” (p. 208). Notice the distinction between a stereotype and a prejudice. Whereas 
a stereotype is a set of beliefs or expectations, a prejudice is a positive or negative 
attitude about them; both relate to group membership. Stereotypes and prejudice are 
cognitive—that is, things we think.
Discrimination goes a step fur-
ther in that it involves a negative 
action toward a social group or its 
members based on a stereotype and 
prejudice (Jones, 2002, p. 8). For 
instance, when Ben discovers that 
he has been paired with Bobby Jo, 
a cheerleader, for a class project, he 
might stereotype her as a ditz who 
is not too concerned about grades. If 
he acts on his prejudice, he may dis-
criminate against her by refusing to 
partner with her. So, without having 
gotten to know Bobby Jo, Ben uses 
her stereotype to prejudge her and 
discriminate. Bobby Jo may never 
get the chance to be known for who 
she really is, and Ben may have lost 
an opportunity to get to work with 
the best student in class. The movie 
Legally Blonde enacts this form of 
prejudice and discrimination.
Emotional State
A ﬁ nal factor that affects how accurately we perceive others is our emotional state 
at the time of the interaction (Forgas, 1991). For example, if you meet Carol for the 
ﬁ rst time after you have just received the good news that you got the internship you 
applied for, your good mood is likely to spill over so that you perceive her more posi-
tively than you might under different circumstances. If, however, you just learned that 
prejudice
a rigid attitude that is based 
on group membership and 
predisposes an individual to 
feel, think, or act in a negative 
way toward another person 
or group.
discrimination
a negative action toward a 
social group or its members 
on account of group 
membership.
Skill Learning Activity 2.4
Web Resource 2.4
What is the relationship 
between these colleagues? 
How did stereotyping 
inﬂ uence your perception?
G. Baden/zefa Value/Corbis

40
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
your car needs $1,500 in repairs, your perception of her might be inﬂ uenced by your 
negative mood and anxiety about paying the bill.
Our emotions also cause us to engage in selective perceptions, so that we “see” 
data that supports our previous knowledge and we ignore inconsistent information. 
For instance, if Nick is physically attracted to Jessica, he is likely to focus on the posi-
tive aspects of Jessica’s personality and may overlook or ignore the negative ones that 
are apparent to others.
Our emotional state also affects our attributions (Forgas, 2000). Attributions are 
reasons we give for others’ behavior (Heider, 1958). According to attribution theory, 
what we determine—rightly or wrongly—to be the causes of others’ behavior has a 
direct impact on our perceptions of them. For instance, suppose a coworker with whom 
you had made a noon lunch date has not arrived by 12:20 p.m. If you like and respect 
your coworker, you may attribute his lateness to something out of his control: an 
important phone call at the last minute, the need to ﬁ nish a job before lunch, or some 
accident that may have occurred. If you are not particularly fond of your coworker, 
you are more likely to attribute his lateness to something in his control: forgetfulness, 
inconsiderateness, or malicious intent. In either case, your attribution will affect your 
perception of him and probably how you treat him.
Like prejudices, the attributions we make can be so strong that we ignore contrary 
evidence. If you are not particularly close to your coworker, when he ﬁ nally arrives 
and explains that he had an emergency long-distance phone call, you may believe he 
is lying.
Perceiving Others’ Messages
Our observations of others and our emotional state certainly affect how we perceive 
others. Not only that, they also tend to inﬂ uence how we perceive the messages others 
send to us. Two additional factors that inﬂ uence how we perceive others’ messages are 
context and shared language.
First, we interpret the content and intent of the speaker based on the context. 
For example, at a family dinner Jeorge’s dad, who dislikes conﬂ ict, sought to dis-
tract family members from a quarrel between two aunts by looking up at the crystal 
chandelier hanging above the table and asking, “How do you suppose they clean 
that chandelier?” Because the aunts were aware that Jeorge’s dad hated conﬂ ict, they 
immediately understood “the message” and stopped arguing. Thereafter, regardless 
of the situation, when anyone in the family wanted to avoid a brewing conﬂ ict, they 
would simply say, “How about that chandelier?” and the potential conﬂ ict would 
usually be diffused. Obviously, people who had not been present at the initial dinner 
would not have understood the historical context of this message and would likely 
be confused by it.
The better we know someone, the more likely we are to share an understanding of 
the context in which our messages are sent and received. When we don’t know some-
one well or when we are speaking with several people or a large audience, there are 
expanded opportunities for messages to be perceived differently.
Second, even when both participants speak the same language, they might not 
enjoy a “shared language” in terms of how each one perceives speciﬁ c words, visual 
images, and nonverbal cues. To clarify, the sender might use a word with which the 
receiver is unfamiliar, ambiguously use a word that has multiple meanings, misuse a 
symbol, or use a personal and idiosyncratic deﬁ nition of a word. When Justin tells his 
wife that he’s “going out with the guys for an hour or so,” she may expect him home 
in 60–90 minutes. When he shows up ﬁ ve hours later, she might be upset. Justin may 
attributions
reasons we give for others’ 
behavior.

41
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
have ﬁ gured that “or so” would cover any additional time he was away, but his wife 
may have viewed it as something less than two hours. Although the message was sent 
in a language that both “understood,” they did not share meaning because they per-
ceived the message to mean different lengths of time.
Understanding how observations and emotional states, as well as context and 
shared language affect our perceptions of others and the messages they send is a ﬁ rst 
step in improving your perceptual accuracy. Now we’ll describe four guidelines and a 
communication skill you can use to improve the accuracy of your perceptions of oth-
ers and the messages they send.
Improving the Accuracy of Social Perceptions
Because distortions in our perception of others and their messages are common and 
because they inﬂ uence how we communicate, improving perceptual accuracy is an 
important ﬁ rst step in becoming a competent communicator. The following guidelines 
can aid you in constructing accurate impressions of others and in assessing your per-
ceptions of others’ messages.
 1. Question the accuracy of your perceptions. Questioning accuracy begins by say-
ing, “I know what I think I saw, heard, tasted, smelled, or felt, but I could be 
wrong. What other information should I be aware of?” By accepting the possibil-
ity that you have overlooked something, you will become interested in increasing 
your accuracy.
 2. Seek more information to verify perceptions. If your perception is based on only 
one or two pieces of information, try to collect additional information so that your 
perceptions are better grounded. Note that your perception is tentative—that is, 
subject to change.
   
The best way to get additional information about people is to talk with them. 
It’s OK to be unsure about how to treat someone from another group. But rather 
than letting your uncertainty cause you to make mistakes, talk with the person 
and ask for the information you need to become more comfortable.
 3. Realize that your perceptions of a person will change over time. People often 
base their behavior on perceptions that are old or based on incomplete infor-
mation. So when you encounter someone you haven’t seen for a while, you will 
want to become reacquainted and let the person’s current behavior rather than 
their past actions or reputation inform your perceptions. A former classmate 
who was wild in high school may well have changed and become a mature, 
responsible adult.
 4. Use the skill of perception checking. One way to assess the accuracy of a per-
ception is to verbalize it and see whether others agree with what you see, hear, 
and interpret. A perception check is a message that reﬂ ects your understand-
ing of the meaning of another person’s nonverbal behavior. It is a process of 
describing what you have seen and heard and then asking for feedback from 
the other person. Perception checking calls for you to (1) watch the behavior 
of the other person, (2) ask yourself “What does that behavior mean to me?” 
and (3) describe the behavior and put your interpretation into words to verify 
your perception.
The following examples illustrate the use of perception checking. In each of the 
examples, the ﬁ nal sentence is a perception check. Notice that the perception-checking 
statements do not express approval or disapproval of what is being received—they are 
purely descriptive statements of the perceptions.
What can we do 
to improve the 
accuracy of our 
perceptions of 
others?
perception check
a message that reﬂ ects 
your understanding of the 
meaning of another person’s 
nonverbal behavior.

42
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
Valerie walks into the room with a completely blank expression. She does not 
speak to Ann or even acknowledge that Ann is in the room. Valerie sits down on 
the edge of the bed and stares into space. Ann says, “Valerie, did something hap-
pen? You look like you’re in a state of shock. Am I right? Is there something I can 
do?”
While Marsha is telling Jenny about the difﬁ culty of her midterm exam in 
chemistry class, she notices Jenny smiling. She says to Jenny, “You’re smiling. 
I’m not sure how to interpret it. What’s up?” Jenny may respond that she’s 
smiling because the story reminded her of something funny or because she had 
the same chemistry teacher last year and he purposely gave an extremely dif-
ﬁ cult midterm to motivate students, but then he graded them on a favorable 
curve.
Cesar, the shift foreman, speaking in short, precise sentences with a sharp 
tone of voice, gives Bill his day’s work assignment. Bill says, “From the sound of 
your voice, Cesar, I get the impression that you’re upset with me. Are you?”
So when we use the skill of perception checking, we encode the meaning that we 
have perceived from someone’s behavior and feed it back so that it can be veriﬁ ed or 
corrected. For instance, when Bill says, “I can’t help but get the impression that you’re 
upset with me. Are you?” Cesar may say: (1) “No, whatever gave you that impression?” 
in which case Bill can further describe the cues that he received; (2) “Yes, I am,” in 
which case Bill can get Cesar to specify what has caused the feelings; or (3) “No, it’s 
not you, it’s just that three of my team members didn’t show up for this shift.” If Cesar 
is not upset with him, Bill can examine what caused him to misinterpret Cesar’s feel-
ings; if Cesar is upset with him, Bill has the opportunity to change the behavior that 
caused Cesar to be upset.
Skill
Making a verbal 
statement that reﬂ ects 
your understanding 
of another person’s 
behavior.
Use
To enable you to test 
the accuracy of your 
perceptions.
Procedure
1. 
Describe the 
behaviors of the 
other person that 
have led to your 
perception.
2. 
Add your inter-
pretation of the 
behavior to your 
statement.
Example
After taking a phone 
call, Shimika comes 
into the room with 
a completely blank 
expression and nei-
ther speaks to Donnell 
nor acknowledges 
that he is in the room. 
Donnell says, “Shimika, 
from your blank look, 
I get the feeling that 
you’re in a state of 
shock. Has something 
happened?”
Communication Skill
Perception Checking
Skill Learning Activity 2.5

43
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
For each of the following situations, write a well-
phrased perception check.
 1. When Franco comes home from the doc-
tor’s ofﬁ ce, you notice that he looks pale 
and his shoulders are slumped. Glancing at 
you with a sad look, he shrugs his shoulders.
 
 You say:
 2. As you return the basketball you borrowed 
from Liam, you smile and say, “Thanks, here’s 
your ball.” You notice Liam stiffen, grab the 
ball, and, turning abruptly, walk away.
 
 You say:
 3. Natalie, who has been waiting to hear 
about a scholarship, dances into the room 
with a huge grin on her face.
 
 You say:
 4. You see your adviser in the hall and ask her 
if she can meet with you on Wednesday 
afternoon to discuss your schedule of 
classes for next term. You notice that she 
pauses, frowns, sighs, turns slowly, and says, 
“I guess so.”
 
 You say:
Compare your written responses to the guide-
lines for effective perception checking discussed 
earlier. Edit your responses where necessary to 
improve them. Now say them aloud. Do they 
sound “natural”? If not, revise them until they do.
Skill Learning Activity 2.6
Skill Building
Perception Checking
A Question of Ethics
UniConCo, a multinational construction com-
pany, successfully bid to build a new minor league 
stadium in a Midwestern city that had very little 
diversity. Miguel Hernandez was assigned to be 
the assistant project manager, and he moved his 
family of seven to town. He quickly joined the 
local chamber of commerce, afﬁ liated with the 
local Rotary group, and was feeling the ﬁ rst signs 
of acceptance. One day Mr. Hernandez was work-
ing at his desk when he accidentally overheard a 
group of local Anglo construction workers who 
were on the project talking about their Mexican 
American coworkers. Hernandez was discouraged 
to hear the negative stereotypes that were being 
used. The degree of hatred expressed was clearly 
beyond what he was used to, and he was further 
upset when he recognized several of the voices as 
belonging to men he had fought to hire.
A bit shaken, Hernandez returned to his 
ofﬁ ce. He had a problem. He recognized his 
workers’ prejudices, but he wasn’t sure how to 
change them. Moreover, he wanted to establish 
good work relationships with his Anglo workers 
for the sake of the company, but he also wanted 
to create a good working atmosphere for the 
other Latino workers who would soon be moving 
to town to work on the project. What could Mr. 
Hernandez do?
Devise a plan for Mr. Hernandez. How could 
he use his social perceptions to address the prob-
lem in a way that is within ethical interpersonal 
communication guidelines?
What Would You Do?

44
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
Summary
Perception is the process of selectively attending to information and assigning 
meaning to it. Our perceptions are a result of our selection, organization, and 
interpretation of sensory information. Self-concept is our self-identity, the idea 
or mental image that we have about our skills, abilities, knowledge, competen-
cies, and personality. Self-esteem is our overall evaluation of our competence and 
personal worthiness. Self-concepts come from interpretations of self based on our 
own experience and on the reactions and responses of others. The inaccuracy of a 
distorted picture of oneself becomes magniﬁ ed through self-fulﬁ lling prophecies, 
ﬁ ltering messages, and media images. Our self-concept and self-esteem moderate 
competing internal messages in our self-talk, inﬂ uence our perception of others, 
and inﬂ uence our personal communication style. Our self-concept is socially con-
structed by us and by others, and the different roles we play in various situations 
create our multiple selves.
Perception plays an important role in forming impressions of others. We form 
these impressions based on others’ physical characteristics and social behaviors, our 
stereotyping, and our emotional state. These factors, along with context and shared 
language, inﬂ uence how we perceive others and the messages they send. You can 
improve the accuracy of your perceptions of others and the messages they send by 
questioning the accuracy of your perceptions, seeking more information about your 
perceptions, realizing that your perceptions will change over time, and practicing 
 perception checking.
Now that you have read Chapter 2, use your 
Premium Web site for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Skill Building 
activity in the body of the chapter.
Communicate! Active Online Learning

45
 
Chapter 2  Perception of Self and Others 
Key Terms
attributions (40)
discrimination (39)
halo effect (38)
ideal self-concept (27)
implicit personality theories (38)
incongruence (31)
interpret (26)
pattern (25)
perception (24)
perception check (41)
prejudice (39)
role (36)
self-concept (26)
self-esteem (26)
self-fulﬁ lling  prophecy (32)
self-monitoring (36)
self-talk (34)
stereotypes (38)
uncertainty reduction (37)
Skill Learning Activities
2.1: Who Am I? (27)
Complete this journal activity to help you assess 
how your self-concept aligns with how others see 
you.
First ask, How do I see myself? List the skills, 
abilities, knowledge, competencies, and personality 
characteristics that describe how you see yourself. To 
generate this list, try completing these sentences: “I 
am skilled at . . . , I have the ability to . . . ,” “I know 
things about . . . , I am competent at doing . . . ,” and 
“One part of my personality is that I am . . . .” List as 
many characteristics in each category as you can 
think of. What you have developed is an inventory of 
your self-concept.
Second ask, How do others see me? List the skills, 
abilities, and so on that describe how you think others 
see you by completing these sentences: “Other people 
believe I am skilled at . . . ,” “Other people believe I 
have the ability to . . . ,” “Other people believe I know 
things about . . . ,” “Other people believe I am compe-
tent at doing . . . ,” and “One part of my personality is 
that other people believe I am . . . .”
Compare your two lists. How are they similar? 
Where are they different? Do you understand why 
they differ? After you have thought about each, write 
a paragraph titled “Who I Am, and How I Know This.”
2.2: The Speech of Introduction About You (36)
Listen to the speech of introduction that a class-
mate gives about you. How do you feel about what 
was said? Did anything the speaker said embarrass 
you? On a scale of 1 to 10, rate how pleased you 
were to be introduced as you were. What did you 
like about what the speaker said about you? What 
did you dislike? Do you think that the other members 
of the class have an accurate perception of who you 
are based on what the speaker said about you? Why 
or why not? Is there anything the speaker did not 
know about you that, if he or she had included it in 
the speech, would have helped the speaker to do a 
better job? If you could go back and have your get-
acquainted conversation with the speaker again, what 
would you do or say differently to help the speaker 
do a better job of presenting you as you would like 
others to know you? How does all of this relate to the 
concept of self-monitoring?
2.3: Monitor Your Enacted Roles (36)
For three days, record your roles in various situ-
ations such as “lunch with a best friend” or “meeting 
professor about a class project.” Describe the roles 
you chose to enact in each setting such as student, 
friend, or customer.
At the conclusion of this three-day observation 
period, analyze what you observed. To what extent 
does your role behavior change across situations? 
What factors seem to trigger you to enact a particu-
lar role? Are there certain roles that you take on more 
than others? Are there roles you need to modify? Are 
there roles you are reluctant to enact that would help 
you be a more effective communicator? How satis-
ﬁ ed are you with the roles you took? With which are 
you most and least pleased?
Write a paragraph explaining what you have 
learned.
You can ﬁ nd a data collection sheet for this 
activity at your Premium Web site for Communicate! 
Look for the Skill Learning activities for Chapter 2.

46
 
Chapter 2 
Perception of Self and Others
2.4: Stereotypes and Media (39)
For a few days, catalog the stereotypes in mass 
media. Enter your research into a log broken out by 
the following categories: (1) medium of communication 
(TV, radio, magazines, newspapers, the Internet, signage/
posters); (2) source (general content or advertising); (3) 
target (race, ethnicity/culture, religion, gender, sexual 
orientation, age, income, profession, hobby, appear-
ance); and (4) connotation (positive or negative).
After you have completed your research, ana-
lyze the results. What target was most frequently 
stereotyped in your ﬁ ndings? Did some mediums 
of communication indulge in more stereotyping 
the others? Did regular programming or advertising 
employ more stereotyping than the other? Were the 
majority of the stereotypes positive or negative in 
connotation? Did anything in your research surprise 
you? Write a paragraph explaining what you learned 
in this activity.
You can ﬁ nd a data collection sheet for this 
activity at your Premium Web site for Communicate! 
Look for the Skill Learning activities for Chapter 2.
2.5: Culture and Perception (42)
 1. Describe a recent encounter you had with some-
one of a different race or ethnic group.
  ________________________________________
________________________________________
 2. How comfortable did you feel talking with this 
person?
  ________________________________________
________________________________________
 3. In what ways did this person’s race or ethnic 
group inﬂ uence how you acted or reacted?
  ________________________________________
________________________________________
 4. Did it affect the topics you discussed or the care 
with which you phrased your messages?
  ________________________________________
________________________________________
Web Resources
2.1: Real Self-Esteem? (30)
Read this provocative article about self-
esteem by Dr. Richard O’Connor, “Self-Esteem: In a 
Culture Where Winning Is Everything and Losing Is 
Shameful.” What points does O’Connor make? How 
does his conclusion coincide with what you have 
observed?
2.2: Self-Esteem Model (31)
The Web site Coping.org is the home of manuals 
for coping with a variety of life’s stressors, including 
the Model of Self-Esteem. This site provides infor-
mation about self-esteem and offers suggestions for 
improving one’s self-esteem.
2.3: Identity in Cyberspace (36)
With the advent of the Internet and anonymity 
it affords, we now create roles that are quite different 
from our ofﬂ ine roles. Read about ﬁ ve interlocking 
factors that are useful in understanding how people 
manage identities in cyberspace.
2.4: Fighting Words with Words (39)
Learn how to identify the sweeping generaliza-
tions behind stereotypes and how to use balancing 
statements to counteract them with this Coverdell 
World Wise Schools activity. Coverdell World Wise 
Schools seeks to foster student inquiry about the 
world and others and began as a correspondence 
“match” program between Peace Corps volunteers 
and U.S. school students.

Communicating Verbally
Questions you’ll be able to answer after reading this chapter:
•  What are the purposes of language?
•  What is the relationship between language and meaning?
•  How do culture and gender affect language use?
•  How can you make your language more clear?
•  How can you make your messages more memorable?
•  What can you do to ensure your listener will understand the words you 
choose?
•  How can you phrase messages to demonstrate linguistic sensitivity?
Donna approached her friend Mary and said, “Ed and I are having a really tough 
time.”
“I’m sorry to hear that,” replied Mary. “What’s happening?”
“Well, you know, it’s just the way he acts.”
“Is he being abusive?”
“Uh, no—it’s not that. I just can’t seem to ﬁ gure him out.”
“Well, is it what he says?”
“No, it’s more what he doesn’t say.”
“What do you mean ‘what he doesn’t say’?”
“You know, he comes home and I ask him where he’s been.”
“And . . . ?”
“He says he was working overtime.”
“And you don’t believe him?”
3
David Young-Wolff/PhotoEdit

48
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
“No, I believe him. It’s just that he’s working so much, I’m starting to feel lonely.”
“Have you talked with him about this?”
“No, I don’t know how to say it, and I don’t think he’d understand me.”
Given what Donna has said and the way she has said it, would you understand? 
Sometimes, for a variety of reasons, the way we form our messages makes it difﬁ cult 
for others to understand. Sometimes the problem is what we say; other times it’s how 
we say it.
As Thomas Holtgraves (2002), a leading scholar in language use, reminds us, 
“Language is one of those things that we often take for granted” (p. 8). Yet we could 
all improve our use of language. In this chapter, we discuss the nature of and purposes 
for language and improving our verbal language skills.
The Nature and Purposes of Language
Language is both a body of symbols (most commonly words) and the systems for their 
use in messages that are common to the people of the same speech community.
A speech community, also called a language community, is a group of people 
who speak the same language. There are between 3,000 and 4,000 speech communities 
in the world. Around 60 percent of the world’s speech communities have fewer than 
10,000 speakers. The ﬁ ve largest speech communities, in order, are Mandarin Chinese, 
Spanish, English, Arabic, and Hindi (World Almanac, 2007).
Words are symbols used by a speech community to represent objects, ideas, and 
feelings. Although the word used to represent a particular object or idea varies from 
language to language, for a word to be a symbol all the members of the speech commu-
nity must recognize it as standing for the same object, idea, or feeling. Different speech 
communities use different word symbols for the same phenomenon. For example, the 
season for planting is called spring in English-speaking communities but printemps in 
French-speaking communities.
Speech communities also vary in how they put words together to form mes-
sages. The structure a message takes depends on the rules of grammar and syntax that 
have evolved in a particular speech community. For example, in English a sentence 
must have at least a subject (a noun or pronoun) and a predicate (a verb). To make a 
statement in English, the subject is placed before the predicate. In Mandarin Chinese, 
however, an idea is usually expressed with a verb and a complement (which is rarely 
a noun and usually another verb or an adjective).
Language affects how people think and what they pay attention to. This con-
cept is called the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis, named after two theorists, Edward Sapir 
and Benjamin Lee Whorf (Littlejohn & Foss, 2008). Language allows us to perceive 
certain aspects of the world by naming them and allows us to ignore other parts of 
the world by not naming them. For instance, if you work in a job such as fashion 
or interior design that deals with many different words for color distinctions, you 
will be able to perceive ﬁ ner differences in color. Knowing various words for shades 
of white, such as ecru, eggshell, cream, ivory, pearl, bone china white, and antique 
white, actually helps you see differences in shades of white. Similarly, there are con-
cepts that people do not fully perceive until a word is coined to describe them. Think 
of words added to American English vocabulary in the last few years such as google, 
language
a body of symbols (most 
commonly words) and 
the systems for their use in 
messages that are common 
to the people of the same 
speech community.
speech community
a group of people who 
speak the same language 
(also called a language 
community).
words
symbols used by a speech 
community to represent 
objects, ideas, and feelings.
Sapir–Whorf hypothesis
a theory claiming that 
language inﬂ uences 
perception.

49
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
texting, couch potato, or mouse potato. The behav-
iors to which those words refer certainly existed 
before the terms were coined. But as a society, we 
did not collectively perceive these behaviors until 
language allowed us to name them.
Purposes of Language
Although language communities vary in the words 
they use and in their grammar and syntax systems, 
all languages serve the same purposes.
 1. We use language to designate, label, deﬁ ne, 
and limit. So, when we identify music as “punk,” 
we are differentiating it from other music labeled 
rap, rock, pop, indie, country, or R&B.
 2. We use language to evaluate. Through lan-
guage we convey positive or negative atti-
tudes toward our subject. For instance, if you 
see Hal taking more time than others to make a decision, you could describe Hal 
positively as “thoughtful” or negatively as “dawdling.” Or you might describe a 
comedy like the movie Superbad positively as “hilarious” or negatively as “vul-
gar.” Kenneth Burke (1968), a prominent language theorist, describes this as the 
power of language to emphasize hierarchy and control. Because language allows 
us to compare things, we tend to judge them as better or worse, which leads to 
social hierarchy or a pecking order. Certainly, programs like What Not to Wear 
and Flip This House use language to suggest how to judge certain looks as better 
or worse.
 3. We use language to discuss things outside our immediate experience. 
Language lets us talk about ourselves, learn from others’ experiences, share a 
common heritage, talk about past and future events, and communicate about 
people and things that are not present. Through language, we can discuss where 
we hope to be in ﬁ ve years, where we plan to go for spring break, or learn 
about the history that shapes the world we live in. If you ever watch television 
programs on the discovery channel, you are learning from things outside your 
own experiences.
 4. We use language to talk about language. We also use language to communicate 
about how we are communicating. For instance, if your friend said she would see 
you “this afternoon,” but she didn’t arrive until 5 o’clock, and you ask her where 
she’s been, the two of you are likely to discuss your communication and the differ-
ent interpretations you each bring to the phrase “this afternoon.” You might also 
relate to this if you’ve ever had a professor tell you an assignment is due “next 
week,” and then asks for it ﬁ rst thing Monday morning with a comment that she 
“will not accept late papers.”
The Relationship Between Language and Meaning
On the surface, the relationship between language and meaning seems perfectly clear: 
We select the correct words, structure them using the rules of syntax and grammar 
agreed upon by our speech community, and people will interpret our meanings cor-
rectly. In fact, the relationship between language and meaning is not nearly so simple 
for ﬁ ve reasons.
Today we know what a 
couch potato is, but that was 
not the case 30 years ago.
What are the 
purposes of 
language?
Ulrich Niehoff/imagebroker/Alamy

50
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
First, the meaning of words is in people, not in the words themselves. If Juan 
says to Julia that the restaurant is expensive, each of them probably has a different 
meaning of the word expensive. Maybe Juan thinks one meal will cost $40, whereas 
for Julia, expensive might mean a $20 meal. All words, especially abstract ones, have 
multiple meanings depending on who is using them and who is hearing them. What 
does expensive mean to you?
Second, words have two levels of meaning: denotation and connotation. Denotation 
is the direct, explicit meaning a speech community formally gives a word—it is the 
meaning found in a dictionary. Different dictionaries may deﬁ ne words in slightly 
different ways. For instance, the Encarta World English Dictionary deﬁ nes bawdy as 
“ribald in a frank, humorous, often crude way,” and the Cambridge American English 
Dictionary deﬁ nes bawdy as “containing humorous remarks about sex.” Similar? Yes, 
but not the same. Not only that, but many words have multiple deﬁ nitions. For instance, 
the Random House Dictionary of the English Language lists 23 deﬁ nitions for the word 
great. Connotation, the feelings or evaluations we associate with a word, may be even 
more important to our understanding of meaning than denotation. C. K. Ogden and 
I. A. Richards (1923) were among the ﬁ rst scholars to consider the misunderstandings 
resulting from the failure of communicators to realize that their subjective reactions 
to words are based on their life experiences. For instance, when Tina says, “We bought 
an SUV; I think it’s the biggest one Chevy makes,” Kim might think “Why in the world 
would anyone want one of those gas guzzlers that take up so much space to park?” 
and Lexia might say, “Oh, I envy you. I’d love to own a vehicle that has so much power 
and sits so high on the road.” Word denotation and connotation are important because 
the only message that counts is the message that is understood, regardless of whether 
it is the one you intended.
Third, meaning may vary depending on its syntactic context (the position of a 
word in a sentence and the other words around it). For instance, in the same sentence 
a person might say, “I love to vacation in the mountains, where it’s really cool in 
mornings and you’re likely to see some really cool animals.” Most listeners would 
understand that “mornings are really cool” refers to temperature and “see some really 
cool animals” refers to animals that are uncommon or special.
Fourth, the language of any speech community will change over time. Language 
changes in many ways, including the creation of new words, the abandonment of old 
words, changes in word meanings in segments of society, and the inﬂ ux of words from 
the mixing of cultures. For instance, the latest edition of Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate 
Dictionary contains 10,000 new words and usages. New words are created to express 
new ideas. For example, younger generations, businesspeople, and scientists, among 
others, will invent new words or assign different meanings to words to better express 
the changing realities of their world. For example, bling is used to describe ﬂ ashy 
jewelry, marathoning is the practice of watching an entire season of a TV series in one 
sitting, a desktop is the visual surface we see on our computer screen, and greenwash-
ing is the practice of making a misleading claim about the environmental beneﬁ ts of a 
product, service, technology, or company practice. In the past 20 years, entire vocabu-
laries have been invented to allow us to communicate about new technologies. So we 
google to get information, use the wi-ﬁ  on our laptop, and listen to a podcast while 
writing a blog. Words used by older generations may fade as they no longer describe 
current realities or are replaced by new words. We once used a mimeograph, but now 
we use a copy machine. In addition, some members of the speech community will 
invent new meanings for old words to differentiate themselves from other subgroups 
of the language community. For instance, in some parts of the country, young people 
use the word bad to mean “intense,” as in “That movie was really bad,” or sick to mean 
What is the 
relationship 
between language 
and meaning?
denotation
the direct, explicit meaning a 
speech community formally 
gives a word.
connotation
the feelings or evaluations we 
associate with a word.
syntactic context
the position of a word in a 
sentence and the other words 
around it.

51
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
“cool” as in “That bike is really sick,” or the word kickin’ to mean “really great” as in 
“That concert was really kickin’.”
Fifth, as a society absorbs immigrants who speak different languages and 
becomes more multicultural, the language of the dominant group gradually absorbs 
some words from the languages of the immigrants. In English we use and under-
stand what were once foreign words, such as petite, siesta, kindergarten, and ciao. 
Similarly, the slang used by a subgroup may also eventually be appropriated by 
the larger speech community. For example, the African American slang terms for 
“girlfriend,” shorty or boo, are now used and understood by a more diverse group of 
American speakers.
Cultural and Gender Inﬂ uences on Language Use
Culture and gender both inﬂ uence how words are used and interpreted. Cultures 
vary in how much meaning is embedded in the language itself and how much 
meaning is interpreted from the context in which the communication occurs. In 
low-context cultures, like the United States and 
most northern European countries, messages 
are typically quite direct and language is very 
speciﬁ c. Speakers say exactly what they mean, 
and the verbal messages are very explicit, with 
lots of details provided. In low-context cul-
tures, what the speaker intends the message to 
mean is not  heavily inﬂ uenced by the setting 
or context; rather, it is embedded in the verbal 
message. In high-context cultures, like Latin 
American, Asian, and American Indian, what a 
speaker intends for you to understand from the 
verbal message depends heavily on the setting or 
context in which it is sent. So verbal messages 
in high-context cultures may be indirect, using 
more general and ambiguous language. Receivers 
in high-context cultures, then, rely on contextual 
cues to help them understand the speaker’s mean-
ing (Samovar, Porter, & McDaniel, 2009).
When people from low-context cultures interact with others from high-context 
cultures, misunderstandings often occur. Imagine that Isaac from a German company 
and Zhao from a Chinese company are trying to conduct business.
ISAAC: “Let’s get right down to it. We’re hoping that you can provide 100,000 
parts per month according to our six manufacturing speciﬁ cations spelled out 
in the engineering contract I sent you. If quality control ﬁ nds more than a 
2-percent error, we will have to terminate the contract. Can you agree to these 
terms?”
ZHAO: “We are very pleased to be doing business with you. We produce the highest 
quality products and will be honored to meet your needs.”
ISAAC: “But can you supply that exact quantity? Can you meet all of our engineering 
speciﬁ cations? Will you consistently have less than a 2-percent error?”
ZHAO: “We are an excellent, trustworthy company that will send you the highest 
 quality parts.”
How do culture and 
gender inﬂ uence 
language use?
low-context cultures
cultures in which messages 
are direct, speciﬁ c, and 
detailed.
high-context cultures
cultures in which messages 
are indirect, general, and 
ambiguous.
People in high-context 
cultures rely on contextual 
cues to understand a 
speaker’s meaning.
Elena Rooraid/PhotoEdit

52
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
Isaac is probably frustrated with what he perceives as general, evasive language 
used by Zhao, and Zhao may be offended by the direct questions, speciﬁ c language, 
and perceived threat in Isaac’s message. Global migration, business, and travel are 
increasing the interactions that occur between people accustomed to high- or low-
context expectations. As this happens, the likelihood of misunderstanding increases. 
To be a competent communicator, you will need to be aware of, compensate for, or 
adapt to the cultural expectations of your conversational partner.
Societal expectations for masculinity and femininity also inﬂ uence language use. 
According to Wood (2007), feminine styles of language typically use words of empa-
thy and support, emphasize concrete and personal language, and show politeness and 
tentativeness in speaking. Masculine styles of language often use words of status and 
problem solving, emphasize abstract and general language, and show assertiveness 
and control in speaking.
Feminine language often includes empathic phrases like “I can understand how 
you feel” or “I’ve had a similar experience, so I can sense what you are going through.” 
Likewise, feminine language often includes language of support such as “I’m so sorry 
that you are having difﬁ culty” or “Please let me know if I can help you in any way.” 
Feminine language often goes into detail by giving speciﬁ c examples and personal 
disclosures. To appear feminine is to speak politely by focusing on others and by not 
being too forceful with language. Words and phrases like “I may be wrong but . . .”; 
“It’s just my opinion”; “maybe”; .“perhaps”; and “I don’t want to step on anyone’s toes 
here” are associated with feminine styles of speaking.
By contrast, masculine styles of speaking often emphasize status through phrases 
like “I know that . . .” and “My experience tells me” and communicates problem solv-
ing or advice giving through such language as “I would . . .”; “You should . . .”; and 
“The way you should handle this is . . .” Masculine styles of communication may 
favor theoretical or general discussions and avoid giving personal information about 
oneself. To appear masculine, one’s language must be forceful, direct, and in control 
through such phrases as “deﬁ nitely,” “I have no doubt,” “It is clear to me,” and “I am 
sure that . . . ”
Women and men can use both masculine and feminine language, although, gener-
ally, dominant American society expects women to use feminine language and men to 
use masculine language. One style is not inherently better than another, but each may 
be better suited to certain communication situations.
Improving Language Skills
Regardless of whether we are conversing with a friend, working on a task force, or 
giving a speech, we should strive to use language in our messages that accurately con-
veys our meanings. We can improve our messages by choosing words that make our 
meaning clear, choosing language that makes our messages memorable, and choosing 
language that demonstrates linguistic sensitivity.
Use Clear Language
We ought to choose words that help listeners assign meaning that is similar to what 
we intended. Compare these two descriptions of a near miss in a car: “Some nut 
almost got me a while ago” versus “An hour ago, an older man in a banged-up Honda 
Civic ran the light at Calhoun and Clifton and almost hit me broadside while I was 
in the intersection waiting to turn left at the cross street.” In the second message, 
feminine styles of 
language
use words of empathy and 
support, emphasize concrete 
and personal language, 
and show politeness and 
tentativeness in speaking.
masculine styles of 
language
use words of status and 
problem solving, emphasize 
abstract and general 
language, and show 
assertiveness and control in 
speaking.

53
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
the language is much more speciﬁ c, so both parties would be likely to have a more 
similar perception of the situation than would be possible with the ﬁ rst message.
Often as we try to express our thoughts, the ﬁ rst words that come to mind are 
general in nature. Speciﬁ c words clear up confusion caused by general words by nar-
rowing what is understood from a general category to a particular group within that 
category. Speciﬁ c words are more concrete and precise than general words. What can 
we do to speak more speciﬁ cally?
For one, we can select a word that most accurately captures the sense of what 
we are saying. At ﬁ rst I might say, “Waylon was angry during our work session 
today.” Then I might think, “Was he really showing anger?” So I say, “To be more 
accurate, he wasn’t really angry. Perhaps he was more frustrated or impatient with 
what he sees as a lack of progress by our group.” What is the difference between 
the two statements in terms of words? By carefully choosing words, you can show 
shades of meaning. Others may respond quite differently to your description of a 
group member showing anger, frustration, or impatience. The interpretation others 
get of Waylon’s behavior depends on the word or words you select. Speciﬁ c lan-
guage is achieved when words are concrete or precise or when details or examples 
are used.
Concrete words are words that appeal to our senses. Consider the word speak. 
This is an abstract word—that is, we can speak in many different ways. So instead of 
saying that Jill speaks in a peculiar way, we might be more speciﬁ c by saying that Jill 
mumbles, whispers, blusters, or drones. Each of these words creates a clearer sense of 
the sound of her voice.
We speak more speciﬁ cally when we use precise words, narrowing a larger cat-
egory to a smaller group within that category. For instance, if Nevah says that Ruben 
is a “blue-collar worker,” she has named a general category; you might picture an 
unlimited number of occupations that fall within this broad category. If, instead, she 
is more precise and says he’s a “construction worker,” the number of possible images 
you can picture is reduced; now you can only select your image from the speciﬁ c 
subcategory of construction worker. So your meaning is likely to be closer to the one 
she intended. To be even more precise, she may identify Ruben as a “bulldozer opera-
tor”; this further limits your choice of images and is likely to align with the one she 
intended you to have.
Clarity also can be achieved by adding detail or examples. For instance, Linda 
says, “Rashad is very loyal.” The meaning of loyal (“faithful to an idea, person, com-
pany, and so on”) is abstract, so to avoid ambiguity and confusion, Linda might add, 
“He defended Gerry when Sara was gossiping about her.” By following up her use of 
the abstract concept of loyalty with a concrete example, Linda makes it easier for her 
How can you make 
your language 
more clear?
speciﬁ c words
words that clarify meaning by 
narrowing what is understood 
from a general category to a 
particular item or group within 
that category.
concrete words
words that appeal to the 
senses and help us see, hear, 
smell, taste, or touch.
precise words
words that narrow a larger 
category to a smaller group 
within that category.
Frank & Ernest reprinted by permission
 of Tom Thaves

54
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
listeners to ground their idea of this personal quality in a concrete or real experience. 
We can also clarify our messages by providing details. The statement “He lives in a 
really big house” can be clariﬁ ed by adding details: “He lives in a 14-room Tudor man-
sion on a six-acre estate.”
We can also increase clarity by dating information. Dating information are details 
that specify the time or period that a fact was true or known to be true. Because nearly 
everything changes with time, not dating our statements can lead some people to 
conclude that what we are saying is current when it is not. For instance, Parker says, 
“I’m going to be transferred to Henderson City.” Laura replies, “Good luck—they’ve had 
some real trouble with their schools.” On the basis of Laura’s statement, Parker may 
worry about the effect his move will have on his children. What he doesn’t know is 
that Laura’s information about this problem in Henderson City is over ﬁ ve years old. 
Henderson City still may have problems, or the situation may have changed. Had Laura 
replied, “Five years ago, I know they had some real trouble with their schools. I’m not 
sure what the situation is now, but you may want to check,” Parker would look at the 
information differently.
Here are two additional examples:
Undated: Professor Powell is really enthusiastic when she lectures.
Dated: Professor Powell is really enthusiastic when she lectures—at least she was 
last semester in communication theory.
Undated: You think Mary’s depressed? I’m surprised. She seemed her regular, 
high-spirited self when I talked with her.
Dated: You think Mary’s depressed? I’m surprised. She seemed her regular, high-
spirited self when I talked with her last month.
To date information, before you make a statement (1) consider when the informa-
tion was true and (2) verbally acknowledge the date or period when the information 
was true. When you date your statements, you increase the clarity of your messages 
and enhance your credibility.
Finally, we can increase clarity through indexing generalizations. Indexing gen-
eralizations is the mental and verbal practice of acknowledging individual differences 
when voicing generalizations. Although we might assume that someone who buys a 
Mercedes is rich, that may not be true for all Mercedes buyers. Thus, just because Brent 
has bought a top-of-the-line, very expensive Mercedes, Brent is not necessarily rich. 
If we said, “Brent bought a Mercedes; he must be rich,” we should add, “Of course not 
all people who buy Mercedes are rich.”
Let’s consider another example:
Generalization: Your Toyota should go 50,000 miles before you need a brake job; 
Jerry’s did.
Indexed Statement: Your Toyota may well go 50,000 miles before you need a 
brake job; Jerry’s did, but of course, all Toyotas aren’t the same.
To index, consider whether what you are about to say applies a generalization to 
a speciﬁ c person, place, or thing. If so, qualify it appropriately so that your assertion 
does not go beyond the evidence that supports it.
To ensure that our listeners decode our messages as we intend them, we can 
use words that are speciﬁ c, concrete, and precise. We can also provide details and 
examples, as well as date our information and index our generalizations. Ulti-
mately, our goal is to be understood. Practicing these strategies will help us achieve 
that goal.
dating information
specifying the time or time 
period that a fact was true or 
known to be true.
indexing generalizations
the mental and verbal 
practice of acknowledging 
the presence of individual 
differences when voicing 
generalizations.
Skill Learning Activity 3.2
Web Resource 3.1
Skill Learning Activity 3.1

55
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
Use Language That Makes Your Messages Memorable
Because your listeners cannot simply re-read what you have said, effective verbal mes-
sages use vivid wording and appropriate emphasis to help listeners understand and 
remember the message.
Vivid wording is full of life, vigorous, bright, and intense. For example, a novice 
football announcer might say, “Jackson made a great catch,” but a more experienced 
commentator’s vivid account would be “Jackson leaped into the air with double-cov-
erage, made a spectacular one-handed catch, and landed somehow with both feet 
planted ﬁ rmly in the end zone.” The words spectacular, leaped, one-handed catch, and 
planted ﬁ rmly paint an intense verbal picture of the action. Vivid messages begin with 
vivid thoughts. You are much more likely to express yourself vividly when you have 
physically or psychologically sensed the meanings you are trying to convey.
Vividness can be achieved quickly through using similes and metaphors. A simile 
is a direct comparison of dissimilar things and is usually expressed with the words like 
or as. Clichés such as “She walks like a duck” and “She sings like a nightingale” are 
both similes. A metaphor is a comparison that establishes a ﬁ gurative identity between 
objects being compared. Instead of saying that one thing is like another, a metaphor 
says that one thing is another. Thus, a problem car is a “lemon” and an aggressive 
driver is a “road hog.” As you think about and try to develop similes and metaphors, 
stay away from trite clichés. Although we use similes and metaphors frequently in 
conversations, they are an especially powerful way to develop vividness when we are 
giving a speech. Try developing and practicing one or two different original metaphors 
or similes when you rehearse a speech to see which works best.
Finally, although your goal is to be vivid, be sure to use words that are under-
stood by all your listeners. Novice speakers can mistakenly believe they will be more 
impressive if they use a large vocabulary, but using big words can be off-putting to the 
audience and make the speaker seem pompous, affected, or stilted. When you have a 
choice between a common vivid word or image and one that is more obscure, choose 
the more common.
How can you make 
your messages 
more memorable?
vivid wording
wording that is full of life, 
vigorous, bright, and intense.
simile
a direct comparison of 
dissimilar things.
metaphor
a comparison that establishes 
a ﬁ gurative identity between 
objects being compared.
Skill Learning Activity 3.3
Skill
Clarify meaning by 
narrowing what is 
understood from a 
general category to 
a particular group 
within that category, 
by appealing to the 
senses, by choosing 
words that symbolize 
exact thoughts and 
feelings, or by using 
concrete details or 
examples.
Use
To help the listener 
picture thoughts 
analogous to the 
speaker’s.
Procedure
1. 
Assess whether the 
word or phrase to 
be used is less spe-
ciﬁ c (or concrete 
or precise) than it 
could be.
2. 
Pause to consider 
alternatives.
3. 
Select a more spe-
ciﬁ c (or concrete 
or precise) word, or 
give an example or 
add details.
Example
Instead of saying, 
“Bring the stuff for the 
audit,” say, “Bring the 
records and receipts 
from the last year for 
the audit.” Or instead 
of saying, “Make sure 
you improve your 
grades,” say, “This term, 
we want to see a B in 
Spanish and at least a 
C in algebra.”
Communication Skill
Using Speciﬁ c Language

56
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
Emphasis is the importance you give to certain words or ideas. Emphasis tells 
listeners what they should seriously pay attention to. Ideas are emphasized through 
proportion of time, repetition, and transitions. Ideas to which you devote more time 
are perceived by listeners to be more important, whereas ideas that are quickly men-
tioned are perceived to be less important. Emphasizing by repeating means saying 
important words or ideas more than once. You can either repeat the exact words, 
“A ring-shaped coral island almost or completely surrounding a lagoon is called an 
Rewrite each of these statements to make it 
more speciﬁ c by making general and abstract 
words more concrete and precise. Add details 
and examples.
 1. My neighbor has a lot of animals that she 
keeps in her yard.
 2. When I was a little girl, we lived in a big 
house in the Midwest.
 3. My husband works for a large newspaper.
 4. She got up late and had to rush to get to 
school. But she was late anyway.
 5. Where’d you ﬁ nd that thing?
 6. I really liked going to that concert. The 
music was great.
 7. I really respect her.
 8. My boyfriend looks like a hippie.
 9. She was wearing a very trendy outﬁ t.
 10. We need to have more freedom to choose 
our courses.
Skill Learning Activity 3.4
Skill Building
Clarifying General Statements
emphasis
the importance given to 
certain words or ideas.
Removed due to e-rights. Please refer to print version for detail
Removed due to e-rights. Please 
refer to print version for detail
Removed due to e-rights. Please refer to a print copy for details

57
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
Removed due to e-rights. Please refer to a print copy for details

58
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
atoll—an atoll,” or you can restate the idea using different words, “The test will con-
tain about four essay questions; that is, all the questions on the test will be the kind 
that require you to discuss material in some detail.” Emphasizing through transitions 
means using words that show the relationship between your ideas. For example, some 
transitions summarize (therefore, and so, so, ﬁ nally, all in all, on the whole, in short, 
thus, as a result), some clarify (in fact, for example, that is to say, more speciﬁ cally), 
some forecast (also, and, likewise, again, in addition, moreover, similarly, further), and 
some indicate changes in direction or provide contrasts (but, however, on the other 
hand, still, although, while, no doubt).
Use Linguistic Sensitivity
Linguistic sensitivity means choosing language and symbols that demonstrate respect 
for your listener(s). Through appropriate language, we communicate our respect for 
those who are different from us. To do so, we need to avoid language our listeners 
might not understand, as well as language that might offend them. Linguistic sen-
sitivity can be achieved by using vocabulary our listeners understand, using jargon 
sparingly, using slang that is appropriate to our listeners and the situation, using 
inclusive language and using language that is not offensive.
 1. Adapt your vocabulary to the level of your listener. If you have made a con-
scious effort to expand your vocabulary, are an avid reader, or have spent time 
conversing with others who use a large and varied selection of words, then you 
probably have a large vocabulary. As a speaker, the larger your vocabulary, the 
more choices you have from which to select the words you want. Having a larger 
vocabulary, however, can present challenges when communicating with people 
whose vocabulary is more limited. One strategy for assessing another’s vocabu-
lary level is to listen to the types and complexity of words the other person uses 
and to take your signal from your communication partner. When you have deter-
mined that your vocabulary exceeds that of your partner, you can use simpler 
synonyms for your words or use word phrases composed of more familiar terms. 
Adjusting your vocabulary to others does not mean talking down to them. Rather, 
it demonstrates respect and effective communication to select words that others 
understand.
 2. Use jargon sparingly. Jargon refers to technical terms whose meanings are under-
stood only by a select group of people based on their shared activity or interests. 
We may form a special speech community, which develops a common language 
(jargon) based on a hobby or occupation. Medical practitioners speak a language 
of their own, which people in the medical ﬁ eld understand and those outside of 
the medical ﬁ eld do not. The same is true of lawyers, engineers, educators, and vir-
tually all occupations. For instance, lawyers may speak of briefs and cases, but the 
general public might associate such terms with underwear (briefs) and packages of 
beer or soda (cases). If you are an avid computer user, you may know many terms 
that non-computer users do not. Likewise, there are special terms associated with 
sports, theatre, wine tasting, science ﬁ ction, and so on. The key to effective use of 
jargon is to use it only with people who you know will understand it or to explain 
the terms the ﬁ rst time you use them. Without explanation, jargon is basically a 
type of foreign language. Have you ever tried to listen to a professor who uses 
jargon of his or her ﬁ eld without deﬁ ning it? If so, how did it affect your learning 
of the material?
 3. Use slang appropriate to the listeners and to the situation. Slang is informal 
vocabulary developed and used by particular groups in society. Slang performs 
How can you phrase 
your messages 
to demonstrate 
linguistic sensitivity?
jargon
technical terms whose 
meanings are understood 
only by select groups.
linguistic sensitivity
language choices that 
demonstrate respect for 
listener(s).

59
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
an important social function. Slang bonds those in an inner circle who use 
the same words to emphasize a shared experience. But slang simultaneously 
excludes others who don’t share the terminology. The simultaneous inclusion 
of some and exclusion of others is what makes slang popular with youth and 
marginalized people in all cultures. Slang may emerge from teenagers, urban 
life, college life, gangs, or other contexts. A young adult, for instance, might 
say, “My bad” for “I made a mistake.” Sweet could be translated as “That’s great, 
ﬁ ne, or excellent.” Using slang appropriately means using it in situations where 
people understand the slang and avoiding it with people who do not share the 
slang terminology.
There is a new type of slang developing with digital and Internet technol-
ogy. Experts in computer-mediated communication (Thurlow, Lengel, & Tomic, 
2004) explain that with texting, for example, many of the rules of grammar, 
style, and spelling are broken. Many people adopt a phonetic type of spelling, 
which increasingly is understandable to 
this speech community but may not be 
understandable to others. Texters know, 
for example, that lol is short for “laugh 
out loud,” brb stands for “be right back,” 
and jk means “just kidding.” Some com-
munication experts who emphasize tra-
ditional styles of communication regard 
this new language of texters as incor-
rect, deﬁ cient, or inferior. Although 
this shorthand is convenient in cyber-
space, using it in other settings could be 
problematic.
 4. Use inclusive language. Generic lan-
guage uses words that apply only to 
one sex, race, or other group as though 
they represent everyone. This usage is a 
problem because it excludes a portion of 
the population it ostensibly includes. For 
example, English grammar  traditionally 
used the masculine pronoun he to stand 
for all humans regardless of gender. 
According to this rule, we would say, 
“When a person shops, he should have 
a clear idea of what he wants to buy.” 
Why do you suppose 
someone felt compelled to 
add woman to this sign?
slang
informal vocabulary used by 
particular groups in society.
generic language
using words that may apply 
only to one sex, race, or 
other group as though they 
represent everyone.
FPO
Calvin & Hobbes. Reprinted by permission of  Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.
Jeffrey Blankfort/Jeroboam
Web Resource 3.2

60
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
Don Imus and Three Extreme 
Curse Words
On April 4, 2007, shock jock and member of the 
National Broadcasters Hall of Fame, Don Imus 
ignited a ﬁ restorm of criticism that eventually 
led to his ﬁ ring and to a national discussion 
of offensive language in music and broadcast-
ing. During his morning program on MSNBC 
he called the 2006–2007 Rutgers women’s bas-
ketball team a bunch of “nappy-headed hos.”1 
Lewd and misogynistic language has been a 
hallmark of both shock radio personalities and 
hip-hop artists for years. But Imus crossed a line 
when, as a white man, he used words common 
to hip-hop music to describe a group of highly 
accomplished young women, eight of whom 
were black. The Rutgers women’s basketball 
team had overcome considerable odds as indi-
viduals and as a team and had made it to the 
ﬁ nals of the NCAA tournament.2 Yet in discuss-
ing them on his program, Imus’s misogynistic 
comments demeaned both the women and their 
accomplishments.
Coach C. Vivian Stringer and the Rutgers’s 
administration refused to let this hate speech go 
unchallenged. Coach Stringer’s coaching phi-
losophy is based on teaching her players to ﬁ rst 
respect themselves and once they have accom-
plished this to never let anyone else disrespect 
them.3 So it was not surprising that Rutgers 
quickly called a press conference during which 
Coach Stringer, called Mr. Imus on his “racist and 
sexist remarks that are deplorable, despicable 
and unconscionable.” Several of the players also 
spoke of the personal pain that Imus’s comments 
had caused. “This week and last, we should have 
been celebrating our accomplishments the past 
season,” said Heather Zurich, a sophomore for-
ward from Montvale, New Jersey. “We fought, 
we persevered, and most of all, we believed in 
ourselves. But all of our accomplishments were 
lost; our moment was taken away. We were 
stripped of this moment by the degrading com-
ments made by Mr. Imus. My team did nothing 
to deserve Mr. Imus’s . . . deplorable comments.”4
Coach Stringer’s reaction was mirrored by 
many inﬂ uential media watchers and in the days 
and months that followed the country debated 
not only the Imus incident but also the causes, 
consequences, and use of crude, demeaning, 
obscene, racist, and misogynistic speech found 
in hip-hop lyrics and on shock talk radio. Within 
days, Al Sharpton, the NAACP, the National 
Association of Black Journalists, the National 
Organization for Women, and the Hip-Hop 
Summit Action Network all weighed in on the 
controversy.
The Hip-Hop Summit Action Network, a 
nonproﬁ t nonpartisan national coalition of 
hip-hop artists, entertainment industry leaders, 
education advocates, civil rights proponents, 
and youth leaders was particularly active in the 
debate.5 On April 13 Russell Simmons, chair-
man of the Hip-Hop Summit Action Network, 
and Benjamin Chavis, president, issued a 
joint statement in which they tried to dif-
ferentiate between the use of derogatory and 
misogynistic speech within the artistic and 
cultural realm of hip-hop music and the use 
of the same language in other contexts: “Don 
Imus is not a hip-hop artist or a poet. Hip-hop 
artists rap about what they see, hear and feel 
around them, their experience of the world. . . . 
Language can be a powerful tool. That is why 
one’s intention, when using the power of 
Pop Comm!
UPI Photo/Monika Graff/Landov 

61
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
language, should be made clear. Comparing Don 
Imus’s language with hip-hop artists’ poetic 
expression is misguided and inaccurate and feeds 
into a mindset that can be a catalyst for unwar-
ranted, rampant censorship.”6
But the following week after hosting a 
private closed door meeting with executives 
of the recording industry, Mr. Simons and Dr. 
Hooks appear to have had a change of heart 
and they issued three recommendations to 
the recording and broadcasting industries. In 
their communiqué the men were careful to 
acknowledge that the recommendations were 
not attempts at censorship but rather recom-
mendations for “corporate social responsibility 
of the industry to voluntarily show respect to 
African Americans and other people of color, 
African American women and to all women in 
lyrics and images.” The ﬁ rst of the three rec-
ommendations was “that the recording and 
broadcast industries voluntarily remove/bleep/
delete the misogynistic words bitch and ho 
and the racially offensive word nigger. Going 
forward, these three words should be consid-
ered with the same objections to obscenity as 
‘extreme curse words.’ The words bitch and ho 
are utterly derogatory and disrespectful of the 
painful, hurtful, misogyny that, in particular, 
African American women have experienced 
in the United States as part of the history of 
oppression, inequality, and suffering of women. 
The word nigger is a racially derogatory term 
that disrespects the pain, suffering, history of 
racial oppression, and multiple forms of racism 
against African Americans and other people of 
color.”7
By September when the U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives Energy and Commerce Subcommittee 
held its hearing titled “From Imus to Indus-
try: The business of stereotypes and degrading 
images” the public had moved on to other issues.8
On Monday December 3, 2007 Don Imus 
returned to the air with a new early morning talk 
show on WABC-AM. And in August 2008 hip-
hop artist Ludacris released a song titled “Politics 
as Usual” in which he supported Barack Obama’s 
bid for president while referring to Senator 
Hillary Clinton as a “bitch.” Although there was 
extensive mainstream media coverage of Imus’s 
return and his subsequent questionable com-
ments about Adam (PacMan) Jones, coverage of 
Ludacris’s misogynistic comment about Senato 
Clinton seemed to only be covered by the conser-
vative press like FOX News.
1Carr, David. (2007, April 7). Network condemns remarks 
by Imus.” New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.
nytimes.com/2007/04/07/arts/television/07imus.html
2Newman, Maria. (2007, April 10). Rutgers women to meet 
with Imus over remark.” New York Times. Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/10/business/media
/10cnd-imus.html?hp
3C. Vivian Stringer took the Imus ﬁ restorm in stride. 
(2008, March 1). New York Daily News. Retrieved from 
http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/arts
/2008/03/02/2008-03-02_c_vivian_stringer_took
_the_imus_ﬁ restor.html
4Newman, op. cit.
5Hip-Hop 
Summit 
Action 
Network. 
(2007April 
13) 
 Differentiating between Don Imus and hip hop: A 
 statement from Russell Simmons, Chairman, and 
Dr. Benjamin Chavis, President of the Hip-Hop Sum-
mit Action Network.” Retrieved from http://hsan.org
/Content/Main. aspx?PageId = 242
6Hip-Hop 
Summit 
Action 
Network. 
Mission 
state-
ment.   Retrieved from http://www.hsan.org/content
/main.aspx?pageid = 7
7Hip-Hop Summit Action Network. (2007, April 23). 
 Recommendation 
to 
the 
recording 
and 
broad-
cast  industries: A  statement by Russell Simmons and
Dr. Benjamin Chavis on behalf of the Hip-Hop Sum-
mit  Action Network. Retrieved from http://hsan.org
/Content/Main. aspx?PageId = 246]]
8Abrams, J. (2007, Sept. 25). House panel debates 
 hip-hop 
lyrics. 
USA 
Today.com. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington
/2007-09-25-3649050705_x.htm

62
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
What Does It Mean?
The Assignment
Following your instructor’s instructions, work alone, partner with someone 
in the class, or form a small group. Make up a nonsensical word and then 
develop a short speech clarifying its meaning using the tools you have 
learned in this chapter. If you work with a partner or in a small group, iden-
tify a representative to present the speech to the class. After each speech 
has been presented, ask a volunteer from the audience to paraphrase the 
meaning of the word.
Guidelines
 1. Be sure to include an attention catcher, listener relevance link, 
speaker credibility, and thesis with preview in your introduction. Be 
sure to include transitions between each main point. And be sure to 
restate the thesis with summary of main points and clincher in your 
conclusion.
 2. Be sure to incorporate the concepts for clarifying meaning in ways 
that are vivid and linguistically sensitive in your speech.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
Despite traditional usage, it is hard to picture people of both sexes when we hear 
the masculine  pronoun he.
The following techniques can help you be more inclusive: First, use plurals. 
For instance, instead of saying, “Because a doctor has high status, his views 
may be believed regardless of the topic,” you could say, “Because doctors have 
high status, their views may be believed regardless of the topic.” Second, use 
both male and female pronouns: “Because a doctor has high status, his or her 
views may be believed regardless of the topic.” Stewart, Cooper, Stewart, and 
Friedley (1998) cite research showing that when speakers refer to people using 
“he and she,” and to a lesser extent “they,” listeners often visualize both women 
and men (p. 68). Thus, when speakers avoid generic language, it’s more likely 
that listeners will perceive a message that is more gender balanced. Third, avoid 
using words that are gender speciﬁ c. For most sex-biased expressions, you 
can use or create suitable alternatives. For instance, use police ofﬁ cer instead 
of policeman and substitute synthetic for man-made. Instead of saying man-
kind, change the wording—for example, change “All of mankind beneﬁ ts” to 
“Everyone beneﬁ ts.”
 5. Use nonoffensive language. Finally, you can demonstrate linguistic sensitivity 
by choosing words that do not offend your listeners. Do you swear when you are 
with your friends but clean up your act when you are with your grandparents? If 
so, you are self-monitoring your language so that you don’t offend your grandma. 
Just as you modify your speech when you are with your grandmother, so too you 
should avoid language that is offensive to those you are talking with. The Pop 
Comm! feature on pages 63–64 describes how shock jocks and hip-hop artists 
have come under attack for their use of offensive language.

63
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
A Question of Ethics
One day Heather, Terry, Paul, and Martha stopped 
at the Student Union Grill before their next class. 
After they had talked about their class for a few 
minutes, the conversation shifted to students who 
were taking the class.
“By the way,” Paul said, “do any of you know 
Fatty?”
“Who?” the group responded in unison.
“The really fat guy who was sitting a couple of 
seats from me. We’ve been in a couple of 
classes together—he’s a pretty nice guy.”
“What’s his name?” Heather asked.
“Carl—but he’ll always be Fatty to me.”
“Do you call him that to his face?” Terry asked.
“Aw, I’d never say anything like that to 
him—I wouldn’t want to hurt his feelings.”
“Well,” Martha chimed in, “I’d sure hate to think 
that you’d call me ‘skinny’ or ‘the bitch’ when 
I wasn’t around.”
“Come on—what’s with you guys?” Paul retorted. 
“You trying to tell me that you never talk 
about another person that way when they 
aren’t around?”
“Well,” said Terry, “maybe a couple of times—but 
I’ve never talked like that about someone 
I really like.”
“Someone you like?” queried Heather. “Why does 
that make a difference? Do you mean it’s OK 
to trash-talk someone so long as you don’t 
like the person?”
 1. Sort out the ethical issues in this case. How 
ethical is it to call a person you suppos-
edly like by an unﬂ attering name that you 
would never use if that person were in your 
presence?
 2 From an ethical standpoint, is whether you 
like a person what determines when such 
name-calling is OK?
What Would You Do?
Summary
Language is a body of symbols and the systems for their use in messages that 
are common to the people of the same language community. Language allows 
us to perceive the world around us. Through language we designate, label, and 
deﬁ ne; we evaluate; discuss things outside our immediate experience; and talk 
about language.
The relationship between language and meaning is complex because the meaning 
of words varies with people, people interpret words differently based on both denota-
tive and connotative meanings, the context in which words are used affects meaning, 
and word meanings change over time.
Culture and gender inﬂ uence how words are used and how we interpret others’ 
words. In low-context cultures, messages are direct and language is speciﬁ c. In high-
context cultures, messages are indirect, general, and ambiguous. Societal expectations 
of masculinity and femininity inﬂ uence language.
We can increase language skills by using speciﬁ c, concrete, and precise language; 
by providing details and examples, dating information, and indexing generalizations; 
and by developing verbal vividness and emphasis. We can speak more appropriately 
by choosing vocabulary the listener understands, using jargon sparingly, using slang 
situationally, and demonstrating linguistic sensitivity.

64
 
Chapter 3 
Communicating Verbally
Now that you have read Chapter 3, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
•  Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
•  Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
•  Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment and Skill Building activity 
in the body of the chapter.
Skill Learning Activities
3.1: Identifying Speciﬁ c Language (54)
Pick an article or essay from your favorite maga-
zine (either the print or online version). Read through 
the piece, highlighting instances in which the writer 
uses concrete words and precise words. Also identify 
places in which the writer employs abstractions or gen-
eralizations that could be made more speciﬁ c if they 
were expressed with either concrete or precise words.
3.2: Dating and Indexing Messages (54)
Read the examples below and practice adjusting 
messages so that they are dated or indexed. After 
writing your ﬁ rst draft, check to make sure that 
your revision is more concrete, precise, and pro-
vides examples and details. Now read your response 
aloud. Does it sound natural? If not, revise it until 
it does.
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Chapter 3.
 1. Oh, Jamie’s an accounting major, so I’m sure she 
keeps her checkbook balanced.
 2. Forget taking statistics; it’s an impossible course.
 3. Never trying talking to Jim in the morning; he’s 
always grouchy.
Key Terms
concrete words (53)
connotation (50)
dating information (54)
denotation (50)
emphasis (56)
feminine styles of language (52)
generic language (59)
high-context cultures (51)
indexing generalizations (54)
jargon (58)
language (48)
linguistic sensitivity (58)
low-context cultures (51)
masculine styles of language (52)
metaphor (55)
precise words (53)
Sapir–Whorf hypothesis (48)
simile (55)
slang (59)
speciﬁ c words (53)
speech community (48)
syntactic context (50)
vivid wording (55)
words (48)
Communicate! Active Online Learning

65
 
Chapter 3  Communicating Verbally 
 4. Don’t bother to buy that book for class. You’ll 
never use it.
 5. I can’t believe you bought a dog. I mean, all they 
do is shed.
3.3: Similes and Metaphors (56)
Over the next three days, as you read books, 
newspapers, and magazine articles and listen to 
people around you talk, make notes of both the trite 
and original similes and metaphors you hear. Choose 
three that you thought were particularly vivid. Write 
a paragraph in which you brieﬂ y describe how and 
why they impressed you.
3.4: Clarifying General Statements (57)
See page 57 in this chapter. When you’re done 
with this activity, compare your answers to the 
authors’ at the Premium Website for Communicate! 
Look for them in the Skill Learning activities for 
Chapter 3.
Web Resources
3.1: Merriam-Webster Online (54)
Merriam-Webster’s online dictionary and the-
saurus is an excellent resource that can help you not 
only at school but also in the workplace.
3.2: Slang Dictionary (59)
The Online Slang Dictionary is a collaborative 
project that features slang contributed by people 
from all around the world.

Communicating Nonverbally
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What are the characteristics of nonverbal communication?
• In what ways do we communicate nonverbally with our bodies?
• In what ways do we communicate nonverbally with our voices?
• In what ways do we communicate nonverbally with our use of space?
• In what ways do we communicate nonverbally with our use of time?
• In what ways do we communicate nonverbally with our appearance?
• What can you do to improve your nonverbal communication skills?
“You’re upset that I accepted my high school girlfriend’s friend request on 
Facebook, aren’t you?” Clay asked.
“Why would you think that? I told you that it doesn’t bother me,” Maya replied.
“But I can tell by the look on your face that you don’t mean it.”
“What look?”
“You know the look—the one you always give me when you’re pretending you 
don’t care about something, but you really do.”
“I don’t know what you’re talking about, Clay.”
“I think you do. And now I can tell that you’re embarrassed that I know, and so 
you’re acting weird.”
“I’m not acting weird.”
“Well, yes you are.”
“Clay, you’re making me angry.”
“I think what you’re really angry about is that I’m in touch with an old girlfriend 
on Facebook.”
4
Archives du 7eme Art/Photos 12/Alamy

67
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
nonverbal 
communication 
behaviors
bodily actions and vocal 
qualities that typically 
accompany a verbal 
message.
emoticons
typed symbols that convey 
emotional aspects of an 
online message.
Nonverbal communication 
is so important that we’ve 
developed emoticons to 
represent it in our computer-
mediated messages.
Ei Katsumata-CMC/Alamy
“How many times do I have to tell you that I honestly don’t feel threatened by that?”
“There’s the look again. You don’t have to tell me in words.”
“Clay, it’s your decision. I’m not going to stop you from being Facebook friends 
with her.”
“After all this I’m not sure it’s worth it. I don’t want this to cause a problem 
between us.”
We’ve all heard—and said—“actions speak louder than words.” In fact, actions are so 
important to our communication that researchers have estimated that in face-to-face 
communication as much as 60 percent of the social meaning is a result of nonverbal 
behavior (Burgoon & Bacue, 2003, p. 179). In other words, the meaning we assign to any 
communication is based on both the content of the verbal message and our interpreta-
tion of the nonverbal behavior that accompanies and surrounds the verbal message. And, 
as Clay found out, interpreting nonverbal behaviors is not always the easiest thing to do.
We begin this chapter by brieﬂ y identifying the characteristics of nonverbal 
communication. Next, we describe the types of nonverbal information we use to 
 communicate with others: use of body (kinesics), use of voice (paralanguage), use of 
space (proxemics), use of time (chronemics), and self-presentation cues (appearance, 
including clothing and grooming). Finally, we offer suggestions to help you improve 
your clarity in sending nonverbal messages and your accuracy in interpreting the 
nonverbal messages you receive from others.
In the broadest sense, the term nonverbal communication describes all human 
 communication messages that tran-
scend spoken or written words (Knapp 
& Hall, 2006). Speciﬁ cally, nonverbal 
communication behaviors are those 
signals that typically  accompany our 
verbal message; our eyes and face, our 
gestures, our use of voice, and even our 
appearance. These behaviors are usu-
ally interpreted as intentional and may 
have agreed-upon interpretations in a 
particular culture or speech community 
(Burgoon & Hoobler, 2002, p. 244).
The widespread use of computer-
mediated communication (CMC—e-mail, 
Facebook, blogs,  texting, and so forth) 
has highlighted nonverbal communica-
tion’s role in clarifying meaning and 
 conveying emotion. It has become 
 obvious that when CMC is limited to 
only words, chances for misunder-
standing  skyrocket (Olaniran, 2002 
& 2003). Recognition of this fact led 
CMC users to improvise and create emoticons: symbolic pictures made with key-
board characters that represent the emotional tone that nonverbal behaviors add to 
face-to-face verbal messages.

68
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
Characteristics of Nonverbal 
Communication
When used effectively, nonverbal communication helps clarify what we are trying 
to convey verbally. Nonverbal communication has four important characteristics: it 
is inevitable, it is the primary conveyer of emotions, it is multichanneled, and it is 
ambiguous.
First, nonverbal communication is inevitable. In their germinal book Pragmatics of 
Human Communication, Watzlawick, Bavelas, and Jackson (1967) coined the phrase “We 
cannot NOT communicate.” Though grammatically awkward, this phrase captures the 
essence of what we mean when we say that nonverbal communication is inevitable. If 
you are in the presence of someone else, your nonverbal behaviors (whether intentional or 
not) are sending messages. Moreover, although we can choose what we say in our verbal 
message, we often don’t control our nonverbal behavior and how it is interpreted. When 
Austin yawns and stares off into the distance during class, his classmates will notice this 
behavior and assign meaning to it. One classmate may interpret it as a sign of boredom, 
another might see it as a sign of fatigue, and yet another may view it as a message of 
disrespect. Meanwhile, Austin may be oblivious to all of the messages his behavior is 
sending. Have you ever noticed a classmate checking e-mail or Facebook during class? 
How did you interpret what you saw? Have you ever done this during a class? If so, what 
possible messages might your behavior be sending to your instructor and classmates?
Second, nonverbal communication is the primary conveyor of our emotions. When 
we listen to others, we base our interpretation of their feelings and emotions almost 
totally on their nonverbal behavior. In fact, about 93 percent of the emotional mean-
ing of messages is conveyed nonverbally (Mehrabian, 1972). So, when Janelle says, 
“I’m ﬁ ne, but thanks for asking,” her sister Renee will understand the real message 
based on the nonverbal behaviors that accompany it. For example, if Janelle uses 
a sarcastic tone, Renee may decide that Janelle is angry about something. If Janelle 
sighs, averts her eyes, tears up, and almost whispers her message, Renee may decide 
that Janelle is sad and emotionally upset.
Third, nonverbal communication is multichanneled. We perceive meaning from a 
variety of nonverbal behaviors including posture, gestures, body movements, appear-
ance, and vocal mannerisms. When we interpret nonverbal behavior, we usually base 
our perception on a combination of these behaviors. So, when Anna observes Mimi’s 
failure to sustain eye contact, her bowed head, and her repetitive toe-stubbing in the 
dirt, she may decide that her daughter is lying about not hitting her brother. The fact 
that nonverbal communication is multichanneled is one reason people are more likely 
to believe nonverbal communication when nonverbal behaviors contradict the verbal 
message (Burgoon, Blair, & Strom, 2008).
Finally, nonverbal communication is ambiguous. Very few nonverbal behaviors 
mean the same thing to everyone. The meaning of one nonverbal behavior can vary, 
for example, based on culture, sex, gender, and even context or situation. For example, 
in mainstream American culture, direct eye contact tends to be understood as a sign 
of respect. That’s why parents often tell their children, “Look at me when I’m talking 
to you.” In many Native American, Latin American, Caribbean, and African cultures, 
however, a direct gaze can be interpreted as disrespectful if the speaker is a superior. In 
this case, averting one’s eyes signals respect. Not only can the meaning of a nonverbal 
behavior vary in different cultures, but the meaning of the same nonverbal behavior also 
can differ based on the situation. For example, a furrowed brow might convey Byron’s 
confusion when he did not understand his professor’s explanation of the assignment, or 
Monica’s anger when she discovered she did not get the internship she had worked so 
hard for, or Max’s disgust when he was dissecting a frog during biology lab.
What are the 
characteristics 
of nonverbal 
communication?
Web Resource 4.1
kinesics
the interpretation of how body 
motions communicate.
gestures
movements of our hands, 
arms, and ﬁ ngers that we use 
to describe or to emphasize.
illustrators
gestures that augment a 
verbal message.
emblems
gestures can substitute for 
words.

69
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
Types of Nonverbal Communication
There are a variety of types of nonverbal messages that we interpret from others and 
display ourselves. These include the use of the body (kinesics), the voice (vocalics/paralan-
guage), space (proxemics), and time (chronemics), as well as self-presentation cues.
Use of Body: Kinesics
Of all the research on nonverbal behavior, you are probably most familiar with 
kinesics, the technical name for the interpretation of what and how body motions 
communicate (Birdwhistell, 1970). Body motions are movements of the body or body 
parts that others interpret and assign meaning to. These include gestures, eye contact, 
facial expression, posture, and touch.
Gestures
Gestures are the movements of our hands, arms, and ﬁ ngers to describe or emphasize 
a point. People vary, however, in the amount of gesturing that accompanies their spo-
ken messages; for example, some people “talk with their hands” far more than others. 
Unfortunately, using our hands too much can defeat our purpose and distract listeners from 
the message we are trying to convey. Some gestures, called illustrators, augment the verbal 
message. When you say “about this high” or “nearly this round,” your listeners expect to 
see a gesture accompanying your verbal description. Other gestures, called emblems, can 
stand alone and substitute completely for words. When you raise your ﬁ nger and place it 
vertically across your lips, it signiﬁ es “Quiet.” An emblem has an automatic agreed-upon 
meaning in a particular culture, but the meaning assigned to a speciﬁ c gesture can vary 
across cultures. For example, the American hand sign for “OK” has an obscene sexual 
meaning in some European countries and stands for “I’ll kill you” in Tunisia. Adaptors 
are gestures that occur unconsciously as a response to a physical need. For example, you 
may scratch an itch, adjust your glasses, or rub your hands together when they are cold. 
You do not mean to communicate a message with these gestures, but others do notice 
and attach meaning to them. Some 
research suggests differences between 
how much women and men use adap-
tors. For example, women tend to play 
more often with their hair or clothing 
and tap their ﬁ ngers more often than 
men (Pearson, Turner, & West, 1995). Do 
you know anyone who tends to use a lot 
of gestures when they talk to you? Does 
it help or hurt message clarity? Why?
Eye contact
The technical term for eye contact, or 
gaze, is oculesics. It has to do with how 
and how much we look at others when 
we are communicating. Although the 
amount of eye contact differs from 
person to person and from situation 
to situation, studies show that talkers 
hold eye contact about 40 percent of 
the time, and listeners nearly 70 per-
cent of the time (Knapp & Hall, 2006).
adaptors
gestures that respond to a 
physical need.
eye contact or gaze
how and how much we look 
at people with whom we are 
communicating.
oculesics
how and how much 
we look at others when 
communicating.
In what ways do 
we communicate 
nonverbally with 
our bodies?
The same nonverbal cue can 
mean very different things in 
different cultures.
Christian Steinhausen/Taxi/Getty Images

70
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
Through eye contact, we both express our emotions and monitor what is 
occurring in the interaction. How we look at a person can convey a range 
of emotions such as anger, fear, or affection. The saying “The eyes are the 
windows to the soul” acknowledges how powerfully we express emotions 
through eye contact. With eye contact, you can tell whether a person or 
an audience is paying attention to and interested in what you are saying, 
as well the person’s or the audience’s reaction to your comments.
A majority of people in the United States and other Western cultures 
expect those with whom they are communicating to look them in the 
eye. Samovar, Porter, and McDaniel (2009) explain, however, that direct 
eye contact is not a custom throughout the world. For instance, in Japan, 
prolonged eye contact is considered rude, disrespectful, and threatening. 
For people from many Latin American, Caribbean, and African cultures, 
avoiding eye contact is a sign of respect.
In the United States, women tend to have more frequent eye 
contact during conversations than men do (Cegala & Sillars, 1989). 
Moreover, women tend to hold eye contact longer than men, regard-
less of the sex of the person they are interacting with (Wood, 2007). 
It is important to note that these differences, which we have described 
according to biological sex, are also related to notions of gender and standpoint in 
society. In other words, people (male or female) will give more eye contact when they 
are displaying feminine-type behaviors than when they are displaying masculine-type 
behaviors. Both women and men using a feminine style of communication tend to 
smile frequently.
Facial expression
Facial expression is the arrangement of facial muscles to communicate emotional 
states or reactions to messages. Our facial expressions are especially important in 
conveying the six basic human emotions of happiness, sadness, surprise, fear, anger, 
and disgust. Studies show that there are many similarities in nonverbal communica-
tion across cultures with regard to facial expressions. For instance, a slight raising of 
the eyebrow communicates recognition, whereas the wrinkling of one’s nose com-
municates repulsion (Martin & Nakayama, 2000, pp. 183–184). The comedic actor Jim 
Carrey is notorious for his use of exaggerated facial expressions to reveal emotions in 
his ﬁ lms (for example, The Mask, Dumb and Dumber, Liar Liar, The Truman Show, and 
Bruce Almighty). If you’ve ever watched the sitcom Seinfeld, you may also recall that 
Kramer (played by Michael Richards) is a master at using facial expressions to make 
his messages more poignant.
Facial expressions are so important to communicating the emotional part of a 
message that people often use representative smiley face ☺, sad face /, and other 
emoticons to represent facial expressions when texting, sending e-mail, or posting 
comments on social networking sites like Facebook (Walther & Parks, 2002).
Posture
Posture is how we position (body orientation) and move our body (body movement). 
From our posture, others interpret how attentive, respectful, and dominant we are. 
Body orientation refers to posture in relation to other people. Facing another person 
squarely is called direct body orientation. When two people’s bodies are at angles to 
each other, this is called indirect body orientation. In many situations, direct body 
orientation signals attentiveness and respect, and indirect body orientation shows 
inattentiveness and disrespect. In a job interview, you are likely to sit up straight 
and face the interviewer directly because you want to communicate your interest and 
facial expression
the arrangement of facial 
muscles to communicate 
emotional states or reactions 
to messages.
posture
the position and movement of 
the body.
body orientation
posture in relation to another 
person.
Our facial expressions are 
especially important in 
conveying emotions. What is 
the message on this face?
Mark L Stephenson/CORBIS

71
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
respect. Interviewers tend to interpret a slouched posture and indirect body orientation 
as inattentiveness and disrespect. Yet in other situations, such as talking with friends, 
a slouched posture and indirect body orientation may be appropriate and may not 
carry messages about attention or respect. When you are making a speech, an upright 
stance and squared shoulders will help your audience perceive you as poised and self-
conﬁ dent. So when you are giving a speech, be sure to distribute your weight equally 
on both feet to appear conﬁ dent. Body movement can be motivated (movement that 
helps clarify meaning) or unmotivated (movement that distracts listeners from the 
point being made). Pacing, for example, is unmotivated movement.
Haptics
Haptics is the technical term for what and how touch communicates. Touching behav-
ior is a fundamental aspect of nonverbal communication. We use our hands, our arms, 
and other body parts to pat, hug, slap, kiss, pinch, stroke, hold, embrace, and tickle 
others. People differ in their use of touching behavior and their reactions to unsolic-
ited touch from others. Some people like to touch others and be touched; other people 
do not. How we interpret appropriate and inappropriate touch varies not only among 
individuals but also varies with culture, sex, and gender.
Although American culture uses relatively little contact, we are likely to shake 
hands to be sociable and polite, pat a person on the back for encouragement, and 
hug a person to show love. Still, the kinds and amounts of touching behavior within 
our society vary widely. Touching behavior that seems appropriate to one person may 
be perceived as overly intimate or threatening by another. Moreover, the perceived 
appropriateness of touch differs with the context. Touch that is considered appropriate 
in private may embarrass a person when done in public or in a large group of people. 
For example, a couple holding hands while strolling in the park or at a shopping mall 
might seem appropriate, but kissing and fondling each other might not.
Lots of contact and touching is considered normal behavior in some cultures 
but not encouraged in others (Samovar, Porter, & McDaniel, 2009). Some cultures in 
South and Central America, as well as many in southern Europea, encourage con-
tact and engage in frequent touching (Neuliep, 2006). In many Arabic countries, for 
instance, two grown men walking down the street holding hands is a sign of friend-
ship. In the United States, however, it might be interpreted as a sign of an intimate 
relationship. Many northern European cultures tend to be medium to low in contact, 
and many Asian cultures are mainly low-contact cultures. The United States, which 
is a country of immigrants, is generally perceived to be medium in contact, though 
there are wide differences between individual Americans due to variations in family 
heritage.
Some research also suggests that women tend to touch others less than men do, 
but value touching more than men do. Women view touch as an expressive behavior 
that demonstrates warmth and affection, whereas men view touch as instrumental 
behavior, so that touching females is considered as leading to sexual activity (Pearson, 
West, & Turner, 1995, p. 142). Of course, these are generalizations based on gender and 
standpoints. They do not apply to every woman and man.
Use of Voice: Vocalics
The interpretation of a verbal message based on the paralinguistic features is called 
vocalics. Paralanguage is the voiced but not verbal part of a spoken message. 
Paralanguage comprises six vocal characteristics: pitch, volume, rate, quality, intona-
tion, and vocalized pauses.
body movement
movement that helps clarify 
meaning (motivated) or 
movement that distracts 
listeners from the point being 
made (unmotivated).
haptics
what and how touch 
communicates.
vocalics
the interpretation of the 
message based on the 
paralinguistic features.
paralanguage
the voiced but not verbal part 
of a spoken message.
Skill Learning Activity 4.1

72
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
Pitch
Pitch is the highness or lowness of vocal tone. People raise and lower vocal pitch to 
emphasize ideas and emotions and to indicate question,. People sometimes raise their 
pitch when they are nervous or afraid. They may lower the pitch to convey peace-
fulness or sadness (as in a speech given at a funeral), or when they are trying to be 
forceful. When parents reprimand a child for misbehaving, for example, they typically 
lower their pitch.
Volume
Volume is the loudness or softness of tone. Whereas some people have booming voices 
that carry long distances, others are normally soft-spoken. People who speak too 
loudly run the risk of appearing obnoxious or pushy, whereas people who speak too 
softly might appear timid and unsure of themselves. Regardless of their normal vol-
ume level, however, people also tend to vary their volume depending on the situation, 
the topic of discussion, and emotional intent. For example, people talk loudly when 
they wish to be heard in noisy settings. They may speak louder when they are angry 
and softer when they are being romantic or loving. We should point out here that 
there are a few cultural and gender variations in the meanings we attach to volume. 
Samovar, Porter, and McDaniel (2009) suggest, for example, that Arabs tend to speak 
with a great deal of volume to convey strength and sincerity, whereas soft voices are 
preferred in Britain, Japan, and Thailand.
Rate
Rate is the speed at which a person speaks. Most people naturally speak between 100 
and 200 words per minute. People tend to talk more rapidly when they are happy, 
frightened, nervous, or excited and more slowly when they are problem solving out 
loud or are trying to emphasize a point. People who speak too slowly run the risk of 
boring listeners, and those who speak too quickly may not be intelligible.
Quality (Timbre)
Quality is the sound of a person’s voice that distinguishes it from others. Voice qual-
ity may be breathy (Marilyn Monroe or Kathleen Turner), strident (Joan Rivers or 
Marge Simpson), throaty (Nick Nolte or Jack Nicholson), or nasal (Fran Drescher in 
The Nanny). Although each person’s voice has a distinct quality, too much breathiness 
can make people sound frail, too much stridence can make them seem hypertense, too 
much throatiness can make them seem cold and unsympathetic, and too much nasality 
can make them sound immature or unintelligent.
Intonation
Intonation is the variety, melody, or inﬂ ection in one’s voice. Voices with little intona-
tion are described as monotone and tend to bore listeners. If you have ever seen the 
movie Ferris Bueller’s Day Off, you may recall the teacher (played by Ben Stein) who is 
portrayed as boring via a monotone pitch as he questions the class: “Anyone? Anyone? 
Bueller? Bueller?” Other voices have too much intonation and may be perceived as 
sing-songy and childlike. Too much intonation is often interpreted as ditzy or even 
dim-witted. People prefer to listen to voices with a moderate amount of intonation.
In the United States, there are stereotypes about masculine and feminine voices. 
Masculine voices are expected to be low-pitched and loud, with moderate to low into-
nation; feminine voices are expected to be higher-pitched, softer in volume, and more 
expressive. Although both sexes have the option to portray a range of masculine and 
feminine paralanguage, most people usually conform to the expectations for their sex 
(Wood, 2007).
In what ways do 
we communicate 
nonverbally with 
our voices?
pitch
the highness or lowness of 
vocal tone.
volume
the loudness or softness of 
tone.
rate
the speed at which a person 
speaks.
quality
the sound of a person’s voice 
that distinguishes it from others.
intonation
the variety, melody, or 
inﬂ ection in one’s voice.

73
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
Vocalized pauses
Vocalized pauses are extraneous sounds or words that interrupt ﬂ uent speech. The 
most common vocalized pauses that creep into our speech include “uh,” “um,” “er,” 
“well,” “OK,” and those nearly universal interrupters of American conversations, “you 
know” and “like.” At times we may use vocal pauses to hold our turn when we momen-
tarily search for the right word or idea. Because they are not part of the intended 
message, occasional vocalized pauses are generally ignored by those who are inter-
preting the message. However, when we begin to use them to excess, listeners are likely 
to perceive us as nervous or unsure of what we are saying. As the use of vocalized 
pauses increases, people are less able to understand what we are saying, and they may 
perceive us as confused and our ideas as not well thought out. For some people, vocal-
ized pauses are so pervasive that listeners are unable to concentrate on the meaning 
of the message.
We can interpret the paralinguistic part of a message as complementing, sup-
plementing, or contradicting the meaning conveyed by verbal message. So when 
Joan says, “Well, isn’t that an interesting story,” how we interpret her meaning will 
depend on her paralanguage. If she alters her normal voice so that “Well” is varied 
both in pitch and tone and the rest of her words are spoken in a staccato mono-
tone, we might interpret the vocalics as contradicting the words and perceive her 
message as sarcasm. But if her voice pitch rises with each word, we might perceive 
the vocalics as supplementing the message and understand that she is asking a 
question.
Use of Space: Proxemics
Have you ever been in the midst of a conversation with someone who you felt was 
standofﬁ sh or pushy? If you had analyzed your feeling, you might have discovered 
that your impression stemmed from how far the person chose to stand from you. If 
the person seemed to be farther away than you are accustomed to, you might have 
interpreted the distance as aloofness. If the distance was less than you would have 
expected, you might have felt uncomfortable and perceived the person as being overly 
familiar or pushy. Proxemics is the formal term for how space and distance communi-
cate (Hall, 1968). People will interpret how you use the personal space around you, the 
physical spaces that you control and occupy, and the things you choose to decorate 
your space.
Personal space
Personal space is the distance we try to maintain when we interact with other people. 
Our need for and use of personal space stems from our biological territorial nature, 
for which space is a protective mechanism. How much space we perceive as appropri-
ate depends on our individual preference, the nature of our relationship to the other 
person or people, and our culture. Although the absolute amount of space varies from 
person to person, message to message, and culture to culture, in general the amount 
of personal space we view as appropriate decreases as the intimacy of our relation-
ship increases. For example, in the dominant U.S. culture, four distinct distances are 
generally perceived as appropriate and comfortable, depending on the nature of the 
conversation. Intimate distance is deﬁ ned as up to 18 inches and is appropriate for pri-
vate conversations between close friends. Personal distance, from 18 inches to 4 feet, 
is the space in which casual conversation occurs. Social distance, from 4 to 12 feet, 
is where impersonal business such as a job interview is conducted. Public distance is 
anything more than 12 feet (Hall, 1966).
In what ways do 
we communicate 
nonverbally with 
our use of space?
Skill Learning Activity 4.2
vocalized pauses
extraneous sounds or words 
that interrupt ﬂ uent speech.
proxemics
the interpretation of a person’s 
use of space and distance.
personal space
the distance you try to 
maintain when you interact 
with other people.

74
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
Of greatest concern to us is the intimate 
distance—that which we regard as appropriate 
for intimate conversation with close friends, 
parents, and younger children. People usually 
become uncomfortable when “outsiders” violate 
this intimate distance. For instance, in a movie 
theater that is less than one-quarter full, peo-
ple will tend to leave one or more seats empty 
between themselves and others whom they do 
not know. If a stranger sits right next to us in 
such a setting, we are likely to feel uncomfort-
able or threatened and may even move away. 
Intrusions into our intimate space are accept-
able only in certain settings and then only when 
all involved follow the unwritten rules. For 
instance, people will tolerate being packed into 
a crowded elevator or subway and even touch-
ing others they do not know, provided that the 
others follow the “rules.” The rules may include 
standing rigidly, looking at the ﬂ oor or the indi-
cator above the door, but not making eye contact with others. The rules also include 
ignoring or pretending that they are not touching.
Physical space
Physical space is the part of the physical environment over which we exert control. 
Our territorial natures not only lead us to maintain personal distance but also to assert 
ownership claims to parts of the physical space that we occupy. Sometimes we do 
not realize the ways we claim space as our own; in other instances, we go to great 
lengths to visibly “mark” our territory. For example, Ramon arrives early for the ﬁ rst 
day of class, ﬁ nds an empty desk, and puts his backpack next to it on the ﬂ oor and 
his coat on the seat. He then makes a quick trip to the restroom. If someone comes 
along while Ramon is gone, moves Ramon’s backpack and coat, and sits down at the 
desk, that person is violating what Ramon has marked as his territory. If you regularly 
take the same seat in a class, that habit becomes a type of marker, signaling to oth-
ers that a particular seat location is yours. Other students will often leave that seat 
empty because they have perceived it as yours. Not only can we interpret someone’s 
ownership of space by their markers, but we also can understand a person’s status in 
a group by noting where the person sits and the amount of space over which owner-
ship is claimed. In a well-established group, people with differing opinions will often 
choose to sit on opposite sides of the table, while allies will sit in adjacent spots. So if 
you are observant, you can tell where people stand on an issue by noticing where they 
choose to sit. Many other meanings can be discerned from how people use physical 
space. Have you ever attended a middle-school dance and noticed how the boys typi-
cally sit on one side of the room and the girls on the other? If so, what might that be 
communicating?
Artifacts
Artifacts are the objects and possessions we use to decorate the physical space we 
control. When others enter our homes, our ofﬁ ces, or our dorm rooms, they look 
around and notice what objects we have chosen to place in the space and how we have 
arranged them. Then they assign meaning to what they see. For example, when Katie 
People have differing 
concepts of personal space. 
Although you might ﬁ nd 
it rude for someone who 
was not an intimate friend 
to get this close to you in 
conversation, these men 
would ﬁ nd it rude if you 
backed away.
Skill Learning Activity 4.3
physical space
the physical environment over 
which you exert control.
artifacts
objects and possessions we 
use to decorate the physical 
space we control.
Robert Azzi - Woodﬁ n Camp

75
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
visited her boyfriend, Peter, at school, the ﬁ rst thing she noticed was a picture on his 
bulletin board of him hugging a cute woman she did not recognize. The second thing 
she noticed was that the framed picture she had given him of her before he left for 
school was nowhere to be found. From this, she concluded that Peter wasn’t honoring 
his promise not to see anyone at school.
The way we arrange the artifacts in our space also can nonverbally communicate 
to others. Professors and businesspeople have learned that by choosing and arranging 
the artifacts in their space, they can inﬂ uence interactions. We once knew a professor 
who was very softhearted. So when he had to handle the students who were petition-
ing to enter closed classes, he turned his desk, which normally faced the window, so 
that it was directly in front of the door. That way, the students couldn’t get into his 
ofﬁ ce, sit down, and break his resolve with their sad stories. Instead, they had to plead 
their case standing in the very public hall. In this case, his desk served as a barrier and 
protected him from his softhearted self.
People choose artifacts not just for their function but also for the message that 
the objects convey about them. When Lee, the baby of his family, got his ﬁ rst job, 
the ﬁ rst items he purchased for his new apartment were a large ﬂ at-screen TV and 
a stuffed leather couch and chair. He chose these primarily to impress his older and 
already successful brother. Whether the artifacts you choose are conscious attempts 
to impress or simply reﬂ ect your taste, when others enter your space, they will notice 
the artifacts and draw conclusions. Have you ever gone to visit someone and been 
turned off by how messy or dirty their home was? Why? What did their artifacts com-
municate to you?
As is the case with most forms of nonverbal communication, one’s use of space 
and territory is associated with culture (Samovar, Porter, & McDaniel, 2009). Western 
cultures like the United States generally demand more space than do collectivist cul-
tures such as India, China, and Japan and will defend space more strongly. Seating and 
furniture placement may also vary by cultural expectations. For example, Americans 
in groups tend to talk to those seated opposite them, but Chinese prefer to talk to those 
seated next to them. Furniture arrangement in the United States and Germany often 
emphasizes privacy. In France and Japan, furniture is typically arranged for group 
conversation or participation.
Use of Time: Chronemics
Chronemics is how we interpret use of time and is based largely on cultural context 
(Hall, 1959). People from Western cultures tend to be very time conscious. We carry 
daily planners and wear digital watches so we can arrive at precisely the “right time.” 
People from many other cultures are far less time conscious. In some cultures, for 
example Mexican, it’s rare to specify an exact time for guests to arrive for dinner. In 
another example, American executives tend to get right down to business and ﬁ nish 
quickly, whereas Japanese executives expect to devote time to social interaction ﬁ rst 
(Samovar, Porter, & McDaniel, 2009).
Moreover, people can have either a monochronic or a polychronic orientation 
to time. Those of us with a monochronic time orientation tend to concentrate our 
efforts on one task, and only when it is ﬁ nished or when the time we have allotted 
to it is over, do we move on to another task. If we are monochronic, we see time 
as “real” and think about “spending time,” “losing time,” and so on. As a result, 
monochronic people subordinate interpersonal relationships to their schedule (Dahl, 
2004, p. 11). When Margarite’s sister comes into the room and interrupts her study 
time to share some good news, Margarite, who is monochronic, screams, “Get out! 
chronemics
the interpretation of a person’s 
use of time.
monochronic time 
orientation
a time orientation that 
emphasizes doing one thing 
at a time.
polychronic time 
orientation
a time orientation that 
emphasizes doing multiple 
things at once.
In what ways do 
we nonverbally 
communicate with 
our use of time?

76
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
Can’t you see I’m studying!” Others of us with a polychronic time orientation tend 
to tackle multiple tasks at once. For example, while writing a paper, we might peri-
odically check our e-mail and Facebook messages and cook dinner too. Polychronic 
people see time as ﬂ exible and ﬂ uid and view appointment times and schedules as 
variable and subordinate to interpersonal relationships; they easily alter or adapt 
their schedule to meet the needs of their relationships (Dahl, 2004, p. 11). For exam-
ple, George, who is polychronic, shows up for a noon lunch with Raoul at 12:47 
p.m. because as he was leaving his ofﬁ ce, his coworker stopped him to ask for help 
on a problem.
How Margarite’s sister or Raoul interpreted the time behavior they experienced 
depends on their time orientation. If Margarite’s sister is also monochronic, she 
probably apologized, perceiving her own behavior to have been at fault. If Raoul is 
polychronic, he will not be offended by George’s late arrival because he will view 
George’s delay as understandable. We tend to view others’ use of time through the 
lens of the culture from which we come. So if we are monochronic in our orientation 
to time, we will view the polychronic time behavior of someone else as being “rude” 
and vice versa.
As you probably recognize, the dominant U.S. culture has a monochronic time 
orientation; Swiss and German cultures tend to be even more monochronic. On the 
other hand, many Latin American and Arab cultures have a polychronic orientation. 
Immigration has led to an inﬂ ux of Arab workers into northern Europe and of Latin 
American workers into the United States. As a result, you are quite likely to encounter 
people whose use of time is different from your own. Dr. Charles Okigbo, talks about 
moving to and from what he calls “African time” to “American time” in the Diverse 
Voices feature entitled “Chronemics.”
Self-Presentation Cues
People learn a lot about us based on how we look. This includes our physical appear-
ance as well as our clothing and grooming.
Physical Appearance
People make judgments about others based on how they look. We can control our phy-
sique to some extent through exercise, diet, cosmetic surgery, and so on. But we also 
inherit much of our physical appearance, including our body type and physical features 
such as hair and eyes. Our body is one of the ﬁ rst things that others notice about us, 
and there are culture-based stereotypes associated with each of the three general body 
shapes. Endomorphs, who are shaped round and heavy, are stereotyped as kind, gentle, 
and jovial. Mesomorphs, who are muscular and strong, are believed to be energetic, 
outgoing, and conﬁ dent. Ectomorphs, whose bodies are lean and have little muscle 
development, are stereotyped as brainy, anxious, and cautious. Although not everyone 
ﬁ ts perfectly into one of these categories, each person tends toward one body type. 
Even though these stereotypes are far from accurate, there is ample anecdotal evidence 
to suggest that many of us form our ﬁ rst impressions based on body type stereotypes.
Clothing and Grooming
Our clothing and personal grooming communicate a message about us. Today, 
more than ever, people use clothing choices, body art, and other personal groom-
ing to communicate who they are and what they stand for. Likewise, when we 
meet someone, we are likely to form our impression of them from how they are 
dressed and groomed. Because clothing and grooming can be altered to suit the 
endomorph
round and heavy body type.
mesomorph
muscular and athletic body 
type.
ectomorph
lean and little muscle 
development.
In what ways do 
we communicate 
non verbally with 
our appearance?

77
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
Chronemics
by Charles Okigbo
Professor of Communication, North Dakota State 
University and Head, Policy Engagement & 
Communication African Population and Health 
Research Center Nairobi, Kenya
It is ironical that time is universal in the sense 
that every society understands the passage of 
time, which is also connected to growth, aging, 
and transitions from one life stage to another. 
And yet, the concept of time is so varied from 
one society to another. I have experienced the 
sameness and variation in understanding or 
appreciating time in my life history, start-
ing from growing up in Nigeria, coming to the 
United States for higher education, and traveling 
between the United States and different African 
countries. In much of Africa, there are two time 
modes—cultural time, which is imprecise, and 
Western or, as we call it in Nigeria, “English” 
time. In Nigeria, we call this precise clock-based 
accounting for time “English time” because the 
British colonized us. Other African countries that 
had different colonists might call it by a differ-
ent name.
Time in much of traditional Africa is seen 
as an inexhaustible resource that ﬂ ows end-
lessly and is hardly in short supply. Growing 
up in my Igbo village in southeastern Nigeria, 
the setting for Chinua Achebe’s novel, Things 
Fall Apart, I saw my people mark time with 
the rising and setting of the sun. Longer peri-
ods were marked by the rainy and dry seasons, 
which could come late or early, and people’s 
ages were gauged by historic events such as 
the world wars, the invasion of locusts, or the 
British colonialists’ conﬁ scation of all guns. 
Such loose characterization meant that preci-
sion was not possible. I vividly remember my 
people saying with utmost imprecision that a 
morning meeting would start “after sunrise” or 
“at the ﬁ rst cockcrow” or “after the morning 
market.” Whereas this would appear confusing 
and imprecise to Western time observers, to us, 
it presented no problems at all.
My ﬁ rst experience with Western time was 
when I went to kindergarten and later elemen-
tary school. We were taught to be punctual, 
and tardiness exacted strict sanctions, usually 
severe ﬂ ogging. The severity of the punishment 
depended on how late one came to school.
When I came to the United States in 1978 
for the ﬁ rst time for graduate studies at Ohio 
University, I was already comfortable with 
Western time and never had any problem with 
punctuality. In fact, many Africans in the United 
States who come from backgrounds of cultural 
time are often hypersensitive about punctuality 
issues and tend to be too punctual. This may be 
a case of overcompensating to avoid relapsing 
to cultural time. The adjustment to Western time 
can present some challenges, especially in situ-
ations when we have exclusive African events 
in the United States. For example, I remember 
from my personal experiences as an African 
student and teacher in the United States that 
many meetings organized by Nigerian or other 
African students hardly ever started “on time” 
by Western standards because we often relapsed 
to our cultural time for exclusively African 
events.
We also tend to operate by cultural time 
when hosting exclusively African events in U.S. 
communities. For example, the Igbo Cultural 
Association in Minneapolis (Umunne) holds an 
annual masquerade festival in the fall. Even when 
the published program states that the celebration 
will start at 4:00 p.m., the organizers and their 
African guests know that the event will probably 
begin about 8:00 p.m. or so, because it is largely 
an exclusive African event.
So, we seem capable of successfully weav-
ing in and out of cultural time depending on 
Diverse Voices
(Continued )

78
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
our expectation of whether the occasion is for 
Africans only or for Africans and “others.” When 
the “others” are people with Western time orien-
tation, we make every effort to be punctual. But 
when they are people who seem to share our sense 
of time, we respond accordingly. This represents 
a chronemics co-orientation, by which I mean 
that unconsciously we size up the other to know 
where to position them on the continuum of “cul-
tural” and “Western” time. If they are closer to the 
former, we expect them to have a more relaxed 
approach to time, but if they are closer to the 
latter, we try to be punctual and seriously time 
conscious in dealing with them.
The tendency is for people to adjust their 
sense of time depending on the situation or the 
expectation of the audience. Professional meet-
ings, conferences, even appointments with doctors 
or lawyers are loosely treated depending on one’s 
expectations of how the other side sees time.
I must say that we Africans are not the only 
ones who could beneﬁ t from engaging in chro-
nemics co-orientation. People who are usually 
Western in their approach to keeping appoint-
ments may decide not to be so punctual if they 
expect that the other party will keep them wait-
ing. For example, in the 1960s my village, Ojoto, 
was so small that we had no resident priest for 
the local church. Every Sunday, an Irish priest 
came from the cathedral in Onitsha to conduct 
mass. Whereas many priests observed Western 
time and were usually punctual and expected us 
to be as well, Revered Father Nicholson, went 
so native in his sense of time that the joke then 
became that if Fr. Nicholson was the celebrant 
for the Sunday mass, you could go to the market 
and do ﬁ ve other chores before coming to his 
Sunday morning mass, and you would not be 
late! So, we could say that whereas sometimes 
Africans may need to adjust to the precision 
of Western time, at other times and in other 
situations, other people, including Europeans 
and Americans who are dealing with exclusive 
African groups, should consider adjusting to 
cultural time.
I have noticed that many African Americans 
in the United States are similar to Africans from 
the continent with respect to time consciousness, 
and many Native Americans in North Dakota 
and Minnesota share a similar cultural time 
orientation. So when African Americans host a 
party where most of the guests are also African 
American, the invitation may state that the party 
starts at 7:00 p.m., but the host may not expect 
most guests to arrive until after 9:30 p.m.
While both cultural time and Western time 
continue to guide human behavior, increasing 
globalization and the information technological 
revolution are dictating a global approach to time 
that runs by the precision of the clock rather than 
by the natural rhythms of the rising or setting of 
the sun or the beginning or ending of seasons. 
Whether this move is ultimately in the best inter-
est of humankind remains to be seen.
There appears to be no rule of thumb about 
how Africans take time. In fact, we have obvi-
ously overgeneralized in talking about “African 
time,” knowing that it is impossible to have all 
53 African countries or 750 million African 
peoples adopt a uniform outlook on how to use 
time. The expectation is that educated Africans 
adopt Western time more than their uneducated 
compatriots, but this is also an overgeneraliza-
tion since there are many educated Africans who 
have a very poor sense of punctuality, whereas 
there are uneducated ones to whom punctual-
ity is second nature. There are many exceptions 
to any generalization. My personal experience, 
which has many limitations, is that being tardy 
is more readily tolerated in Africa, although there 
are many Africans who value punctuality and 
cannot stand tardy time keeping. Every culture 
has people who are punctual and others who are 
tardy. We have them both in Africa as well.

79
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
occasion, we rely heavily on these 
nonverbal cues to understand who 
other people are and how to treat 
them. As a result, you can change 
how people perceive you by alter-
ing your clothing and grooming. 
For example, a successful sales rep-
resentative may wear an oversize 
white T-shirt, baggy shorts, and a 
backward ball cap when hanging 
out with his friends; put on khakis 
and a golf shirt to go to the ofﬁ ce; 
and dress in a formal blue suit to 
make a major presentation to a 
potential client group. In each case, 
he uses what he is wearing to com-
municate who he is and how others 
should treat him. Body art (pierc-
ings and tattoos) have become quite 
popular in the United States today. Although body art can be an important means 
of self-expression, the Pop Comm! feature points out some serious considerations 
regarding body art and the impression it might make on an employer. Clothing 
choices vary based on gender, as well. In the United States, feminine clothing is 
more decorative, and masculine clothing is more functional (Wood, 2007). In pro-
fessional settings today, masculine clothing (a two-piece suit) is considered most 
appropriate for both women and men, but women will often wear feminine cloth-
ing on a date.
Guidelines for Improving Nonverbal 
Communication
Because nonverbal messages are inevitable, multichanneled, ambiguous, and some-
times unintentional, decoding them accurately can be tricky. Add to this the fact that 
the meaning for any nonverbal behavior can vary by situation, culture, and gender, 
and you begin to understand why we so often misread the behavior of others. The fol-
lowing guidelines can help you improve the likelihood that the messages you send will 
be perceived accurately and that you will accurately interpret the nonverbal messages 
you receive.
Sending Nonverbal Messages
 1. Be conscious of the nonverbal behaviors you are displaying. Remember that 
you are always communicating nonverbally. Some nonverbal cues will always be 
out of your level of consciousness, but you should work to bring more of your 
nonverbal behavior into your conscious awareness. Pay attention to what you are 
doing with your body, voice, space, and self-presentation cues. If you initially 
have difﬁ culty doing this, ask a friend to point out the nonverbal behaviors you 
are displaying.
Skill Learning Activity 4.4
From Wall Street Journal. Permission, Cartoon Features Syndicate. Reprinted 
by permission.
What can you 
do to improve 
your nonverbal 
communication 
skills?

80
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
Body Art Then and Now: Its 
Messages and Meanings
Since ancient times, people have been paint-
ing, piercing, scarring, tattooing, and shaping 
their bodies. In fact, there is no culture that didn’t 
or doesn’t use body art to signal people’s place in 
society, mark a special occasion, or just make a 
fashion statement (American Museum of Natural 
History, 1999). The body art you see today is sim-
ply an extension of ancient human practice that 
has been adapted to our 21st-century deﬁ nitions 
of status, ritual, and beauty.
Body painting is a temporary means of creat-
ing a different identity or celebrating a particular 
occasion. For centuries Eastern cultures have 
used henna to dye hands and other body parts 
to celebrate rites of passage such as marriages. 
Traditionally in India, married women wore a 
bindi, a red spot, between their eyebrows. Native 
Americans used a variety of natural dyes to paint 
their bodies in preparation for war. Today, women 
use cosmetics, sports fans decorate their faces and 
bodies before big games, and children have their 
faces painted at community festivals.
Roman soldiers and Masai warriors vol-
untarily underwent body piercings as a sign of 
strength. Some tribal cultures had a rite of passage 
in which the person hangs from large piercings 
in the limbs or body trunk. Some societies used 
piercings as a sign of slavery, and others viewed 
them as signs of beauty or royalty (Schurman, 
n.d.). Today piercing is voluntary, and common 
parts of the body to be pierced are the ears and 
nose. Some people choose to pierce other body 
parts including eyebrows, tongues, navels, and 
genitals. Often, piercings are a rite of passage 
signaling some personal milestone. At a certain 
age girls may have their ears pierced. Less tra-
ditional piercings or multiple piercings may be 
undertaken as a sign of rebellion or to express 
membership in a particular subculture.
Scariﬁ cation is the deliberate cutting or 
burning of the skin in such a way as to con-
trol the scarring and create a pattern or picture. 
Sometimes the freshly made cuts are purposely 
irritated so that they form raised or keloid scars. 
Scariﬁ cation was widely practiced in Africa, 
where facial scars could identify a person’s eth-
nic group or family, or just be an individual 
statement of beauty. The Jewish rite of circum-
cision practiced since the time of Abraham is a 
form of scariﬁ cation. Today, scariﬁ cation may 
be part of a fraternity or gang initiation rite. 
Some individuals use cutting to escape from feel-
ing trapped in an intolerable psychological and 
emotional situation (Jacobs, 2005). The scars that 
result from this type of cutting are seen as badges 
of survival.
Pop Comm!
 2. Be purposeful in your use of nonverbal communication. Sometimes, it is important 
to control what you are communicating nonverbally. For instance, if you want to be 
persuasive, you should use nonverbal cues that demonstrate conﬁ dence and credibil-
ity. These may include direct eye contact, a serious facial expression, a relaxed posture, 
a loud and low-pitched voice with no vocal interferences, and a professional style of 
clothing and grooming. Although there are no absolute prescriptions for communicat-
ing nonverbally, we can make strategic choices to convey the message we desire.
Cora Reed,2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com

81
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
Tattooing is the oldest form of body art; tat-
tooed mummies have been found in various parts 
of the world. Tattoos are permanent alterations to 
the body using inks or dyes, and they are sym-
bolic in nature. Like other body art, tattoos can 
be either a statement of group solidarity or an 
expression of individuality. They can be sources 
of shame or pride. They can be public statements 
of outsider status or privately enjoyed personal 
symbols.
Like piercings, tattoos have also been used 
to mark people who were considered property 
or inferior in some other way. African American 
slaves were often tattooed. During World War 
II, the Nazis tattooed a ﬁ ve-digit number on the 
inner forearm of Jews and other “undesirables” 
in concentration camps to strip them of their 
individual identities. Unlike self-initiated tattoos, 
which are a source of pride for the wearer, these 
tattoos were a source of shame. For years after 
their ordeal, many Holocaust survivors covered 
their forearms and refused to talk about their 
experiences. The number on their arm was a grim 
reminder that they had survived while others had 
perished.
Today tattoos are losing their outsider status. 
Celebrities, soccer moms, corporate executives, 
sports stars, and high school students sport tat-
toos as statements of individuality and personal 
aesthetic. Teenagers may “rebel” by having a 
small butterﬂ y tattooed on their shoulder blade 
or a Native American–patterned band tattooed 
on their bicep. Some people have tattoos strategi-
cally placed so that they can choose to display 
them or hide them from view depending on the 
self they want to portray.
Shaping, another type of body art, is alter-
ing the silhouette or shape of the body based 
on a culturally validated aesthetic (Australian 
Museum, 2009). Cranial shaping, neck stretch-
ing, corsetry, and foot binding have been 
practiced in various cultures at various times. 
Native American and African tribes practiced 
head shaping. In Africa, Burma, and Thailand 
rings or beaded necklaces are used to give the 
appearance of an elongated neck (“African 
Neck Stretching,” 2008–2009). Corsetry began 
in ancient times as a means of protecting the 
wearer from hernias and other body damage that 
occurs during strenuous activity. By the time of 
the Romans, wearing a corset became a sign 
of lower status. Slaves, who did manual labor, 
wore corsets while their owners wore ﬂ ow-
ing garments. In the16th century, fashionable 
French women cinched their corsets to achieve 
a 13-inch waist (Wilson, 2002). For over two 
thousand years, Chinese girls’ feet were bound 
so that they would have the ideal tiny feet and 
would be able to marry well (Lim, 2007).
When Madonna donned a merry widow 
corset, she was just following a practice that is 
several centuries old. And the Spanx undergar-
ments that many women wear today have their 
origins in body shaping. But today, we body 
shape in a variety of additional ways includ-
ing weight lifting and other workouts that go 
beyond keeping us healthy. We also body shape 
through cosmetic surgeries, allowing us to rid 
ourselves of our familial nose, take years off of 
our face, or suck off unwanted weight. Some 
people become addicted to cosmetic surgery, 
and others develop eating disorders in order to 
conform their natural bodies to the current deﬁ -
nitions of beauty.
When it comes to body art, everything old is 
new again.
 3. Make sure that your nonverbal cues do not distract from your message. 
When you are not aware of what nonverbal cues you are displaying or when 
you are anxious, certain nonverbal behaviors may hinder your communication. 
Fidgeting, tapping your ﬁ ngers on a table, pacing, mumbling, and using vocal 
interferences and adaptors can hinder other people’s interpretation of your mes-
sage. Try to use nonverbal behaviors that enhance rather than distract from your 
message.

82
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
 4. Make your nonverbal communication match your verbal communication. 
When nonverbal messages contradict verbal messages, people are more likely 
to believe the nonverbal messages, so it is important to have your verbal and 
nonverbal messages match. In addition, the various kinds of nonverbal com-
munication behavior should match each other. If you are feeling sad, your 
voice should be softer and less expressive, and you should avoid smiling, which 
would contradict your voice. People get confused and frustrated by inconsistent 
messages.
 5. Adapt your nonverbal behavior to the situation. Situations vary in their formal-
ity, familiarity among the people, and purpose. Just like you would select different 
language for different situations, you should adapt your nonverbal messages to 
the situation. Assess what the situation calls for in terms of body motions, paralan-
guage, proxemics and territory, artifacts, chronemics, and physical appearance. Of 
course, you already do some situational adapting with nonverbal communication. 
You would not dress the same way for a wedding as you do to walk the dog. You 
do not treat your brother’s space and territory the same way you treat your doc-
tor’s space and territory. The more you can consciously adapt your nonverbal 
behavior to what seems appropriate to the situation, the more effective you will be 
as a communicator.
Interpreting Nonverbal Messages
 1. Do not automatically assume that a particular behavior means the same thing 
to everyone. There is much room for error when people draw quick conclusions 
about an aspect of nonverbal behavior. Instead, assume multiple possibilities 
based on culture, gender, and even individual differences. You may have learned 
over time that your friend grinds her teeth when she is excited. You may never 
encounter another person who uses this behavior in this way.
 2. Consider nonverbal behaviors as they relate to the context of the message. 
Because the same nonverbal cue can mean different things in different contexts, 
take the time to consider how it is intended in a given situation. Realize, too, that 
you might not understand all the details of the situation. One behavior that often 
offends teachers is a student answering a cell phone during class. Before assum-
ing the worst, however, it might be best if the teacher tried to discover why the 
student did so. The student might be in the midst of a serious family situation that 
demanded instant access.
 3. Pay attention to the multiple nonverbal cues being sent and their relation-
ship to the verbal message. In any one interaction, you are likely to get simul-
taneous messages from a person’s eyes, face, gestures, posture, voice, and use 
of space and touch. Even in electronic communication, where most nonverbal 
communication is impossible, facial expression and touch can be communicated 
through emoticons, paralanguage through capitalization of words, and chrone-
mics through the timing and length of the electronic message. By taking into 
consideration all nonverbal cues, you will be more effective in interpreting oth-
ers’ messages.
 4. Use perception checking. The skill of perception checking lets you see if your 
interpretation of another person’s message is accurate. By describing the nonver-
bal behavior you have noticed and tentatively sharing your interpretation of it, 
you can get conﬁ rmation or correction of your interpretation.

83
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
Communicating Emotions Nonverbally: Encoding and 
Decoding Skill and Practice
The Assignment
Your instructor will write a simple sentence on the board that you will recite 
to your classmates while attempting to convey a particular emotion non-
verbally. First, you will use only your voice; then you will use your voice and 
face; and ﬁ nally you will use your voice, face, and body. The sentence 
could be as simple as “I had bacon and eggs for breakfast this morning.”
 1. To ﬁ nd out the emotion you will convey, draw a card from a stack 
offered by your instructor. Without letting your classmates see, turn 
the card over to read what emotion is written on the front. Some 
possible emotions include anger, excitement, fear, joy, worry, and 
sadness. Consider how you will use vocalics and kinesics to convey 
that emotion.
 2. When your instructor calls on you, go to the front of the classroom 
and face the wall (so your classmates cannot see your face). Try to 
convey that emotion with only your voice while saying the sentence 
with your back to the class.
 3. The class might make some guesses about the emotion you are 
conveying and give some reasons for their guesses. You should not 
tell them whether they are correct at this point.
 4. Turn around to face your classmates and say the sentence again, 
this time trying to reinforce the emotion with your face and eyes.
 5. The class might again make some guesses and why.
 6. Repeat the sentence once more, this time using your voice, face, 
and body to convey the emotion.
 7. The class might again make some guesses and why.
 8. Tell them the emotion that was on the card and what you did with 
your voice, face, and body to convey it.
 9. Your instructor may lead a discussion about what worked and 
didn’t, as well as how you could have made the emotional mes-
sage more clear.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
A Question of Ethics
After the intramural mixed-doubles tennis 
matches on Tuesday evening, most of the play-
ers adjourned to the campus grill for a drink and 
a chat. Marquez and Lisa sat down with Barry 
and Elana, the couple they had lost a match to 
that night largely because of Elana’s improved 
play. Although Marquez and Lisa were only ten-
nis friends, Barry and Elana had been going out 
together for much of the season.
What Would You Do?

84
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
Summary
Nonverbal communication refers to the interpretations of bodily actions, vocal qualities, 
use of space and time, and self-presentation cues. Nonverbal communication is inevitable, 
multichanneled, intentional or unintentional, possibly ambiguous, and the primary means 
by which we convey our emotions. The sources of nonverbal messages include use of body 
motions (kinesics: gestures, eye contact, facial expression, posture, and touch), use of voice 
(vocalics: pitch, volume, rate, quality and intonation, and vocalized pauses), use of space 
(proxemics: personal space, physical space, and use of artifacts), use of time (chronemics), 
and self-presentation cues (physical appearance as well as clothing and grooming).
Although the meanings we attach to nonverbal behaviors are inﬂ uenced by culture 
and gender, we can become more adept at sending and interpreting nonverbal mes-
sages. In terms of sending nonverbal messages, we can improve by being conscious of 
the nonverbal behavior we are displaying, by being purposeful in its use, by making 
sure that our nonverbal cues do not distract from our message, by making our nonverbal 
communication match our verbal messages, and by adapting our nonverbal behavior to 
the situation. In terms of receiving nonverbal messages, we can improve by not jumping 
to conclusions, by acknowledging context, by paying attention to multiple nonverbal 
cues and their relationship to the verbal message, and by perception checking.
After some general conversation about the 
tournament, Marquez said, “Elana, your serve 
today was the best I’ve seen it this year.”
“Yeah, I was really impressed. And as you 
saw, I had trouble handling it,” Lisa added.
“And you’re getting to the net a lot better 
too,” Marquez added.
“Thanks, guys,” Elana said in a tone of grati-
tude, “I’ve really been working on it.”
“Well, aren’t we getting the compliments 
today,” sneered Barry in a sarcastic tone. Then 
after a pause, he said, “Oh, Elana, would you get 
my sweater—I left it on that chair by the other 
table.”
“Come on, Barry; you’re closer than I am,” 
Elana replied.
Barry got a cold look on his face, moved 
slightly closer to Elana, and said emphatically, 
“Get my sweater for me, Elana. Now.”
Elana quickly backed away from Barry as she 
said, “OK, Barry—it’s cool,” and she then quickly 
got the sweater for him.
“Gee, isn’t she sweet,” Barry said to Marquez 
and Lisa as he grabbed the sweater from Elana.
Lisa and Marquez both looked down at the 
ﬂ oor. Then Lisa glanced at Marquez and said, “Well, 
I’m out of here. I’ve got a lot to do this evening.”
“Let me walk you to your car,” Marquez said 
as he stood up.
“See you next week,” they both said in uni-
son as they hurried out the door, leaving Barry 
and Elana alone at the table.
 1. Analyze Barry’s nonverbal behavior. What 
was he attempting to achieve?
 2. How do you interpret Lisa’s and Marquez’s 
nonverbal reactions to Barry?
 3. Was Barry’s behavior ethically acceptable? 
Explain.
Now that you have read Chapter 4, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
Communicate! Active Online Learning

85
 
Chapter 4  Communicating Nonverbally 
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment in the body of the chapter.
Skill Learning Activities
4.1: Body Motions (71)
Go to a public place (for example, a restaurant) 
where you can observe two people having a con-
versation. You should be close enough so that you 
can observe their eye contact, facial expression, and 
gestures, but not close enough to hear what they are 
saying.
Carefully observe the interaction, with the goal 
of answering the following questions: What is their 
relationship? What seems to be the nature of the 
conversation (social chitchat, plan making, problem 
solving, argument, intimate discussion)? How does 
each person feel about the conversation? Do feel-
ings change over the course of the conversation? Is 
one person more dominant? Take note of the speciﬁ c 
nonverbal behaviors that led you to each conclusion, 
and write a paragraph describing this experience and 
what you have learned.
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the observation sheet provided in your Premium 
Website for Communicate! Look for it in the Skill 
Learning activities for Chapter 4.
4.2: Vocal Characteristics (73)
Spend a few hours listening to public or talk radio. 
If possible, listen to a station that broadcasts in a 
language with which you are unfamiliar. Attempt 
to block out your awareness of the speakers’ words, 
and instead focus on the meaning communicated by 
the pitch, volume, rate, and quality of their speech. 
Be sure to listen to a number of different speakers 
and record your results in a log. Can you detect any 
variations in the vocal characteristics of the dif-
ferent speakers? If so, what do you make of these 
Key Terms
adaptors (69)
artifacts (74)
body movement (71)
body orientation (70)
chronemics (75)
ectomorph (76)
emblems (68)
emoticons (67)
endomorph (76)
eye contact or gaze (69)
facial expression (70)
gestures (68)
haptics (71)
illustrators (68)
intonation (72)
kinesics (68)
mesomorph (76)
monochronic time orientation (75)
nonverbal communication 
 behaviors (67)
oculesics (69)
paralanguage (71)
personal space (73)
physical space (74)
pitch (72)
polychronic time orientation (75)
posture (70)
proxemics (73)
quality (72)
rate (72)
vocalics (71)
vocalized pauses (73)
volume (72)

86
 
Chapter 4 
Communicating Nonverbally
variations and what they say about each speaker’s 
message?
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the log sheet provided in your Premium Website for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Chapter 4.
4.3: Violating Intimate Space Norms (74)
Enter a crowded elevator. Get on it and face the back. 
Make direct eye contact with the person you are 
standing in front of. When you disembark, record the 
person’s reactions. On the return trip, introduce your-
self to the person who is standing next to you and 
engage in an animated conversation. Record the reac-
tion of the person and others around you. Then get 
on an empty elevator and stand in the exact center. 
Do not move when others board. Record their reac-
tions. Be prepared to share what you have observed 
with your classmates.
4.4: Self-Presentation Audit (79)
The Self-Presentation Audit allows you to analyze 
the image you project, using the dimensions you 
have studied in Chapter 4. These include body type, 
clothing and personal grooming, poise, touch, and 
use of time. Once you have completed the audit, 
review how you have described yourself with respect 
to each of the self-presentation dimensions. Then 
write a short essay in which you describe how you 
present yourself, evaluate how satisﬁ ed you are with 
this image, and list what, if any, adjustments to your 
self-presentation you would like to make so that your 
self-presentation matches the image you are trying 
to project.
To complete this activity, you’ll need the audit 
provided in your Premium Website for Communicate! 
Look for it in the Skill Learning activities for Chapter 4.
Web Resources
4.1: Maria Brazil (69)
Maria-Brazil.org is a U.S.-based Web site dedicated to 
Brazilian culture. The link at your Premium Website 
will take you to a page on the site that depicts how 
Brazilians use body language to communicate. How 
does Brazilian body language compare to body lan-
guage used in the United States?

Listening and Responding
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What is listening and why is it important?
• What are the ﬁ ve different types of listening?
• How can you improve your listening skills by focusing your attention?
• How can you improve your listening skills to increase understanding?
• What are three tactics that can help you remember what you hear?
• How can you improve your listening skill of evaluating what you’ve heard?
• How can you improve your listening skills so that you respond 
appropriately to what you’ve heard?
“Beth, do you have an extra key to the media cabinet? I misplaced mine, 
and I have to get into it right away.”
“No, I don’t have a key, but it doesn’t matter because . . .”
“I can’t believe it. When I left home this morning, I was sure I had it.”
“Bart, it’s okay . . .”
“I pulled out my keys—but I just had my car key and main door key.”
“Bart, I’ve been trying to tell you, just try the . . .”
“It’s just like me. I think I’ve got everything, but just before I check the last time, 
Sue will say something to me and I get sidetracked. Then I just take off.”
“Bart, chill out.  The door’s . . .”
“Chill out? If I can’t get the DVD for the meeting, I’ll get torn apart. We’ve got 
six advertising people coming from all over the city just to see the DVD. What am 
I supposed to say to them?”
“Bart, you don’t have to say anything. I’ve been trying to tell you . . .”
5
Mark Richards/PhotoEdit

88
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
“Oh sure—I just go in there and say, ‘By the way, the DVD of the new ad 
campaign is locked up in the cabinet, and I left my key at home.’ Come on, 
Beth—who’s got the other key?”
“Bart, listen! I’ve been trying to tell you—Miller was in the cabinet and, 
knowing you’d be along in a minute, he left the door open for you.”
“Geez, Beth, why didn’t you tell me?”
Are you a good listener when you are under pressure? Or, like Bart, do you occa-
sionally ﬁ nd that your mind wanders when others are talking to you? We must not 
underestimate the importance of listening, because it can provide clariﬁ cation, con-
nect us to others, build trust and empathy, help us learn and remember material, and 
improve our ability to evaluate information (Donoghue & Siegel, 2005). We begin this 
chapter with a discussion of what listening is and the different types of listening. Then, 
we focus on speciﬁ c ways you can improve your listening skills during each phase of 
the listening process.
What Is Listening?
People sometimes make the mistake of thinking listening and hearing are the same 
thing, but they’re not. Hearing is a physiological process, whereas listening is a cogni-
tive process. In other words, listening occurs only when we choose to attach meaning 
to what we hear. Members of the International Listening Association deﬁ ne listening 
as “the process of receiving, constructing meaning from, and responding to spoken 
and/or nonverbal messages” (Brownell, 2002, p. 48).
Listening is important for effective communication because 50 percent or more 
of the time we spend communicating is spent listening (Janusik & Wolvin, 2006). 
 Although most of us have spent a great deal of time learning to read and write, fewer 
than 2 percent of us have had any formal listening training (Listening Factoid, 2003). 
According to research by the International Listening Association, even when we try to 
listen carefully, most of us remember only about 50 percent of what we hear shortly 
after hearing it and only about 20 percent two days later. One survey of top-level 
North American executives revealed that 80 percent believe listening is one of the 
most important skills needed in the corporate environment (Salopek, 1999). It simply 
makes sense to improve our listening skills.
Types of Listening
Although we spend most of the time we are communicating listening to what others are 
saying, the type of listening that is required of us depends on the situation. So in order 
to be an effective listener in different situations, you must ﬁ rst consider your purpose 
for listening. Scholars have identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve types of listening based on ﬁ ve different 
purposes. These types are appreciative, discriminative, comprehensive, empathic, and 
critical listening (Wolvin & Coakley, 1996). Each type of listening requires a different 
listening
the process of receiving, 
constructing meaning from, 
and responding to spoken 
and/or nonverbal messages.
What is listening 
and why is it 
important?

89
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
degree of psychological processing. By considering your purpose, you can engage in 
the most appropriate type of listening in a given situation and devote the degree of 
psychological processing necessary.
Appreciative Listening
In an appreciative listening situation, your goal is to simply enjoy the thoughts and 
experiences of others by listening to what they are saying. (Wolvin & Coakley, 1996). 
With appreciative listening, you do not have to focus as closely or as carefully on 
speciﬁ cs as you do in other listening situations. You might use appreciative listening 
during a casual social conversation while watching a ball game with friends or when 
listening to your daughter describe the ﬁ sh she caught on an outing with her grandpa. 
Most people listen to music in this way. Do you ever turn on the TV or radio just for 
background sound? 
Discriminative Listening
In a discriminative listening situation, your goal is to accurately understand the 
speaker’s meaning. At times this involves listening “between the lines” for meaning 
conveyed in other ways than the words themselves. Discriminative listening requires 
us to pays attention not only to the words but also to nonverbal cues such as rate, 
pitch, inﬂ ection, volume, voice quality, inﬂ ection, and gestures. So when a doctor is 
explaining the results of a test, a patient not only listens carefully to what the doctor 
is saying but also pays attention to the nonverbal cues that indicate whether these 
results are troubling or routine. Likewise, we often choose to support political candi-
dates based on whether, when we listen, we believe that we can trust that they will 
fuﬁ ll their campaign promises. If you’ve ever questioned the truthfulness of a friend’s 
claim, what nonverbal cues helped convince you they were not telling the whole truth?
What are the ﬁ ve 
different types of 
listening?
appreciative listening
listening for enjoyment.
discriminative listening
listening to understand the 
meaning of a message.
Do you ever choose to 
listen to a particular song 
just because it makes you 
feel good? If so, you are 
engaging in appreciative 
listening.
Monkey Business Images, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.Com

90
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
What are some nonverbal 
cues that hot line volunteers 
can use to show their 
empathy?
Comprehensive Listening
In a comprehensive listening situation, your goal is not only to understand the speak-
er’s message but also to learn, remember, and be able to recall what has been said. 
We listen comprehensively to professors lecturing about key concepts, speakers at 
training seminars, and broadcast news reports that provide timely information about 
trafﬁ c conditions.
Empathic Listening
When the situation calls for us to try to understand how someone else is feeling 
about what they have experienced or are talking about, we use empathic listening. 
Therapists, counselors, psychologists, and psychiatrists engage in empathic listening 
with their clients as do those who answer telephone hotlines. When your goal is to be 
a sounding board or help a friend sort through feelings, you will want to begin with 
empathic listening.
Critical Listening
In critical listening situations, your ultimate goal is to evaluate the worth of a message. 
Because you need to hear, understand, evaluate, and assign worth to the message, it 
requires more psychological processing than the other types. Critical listening is the most 
demanding of the types of listening because it requires that you understand and remem-
ber both the verbal and nonverbal message, assess the speaker’s credibility, and effectively 
analyze the truthfulness of the message. Fortunately, we don’t need to engage in critical 
listening all the time. But when we are talking with salespeople or listening to political 
candidates, when we are receiving an apology from someone who has  violated our trust 
or when we are being solicited for a donation, we need to engage in critical listening.
comprehensive listening
listening to learn or remember.
empathic listening
listening to understand the 
speakers feelings about the 
message.
critical listening
listening to evaluate the 
truthfulness or honesty of a 
message.
AP Photo/Rob Carr

91
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
Steps in the Listening Process
Listening is a complex process made up of ﬁ ve steps. These steps are (a) attending, (b) 
understanding, (c) remembering, (d) evaluating, and (e) responding to the message.
Attending
Attending is the process of focusing on what a speaker is saying regardless of the 
potential distractions of other competing stimuli. Poor listeners have difﬁ culty exer-
cising control over what they attend to, often letting their minds drift to thoughts 
unrelated to the topic. One reason is that people typically speak at a rate of about 
120–150 words per minute, but our brains can process between 400 and 800 words 
per minute (Wolvin & Coakley, 1996). This means we usually assume we know what a 
speaker is going to say before he or she ﬁ nishes saying it, so our mind has lots of time 
to wander from the message. Moreover, research suggests that the average attention 
span for adults is 20 minutes or less (Stephens, 1999). Some reports even claim that, 
thanks to the Internet, our attention span is considerably shorter.
To be a good listener then, you must train yourself to focus on or attend to what 
people are saying regardless of potential distractions. Let’s consider ﬁ ve techniques 
that can help you improve your attending.
 1. Get physically ready to listen. Good listeners create a physical environment that 
will aid listening, and they adopt a listening posture. They eliminate distractions 
from the physical environment. If the music is playing so loudly that it competes 
with your roommate who is trying to talk with you, turn it down. If you are 
checking e-mail or Facebook, stop. Shut down the site so you won’t be tempted 
to check it while you are supposed to be listening. Similarly, turn off or silence 
your cell phone.
A listening posture is one that moves the listener toward the speaker, allows 
direct eye contact, and stimulates the senses. For instance, when the professor tells 
the class that the next bit of information will be on the test, effective listeners are 
likely to sit upright in their chairs, lean forward slightly, cease any unnecessary 
physical movement, and look directly at the professor.
 2. Resist mental distractions while you listen. Block out wandering thoughts when 
they creep into your head while you listen. These thoughts may stem from a visual 
distraction associated with something you see (such as a classmate who enters 
the room while the professor is lecturing), an auditory distraction associated with 
something you hear (such as classmates chatting beside you during class), or a 
physical distraction associated with body aches, pains, or discomfort (such as 
wondering what you’ll eat for lunch because your stomach is growling) Obviously, 
the more you can do to eliminate the potential for mental distractions, the less 
likely you’ll be to experience wandering thoughts while you listen.
 3. Resist interrupting others. In conversation, we switch from speaker to listener so 
frequently that we may ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult at times to make these shifts completely. 
Instead of listening, it is easy to rehearse what we are going to say as soon as we 
have a chance. It is especially important to when trying to be a good listener that 
you let the other person ﬁ nish before you take your turn to speak. Good listen-
ers resist interrupting others. Especially when you are in a heated conversation 
or excited about what you just heard, you will consciously need to stop yourself 
from preparing a response or interrupting the speaker. The Pop Comm! feature for 
this chapter focuses on the lost art of listening on cable news programs, where 
interrupting and talking over one another seems to have become the norm.
attending
the process of focusing on 
what a speaker is saying 
regardless of the potential 
distractions of other 
competing stimuli.
How can you 
improve your 
listening skills by 
focusing your 
attention?

92
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
 4. Hear a person out before you react. Far too often, we stop listening before the per-
son has ﬁ nished speaking because we think we know what the person is going to 
say. Yet often we are wrong. In addition, we often stop listening to people because 
their mannerisms or words turn us off. Think of the times you may have stopped 
listening to a professor’s lecture and missed important information because of the 
teacher’s accent or gestures. Most of us need to learn the value of patience and 
silence in allowing others to express themselves and in helping us to listen closely 
and carefully.
 5. Observe nonverbal cues. Listeners interpret messages more accurately when they 
observe the nonverbal behaviors accompanying the words. For instance, when 
your friend says, “Don’t worry about me. I’m ﬁ ne, really,” we must interpret cues 
Pundit “Debates”: The Lost Art 
of Listening and the Future of 
Civil Democratic Discourse in 
America
During their August 2009 recess, members of the 
U.S. Congress returned to their home states amidst 
partisan wrangling over health care reform. Many 
of them held town hall meetings, allowing citi-
zens to debate the government’s proposed changes 
to the health care system. They were shocked to 
encounter citizens shouting at one another and 
at their elected representatives, refusing to listen 
to explanations and differing points of view. But 
could this situation have been predicted, given the 
steady diet of what now passes for “debate” on 
televised news and opinion programs?
Today, the uncivil discourse spouted by tele-
vision’s self-proclaimed pundits is so widespread 
that comedian Stephen Colbert created a TV show, 
The Colbert Report, devoted entirely to satirizing 
them. Mimicking real cable TV hosts, Colbert fre-
quently interrupts his guests, manipulates data, 
and has the unshakeable faith that his opinions 
are always right.
One of the ﬁ rst and most popular of these 
pundits is Bill O’Reilly, host of Fox’s The O’Reilly 
Factor (Colapinto, 2006; Johnson, 2006). O’Reilly’s 
aggressive pundit style has been widely copied by 
others such as Lou Dobbs on CNN, Nancy Grace 
on Headline News, Chris Matthews on NBC, and 
Keith Olbermann on MSNBC. Taken as a group, 
these TV talk show hosts are inﬂ uencing a gen-
eration of Americans, whose only exposure to 
the concept of democratic debate is informed by 
these programs.
But 
news 
programming 
that 
features 
 in-depth interviews and discussion about pol-
icy issues is not new. In 1945, Meet the Press 
debuted as a radio show, providing discussion 
and debate among public ofﬁ cials and other 
policy experts about the issues of the day. The 
program migrated to the NBC television network 
in 1947 and has been broadcast continuously 
ever since.
In its original format, Meet the Press was 
considered part of the NBC’s public information 
programming, featuring a government ofﬁ cial 
or a prominent expert who was quizzed by a 
Pop Comm!
AP Photo/Jeff Christensen

93
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
such as tone of voice, body actions, and facial expression to tell whether she is 
really ﬁ ne or whether she is upset but reluctant to tell you about it.
Understanding
Understanding is decoding a message accurately to reﬂ ect the meaning intended by 
the speaker. Sometimes we do not understand because the message is encoded in 
words that are not in our vocabulary; other times the meaning that we ﬁ nd in the 
message may not be the meaning intended by the speaker; and at still other times our 
misunderstanding may stem from our missing the emotional, nonverbal meaning of 
a message. We can improve our understanding by asking questions, paraphrasing the 
message, and empathizing with the speaker.
understanding
decoding a message 
accurately to reﬂ ect the 
meaning intended by the 
speaker.
panel of well-known journalists. These discus-
sions were moderated by the host of the show, 
also a respected journalist. This format changed 
in the early 1990s, when journalist and lawyer 
Tim Russert began hosting the show. Under the 
new format, Russert interviewed the guests alone, 
and a panel of people with opposing viewpoints 
discussed the interview. Russert was known for 
ambushing his guests on air, confronting them 
with statements they’d made in the past that dif-
fered from their current views and asking them to 
reconcile the differing positions. In addition, the 
show’s panels were often populated by the same 
combative pundits who appear on other TV news 
and opinion talk shows.
There are two reasons why public information 
programs meant to educate us about impor-
tant issues have become “gotcha” scream-fests. 
First, such shows are proﬁ table for TV networks 
because the costs to produce them are relatively 
low—they don’t require writers or elaborate sets, 
and guests receive no compensation for sharing 
their opinions (Farhi, 2009).
Second, viewers like edginess. Professor 
Dale Harrison of Auburn University explains, 
“Rants add passion to news events and inspire 
people to take sides on issues” (Johnson, 2006). 
This is certainly not a new phenomenon. As 
journalist James Maguire (2007) points out, as 
far back as 80 B.C., Roman philosopher Cicero 
speculated that people are more convinced by 
pathos  (emotion) than by logos (logic). Professor 
Harrison acknowledges the effectiveness of 
pathos, saying, “That’s not all bad, as long as 
viewers are skeptical about the facts presented 
on TV rants and balance their media diet with 
more reliable sources of facts and information” 
(Johnson, 2006, p. 71). But with newspaper cir-
culation dropping precipitously (Hau, 2008), 
more Americans are getting their news from TV 
sources, often choosing those whose ideological 
bent mirrors their own. As a result, they are less 
likely to be exposed to valid arguments made by 
people with opposing views.
Furthermore, as explored in a presentation 
by Diana Mutz, Byron Reeves, and Kevin Wise 
(2003) at an annual meeting of the International 
Communication Association, experiments show 
that although viewers are more likely to remem-
ber the main emphasis of the arguments in less 
civil debates, they are also less likely to remember 
the actual arguments underlying the positions. 
Compared to more civil debate, viewers are also 
less likely to remember the arguments that are 
opposed to their own opinion.
Despite what viewers say they want, how 
well does the pundit debate style serve our 
democracy? What would Thomas Jefferson—who 
said, “Information is the currency of democ-
racy”—think of Bill O’Reilly? How would John F. 
Kennedy—who said, “The ignorance of the voter 
in a democracy impairs the security of all”—grade 
Keith Olbermann? And what must Jesse Jackson—
who said, “A full and fair discussion is essential to 
democracy”—make of the talk-show round tables 
he participates in, where guests interrupt, fail to 
listen, and insult other guests? Fair and balanced? 
You decide.
How can you 
improve your 
listening skills 
to increase 
understanding?

94
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
 1. Ask questions to gain additional information. A question is a statement 
designed to get further information or to clarify information already received. 
Effective questioning begins by identifying the kind of information you need 
to increase your understanding. Suppose Maria says to you, “I am totally 
 frustrated. Would you stop at the store on the way home and buy me some 
more paper?” You may be a bit confused by her request and need more infor-
mation to understand. Yet if you simply respond “What do you mean?” Maria, 
who is already frustrated, may become defensive. Instead, you might think 
about what type of information you need and form a question to meet that 
need. To increase your understanding, you can ask one of these three types of 
questions:
• 
 To get details: “What kind of paper would you like me to get, and how much 
will you need?”
• 
To clarify word meanings: “Could you tell me what you mean by frustrated?”
• 
To clarify feelings: “What’s frustrating you?”
 2. Paraphrase the message to check your understanding. Paraphrasing is put-
ting into words the ideas or feelings you have perceived from the message. 
For example, during an argument with your sister, after she has stated her 
concern about your behavior, you might paraphrase what she has said as 
follows: “You say that you are tired of my talking about work and that you 
feel that I try to act better than you when I talk about my successes at work.” 
Paraphrases may focus on content, on feelings underlying the content, or 
on both. A content paraphrase focuses on the denotative meaning of the 
message. The first part of the example above (“You say that you are tired of 
my talking about work”) is a content paraphrase. A feelings paraphrase is a 
response that captures the emotions attached to the content of the message. 
The second part of the example (“you feel that I try to act better than you”) 
is a feelings paraphrase.
By paraphrasing, you give the speaker a chance to verify your understanding. 
The longer and more complex the message, the more important it is to paraphrase. 
When the speaker appears to be emotional or when English is not the speaker’s 
native language, paraphrasing is also important.
To paraphrase effectively, (1) listen carefully to the message, (2) notice what 
images and feelings you have experienced from the message, (3) determine what 
the message means to you, and (4) create a message that conveys these images or 
feelings.
 3. Empathize with the speaker. Empathy is intellectually identifying with or vicari-
ously experiencing the feelings or attitudes of another. To empathize, we generally 
try to put aside our own feelings or attitudes about another. Three approaches 
people use when empathizing are empathic responsiveness, perspective taking, 
and sympathetic responsiveness (Weaver & Kirtley, 1995, p. 131).
• Empathic responsiveness occurs when you experience an emotional response 
parallel to, and as a result of observing, another person’s actual or anticipated 
display of emotion (Omdahl, 1995, p. 4; Stiff, Dillard, Somera, Kim, & Sleight, 
1988, p. 199). For instance, when Jackson tells Janis that he is in real trouble 
ﬁ nancially, and Janis senses the stress and anxiety that Jackson is feeling, we 
would say that Janis has experienced empathic responsiveness.
• Perspective taking, imagining yourself in the place of another, is the most com-
mon form of empathizing. Although perspective taking is difﬁ cult for many of 
question
a statement designed to get 
further information or to clarify 
information already received.
paraphrasing
putting into words the ideas or 
feelings you have perceived 
from the message.
content paraphrase
one that focuses on the 
denotative meaning of the 
message.
feelings paraphrase
a response that captures the 
emotions attached to the 
content of the message.
empathy
intellectually identifying with 
or vicariously experiencing 
the feelings or attitudes of 
another.
empathic responsiveness
experiencing an emotional 
response parallel to, and as 
a result observing, another 
person’s actual or anticipated 
display of emotion.
perspective taking
imagining yourself in the 
place of another; the most 
common form of empathizing.

95
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
Skill
A response that 
conveys your under-
standing of another 
person’s message.
Use
To increase listening 
efﬁ ciency; to avoid 
message confusion; to 
discover the speaker’s 
motivation.
Procedure
1. 
Listen carefully to 
the message.
2. 
Notice what 
images and feel-
ings you have 
experienced from 
this message.
3. 
Determine what 
the message 
means to you.
4. 
Create a mes-
sage that conveys 
these images or 
feelings.
Example
Grace says, “At two 
minutes to ﬁ ve, the 
boss gave me three 
letters that had to be 
in the mail that eve-
ning!” Bonita replies, “If 
I understand, you were 
really resentful that 
your boss dumped 
important work on you 
right before quitting 
time when she knows 
you have to pick up 
the baby at day care.”
Communication Skill
Paraphrasing
Provide an appropriate question and para-
phrase for each of these statements. To get you 
started, look at this model:
Example: “It’s Dionne’s birthday, and I’ve 
planned a big evening. Sometimes I think 
Dionne believes I take her for granted—well, 
after tonight she’ll know I think she’s something 
special!”
Question: “What speciﬁ c things do you have 
planned?”
Paraphrase: “If I’m understanding you, you’re 
really proud that you’ve planned a night that’s 
going to be a lot more elaborate than what 
Dionne expects on her birthday.”
 1. Luis: “It was just another mind-numbing 
class. I keep thinking one of these days 
Professor Romero will get excited about 
something. He is a real bore!”
 2. Angie: “Everyone seems to be raving about 
the new reality show on Channel 5 last 
night, but I didn’t see it. You know, I don’t 
watch the boob tube.”
 3. Kaelin: “I don’t know if it’s me or Mom, but 
lately she and I just aren’t getting along.”
 4. Aileen: “I’ve got a report due at work and a 
paper due in management class. On top 
of that, it’s my sister’s birthday, and so far I 
haven’t even had time to get her anything. 
Tomorrow’s going to be a disaster.”
Skill Learning Activity 5.1
Skill Building
Questions and Paraphrases

96
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
The New Yorker Collection 1999 © Michael Crawford from the cartoonbank.com. All rights reserved.
us (Holtgraves, 2002), with conscious effort we can learn to imagine ourselves 
in the place of another. For example, if Janis personalizes the message by 
picturing herself in serious ﬁ nancial debt, anticipates the emotions she might 
experience, and then assumes that Jackson might be feeling the same way, then 
Janis is empathizing by perspective taking.
• Sympathetic responsiveness is feeling concern, compassion, or sorrow for 
another because of the other’s situation or plight. Having sympathy differs from 
the other two approaches. Rather than attempting to experience the feelings of 
the other, when you sympathize, you translate your intellectual understand-
ing of what the speaker has experienced into your own feelings of concern, 
compassion, and sorrow for that person. In our previous example, Janis has 
sympathy for Jackson when she understands that Jackson is embarrassed and 
worried, but instead of trying to feel those same emotions, she feels concern 
and compassion for her friend. Because of this difference in perspective, many 
scholars differentiate sympathy from empathy.
How well you empathize also depends on how observant you are of others’ 
behavior and how clearly you read the nonverbal messages they are sending. 
To improve your observational skills when another person begins a conversa-
tion with you, develop the habit of silently posing two questions to yourself: 
(1) What emotions do I believe the person is experiencing right now? and (2) 
On what cues from the person am I basing this conclusion? Consciously asking 
these questions helps you focus on the nonverbal aspects of messages, which 
convey most of the information on the person’s emotional state. 
To further increase the accuracy of reading emotions, you can use the skill of 
perception checking. This is especially helpful when the other person’s culture is dif-
ferent from yours. Let’s consider an example. Atsuko, who was raised in rural Japan 
(a collectivist culture) and is now studying at a university in Rhode Island may feel 
embarrassed when her professor publically compliments her for her part of a group 
Skill Learning Activity 5.2
sympathetic 
responsiveness
feeling concern, compassion, 
or sorrow for another because 
of the other’s situation or 
plight.

97
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
project. Her friend Meredith might notice Atsuko’s reddened cheeks and downcast eyes 
and comment, “Atsuko, you look like I do when I’m embarrassed. Are you uncomfort-
able that Professor Shank singled you out for praise?”
Remembering
Remembering is being able to retain information and recall it when needed. Too often, 
people forget almost immediately what they have heard. For instance, you can probably 
think of many times when you were unable to recall the name of a person to whom you 
had just been introduced.
Think of how much the education system depends on listening and recalling infor-
mation. Given the common use of lectures, class discussions, and other listening-based 
learning experiences, it is not surprising that research shows a link between effective 
listening and school success (Bommelje, Houston, & Smither, 2003). Three techniques 
that can help you improve your ability to remember information are repeating, con-
structing mnemonics, and taking notes.
 1. Repeat the information. Repetition—saying something aloud or mentally rehears-
ing it two, three, or four times immediately after hearing it—helps listeners store 
information in long-term memory by providing necessary reinforcement (Estes, 
1989). If information is not reinforced, it will be held in short-term memory 
for as little as 20 seconds and then forgotten. When you are introduced to a 
stranger, increase the chances that you will remember the person’s name by 
immediately using it: “It’s nice to meet you, Jack . . . McNeil right?” If you also 
mentally say “Jack McNeil, Jack McNeil, Jack McNeil, Jack McNeil” to yourself, 
you’ll further increase your chances of remembering his name. Likewise, when 
you receive the directions “Go two blocks east, turn left, turn right at the next 
light, and it’s in the next block,” immediately repeat to yourself “two blocks east, 
turn left, turn right at light, next block—that’s two blocks east, turn left, turn 
right at light, next block.”
 2. Construct mnemonics. Constructing mnemonics helps listeners put information 
in forms that are more easily recalled. A mnemonic device is any artiﬁ cial tech-
nique used as a memory aid. One of the most common mnemonic techniques is to 
form a word with the ﬁ rst letters of a list of items you are trying to remember. For 
example, a popular mnemonic for the ﬁ ve Great Lakes is HOMES (Huron, Ontario, 
Michigan, Erie, Superior).
When you want to remember items in a sequence, you can form a sentence 
with the words themselves or use words starting with the same ﬁ rst letters. For 
example, most beginning music students learn the mnemonic “every good boy 
does fine” for the notes on the lines of the treble clef (E, G, B, D, F). (And the word 
face is a common mnemonic for the notes on the treble clef spaces, F, A, C, E.)
 3. Take notes. Although note taking would be inappropriate in casual interpersonal 
encounters, it is a powerful tool for increasing your recall when important infor-
mation is being shared. Note taking is an important strategy for learners when 
they attempt to listen to and absorb information from lecture-type speech (Dunkel 
& Pialorsi, 2005). Note taking does more than provide a written record that you 
can go back to; it also allows you to take an active role in the listening process 
(Wolvin & Coakley, 1996, p. 239).
Useful notes may consist of a brief list of main points or key ideas, plus a 
few of the most signiﬁ cant details. Or they may be a short summary of the entire 
concept (a type of paraphrase) after the message is completed. For lengthy and 
remembering
being able to retain 
information and recall it when 
needed. 
mnemonic device
any artiﬁ cial technique used 
as a memory aid.
Skill Learning Activity 5.3
Skill Learning Activity 5.4
Web Resource 5.1
What are the 
three tactics that 
can help you to 
remember what 
you hear?

98
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
detailed  information, however, good notes likely will consist of a brief outline of 
what the speaker has said, including the overall idea, the main points of the mes-
sage, and key developmental material. Good notes are not necessarily long. In fact, 
many classroom lectures can be summarized in a simple outline. Figure 5.1 is an 
example of notes based on the material in this chapter.
Evaluating
The fourth listening process is to evaluate or critically analyze what has been said. 
Evaluation is critically analyzing what you have heard to determine its truthful-
ness. Critical listening is especially important when you are asked to believe, act 
on, or support what is being said. For instance, if a person is trying to convince 
you to vote for a particular candidate, support efforts to legalize gay marriage, or 
buy an expensive gadget, you will want to listen critically in order to evaluate the 
information and arguments presented. If you don’t critically analyze what you hear, 
you risk going along with ideas or plans that violate your values, are counterpro-
ductive to your interests, or mislead others (including the speaker) who value your 
judgment.
To evaluate a message, you must learn to separate statements of fact from state-
ments based on inferences. Factual statements are those whose accuracy can be veri-
ﬁ ed as true. Inferences are conjectures which may be based on facts or  observations. 
If we comment, “You are reading this sentence,” we have stated a fact. If we say, “You 
are understanding and enjoying what you are reading,” we have made an inference. 
Once you’ve determined what in the message is being offered as fact and what is being 
offered as inference, you need to (1) analyze the “facts” to determine if they are true 
and (2) test the inferences to determine whether they are valid.
 1. Analyze “facts” to determine if they are true. If a statement is offered as a fact, 
you need to determine if it is true and not simply rely on the speaker’s statement. 
Doing so often requires asking questions that probe the evidence. For example, if 
Raoul states, “It’s going to rain tomorrow.” You might ask, “Oh did you see hear 
the weather report this morning?”
evaluation
critically analyzing what you 
have heard to determine its 
truthfulness.
factual statements
statements whose accuracy 
can be veriﬁ ed or proven.
inferences
statements made by the 
speaker that are based on 
facts or observations.
Effective managers 
understand the value 
of making notes about 
problems that employees 
point out. How can you 
use note taking at work to 
improve your performance?
Dana White/PhotoEdit
How can you 
improve your 
listening skills of 
evaluating what 
you’ve heard?

99
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
I. 
What is listening?
 
A. 
Attaching meaning to what we hear
 
B. 
50% of communication time is listening
II. 
 Types of listening (appreciative, discriminative, comprehensive, empathic, 
critical)
III. 
Steps in listening process
 
A. 
Attending—focusing
 
 
1. 
Get ready (physically & mentally)
 
 
2. 
Resist mental distractions
 
 
3. 
Don’t interrupt (Make complete shift, don’t rehearse)
 
 
4. 
Hear person out (don’t check out)
 
 
5. 
Watch nonverbal cues (do they match words?)
 
B. 
Understanding—decoding message
 
 
1. 
Ask questions (get details & clarify words & feelings)
 
 
2. 
Paraphrase (content & feelings)
 
 
3. 
Empathize (empathy, perspective taking, sympathy)
 
 
4. 
Check perceptions
 
C. 
Remembering
 
 
1. 
Repeat info
 
 
2. 
Construct mnemonics (e.g., Great Lakes = HOMES)
 
 
3. 
Take notes
 
D. 
Evaluating
 
 
1. 
Analyze facts
 
 
2. 
Test inferences
 
E. 
Responding
 
 
1. 
 Supportive messages (state aim to help, acceptance of other, 
 concern, availability to listen, being ally; acknowledge & validate 
 feelings; encourage elaboration)
 
 
2. 
 Disagree respectfully (“I” language, speciﬁ c examples, points of 
agreements)
Figure 5.1
Notes based on a lecture on 
listening
 2. Test inferences to determine whether they are valid. If a statement offered is 
an inference, you need to determine whether it is valid. You can ask yourself (or 
the speaker) three questions: (1) What are the facts that support this inference? 
(2) Is this information really central to the inference? (3) Are there other facts or 
information that would contradict this inference? For example, if someone says, 
“Better watch it—Katie’s in one bad mood today. Did you catch the look on her 
face? That’s one unhappy girl,” you should stop and think, is Katie really in a bad 
mood? The support for this inference is her facial expression. Is this inference 
accurate? Is Katie’s expression one of unhappiness, or is it anger? Is the look on 
her face enough to conclude that she’s in a bad mood? Or are there other cues that 
those of us who know her would expect to see? Is there anything else about Katie’s 
behavior today that could lead us to believe that she’s not in a bad mood?
You are listening critically when you separate facts from inferences and then 
evaluate them as true or valid.
Skill Learning Activity 5.5
Skill Learning Activity 5.6

100
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
Critical Listening
Find and attend a formal public presentation that is being given on cam-
pus or in your community. Your goal is to listen so that you remember and 
can critically evaluate what you have heard. Be sure to take notes and 
record the main ideas the speaker presents. After you have heard the 
speech, analyze what you have heard. You can use the following questions 
to guide your initial thinking:
•  What was the purpose of the speech? What was the speaker trying to 
explain to you or convince you about?
•  Was it easy or difﬁ cult to identify the speaker’s main ideas? What did 
you notice about how the speaker developed each point she or he 
made?
•  Did the speaker use examples or tell stories to develop a point? If so, 
were these typical examples, or did the speaker choose examples that 
were unusual but seemed to prove the point?
•  Did the speaker use statistics to back up what was said? If so, did the 
speaker tell you where the statistics came from? Did the  statistics sur-
prise you? If so, what would you have needed to hear that would have 
helped you to accept them as accurate?
•  Do you think that the speaker did a good job? If so, why? If not, what 
should the speaker have done to be more effective?
When you have ﬁ nished your analysis, follow your instructor’s directions. You 
may be asked to write a short essay about the speech or to present what 
you have learned to the class.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
Responding
At times, to be truthful and ethical, we will need to disagree with someone or pro-
vide negative feedback or a negative critique. When we respond to a friend or family 
member who appears emotionally upset, respond to a work-group colleague’s ideas, 
or respond to a public speech by critiquing it, we need to respond supportively. 
Supportive responses conﬁ rm the speaker’s feelings, and when we are disagreeing 
or critiquing, they demonstrate respect for the speaker. Let’s take a look at several 
guidelines.
 1. Guidelines for responses that offer emotional support. At times the appropriate 
response is one that is related to the emotional content of the message we have 
heard. So the goal of our response will be to reassure, encourage, soothe, console, 
or cheer up. Supportive messages are helpful when they create a conversational 
environment that encourages the other person to talk about and make sense of the 
situation that is causing distress. Supporting does not mean making false state-
ments or telling someone only what he or she wants to hear. Effective supporting 
responses are based on the facts but focus on how those facts can provide emo-
tional support for the speaker.
supportive messages
comforting statements that 
have a goal to reassure, 
bolster, encourage, soothe, 
console, or cheer up.
How can you 
improve your 
listening skills so 
that you respond 
appropriately to 
what you’ve heard?

101
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
Research suggests several key characteristics of supportive messages in 
 interpersonal settings (Burleson, 2003, pp. 565–568). The following guidelines are 
based on this research:
• Clearly state that your aim is to help.
Example: “I’d like to help you, what can I do?”
• Express acceptance or affection; do not condemn or criticize.
Example: “I understand that you just can’t seem to accept this.”
• Demonstrate care, concern, and interest in the other’s situation; do not give a 
lengthy recount of a similar situation.
Example: “What are you planning to do now?” Or “Gosh, tell me more; what 
happened then?”
• Indicate that you are available to listen and support the other without intruding.
Example: “I know we’ve not been that close, but sometimes it helps to have 
someone to listen, and I’d like to do that for you.”
• State that you are an ally.
Example: “I’m with you on this.” Or “Well, I’m on your side; this isn’t right.”
• Acknowledge the other’s feelings and situation as well as expressing your  sincere 
sympathy; do not condemn or criticize the other’s behavior or feelings.
Example: “I’m so sorry to see you feeling so bad; I can see that you’re  devastated 
by what has happened.”
• Assure the other that what he or she is feeling is legitimate; do not tell the other 
how to feel or to ignore his or her feelings.
Example: “With what has happened to you, you have a right 
to be angry.”
• Use prompting comments to encourage the other to elaborate 
on his or her story.
Example: “Uh-huh,” “yeah,” or “I see. How did you feel about 
that?” Or “What happened before that? Can you elaborate?”
 2. Guidelines for responses that demonstrate respect when dis-
agreeing or  critiquing others. When you cannot agree with what 
a speaker has said, or when you are in a position where it is 
appropriate for you to critique what someone else has said or 
done, the following guidelines can help you demonstrate that 
you respect the person and that your goal is to provide the person 
with your point of view.
• Use “I” language so that you clearly own the comments you are 
making and do not ascribe them to others.
Example: “Carla, I really like the way you cited the reference 
for your opening quotation.”
• Use speciﬁ c language and speciﬁ c examples to point out areas 
of disagreement and areas for improvement.
Example: “I apologize, but I can’t agree to that deadline or to 
another meeting about this project until I have had a chance to 
see the entire presentation. I’d suggest that by Monday at 10:00 
a.m. each of us e-mails other team members a copy of the report 
section we are drafting. Then let’s have a short meeting right after 
class to see if we need to meet again and, if so, to set a time.”
•  Find a point to agree with or something positive to say before 
expressing your disagreement or offering a negative critique.
 Example: “I really appreciate what you had to say on this 
topic. But it was hard for me to follow your argument, and I 
Effective supportive 
messages are in touch 
with the facts and provide 
emotional support for the 
speaker.
David R. Frazier/Photoresearchers/First Light

102
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
Figure 5.2
Examples of effective and 
ineffective speech critiques
Ineffective critique
Effective critique
Content
“The sources you cited 
are old and no longer 
represent current thinking 
on the topic.”
“I noticed you relied heavily on Johnson’s 
1969 essay about global warming. For me, 
your argument would be more compelling if 
you were to cite research that has been pub-
lished in the last ﬁ ve years.”
Structure “You were really hard to 
follow.”
“I really appreciate what you had to say on 
this topic. I would have been able to follow 
your main points better if I had heard clear 
transitions between each one. Transitions 
would have helped me notice the switch from 
one topic to the next.”
Delivery
“You talk too fast!”
“I was fascinated by the evidence you offered 
to support the ﬁ rst main point. It would have 
been even more compelling for me if you were 
to slow down while explaining that informa-
tion. That would give me time to understand 
the material more fully before we moved on to 
the next main point.”
think that if you had used transitional statements, they could have helped me 
understand your points better.”
In this course, you may be asked to respond to a speech given by one of your 
classmates. If so, you will want to remember that your goal is to be supportive, honest, 
and helpful. A good critique will address three topics: the content of the speech, the 
structure of the speech, and the delivery of the speech.
•  When critiquing the content, you can comment on the appropriateness of the 
speech for that particular audience and the use of facts and inferences; you can 
also analyze the logic of the arguments and the evidence used to support ideas.
•  When critiquing structure, you can focus on the introduction, the use of transi-
tions, the choice of organizational pattern, and the concluding remarks.
•  When critiquing delivery, you can comment on how the speaker used voice and 
gesture, whether the tone was appropriately conversational or formal, and how 
effectively the speaker used visual aids such as PowerPoint slides.
When you critique a classmate’s speech, it is especially important to offer speciﬁ c 
suggestions for improvement. Figure 5.2 provides examples of ineffective and effective 
speech critique statements.
Figure 5.3 on pages 104 and 105 summarizes the ﬁ ve processes involved in listen-
ing and describes how good and poor listeners approach each process.
Conversation and Analysis
Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Skill Learning Activity 5.7, 
which is a video clip of Damien and Chris’s conversation. As you watch the interaction, 
analyze how well Damien uses the skills of active listening and how well his responses 

103
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
demonstrate effective support and comforting. You can respond to this and other analy-
sis questions by clicking on “Critique” in the menu bar at the top of the screen. When 
you’ve answered all the questions, click “Done” to compare your answers to those pro-
vided by the authors.
Damien and Chris work in a small shop selling shirts and gifts. Usually they get 
along well, but lately Chris has seemed standofﬁ sh. Damien decides to talk with Chris 
to see if anything is wrong. Damien approaches Chris in the break room.
Conversation
DAMIEN: Chris, you’ve been kind of quiet lately, man. What’s been going on?
DAMIEN: Come on, man, what’s going on?
CHRIS: Just life. (He shrugs.) I’m just kind of down right now.
DAMIEN: Well, what am I here for? I thought we were friends.
CHRIS: (He thinks brieﬂ y and decides to talk about it.) Well, Carl’s been on my case 
the last few weeks.
DAMIEN: Why? Did you do something?
CHRIS: Oh, he says that I’m sloppy when I restock and that I’m not always “polite” 
to our customers. You know, just ’cuz I don’t smile all the time. I mean, what 
does he want—Little Mary Sunshine?
DAMIEN: So you’re angry with the boss.
CHRIS: Yeah, I guess. . . . No, no, not so angry. I’m just frustrated. I come in to work 
every day, and I try to do my job, and I don’t complain. You know, I’m sick and 
tired of getting stuck back there in the stock room reorganizing everything. It’s not 
like they’re paying us big bucks here. And Carl shouldn’t expect us to be charming 
with everybody who walks through that door. I mean, half of the people who walk 
through that door are, well, they’re totally rude and act like jerks.
DAMIEN: Yeah, I feel like you on that. Some of those people shouldn’t be allowed 
out in public. What is Carl saying about how you’re dealing with the customers?
CHRIS: Oh, he just says that I’ve changed and that I’m not being “nice.” I mean, he 
used to call me his top guy.
DAMIEN: I mean, you know how Carl is. He’s a fanatic about customer service. 
You know how, when we ﬁ rst started, he drilled us about being polite and 
smiling and being courteous at all times. So maybe when he says “you’re not 
being nice,” he just means that you’re not doing it the way you used to. I 
mean, I’ve noticed a change. I mean, you’re just not yourself lately. Is any-
thing going on outside of work?
CHRIS: You could say that. Sarah and I just bought a house, so money’s been a bit 
tight. Now, she wants to quit her job and start a family, and I’m not sure we can 
afford it. On top of it all, my kid sister shows up a few weeks ago on our doorstep, 
pregnant, and so she’s living with us. So yeah, it is a bit overwhelming. And I’m a 
bit worried that Carl’s going to ﬁ re me.
DAMIEN: Wow, that is a lot of stuff! I can understand why you’re down, but did Carl 
really threaten to ﬁ re you?
Skill Learning Activity 5.7
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

104
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
Figure 5.3
A summary of the ﬁ ve aspects of listening
ATTENDING
The process of focus-
ing on what a speaker 
is saying regardless of 
competing stimuli that 
are potential distractions.
UNDERSTANDING
The process of decoding 
a message accurately 
to reﬂ ect the meaning 
intended by the speaker.
REMEMBERING
The process of 
being able to 
retain information 
and recall it when 
needed.
Good listeners
Good listeners attend to 
important information. 
They
•  ready themselves phys-
ically and mentally
•  listen objectively 
regardless of emo-
tional involvement
•  listen differently depend-
ing on situations
Good listeners assign 
appropriate meaning to 
what is said. They
•  seek out apparent 
 purpose, main points, 
and  supporting 
information
•  ask mental questions to 
anticipate information
•  silently paraphrase to 
solidify understanding
•  seek out subtle mean-
ings based on nonverbal 
cues
Good listeners 
mentally work to 
retain what has 
been said. They
•  repeat key 
information
•  mentally create 
mnemonics for 
lists of words 
and ideas
• take notes
Poor listeners
Poor listeners may not 
hear what a person is 
saying because of day-
dreaming or distractions. 
They
•  ﬁ dget in their chairs, 
look out the window, 
and let their minds 
wander
•  visibly react to 
 emotional language
•  listen the same way 
regardless of the type 
of material
Poor listeners hear what is 
said but are either unable 
to understand or assign 
different meaning to the 
words. They
•  ignore the way informa-
tion is organized
•  fail to anticipate com-
ing information
•  seldom or never men-
tally review information
•  ignore nonverbal cues
Poor listeners rely 
on a single hear-
ing to retain what 
has been said. 
They
•  assume they will 
remember
•  seldom single 
out any infor-
mation as 
especially 
important
•  rely on memory 
alone

105
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
EVALUATING
The process of critically analyzing 
what you have heard to determine its 
truthfulness.
RESPONDING SUPPORTIVELY
The process of conﬁ rming the speaker’s 
feelings and, when disagreeing or 
critiquing, demonstrating respect for the 
speaker
Good listeners assess the accuracy, 
truthfulness, and extent to which they 
agree with the speaker’s ideas. They
•  assess facts to determine if they are 
true.
•  test the logic underlying speaker 
inferences to see if they are valid.
Good listeners provide emotional 
comfort or demonstrate respect for the 
speaker while disagreeing or critiquing. 
They
•  offer statements that acknowledge 
the legitimacy of the speaker’s emo-
tional state.
•  use “I” centered statements that 
begin by agreeing or acknowledg-
ing positives before offering speciﬁ c 
disagreements or commenting on 
problems.
Poor listeners hear and understand 
but don’t take time to consider the 
accuracy, truthfulness, and extent to 
which they agree. They
•  accept information at face value.
•  don’t analyze the logic behind 
inferences.
Poor listeners ignore the speaker’s emo-
tional  message or disagree or critique 
in a manner that demeans. They
•  respond without acknowledging the 
explicit  emotional pain or joy of the 
speaker.
•  couch statements in other-centered 
language, fail to acknowledge 
positives or areas of agreement, 
and make comments that are overly 
 general, not speciﬁ c, or negative.

106
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
CHRIS: No, no, but I’m not perfect, and he could use my “attitude” as an excuse to ﬁ re me.
DAMIEN: Well, did you think about telling him what’s been going on? And maybe, 
you know, he’ll understand and cut you some slack.
CHRIS: Or he could see that I really have changed and he’d can me.
DAMIEN: OK, well, just tell me this. Do you like working here?
CHRIS: Yeah, of course I do.
DAMIEN: OK, well, then, you’ve just got to tough it out. I mean, you’ve just got to 
use the game face on these people. You used to be the best at doing that. So 
you’re just gonna have to get back to being a salesman, and leave everything 
else behind.
CHRIS: I guess I never realized how much my problems were affecting my work. I 
thought Carl was just out to get me, but now you’re noticing something too, then 
maybe I have changed. Thanks, thanks for talking this out.
A Question of Ethics
Janeen always disliked talking on the tele-
phone—she thought it was an impersonal form of 
communication. Thus, college was a wonderful 
respite. When friends called her, instead of stay-
ing on the phone she could quickly run over to 
their dorm or meet them at a coffeehouse.
One day during reading period before exams, 
Janeen received a phone call from Barbara, an 
out-of-town friend. Before she was able to dis-
miss the call with her stock excuses, she found 
herself bombarded with information about old 
high school friends and their whereabouts. Not 
wanting to disappoint Barbara, who seemed eager 
to talk, Janeen tucked her phone under her chin 
and began straightening her room, answering 
Barbara with the occasional “uh-huh,” “hmm,” 
or “wow, that’s cool!” As the “conversation” pro-
gressed, Janeen began reading through her mail 
and then her notes from class. After a few min-
utes, she realized there was silence on the other 
end of the line. Suddenly very ashamed, she said, 
“I’m sorry, what did you say? The phone . . . uh, 
there was just a lot of static.”
Barbara replied with obvious hurt in her voice, 
“I’m sorry I bothered you. You must be terribly busy.”
Embarrassed, Janeen muttered, “I’m just 
really stressed, you know, with exams coming 
up and everything. I guess I wasn’t listening 
very well; you didn’t seem to be saying any-
thing really important. I’m sorry. What were you 
saying?”
“Nothing ‘important,’” Barbara answered. “I 
was just trying to ﬁ gure out a way to tell you. I 
know that you are friends with my brother Billy, 
and you see, we just found out yesterday that he’s 
terminal with a rare form of luekemia. But you’re 
right; it obviously isn’t really important.” With 
that, she hung up.
 1. How ethical was Janeen’s means of dealing 
with her dilemma of not wanting to talk on 
the phone but not wanting to hurt Barbara’s 
feelings?
 2. Identify ways in which both Janeen and 
Barbara could have used better and perhaps 
more ethical interpersonal communication 
skills. Rewrite the scenario incorporating 
these changes.
What Would You Do?
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

107
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
Now that you have read Chapter 5, use your Premium 
Website for Communicate! for quick access to the 
electronic resources that accompany this text. These 
resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communicate on Your Feet speech assignments, 
Action Step activities). Many of these activities 
allow you to compare your answers to those pro-
vided by the authors, and, if requested, submit 
your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore commu-
nication concepts online (Web Resources), develop 
your speech outlines (Speech Builder Express 
3.0), watch and critique videos of communication 
Communicate! Active Online Learning
Summary
Listening is a complex activity made up of ﬁ ve simple processes: attending, under-
standing, remembering, evaluating, and responding. Listening skill is important to 
both effective personal and professional relationships. Because we spend so much time 
listening, we adjust our listening depending on its purpose in a particular situation. 
The ﬁ ve types of listening we might use are appreciative, discriminative, comprehen-
sive, empathic, and critical. To be an effective listener, you must master each of the 
ﬁ ve processes of listening.
Attending is the process of selecting and focusing on speciﬁ c stimuli from among 
the countless ones that we receive. We can be more effective in attending if we (1) get 
ready physically, (2) resist mental distractions, (3) resist interrupting (don’t rehearse), 
(4) hear a person out before responding, and (5) observe nonverbal clues.
Understanding is the process of decoding a message so that the meaning accu-
rately reﬂ ects that intended by the speaker. Empathizing, which is identifying with 
or vicariously experiencing the feelings of another, can increase understanding. We 
can also increase understanding by asking questions to clarify and get details and by 
paraphrasing the speaker’s content and feelings.
Remembering is the process of retaining information so that it can be recalled 
when it is needed. By repeating information, using mnemonics, and taking notes, we 
can increase the likelihood that we will remember what we hear.
Critical analysis is the process of evaluating what has been said to determine its 
truthfulness. Critical analysis is especially important when a speaker is asking you to 
believe, act on, or support what is being said. One important skill of critical analysis is 
to separate statements of fact from inferences. Statements of fact should be analyzed 
to see if they are true. Inferences should be tested to see if they are valid. Three ques-
tions can help us to test inferences: (1) What facts support this inference? (2) Is the 
information really central to the inference? (3) Do other facts contradict the inference?
Responding supportively helps people feel better about themselves and their 
behavior. Whenever you respond to others, you want to conﬁ rm their feelings and 
demonstrate respect. You can offer emotional support by bolstering, reassuring, encour-
aging, or consoling the speaker. You can show respect when disagreeing or critiquing 
others by using “I” language, being speciﬁ c, and offering something positive ﬁ rst.

108
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
Key Terms
appreciative listening (89)
attending (91)
comprehensive listening (90)
content paraphrase (94)
critical listening (90)
discriminative listening (89)
empathic listening (90)
empathic responsiveness (94)
empathy (94)
evaluation (98)
factual statements (98)
feelings paraphrase (94)
inferences (98)
listening (88)
mnemonic device (97)
paraphrasing (94)
perspective taking (94)
question (94)
remembering (97)
supportive messages (100)
sympathetic responsiveness (96)
understanding (93)
Skill Learning Activities
5.1: Questions and Paraphrases (96)
Finish the in text activity.
5.2: Empathizing Effectively (97)
Write a paragraph describing a time when you 
effectively empathized with another person. What 
was the person’s emotional state? How did you rec-
ognize it? What were the nonverbal cues? Verbal 
cues? What type of relationship did you have with 
this person? How similar were the two of you? What 
type of empathizing did you use? Why?
5.3: Creating Mnemonics (98)
Mnemonics are useful memory aids. Construct a 
mnemonic for the ﬁ ve phases of the listening process: 
attending, understanding, remembering, evaluating, 
and responding. Record your mnemonic.
Tomorrow, while you are getting dressed, see 
whether you can recall the mnemonic you created. 
Then see whether you can recall the phases of the 
listening process from the cues in your mnemonic. 
Write a brief paragraph describing your experience.
5.4: Listening to Remember (98)
Take an online listening test to evaluate how 
well you remember what you hear, with and with-
out notes. Access this test at your Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning 
activities for Chapter 5.
5.5: Evaluating Inferences (100)
For each of the following statements, identify the 
fact(s) and the inference(s). Then, write three speciﬁ c 
questions that “test” the validity of the inference. 
Here’s an example:
The campus walk-in health clinic is understaffed. 
I stopped by the other day and had to wait two 
hours to be seen.
Fact: I had to wait two hours to be seen at 
the walk-in clinic.
Inference: The clinic is understaffed.
 
Questions:
1.  Is one person’s experience alone enough to 
support the inference?
2.  Are there times when there is not a backup?
3.  Are there other things besides stafﬁ ng levels 
that could account for the wait?
When you’re done with this activity, compare your 
answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website for 
Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Chapter 5.
 1. Christy got a 96 percent on the ﬁ rst test. She 
must have crammed all weekend.
 2. Kali’s pregnant. Just look at how tight her jeans 
are; she can barely keep them buttoned.
situations and sample speeches (Interactive Video 
Activities), upload your speech videos for peer 
reviewing and critique other students’ speeches 
(Speech Studio online speech review tool), and 
download chapter review so you can study when 
and where you’d like (Audio Study tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment and Skill Building activity 
in the body of the chapter.

109
 
Chapter 5  Listening and Responding 
 3. You can’t get a good job unless you know some-
one. Mike searched everywhere for six months 
before he ﬁ nally talked to his next-door neigh-
bor, who hired him for his construction company.
 4. If you want to go to dental school when you 
graduate, forget it. In the past three years, none 
of the students from this program who applied 
got in.
 5. Kids today are growing up too fast. I mean, they 
carry cell phones and everything.
5.6: Critically Analyzing the Use of Facts and 
Inferences in the Media (100)
Watch a political talk show and an infomercial 
on television. If possible, record the two programs 
so you can watch them more than once. While you 
are watching each program, note as many individual 
factual statements and inferences as you can. Next, 
write a paragraph in which you answer these ques-
tions: What was the ratio of factual statements to 
inferences in each program (for example, 1 to 1, 1 
to 2, or 1 to 3)? Did these results surprise you? If so, 
how? Were the ratios different for the two programs? 
If so, how did the results conform to or differ from 
your expectations? How did evaluating the inferences 
used in the two programs change your perception of 
their messages?
To help you complete this activity, you can 
use the log provided in your Premium Website for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Chapter 5.
5.7: Damien and Chris (105)
After you’ve watched the video of Damien and 
Chris and have read the transcript of their conversa-
tion, answer the following questions.
 1. What does Damien do that shows he’s attending?
 2. What does Damien do that demonstrates his 
understanding?
 3. Does Damien use critical listening to separate 
facts from inferences?
 4. How does Damien show empathy?
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Chapter 5.
Web Resources
5.1: Mnemonics (98)
Mindtools.com is a great site that describes and 
provides links to a variety of mnemonic techniques.

110
 
Chapter 5 
Listening and Responding
1
part
Establishing a Communication Foundation from Chapters 2 
through 5
What kind of a communicator are you? This review looks at several speciﬁ cs that are 
basic to effective communicators. On the line provided for each statement, indicate the 
response that best captures your behavior: 1, almost always; 2, often; 3, sometimes; 
4, rarely; 5, never.
____ 
When I speak, I tend to present a positive image of myself. (Chapter 2)
____ 
In my behavior toward others, I look for more information to conﬁ rm or 
negate my ﬁ rst impressions. (Chapter 2)
____ 
Before I act on perceptions drawn from people’s nonverbal cues, I seek verbal 
veriﬁ cation of their accuracy. (Chapter 2)
____ 
I use speciﬁ c language when I speak, avoiding generalizations that could be 
misinterpreted. (Chapter 3)
____ 
I speak clearly, using words that people readily understand. (Chapter 3)
____ 
When I am speaking with people of different cultures or of the opposite sex, I 
am careful to monitor my word choices. (Chapter 3)
____ 
I tend to look at people when I talk with them. (Chapter 4)
____ 
Most of my sentences are free from such expressions as “uh,” “well,” “like,” 
and “you know.” (Chapter 4)
____ 
I consider the effect of my dress on others. (Chapter 4)
____ 
I try to make sure that my nonverbal messages match my verbal messages. 
(Chapter 4)
____ 
I listen attentively, regardless of my interest in the person or the ideas.
(Chapter 5)
____ 
When I’m not sure whether I understand, I seek clariﬁ cation. (Chapter 5)
____ 
When a person describes an unfortunate experience, I am able to provide 
appropriate comfort. (Chapter 5)
Based on your responses, select the communication behavior you would most like 
to change. Write a communication-improvement goal statement similar to the sam-
ple improvement plan in Chapter 1 (page 18). If you would like veriﬁ cation of your 
self-analysis before you write a goal, have a friend or co-worker complete this same 
analysis for you.
You can complete this Self-Review online and, if requested, e-mail it to your instructor. Go to 
your Premium Website for Communicate! to access Part I Self-Review.
Self Review
Foundations of Communication

Communicating Across 
Cultures
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
•  What is intercultural communication?
•  What is the relationship between a dominant culture and a co-culture?
•  How does the communication of people from individualistic cultures 
differ from that of people in collectivist cultures?
•  How does the communication of people from high uncertainty-avoidance 
cultures differ from that of people from low uncertainty-avoidance cultures?
•  How does the communication of people from high power-distance 
cultures differ from that of the people from low power-distance cultures?
•  How does the communication of people from masculine cultures differ 
from that of people from feminine cultures?
•  What barriers do we face when communicating interculturally?
•  How can you improve your intercultural communication?
“Jack, I don’t think we should take this ﬂ ight,” Alicia said. “Why don’t we wait and 
take the next one?”
“What are you talking about?” Jack replied. “Our reservations are conﬁ rmed, 
our bags are probably on board by now, and why would we want to sit around 
here for hours?”
“But Jack, over there,” Alicia muttered behind her hand while nodding to her 
far right. Jack turned his head. There on the end of the long bench sat a large 
bearded man in a turban.
“Jack, I’m afraid,” Alicia whispered urgently. “He could be a terrorist.”
6
Wally McNamee/Wally McNamee/Corbis

112
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
“Relax, Alicia,” Jack said. “There is nothing to worry about.  Anyway, what makes 
you think that all Muslims are terrorists? For that matter, anyone on our ﬂ ight could 
be a terrorist.”
How could we evaluate Alicia’s assumptions in this situation? Are the inferences 
underlying Jack’s responses more accurate? In both cases, their judgments are based 
on their perceptions of people who are culturally different from themselves.
Because culture has a profound impact on not only our perceptions but also 
our communication behavior, in this chapter we examine how culture affects our 
 communication behavior and how it inﬂ uences our perception of the communication 
we receive from others. We begin by taking a look at some basic concepts of culture, 
identifying important values and norms that set cultures apart. Then we discuss the 
barriers that arise from cultural difference and offer strategies for improving intercul-
tural communication competence.
Culture and Communication
How often have we heard people observe that the world is getting smaller and the 
people in it increasingly similar? Today, through the globalization of trade and the 
Internet, our lives are affected by the decisions and actions of people in other parts 
of the world, and we can make instant personal contact with people around the globe 
through the click of a mouse. Some people celebrate this trend as a step toward world 
unity, but others mourn the loss of local cultures, traditions, and control and feel over-
whelmed by the pervasiveness of communication.
Culture includes the values, attitudes, beliefs, orientations, and underlying assump-
tions prevalent among people in a society (Samovar, Porter, & McDaniel, 2009). Yet, 
we do not have to journey to other countries to meet people of different cultures. 
As a nation of immigrants, the United States is a multicultural society. Our popula-
tion includes not only recent immigrants from Asia, Latin America, Eastern Europe, 
and other countries, but also the descendents of earlier voluntary immigrants and of 
African slaves brought here against their will, as well as native peoples. So under-
standing how cultural groups vary in their approach to communication can help us as 
we interact with the people we meet each day.
Intercultural Communication
We are so familiar with our own language, gestures, facial expressions, conversational 
customs, and norms that we may experience anxiety when these familiar aspects of 
communication are disrupted. This occurs frequently when we interact with people 
from different cultures. Culture shock is the psychological discomfort you may feel 
when you attempt to adjust to a new cultural situation (Klyukanov, 2005, p. 33). 
Because culture shock is caused by an absence of shared meaning, you are likely to feel 
it most profoundly when you are thrust into another culture through travel, business, 
or studying abroad. In the ﬁ lm Lost in Translation, for example, Bill Murray’s charac-
ter struggles with culture shock when ﬁ lming a commercial in Japan.
culture shock
the psychological discomfort 
you may feel when you 
attempt to adjust to a new 
cultural situation
culture
the values, attitudes, beliefs, 
orientations, and underlying 
assumptions prevalent 
among people in a society.

113
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
Culture shock can also  occur 
when you have contact with peo-
ple from another culture within 
your home country. For example, 
Brittney, who is from a small town 
in Minnesota, experienced culture 
shock when she visited Miami for 
the ﬁ rst time. She was overwhelmed 
by the distinct Hispanic ﬂ avor of 
the city, hearing Spanish spoken 
on the street and seeing signs and 
 billboards written in Spanish, the 
prevalence of Latin beat music, 
and the ways people looked and 
dressed. Brittney was disoriented 
not only because of the prominence 
of  Spanish but also because the val-
ues,  attitudes, beliefs, and behav-
iors of the people she  encountered 
seemed quite foreign to her. Like-
wise, if  Maria, who lives in Miami, 
were to visit the small  Minnesota 
town where Brittney grew up, she would also be likely to experience culture shock as 
Brittney’s hometown is like the rural Minnesota towns whose values and customs are 
humorously highlighted on Garrison Keillor’s public radio program A Prairie Home 
Companion.
Intercultural communication refers to interactions between people whose 
cultural assumptions are so different that the communication between them is 
altered (Samovar, Porter, & McDaniel, 2009). In other words, when we interact 
with people whose attitudes, values, beliefs, customs, and behaviors are cultur-
ally different from ours, we are communicating across cultural boundaries, which 
can lead to misunderstandings that would not commonly occur between people 
who are culturally similar. It is important to recognize that not every exchange 
between people of different cultures exempliﬁ es intercultural communication. For 
example, when Brittney is on the beach in Miami and joins a group of Hispanics 
in a friendly game of beach volleyball, the cultural differences between them are 
unlikely to affect their game-related exchanges. However, should Brittney decide 
to join the group for a night of club hopping, she is more likely to experience 
conversations in which cultural differences lead to difﬁ culty in understanding or 
interpreting what is said.
Dominant Cultures and Co-Cultures
Although the United States is a multicultural society, there are many attitudes, values, 
beliefs, and customs that a majority of people hold in common. This shared system 
of meaning constitutes our dominant culture, and like the dominant culture of any 
country, ours has evolved over time. The dominant culture of the United States once 
reﬂ ected the values of white, Western European, English-speaking, Protestant, hetero-
sexual men. But as we have recognized our diversity, the dominate culture has evolved 
and incorporated aspects of other cultural groups. The result is a dominant culture that 
better reﬂ ects the diversity of the people in the United States.
What is intercultural 
communication?
intercultural communication
interactions that occur 
between people whose 
cultural assumptions 
are so different that the 
communication between 
them is altered.
dominant culture
the attitudes, values, beliefs, 
and customs that the majority 
of people in a society hold in 
common.
If you plan to study abroad, 
how might you prepare 
yourself to manage initial 
feelings of culture shock?
What is the 
relationship 
between a 
dominant culture 
and a co-culture?
Image Source/Getty Images

114
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
Still, there are cultural groups whose values, attitudes, beliefs, and customs differ 
from the dominant culture. These groups, called co-cultures, exhibit communication 
that is sufﬁ ciently different to distinguish them from the dominant culture. The follow-
ing are some of the major contributors to co-cultures in United States society today:
Race
Traditionally, the term race was used to classify people in terms of biological 
 characteristics, such skin and eye color, hair texture, and body shape. However, scien-
tiﬁ c justiﬁ cations for such divisions have proven elusive, and the classiﬁ cation system 
itself has changed drastically over time (Hotz, 1995). Despite the difﬁ culty of scien-
tiﬁ cally deﬁ ning race, people have experienced the social effects of perceived race 
and have formed communities and cultures based on racialized experiences. So race 
is an important cultural signiﬁ er for many people, and racial identity can inﬂ uence 
 communication in a number of ways. For example, African Americans “code switch” 
at times using the linguistic and non verbal patterns of the dominant culture and 
at other times using the communication style that is unique to their race (Jackson, 
2004). Which code is used may depend on their attitude, the topic, or who is listening 
(Bonvillain, 2003). Likewise, members of co-cultures based on gender, ethnicity, or 
social class may also change their communication style from time to time, to be more 
similar to or distant from that of the dominant culture.
Ethnicity
Like race, ethnicity is an inexact distinction. Ethnicity refers to a classiﬁ cation of 
people based on combinations of shared characteristics such as nationality, geographic 
origin, language, religion, ancestral customs, and tradition. So, people may identify 
themselves as Italian Americans, Irish Americans, Mexican Americans, and so on. 
People vary greatly in the importance they attach to their ethnic heritage and the 
degree to which it affects their attitudes, values, and behavior. You may descend from 
Italians and this heritage may affect your closeness to family, your religion, the foods 
you prefer, and many other aspects of your identity. Your roommate may also have 
Italian ancestors but may not identify herself as Italian and may not follow any family 
traditions based on this ethnicity.
Language or mother tongue is an obvious inﬂ uence of ethnicity on communica-
tion. Immigrants bring with them the language of their original country, and they 
may or may not speak English when they arrive. Even after they learn English, many 
immigrants choose to speak their mother tongue at home, intentionally live close to 
other people from their home country, and interact with these people in their primary 
language. English is the ﬁ rst language of most people in the United States. But Spanish 
is quickly becoming a de facto second language. The U.S. Census Bureau data indicates 
that 15 percent of the U.S. population is Hispanic and that ﬁ gure is projected to grow 
to 30 percent by 2050. Furthermore, in Hispanic homes 78 percent report that Spanish 
is the primary language used in the home (U.S. Census Bureau, 2007). So today most 
toll-free 800 and 888 numbers offer the option of conversing in English or Spanish; 
most cable companies have several Spanish-language channels as part of their basic 
package; and Spanish-language radio stations can be heard across the country.
Sex and gender
“Frogs and snails and puppy dog tails, that’s what little boys are made of.” “Sugar 
and spice and everything nice, that’s what little girls are made of.” “He’s a real man’s 
man.” “She’s such a girlie girl.” These traditional childhood rhymes and sex-speciﬁ c 
generalizations capture the traditional thinking about men’s and women’s  co-cultures. 
Women and men tend to belong to different co-cultures within each larger cultural 
co-cultures
groups of people living within 
a dominant culture but 
exhibiting communication 
that is sufﬁ ciently different to 
distinguish them from the 
dominant culture.
ethnicity
a classiﬁ cation of people 
based on combinations of 
shared characteristics such as 
nationality, geographic origin, 
language, religion, ancestral 
customs, and tradition.
Skill Learning Activity 6.1

115
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
group. Part of what men and women learn from their co-culture is 
expectations of how they are to behave and communicate. Because 
women’s co-culture values the nurturing role, women who identify with 
the feminine co-culture may tend to speak more about their personal 
relationships, more easily describe their feelings, and be more likely to 
include others in conversation and actively respond to others. On the 
other hand, men who identify with masculine co-cultural norms may 
focus more on tasks or outcomes when they communicate. They may 
tend to talk more about content and problem solving, emphasize control 
and status, and be less responsive to others (Wood, 2007). Obviously, 
people differ in the extent to which they identify with these gendered 
co-cultures, and those who do not strongly identify with the co-culture 
may not behave in line with co-cultural expectations. In addition, over 
time the values and norms of each co-culture can change. For example, 
in Western societies many of the value differences between men’s and 
women’s co-cultures have decreased, but in many Middle Eastern societ-
ies such differences still exist.
Religion
A religion is a system of beliefs that is shared by a group and that supplies 
the group with an entity (or entities) for devotion, rituals for worship-
ping that entity, and a code of ethics. Although the dominant culture of 
the United States values religious freedom and diversity, historically it has reﬂ ected 
Judeo-Christian values and practices. All observant practitioners of a religion partici-
pate in a co-culture. Those who strongly identify with a religious group that is outside 
the Judeo-Christian tradition have different orientations that shape their relationships 
and their communication behavior. For example, Buddhism advises individuals to 
embrace rather than to resist personal conﬂ ict. Adversity, emotional upheaval, and 
conﬂ ict are seen as natural parts of life (Chuang, 2004). So a Buddhist is apt to com-
municate openly and calmly during an interpersonal conﬂ ict and embrace the positive 
aspects of conﬂ ict in strengthening interpersonal ties. Throughout history, we can 
point to religious differences as the source of many culture wars. Many of the conﬂ icts 
in the Middle East today are essentially culture wars based on religious differences.
Sexual orientation
In most places in the world today, the dominant culture values heterosexuality. 
Although the dominant cultures of many Western countries have changed their laws 
reﬂ ecting a change in attitudes toward homosexuality, people who are not hetero-
sexual still face discrimination in Western societies and legal and physical threats in 
many parts of the world. As a result, gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people 
may participate in and identify with “underground” co-cultural communities. These 
communities have attitudes, values, customs, rites, and rituals that are supportive 
of homosexual behavior. So people may frequent gay, lesbian, or bi- bars, join gay 
churches, sing in local gay men’s or women’s choruses, and participate in commitment 
ceremonies where the dominant society has laws against homosexual marriage.
Social class
Social class is a level in the power hierarchy of a society. Membership in each social class 
is determined by income, education, occupation, and social habits. The dominant culture 
of the United States is the middle class culture. Because social class often determines 
where people live, people of the same social class often establish communities where 
they reinforce co-cultures with distinct values, rituals, and communication practices. For 
Image Source/Getty Images
religion
a system of beliefs shared by 
a group and that supplies the 
group with an entity(ies) for 
devotion, rituals for worship, 
and a code of ethics.
social class
an indicator of a person’s 
position in a social hierarchy, 
as determined by income, 
education, occupation, and 
social habits.
Women and men tend to 
communicate differently 
because of their cultural 
differences. Some research 
suggests that women 
focus on feelings, whereas 
men focus on outcomes. 
What about you? Do you 
communicate as women 
tend to do, as men tend to 
do, or do you communicate 
in different ways?
Julie Toy/Taxi/Getty Images 

116
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
example, lower-class parents tend to 
emphasize obedience, acceptance of 
what others think, and hesitancy in 
expressing desires to authority ﬁ g-
ures, whereas middle-class parents 
more often emphasize self-control, 
self-direction, and intellectual curi-
osity. Such differences in values 
based on social class may lead those 
from middle-class backgrounds to 
speak more directly and assertively 
than do people from working-
class 
backgrounds 
(Gilbert 
&
Kahl, 1982).
Age
The period in which we are born and 
raised can have a strong formative 
inﬂ uence on us. People of the same 
generation form a cultural cohort 
whose personal values, beliefs, and 
behaviors have been inﬂ uenced by 
the common life experiences and events they encountered as they aged. People who 
grew up during the Great Depression tend to be frugal; those alive during World War 
II value sacriﬁ ce of self for cause and country; the baby boom generation, who came 
of age during the counterculture sixties, are likely to question authority; Generation 
Xers, who were born in the 1960s and 1970s and experienced latchkey childhoods and 
other consequences of widespread divorce, value self-sufﬁ ciency; and those called 
Generation Next, who came of age after 9/11 and grew up with personal computers, 
cell phones, and the Internet, tend to value fortune, fame, and tolerance (Pew Research 
Center, 2007).
Whether in family relationships or in the workplace, when people from different 
generations interact, their co-cultural orientations can create communication difﬁ cul-
ties. Miscommunication, misunderstandings, and conﬂ ict are likely to occur when 
people work with others of different generations. For example, people from earlier 
generations are unlikely to question authority ﬁ gures such as parents, teachers, reli-
gious leaders, or bosses. They demonstrate respect by using formal terms of address, 
such as Mr., Ms., Dr., and sir. People who came of age in the 1960s or later, on the 
other hand, tend to be skeptical of authority and less formal in dealing with authority 
ﬁ gures. They are more likely to question their managers and to openly disagree with 
decisions made by those in authority (Zempke, Raines, & Filipczak, 2000).
Cultural Identity
Recall that your self-concept is the mental image that you have of yourself, and 
that image is negotiated and reinforced through your communication with others. 
Membership in the co-cultural groups described above contributes to your cultural 
identity, but how much your identity is affected by each co-culture depends on 
the extent to which you identify with it (Ting-Toomey et al., 2000). For example, 
20-year-old Kelly is a devout Catholic who attends Mass every morning and is a 
leader at the Newman Center on campus. She volunteers at the local pregnancy crisis 
In the 1970’s, Harvey Milk, who 
became the ﬁ rst openly gay 
politician in California, urged 
other gay people to come 
out of the closet and stand 
up for their human rights. 
Assassinated at the height 
of his popularity, he became 
the face of the nascent 
gay pride movement. Do 
you have friends or family 
members who are gay? How 
are their lives different from 
yours?
Focus Features/The Kobal Collection/Picture Desk

117
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
center, where she tutors pregnant teens, and she dates only men who are Catholic. 
By contrast, Kelly’s roommate, Nicole, is also Catholic, but rarely goes to Mass, is not 
involved at the Newman Center, is pro-choice, and is engaged to a classmate who is 
Jewish. As you would expect, being a Catholic is central to how Kelly views herself, 
and it is one of the ﬁ rst things she shares about herself when she meets someone. By 
contrast, the values of Catholicism don’t seem to be central to Nicole’s self-image, 
what she believes, or how she behaves.
Identifying Cultural Norms and Values
Some aspects that identify members of a culture may be easy to spot. We may be able 
to ﬁ gure out people’s cultural background by the language they speak, their dress, or 
artifacts such as religious markers they wear as jewelry or place in their home. For 
example, when people meet Shimon, from his sidecurls, his yarmulke, and his black 
clothes, they can quickly discern that he is a Hassidic Jew. But beyond style of dress, 
what does it mean to be a Hassidic Jew? How do Hassidic Jews differ from the domi-
nant culture and from other cultural groups? What are other cultural groups to which 
they are similar?
The work of Geert Hofstede gives us a way to understand how cultures are similar 
to and different from one another and to understand how that variation affects com-
munication. Hofstede (1980) identiﬁ es four major dimensions of culture that affect 
communication: individualism–collectivism, uncertainty avoidance, power distance, 
and masculinity–femininity. Table 6.1 shows where the United States falls on each of 
these dimensions.
Individualism–Collectivism
In individualistic cultures (for example, the United States, Australia, Great Britain, 
Canada, as well as northern and eastern European countries), people place primary 
value on the self and personal achievement. In an individualistic society, people tend 
to consider the interests of others primarily in relationship to how they affect the 
interest of the self. If you come from an individualistic culture, you may consider 
your family and close friends when you act, but mainly because your interests and 
theirs align. People in individualistic cultures view competition between people as 
desirable and useful. Because of this, individualistic cultures emphasize personal 
rights and responsibilities, privacy, voicing one’s opinion, freedom, innovation, and 
 self-expression (Andersen, Hecht, Hoobler, & Smallwood, 2003).
In contrast, collectivist cultures (for example, countries in South and Central 
Web Resource 6.1
individualistic culture
emphasizes personal rights 
and responsibilities, privacy, 
voicing one’s opinion, 
freedom, innovation, and
self-expression.
How does the 
communication 
of people from 
individualistic 
cultures differ from 
that of people in 
collectivist cultures?
Matisyahu displays an 
interesting blend of cultural 
identities. His clothing 
represents how important 
his Jewish faith is to him. Yet 
he performs reggae music. 
Does this blending of cultural 
identities seem odd to you? 
Why or why not?
Table 6.1 U.S. Ranking Among 53 Countries/Regions
 
 
High uncertainty- 
High power- 
Individualism 
avoidance 
distance 
Masculinity
 
✓ (1st)
 
 
 
 
✓ (15th)
 
 
 
✓ (38th)
 
 
✓ (43rd)
Collectivism 
Low uncertainty- 
Low power- 
Femininity
 
 
avoidance 
distance
Karl Walter/Getty Images Entertainment /Getty Images 

118
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
America, east and Southeast Asia, and Africa) place primary value on the interests 
of the group and group harmony. In a collectivist society, an individual’s decision is 
shaped by what is best for the group whether it serves the individual’s interests or not. 
Collectivist societies are highly integrated, and maintaining harmony and cooperation 
are valued over competitiveness and personal achievement. As a result, members of 
collectivist societies will probably have stronger bonds within the groups to which 
they belong (family, workplace, and community). Collectivist cultures emphasize 
 community, collaboration, shared interest, harmony, the public good, and avoiding 
embarrassment (Andersen, Hecht, Hoobler, & Smallwood, 2003).
Notions of individualism and collectivism inﬂ uence many aspects of communica-
tion, including most notably our self-concept formation, conﬂ ict management style, 
and group communication behavior (Samovar, Porter, & McDaniel, 2009). In individu-
alistic cultures, people stress the self and personal achievement, and the individual 
is treated as the most important element in a social setting. In a collectivist culture, 
what affects self-concept and self-esteem is not individual achievement; rather, it is 
whether the group thrives and how people’s actions have contributed to their group’s 
success. So if Marie has been raised in an individualist culture and she is the highest 
scoring player on her basketball team, she will feel good about herself and identify 
herself as a “winner” even if her team has a losing season. But if Marie is from a 
collectivist culture, being the highest scoring player will have little effect on her self-
esteem, but the fact that her team had a losing season will likely cause her to feel less 
personal esteem.
People from each of these cultural perspectives also view conﬂ ict differently. In 
individualistic cultures, the emphasis on the individual leads its members to value and 
practice assertiveness and confrontational argument, whereas members of collectivist 
cultures value accord and harmony and so practice tentativeness and collaboration or 
avoidance of arguments. In the United States, we teach assertiveness and argumenta-
tion as useful skills and expect them in interpersonal and work relationships, politics, 
consumerism, and other aspects of civic life. By contrast, to maintain harmony and 
avoid interpersonal clashes, Japanese business has evolved an elaborate process called 
nemawashi, a term that literally means digging around the roots of a tree before 
transplanting it. In Japan, any subject that might cause conﬂ ict at a meeting should 
be discussed in advance, so that the interaction at the meeting will not seem rude or 
impolite (Samovar & Porter, 2001). In collectivist societies, a style of communica-
tion that respects the relationship is more important than the information exchanged 
(Jandt, 2001). In collectivist societies, group harmony, sparing others embarrassment, 
and a modest presentation of oneself are important ways to show respect. A person 
does not speak directly if it might hurt others in the group.
How people work in groups also depends on the type of culture they come from. 
Because members of collectivist cultures see group harmony and the welfare of the 
group to be of primary importance, they strive for consensus on group goals and 
may, at times, sacriﬁ ce optimal outcomes for the sake of group accord. Your cultural 
assumptions affect how you work to establish group goals, how you interact with other 
group members, and how willing you are to sacriﬁ ce for the sake of the group. Groups 
with members from both individualistic and collectivist cultures may experience dif-
ﬁ culties due to their varying cultural assumptions. In the Diverse Voices feature in 
this chapter, a Chinese-born communication professor, Min Liu, talks about how she 
dealt with the transition from China (a collectivist culture) to the United States (an 
individualistic culture) as a graduate student and how she has learned to manage both 
perspectives today.
collectivist culture
emphasizes community, 
collaboration, shared interest, 
harmony, the public good, 
and avoiding embarrassment.
Web Resource 6.2

119
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
Individualism and Collectivism
by Min Liu
Assistant Professor of Communication
Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
I was born and raised in China, which is a 
 collectivist country. I arrived in the United States 
for the ﬁ rst time in August of 2002 when I entered 
the Ph.D. program as a graduate student at North 
Dakota State University (NDSU) in Fargo, North 
Dakota. I chose NDSU for a number of reasons, 
but one that stands out in my mind as impor-
tant is the fact that Fargo was listed as one of 
the safest cities in the United States at the time. 
You see, my family was concerned about send-
ing their daughter to study in the United States, 
which is the most individualistic country in the 
world. They felt a bit more at ease knowing I 
would be studying in one of the safest cities in 
that country. Even my decision to come to NDSU 
was inﬂ uenced by my family and our collectivist 
ideals. Little did I know, however, how much cul-
ture shock I would experience beginning with the 
ﬁ rst day I set foot on the NDSU campus.
I ofﬁ cially became an international student 
studying Communication at North Dakota State 
University in August of 2002. I felt prepared to 
study in the United States because I had learned 
English and was trained to become a college 
English instructor back in China. I had also aced 
the English proﬁ ciency test (TOEFL) required 
of international students. I remember feeling 
pretty conﬁ dent about communicating with my 
American colleagues. As I walked across cam-
pus for my ﬁ rst day of orientation, I thought to 
myself, “Worst-case scenario, I’ll forget how to 
say something in English and that’s what my dig-
ital Chinese-English dictionary is for.”
I would soon learn, however, that the issue of 
translating vocabulary was not the worst-case 
scenario. For most of my communication strug-
gles, I could not ﬁ nd an answer in the dictionary. 
For example, in one of the ﬁ rst graduate classes 
I took, the professor asked everyone to call her 
by her ﬁ rst name (Deanna). Without hesitation, 
all my American classmates began doing so. 
Calling a professor by her ﬁ rst name was unheard 
of for Chinese students like me! As a sign of 
respect, we always call our teachers by their 
titles—Dr. Sellnow, Professor Sellnow, or Teacher 
Sellnow. Wherever you are on a college campus 
in China, it’s clear who is the teacher and who 
are the students. I thought, “How am I to call a 
professor of mine by her ﬁ rst name?”
For a long time, I felt torn as to what to 
do—continuing to call her Dr. Sellnow may seem 
too distant and she might correct me. I want to 
honor her request out of respect for her authority. 
But everything in my collectivist values sug-
gested that calling her Deanna was simply too 
disrespectful. So I simply avoided calling her 
anything. This solution worked fairly well in 
face-to-face communication situations—I would 
walk up to her, smile, and then start the con-
versation. This approach was working fairly 
well for me until the day came when I needed 
to e-mail her. I remember sitting in front of my 
computer for almost an hour trying to ﬁ ne-tune a 
one-paragraph e-mail. Soon I realized the e-mail 
message was ﬁ ne. The reason I couldn’t bring 
myself to press “Send” was with the beginning of 
the e-mail, which read “Hello Deanna.” I ﬁ nally 
changed it to “Dr. Sellnow,” followed by an apol-
ogetic explanation asking her to understand my 
dilemma and why I addressed her in this way. To 
my surprise, she responded by saying there was 
nothing wrong in addressing her as “Dr. Sellnow” 
and that I should continue to do so if that is what 
feels most appropriate to me.
In another class, I studied intercultural 
communication 
concepts. 
What 
I 
learned 
there proved helpful to me in reconciling my 
 collectivist-individualistic 
predicament 
and 
better understand the cultural shock I was expe-
riencing. As a Chinese, I grew up in a high 
 power-distance culture. Professors and teachers 
Diverse Voices

120
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
are seen as having more power than students 
because, in my culture, people hold more or less 
power depending on where they are situated in 
certain formal, hierarchical positions. Students 
are to respect and honor their teachers by 
acknowledging their higher position of author-
ity and status. The United States, however, is a 
low  power-distance culture. People demonstrate 
respect for one another by addressing each other 
more as equals regardless of the formal positions 
they may hold. So, as uncomfortable as I felt, I 
tried to call my professors by their ﬁ rst names 
when they suggested it was appropriate to do so. 
I reminded myself that in the United States doing 
so was culturally appropriate and not a sign of 
disrespect.
Another culture shock experience I had to 
reconcile as a result of the differences between 
my collectivist values and the individualistic 
values of the United States had to do with dis-
agreeing with my professor. In the United States, 
students learn to form opinions and defend their 
viewpoints and are rewarded for doing so in 
classroom presentations and debates. Professors 
perceive students who challenge their viewpoints 
with evidence and reasoning as intelligent and 
motivated. Students who do so are perceived very 
differently in the Chinese culture, where public 
disagreement with an authority ﬁ gure is not only 
rare, but also inappropriate. Because of this value 
clash, I found it difﬁ cult to express and defend 
my opinions in class, especially if they differed 
from something the professor said. Doing so, it 
seemed to me, would be extremely disrespect-
ful. Yet I observed classmates doing so and being 
lauded for their comments. Many times, I chose 
not to say anything during a face-to-face meet-
ing with a professor, but found the courage to 
write an e-mail later. In the online environment, 
I found I could be honest and explain my dis-
agreement with respect. Fortunately, many of 
my professors soon realized my cultural-values 
dilemma and adapted their communication styles 
toward me. Still today, though, I prefer to pres-
ent my viewpoints concerning controversial 
issues in a paper, a letter, an e-mail message, or 
an online post rather than in a meeting or other 
 face-to-face discussion. I have found a way to 
honor my collectivist values in a way that also 
allows me to express myself in an individualistic 
cultural setting.
Finally, I recall struggling with how to 
behave in group settings as a result of the cul-
tural differences along the individualism versus 
collectivism continuum. When I ﬁ rst arrived 
in the United States, I was very conﬂ ict avoid-
ant, probably because in collectivistic cultures 
maintaining the harmony of the collective is 
an important priority. The approaches I had 
learned to value and enact in small group set-
tings were actually perceived negatively by my 
peers and professors in the United States. My 
conﬂ ict avoidant style—which I engaged in as 
a sign of respect—would actually frustrate some 
of my group members. They perceived it as a 
sign that I did not care about the group’s suc-
cess and was a “slacker.” I felt frustrated, too, as 
I tried to help the group become more cohesive 
and successful by avoiding conﬂ ict! I eventu-
ally learned that, to be successful, we all had to 
begin by being upfront about where we come 
from and our values. Once we all understood 
the differences, we could create a workable plan 
for success.
I have been in the United States for seven 
years now, am married, and have a son. I have 
also earned my Ph.D. and am working as an 
assistant professor of communication at the 
University of Southern Illinois at Edwardsville. 
Even now, I continue to learn new things about 
how to communicate best in this individualistic 
culture as compared to my collectivist home in 
China. Based on my experiences, I would have to 
say the most important thing for successful com-
munication when interacting with people who 
come from a different place on the collectivism-
individualism continuum is for all of us to always 
be mindful.
Used with permission.

121
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
Uncertainty Avoidance
Cultures differ in how their members feel about and deal with unpredictable people, 
relationships, or events. Low uncertainty-avoidance cultures (such as the United 
States, Sweden, and Denmark) are more tolerant of uncertainty in how people behave  
in relationships and in events, and so put little cultural emphasis on reducing unpre-
dictability. People from cultures with low uncertainty avoidance more easily accept the 
unpredictability and ambiguity in life. They tend to be tolerant of the unusual, prize 
initiative, take risks, and think that there should be as few rules as possible. People who 
come from high uncertainty-avoidance cultures have a lower tolerance for unpredict-
able people, relationships, and events. These cultures create systems of formal rules 
and believe in absolute truth as the way to provide more security and reduce the risk. 
They also tend to be less tolerant of people or groups with deviant ideas or behavior. 
Because their culture emphasizes the importance of avoiding uncertainty, they often 
view life as hazardous and experience anxiety and stress when confronted with unpre-
dictable people, relationships, or situations. Nations whose cultures are marked by high 
uncertainty-avoidance include Japan, Portugal, Greece, Peru, and Belgium (Samovar, 
Porter, & McDaniel, 2009).
How our culture has taught us to view uncertainty affects our communication 
with others. It shapes how we use language, develop relationships, and negotiate with 
others. People from high uncertainty-avoidance cultures use and value precise lan-
guage because they believe that careful word choice makes the meaning of a message 
easier to understand. Imagine a teacher declaring to a class that “the paper must be 
well researched, with evidence cited, and professional in format and appearance.” Stu-
dents from high uncertainty-avoidance cultures would ﬁ nd the teacher’s remarks to 
be too general and vague. They would most likely experience anxiety and ask a lot of 
questions about what kind of research is appropriate, how to cite evidence, how much 
evidence is needed, what writing style to use, and the length of the paper in order to 
reduce their uncertainty. These students would welcome a speciﬁ c checklist or rubric 
that enumerated the exact criteria by which the paper would be graded. By contrast, 
students from low uncertainty-avoidance cultures would be annoyed by an overly spe-
ciﬁ c list of rules and guidelines, viewing it as a barrier to creativity and initiative. As 
you can imagine, a teacher with students from both these backgrounds faces a difﬁ cult 
challenge when trying to explain an assignment.
How people approach new relationships and how they communicate in develop-
ing relationships is also affected by their culture’s view of uncertainty. As you would 
expect, people from high uncertainty-avoidance cultures are wary of strangers and 
may not seek out new relationships or relationships with others they perceive as differ-
ent (unpredictable). They generally prefer meeting people through friends and family 
and refrain from being alone with strangers. When developing relationships, people 
from high uncertainty-avoidance cultures tend to guard their privacy, refrain from 
self-disclosure early in a relationship, and proceed more slowly through relationship 
development. Members of low uncertainty-avoidance cultures, on the other hand, are 
likely to initiate relationships with people who differ from them, and enjoy the excite-
ment of disclosing personal information in earlier stages of relationship development.
Power Distance
Cultures differ in how accepting they are of wide differences in power held by different 
groups of people and how people of unequal power expect to be treated. In cultures 
characterized as having high power-distance, inequalities in power, status, and rank 
are viewed as natural and these differences are acknowledged by all members of the 
low uncertainty-avoidance 
cultures
cultures characterized by 
greater acceptance of, 
and less need to control, 
unpredictable people, 
relationships, or events.
high uncertainty-avoidance 
cultures
cultures characterized by 
a low tolerance for, and 
a high need to control, 
unpredictable people, 
relationships, or events.
high power-distance
the cultural belief that 
inequalities in power, status, 
and rank are “natural” and 
that these differences should 
be acknowledged and 
accentuated.
How does the 
communication 
of people from 
high uncertainty-
avoidance cultures 
differ from that 
of people from 
low uncertainty-
avoidance 
cultures?
How does the 
communication of 
people from high 
power-distance 
cultures differ from 
that of the people 
from low power-
distance cultures?

122
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
culture. These cultures believe that everyone in the culture has a rightful place and 
that members who have higher power, status, and rank should be deferred to by those 
with less power, status, and rank. High power-distance cultures include most Arab 
countries of the Middle East as well as India, Malaysia, Guatemala, Venezuela, and 
Singapore.
In cultures characterized as having low power-distance, inequalities in power, 
status, and rank are muted. People know that some individuals have more clout, 
authority, and inﬂ uence, but lower-ranking people are not in awe of, are not more 
respectful toward, and do not fear people with more power. Even though power 
differences exist, these cultures value democracy and egalitarian behavior. Austria, 
Finland, Denmark, Norway, the United States, New Zealand, and Israel are examples 
of countries whose dominant cultures are characterized by low power-distance.
Our cultural beliefs about power distance affect how we interact with others, 
including how we communicate with authority ﬁ gures, our language use, and our 
nonverbal behavior. If you were a student, unskilled worker, or average citizen in a 
high power-distance culture, you would not challenge a person in authority, because 
you would expect to be punished for doing so. You would expect the more powerful 
person to control the interaction and would listen to what that person said and do 
what was ordered without question. When talking with more powerful people, you 
would address them formally by using their title as a sign of respect. Formal terms 
of address like Mr. or Mrs., proper and polite forms of language, as well as nonverbal 
signals of your status differences would be evident in the exchange. If you come 
from a low power-distance culture, you would be more comfortable challenging those 
in authority because differences in status are muted. When interacting with a more 
powerful people, you would feel comfortable directing the course of the conversation 
and would question or confront them if you needed to. You would not feel compelled 
to use a formal title when addressing a more powerful person.
Masculinity–Femininity
Cultures differ in how strongly they value traditional sex role distinctions. Cultures that 
Hofstede (2000) called masculine cultures expect people to maintain traditional sex 
roles and maintain different standards of behavior for men and women. Hofstede called 
these cultures “masculine” because, for the most part, groups that maintain distinct 
sex-based roles also value masculine roles more highly than feminine ones. If you come 
from a masculine culture like the ones that are dominant in Mexico, Italy, and Japan, 
you are likely to value men when they are assertive and dominant and to value women 
when they are nurturing, caring, and service oriented. When you encounter people who 
don’t meet these expectations, you are likely to be uncomfortable. Overall, however, 
if you come from a masculine culture regardless of your sex, you will see masculine 
behaviors as more worthwhile, so you are likely to value the masculine characteristics of 
performance, ambition, assertiveness, competitiveness, and material success more than 
you value traditionally feminine traits such as  service, nurturing, investment in relation-
ships, and helping behaviors. Feminine  cultures expect that people, regardless of sex, 
will assume a variety of roles depending on the circumstances and their own choices; 
they do not have any sex-role expectations. If you are from a feminine culture, like the 
national cultures of Sweden, Norway, and Denmark, not only will you feel free to act in 
ways that are not traditionally assigned to people of your sex, but you will also value 
traits that have traditionally been associated with feminine roles.
Whether you come from a masculine or a feminine culture has a signiﬁ cant effect 
on how much behavioral ﬂ exibility you demonstrate. People from masculine cultures 
low-power distance
the cultural belief that 
inequalities in power, 
status, and rank should be 
underplayed and muted.
masculine culture
a culture in which people 
are expected to adhere to 
traditional sex roles.
feminine culture
a culture in which people, 
regardless of sex, are expected 
to assume a variety of roles 
based on the circumstances 
and their own choices.
In the United States, a low 
power-distance culture, 
employers and employees 
often interact informally in 
many work settings. How have 
you interacted with your bosses 
or employees? Has it varied 
from workplace to workplace?
How does the 
communication 
of people from 
masculine cultures 
differ from that 
of people from 
feminine cultures?
Spencer Grant/PhotoEdit 

123
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
have strict deﬁ nitions of appropriate behavior for people of each sex. As a result, they 
learn and are reinforced for only those behaviors that are seen to be appropriate for 
their sex. So men in these cultures are unprepared to engage in nurturing and car-
ing behaviors, such as empathizing and comforting, and women are unprepared to 
be assertive and argue persuasively. This is one of the reasons why those of us raised 
in masculine cultures ﬁ nd movies portraying men as bumbling caregivers humorous. 
Both men and women in feminine cultures learn to and are reinforced for demonstrat-
ing both traditionally masculine and feminine behaviors. As a result, people from 
feminine cultures are more ﬂ exible in their communication behavior. Both men and 
women learn to nurture, empathize, assert, and argue, although any single individual 
may lack skill in one or more behaviors. In fact, some situation comedies created in 
the United States that have been translated for audiences in feminine cultures have 
ﬂ opped because the humorous anecdotes about men who fail as caregivers don’t trans-
late.
Barriers to Effective Intercultural 
Communication
Now that you have developed an understanding of culture and the variations that 
can exist among cultures and co-cultures, you are in a better position to appreciate 
the speciﬁ c barriers caused by cultural differences, including anxiety, assumptions of 
similarity or difference, ethnocentrism, stereotypes and prejudice, incompatible com-
munication codes, and incompatible norms and values.
Anxiety
It is normal to feel some discomfort or apprehension when we recognize that we 
are different from most everyone else or when we enter a cultural milieu that has 
unfamiliar customs. Most people experience fear, dislike, and distrust when ﬁ rst inter-
acting with someone from a different culture (Luckmann, 1999). So when Marissa, 
who is from a barrio in Los Angeles, decided to attend a small, liberal arts college in 
New England, she was nervous and wondered if her decision to attend school in the 
northeast had been a good one. The other students had been friendly enough during 
orientation week, but it had become clear that she didn’t really have much in com-
mon with them. While the others easily shared stories of spring-break trips with their 
families and joked about the cars they had wrecked, Marissa found she had little to 
add—her family always went to see her grandmother in Mexico when her parents took 
time off from their jobs. She didn’t even have a driver’s license. When she hesitantly 
mentioned her quinceañera party, everyone turned and stared at her and one guy said, 
“What in the world is a ‘keensy snare yah’ party?” And all of the guys laughed. At ﬁ rst, 
the other women listened politely, but by that time Marissa was so nervous that she 
stumbled over her words and really didn’t do a good job of explaining this coming-
of-age tradition that was so important to her community. Most of us are like Marissa 
when we are anxious—we don’t do a good job of sharing our ideas and feelings. So, 
our anxiety becomes a barrier to our communication.
Assuming Similarity or Difference
When people cross into an unfamiliar cultural environment, they often assume that 
the norms, values, and traditions that applied in their familiar situation match those 
that apply in the new one. When traveling internationally from the United States, for 
What barriers do 
we face when 
communicating 
interculturally?

124
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
example, many people expect to eat their familiar hamburgers and fries, provided with 
rapid and efﬁ cient service. Likewise, they may be annoyed when shops and restaurants 
closing during midday in countries that observe the custom of siesta.
It can be just as great a mistake to assume that everything about an unfamiliar 
culture will be different. With time, Marissa is likely to ﬁ nd that the other students 
really aren’t as different from her friends at home, and that school is still school even 
when there is snow on the ground. As she makes friends, she learns that although 
Rachel, who is Jewish, didn’t have a quinceañera party, she did have a bat mitzvah cel-
ebration, and Kate, who is Irish Catholic, had a big party to celebrate her conﬁ rmation. 
Because our assumptions guide our communication behavior, incorrectly assuming 
similarities or differences can lead to miscommunication. The wisest way to overcome 
this barrier is not to assume anything, but to be aware of the feedback you receive, 
which provides cues to the real similarities and differences that exist between your 
cultural expectations and those of your interaction partners.
Ethnocentrism
Ethnocentrism is the belief that one’s own culture is superior to others. The stereotype of 
the immigrant in the host country, loudly complaining of how much better everything 
is back home, is the classic example of ethnocentrism. In varying degrees, ethnocen-
trism is found in every culture (Haviland, 1993) and can occur in co-cultures as well. 
Skill Learning Activity 6.2
ethnocentrism
the belief that one’s own 
culture is superior to others.
Professor Gates, Sergeant 
Crowley, and the Rose 
Garden Beer Summit
In July 2009, Henry Louis Gates, Jr., a distin-
guished Harvard professor who is black, was 
arrested at his home in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
for “disorderly conduct.” The arresting ofﬁ cer 
was Sergeant James Crowley, a white police 
ofﬁ cer who teaches police academy courses on 
how to avoid racial proﬁ ling. What might have 
been a national story for one day became a cause 
célèbre for over a week when President Obama 
weighed in with his opinion. The event culmi-
nated in what became known as the Rose Garden 
Beer Summit, where Gates and Crowley met with 
President Obama and Vice President Biden over 
a beer in the White House’s Rose Garden and 
agreed to disagree about the events of that night 
and to continue a dialogue (Williams, 2009).
It appears that during this incident both 
Professor Gates and Sergeant Crowley were 
inﬂ uenced by deeply ingrained co-cultural mes-
sages about race and police authority. Professor 
Gates, returning home after what must have 
been an exhausting trip to China, was con-
fronted with a front door that was stuck, so he 
had to force his way into his own home. A short 
time later, when confronted by a white ofﬁ cer 
at his door who claimed to be investigating a 
break-in, Gates’s normal civility was probably 
overridden by his exhaustion and his co-cultural 
experience of racial proﬁ ling. According to the 
Pop Comm!
Chip Somodevilla/ Getty Images News/Getty Images

125
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
An ethnocentric view of the world leads to attitudes of superiority and  messages that 
are directly and subtly condescending in content and tone. As you would expect, these 
messages are offensive to receivers from other cultures or co-cultures.
Stereotypes and Prejudice
Stereotypes are the attributions that cover up individual differences and ascribe 
certain characteristics to a group of people. Basing our interactions on stereotypes 
can lead to misunderstandings and can strain relationships. For example, when 
Laura anticipates meeting Joey, who she has heard is gay, she may expect him to 
be effeminate in his mannerisms and interested in fashion. So she embarrasses him 
and herself when, early in their conversation, she attempts to ﬁ nd common ground 
and asks him for advice on what type of cologne to buy her boyfriend—to which 
he replies, “What is your problem? I may be gay, but I’m not that Clinton Kelly 
dude from What Not to Wear! Just because I’m gay doesn’t make me a fashion 
consultant.”
Prejudice is deﬁ ned as a rigid attitude based on group membership that pre-
disposes us to think, feel, or act in a negative way toward another person or group. 
Thinking that Xue, a Chinese student in your class, will get the best grade in the 
course because, supposedly, all Chinese students excel intellectually or assuming that 
Alberto, who is Mexican, is working in the United States illegally would be examples 
stereotypes
attributions that cover up 
individual differences and 
ascribe certain characteristics 
to a group of people.
prejudice
a rigid attitude based on 
group membership.
police report ﬁ led by Sergeant Crowley, Gates’s 
response to Crowley’s request to step out to the 
porch was to demand, “Why, because I’m a black 
man in America?” (Associated Press, 2009).
On the other hand, Sergeant Crowley was 
responding to a 911 call about a possible home 
invasion and asked Gates to step outside and pro-
vide identiﬁ cation to support Gates’s statement 
that he was the homeowner. This procedure is 
designed to ensure that if a home invader answers 
the door and has hostages, the person is drawn 
out of the residence. Crowley indicated in his 
police report that he was “surprised and confused” 
by Gates’s continued accusations that he was a 
racist police ofﬁ cer (“Henry Louis Gates, Jr., Police 
Report,” 2009). We can speculate that Crowley, 
who prided himself on his race-neutral approach 
to his work, may have been offended and angered 
by what he probably perceived as an unfair attack.
So, when confronted with a stressful and per-
sonally humiliating situation, two otherwise good 
men who make it their professional mission to 
overcome racism allowed their egos and their co-
cultural stereotypes to escalate a routine police 
call into a national incident.
That two men who seem especially under-
standing and aware about the issue of racial 
proﬁ ling still clashed so intensely with one 
another is an example of how deep co-cultural 
conﬂ ict runs in the United States. This event also 
illustrates how the approaches we advocate in this 
chapter—listening, empathy, and ﬂ exibility—are 
often times easier said than done, especially when 
sensitive buttons are pushed. Rosie Sizer, chief of 
police in Portland, Oregon, says, “I think there’s 
been . . . very little attention [paid] to how com-
munications can sometimes break down in the 
heat of discussions of race” (Goodwin, 2009). To 
help avoid these kinds of communication break-
downs, Reverend Jim Wallis, author of God’s 
Politics: Why the Right Gets It Wrong and the Left 
Doesn’t Get It, encourages respect even when it 
might seem undeserved: “The best way to defuse, 
diminish, and ultimately dismantle the power of 
[prejudice] is to show even excessive respect in 
potential situations of conﬂ ict” (Jonsson, 2009). 
We can only hope that as Professor Gates and 
Sergeant Crowley continue their dialogue, they 
will inspire all of us as we seek to overcome our 
own co-culturally ingrained stereotypes.

126
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
of prejudice. Colin is prejudiced and believes 
that all white people try to take advantage of 
people of color. So when his coworker John, 
who is white, offers to refer a client to Colin, 
Colin replies, “Forget it—you’re not going to 
pawn off a deadbeat on me.” When we inter-
act based on stereotypes and prejudice, we 
risk creating messages that are inaccurate and 
damage our relationships. When we listen 
with our stereotypes and prejudices in mind, 
we may misperceive the intent of the person 
with whom we are talking. In the Pop Comm! 
article in this chapter you can read about how 
prejudice and stereotyping created a conﬂ ict 
that resulted in what is now know as the Rose 
Garden Beer Summit.
Incompatible Communication 
Codes
At times, we misunderstand one another 
because the language or other communication 
behavior of our culture or co-culture differs from that of another cultural group. For 
example, Zeke could not understand why those Chinese guys who were continually 
ﬁ ghting—screaming at each other and waving their arms—always sat together in the 
dining hall. Zeke had no idea what they were saying but he from his standpoint they 
looked pretty angry.
Because he didn’t understand Mandarin, Zeke was judging the conversation of the 
Chinese students based on their paralanguage and body movement, which he inter-
preted as hostile and angry. Zeke did not know that Mandarin is a tonal language. How 
the words are voiced affects their meaning. The large changes in pitch and volume 
that he heard were not expression of strong emotion, but only the voicing of different 
words.
When our conversational partners, people in our group, or audience members 
speak a different language, it is easy to see that we have incompatible communication 
codes. But even when people speak the same language, cultural variations can result 
from their belonging to different co-cultures. For example, people from Great Britain 
take a lift to reach a higher ﬂ oor, while Americans ride an elevator. Even within a 
national group, co-cultural use of the language can lead to incompatible communica-
tion codes. In fact, less powerful co-cultural groups will often purposefully develop 
in-group codes that are easily understood by co-culture members but unintelligible to 
those from the outside. Just try to have a conversation about your computer problem 
with your friend Sam who is a “techno geek.” As an insider, Sam’s vocabulary is likely 
to be as foreign to you as if he were speaking Icelandic.
People who speak different languages quickly comprehend their inability to com-
municate verbally and invariably turn to some type of nonverbal signing in an effort 
to overcome the language barrier. As we have seen, however, there are also signiﬁ cant 
differences in the use and meaning of nonverbal behaviors. Not only do incompatible 
verbal communication codes create barriers to intercultural communication, so do our 
differences in how we use and interpret nonverbal behavior. For example, in some cul-
tures, belching after eating signiﬁ es that the meal did not agree with the diner, whereas 
Prejudice and stereotypes 
can negatively affect our 
relationships not only with 
people we know personally 
but also with our larger 
communities. How do you 
suppose this protester’s sign 
will affect the young girls in 
the photo?
Doug Pensinger/Getty Images News/Getty Images

127
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
in other cultures, it is a compliment to the cook. Such cultural differences in nonverbal 
behavior often account for misunderstandings or embarrassment when people from 
different cultures attempt to communicate with each other.
Incompatible Norms and Values
All cultures base their communication behaviors on cultural norms and rules and on 
personal values based on those cultural norms and rules. Sometimes the norms and 
values of two people of different cultures create barriers that make it difﬁ cult for 
them to understand each other. For example, Jeff and Abdul have been best friends 
since elementary school. They have shared everything: school work, summer vaca-
tions, sports, and camping trips. Now that they are in high school, their interests 
seem to be changing. One day Jeff tells Abdul that he has a six-pack of beer and 
offers to share it with Abdul. Abdul simply says, “No,” and offers no explanation. 
Jeff is confused by Abdul’s behavior. To Jeff, a fourth-generation American whose 
family is not religious and is individualistic in their cultural orientation, drinking 
a couple of beers is no big deal. He ﬁ gures, “Even if we get caught, neither of us 
has ever been in trouble before, so all we’d get is a slap on the wrist.” He doesn’t 
consider how his arrest might affect his family and chides Abdul, saying, “Come on, 
don’t wimp out on me now.” What Jeff does not understand is that Abdul, coming 
from a ﬁ rst-generation Saudi American Muslim family, has religious norms and the 
collectivist values of his parents. Being caught with alcohol would not only violate 
his religious beliefs but it would also bring great disgrace upon his whole family. To 
Abdul, honoring Allah as well as maintaining his family honor is much more impor-
tant than having fun with a friend. But because they are life long friends, Abdul and 
Jeff don’t recognize that their cultural backgrounds have led them to have different 
expectations that they don’t really know how to discuss, so this incident puts a strain 
on their relationship
Intercultural Communication Competence
Competent intercultural communicators overcome cultural barriers by adopting the 
correct attitudes toward other cultures, acquiring accurate information about other 
cultures’ values and practices, and developing speciﬁ c skills needed to be effective 
across cultures.
Adopt Correct Attitudes
The right attitudes for intercultural communication involve one’s motivations and 
ﬂ exibility in interacting with others from different cultures (Neuliep, 2006). In other 
words, we must be willing to try and must have a desire to succeed when communi-
cating interculturally. We must be willing to try new behaviors rather than expecting 
the other person to adjust to our style of communicating. Tolerating ambiguity, being 
open-minded, and acting altruistically enable us to effectively communicate across 
cultural differences.
 1. Tolerate ambiguity. Communicating with strangers creates uncertainty, and when 
the stranger also comes from a different culture, we can become anxious about 
what he or she will expect of us. People beginning intercultural relationships must 
be prepared to tolerate a high degree of uncertainty about the other person and to 
tolerate it for a long time. If you enter an intercultural interaction believing that it 
is OK to be unsure about how to proceed, you are likely to pay closer attention to 
How can you 
improve your 
intercultural 
communication?

128
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
the feedback you receive from the other person, and you can then work to adjust 
your behavior and messages so that together the two of you can achieve under-
standing. Accepting the ambiguity in the interaction can help you work hard to 
make the conversation successful; you will be much less apt to become frustrated 
or discouraged by the inevitable false starts and minor misunderstandings.
   
When Jerome read the Partner Assignment List posted on the bulletin board 
outside the lab, he discovered that his lab partner had an Indian-sounding name, 
but he resolved to work hard to make the relationship a success. So when he 
met Meena in class and found that she was an exchange student from Mumbai, 
he worked hard to attune his ear to her accent and was pleased to discover 
that although her accent was at ﬁ rst difﬁ cult to understand, her command of 
English was as good as his. Over the semester, Jerome worked hard to under-
stand Meena’s English. He was rewarded, because she really had a much better 
grasp of chemistry than he did and was willing to tutor him as they worked on 
assignments.
 2. Be open-minded. An open-minded person is willing to dispassionately receive 
the ideas and opinions of others. Open-minded people are aware of their own cul-
tural values and recognize that other people’s values are different. They resist the 
impulse to judge the values of other cultures in terms of those of their own culture. 
In other words, they resist ethnocentrism.
 3. Be altruistic. Altruism is a display of genuine and unselﬁ sh concern for the welfare of 
others. The opposite of altruism is egocentricity, a selﬁ sh interest in one’s own needs 
to the exclusion of everything else. Egocentric people are self-centered, whereas altru-
istic people are other-centered. Altruistic communicators do not neglect their own 
needs, but they recognize that for a conversation to be successful, both parties must 
be able to contribute what they want and take what they need from the exchange.
Acquire Knowledge About Other Cultures
The more we know about other cultures, the more likely we are to be competent intercul-
tural communicators (Neuliep, 2006). There are several ways to learn about other cultures.
 1. Observe. You can simply watch as members of another culture interact with 
each other. As you watch, you can notice how their values, rituals, and com-
munication styles are similar to and different from your own and other 
cultures with which you are familiar. The technique of watching the commu-
nication behaviors used by members of a particular culture is called “passive 
observation.”
 2. Formally study. You can learn about other cultures by reading accounts by their 
members and ethnographic research studies, by taking courses, and by interview-
ing members of the culture about their values, rituals, and so on.
 3. Immerse yourself in the culture. You can learn a great deal about another culture 
by actively participating in it. When you live or work with people whose cul-
tural assumptions are different from yours, you not only acquire obvious cultural 
information, but you also learn nuances that escape passive observers and are 
generally not accessible through formal study alone. One reason that study-abroad 
programs often include home stays is to ensure that students become immersed in 
the culture of the host country. We hope that you will consider participating in a 
study-abroad experience. The international or global studies ofﬁ ce at your college 
or university can point you to a variety of study-abroad opportunities and may 
even guide you to scholarships or grants to help pay your expenses.
altruism
a display of genuine and 
unselﬁ sh concern for the 
welfare of others.
egocentricity
a selﬁ sh interest in one’s own 
needs, to the exclusion of 
everything else.
Skill Learning Activity 6.3
One way to develop 
intercultural communication 
competence is to tolerate 
ambiguity. How well do 
you tolerate ambiguity 
when meeting someone 
from a different culture or 
co-culture?
Chris Schmidt/istockphoto.com 

129
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
Acquiring Cultural Knowledge
The Assignment
Choose a culture you’re not familiar with but are curious about. Prepare 
a 3- to 5-minute speech to deliver in class by gathering materials from 
(a) reviewing an encyclopedia entry (b) researching two or three aca-
demic sources about the culture, and (c) interviewing someone from that 
country either face-to-face or online. Use what you learn from the ency-
clopedia and the academic sources to shape the questions you ask in 
the interview. In your speech discuss what you learned from each source, 
answering the following questions:
 1. What did you know about the culture before you began your 
research?
 2. What did you learn from the encyclopedia article that changed or 
deepened your knowledge?
 3. How was your understanding enriched from the additional aca-
demic sources you read?
 4. What did you learn from your interviewee, and how did the inter-
view compare to your other sources?
Using Diverse Resources
When we are researching any topic, we can be tempted to limit our quest to 
only one type of information source. But as you will learn in this assignment, 
what you know about a subject is often the result of where you look. That is 
why it is important to consult a variety of information sources. Whether online 
or in print, encyclopedias are good jumping-off points to acquire informa-
tion and can provide a wonderful overview of the subject. Specialized 
sources like books and articles by experts provide additional details and 
can conﬁ rm or disconﬁ rm information in the encyclopedia. Finally, per-
sonal interviews with experts add another dimension or level of speciﬁ city. 
For example, in this assignment when you interview the  person from the 
other culture, you can ask for speciﬁ c examples of his or her  experiences 
and whether what you have read is accurate. Good speeches depend on 
accurate information, so learning to use diverse sources is important to your 
success.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
Develop Culture-Speciﬁ c Skills
To be effective in intercultural situations, you may need to adapt the basic communica-
tion skills that you learn in this course to the demands of a particular culture. To this 
end, the three most useful skills that you will study are listening, empathy, and ﬂ exibility.
 1. Practice listening. By carefully listening and demonstrating you’re listening, you 
can improve your communication with people from other cultures. Because lan-
guage and nonverbal communication vary across cultures, it is vitally important that 
you focus closely on the other and listen attentively. There are cultural differences 
in how people engage in listening and the value that cultures place on listening. In 
the United States, we listen closely for concrete facts and information and often ask 

130
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
questions while listening. In other cultures, such as Japan, Finland, and Sweden, 
listeners are more reserved and do not ask as many questions (Samovar, Porter, & 
McDaniel, 2009). For many cultures in the Far East, listening is much more valued 
than speaking. Regardless of your cultural background, however, becoming a more 
skillful listener will help you in your intercultural encounters.
 2. Practice intercultural empathy. Intercultural empathy means imaginatively plac-
ing yourself in the other person’s cultural world to attempt to experience what 
he or she is experiencing (Ting-Toomey, 1999). The saying “Don’t judge a person 
until you have walked a mile in his shoes” captures this idea. By paying close 
attention to the other person and focusing on the emotions displayed, we can 
improve our empathic skills.
 3. Develop ﬂ exibility. We discussed the concept of ﬂ exibility as part of an appropriate 
attitude toward intercultural encounters, but we can also provide concrete strategies 
for becoming more ﬂ exible in communication. Flexibility is the ability to adjust 
your communication to ﬁ t the other person and the situation. With  ﬂ exibility, you 
can use a wide variety of communication skills during an interaction and modify 
your behavior within and across situations. Being ﬂ exible means analyzing a situa-
tion, making good decisions about how to communicate in that situation, and then 
modifying your communication when things are not going well.
intercultural empathy
imaginatively placing yourself 
in the dissimilar other person’s 
cultural world to attempt to 
experience what he or she is 
experiencing.
ﬂ exibility
the ability to adjust your 
communication to ﬁ t the other 
person and the situation.
A Question of Ethics
Tyler, Jeannie, Margeaux, and Madhukar were sit-
ting around Margeaux’s dining-room table working 
on a group marketing project. It was 2:00 a.m. They 
had been working since 6:00 p.m. and still had sev-
eral hours’ work remaining.
“Oh, the misery,” groaned Tyler, pretending 
to slit his own throat with an Exacto knife. “If 
I never see another photo of a veggie burger, it 
will be too soon. Why didn’t we choose a more 
interesting product?”
“I think it had something to do with some-
one wanting to promote a healthy alternative to 
greasy hamburgers,” Jeannie replied sarcastically.
“Right,” said Tyler, “I don’t know what I 
could have been thinking. Speaking of greasy 
hamburgers, is anyone else starving? Anybody 
want to order pizza or something?”
“No one will deliver up here this late,” Margeaux 
replied, “but I have a quiche that I could heat up.”
“Fancy,” Tyler quipped.
“You wish,” Margeaux said. “It came out of 
a box.”
“Sure, that sounds great, thanks,” Jeannie 
said. “I’m hungry too.”
“It doesn’t have any meat in it, does it?” 
asked Madhukar. “I don’t eat meat.”
“Nope, it’s a cheese and spinach quiche,” 
Margeaux said.
Tyler and Margeaux went off to the kitchen 
to prepare the food. Tyler took the quiche, still in 
its box, from the fridge. “Uh-oh,” he said. “My 
roommate is a vegetarian, and he won’t buy this 
brand because it has lard in the crust. Better warn 
Madhukar. He’s a Hindu, so I imagine it’s pretty 
important to him.”
“Shhh!” said Margeaux, “I don’t have anything 
else to offer him, and he’ll never know the differ-
ence anyway. Just pretend you didn’t notice that.”
“Okay,” Tyler said. “It’s your kitchen.”
 1. What exactly are Margeaux’s ethical obliga-
tions to Madhukar in this situation? Why?
 2. Does the fact that Tyler is not the host 
relieve him of all ethical responsibility in 
this case?
What Would You Do?

131
 
Chapter 6  Communicating Across Cultures 
Summary
Culture encompasses the values, attitudes, beliefs, orientations, and underlying 
assumptions prevalent among people in a society. Culture shock is the psychologi-
cal discomfort people have when they attempt to adjust to a new cultural situation. 
Intercultural communication takes place when people’s distinct cultural assumptions 
alter the communication event. A shared system of meaning exists within the dominant 
culture, but meanings can vary within co-cultures based on race, ethnicity, sex and 
gender, religion, sexual orientation, social class, and age. Cultural norms and values 
vary in systematic ways, and we can understand how similar or different one culture is 
from others by understanding where the culture is on the dimensions of  individualism–
collectivism, uncertainty avoidance, power distance, and masculinity–femininity.
Barriers to intercultural communication include anxiety, assumptions about dif-
ferences and similarities, ethnocentrism, stereotypes and prejudice, incompatible 
communication codes, and incompatible norms and values. To develop intercultural 
communication competence, we should learn to tolerate ambiguity, be open-minded, 
and be altruistic. We can acquire knowledge of other cultures through observing, 
formal study, and cultural immersion. Useful skills for intercultural communication 
competence are listening, intercultural empathy, and ﬂ exibility.
Now that you have read Chapter 6, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access to 
the electronic resources that accompany this text. These 
resources include
•  Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
•  Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
•  Media resources that will help you explore commu-
nication concepts online (Web Resources), develop 
your speech outlines (Speech Builder Express 
3.0), watch and critique videos of communication 
situations and sample speeches (Interactive Video 
Activities), upload your speech videos for peer 
reviewing and critique other students’ speeches 
(Speech Studio online speech review tool), and 
download chapter review so you can study when 
and where you’d like (Audio Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment in the body of the chapter.
Key Terms
altruism (128)
co-culture (114)
collectivist culture (118)
culture (112)
culture shock (112)
dominant culture (113)
egocentricity (128)
ethnicity (114)
ethnocentrism (124)
feminine culture (122)
ﬂ exibility (130)
high power-distance (121)
high uncertainty-avoidance 
 cultures (121)
individualistic culture (117)
intercultural communication (113)
intercultural empathy (130)
low power-distance (122)
low uncertainty-avoidance cultures
 (121)
masculine culture (122)
prejudice(125)
religion (115)
social class (115)
stereotypes (125)
Communicate! Active Online Learning

132
 
Chapter 6 
Communicating Across Cultures
Skill Learning Activities
6.1: Race and Ethnicity (114)
What is the difference between race and ethnic-
ity? Can you think of examples of people who are 
ethnically different but racially the same? racially 
different but ethnically the same? Can you think 
of anyone for whom both designations might be 
identical? For whom the two designations might be 
contradictory? What does this analysis suggest about 
the accuracy and legitimacy of such classiﬁ cation 
systems?
6.2: Similarities and Differences (124)
Recall a time when you visited a place that was 
different from your usual social milieu: a different 
country, a different city, a different kind of club 
or market. Did you assume any similarities or dif-
ferences? Were your assumptions correct? How did 
they affect your perception of the place? How did 
they affect your appreciation for, or enjoyment of, 
the place?
6.3: Acquiring Accurate Cultural Knowledge 
(128)
For the next week, conduct research into a 
distinct culture with which you have little or no 
familiarity. This can be a co-culture based on gender, 
race, religion, ethnicity, social class, sexual orienta-
tion, age, or some combination of these factors, but 
whatever culture you choose to study, be sure you 
can access it locally. First, arrange to observe mem-
bers of the culture engaged in a typical activity and 
note as many of their individual communication 
behaviors as you can. Take your notes respectfully, 
being careful not to offend those you observe. Next, 
spend some time formally researching the culture and 
its communication behaviors at a library or over the 
Internet, consulting only reputable sources for your 
information. Finally, observe members of the culture 
once more and then write a paragraph in which you 
answer these questions: What were your impressions 
of the culture’s communication behaviors the ﬁ rst 
time you observed its members? How were these ﬁ rst 
impressions altered, if at all, by your formal research 
into the culture? How did your formal research affect 
your second observation of the culture?
To help you complete this activity, you can 
use the log provided in your Premium Website for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Chapter 6.
Web Resources
6.1: Hofstede’s Cultural Dimensions (117)
Geert Hofstede’s Web site lists national scores in 
ﬁ ve cultural dimensions: power-distance index, indi-
vidualism, masculinity, uncertainty-avoidance index, 
and long-term orientation.
6.2: Individualism and Collectivism (118)
This page from WestEnd.com, an agency that 
does research in education, offers resources about the 
differences between individualism and collectivism 
and their implications for teaching. One of its publi-
cations, a knowledge brief called Bridging Cultures in 
Our Schools: New Approaches That Work, discusses 
sources of cross-culture conﬂ icts and describes strat-
egies for resolving them. To read the brief online, 
click on the link “View online/PDF.”

Understanding Interpersonal 
Relationships
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What is competent communication in acquaintance, friendship, and 
intimate relationships?
• How do disclosure and feedback affect relationship life cycles?
• What role does communication play in beginning, developing, 
maintaining, and deteriorating relationships?
• How do dialectal tensions operate in interpersonal relationships?
It was Monday, between classes, and Jennifer had an hour before her next class. 
She decided to walk over to the bookstore. On the way, she spotted Maria, a 
woman in her accounting class, and asked, “Hey, how you doing?”
“OK,” Maria replied. “What did you think of that test we had yesterday?”
“Not sure I want to think about it now,” Jennifer replied with a little laugh.
“I know what you mean,” Maria said. “I hope we get them back soon. See you 
in class tomorrow.”
“Right,” Jennifer replied as Maria made her way across the street.
A minute later, Jennifer was startled as she heard, “Hey beautiful, what are you 
doing here?”
“Greg!” Jennifer said with a big smile on her face. “You scared me. I thought 
you were working today!”
7
Gabe Palmer/Alamy

134
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
“Well,” Greg replied, “as it turned out, my plans to work with Ken kind of fell 
through. Have you got time to get lunch?”
“You know I’ve always got time to spend with you.”
“Like to decide what we’re going to do this weekend?”
“Sounds good to me!”
Interpersonal communication skills help you start, build, and maintain healthy 
 relationships, sets of expectations two people have for their behavior based on the 
pattern of interaction between them (Littlejohn & Foss, 2008). We form relationships 
to satisfy our innate human need for connection with others. That is, we want to feel a 
sense of belonging and that someone else is here for us . Relationships run the gamut 
from impersonal acquaintances (like Maria and Jennifer) to intimate friends (like Greg 
and Jennifer). Regardless of the level of intimacy, we seek good relationships, ones in 
which the interactions are satisfying to and healthy for those involved. How we com-
municate is central to achieving that goal (Littlejohn & Foss, 2008).
In this chapter, we describe three types of interpersonal relationships and provide 
guidelines for healthy communication in each of them. Next, we talk about the role 
of self-disclosure and feedback in relationship life cycles. Finally, we talk about the 
dialectical tensions in relationships and ways to manage them.
Types of Relationships
We behave differently depending on whether our relationships are personal or imper-
sonal. Moving on a continuum from impersonal to personal (Dindia & Timmerman, 
2003), we can classify our relationships as acquaintances, friendships, and close friends 
or intimates. Speciﬁ c communication competencies help establish and maintain each 
type of relationship.
Acquaintances
Acquaintances are people we know by name and talk with when the opportunity 
arises, but with whom our interactions are limited. Many acquaintance relationships 
grow out of a particular context. We become acquainted with those who live in our 
apartment building or dorm or in the house next door, who sit next to us in class, 
who go to our church, or belong to our club. Thus Whitney and Paige, who meet in 
calculus class, may talk with each other about class-related issues but make no effort 
to share personal ideas or to see each other outside of class. Most conversations with 
acquaintances can be deﬁ ned as impersonal communication, which is essentially 
interchangeable  chit-chat (Buber, 1970). In other words, I may talk about the same 
thing—for instance, the weather—with the grocery clerk, the sales associate, the bank 
teller, or the server at dinner. If you have an online social networking proﬁ le on 
Facebook, Twitter, or MySpace, many of your online “friends” would probably be 
most accurately deﬁ ned as acquaintances if your online conversations are surface-
level ones.
Our goals when communicating with acquaintances are usually to reduce 
uncertainty and maintain face. We engage in impersonal conversations to gain 
information that may help us connect with other people by discovering that their 
relationship
sets of expectations two 
people have for their behavior 
based on the pattern of 
interaction between them.
good relationship
ones in which the interactions 
are satisfying to and healthy 
for those involved.
What is competent 
communication 
in acquaintance 
relationships?
acquaintances
people we know by name 
and talk with when the 
opportunity arises, but with 
whom our interactions are 
largely impersonal.
impersonal 
communication
interchangeable polite chit-
chat involving no or very little 
personal disclosure.

135
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
beliefs, attitudes, and values are similar to our own 
(Berger, 1987). In doing so, however, either of us may 
say or do something that produces unintended con-
sequences. That is, we could offend the other person 
or say something that is taken the wrong way. So, 
our second goal is to monitor verbal and nonver-
bal feedback and  provide opportunities to help the 
other person save face. Saving face is the process 
of attempting to maintain a positive self-image in a 
relational situation (Ting-Toomey, 2004).
Acquaintanceship guidelines
To meet other people and develop acquaintance rela-
tionships, it helps to be good at starting and developing 
conversations. The following guidelines can help you 
become more competent in conversing with others:
• Initiate conversations by introducing yourself, 
referring to the physical context, referring to your 
thoughts or feelings, referring to another person, or making a joke. For example, 
“Hi, I’m Whitney. Do you think it’s hot in here, or is it just me?”
• Develop an other-centered focus by asking questions, listening carefully, and fol-
lowing up on what has been said. Here is an example:
WHITNEY: “Have you ever taken a class from this professor?”
PAIGE: “Yeah, I took algebra from her.”
WHITNEY: “What was she like?”
PAIGE: “She was pretty good. Her tests were hard, but they were fair. I learned a 
lot.”
WHITNEY: “Did she offer study guides?
PAIGE: “Yes, and we reviewed as a class by playing what she called ‘algebra jeop-
ardy.’ That worked well for me.”
WHITNEY: “Sounds like I’m going to like this class and this instructor!”
• Engage in appropriate turn-taking. Effective conversationalists balance talking 
with listening and do not interrupt the other. Not only do we need to avoid domi-
nating the conversation, but we also need to uphold our part by talking enough.
• Make your comments relevant to what has previously been said before you 
change subjects.
• Be polite. Consider how your conversational partner will feel about what you say 
and work to phrase your comments in a way that allows your partner to save face. 
Here is an example:
WHITNEY: “I wish I wouldn’t have signed up for this section that meets right at 
noon. I’m famished. Here, do you want some M&Ms?”
PAIGE: “No thanks.”
WHITNEY: “Are you sure? I don’t mind sharing. A little sugar never hurt anyone.”
PAIGE: “I’m diabetic.”
WHITNEY: “Oh, I’m so sorry. I’ll save these for later.”
Web Resource 7.1
Which of your online “friends” 
would you describe as 
acquaintances and why?
David J. Green-lifestyle themes/Alamy
saving face
the process of attempting to 
maintain a positive self-image 
in a relational situation.

136
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
Friends
Over time, some acquaintances become our friends. Friends are people with whom 
we have voluntarily negotiated more personal relationships (Patterson, Bettini, & 
Nussbaum, 1993, p. 145). As friendships develop, people move toward interactions 
that are less role bound and more interpersonally satisfying. For example, Whitney 
and Paige, who are acquaintances in calculus class and have only talked about class-
related subjects, may decide to get together after class to work out at the gym. If they 
ﬁ nd that they enjoy each other’s company, they may continue to meet outside of class 
and eventually become friends.
Some of our friendships are context bound. Thus, people often refer to their tennis 
friends, ofﬁ ce friends, or neighborhood friends. These context friendships may fade 
if the context changes. For instance, your friendship with a person at the ofﬁ ce may 
fade if you or your friend takes a job with a different company. Did you move a great 
distance from your hometown to attend college? If so, how many of your high school 
friends do you still consider friends?
Friendship guidelines
For friendships to develop and continue, some key behaviors must occur. These 
behaviors help friendships continue whether you are face to face or separated by 
distance. Computer-mediated communication (CMC) and cell phones have proven 
helpful in maintaining long distance relationships (Walther & Parks, 2002). The 
following ﬁ ve competencies can help you develop and maintain your friendships 
(Samter, 2003):
• Initiation. Be proactive in setting up times to spend together. One person must get 
in touch with the other, and the interaction must be smooth, relaxed, and enjoy-
able. A friendship is not likely to form between people who rarely interact or who 
have unsatisfying interactions.
• Responsiveness. Each person must listen. Listen to others and respond to what 
they say. It is difﬁ cult to form friendships with people who focus only on them-
selves or their issues, and it is equally difﬁ cult to maintain relationships with 
people who are uncommunicative.
• Self-disclosure. Friends share feelings with each other. Although acquaintances 
can be maintained by conversations that discuss surface issues or abstract ideas, 
a friendship is based on the exchange of more personal and speciﬁ c information 
including personal history, opinions, and feelings. For example, after Paige and 
Whitney start to spend more time together outside of class, they might have this 
conversation:
PAIGE: “Can I tell you something and trust you to keep it between us?”
WHITNEY: “Of course.”
PAIGE: “Well, you know I’ve been seeing David for a while now.”
WHITNEY: “Yeah, he seems like a nice guy.”
PAIGE: “Well, the other night we got into a little ﬁ ght and he pushed me onto the 
couch. I actually have a bruise here on my arm from it.”
• Emotional support. Provide comfort and support when needed. When we are 
emotionally or psychologically vulnerable, we expect to be helped by those we 
consider to be friends. When your friends are hurting, they need you to sup-
port them by conﬁ rming their feelings and helping them make sense of what has 
happened.
friends
people with whom we have 
negotiated more personal 
relationships that are 
voluntary.
What is competent 
communication in 
friendships?

137
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
WHITNEY: “Oh no.”
PAIGE: “He said he was sorry and I believe him, but I just don’t feel comfortable 
around him now.”
WHITNEY: “I understand. I’m not sure I would feel comfortable either. Is there 
anything I can do?”
PAIGE: “No, not really. I guess I just wanted someone to conﬁ rm that I’m not 
overreacting.”
WHITNEY: “Well, I don’t think you’re overreacting at all. Please let me know what 
I can do to help, OK?”
PAIGE: “OK. I’m so lucky to have you for a friend.”
• Conﬂ ict management. Manage conﬂ icts so that both parties’ needs are met. It is 
inevitable that friends will disagree about ideas or behaviors. Friendship depends 
on successfully handling these disagreements through conversation. In fact, by 
competently managing conﬂ ict, people can strengthen their friendship.
WHITNEY: “Maybe you should talk to a campus counselor about this.”
PAIGE: “No, I don’t want to make a big deal out of it.”
WHITNEY: “Paige, you got a bruise. That seems like a big deal to me.”
PAIGE: “Actually, I bruise really easily. I don’t want to see a counselor.”
WHITNEY: “Well, if anything like this happens again, will you please talk to 
someone?”
PAIGE: “OK, if something happens again, I promise I will.”
Close Friends or Intimates
Close friends or intimates are those few people with whom 
we share close,  caring, and trusting relationships character-
ized by a high degree of commitment, trust, interdependence, 
disclosure, and enjoyment. We may have countless acquain-
tances and many friends, but we are likely to have only a 
few truly intimate relationships. Intimacy is not synonymous 
with “love” or exclusivity, and both platonic and romantic 
relationships may become intimate. A platonic relationship 
is one in which the partners are not sexually attracted to 
each other or do not act on an attraction they feel. If you’re 
familiar with the television series, Will and Grace, their rela-
tionship is platonic. Although Will and Grace live together 
and are intimate friends, Will is homosexual and Grace is 
heterosexual. Conversely, a romantic relationship is one 
in which the partners act on their sexual attraction. Today, 
many people use social networking and matchmaking sites 
to ﬁ nd romantic relationship partners. Sometimes people use 
ghostwriters to help create the online proﬁ le they would like 
to project. The Pop Comm! feature talks about the role of 
ghostwriters and the ethical decisions to consider when using 
matchmaking sites to ﬁ nd romantic partners.
close friends or intimates
people with whom we share a 
high degree of commitment, 
trust, interdependence, 
disclosure, and enjoyment.
platonic relationship
an intimate relationship in 
which the partners are not 
sexually attracted to each 
other or do not act on an 
attraction they feel.
romantic relationship
an intimate relationship in 
which the partners act on 
their sexual attraction.
Original Artist/CSL, CartoonStock Ltd

138
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
Regardless of whether the relationship is platonic or romantic, for it to remain 
intimate, both partners must continue to trust the other. Trust is placing conﬁ dence in 
another in a way that almost always involves some risk. We show trust by having posi-
tive expectations of the other person and believing that he or she will behave fairly and 
honestly. With our close friends, our lives are interdependent or intertwined. We are 
more likely to share personal, private information about ourselves with close friends. 
In close relationships, there is some fusion of the self and the other. The partner is 
perceived as part of yourself. In other words, you come to deﬁ ne who you are, in part, 
through your close relationships (Aron, Aron, Tudor, & Nelson, 2004). As we disclose 
personal information, we monitor how well our partner keeps our conﬁ dence. Once we 
perceive our partner to be untrustworthy, we are likely to withdraw and not continue 
to disclose. As a result, over time the intimacy in the relationship will decrease. When 
there is a severe breach of trust, we may even abruptly end the relationship.
Research shows that women and men tend to differ on the factors that lead to 
intimacy in relationships. This may be because society teaches women and men to 
behave differently, according to the norms of femininity and masculinity. Women 
tend to develop close relationships with others based on talking, opening up with the 
other, and sharing personal feelings. By gaining knowledge of the innermost being of 
their partner, women develop a sense of “we-ness” with others. Men tend to develop 
What is competent 
communication 
in intimate 
relationships?
trust
placing conﬁ dence in 
another in a way that almost 
always involves some risk.
Why Don’t You Speak for 
Yourself, John?: Using 
Ghostwritten Online Dating 
Proﬁ les
Throughout history—in life, literature, and the 
media—people hoping to ﬁ nd love have solicited 
others to help them with self-expression. In Henry 
Wadsworth Longfellow’s poem “The Courtship of 
Miles Standish,” the shy Miles asks his friend John 
Alden to plead his case with the beautiful Priscilla 
Mullins. John complies, but in a classic love tri-
angle scenario, Priscilla asks John, “Why don’t you 
speak for yourself, John?” More recently, in an epi-
sode of Seinfeld, Kramer asks his friend Newman 
to write a poem for Kramer to recite to a woman 
he is wooing. But Newman’s poetry leaves some-
thing to be desired: “He imbibed her glistening 
spell / Just before the other shoe fell.” And most of 
us remember at least one occasion in junior high 
when we asked our best friend to ﬁ nd out if that 
cute classmate was interested in us.
Today we’ve expanded our search for love to 
online dating services, but advanced technologies 
don’t eliminate the need some of us have to seek out-
side help in expressing ourselves. A quick Amazon 
search shows several titles promising online dating 
success: I Can’t Believe I’m Buying This Book: A 
Commonsense Guide to Successful Internet Dating 
by Evan Marc Katz; Online Dating for Dummies 
by Judy Silverstein and Michael Lasky; Fine, I’ll 
Go Online!: The Hollywood Publicist’s Guide to 
Successful Internet Dating by Leslie Oren; and 
Pop Comm!
AP Photo/Jeff Christensen

139
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
close friendships through joint activities, doing favors for each other, and being able 
to depend on one another. Men are less likely to deﬁ ne a close friend as someone 
with whom you can share feelings. For men, close friends are the people you can 
depend on to help you out of a jam and the people you regularly choose for pursuing 
enjoyable activities together (Wood & Inman, 1993). It is important to note that these 
differences are more pronounced in same-sex friendships. When men and women 
develop close friendships or intimate relationships with each other, these distinctions 
may not apply.
Intimacy guidelines
Maintaining intimacy depends on developing and maintaining trust in your partner 
and commitment to your relationship. The following guidelines can help you establish 
and maintain trust (Boon, 1994, pp. 97–101):
• Be dependable so your partner learns he or she can rely on you at all times 
and under all circumstances. Of course, nobody is perfect. But striving to be 
dependable will provide a foundation for understanding when something does 
come up.
Romancing The Web: A Therapist’s Guide To The 
Finer Points Of Online Dating by Diane M. Berry.
Personal coaching for online dating is also on 
the rise. Online services such as Dating-Proﬁ le.com, 
Proﬁ leHelper.com, and E-Cyrano.com help online 
daters write their proﬁ les for a fee ranging from 
$29 to $2,000 (Alsever, 2007). On the Proﬁ leHelper.
com home page, the founder, Eric Resnic, says:
Everyone has something unique that makes 
them special. Together we will ﬁ gure out that 
 special thing that attracts people to you and 
exactly what qualities you are looking in a 
partner. Then, I will create or enhance your 
proﬁ le so that it is one of a kind, charming, 
entertaining and impossible to resist.
Opinions vary on what it means to “speak for 
yourself” on dating proﬁ le sites. Jenny Cargile, a 
Match.com user, says hiring someone to help write 
her proﬁ le would obscure who she truly is. “I’m not 
a person who is put together or always knows the 
right thing to say,” she says. “I would feel like if I 
went out on a date with someone, I would have to 
be what they read instead of myself” (Alsever, 2007).
However, online dater Jim West sings the 
praises of Proﬁ leHelper.com, where he learned to be 
more speciﬁ c and inquisitive when communicating 
on online dating sites (Alsever, 2007). In his case, 
a proﬁ le-writing coach stressed basic communica-
tion principles that helped West more accurately 
convey the kind of person he was, the types of 
things he enjoyed, and what he was looking for 
in a potential partner. Steve Zologa, founder of a 
similar company in Washington, D.C., looks at it 
as a simple matter of marketing: “My hypothesis is 
that there are many great men and women in the 
D.C. area who can’t market themselves. You have 
about seven seconds to make a good impression, 
then you’re done” (McCarthy, 2008).
However you feel about proﬁ le-writing 
coaches, most would agree that communication on 
online dating sites is tricky. An article in Skeptic 
explores the pros and cons of  self-disclosing when 
dating online (King, Austin-Oden, & Lohr, 2009): 
On one hand, information presented online is easy 
to manipulate and control, so people can present 
themselves in any way they like—even if what they 
present isn’t 100 percent accurate. On the other 
hand, the relative anonymity of online commu-
nication “accelerates intimacy through increased 
openness about aspects of the self.” When what we 
disclose about ourselves is true, self-disclosure is an 
important step in making a successful relationship.
What do you think—is true self-disclosure 
encouraged or obscured by online dating?

140
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
• Be responsive in meeting your partner’s needs. At times, this will require you to 
put their needs before your own.
• Be collaborative in managing conﬂ ict. Doing so includes saying you’re sorry for 
something you’ve done or said, agreeing to disagree, and letting go of the need 
to be “right.”
• Be faithful by maintaining your partner’s conﬁ dential information and by abiding 
by sexual or other exclusivity agreements between you and your partner. If your 
partner tells you something in conﬁ dence, honor that request.
• Be transparent by honestly sharing your real ideas and feelings with your partner.
• Be willing to put your relationship ﬁ rst. This may mean giving up some activities 
or relationships to spend time with your partner. This is not to say you should give 
up all other activities and relationships. Rather, healthy intimate relationships are 
characterized by a balance between doing things together and doing things apart 
(Baxter & Montgomery, 1996).
Skill Learning Activity 7.1
Friendship Speech
The Assignment
Prepare a 3- to 5-minute speech about your friends. Identify one person 
you have known for some time that you would consider an acquaintance, 
one that you would consider a friend, and one that you would consider a 
best friend. Describe each person and your relationship, as well as why you 
placed them in the category you did. Talk about the kinds of topics you typi-
cally discuss with them and the kinds you would not be likely to talk about 
with them. Be sure to follow the Speech Organization Guidelines here as you 
prepare. At your instructor’s request, deliver your speech for your classmates.
Speech Organization Guidelines
Introduction
 1. Catch attention
 2. Provide listener relevance and speaker credibility
 3. State thesis with preview of main points
Body
 1. Acquaintance
 2. Friend
 3. Best friend
Conclusion
 1. Restate thesis with summary of main points
 2. Clincher
Throughout our lives, we interact in relationships with lots of people. But as 
you will learn in this assignment, most of our interpersonal relationships 
fall into the categories of acquaintances or friends. If we are honest with 
ourselves, most of us can probably name only a few best friends. As you 
prepare the speech, you will begin to see how the topics and feelings you 
share are deeper and more personal with best friends than with acquain-
tances or even friends.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet

141
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
Disclosure and Feedback in Relationship Life 
Cycles
Relationships are not something we have, but rather are something we make as we 
communicate with others. Over time, in the give and take of our conversations, we 
create, recreate, and sometimes even destroy our relationships (Parks, 2006). Even 
though no two relationships develop in exactly the same manner, all relationships tend 
to move through identiﬁ able stages that include beginning, developing, maintaining, 
and perhaps deteriorating (Baxter; 1982, Duck, 1987; Knapp & Vangelisti, 2005; Taylor 
& Altman, 1987). Relationships don’t move through these stages in a linear fashion: 
rather, we seem to cycle back and forth through the stages, so we say that these stages 
occur within the life cycle of a relationship (Honeycutt, 1993; Duck, 2007). How a 
relationship moves through these stages depends on the interpersonal communication 
between the partners. In fact, talking is basic to all relationship stages—whether they 
are beginning, deepening, getting worse, or maintaining at a status quo. (Duck, 2007). 
What enables a relationship to move between stages is the disclosure and feedback 
that occurs between partners. So let’s take a look at how disclosure and feedback work 
together in relationship development.
A healthy interpersonal relationship is marked by an appropriate balance of 
self-disclosure (sharing biographical data, personal ideas, and feelings that are unknown 
to the other person) and feedback (the verbal and physical responses to people and/or their 
messages) within the relationship. The Johari window, named after its two originators, 
Joe Luft and Harry Ingham, is a tool for examining the relationship between disclosure 
and feedback in a relationship (Luft, 1970). The window represents all of the information 
about you that can be known. You and your partner each may know some (but not all) 
of this information. The window has four “panes” or quadrants, as shown in Figure 7.1.
The Open Pane
The ﬁ rst quadrant is called the “open” pane of the window because it represents the 
information about you that both you and your partner know. It includes information 
self-disclosure
sharing biographical data, 
personal ideas, and feelings 
that are unknown to the other 
person.
feedback
verbal and physical 
responses to people (and/
or their messages) within the 
relationship.
Johari window
a tool for examining the 
relationship between 
disclosure and feedback in 
the relationship.
How do disclosure 
and feedback 
affect relationship 
life cycles?
Known
to self
Known
to others
Not known
to others
Not known
to self
Open
Blind
Secret
Secret
Unknown
Figure 7.1
The Johari window

142
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
that you have disclosed and the observations about you that your partner has shared 
with you. It might include mundane information that you share with most people, 
such as your college major, but it also may include information that you disclose to 
relatively few people. Similarly, it could include simple observations that your partner 
has made, such as how you doodle when you’re bored, or more serious feedback such 
as how you behave when you’re angry.
The Secret Pane
The second quadrant is called the “secret” pane. It contains all those things that you 
know about yourself but that your partner does not yet know about you. Secret infor-
mation is made known through the process of self-disclosure. The information moves 
into the open pane of the window once you share it with your partner. For example, 
suppose that you had been engaged to be married, but on the day of the wedding your 
ﬁ ancé(e) had backed out. You may not want to share this part of your history with 
casual acquaintances, so it will be in the secret pane of your window in many of your 
relationships. But when you disclose this fact to a friend, it moves into the open part 
of your Johari window with this person. As you disclose information, the secret pane 
of the window becomes smaller and the open pane is enlarged.
The Blind Pane
The third quadrant is called the “blind” pane. This is the place for information that 
the other person knows about you, but about which you are unaware. Most people 
have blind spots—parts of their behavior or the effects of their behavior of which they 
are unaware. Information moves from the blind area of the window to the open area 
through feedback from others. When someone gives you an insight about yourself and 
you accept the feedback, then the information moves into the open pane . Thus, like 
disclosure, feedback enlarges the open pane of the Johari window, but in this case, it 
is the blind pane that becomes smaller.
The Unknown Pane
The fourth quadrant is called the “unknown” pane. It contains information that neither 
you nor your partner knows about you. Obviously, you cannot develop a list of this 
information. So how do we know that it exists? Well, because periodically we discover 
it. If, for instance, you have never tried hang gliding, then nobody knows how you will 
react. You might chicken out or follow through, do it well or crash, love every minute 
of it or be paralyzed with fear. But until you try it, this information is unknown. Once 
you try it, you gain information about yourself that becomes part of the secret pane, 
which you can move to the open pane through disclosure. Also, once you have tried 
it, others who observe your ﬂ ight will have information about your performance that 
you may not know unless they give you feedback.
As you disclose and receive feedback, the sizes of the various windowpanes 
change. These changes reﬂ ect the relationships. So the panes of the Johari window 
you have with different people will vary in size. Figure 7.2 shows examples.
In Figure 7.2a we see an example of a person in a relationship where there is little 
disclosure or feedback. The open pane is very small because this person has not shared 
much information with the other and has received little feedback. This pattern is typi-
cal of new relationships and ones between casual acquaintances.
Figure 7.2b shows the panes when a person discloses to the partner, but the part-
ner provides little feedback. As you can see, the secret pane is smaller than in 7.2a, but 

143
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
the hidden pane is unchanged. Because feedback from others is one of the ways we 
learn about who we are, relationships in which one partner does not provide feedback 
can become very unsatisfying to the other individual.
Figure 7.2c shows the panes when a partner is good at providing feedback, but 
the individual does not disclose. Because most of us disclose only when we trust our 
partner, this pattern may indicate that the individual does not have conﬁ dence in the 
partner.
Figure 7.2d shows the panes when the individual discloses information and receives 
feedback. The open pane of the window has enlarged as a result of both processes. 
Windows that look like this indicate sufﬁ cient trust and interest in the relationship that 
both partners are willing to risk disclosing and giving feedback.
Obviously, to get a complete “picture” of a relationship, each partner’s Johari win-
dow would need to be examined. A balance of appropriate disclosure and feedback for 
both partners is a sign of a healthy relationship.
Communication in the Stages 
of Relationships
Regardless of whether your relationship is with an acquaintance, a friend, or an inti-
mate partner, every relationship develops and changes with time. Even though no two 
relationships develop in exactly the same manner, they tend to follow a life cycle that 
has four identiﬁ able stages: beginning, developing, maintaining, and deteriorating 
(Baxter, 1982; Duck, 1987; Knapp & Vangelisti, 2000; Taylor & Altman, 1987). Your 
relationship moves among the stages based on the conversations you have with your 
partner. Your relationship develops based not only on the information you share with 
each other, but “by the interpretation of such things by the partners” (Duck, 2007, p. 
80). In other words, your relationship develops as you and your partner realize the 
similar ways in which the two of you see the world. Not only that, relationships can 
alternate almost imperceptibly between stages, so it may be difﬁ cult at any point in 
time to accurately label a stage of the relationship. At times, relationship stages may 
merge, and at other times, they may be quite distinct. But if you are observant, you can 
detect which way the relationship is moving over time.
Beginning Relationships
Communication during the beginning stage of a relationship focuses on reducing 
uncertainty by increasing your knowledge of the other person Your goal is to under-
stand how he or she sees the world (Berger, 1987). Noted interpersonal communication 
scholar Steve Duck (1999) conceived the Relationship Filtering Model to explain the 
Skill Learning Activity 7.2
Web Resource 7.2
a
b
c
d
O
B
S
U
O
B
S
U
O
B
S
U
O
B
S
U
Figure 7.2
Sample Johari windows: 
(a) low disclosure, low 
feedback; (b) high 
disclosure, low feedback; 
(c) low disclosure, high 
feedback; (d) high 
disclosure, high feedback.

144
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
process that relationships go through in the beginning stage. When you ﬁ rst meet 
someone, the model suggests you assume they are similar to you until what they say 
or do tells you otherwise. You begin by communicating very generally about noncon-
troversial topics and ask questions about surface information such as where they grew 
up and if they have any hobbies. Based on what you learn, you make inferences about 
their general attitudes, values, and ways of thinking. If you decide you have enough 
common interests and attitudes, you will choose to develop the relationship by disclos-
ing more about yourself.
Let’s look again at Whitney and Paige, who 
have decided to become college roommates. At 
ﬁ rst, they are nervous, wondering if they will be 
compatible as roommates. To reduce this uncer-
tainty, they get to know each other better through 
disclosure and feedback They may talk about 
what they did in high school, what major each is 
 pursuing, what hobbies they like, and their favor-
ite foods, movies, and music. As they learn more 
about each other, they ﬁ nd that although Whit-
ney is majoring in ﬁ ne arts and Paige is in pre-
med, they both are passionate  environmentalists 
and vegetarians. As they learn more, they begin 
to relax and ﬁ nd that although they have many 
 differences, they like and respect each other. Over 
the semester, they each socialize with different 
friends, but they continue to have evening meals 
in the dining hall together. Life in the room they 
share begins to take on a predictable pattern. 
When Whitney is working on a class project, materials are strewn all over the room, 
so Paige accommodates her by studying in the library. When Paige is freaking out over 
her  mid-term exam in chemistry, Whitney gets her a Red Bull from the Quick Mart and 
then goes to the lounge to watch TV while Paige studies.
Relationships can begin in face-to-face or online environments. Increasingly, 
the beginning stage may occur online (Ward & Tracy, 2004). Online communication 
may present a potentially less difﬁ cult way to meet others than traditional face-to-
face interactions. The initial interaction can occur in the comfort of your own home 
and at your own pace. You need not be concerned about physical aspects of the self 
or the other, and you can more precisely select what you are going to say (Ward & 
Tracy, 2004).
Developing Relationships
As the relationship develops, you disclose more to one another and begin to engage in 
more physical contact and feel a deepening psychological closeness (Duck, 1999). As 
healthy relationships develop, partners will identify and capitalize on their similarities 
and tolerate or negotiate their differences.
As the relationship develops, partners also tend to share greater physical con-
tact. Physical contact may involve sitting closer together, leaning toward each 
other, more eye contact, and more touch. Such physical behaviors may or may 
not involve  romantic feelings. Even platonic friends increase physical contact with 
each other as the relationship develops, though females and males may differ in 
how they show physical contact in same- and opposite-sex friendships. Females 
What role does 
communication 
play in beginning 
relationships?
What role does 
communication 
play in developing 
relationships?
One exciting thing about 
the college experience is 
the opportunity to meet 
new people and form 
new friendships. What new 
relationships have you begun 
since arriving on campus?
David Young-Wolff/PhotoEdit

145
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
may hold hands or hug other female friends, whereas males may high-ﬁ ve each 
other or punch each other’s shoulder. Let’s say the relationship between Whitney 
and Paige is working out well. They spend time together, get to know each other 
well, and consider themselves to be close friends. By second semester, they hug each 
other when they return from spring break, share clothes, and do each other’s hair, 
makeup, and nail polish.
Of course, cultural norms also affect how people engage in physical contact in 
relationships. In some cultures, for instance, male friends who are not romantic part-
ners may hold hands in public or kiss to greet one another. In contrast, for orthodox 
Jews and observant Muslim women, touching men is abhorred. Take a moment to read 
the Diverse Voices article by Saba Ali in which she recounts how holding hands with a 
man she considered marriage material short-circuited the relationship.
As a relationship develops, partners will feel psychologically closer as well 
(Duck, 1999). Partners who do not feel relaxed and comfortable will remain casual 
acquaintances and may even decide to avoid having any relationship with one 
another. If you share no common interests, attitudes, or ways of interpreting the 
world, you are not likely to choose to develop a deeper relationship. Consider, for 
example, the people you met during your ﬁ rst weeks on campus. Which ones did 
not become your friends and why? Most likely, during your initial encounters you 
gathered information that reduced uncertainty about them, but what you learned 
was that they did not share enough common interests or attitudes to warrant devel-
oping a relationship.
Relationships can develop via face-to-face or online interactions. Some people 
even report that they achieve more closeness in online relationships than in equivalent 
face-to-face relationships (Walther, 1996). Indeed, rapid and exaggerated intimacy can 
be part of the fun of online relationships (Rabby & Walther, 2003).
Maintaining Relationships
Maintaining a relationship means that both people participate in ways that keep the 
relationship at a particular level of closeness. Researchers have catalogued many 
strategies, such as spending time together, merging friendship networks, sacriﬁ ce, 
and forgiveness that people use to maintain relationships (Rusbult, Olsen, Davis, & 
Hannon, 2004). You probably unconsciously use many of these techniques to maintain 
your relationships. Whitney and Paige used these strategies to maintain their relation-
ship. Second term, they decided to take a few classes together, join some of the same 
clubs, and get to know each other’s friends. They even visited each other’s hometowns 
and met each other’s families and high school friends.
You can maintain your relationship by choosing to spend time together face to 
face or online. In fact online communication can be the main vehicle for maintaining 
long distance relationships (Shedletsky & Aitken, 2004).
Another relationship maintenance strategy involves a willingness to sacri-
ﬁ ce. Sacriﬁ ce means putting your own needs or desires on hold. For example, when 
Whitney was ill, Paige sacriﬁ ced a date in order to stay home and take care of her sick 
roommate. Because all relationships involve give-and-take, being willing at times to 
do what is best for the other person or for the relationship itself can help maintain the 
relationship.
Another strategy people sometimes practice is “positive illusion.” This means 
emphasizing others’ virtues and downplaying their faults.
Relationships can also be maintained by forgiveness. Because conﬂ ict is inevitable 
in close relationships, we may do or say things that hurt our partner. If not handled 
Web Resource 7.3
What 
communication 
strategies 
help maintain 
relationships?

146
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
Diverse Voices
“Would you mind if my parents were to move in 
with us after the reception?”
Yet now, at 29, despite all of my “meetings,” 
I remain unmarried. And in the last ﬁ ve years 
I’ve exhausted the patience of my matchmaking 
aunties and friends who have offered up their 
husbands’ childhood playmates.
All I wanted was to feel secure, to look for-
ward to spending my days and nights with my 
match. Which is why my interest was piqued last 
year when a friend from college told me about 
a radiologist in his early 30s who was also frus-
trated by the challenges of the contemporary 
Muslim hookup. Our ﬁ rst get-together was for 
brunch at a little French café near Central Park. I 
listened as he talked about his past relationships. 
Not the most appropriate topic for a ﬁ rst date, 
perhaps, but more comfortable for me than the 
typical pressurized questions: “Do you cook?” and 
“How many children do you want?” As he talked 
about the girls who either broke his heart, or 
whose hearts he had broken, I watched his hands, 
wondering what they would feel like to touch.
After brunch, we walked through the park. 
I spoke with ease about my own confusions, 
ambitions, faith, and fear of making the wrong 
decision about marriage. I told him I wanted 
someone who liked eating out, prayed ﬁ ve times 
a day and didn’t drink alcohol, and who made 
eye contact when talking with girls. He said he 
wanted a wife who wasn’t conservative and could 
ﬁ t in with his non-Muslim friends. He had most 
of the items on my mental checklist.
We kept getting to know each other by phone, 
often talking for hours at a time. If I was driving 
when he called, I would roam around aimlessly 
just so our exchange wouldn’t end when I reached 
my destination. I hadn’t yet told my parents about 
him, not wanting to get my mother’s hopes up.
Our lingering problem, however, was the 
difference in how religious we each were; he 
Close Enough to Touch Was Too Far 
Apart
by Saba Ali
Saba Ali lives in upstate New York.
 Who knew that holding hands, the very act that 
signals the start of so many relationships, would 
be the end of mine? It seems the mullahs were 
onto something when they wagged their ﬁ ngers 
against premarital relations, of any kind.
Born in Kenya, I came to the United States 
at age 6, settling with my family in upstate New 
York. Growing up Muslim, I missed out on the 
“Dawson’s Creek” method of courtship.
For scarf-wearing Muslims like me, premarital 
interaction between the sexes (touching, talking, 
even looking) is strictly controlled. Men and women 
pray, eat, and congregate separately. At private din-
ner parties, women exit the dining room so the men 
can serve themselves. Boys sit on one side of the hall, 
girls on the other, and married couples in the middle.
When out in public, interactions with 
 non-Muslim boys tend to be less constrained but 
still formal. A playful push from a boy would 
bring an awkward explanation of how touching 
is against my religion.
So my friends and I had high expectations 
for marriage, which was supposed to quickly fol-
low graduation from college. That’s when our 
parents told us it was time to ﬁ nd the one man 
we would be waking up with for the rest of our 
lives, God willing. They just didn’t tell us how.
There were no tips from our mothers or anyone 
else on how to meet the right man or to talk to him. 
It’s simply expected that our lives will consist of two 
phases: unmarried and in the company of women, 
and then married and in the company of a man.
It’s all supposed to start with a conversation, 
but not a private one. My friends and I call them 
“meetings.” The woman comes with her chaper-
one, a family member, and the man comes with 
his. Talking points include such questions as 
“What do you expect from your husband?” and 

147
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
hadn’t planned on marrying someone who wore 
the traditional head scarf. His ideal woman was 
less strict, more secular. But I reveled in the rec-
ognition. Covering was a choice I had made in 
high school, partly out of a need for identity, and 
partly out of fear. The fear came from what I had 
heard at Muslim summer camp, which scared me 
enough to start covering and praying. Instead 
of ghost stories, we had “judgment day” stories 
about the terrible things that would happen if 
you strayed from God, which scared me enough 
to start covering and praying.
In the years since, that fear has evolved into 
understanding. Most girls will say the scarf is for 
modesty. I see it as a protection. It keeps me from 
making stupid decisions. To me, the scarf is more 
than a piece of fabric—it’s a way of life. On my 
wedding night, going topless would mean unpin-
ning my scarf and letting it fall down.
In order to get him over his hesitation, I 
planned our dates to take place in very public 
places. We played miniature golf, ate out at res-
taurants, and went blueberry picking. I looked at 
his objection as a challenge, a project. I wanted 
to convince him that even though I did stand 
out with my hijab, it didn’t matter because no 
one really took notice of the scarf after the ﬁ rst 
glance.
And I had my own doubts, although I was 
afraid to admit them: Namely, why should I 
push forward with this when we weren’t aligned 
in terms of our faith? How could we be a good 
match if he didn’t approve of my hijab? Would I 
have to change? Should I?
One evening he called to tell me he had gone 
to a lounge with a few of his buddies. “I visual-
ized what it would feel like to have you sitting 
next to me,” he told me.
“And how did I feel?” I asked.
“Pretty good,” he said. “Manageable.”
After, I ﬁ nally called my mother and told her 
about him.
Before him, I had never gone past the second 
date. But by now he and I were approaching our 
fourth date—plenty of time, in my mind, to decide 
whether a man is right for you.
And then came the night of the movie, his idea. 
I’m a movie fanatic and remember the details of 
almost every movie I’ve ever seen. I can’t remem-
ber the title of the one we saw that night. I looked 
over at him and smiled, convincing myself that the 
weightiness I felt was because I was in uncharted 
territory. We were moving forward, talking about 
meeting each other’s families. So when he leaned 
over and asked, “Can I hold your hand?” I didn’t 
feel I could say no. I liked him for taking the risk.
Nearly 30 years old, I had thought about hold-
ing hands with a boy since I was a teenager. But 
it was always in the context of my wedding day. 
Walking into our reception as husband and wife, 
holding hands, basking in that moment of knowing 
this was forever.
Non-Muslim girls may wonder about their 
ﬁ rst kiss or, later, about losing their virginity. I 
thought I was running the same risk, though for 
me it would be the ﬁ rst time actually touching 
the hand of a potential husband. How would it 
feel? Would it convince me that he was the one?
A lifetime’s worth of expectations culmi-
nated in this single gesture in a dark theater over 
a sticky armrest. I’m not sure it’s possible to hold 
hands wrong, but we were not doing it right. 
It felt awkward with my hand under his, so we 
changed positions: my arm on top, his hand cra-
dling mine. It was still uncomfortable, and soon 
my hand fell asleep, which was not the tingling 
sensation I was hoping for. Finally, I took it away.
But the damage had been done. We had bro-
ken the no-contact rule, and in doing so, I realized 
I wasn’t willing to be the kind of girl he wanted. I 
believe in my religion, the rules, the reasons, and 
even the restrictions. At the same time, I’ve always 
wanted to be married, and the thought of never 
knowing that side of myself, as a wife and a mother, 
scares me. Being with him made me compromise 
my faith, and my fear of being alone pushed me to 
ignore my doubts about the relationship.
When we took it too far, I shut down. It 
wasn’t supposed to happen that way. So after the 
date, I split us up. And I never saw him again.
Excerpted from the New York Times, October 7, 2007.

148
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
properly, such transgressions can harm the relationship and move it to a level of 
less intimacy. By forgiving minor transgressions, we can keep a relationship at the 
desired level of closeness. For example, Whitney and Paige each have little habits that 
annoy the other, but they choose not to let these annoyances get in the way of a good 
friendship.
Other ways that people maintain their relationships include continuing mutually 
acceptable levels of affection, self-disclosure, favors, and support.
Deteriorating and Dissolving Relationships
The less highly developed a relationship is, the more likely it is to dissolve (Parks, 
2007). Relationships between acquaintances, casual friends, coworkers, and neighbors 
will probably end at some point. Over time, a developed relationship may become less 
 satisfying to one or both partners so that a partner will invest less time in the rela-
tionship. But this doesn’t mean that the relationship will end. Instead it may revert 
to a different, less intimate level. The communication in deteriorating relationships 
is marked by three stages: recognition of dissatisfaction, disengaging, and at times, 
ending.
The ﬁ rst sign that a relationship is deteriorating is a subtle indication of dis-
satisfaction. The partners may feel less connected to each other, begin to share fewer 
activities, and communicate less frequently. They may begin to emphasize each other’s 
faults and downplay virtues. Subjects that once involved deep, private, and frequent 
communication may become off-limits or sources of conﬂ ict. As the relationship 
 begins to be characterized by an increase in touchy subjects and more unresolved 
conﬂ icts, partners become more defensive and less willing to foster a positive com-
munication climate.
If the relationship continues to be dissatisfying, people begin to drift apart. They 
become less willing to sacriﬁ ce for each other, and they show less forgiveness. Their 
communication changes from sharing ideas and feelings, to making small talk and 
other “safe” communication, and then, to having no signiﬁ cant communication at all. 
It may seem strange that people who once had so much to share can ﬁ nd themselves 
with nothing to talk about. They depend less on each other and more upon other 
people for favors and support. Hostility need not be present; rather, this stage is likely 
to be marked by indifference. Even though Whitney and Paige were very close during 
their ﬁ rst year at college, they may drift apart over time. Maybe one of them betrayed 
the trust of the other and the tension led to their becoming more annoyed with each 
other’s faults. Once this happens, they will probably spend less time together, share 
fewer activities, talk about less important topics, and generally interact less frequently 
with each other.
When a relationship can’t be maintained at a less developed level, it will end. A 
relationship has ended when the people no longer interact with each other. As Cupach 
and Metts (1986) show, people give many reasons for terminating relationships, 
including poor communication, lack of fulﬁ llment, differing lifestyles and interests, 
rejection, outside interference, absence of rewards, and boredom.
Unfortunately, when people decide to end a relationship, they sometimes look for 
reasons to blame each other rather than trying to ﬁ nd equitable ways of bringing the 
relationship to an acceptable conclusion. To clarify, people sometimes use strategies of 
manipulation, withdrawal, and avoidance (Baxter, 1982). Though misguided and inap-
propriate, manipulation involves being indirect and failing to take any responsibility 
for ending the relationship. Manipulators may purposely sabotage the relationship 
in hopes that the other person will break it off. Withdrawal and avoidance, also less 
What role does 
communication 
play in 
deteriorating 
and dissolving 
relationships?

149
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
than competent ways of communicating desires to 
terminate a relationship, are passive approaches, 
which lead to the slow and often painful death of the 
relationship. 
The most competent way to end a relationship 
is to be direct, open, and honest. It is important to 
clearly state your wish to end the relationship while 
being respectful of the other person and sensitive 
to the resulting emotions. If two people have had 
a satisfying and close relationship, they owe it to 
themselves and to each other to be forthright and 
fair about  communicating during the ﬁ nal stage of 
the relationship.
Perhaps Whitney and Paige decide, separately, 
that they want to room with someone else next year. 
As effective communicators, they would discuss 
the sensitive topic without blame or manipulation, 
acknowledge that their relationship is less close than 
it once was, and move in with new roommates for 
the second year of college.
Even when the participants agree that their relationship is over, they may con-
tinue to interact and inﬂ uence each other through a different type of relationship. 
This is called relationship transformation. Romantic relationships may transform into 
friendships, best friends may become casual friends, and even marriages may continue 
on friendly terms or as a type of business relationship where child-rearing practices 
and expenses are coordinated. (Parks, 2006). After Whitney and Paige graduate, they 
may try to keep in touch, but as the years pass and they form other attachments, their 
friendship may wane until they are simply acquaintances who enjoy seeing each other 
at reunions.
Dialectics in Interpersonal Relationships
Have you ever felt ambivalent about a relationship? On the one hand, you really wanted 
to become close to someone but at the same time you wanted your “space.” Or have you 
met someone who seemed a bit too nosy but you really wanted to get to know the per-
son? Or have you ever felt that a relationship you were in was in a rut and wished that 
there could be some excitement like when you ﬁ rst met? If so, you were experiencing 
what scholars call a relationship dialectic. A dialectic is a tension between conﬂ icting 
forces. Relational dialectics are the competing psychological tensions that exist in any 
relationship. At any one time, one or both people may be aware of these tensions. Let’s 
take a look at the speciﬁ c dialectics and then discuss how you can use interpersonal 
communication skills to manage these inevitable tensions in your relationships.
Relational Dialectics
Three dialectics that are common to most relationships are the tugs between autonomy 
and connection, openness and closedness, and novelty and predictability (Baxter & 
Montgomery, 1996; Baxter & West, 2003). How these tensions are dealt with can alter 
the stage and life cycle of a relationship. We’ll describe each dialectic and then discuss 
how you can effectively manage them in your relationships.
relationship 
transformation
the process of changing a 
relationship from one level of 
intimacy to another.
dialectic
a tension between conﬂ icting 
forces.
relational dialectics
the competing psychological 
tensions in a relationship.
How do dialectal 
tensions operate 
in interpersonal 
relationships?
How relationships 
end depends on the 
interpersonal competence 
of both people. Do you know 
people who have amicable 
divorces? How do they differ 
from people who have hostile 
divorces?
Michael Newman/PhotoEdit

150
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
Autonomy-Connection
Autonomy is the desire to do things independent of your partner. Connection is the 
desire to link your actions and decisions with your partner. Joel and Shelly have been 
dating for about a year. At this point in their relationship, Shelly wants to spend 
most of her free time with Joel and enjoys talking with Joel before acting or making 
decisions, but Joel has begun to feel hemmed in. For example, he wants to be able to 
play basketball with the guys without having to clear it ﬁ rst with Shelly. At the same 
time, however, he doesn’t want to hurt Shelly’s feelings or ruin the closeness of their 
relationship. Shelly is at peace and may not recognize any tension between autonomy 
and connection. On the other hand, Joel is feeling the tension between wanting to be 
more autonomous without jeopardizing his connection to Shelly. If Joel begins to act 
autonomously, he may relieve his own tension but at the same time create tension in 
the relationship.
Openness-Closedness
Openness is the desire to share intimate ideas and feelings with your partner. 
Closedness is the desire to maintain privacy. Let’s say that Shelly discloses quite 
a bit to Joel. She believes it is important to divulge her feelings to Joel, and she 
expects him to do the same. In other words, the open quadrant of Shelly’s Johari 
window in her relationship with Joel is quite large. Joel, however, is a more private 
person. He does disclose to Shelly, but not as much as she would like. The secret 
pane of his Johari window is larger than Shelly would like it to be. The fact that 
Shelly and Joel differ in their preferred levels of self-disclosure is one source of ten-
sion in their relationship. But Shelly does not want complete openness all the time. 
She realizes that it is appropriate to be closed, or to refrain from self-disclosure 
with Joel, at times. So she seeks both openness and closedness in this relationship. 
Likewise Joel, although wanting more closedness than Shelly does, still wants some 
openness. So, like Shelly, he wants both forces to occur simultaneously in this 
relationship.
Novelty–Predictability
Novelty is the desire for originality, freshness, and uniqueness in your own or your 
partner’s behavior or in the relationship. Predictability is the desire for consistency, 
reliability, and dependability. People experience tension between their desires for 
novelty and predictability. Because Shelly and Joel have been dating for a year, 
much of the uncertainty is gone from their relationship. But they do not want to 
eliminate uncertainty altogether. With no uncertainty at all, a relationship becomes 
so predictable and so routine that it is boring. Although Shelly and Joel know each 
other well, can predict much about each other, and have quite a few routines in 
their relationship, they also want to be surprised and have new experiences with 
each other. Shelly and Joel may differ in their needs for novelty and predictability. 
Shelly may yearn for Joel to surprise her with a mystery date, or she may shock Joel 
by spontaneously breaking into their favorite song in the middle of the mall. At 
this point in their relationship, Joel may be comfortable operating by the routines 
they have established and may be embarrassed and shocked by Shelly’s song. Here 
is another tension between the two that must be managed in their relationship. But 
they must also cope with the fact that they each need some amount of both novelty 
and predictability in the relationship.
Although our example of Shelly and Joel is an intimate relationship, it is impor-
tant to remember that dialectical tensions exist in all relationships—not just romantic 
ones—and they are always in ﬂ ux. Sometimes these dialectical tensions are active 
autonomy
the desire to do things 
independent of one’s partner.
connection
the desire to do things and 
make decisions with one’s 
partner.
openness
the desire to share intimate 
ideas and feelings with one’s 
partner.
closedness
the desire to maintain one’s 
privacy in a relationship.
novelty
originality, freshness, 
and uniqueness in the 
partner’s behaviors or in the 
relationship.
predictability
consistency, reliability, 
and dependability in a 
relationship.

151
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
and in the foreground; at other times they are in the background. Nevertheless, when 
these  tension are experienced, they change what is happening in the relationship 
(Wood, 2000).
Managing Dialectical Tensions
You may be wondering how you can cope with dialectical tensions in relationships. 
How do people satisfy opposite needs at the same time in relationships? Several 
researchers (Baxter & Montgomery, 1996; Wood, 2000) have studied how people man-
age dialectical tensions in relationships. Four strategies have been reported: temporal 
selection, topical segmentation, neutralization, and reframing.
Temporal selection is the strategy of choosing one desire and ignoring the 
other for the time being. Perhaps you and a friend realize that you have spent too 
much time apart lately (autonomy), so you make a conscious decision to pursue 
connection. That is, you agree that over the next few months, you will make a 
point of spending more time together. You schedule lots of activities together 
so you can be more connected. Over time, however, you may feel that you are 
spending too much time together, and so you may ﬁ nd yourself cancelling dates. 
Seesawing back and forth like this is one way to temporarily manage a relational 
dialectic.
Topical segmentation is the strategy of choosing certain topics with which to 
satisfy one desire and other topics for the opposite desire. You and your mom may 
practice openness by sharing your opinions and feeling about certain topics such as 
school, work, or politics but maintain your privacy concerning your sex lives. This seg-
mentation satisﬁ es both your needs for balance in the openness-closedness dialectic.
Neutralization is the strategy of compromising between the desires of one person 
and the desires of the other. Neutralization partially meets the needs of both people 
but does not fully meet the needs of either. A couple might pursue a moderate level 
of novelty and spontaneity in their lives, which satisﬁ es both of them. The amount of 
novelty in the relationship may be less than what one person would ideally want and 
more than what the other would normally desire, but they have reached a middle point 
comfortable to both.
Reframing is the strategy of changing your perception about the level of ten-
sion. Reframing involves putting less emphasis on the dialectical contradiction. It 
means looking at your desires differently so they no longer seem quite so contra-
dictory. Maybe you are tense because you perceive that you are more open and 
your partner is more closed. So, you think about how much you disclose to him 
and how little he discloses to you. You might even discuss this issue with your 
partner. Perhaps during the conversation, you begin to realize the times that you 
have held back (closedness), as well as the instances when he was open. After the 
conversation, you no longer see as strong a contradiction. You see yourselves as 
more similar than different on this dialectic. You have reframed your perception 
of the tension.
In most cases when you are developing, maintaining, or trying to repair a dete-
riorating relationship, it is helpful if you can openly talk with your partner about the 
tensions that you are feeling and come to an agreement about how you will manage 
the dialectic going forward. Through self-disclosure and feedback, you and your part-
ner may be able to negotiate a new balance that both of you ﬁ nd satisfying. At times, 
however, partners will be unable to resolve the tensions. When this happens, it is likely 
that one or both of you will experience dissatisfaction with the relationship and the 
relationship may deteriorate or end.
temporal selection
the strategy of choosing 
one dialectical tension and 
ignoring its opposite for a 
while.
topical segmentation
the strategy of choosing 
certain topics with which 
to satisfy one dialectical 
tension and other topics for its 
opposite.
neutralization
the strategy of compromising 
between the desires of the 
two partners.
reframing
the strategy of changing 
one’s perspective about the 
level of tension.
Skill Learning Activity 7.3

152
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
A Question of Ethics
Jeff and Magda, seniors at a small rural college, 
had been dating each other since they were fresh-
men. Jeff loved Magda, and he planned to propose 
to her after they graduated in spring. At the same 
time, though, he reluctantly recognized that their 
relationship had fallen into a bit of a rut over 
the last six months, and he missed the excitement 
and romance of their ﬁ rst year together. Although 
he was troubled by these conﬂ icting feelings, Jeff 
was unsure what to do about them.
One day while he was surﬁ ng MySpace.
com, Jeff decided, on a whim, to create a fake 
user proﬁ le for the person he wanted to be in his 
fantasies. He spent quite a bit of time research-
ing and designing the proﬁ le of his imaginary 
persona, a rap singer/ﬂ amenco guitarist/snow-
boarder/kung fu expert who went by the user 
name “MoonDog13.” Jeff inserted photos of an 
obscure young Romanian actor he found online 
into MoonDog13’s user proﬁ le. He posted lyrics 
to rap songs he wrote on MoonDog13’s page and 
joined online user groups for those interested in 
ﬂ amenco guitar, snowboarding, and kung fu. In 
very little time, MoonDog13 had made a number 
of online friends, many of whom were admiring 
young women. MoonDog13 loved to ﬂ irt with 
these girls.
Jeff told Magda nothing about MoonDog13, 
even when the time he spent online managing the 
ﬁ ctitious life of his alter ego began to interfere in 
his relationship with her. He justiﬁ ed this decision 
with the belief that MoonDog13 was an imagi-
nary ﬁ gure who existed only in cyberspace. As 
long as fantasy didn’t cross into reality, there was 
no reason Jeff had to feel guilty about anything 
MoonDog13 said online.
 1. How is Jeff acting ethically or unethically in 
this situation?
 2. Like Jeff, most people act differently in 
cyberspace than they do in the real world. 
Are the ethics of cyberspace any different 
from those of the real world? What about 
fantasy—are the ethics of our private desires 
different from the real world? Are we ethi-
cally obliged to disclose our fantasies to our 
loved ones?
What Would You Do?
Conversation and Analysis
Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Skill Learning Activity 7.4, 
which is a video clip of Trevor and Meg’s conversation. As you watch Trevor and Meg 
discuss the future of their relationship, focus on how effectively they are communicat-
ing. How do Trevor and Meg engage in disclosure and feedback? What stage of their 
relationship life cycle do they seem to be in and why? What dialectical tensions are 
they dealing with and what strategies are they, or should they be, using to manage 
them? What really is Meg’s fear? You can respond to these and other analysis ques-
tions by clicking on “Critique” in the menu bar at the top of the screen. When you’ve 
answered all the questions, click “Done” to compare your answers to those provided 
by the authors.
Trevor and Meg have been going together for the last several months of their 
 senior year at college. Now that graduation is approaching, they are trying to ﬁ gure 
out what to do about their relationship. They sit and talk.
Skill Learning Activity 7.4

153
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
Conversation
TREVOR: Meg, I think it’s time we talk about making plans for the future. After all, 
we’ll be graduating next month.
MEG: Trevor, you know how uncomfortable I feel about making any long-range plans 
at this time. We still need to know a lot more about each other before we even 
think about getting engaged.
TREVOR: Why? We’ve both said we love each other, haven’t we? (Meg nods.) So why’s 
this too soon? What else do we need to know?
MEG: For starters, I’ll be going to law school this fall, and this year is going to be 
 difﬁ cult. And, you haven’t gotten a job yet.
TREVOR: Come on, Meg. You’re going to law school in the city, so I’ll have a degree 
in business, so I can probably get a job most anywhere.
MEG: But Trevor, that’s just my point. I know I’ll be starting law school; I’ve always 
wanted to be a lawyer. And you don’t really have any idea what you want to do. 
And that bothers me. I can’t be worrying about you and your career when I’m 
going to need to focus on my classes.
TREVOR: But I told you, I can get a job anywhere.
MEG: Yes, Trevor, but you need more than a job. You need to ﬁ gure out what kind 
of job really turns you on, or else you risk waking up one day and regretting 
your life. And, I don’t want to be there when that happens. I watched my dad go 
through a midlife crisis, and he ended up walking out on us.
TREVOR: I’m not your dad, Meg. I won’t leave you. And don’t worry about me; I’ll 
ﬁ nd a job.
MEG: Really? You knew I was going to law school in the city for over a month, but you 
still haven’t even begun a job search. Trevor, right now is the time when people 
are hiring, and you haven’t even done your résumé. The longer you wait, the more 
difﬁ cult your search is going to be.
TREVOR: Come on, Meg. You’ve already said I’m irresistible. What company wouldn’t 
want me?
MEG: I’m serious, Trevor. Look, I’ve got a scholarship to law school, but it’s only going 
to pay half of my expenses. I’ll be taking a loan to get enough money to pay the 
rest and to have money to live on. I won’t have the money or the time to be very 
supportive of you if you haven’t found work. I need the security of knowing that 
you’ve got a job and that you are saving money.
TREVOR: Well, they say that “two can live as cheaply as one.” I was thinking that once 
you got settled, I’d move in and that will save us a lot of money.
MEG: Whoa, Trevor. You know how I feel about that. I do love you, and I hope that 
we have a future together. But living together this year is not an option. I think 
we need at least a year of living on our own to get ourselves settled and make 
sure that we really are compatible. After all, we come from totally different back-
grounds. I practically raised myself, and I’ve paid my own bills since I was 18, 
while you’ve been lucky enough to have parents who footed your bills. There have 
been several times when we’ve talked about important issues and the differences 
between us have been obvious, and they worry me.
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/ 
Wadsworth Publishing Group
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

154
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
TREVOR: You mean when I was joking around about our different taste in cars?
MEG: No, Trevor, not cars; that’s minor. But we also have greatly different feelings 
about money and family. You’ve told me that once you get married you want to 
start a family immediately. As I see it, I’ve got a three-year commitment to law 
school, then seven to 10 years of hard work to make partner at a good ﬁ rm. So 
I’m not sure when I want to start a family. But I know it won’t be for at least six 
years.
TREVOR: So, what are you saying, Meg? Is it over? “Thanks for the good time, Trevor, 
but you’re not in my plans?”
MEG: Please don’t be sarcastic. I’m not trying to hurt you. It makes me happy to think 
that we’ll spend the rest of our lives together. But I’m worried about several things, 
so I’m just not ready to commit to that now. Let’s just take a year, get settled, and 
see what happens. I’ll love it if you do get a job near where I’m in school. That way 
we can have time to sort through some of the issues between us.
TREVOR: You mean if you can ﬁ t me into your schedule? Meg, if we love each other 
now, aren’t we still going to love each other next year? If we wait until we have 
everything settled, we might never get married; there’ll always be something. 
After all, we are two different people. We’re never going to agree on everything!
MEG: Are you saying that as unsettled as our lives are right now, we can shoulder the 
additional stress of planning for a marriage?
TREVOR: No, what I’m saying is that we live together this year, see how it goes, then 
if it isn’t working, we don’t have to get married.
Summary
Interpersonal communication helps develop and maintain relationships. A good rela-
tionship is any mutually satisfying interaction with another person. We have three 
types of relationships. Acquaintances are people we know by name and talk with, 
but with whom our interactions are limited in quality and quantity. Friendships are 
marked by degrees of warmth and affection, trust, self-disclosure, commitment, and 
expectation that the relationships will endure. Close or intimate friends are those with 
whom we share a high degree of commitment, trust, interdependence, disclosure, and 
enjoyment.
A healthy relationship is marked by a balance of self-disclosure and feedback. The 
Johari window is a tool for analyzing this balance helping us to identify the informa-
tion in our relationships that are open, hidden, secret, or unknown.
Relationships go through a life cycle that includes beginning, developing, main-
taining, and perhaps deteriorating or dissolving. In the ﬁ rst stage of beginning a 
relationship, we try to get to know each other to reduce uncertainty. If we decide to 
develop the relationship, we engage in more disclosure and experience feelings of 
relaxation and conﬁ rmation. There are various ways to maintain a relationship includ-
ing spending time together, merging social networks, making sacriﬁ ces, and forgiving. 
When relationships deteriorate, we tend to recognize feelings of dissatisfaction, notice 
each other’s faults, experience more conﬂ ict, discuss only safe topics, and spend less 
time together.
In any relationship, we negotiate dialectics, the tensions that tug at us as indi-
viduals and the relationship. These tensions focus on autonomy-connectedness, 
openness-closedness, and novelty-predictability. We can manage these tensions 

155
 
Chapter 7  Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 
through temporal selection, topical segmentation, neutralization, and reframing. 
Effective communicators talk openly with their partners rather than manipulating or 
withdrawing.
Now that you have read Chapter 7, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning 
Activities, and Web Resources are also featured on 
the following pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s 
Communicate on Your Feet assignment in the body 
of the chapter.
Communicate! Active Online Learning
Key Terms
acquaintances (134)
autonomy (150)
close friends or intimates (137)
closedness (150)
connection (150)
dialectic (149)
feedback (141)
friends (136)
good relationship (134)
impersonal communication (134)
Johari window (141)
neutralization (151)
novelty (150)
openness (150)
platonic relationship (137)
predictability (150)
reframing (151)
relational dialectics (149)
relationship (134)
relationship transformation (149)
romantic relationship (137)
saving face (135)
self-disclosure (141)
temporal selection (151)
topical segmentation (151)
trust (138)
Skill Learning Activities
7.1: Distinguishing between Types 
of Relationships (140)
 1. List ﬁ ve people you have known for some time 
whom you consider to be acquaintances. Why 
do you consider these people to be acquain-
tances rather than friends? What do you talk 
about with each of these people? What subjects 
do you avoid? Do any of these relationships 
have the potential to become friendships? If 
so, what would you have to do to make that 
transition?
 2. List ﬁ ve people you have known for some time 
whom you consider to be friends. Why do you 
consider each of these people to be a friend? How 
does your relationship with each differ from your 
relationships with your acquaintances? What 
do you talk about with each of these people? 
What subjects do you avoid? Do any of these 
relationships have the potential to become best 

156
 
Chapter 7 
Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
friendships or intimate relationships? If so, what 
would you have to do to make the transition?
 3. List one to three people you have known for some 
time whom you consider to be your best friends or 
your intimates. Why do you consider each of these 
people to be best friends or intimates? What do you 
talk about with each of these people? What subjects 
do you avoid? How does each of these relationships 
differ from those you have with your friends?
Write an essay in which you describe what you 
have learned about your relationships.
7.2: Johari Window (143)
Access Web Resource 7.2: Interactive Johari 
Window. Select ﬁ ve or six adjectives from the grid 
provided that you feel accurately describe yourself. 
Enter your name (or an alias if you’d prefer) and save 
your grid. Then ask a few of your friends, relatives, or 
colleagues to access your grid and pick out ﬁ ve or six 
adjectives from that grid that they feel describe you.
When you have ﬁ nished, write a paragraph dis-
cussing what you have learned. Did the adjectives other 
people picked to describe you match the adjectives 
you picked for yourself? How does this information 
explain your experiences in developing and sustain-
ing relationships? Does this suggest any changes you 
need to make to improve your relationships?
7.3: Dialectics in Your Relationships (151)
Choose one of your current close friendship or 
intimate relationships. It can be with a friend or fam-
ily member. Brieﬂ y explain this assignment and ask 
your relationship partner if she or he is willing to help 
you with this assignment and to have what you dis-
cuss become part of a short paper you are doing for 
this class. Only if your partner consents should you 
proceed. Otherwise, ﬁ nd another friend or intimate.
 1. Brieﬂ y explain the concept of relationship dialec-
tics to your partner. You may want to have them 
read the section of this chapter that explains these.
 2. Once your partner understands the concepts, have 
a conversation about how each of you has expe-
rienced each of these tensions over the course of 
your relationship. Can you each think of speciﬁ c 
instances when you were “out of sync”? How did 
this play out in the relationship? Be speciﬁ c and 
be sure to talk about each of the three dialectical 
tensions.
 3. Based on your conversation, write a short paper/
journal entry in which you describe what you 
learned. How has hearing your partner talk about 
how he or she experienced these changed your 
understanding?
 4. Given what you have learned in this conversa-
tion, how can you use this to improve this rela-
tionship going forward.
7.4: Trevor and Meg (152)
After you’ve watched the video of Trevor and 
Meg and have read the transcript of their conversa-
tion, answer the following questions.
 1. How do Trevor and Meg disclose their feelings 
and offer feedback?
 2. What stage of their relationship life cycle do they 
seem to be in and why?
 3. What dialectical tensions are they dealing with 
and what strategies are they, or should they be, 
using to manage them?
 4. What is Meg’s real fear?
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Chapter 7.
Web Resources
7.1: Holding Effective Conversations (135)
This bonus chapter discusses how to hold effec-
tive conversations.
7.2: Interactive Johari Window (143)
This interactive site allows you to gauge your 
personality awareness. Describe yourself from the 
adjectives provided, then ask your friends and col-
leagues to describe you from the same adjectives. 
This site will build a window of overlap and differ-
ence for you—a type of Johari window.
7.3: In-Person versus Cyberspace Relationships 
(145)
Go to this page at the Psychology of Cyberspace 
Website to read a thorough comparison of the 
differences between relationships in person and elec-
tronically mediated relationships.

Communication Skills in 
Interpersonal Relationships:
Providing Emotional Support, Managing Privacy, and Negotiating 
Conﬂ ict
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What are the characteristics of comforting messages?
• How can you manage disclosure and privacy in your relationships?
• How do people negotiate different needs, wants, and preferences?
• How do we deal with conﬂ ict in our relationships?
• What is a collaborative approach to conﬂ ict?
“Chuck, when that interviewer at the grocery store asked you whether you’d rather 
have rice than potatoes, you said ‘Yes!’ We’ve been married for more than 
20 years, and I’m just now learning that you like rice more than potatoes!” Susan 
said, her voice becoming shrill.
“Gosh, I’m sorry, Susan,” Chuck said sheepishly.
“Chuck,” Susan asked, “are there other things that you like or don’t like that 
you haven’t told me about during these more than 20 years I’ve been your wife?”
“Well, um, probably.”
“Probably? Probably? Why haven’t you been telling me about these things?”
8
Rohit Seth, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com 

158
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
“Well, I don’t know. I guess I just didn’t think they were all that important.”
“Not important? Chuck, we have potatoes almost every night that I cook. And 
frankly, I don’t like potatoes all that much. I wouldn’t care if I never saw a potato 
again. Now I ﬁ nd out you like rice better!”
“Sue, why didn’t you ever tell me that you don’t like potatoes?”
“Well I, uh, uh . . .”
Poor Chuck—poor Susan! Although this opening story might seem silly, every day in 
your relationships you make decisions about three fundamental issues: (1) how you 
will respond to the emotional distress of your partner, (2) the information you will 
share or keep private, and (3) how you will negotiate the differences between your own 
and your partner’s needs, wants, and preferences. The decisions you make and how 
you choose to behave will affect the degree of intimacy and satisfaction you experi-
ence in your relationships. We begin this chapter by discussing emotional support and 
the communication skills for effective comforting. Next, we discuss how to manage 
the competing urges between wanting to share information and keeping it to yourself. 
We conclude the chapter by describing various conﬂ ict management styles that can 
damage your relationships and then present the skills associated with collaboration, a 
conﬂ ict management style that can lead to a win-win situation for both you and your 
partner.
Comforting Messages
Can you recall a time when you were emotionally distraught? Perhaps someone close 
to you died unexpectedly, or the person you believed you would spend the rest of your 
life with dumped you, or someone you trusted betrayed you, or you were unjustly 
harmed by someone with power over you. If you have experienced any of these or 
other emotionally devastating events, you probably appreciated the emotional support 
you received from some of your friends and family members and might have been 
perplexed, annoyed, or angered by inappropriate statements made by others. In most 
long-term relationships, we will encounter incidents when we are expected to respond 
to the emotional distress of a partner. Comforting is helping people feel better about 
themselves, their behavior, or their situation by creating a safe conversational space 
where they can express their feelings and work out a plan for the future. Effective 
comforting aids the person who is comforted, helping him or her cope with the future 
and improving his or her relationship with the comforter. Skilled comforting also ben-
eﬁ ts the comforter, improving his or her self-esteem and relationship with the person 
being comforted (Burleson, 2002). Comforting rarely happens in a single statement. 
Instead, it usually occurs over several turns in a conversation or over several conversa-
tions that may span weeks, months, or even years.
Skills for Comforting
The following skills can help you succeed when providing emotional comfort:
 1. Clarify supportive intentions. When people are experiencing emotional turmoil, 
they may have trouble trusting the motives of those who want to help. You can 
What are the 
characteristics 
of comforting 
messages?
comforting
helping people feel better 
about themselves, their 
behavior, or their situation by 
creating a safe conversational 
space where they can express 
their feelings and work out a 
plan for the future.
buffering messages
comforting messages that are 
phrased very politely in ways 
that address another person’s 
face needs.
positive face needs
the desires to be appreciated 
and approved, liked, and 
honored.

159
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
clarify your supportive intentions by openly 
stating that your goal in the conversation is to 
help your partner. Notice how David does this:
DAVID: (noticing Paul sitting in his cubicle with his 
head in his lap and his hands over his head): Paul, 
is everything OK?
PAUL: (sitting up with a miserable but deﬁ ant look on 
his face): Like you should care. Yeah, everything 
is ﬁ ne.
DAVID: Paul, I do care. You’ve been working for me 
for ﬁ ve years. You’re one of our best technicians. 
So if something is going on, I’d like to help, even 
if all I can do is listen. Now, what’s up?
 2. Buffer face threats with politeness. Buffering 
messages cushion the effect of what is said by 
using both positive and negative politeness skills. 
The very act of providing comfort can threaten the 
positive and negative face needs of your partner. 
Positive face needs are the desires to be appreci-
ated and approved, liked, and honored. Negative 
face needs are the desires to be free from imposi-
tion and intrusion. On the one hand, your partner 
might worry that you will respect, like, or value 
him less because of his situation. On the other 
hand, the very act of comforting suggests that 
he cannot independently handle the situation. So 
comforting messages are phrased very politely in 
ways that address the other person’s face needs. 
Notice how David says to Paul, “You’re one of our 
best technicians,” which reafﬁ rms his admiration 
for Paul’s work. David also attends to Paul’s need 
for independence by stating that maybe all he 
“can do is listen,” which implies that Paul will be 
able to do the rest.
 3. Encourage understanding through  other-centered 
messages. To reduce emotional distress, people need to make sense out of what has 
happened (Burleson & Goldsmith, 1998). People feel better if they can re-evaluate 
speciﬁ c parts of the situation or change their opinion about what happened. An 
important way people do this is by repeatedly telling and elaborating on the story 
(what happened to them). We can help this process by using other-centered mes-
sages, those that encourage our partner to talk about and elaborate on what hap-
pened and how she feels about it. Many of us ﬁ nd this difﬁ cult to do because we 
have been taught it is rude to pry or we are uncomfortable hearing someone’s 
problems, so our initial reaction may be to change the subject or to talk about 
similar experiences we have had.
Other-centered messages can be questions that allow the other to elaborate, 
or they can simply be vocalized encouragement (um, uh-huh, wow, I see). They 
encourage the person to explore her feelings, and they demonstrate understanding 
and empathy.
Can you recall a time 
when you were upset and 
someone comforted you? 
Did you feel closer to this 
person as a result?
negative face needs
the desires to be free from 
imposition and intrusion.
other-centered messages
comforting messages that 
encourage relational partners 
to talk about and elaborate 
on what happened and how 
they feel about it.
R. Eko Bintoro/istockphoto.com 

160
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
 4. Reframe the situation. When people are in the midst of strong emotions, they 
are likely to perceive events in a limited way. In these cases, it may be helpful 
for you to reframe the situation by offering ideas, observations, information, or 
alternative explanations that might help your partner understand the situation in 
a different light. For example, imagine that Travis returns from class and tells his 
roommate, Abe, “Well, I’m ﬂ unking calculus. It doesn’t matter how much I study 
or how many of the online practice problems I do, I just can’t get it. I might as 
well just drop out of school before I ﬂ unk out completely. I can ask for a full-
time schedule at work and not torture myself with school anymore.” To reframe 
the situation, Abe might remind Travis that he has been putting in many hours at 
work and ask Travis if he thinks that the heavy work schedule might be cutting 
into his study time. Or he might tell Travis that he heard calculus instructors curve 
grades at the end of the term because the material is so difﬁ cult. In each case, Abe 
is offering new observations and providing alternative explanations that can help 
Travis reframe the situation from an impossible one to a manageable one.
 5. Give advice. At times, we can comfort people by giving advice—presenting rel-
evant suggestions and proposals that a person can use to resolve a situation. 
You should not give advice, however, until your supportive intentions have been 
understood, you have attended to your partner’s face needs, and you have sus-
tained other-centered conversation for some time. Only when your partner has 
had time to make his or her own sense out of what has happened should you move 
the conversation to addressing next steps. Then you might begin by asking your 
partner what he or she thinks could help. After listening carefully to the response, 
you can ask your partner if some feedback and advice would be welcome. Always 
ask permission and acknowledge that your advice is only one suggestion of many 
that might work. Present the potential risks or costs associated with your advice, 
and let your partner know that it’s OK if he or she chooses to ignore it.
Gender and Cultural Considerations in Comforting
Many people believe that women expect, need, and provide more emotional sup-
port than men. However, a growing body of research suggests that both men and 
women place a high value on emotional support from their partners in a variety of 
relationships; siblings, same-sex friendships, opposite-sex friendships, and romantic 
relationships (Burleson, 2003). Studies also ﬁ nd that both men and women report that 
other-centered messages encouraging them to explore and elaborate on their feelings 
provide the most comfort. However, men are less likely to use other-centered messages 
when comforting.
Researchers have also examined cultural differences in comforting. Again, members 
of all social groups ﬁ nd solace strategies, especially other-centered messages, the most 
sensitive and comforting way to provide emotional support (Burleson, 2003, p. 574). 
Research does suggest, however, several differences related to race and ethnicity:
 1. European Americans, more than other American ethnic groups, believe that 
openly discussing feelings will help a person feel better.
 2. Americans are more sensitive to other-centered messages than are Chinese.
 3. Both Chinese and Americans view avoidance strategies as less appropriate 
than approach strategies, but Chinese see avoidance as more appropriate than 
Americans do.
 4. Married Chinese and married Americans both view the emotional support pro-
vided by their spouse to be the most important type of social support they receive.
reframing the situation
offering ideas, observations, 
information, or alternative 
explanations that might 
help a relational partner 
understand a situation in a 
different light.
giving advice
presenting relevant 
suggestions and proposals 
that a person can use to 
resolve a situation.

161
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
 5. African Americans place lower value on their partner’s emotional support 
skills than do European or Asian Americans. This is especially true for African 
American women.
Although some differences exist, it appears that people are more alike than differ-
ent in the desire for emotional support from close friends and intimate partners.
Managing Privacy and Disclosure
in Relationships
In any relationship, both people will at times experience opposite pulls or dialectical 
tensions. One of these dialectics is the tension between openness and closedness. When 
we want openness, we use the skills of disclosure to share information and feelings 
with others. When we are feeling the pull of closedness, we manage our privacy to 
control what others know about us.
Disclosure is revealing conﬁ dential or secret information. Although it includes 
self-disclosure—which is sharing your own biographical data, personal ideas, and 
feelings that were unknown to others—disclosure is a larger concept because it 
 includes conﬁ dential information about others as well as yourself (Petronio, 2002). 
Suppose Jim tells Mark that he wet the bed until he was 12 years old, but had never 
told anyone about it before because he was afraid of being teased. Jim has self-
disclosed something conﬁ dential to Mark. If Mark later tells someone else that Jim 
was once a bed wetter, Mark is also disclosing, but he is disclosing Jim’s private 
information, not his own.
Privacy management is the exercise of control over conﬁ dential or secret infor-
mation in order to enhance autonomy or minimize vulnerability (Margulis, 1977, 
p. 10). The concept of privacy rests on the assumption that people own their personal 
information and have the right to control it by determining whether that information 
is to be communicated (Petronio, 2002). Like Jim, you can choose to reveal or conceal 
personal information from your partner. As your relationship develops, you and your 
partner will share sensitive information with each other. Then, either one of you could 
choose to reveal that sensitive information to others outside of the relationship or 
maintain it within the privacy of your relationship.
If your partner has your permission to share some item of your personal infor-
mation, then disclosing it to others is unlikely to affect your relationship. However, 
if you have not given your partner permission to disclose that information and 
you expect that information to be held privately within your relationship, then 
its disclosure is likely to damage your trust in your partner and your relationship. 
So when Jim hears that Mark has “outed” him as a former bed wetter, he may be 
embarrassed, hurt, and feel violated because Mark breached his conﬁ dentiality, or 
he may be unaffected if he doesn’t care that others know. How Jim reacts to Mark’s 
disclosure of this private information can vary with age. If Jim and Mark are 16 
when Jim discloses his bed wetting, Jim may see this as a very risky disclosure 
and be much more sensitive than he would if they are 35 when Mark discloses the 
information. The communication or the withholding of personal information is a 
very complex matter.
People use culture, gender, motivation, context, and risk-beneﬁ t analysis as cri-
teria in creating rules for revealing and concealing of information (Petronio, 2002):
 •  Individualistic cultures value privacy more than collectivist cultures do. Members 
of individualistic cultures are less likely to disclose personal information to any-
one but close intimates.
disclosure
revealing conﬁ dential or 
secret information about 
others as well as yourself.
privacy
the right of an individual 
to keep biographical data, 
personal ideas, and feelings 
secret.
privacy management
exercising personal control 
over conﬁ dential information 
in order to enhance 
autonomy or minimize 
vulnerability.
How can you 
manage privacy 
and disclosure in 
your relationships?

162
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
 • Men or women who strongly identify themselves as masculine or feminine are 
likely to use rules for disclosure and privacy that correspond to sex-role ste-
reotypes (Snell, Belk, & Hawkins, 1986). In cultures where the male stereotype 
includes “strong and silent” and competitive, men are likely to keep their feelings 
to themselves and to avoid disclosing private information that might be used 
against them.
 • We are more likely to disclose when we have a speciﬁ c motive. For example, we 
are more likely to disclose to avoid loneliness or to attract someone we are inter-
ested in knowing.
 • Privacy and disclosure rules, like other communication rules, are inﬂ uenced by the 
situation. We may disclose private information to a therapist or counselor in order 
to cope with a problem. In times of crisis, we may open up to people with whom 
we do not normally disclose.
Long Overdue
by Naomi Shihab Nye
Poets like Naomi Shihab Nye devote their lives to 
using words to communicate their feelings and ideas, 
yet when Shihab Nye, whose father was Palestinian, 
encountered anti-Arab prejudice, she was unable to 
disclose her Arab roots and to respond. In the excerpt 
that follows, Shihab Nye explores her silence.
The words we didn’t say. How many times? 
Stones stuck in the throat. Endlessly revised 
silence. What was wrong with me? How could I, a 
person whose entire vocation has been dedicated 
one way or another to the use of words, lose 
words completely when I needed them? Where 
does vocal paralysis come from? Why does regret 
have such a long life span? My favorite poet, 
William Stafford, used to say, “Think of some-
thing you said. Now write what you wish you 
had said.”
But I am always thinking of the times I said 
nothing.
In England, attending a play by myself, I 
was happy when the elderly woman next to me 
began speaking at intermission. Our arms had 
been touching lightly on the armrest between our 
seats.
“Smashingly talented,” she said of Ben 
Kingsley, whose brilliant monologue we’d 
been watching. “I don’t know how he does 
it—transporting us so effortlessly; he’s a genius. 
Not many in the world like him.” I agreed. But 
then she sighed and made an odd turn. “You 
know what’s wrong with the world today? It’s 
Arabs. I blame it all on the Arabs. Most world 
problems can really be traced to them.”
My blood froze. Why was she saying this? 
The play wasn’t about Arabs. Ben Kingsley was 
hardly your blue-blooded Englishman, either, so 
what brought it up? Nothing terrible about Arabs 
had happened lately in the news. I wasn’t wearing 
a kefﬁ yeh [traditional Arab headdress] around my 
neck.
But my mouth would not open.
“Why did so many of them come to England?” 
she continued, muttering as if she were sharing a 
conﬁ dence. “A ruination, that’s what it is.”
It struck me that she might be a landlady 
having trouble with tenants. I tried and tried 
to part my lips. Where is the end of the tangled 
thread? How will we roll it into a ball if we can’t 
ﬁ nd an end?
Diverse Voices

163
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
She chatted on about something less con-
sequential, never seeming to mind our utterly 
one-sided conversation, till the lights went down. 
Of course, I couldn’t concentrate on the rest of 
the play. My precious ticket felt wasted. I twisted 
my icy hands together while my cheeks burned.
Even worse, she and I rode the same train 
afterwards. I had plenty of time to respond, to 
ﬁ nd a vocabulary for prejudice and fear. The 
dark night buildings ﬂ ew by. I could have said, 
“Madam, I am half Arab. I pray your heart 
grows larger someday.” I could have sent her off, 
stunned and embarrassed, into the dark.
My father would say, “People like that can’t 
be embarrassed.”
But what would he say back to her?
Oh I was ashamed for my silence and I 
have carried that shame across oceans, through 
the summer when it never rained, in my secret 
pocket, till now. I will never feel better about it. 
Like my reckless angry last words to the one who 
took his own life.
Years later, my son and I were sitting on 
an American island with a dear friend, the only 
African American living among 80 or so residents. 
A brilliant artist and poet in his seventies, he has 
made a beautiful lifetime of painting picture books, 
celebrating expression, encouraging the human 
spirit, reciting poems of other African American 
heroes, delighting children and adults alike.
We had spent a peaceful day riding bicycles, 
visiting the few students at the schoolhouse, 
picking up rounded stones on the beach, digging 
peat moss in the woods. We had sung hymns 
together in our resonant little church. Our friend 
had purchased a live lobster down at the dock for 
supper. My son and I were sad when it seemed to 
be knocking on the lid of the pot of boiling water. 
“Let me out.” We vowed quietly to one another 
never to eat a lobster again.
After dinner, a friend of our friend dropped 
in, returned to the island from her traveling life 
as an anthropologist. We asked if she had heard 
anything about the elections in Israel—that was 
the day Shimon Peres and Benjamin Netanyahu 
vied for prime minister and we had been unable 
to pick up a ﬁ nal tally on the radio.
She thought Netanyahu had won. The elec-
tion was very close. But then she said, “Good 
thing! He’ll put those Arabs in their places. Arabs 
want more than they deserve.”
My face froze. Was it possible I had heard 
correctly? An anthropologist speaking. Not a 
teenager, not a blithering idiot. I didn’t speak 
another word during her visit. I wanted to. I 
should have, but I couldn’t. My plate littered with 
red shells.
After she left, my friend put his gentle hand 
on my shoulder. He said simply, “Now you know 
a little more what it feels like to be black.”
So what happens to my words when the going 
gets rough? In a world where certain equalities 
for human beings seem long, long, long, over-
due, where is the magic sentence to act as a tool? 
Where is the hoe, the tiller, the rake?
Pontiﬁ cating, proving, proselytizing leave 
me cold. So do endless political debates over 
coffee after dinner. I can’t listen to talk radio, 
drowning in jabber.
The poetic impulse—to suggest, hint, shape 
a little picture, to ﬁ nd a story, metaphor, scene—
abides as a kind of music inside. Nor can I forget 
the journalist in Dubai who called me donkey for 
talking about vegetables when there was injustice 
in the world.
I can talk about sumac, too. When a friend 
asks what’s that purple spice in the little shake-up 
jar at the Persian restaurant, tears cloud my eyes.
Is it good for you?
Are vegetables, in some indelible way, 
smarter than we are? Are animals?
But then the headlines take the power. The 
fanatical behavior.
“Problem is, we can’t hear the voices of the 
moderates,” said the Israeli man, who assured me 
his house was built on a spot where Arabs had 
never lived. “Where are they? Why don’t they 
speak louder?”
(They don’t like to raise their voices.)
(Maybe they can’t hear you either.)
Excerpt from Naomi Shihab Nye, “Long Overdue,” Post Gibran: 
An Anthology of New Arab American Writing (Syracuse 
University Press, 2000), p. 127.

164
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
 • One of the most important criteria we use to decide whether to disclose informa-
tion or keep it private is the risk-beneﬁ t analysis. That is, we weigh the advantages 
we might gain by disclosing or maintaining private information against the 
 disadvantages of disclosing or maintaining private information. Common beneﬁ ts 
of disclosing include building the relationship, coping with stress, and emotional 
or psychological catharsis. Beneﬁ ts of maintaining privacy include control and 
independence. The risks of disclosing include loss of control, vulnerability, and 
embarrassment. The risks of maintaining privacy include social isolation and 
 having others misunderstand you.
In the Diverse Voices feature “Long Overdue,” Naomi Shihab Nye describes her 
experiences with anti-Arab prejudice. As you read this excerpt from an interview with 
Shihab Nye, try to empathize with her frustration about Arab stereotypes, and consider 
her courage in disclosing information about herself and her feelings.
Although privacy and disclosure decisions affect relationships in many ways, the 
three most important are related to levels of intimacy, expectations for reciprocity, and 
information co-ownership—how jointly held private information is shared with others 
outside the relationship.
Effects on Intimacy
The effects of privacy and disclosure on intimacy in a relationship are not straightfor-
ward. You might think that as relationships develop, people move in a clear-cut way 
toward deeper disclosure. But research shows that over time, due to the dialectical 
tensions in relationships, people move back and forth between greater disclosure and 
moves to reestablish privacy (Altman, 1993).
Sometimes disclosure deepens intimacy. In your relationships you will probably 
ﬁ nd yourself and your partner cycling between times when you actively disclose and 
times when you back off and re-establish privacy boundaries. This can create prob-
lems when one partner craves greater intimacy at the same time her partner needs to 
re-establish privacy.
Other times, disclosure can decrease intimacy. People may disclose something to 
relieve their guilt or stress, as a type of confession. Some disclosures can do irrepa-
rable damage to a relationship, such as when one partner in a romantic relationship 
discloses an inﬁ delity. So, sometimes opting for privacy may preserve the intimacy 
in a relationship (Hendrick, 1981) and avoid conﬂ ict (Roloff & Ifert, 2000). We may 
choose privacy over disclosure for many legitimate reasons, including protecting 
the other person’s feelings, avoiding unnecessary conﬂ ict, sensitivity to the other’s 
face needs, and protecting the relationship. Similarly, people whose religious, social, 
political, or sexual orientations conﬂ ict with the value systems of their partners may 
choose to keep their orientations private (Petronio, 2002). For example, some gays 
and lesbians choose not to “come out” to their parents because doing so may lead to 
estrangement.
Expectations of Reciprocity
Whether your disclosure is matched by similar disclosure from your partner also can 
affect your relationship. Although you may expect reciprocity, recent research (Dindia, 
2000b) suggests there can be a long time lag after one person discloses before the other 
reciprocates. In between, their conversations may center on non-personal topics. One 
person may not be ready to disclose his or her feelings, even though the conversational 
partner had revealed private information. After a fourth date, Tom blurts out, “Nancy, 

165
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
I love you and I know that I’m going to marry you.” Nancy, who thinks she loves Tom 
but wants to make sure she is not just taken with the idea of being in love, may not 
voice her feelings for many more months. Nevertheless, the two of them continue to 
see each other, building common history, and sharing other personal information even 
though Nancy did not reciprocate at the moment when Tom ﬁ rst declared his love for 
her.
Information Co-Ownership
A third way that decisions about disclosure and privacy affect relationships has to do 
with how partners treat the private information that each has shared with the other. 
When you disclose a secret to your partner, you expect your partner to respect your 
privacy and not disclose your private information with others. Similarly, you and 
your partner may share experiences and make decisions that you consider private, 
and you expect your partner to protect these as well. Whether we hold revealed 
information in conﬁ dence or share it with others outside the relationship may affect 
the relationship.
As people use technology to develop and maintain their relationships, their deci-
sions about what to disclose and what to keep private as well as the rules that guide 
those decisions are changing. Both mobile communication technology and the Internet 
are affecting the disclosure-privacy dialectic by blurring the distinction between what 
is public and what is private communication (Kleinman, 2007). Cell phones and other 
wireless technology allow people to carry on private conversations in public spaces. 
You may IM your friend, and that friend may pass your message around to others 
you would prefer did not have access to that thought. Social networking sites also 
blur the edges. Once we post information, it is there for others to take and share with 
anyone. Whereas paper diaries are considered private thoughts in written form to be 
guarded from others, online diaries in the form of blogs or tweets are purposely made 
accessible to friends, acquaintances, and often to hundreds of millions of strangers 
on the Web.
In the Pop Comm! feature “Our Right to Privacy in a Mediated Society,” we talk 
about managing privacy in our mediated society. Do you think it is okay for gossip 
magazines to disclose information about celebrities without their permission? Why or 
why not?
Guidelines and Communication Strategies for Disclosure
The following communication guidelines can help you make wise decisions regard-
ing disclosure when sharing personal information, sharing feelings, and providing 
feedback.
Sharing personal information
The following strategies can help you make good decisions about disclosing personal 
information.
 1. Self-disclose the kind of information you want others to disclose to you. One 
way to determine what information is appropriate to disclose is to ask yourself 
whether you would feel comfortable if the other person were to disclose that kind 
of information to you.
 2. Self-disclose more intimate information only when the disclosure represents an 
acceptable risk. There is always some risk that self-disclosure will distress your 
partner and damage your relationship, but the better you know your partner, the 
more likely a difﬁ cult self-disclosure will be well received.
Skill Learning Activity 8.1

166
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
The Right to Privacy in a 
Mediated Society
For over a century, celebrities have complained 
that the media invades their privacy, but it was 
the death of Princess Diana in 1997 that focused 
worldwide attention on the extent to which celeb-
rities are denied any right to privacy. From the 
paparazzi who literally hounded Princess Diana 
to her death, to the newspapers who publicized 
the college antics of the Bush twins, it appears 
that anyone the media takes an interest in can 
no longer expect even a basic right to privacy. 
Certainly, public ﬁ gures expect to be scrutinized 
regarding their professional lives, but the current 
cult of celebrity has created a situation in which 
the media thinks little about also prying into their 
private lives. Not only that, but anyone connected 
to these public ﬁ gures, including their families, is 
also subject to invasive media coverage.
For example, during the 2008 presidential 
campaign, the media covered the pregnancy 
of vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin’s 
17-year-old unmarried daughter, Bristol, exten-
sively. In addition, the father of Bristol’s child 
and his parents were subjected to intense media 
scrutiny. Although Bristol’s pregnancy didn’t 
seem relevant to Palin’s campaign, Reverend 
Debra Haffner (2008) argued in a Hufﬁ ngton 
Post column that when “family matters relate 
directly to policy matters”—such as Palin’s 
positions on sexuality education and teenage 
pregnancy—they are fair game. She maintained 
that calls for personal privacy could sometimes 
shroud political issues. But then-presidential 
candidate Barack Obama urged media to “back 
off these kinds of stories,” saying, “People’s 
families are off-limits, and people’s children 
are especially off-limits. This shouldn’t be 
a part of our politics. It has no relevance to 
Pop Comm!
 3. Continue self-disclosure only if it is reciprocated. Although a self-disclosure 
may not immediately be reciprocated, when it is apparent that it is not being 
returned, you should consider limiting the amount of self-disclosure you make. 
The choice not to reciprocate indicates that the person does not yet feel comfort-
able with the level of intimacy.
 4. Gradually move to deeper levels of self-disclosure. Because receiving self-
disclosure can be as threatening as giving it, most people become uncomfortable 
when the level of disclosure exceeds their expectations. The depth of  self-disclosure 
should gradually increase as the relationship develops. So we should disclose sur-
face information early in a relationship and more personal information in a more 
developed relationship (Dindia, Fitzpatrick, & Kenny, 1997, p. 408).
 5. Reserve very personal self-disclosure for ongoing relationships. Disclosures 
about intimate matters are appropriate in close, well-established relationships. 
Making intimate self-disclosures before a bond of trust is established risks alien-
ating the other person. Moreover, people are often embarrassed by and hostile 
toward others who try to saddle them with intimate information in an effort to 
establish a personal relationship where none exists.
ROBYN BECK/AFP/Getty Images

167
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
Sharing feelings
At the heart of intimate self-disclosure is sharing personal feelings. When we do so, we 
demonstrate that we trust our partner not to use the information to do us harm. Once 
we decide to share our feelings, we have to know how to do so appropriately.
The best way to share feelings is by describing them. Describing feelings is the skill 
of naming the emotions you are feeling without judging them. When we describe our 
feelings, we teach others how to treat us by explaining how what has happened affects 
us. For example, if you tell Paul that you enjoy it when he visits you, your description 
of how you feel should encourage him to visit you again. Likewise, when you tell Gloria 
that it bothers you when she borrows your iPod without asking, she may be more likely 
to ask the next time. Describing feelings allows you to exercise a measure of control over 
others’ behavior simply by making them aware of the effects their actions have on you.
To practice describing your feelings, try following these four steps:
 1. Identify the behavior that triggered the feeling. What speciﬁ cally has someone 
said or done to or about you?
describing feelings
the skill of naming the 
emotions you are feeling 
without judging them.
Governor Palin’s performance as a governor or 
her potential performance as a  vice-president” 
(Seelye, 2008).
The debate over invasive media coverage 
was not clouded by politics in February 2009 
when the celebrity Web site TMZ.com posted a 
photo of pop star Rihanna after she was physi-
cally assaulted by her then-boyfriend, R&B artist 
Chris Brown. The photo had been leaked by some-
one at the Los Angeles Police Department and, 
embarrassed, the department opened an internal 
investigation about the publication of the photo, 
saying it “takes seriously its duty to maintain the 
conﬁ dentiality of victims of domestic violence” 
(Itzkoff, 2009). However, TMZ.com’s executive 
producer, Harvey Levin, defended the publica-
tion of the photo, saying it helped put a face to 
the victims of domestic abuse (“TMZ Responds,” 
2009). Even people who ﬁ ght for the rights of 
victims of domestic abuse hesitantly supported 
the decision to publish the photo. Chicago author 
and advocate for battered women Susan Murphy-
Milano speculated, “Maybe it is a good idea, if 
it’s her, if young girls see this.” She added that 
she hoped it would make young women think “Is 
the next picture going to be of her in a morgue?” 
(McCartney, 2009).
But what about Rihanna’s right to privacy? 
PR Week points out that typical standards of 
journalism prevent reporters and editors from 
publishing names of victims. However, in the 
case of Rihanna, David Hauslaib, editorial direc-
tor of Jossip.com, says, “We have this appetite 
for celebrity culture and it brings down any 
sort of safeguards we, as a media industry, have 
implemented to protect people” (Maul, 2009). The 
Gawker.com further explored this debate about 
media ethics: “Critics say running the picture 
humiliates Rihanna at a time when she’s already 
in emotional agony, that it pierces a zone of 
emotional and physical privacy already grossly 
violated in the apparent attack on her” (Tate, 
2009). Nonetheless, proﬁ t-seeking publishers 
know that publishing such a shocking image will 
increase their trafﬁ c hits, and thus they simply 
choose to run the risk of exploitation accusations.
In both these cases, proponents of breaking 
privacy boundaries argued that they did so for 
a greater good. In Palin’s case, they maintained 
that the media coverage highlighted important 
political issues; in Rihanna’s case, publishing 
her photo furthered awareness of the seriousness 
of domestic violence. What do you think? Is the 
media justiﬁ ed in exposing the private moments 
of celebrities’ lives, no matter how personal or 
painful, if doing so raises public awareness? Or is 
this sort of coverage just exploitive?

168
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
 2.  Identify the speciﬁ c emotion you are experi-
encing as a result of the behavior. Sometimes we 
can’t describe our emotions because we don’t have the 
vocabulary to accurately describe what we are feeling. 
Yes, what we are feeling is similar to anger, but are we 
annoyed, betrayed, cheated, crushed, disturbed, furi-
ous, outraged, or shocked? Each of these words more 
richly describes a feeling that might less precisely be 
labeled anger.
 3.  Frame your response as an “I” statement. For 
example, “I feel happy/sad/ irritated/excited/vibrant.” 
“I” statements help neutralize the impact of an emo-
tional description because they do not blame the other 
or evaluate the other’s behavior. Instead, a ﬁ rst-person 
message accurately conveys what you are expressing 
and why. Be careful, however, not to couch a blaming 
statement as an “I” statement. For example, “I feel like 
you don’t respect me” is a criticism of the other person. It doesn’t let the other per-
son know how you feel about what happened. You might have felt hurt, betrayed, 
or angry. But you haven’t disclosed this.
 4. Verbalize the speciﬁ c feeling. Here are two examples of describing feelings effec-
tively. The ﬁ rst one begins with the trigger, and the second one begins with the 
feeling—either order is acceptable:
“Thank you for your compliment [trigger]; I [the person having the feeling] feel 
gratiﬁ ed [the speciﬁ c feeling] that you noticed the effort I made.”
“I [the person having the feeling] feel very resentful [the speciﬁ c feeling] when 
you criticize my cooking after I’ve worked as many hours as you have [trigger].”
To begin with, you may ﬁ nd it easier to describe positive feelings: “I felt so much 
happier after you took me to the movie” or “When you offered to help me with the yard 
work, I really felt relieved.” As you become comfortable describing positive feelings, 
you can move to describing negative feelings caused by environmental factors: “It’s 
cold and cloudy; I feel gloomy” or “When there’s a thunderstorm, I get jumpy.” Finally, 
you can risk describing the difﬁ cult emotions you feel resulting from what people have 
said or done: “When you use a sarcastic tone while you are saying that what I did 
pleased you, I really feel confused.”
Providing personal feedback
Sometimes it is appropriate to go beyond sharing feelings to also disclose our thoughts 
about another’s message or behavior. When personal feedback is shared with sensi-
tivity, it can help the other person to develop a more accurate self-concept, and it 
can increase the openness in the relationship. Three skills can guide us when giv-
ing personal feedback: describing behavior, praising positive behavior, and criticizing 
negative behavior constructively.
 1. Describing behavior. As is the case when sharing feelings, both effective praising 
and critiquing are based on being descriptive rather than evaluative, as well as 
being speciﬁ c rather than vague. Unfortunately, people are quick to share ambigu-
ous conclusions and evaluations. “You’re so mean,” “She’s a tease,” “You’re a real 
friend,” and countless statements like these are attempts to provide feedback, but 
they are evaluative and vague.
Skill Learning Activity 8.2
Describing feelings is difﬁ cult 
for many people because 
it makes them vulnerable. 
Can you recall a situation 
in which you masked your 
feelings because you didn’t 
trust the other person? Was 
your fear justiﬁ ed?
Jetta Productions/Iconica/Getty Images

169
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
Skill
Naming the emotions 
you are feeling with-
out judging them.
Use
For self-disclosure; to 
teach people how to 
treat you.
Procedure
1. 
Identify the behavior 
that has triggered 
the feeling.
2. 
Identify the speciﬁ c 
emotion you are 
experiencing as a 
result of the behav-
ior. Anger? Joy? Be 
speciﬁ c.
3. 
Frame your 
response as an “I” 
statement. “I feel 
_____.”
4. 
Verbalize the spe-
ciﬁ c feeling.
Example
“I just heard I didn’t 
get the job, and I feel 
cheated and bitter” 
or “Because of the 
way you defended 
me when I was being 
belittled by Leah, I 
feel both grateful and 
humbled.”
Communication Skill
Describing Feelings
For each of these statements, determine if 
the message is a description of feelings. If it is, 
place a “D” next to it. If you determine that the 
message is not a description of feelings, sup-
ply a message that provides a description of 
feelings.
_____ 1. That was a great movie!
_____ 2. I was really cheered by the ﬂ owers.
_____ 3.  I feel that you are not respecting my 
rights.
_____ 4. Yuck!
_____ 5.  Damn—I screwed that up again. I feel 
like an idiot.
_____ 6.  I feel certain I got the job because I 
was the most qualiﬁ ed person.
_____ 7.  Congratulations, I feel happy for you.
_____ 8.  When Pam’s around, I feel like a third 
wheel.
_____ 9.  I’m ecstatic about winning the award.
_____10.  I’m sick and tired of you.
Skill Learning Activity 8.3
Skill Building
Identifying Descriptions of Feelings
   
Describing behavior is accurately recounting the speciﬁ c behaviors of another 
without commenting on their appropriateness. To describe behavior, we move 
backward to identify the speciﬁ c behaviors that led to our perception. What led 
you to conclude someone was “mean”? Was it something the person said or did? 
If so, what? Once you have identiﬁ ed the speciﬁ c behaviors, actions, or messages 
that led to your conclusion, you can share that information as feedback. For 
describing behavior
accurately recounting the 
speciﬁ c behaviors of another 
without commenting on their 
appropriateness.

170
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
example, “Giorgio, you called me a liar in front of the team, and you know I have 
no way to prove that I told the truth.” “Shana, you came to my graduation even 
though it was on your twenty-ﬁ rst birthday.” “You stayed and comforted me when 
Tyrone left, and you even volunteered to stay with my son so I could job hunt. 
You’re a real friend.”
 2. Praising positive behavior. Praise is describing a speciﬁ c positive behavior or 
accomplishment of another person and the effect that behavior has on others. 
Praise is not the same as ﬂ attery. When we ﬂ atter someone, we use insin-
cere compliments to ingratiate ourselves to that person. When we praise, our 
compliments are sincere. Too often we fail to acknowledge the positive and 
helpful things people say and do. Yet our view of who we are—our identity 
as well as our behavior—is shaped by how others respond to us. Praise can 
be used to reinforce positive behavior and to help another develop a positive 
self-concept.
For praise to be effective, we need to focus on the speciﬁ c behavior we want 
to reinforce. If your sister, who tends to be forgetful, remembers your birthday, 
you might want to praise that behavior. To say “You’re so wonderful; you’re on 
top of everything” does not reinforce the behavior because it does not identify the 
behavior. Instead, saying something like “Thanks for the birthday card; I really 
appreciate it” would be appropriate. The response acknowledges the accomplish-
ment by describing the speciﬁ c behavior you want to reinforce.
Praise, when appropriate, doesn’t cost much, and it is usually appreciated. 
Not only does praise provide feedback and build esteem, it can also deepen our 
relationship with that person. To praise behavior effectively, always begin by iden-
tifying the speciﬁ c behavior or accomplishment that you want to reinforce. Then, 
describe the speciﬁ c behavior or accomplishment and any positive feelings you or 
others experienced as a result of the behavior or accomplishment. Finally, phrase 
your comment so that the level of praise appropriately reﬂ ects the signiﬁ cance of 
the behavior or accomplishment.
 3. Giving constructive criticism. Constructive criticism is describing speciﬁ c behav-
iors of another that hurt the person or that person’s relationships with others. 
Although the word criticize can mean judgment, constructive criticism does not 
condemn or judge but is based on empathy and a sincere desire to help someone 
understand the impact of his or her behavior. Use the following guidelines when 
providing constructive criticism.
• Ask the person’s permission before giving criticism. A person who has agreed to 
hear constructive criticism is likely to be more receptive to it than is someone 
who was not accorded the respect of being asked beforehand.
• Describe the behavior and its consequences by accurately recounting precisely 
what was said or done and the reaction of those affected by it. Your objective 
description allows the other to maintain face while receiving accurate feed-
back about the damaging behavior. For example, DeShawn asks, “What did 
you think of the visuals I used when I delivered my report?” If you reply, “They 
weren’t very effective,” you would be too general and evaluative to be helpful. 
In contrast, to give descriptive feedback, you might say, “Well, the type on the 
ﬁ rst two was too small, and I had trouble reading them.” Notice this construc-
tive criticism does not attack DeShawn’s competence. Instead, it points out a 
problem and in so doing enables DeShawn to see how to improve.
• Preface constructive criticism with an afﬁ rming statement. Remember, even 
constructive criticism threatens the innate human need to be liked and admired. 
So, prefacing constructive criticism with statements that validate your respect 
praise
describing the speciﬁ c 
positive behaviors or 
accomplishments of another 
and the effect that behavior 
has on others.
constructive criticism
describing speciﬁ c behaviors 
of another that hurt the 
person or that person’s 
relationships with others.

171
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
for the other person is important. One way to do this is to offer praise before 
criticism. You could begin your feedback to DeShawn by saying, “First, the chart 
showing how much energy we waste helped me see just how much we could 
improve. The bold colors you chose also really helped me see the problems. But 
the type size on the ﬁ rst two slides was too small for me to see from the back of 
the room. It would have helped me read them if they had been larger.”
• When appropriate, suggest how the person can change the behavior. Because 
the goal of constructive criticism is to help, it is appropriate to provide sugges-
tions that might lead to positive change. In responding to DeShawn’s request 
for feedback, you might also add, “In my Communication class, I learned that 
most people in an audience will be able to read 18-point font or larger. You 
might want to give that a try.” By including a positive suggestion, you not 
only help the person by providing useful information, you also show that your 
intentions are positive.
Communication Strategies for Managing Privacy
Maintaining privacy during interpersonal interactions can be awkward especially if you 
want to maintain or further develop your relationship. Because reciprocal disclosures 
are part of relationship development, 
your partner may expect you to respond 
to their disclosure with a similar one 
of your own. Or you may encounter 
someone who asks you personal ques-
tions that you do not want to answer. In 
both cases, you will want to respond in 
a way that maintains your privacy with-
out damaging the relationship. We offer 
three indirect and one direct communi-
cation strategy you can use when you 
are being pressed to disclose something 
that you are not comfortable sharing.
Indirect strategies for maintaining 
privacy
Sometimes you may choose to maintain 
your privacy by deﬂ ecting attention or 
by simply deceiving the other person. 
These strategies can be effective in the 
short term, but don’t make them a habit 
because over the long term, they may 
damage the relationship.
 1. Change the subject. Partners who are sensitive will recognize a change of subject 
as a signal that you don’t want to disclose. For example, when Pat and Eric are 
leaving economics class, Pat says to Eric, “I got an 83 on the test, how about 
you?” If Eric doesn’t want to share his grade, he might redirect the conversa-
tion by saying, “Hey, that’s a B. Good going. Did you ﬁ nish the homework for 
calculus?”
 2. Mask feelings. When you have decided that sharing your feelings is too risky, you 
may choose to mask your emotions. A good poker player who develops a poker 
face, a neutral look that is impossible to decipher and stays the same whether the 
Skill Learning Activity 8.4
Learning to give constructive 
criticism can help you avoid 
a defensive reaction when 
you describe a person’s 
negative behavior.
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/Wadsworth Publishing Group

172
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
player’s cards are good or bad, has learned to mask emotions. Likewise, if Alita 
laughs along with the others as Manny makes fun of her, this display may mask 
her feelings of betrayal and embarrassment. On occasion masking your feelings 
can be an effective strategy. However, if we rely too much on this strategy, we 
might experience health problems because we are turning our feelings inward 
and not expressing them. We also run the risk of stunting the growth of our rela-
tionships because our partners won’t really know or understand us.
 3. Tell a white lie. A white lie is a false or misleading statement that might be 
acceptable if telling the truth would embarrass you or your partner and if the 
untruth will not cause serious harm to either person or to the relationship. So 
when Pat asks Eric about his grade on the test, Eric might respond, “I’m not sure. 
I got a few tests back this week.”
Direct strategy for maintaining privacy: Establish a boundary
Changing the subject, masking feelings, and telling white lies are indirect ways to 
maintain your privacy and generally work in one-time situations. But these strategies 
will eventually damage your relationships if used repeatedly. When you wish to keep 
information private over a longer period of time, you will want to use a more direct 
approach. The skill of establishing a boundary allows you to effectively respond to 
people who expect you to disclose information you prefer to keep private. In essence, it 
is a polite way to let your partner know that questions requiring you to disclose about 
a speciﬁ c topic are unacceptable.
 1. Recognize why you are choosing not to share the information. For example, 
when Pat asks Eric about the grade he received on a history term paper, Eric may 
hesitate to share this recognizing that he feels uncomfortable doing so.
 2. Identify your rule that guided this decision. Eric relates his discomfort in shar-
ing the test score to his inability to predict how Pat will react when he ﬁ nds out 
that Eric has received an “A+” while Pat got only a “B”. Eric, who in the past has 
been teased for his good grades has developed a rule that he does not disclose the 
grades he receives unless he knows that the person he is talking to respects aca-
demic achievement.
 3. Form an “I”-centered message that brieﬂ y establishes a boundary. For example, 
when Pat asks Eric about his test grade, Eric might reply, “I know that everyone’s 
different, and I don’t mean to be rude, but it’s my policy not to ask other people 
about their grades and not to discuss my own. I know you may think this is weird, 
but please don’t be offended.” This lets Pat know that Eric’s decision is based on a 
personal rule rather than an indication of his trust in Pat. Similarly, we sometimes 
need to establish a boundary regarding private information that another person has 
entrusted to us. So when Julie asks Ilaria why Emma isn’t going on the alternative 
spring break trip this year, Emma may say, “You know, I’d like to share that with 
you, but Emma told me her reasons in conﬁ dence, and I pride myself on honoring 
commitments I’ve made to guard others’ privacy. I know you can appreciate that.”
Negotiating Different Needs, Wants,
and Preferences in Relationships
Even two people who are in a mutually satisfying, intimate relationship have dif-
ferent needs, wants, and preferences. The dialectical tension between our need for 
autonomy and need for connection can affect whether we choose to push to have 
a preference honored by our partner or whether we are willing to subordinate our 
establishing a boundary
effectively respond to people 
who expect you to disclose 
information you prefer to keep 
private.

173
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
wishes to maintain connectedness with our partner. For example, Anna may enjoy 
watching college football all day every Saturday. But she has begun to date Jack, 
who hates all sports. So Anna may forego her Saturday habit in order to spend time 
with Jack. Or Jack may initially indulge Anna by watching with her, getting pleasure 
from just spending time with her. As they get to know each other better, the person 
who has made the personal sacriﬁ ce may choose to express his or her real preference. 
How Anna and Jack communicate their preferences and how the other one responds 
will affect the quality of their relationship. We negotiate our differences in relation-
ships by communicating our personal needs and preferences and by managing the 
conﬂ ict that occurs when our needs, wants, and preferences do not match those of 
our partner.
Communicating Personal Needs, Wants, and Preferences: 
Passive, Aggressive, and Assertive Behavior
We can communicate our needs, wants, and preferences in one of three ways. We can 
be passive, aggressive, or assertive.
Passive behavior
Passive behavior is expressing our personal preferences or defending our rights 
because we value our connection with the other person more than we value 
our independence and we fear that we will lose our connection if we stand
Personal Narrative
Prepare a 3- to 5-minute speech that is a story about something that 
happened to you and is not generally known by others. Your story 
might be humorous, serious, or somewhere in between. It might be 
about something that happened recently or about an event from 
your past.
Begin by making a list of stories you might tell. As you think about 
the stories on your list, use the privacy and disclosure guidelines in 
this chapter to determine whether the story is appropriate for a class-
room setting. Remember to consider not only your own privacy, but 
also the privacy of others who are part of the story.
As you prepare your speech, think about how to tell the story 
so that your audience can easily follow what you are saying. We tell 
most stories in chronological order, introducing people in the story as 
they make their appearance in the events. You can help your audi-
ence follow your story if you chunk it into two, three, or four sequential 
parts, similar to the chapters of a book. For example, if you are going 
to tell a story about a cake-baking disaster, you could divide your 
story into three parts: problems with ingredients, problems with mixing, 
and problems with baking.
Brieﬂ y introduce your story in a way that piques the interest of 
your audience members. End your story by summarizing what you 
learned from the experience.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
How do people 
negotiate different 
needs, wants, and 
preferences in 
relationships?
passive behavior
not expressing personal 
preferences or defending our 
rights because we fear the 
cost and are insecure in the 
relationships, have very low 
self-esteem, or value the other 
person above ourself.

174
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
up for ourselves. We behave passively when we submit to other people’s demands 
even when doing so is inconvenient, against our best interests, or when it vio-
lates our rights. For example, Aaron and Katie routinely go to the gym at 10 a.m. 
Saturday mornings, but Aaron’s Friday work schedule has changed and he doesn’t 
get home until 3 a.m. on Saturday morning. Aaron behaves passively if he doesn’t 
say anything to Katie but drags himself out of bed even though he’d much rather 
sleep.
Aggressive behavior
Aggressive behavior is forcefully making claims for our preferences, feelings, needs, 
or rights with little or no regard for the situation or for the feelings or rights of our 
partner. People behave aggressively when they perceive themselves to be powerful, 
do not value the other person, lack emotional control, or feel defensive. Although 
aggressive behavior may stem from the need to establish more independence in 
a relationship, it also weakens feelings of connection and damages relationships. 
Research shows that people who receive aggressive messages from their partner are 
likely to feel hurt by them regardless of their relationship (Martin, Anderson, & 
Horvath, 1996). Suppose that, without letting her know of his schedule change, 
Aaron continues to meet Katie at the gym. If Katie suggests they meet next week at 
8 a.m. instead of 10 a.m., Aaron may explode and aggressively reply, “No way! In 
fact, I don’t care if I ever work out on Saturday again!” Katie, who has no context for 
understanding this aggressive outburst, may be startled, hurt, and confused.
Assertive behavior
Assertive behavior is expressing our personal preferences and defending our personal 
rights while respecting the preferences and rights of others. Assertiveness is an effec-
tive way to establish our independence while continuing to nurture the relationship 
because our assertive messages teach our partners how to treat us. When we assert our 
needs and preferences effectively, we provide our partners with the honest and truth-
ful information they need to understand and meet our needs. When Aaron’s schedule 
changed, he could have behaved assertively and called Katie, explained his situation, 
and negotiated a more convenient time for working out together.
Assertive messages balance our rights and needs with the rights and needs of 
 others. For a review of the characteristics of assertive behavior, see Figure 8.1.
Here are some useful guidelines for practicing assertive behavior: (1) identify what 
you are thinking or feeling; (2) analyze the cause of these feelings; (3) identify what 
your real preferences and rights are; and (4) use describing feelings and describing 
behavior skills to make “I” statements that explain your position politely.
Cultural Variations in Passive, Aggressive, and Assertive 
Behavior
Assertiveness is typically valued in individualistic cultures. Whereas North American 
culture is known for its assertive communication style, Asian and South American 
cultures, which are collectivist, tend to value accord and harmony (Samovar, Porter, 
& McDaniel, 2007). In collectivist cultures, passive behavior is more prevalent, and 
personal needs, wants, and preferences are subordinate to the needs of the group. 
In some cultures, such as Latino or Hispanic societies, men exercise a form of self-
expression that goes far beyond the guidelines presented here for assertive behavior. 
In these  societies, the concept of “machismo” guides male behavior (Arboleda-Florez & 
Weisstub, 2000). Although what is labeled appropriate behavior varies across cultures, 
aggressive behavior
belligerently or violently 
confronting another with your 
preferences, feelings, needs, or 
rights with little regard for the 
situation or for the feelings or 
rights of others.
assertive behavior
expressing your personal 
preferences and defending 
your personal rights while 
respecting the preferences 
and rights of others.
Skill Learning Activity 8.5
Web Resource 8.1

175
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
the results of passive and aggressive behaviors seem universal. Passive behavior can 
cause resentment and aggressive behavior leads to fear and misunderstanding. When 
talking with people whose culture, background, or lifestyle differs from your own, you 
may need to observe their behavior and their responses to your statements before you 
can be sure about the kinds of behavior that are likely to effectively communicate your 
needs, wants, and preferences.
Figure 8.1
Characteristics of assertive 
behavior
Own your feelings
Assertive individuals acknowledge that the thoughts 
and feelings expressed are theirs.
Avoid confrontational 
language
Assertive individuals do not use threats, evaluations, or 
dogmatic language.
Use speciﬁ c 
 statements directed to 
the behaviors at hand
Instead of focusing on extraneous issues, assertive 
individuals use descriptive statements that focus on the 
issue that is most relevant.
Maintain eye contact 
and ﬁ rm body position
Assertive individuals look people in the eye rather than 
shifting gaze, looking at the ﬂ oor, swaying back and 
forth, hunching over, or using other signs that may be 
perceived as indecisive or lacking conviction.
Maintain a ﬁ rm but 
pleasant tone of voice
Assertive individuals speak ﬁ rmly but at a normal pitch, 
volume, and rate.
Avoid hemming and 
hawing
Assertive individuals avoid vocalized pauses and other 
signs of indecisiveness.
Skill
Standing up for 
yourself and doing 
so in interpersonally 
effective ways that 
describe your feelings 
honestly and exercise 
your personal rights 
while respecting the 
rights of others.
Use
To show clearly what 
you need, want, or 
prefer.
Procedure
1. 
Identify what you 
are thinking or 
feeling.
2. 
Analyze the cause 
of these feelings.
3. 
Identify what your 
real preferences 
and rights are.
4. 
Use  describing 
feelings and 
describing 
 behavior skills to 
make “I” statements 
that politely explain 
your position.
Example
When Gavin believes 
he is being charged 
too much, he says, 
“I have never been 
charged for a reﬁ ll on 
iced tea before—has 
there been a change 
in policy?”
Communication Skill
Assertiveness

176
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
For each of the following situations, write an 
assertive response.
 1. You come back to your dorm, apartment, 
or house to ﬁ nish a paper that is due tomor-
row, only to ﬁ nd that someone else is using 
your computer.
Assertive response:
 2. You work part time at a clothing store. Just 
as your shift is ending, your manager says 
to you, “I’d like you to work overtime, if you 
would. Martin’s supposed to replace you, 
but he just called and can’t get here for at 
least an hour.” You have tickets to a concert 
that starts in an hour.
Assertive response:
 3. During a phone call with your elderly 
grandmother, she announces, “Your great-
aunt Margie called, and I told her you’d be 
happy to take us grocery shopping and 
out to lunch on Sunday.” You were planning 
to spend Sunday working on your résumé 
for an interview on Monday.
Assertive response:
 4. You and your friend made a date to go 
dancing, an activity you really enjoy. When 
you meet, your friend says, “I don’t feel like 
dancing tonight. Let’s go to Joey’s party 
instead.”
Assertive response:
 5. You’re riding in a car with a group of friends 
on the way to a party when the driver 
begins to clown around by swerving the 
car back and forth, speeding up to tail-
gate the car in front, and honking his horn. 
You believe this driving is dangerous, and 
you’re becoming scared.
Assertive response:
Skill Learning Activity 8.6
Skill Building
Assertive Messages
Managing Conﬂ ict in Relationships
When two people have an honest relationship, there will be times when one person’s 
attempt to satisfy his or her own needs will conﬂ ict with the other person’s desires. 
When this happens, the partners experience conﬂ ict. Interpersonal conﬂ ict exists 
when the needs or ideas of one person are at odds with the needs or ideas of another. 
In these conﬂ ict situations, participants have choices about how they act and how they 
communicate with each other.
Many people view conﬂ ict as a sign of a bad relationship, but in reality conﬂ ict 
occurs in all relationships. Although cultures differ in how they view conﬂ ict (for 
example, Asian cultures see it as dysfunctional), whether conﬂ ict hurts or strengthens 
a relationship depends on how you deal with it. In this section, we discuss ﬁ ve styles 
people use to manage conﬂ ict and how you can skillfully initiate and respond to con-
ﬂ ict in your relationships.
Styles of Conﬂ ict
Think about the last time you experienced a conﬂ ict. How did you react? Did you avoid it? 
Give in? Force the other person to accept your will? Did you compromise? Or did the two 
of you use a problem-solving approach? When faced with a conﬂ ict, you can withdraw, 
accommodate, force, compromise, or collaborate (Lulofs & Cahn, 2000).
interpersonal conﬂ ict
when the needs or ideas of 
one person are at odds with 
the needs or ideas of another.
How do we deal 
with conﬂ ict in our 
relationships?

177
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
One of the most common ways to deal with conﬂ ict is withdrawing. Withdrawing 
involves physically or psychologically removing yourself from the conﬂ ict. You with-
draw physically by leaving the site. For instance, imagine Eduardo and Justina get into 
an argument about their ﬁ nancial situation. Eduardo may withdraw physically by saying, 
“I don’t want to talk about this” and walking out the door. Or he may psychologically 
withdraw by simply ignoring Justina. When you withdraw repeatedly, you risk damaging 
your relationship. First, in terms of dialectical tension, withdrawing signals closedness 
rather than openness and autonomy rather than connection. Further, withdrawing doesn’t 
eliminate the source of the conﬂ ict and it often increases the tension. In many cases, not 
confronting the problem when it occurs only makes it more difﬁ cult to deal with in the 
long run. Nevertheless, as a temporary strategy, withdrawing may allow tempers to cool 
and may be appropriate when the issue or the relationship isn’t important.
A second style of managing conﬂ ict is accommodating, which means satisfying 
others’ needs or accepting others’ ideas while neglecting your own. People who adopt 
the accommodating style use passive behavior. For instance, during a discussion of 
their upcoming vacation, Mariana and Juan disagree about whether to invite friends 
to join them. Juan, who would really prefer to be alone with Mariana, uses accommo-
dation when Mariana says, “I think it would be fun to go with another couple, don’t 
you?” and he replies, “OK, whatever you want.”
Accommodating can result in ineffective conﬂ ict resolution because important 
facts, arguments, and positions are not voiced. There are situations, of course, when 
accommodating is appropriate. When the issue is not important to you, but the relation-
ship is, accommodating is the preferred style. Hal and Yvonne are trying to decide where 
to go for dinner. Hal says, “I really have a craving for some Thai food tonight.” Yvonne, 
who prefers pizza, says, “OK, that will be ﬁ ne.” Yvonne’s interest in pizza was not very 
strong, and because Hal really seemed excited by Thai food, Yvonne accommodated.
A third style of dealing with conﬂ ict is forcing. Forcing means satisfying your 
own needs or with no concern for the needs of the other and no concern for the harm 
done to the relationship. Forcing may use aggressive behavior such as physical threats, 
verbal attacks, coercion, or manipulation. If you use forcing in a conﬂ ict and your 
partner avoids or accommodates, the conﬂ ict seems to subside. If, however, your part-
ner answers your forcing style with a forcing style, the conﬂ ict escalates.
Although forcing may result in a person getting her or his own way, it usually 
hurts a relationship, at least in the short term. There are times, however, when forcing is 
an effective means to resolve conﬂ ict. In emergencies, when quick and decisive action 
must be taken to ensure safety or minimize harm or when an issue is critical to your 
own or the other’s welfare, or if you are interacting with someone who will take advan-
tage of you if you do not force the issue, this style is appropriate. For example, David 
knows that, statistically speaking, the likelihood of death or serious injury increases 
dramatically if one does not wear a helmet when riding a motorcycle. So he insists that 
his sister wear one when she rides with him, even though she complains bitterly.
withdrawing
managing conﬂ ict by 
physically or psychologically 
removing yourself.
accommodating
managing conﬂ ict by 
satisfying others’ needs or 
accepting others’ ideas while 
neglecting our own.
forcing
managing conﬂ ict by 
satisfying your own needs or 
advancing your own ideas, 
with no concern for the needs 
or ideas of the other and no 
concern for the harm done to 
the relationship.
©1995 Baby Blues Partnership. Reprinted by permission of King Features Syndicate, Inc.

178
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
A fourth way to manage conﬂ ict is compromising, which occurs when partners each 
give up part of what they want to provide at least some satisfaction for both parties. 
For example, if Heather and Paul are working together on a class project and need to 
meet outside of class but both have busy schedules, they may compromise on a time 
to meet that isn’t particularly ideal for either one.
Although compromising is a popular and effective style, there are drawbacks asso-
ciated with it. One drawback is that the quality of a decision is affected if one of the 
parties “trades away” a better solution to ﬁ nd a compromise. Compromising is appro-
priate when the issue is moderately important, when there are time constraints, and 
when attempts at collaborating have not been successful.
A ﬁ fth style for dealing with conﬂ ict is collaborating. When you collaborate, 
you view the disagreement as a problem to be solved, discuss the issues, describe 
your feelings, and identify the characteristics of an effective solution. With col-
laboration, both people’s needs are met and both sides feel that they have been 
heard. For example, if Juan and Mariana decide to collaborate on their conﬂ ict 
about asking friends to join them on vacation, Mariana may explain how she 
thinks that vacationing with friends lower the cost of the trip. Juan may describe 
his desire to have “alone time” with Mariana. As they explore what each wants 
from the vacation, they can arrive at a plan that meets both of their needs. So, 
they may end up vacationing alone, but spending several nights camping to lower 
their expenses. Or they may share a condo with friends but agree to schedule alone 
time each day.
Guidelines for Collaboration
You may be the person to initiate a conﬂ ict or you may have to respond to a conﬂ ict initi-
ated by your partner. In either case, several guidelines can help you guide the conversation.
You can initiate a collaborative conﬂ ict by following these guidelines:
• Identify the problem and own it as your own: “Hi, I’m trying to study and I need 
your help.”
• Describe the problem in terms of behavior, consequences, and feelings: “When I 
hear your music, I listen to it instead of studying, and then I get frustrated and 
behind schedule.”
• Don’t evaluate the other person’s motives. Refrain from blaming or accusing: 
“That person isn’t trying to ruin your study; she’s just enjoying her music.”
• Find common ground: “I would guess that you have had times when you became 
distracted from something you needed to do, so I’m hoping that you can help me 
out by lowering the volume a bit.”
• Mentally rehearse so that you can state your request brieﬂ y.
It is more difﬁ cult to create a collaborative climate when you have to respond to 
a conﬂ ict that someone initiates in a confrontational manner. But you can shape the 
conversation toward collaboration by following these guidelines:
• Disengage. Mentally “put up your shield” and avoid a defensive response by emo-
tionally disengaging.” Remember your partner has a problem and you want to 
help.
• Respond empathically and with genuine interest and concern. Sometimes you 
need to allow your partner to vent before the partner will be ready to problem 
solve: “I can see that you’re angry. Tell me about it.”
collaborating
managing conﬂ ict by fully 
addressing the needs and 
issues of each party and 
arriving at a solution that is 
mutually satisfying.
Skill Learning Activity 8.7
Web Resource 8.2
What is a 
collaborative 
approach to 
conﬂ ict?
compromising
managing conﬂ ict by giving 
up part of what you want, 
to provide at least some 
satisfaction for both parties.

179
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
• Paraphrase your understanding of the problem and ask questions to clarify issues: 
“Is it the volume of my music or the type of music that is making it difﬁ cult for 
you to study?”
• Seek common ground by ﬁ nding some aspect of the complaint that you can hon-
estly agree with: “I can understand that you would be upset about losing precious 
study time.”
• Ask the other person to suggest alternative solutions: “Can you give me a couple 
of ideas about how we could resolve this so your study is more effective?”
Conversation and Analysis
Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Skill Learning Activity 
8.8, which is a video clip of Jan and Ken’s conversation. As you watch Jan and 
Ken talk, focus on how the nature of their relationship inﬂ uences their interac-
tion. What does each person do to help maintain the relationship? How does each 
person handle this conﬂ ict? How well does each person listen to the other? Are 
Jan and Ken appropriately assertive? Notice how well each provides feedback and 
describes feelings. You can respond to these and other analysis questions by click-
ing on “Critique” in the menu bar at the top of the screen. When you’ve answered 
all the questions, click “Done” to compare your answers to those provided by the 
authors.
Jan and Ken are in their early to middle twenties. They meet at Jan’s apartment. 
Jan and Ken have been good friends for most of their lives. But because of what she 
said last week, Ken believes Jan has betrayed their friendship.
Conversation
KEN: Jan, we need to talk. Why’d you tell Shannon about what happened between 
Katie and me? Now Shannon doesn’t want to talk to me.
JAN: (Silent for a moment as she realizes that he knows): Ken, I’m sorry, I didn’t 
mean to tell her. It just kind of slipped out when we were talking.
KEN: Sorry? Sorry is not enough. I told you that in private, and you promised 
that you’d keep it just between you and me.
JAN: Ken, I told her that long before the two of you started dating. You know, 
Shannon and I, we’ve been friends for a long time. We were just talking 
about guys and cheating and stuff. It wasn’t about you speciﬁ cally.
KEN: It wasn’t about me? It was totally about me. You had no right to tell anyone that, 
under any circumstances. Now Shannon doesn’t trust me. She thinks I’m a lowlife 
that sleeps around.
JAN: Well, I’m sorry, but the two of you weren’t even dating yet.
KEN: Oh, that’s irrelevant. You know, it would be irrelevant even if Shannon and I 
weren’t dating. But, you know, the point is I thought I could trust you and tell you 
anything and that it would go no further.
JAN: Yeah, like the time I told you I was thinking about dropping out of school for a 
semester and you just happened to tell my dad?
Web Resource 8.3
Skill Learning Activity 8.8
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

180
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
 
KEN: Ah, that’s not the same thing.
 
JAN: You know what? It’s exactly the same. I trusted you and you squealed. My 
dad lit into me big-time. He should have never known I was thinking about that. 
I trusted you, and you betrayed me.
KEN: Well look, I was just trying to look out for you. I knew you were making a 
big mistake, and I was just trying to stop you. And besides, you know I was right! 
(Gets discouraged.) Don’t change the subject here. Are you saying that your telling 
Shannon is some sort of payback for me telling your dad?
JAN: No, I’m just trying to point out that you’ve got no right to throw stones!
KEN: You know what? Then maybe neither of us can trust the other. Maybe we 
just shouldn’t tell each other anything that we don’t want broadcast to the world, 
huh?
JAN: Don’t be such a jerk. I’m sorry, OK?
KEN: Well, that’s not good enough. You ruined any chance I had with her.
JAN: Are you saying that something I said about what you did a long time ago is ruin-
ing your chances?
KEN: Yeah, it might.
JAN: Ken, if she truly valued your friendship, something that you did a long time ago 
shouldn’t matter.
KEN: Well, maybe you’re right.
JAN: Look, I said I’m sorry, and I meant it. I’m also sorry about, you know, throwing 
in what you told my dad. I know that wasn’t fair, but you know, you really hurt 
my feelings when you blew up at me like that.
KEN: Listen, listen, I shouldn’t have, and I shouldn’t have told your dad. I should have 
probably encouraged you to talk to him. We still friends?
A Question of Ethics
Ronaldo sat in the study hall cramming for a 
ﬁ nal examination when two of his classmates, 
Chauncey and Doug, walked up to his table.
“Studying hard, huh?” Chauncey asked.
“Yeah. I’m stressing hard over this ﬁ nal,” said 
Ronaldo. “What about you guys?”
“Hardly studying,” said Chauncey.
Doug laughed.
Ronaldo looked at the two and saw that they both 
seemed relaxed and conﬁ dent. “Something’s 
not right with this picture,” he said. “You’re 
not going to tell me you guys are ready for 
this thing, are you?”
“Yep,” said Chauncey.
What Would You Do?
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

181
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
Summary
We develop and maintain our interpersonal relationships through communication with 
our partner. How satisﬁ ed we are with our relationships depends on how well we 
accomplish basic relationship communication tasks including: (1) providing emotional 
support and comfort, (2) managing our competing needs for privacy and disclosure, 
and (3) negotiating our differences.
We can provide emotional comfort for our partner by clarifying our supportive 
intentions, buffering face threats, using other-centered messages, reframing the situa-
tion, and giving advice.
The openness vs. closedness dialectical tension gives rise to our needs to disclose 
or maintain privacy within our relationships. When we disclose, we will be most effec-
tive when we own our feelings and describe feelings. We can also effectively disclose 
feedback by describing behavior, offering praise, and giving constructive feedback. 
When we want to maintain privacy, we can use three indirect methods: change the 
subject, mask feelings, or tell “white lies.” Alternatively, we can directly express our 
desire for privacy by establishing a boundary.
Finally, our relationship satisfaction depends on our ability to negotiate dif-
ferences with our partner. We can communicate our needs, wants, and preferences 
through  passive, aggressive, or assertive behavior and messages. The skill of asser-
tiveness is most useful in individualistic cultures. When our needs, wants, and 
preferences  conﬂ ict with those of our partner, we can adopt one of ﬁ ve con-
ﬂ ict styles:  withdrawal, accommodation, forcing, compromising, or collaborating. 
While each style may be appropriate under certain circumstances, when we want 
to maintain a good relationship and our differences are serious, collaborative 
methods are most appropriate. Whether you initiate or respond to the conﬂ ict 
initiation of your partner, several guidelines can help you collaboratively resolve 
the conﬂ ict.
Doug nodded.
“I don’t get it,” said Ronaldo. “You mean you’ve 
already gone back and studied everything 
we’ve covered this semester?”
“Hey, bright boy, you only need to study what’s 
actually on the test,” said Chauncey.
“And how would you know that when McAllister 
didn’t even give us a study sheet to help us 
know what would be on the test?” asked 
Ronaldo. He was beginning to put the puzzle 
together.
Doug placed his hand on Chauncey’s arm. “Don’t 
tell him anything else, man,” he said.
“No, it’s all right. Ronaldo’s cool,” said 
Chauncey. “He knows how to keep a secret. 
Don’t you?”
“I guess,” Ronaldo said uneasily.
“It’s like this,” said Chauncey. “Doug’s little 
brother is a super geek with computers. 
He hacked into McAllister’s system and 
downloaded a copy of the ﬁ nal exam. You 
interested in getting a head start?”
 1. Assuming that Ronaldo declines Chauncey’s 
offer to cheat, what are the remaining ethical 
issues he faces? Which would be more ethically 
compromising: letting Chauncey and Doug get 
away with cheating, or betraying their trust by 
notifying the professor about their actions?
 2. When, if ever, is it ethically acceptable to 
divulge information that you have sworn not 
to share with others?

182
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
Now that you have read Chapter 8, use your Premium 
Website for Communicate! for quick access to the 
electronic resources that accompany this text. These 
resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment and Skill Building activities 
in the body of the chapter.
Communicate! Active Online Learning
Key Terms
accommodating (177)
aggressive behavior (174)
assertive behavior (174)
buffering messages (159)
collaborating (178)
comforting (158)
compromising (178)
constructive criticism (170)
describing behavior (169)
describing feelings (167)
disclosure (161)
establishing a boundary (172)
forcing (177)
giving advice (160)
interpersonal conﬂ ict (176)
negative face needs (159)
other-centered messages (159)
passive behavior (173)
positive face needs (159)
praise (170)
privacy (161)
privacy management (161)
reframing the situation (160)
self-disclosure (161)
withdrawing (177)
Skill Learning Activities
8.1: Self-Disclosure and Popular Media (165)
Popular American culture has a reputation for 
promoting self-disclosure that probably exceeds 
that of any other culture in the world. Yet clearly, 
as the phrase “too much information” indicates, 
 inappropriate self-disclosure still happens in popular 
American culture. Of course, what may be inappro-
priate for one person can be appropriate for another. 
Find three instances of self-disclosure in popular 
media (ﬁ lm, television, radio, magazines, newspa-
pers, or the Internet) and write a paragraph on each, 
explaining why you think the particular instance of 
 self-disclosure is appropriate or inappropriate.
To help you complete this activity, you can 
use the log provided in your Premium Website for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Chapter 8.
8.2: Building Your Vocabulary of Emotions (168)
Go to your Premium Website for Communicate! 
and look for Skill Learning Activity 8.2. There you’ll 
ﬁ nd a list of words related to emotions such as 
angry and happy. For each of the following state-
ments, select three words from the list that might 
ﬁ t the statement but would represent three differ-
ent emotional reactions. As you select the words, 
try to visualize the feeling that each of the words 
arouses.
 1. I feel _______ when you call me late at night.
 2. I was _______ that she told everyone about that.
 3. He was _______ when he discovered what she 
had done.

183
 
Chapter 8  Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships 
 4. Witnessing that accident really made me feel 
_______.
 5. When my father died, I felt _______.
 6. I’m _______ about graduating.
 7. I’m _______ about losing my job.
 8. I was _______ when the doctor told me I needed 
surgery.
 9. I suppose I should understand that it was a mis-
take, but I feel _______.
 10. When you look at me like that, I feel _______.
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’.
8.3: Identifying Descriptions of Feelings (169)
Finish the in text activity. When you’re done 
with this activity, compare your answers to the 
authors’ at the Premium Website for Communicate! 
Look for them in the Skill Learning activities for 
Chapter 8.
8.4: Praising and Criticizing (171)
Think of someone you need to praise and some-
one to whom you would like to give constructive 
criticism. Prepare feedback for each person. Use the 
following steps:
 1. Begin by writing a sentence that identiﬁ es your 
general impression of each person.
 2. For each person, recall and write down the spe-
ciﬁ c behaviors, actions, and messages that led to 
your impression.
 3. Identify all the consequences that have resulted 
from the way this person has acted or spoken.
 4. If you have any advice that seems appropriate to 
give to this person, record it.
 5. Write a short feedback message for each person 
that follows the guidelines for effective praise or 
criticism.
In the next day or two, have a feedback conver-
sation with at least one of these people and use your 
preparation to help you deliver the feedback. Then 
write a paragraph describing what happened and 
how well the feedback was received. Analyze why 
you believe the feedback was received as it was.
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the worksheet provided in your Premium Website for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Chapter 8.
8.5: Passive and Aggressive Behavior(174)
Describe two incidents in the past where you 
behaved passively or aggressively. Now analyze each 
situation. What type of situation was it? Did someone 
make a request? Did you need to express a prefer-
ence or right? Was someone imposing on you? What 
type of relationship did you have with the person 
(stranger, acquaintance, friendship, business, inti-
mate, romantic)? How did you feel about how you 
behaved? If you had used assertive messages, what 
might you have said?
8.6: Assertive Messages (176)
Finish the in text activity. When you’re done 
with this activity, compare your answers to the 
authors’ at the Premium Website for Communicate! 
Look for them in the Skill Learning activities for 
Chapter 8.
8.7: Your Conﬂ ict Proﬁ le (178)
Access and print out Web Resource 8.2: Your 
Conﬂ ict Proﬁ le, which is an article called “How Do 
You Manage Conﬂ ict?” by Dawn M. Baskerville. Fill 
out and score the self-assessment questionnaire and 
graph your results. Read the description of each pat-
tern. Study these results. Do they seem to capture 
your perception of your conﬂ ict proﬁ le accurately? 
Which are your dominant styles? Are your scores 
close together, or are there one or two styles that 
seem to dominate and other styles you prefer not 
to use? How does this pattern equip you to handle 
the conﬂ icts you have experienced? Based on the 
information from this self-assessment, what do you 
need to do to become better able to handle conﬂ ict in 
your relationships? Write a paragraph in which you 
describe what you have learned about your conﬂ ict 
proﬁ le.
8.8: Jan and Ken (179)
After you’ve watched the video of Jan and Ken 
and have read the transcript of their conversation, 
answer the following questions.
 1. How does each person handle this conﬂ ict?
 2. How well does each person listen to the other?
 3. Are Jan and Ken appropriately assertive?
 4. Comment on how well each provides feedback 
and describes feelings?

184
 
Chapter 8 
Communication Skills in Interpersonal Relationships
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Chapter 8.
Web Resources
8.1: How to Say No (174)
The University of Florida’s counseling Web 
site and the Hampden-Sydney College Counseling 
Center’s Web site provide good advice about how to 
refuse requests, including unfair and unreasonable 
requests.
8.2: Your Conﬂ ict Proﬁ le (178)
Learn about conﬂ ict management and deter-
mine your conﬂ ict management style by reading the 
article “How Do You Manage Conﬂ ict?” by Dawn 
M. Baskerville.
8.3: Skills for Collaborative Conﬂ ict (179)
This article, “Resolving Conﬂ icts through 
Collaboration,” describes how to initiate conﬂ ict and 
how to respond to conﬂ icts initiated by others.

Appendix: Interviewing
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this appendix:
• What types of questions are used in interviews?
• How do you prepare for and conduct an information gathering interview?
• How do you conduct an employment interview?
• How do you present yourself successfully in a job interview?
• How do you participate in a media interview?
Terrence, the manager at Qwik In and Out, a convenience store and gas station, 
needed a new night cashier and was interviewing applicants. His ﬁ rst candidate 
arrived on time, and after taking a tour around the store, they retired to Terrence’s 
ofﬁ ce for the interview.
Terrence began, “Take a seat. What did you say your name was again?”
“Bobby. And, um, . . . I’m not sure where you want me to sit.”
“Oh, well, just sit on that box over there. Sorry for the mess, but, you know, I’ve 
had a lot to do. So, Bobby, you want to work here at Qwik In and Out?”
“Yeah.”
“Well, you understand that you will be working alone at night, right?”
“Yeah.”
“So, it says on your application that you went to Highlands High School. Is that 
right?”
“Uh-huh.”
“And now you’re a student at CSCTU?”
“Yeah.”
“Will school interfere with your work schedule?”
Jeff Cadge

186
 
Appendix  Interviewing
“Nope.”
“Is there anything else I should know?”
“No.”
“Well, I’ve got several other people to talk to, and I’ll let you know by Monday 
what I decide.”
“Okay.”
After Bobby left the store, Terrence turned to Mary, the day cashier, and said, 
“Boy, that guy was sure a loser. He just wasn’t at all prepared for the interview. I sure 
hope the next one’s better.”
What do you think about Terrence’s assessment of Bobby? What do you think about 
Terrence’s conducting of the interview? Interviewing is a powerful method of collect-
ing or presenting ﬁ rsthand information that may be unavailable elsewhere. So, it is an 
important communication skill to master. An interview is a highly structured conver-
sation in which one person asks questions and another person answers them. Effective 
interview participants prepare in advance for the interview conversation, unlike most 
interpersonal communication. By highly structured, we mean that the purpose of the 
conversation and the questions to be asked are determined ahead of time. Because 
interviews are highly structured, they can be used to make comparisons. For example, 
an interviewer may ask two potential employees the same set of questions, compare 
the answers, and hire the person whose answers ﬁ t best with the needs of the organiza-
tion. Although we all are experienced in informal conversation, few people know how 
to conduct an effective interview, and few of us have practice in effectively presenting 
ourselves and our ideas in an interview.
Because the heart of effective interviewing is developing a structured series of 
good questions, we begin by describing how to do so. Then we propose some guide-
lines for conducting both information and employment interviews. Finally, we offer 
tips about how to present yourself in an employment interview and in a media 
interview.
Structuring Interviews
The questions you develop for any interview depend on the speciﬁ c purpose of the 
interview. Deﬁ ning the purpose will give you insight into the major topic areas you 
will need to cover during the interview conversation. With these topics in mind, you 
can then structure the interview by forming and ordering a series of questions to use 
during the meeting.
The Interview Protocol
The interview protocol is the list of questions you prepare to elicit the information you 
want to know from the interviewee. To prepare the interview protocol, begin by listing 
the topic areas to be covered in the interview. Then prioritize them. Figure A.1 presents 
a list of topics for an interview with a music producer when the goal is to learn about 
how producers ﬁ nd and sign new talent.
interview
a planned, structured 
conversation in which one 
person asks questions and 
another person answers them.
interview protocol
the list of questions prepared 
to elicit relevant information 
from the interviewee.

187
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
Effective Questions
Just as the topics in a well-developed speech are structured in an outline with main 
points, subpoints, and supporting material, an effective interview protocol is structured 
into primary and secondary questions. The questions should be a mix of open-ended 
and closed questions, as well as neutral and leading questions. Let’s brieﬂ y examine 
each type.
Primary and secondary questions
Primary questions are the lead-in questions about one of the major topics of the 
interview. They are like the main points of an essay or speech. The interview with 
the music producer may have four primary questions corresponding to the topics in 
Figure A.1: (1) How do you ﬁ nd artists to consider for contract? (2) Once an artist 
has been brought to your attention, what course of action do you follow? (3) What 
criteria do you use when deciding to offer a contract? (4) Can you tell me the story 
of how you came to sign one of your most successful artists and then one about an 
unsuccessful artist?
Secondary questions are follow-up questions designed to probe the answers given 
to primary questions. You can anticipate some of the follow-up questions you may 
want to ask. For example, if in his response to your primary question about the criteria 
used in selecting artists, the music producer doesn’t mention music genre or demo-
graphic considerations, you might probe with a follow-up question. Some follow-up 
questions are not as directive and simply encourage the interviewee to continue (“And 
then?” or “Is there more?”); some probe into what the person has said (“What does 
‘regionally popular’ mean?” or “What were you thinking at the time?”); and some 
probe the feelings of the person (“How did it feel when her ﬁ rst record went platinum?” 
or “Did you expect them to become so popular?”). The major purpose of follow-up 
questions is to encourage the interviewee to expand on an answer they’ve given. 
Sometimes the interviewee may not understand how much detail you are looking for, 
and occasionally he or she may be purposely evasive.
Open and closed questions
Open questions are broad-based probes that allow the interviewee to provide perspec-
tives, ideas, information, feelings, or opinions as he or she wishes. For example, in a 
job interview you might be asked, “What one accomplishment has best prepared you 
for this job?” In a customer service interview, a representative might ask, “What seems 
to be the problem?” or “Can you tell me the steps you took when you ﬁ rst set up this 
product?” Open questions encourage the interviewee to talk and allow the interviewer 
an opportunity to listen and observe. Open questions take time to answer and give 
respondents more control, which means that interviewers can lose sight of their origi-
nal purpose if they are not careful (Tengler & Jablin, 1983).
By contrast, closed questions are narrowly focused and control what the inter-
viewee can say. They require very brief (one- or two-word) answers. Closed questions 
range from those that can be answered yes or no, such as “Have you had a course in 
marketing?” to those that require only a short answer, such as “Which of the artists 
primary questions
lead-in questions that 
introduce one of the major 
topics of the interview 
conversation.
secondary questions
follow-up questions designed 
to probe the answers given to 
primary questions.
open questions
broad-based probes that 
call on the interviewee to 
provide perspective, ideas, 
information, feelings, or 
opinions as he or she answers 
the question.
closed questions
narrowly focused questions 
that require the respondent 
to give very brief (one- or two-
word) answers
Figure A.1
Topics for interview with the 
music producer
• Finding artists
• Decision process
• Criteria
• Stories of success and failure
What types of 
questions are used 
in interviews?

188
 
Appendix  Interviewing
that you have signed have won Grammys?” By asking closed questions, interviewers 
can control the interview and obtain speciﬁ c information quickly. But the answers to 
closed questions cannot reveal the nuances behind responses, nor are they likely to 
capture the complexity of the story.
Effective interview conversations contain a combination of open and closed ques-
tions. With this in mind, look again at the opening interview. What kinds of questions 
did Terrence ask Bobby? How did this affect what happened?
Neutral and leading questions
Open and closed questions may be either neutral or leading. Neutral questions do 
not direct a person’s answer. “What can you tell me about your work with Habitat 
for Humanity?” or “What criteria do you use in deciding whether to offer an artist a 
contract?” are both neutral questions. The neutral question gives the respondent free 
rein to answer the question without any knowledge of what the interviewer thinks or 
believes.
By contrast, leading questions guide respondents toward providing certain types 
of information and imply that the interviewer prefers one answer over another. “What 
do you like about working for Habitat for Humanity?” steers respondents to describe 
only the positive aspects of their volunteer work. “Having a ‘commercial sound’ is an 
important criteria, isn’t it?” directs the answer by providing the standard for compari-
son. In most types of interviews, neutral questions are preferable because they are less 
likely to create defensiveness in the interviewee. In the opening interview, which of 
Terrence’s questions were neutral and which were leading?
Order and Time Constraints in Interview Protocols
The ﬁ nal step in creating the interview protocol is to develop a sequence for the ques-
tions. Here are a few tips about sequencing an interview:
• As in an interpersonal conversation, your initial questions should be short and 
designed to get the interviewee involved in the conversation. In general, it is bet-
ter to leave more complex or controversial questions until later, after you have 
established rapport.
• Be sure to place topics of great importance earlier in the interview, so you will 
have plenty of time for follow-up questions.
• Answering fact questions can be boring for the interviewee, so you might consider 
spreading these throughout the interview.
• Finally, it is usually easier for people to talk about things in the present than it is 
for them to remember things from the past or to hypothesize about the future, so 
begin by asking about current practices or events, then work backward or forward.
Once you have generated a complete question list, you will need to estimate how 
long it will take to ask and answer all the questions. Typically, allow four minutes for 
an open question and one minute for a closed question. If your estimate for the length 
of time needed to answer all the questions exceeds the time allotted for the interview, 
mark the less-important questions with an asterisk (*)so you can skip them if  necessary. 
You never want an interview to take longer than what you told the interviewee when 
you scheduled it. Figure A.2 shows what an interview protocol for a music producer 
might look like.
When you have ﬁ nalized your interview protocol, make a version to use during 
the interview with enough space between questions for you to take complete notes of 
the answers.
Skill Learning Activity A.1
neutral questions
questions that do not direct a 
person’s answer.
leading questions
questions that guide 
respondents toward providing 
certain types of information 
and imply that the interviewer 
prefers one answer over 
another.

189
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
Guidelines for Conducting Information 
Interviews
Interviewing is a valuable method for obtaining information on nearly any topic. 
Lawyers and police interview witnesses to establish facts; health care providers 
interview patients to obtain medical histories before making diagnoses; reporters 
interview sources for their stories; social workers and sales representatives interview 
clients; managers interview employees to receive updates on projects; and students 
interview experts to obtain information for research papers. Assuming you have 
prepared a good interview protocol, the quality of the information you receive will 
depend on choosing the right person to interview and effectively conducting the 
interview conversation.
Doing Research About Interviewees
Sometimes it is obvious who you should interview. Other times, you may have to do 
research to identify the right person or people to interview. Suppose your purpose is to 
learn about how to get a recording contract. You might begin by asking a professor in 
the music department for the name of a music production agency in your community 
or nearby. Or you could ﬁ nd the name of an agency by searching online. Once you 
ﬁ nd a Web site, you can usually ﬁ nd an “About Us” or “Contact Us” link on it, which 
will offer names, titles, e-mail addresses, and phone numbers. You should be able to 
identify someone appropriate to your purpose from this list. Once you have identiﬁ ed 
the person or people to be interviewed, you should contact them to make an appoint-
ment. Today, it is generally best to do so by both e-mail and telephone if possible. 
When you contact them, be sure to clearly state the purpose of the interview, how the 
interview information will be used, and how long you expect the interview to take. 
When setting a date and time, suggest several dates and time ranges and ask which 
would be best for them.
Figure A.2
Protocol for interview with 
music producer
1. How do you ﬁ nd artists to consider for contract?
 
a. Is this different than the methods used by other producers?
 
b. Do artists ever come to you in other ways?
2. Once an artist has been brought to your attention what course of action follows?
 
a. Do you ever just see an artist and immediately sign them?
 *b.  What’s the longest period of time you have ever “auditioned” an artist before 
signing them?
3. What criteria do you use in deciding to offer a contract?
 
a. How important are the artists’ age, sex, or ethnicity?
4.  Can you tell me the story of how you came to sign one of your most successful 
artists and then one about an unsuccessful artist?
 *a. What do you think made this artist so successful?
 
b. What single factor led to this artist’s failure?
 
c. In retrospect was it a mistake to sign this artist?
 *d.  What could you have done differently with this artist so that they would have 
been successful?

190
 
Appendix  Interviewing
You don’t want to bother your interviewee with information you can get 
elsewhere. So to prepare appropriate questions, do some research on the topic in 
advance. If, for instance, you are going to interview a music producer, you will 
want to ﬁ nd out what a music producer is and does. If your purpose is to understand 
what criteria producers use to sign an artist or group, you will want to ﬁ nd out ﬁ rst 
if general “best practices” exist. Then, you can ask the interviewee if he or she has 
additional criteria, different criteria, or even to expand on how the criteria is used 
in making judgments. Interviewees will be more likely to enjoy talking with you if 
you’re well informed. And being familiar with your subject will enable you to ask 
better questions.
Conducting an Information Interview
By applying the communication skills we have been discussing in this book, you’ll ﬁ nd 
that you can turn your careful planning into an excellent interview. To guide you in 
the process, we offer this list of best practices:
 1. Be prompt. Your interviewee deserves your respect, which you can show by show-
ing up prepared to begin at the time you have agreed to. Remember to allow 
enough time for potential trafﬁ c and parking problems.
 2. Be courteous. Begin by thanking the person for taking the time to talk to you. 
Remember, although interviewees may enjoy talking about the subject, may be 
ﬂ attered, and may wish to share knowledge, they have nothing to gain from the 
interview. So, you should let them know are grateful to them for taking the time 
to talk with you. Most of all, respect what the interviewee says regardless of what 
you may think of the answers.
 3. If you want to tape record the interview, ask permission. If the interviewee says 
no, respect his or her wishes and take careful notes.
 4. Listen carefully. For key information in the interview, paraphrase what the inter-
viewee has said to be sure that you really understand.
 5. Keep the interview moving. You do not want to rush the person, but you do want 
to get your questions answered during the allotted time.
 6. Make sure that your nonverbal reactions—your facial expressions and your 
gestures—are in keeping with the tone you want to communicate. Maintain 
good eye contact with the person. Nod to show understanding, and smile occa-
sionally to maintain the friendliness of the interview. How you look and act is 
likely to determine whether the person will warm up to you and give you an 
informative interview.
 7. Get permission to quote the interviewee. If you are going to publish the sub-
stance of the interview, be sure to get written permission for exact quotes. As a 
courtesy, offer to let the person see a copy of the article (or at least tell the person 
exactly when and where it will be published). Under some circumstances, you may 
want to show the interviewee a draft before it goes into print, if only to allow him 
or her to double-check the accuracy of direct quotations. If so, provide the draft 
well before the deadline, to give the person the opportunity to read it and to give 
you time to deal with any suggestions.
 8. Always close the interview by thanking the interviewee for his or her 
time. This closure leads to positive rapport should you need to follow up later 
and demonstrates that you realize the person gave up valuable time to visit 
with you.
Skill Learning Activity A.2
Web Resource A.1

191
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
Conducting Employment Interviews
Almost all organizations use interviewing as part of their hiring process. Employment 
interviews help organizations assess which applicants have the knowledge, experience, 
and skills to do a job and which applicants will ﬁ t into the organization’s culture best. 
Interviews allow organizations to evaluate personal characteristics (such as ambition, 
energy, and enthusiasm) and interpersonal skills (such as conversing and listening) 
that cannot be judged from a résumé.
Did you know that in the past 50 years, the average number of years a person 
 continues to work with the same organization has gone from 23 ½ years to 3 ½ years 
(Taylor & Hardy, 2004)? What this means is that we spend more time doing  employment 
interviews both as job seekers and employers than ever before.
Historically, human resource professionals or managers did most of the employ-
ment interviewing, but today organizations are relying more and more on coworkers 
as interviewers. You may have already helped conduct employment interviews, or you 
may be asked to do so in the near future.
Preparing for the Interview
As with information interviews, your preparation begins by doing research. In the case 
of employment interviewing, this means becoming familiar with the knowledge, skills, 
and aptitudes someone must have to be successful in the job. It also means studying the 
résumés, references, and, if available, the test scores for each person you will interview.
In most employment interviewing situations, you will see several candidates. You will 
want to make sure that all applicants are asked the same (or very similar) questions and 
that the questions selected allow applicants to disclose information you will need to know 
to make an informed hiring decision. To accomplish this, you will want to use a moder-
ately to highly structured interview. This means that you will prepare a general interview 
protocol to use with all interviewees. Your protocol should have questions designed to 
probe the interviewees’ knowledge, skills, and experiences that are relevant to the job.
It is also important to avoid questions that violate fair employment practice legis-
lation. The Equal Opportunity Commission has detailed guidelines that spell out what 
questions are unlawful.
Conducting the Interview
As with the information interview, a well-planned employment interview begins with 
an introduction designed to establish rapport and help the interviewee relax. What 
follows are some best-practice tips to follow when conducting employment interviews.
 1. Greet the applicant. Warmly greet the applicant by name, shake hands, and intro-
duce yourself. If you will be taking notes or recording the interview, you should 
explain that as well. If the applicant is extremely nervous, you may want to ask 
a couple of “warm-up” questions designed to put the applicant at ease. Once the 
applicant seems comfortable, you can proceed.
 2. Ask the series of prepared questions. Here is where you ask your well-planned 
questions to determine whether the applicant’s knowledge, skills, experiences, per-
sonal characteristics, and interpersonal style ﬁ t the demands of the job and the 
organizational culture. It is important to keep the interview moving. You want to 
give the applicant sufﬁ cient time to answer your questions, but don’t waste time 
by allowing the applicant to over-answer questions.
Skill Learning Activity A.3
Web Resource A.2
Web Resource A.3
How do you 
conduct an 
employment 
interview?

192
 
Appendix  Interviewing
 3. Consider your verbal and nonverbal cues. As you ask questions, strive to sound 
spontaneous and to speak in a voice that is easily heard. Be sensitive to the non-
verbal messages you are sending. Be careful that you are not leading applicants to 
answer in certain ways through your nonverbal cues.
 4. Use follow-up questions. You should probe the applicant to expand on answers 
that are vague or too brief. Remember, your goal is to understand the applicant, 
which includes his or her strengths, weaknesses, and potential ﬁ t with the position 
and your organization.
 5. Conclude with a clariﬁ cation of next steps. As the interview comes to an end, tell 
the applicant what will happen next. Explain how and approximately when the 
hiring decision will be made, as well a how the applicant will be notiﬁ ed. Unless 
you are the person with hiring authority, remain neutral about the applicant. You 
don’t want to mislead the applicant with false hope or discouragement.
Interviewing Strategies for Job Seekers
The steps involved in getting a job include preparing a résumé and cover letter, prepar-
ing for and participating in the interview, and then following up afterward.
A job seeker is anyone who is looking for a job or considering a job change. 
Some job seekers are unemployed and dedicating 100 percent of their time to ﬁ nd-
ing a job. A job seeker also could be a happily employed person who is recruited to 
apply for another position. Or a job seeker could be an employed person seeking a 
more rewarding position. All job seekers must master certain skills to be competi-
tive. As many employment experts will tell you, “As a rule, the best jobs do not go to 
the best-qualiﬁ ed individuals—they go to the best job seekers” (Graber, 2000, p. 29). 
Successful job seekers begin with a winning résumé and cover letter that helps them 
get an interview.
Applying for the Job
Because interviewing is time consuming, most organizations do not interview all the 
people who apply for a job. Rather, they use a variety of screening devices to elimi-
nate people who don’t meet their qualiﬁ cations. Chief among these are evaluating the 
qualiﬁ cations presented on the résumé and in the cover letter. The goal of your résumé 
with cover letter “is to communicate your qualiﬁ cations in writing and sell yourself to 
prospective employers” (Kaplan, 2002, p. 6).
It all begins with research
To write an effective cover letter and résumé that highlight your qualiﬁ cations for a 
particular job, you need to know something about the company and about the job 
requirements. The career center advisers at your college or university can assist you 
with your research. And you can go online to review the company’s Web site.
Write an effective cover letter
A cover letter is a short, well-written letter expressing your interest in a particular job. 
In a cover letter, it is important to focus on the employer’s needs—not on your needs. 
The letter should capture the reader’s attention, demonstrate your qualiﬁ cations, and 
request an interview. To write your cover letter, follow these simple steps:
 1. Identify the job for which you are applying.
 2. Provide a brief summary of your qualiﬁ cations. If you have special qualiﬁ ca-
tions that you cannot emphasize adequately in your résumé, you can mention 
Skill Learning Activity A.4
job seeker
anyone who is looking for 
a job or considering a job 
change
cover letter
a short, well-written letter 
expressing your interest in a 
particular job

193
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
them in your cover letter. Also, be sure to direct the potential employer to the most 
relevant and impressive parts of your résumé related to the position for which you 
are applying. Keep in mind, however, that most employers are unlikely to read a 
cover letter that is longer than two or three paragraphs.
 3. Indicate that you hope to be contacted for an interview and how you can be 
reached.
 4. Close by saying that you look forward to hearing from them soon.
Figure A.3. provides a sample of a cover letter that follows these steps.
Web Resource A.4
Figure A.3
Sample cover letter
 
2326 Tower Place
 
Cincinnati, OH 45220
 
April 8, 2009
Mr. Kyle Jones
Acme Marketing Research Associates
P.O. Box 482
Cincinnati, OH 45201
Dear Mr. Jones:
I am applying for the position of ﬁ rst-year associate at Acme Marketing Research 
Associates, which I learned about through the Ofﬁ ce of Career Counseling at 
the University of Cincinnati. I am a senior mathematics major at the University of 
Cincinnati who is interested in a career in marketing research. I am highly moti-
vated, eager to learn, and I enjoy working with all types of people. I am excited 
by the prospect of working for a ﬁ rm like Acme Marketing Research Associates, 
where I can apply my leadership and problem-solving skills in a professional 
setting.
As a mathematics major, I have developed the analytical proﬁ ciency that is neces-
sary for working through complex problems. My courses in statistics have especially 
prepared me for data analysis, and my more theoretical courses have taught me 
how to construct an effective argument. My leadership training and experiences 
have given me the ability to work effectively in groups and have taught me the 
beneﬁ ts of both individual and group problem solving. My work on the Strategic 
Planning Committee has given me an introduction to market analysis by teaching 
me skills associated with strategic planning. Finally, from my theatrical experience, 
I have gained the poise to make presentations in front of small and large groups 
alike. I believe these experiences and others have shaped who I am and have 
helped me to develop many of the skills necessary to be successful. I am interested 
in learning more and continuing to grow.
I look forward to having the opportunity for an interview with you. I have enclosed 
my résumé with my school address and phone number. Thank you for your consid-
eration. I hope to hear from you soon.
Sincerely, 
Elisa C. Vardin

194
 
Appendix  Interviewing
Prepare a professional résumé
The résumé is a brief summary of your skills and accomplishments and is your “silent 
sales representative” (Stewart & Cash, 2000, p. 274). Although there is no universal 
format for a résumé, there is some agreement on what should be included:
 1. Contact information: Your name, addresses (current and permanent), telephone 
numbers, and e-mail address. This may sound easy, but consider your contact 
information from the potential employers’ perspective. If you go by a nickname, 
think twice before using it for your contact information. Think also about your 
e-mail address. If your e-mail address is something personal like redwingsfan@
yahoo.com or hottee@aol.com, create a separate account with a more profes-
sional-sounding name to use on your résumé. Finally, since recruiters typically 
telephone to set up an interview, think about your voice-mail message. If you have 
a novelty phone message such as a recording of Ozzy Osbourne’s voice asking the 
caller to “leave a $%*# message,” replace it with a more professional-sounding 
salutation.
 2. Career objective: A one-sentence objective describing your job search goal.
 3. Employment history: A list of your paid work experiences, beginning with the 
most recent. List the name and address of the organization, your employment 
dates, your title, key duties, and noteworthy accomplishments. Try not to leave 
gaps in your work history because doing so can raise a red ﬂ ag to a potential 
employer. Rather, if you left a paid job while you worked as a stay-at-home par-
ent, say so in a brief line.
 4. Education: List the names and addresses of the schools you have attended (includ-
ing specialized military schools), the degrees or certiﬁ cates you have earned (or 
expect to earn), and the dates of attendance and graduation. Also list academic 
honors received with degrees or certiﬁ cates.
 5. Relevant professional afﬁ liations: List the names of the organizations, dates of 
membership, and ofﬁ ces you held in them.
 6. Military background (if applicable): List branch and dates of service, last rank 
held, signiﬁ cant commendations, and discharge status.
 7. Special skills: List language ﬂ uencies, technical expertise, computer expertise, 
multimedia competencies, and any other skills related to your job goal.
 8. Community service: List signiﬁ cant involvement in community service organiza-
tions, clubs, and other volunteer efforts.
 9. References: List or have available the names, addresses, e-mail addresses, and 
phone numbers of at least three people who will speak well of your ability, your 
work product, and your character.
Prepare your résumé so that it is easy to read, highlights your accomplishments, 
and is short. Good résumés are generally one (and not more than two) pages long.
Figure A.4 displays a sample résumé for a recent college graduate.
Electronic Cover Letters and Résumés
Employers like electronic résumés because they can sift through large numbers, look-
ing only for particular qualiﬁ cations or characteristics. Candidates like electronic 
résumés because they can send essentially the same materials online, saving time and 
money. In fact, many large employers now expect to receive your résumé electroni-
cally. As a result, most job search experts now recommend that you have your résumé 
available in four formats: a print version, a scannable version, a plain text format  
version, and an e-mail version. These are not separate résumés; rather, they contain 
Web Resource A.5
Skill Learning Activity A.5
Web Resource A.6
Web Resource A.7
résumé
a written summary of your skills 
and accomplishments

195
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
Elisa C. Vardin 
2326 Tower Avenue
 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45220
 
Phone: (513) 861-2497
 
E-mail: ElisVardin@UC.edu
PROFESSIONAL OBJECTIVE
To use my intellectual abilities, quantitative capabilities, communication skills, and 
proven leadership to further the mission of a high-integrity marketing research 
organization.
EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, B.A. in Mathematics, June 2009. GPA 3.36. 
Dean’s List.
National Theater Institute at the Eugene O’Neill Theater Center, Waterford, CT. Fall 
2008. Acting, Voice, Movement, Directing, and Playwriting.
WORK AND OTHER BUSINESS-RELATED EXPERIENCE
Reynolds & Dewitt, Cincinnati, OH. Summer 2008. Intern at brokerage/ investment 
management ﬁ rm. Provided administrative support. Created new databases, 
performance comparisons, and fact sheets in Excel and Word ﬁ les.
Mummers Theatre Guild, University of Cincinnati, Spring 2008–Spring 2009. Treasurer. 
Responsible for all ﬁ nancial/accounting functions for this undergraduate the-
ater community.
Breakthough, Cincinnati, Cincinnati Country Day School, Cincinnati, OH. Summer 
2007. Teacher in program for at-risk junior high students. Taught seventh-
grade mathematics, sixth- and seventh-grade speech communication, sign 
language; academic advisor; club leader. Organized ﬁ ve-hour diversity work-
shop and three-hour tension-reduction workshop for staff.
Strategic Planning Committee, Summit Country Day School, Cincinnati, OH. Fall 
2003–2004. One of two student members. Worked with the board of direc-
tors developing the ﬁ rst Strategic Plan for a 1,000-student independent school 
(pre-K through 12).
AYF International Leadership Conference, Miniwanca Conference Center, Shelby, 
MI. Summer 2002–2003. Participant in international student conference spon-
sored by American Youth Foundation.
PERSONAL
Musical theater: lifetime involvement, including leads and choreography for 
several shows. A cappella singing group, 2006–2009; director 2007–2008. Swing 
Club 2007–2009, president and teacher of student dance club. Junior high youth 
group leader, 2006. Math tutor, 2005. Aerobics instructor, 2008–2009. University of 
Cincinnati Choral Society, 2005–2009. American Sign Language instructor, Winter 
2007, 2008.
TECHNICAL SKILLS AND TRAINING: SAS, PASW, Excel, Access, Word. Univariate and 
multivariate statistics (2 courses), regression analysis (2 courses).
REFERENCES: Available on request.
Figure A.4
Sample résumé

196
 
Appendix  Interviewing
the same information but are prepared so that they can be easily received by a pro-
spective employer. Speciﬁ c information on how to develop each version is available on 
the Web.
Preparing to Be Interviewed
Once you submit your résumé/cover letter package, you need to prepare for the inter-
view you hope to get. In this section, we offer four suggestions to prepare for a job 
interview: research the organization, prepare a self-summary, practice answering 
 difﬁ cult questions, and prepare your questions.
 1. Do your homework. If you haven’t yet done extensive research on the posi-
tion and the organization, do so before you go to the interview. Be sure you 
know the organization’s products and services, areas of operation, ownership, 
and ﬁ nancial health. Nothing puts off interviewers more than applicants who 
arrive at an interview knowing little about the organization. You can easily 
begin your research by looking at the organization’s home page online. Be sure 
to look beyond the “Work for Us” or “Frequently Asked Questions” links. Find 
more speciﬁ c information such as pages that target potential investors, report 
company stock performance, and describe the organization’s mission (Slayter, 
2006). Likewise, pictures can suggest the type of organizational culture you 
can expect—formal or informal dress, collaborative or individual work spaces, 
diversity, and so on. Researching these details will help you decide whether the 
organization is right for you, as well as help you form questions to ask during 
the interview.
 2. Prepare a self-summary. You should not have to hesitate when an interviewer 
asks you why you are interested in the job. You should also be prepared to 
describe your previous accomplishments. Form these statements as personal 
stories with speciﬁ c examples that people will remember (Beshara, 2006). Robin 
Ryan (2000), one of the nation’s foremost career authorities, advises job seek-
ers to prepare a 60-second general statement they can share with a potential 
employer. She advises job seekers to identify which aspects of their training 
and experience would be most valued by a potential employer. She suggests 
making a ﬁ ve-point agenda that can (a) summarize your most relevant experi-
ence and (b) “build a solid picture emphasizing how you can do the job” (p. 10). 
Once you have your points identiﬁ ed, practice communicating them ﬂ uently in 
60 seconds or less.
 3. Prepare a list of questions about the organization and the job. The employ-
ment interview should be a two-way street, where you size up the company as 
they are sizing you up. So you will probably have a number of speciﬁ c ques-
tions to ask the interviewer. For example, “Can you describe a typical workday 
for the person in this position?” or “What is the biggest challenge in this job?” 
Make a list of your questions and take it with you to the interview. It can be 
difﬁ cult to come up with good questions on the spur of the moment, so you 
should prepare several questions in advance. One question we do not advise 
asking during the interview, however, is “How much money will I make?” 
Save salary, beneﬁ ts, and vacation-time negotiations until after you have been 
offered the job.
 4. Rehearse the interview. Several days before the interview, spend time outlining 
the job requirements and how your knowledge, skills, and experiences meet those 
requirements. Practice answering questions commonly asked in interviews, such 
as those listed in Figure A.5.
Web Resource A.8
Web Resource A.9
How do you 
present yourself 
successfully in a 
job interview?

197
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
Guidelines for Job Interviewees
The actual interview is your opportunity to sell yourself to the organization. Although 
interviews can be stressful, your preparation should give you the conﬁ dence you need 
to relax and communicate effectively. Believe it or not, the job interview is some-
what stressful for the interviewer as well. Most companies do not interview potential 
employees every day. Moreover, the majority of interviewers have little or no formal 
training in the interview process. Your goal is to make the interview a comfortable 
conversation for both of you.
Use these guidelines to help you have a successful interview.
 1. Dress appropriately. You want to make a good ﬁ rst impression, so it is important 
to be well groomed and neatly dressed. Although “casual” or “business casual” 
is common in many workplaces, some organizations still expect employees to be 
more formally dressed. If you don’t know the dress code for the organization, call 
the human resources department and ask.
 2. Arrive on time. The interview is the organization’s ﬁ rst exposure to your work 
behavior, so you don’t want to be late. Find out how long it will take you to travel 
by making a dry run at least a day before. Plan to arrive 10 or 15 minutes before 
your appointment.
 3. Bring supplies. Bring extra copies of your résumé, cover letter, and references, as 
well as the list of questions you plan to ask. You will also want to have paper and 
a pen so that you can make notes.
 4. Use active listening. When we are anxious, we sometimes have trouble listen-
ing well. Work on attending, understanding, and remembering what is asked. 
Remember that the interviewer will be aware of your nonverbal behavior, so be 
sure to make and keep eye contact as you listen.
 5. Think before answering. If you have prepared for the interview, make sure that as 
you answer the interviewer’s questions, you also tell your story. Take a moment to 
consider how your answers portray your skills and experiences.
 6. Be enthusiastic. If you come across as bored or disinterested, the interviewer is 
likely to conclude that you would be an unmotivated employee.
 7. Ask questions. As the interview is winding down, be sure to ask the questions you 
prepared that have not already been answered. You may also want to ask how well 
the interviewer believes your qualiﬁ cations match the position, and what your 
strengths are.
In the interview at the opening of this appendix, Terrence didn’t really probe 
Bobby’s answers. If Terrence had probed, his evaluation of Bobby’s competence might 
Web Resource A.10
• In what ways does your transcript reﬂ ect your ability?
• Can you give an example of how you work under pressure?
• What are your major strengths? Weaknesses?
• Can you give an example of when you were a leader and what happened?
•  Tell me a time when you tried something at work that failed. How did you respond 
to the failure?
•  Tell me about a time you had a serious conﬂ ict with a co-worker. How did you 
deal with the conﬂ ict?
• What have you done that shows your creativity?
• What kind of position are you looking for?
Figure A.5
Frequently asked interview 
questions

198
 
Appendix  Interviewing
have been different. Even though Terrence did not do his part in probing, if Bobby had 
been an effective and prepared interviewee, he could have expanded on his answers 
anyway:
TERRENCE: So, Bobby, you want to work here at Qwik In and Out?
BOBBY: Yes. I’m a marketing major at CSCTU and this job would provide great experi-
ence for me.
TERRENCE: Well, you understand that you will be working alone at night, right?
BOBBY: Yes, and that will work well with my class schedule. I used to close at my job 
at the Burger Barn so I’m used to working at night.
TERRENCE: It says on your application that you went to Highlands High School. Is that 
right?
BOBBY: Yes, I graduated with honors two years ago.
TERRENCE: And now you’re a student at CSCTU?
BOBBY: Yes. I’m in my second year, but credit-wise I’m a junior.
TERRENCE: Will school interfere with your work schedule?
BOBBY: Not at all. My program at CSCTU doesn’t offer night classes, so this is perfect 
in that regard.
TERRENCE: Is there anything else I should know?
BOBBY: Yes. I really want this job and if you decide to hire me, you will ﬁ nd that I am 
a hard worker, responsible, and enjoy serving people.
TERRENCE: Well, I’ve got several other people to talk to, and I’ll let you know by 
Monday what I decide.
BOBBY: Okay. Thanks for taking the time to interview me, and I look forward to talking 
with you again on Monday.
Conversation and Analysis
Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Skill Learning Activity 
A.6, which is a video clip of Elliott Miller’s job interview at Community Savings and 
Loan. As you watch the video, notice how well both Karen Bourne and Elliott Miller 
follow the guidelines for effective interviews. You can record your observations and 
respond to analysis questions by clicking on “Critique” in the menu bar at the top of 
the screen. When you’ve answered all the questions, click “Done” to compare your 
answers to those provided by the authors.
Elliott Miller is a second-semester senior who has double-majored in business and 
communication. Today he is interviewing with Community Savings and Loan, which is 
recruiting managerial trainees. Elliott has dressed carefully. He has on his good char-
coal suit, a light blue shirt, a conservative necktie, and wingtips. At 10 a.m. sharp, he 
knocks on the ofﬁ ce door of Karen Bourne, the person with whom he has an interview. 
She is in her mid-thirties and dressed in a conservative navy blue suit. She opens the 
door and offers her hand to Elliott.
Skill Learning Activity A.6

199
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
Conversation
BOURNE: Mr. Miller, I see you’re right on time. That’s a good start. (They shake hands.)
MILLER: Thank you for inviting me to interview today.
BOURNE: Sit down. (He sits in the chair in front of her desk; she sits behind the 
desk.) So you’re about to ﬁ nish college are you? I remember that time in my 
own life—exciting and scary!
MILLER: It’s deﬁ nitely both for me. I’m particularly excited about the job here at 
Community Savings and Loan.
BOURNE (smiles): Then there’s a mutual interest. We had a lot of applications, but 
we’re interviewing only eight of them. What I’d like to do is get a sense of your 
interests and tell you about our managerial trainee program here, so that we can 
see if the ﬁ t between us is as good as it looks on paper. Sound good to you?
MILLER: Great.
BOURNE: Let me start by telling you about a rather common problem we’ve had 
with our past managerial trainees. Many of them run into a problem—something 
they have trouble learning or doing right. That’s normal enough—we expect that. 
But a lot of trainees seem to get derailed when that happens. Instead of ﬁ nding 
another way to approach the problem, they get discouraged and give up. So I’m 
very interested in hearing what you’ve done when you’ve encountered problems 
or roadblocks in your life.
MILLER: Well, I can remember one time when I hit a real roadblock. I was taking an 
advanced chemistry course, and I just couldn’t seem to understand the material. 
I failed the ﬁ rst exam, even though I’d studied hard.
BOURNE: Good example of a problem. What did you do?
MILLER: I started going to all the tutorial sessions that grad assistants offer. That 
helped a little, but I still wasn’t getting the material the way I should. So I orga-
nized a study team and offered to pay for pizzas so that students who were on top 
of the class would have a reason to come.
BOURNE (nodding with admiration): That shows a lot of initiative and creativity. Did 
the study team work?
MILLER (smiling): It sure did. I wound up getting a B in the course, and so did several 
other members of the study team who had been in the same boat I was in early in 
the semester.
BOURNE: So you don’t mind asking for help if you need it?
MILLER: I’d rather do that than ﬂ ounder, but I’m usually pretty able to operate 
independently.
BOURNE: So you prefer working on your own to working with others?
MILLER: That depends on the situation or project. If I have all that I need to do 
something on my own, I’m comfortable working solo. But there are other cases in 
which I don’t have everything I need to do something well—maybe I don’t have 
experience in some aspect of the job or I don’t have a particular skill or I don’t 
understand some perspectives on the issues. In cases like that, I think teams are 
more effective than individuals.
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

200
 
Appendix  Interviewing
BOURNE: Good. Banking management requires the ability to be self-initiating and 
also the ability to work with others. Let me ask another question. As I was looking 
over your transcript and résumé, I noticed that you changed your major several times. 
Does that indicate you have difﬁ culty making a commitment and sticking with it?
MILLER: I guess you could think that, but it really shows that I was willing to 
explore a lot of alternatives before making a ﬁ rm commitment.
BOURNE: But don’t you think that you wasted a lot of time and courses getting to 
that commitment?
MILLER: I don’t think so. I learned something in all of the courses I took. For 
instance, when I was a philosophy major, I learned about logical thinking and 
careful reasoning. That’s going to be useful to me in management. When I was 
majoring in English, I learned how to write well and how to read others’ writing 
critically. That’s going to serve me well in management too.
BOURNE: So what led you to your ﬁ nal decision to double-major in business and 
 communication? That’s kind of an unusual combination.
MILLER: It seems a very natural one to me. I wanted to learn about business because 
I want to be a manager in an organization. I need to know how organizations 
work, and I need to understand different management philosophies and styles. At 
the same time, managers work with people, and that means I have to have strong 
communication skills.
Following Up After the Interview
Once the interview is over, you can set yourself apart from the other applicants by 
following these important steps:
 1. Write a thank-you note. It is appropriate to write a short note thanking the inter-
viewer for the experience and again expressing your interest in the job.
 2. Self-assess your performance. Take time to critique your performance. How well 
did you do? What can you do better next time?
 3. Contact the interviewer for feedback. If you don’t get the job, you might call the 
interviewer and ask for feedback. Be sure to be polite and to indicate that you are 
only calling to get some help on your interviewing skills. Actively listen to the 
feedback, using questions and paraphrases to clarify what is being said. Be sure to 
thank the interviewer for helping you.
To practice what you’ve learned about job interviews in this appendix, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! to complete Skill Learning Activity A.7: Mock 
Interview. In this activity, you will work with a partner to prepare and participate in 
two interviews, one in which you will use your partner’s job advertisement, résumé, 
and cover letter to prepare and interview your partner for a job, and the other in which 
your partner will use the material you supply to interview you for a job.
Strategies for Interviews with the Media
Today we live in a media-saturated environment where any individual may be approached 
by a newsperson and asked to participate in an on-air interview. For example, we have 
a friend who became the object of media interest when the city council in his town 
refused to grant him a zoning variance so he could complete building a new home on 
Web Resource A.11
Skill Learning Activity A.7
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

201
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
his property. In the course of three days, his story became front-page news in his town, 
and reports about his situation made the local radio and TV news shows. You might 
be asked for an interview at public meetings, at the mall, or within the context of your 
work or community service. For example, you may be asked to share your knowledge of 
your organization’s programs, events, or activities. Because media interviews are likely 
to be edited in some way before they are aired and because they reach a wide audience, 
there are speciﬁ c strategies you should use to prepare for and participate in them.
Before the Interview
The members of the media work under very tight deadlines, so it is crucial that you 
respond immediately to media requests for an interview. When people are insensitive to 
media deadlines, they can end up looking like they have purposefully evaded the interview 
and have something to hide. When you speak with the media representative, clarify what 
the focus of the interview will be and how the information will be presented. At times, 
the entire interview will be presented; however, it is more likely that the information from 
the interview will be edited or paraphrased and not all of your comments will be reported.
As you prepare for the interview, identify three or four talking points, that is, the 
central ideas you want to present as you answer the questions during a media inter-
view. For example, before our friend was interviewed by the local TV news anchor, 
he knew that he wanted to emphasize that he was a victim of others’ mistakes: (1) he 
had hired a licensed architect to draw the plans; (2) the city inspectors had repeatedly 
approved earlier stages of the building process; (3) the city planning commission had 
voted unanimously to grant him the variance; and (4) he would be out half the cost of 
the house if he were forced to tear it down and rebuild. Consider how you will tailor 
your information to the speciﬁ c audience in terms they can understand. Consider how 
you will respond to tough or hostile questions.
During the Interview
Media interviews call for a combination of interviewing, nonverbal communication, 
and public speaking skills (Boyd, 1999). There are many strategies to be followed dur-
ing a media interview:
 1. Present appropriate nonverbal cues. Inexperienced interviewees can often look 
or sound tense or stiff. By standing up during a phone interview, your voice 
will sound more energetic and authoritative. With on-camera interviews, when 
checking your notes, move your eyes but not your head. Keep a small smile when 
listening. Look at the interviewer, not into the camera.
 2. Make clear and concise statements. It is important to speak slowly, to articulate 
clearly, and to avoid technical terms or jargon. Remember that the audience is not 
familiar with your area of expertise.
 3. Realize that you are always “on the record.” Say nothing as an aside or conﬁ -
dentially to a reporter. Do not say anything that you would not want quoted. If 
you do not know an answer, do not speculate, but indicate that the question is 
outside of your area of expertise. Do not ramble during the interviewer’s periods 
of silence. Do not allow yourself to be rushed into an answer.
 4. Learn how to bridge. Media consultant Joanna Krotz (2006) deﬁ nes a bridge as 
a transition you create so that you can move from the interviewer’s subject to the 
message you want to communicate. To do this, you ﬁ rst answer the direct question 
and then use a phrase such as “What’s important to remember, however . . .,” “Let 
me put that in perspective . . .,” or “It’s also important to know . . .”
talking points
the three or four central ideas 
you will present as you answer 
the questions that are asked 
during a media interview.
bridge
a transition you create in 
a media interview so that 
you can move from the 
interviewer’s subject to 
the message you want to 
communicate.
How do you 
participate in a 
media interview?

202
 
Appendix  Interviewing
With careful preparation, speciﬁ c communication strategies during the interview, and 
practice, one can skillfully deliver a message in any media interview format.
Summary
Interviewing can be a productive way to obtain information from an expert for a 
paper, an article, or a speech. The key to effective interviewing begins with a highly 
structured protocol identifying a series of good questions. Your protocol should use a 
variety of question types. Primary questions stimulate response; follow-up questions 
ask for additional information. Open questions allow for ﬂ exible responses; closed 
questions require very brief answers. Neutral questions allow the respondent free 
choice; leading questions require the person to answer in a particular way. When you 
are interviewing for information, you will want to deﬁ ne the purpose, select the best 
person to interview, develop a protocol, and conduct the interview according to the 
protocol. 
When you are interviewing a prospective applicant for a job, become familiar with 
the data contained in the interviewee’s application form, résumé, letters of recommen-
dation, and test scores, if available. Be careful how you present yourself, do not waste 
time, do not ask questions that violate fair employment practice legislation, and give 
the applicant an opportunity to ask questions. At the end of the interview, explain to 
the applicant what will happen next in the process.
If you are a job seeker, your ﬁ rst goal is to submit a résumé and cover letter that 
will get you an interview. Begin by taking the time to learn about the company and 
prepare your cover letter and résumé to highlight strengths you have that match the 
company’s needs. Electronic cover letters and résumés have become popular and need 
special preparation. For the interview itself, you should dress appropriately, be prompt, 
be alert, look directly at the interviewer, give yourself time to think before answering 
difﬁ cult questions, ask intelligent questions about the company and the job, and show 
enthusiasm for the position.
If you are asked for an interview from the media, prepare by understanding the 
focus and format of the interview and considering the few main points you want to 
convey. During the media interview, you should present appropriate nonverbal cues, 
make clear and concise statements, realize everything you say is on the record, and 
learn to use bridges as transitions to your message.
Skill Learning Activity A.8
A Question of Ethics
Ken shifted in his chair as Ms. Goldsmith, his 
interviewer, looked over his résumé.
“I have to tell you that you have consider-
ably more experience than the average applicant 
we usually get coming straight out of college,” 
Ms. Goldsmith said. “Let’s see, you’ve managed 
a hardware store, been a bookkeeper for a chain 
of three restaurants, and were the number-one 
salesman for six straight months at a cell phone 
store.”
“That’s right,” Ken said. “My family has 
always stressed the value of hard work, so I have 
worked a full-time job every summer since I 
What Would You Do?

203
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
entered junior high school, right through my last 
year of college. During the school year, I usually 
worked four to six hours a day after class.”
“Very impressive,” Ms. Goldsmith said. “And 
still you managed to get excellent grades and do 
a considerable amount of volunteer work in your 
spare time. What’s your secret?”
“Secret?” said Ken nervously. “There’s no 
secret—just a lot of hard work.”
“Yes, I see that,” said Ms. Goldsmith. “What I 
mean is that there are only 24 hours in a day and 
you obviously had a lot on your plate each day, 
especially for someone so young. How did you 
manage to do it?”
Ken thought for a moment before answer-
ing. “I only need ﬁ ve hours of sleep a day.” He 
could feel Ms. Goldsmith’s eyes scrutinizing his 
face. He hadn’t exactly lied on his résumé—just 
exaggerated a little bit. He had, in fact, helped his 
father run the family hardware store for a number 
of years. He had helped his aunt, from time to 
time, keep track of her restaurant’s receipts. He 
had also spent one summer selling cell phones for 
his cousin. Of course, his family always required 
him to do his schoolwork ﬁ rst before they let him 
help at the store, so Ken often had little time to 
help at all, but there was no reason Ms. Goldsmith 
needed to know that.
“And you can provide references for these 
jobs?” Ms. Goldsmith asked.
“I have them with me right here,” said Ken, 
pulling a typed page from his briefcase and hand-
ing it across the desk.
 1. Are the exaggerated claims Ken made in his 
résumé ethical? Do the ethics of his actions 
change at all if he has references (family 
members) who will vouch for his claims?
 2. Many people justify exaggerating or even 
lying on their résumés by saying that every-
body does it and then rationalizing that, if 
they don’t do it too, they will be handicap-
ping their chances to get a good job. If the 
consequences of acting  ethically diminish 
your economic prospects, are you justiﬁ ed in 
bending the rules? Explain your answer. If 
you think bending the rules is acceptable in 
such circumstances, how far can you bend 
them before you cross the line into unaccept-
able behavior? 
Now that you have read Appendix: Interviewing, use 
your Premium Website for Communicate! for quick 
access to the electronic resources that accompany 
this text. These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore commu-
nication concepts online (Web Resources), develop 
your speech outlines (Speech Builder Express 3.0), 
watch and critique videos of communication situ-
ations and sample speeches (Interactive Video 
Activities), upload your speech videos for peer 
reviewing and critique other students’ speeches 
(Speech Studio online speech review tool), and 
download chapter review so you can study when 
and where you’d like (Audio Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, and 
Web Resources are also featured on the following pages.
Communicate! Active Online Learning

204
 
Appendix  Interviewing
Skill Learning Activities
A.1: Open and Closed Questions (188)
Indicate which of the following questions are 
open and which are closed. If the question is open, 
write a closed question seeking similar information; if 
the question is closed, write an open question. Make 
sure your questions are neutral rather than leading.
 1. What leads you to believe that Sheldon will be 
appointed?
 2. How many steps are there in getting a book into 
print?
 3. Will you try out for the Shakespeare play this 
year?
 4. When are you getting married?
 5. Have you participated in the Garden Project?
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Appendix: Interviewing.
A.2: Information Interviews (190)
Select a televised interview (for example, a news 
program, infomercial, or congressional hearing) for 
analysis. You may want to videotape it so that you 
can watch it several times. Count the number of open, 
closed, neutral, leading, and follow-up questions. 
After viewing the interview, analyze it. Was there 
a good balance of questions? Did the interviewer 
ask appropriate follow-up questions? What was the 
apparent goal of the interview? Was it reached? What 
grade would you give the interviewer? Why? What 
were the interviewer’s strengths? Weaknesses? When 
you have ﬁ nished analyzing the interview, write a 
paragraph discussing your analysis.
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the tally sheet provided in your Premium Website for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Appendix: Interviewing.
A.3: Interviewing an Interviewer (192)
Make an appointment to interview a human 
resource manager who is responsible for employment 
interviewing. Prepare an interview protocol that 
probes this manager about his or her interviewing 
practices. After the interview, compare this manager’s 
practice to the text discussion. Submit your protocol, 
interview notes, and a short essay that describes what 
you have learned to your instructor.
A.4: Thinking Like an Interviewer (192)
Read the sample résumé shown in Figure A.4 or 
ﬁ nd another sample résumé more to your interest online 
by using your Premium Website for Communicate! to 
access Web Resource A.10: Sample Résumés Online. 
Analyze the résumé based on the position for which it 
was written and on the candidate’s education, experi-
ence, and skills. Write 10 primary questions you would 
ask the job candidate if you were going to interview 
him or her for the position.
A.5: Résumé and Cover Letter (194)
Read the help wanted ads in your local news-
paper or online until you locate a job you would 
enjoy. Write a résumé and cover letter applying for 
this position. To link you to an online résumé service 
to draft and print your résumé, access Web Resource 
A.7: Résumé Builder. When you have completed 
your résumé and cover letter, if requested, submit 
them to your instructor.
A.6: Elliott Miller’s Interview (198)
After you’ve watched the video of Elliott Miller 
and Karen Bourne and have read the transcript of 
their conversation, answer the following questions.
 1. Did Ms. Bourne provide a good opening for the 
interview?
 2. How effectively do you think Mr. Miller handled 
the tough questions that Ms. Bourne asked?
Key Terms
bridge (201)
closed questions (187)
cover letter (192)
interview (186)
interview protocol (186)
job seeker (192)
leading questions (188)
neutral questions (188)
open questions (187)
primary questions (187)
résumé (194)
secondary questions (187)
talking points (201)

205
 
Appendix  Interviewing 
 3. Did Mr. Miller seem well prepared for the 
interview?
 4. Identify leading questions asked by Ms. Bourne 
and evaluate how Mr. Miller responded to them.
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Appendix: Interviewing.
A.7: Mock Interview (200)
Work with a partner to prepare and participate 
in two interviews, one in which you will use your 
partner’s ad, résumé, and cover letter to prepare and 
interview your partner for a job, and the other in 
which your partner will use the material you supply 
to interview you for a job. (Use an ad for a job that 
you’d consider applying for right now.)
 1. You are the interviewer
  a. For what job did you interview your partner?
  b.  List your interview questions for your 
partner.
 2. You are the interviewee
  a.  For what job did your partner interview you?
  b.  List the answers you provided during your 
interview.
A.8: Critiquing a Media Interview (202)
Select a TV interview program like The NewsHour 
with Jim Lehrer, Larry King Live, or some other pro-
gram whose focus is a lengthy interview with an 
expert, media personality, or political leader. Tape 
the interview so that you can replay it during your 
analysis. Make a list of the questions the interviewer 
asked and analyze them to determine which were the 
primary, secondary, and follow-up questions. What 
was the mix of open and closed questions? How 
did this mix affect the tone of the interview and 
the amount and kind of information offered by the 
interviewee? What percentage of the questions were 
neutral versus leading? Were the leading questions 
confrontational or cooperative? How did these ques-
tions affect the tone of the interview and the amount 
or kind of information offered by the interviewee? 
What do you think the purpose of this interview was? 
How effective was the interviewer in accomplishing 
this purpose? What one thing might the interviewer 
have done better?
Web Resources
A.1: E-mail Interviews (190)
Visit Writing-World.com to read useful tips for 
conducting electronic interviews with e-mail.
A.2: 150 Typical Job Interview Questions (191)
Prepare for a job interview by visiting 
QuintCareers.com, which provides a list of questions 
typically asked in interviews.
A.3: Discrimination Laws and Interviewing (191)
Salary.com provides helpful information about 
illegal interview questions, including a list of sample 
illegal questions and how you might deal with these 
types of questions during an interview.
A.4: Ten Cover Letter Don’ts (193)
This page at Monster.com features a list of sev-
eral cover letter blunders to avoid.
A.5: What Is Your Objective? (194)
Visit this page at Money-Zine.com for help in for-
mulating a career objective statement for your résumé.
A.6: Résumé Pet Peeves (194)
The ResumeDoctor.com Resource Center features 
this article about how to avoid the top twenty résumé 
pet peeves identiﬁ ed by 2,500 recruiters. (Click on 
the link “Recruiter Resume ‘Pet Peeve’ Survey Results 
and Articles.”)
A.7: Sample Résumés Online (197)
This site provides several links to sample résumés. 
Look under the headings “Occupation” and “Problem 
Solved” for links to samples that pertain to speciﬁ c 
job types and common résumé-writing challenges.
A.8: Résumé Builder (194)
Visit Buildaresume.com for help in drafting your 
résumé online. This free service allows you to prepare 
and edit your résumé and print it from any computer 
anytime.
A.9: Internet-Ready Résumés (196)
RileyGuide.com provides advice about how to 
prepare your résumé for e-mailing or posting on the 
Internet.

206
 
Appendix  Interviewing
A.10: Virtual Interview (196)
Visit this page at Monster.com to sharpen your 
interviewing skills, answer sample questions, and 
receive help to improve your answers. (Click on the 
links under the heading “Virtual Interviews.”)
A.11: Notable Notes (200)
Visit this page at About.com for links to sample 
thank-you notes to follow up on an interview.
2
part
Interpersonal Communication from Chapters 6 through 8
What kind of an interpersonal communicator are you? This analysis looks at speciﬁ c 
behaviors that are characteristic of effective interpersonal communicators. On the line 
provided for each statement, indicate the response that best captures your behavior: 
1, almost always; 2, often; 3, occasionally; 4, rarely; 5, never.
____ 
When I communicate with a person from another culture, I make an effort to 
keep an open mind and accept ambiguity in our interactions. (Ch. 6)
____ 
When engaging in intercultural communication, I listen carefully to what the 
other person is saying and adjust my communication to that person and our 
situation. (Ch. 6)
____ 
I make an effort to spend time with my friends, I share my feelings with them, 
and I provide them with comfort and support when they are feeling vulner-
able. (Ch. 7)
____ 
I maintain intimacy in my closest relationships by being dependable and re-
sponsive. (Ch. 7)
____ 
I describe objectively to others my negative feelings about their behavior to-
ward me without withholding or blowing up. (Ch. 8)
____ 
I am quick to praise people for doing things well. (Ch. 8)
____ 
I criticize people for their mistakes only when they ask for criticism. (Ch. 8)
____ 
When I ﬁ nd myself in conﬂ ict with another person, I am able to discuss the 
issue openly without withdrawing or appearing competitive or aggressive. 
(Ch. 8)
Based on your responses, select the interpersonal communication behavior that you would 
most like to change. Write a communication improvement plan similar to the sample goal 
statement in Chapter 1 (page 000). If you would like veriﬁ cation of your self-review before 
you write a contract, have a friend or a co-worker complete this same analysis for you.
You can complete this Self-Review online and, if requested, e-mail it to your instructor. Go to 
your Premium Website for Communicate! to access Part II Self-Review.
Self Review
Interpersonal Communication

Communicating in Groups
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What makes a group different from a mere assembly of people?
• What are the characteristics of healthy groups?
• How do groups develop?
• What are some types of groups we might participate in?
• How can you evaluate group dynamics?
“Hi Mom, I’m just calling to tell you that I’m not going to make it home for dinner 
again tonight. Jennifer was supposed to close tonight and she just called in sick. 
So Bob asked me if I would close—I’m the only one in the store right now who 
knows how to do it.”
“I can’t believe it! Tonight is Sarah’s last night at home before she deploys, 
and you know that Grandma and Grandpa are coming over for a big family 
dinner. What’s wrong with you, Darla? Two nights ago you weren’t home because 
you were playing softball; last night you begged off, claiming you had a group 
meeting for some class project; and now you’re going to miss your sister’s going-
away dinner? I just don’t understand you. Isn’t your family important to you at 
all?  I mean, where do we fall in your priorities? It seems to me that you have 
a lot  of commitments to other people and that we are always last.”
“But Mom, . . . .”
9
Randy Faris/Flirt/CORBIS

208
 
Chapter 9 
Communicating in Groups
Like Darla in the opening scenario, you probably belong to many formal and informal 
groups. Each group has different purposes and different expectations of you. But one thing 
all groups have in common is that their effectiveness depends on members’ communica-
tion. In fact, year after year, surveys conducted by the National Association of Colleges 
and Employers report “the ability to work well in groups” is one of the top ten skills sought 
in college graduates. Although students are often asked to do group projects, very few 
graduate from college with any formal training in how to participate effectively in groups.
In this chapter and the one that follows, we will help you understand how groups 
function and how you can communicate most effectively in them. We begin by 
explaining the characteristics of groups that differentiate them from other collections 
of people. Next, we describe the stages of development that groups follow over the 
course of their existence. Then we identify different types of groups and the communi-
cation challenges you might face in each one. We end this chapter by discussing how 
you can evaluate the effectiveness of groups and group members.
Characteristics of Healthy Groups
Take a moment to think about the groups of people you interact with consistently. 
Examples may range from student clubs to groups of friends you hang out with on 
weekends to family groups you interact with on special occasions to study groups to 
online chat rooms or interest groups on social networking sites. What makes each of 
these a group rather than a mere assembly of people? Scholars generally agree that a 
group is a collection of three or more people who interact and attempt to inﬂ uence 
The Dark Side of Online 
Social Groups
Imogen D’Arcy was only 13 when she hanged 
herself in her bathroom because, despite being 
described as ﬁ t and well-liked, she felt fat and 
ugly (Stokes, 2008). Laura Dunnegan developed 
an eating disorder at 7. Sixteen years later she sees 
her disorder as a “lifestyle option” rather than as 
a disease that may kill her (Croucher, 2008). What 
do these girls have in common? Both regularly 
visited Websites where they received encourage-
ment to pursue their distorted self-images.
In this chapter, we focus on healthy groups, 
but the Internet provides unprecedented opportu-
nity for groups with unhealthy goals to ﬂ ourish. 
Extreme examples include Websites that offer tips 
about how to commit suicide quickly and pain-
lessly. Most consider these Websites to be dangerous 
and unethical, but some have argued that they can 
help people reach out and connect. “Ama Terasu,” 
the 24-year-old creator of one such site, explains, 
“I think it has saved my life, because it has enabled 
me to open up about things online.” (Harding 2004)
There is similar debate about online “pro-
ana” (promoting anorexia nervosa) communities, 
Pop Comm!
What makes a 
group different from 
a mere assembly of 
people?
Kangah/iStockphoto

209
 
Chapter 9  Communicating in Groups 
each other in order to accomplish a common purpose. In a social group that purpose 
may be to have a good time, in a study group to get a good grade, in a work group to 
help an organization accomplish a task, and in a family to ensure that members survive 
and thrive. Group communication—all the verbal and nonverbal messages shared with 
or among members of the group—is what makes our participation in these different 
groups a positive or negative experience. Healthy groups are characterized by ethical 
goals, interdependence, cohesiveness, productive norms, accountability, and synergy.
Healthy Groups Have Ethical Goals
At times, the goals of a group may not be ethical either because the goal itself is 
unethical or because fulﬁ lling the goal requires some or all group members to behave 
in ways that are not in their own best interest. For example, recent news reports have 
been ﬁ lled with stories about investment ﬁ rms built on Ponzi schemes (fraudulent 
investments) that have ﬁ nancially ruined clients who trusted them. Likewise, some 
children live in divorced families where the parents’ goal seems to be to use the chil-
dren as foils to harm each other. Criminal gangs are highly effective groups who may 
make lots of money but do so at the expense of society at large and who risk the lives 
of members to accomplish their illicit goals. In this chapter’s Pop Comm! feature, “The 
Dark Side of Online Social Groups,” you can read about online groups with unethical 
goals. By contrast, healthy groups have goals that beneﬁ t the members and the larger 
society. Fulﬁ lling these goals may require sacriﬁ ce and hard work, but accomplishing 
them does not depend on any illegal or immoral behavior.
healthy group
a group characterized 
by ethical goals, 
interdependence, 
cohesiveness, productive 
norms, accountability, and 
synergy.
What are the 
characteristics of 
healthy groups?
group
a collection of three or more 
people who interact and 
attempt to inﬂ uence each 
other in order to accomplish a 
common purpose
group communication
all the verbal and nonverbal 
messages shared with or 
among members of the group
sites where people with eating disorders can 
ﬁ nd support and share their experiences with-
out judgment. These are the types of sites D’Arcy 
visited before she died and that Dunnegan fre-
quently visits. Although initially it may seem 
these sites provide a positive environment, they 
often encourage people to develop and continue 
dangerous and pathological behaviors. For exam-
ple, pro-ana sites often feature advice on how to 
starve effectively.
C. J. Pascoe (2008), a sociologist who stud-
ies teenagers and digital media at the University 
of California, Berkeley, thinks pro-ana Websites 
present a danger primarily because, before the 
Internet, anorexics had to check into a psychiat-
ric hospital to ﬁ nd others like themselves. Now, 
with pro-ana Websites, they can ﬁ nd community 
without having to seek treatment. But creators of 
pro-ana groups argue they are ﬁ ghting isolation 
and supporting others, and some pro-ana groups 
do legitimately focus on recovery (Peng, 2008). 
In the British Journal of Social Psychology, 
David Giles (2006) suggests that pro-ana 
Websites—and other sites that promote unhealthy 
behaviors such as unsafe sex, smoking, and self-
harm—may have no ofﬂ ine equivalent, saying, 
“The Internet offers a perfect sanctuary for people 
with interests that are unacceptable to the general 
public. By serving as a counter-culture to ofﬁ cial 
discourse around health and illness, the Web may 
serve to undermine the professionals so that more 
and more people ﬁ nd ways of opting out of con-
ventional society (e.g., health care) if they can 
locate supportive communities online (p. 2).”
On the other hand, Pascoe (2008) believes 
that the subversion of mainstream society avail-
able online is not always a bad thing. An example 
is the vast online community of gay, lesbian, 
bisexual, and transgendered (GLBT) teenagers. 
These teens, who can have a difﬁ cult time ﬁ nding 
friends or dates in their physical communities, 
can easily ﬁ nd other GLBT teenagers online. “It’s 
a double-edged sword when it comes to subcul-
tures,” says Pascoe. “For better or for worse, kids 
who are marginalized can ﬁ nd community online 
(p. 2).”

210
 
Chapter 9 
Communicating in Groups
Healthy Groups Are Interdependent
In interdependent groups, members rely on each other’s skills and knowledge to accom-
plish the group goals. One concrete way to understand interdependence is to observe a 
musical group. Consider, for instance, a symphony orchestra. One reason the music we 
hear is so beautiful has to do with the fact that the violins, violas, cellos, and basses 
not only sound different but are each performing a different part made up of differing 
notes. If any of the musicians did not do their part well, we would hear it. Likewise, in 
any group, if one person doesn’t choose to blend but instead tries to do all the “work,” 
or if everyone in a group does the same piece of “work” while other pieces are left 
unattended, that group is not interdependent and is also not as effective as it could be.
Healthy Groups Are Cohesive
Cohesiveness is the force that brings group members closer together (Eisenberg, 2007). 
In a highly cohesive group, members genuinely like and respect each other and work 
cooperatively to reach the group’s goals (Evans & Dion, 1991). Because cohesiveness 
is such an important characteristic of healthy groups, many newly formed groups will 
engage in team-building activities designed to build rapport and develop trust among 
members (Midura & Glover, 2005). Research suggests that ﬁ ve factors help foster 
cohesiveness in groups (Balgopal, Ephross, & Vassil, 1986; Widmer & Williams, 1991; 
Wilson, 2005). First, a group develops cohesiveness when members are attracted to its 
purpose. Daniel, for example, joined the local Lions Club because he was attracted to 
group’s goal of community service. Second, groups are generally more cohesive when 
membership in them is voluntary. If Daniel had joined the Lions Club because he felt 
obligated to do so, cohesiveness would have suffered. Third, members feel free to 
express their honest opinions even when they disagree with others. Fourth, members 
support, encourage, and provide positive feedback to each other. Finally, members per-
ceive the group to be achieving its goals and celebrate their accomplishments. When 
the Lions Club surpassed their previous fundraising record for the annual Journey for 
Sight 5K Community Run, they celebrated the accomplishment with a picnic in the 
park, which fostered cohesiveness.
Healthy Groups Develop and Abide by Productive Norms
Norms are expectations about the way group mem-
bers are to behave while in the group. Healthy groups 
develop norms that help them achieve their goals 
(Shimanoff, 1992) and foster cohesiveness (Shaw, 
1981). Norms can be developed through formal dis-
cussions or informal group processes (Johnson & 
Johnson, 2003, p. 27). Some groups choose to for-
mulate explicit ground rules, prescribed behaviors 
designed to help the group meet its goals and con-
duct its conversations. These may include sticking 
to the agenda, refraining from interrupting others, 
making brief comments rather than lengthy mono-
logues, expecting everyone to participate, focusing 
on issues rather than personalities, and sharing 
decision making. Did your family have formal rules 
about going out on school nights or curfews? These 
are also examples of explicit ground rules.
interdependent group
group in which members rely 
on each other’s skills and 
knowledge to accomplish the 
group goals
cohesiveness
force that brings group 
members closer together.
team-building activities
activities designed to build 
rapport and develop trust 
among members.
norms
expectations for the way 
group members will behave 
while in the group.
ground rules
prescribed behaviors 
designed to help the group 
meet its goals and conduct its 
conversations.
Skill Learning Activity 9.1
Most clubs follow a set of 
norms to keep the meetings 
on track. What norms might 
this group follow and why?
Spencer Grant/PhotoEdit 

211
 
Chapter 9  Communicating in Groups 
In most groups, however, norms evolve informally. When we join a new group, we 
act in ways that were considered appropriate in the groups we participated in previ-
ously. When members of our new group respond positively to our actions, an informal 
norm is established. For example, suppose Daniel and two others show up late for a 
Lions Club meeting. If the latecomers are greeted with disapproving glares, then Daniel 
and the others will learn that this group has an on-time norm. A group may never 
actually discuss informal norms, but all veteran group members understand what they 
are, behave in line with them, and educate new members about them.
We sometimes ﬁ nd ourselves struggling to act appropriately in different groups 
we belong to because each seems to abide by different norms. This can be especially 
true for people who move from one country to another, as was the case for Dr. Mina 
Tsay, an assistant professor at Boston University who emigrated from Taiwan to the 
United States and maintains strong ties with groups in both cultures. Read her story in 
the Diverse Voices feature.
Web Resource 9.1
Removed due to e-rights. Please refer to a print copy for details

212
 
Chapter 9 
Communicating in Groups
Healthy Groups Are Accountable
Accountability means all group members are held responsible for adhering to the 
group norms and working toward the group’s goal. This means a group will sanction 
a member who violates a group norm. The severity of the sanction depends on the 
importance of the norm that was violated, the extent of the violation, and the status 
of the person who violated the norm. Violating a norm that is central to a group’s 
performance or cohesiveness will generally receive a harsher sanction than violating 
a norm that is less central. Minor violations or violations by a newcomer generally 
receive more lenient sanctions. As a new Lions Club member, for example, Daniel’s 
sanction was merely a stern look from the others. Group members who have achieved 
higher status in the group also tend to receive more lenient sanctions or escape sanc-
tioning altogether.
Being accountable can also mean changing counterproductive norms. For exam-
ple, suppose a few folks tell jokes, stories, and generally ignore attempts by others to 
begin more serious discussion about community service issues at the Lions Club meet-
ings. If the group does not effectively sanction this behavior, then it could become 
a counterproductive group norm. As a result, work toward the group’s goals could 
accountability
group members being held 
responsible for adhering to 
the group norms and working 
toward the group’s goal.
Removed due to e-rights. Please refer to a print copy for details

213
 
Chapter 9  Communicating in Groups 
be delayed, set aside, or perhaps even forgotten. If 
counterproductive behavior continues for several 
meetings and becomes a norm, it will be very dif-
ﬁ cult (though not impossible) to change.
What can a group member do to try to change a 
norm? You can help your group change a counter-
productive norm by (1) observing the norm and its 
outcome, (2) describing the results of the norm to the 
group, and (3) soliciting opinions of other members 
of the group (Renz & Greg, 2000, p. 52). For instance, 
Daniel observed that every Lions Club meeting began 
15–20 minutes late and that this was making it neces-
sary to schedule additional meetings. When members 
became frustrated at holding extra meetings, he could 
bring up his observations and the consequences and 
ask the group for their reaction.
Healthy Groups Are Synergetic
The old saying “two heads are better than one” captures an important characteristic 
of healthy groups. Synergy is the multiplying force of a group of individuals work-
ing together that results in a combined effort greater than any of the parts (Henman, 
2003). For instance, the sports record books are ﬁ lled with “no-name teams” that 
have won major championships over opponents with more talented players. A healthy 
group can develop a collective intelligence and a dynamic energy that translate into 
an outcome that exceeds what even a highly talented individual could produce. When 
a group has ethical goals and is interdependent, cohesive, and held accountable to 
productive norms, the group is well on its way toward achieving synergy.
Stages of Group Development
Just as interpersonal relationships go through identiﬁ able life cycles, so too do groups 
move through stages of development. Although numerous models have been proposed 
to describe the stages of group development, psychologist, Bruce Tuckman’s (1965) 
model has been widely accepted because it identiﬁ es central issues facing a group at 
each stage. In this section, we describe each of these stages and the nature of com-
munication during each one.
Forming
Forming is the initial stage of group development, and it is characterized by orienta-
tion, testing, and dependence. Members try to understand precisely what the goal is, 
what role they will play in reaching the goal, and what the other group members are 
like. As the goal becomes clearer, members assess how their skills, talents, and abilities 
might be used in accomplishing it. Members also begin to develop relationships and 
to test what behaviors will be acceptable in the group. Group interactions are likely to 
be polite and tentative as members become acquainted with each other and ﬁ nd their 
place in the group. Any real disagreements between people often remain unacknowl-
edged during this stage because members want to be perceived as ﬂ exible and likable. 
During the forming stage, you should express positive attitudes; refrain from abrasive 
or disagreeable comments; make appropriately benign self-disclosures and wait to see 
synergy
the multiplying force of a 
group working together that 
results in a combined effort 
greater than any of the parts.
forming
the initial stage of group 
development characterized 
by orientation, testing, and 
dependence.
How do groups 
develop?
When underdog teams win 
championships, it is often 
because their combined 
efforts resulted in synergy. 
Have you ever been on an 
underdog team that went 
on to win a big game or 
championship? Do you think 
synergy played a role? Why 
or why not?
Photo and Co/Riser/Getty Images

214
 
Chapter 9 
Communicating in Groups
if they are reciprocated; and try to be friendly, open, and 
interested in others (Anderson, 1988).
Storming
As members ﬁ gure out the goal and become comfortable with 
the other group members, they begin to express their hon-
est opinions and vie for power and position. This signals the 
beginning of the second stage of group development. The 
storming stage is characterized by conﬂ ict and power plays 
as members seek to have their ideas accepted and to ﬁ nd their 
place within the group’s power structure. Constructive dis-
agreements help the group clarify its goal and the resolution of 
power plays clariﬁ es the group structure and what is expected 
of each member. During this storming stage, the politeness 
exhibited during forming may be replaced by snide comments, 
sarcastic remarks, or pointedly aggressive exchanges between some members. While 
storming, members may take sides and form coalitions. Although storming occurs in 
all groups, some groups manage it better than others. When storming is severe, it can 
threaten the group’s survival. However, if a group does not storm, it may experience 
groupthink, a deterioration of mental efﬁ ciency, reality testing, and moral judgment 
that results from in-group pressure to conform (Janis, 1982, p. 9). To avoid groupthink, 
we should encourage constructive disagreement, avoid name-calling and inﬂ ammatory 
language, and use the active listening skills with an emphasis on paraphrasing and hon-
est questioning (Anderson, 1988).
Norming
Norming is the third stage of group development and is characterized by increased 
cohesion, collaboration, emerging trust among members, and motivation to achieve 
the group goal. Having expressed honest opinions, resolved major differences, and 
sorted out speciﬁ c roles, members become loyal to each other and to the group goal. 
During this stage, members come to appreciate their differences, strengthen their rela-
tionships, and freely express their ideas and opinions. Members accept the norms 
established by the group and provide positive and constructive feedback to each other.
Performing
Performing is the fourth stage of group development and is characterized by harmony, 
productivity, problem-solving, and shared leadership. During this stage, the group capi-
talizes on the skills, knowledge, and abilities of all members to work toward achieving 
its goal. During this stage, conversations are focused on sharing task-related informa-
tion and problem-solving. Groups cannot achieve their full potential in this stage unless 
they have successfully resolved storming conﬂ icts and developed productive norms.
Adjourning
Adjourning is the stage of group development characterized by celebration of goal 
accomplishment and disengagement. Adjourning begins when the group recognizes that 
it has reached its goal. The group will engage in some type of formal or informal celebra-
tion during which they recognize their accomplishment and the role that each member 
played. They may rehash parts of their work and try to capture what they have learned 
Web Resource 9.2
storming
the stage of group 
development characterized 
by conﬂ ict and power plays as 
members seek to have their 
ideas accepted and to ﬁ nd 
their place within the group’s 
power structure.
groupthink
a deterioration of mental 
efﬁ ciency, reality testing, and 
moral judgment that results from 
in-group pressure to conform.
norming
the stage of group 
development during which 
the group solidiﬁ es its rules 
for behavior, resulting in 
greater trust and motivation to 
achieve the group goal.
performing
the stage of group 
development when the skills, 
knowledge, and abilities of 
all members are combined 
to overcome obstacles and 
meet goals successfully.
Why is storming an 
important stage of group 
development?
Jetta Productions/Iconica/Getty Images 

215
 
Chapter 9  Communicating in Groups 
about group process or their own behavior. Finally, group members will begin to dis-
engage from their relationships with each other. The group may formally disband while 
some members continue to see each other in social settings, or the group may continue 
to exist with a new goal. The new goal will inevitably cause the members to revisit the 
earlier stages of group development, but the cohesion, trust, and norms developed earlier 
are likely to help the group move quickly and more smoothly through these stages.
With this basic understanding of the stages of group development, we now turn 
to describing types of groups.
Types of Groups
Most of us can identify many different groups to which we belong at any point in 
time; each one is focused on a common purpose, goal, or objective. You have probably 
noticed that what is expected of you varies from group to group. Scholars who study 
groups ﬁ nd it useful to categorize groups according to their purpose. This allows schol-
ars to better understand how groups with similar purposes behave and what effects they 
have on their members. Let’s look at the most common group types: families, social 
friendship groups, support groups, interest groups, service groups, and work groups.
Families
A family is “a group of intimates who through their communication generates a sense 
of home and group identity, complete with strong ties of loyalty and emotion, and 
experiences a history and a future” (Galvin, Byland, & Brommel, 2007). Families can 
be nuclear (consisting of two parents who live together with their biological or adopted 
children), single parent (consisting of one adult living with his or her children), 
extended (consisting of a parent or parents and children living with grandparents, 
cousins, aunts and uncles, or other relatives), blended (consisting of committed or 
married adults living with the children of their previous marriages and relationships as 
well as the children of their union), or mixed (consisting of people of different races).
Not all families work the same way. Contemporary research on families suggests 
four different ways families function when facing an issue (Koerner & Fitzpatrick, 
2002). In protective families, issues are not discussed and are decided solely by the 
family authority ﬁ gure. In the movie The Sound of Music, prior to Maria’s arrival, the 
Von Trapp family exempliﬁ ed this family dynamic. In consensual families, all members 
engage in conversation about an issue but a family authority ﬁ gure still makes the ﬁ nal 
decision. Many television sitcoms from the 1950s and 1960s such as Father Knows 
Best, Leave It to Beaver, and The Brady Bunch portray families with a benevolent and 
self-sacriﬁ cing father ﬁ lling this role. In pluralistic families, all members engage in 
conversation about an issue and everyone participates in the decision-making. These 
families may have formal family meetings to decide important family issues. The popu-
lar 1980s television sitcom Full House, where three men raised the children together, 
operated in this way. Finally, in laissez-faire families, members may converse about an 
issue, but each member makes his or her own decision and is responsible for its con-
sequences. The cartoon family portrayed on The Simpsons tends to function this way.
We initially learn how to act in groups based on the ways our family members 
interacted with each other while we were growing up. Of course, the conversational 
norms we learned may change as a result of the experiences we have in additional 
groups throughout our lives. Which family type did you grow up in? Do you think 
your conversational norms for participating in groups are consistent with what you 
experienced growing up? Why or why not?
adjourning
the stage of group 
development in which 
members assign meaning 
to what they have done 
and determine how to end 
or maintain interpersonal 
relations they have 
developed.
family
a group of intimates who 
through their communication 
generates a sense of home 
and group identity, complete 
with strong ties of loyalty and 
emotion, and experiences a 
history and a future
Skill Learning Activity 9.2
What are some 
types of groups we 
might participate in?

216
 
Chapter 9 
Communicating in Groups
One of the major responsibilities of healthy families is to talk in ways that build 
one another’s self-concept and self-esteem. So it is important that family members 
(1) praise each other: “Manuel you got a B on that spelling test, good for you!”; 
(2) offer statements of acceptance and support: “You know that I would rather you 
go to college, but your mom and I will support your decision to join the Navy”; and 
(3) verbally express love: “Nevah, you know I love you no matter what.”
Social Friendship Groups
A social friendship group is composed of friends who have a genuine concern about 
each other’s welfare and enjoy spending time together. Their interactions are charac-
terized by “interpersonal ties and positive, amiable preexisting relationships among 
members” (Thompson, 2003, p. 239). Most of us belong to more than one social friend-
ship group during our lives. You may have had a 
group of friends you were close to in high school, a 
group of buddies you were close to when you served 
in the military, or a group of friends you play golf or 
softball with regularly. Sometimes people who work 
together evolve into a social friendship group when 
they begin to get together for social activities out-
side of work. Social friendship groups may initially 
form around a shared interest like a book club or 
Bible study, but as members spend time together and 
ﬁ nd they enjoy one another’s company, they may 
evolve into a social friendship group. Popular TV 
programs such as Friends, Seinfeld, and Sex in the 
City are examples of sitcom social friendship groups.
Because social friendship groups ﬁ ll our needs to 
be accepted and to belong, communication in these 
groups should (1) encourage quieter members to par-
ticipate in conversations: “Hey, Jules, you haven’t 
had a chance to catch us up on how your Dad is 
doing”; (2) protect members from playful harassment: 
“Hey Jenna, back off, you’ve been aiming your put downs at Pam all evening”; (3) 
provide opportunities for friends to disclose problems and receive support; “Hey, Zach, 
I heard that your sister was diagnosed with Hodgkins lymphoma. How are you doing?”
Support Groups
Support groups are composed of people who come together to bolster each other by pro-
viding encouragement, honest feedback, and a safe environment for expressing deeply 
personal feelings about a problem common to the members. Support groups include 
well-known fellowships like Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and Narcotics Anonymous, 
survivor or caregiver support groups formed by local chapters of a national orga-
nization like the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society or the Alzheimer’s Association, 
grief groups at local synagogues and churches, and neighborhood stay-at-home-dads 
groups. Until recently, support groups met face to face, but today there are thousands 
of online support groups connecting people who have never met face to face.
Support groups must create an environment where members feel safe to disclose 
highly personal information. So members need to make sure that their messages fol-
low the guidelines in Chapter 8 for comforting, which include clarifying supportive 
social friendship group
a group comprised of friends 
who have a genuine concern 
about each other’s welfare 
and enjoy spending time 
together.
support group
a group comprised of 
people who come together 
to bolster each other by 
providing encouragement, 
honest feedback, and a safe 
environment for expressing 
deeply personal feelings 
about a problem common to 
the members.
Can you identify ways that 
this social friendship group 
was similar to a family 
and ways in which it was 
different?
Everett Collection

217
 
Chapter 9  Communicating in Groups 
intentions, buffering face threats, using other-centered language, framing, and selec-
tively offering advice.
Interest Groups
An interest group is composed of individuals who come together because they share 
a concern, hobby, or activity. These groups may be formal with deﬁ ned goals and 
tasks (such as a 4-H club or community theater troupe) or they may be informal (like 
a neighborhood book or gardening club). They may be part of a larger organization 
like La Raza, the Urban League, or the Houston Area Apple Users Group. Some inter-
est groups are externally focused on a common political or social issue and adopt an 
agenda to achieve change. MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Drivers) is an example. 
Other interest groups are internally focused on increasing skills or knowledge of their 
members. Toastmasters, for instance, is focused on helping its members improve their 
public speaking skills. Some interest groups meet online. Meetup.com is an Internet 
site that helps people ﬁ nd others who share their interests.
Because interest group members share some passion, all members ought to have 
an opportunity to communicate their expertise by (1) encouraging members to share 
success stories: “I’m really glad that Brian was able to get Ace Hardware to donate all 
the bathroom ﬁ xtures for our project. Brian, can you tell us what you said and did?” 
and (2) doing so in ways that all members highlight what they know without demean-
ing the knowledge or opinions of others: “I really liked hearing Brian’s story and I’d 
like to hear about how other people approach getting donations.”
Service Groups
Service groups are composed of individuals who come together to perform hands-
on charitable works or to raise money to help organizations that perform such work. 
Service groups may be local afﬁ liates of larger secular or religious service organiza-
tions like Break Away, Lions Club International, Red Cross, Salvation Army, B’nai 
B’rith, and Habitat for Humanity. Other service groups are local and function indepen-
dently. Small soup kitchens, urban gardening groups, and community beautiﬁ cation 
groups perform charitable work that may include raising funds and interfacing with 
government agencies.
Because service groups are both voluntary and task-oriented, they need to be ded-
icated to the task as well as sensitive to the ego and emotional needs of members. So 
communication should (1) be clear about individual tasks, roles, and responsibilities: 
“Jim, as I remember it, today you agreed to work on patching the roof.”; (2) encour-
age and praise member accomplishments: “I was really impressed with how sensitive 
you were when you turned her down for another bag of groceries”; and (3) be polite: 
“Mary, it would be great if you would please work with Yvonne on stufﬁ ng envelopes 
for that mailing. Thanks so much!”
Work Groups
A work group is a collection of three or more people formed to solve a problem 
or accomplish a speciﬁ c task. Examples of work groups include class project groups 
(established to create a joint presentation, paper, or other learning project) and work 
teams (established as needed to perform speciﬁ c activities in the workplace). Effective 
work groups have clearly deﬁ ned goals, an appropriate number of members, and 
diversity in the skills and viewpoints of its members.
interest group
a group comprised of 
individuals who come 
together because they share 
a common concern, hobby, 
or activity.
service group
a group comprised of 
individuals who come 
together to perform hands-on 
charitable works, or to raise 
money to help organizations 
that perform such work.
work group
a collection of three or more 
people formed to solve a 
problem.

218
 
Chapter 9 
Communicating in Groups
An effective work group goal is a clearly stated future state of affairs desired 
by enough members to motivate the group to work toward achieving it (Johnson & 
Johnson, 2003). Effective work group goals are speciﬁ c. For example, the crew at a 
local fast food restaurant that began with the goal of “increasing proﬁ tability of the 
restaurant” made the goal more speciﬁ c in this way: “During the next quarter, the 
second shift night crew will increase proﬁ tability by reducing food costs by 1 percent. 
They will do so by throwing away less food due to precooking.” Effective work group 
goals are also consistent in that they serve a common purpose. That is, achieving one 
goal does not prevent the achievement of another. For the fast food crew, all members 
must believe that reducing the amount of precooked food on hand will not interfere 
with maintaining their current level of service. Effective work group goals are chal-
lenging. Achieving them will require hard work and team effort. Finally, effective work 
group goals are acceptable in that all members feel personally committed to achieving 
them. People tend to support things they help create. So group members who partici-
pate in setting the goals are likely to exert high effort to achieve them as well.
What is the best size for a work group? In general, research suggests that the best size 
is the smallest number of people capable of effectively achieving the goal (Sundstrom, 
DeMeuse, & Futrell, 1990). For many situations, this might mean as few as three to ﬁ ve 
people. As the size of the group increases, the time spent discussing and deciding also 
increases. When only Jeff, Bryan, and Sue are in a group, for instance, there are only 
four relationships to manage (Jeff–Sue; Bryan–Jeff; Bryan–Sue; Bryan–Sue–Jeff). Adding 
members also means more relationships to manage. Smaller groups can make decisions 
more quickly than larger ones. However, if the goals and issues are complex, a group with 
more members is more likely to have the breadth of information, knowledge, and skills 
needed to make high-quality decisions. As groups grow in size and complexity, however, 
the opportunities for each member to participate drop and because people tend to be more 
satisﬁ ed when they can actively participate, the most desirable size for most work group 
situations is ﬁ ve to seven members (Bonito, 2000).
More important than the number of people is the right combination of people 
in the work group. Effective work groups are likely to be composed of people who 
offer different but relevant knowledge and skills (Valacich, George, Nonamaker, & 
Vogel, 1994). A heterogeneous group is usually better than a homogeneous group. 
In homogeneous groups, members are likely to know the same things, come at the 
problem from the same perspective, and, consequently, be likely to overlook some 
important information or take shortcuts in the problem-solving process. In contrast, 
groups composed of heterogeneous members are more likely to have diverse infor-
mation, perspectives, and values, and, consequently, discuss issues more thoroughly 
before reaching a decision. For example, a group composed of seven nurses who are all 
young white females would be considered a homogeneous group; a group composed 
of nurses, doctors, nutritionists, and physical therapists who differ in age, race, and 
work group goal
a future state of affairs desired 
by enough members of 
the group to motivate the 
group to work toward its 
achievement.
heterogeneous group
group in which various 
demographics, levels of 
knowledge, attitudes, and 
interests are represented.
homogeneous group
group in which members 
have a great deal of similarity.
Dilbert © United Media

219
 
Chapter 9  Communicating in Groups 
sex would be considered a heterogeneous group. The heterogeneous medical group 
would probably make a more comprehensive decision about a patient’s care than the 
homogeneous group of nurses.
Work groups are usually more task oriented than other groups. So, much of the com-
munication focuses on task-related issues and should (1) seek collaboration to resolve 
conﬂ icts: “Felicia, I’m having a problem that I need your help with”; (2) update other 
members on the status of individual efforts: “I thought you all should know that I will be 
about two days late with that feasibility report as the woman who was providing me with 
the cost data is on vacation”; and (3) appropriately credit the contributions of other team 
members: “Today I am presenting the ﬁ ndings, but I think you should know that Len did 
the initial research and Mavis did the quantitative analysis that led to these conclusions.”
Evaluating Group Dynamics
Group dynamics is the way a group interacts to achieve its goal. Effective groups 
periodically stop and evaluate how their interactions are affecting what they are 
accomplishing and how members perceive themselves and others. At times you may 
be asked to provide a formal evaluation of the group dynamics of a class project group 
or other work team. One way you might evaluate members is to describe how each 
member performed his or her speciﬁ c tasks and how well his or her communication 
contributed to the cohesiveness, problem solving, and conﬂ ict resolution processes 
in the group. Figure 9.1 is one example you can use for evaluating class project 
group member participation. Alternatively, in a class project group, members could 
prepare a “reﬂ ective thinking process paper,” which details in paragraph form what 
each member did well and could improve upon as well as a self-analysis of their own 
contributions and what they could do to improve.
Like the evaluations business managers make of employees, these evaluations serve 
to document the efforts of group members. They can be submitted to the instructor, 
just as they would be submitted to a supervisor. In business, these documents provide a 
basis for determining promotion, merit pay, and salary adjustments. In the classroom, 
they can provide a basis for determining one portion of each member’s grade.
group dynamics
the way a group interacts to 
achieve its goal.
How might 
you evaluate 
participation in 
groups?
Group Dynamics Evaluation Form
Meeting date:  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Your name:  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Directions
After each required group meeting, provide ethical critiques for both your group 
members and yourself. Rate each individual on his or her performance in the 
group. Justify the rating with speciﬁ c examples. As you rate each member,  consider 
the following:
• commitment to the group goal
• fulﬁ lls individual assignments
• manages interpersonal conﬂ icts
• encourages group participation
• helps keep the discussion on track
Figure 9.1
Group dynamics evaluation form

220
 
Chapter 9 
Communicating in Groups
Yourself  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Circle overall individual rating
0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
(poor)     (met requirements)    (excellent)
Tasks accomplished:
Tasks assigned:
Ethical critique:
Group member ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Circle overall individual rating
0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
(poor)     (met requirements)    (excellent)
Tasks accomplished:
Tasks assigned:
Ethical critique:
Group member  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Circle overall individual rating
0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
(poor)     (met requirements)    (excellent)
Tasks accomplished:
Tasks assigned:
Ethical critique:
Group member  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Circle overall individual rating
0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
(poor)     (met requirements)    (excellent)
Tasks accomplished:
Tasks assigned:
Ethical critique:
Group member  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Circle overall individual rating
0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
(poor)     (met requirements)    (excellent)
Tasks accomplished:
Tasks assigned:
Ethical critique:
Figure 9.1
(continued)

221
 
Chapter 9  Communicating in Groups 
A Question of Ethics
The community service and outreach committee 
of Students in Communication was meeting to 
determine what cause should beneﬁ t from their 
annual fund-raising talent contest.
“So,” said Mark, “does anyone have any ideas 
about whose cause we should sponsor?”
“Well,” replied Glenna, “I think we should 
give it to a group that’s doing literacy work.”
“Sounds good to me,” replied Mark.
“My aunt works at the Boardman Center as 
the literacy coordinator, so why don’t we just 
adopt them?” asked Glenna.
“Gee, I don’t know much about the group,” 
said Reed.
“Come on, you know, they help people learn 
how to read,” replied Glenna sarcastically.
“Well, I was kind of hoping we’d take a look 
at sponsoring the local teen runaway center,” 
offered Angelo.
“Listen, if your aunt works at the Boardman 
Center,” commented Leticia, “let’s go with it.”
“Right,” said Pablo, “that’s good enough for 
me.”
“Yeah,” replied Heather, “let’s do it and get 
out of here.”
“I hear what you’re saying, Heather,” Mark 
responded, “I’ve got plenty of other stuff to do.”
“No disrespect meant to Glenna, but wasn’t 
the Boardman Center in the news because of 
questionable use of funds?” countered Angelo. 
“Do we really know enough about them?”
“OK,” said Mark, “enough discussion. I’ve got 
to get to class. All in favor of the literacy program 
at the Boardman Center indicate by saying aye. I 
think we’ve got a majority. Sorry, Angelo—you 
can’t win them all.”
“I wish all meetings went this smoothly,” 
Heather said to Glenna as they left the room. “I 
mean, that was really a good meeting.”
 1. What did the group really know about the 
Boardman Center? Is it good group discus-
sion practice to rely on a passing comment 
of one member?
 2. Regardless of whether the meeting went 
smoothly, is there any ethical problem with 
this process? Explain.
What Would You Do?
Summary
We participate in a variety of groups throughout our lives. A group is more than a 
mere assembly of people in that all members involved share a common goal, purpose, 
or objective. Although some groups form around purposes that have negative conse-
quences, we focus on the characteristics of healthy groups—groups that are formed 
around a constructive purpose, goal, or objective. These characteristics are ethical 
goals, interdependence, cohesiveness, productive norms, accountability, and synergy.
Just as interpersonal relationships move through life cycles, so groups move 
through stages of development. These stages are forming, storming, norming, per-
forming, and adjourning. Ultimately, moving through these stages successfully results 
in achieving group goals.
Because we participate in so many different groups, researchers have categorized 
group types based on purposes. For example, family groups share a mutual commit-
ment to the group and its members and may operative protectively, consensually, 
pluralistically, or laissez-faire. Social friendship groups focus on purposes regarding 

222
 
Chapter 9 
Communicating in Groups
a genuine concern for one another’s welfare and pleasure in spending time together. 
Support groups come together to bolster each other by providing encouragement, hon-
est feedback, and a safe environment for expressing deeply personal feelings about a 
problem common to the members. Interest groups form because the individuals share 
a common concern, hobby, or activity. Service groups perform hands-on charitable 
works and/or raise money to help organizations that perform such work. Work groups 
are collections of three or more people who must interact and inﬂ uence each other 
to solve problems and accomplish a task. Examples of work groups are class project 
groups and work teams.
Sometimes you might be asked to evaluate how you and other members partici-
pate in a group. Doing so might help your instructor grade group dynamics or help 
your employer determine merit pay or bonuses.
Now that you have read Chapter 9, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communica-
tion situations (Skill Learning Activities), and 
build your public speaking skills through-
out the course (Communication on Your Feet 
speech assignments, Action Step activities). 
Many of these activities allow you to compare 
your answers to those provided by the authors, 
and, if requested, submit your answers to your 
instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore commu-
nication concepts online (Web Resources), develop 
your speech outlines (Speech Builder Express 3.0), 
watch and critique videos of communication situ-
ations and sample speeches (Interactive Video 
Activities), upload your speech videos for peer 
reviewing and critique other students’ speeches 
(Speech Studio online speech review tool), and 
download chapter review so you can study when 
and where you’d like (Audio Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning 
Activities, and Web Resources are also featured on 
the following pages.
Key Terms
accountability (212)
adjourning (215)
cohesiveness (210)
forming (213)
family (215)
ground rules (210)
group (208)
group communication (208)
group dynamics (219)
groupthink (214)
healthy group (209)
heterogeneous group (218)
homogeneous group (218)
interdependent group (210)
interest group (217)
norming (214)
norms (210)
performing (214)
service group (217)
social friendship group (216)
storming (214)
support group (216)
synergy (213)
team-building activities (210)
work group (217)
work group goal (218)
Communicate! Active Online Learning

223
 
Chapter 9  Communicating in Groups 
Skill Learning Activities
9.1: Cohesiveness in Homogeneous versus 
Heterogeneous Groups (210)
Identify two groups (for example, a sports team, 
study group, fraternal or community group, or work 
team) to which you belong; one should have a diverse 
membership and the other should have members who 
are similar (see page 218).
Analyze the demographic differences in each 
group. When you have completed this analysis, write 
a paragraph that discusses cohesiveness in each 
group. How cohesive is each group? Are both groups 
equally cohesive? Was it easier to establish cohesive-
ness in one of the groups? What real or potential 
pitfalls result from the level of cohesiveness in each 
group?
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the demographic analysis provided in your Premium 
Website for Communicate! Look for it in the Skill 
Learning activities for Chapter 9.
9.2: Stages of Group Development (215)
Think of a group to which you have belonged for 
less than one term (if you have an assigned group in 
this course, use it). Now, write a paragraph that begins 
by identifying the stage of development the group is 
currently in and then describe how this group transi-
tioned through each of the previous stages of group 
development. What event(s) do you recall as turn-
ing points, marking the group’s movement from one 
stage to another? Has the group become stuck in a 
stage, or has it developed smoothly? What factors 
contributed to that? What can you do to help this 
group succeed in the stage it is in and to transition 
to the next stage?
Web Resources
9.1: Setting Group Norms (211)
This site at Brushy Fork Institute, a group dedi-
cated to advancing leadership and community 
development in the Appalachians, features infor-
mation on setting norms that contribute to group 
effectiveness.
9.2: Groupthink (214)
This site features an article whose purpose is to 
raise awareness about groupthink and to provide 
suggestions that can help task-oriented groups avoid 
this phenomenon.

Problem Solving in Groups
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What are the steps in the systematic problem solving process?
• How does leadership function most effectively in problem solving 
groups?
• What are group member responsibilities when participating in meetings?
• How can groups communicate their solutions to others?
Members of the Alpha Production Team at Meyer Foods were gathered to review 
their hiring policies. At the beginning of the meeting, Kareem, the team facilitator, 
began: “You know why I called you together. Each production team has been 
asked to review its hiring practices. So, let’s get started.” 
After a few seconds of silence, Kareem asked, “Drew, what have you been 
thinking?”
“Well, I don’t know,” Drew replied. “I haven’t really given it much thought.” 
There were nods of agreement all around the table.
“Well,” Jeremy said, “I’m not sure I even remember what our current policies are.”
“But when I sent you an e-mail notice about the meeting, I attached a 
preliminary analysis of our practices and some questions I hoped each of us 
would think about before this meeting,” Kareem replied.
“Oh, is that what that was?” Byron asked. “I read the part about the meeting, 
but I guess I didn’t get a chance to look at the attachment.”
10
Hill Street Studios/Blend Images/Getty Images

225
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
Kareem responded, “I think the CEO is looking for some speciﬁ c 
recommendations from us about attracting employees with the skills we 
need, increasing diversity in our workforce, and ﬁ nding individuals who will be 
likely to stay and grow with the company. All of this was covered in the materials 
I sent.”
“Anything you think would be appropriate is OK with me,” Dawn said.
“Well, I’m not comfortable making these decisions alone. Let’s each of us 
plan to review what I sent and meet again tomorrow night with some concrete 
ideas, OK?” Kareem suggested. There were nods of agreement around the table. 
“Meeting adjourned.”
As the group dispersed, Kareem overheard Drew whisper to Dawn, “These 
meetings sure are a waste of time, aren’t they?”
Perhaps you have been to a meeting like this one. If so, you were probably just as 
frustrated as the people in this vignette. When group meetings are ineffective, it 
is easy to point the ﬁ nger at the leader. But as was the case with this group, the 
responsibility for the “waste of time” lies not with one person but with the group and 
the complex nature of problem solving in groups. Although working in groups can 
have its disadvantages, it is the preferred approach in business and industry today 
(O’Hair, O’Rourke, & O’Hair, 2001; Snyder, 2004; Teams, 2004). Leaders in business 
and industry realize that when groups work effectively to solve problems, they pro-
vide a deeper analysis of problems, generate a greater breadth of ideas and potential 
solutions, promote positive group morale, and lead to increased productivity. You 
can expect to work in groups to solve problems your organization faces during your 
professional life. These meetings may be in face-to-face or in virtual settings through 
e-mail, discussion boards, or video conferencing (Tullar & Kaiser, 2000). You will also 
encounter group problem solving in community groups, service groups, and even in 
your family.
In this chapter you will learn an effective process for group problem solving, 
the leadership skills needed to effectively manage group interactions during problem 
solving, the responsibilities that group members share, and ways that a group can 
effectively communicate the results of its deliberations to others.
The Problem Solving Process
When a group of people tackles a problem together, they may use an orderly series 
of steps or a less-structured spiral pattern in which they reﬁ ne, accept, reject, modify, 
combine ideas, and circle back to previous discussion as they go along. To observers, 
groups that follow an orderly sequence of steps—ﬁ nishing each before moving to the 
next one—appear to be more organized and are generally more efﬁ cient, completing 
their deliberations more quickly. Groups that follow a spiral sequence of activities may 
be less efﬁ cient, but they can also arrive at effective solutions. For example, when 
a group is presented with a problem, members will often immediately begin to offer 
solutions. But after a while most groups realize they can’t decide on a solution until 

226
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
they ﬁ gure out the criteria for a good solution, or they may realize that each member 
has a different idea about what the problem is. A group needs to deal with these tasks 
before it can move to making a decision.
Whether the deliberations are linear or spiral, groups that arrive at high-quality 
decisions accomplish the six tasks that make up what is known as the Systematic 
Problem Solving Process. This process, ﬁ rst described by John Dewey in 1933 and 
since revised by others, is still the best approach to individual or group problem solv-
ing (Duch, Groh, & Allen, 2001; Edens, 2000; Levin, 2001). By understanding the steps 
in problem solving and guiding your group to use them systematically, you can help 
your group to be both effective and efﬁ cient.
Step One: Identify and Deﬁ ne the Problem
The ﬁ rst step is to identify the problem and deﬁ ne it in a way that all group members 
understand and agree with. Even when a group is commissioned by an outside agency 
that provides a description of the problem, the group still needs to understand precisely 
what is at issue and needs to be resolved. Many times what appears to be a problem is 
only a symptom of a problem, and if the group focuses on solutions that eliminate only 
a symptom, the underlying problem will remain. For example in the opening vignette, 
the group’s budget crisis was described as stemming from a recession-related member-
ship drop. How does the group know that the inability to fund the budget is the problem 
and not just a symptom of the problem? What if their membership drop has some other 
cause? If that is the case, then cutting the budget may be a temporary ﬁ x but will not 
solve the problem. One way to see if you have uncovered the root cause or real prob-
lem is to ask, “If we solve this problem, are we conﬁ dent that the consequences of the 
problem will not reoccur?” If we cut the budget, are we conﬁ dent that we won’t have 
to cut it further? If not, then we probably need to look further for the root problem. We 
will need to look more closely at causes for the drop in membership and other ways 
besides dues for funding the budget. The real problem may be how to fund the budget.
Once your group agrees about the nature of the root problem you will want to 
draft a problem deﬁ nition, which is a formal written statement describing the prob-
lem. An effective problem deﬁ nition is stated as a question of fact, value, or policy; 
it contains only one central idea; and it uses speciﬁ c, precise, and concrete language. 
Questions of fact ask the group to determine what is true or to what extent something 
is true. “What percentage of our projected expenses can be covered with our exist-
ing revenue?” is a question of fact. Questions of value ask the group to determine or 
judge whether something is right, moral, good, or just. Questions of value often con-
tain words such as good, reliable, effective, or worthy—for instance, “What is the most 
effective way to recruit new members?” Questions of policy concern what course of 
action should be taken or what rules should be adopted to solve a problem—for exam-
ple, “Should we sponsor an annual fund-raising event with the local Public Relations 
Society of America (PRSA) chapter in order to help fund our budget?” After some 
discussion, the student chapter decided that the problem they needed to solve was a 
policy question that could be best stated: “How can we increase our revenues in order 
to meet our budget in the current economic conditions?” 
Step Two: Analyze the Problem
Analysis of a problem entails ﬁ nding out as much as possible about the problem. Most 
groups begin this process with each member sharing information he or she already 
knows about the problem through previous experiences. Some groups don’t move 
problem deﬁ nition
a formal written statement 
describing a problem.
question of fact
a question asked to 
determine what is true or to 
what extent something is true.
question of value
a question asked to 
determine or judge whether 
something is right, moral, 
good, or just.
question of policy
a question asked to 
determine what course of 
action should be taken or 
what rules should be adopted 
to solve a problem.
What are the steps 
in the systematic 
problem solving 
process?
Skill Learning Activity 10.1
Web Resource 10.1

227
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
beyond this level of analysis, which maybe OK if the group consists of individuals 
who are expert in the important areas related to the problem. But when this is not the 
case, the group needs to search for additional information. Members may be assigned 
to collect and examine information about the problem that is published in materials 
available at the library and on the Internet. Other members may interview experts, and 
still others may conduct surveys to gather information from particular target groups. 
The information gathered by group members should help the group to answer key 
questions about the nature of the problem such as those listed in Figure 10.1.
The PRSSA chapter, for example, might interview the dean of Student Affairs 
to understand how in the past other campus groups increased their revenues and to 
learn of any campus policies that govern fund-raising by student groups. Some group 
members might network with other student groups on campus and PRSSA chapters 
at other schools. Finally, the group could survey former members to understand why 
they dropped out of the group and what might entice them to rejoin, as well as survey 
eligible students who are not members to ﬁ nd out what would entice them to join.
During the information gathering and analysis step, it is important to consciously 
encourage members to share information they have found that is new or contradicts 
the sentiments or preferences expressed in the group. It is difﬁ cult for most of us to 
give up our pet theories or preferred worldviews. A group that is willing to consider 
new and unexpected information will more deeply analyze the problem and, therefore, 
will likely come to a more effective solution.
Step Three: Determine Criteria for Judging Solutions
Criteria are standards or measures used for judging the merits of proposed solutions. 
They provide a blueprint for how the group will evaluate the virtues of each alterna-
tive solution. Research suggests that when groups develop criteria before they think 
about speciﬁ c solutions, they are more likely to come to a decision that all members 
can accept (Young, Wood, Phillips, & Pedersen, 2007). Without clear criteria, group 
members may argue for their preferred solution without regard to whether it will 
adequately address the problem and whether it is feasible. Figure 10.2 provides a list of 
questions that can help a group think about the types of criteria that a solution might 
need to meet.
Once you’ve agreed on the list of solution criteria, the group needs to prioritize the 
list. Although rank ordering the list from most to least important may be unwieldy and 
counterproductive, it is probably useful to agree which criteria are major (must meet) 
and which are minor (would like to see).
criteria
standards or measures used 
for judging the merits of 
proposed solutions.
• What are the symptoms of this problem?
• What are the causes of this problem?
•  Can this problem be subdivided into several smaller problems that each may 
have individual solutions?
• What have others who have faced this problem done?
• How successful have they been with the solutions they attempted?
• How is our situation similar and different from theirs?
•  Does this problem consist of several smaller problems? If so, what are their symp-
toms, causes, previously tried solutions, and so forth?
• What would be the consequences of doing nothing?
• What would be the consequences of trying something and having it fail?
Figure 10.1
Questions to guide problem 
analysis

228
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
Based on their research and discussion, the PRSSA chapter agreed on three major 
criteria and one minor criterion. A good plan would comply with the university’s 
policy on fund-raising by student groups. It would need to cost less than $500 to 
implement. It would need to raise at least $4,000. It would not require more than 20 
hours of work from each member.
Step Four: Identify Alternative Solutions
Ending up with a good solution depends on having a wide variety of possible solutions 
to choose from. So one of the most important activities of problem solving is coming 
up with solution ideas. Many groups fail at generating solution ideas because they 
criticize the ﬁ rst ideas expressed; this discourages members from taking the risk to put 
their ideas out for the group to consider. One way to encourage everyone’s ideas is to 
use the technique of brainstorming. Brainstorming is an uncritical, non-evaluative 
process of generating possible solutions by being creative, suspending judgment, and 
combining or adapting ideas. When brainstorming, the group agrees to a freewheel-
ing session when members offer ideas without censoring themselves. During this time 
other members may build on ideas that have been presented, combine two or more 
ideas, or even offer off-the-wall thoughts. What members may not do is criticize, poke 
fun at, or in any other way evaluate the ideas. While the group is brainstorming, one 
member should be recording the ideas, preferably in a manner that allows all members 
to see them (on a white board, smart board, or overhead projector, for instance).
When individuals are freed from the fear of criticism, a group may quickly gener-
ate 20 or more solution ideas. When members trust each other to abide by the rules, 
brainstorming is fun and productive.
The PRSSA chapter brainstormed and came up with these ideas:
• Place an ad on the Communication Department’s Website to recruit members.
• Place an ad on the college Website to recruit members.
• Ask faculty to allow PRSSA members to do 2-minute “testimonials” in classes as 
a way of recruiting members.
• Text-message all the people we know about upcoming PRSSA events.
• Run a monthly rafﬂ e at the PRSA meetings. The winning ticket would get 4 hours 
of work from a PRSSA member.
• Find PRSA chapter members whose businesses would sponsor student scholarships 
to the national convention.
• Set up a consulting program to provide public relations help to other student 
groups for a fee.
• Set up a consulting program to provide public relations help to small businesses 
for a fee.
Web Resource 10.2
brainstorming
an uncritical, non-evaluative 
process of generating 
possible solutions by being 
creative, suspending 
judgment, and combining or 
adapting ideas.
•  What are the quantitative and qualitative measures of success that a solution 
must be able to demonstrate?
•  Are there resource constraints that a good solution must meet (costs, time, 
manpower)?
• Is solution simplicity a factor?
• What risks are unacceptable?
• Is ease of implementation a consideration?
•  Is it important that no constituency be unfairly harmed or advantaged by a solution?
Figure 10.2
Questions to guide 
discussion of solution criteria

229
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
• Do a virtual newsletter instead of a printed one.
• Double membership dues.
• Co-sponsor a golf outing with the local PRSA chapter.
• Rafﬂ e off a spring break getaway for six to St. Thomas.
Step Five: Evaluate Solutions and Decide
With a list of potential solutions in hand, the group must then sort through them to ﬁ nd 
the one or ones that will best solve the problem. To do this, the group needs to compare 
each of the alternatives to the decision criteria they established earlier. If a lot of solutions 
were generated during brainstorming, the group will probably want to quickly review the 
list and eliminate those that obviously do not meet the criteria. Then it can concentrate 
on evaluating the remaining solutions, talking about how well each meets speciﬁ c crite-
ria and comparing the positive features of each. This discussion may result in only one 
solution that meets all the criteria, but often there will be more than one viable solution.
Decision making is the process of choosing among alternatives. Sometimes your group 
may not be responsible for choosing among the remaining alternatives. Instead you will 
present the results of your work to others who will make the actual decision. At other times 
your group will make the decision. Five methods are commonly used to reach a group deci-
sion. Methods that require greater agreement among members are more time consuming.
 1. The expert opinion method. Once the group has eliminated those alternatives that 
do not meet the criteria, the group asks the member who has the most expertise to 
make the ﬁ nal choice. Obviously, this method is quick and useful if one member 
is much more knowledgeable about the issues or has a greater stake in the imple-
mentation of the decision. The PRSSA chapter, for instance, might ask its president 
to make the ﬁ nal choice.
 2. The average group opinion method. In this approach, each group member ranks 
each of the alternatives that meet all the criteria. Their rankings are then averaged, 
and the alternative receiving the highest average becomes the choice. This method 
is useful for routine decisions or when a decision needs to be made quickly. It can 
also be used as an intermediate straw poll so the group can eliminate low-scoring 
alternatives before moving to a different process for making the ﬁ nal decision.
 3. The majority rule method. In this method, the group votes on each alternative, 
and the one that receives a majority of votes (50 percent + 1) is selected. Although 
this method is considered democratic, it can create problems. If the majority vot-
ing for an alternative is slight, then nearly as many members oppose the choice 
as support it. If these minority members strongly object to the choice, they may 
sabotage implementation of the solution either actively or passively.
 4. The unanimous decision method. In this method, the group must continue delibera-
tion until every member of the group believes that the same solution is the best. As 
you would expect, it is very difﬁ cult to arrive at a truly unanimous decision, and to 
do so takes a lot of time. When a group reaches unanimity, however, each member is 
likely to be committed to selling the decision to others and helping to implement it.
 5. The consensus method. This method is an alternative to the unanimous decision 
method. In consensus, the group continues deliberation until all members of the 
group ﬁ nd an acceptable solution, one they can support and are committed to 
helping implement. Some group members may believe there is a better solution 
than the one chosen, but all feel they can live with the chosen solution. Arriving at 
consensus, though easier than reaching unanimity, is still difﬁ cult. Although the 
majority rule method is widely used, the consensus method is a wise investment if 
the group needs everyone’s support to implement the decision successfully.
decision making
the process of choosing 
among alternatives.

230
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
Sometimes a group will choose only one solution. But frequently a group will 
decide on a multi-pronged approach that combines two or three of the acceptable 
solutions. The PRSSA chapter, for instance, reached consensus on a plan to place ads 
on both the college and department Websites and to launch a text-message campaign 
24 hours before their next meeting. They also decided to approach PRSA chapter mem-
bers and ask them to sponsor student members to the national convention. Finally, 
they decided to explore the feasibility of setting up a consulting program.
Step Six: Implement the Agreed-Upon Solution
Finally, the group may be responsible for implementing the agreed-upon solution or, if 
the group is presenting the solution to others for implementation, making recommen-
dations for how the solution should be implemented. The group has already considered 
implementation in terms of selecting a solution, but now must ﬁ ll in the details. What 
tasks are required by the solution(s)? Who will carry out these tasks? What is a reason-
able time frame for implementation generally and for each of the tasks speciﬁ cally?
Shared Leadership
When we think of leadership, we typically think of a person who is in charge. It was 
once thought that leaders were “born”—that some people inherited personality and 
other traits that made them naturally suited to be leaders. Later, the emphasis moved to 
the notion that leaders were “made” and that if we could identify the speciﬁ c  behaviors 
of leadership, then any person could learn them and become an effective leader. Then, 
we recognized who became a leader and the behaviors that made a leader effective 
varied depending on the task, the situation, and the followers. The most recent think-
ing is that leadership is a set of functions that can be performed by one, more than 
one, or all group members at various times. In other words, leadership is most often a 
shared activity in which different members perform various functions based on their 
unique strengths and expertise (Fairhurst, 2001). A group, then, may have a formal 
leader, but in actuality, throughout the life of the group, a series of informal lead-
ers (also called emergent leaders) will arise to help the group meet the challenges the 
group faces. People who assume the role of a leader behave and communicate in spe-
ciﬁ c ways that fulﬁ ll important leadership functions.
Shared leadership functions are the sets of roles that you or other members per-
form to facilitate the work of the group and help maintain harmonious relationships 
between members. A role is a speciﬁ c pattern of behavior that group members perform 
based on their skills and their perception about the needs of the group at that time. 
When leadership roles are effectively performed, the group will function smoothly and 
members will enjoy each other and working on the task. There are three sets of leader-
ship roles that must be performed by members if a group is to be successful: task roles, 
maintenance roles, and procedural roles.
Task Roles
Task roles help the group acquire, process, or apply information that contributes 
directly to completing a task or goal.
• Information or opinion givers provide content for the discussion. People who per-
form this role are well informed on the content of the task and share what they 
know with the group. Your ability to assume this role depends on your command 
of high-quality information that the group needs in order to complete its task. 
“Well, the articles I read seem to agree that . . .” and “Based on how my sorority 
Skill Learning Activity 10.2
Skill Learning Activity 10.3
informal or emergent 
leaders
members who gain power 
because they are liked and 
respected by the group
shared leadership 
functions
the sets of roles that group 
members perform to facilitate 
the work of the group and 
help maintain harmonious 
relationships between 
members.
task roles
sets of behaviors that help 
a group acquire, process, 
or apply information that 
contributes directly to 
completing a task or goal.
How does 
leadership function 
most effectively in 
problem solving 
groups?

231
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
raised money for the Ronald McDonald House, we 
could. . .” are statements typical of information and 
opinion givers.
• Information or opinion seekers probe others for their 
ideas and opinions during group meetings. Typical 
comments by those performing this role include 
“Before going further, what information do we have 
about how raising fees is likely to affect member-
ship?” or “How do other members of the group feel 
about this idea?”
• Information or opinion analyzers help the group to 
scrutinize the content and the reasoning of discus-
sions. They may question what is being said and help 
members understand the hidden assumptions in their 
statements. Information or opinion analyzers make 
statements such as “Enrique, you’re generalizing from 
only one instance. Can you give us some others?”
Maintenance Roles
Maintenance roles are the sets of behaviors that help the 
group to develop and maintain cohesion, commitment, and 
positive working relationships. We engage in maintenance 
leadership any time we manage participation, foster collabora-
tion to resolve conﬂ ict, or integrate fun into the group experience. Managing participation 
means giving everyone an opportunity to share ideas and information with the group 
and ensuring that no group member or members dominate the discussion. Fostering col-
laboration to resolve conﬂ ict means acting as an unbiased mediator when disagreements 
between members become heated so that the conﬂ ict is resolved as a win-win.
Integrating fun into the group experience means intervening in the group’s pro-
cess in order to reduce tension by encouraging the group to relax, laugh, and enjoy 
each other’s company. We know that humor has a positive impact on group communi-
cation. Noted psychotherapist and business consultant S. M. Sultanoff (1993) explains 
that “humor facilitates communication, builds relationships, reduces stress, provides 
perspective, and promotes attending and energizes” (para 2). Fortune 500 companies 
such as General Electric, AT&T, Kodak, Lockheed, and IBM all emphasize the value of 
workplace humor in their training programs.
Members who undertake maintenance leadership roles will be supporters, inter-
preters, harmonizers, mediators, or interpreters.
• Supporters encourage others in the group. When another member contributes to the 
group, supporters show appreciation through their nonverbal or verbal behavior. 
Nonverbally, supporters may smile, nod, or vigorously shake their heads. Verbally, 
they demonstrate support through statements like “Good point, Ming,” “I really 
like that idea, Nikki,” or “It’s obvious you’ve really done your homework, Janelle.”
• Interpreters are familiar with the differences in the social, cultural, and gender orien-
tations of group members and use this knowledge to help group members understand 
each other. Interpreters are especially important in groups whose members are cultur-
ally diverse (Jensen & Chilberg, 1991). For example, an interpreter might say, “Paul, 
Lin Chou is Chinese, so when she says that she will think about your plan she might 
mean that she does not support your ideas, but she doesn’t want to embarrass you in 
front of the others.” Or an interpreter might say, “Jim, most of us are from the South 
and consider it impolite to begin business before we socialize and catch up with one 
maintenance roles
sets of behaviors that help a 
group develop and
maintain cohesion, 
commitment, and positive 
working relationships.
Some members provide 
information to the group, 
others help maintain 
harmonious relations among 
group members, and still 
others help the group stay on 
track. When you are part of a 
problem solving group, which 
roles do you usually assume?
Nita Winter Photography

232
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
another.” When groups do not have a member to serve in 
the interpreter leadership role and members come from 
different cultures, effective group process can suffer. This 
was the case for Lily Herakova when she came to the 
United States from Bulgaria to study. You can read Lily’s 
story in the Diverse Voices feature in this chapter.
•  Harmonizers intervene in the group’s discussion 
when conﬂ ict is threatening to harm group cohe-
siveness or the relationship between speciﬁ c group 
members. Harmonizers are likely to make statements 
such as “Tom, Jack, hold it a second. I know you’re 
on opposite sides of this, but let’s see where you 
might have some agreement” or “Cool it, everybody, 
we’re coming up with some good stuff; let’s not lose 
our momentum by getting into name-calling.”
•  Mediators are neutral and impartial arbiters who guide the discussion so that mem-
bers who have conﬂ icting ideas ﬁ nd a mutually acceptable resolution. Mediators 
do this by maintaining their own neutrality, keeping the discussion focused on 
issues and not personalities, helping to identify areas of common ground, and 
working to ﬁ nd a mutually satisfying solution to the disagreement using para-
phrasing and perception checking.
•  Tension relievers recognize when group members are stressed or tired and then inter-
vene to relieve the stress or reenergize the group usually through humor. People who 
are effective in this leadership role might tell a joke, kid around, or tell a lighthearted 
story so that the group is refreshed when it returns to the task. In some situations, 
a single well-placed one-liner will get a laugh, break the tension or monotony, 
and jolt the group out of its lethargy. Although the tension reliever momentarily 
 distracts the group from its task, this action helps the group remain cohesive.
Procedural Roles
Procedural leadership roles are sets of behaviors that directly support the group pro-
cess. This includes providing logistical support for the group, managing the group’s 
interaction, and keeping records of the group’s accomplishments and decisions.
•  Logistics coordinators arrange for appropriate spaces for group meetings, procure 
the supplies and equipment that will be needed by the group, and manage other 
details so that the group’s physical needs are met. The logistics coordinator’s lead-
ership role is usually carried out behind the scenes, but the successful performance 
of this role is crucial to a group’s ability to be efﬁ cient and effective. Making 
arrangements so that the group has appropriate space, furniture, and equipment 
and providing for the physical needs of members during the meeting allows the 
group to efﬁ ciently work on its tasks
•  Expediters keep track of what the group is trying to accomplish and help move 
the group through the agenda. When the group has strayed, expediters will make 
statements like “I’m enjoying this, but I can’t quite see what it has to do with 
resolving the issue” or “Let’s see, aren’t we still trying to ﬁ nd out whether these 
are the only criteria that we should be considering?”
• Gatekeepers manage the ﬂ ow of conversation so that all members have an equal 
opportunity to participate. If one or two members begin to dominate the con-
versation, the gatekeeper acknowledges this and invites other group members to 
participate. Gatekeepers also notice nonverbal signals that indicate that a member 
procedural leadership 
roles
sets of behaviors that directly 
support a group process.
A good logistics coordinator 
leads by providing for the 
physical needs of the group 
and its members. Can you 
think of a group experience 
you have had in which no 
one provided this type of 
leadership?
Lajusticia Richard/PhotoLibrary

233
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
The Effects of Cultural Diversity 
When Problem Solving in Groups
by Lily Herakova
Ph.D. student, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
I’ll never forget the day—it must have been early 
October—the rural Minnesota town where I had 
arrived from Bulgaria to pursue my dreams 
of attaining a diverse and challenging educa-
tion was still holding on to the warm traces of 
summer. In history class that day, the professor 
assigned us to work in what he called “problem 
solving groups.” We were to review each other’s 
papers and offer suggestions for improvement. He 
said, “Use this not only as an editing exercise, 
but as a problem solving activity. I want you to 
rely on your group partners’ responses to move 
toward solutions of problems you might be hav-
ing in your papers.” Because I was not sure I 
understood the professor, I asked for clariﬁ cation. 
One of my classmates explained that we were to 
identify problem areas in the papers and make 
suggestions for improvement to the author. Then, 
through further discussion with group members, 
the author was to make sense of the comments 
and use the ones he or she agreed with to improve 
the manuscript. I realize today that the profes-
sor’s deﬁ nition of a problem solving group was 
pretty loosely deﬁ ned. We would not be work-
ing together as a group to arrive at a solution to 
one problem. However, we did have to work in 
groups to solve problems. So, to be most effec-
tive, it would be important to engage in shared 
leadership.
The bright sunshine outside the classroom 
window carried me away and, in my mind, I was 
back in my parents’ bedroom in Bulgaria. That 
was where our family computer was and where, 
consequently, I did a lot of my paper writing and 
editing. (Nostalgia has a strange way of creeping 
in to the most mundane activities.) Although I 
hadn’t ever been asked to do so in a class with my 
peers before, I thought to myself: “I know how to 
do this. I’ve done it plenty of times. In fact, it’s 
kind of cool that professors here in the United 
States allow us time in class to ‘problem-solve’ 
and learn from each other.” Conﬁ dent in my 
understanding, I began reading my classmates’ 
papers. I was going to help “solve problems” and 
help my group mates improve their papers.
I was fairly conﬁ dent because back home 
in Bulgaria my friends and I often reviewed 
each others’ papers and offered suggestions for 
improvement. Although I had never heard of the 
concept of “problem solving in groups,” it seemed 
to me I actually had experience in doing so. You 
see, in Bulgaria computers and printers were 
scarce and it cost a lot of money to hire someone 
to type and print your term paper. So my parents 
agreed to let my friends use our computer to type 
and print their papers. Because classes in Bulgaria 
were usually large lectures where we rarely knew 
our professors, our insecurities about expecta-
tions abounded. Our collaborative paper writing 
was our way of checking perceptions in terms of 
identifying and deﬁ ning the goals (e.g., problem) 
of the assignment, getting information from each 
other (e.g., analyzing the problem), and develop-
ing papers that met the assignment guidelines 
(e.g., solution). So, we did actually solve prob-
lems in groups. It was just something my friends 
and I did informally as opposed to as an in-class 
activity.
My friends and I would assemble in my par-
ents’ sunny bedroom to “problem solve” about the 
goal of the assignment and help each other prepare 
papers that met the goal. One of us dictated the 
draft of her paper while another typed using only 
her two pointer-ﬁ ngers. The other group members 
listened and offered on-the-spot suggestions for 
revising the essay in ways that more clearly met 
the goal (at least what we believed it to be) of 
the assignment. In our informal problem solving 
Diverse Voices
(Continued )

234
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
wishes to speak. The gatekeeper is the one who sees that Juanita is on the edge of 
her chair, eager to comment, and says, “We haven’t heard from Juanita, and she 
seems to have something she wants to say.”
• Recorders take careful notes of what the group has decided and the evidence upon 
which the decisions are based. Recorders usually distribute edited copies of their 
notes to group members prior to the next meeting. Sometimes these notes are pub-
lished as minutes, which become a public record of the group’s activities.
sessions, my Bulgarian classmates and I would 
offer conﬂ icting opinions, argue, and laugh about 
our “mistakes.” We straightforwardly pointed 
out when we thought something in the text was 
wrong, and quietly swallowed our pride as the 
others made candid comments and offered con-
structive criticism. For example, members might 
say, “This sentence doesn’t make any sense,” “It’s 
grammatically weird,” “It’s completely missing a 
verb,” or “How is this even relevant?” Responses 
to this feedback ranged from anger—“I give up! 
No one seems to get me!”—to much quieter res-
ignation—“Fine I’ll just do it your way . . . .” Most 
of the time, though, reactions fell somewhere in 
between. We often dove into long conversations 
about what someone actually wanted to say and 
why it wasn’t coming through that way on paper.
Though sometimes painful to hear, more 
often than not, these group sessions helped me. 
Comments the others made sometimes hurt my 
pride but often deepened the analysis of my paper 
and always clariﬁ ed my thoughts and my writing. 
As often happens, what seems so obvious to the 
writer might not be so obvious to the reader, and 
what the writer might overlook becomes a glaring 
oversight to the reader. At least that was my expe-
rience . . . my friends helped me deﬁ ne the problems 
in my papers and our conversations suggested 
possible solutions. Ultimately, we all beneﬁ tted 
because we produced papers that usually met and 
often exceeded the expectations of the instructor.
So, in history class that day in rural 
Minnesota, I felt I had the proper experience to 
participate effectively in what he called “prob-
lem solving” groups! I proceeded conﬁ dently to 
read the papers. When I read one of the papers 
and it was mostly composed of incomplete sen-
tences, I said to the author, “This will make so 
much more sense if you would write in complete 
sentences. It’s kind of hard to get what you mean 
when you’re missing verbs.” In retrospect, I only 
remember what I said because of the reaction 
that followed. She immediately raised her hand 
to call the instructor over to our group and said, 
“I don’t know why you let her respond to our 
papers. She’s not even a native English speaker, 
and she’s telling me I don’t know how to write! I 
want someone else to read my paper.” I believed 
I was acting appropriately in my role as an infor-
mation analyzer, which was what our instructor 
expected us to do. My group member, however, 
was unwilling to listen (regardless of whether 
I may have been correct) because English was 
not my ﬁ rst language. I would argue that she 
responded in a self-centered way that hurt the 
functioning of the group toward our overall goal.
To this day, I don’t know for certain if her 
reaction was due to cultural differences (perhaps 
ethnocentrism), an inability to accept feedback 
(especially accepting constructive criticism), or 
some other issue. Throughout the years, however, 
this experience has stayed with me as an unre-
solved confusion—why did my nationality matter 
in terms of functioning as an analyzer in the 
group? Did it somehow automatically disqualify 
me from having a good command of the English 
language or a good understanding of history? 
I could have taken her response personally and 
been hurt by it, but, interestingly, this was not my 
reaction. Instead, throughout my education as an 
undergraduate student, a master’s student, and 
now a Ph.D. student in the United States, I keep 
this question in the forefront of my mind when 
asked to work in a group to solve problems: How 
can we problem solve together without creating 
new problems out of our good-natured attempts 
to “help,” especially when cultural diversity 
might play a role?
Skill Learning Activity 10.4
Web Resource 10.3

235
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
Making Meetings Effective
The disastrous meeting experience recorded in the chapter opener stemmed from poor 
meeting management skills by both the meeting facilitator and by those who attended 
the meeting. In a recent survey, business consultant Dike Drummond (2004) discovered 
that over 50 percent of managers spend at least six hours per week in meetings and 
these same managers feel 50 percent of their meeting time is wasted! To ensure that 
your meetings are not a waste of your time or that of others, let’s look at guidelines for 
meeting leaders and meeting participants.
Guidelines for Meeting Leaders
Most of us will be responsible for convening a group meeting at some point in our 
lives. Whether you are leading the meeting for a class project, a task force at work, or 
substituting for your manager at the monthly department meeting, knowing how to 
effectively plan for, facilitate, and follow up after meetings are useful skills.
Before the meeting
 1. Prepare and distribute an agenda. An agenda is an organized outline of the infor-
mation and decision items that will be covered during a meeting. It is a road map 
that lets the members know the purpose of the meeting and what they are expected 
to accomplish as a result of attending. Agenda items should move the group toward 
its goals and should not include items that could be accomplished without the pres-
ence (albeit in a face-to-face or virtual environment) of all of the meeting attendees.
You can identify the items for your agenda by
• reviewing your notes and the formal minutes of the previous meeting;
•  identifying what the group decided would be its work between meetings; and
• identifying what decisions it expected to make in the next session.
Then you can structure the agenda into information items and decision items, 
having members report on their assignments and then, based on what has been 
learned or accomplished, moving to make relevant decisions.
It is critical to distribute the agenda at least 24 hours before the meeting so that 
members have time to prepare. You can e-mail the agenda, post it to the group’s Web 
page, or hand-deliver it. None of us likes to come to a meeting and be embarrassed 
because we have forgotten to complete an assignment, and most of us don’t like 
to be called on to make decisions that we have not had time to think about. Being 
unprepared is one of the main reasons that time is wasted in meetings. As the meet-
ing leader, you are responsible for providing the information that members need in 
order to come prepared. Figure 10.3 shows an agenda for a group that is meeting to 
decide which one of three courses to offer over the Internet next semester.
 2. Decide who should attend the meeting. In most cases, all members of a group will 
attend meetings. Occasionally, one or more members of the group may not need 
to attend a particular meeting but may only need to be informed of the outcomes 
later.
 3. Manage meeting logistics. You may choose to enact this role or to ask another group 
member to do this. But even if you delegate these tasks, it remains your responsibility 
to make sure that the meeting arrangements are appropriate. If the group is meet-
ing face to face you will want a room that is appropriate to the size and work of 
the group, and you will want to make sure that all of the equipment that the group 
needs is on hand and operational. The room should be set up so that it encourages 
group interaction. This usually means that members can sit around a table or in a 
circle with plenty of desk/table space for writing. If the entire group or some group 
agenda
an organized outline of the 
information and decision 
items that will be covered 
during a meeting.
What are 
group member 
responsibilities 
when participating 
in meetings?

236
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
members are attending the meeting from remote locations you will need to make 
sure that the technology needed to conference them in has been provided. Because 
groups become less effective in long meetings, a meeting should last no longer than 
ninety minutes. If a meeting must be planned for a longer period of time, use seg-
ments of no longer than ninety minutes with scheduled breaks to avoid fatigue.
 4. Speak with each participant prior to the meeting. As the leader, it is important for 
you to understand members’ positions and personal goals. Time spent discussing 
issues in advance allows you to anticipate conﬂ icts that might emerge and plan 
how to manage them so that the group makes effective decisions and maintains 
cohesiveness.
During the meeting
 1. Review and modify the agenda. Begin the meeting by reviewing the agenda and 
modifying it based on members’ suggestions. Because things can change between 
distribution of the agenda and the meeting, reviewing the agenda ensures that the 
group will be working on items that are still relevant. Reviewing the agenda also 
gives members a chance to give input into what is to be discussed.
 2. Monitor member interaction. If other group members are assuming the task-related, 
maintenance, and procedural functions, you need do nothing. But when there is a 
need for a particular role and no one is assuming it, you should do so. For example, 
March 1, 2009
To: Campus computer discussion group
From: Janelle Smith
Re: Agenda for discussion group meeting
Meeting Date: March 8, 2009
Place: Student Union, Conference Room A
Time: 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.
Meeting objectives
•  We will familiarize ourselves with each of three courses that have been proposed 
for Internet-based delivery next semester.
• We will evaluate each course against the criteria we developed last month.
•  We will use a consensus decision process to determine which of the three 
courses to offer.
Agenda for Group discussion
• Review and discussion of Philosophy 141 (Report by Justin)
• Review and discussion of Art History 336 (Report by Marique)
• Review and discussion of Communication 235 (Report by Kathryn)
Consensus building discussion and decision
• Which proposals ﬁ t the criteria?
• Are there non-criteria-related factors to consider?
• Which proposal is more acceptable to all members?
Discussion of next steps and task assignments
Set date of next meeting
Figure 10.3
Agenda for Internet course 
committee

237
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
if you notice that some people are talking more than their fair share and 
no one is trying to draw out quieter members, you should assume the 
gatekeeper role and invite reluctant members to comment on the dis-
cussion. Similarly, if a discussion becomes too heated, you may need to 
take on the role of harmonizer so relationships are not unduly strained.
 3. Monitor the time. It is easy for a group to get bogged down in a dis-
cussion. Although another group member may serve as expediter, it is 
your responsibility as meeting leader to make sure that the group stays 
on schedule.
 4. Praise in public and reprimand in private. Meetings provide an excel-
lent opportunity to praise individuals or the entire group for jobs well 
done. Being recognized among one’s peers often boosts self-esteem, 
group morale, and synergy. Conversely, criticizing individuals or the 
entire group during a meeting has the opposite effect. The humiliation of 
public criticism can deﬂ ate self-esteem, group morale, and motivation.
 5. Check periodically to see if the group is ready to make a decision. You should 
listen carefully for agreement among members and move the group into its formal 
decision-making process when the discussion is no longer adding insight.
 6. Implement the group’s decision rules. You are responsible for executing the deci-
sion-making rule the group has agreed to use. If the group is deciding by con-
sensus, for example, you must make sure all members feel they can support the 
chosen alternative. If the group is deciding by majority rule, you call for the vote 
and tally the results.
 7. Summarize decisions and assignments. You should summarize what has hap-
pened and what is left to accomplish, as well as reiterate task assignments made 
during the meeting, and review what is left to accomplish or decide.
 8. Set the next meeting. You should clarify with members when, and if, future 
meetings are necessary. The overall purposes of the next meeting will dictate what 
you’ll put in the next agenda.
Following up
 1. Review the meeting outcomes and process. A good leader learns how to be more 
effective by reﬂ ecting on how well the meeting went. Did the meeting accomplish 
its goals? Was group cohesion improved or damaged in the process? What will you 
do differently next time to improve the experience?
 2. Prepare and distribute a meeting summary. Although in some groups, a member 
serves as the recorder and distributes minutes, many groups rely on their leader. 
Having a written record of what was agreed to and accomplished as well as assign-
ments that members agreed to complete prior to the next meeting and the decision 
items the group agreed to consider next time gives members an opportunity to 
review the group’s progress and to correct any mistakes in the record. If the group 
has a recorder, you should review the minutes and compare them to your notes 
before they are distributed. Summaries are most useful when they are distributed 
within two or three days of the meeting when everyone’s memories are still fresh.
 3. Repair damaged relationships. If the debate during the meeting was heated, some 
members may have damaged their relationships or left the meeting angry or hurt. 
You should help repair relationships by seeking out these participants and talking 
with them. Through empathic listening, you can soothe hurt feelings and spark a 
recommitment to the group.
 4. Conduct informal progress reports. When participants have been assigned speciﬁ c 
task responsibilities, you should periodically check in to see if they have encoun-
tered any problems in completing those tasks and how you might help them.
© 2002 Ted Goff www.tedgoff.com

238
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
Guidelines for Meeting Participants
Just as there are guidelines for effective conveners/formal leaders to follow before, 
during, and after meetings, there are also guidelines to help meeting participants.
Before the meeting
As the chapter opener illustrated, too often people think of group meetings as a “hap-
pening” that requires attendance but no preparation. Countless times we have observed 
people arriving at a meeting unprepared even though they are carrying packets of 
material they received in advance. To be worthwhile, meetings should not be treated 
as impromptu events but as carefully planned interactions that pool information from 
well-prepared individuals. Here are some important steps for members to take prior to 
attending a meeting.
 1. Study the agenda. Consider the purpose of the meeting and determine what you 
need to do to be prepared. If you had an assignment, make sure that you will be 
ready to report on it.
 2. Study the minutes. If this is one in a series of meetings, read the minutes and your 
own notes from the previous meeting. What happened at the previous meeting 
should provide the basis for preparing for the next one.
 3. Do your homework. Read the material distributed prior to the meeting and do 
your own research to become better informed about items on the agenda. If no 
material is provided, then identify the issues and learn what you need to know to 
be a productive group member. Bring any materials you ﬁ nd that may help the 
group accomplish the agenda. If some members will not be able to attend, solicit 
their ideas about the agenda.
 4. List questions. Make a list of questions related to agenda items that you would 
like to have answered during the meeting.
 5. Plan to play a leadership role. Consider which leadership functions and roles you 
are best at. Decide what you will do to play those roles to the best of your ability.
During the meeting
Go into the meeting planning to be a full 
participant. If there are ﬁ ve people in the 
group, all ﬁ ve should be participating.
1.  Listen attentively. Concentrate on 
what others are saying so that you 
can use your material to comple-
ment, supplement, or counter what is 
presented.
2.  Stay focused. It is easy to get off track 
during meetings. Keep your comments 
focused on the speciﬁ c agenda item 
under discussion. If others get off the 
subject, do what you can to get the 
discussion back on track.
3.  Ask questions. Honest questions, 
whose answers you do not already 
know, help stimulate discussion and 
build ideas.
Some people wait until the 
last minute to prepare for 
meetings. Do you ﬁ nd it 
annoying to attend meetings 
where people come 
unprepared to participate?
Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit

239
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
 4.  Take notes. Even if someone else is responsible for providing the ofﬁ cial minutes, 
you’ll need notes that help you follow the discussion’s line of development. Also, 
these notes will help you remember what has been said and any responsibilities 
you have agreed to take on after the meeting.
 5. Play devil’s advocate. When you think an idea has not been fully discussed or 
tested, be willing to voice disagreement or encourage further discussion.
 6. Monitor your contributions. Especially when people are well prepared, they have 
a tendency to dominate discussion. Make sure that you are neither dominating the 
discussion nor abdicating your responsibility to share insights and opinions.
Following these guidelines for participating responsibly in meetings will make 
them a more pleasant and productive experience. Although most meetings used 
to be conducted face to face, today more meetings are occurring via teleconfer-
ence, video conference, and online social networks. Engaging responsibly in virtual 
meetings has some unique challenges, particularly in staying focused and listening 
attentively. 
Following up
When meetings end, too often people leave and forget about what took place until the 
next meeting. But what happens in one meeting provides a basis for what happens in 
the next. You must do your part to prepare to move forward at the next meeting.
 1. Review and summarize your notes. Try to do this shortly after the meeting while 
ideas are still fresh in your mind. Make notes of what needs to be discussed next 
time.
 2. Evaluate your effectiveness. How effective were you in helping the group move 
toward achieving its goals? Where were you strong? Where were you weak? What 
should you do next time to improve and how? For example, if you didn’t speak up 
as much as you would have liked to, perhaps you’ll decide to write down questions 
or topics when they come to you and use them as notes to encourage you to speak 
up next time.
 3. Review decisions. Make notes about what your role was in making decisions. Did 
you do all that you could have done? If not, what will you do differently next 
time, why, and how?
 4. Communicate progress. Inform others who need to know about information con-
veyed and decisions made in the meeting.
 5. Complete your tasks. Make sure you complete all assignments you received in the 
meeting.
 6. Review minutes. Compare the ofﬁ cial meeting minutes to your own notes, and 
report any signiﬁ cant discrepancies to the member who prepared the minutes.
Conversation and Analysis
Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access Skill Learning Activity 10.6, 
which is a video clip of the Student Government Financial Committee meeting. As you 
watch the conversation, observe the group’s dynamics. Is its goal clear? Is its member-
ship sufﬁ ciently diverse? What stage of group development does the committee appear 
to be in? Are the members using the problem solving method? What roles are being 
played by each member? Do they appear to be prepared for the meeting? You can 
respond to these analysis questions by clicking on “Critique” in the menu bar at the 
Web Resource 10.4
Skill Learning Activity 10.5

240
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
top of the screen. When you’ve answered all the questions, click “Done” to compare 
your answers to those provided by the authors.
As members of the Student Government Financial Committee, Davinia, Joyce, 
Thomas, and Pat make decisions on how much funding, if any, to give to various stu-
dent groups that request support from the funds collected from student fees. They are 
meeting for the ﬁ rst time in a campus cafeteria.
Conversation
THOMAS: Well, we’ve got 23 applications for funding and a total of $19,000 that we 
can distribute.
DAVINIA: Maybe we should start by listing how much each of the 23 groups wants.
JOYCE: It might be better to start by determining the criteria that we will use to decide 
if groups get any funding from student fees.
DAVINIA: Yeah, right. We should set up our criteria before we look at applications.
Skill Learning Activity 10.6
Problem Solving in 
Cyberspace: Dungeons & 
Dragons and World of Warcraft
For some, the role-playing games Dungeons & 
Dragons and World of Warcraft might conjure 
up the stereotypical image of a teenage boy 
typing away at his computer, alone. But role-
playing games are actually social interactions 
that encourage successful group problem 
solving, incorporating the six steps we discuss 
in this chapter: identifying and deﬁ ning the 
problem, analyzing the problem, developing 
criteria for evaluation solutions, brainstorming 
possible solutions, selecting one, and imple-
menting it.
Dungeons & Dragons, the ﬁ rst modern role-
playing game of its kind (Williams, Hendricks, 
& Winkler, 2006), is typically played among a 
group of friends at a table, without a computer. 
A Dungeon Master narrates and creates rules for 
a fantasy story, and people at the table act as the 
story’s characters. Together, the players work to 
defeat monsters, ﬁ nd treasure, gain experience, 
and face other challenges. One of the creators of 
Dungeons & Dragons, Gary Gygax, said in a 2006 
telephone interview, “The essence of a role-playing 
game is that it is a group, cooperative experience. 
There is no winning or losing” (Schiesel, 2008). 
Newsweek’s Patrick Enright remembers his 
own Dungeons & Dragons experiences as a boy 
(Ebeling, 2008):
Pop Comm!
AP Photo/Eckehard Schulz
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

241
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
THOMAS: Sounds good to me. Pat, what do you think?
PAT: I’m on board. Let’s set up criteria ﬁ rst and then review the applications against 
those.
JOYCE: OK, we might start by looking at the criteria used last year by the Financial 
Committee. Does anyone have a copy of those?
THOMAS: I do. (He passes out copies to the other three people.) They had three cri-
teria: service to a signiﬁ cant number of students, compliance with the college’s 
nondiscrimination policies, and educational beneﬁ t.
DAVINIA: What counts as “educational beneﬁ t”? Did last year’s committee specify 
that?
JOYCE: Good question. Thomas, you were on the committee last year. Do you remem-
ber what they counted as educational beneﬁ t?
THOMAS: The main thing I remember is that it was distinguished from artistic beneﬁ t—
like a concert or art exhibit or something like that.
PAT: But can’t art be educational?
If you suddenly wanted to attack your travel-
ing companions with a broadsword or a Finger 
of Death spell, there was nothing stopping you. 
The amazing thing is how rarely that happened. 
Unless the neighborhood bully joined in (and 
almost never did those tanned, skinned-kneed 
fellas venture into our dank lairs), we all helped 
each other and together defeated whatever 
dragon or monster we were battling. Yes, I’ll say 
it: Dungeons & Dragons taught me everything I 
need to know about teamwork.
Dungeons & Dragon inspired World of 
Warcraft, a popular MMORPG (massively mul-
tiplayer online role-playing game). World of 
Warcraft differs from Dungeons & Dragons in that 
it is played online, and the game, instead of a 
human Dungeon Master, regulates the story and 
the rules. To signiﬁ cantly advance in the game, 
players must still work with others to defeat 
monsters, ﬁ nd treasure, and gain experience, but 
they communicate with one another using text or 
voice chat programs (Newman, 2007).
In a Business Week Online article, researcher 
John Seely Brown and business consultant John 
Hagel (2009) argue that many aspects of World 
of Warcraft encourage group problem solving 
and can even be applied as innovative workplace 
strategies. These aspects include
• Creating opportunities for teams to self-
organize around challenging performance 
targets.
• Providing opportunities to develop tacit 
knowledge without neglecting the exchange 
of broader knowledge.
• Encouraging frequent and rigorous 
performance feedback.
But beyond the application to real-life situ-
ations, many fans of role-playing ﬁ nd that the 
complexities of group problem solving make 
things more interesting and more exciting. In 
The Escapist, an online magazine about video 
games, Ray Huling (2008) writes of Dungeons & 
Dragons, “Players can mitigate the chaos inherent 
in a game’s dice by agreeing to ignore rolls, but 
they can also intensify chaos by pissing off (or 
on!) huge barbarians. The group decides whether 
encouraging mischief-makers adds to the game.” 
He adds, “Group dynamics produce unforeseen 
complications, which often maximize fun.”

242
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
DAVINIA: Yeah, I think so. Thomas, Joyce, do you?
THOMAS: I guess, but it’s like art’s primary purpose isn’t to educate.
JOYCE: I agree. It’s kind of hard to put into words, but I think educational 
beneﬁ t has more to do with information and the mind, and art has more to do 
with the soul. Does that sound too hokey? (Laughter.)
PAT: OK, so we want to say that we don’t distribute funds to any hokey groups, 
right? (More laughter.)
DAVINIA: It’s not like we’re against art or anything. It’s just that the funding 
we can distribute is for educational beneﬁ t, right? (Everyone nods.)
JOYCE: OK, let’s move on to another criterion. What is the signiﬁ cant number of 
students?
THOMAS: Last year we said that the proposals for using money had to be of potential 
interest to at least 20 percent of students to get funding. How does that sound to you?
PAT: Sounds OK as long as we remember that something can be of potential interest to 
students who aren’t members of speciﬁ c groups. Like, for instance, I might want 
to attend a program on Native American customs even though I’m not a Native 
American. See what I mean?
DAVINIA: Good point—we don’t want to deﬁ ne student interest as student identity or 
anything like that. (Nods of agreement.)
THOMAS: OK, so are we agreed that 20 percent is about right with the understanding 
that the 20 percent can include students who aren’t in a group applying for fund-
ing? (Nods.) OK, then, do we need to discuss the criterion of compliance with the 
college’s policies on nondiscrimination?
Communicating Group Solutions
Once a group has completed its deliberations, it is usually expected to communicate 
what it has decided to someone or some other body. Deliverables are tangible or 
intangible products of your work that must be provided to someone else. Although 
some deliverables are objects, typically the deliverables from problem solving groups 
are communications of the information gathered, analyses, decisions, and recommen-
dations of the group. These kinds of intangible deliverables can be communicated in 
written formats, oral formats, or visual and audiovisual formats.
Written Formats
 1. Written brief. A written brief is a very short document that describes the 
problem, background, process, decision, and rationale so that the reader can 
quickly understand and evaluate the group’s product. Most briefs are one or 
two pages long. When preparing a brief, begin by describing your group’s task. 
What problem were you attempting to solve and why? Then brieﬂ y provide the 
background information the reader will need to evaluate whether the group 
has adequately studied the problem. Present solution steps and timelines for 
implementation as bullet points so that the reader can quickly understand what 
is being proposed. Close with a sentence or very short paragraph that describes 
how the recommendation will solve the problem, as well as any potential side 
effects.
deliverables
tangible or intangible 
products of work that must be 
provided to someone else.
written brief
a very short document 
that describes a problem, 
background, process, 
decision, and rationale so 
that a reader can quickly 
understand and evaluate a 
group’s product.
How can groups 
communicate their 
solutions to others?
Jason Harris/Thomson Higher Education/
Wadsworth Publishing Group

243
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
 2. Comprehensive report. A comprehensive report is a written document that 
provides a detailed review of the problem solving process used to arrive at the 
recommendation. A comprehensive report is usually organized into sections that 
parallel the problem solving process.
Because comprehensive reports can be very long, they usually include an 
executive summary. An executive summary is a one-page synopsis of the report. 
This summary contains enough information to acquaint readers with the high-
lights of the full document without reading it. Usually, it contains a statement of 
the problem, some background information, a description of any alternatives, and 
the major conclusions.
Oral Formats
 1. Oral brief. An oral brief is essentially a summary of a written brief delivered to an 
audience by a group member. Typically, an oral brief can be delivered in less than 
10 minutes.
 2. Oral report. An oral report is similar to a comprehensive report. It provides a more 
detailed review of a group’s problem solving process. Oral reports can range from 
30 to 60 minutes.
 3. Symposium. A symposium is a set of prepared oral reports delivered sequentially by 
group members before a gathering of people who are interested in the work of the 
group. A symposium may be organized so that each person’s speech focuses on one 
step of the problem solving process, or it may be organized so that each speaker cov-
ers all of the steps in the problem solving process as they relate to one of several issues 
or recommendations that the group worked on or made. In a symposium format, the 
speakers usually sit together at the front of the room. One member acts as moderator, 
offering the introductory and concluding remarks and providing transitions between 
speakers. When introduced by the moderator, each speaker may stand and walk to 
a central spot, usually a lectern. Speakers who are going to use PowerPoint visu-
als should coordinate their slides so that there can be seamless transitions between 
speakers. Symposiums often conclude with a question-and-answer session facilitated 
by the moderator, who directs one or more of the members to answer based on their 
expertise. Questions can be directed to individuals or to the group as a whole.
 4. Panel discussion. A panel discussion is a structured problem solving discussion 
held by a group in front of an audience. One member serves as moderator, intro-
ducing the topic and providing structure by asking a series of planned questions 
that panelists answer. Their answers and the interaction among them provide the 
supporting evidence. A well-planned panel discussion seems spontaneous and 
interactive but requires careful planning and rehearsal to ensure that all relevant 
information is presented and that all speakers are afforded equal speaking time. 
After the formal discussion, the audience is often encouraged to question the 
participants. Perhaps you’ve seen or heard a panel of experts discuss a topic on a 
radio or television talk show like Sports Center or The View.
Virtual Reports
 1. Remote access reports. A remote access report (RAR) is a computer-mediated 
audiovisual presentation of the group’s process and outcome that others can 
receive through e-mail, Web posting, and so forth. Prepared by one or more 
members of the group, the RAR is prepared in PowerPoint or other computer 
software and provides a visual overview of the group’s process, decisions, and 
comprehensive report
a written document that 
provides a detailed review 
of the problem solving 
process used to arrive at a 
recommendation.
executive summary
a one-page synopsis of a 
comprehensive report.
oral brief
a summary of a written brief 
delivered to an audience by 
a group member.
oral report
a detailed review of a group’s 
problem solving process 
delivered to an audience by 
one or more group members.
symposium
a set of prepared oral reports 
delivered sequentially by 
group members before a 
gathering of people who are 
interested in the work of the 
group.
panel discussion
a structured problem solving 
discussion held by a group in 
front of an audience.
panel discussion
a structured problem solving 
discussion held by a group in 
front of an audience.
remote access report 
(RAR)
a computer-mediated 
audiovisual presentation of a 
group’s process and outcome 
that others can receive 
electronically.

244
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
Panel Discussion
The Assignment
Form a small group with 3–5 classmates. As a group, decide on a social 
issue or problem you would like to study in depth. Then select one group 
member to serve as moderator and the others as expert panelists. Each 
member should do research to ﬁ nd out all they can about the issue, 
why it is a problem, how it affects people and to what degree, as well as 
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
28%
17%
11%
Operating expenses
Salaries
Fundraising
Travel
Budget allocations
44%
Figure 10.4
Example of a slide in a 
remote access report
recommendations. Effective RARs consist of no more than 15 to 20 slides. Slides 
are titled and content is presented in outline or bullet-point phrases or key words 
(rather than complete sentences or paragraphs), as well through visual representa-
tions of important information. For example, a budget task force might have a slide 
with a pie chart depicting the portions of the proposed budget that are allocated to 
operating expenses, salaries, fundraising, and travel (see Figure 10.4). RARs may 
be self-running so that the slides automatically forward after a certain number of 
seconds, but it is better to let the viewer choose the pace and control when the 
next slide appears. RARs can be silent or narrated. When narrated, a voice-over 
accompanies each slide, providing additional or explanatory information.
 2. Streaming videos. A streaming video is a pre-recording that is sent in com-
pressed form over the Internet. You are probably familiar with streaming video 
from popular Websites such as YouTube. Streaming videos are a great way to 
distribute oral briefs, but they also can be used to distribute recordings of oral 
reports, symposiums, or panel presentations. Streaming videos are useful when 
it is inconvenient for some or all the people who need to know the results of the 
group’s work to meet at one time or in one place.
streaming video
a pre-recording that is sent 
in compressed form over the 
Internet.

245
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
A Question of Ethics
“You know, Sue, we’re going to be in deep trouble 
if the group doesn’t support McGowan’s resolu-
tion about dues reform.”
“Well, we’ll just have to see to it that all the 
arguments in favor of that resolution are heard, 
but in the end it’s the group’s decision.”
“That’s very democratic of you, Sue, but you 
know that if it doesn’t pass, you’re likely to be out 
on your tail.”
“That may be, Heather, but I don’t see what I 
can do about it.”
“You don’t want to see. First, right now the 
group respects you. If you would just apply a 
little pressure on a couple of the members, you’d 
get what you want.”
“What do you mean?”
“Look, this is a good cause. You’ve got some-
thing on just about every member of the group. 
Take a couple of members aside and let them 
know that this is payoff time. I think you’ll see 
that some key folks will see it your way.”
 1. Should Sue follow Heather’s advice? Why or 
why not?
 2. Is it appropriate to use personal inﬂ uence to 
affect the outcome of group decisions? If you 
answered yes, at what point does the use of 
personal inﬂ uence cross the line from ethi-
cal to unethical behavior? If you answered 
no, explain why personal inﬂ uence shouldn’t 
be one of the many factors groups consider 
when making decisions?
What Would You Do?
potential ideas for solving it. The moderator’s role is to come up with 4–6 
good  questions to ask the panelists. The panelists should prepare notes 
about the research they discovered.
On the day determined by the instructor, you will engage in a 15- to 
20-minute panel discussion in front of your classmates. The moderator will 
guide the discussion by asking questions of the panelists, as well as asking 
for questions from the class.
Suggested Format
 1. 
Moderator thanks audience for coming and introduces the pan-
elists and the topic.
 2. 
Moderator asks panelists a series of questions, letting a different 
panelist respond ﬁ rst each time.
 3. 
Moderator asks follow-up questions when appropriate.
 4. 
Moderator asks for questions from the audience.
 5. 
Moderator thanks the panelists and the audience members for 
participating.

246
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
Now that you have read Chapter 10, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore commu-
nication concepts online (Web Resources), develop 
your speech outlines (Speech Builder Express 3.0), 
watch and critique videos of communication situ-
ations and sample speeches (Interactive Video 
Activities), upload your speech videos for peer 
reviewing and critique other students’ speeches 
(Speech Studio online speech review tool), and 
download chapter review so you can study when 
and where you’d like (Audio Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Acti-
vities, and Web Resources are also featured on the 
following pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s 
Communicate on Your Feet assignment in the body 
of the chapter.
Key Terms
agenda (235)
brainstorming (228)
comprehensive report (243)
criteria (227)
decision making (229)
executive summary (243)
informal or emergent leader (230)
maintenance roles (231)
oral brief (243)
oral report (243)
panel discussion (243)
problem deﬁ nition (226)
procedural roles (232)
question of fact (226)
question of policy (226)
question of value (226)
remote access report 
(RAR) (243)
shared leadership functions (230)
streaming video (244)
symposium (243)
task roles (230)
written brief (242)
Communicate! Online
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about an effective process for problem solving developed 
by John Dewey over 75 years ago. That six-step process consists of identifying and 
deﬁ ning the problem, analyzing the problem, developing criteria for evaluating solu-
tions, brainstorming possible solutions, selecting a solution, and implementing it.
You also learned about the leadership skills needed to effectively manage group 
interactions during problem solving. These shared leadership skills focus on task, 
maintenance, and procedural roles.
Then, we explained your responsibilities as group convener and as group partici-
pant before, during, and after meetings. Finally, we talked about the different formats 
you might choose from to share your solutions with others. These formats can be writ-
ten, oral, or visual/audiovisual. By following the guidelines we offer in this chapter, 
you will ﬁ nd your participation in problem solving groups to be both pleasant and 
productive.

247
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
Skill Learning Activities
10.1: Stating Problems (226)
Indicate whether each of the following is a ques-
tion of fact, a question of value, or a question of 
policy. When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
activities for Chapter 10.
 1. What should we do to increase the quality of ﬁ n-
ished parts?
 2. Do police stop African American drivers more 
frequently than other drivers?
 3. Should television news organizations use exit 
polls to call elections?
 4. Is John guilty of involuntary manslaughter?
 5. Is seniority the best method of handling employee 
layoffs?
 6. What is the best vacation plan for our family?
10.2: How Does Your Group Solve Problems? 
(230)
Analyze a situation in which a group to which 
you belong attempted to solve a problem. Write a 
paragraph in which you answer the following ques-
tions. Did the group use all six of the problem solving 
steps listed in this chapter? If not, which steps did 
the group overlook? Were there any steps the group 
should have placed more emphasis on? Was the 
group successful in its efforts to solve the problem? 
Explain why you think this was or was not the case.
10.3: Emerging Informal Leadership in CBS’s 
Survivor Series (230)
Watch a recent episode of one of the popular 
CBS Survivor series. Select one tribe and identify the 
dominant roles that each member of the group seems 
to play in that episode. Who is vying for informal 
leadership? How are they trying to gain or maintain 
their leadership? What do you think will happen to 
each leader candidate?
To help you complete this activity, use the link to 
the Website for each Survivor series provided in your 
Premium Website for Communicate! (Look for it in 
the Skill Learning Activities for Chapter 10.) Click on 
the “Video” link in the menu at the top of the home 
page to access video to each season’s episodes. Click 
on the “Recaps” link for the group you chose and 
see how well your predictions held up. Write a short 
essay describing what you have learned.
10.4: Identifying Roles (234)
Match the typical comment to the role it is most 
characteristic of. When you’re done with this activity, 
compare your answers to the authors’ at the Premium 
Website for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill 
Learning Activities for Chapter 10.
Roles
a. aggressor
b. analyzer
c. 
expediter
d. gatekeeper
e. 
harmonizer
f. 
information or opinion giver
g. information or opinion seeker
h. interpreter
i. 
supporter
j. 
tension reliever
Comments
 1. Did anyone discover if we have to recommend 
only one company?
 2. I don’t have time to help with that.
 3. I think Rick has an excellent idea.
 4. Stupid idea, Katie. Why don’t you stop and think 
before you open your mouth?
 5. Kwitabe doesn’t necessarily agree with you, but 
he would consider it rude to openly disagree with 
someone who is older.
 6. Josiah, in your plan weren’t you assuming that 
we’d only need two days rest for rehearsal?
 7. Lisa, I understand your point. What do you think 
about it, Paul?
 8. Okay, so we’ve all agreed that we should begin 
keeping time logs. Now shouldn’t we be thinking 
about what information needs to be on them?
 9. Wow, it’s getting tense in here. If we don’t chill 
out soon, we’re likely to spontaneously combust. 
And, hello, that’ll be a problem because we’re the 
only engine company in this area of town, right?
 10. Barb, I don’t think that your position is really 
that different from Saul’s. Let me see if I can 
explain how they relate.

248
 
Chapter 10 Problem Solving in Groups
 11. I’ve visited that home before, and I found that 
both the mom and dad are trying very hard to 
help their son.
10.5: Member Meeting Responsibilities (239)
Recall the last time you attended a small group 
problem solving meeting. On a scale of 1 to 5 (1 = not at 
all, 2 = poorly, 3 = somewhat, 4 = well done, 5 = to the best 
of my ability), rate yourself on how well you carried out 
each of the preparation, participation, and follow-up 
guidelines. Analyze your responses and determine how 
effectively you participated in that meeting. What do 
you need to work on to become a more valuable member 
of a problem solving group? Why? Write a paragraph in 
which you describe what you have learned.
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the check sheet provided in your Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning 
Activities for Chapter 10.
10.6: Group Communication (240)
After you’ve watched the video of Thomas, 
Davinia, Joyce, and Pat and have read the transcript 
of their conversation, answer the following questions.
 1. Is the group’s goal clear?
 2. Do they have sufﬁ cient diversity in their 
membership?
 3. What stage of group development do they seem 
to be in?
 4. Are they using the problem solving method?
 5. What roles are being played by each member?
 6. Do they appear to be prepared for the meeting?
When you’re done with this activity, compare 
your answers to the authors’ at the Premium Website 
for Communicate! Look for them in the Skill Learning 
Activities for Chapter 10.
Web Resources
10.1: What’s Your Problem? (226)
This page at the Website for the Sheridan Institute 
of Technology and Advanced Learning suggests that 
later stages of problem solving move more quickly 
if the group has thoroughly studied, discussed, and 
agreed on the problem.
10.2: Rules for Brainstorming (228)
This site at the Center for Leadership and 
Community Engagement, George Mason University, 
features a list of rules to guide the brainstorming 
process.
10.3: Identifying Your Team Player Style (234)
Determine whether you are a contributor, collab-
orator, communicator, or challenger using this survey 
at the Professional Teambuilding Website.
10.4: Taking Notes (239)
For useful tips on how to take minutes in meet-
ings, visit this page at the MeetingWizard.org Website.

249
 
Chapter 10  Problem Solving in Groups 
3
part
Self Review
Group Communication
Group Communication from Chapters 9 and 10
How effective are you at working in problem solving groups? The following state-
ments can help you evaluate your effectiveness in group settings. Use this scale to 
assess the frequency with which you perform each behavior: 1 = always; 2 = often; 
3 = sometimes; 4 = rarely; 5 = never.
____ 
I enjoy working with others to accomplish goals. (Ch. 9)
_____ 
I adapt my behavior to the norms of the group. (Ch. 9)
_____ 
I am comfortable with conﬂ ict. (Ch. 9)
_____ 
I actively listen and keep an open mind during problem solving discussions. 
(Ch. 10)
_____ 
I avoid performing self-centered roles in the group. (Ch. 10)
_____ 
I am equally adept at performing task and maintenance roles in the 
group. (Ch. 10)
_____ 
I come to group meetings prepared. (Ch. 10)
_____ 
During group meetings, my active participation makes positive contributions 
to goal accomplishment and maintaining good relationships. (Ch. 10)
_____ 
After meetings, I complete tasks I have been assigned and review meeting 
notes and minutes. (Ch. 10)
To verify this self-analysis, have a friend or fellow group member complete this 
review for you. Based on what you have learned, select the group communication 
behavior you would most like to improve. Write a communication improvement plan 
similar to the sample goal statement in Chapter 1 (page 18).
You can complete this Self-Review online and, if requested, e-mail it to your instructor. Use 
your Premium Website for Communicate! to access Part 3 Self-Review under the chapter 
resources for Chapter 10, then click on “Part 3 Self-Review.”

11
Will Hart/PhotoEdit
Developing and Researching 
a Speech Topic
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• How can you choose a good topic for your speech?
• What can you do to make sure that your speech topic and goal are 
appropriate?
• How can you adapt your speech goal to your audience?
• What are the three types of information sources for speeches?
• How can you evaluate sources to ensure that the information they 
provide is unbiased and true?
• Why is it important for you to make a record of the information you ﬁ nd?
• How do you orally cite sources during your speech?
Donna is a marine biologist. She knows that her audience wants to hear her talk 
about marine biology, but she doesn’t know what aspect of the topic she should 
focus on.
Romeo has been invited to speak to a student assembly at the inner-city middle 
school he attended. He has a lot he could say to these students who are so much 
like him. He really wants them to understand what they need to do now to have a 
chance to go to college. However, he’s not sure how to organize his thoughts.
Dan is taking a required public speaking class. His ﬁ rst speech is scheduled for 
two weeks from tomorrow. As of today, he doesn’t have the foggiest idea what he 
is going to talk about and he’s scared to death.

251
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
Do any of these situations seem familiar? Do you identify with Dan? You may be 
taking this course as part of a graduation requirement and the thought of giving a 
speech can be overwhelming. However, developing public speaking skills is impor-
tant. Why? Because when you are able to express your ideas to an audience, you 
are empowered. In a public forum, an effective speaker can stimulate and inﬂ uence 
the thinking of others in ways that can improve their lives and the lives of those 
around them. In the workplace, effective public speaking skills are essential to 
advancement. Whether presenting oral reports and proposals, responding to ques-
tions, or training other workers, management-level and professional employees 
spend much of their work lives in activities that include or draw on public speak-
ing skills.
Luckily, public speaking skills are not inborn; they are learned. In the chap-
ters that follow, we will explain how you can improve your public speaking 
through careful preparation. In Chapters 11 through 14, you will learn a simple 
speech planning process that consists of the ﬁ ve Action Steps listed in Figure 11.1. 
Then in the ﬁ nal two chapters, we present more detailed information on organiz-
ing and developing informative and persuasive speeches, which are the two most 
common types.
This chapter is devoted to explaining how to complete the ﬁ rst two action steps.
Action Step 1: Determine a Speciﬁ c Speech 
Goal That Is Adapted to the Audience and Occasion
Speech planning begins by identifying a goal for your speech. To prepare a speciﬁ c 
goal, you will need a list of topics that are appropriate to your speciﬁ c audience and to 
the occasion. From these you will be able to select one and to write a goal statement 
for your speech.
Action Step 1
Determine a Speciﬁ c Speech Goal that is Adapted to the Audience and 
Occasion.
Action Step 2
Gather and Evaluate Information to Develop the Content of Your Speech.
Action Step 3
Organize Your Material to Meet the Needs of Your Particular Audience.
Action Step 4
Adapt the Verbal and Visual Material to the Needs of Your Speciﬁ c Audience.
Action Step 5
Practice Presenting Your Speech
Figure 11.1
Speech plan action steps

252
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
Identify Topics
Good speech topics are developed from subjects that interest you and that you already 
know something about. What do you know a lot about? What has interested you 
enough so that you have gained some expertise? These subjects are a good source for 
speech topics. What is the difference between subject and topic? A subject is a broad 
area of knowledge; for example, you may have expertise in the subject of movies, 
cognitive psychology, computer technology, hip-hop culture, Asian art, or the politics 
of the Middle East. A topic is narrower and is a subset or speciﬁ c aspect of a subject. If 
your subject is movies, you might feel qualiﬁ ed to speak on a variety of topics such as 
how the Academy Awards nomination process works; the relationships between movie 
producers, directors, and distributors; or how technology is changing movie produc-
tion. Similarly, if your subject area is computer technology, you might be able to speak 
on cloud technology or Web 2.0.
Let’s look at how you can identify subject areas that interest you and then, from 
those subject areas, identify and select speciﬁ c topics you might use for the speeches 
you will present.
List Subjects
You can identify potential subjects for your speeches by listing subjects that 
(1) are important to you—that you ﬁ nd interesting and exciting—and (2) you know 
something about. Subjects may be related to careers that interest you, your major 
area of study, special skills or competencies that you have or admire, your hobbies, 
your leisure and volunteer activities, as well as your social, economic, or politi-
cal interests. So if sales and marketing are your majors and your intended career, 
playing WoW online and snowboarding are your favorite activities, and you are 
a literacy volunteer who is concerned about the falling rate of high school gradu-
ation, then these are subject areas from which you can identify topics for your 
speeches.
At this point, it is tempting to think, “The audience is going to be bored if I talk 
about what interests me.” In reality, all subject areas can interest an audience. Have 
you ever been drawn into a subject because the person you were talking to was so 
excited by the subject and good at explaining it? If you speak on a topic that you 
know something about and that really interests you, you will ﬁ nd it easy to be appear 
knowledgeable and to communicate your enthusiasm to others. Figure 11.2 is the list 
of subjects that Holly, a beginning speech student, identiﬁ ed for the speeches she 
was to give this term in her speech class. She identiﬁ ed subjects under three broad 
subject
a broad area of knowledge.
topic
some speciﬁ c aspect of a 
subject.
How can you 
choose a good 
topic for your 
speech?
Figure 11.2
Holly’s subject list
Major and career 
interests
Hobbies and activities
Issues and concerns
teaching
social networking
endangered birds
Web site design
rowing
child pornography on the 
Internet and child abuse
information systems
Big Brotherss Big Sisters 
organization 
personal privacy and the 
Internet
technology trainer
birding
water pollution
computer-aided design
photography
parenting education

253
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
headings: (1) major subject and career interests, (2) hobbies and activities, and (3) 
issues or concerns.
Brainstorm and Concept Map for Topic Ideas
Because a topic is only one aspect of a subject, you can identify many topics within a 
subject. Two methods for identifying topics are brainstorming and concept mapping.
Brainstorming is an uncritical, nonevaluative process of generating associated 
ideas. When you brainstorm, you list as many ideas as you can without evaluating 
them. Holly, for example, decided she wanted to give a speech on the subject of social 
networking. By brainstorming, she was able to a list topics that included: the history 
of social networking, future trends in social networking, comparisons between popular 
social networking sites; the downside of social networking, and the social impacts of 
online social networks.
A second tool you can use to identify speciﬁ c topics from a general subject area 
is concept mapping. Concept mapping is a visual means of exploring connections 
between a subject and related ideas (Callison, 2001). To generate connections, you 
might ask yourself questions about your subject, focusing on who, what, where, when, 
and how. Holly used concept mapping to identify topics related to endangered birds. 
In Figure 11.3 you can see what Holly’s concept map looked like.
You can create a list of potential topics by completing Action Step 1.a: Brainstorm 
and Concept Map for Topics.
When you brainstorm, you will 
come up with many topics 
from one subject. Try it!
Web Resource 11.1
Endangered
Birds
Checklist
 Programs
Christmas Bird
Count Data Base
Project
Migration
Tracking
Bird Atlases
How do we monitor
 bird populations ?
What is causing
bird populations
to decline ?
Overhunting
The Endangered
Species Act
The Politics
The Process
How is a bird species 
declared endangered ?
Online Video
Monitoring
Satellite Tracking
Environmental
Decline
Figure 11.3
Concept map for 
endangered birds
brainstorming
an uncritical, nonevaluative 
process of generating 
associated ideas.
concept mapping
A visual means of exploring 
connections between a 
subject and related ideas.
Thomson Higher Education/Wadsworth Publishing Group

254
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
Analyze the Audience
Because speeches are presented to a particular audience, before you can ﬁ nally decide 
on your topic, you need to understand who will be in your prospective audience. 
Audience analysis is the study of the intended audience for your speech. Understanding 
your prospective audience will help you select an appropriate topic from your list. Your 
audience analysis will also help you in audience adaptation, the process of tailoring 
your speech’s information to the needs, interests, and expectations of your audience.
Identify Audience Analysis Information Needs
To begin, you will want to gather information that will help you understand how audi-
ence members are alike and different from you and from each other. You will want to 
gather data to help you understand basic audience characteristics or demographics. 
Helpful demographic information includes things such as each audience member’s age, 
education, gender, income, occupation, race, ethnicity, religion, geographic unique-
ness, and language. This information will help you make educated inferences about 
them and adapt your speech accordingly. Figure 11.4 presents a list of questions you 
can use to obtain necessary demographic information.
Let’s look at an example to see how audience analysis data can help you decide on 
a topic. Suppose that you have decided to give a speech on blogging. If you’re not sure 
your audience understands what blogging is you may infer what they know by looking 
at their demographics. Is almost all of the audience young, well-educated, and from a 
middle class background? If so, you can infer that they will have heard about blogging 
and know some of the basics. So you will gear your speech to more specialized infor-
mation. But if your audience is from different demographic groups, then you might 
need to survey them about what they know about blogging and then use what they tell 
you to pick an appropriate topic within the general subject of blogging. For example, 
audience analysis
the study of the intended 
audience for your speech.
audience adaptation
the process of tailoring your 
information to the needs, 
interests, and expectations of 
your speech audience.
demographics
data to help you 
understand basic audience 
characteristics
How can you 
analyze  your 
audience and 
setting so that 
your speech topic 
and goal are 
appropriate?
Action Step 1.a
Brainstorm and Concept Map for Topics
 1. 
Develop a subject list.
a. 
Divide a sheet of paper into three columns. Label column 1 “major 
or vocational interest,” label column 2 “hobby or activity,” and label 
column 3 “concern or issue.”
b. 
Working on one column at a time, identify subjects of interest to 
you. Try to identify at least 3 subjects in each column.
c. 
Place a check mark next to subject in each column you would 
most enjoy speaking about.
d. 
Keep these lists for future use in choosing a topic for an assigned 
speech.
 2. 
For each subject you have checked, brainstorm a list of topics that 
relate to it.
 3. 
Then, for each subject you have checked, develop a concept map to 
identify smaller topic areas and related ideas that might be developed 
into future speeches.

255
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
imagine that one of the topics that interests you is the dangers or “dark side” of blog-
ging. If your audience is made up primarily of 18–22 year-old college students, you 
can assume they know what blogging is and so this topic would probably be a good 
one for this audience. If you discover that one or two audience members are older than 
that, you can avoid marginalizing them by brieﬂ y deﬁ ning blogging in your open-
ing remarks so that they aren’t completely lost. But if you discover that most of your 
audience members are older and have never read or written a blog, then this topic may 
not be appropriate for this audience or you may need to spend more time acquainting 
the audience with blogging before moving to a discussion of the dangers of blogging.
You will also want to collect subject-related audience data, including: how knowl-
edgeable audience members are in your subject area, their initial level of interest in the 
subject, their attitude toward the subject, and their attitude toward you as a speaker. 
Once you determine what your audience already knows about your subject, you can 
eliminate familiar topics that might bore them and choose a topic that will present 
them with new information and new insights. When you understand the initial level 
of interest that audience members have regarding your subject, you can choose a topic 
that builds on that interest, or you will need to adapt your material so that it captures 
their interest. Understanding your audience’s attitude toward your subject is especially 
important when you want to inﬂ uence their beliefs or move them to action. Because 
there is a limit to how persuasive any one speech can be, knowing your audience 
members’ attitudes toward your subject will enable you to choose a topic that affects 
your audience’s position without alienating them.
Gather Audience Data
There are four main methods you can use to gather the information you need for an 
audience analysis:
 1. Conduct a survey. Although it is not always feasible, the most direct and most 
accurate way to collect audience data is to survey the audience. A survey is a 
questionnaire designed to gather information from people. Some surveys are done 
as interviews; others are written forms that are completed by audience members. 
Survey questions or items can be: two-sided items (respondents choose between 
two answers), multiple response items (respondents choose between several items), 
survey
a questionnaire designed 
to gather information from 
people.
Age: Average age and age range?
Educational level: Percentage with high school, college, or postgraduate 
education?
Gender: Percentages of men and women?
Occupation: Single (or dominant) occupation or industry or diverse occupations 
and industries?
Socioeconomic background: Percentage lower, medium, upper income?
Ethnicity: Dominant culture of group if any? Other co-cultures represented?
Religion: Religions represented? Is one preponderant?
Community: Single neighborhood, city, state, country? Or mixed?
Language: Common spoken language? Other ﬁ rst languages shared by a 
 signiﬁ cant minority?
Knowledge of the subject: What do they know? How varied is their knowledge?
Attitude toward subject: What do they feel or think about the subject?
Figure 11.4
Demographic and subject-
speciﬁ c audience analysis 
questions

256
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
scaled items (respondents choose between levels of intensity in a response), or 
open-ended items (respondents reply in any way they see ﬁ t). Figure 11.5 gives 
examples of each type of question.
 2. Informally observe. If the members of the audience are people whom we know, 
such as classmates or coworkers, we can learn a lot about them by just watching. 
For instance, after a couple of classes, we can determine the approximate average 
age of the class members, the ratio of men to women, and the general cultural 
makeup. As we listen to classmates talk, we learn about their knowledge of, and 
interest in, certain issues.
 3. Question a representative. When we are invited to make a speech, we can ask 
the contact person for audience information. You should speciﬁ cally ask for data 
that are somewhat important for you as you choose a topic or work to adapt your 
Two-sided question
Are you _____ a man _____ a woman?
Question with multiple responses
 Which is the highest educational level you have completed? _____ less than 
high school _____ high school _____ attended college _____ associate’s degree 
_____  bachelor’s degree _____ master’s degree _____ doctorate degree _____ 
postdoctorate
Scaled items
 How much do you know about Islam? _____ not much _____ a little _____ some
_____ quite a lot _____ detailed knowledge
Open-ended item
What do you think about labor unions?
Figure 11.5
Sample survey questions
Action Step 1.b
Analyze Your Audience
 1. 
Decide on the audience characteristics (demographics and subject-
speciﬁ c information that you need in order to choose a topic and 
adapt to your audience).
 2. 
Choose a method for gathering audience information.
 3. 
Collect the data.
To help you complete this step, you can use the worksheet provided in your 
Premium Website for Communicate! Look for it in the Action Steps for Chapter 11. 
Save your completed worksheet so you can use the information to guide you as 
you choose your topic. You will also refer to it as you complete other steps of the 
speech planning process.

257
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
material. For the blogging speech, for example, you would want to know if the 
audience members have a basic understanding of what it is.
 4. Make educated guesses. If you can’t get information in any other way, you can 
make informed guesses based on indirect data such as the general proﬁ le of peo-
ple in a certain community or the kinds of people likely to attend the event or 
occasion.
Analyze the Setting
The location and occasion make up the speech setting. Answers to several questions 
about the setting should also guide your topic selection and other parts of your speech 
planning.
 1. What are the special expectations for the speech? Every speaking occasion is 
surrounded by expectations. At an Episcopalian Sunday service, for example, the 
congregation expects the minister’s sermon to have a religious theme. Likewise, at 
a national sales meeting, the ﬁ eld representatives expect to hear about new prod-
ucts. For your classroom speeches, a major expectation is that your speech will 
meet the criteria set for the assignment.
 2. What is the appropriate length for the speech? The time limit for classroom 
speeches is usually quite short, so you will want to choose a topic that is narrow 
enough to be accomplished in the brief time allowed. For example, “Two Major 
Causes of Environmental Degradation” could be presented as a 10-minute speech, 
but “A History of Human Impact on the Environment” could not. Speakers who 
speak for more or less time than they have been scheduled can seriously interfere 
with the program of an event and lose the respect of both their hosts and their 
audience.
 3. How large will the audience be? Although audience size may not directly affect 
the topic you select, it will affect how you adapt your material and how you 
present the speech. For example, if the audience is small (up to about 50), you 
can talk without a microphone and move about if you choose to do so. For 
larger audiences, you might have a microphone that may limit your range of 
movement.
 4. Where will the speech be given? Rooms vary in size, shape, lighting, and seating 
arrangements. Some are a single level, some have stages or platforms, and some 
have tiered seating. The space affects the speech. For example, in a long narrow 
room, you may have to speak loudly to be heard in the back row. The brightness 
of the room and the availability of shades may affect what kinds of visual aids you 
can use. So you will want to know and consider the layout of the room as you plan 
your speech. At times, you might request that the room be changed or rearranged 
so that the space is better suited to your needs.
 5. What equipment is necessary to give the speech? Would you like to use a 
microphone, lectern, ﬂ ip chart, overhead projector and screen, or a hookup for 
your laptop computer during your speech? If so, you need to check with your 
host to make sure that the equipment can be made available to you. In some 
cases, the unavailability of equipment may limit your topic choice. Regardless of 
what arrangements have been made, however, experienced speakers expect that 
 something may go wrong and are always prepared with alternative plans. For 
example, although computer slide shows can be very effective, there are often 
technological glitches that interfere with their use, so many speakers prepare over-
heads or handouts and bring them along as backup.
setting
the occasion and location for 
your speech.
Skill Learning Activity 11.1
How does the setting and 
the occasion dictate what a 
speaker will talk about at a 
graduation ceremony?
Bob Daemmrich/PhotoEdit

258
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
Select a Topic
Armed with your topic lists and the information you have collected on your audience 
and setting, you are ready to select an appropriate topic. Are there some topics on your 
list that are too simple or too difﬁ cult for this audience? Eliminate them. Are some top-
ics likely to bore the audience and you can’t think of any way to pique their interest. 
Eliminate them. How does the audience’s demographic proﬁ le mesh with each topic? 
Are some ill suited to this demographic proﬁ le? Eliminate them. At the end of this 
process, you should have several topics that would be appropriate for your audience.
Action Step 1.d
Select a Topic
Use your responses to Action Steps 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c to complete this step.
 1. 
Write each of the topics that you checked in Action Step 1on the lines 
below:
 
__________________
__________________
__________________
 
__________________
__________________
__________________
 
__________________
__________________
__________________
 2. 
Using the information you compiled in Action Step 1.b, the audience 
analysis, compare each topic to your audience proﬁ le. Draw a line 
through topics that seem less appropriate for your audience.
 3. 
Using the information you compiled in Action Step 1.c, your analysis of 
the setting, compare the remaining topics to the requirements of the 
setting. Eliminate topics that seem less suited to the setting.
 4. 
From the topics that remain, choose the one that you would ﬁ nd most 
enjoyable to present. Circle that topic.
To complete this activity, you can use the worksheet provided in your Premium 
Website for Communicate! Look for it in the Action Steps for Chapter 11.
Action Step 1.c
Understand the Speech Setting
Hold a conversation with the person who arranged for you to speak and 
get answers to the following questions:
 1. 
What are the special expectations for the speech? __________________
 2. 
What is the appropriate length for the speech? ______________________
 3. 
How large will the audience be? _____________________________________
 4. 
Where will the speech be given? _____________________________________
 5. 
What equipment is necessary to give the speech? ___________________
Write a short paragraph mentioning which aspects of the setting are 
most important for you to consider in speech preparation and why.

259
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
Now consider the setting. Are some of the remaining topics inappropriate for the 
expectations of the audience or too broad for the time allocated, or do they require 
equipment that is unavailable in this setting? If so, eliminate them.
From the topics that still remain after considering the audience and the setting, 
you should choose the one that you would ﬁ nd most enjoyable to share with the audi-
ence as your speech topic.
Write a Speech Goal
Once you have chosen your topic, you are ready to identify the general goal of your 
speech and to write a speciﬁ c goal statement tailored to the audience and setting.
Identify Your General Goal
The general goal is the overall intent of the speech. Most speeches generally intend 
to entertain, inform, or persuade, even though each type can include elements of the 
other types. Consider the following examples: Conan O’Brien’s opening monologue on 
The Tonight Show is intended to entertain, even though it may include material that 
is persuasive. President Obama’s campaign speeches were intended to persuade, even 
though they may also have been informative. In this book, we focus the general goals 
of informing and persuading. These are the kinds of speeches you will most likely pres-
ent in academic, professional, and community settings.
Phrase a Speciﬁ c Goal Statement
The speciﬁ c goal, or speciﬁ c purpose of your speech, is a single statement that identi-
ﬁ es the exact response you want from the audience after they have listened to your 
speech. A speciﬁ c goal statement for an informative speech usually speciﬁ es whether 
you want the audience to learn about, understand, or appreciate the topic. “I would 
like the audience to understand the four major criteria used for evaluating a diamond” 
is a goal statement for an informative speech. A speciﬁ c goal statement for a persua-
sive speech speciﬁ es whether you want the audience to accept the belief that you are 
presenting: “I want my audience to believe that the militarization of space is wrong,” 
or to act a certain way: “I want my audience to donate money to the United Way.” 
Figure 11.6 gives further examples of informative and persuasive speech goals.
general speech goal
the overall intent of your 
speech.
speciﬁ c speech goal
a single statement of the 
exact response the speaker 
wants from the audience.
Figure 11.6
Informative and persuasive 
speech goals
Informative Goals
Increasing understanding: I want my audience to understand the three basic 
forms of a mystery story.
Increasing knowledge: I want my audience to learn how to light a ﬁ re without a 
match.
Increasing appreciation: I want my audience to appreciate the intricacies of 
spider-web designs.
Persuasive Goals
Reinforce belief: I want my audience to maintain its belief in drug-free sports.
Change belief: I want my audience to believe that SUVs are environmentally 
destructive.
Motivation to act: I want my audience to join Amnesty International.
How can you 
adapt your speech 
goal to your 
audience?

260
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
To create a well-worded speciﬁ c goal statement, follow these guidelines:
 1. Write a ﬁ rst draft of your speech goal, using a complete sentence that speciﬁ es 
the response you want from the audience. Julia, who has been concerned with 
and is knowledgeable about the subject of illiteracy, drafts the following statement 
of her general speech goal: “I want my audience to be informed about the effects 
of illiteracy.” Julia’s draft is a complete sentence, and it speciﬁ es the response she 
wants from the audience: to be informed about the effects of illiteracy. Her phras-
ing tells us that she is planning to give an informative speech.
 2. Revise the draft statement until it focuses clearly on the desired audience 
 reaction. The draft “I want my audience to understand illiteracy” is a good start, but 
it is extremely broad. Just what is it about illiteracy that Julia wants the audience to 
understand? She narrows the statement: “I want my audience to understand three 
effects of illiteracy.” This version is more speciﬁ c than her ﬁ rst draft, but it still does 
not clearly capture her intention, so she revises it further: “I would like the audience 
to understand three effects of illiteracy in the workplace.” Now the goal is limited by 
Julia’s focus not only on the speciﬁ c number of effects but also on a speciﬁ c situ-
ation. If Julia wanted to persuade her audience, her speciﬁ c goal might be “I want 
my audience to believe that illiteracy in the workplace is a major problem.”
 3. Make sure the goal statement contains only one central idea. Suppose Julia had 
written the following speciﬁ c goal statement: “I want the audience to understand 
the nature of illiteracy and innumeracy.” This would need to be revised because it 
includes two distinct ideas: illiteracy and innumeracy. Although these problems may 
be related, because both make it difﬁ cult for people to function in society, the causes 
of illiteracy and innumeracy are different. It would be difﬁ cult to adequately address 
both within one speech. So Julia would need to realize this statement includes two 
topic ideas and to choose between them. If your goal statement includes the word 
and, you may have more than one idea and will need to narrow your focus.
Skill Learning Activity 11.2
Action Step 1.e
Write a Speciﬁ c Goal
Type of speech___________________________________________________________
 1. 
Write a draft of your speciﬁ c speech goal, using a complete sentence 
that speciﬁ es the type of response you want from the audience: to 
learn about, to understand, or to appreciate the topic.
 2. 
Review the speciﬁ c goal statement. If it contains more than one idea, 
select one and redraft your speciﬁ c goal statement.
 3. 
Test the inﬁ nitive phrase. Does the inﬁ nitive phrase express the speciﬁ c 
audience reaction desired? If not, revise the inﬁ nitive phrase.
Write your ﬁ nal wording of the speciﬁ c goal:
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
You can complete this activity online with Speech Builder Express, a speech 
organization and development program that will help you complete some of the 
action steps in this book to develop your speech. Access Speech Builder Express 
at your Premium Website for Communicate!

261
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
Action Step 2: Gather and Evaluate Information 
to Develop the Content of Your Speech
To select and then use the most effective information to support your speech, you must 
be able to locate and evaluate appropriate sources of information, identify and select 
the information most relevant to your speech, draw information from multiple cultural 
perspectives, and then record the information in a way that will help you prepare for 
and present your speech.
Locate and Evaluate Information Sources
How can you quickly ﬁ nd the best information related to your speciﬁ c speech goal? 
It depends. Speakers usually start by assessing their own knowledge, experience, 
and personal observations. Then they move to secondary resources, which includes 
Skill
The process of 
identifying a speech 
purpose that draws 
on the speaker’s 
knowledge and 
 interests and is 
adapted to a speciﬁ c 
audience and setting.
Use
To identify a speaking 
goal that matches 
speaker interest and 
expertise, audience 
needs and interests, 
and setting.
Procedure
1. 
Identify topics 
within subject 
areas in which you 
have interest and 
expertise.
2. 
Analyze your 
audience’s 
demographic 
characteristics, 
interests, and 
 attitudes toward 
your subject.
3. 
Understand the 
occasion and the 
location for the 
speech.
4. 
Select a topic 
that will meet 
the  interests and 
needs of your audi-
ence and setting.
5. 
Write a speciﬁ c 
speech goal that 
clearly states the 
exact response 
you want from 
your audience.
Example
Ken ﬁ rst writes, “I want 
my audience to know 
what to look for in 
buying a dog.” As he 
revises, he writes, “I 
want my audience 
to understand four 
important consider-
ations in buying the 
perfect dog.” Once 
Ken has a goal with 
a single focus and 
a clearly speciﬁ ed, 
desired audience 
reaction, he tests his 
ﬁ rst version by writing 
two differently worded 
versions.
Communication Skill
Crafting a Speciﬁ c Speech Goal 
That Meets Audience Needs

262
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
information about the topic that has been discovered by other people and is avail-
able in public sources. They might do an electronic search for relevant books, articles, 
general references, and Web sites. Occasionally, when other resources do not have the 
information needed, they may conduct their own study by doing a survey, interview-
ing experts, or performing an experiment.
Personal Knowledge, Experience, and Observation
If you have chosen to speak on a topic you know something about, you are likely 
to have material that you can use as examples and personal experiences in your 
speech. For instance, musicians have special knowledge about music and instruments, 
entrepreneurs know about starting up businesses, and marine biologists about marine 
reserves. So Erin, a skilled rock climber, can draw from her own knowledge and experi-
ence for her speech “Rappelling Down a Mountain.”
For many topics, the knowledge you’ve gained from experience can be supple-
mented with careful observation. If, for instance, you were planning to talk about 
how a small claims court works or how churches help the homeless ﬁ nd shelter and 
job training, you could learn more by attending small claims sessions or visiting a 
church’s outreach center. By focusing on speciﬁ c behaviors and taking notes on your 
observations, you could make a record of speciﬁ cs to use in your speech.
Sharing your personal knowledge, experience, and observations can also bolster 
your credibility if you inform your audience about your credentials—your experiences 
or education that qualiﬁ es you to speak with authority on a speciﬁ c subject. For Erin, 
establishing her credentials means brieﬂ y mentioning her training and expertise as 
a rock climber before she launches into her observations about unqualiﬁ ed climbers.
Secondary Research
Secondary research is the process of locating information about your topic that has 
been discovered by other people. Libraries house various sources of secondary research. 
Most libraries store information about their holdings in electronic databases. Users 
retrieve the information at computer terminals in the library or over the Internet. If 
you don’t know how to access your school’s library resources online, you can call the 
help desk at your library. If you have difﬁ culty using library search tools, your library 
probably offers a short seminar or you can ask a research librarian for help. Secondary 
resources include the following types of materials:
Books
If your topic has been around for at least six months, there are likely to be books written 
about it. To ﬁ nd them, you can do a keyword search of an online database. Although 
books are excellent sources of in-depth material about a topic, books are not a good 
resource if your topic is very new or if you’re looking for the latest information on a topic.
Articles
Articles, which may contain more current or highly specialized information on your 
topic than a book would, are published in periodicals—magazines and journals that 
appear at regular intervals. The information in periodical articles is often more current 
than that in books because many periodicals are published weekly, biweekly, or monthly. 
However, articles don’t provide as much in-depth information as you’d ﬁ nd in a book. 
Articles are often a good source of information for highly specialized topics. Today, most 
libraries subscribe to electronic databases that index periodical articles. Check with your 
librarian to learn what electronic indexes your college or university subscribes to.
secondary research
the process of locating 
information about your topic 
that has been discovered by 
other people.
periodicals
magazines and journals that 
appear at ﬁ xed intervals.
What are three 
types of information 
sources for 
speeches?
Web Resource 11.2
Web Resource 11.3
Web Resource 11.4
Web Resource 11.5

263
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
Newspapers
Newspaper articles are excellent sources of facts about and interpretations of both 
contemporary and historical issues. Keep in mind, however, that most authors of news-
paper articles are journalists who are not experts on the topics they write about. So, it 
is best not to rely solely on newspaper articles for your speech. Today most newspapers 
are available online, which makes them very accessible. Two electronic newspaper 
indexes that are most useful if they are available to you are the National Newspaper 
Index, which indexes ﬁ ve major newspapers: the New York Times, the Wall Street 
Journal, the Christian Science Monitor, the Washington Post, the Los Angeles Times, 
and Newsbank, which provides not only the indexes but also the text of articles from 
more than 450 U.S. and Canadian newspapers.
Encyclopedias
An encyclopedia can be a good starting point for your research. Encyclopedias give 
an excellent overview of many subjects and can acquaint you with the basic termi-
nology and ideas associated with a topic. But because encyclopedias provide only 
overviews, they should never be the sole research base for your speech. Wikipedia, 
the online collaborative encyclopedia has become a popular research tool, but it is 
also a controversial source of information. To understand the controversy about this 
and similar online resources, read the Pop Comm! feature “To Wikipedia or Not to 
Wikipedia? Good Question.”
Statistical sources
Statistical sources present numerical information on a wide variety of subjects. When 
you need facts about demography, continents, heads of state, weather, or similar sub-
jects, access one of the many single-volume sources that report such data. Two of 
the most popular sources in this category are The Statistical Abstract of the United 
States (available online), which provides numerical information on various aspects of 
American life, and The World Almanac and Book of Facts.
Biographical references
When you need an account of a person’s life, you can turn to one of the many bio-
graphical references that are available. In addition to full-length biographies and 
encyclopedia entries, consult such reference books as Who’s Who in America and 
International Who’s Who. Your library may also carry other biographical references 
such as Contemporary Black Biography, Dictionary of Hispanic Biography, Native 
American Women, Who’s Who of American Women, Who’s Who Among Asian 
Americans, and many more.
Government documents
If your topic is related to public policy, government documents may provide useful 
information. For Internet links to several frequently used U.S. federal government 
documents, consult Web Resource 11.6: Government Publications Online through your 
Premium Website for Communicate!. Similar documents for other countries, states, and 
cities may be found by using a search engine.
Internet-based resources
In addition to printed resources (many of which you can access online), you may ﬁ nd 
resources for your speech that are only available on the Internet. For example, you can 
access electronic databases, bulletin boards, and scholarly and professional electronic 
discussion groups, as well as Web sites and Web pages authored by individuals and 
groups.
Web Resource 11.6
Have you ever taken a class 
at your library on online 
research? If not, consider 
doing so. You can save 
yourself lots of time and 
locate great sources of useful 
information.
F. Pedrick/The Image Works

264
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
To Wikipedia or Not to 
Wikipedia?: That’s a Good 
Question
Of Wikipedia, The Ofﬁ ce’s Michael Scott opined, 
“Wikipedia is the best thing ever. Anyone in the 
world can write anything they want about any 
subject, so you know you are getting the best 
possible information.” Funny, right? Not for John 
Seigenthaler, a well-respected journalist who was 
a friend and aide to President John F. Kennedy 
and Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in the 
1960s. Seigenthaler was a victim of a hoax article 
posted to Wikipedia that falsely claimed he had 
been suspected in the assassinations of John and 
Robert Kennedy. The hoax upset Seigenthaler not 
only because the article defamed his character, 
but also because Wikipedia editors didn’t discover 
and correct it for over four months (Seigenthaler, 
2005). Shortly after Seigenthaler published an 
article in USA Today about the incident, Wikipedia 
announced that it had barred unregistered users 
from creating new articles, and later the site 
enacted a policy that prevented the public from 
creating new articles about living people without 
editorial review (Helm, 2005; Cohen, 2009). These 
moves signaled a change from Wikipedia’s initial 
desire to provide a free online encyclopedia that 
the public could create collaboratively.
Wikipedia is one of the top ten Web sites used 
worldwide, offering 2,665,263 articles covering 
Pop Comm!
Primary Research
Primary research is the process of conducting your own study to acquire information 
for your speech. It is much more labor intensive and time consuming than secondary 
research, and in the professional world, it is much more costly. If, after making an 
exhaustive search of secondary sources, you cannot locate the information you need, 
you might consider getting it through one of the following primary research methods:
Surveys
You can gather information directly from a group of people through the use of a 
questionnaire. If you decide to conduct your own survey, consult Web Resource 11.7 
Conducting Surveys, which you can access through your Premium Website for 
Communicate! This resource will provide you with important tips for collecting good 
information.
Interviews
You can locate someone who is an acknowledged expert on your topic and ask for 
their opinions on your topic. The appendix after Chapter 8 provides information about 
conducting interviews.
primary research
the process of conducting 
your own study to acquire 
information for your speech.
Web Resource 11.7
www.wikipedia.org

265
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
Experiments
You can design a study to test a hypothesis that you have. Then, based on your analy-
sis, you can report the results in your speech.
Evaluate Sources
Information sources vary in the accuracy, reliability, and validity of the information 
they present. So before you use the information from a source in your speech, you will 
want to evaluate it. Four criteria you can use are authority, objectivity, currency, and 
relevance.
 1. Authority. The ﬁ rst test of a resource is the expertise of its author and/or the repu-
tation of the publishing or sponsoring organization. When the author is named, 
you can check his or her credentials through biographical references or look on 
the Internet for a home page listing professional qualiﬁ cations. Use your library’s 
electronic periodical indexes or check the Library of Congress to see what else the 
author has published in the ﬁ eld.
On the Internet, some information is anonymous or credited to someone 
whose background is not clear. In these cases, your ability to trust the informa-
tion depends on evaluating the qualiﬁ cations of the sponsoring organization. 
over 2 million topics (Smith, 2008). Nonetheless, 
the Seigenthaler hoax and other incidents have 
spurred a “credibility” backlash against the site. 
For example, U.S courts have begun ruling that 
Wikipedia cannot be used as legal evidence—in 
April 2009, a New Jersey judge reversed an ini-
tial ruling that Wikipedia could be used to plug 
an evidentiary gap, saying that because “anyone 
can edit” the online encyclopedia, it is not a reli-
able source of information (Gallagher, 2009). In 
addition, many educators discourage their stu-
dents from using Wikipedia as a research tool, 
and some schools have even banned access to it 
completely. The site prompts comments such as 
“Better to make such a site off-limits to students 
. . . if it will get them to rely on more authen-
tic research sources for their writing” (Crovitz & 
Smoot, 2008). Even Wikipedia founder Jimmy 
Wales cautions against relying on the Web site as 
a primary source: “People shouldn’t be citing en-
cyclopedias in the ﬁ rst place. [Rather,] Wikipedia 
and other encyclopedias should be solid enough 
to give good, solid background information to in-
form your studies for a deeper level” (Helm, 2005).
But some educators argue that student use 
of Wikipedia can provide invaluable teaching 
 moments. Jade Tippett of Ukiah High School 
suggests, “By showing students how Wikipedia 
entries are developed by dynamic consensus, as 
opposed to ‘authoritative’ sourcing, we can get to 
deeper levels of the ‘what is truth’ conversation” 
(“Wikipedia: Friend or Foe?” 2009). David Geary 
of the Harris County Department of Education 
says that although he hesitates to call Wikipedia 
“factual,” he believes that information contrib-
uted to Wikipedia is often reﬂ ective of a popular 
cultural viewpoint (“Wikipedia: Friend or Foe?” 
2009). And in English Journal, Darren Crovitz 
and W. Scott Smoot (2009) write, “Talking with 
[students] about how the site operates is essen-
tial in helping them move from passive accep-
tors of information to practicing analyzers and 
 evaluators.”
So, to Wikipedia or not to Wikipedia? A mod-
erate approach advocates using Wikipedia as a 
starting point for research rather than a primary 
source. Here’s a tip: Use the Notes section at the 
end of Wikipedia articles to ﬁ nd links to the pub-
lished sources that support and inform each article. 
These sources include books; magazine, newspaper, 
and journal articles; original interviews; court deci-
sions; and similar authoritative sources.
How can you 
evaluate sources 
to ensure that the 
information they 
provide is unbiased 
and accurate?

266
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
On the Internet, URLs ending in “.gov” (governmental), “.edu” (educational), and 
“.org” are noncommercial sites with institutional publishers. The URL “.com” 
indicates that the sponsor is a for-proﬁ t organization and may be selling some-
thing. If you do not know whether you can trust the source, then do not use the 
information.
 2. Objectivity. Although all authors have a viewpoint, you will want to be wary 
of information that is overly slanted. Documents that have been published by 
business, government, or public interest groups should be carefully scrutinized 
for obvious biases and good public-relations fronts. To evaluate the potential 
biases in books and articles, read the preface or identify the thesis statement. 
These often reveal the author’s point of view. When evaluating a Web site with 
which you are unfamiliar, look for its purpose. Most home pages contain a 
purpose or mission statement (sometimes in a link called “About Us”). Armed 
with this information, you are in a better position to recognize the biases in the 
information.
 3. Currency. In general, newer information is more accurate than older. So when 
evaluating your sources, be sure to consult the latest information you can ﬁ nd. 
One of the reasons for using Web-based sources is that they can provide more up-
to-date information than printed sources (Munger, Anderson, Benjamin, Busiel, & 
Pardes-Holt, 2000). But just because a source is found online does not mean that 
the information is timely. To determine how current the information is, you will 
need to ﬁ nd out when the book was published, the article was written, the study 
was conducted, or the article was placed on the Web or revised. Web page dates 
are usually listed at the end of the article. If there are no dates listed, you have no 
way of judging how current the information is.
Action Step 2.a
Locate and Evaluate Information Sources
The goal of this activity is to help you compile a list of potential sources for 
your speech.
 1. 
Identify gaps in your knowledge that you would like to ﬁ ll.
 2. 
Identify a person, an event, or a process that you could observe to 
broaden your personal knowledge base.
 3. 
Brainstorm a list of keywords that are related to your speech goal.
 4. 
Working with your library’s catalog, periodical indexes (including 
InfoTrac College Edition), and general references discussed in this 
chapter, ﬁ nd and list speciﬁ c resources that appear to provide informa-
tion for your speech.
 5. 
Using a search engine, identify organizationally sponsored and per-
sonal Web sites that may be sources of information for your speech.
 6. 
Identify a person you could interview for additional information for your 
speech.
 7. 
Skim the resources you have identiﬁ ed to decide which are likely to be 
most useful.
 8. 
Evaluate each resource to determine how much faith you can place in 
the information.

267
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
 4. Relevance. During your research, you will likely come across a great deal of inter-
esting information. Whether that information is appropriate for your speech is 
another matter. Relevant information is directly related to your topic and supports 
your main points, making your speech easier to follow and understand. Irrelevant 
information will only confuse listeners, so you should avoid using it no matter 
how interesting it is.
Identify and Select Relevant Information
Types of information that you may ﬁ nd in your sources include factual statements, 
expert opinions, and elaborations.
Factual Statements
Factual statements are those that can be veriﬁ ed. A recent study conﬁ rmed that 
preschoolers watch an average of 28 hours of television a week and The micro-
processor, which was invented by Ted Hoff at Intel in 1971, made the creation of 
personal computers possible are both statements of fact that can be veriﬁ ed. One 
way to verify whether a statement is accurate is to check it against other sources 
on the same subject. Never use any information that is not carefully documented 
unless you have corroborating sources. Factual statements may be statistics or 
examples.
 1. Statistics. Statistics are numerical facts. Only ﬁ ve of every ten local citizens voted 
in the last election or The national unemployment rate for May 2009 was 9.4 per-
cent can provide impressive support for a point, but if statistics are poorly used in 
a speech, they may be boring and, in some instances, downright deceiving. When 
you use statistics, follow these guidelines:
•  Use only statistics that you can verify to be reliable. Taking statistics from 
only the most reliable sources and double-checking any startling statistics with 
another source will guard against the use of faulty statistics.
• Use only recent statistics so your audience will not be misled.
•  Use statistics comparatively. You can show growth, decline, gain, or loss by 
comparing two numbers.
•  Use statistics sparingly. A few pertinent numbers are far more effective than a 
battery of statistics.
•  No statistic is completely accurate, and statistics can be manipulated to prove 
things that a more honest rendering would belie. So before you use a statistic, 
be sure to evaluate the source and to cross check the method used to collect and 
interpret the data (Frances, 1994).
 2. Examples. Examples are speciﬁ c instances that illustrate or explain a general 
factual statement. One or two short examples like the following ones provide 
concrete detail that makes a general statement more meaningful to the audi-
ence: One way a company increases its power is to buy out another company. 
Recently, Delta bought out Northwest and thereby became the world’s larg-
est airline company. Professional billiard players practice many long hours 
every day. Jennifer Lee practices up to 10 hours a day when she is not in a 
tournament.
factual statements
statements that can be 
veriﬁ ed.
statistics
numerical facts.
examples
speciﬁ c instances that 
illustrate or explain a general 
factual statement.
Skill Learning Activity 11.3
Web Resource 11.8

268
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
Expert Opinions
Expert opinions are interpretations and judgments made by an authority in a particu-
lar subject area. They can help explain what facts mean or put them in perspective. 
Watching 28 hours of television a week is far too much for young children, but may 
be OK for adults and Having a ﬁ rewire port on your computer is absolutely necessary 
are opinions. Whether they are expert opinions depends on who made the statements. 
An expert is a person who has mastered a speciﬁ c subject, usually through long-term 
study and who is recognized by other people in the ﬁ eld as being a knowledgeable and 
trustworthy authority.
Elaborations
Both factual information and expert opinions can be elaborated upon through anec-
dotes and narratives, comparisons and contrasts, or quotable explanations and 
opinions.
 1. Anecdotes and narratives. Anecdotes are brief, often amusing stories; narratives 
are accounts, personal experiences, tales, or lengthier stories. Because holding 
audience interest is important and because audience attention is likely to be cap-
tured by a story, anecdotes and narratives are worth looking for or creating. The 
key to using them is to be sure the point of the story directly addresses the point 
you are making in your speech. Good stories and narratives may be humorous, 
sentimental, suspenseful, or dramatic.
 2. Comparisons and contrasts. One of the best ways to give meaning to new ideas 
or facts is through comparison and contrast. Comparisons illuminate a point 
by showing similarities, whereas contrasts highlight differences. Although 
comparisons and contrasts may be literal, like comparing and contrasting the 
murder rates in different countries or during different eras, they may also be 
ﬁ gurative.
•  Figurative comparison: “In short, living without health insurance is as much of 
a risk as having uncontrolled diabetes or driving without a safety belt” (Nelson, 
2006, p. 24).
•  Figurative contrast: “If this morning you had bacon and eggs for breakfast, I 
think it illustrates the difference. The eggs represented ‘participation’ on the 
part of the chicken. The bacon represented ‘total commitment’ on the part of 
the pig!” (Durst, 1989, p. 325).
 
3. Quotations. At times, information you ﬁ nd will be so well 
stated that you want to quote it directly in your 
speech. Because the audience is interested in 
listening to your ideas and arguments, you 
should avoid using quotations that are too 
long or too numerous. But when you ﬁ nd 
that an author or expert has worded an 
idea especially well, quote it directly and 
then verbally acknowledge the person who 
said or wrote it. Using quotations or 
close paraphrases without acknowl-
edging their source is plagiarism, 
the unethical act of representing 
another person’s work as your own.
expert opinions
interpretations and judgments 
made by authorities in a 
particular subject area.
expert
a person who has mastered 
a speciﬁ c subject, usually 
through long-term study.
anecdotes
brief, often amusing stories.
narratives
accounts, personal 
experiences, tales, or lengthier 
stories.
comparisons
illuminate a point by showing 
similarities.
contrasts
highlight differences.
plagiarism
the unethical act of 
representing a published 
author’s work as your own.
©2009 Peter Mueller from Cartoonbank.com. All Rights Reserved.

269
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
Draw Information from Multiple Cultural 
Perspectives
How we perceive facts and what opinions we hold often are inﬂ uenced by our cultural 
background. Therefore, it is important to draw information from a variety of cultural 
perspectives by seeking sources with different cultural orientations and by interview-
ing experts with diverse cultural backgrounds. For example, when Carrie was preparing 
for her speech on proﬁ ciency testing in grade schools, she purposefully searched for 
articles written by noted Hispanic, Asian American, African American, and European 
American authors. In addition, she interviewed two local school superintendents—one 
from an urban district and one from a suburban district. Because she consciously 
worked to develop diverse sources of information, Carrie felt conﬁ dent that her speech 
would more accurately reﬂ ect all sides of the debate on proﬁ ciency testing.
Record Information
As you ﬁ nd facts, opinions, and elaborations that you want to use in your speech, you 
need to record the information accurately and keep a careful account of your sources 
so you can cite them appropriately during your speech.
Prepare Research Cards
How should you keep track of the information you plan to use? Although it may seem eas-
ier to record all material from one source on a single sheet of paper (or to photocopy source 
material), sorting and arranging material is much easier when each item is recorded sepa-
rately. Recording each piece of information on its own research card allows you to easily 
ﬁ nd, arrange, and rearrange individual pieces of information as you prepare your speech.
Make a research card for each factual statement, expert opinion, or elaboration 
you ﬁ nd. To prepare a research card, begin by writing a keyword or category heading 
that captures the main idea of this piece of information and identiﬁ es the subcategory 
to which the information belongs. Next, record the speciﬁ c fact, opinion, or elabo-
ration statement. Any part of the information item that is quoted directly from the 
source should be enclosed in quotation marks. Finally, record the bibliographic infor-
mation you will need for your source list.
The exact bibliographic information you record depends on the type of source 
(such as book, article, or Web site) and the style guide (such as APA or MLA) you are 
using. Generally for a book, you will record the names of authors, title of the book, the 
place of publication and the publisher, the date of publication, and the page or pages 
from which the information is taken. For a periodical or newspaper, you will record the 
name of the author (if given), the title of the article, the name of the publication, its 
volume and issue numbers, the date, and the page number from which the information 
is taken. For online sources, include the URL for the Web site, the heading under which 
you found the information, the author, the date (if given), and the sponsoring organi-
zation or publisher. Be sure to record enough source information so you can relocate 
the material if you need to. Figure 11.7 provides a sample research card.
The number of sources you will need depends, in part, on the type of speech you are 
giving and your own expertise. For a narrative/personal experience, you obviously will 
be the main, if not the only, source. For informative reports and persuasive speeches, 
however, speakers ordinarily draw from multiple sources. For a ﬁ ve-minute speech on 
swine ﬂ u in which you plan to talk about causes, symptoms, and means of transmission, 
you might have two or more research cards under each heading. Moreover, the cards 
should come from a number of different sources. Selecting and using information from 
Why is it important 
to make a record of 
the information you 
ﬁ nd?

270
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
several sources helps you develop an original approach to your topic, insures a broader 
research base, makes it more likely that you will uncover the various opinions related 
to your topic, and reduces the likelihood that you will plagiarize the ideas of another.
Cite Sources in Speeches
Although it is important to credit the sources of your information in all of your commu-
nication, there are three reasons that it is crucial to cite the sources of your information 
within your speech. First, speeches, like essays and research papers, are public, so it 
is plagiarism to present information that you have learned from secondary sources as 
though it were your own. Second, doing so is also unethical behavior because it prevents 
the audience from accurately evaluating the source of the information. When a topic is 
Topic: Swine Flu
Heading: Swine Flu Myths
Inﬂ uenza A (subtype H1N1) is a ﬂ u strain commonly found in pigs, but you cannot 
get this virus by eating pork.
“Inﬂ uenza in Pigs: Questions and Answers: Key Facts about Swine Inﬂ uenza 
(Swine Flu).” April 23, 2009. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
http://www.cdc.gov/ﬂ u/swineﬂ u/key_facts.htm
Figure 11.7
A sample research card
Action Step 2.b
Prepare Research Cards: Record Facts, Opinions, and 
Elaborations
The goal of this step is to review the source material you identiﬁ ed in Action 
Step 2.a and to record speciﬁ c items of information that you might wish to 
use in your speech.
 1. 
Carefully read all print and electronic sources (including Web site 
material) you have identiﬁ ed and evaluated as appropriate sources 
for your speech. Review your notes and any tapes from interviews and 
observations.
 2. 
As you read an item (fact, opinion, example, illustration, statistic, 
anecdote, narrative, comparison/contrast, quotation, deﬁ nition, or 
description) that you think might be useful in your speech, record it 
on a research card or on the appropriate electronic note card form 
available on the Premium Website for Communicate! If you are using 
an article from a periodical that you read online, use the periodical 
research card form.
Go to your Premium Website for Communicate! to access this activity online. Look 
for it in the Action Steps for Chapter 11. There you can view samples of research 
cards prepared by another student, use online forms to prepare your own research 
cards, print them out to use as you prepare your speech, and, if requested, e-mail 
them to your instructor.
How do you orally 
cite sources during 
your speech?

271
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
controversial, knowing the source of the information can be critical to the audience’s 
ability to trust it. Third, citing the source of your information adds to your credibility 
because it demonstrates to the audience that you have studied the topic. You should 
make a habit of using oral footnotes, which are references to the original sources, made 
at the points in the speech where information from those sources is presented. An oral 
footnote includes enough information for listeners to identify and evaluate the source 
for themselves. Figure 11.8 gives several examples of appropriate oral footnotes.
oral footnote
references to an original 
source, made at the point in 
the speech where information 
from that source is presented.
“Thomas Friedman, noted international editor for The New York Times, stated in his 
book The World Is Flat . . .”
“In an interview with New Republic magazine, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger 
stated . . . ”
“According to an article in last week’s Newsweek magazine, the average college 
graduate . . . ”
“In the latest Gallup poll cited in the February 10 issue of The New York Times 
Online . . . ”
“But to get a complete picture, we have to look at the statistics. According to 
the 2010 Statistical Abstracts, the level of production for the European Economic 
Community fell from . . . ”
“In June of 2009, during her keynote speech at the U.S.–India Business Council’s 
34th Anniversary Summit, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stated . . . ”
Figure 11.8
Appropriate oral footnotes
Action Step 2.c
Citing Sources
On the back of each research card, write a short phrase that you can use 
in your speech as an oral footnote.
Citing Oral Footnotes
The Assignment
Do secondary research on a topic assigned to the class by your instructor. 
For that topic, create research cards and oral footnotes for the following 
kinds of sources:
• One newspaper article
• One journal or magazine article
• One book
• One Internet source
Be prepared when called on in class to present the information on your 
research card with an appropriate oral footnote. Be prepared to critique 
the oral footnotes your classmates present and to hear critiques of yours.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet

272
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
Summary
Five simple action steps can help you to prepare effective speeches: (1) determine a 
speciﬁ c speech goal that is adapted to the audience and occasion; (2) gather and evalu-
ate material to use in the speech; (3) organize and develop the material in a way that 
is suited to the audience and occasion; (4) choose visual and other presentational aids; 
and (5) practice delivering the speech.
To accomplish the ﬁ rst action step—determining a speciﬁ c speech goal—begin iden-
tifying a topic by listing subjects you are interested in and know something about. Then 
for each subject, generate topic ideas by brainstorming or concept mapping. To select 
an appropriate topic, gather and analyze data about your audience members’ informa-
tion needs. The data should include demographic- and subject-related speciﬁ cs. You can 
gather the data by conducting a survey, informally observing, questioning an audience 
representative, or by making educated guesses. When selecting a topic, you will also want 
to know about the speech setting and the occasion. Based on your audience and setting 
A Question of Ethics
When Mr. Allen gave the class its ﬁ nal public 
speaking assignment, Alessandra decided that 
she would deliver a speech on the limited educa-
tional opportunities for women in the developing 
world. This topic was close to her heart, as her 
mother had struggled for years to improve 
education for women in her native country of 
Eritrea before immigrating to the United States. 
Moreover, Alessandra had already done quite a 
bit of reading on the topic in the past.
As chance would have it, Alessandra came 
down with the ﬂ u the week before her speech 
was due and was ﬂ at on her back for four days 
before she ﬁ nally recovered. Because she was so 
far behind in her studies, Alessandra didn’t begin 
working on her speech until the afternoon before 
it was due. Still, by midnight, she had completed 
what she felt was a strong draft.
The next morning she cleaned up a few typos 
and errors in her outline and then practiced deliv-
ering it the next two hours. Just before leaving 
for school, she read the instructions one last time 
to double check that she had done everything 
correctly. Were her eyes playing tricks on her? 
The speech needed to be supported by no fewer 
than ﬁ ve published sources, yet she had cited 
only four. How could she have overlooked this 
detail? Alessandra thought frantically. She could 
ask for an extension, but she had too much other 
schoolwork to do in the coming days and needed 
to complete this project now. She could leave her 
speech as it was, but Mr. Allen was a stickler for 
little details and he’d certainly lower her grade 
over the missing source.
Alessandra had, of course, read other books 
on her topic in the past, even if she hadn’t 
cited them in her speech. Although she couldn’t 
remember the speciﬁ c details of these books, she 
recalled their general message well enough. That 
was the solution! She would write a few quota-
tions from one of the books based on her mem-
ory, drop them into her speech—she knew just the 
spot—and then update her references with credit 
information pulled from the Internet.
In less than a half an hour, Alessandra com-
pleted her emergency revisions to her speech and 
was on her way to class.
 1. Although blatantly fabricating informa-
tion from a source is clearly unethical, what 
about someone like Alessandra writing quo-
tations based on her memory of earlier read-
ing?
 2. What ethical obligations does Alessandra 
have to her sources? 
What Would You Do?

273
 
Chapter 11  Developing and Researching a Speech Topic  
analyses, you can eliminate topics that would be inappropriate and then select your 
personal favorite from among the topics that remain. Once you have a topic, identify 
whether your general goal is to entertain, inform, or persuade. Finally, develop a speciﬁ c 
goal—a single statement that identiﬁ es the exact response you want from your audience.
The second action step of the speech preparation process is to gather and evaluate 
material to use in your speech. The three general sources for information are (1) your 
personal knowledge, experiences, and observations; (2) secondary source research; and 
(3) primary source research. If you are an expert on your topic, you may already have 
most of the information you will need to use in your speech. But usually you will also 
need to do secondary research in resources like books, periodical articles, newspaper 
accounts, encyclopedia entries, statistical sources, biographical references, govern-
ment documents, and Internet-based information on your topic. In rare instances, you 
may need to conduct primary research to get the information you need by survey-
ing, interviewing, or conducting experiments. Before you use any information you 
ﬁ nd, you will want to evaluate it by testing its authority (expertise of the author and 
reputation of the publication), objectivity, currency (newness), and relevance (ﬁ t). The 
information you ﬁ nd will include factual statements (statistics and examples), expert 
opinions, and elaborations (anecdotes and narratives, comparisons and contrasts, and 
quotations). You will want to draw information from multiple cultural perspectives so 
that you accurately reﬂ ect what is known about your topic.
As you review your sources, you will want to record the information you ﬁ nd 
on research cards. Each card should contain only one factual statement, opinion, or 
elaboration so that you can easily access, sort, and arrange the pieces of information 
as you prepare your speech. On each research card, identify the information with a 
keyword or category so you can group similar items. You will also want to note the 
appropriate bibliographic information on each card so that you can relocate the source 
if you need to and prepare your source list. Finally, on the back of each research card, 
write a short oral footnote that you can use during your speech.
Now that you have read Chapter 11, use your Premium 
Website for Communicate! for quick access to the 
electronic resources that accompany this text. These 
resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communicate on Your Feet speech assignments, 
Action Step activities). Many of these activities 
allow you to compare your answers to those pro-
vided by the authors, and, if requested, submit 
your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment and Action Step activities in 
the body of the chapter.
Communicate! Active Online Learning

274
 
Chapter 11 Developing and Researching a Speech Topic 
Key Terms
anecdotes (268)
audience adaptation (254)
audience analysis (254)
brainstorming (253)
comparisons (268)
concept mapping (253)
contrasts (268)
demographics (254)
examples (267)
expert (268)
expert opinions (268)
factual statements (267)
general speech goal (259)
narratives (268)
oral footnotes (271)
periodicals (262)
plagiarism (268)
primary research (264)
secondary research (262)
setting (257)
speciﬁ c speech goal (259)
statistics (267)
subject (252)
survey (255)
topic (252)
Skill Learning Activities
11.1: Audience and Setting (257)
Attend a public speech delivered outside your 
school. If your schedule makes going to a live speech 
difﬁ cult, you may watch a speech delivered on TV or 
cable (try C-SPAN). When watching the speech, give 
close consideration to the audience and the setting 
and evaluate how they might have inﬂ uenced the 
speaker. Was the speech pitched directly at the imme-
diate interests of the audience? If not, did the speaker 
attempt to draw connections between his or her topic 
and the audience’s interests? Did the speaker use any 
particular words or gestures to connect better with 
the audience? What about the manner in which the 
speaker was dressed; how might this have played 
with the audience? Can you discern any inﬂ uence 
the setting might have played on the speaker?
11.2: Recognizing a Speciﬁ c Goal (260)
Find a speech online about a topic that inter-
ests you. (Try sites such as AmericanRhetoric.com or 
www.whitehouse.gov/brieﬁ ng_room.) Then read that 
speech to identify the speaker’s goal. Was the goal 
clearly stated in the introduction? Was it implied but 
nevertheless clear? Was it unclear? Note how this 
analysis can help you clarify your own speech goal. 
Write a paragraph explaining what you have learned.
11.3: Evaluating Online Sources (260)
The Internet can be a gold mine for a researcher, 
but the challenge can be knowing the fool’s gold 
from the real thing. Pick a subject at random and 
search the Internet for information on it. Find ﬁ ve 
reliable and ﬁ ve unreliable online sources on the 
subject, explaining your rationale for your evalua-
tion of each source.
Web Resources
11.1: Brainstorming (253)
For ideas about how to use brainstorming for 
developing speech topics, check out the handout 
“Brainstorming and Topic Development,” prepared 
by the Auburn University English Center.
11.2: Statistics Online (262)
The Statistical Abstract of the United States con-
tains a summary of social, political, and economic 
statistics on the United States.
11.3: Online Biographical References (262)
LibrarySpot.com provides numerous links to 
online biographical references.
11.4: Online Encyclopedias (262)
LibrarySpot.com also provides numerous links to 
online encyclopedias.
11.5: Quotations Online (262)
Bartleby.com features links to Web-based sources 
of quotations. Scroll down to the Quotations section.
11.6: Government Publications Online (263)
The Central Library at Vanderbilt University 
hosts an excellent site that features links to several 
frequently used U.S. government documents.
11.7: Conducting Surveys (264)
If you want to conduct your own survey, Online 
magazine at InfoToday.com features important tips 
for collecting information.
11.8: Analyzing Information Sources (267)
Visit this site, hosted by Cornell University, to 
read about criteria you can use to evaluate the cred-
ibility of your sources.

Organizing Your Speech
Questions you’ll be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• How can you determine the main points of your speech?
• How can you construct a thesis statement for your speech?
• How can you prepare a well-written speech outline?
• How can you create effective transitions?
• How can you create an effective introduction to your speech?
• How can you create an effective conclusion for your speech?
“Troy, Mareka gave an awesome speech on recycling paper. I didn’t realize the 
efforts that other universities are making to help the environment and I haven’t 
heard so many powerful stories in a long time.”
“Yeah, Brett, I agree; the stories were interesting. But, you know, I had a hard 
time following the talk. I couldn’t really get a hold of what the main ideas were.
Did you?”
“Well, she was talking about recycling and stuff, . . . but now that you mention 
it, I’m not sure what she really wanted us to think or do about it. I mean, it was 
really interesting, but kind of confusing too.”
12
Amy Eckert/Riser/Getty Images

276
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
Troy and Brett’s experience is not that unusual. We often hear speeches that are packed 
with interesting information and delivered in ways that hold our attention, but when 
we reﬂ ect on what was said, we ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to recall the speaker’s main ideas, or 
even the overall goal of the speech. Although every speech should have an introduc-
tion, a body, and a conclusion, not all speeches that have these components are well 
organized. So, we may listen to a speech and ﬁ nd that even though we have been 
entertained, the speaker’s words have no lasting impact on us.
Well-constructed speeches have impact. When a speech is over, we must remember 
not only the opening joke or a random story, but we must also remember the main 
ideas that the speaker presented. In this chapter, we describe the third of the ﬁ ve 
speech-plan action steps. When you have completed this step, you can be conﬁ dent 
that your speech not only will maintain your audience’s interest but will help your 
audience understand and remember what you have said.
Action Step 3: Organize Your Material to Meet 
the Needs of Your Particular Audience
Organizing, the process of selecting and structuring ideas you will present in your speech, 
is guided by the audience analysis you conducted during the ﬁ rst step of the speech plan. 
Your audience will have certain expectations about what you will say and how you 
will organize it. When the audience’s expectations are violated, they may get frustrated 
and “tune out” or even become hostile. The Pop Comm! feature “And the Winner Is . . .” 
discusses how the Academy Awards’ audience reacted to the acceptance speeches by 
winners such as Michael Moore and Sally Field, who violated audience expectations.
As you’re learning in this chapter, you continue your preparation by organizing 
the information you have gathered into an outline. To do so, begin by developing the 
body of your speech and then your introduction and conclusion.
Developing the Body of the Speech
Once you have analyzed the audience, developed a speech goal, and assembled infor-
mation on your topic, you are ready to craft the body of your speech by (a) determining 
the main points; (b) writing a thesis statement; (c) outlining the body of the speech; 
(d) selecting and ordering the supporting material (examples, statistics, illustrations, 
quotations, and so on) that elaborates on or supports each of your main points; and 
(e) preparing sectional transitions.
Determining Main Points
The main points of a speech are the two to ﬁ ve central ideas you want to present, each 
stated as a complete sentence. You will want to limit the number of main points so that 
your audience members can keep track of your ideas and so that you can develop each 
idea with an appropriate amount of supporting material. Usually, the difference between 
a 5-minute speech and a 25-minute speech with the same speech goal is not the number 
of main ideas presented but the extent to which each main point is developed.
For some topics and goals, determining the main points is easy. Erin, who plays 
Division I volleyball for her college, didn’t need to do much research for her speech on 
how to spike a volleyball. And because she will be speaking to a group of athletes, it 
was easy for her to group the actions into three steps: the proper approach, a powerful 
swing, and an effective follow-through.
organizing
the process of selecting and 
arranging the main ideas 
and supporting material to be 
presented in the speech in a 
manner that makes it easy for 
the audience to understand.
main points
complete sentence 
representations of the main 
ideas used in your thesis 
statement.
How can you 
determine the 
main points of your 
speech?

277
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
And the Winner Is . . .
The MTV Video Vanguard Awards, the People’s 
Choice Awards, the Emmys, the Grammys, the 
Tonys, the Oscars—each year it seems as though 
there are more and more entertainment awards 
shows to keep us, well, entertained. Do you watch 
any of these shows? If so, why? To see what the 
celebrities are wearing? To view outstanding per-
formances by your favorite artists? Or to hear what 
your favorite star says in an acceptance speech?
Acceptance speeches, long a staple of awards 
shows, can be a bane to the award show’s pro-
ducers and a way for celebrities to become even 
more famous—or infamous. Consider some of the 
more unconventional Oscar acceptance speeches. 
When James Cameron won the award for best 
director in 1998 for his movie Titanic, he ﬁ rst 
requested a moment of silence for the victims 
of the Titanic disaster, then proclaimed, “I am 
the king of the world!” In 2003 Michael Moore 
chastised the U.S. president in his speech, saying 
“Shame on you Mr. Bush, shame on you.” In 1985 
Sally Field famously, and very enthusiastically, 
proclaimed, “You like me, right now, you really 
like me!” And Greer Garson, who won the award 
for best actress in 1942, still holds the record for 
the longest Oscar speech—it lasted for seven min-
utes (“The ten most  memorable,” 2008).
To help Oscar nominees give effective and 
well-received speeches, award-winning actor 
Tom Hanks, a vice-president of the organiza-
tion that presents the awards, has released a 
DVD of speech tips such as “Instead of hugging 
everyone within a 10-row radius, you might 
have to settle for a few fast high-ﬁ ves as you 
sprint down the aisle.” He also cautions against 
reading from a list or thanking a long list of 
people, and he recommends saying something 
witty, creative, and memorable (“Hanks for the 
Oscars,” 2006).
Because Oscar speeches are often exten-
sively covered in the media, many sources offer 
additional tips to nominees. Communication 
expert Bill Lampton suggests that people don’t 
try to be funny if humor is not their strength 
and that they remember to keep the speech 
concise (Goodale, 2005). The New York Times 
advises Oscar nominees to avoid addressing 
political issues (Iorio, 1995). Media trainer T. 
J. Walker emphasizes the importance of being 
prepared, saying, “Preparedness is the only 
way to be truly spontaneous.” As an example, 
he cites former President Clinton, who has a 
conversational style that always sounds extem-
poraneous. Walker explains, “He is still working 
from a scripted speech, but he knows it inside 
and out and that allows him to feel prepared 
and relaxed” (Goodale, 2005).
Feeling prepared and comfortable may 
encourage sincere emotional expression, which 
is what many Oscar viewers most appreciate. 
For Kirwan Rockefeller, pop culture professor 
at the University of California, Irvine, Halle 
Berry’s 2002 acceptance speech for best actress 
was a great example of speaking from the heart. 
“Berry’s speech was  poignant and full of emo-
tion,” he said. “Everybody loves to see an Oscar 
winner cry and be humble and be really sur-
prised” (Goodale, 2005).
Pop Comm!
AP Photo/Kevork Djansezian

278
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
But for other topics and goals, determining main points can be more difﬁ cult. For 
example Emming wants to speak on choosing a credit card. His speciﬁ c goal state-
ment is “I want the audience to understand the criteria for choosing a credit card.” 
As he did his research, he uncovered numerous interesting facts related to the topic, 
but he has had trouble ﬁ guring out how to group them. When you ﬁ nd yourself in 
this situation, you will need to do further work to determine the main ideas you want 
to present.
How should you proceed? First, list the ideas you have found that relate to your 
speciﬁ c goal. Like Emming, you may have a very long list. Second, eliminate ideas that 
your audience analysis suggests that your audience already understands. Third, see if 
some of the ideas can be grouped under a broader concept. Fourth, eliminate ideas for 
which you do not have strong support in the sources you consulted. Fifth, eliminate 
ideas that might be too complicated for this audience to comprehend in the time you 
have to explain them. Finally, from the ideas that remain, choose three to ﬁ ve that 
are the most important for your audience to understand if you are to accomplish your 
speciﬁ c speech goal.
Let’s look at how Emming used these steps to identify the main points for his 
speech on criteria for choosing a credit card. Emming had some thoughts about pos-
sible main ideas for the speech, but it wasn’t until he completed most of his research, 
sorted through what he had collected, and thought about it, that he was able to choose 
his main points.
First, he listed ideas (in this case nine) that were discussed in the research materials 
he had found about choosing a credit card:
what is a credit card
interest rates
credit ratings
convenience
discounts
annual fee
institutional reputation
reward points
rebates
Second, Emming eliminated the idea “what is a credit card” because he knew 
that his audience already understood this. This left him with eight ideas—still too 
many for his speech. Third, Emming noticed that several ideas seemed to be related. 
“Discounts,” “reward points,” and “rebates” are all types of incentives that card 
companies offer to entice people to choose their card. So Emming grouped these 
three ideas together under the single heading of “incentives.” Fourth, Emming 
noticed that he had uncovered considerable information on interest rates, credit 
ratings, discounts, annual fees, rebates, and frequent ﬂ yer points, but he had very 
little information on convenience or institutional reputation, so he crossed out those 
two ideas.
Finally, Emming considered each of the six remaining ideas in light of the ﬁ ve-
minute time limit for his speech. He decided to cross out credit ratings because, 
although people’s credit ratings inﬂ uence the types of cards and interest rates for 
which they might qualify, Emming believed that he could not adequately explain this 
idea in the short time available. In fact, he believed that explaining credit ratings to 
this audience might take a lot longer than ﬁ ve minutes and wasn’t as basic as some 

279
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
of the other ideas he had listed. When he was ﬁ nished with his analysis and synthesis, 
his list looked like this:
what is a credit card
interest rates
credit ratings
convenience
discounts
annual fee 
incentives
institutional reputation
frequent ﬂ yer points
rebates
This process left Emming with three broad points he could develop in his speech: inter-
est rates, annual fee, and incentives. When you want to talk about a topic that includes 
numerous types, categories, and so on, follow Emming’s steps to reduce the number of 
your main points to between two and ﬁ ve.
Writing a Thesis Statement
A thesis statement is a one- or two-sentence summary of your speech that states your 
general and speciﬁ c goals and previews the main points of your speech. Thus, your thesis 
statement provides a blueprint from which you will organize the body of your speech.
Now let’s consider how you arrive at this thesis statement. Recall that Emming 
determined three main ideas that he wanted to talk about in his speech on choosing a 
thesis statement
a one- or two-sentence 
summary of your speech 
that states your general and 
speciﬁ c goals and previews 
the main points of your 
speech.
Action Step 3.a
Determining Main Points
The goal of this activity is to help you determine three to ﬁ ve main ideas or 
main points that you will present in your speech.
 1. 
List all the ideas you have found that relate to the speciﬁ c goal of your 
speech.
 2. 
If there are more than ﬁ ve:
a. 
Draw a line through each idea that you believe the audience 
already understands, that you have no supporting information for, 
or that just seems too complicated for the time allowed.
b. 
Look for ideas that can be grouped under a larger heading.
 3. 
From the ideas that remain, choose the two to ﬁ ve that you think will 
make the best main points for your audience.
You can complete this activity online with Speech Builder Express, view a student 
sample of this activity, and, if requested, e-mail your completed activity to your 
instructor. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step 
activities for Chapter 12.
How can you 
construct a thesis 
statement for your 
speech?

280
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
credit card: interest rates, annual fee, and incentives. Based on his general and speciﬁ c 
goals and the main points he had determined, Emming was able to write his thesis 
statement: “Three criteria you should use to ﬁ nd the most suitable credit card are level 
of real interest rate, annual fee, and advertised incentives.”
Outlining the Body of the Speech
Once you have a thesis statement, you can begin to outline your speech. A speech 
outline is a sentence representation of the hierarchical and sequential relationships 
between the ideas presented in the speech. Your outline may have three hierarchical 
levels of information: main points (numbered with Roman numerals), subpoints that 
support a main point (ordered with capital letters), and sometimes sub-subpoints that 
support a subpoint (numbered with Arabic numbers). Figure 12.1 shows the general 
form of the speech outline system.
Writing your main points and subpoints in complete sentences will help you clar-
ify the relationships between main points and subpoints. Once you have worded each 
main point and determined its relevant subpoints, you will choose a pattern of organi-
zation that ﬁ ts your thesis. The order of your main points will depend on the pattern 
of organization that you choose.
Wording main points
Recall that Emming determined that interest rates, annual fee, and incentives are the 
three major criteria for ﬁ nding a suitable credit card and his thesis statement was 
“Three criteria that you should use to ﬁ nd the most suitable credit card are level of 
real interest rate, annual fee, and advertised incentives.” So Emming’s ﬁ rst draft of the 
main points of his speech might look like this:
 I. Examining the interest rate is one criterion that you can use to ﬁ nd a credit 
card that is suitable for where you are in life.
 II. Another criterion that you can use to make sure you ﬁ nd a credit card that 
is suitable for where you are in life is to examine the annual fee.
 III. Finding a credit card can also depend on weighing the advertised incen-
tives, which is the third criterion that you will want to use to be sure that 
it is suitable for where you are in life.
Skill Learning Activity 12.1
Web Resource 12.1
speech outline
a sentence representation 
of the hierarchical and 
sequential relationships 
between the ideas presented 
in a speech.
How can you 
prepare a 
well-written speech 
outline?
Action Step 3.b
Writing a Thesis Statement
The goal of this activity is to use your speciﬁ c goal statement and the main 
points you have identiﬁ ed to develop a well-worded thesis statement for 
your speech.
 1. 
Write the speciﬁ c goal you developed in Chapter 11 with Action Step 1.e.
 2. 
List the main points you determined in Action Step 3.a.
 3. 
Now write a complete sentence that includes both your speciﬁ c goal 
and your main points.
You can complete this activity online with Speech Builder Express, view a student 
sample of this activity, and, if requested, e-mail your completed activity to your 
instructor. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step 
activities for Chapter 12.

281
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
Study these statements. Do they seem a bit vague? Sometimes, the ﬁ rst draft of a main 
point is well expressed and doesn’t need additional work. More often, however, our ﬁ rst 
attempt doesn’t quite capture what we want to say. So we need to rework the statements 
to make them clearer. Testing our main points with two questions can help us as we revise.
 1. Is the relationship of each main point statement to the goal statement clearly 
speciﬁ ed? Based on this question, Emming revised his main points like this:
 I. A low interest rate is one criterion that you can use to select a credit card 
that is suitable for where you are in life.
 II. Another criterion that you can use to make sure you ﬁ nd a credit card that 
is suitable for where you are in life is to look for a card with no annual fee 
or a very low one.
 III. Finding a credit card can also depend on weighing the value of the adver-
tised incentives against the increased annual cost or interest rate, which is 
the third criterion that you will want to use to be sure that it is suitable for 
where you are in life.
 2. Are the main points parallel in structure? Main points are parallel to each other 
when their wording follows the same structural pattern, often using the same 
introductory words. Parallel structure helps the audience recognize main points by 
recalling a pattern in the wording. Based on this, Emming revised his main points 
to make them parallel:
 I. The ﬁ rst criterion for choosing a credit card is a relatively low interest rate.
 II. A second criterion for choosing a credit card is no annual fee or a low 
annual fee.
 III. A third criterion for choosing a credit card is the value of the advertised 
incentives compared to the increased annual cost or interest rate.
parallel
wording in more than one 
sentence that follows the 
same structural pattern, often 
using the same introductory 
words.
 I. Main point one
  A. Subpoint A for main point one
   
1. Sub-subpoint one for subpoint A of main point one
   
2. Sub-subpoint two for subpoint A of main point one
  B. Subpoint B of main point one
 II. Main point two
  A. Subpoint A for main point two
   
1. Sub-subpoint one for subpoint A of main point two
   
2. Sub-subpoint two for subpoint A of main point two
  B. Subpoint B of main point two
  C. Subpoint C of main point two
   
1. Sub-subpoint one for subpoint C of main point two
   
2. Sub-subpoint two for subpoint C of main point two
   
3. Sub-subpoint three for subpoint C of main point two
 III. Main point three
  A. Subpoint A for main point three
   
1. Sub-subpoint one for subpoint A of main point three
   
2. Sub-subpoint two for subpoint A of main point three
  B. Subpoint B of main point three
   
. . . and so on.
Figure 12.1
General form for a speech 
outline

282
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
Selecting an organizational pattern for main points
A speech can be organized in many different ways. Your objective is to use a struc-
ture that will help the audience make the most sense of the material. You will want to 
choose an organizational pattern that makes your main points easy for your audience 
to understand. Although there are numerous organizational patterns, four fundamen-
tal patterns for beginning speakers are time (or sequential) order, narrative order, topic 
order, and logical reasons order.
 1. Time order, sometimes called sequential order or chronological order, arranges 
main points by a chronological sequence or by steps in a process. When you are 
explaining how to do something, how to make something, how something works, 
or how something happened, you will want to use time order. Erin’s audience will 
ﬁ nd it easiest to understand the process of spiking a volleyball if she uses time 
order for her main points (good approach, powerful swing, good follow-through). 
Imagine how difﬁ cult it would be for her audience if Erin began by talking about 
a powerful swing, then discussed a good-follow through, and ended by describing 
a good approach. Could her audience understand her point? Probably. But they 
would have to work much harder than if she ordered the topics sequentially. Let’s 
look at another example of time order.
Thesis statement: The four steps involved in developing a personal network 
are to analyze your current networking potential, to position yourself in places for 
opportunity, to advertise yourself, and to follow up on contacts.
 I. First, analyze your current networking potential.
 II. Second, position yourself in places for opportunity.
 III. Third, advertise yourself.
 IV. Fourth, follow up on contacts.
Although the use of “ﬁ rst,” “second,” and so on, is not a requirement when 
using a time order, their inclusion helps audience members keep track of the 
 sequence.
 2. Narrative order dramatizes the thesis with a story or series of stories that 
includes characters, settings, and a plot. While a narrative may be presented in 
chronological order, it may also use a series of ﬂ ash backs or ﬂ ash forwards to 
increase the dramatic effect. The main points in a narrative may be the events 
in a single story that highlights the thesis, or the main points may be individual 
stories, each of which dramatizes the thesis. Narrative order is a particularly 
effective way of developing a thesis when you tell stories that are emotionally 
compelling. Lonna wanted her audience to understand how AIDS affects the 
lives of survivors, so she chose to develop this thesis by using a narrative order 
and tell her personal story.
Thesis statement: Today, I want you to understand what it is like to live with 
AIDS. So I am going to share the story of my life before contracting AIDS, my life 
today with AIDS, and my future plans knowing that I have AIDS.
 I. My life before I contracted AIDS was pretty typical for a middle-class white 
girl.
 II. My life today is anything but typical as I balance my schoolwork and social 
life with weekly visits to the doctor and daily physical and drug therapy.
 III. My future life plans have changed dramatically because I have AIDS.
Here’s how Lonna could also use a narrative order that shares several stories:
Thesis statement: Today, I want you to understand what it is like to live with 
AIDS. So I am going to share the stories of Robert, Emma, and me.
time, or sequential, order
organizing the main points by 
a chronological sequence, or 
by steps in a process.
narrative order
dramatizes the thesis using a 
story or series of stories that 
includes characters, settings, 
and a plot.

283
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
 I. Robert’s story is about a 27-year-old store manager with AIDS.
 II. Emma’s story is about a 3-year-old toddler with AIDS.
 III. My story is about a 20-year-old college student with AIDS.
 3. Topic order arranges the main points of the speech by categories or divisions 
of a subject. This is a common way of ordering main points because nearly any 
subject may be subdivided or categorized in many different ways. The order of 
the topics may go from general to speciﬁ c, least important to most important, 
or some other logical sequence. In the following example, the most important 
point is presented last and the second most important point is presented ﬁ rst, 
which is the order that the speaker believes is most suitable for the audience and 
speech goal.
Thesis statement: To maintain good health, let’s discuss three proven methods 
for ridding our bodies of harmful toxins: staying hydrated, reducing animal foods, 
and eating natural whole foods.
 I. One proven method for ridding our bodies of harmful toxins is reducing 
our intake of animal products.
 II. A second proven method for ridding our bodies of harmful toxins is eating 
more natural whole foods.
 III. A third proven method for ridding our bodies of harmful toxins is keeping 
well hydrated.
 4. Logical reasons order is used when the main points are the rationale or proof that 
supports the thesis.
Thesis statement: Donating to the United Way is appropriate because your one 
donation can be divided among many charities, you can stipulate which speciﬁ c 
topic order
organizing the main points of 
the speech by categories or 
divisions of a subject.
logical reasons order
emphasizes when the 
main points provide proof 
supporting the thesis 
statement.
Action Step 3.c
Organizing and Outlining the Main Points of Your Speech
The goal of this activity is to help you phrase and order your main points.
 1. 
Write your thesis statement (Action Step 3.b).
 2. 
Underline the two to ﬁ ve main points determined for your thesis 
statement.
 3. 
For each underlined item, write one sentence that summarizes what 
you want your audience to know about that idea.
 4. 
Review the main points as a group.
a. 
Is the relationship of each main point statement to the goal state-
ment clearly speciﬁ ed? If not, revise.
b. 
Are the main points parallel in structure? If not, revise.
 5. 
Choose an organizational pattern for your main points, and write them 
in this order. Place a “I.” before the main point you will make ﬁ rst, a “II.” 
before your second point, and so on.
You can complete this activity online using Speech Builder Express, view a student 
sample of this activity, and, if requested, e-mail your completed activity to your 
instructor. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step 
activities for Chapter 11.

284
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
charities you wish to support, and a high percentage of your donation goes to 
charities.
 I. When you donate to the United Way, your one donation can be divided 
among many charities.
 II. When you donate to the United Way, you can stipulate which charities you 
wish to support.
 III. When you donate to the United Way, you know that a high percentage of 
your donation will go directly to the charities you’ve selected.
Although these four orga-
nizational patterns are the most 
 basic ones, in Chapters 15 and 16 
you will be introduced to several 
other  patterns that are appropri-
ate for  informative and persuasive 
 speaking.
Selecting and Outlining 
Supporting Material
Although the main points provide 
the basic structure or skeleton of 
your speech, whether your audience 
understands, believes, or appreciates 
what you have to say usually depends 
on your supporting material—the 
information you use to develop the 
main points. You can identify sup-
porting material by sorting your 
research cards into piles that correspond to each of your main points. The goal is to see 
what information you have to develop each point. When Emming sorted his research 
cards, he discovered that for his ﬁ rst point, interest rates, he had the following support:
• Most “zero percent” cards carry an average of 8 percent after a speciﬁ ed 0 percent 
interest period.
• Some cards carry as much as 21 percent after the ﬁ rst year.
• Some cards offer a grace period.
• Department store interest rates are often higher than bank rates.
• Variable rate means that the interest rate can change from month to month.
• Even ﬁ xed rates on some cards can be raised to as much as 32 percent if you make 
a late payment.
• Fixed rate means the interest rate will stay the same.
• Many companies offer “zero percent” for up to 12 months.
• Some companies offer “zero percent” for a few months.
Once you have listed each of the supporting items, look for relationships 
between them that will allow you to group ideas under a broader heading and 
eliminate ideas that don’t really belong. Then select the ideas that best support the 
main idea and develop them into complete sentences. When Emming did this, he 
came up with two statements for grouping the supporting information about his 
ﬁ rst main point. These two statements became his subpoints. He also had material 
Skill Learning Activity 12.2
If you were giving a speech 
on the phenomenon of 
soldiers creating blogs about 
their combat experiences, 
what organizational pattern 
do you think would best suit 
your speech?
Jim MacMillan/AP Photos

285
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
that supported each subpoint. Here is Emming’s expanded outline for his ﬁ rst main 
point:
 I. The ﬁ rst criterion for choosing a credit card is a low interest rate.
A. Interest rates are the percentages that a company charges you to carry a 
balance on your card past the due date.
 1. Most credit cards carry an average of 8 percent after a speciﬁ ed 0 
percent interest period.
 2. Some cards carry as much as 21 percent after the ﬁ rst year.
 3. Many companies quote low rates (0%–3%) for a speciﬁ c period.
B. Interest rates can be variable or ﬁ xed.
 1. A variable rate means that the percent charged can vary from month 
to month.
 2. A ﬁ xed rate means that the rate will stay the same.
 3. Even a card with a ﬁ xed rate can be raised to as much as 32 percent 
if you make a late payment.
The outline includes the supporting points of a speech, but it does not include 
all the development of them. For instance, Emming could use personal experiences, 
examples, illustrations, anecdotes, statistics, or quotations to elaborate on main points 
and subpoints. But these are not detailed on the outline. Emming will choose these 
developmental materials later as he considers how to verbally and visually adapt to 
his audience.
Skill Learning Activity 12.3
Action Step 3.d
Selecting and Outlining Supporting Material
The goal of this activity is to help you develop and outline your supporting 
material. Complete the following steps for each of your main points.
 1. 
List the main point.
 2. 
Using your research cards, list the key information related to that main 
point.
 3. 
Analyze that information and cross out items that seem less relevant or 
don’t ﬁ t.
 4. 
Look for items that seems related and can be grouped under a broader 
heading.
 5. 
Try to group information until you have between two and ﬁ ve support-
ing points for the main point.
 6. 
Write those supporting subpoints in full sentences.
 7. 
Write the supporting sub-subpoints in full sentences.
 8. 
Repeat this process for all main points.
 9. 
Write an outline using Roman numerals for main points, capital letters 
for supporting points, and Arabic numbers for material related to sup-
porting points.
You can complete this activity online using Speech Builder Express and, if request-
ed, e-mail your completed activity to your instructor. Use your Premium Website for 
Communicate! to access the Action Step activities for Chapter 12.

286
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
Preparing Section Transitions and Signposts
Once you have outlined your main points, subpoints, and potential supporting mate-
rial, you will want to consider how you will move smoothly from one main point 
to another. Transitions are words, phrases, or sentences that show the relationship 
between or bridge two ideas. Transitions act like tour guides leading the audience from 
point to point through the speech. Good transitions are important in writing, but they 
are even more important in speaking. If listeners get lost or think they have missed 
something, they cannot check back as they can when reading. Transitions can come in 
the form of section transitions or signposts.
Section transitions are complete sentences that show the relationship between or 
bridge major parts of the speech. They summarize what has just been said and preview 
the next main idea. For example, suppose Noel has just ﬁ nished the introduction of 
his speech on what it’s like to be in a color guard and is now ready to launch into his 
main points. Before stating his ﬁ rst main point, he might say, “There are many beneﬁ ts 
to participating in a color guard, one of which is the physical beneﬁ ts you get from 
the workouts.” When his listeners hear this transition, they are signaled to mentally 
prepare to listen to and remember the ﬁ rst main point. When he ﬁ nishes his ﬁ rst main 
point, he will use another section transition to signal that he is ﬁ nished speaking about 
the ﬁ rst main point and is moving on to the second main point: “Now that we under-
stand some of the physical beneﬁ ts, we can move on to some of the friendship beneﬁ ts.”
Section transitions are important for two reasons. First, they help the audience fol-
low the organization of ideas in the speech. If every member of the audience were able 
to pay complete attention to every word, then perhaps section transitions would not 
be needed. But our attention rises and falls during a speech, so we often ﬁ nd ourselves 
wondering where we are. Section transitions give us a mental jolt and say, “Pay atten-
tion.” Second, section transitions are important in helping us retain information. We 
may remember something that was said once in a speech, but our retention is likely to 
increase markedly if we hear something more than once.
In a speech, if we forecast main points, then state each main point, and use section 
transitions between each point, audiences are more likely to follow and remember the 
organization. To help remember and use section transitions, write them in complete 
sentences on your speech outline.
transitions
words, phrases, or sentences 
that show the relationship 
between or bridge ideas.
section transition
complete sentence that 
shows the relationship 
between or bridge major 
parts of the speech.
How can you 
create effective 
transitions?
Action Step 3.e
Preparing Section Transitions
The goal of this exercise is to help you prepare section transitions. Section 
transitions appear as parenthetical statements before or after each main 
point. Using complete sentences:
 1. 
Write a transition from your ﬁ rst main point to your second.
 2. 
Write a transition from each remaining main point to the one after it.
 3. 
Add these transitional statements to your outline.
You can complete this activity online with Speech Builder Express, view a student 
sample of this activity, and, if requested, e-mail your completed activity to your 
instructor. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step 
activities for Chapter 12.

287
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
Signposts are single words or phrases that connect pieces of supporting material 
to their main point or subpoint. Signposts are briefer than section transitions, and their 
only goal is to show relationships among or emphasize important supporting material. 
Sometimes signposts number ideas: ﬁ rst, second, third, and fourth. Sometimes they 
help the audience focus on a key idea: foremost, most important, or above all. Signposts 
can also be used to introduce an explanation: to illustrate, for example, in other words, 
essentially, or to clarify. Signposts can also signal that a lengthy anecdote, or even the 
speech itself, is coming to an end: in short, ﬁ nally, in conclusion, or to summarize. Just 
as section transitions serve as the glue that holds your big-picture main points together, 
signposts connect your subpoints and supporting material within each main point.
Creating the Introduction
Once you have developed the body of the speech, you can decide how to begin your 
speech. The introduction of your speech establishes your relationship with your audi-
ence, so it is worth your time to develop two or three different introductions and then 
select the one that seems best for this particular audience. Although your introduction 
may be very short, it should gain the audience’s attention and motivate them to listen 
to all that you have to say. An introduction is generally no more than 10 percent of the 
length of the entire speech, so for a ﬁ ve-minute speech (approximately 750 words), an 
introduction of about 30 seconds (approximately 60–85 words) is appropriate.
An effective introduction achieves three goals: it gains attention, it points out 
how your topic is relevant to the listener, and it reveals your thesis statement (speciﬁ c 
speech goal and main points). In addition, effective introductions can help you begin 
to establish your credibility, set the tone for the speech, and create a bond of goodwill 
between you and the audience.
Gaining Attention
An audience’s physical presence does not guarantee that people will actually listen to 
your speech. Your ﬁ rst goal, then, is to create an opening that will win your listen-
ers’ attention by arousing their curiosity and motivating them to continue listening. 
Although your introductions are limited only by your imagination, let’s look at several 
techniques you can use to get your audience’s attention and also to stimulate their 
interest in what you have to say: startling statements, questions, jokes, personal refer-
ences, quotations, stories, and suspense.
Startling statements
A startling statement is a sentence or two that grabs your listeners’ attention by shock-
ing them in some way. Because they were shocked, audience members stop what they 
were doing or thinking about and focus on the speaker. Chris used a startling statement 
to get his listeners’ attention for his speech about how automobile emissions contribute 
to global warming:
Look around. Each one of you is sitting next to a killer. That’s right. You are 
sitting next to a cold-blooded killer. Before you think about jumping up and 
running out of this room, let me explain. Everyone who drives an automobile is 
a killer of the environment. Every time you turn the key to your ignition, you 
are helping to destroy our precious surroundings.
Once Chris’s startling statement grabbed the attention of his listeners, he went on to 
state his speech goal and preview his main points.
signposts
short word or phrase 
transitions that connect 
pieces of supporting material 
to the main point or subpoint 
they address.
Section transitions mentally 
prepare the audience to 
move to the next main idea.
How can you 
create an effective 
introduction to your 
speech?
Michael Blann

288
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
Rhetorical and direct questions
Questions encourage the audience think about something related to your topic 
Questions can be rhetorical or direct. A rhetorical question seeks a mental rather than 
a direct response. Notice how a student began her speech on counterfeiting with three 
short, rhetorical questions:
What would you do with this $20 bill if I gave it to you? Take your friend to 
a movie? Treat yourself to a pizza and drinks? Well, if you did either of these 
things, you could get in big trouble—this bill is counterfeit!
Today I want to explain the extent of counterfeiting in America and what 
our government is doing to curb it.
Unlike a rhetorical question, a direct question demands an overt response from the 
audience, usually by a show of hands. For example, here’s how Stephanie introduced 
her speech on seatbelt safety:
By a show of hands, how many of you drove or rode in an automobile to get here 
today? Of those of you who did, how many of you actually wore your seatbelt?
Direct questions get audience attention because they require a physical response. 
However, getting listeners to actually respond can sometimes pose a challenge.
Jokes
A joke is an anecdote or a piece of wordplay designed to be funny and make people 
laugh. To get audience attention, a joke needs to meet the “three-r test”: it must be 
realistic, relevant, and repeatable (Humes, 1988). In other words, the joke can’t be too 
far-fetched, unrelated to the speech purpose, or potentially offensive to some listeners. 
For example, one of your authors gave a speech recently about running effective meet-
ings to a group of business professionals. She began with, “As many of you know, I’m 
a college professor, so I just couldn’t resist giving you a quiz.” She then handed out a 
12-item personal-learning-styles inventory to the audience members. As she distributed 
it, she explained, “The nice thing about this quiz though is that you can’t be wrong. 
You’ll all get 100 percent.” The audience laughed with relief. Be careful with humorous 
attention-getters—and consider how you will handle the situation if nobody laughs.
Personal references
A personal reference is a brief account of something that happened to you or a 
hypothetical situation that listeners can imagine themselves in. In addition to getting 
attention, a personal reference can engage listeners as active participants. A personal 
reference opening, like this one, may be suitable for a speech of any length:
Say, were you panting when you got to the top of those four ﬂ ights of stairs 
this morning? I’ll bet there were a few of you who vowed you’re never going 
rhetorical question
a question seeking a mental 
rather than a vocal response.
direct question
a question that demands 
an overt response from the 
audience, usually by a show 
of hands.
joke
anecdote or a piece of 
wordplay designed to be 
funny and make people 
laugh.
personal reference 
a brief account of something 
that happened to you or 
a hypothetical situation 
that listeners can imagine 
themselves in.
©1983 Cathy Guisewite. Reprinted by permission of Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.

289
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
to take a class on the top ﬂ oor of this building again. But did you ever stop to 
think that maybe the problem isn’t that this class is on the top ﬂ oor? It just 
might be that you are not getting enough exercise.
Quotations
A quotation is a comment made by and attributed to someone other than the speaker. A 
particularly vivid or thought-provoking quotation can make an excellent introduction 
to a speech of any length, especially if you can use your imagination to relate the quota-
tion to your topic. For instance, notice how Sally Mason, provost at Purdue University, 
used a quotation to get the attention of her audience, the Lafayette, Indiana, YWCA:
There is an ancient saying, “May you live in interesting times.” It is actually an 
ancient curse. It might sound great to live in interesting times. But interesting 
times are times of change and even turmoil. They are times of struggle. They 
are exciting. But, at the same time, they are difﬁ cult. People of my genera-
tion have certainly lived through interesting times and they continue today. 
(Mason, 2007, p. 159)
Stories
A story is an account of something that has happened (actual) or could happen (hypo-
thetical). Most people enjoy a well-told story, so a story can make a good attention 
getter. One drawback of stories is that they can be lengthy. So use a story only if it is 
short or if you can abbreviate it to make it appropriate for your speech length. Matt used 
a story to get audience attention for his speech about spanking as a form of discipline:
One rainy afternoon, four-year-old Billy was playing “pretend” in the living 
room. He was Captain Jack Sparrow, staving off the bad guys with his amaz-
ing sword-ﬁ ghting skills. Then it happened. Billy knocked his mother’s very 
expensive china bowl off the table. Billy hung his head and began to cry. He 
knew what was coming, and sure enough it did. The low thud of his mother’s 
hand on his bottom brought a sting to his behind and a small yelp from his 
mouth. Billy got a spanking.
Suspense
To create suspense, you word your attention-getter so that it generates uncertainty 
and excites the audience. When your audience wonders, “What is she leading up 
to?’’ you have created suspense. A suspenseful opening is especially valuable when 
your audience is not particularly interested in hearing about your topic. Consider the 
attention-getting value of this introduction:
It costs the United States more than $116 billion per year. It has cost the loss 
of more jobs than a recession. It accounts for nearly 100,000 deaths a year. I’m 
not talking about cocaine abuse—the problem is alcoholism. Today I want to 
show you how we can avoid this inhumane killer by abstaining from it.
By putting the problem, alcoholism, at the end, the speaker encourages the audience to 
try to anticipate the answer. And because the audience may well be thinking “narcot-
ics,” the revelation that the answer is alcoholism is likely to make them interested in 
hearing what the speaker has to say.
Establishing Listener Relevance
Even if you successfully get the attention of your listeners, to keep their attention you 
will need to motivate them to listen to your speech. You can do this by creating a clear 
quotation
a comment made by and 
attributed to someone other 
than the speaker.
story
an account of something that 
has happened (actual) or 
could happen (hypothetical).
suspense
wording your  attention-
getter so that it generates 
uncertainty and excites the 
audience.

290
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
listener relevance link, a statement of how and why your speech relates to or might 
affect your audience. Sometimes your attention-getting statement will serve this func-
tion, but if it doesn’t, you will need to provide a personal connection between your 
topic and your audience. Notice how Tiffany created a listener relevance link for her 
speech about being a vegetarian by asking her audience to consider the topic in rela-
tion to their own lives:
Although a diet rich in eggs and meat was once the norm in this country, more 
and more of us are choosing a vegetarian lifestyle to help lower blood pressure, 
reduce cholesterol, and even help prevent the onset of some diseases. So as I 
describe my experience, you may want to consider how you could alter your diet.
When creating a listener relevance link, answer these questions: Why should my lis-
teners care about what I’m saying? In what way(s) might they beneﬁ t from hearing 
about it? How might my speech address my listeners’ needs or desires for such things 
as health, wealth, well-being, self-esteem, or success?
Stating the Thesis
Because audiences want to know what the speech is going to be about, it’s important 
to state your thesis, which will introduce them to the speciﬁ c goal and main points of 
your speech. For his speech about romantic love, after Miguel gained the audience’s 
attention, he introduced his thesis, “In the next ﬁ ve minutes, I’d like to explain to you 
that romantic love consists of three elements: passion, intimacy, and commitment.”
Stating main points in the introduction is necessary unless you have some special 
reason for not revealing the details of the thesis. For instance, after getting the atten-
tion of his audience, Miguel might say, “In the next ﬁ ve minutes, I’d like to explain the 
three aspects of romantic love,” a statement that speciﬁ es the number of main points, 
but leaves stating speciﬁ cs for transition statements immediately preceding main 
points. Now let’s consider three other goals you might have for your introduction.
Establishing Your Credibility
If someone hasn’t formally introduced you before you speak, the audience members 
are going to wonder who you are and why they should pay attention to what you have 
to say. So another goal of the introduction may be to begin to build your credibility. 
For instance, it would be natural for an audience to question Miguel’s qualiﬁ cations 
for speaking on the topic of romantic love. So after his attention-getting statement 
he might say, “As a child development and family science major, last semester I took 
an interdisciplinary seminar on romantic love, and I am now doing an independent 
research project on commitment in relationships.” Remember that your goal is to high-
light why you are a credible speaker on this topic, but not to imply that you are the or 
even a ﬁ nal authority on the subject.
Setting a Tone
The introductory remarks may also reﬂ ect the emotional tone that is appropriate for the 
topic. A humorous opening will signal a lighthearted tone; a serious opening signals a 
more thoughtful or somber tone. For instance, a speaker who starts with a rib-tickling 
story is putting the audience in a lighthearted mood. If that speaker then says, “Now 
let’s turn to the subject of abortion [or nuclear war, or global warming],” the audience 
will be confused by the introduction that signaled a far different type of subject.
listener relevance link
a statement of how and why 
your speech relates to or 
might affect your audience

291
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
Creating a Bond of Goodwill
In your ﬁ rst few words, you may also establish how your audience will feel about 
you as a person. If you’re enthusiastic, warm, and friendly and give a sense that what 
you’re going to talk about is in the audience’s best interest, it will make them feel more 
comfortable about spending time listening to you.
For longer speeches, you will have more time to accomplish all ﬁ ve goals in the 
introduction. But for shorter speeches, like those that you are likely to be giving in 
class, you will ﬁ rst focus on getting attention, establishing listener relevance, and stat-
ing the thesis; then you will use very brief comments to try to build your credibility, 
establish an appropriate tone, and develop goodwill.
Crafting the Conclusion
Shakespeare said, “All’s well that ends well.” A strong conclusion will summa-
rize the main ideas and will leave the audience with a vivid impression of what 
they have learned. Even though the conclusion is a relatively short part of the 
speech—seldom more than 5 percent (35 to 40 words for a ﬁ ve-minute speech)—it is 
important that your conclusion be carefully planned. It should achieve two major 
goals: summarize your speech goal and main points and provide a clincher that 
leaves a vivid impression of your message in the minds of your audience or com-
pels them to action.
As with your speech introduction, you should prepare two or three conclu-
sions and then choose the one you believe will be the most effective with your 
audience.
How can you 
create an effective 
conclusion for your 
speech?
Action Step 3.f
Writing Speech Introductions
The goal of this activity is to create choices for how you will begin your 
speech.
 1. 
For the speech body you outlined earlier, write three different intro-
ductions—using a startling statement, rhetorical or direct question, 
joke, personal reference, quotation, story, or suspense—that you 
believe meet the goals of effective introductions and that you 
believe would set an appropriate tone for your speech goal and 
audience.
 2. 
Of the three you drafted, which do you believe is the best? Why?
 3. 
Next, plan how you will introduce your thesis statement.
 4. 
Develop a very short statement that will establish your credibility.
 5. 
Consider how you might establish goodwill during the introduction.
 6. 
Write that introduction in outline form.
You can complete this activity online with Speech Builder Express, view a student 
sample of this activity, and, if requested, e-mail your completed activity to your 
instructor. Use you Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step 
activities for Chapter 12.

292
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
Summary
An effective speech conclusion will include a restatement of your speech goal and 
summary of the main points. An appropriate summary for an informative speech on 
how to improve your grades might be “So I hope you now understand [informative 
goal] that three techniques to help you improve your grades are to attend classes 
regularly, to develop a positive attitude toward the course, and to study systematically 
[main points].” A short ending for a persuasive speech on why you should lift weights 
might be “So remember that three major reasons why you should consider lifting 
weights [persuasive goal] are to improve your appearance, to improve your health, and 
to accomplish both with a minimum of effort [main points].”
Clincher
Although 
summaries 
help 
you 
achieve the ﬁ rst goal of an effective 
conclusion, you’ll need to develop 
additional material to achieve the 
second goal: leaving the audience 
with a vivid impression or appeal-
ing to action. You can achieve this 
goal with a clincher—a one- or two-
sentence statement that provides a 
sense of closure by driving home 
the importance of your speech in a 
memorable way. Very often, effec-
tive clinchers also achieve closure 
by referring back to the introduc-
tory comments in some way. You 
can provide closure and create 
vivid impressions using any of the 
 attention-getters described  earlier 
in this chapter. For example, in 
Tiffany’s conclusion to her speech about being a vegetarian, she mentioned the per-
sonal reference she made in her introduction about a vegetarian Thanksgiving dinner:
So now you know why I made the choice to become a vegetarian and how this 
choice affects my life today. As a vegetarian, I’ve discovered a world of food I 
never knew existed. Believe me, I am salivating just thinking about the meal I 
have planned for this Thanksgiving: fennel and blood orange salad; followed by 
baked polenta layered with tomato, Fontina, and Gorgonzola cheeses; an acorn 
squash tart, marinated tofu; and with what else but pumpkin pie for dessert!
Sounds good doesn’t it? Clinchers with vivid imagery are effective because they leave 
listeners with a picture imprinted in their minds.
The appeal to action is a common clincher for a persuasive speech. The appeal 
describes the behavior that you want your listeners to follow after they have heard 
your arguments. Notice how David M. Walker, former comptroller general of the United 
States, concluded his speech on ﬁ scal responsibility with a strong appeal to action:
The truth is that all sectors of society have a dog in this ﬁ scal ﬁ ght and trans-
formation effort. If government stays on its current course, we’ll all end up 
paying a big price, especially our kids and grandkids.
clincher
a one- or two-sentence 
statement that provides a 
sense of closure by driving 
home the importance of your 
speech in a memorable way.
appeal
describes the behavior you 
want your listeners to follow 
after they have heard your 
arguments.
When you end your 
speech with an emotional 
conclusion, you really drive 
your point home. Can you 
recall conclusions from 
speeches you have heard? 
Were they emotional?
Jeff Greenberg/PhotoEdit

293
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
Over its 200-plus years of existence, the United States has faced many 
great challenges. We’ve always risen to those challenges, and I’m conﬁ -
dent we’ll eventually do so this time as well. After all, it’s always a mistake 
to underestimate American resolve when we set our minds to accomplish 
something.
But we need to act, and act soon. Baby boomers like myself are on course to 
become the ﬁ rst generation of Americans who leave things in worse shape than 
when we found them. Fortunately, such a legacy isn’t carved in stone. Turning 
things around won’t be easy, and it’s not going to happen overnight. But we 
all need to be part of the solution. By applying our collective energy, expertise, 
and experience to looming problems; by making some difﬁ cult decisions; and 
by accepting some degree of shared sacriﬁ ce, we can ensure a brighter future 
for this great nation, for our children and grandchildren, and for those who will 
follow them. (Walker, 2006, p. 762).
Skill Learning Activity 12.4
The Assignment
 1. Identify a favorite toy, game, food, or hobby you had as a child.
 2. Come up with a thesis statement and three main points you could 
talk about for that toy, game, food, or hobby.
 3. Prepare an introduction, section transitions, and conclusion for a 
“speech” about that toy, game, food, or hobby. But do not prepare 
any supporting material.
 4. At your instructor’s request, come to the front of the room and deliver 
the introduction, section transitions, and conclusion for a speech on 
that topic.
 5. Be prepared to hear critiques from your classmates and to offer sug-
gestions on theirs as well.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
Action Step 3.g
Creating Speech Conclusions
The goal of this activity is to help you create choices for how you will con-
clude your speech.
 1. 
For the speech body you outlined earlier, write three different conclu-
sions that review important points you want the audience to remember 
and leave the audience with vivid imagery or an emotional appeal.
 2. 
Which do you believe is the best? Why?
 3. 
Write that conclusion in outline form.
You can complete this activity online with Speech Builder Express, view a student 
sample of this activity, and, if requested, e-mail your completed activity to your 
instructor. Use you Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step 
activities for Chapter 12.

294
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
Listing Sources
Regardless of the type or length of speech, you’ll want to prepare a list of the sources 
you are going to use in the speech. Although you may be required to prepare this 
list for the speeches you give in this course and other courses you take, in real set-
tings, this list will enable you to direct audience members to the speciﬁ c source of the 
information you have used, and will allow you to quickly ﬁ nd the information at a 
later date. The two standard methods of organizing source lists are (1) alphabetically 
by author’s last name or (2) by content category, with items listed alphabetically by 
author within each category. For speeches with a short list, the ﬁ rst method is efﬁ -
cient. But for long speeches with a lengthy source list, it is helpful to group sources 
by content categories.
There are many formal bibliographic style formats you can use in citing sources 
(for example, MLA, APA, Chicago, CBE). The “correct” form differs by professional or 
academic discipline. Check to see if your instructor has a preference about which style 
you use for this class.
Regardless of the particular style, however, the speciﬁ c information you need to 
record differs somewhat, depending on whether the source is a book, a periodical, a 
newspaper, or an Internet source or Web site. The elements that are essential to all 
are author, title of publication, date of publication, and page numbers. Figure 12.2 
MLA style
APA style
Book
Miller, Roberta B. The Five Paths 
to Persuasion: The Art of Selling 
Your Message. New York: Warner 
Business Books, 2004. Print.
Miller, R. B. (2004). The ﬁ ve 
paths to persuasion: The art 
of selling your message. New 
York: Warner Business Books.
Edited book
Janzen, Rod. “Five Paradigms of 
Ethnic Relations.” Intercultural 
Communication 10th ed. Eds. 
Larry Samovar and Richard Porter. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2003. 
36–42. Print.
Janzen, R. (2003). Five para-
digms of ethnic relations. 
Intercultural communication 
(10th ed.) (L. Samovar & R. 
Porter, Eds.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth, 36–42.
Academic 
journal
Barge, J. Kevin. “Reﬂ exivity 
and Managerial Practice.” 
Communication Monographs 71 
(Mar. 2004): 70–96. Print.
Barge, J. K. (2004, March). 
Reﬂ exivity and managerial 
practice. Communication 
Monographs, 71, 70–96.
Magazine
Krauthammer, Charles. “What 
Makes the Bush Haters So Mad?” 
Time 22 Sept. 2003: 84. Print.
Krauthammer, C. (2003, 
September 22). What makes the 
Bush haters so mad? Time, 84.
Newspaper
Cohen, Richard. “Wall Street 
Scandal: Whatever the Market 
Will Bear.” The Cincinnati Enquirer 
17 Sept. 2003: C6. Print.
Cohen, R. (2003, September 
17). Wall Street scandal: 
Whatever the market will bear. 
The Cincinnati Enquirer, p. C6.
Electronic 
article 
based on 
print source
Friedman, Thomas L. “Connect 
the Dots.” The New York 
Times. 25 Sept. 2003. Web. 
20 Aug. 2004. <http://www.
nytimes.com/2003/09/25/
opinion/25FRIED.html>.
Friedman, T. L. (2003, 
September 25). Connect the 
dots. The New York Times. 
Retrieved from http://www.
nytimes.com/2003/09/25/
opinion/25FRIED.html
Figure 12.2
Examples of the MLA and 
APA citation forms for speech 
sources

295
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
Electronic 
article from 
Internet-only 
publication
Osterweil, Neil, and Michelle 
Smith. “Does Stress Cause Breast 
Cancer?” Web M.D. Health. 
WebMD Inc. 24 Sept. 2003. 
Web. 20 Aug. 2004. <http://
my.webmd.com/contents/
article/74/89170.htm?z 
3734_00000_1000_ts_01>.
Osterweil, N., & Smith, M. (2003, 
September 24). Does stress 
cause breast cancer? Web 
M.D. Health. Retrieved from 
http://my.webmd.com/con-
tents/article/74/89170.htm?z 
3734_00000_1000_ts_01
Electronic 
article 
retrieved 
from 
database
Grabe, Mark. “Voluntary Use of 
Online Lecture Notes: Correlates 
of Note Use and Note Use 
as an Alternative to Class 
Attendance.” Computers and 
Education 44 (2005): 409–21. 
ScienceDirect. Web. 28 May 
2006. <http://www.sciencedi-
rect.com/>.
Grabe, M. (2005). Voluntary 
use of online lecture notes: 
Correlates of note use and 
note use as an alternative to 
class attendance. Computers 
and Education 44, 409–421. 
Retrieved from ScienceDirect.
Movie
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead 
Man’s Chest. Dir. Gore Verbinksi. 
Perf. Johnny Depp, Orlando 
Bloom, Keira Knightly. 2006. Walt 
Disney Pictures, 2007. DVD.
Verbinksi, G. (Director). (2006). 
Pirates of the Caribbean: 
Dead man’s chest [Motion 
picture]. Burbank, CA: Walt 
Disney Pictures.
Television 
program
Gordon, Keith, dir. “Truth Be Told.” 
By Drew Z. Greenberg and Tim 
Schlattmann. Dexter. Showtime. 
10 Dec. 2006. Television.
 Greenberg, D. Z., & 
Schlattmann, T. (Writers), & 
Gordon, K. (Director). (2006, 
December 10). Truth be told 
[Television series episode]. In 
Dexter. Manos, J., Jr. (Executive 
producer), New York, NY: 
Showtime.
Music 
recording
Nirvana. “Smells Like Teen Spirit.” 
Nevermind. Geffen, 1991. CD.
Nirvana. (1991). Smells like 
teen spirit. On Nevermind 
[CD]. Santa Monica, CA: 
Geffen.
Personal 
interview
Mueller, Bruno (diamond cutter 
at Fegel’s Jewelry). Personal inter-
view. 19 March 2004.
APA style dictates that 
personal interviews are not 
included in a reference list. 
Rather, cite this type of source 
orally in your speech, mention-
ing the name of the person 
you interviewed and the date 
of the interview.
gives examples of Modern Language Association (MLA) and American Psychological 
Association (APA) citations for the most commonly used sources.
Action Step 3.h helps you compile a list of sources used in your speech. Figure 12.3 
gives an example of this activity completed by a student in this course.
Figure 12.2
(continued)

296
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
Compiling a List of Sources
Dixon, Dougal. The Practical Geologist. (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992.)
Farver, John, professor of Geology. Personal interview. June 23, 2006.
Klein, Cornelius. Manual of Mineralogy, 2nd ed. (New York: Wiley, 1993.)
Montgomery, Carla W. Fundamentals of Geology, 3rd ed. (Dubuque, IA: Wm.
C. Brown, 1997.)
Figure 12.3
Student response to Action 
Step 3.h
Reviewing the Outline
Now that you have created all of the parts of the outline, it is time to put them together 
in complete outline form and edit them to make sure the outline is well organized and 
well worded. Use this checklist to complete the ﬁ nal review of the outline before you 
move into adaptation and rehearsal.
 1. Have I used a standard set of symbols to indicate structure? Main points are 
indicated by Roman numerals, major subdivisions by capital letters, minor sub-
headings by Arabic numerals, and further subdivisions by lowercase letters.
 2. Have I written main points and major subdivisions as complete sentences? 
Complete sentences help you to see (1) whether each main point actually devel-
ops your speech goal and (2) whether the wording makes your intended point. 
Unless the key ideas are written out in full, it will be difﬁ cult to follow the next 
guidelines.
Action Step 3.h
Compiling a List of Sources
The goal of this activity is to help you record the list of sources you used in 
the speech.
 1. 
Review your research cards, separating those with information you 
have used in your speech from those you have not.
 2. 
List the sources of information used in the speech by copying the 
 bibliographic information recorded on the research cards.
 3. 
For short lists, organize your list alphabetically by the last name of the 
ﬁ rst author. Be sure to follow the form shown in Figure 12.2. If you did 
not record some of the bibliographic information on your research 
card, you will need to revisit the library, database, or other source to 
ﬁ nd it.
You can complete the activity online with Speech Builder Express, view a student 
sample of this activity, and, if requested, e-mail your completed activity to your 
instructor. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step 
activities for Chapter 12.

297
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
Skill
The process of iden-
tifying main points, 
constructing a thesis 
statement, outlin-
ing the body of the 
speech, developing 
section transitions, 
creating an intro-
duction, crafting 
a conclusion, and 
cataloguing a list of 
sources.
Use
To create a hierar-
chy and sequence 
of ideas that help a 
particular audience 
to easily understand 
the speaker’s ideas 
and the goal of the 
speech.
Procedure
1. 
Identify your main 
ideas.
2. 
Write a thesis 
statement.
3. 
Outline the body 
of the speech by 
carefully word-
ing main points, 
selecting an 
organizational 
pattern, selecting 
and organizing 
support, and pre-
paring section 
transitions.
4. 
Create introduc-
tions and select 
the best one.
5. 
Create conclu-
sions and select 
the best one.
6. 
List sources.
Example
The three aspects 
of romantic love are 
passion, intimacy, 
and commitment.
I. 
Passion is the ﬁ rst 
aspect of romantic 
love to develop.
II. 
Intimacy is the 
second.
III. 
Commitment is the 
third.
Example for “passion”:
A. 
Passion is a com-
pelling feeling of 
love.
B. 
(Focus on 
function.)
C. (Discuss 
maintenance.)
Transition from I to II: 
Although  passion 
is essential to a 
 relationship, passion 
without intimacy is 
just sex.
Possible introduction: 
What does it mean to 
say “I’m in love”? And 
how can you know 
whether what you are 
experiencing is not 
just a crush?
Possible conclusion: 
Developing romantic 
love involves  passion, 
intimacy, and 
commitment.
Sample entry: 
Sternberg, Robert 
J., and Michael L. 
Barnes, eds. The 
Psychology of Love. 
New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1988.
Communication Skill
Organizing the Speech

298
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
 3. Do main points and major subdivisions each contain a single idea? This guide-
line ensures that the development of each part of the speech will be relevant to the 
point. Thus, rather than
 I. The park is beautiful and easy to get to.
  divide the sentence so that both parts are separate:
 I. The park is beautiful.
 II. The park is easy to get to.
  The two-point example sorts out distinct ideas so that the speaker can line up 
supporting material with conﬁ dence that the audience will see and understand its 
relationship to the main points.
 4. Does each major subdivision relate to or support its major point? This principle, 
called subordination, insures that you don’t wander off point and confuse your 
audience. For example:
 I. Proper equipment is necessary for successful play.
A. Good gym shoes are needed for maneuverability.
B. Padded gloves will help protect your hands.
C. A lively ball provides sufﬁ cient bounce.
D. And a good attitude doesn’t hurt.
  Notice that the main point deals with equipment. A, B, and C (shoes, gloves, and 
ball) all relate to the main point. But D, attitude, is not equipment and should 
appear under some other main point, if at all.
 5. Are potential subdivision elaborations indicated? Recall that it is the subdivi-
sion elaborations that help to build the speech. Because you don’t know how 
long it might take you to discuss these elaborations, it is a good idea to include 
more than you are likely to use. During rehearsals, you may discuss each a dif-
ferent way.
 6. Does the outline include no more than one-third the total number of words 
anticipated in the speech? An outline is only a skeleton of the speech—not a 
complete manuscript with letters and numbers attached. The outline should be 
short enough to allow you to experiment with different methods of development 
during practice periods and to adapt to audience reaction during the speech 
itself. An easy way to judge whether your outline is about the right length is to 
estimate the number of words that you are likely to be able to speak during the 
actual speech and compare this to the number of words in the outline (counting 
only the words in the outline minus speech goal, thesis statement, headings, and 
list of sources). Because approximate ﬁ gures are all you need, to compute the 
approximate maximum words for your outline, start by assuming a speaking rate 
of 160 words per minute. (Last term, the speaking rate for the majority of speak-
ers in my class was 140 to 180 words per minute.) Thus, using the average of 
160 words per minute, a three- to ﬁ ve-minute speech would contain roughly 480 
to 800 words, and the outline should be 160 to 300 words. An 8- to 10-minute 
speech, roughly 1,280 to 1,600 words, should have an outline of approximately 
426 to 533 words.
Now that we have considered the various parts of an outline, let us put them 
together for a ﬁ nal look. The outline in Figure 12.4 illustrates the principles in prac-
tice. The commentary to the right of the outline relates each part of the outline to the 
guidelines we have discussed.

299
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
OUTLINE
ANALYSIS
General goal: I want to inform my audience.
Speciﬁ c goal: I would like the audience to 
understand the major criteria for ﬁ nding a 
suitable credit card.
Write your general and speciﬁ c 
goals at the top of the page. Refer 
to the goal to test whether every-
thing in the outline is relevant.
Thesis statement: Three criteria that will 
enable audience members to ﬁ nd the credit 
card that is most suitable for them are level 
of real interest rate, annual fee, and adver-
tised incentives.
The thesis statement states the ele-
ments that are suggested in the 
speciﬁ c goal. In the speech, the the-
sis serves as a forecast of the main 
points.
Introduction
 I.  How many of you have been hounded 
by credit card vendors outside the 
Student Union?
 II.  They make a credit card sound like the 
answer to all of your dreams, don’t they?
 III.  Today I want to share with you three crite-
ria you need to consider carefully before 
deciding on a particular credit card: 
interest rate, annual fee, and advertised 
incentives.
The heading Introduction sets the 
section apart as a separate unit. 
The introduction attempts to (1) 
get attention and (2) lead into 
the body of the speech as well as 
establish credibility, set a tone, and 
gain goodwill.
Body
The heading Body sets this sec-
tion apart as a separate unit. In 
this example, main point I begins a 
topical pattern of main points. It is 
stated as a complete sentence.
The two main subdivisions desig-
nated by A and B indicate the equal 
weight of these points. The second-
level subdivisions—designated by 
1, 2, and 3 for major subpoint A, 
and 1 and 2 for major subpoint B—
give the necessary information for 
understanding the subpoints.
 I.  The ﬁ rst criterion for choosing a credit 
card is to select a card with a lower inter-
est rate.
A.  Interest rates are the percentages 
that a company charges you to carry 
a balance on your card past the due 
date.
1.  Most credit cards carry an aver-
age of 8 percent.
2.  Some cards carry as much as 32 
percent.
3.  Many companies offer 0 interest 
rates for up to 12 months.
4.  Student credit cards typically have 
higher interest rates.
5.  Some student credit cards carry 
APRs below 14%.
B. Interest rates can be variable or ﬁ xed.
1.  Variable rates mean that the rate 
can change from month to month.
2.  Fixed rates mean that the rate will 
stay the same.
3.  Even cards with ﬁ xed rates can be 
raised to as much as 32% if you 
make a late payment.
The number of major and second-
level subpoints is at the discretion of 
the speaker. After the ﬁ rst two levels 
of subordination, words and phrases 
may be used in place of complete 
sentences for elaboration.
Figure 12.4
Sample complete outline
(continued on next page)

300
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
(Transition: Now that we have considered 
interest rates, let’s look at the next criterion.)
This transition reminds listeners of 
the ﬁ rst main point and forecasts 
the second.
 II.  A second criterion for choosing a suit-
able credit card is to select a card with 
no annual fee.
Main point II, continuing the topi-
cal pattern, is a complete sentence 
that parallels the wording of main 
point I. Notice that each main point 
considers only one major idea.
A.  The annual fee is the cost the com-
pany charges you for extending you 
credit.
B. The charges vary widely.
1. Most cards have no annual fee.
2. Some companies still charge fees.
(Transition: After you have considered inter-
est and fees, you can weigh the incentives 
that the company promises you.)
This transition summarizes the ﬁ rst 
two criteria and forecasts the third.
III.  A third criterion for choosing a credit 
card is to weigh the incentives.
A.  Incentives are extras that you get for 
using a particular card.
Main point III, continuing the topi-
cal pattern, is a complete sentence 
paralleling the wording of main 
points I and II.
1.  Some companies promise rebates.
2.  Some companies promise fre-
quent ﬂ yer miles.
3.  Some companies promise dis-
counts on “a wide variety of items.”
4.  Some companies promise “cash 
back” on your purchases.
Throughout the outline, notice that 
main points and subpoints are fac-
tual statements. The speaker adds 
examples, experiences, and other 
developmental 
material 
during 
practice sessions.
B.  Incentives 
don’t 
outweigh 
other 
criteria.
Conclusion
 I.  So, if you exercise care in examining inter-
est rates, annual fees, and incentives, 
you can choose the credit card that’s 
right for you.
 II.  Then your credit card may truly be the 
answer to your dreams.
The heading Conclusion sets this 
section apart as a separate unit. 
The content of the conclusion is 
intended to summarize the main 
ideas and leave the speech on a 
high note. The conclusion also pro-
vides closure by referring back to 
the idea mentioned in the introduc-
tion, a credit card is the answer to 
your dreams.
Sources
Bankrate 
Monitor. 
Web. 
<http://www.
Bankrate.com>.
Barrett, Lois. “Good Credit 101.” Black Enterprise 
Oct. 2006. Web. <http://www.blackenter-
prise.com/ArchiveOpen.asp?Source=Ar
chiveTab/2006/10/1006-16.htm>.
“Congratulations, Grads—You’re Bankrupt: 
Marketing Blitz Buries Kids in Plastic Debt.” 
Business Week. 2001 May 21: , 48. Print.
A list of sources should always be 
a part of the speech outline. The 
sources should show where the fac-
tual material of the speech came 
from. The list of sources is not a total 
of all sources available—only those 
that were used, directly or indirectly. 
Each of the sources is shown in 
proper form.
Figure 12.4
(continued)

301
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
Hennefriend, Bill. Ofﬁ ce Pro 64 Oct. 2004: 
17–20. Print.
Lankford, Kimberly. “The 31% Credit-card Trap,” 
Kiplinger’s January 2007: 96–98. Print.
“Protect Your Credit Card.” Kiplinger’s (Dec. 
2004): 88. Print.
Ramachandran, Nisha. “Harvesting Rewards.” 
U.S. News and World Report 31 July 2005. 
Web. <http://www.usnews.com/
biztech/articles/050808/8rewards.htm>.
Figure 12.4
(continued)
Summary
Organizing is the process of selecting and structuring ideas you will present in your 
speech; it is guided by your audience analysis. Once you have analyzed your audience, 
created a speech goal, and assembled a body of information on your topic, you are 
ready to identify the main ideas you wish to present in your speech and to craft them 
into a well-phrased thesis statement.
A Question of Ethics
As Marna and Gloria were eating lunch together, 
Marna happened to ask Gloria, “How are you 
doing in Woodward’s speech class?”
“Not bad,” Gloria replied. “I’m working on this 
speech about product development. I think 
it will be really informative, but I’m hav-
ing a little trouble with the opening. I just 
can’t seem to get a good idea for getting 
started.”
“Why not start with a story—that always worked 
for me in class.”
“Thanks, Marna; I’ll think on it.”
The next day when Marna ran into Gloria again, 
she asked, “How’s that introduction going?”
“Great. I’ve prepared a great story about Mary 
Kay—you know, the cosmetics woman? I’m 
going to tell about how she was terrible in 
school and no one thought she’d amount to 
anything. But she loved dabbling with cos-
metics so much that she decided to start her 
own business—and the rest is history.”
“That’s a great story. I really like that part about 
being terrible in school. Was she really that 
bad?”
“I really don’t know—the material I read didn’t 
really focus on that part of her life. But I 
thought that angle would get people listen-
ing right away. And after all, I did it that way 
because you suggested starting with a story.”
“Yes, but . . . ”
“Listen, she did start the business. So what if the 
story isn’t quite right? It makes the point I 
want to make—if people are creative and have 
a strong work ethic, they can make it big.”
 1. What are the ethical issues here?
 2. Is anyone really hurt by Gloria’s opening the 
speech with this story?
 3. What are the speaker’s ethical responsibilities?
What Would You Do?

302
 
Chapter 12 Organizing Your Speech
Once you have identiﬁ ed a thesis, you will prepare the body of the speech. The 
body of the speech is hierarchically ordered through the use of main points and sub-
points. Once identiﬁ ed, main points and their related subpoints are written in complete 
sentences, which should be checked to make sure that they are clear, parallel in struc-
ture, meaningful, and limited in number to ﬁ ve or less. The sequential relationship 
between main point ideas and among subpoint ideas depends on the organizational 
pattern that is chosen. The four most basic organizational patterns are time, narrative, 
topic, and logical reasons order. You will want to choose an organizational pattern 
that best helps your audience understand and remember your main points. Main point 
sentences are written in outline form using the organizational pattern selected.
Subpoints support a main point with deﬁ nitions, examples, statistics, personal 
experiences, stories, quotations, and so on. These subpoints also appear in the outline 
below the main point to which they belong. An organizational pattern will also be 
chosen for each set of subpoints.
Once the outline of the body is complete, transitions between the introduction 
and the body, between main points within the body, and between the body and the 
conclusion need to be devised so that the audience can easily follow the speech and 
identify each main point. Similarly, signposts should be placed appropriately to con-
nect subpoints and supporting material together.
The organization process is completed by creating (1) an introduction that gets 
audience attention, introduces the thesis, establishes listener relevance and speaker 
credibility, sets the tone for the speech, and creates goodwill; (2) a conclusion that 
summarizes the main points and creates a vivid impression; and (3) a list of sources 
compiled from the bibliographic information recorded on research cards.
The complete draft outline should be reviewed as revised to make sure that you have 
used a standard set of symbols, used complete sentences for main points and major subdi-
visions, limited each point to a single idea, related minor points to major points, and made 
sure the outline length is no more than one-third the number of words of the ﬁ nal speech.
Now that you have read Chapter 12, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment and Action Step activities in 
the body of the chapter.
Communicate! Active Online Learning

303
 
Chapter 12  Organizing Your Speech 
Key Terms
appeal (292)
clincher (292)
direct question (288)
joke (288)
listener relevance link (290)
logical reasons order (283)
narrative order (282)
main points (276)
organizing (276)
parallel (281)
personal reference (288) 
rhetorical question (288)
section transition (286)
signpost (287)
speech outline (280)
story (289) 
suspense (289) 
thesis statement (279)
time order (282)
topic order (283)
transitions (286)
Skill Learning Activities
12.1: Identifying Thesis Statements (280)
Access the American Rhetoric Online Speech 
Bank. Select ﬁ ve speeches and listen to the audio 
recordings or read the printed transcript of each 
speech. As you listen to or read the speeches, identify 
and write down the thesis statements in each. Not 
all speeches necessarily have explicit thesis state-
ments, but all speeches have an implied thesis or 
purpose. If you feel any one of the speeches you have 
selected does not contain an explicit thesis, identify 
its implied thesis or purpose.
12.2: Identifying Main Points (284)
Choose one of the speeches you listened to or 
read in Skill Learning Activity 12.1. Listen to or read 
it again, but this time identify and write down the 
main points in each. What type of organizational 
pattern is the speaker using in the speech?
12.3: Identifying Supporting Materials (285)
Using the speech you chose in Skill Learning 
Activity 12.1, list the various types of support the 
speaker uses to develop each main point. Does the 
speaker acknowledge the sources of this information? 
Are there types of support that you thought should 
have been used that are missing from this speech? 
Does the speaker seem to rely on one type of sup-
port to the exclusion of others? Why do you suppose 
that the speaker chose the types of support that were 
used?
12.4: Identifying Transition Statements, 
Introductions, and Conclusions (293)
Using the same speech you chose for Skill 
Learning Activity 12.1:
 1. Identify the transition statements the speaker 
used to move from one main point to another.
 2. Identify the type of introduction the speaker 
used. Do you think it was effective? If so, why? 
If not, why not?
 3. Identify the type of conclusion the speaker used. 
Why do you think the speaker chose to end the 
speech in this way? Was the conclusion effec-
tive? If so, why? If not, why not?
Web Resources
12.1: Writing Different Types of Thesis Statements 
(280)
Visit this site at Purdue University for guidance 
in writing analytical, expository, and persuasive the-
sis statements.

Adapting Verbally and Visually
Questions you’ll be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What can you do to demonstrate the relevance of your speech to your 
audience?
• How can you establish common ground in your speech?
• What can you do to bolster your credibility as a speaker?
• How can you help your audience comprehend and retain your message?
• What can you do to adapt to the cultural differences between you and 
your audience?
• What are the different types of presentational aids?
• What criteria can you use to select presentational aids?
• What guidelines should you follow to construct and integrate 
presentational aids?
Charlie had asked his friend Tom to listen to one of his speech rehearsals. He 
ﬁ nished the ﬁ nal sentence of his speech: “So, playing violent video games does 
affect children in at least two ways—it desensitizes them to real violence, and it also 
inﬂ uences them to behave more aggressively.”
Then, he asked Tom, “So, what do you think?”
“You’re giving the speech to your classmates, right?”
“Yeah.”
“And they’re mostly mass media majors?”
“Uh huh.”
“Well, it was a good speech, but I didn’t hear anything that showed that you 
had media majors in mind. How is this topic relevant to them? Why would they 
want to know about it?”
13
Biggie Productions/Riser/Getty Images

305
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
Charlie may have chosen his topic and main points with his audience in mind, but as 
he prepared, he forgot that an effective speech is one that is adapted to the speciﬁ c 
audience. Recall from Chapter 11 that audience adaptation is the process of custom-
izing your speech to your speciﬁ c audience. Audience adaptation depends on audience 
analysis. You used the results of your audience analysis in Action Step 1.b to identify 
your topic, decide on a speciﬁ c purpose, and select main points. Now you are going to 
learn how to use your audience analysis as you develop that speech. In this chapter, 
we will look at Action Step 4: Adapt the Verbal and Visual Material to the Needs of 
Your Speciﬁ c Audience. You will use your knowledge of your audience as you consider 
what speciﬁ c verbal material you will present and how you will represent that material 
visually with presentational aids.
Action Step 4:  Adapt the Verbal and Visual 
Material to the Needs of Your Speciﬁ c Audience
The skill of adapting involves both verbally and visually adapting by preparing 
 presentational aids that facilitate audience understanding.
Adapting to Your Audience Verbally
As you select supporting material and make language choices for your speech, you will 
want to consider how they (1) demonstrate relevance, (2) establish common ground, (3) 
enhance your credibility and the credibility of the material you are presenting, (4) help 
the audience comprehend and remember the information, and (5) reﬂ ect the cultural 
diversity in your audience.
Relevance
Your ﬁ rst challenge will be to adapt your speech so the audience sees its relevance to 
them. Listeners pay attention to and are interested in ideas that have a personal impact 
(when they can answer the question, What does this have to do with me?); they are 
bored when they don’t see how the speech relates to them. You can help the audience 
perceive your speech as relevant by including supporting material that is timely, proxi-
mate, and has a personal impact.
Establish timeliness
Listeners are more likely to be interested in information they perceive as timely—they 
want to know how they can use the information now. For example, in a speech about 
the hazards of talking on cell phones while driving, J. J. quickly established the topic’s 
relevance in his introduction:
Most of us in this room, as many as 90 percent in fact, are a danger to soci-
ety. Why? Because we talk or text on our cell phones while driving. Although 
driving while phoning (DWP) seems harmless, a recent study conducted by the 
Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company reports that DWP is the most common 
cause of accidents today—even more common than driving under the inﬂ uence 
(DUI)! Did you know that when you talk on the phone when you’re driving—
even if you do so on a hands-free set—you’re four times more likely to get 
into a serious crash than if you’re not doing so? That’s why several states have 
actually banned the practice. So this issue is far from harmless and is one each 
of us should take seriously.
audience adaptation
the process of customizing 
your speech material to your 
speciﬁ c audience.
relevance
adapting the information in 
the speech so that audience 
members view it as important 
to them.
timely
showing how information 
is useful now or in the near 
future.
What can you 
do to help your 
audience see the 
relevance of your 
speech to them?

306
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
Establish proximity
Your listeners are more likely to be interested in information that has proximity, a 
relationship to their personal “space.” Psychologically, we pay more attention to infor-
mation that is related to our “territory”—to us, our family, our neighborhood, or our 
city, state, or country. You have probably heard speakers say something like this: “Let 
me bring this closer to home by showing you . . .” and then make their point by using 
a local example. As you review the supporting material you collect for your speech, 
look for statistics and examples that have proximity for your audience. For example, 
J. J. used the latest DWP accident statistics in his state and used a story reported in the 
local paper of a young mother who was killed while DWPing.
Demonstrate personal impact
When you present information that can have a serious physical, economic, or psycho-
logical impact on audience members, they are more likely to be interested in what you 
have to say. For example, notice how your classmates’ attention picks up when your 
instructor says that what is said next “will deﬁ nitely be on the test.” Your instructor 
understands that this “economic” impact (not paying attention can “cost”) is enough 
to refocus most students’ attention on what is being said.
As you prepare your speech, incorporate ideas that create personal impact for your 
audience. In a speech about toxic waste, you might show a serious physical impact by 
providing statistics on the effects of toxic waste on the health of people in your state. 
You may be able to demonstrate serious economic impact by citing the cost to the tax-
payers of a recent toxic waste cleanup in your city. Or you might be able to illustrate 
a serious psychological impact by ﬁ nding and recounting the stresses faced by one 
family (that is demographically similar to the audience) with a long-term toxic waste 
problem in their neighborhood. To drive home the impact of DWP, toward the end of 
his speech, J.J. introduced John, his high school friend, who had come to class with J.J. 
and who is now paralyzed and wheelchair-bound because his girlfriend crashed into 
another car while she was dialing her cell phone.
Common Ground
Each person in the audience is unique, with differing knowledge, attitudes, philoso-
phies, experiences, and ways of perceiving the world. They may or may not know 
others in the audience. So it is easy for them to assume that they have nothing in com-
mon with you or with other audience members. Yet when you speak, you will be giving 
one message to that diverse group. Common ground is the background, knowledge, 
attitudes, experiences, and philosophies that are shared by audience members and the 
speaker. Effective speakers use their audience analysis to identify areas of similarity; 
then they use the adaptation techniques of personal pronouns, rhetorical questions, 
and common experiences to create common ground.
Use personal pronouns
The simplest way to establish common ground between yourself and the members of 
your audience is to use personal pronouns: we, us, and our. For example, in a speech 
given to an audience whose members are known to be sympathetic to legislation limit-
ing violence in children’s programming on TV, notice the different effects of using an 
unspeciﬁ c noun and a personal pronoun:
I know that most people are worried about the effects that violence on TV is 
having on young children.
I know that most of us worry about the effects that violence on TV is having 
on young children.
proximity
a relationship to personal 
space.
common ground
the background, knowledge, 
attitudes, experiences, and 
philosophies that are shared 
by audience members and 
the speaker.
personal pronouns
we, us, and our: pronouns that 
refer directly to members of 
the audience.
How can you establish 
relevance in a speech about 
driving while phoning?
How can you 
establish common 
ground in your 
speech?
Michael Ventura/Alamy

307
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
By using us instead of most 
 people, the speaker includes the 
audience members, and this gives 
them a stake in listening to what is 
to follow.
Ask rhetorical questions
A rhetorical question is one whose 
answer is obvious to audience 
 members and to which they are not 
really expected to reply. Rhetorical 
questions create common ground 
by alluding to information that is 
shared by audience members and 
the speaker. They are often used in 
speech introductions but can also be 
effective as transitions and in other 
parts of the speech. For instance, 
notice how this transition, phrased 
as a rhetorical question, creates 
common ground:
When you have watched a  particularly violent TV  program, have you ever 
asked yourself, “Did they really need to be this graphic to make the point”?
Rhetorical questions are meant to have only one answer that highlights similarities 
between audience members and leads them to be more interested in the content that 
follows.
Draw from common experiences
You can also develop common ground by sharing personal experiences, examples, and 
illustrations that embody what you and the audience have in common. For instance, 
in a speech about the effects of television violence, you might allude to a common 
viewing experience:
Remember how sometimes at a key moment when you’re watching a really 
frightening scene in a movie, you may quickly shut your eyes? I vividly 
remember slamming my eyes shut over and over again during the scariest 
scenes in Texas Chainsaw Massacre, The Blair Witch Project, and Halloween.
To create material that draws on common experiences, you must ﬁ rst analyze how you 
and your audience members are similar in the exposure you have had to the topic or 
in other areas that you can then relate to your topic.
Speaker Credibility
Credibility is the conﬁ dence that an audience places in the truthfulness of what a 
speaker says. Some people are widely known as experts in a particular area and have 
proven to be trustworthy and likeable. When these people give a speech, they don’t 
have to adapt their remarks to establish their credibility. However, most of us—even 
if we are given a formal introduction to acquaint the audience with our credentials 
and character—will still need to adapt our remarks to build audience conﬁ dence in 
the truthfulness of what we are saying. Three adaptation techniques can affect how 
rhetorical questions
questions whose answers 
are obvious to the audience 
and to which they are not 
expected to reply.
credibility
the level of conﬁ dence that 
an audience places in the 
truthfulness of what a speaker 
says.
Skill Learning Activity 13.1
In what ways do you think 
the speaker in this situation 
could create common 
ground with the audience?
Mark Peterson/CORBIS

308
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
credible we are perceived to be: demonstrating knowledge and expertise, establishing 
trustworthiness, and displaying personableness.
Demonstrate knowledge and expertise
When listeners perceive that you are a knowledgeable expert, they will perceive you 
as credible. Their assessment of your knowledge and expertise depends on how well 
you convince them that you are qualiﬁ ed to speak on this topic. You can demonstrate 
your knowledge and expertise through direct and indirect means.
You directly establish expertise when you disclose your experiences with your 
topic including formal education, special study, demonstrated skill, and your track 
record. Audience members will also assess your expertise through indirect means, 
such as how prepared you seem and how much ﬁ rsthand involvement you dem-
onstrate through personal examples and illustrations. Audiences have an almost 
instinctive sense of when a speaker is winging it, and most audiences distrust a 
speaker who does not appear to have command of the material. Speakers who are 
overly dependent on their notes or who hem and haw, fumbling to ﬁ nd ways to 
express their ideas, undermine the conﬁ dence of the audience. When your ideas are 
easy to follow and are clearly expressed, audience members perceive you to be more 
credible.
Similarly, when your ideas are developed through speciﬁ c statistics, high-quality 
examples, illustrations, and personal experiences, audience members are likely to 
view you as credible. Recall how impressed you are with instructors who always 
seem to have two or three perfect examples and illustrations and who are able to 
recall statistics without looking at their notes. Compare them to instructors who 
seem tied to the textbook and don’t appear to know much about the subject beyond 
their prepared lecture. In which instance do you perceive the instructor to be more 
knowledgeable?
Establish trustworthiness
Your trustworthiness is the extent to which the audience members believe that what 
you say is accurate, true, and in their best interests. The more your audience sees you 
as trustworthy, the more credible you will be. People assess others’ trustworthiness 
by judging their character and their motives. So you can establish yourself as trust-
worthy by following ethical standards and by honestly explaining what is motivating 
you to speak.
As you plan your speech, you need to consider how to demonstrate your char-
acter: that you are honest, industrious, dependable, and a morally strong person. For 
example, when you credit the source of your information as you speak, you conﬁ rm 
that the information is true—that you are not making it up—and you signal your 
honesty by not taking credit for someone else’s ideas. Similarly, if you present the 
arguments evenly on both sides of an issue, instead of just the side you favor, audi-
ence members will see you as fair-minded.
How trustworthy you appear to be will also depend on how the audience views 
your motives. If people believe that what you are saying is self-serving rather than in 
their interests, they will be suspicious and view you as less trustworthy. Early in your 
speech, then, it is important to show how audience members will beneﬁ t from what 
you are saying. For example, in his speech on toxic waste, Brandon might describe 
how one community’s ignorance of the dangers of toxic waste disposal allowed a toxic 
waste dump to be located in their community, with subsequent serious health issues. 
He can then share his motive by saying something like: “My hope is that this speech 
will give you the information you need to thoughtfully participate in decisions like 
these that may face your community.”
knowledge and expertise
how well you convince 
your audience that you are 
qualiﬁ ed to speak on the 
topic.
trustworthiness
the extent to which audience 
members believe that what 
you say is accurate, true, and 
in their best interests.
What can you 
do to bolster your 
credibility as a 
speaker on your 
topic?
Do you think Steven Colbert 
is trustworthy? Why or why 
not?
ALEXIS C. GLENN/UPI/Landov

309
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
Display personableness
We have more conﬁ dence in people we like. Personableness is the extent to which you 
project an agreeable or pleasing personality. The more your listeners like you, the more 
likely they are to believe what you tell them. We quickly decide how much we like a 
new person based on our ﬁ rst impressions. As a speaker trying to build credibility with 
an audience, you should look for ways to adapt your personal style to one that will 
help the audience like you and perceive you as credible.
Besides dressing in a way that is appropriate for the audience and occasion, you 
can increase the chances that the audience will like you by smiling at individual audi-
ence members before beginning your remarks and by looking at individuals as you 
speak, acknowledging them with a quick nod. You can also demonstrate personable-
ness by using appropriate humor.
Information Comprehension and Retention
Although your audience analysis helped you select a topic that was appropriate for your 
audience’s current knowledge level, you will need to adapt the information you present so 
that audience members can easily understand it and remember it when you are through. 
Five guidelines that can aid you are (1) appealing to diverse learning styles, (2) orienting 
the audience with internal reviews, (3) choosing clear language, (4) using vivid language 
and examples, and (5) comparing unfamiliar ideas with those the audience recognizes.
Appeal to diverse learning styles
A learning style is a person’s preferred way of receiving information. Because people 
differ in how they prefer to learn, you should present your ideas in ways that make it 
easy for all audience members to understand and remember what you are saying. Kolb’s 
(1984) cycle of learning cycle of learning conceptualizes learning style preferences along 
four dimensions: feeling, watching, thinking, and doing. Because your audience is likely 
to have people with a diversity of learning styles, you will want to adapt your ideas so 
that they can be understood and remembered by people who prefer different styles. Kolb 
argues that even though individuals might prefer learning in one these four ways, we 
all learn best when we engage with material in all four ways. So it makes sense to adapt 
your speech in ways that address all four dimensions. Figure 13.1 illustrates the cycle.
personableness
the extent to which you 
project an agreeable or 
pleasing personality.
learning style
a person’s preferred way 
of receiving information.
What can 
you do to help 
your audience 
comprehend 
and retain your 
message?
Feeling
Thinking
Watching
Stage 1
DIVERGERS
Stage 2
ASSIMILATORS
Stage 3
CONVERGERS
Stage 4
ACCOMMODATORS
Doing
Figure 13.1
Kolb’s cycle of learning

310
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
To address the feeling (concrete experience) dimension, you can offer per-
sonal stories or examples that appeal to the senses and emotions. J. J. did this 
when he shared the story about the young mother and when he introduced his 
wheelchair-bound friend. To address the watching (reﬂ ective observation) dimen-
sion, you should include visual materials to reinforce important points. You might 
also integrate rhetorical questions that encourage your listeners to reﬂ ect on some 
of the ideas you present. J. J. did so, for example, when he asked his audience 
whether they knew serious automobile accidents are more commonly related to 
driving while phoning than driving under the inﬂ uence. To address the think-
ing (abstract conceptualization) dimension, you should support your ideas with 
detailed deﬁ nitions, explanations, facts, and statistics. To address the doing (active 
experimentation) dimension, you can identify ways that the audience can become 
personally involved in doing something related to your ideas. J. J. talked about 
turning off cell phones before starting the car or pulling over to the side of the road 
to answer or make a call.
Orient the audience with internal reviews
Listeners who are confused or have forgotten previous information from your speech 
lose interest in what is being said. If your speech is more than a couple of minutes 
long, you can use internal reviews to remind and orient your audience. Suppose 
your goal is to inform your audience about the three phases of clinical trials that a 
cancer drug must pass in order to win FDA approval. After explaining the goals of 
the ﬁ rst phase, the types of patients recruited, the type of information that must be 
provided to the FDA, and the FDA’s review process, you are ready to move on to an 
explanation of the next phase. But your audience may still be trying to process the 
information you have presented on the ﬁ rst phase. You can use an internal review to 
summarize the ﬁ rst phase and to preview phase two: “So the goal of the ﬁ rst phase 
is to see whether a drug that has been found to be safe in animals is safe in a small 
number of humans who have the cancer. Phase I trials are not designed to determine 
whether the drug works or not. It is in the next phase, Phase II, that we begin to 
answer that question.
Choose speciﬁ c and familiar language
Words can have many meanings, so you want to make sure your listeners understand 
the meaning you intend. You can do so by using speciﬁ c language and choosing 
familiar terms. Speciﬁ c words clear up the confusion caused by general words by 
narrowing the focus in some way. For example, saying “a banged-up Honda Civic” is 
more speciﬁ c than “a car.” Narrowing the meaning encourages your listeners to picture 
the same thing you are. Similarly, you can narrow a term such as “blue-collar worker” 
further by saying “construction worker” and even further by saying “bulldozer opera-
tor.” Choosing speciﬁ c language is one way to make sure your listeners understand the 
precise meaning you intend.
Using familiar terms is just as important as using speciﬁ c words. Avoid jargon and 
slang unless (1) you deﬁ ne them clearly the ﬁ rst time you use them and (2) they are 
central to your speech goal. For instance, in a speech on the major problems faced by 
functionally illiterate people in the workplace, it will be important to your audience to 
understand what you mean by “functionally illiterate.” Early in the speech, you should 
offer your deﬁ nition: “By ‘functionally illiterate,’ I mean people who have trouble 
accomplishing simple reading and writing tasks.”
jargon
the unique technical 
terminology of a trade or 
profession.
slang
informal, nonstandard 
vocabulary and deﬁ nitions 
assigned to words by a social 
group or subculture.

311
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
Use vivid language and examples
Because listeners cannot reread what you have said, you must speak in ways that help 
them remember your message. You can do so by using sensory language that appeals 
to the senses of seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and feeling. Here is how Marla 
appealed to the senses when describing the downhill skiing experience:
As you climb the hill, you squint because the bright winter sunshine glistening 
on the snow is almost blinding [sight]. Just before you take off, you gently slip 
your goggles over your eyes. The bitter cold of them stings your nose [touch 
and feel]. You start the descent, and as you gradually pick up speed, the taste of 
air and ice and snow in your mouth invigorates you [taste]. An odd silence ﬁ lls 
the air, and you hear only the swish of your skis against the snow [sound] until, 
at last, you arrive at the bottom of the hill. As you enter the warming house, 
you feel your ﬁ ngers thaw in the warm air [feel], and the familiar aroma of the 
wood stove [smell] comforts you as you pour yourself a cup of hot chocolate.
Sensory language and examples help audience members understand and  remember 
abstract, complex, and novel material. A vivid example can help us understand a com-
plicated concept. So as you prepare your speech, you will want to adapt by choosing 
sensory language
language that appeals to the 
senses.
©1999 Ted Goff www.tedgoff.com

312
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
real or hypothetical examples and illustrations to help your 
audience understand the new information you present.
Compare unknown ideas with familiar ones
An easy way to adapt your material to your audience is to com-
pare your new ideas with ones the audience already understands. 
For example, if you wanted an audience of 18- to 24-year-olds 
to feel the excitement that was generated when telegrams were 
ﬁ rst introduced, you might compare it to the public response 
when cell phones became widely available. In the speech on 
functional illiteracy, if you want your audience of literates to 
sense what functionally illiterate people experience, you might 
compare it to the experience of living in a country where one is 
not ﬂ uent in the language.
Adapting to Cultural Differences
 When you address an audience composed of people from ethnic and language groups 
different from your own, you should make three adaptations: being understand-
able when you are speaking in your second language, showing respect by choosing 
bias-free language, and creating common ground by choosing culturally appropriate 
supporting material.
Work to be understood when speaking in your second language
When the ﬁ rst language spoken by audience members is different from yours, they 
may not be able to understand what you are saying because you may speak with an 
accent, mispronounce words, choose inappropriate words, and misuse idioms. Speaking 
in a second language can make you anxious and self-conscious. But most audience 
members are more tolerant of mistakes made by a second-language speaker than they 
are of those made by a native speaker. Likewise, they will work hard to understand a 
second-language speaker.
Nevertheless, when you are speaking in a second language, you have an addi-
tional responsibility to make your speech as understandable as possible. You can help 
your audience by speaking more slowly and articulating as clearly as you can. By 
slowing your speaking rate, you give yourself additional time to pronounce difﬁ cult 
sounds and choose words whose meanings you know. You also give your audience 
members additional time to adjust their ears so that they can more easily process 
what you are saying. You can also use visual aids to reinforce key terms and concepts 
as you move through you speech. Doing so assures listeners that they’ve heard you 
correctly.
One of the best ways to improve when you are giving a speech in a second language 
is to practice the speech in front of friends and associates who are native speakers. Ask 
them to take note of words and phrases that you mispronounce or misuse. Then they 
can work with you to correct the pronunciation or to choose other words that better 
express your idea. Also, keep in mind that the more you practice speaking the lan-
guage, the more comfortable you will become with the language and with your ability 
to relate to the audience members.
Choose nonoffensive language
Some words, phrases and references may be offensive to some cultural groups. When 
you use these in a speech, you are being disrespectful of the feelings of your audi-
ence. Respectful language choices are those that will not offend any of your listeners. 
You can help listeners 
remember by appealing to 
the senses.
How can you 
adapt to cultural 
differences 
between you and 
members of your 
audience?
Ken Redding/Surf/Corbis

313
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
Disrespectful language includes expressions that some people perceive as sexist, rac-
ist, demeaning, insulting, or offensive. Any words, examples, or stories that belittle a 
person or a group of people based on their race, sex, religion, age, class, education, or 
occupation are disrespectful.
Profane or vulgar language can also offend some audience members and should be 
avoided in a public address. Although casual swearing—profanity injected into regular 
conversation—occurs more today than in the past, research has shown that people who 
pepper their formal speeches with it are often perceived as abrasive, as well as lacking 
in character and emotional control (DuFrene & Lehman, 2002; O’Connor, 2000).
Respectful language is also gender neutral and avoids stereotypes. Fireﬁ ghter
rather than ﬁ reman, server rather than waitress, and ﬂ ight attendant rather than 
stewardess are examples of bias-free language choices.
You will also want to avoid offensive examples and stories. Dirty jokes and  racist, 
sexist, or other -ist examples show your disregard for the feelings of some of your 
audience members and are likely to turn off not only those who you are demeaning 
but also other members of the audience. You might recall when comedian Chris Rock 
hosted the 2003 MTV music awards and introduced Eminem as someone who “saves 
a lot of money on Mother’s Day” and P. Diddy as “being sued by more people than 
the Catholic church” (MTV Music Awards, 2003). Although some audience may have 
thought these remarks were funny, others surely did not. And although remarks such 
as these may be accepted from Chris Rock the comedian, your audience is unlikely 
Action Step 4.a
Adapting to Your Audience Verbally
The goal of this activity is to help you plan how you will verbally adapt your 
material to the speciﬁ c audience.
Write your thesis statement: __________________________________
Review the audience analysis that you completed in Action Steps 1.b and 
1.c. As you review the speech outline that you completed in Action Steps 
3.a–3.h, plan the supporting material you will use to verbally adapt to your 
audience by answering the following questions:
 1. 
How can I adapt this material so that it is relevant to this audience by 
showing its timeliness, proximity, and personal impact?
 2. 
How can I establish common ground by using personal pronouns, ask-
ing rhetorical questions, and drawing from common experiences?
 3. 
How can I establish my credibility by demonstrating my knowledge 
and expertise, my trustworthiness, and my personableness?
 4. 
How can I make this material easier for the audience to comprehend 
by addressing diverse learning styles, orienting them with internal 
reviews, speaking clearly, using sensory language and examples, and 
comparing unknowns with what your audience knows?
 5. 
How can I adapt to the cultural differences between my audience 
and me?
You can complete this activity online, view another student’s sample of this activity, 
and, if requested, e-mail your completed activity to your instructor. Use your Premi-
um Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step activities for Chapter 13.

314
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
to ﬁ nd your use of this type of humor appropriate or effective. As a general rule of 
thumb: When in doubt, leave it out.
Choose culturally appropriate supporting material
Much of your success in adapting to the audience hinges on establishing common 
ground and drawing on common experiences. When you are speaking to audiences 
who are vastly different from you, you should learn as much as you can about their 
culture so that you can develop the material in a way that is meaningful to them. 
This may mean conducting additional library research to ﬁ nd statistics and examples 
that are meaningful to the audience. Or it may require you to elaborate on ideas that 
would be self-explanatory in your own culture. For example, suppose that Maria, a 
Mexican American exchange student, was giving a personal narrative speech on her 
quinceañera party when she turned 15 for her speech class at Yeshiva University in 
Israel. Because students in Israel have no experience with the Mexican coming-of-age 
tradition of quinceañera parties, they would have had trouble understanding the sig-
niﬁ cance of this event if Maria had not used her knowledge of the Bar Mitzvah and 
Bat Mitzvah coming-of-age ritual celebrations in Jewish culture and related it to them.
In the Diverse Voices feature, Ann Neville Miller provides insights into public 
speaking practices in Kenya and how Kenyans must adapt their speeches to appeal to 
their audiences’ shared experiences and knowledge.
Public Speaking Patterns in Kenya
by Ann Neville Miller
One of the major differences in adapting to different 
groups is understanding their expectations and their 
reactions to your words. In this excerpt, Ann Neville 
Miller describes the different purposes of public 
speaking in Kenya and how those purposes inﬂ uence 
how Kenyan speakers adapt their words to the expec-
tations of their audiences.
Much public speaking in the United States is 
informative or persuasive in purpose; ceremonial 
occasions for public speaking are less common. 
This is due, in part, to the stress that main-
stream U.S. culture places on informality. The 
average Kenyan, in contrast, will give far more 
ceremonial speeches in life than any other kind 
of speech. These may be speeches of greeting, 
introduction, tribute, and thanks, among others. 
Life events, both major and minor, are marked 
by ceremonies, and ceremonies occasion multiple 
public speeches.
This means that, unlike the majority of peo-
ple in the United States, who report that they fear 
speaking in public, possibly even more than they 
fear death (Richmond & McCroskey, 1995), for 
most Kenyans, public speaking is an unavoid-
able responsibility. For example, when a Kenyan 
attends a church service or other event away from 
home, he or she will often be asked to stand up 
and give an impromptu word of greeting to the 
assembly. In more remote areas, where literacy 
rates are low and there is little access to electronic 
media, this word of greeting also can serve an 
informative purpose because the one who has 
traveled often brings news of the outside world. 
The harambee, a kind of community fund-raising 
event peculiar to Kenya, is characterized by the 
Diverse Voices

315
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
presence of both a guest of honor and various 
dignitaries of a stature appropriate to the speciﬁ c 
occasion, all of whom are likely at some point 
to address the gathering. Weddings and funer-
als overﬂ ow with ceremonial speeches; virtually 
any relative, friend, or business associate of the 
newly married or deceased may give advice or pay 
tribute. Older members of the bride’s family, for 
example, may remind her how important it is to 
feed her husband well, or warn the groom that in 
their family men are expected never to abuse their 
wives, but to settle marital disputes with patience. 
Even the woman selected to cut the cake expects 
to give a brief word of exhortation before per-
forming her duty. The free dispensing of advice, a 
hallmark of Kenyan wedding celebrations, would 
be out of place at most receptions in the United 
States, where the focus of speeches is normally 
more on remembrances and well-wishing.
In fact, when it comes to marriage, speech 
making begins long before the actual wedding 
day, at bridal negotiations where up to 40 or 50 
people from the two families attempt to settle on 
a bride price. At these negotiations especially, 
but also in other ceremonial speeches, “deep” 
language replete with proverbs and metaphors is 
expected. The family of the man may explain that 
their son has seen a beautiful ﬂ ower, or a lovely 
she-goat, or some other item in the compound 
of the family of the young lady and that they 
would like to obtain it for their son. In a nego-
tiation of this type that I recently attended, the 
speaker for the bride’s relatives explained that 
the family would require 20 goats as a major 
portion of the bride price. Because both parties 
were urban dwellers and would have no space to 
keep that many animals, the groom’s family con-
ferred with each other and determined that the 
bride’s family really wanted cash. They settled on 
what they considered to be a reasonable price per 
goat, multiplied it by 20, and presented the total 
amount through a designated spokesperson to the 
representative of the bride. The original speaker 
from the bride’s family looked at the money and 
observed dryly that goats in the groom’s area 
were considerably thinner than those the bride’s 
family were accustomed to! This type of indirect 
communication, the subtlety of which affords 
immense satisfaction and sometimes amusement 
to both speaker and listener, is a form of the high-
context communication described by [Edward T.] 
Hall. A full appreciation of the speech requires 
extensive knowledge of shared experiences and 
traditions.
Excerpted from Ann Neville Miller, “Public Speaking Patterns 
in Kenya.” In Larry A. Samovar, Richard E. Porter, & Edwin R. 
McDaniel, eds., Intercultural Communication: A Reader (11th 
ed., pp. 238–245). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2006.
Adapting to Audiences Visually
Because of the inﬂ uence of mass media, today’s audiences are visually oriented. As a 
result, your audience is likely to expect you to use presentational aids to provide a 
visual component to your speech. A presentational aid is any visual, audio, or audio-
visual material used in a speech for the purpose of helping the audience understand 
some point the speaker is making. The most common form of presentational aid is a 
visual aid—a form of supporting material that allows the audience to see as well as 
hear information.
There are several beneﬁ ts to using presentational aids. First, they enable you to 
adapt to an audience’s level of knowledge by clarifying and dramatizing your ver-
bal message. Second, they help audiences retain the information because people are 
better able to remember what they both see and hear rather than what they only 
hear (Tversky, 1997). Third, presentational aids help listeners whose learning styles 
are based on visual cues (Kolb, 1984). Fourth, presentational aids are persuasive. In 
fact, some research suggests that speakers who use presentational aids are almost two 
times more likely to convince listeners than those who do not have presentational 
aids (Hanke, 1998). Finally, using presentational aids helps you feel more conﬁ dent. 
presentational aid
any visual, audio, or 
audiovisual material used 
in a speech for the purpose 
of helping the audience 
understand some point the 
speaker is making. 
visual aid
a form of supporting material 
that allows the audience 
to see as well as to hear 
information.

316
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
Speakers report that when they use presentational aids, they tend to be less anxious 
and have more conﬁ dence (Ayres, 1991).
The important role of presentational aids in speech giving has lead to a new form 
of entertainment. In Ignite speech contests (many of which take place in bars), speak-
ers compete by giving informative speeches with a slide show. You can read more 
about “Ignite Nights” in the Pop Comm! feature “Ignite: The Power(Point) of eXtreme 
Audience Adaptation.”
Types of Presentational Aids
Presentational aids range from those that are ready-made and simple to use to those 
that require practice to use effectively and must be custom produced for the speciﬁ c 
speech. In this section, we describe the types of presentational aids that you can con-
sider using as you prepare your speech.
Actual objects
Actual objects are inanimate or animate physical samples of the idea you are com-
municating. Inanimate objects make good visual aids if they are (1) large enough 
Ignite: The Power(Point) of 
eXtreme Audience Adaptation
Ignite asks speakers, “If you had ﬁ ve minutes on 
stage, what would you say? What if you only got 
20 slides and they rotated automatically after 
15 seconds?” (“What Is Ignite?”). Ignite chal-
lenges speakers to engage in what could be called 
extreme audience adaptation, sharing informa-
tion in a timely and relevant manner so that it is 
easily comprehended by its techie audience. The 
entire focus of Ignite presentations is on what the 
target demographic wants to see: short and fast 
communication.
Ignite is a style of presentation that began 
in Seattle in 2006, created by Brady Forrest of 
O’Reilly Radar, a blog sponsored by the com-
puter-book publisher O’Reilly Media, and Bre 
Pettis of Make Magazine, which is devoted to DIY 
technology projects. Started as a way to provide 
fun, informal conferences for people working in 
the technology industry, the events have spread 
to cities all over the United States and beyond, 
including Sydney, Australia, and Buenos Aires, 
Argentina (Guzman, 2009). Ignite events are free 
of charge, only relying on sponsors to provide 
food and drink.
Speeches at Ignite events range from 
“Fighting Dirty in Scrabble” to “Causal Inference 
Is Hard,” or “How I Learned to Stop Worrying 
and Love Counterfactuals” to “How I Learned to 
Appreciate Dance: Being Married to a Ballerina” 
to “Geek Generation” (“Ignite Seattle 7,” 2009). 
The emphasis on extreme brevity as a way to 
share ideas is reﬂ ected in Ignite Seattle’s tagline: 
“Enlighten us, but make it quick” (Ignite Seattle, 
n.d.). Aside from their strict limits on presentation 
Pop Comm!
What are the 
different types of 
presentational 
aids?
Ignite Baltimore/Mike Subelsk

317
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
structure, Ignite events are low on rules—most cit-
ies’ Ignite Web sites say in their basic guidelines, 
“We want Ignite to be about promoting and shar-
ing burning ideas. If those ideas happen to take 
the form of . . . any other self-serving commercial 
interest, then so be it. We’re ﬁ ne with it, really. 
But whatever you present had better be interest-
ing” (“Basic Guidelines,” n.d.).
Luciana Lopez (2008) of The Oregonian calls 
Ignite events “attention deﬁ cit theater,” and 
these events are indeed tailored to a genera-
tion increasingly comfortable with pared-down 
forms of communication, such as text messag-
ing and Twitter. Event organizer Jason Prothero 
says, “[Ignite is] a deliberate attempt to avoid 
what sucks about presentations. They’re bor-
ing” (Neznanski, 2008). An online review of 
Ignite Seattle recommends that “all presenta-
tions should be ﬁ ve minutes long,” explaining: 
“Anyone who knows PowerPoint presentations 
knows that a ‘ﬁ ve-minute presentation,’ after 
including setup time, switching between appli-
cations, waiting for your web browser demo to 
respond, etc., lasts a half hour but feels like an 
eternity. Ignite’s presentation style is a slap in 
the face to convention” (Weill, 2006). Another 
online reviewer wrote, “The messages were 
succinct and powerful because the speakers 
knew they didn’t have time for the clutter that 
normally pops up in conferences” (Raybould, 
2007).
Part of Ignite’s success has been its ability 
to adapt to the interests of its various audiences. 
For example, co-creator Brady Forrest attempts 
to balance the gender of the speakers and to 
keep topics only moderately techie so that more 
audience members can relate (Guzman, 2009). 
Ignite Bend in Oregon has applied Ignite’s pre-
sentation style to community organization, and 
IgniteChange in Boston focuses on social justice 
(Guzman, 2009).
In addition, Ignite’s message has spread so 
rapidly because of its incorporation of online 
social networking tools. Ignite Web sites fea-
ture real-time Twitter feeds, Flickr photos and 
streaming videos, and links to individual blog 
posts that review Ignite events. Of Ignite’s 
intense Internet focus, Luciana Lopez (2008) 
says, “This crowd was so wired, organizers went 
online to update folks waiting to get inside the 
[theater].”
Extreme audience adaptation? Perhaps for 
now—sounds like pretty soon everybody will be 
doing it. If you’d like to see for yourself what 
Ignite is all about, visit the Ignite Seattle Web site 
at www.igniteseattle.com.
to be seen by all audience members, (2) small enough to carry to the site of the 
speech, (3) simple enough to understand visually, and (4) safe. A volleyball or a 
Muslim prayer rug would be appropriate in size for most classroom audiences. A 
smart phone might be OK if the goal was simply to show what a smart phone looks 
like, but it might be too small if you want to demonstrate how to use the phone’s 
specialized functions.
Some animate objects also make effective visual aids. On occasion, you can be an 
effective visual aid. For instance, you can use descriptive gestures to show the height 
of a tennis net; you can use posture and movement to show the motions involved in a 
golf swing; or you can use your attire to illustrate the traditional attire of a particular 
country. Sometimes it can be appropriate to use another person as a visual aid, such 
as when Jenny used a friend to demonstrate the Heimlich maneuver. Animals can 
also be effective visual aids. For example, Josh used his AKC Obedience Champion 
dog to demonstrate the basics of dog training. But keep in mind that some animals 
placed in unfamiliar settings can become difﬁ cult to control and can distract from 
your message.

318
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
Models
When an object is too large or too small, too complex to understand visually, or poten-
tially unsafe or uncontrollable, a model of the object can be an effective visual aid. A 
model is a three-dimensional scaled-down or scaled-up version of an actual object, and 
it may also be scaled-down to aid understanding. In a speech on the physics of bridge 
construction, a scale model of a suspension bridge would be an effective visual aid. 
Likewise, in a speech on genetic engineering, a scaled-up model of the DNA double helix 
might help the audience understand what happens during these microscopic procedures.
Photographs
If an exact reproduction of material is needed, enlarged still photographs are excellent 
visual aids. In a speech on smart weapons, enlarged before-and-after photos of target 
sites would be effective in helping the audience understand the pinpoint accuracy of 
these weapons.
Simple drawings and diagrams
Simple drawings and diagrams are easy to prepare. If you can use a compass, a straight-
edge, and a ruler, you can draw well enough to prepare a simple diagram. Or with a 
little practice, you can use a basic computer drawing program to prepare one. For 
instance, if you are making the point that water-skiers must hold their arms straight, 
their back straight, and their knees bent slightly, a stick ﬁ gure (see Figure 13.2) will 
illustrate the point. Stick ﬁ gures may not be as aesthetically pleasing as professional 
drawings or photographs, but they can still be effective. In fact, elaborate, detailed 
drawings may not be worth the time and effort, and actual photographs may be so 
detailed that they obscure the point you wish to make. Likewise, a simple diagram, a 
type of drawing that shows how the whole relates to its parts, can be more effective 
than a photograph because you can choose how much detail to include. Andria’s dia-
gram of the human body and its pressure points, for example, worked well to clarify 
her message visually (see Figure 13.3).
Maps
Like drawings and diagrams, maps are relatively easy to prepare. Simple maps allow 
you to orient audiences to landmarks (mountains, rivers, and lakes), states, cities, land 
routes, weather systems, and so on. Commercial maps are available, but simple maps can 
be customized so that audience members are not confused by visual information that is 
irrelevant to your purpose. Figure 13.4 shows a map that focuses on weather systems.
model
a three-dimensional scaled-
down or scaled-up version of 
an actual object.
diagram
a type of drawing that shows 
how the whole relates to its 
parts.
Water Skiing Form
Figure 13.2
Sample drawing

319
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
Charts
A chart is a graphic representation that distills a lot of information and presents it in 
an easily interpreted visual format. Word charts, ﬂ ow charts, and organizational charts 
are the most common. A word chart is used to preview, review, or highlight important 
ideas covered in a speech. In a speech on Islam, a speaker might make a word chart 
that lists the ﬁ ve pillars of Islam, as shown in Figure 13.5. A ﬂ ow chart uses symbols 
and connecting lines to diagram the progressions through a complicated process. Tim 
charts
graphic representations that 
present information in easily 
interpreted formats
word charts
used to preview, review, or 
highlight important ideas 
covered in a speech.
B
B  Bladder  
Cv  Conception vessel
K  Kidney
Lu  Lung 
Lv  Liver
P  Pericardium
St  Stomach
Accupressure Points
KEY
Pressure Points
B
St
St
K
Lu
St
P
P
P
St
St
B
Lv
St
St
St
CV
CV
P
P
P
St
Lv
St
B
K
Lu
Figure 13.3
Sample diagram
H = High
L = Low
Cold
Cool
Warm
H
L
L
L
Weather Systems
Figure 13.4
Sample map

320
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
used a ﬂ ow chart to help listeners move through the sequence of steps to determine 
whether they might be overweight (Figure 13.6) Organizational charts are a common 
type of ﬂ ow chart that shows the chain of command in an organization. The chart in 
Figure 13.7 illustrates the organization of a student union board.
Figure 13.5
Sample word chart
Five Pillars of Islam
1. 
Shahadah—Witness to Faith
2. 
Salat—Prayer
3. 
Sawm—Fasting
4. 
Zakat—Almsgiving
5. 
Hajj—Pilgrimage
Figure 13.6
Sample ﬂ owchart
ﬂ ow charts
use symbols and connecting 
lines to diagram the 
progressions through a 
complicated process.
Have you been
overweight for
most of your life?
START
HERE
Did you put on
weight after
giving up
smoking?
Are you a
woman?
Did you put on
weight at a time
when you were
depressed?
Did the weight
gain follow a
change from a
physically
strenuous job to
sedentary work?
Have you noticed any of the
following symptoms since
you began to put on weight?
• feeling the cold more than
  you used to
• thinning or brittle hair
• dry skin
Have you been taking
steroid drugs for a problem
such as asthma or
rheumatoid arthritis?
Are you over 40?
If you are unable to make a diagnosis from this chart,
your excess weight is probably due only to overeating.
If, after a month of following the recommended reducing
diet, you fail to lose weight, consult your physician.
Weight gain as you grow older may be
a result of such factors as a decline in the
amount of exercise you get and changes in
the rate that your body burns up food.
Such drugs can cause weight gain.
Discuss with your physician.
You may have an underactive
thyroid gland.
In your former job you probably needed more
calories than you do now. You should adjust
your eating habits accordingly.
Many women gain too much
weight during pregnancy and
have difficulty losing it after
the baby is born.
Many people overeat when they
are depressed.
Did you become
overweight
after pregancy
and childbirth?
This is a common experience that
may be partly due to changes in
body chemistry, but is more likely
to be due to compensatory overeating.
A tendency toward
being overweight
can run in families,
often–but not always
–because of acquired
eating habits.
YES
YES
NO
Are You Overweight?
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
Are both your
parents
overweight?
You are probably
overweight because
you eat more than
you need.
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO

321
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
Graphs
A graph is a diagram that presents numerical information. Bar graphs, line graphs, and 
pie graphs are the most common forms of graphs.
A bar graph is a diagram that uses vertical or horizontal bars to show relation-
ships between two or more variables at the same time or at various times on one or 
more dimensions. For instance, Jacqueline used a bar graph to compare the amounts 
of caffeine found in one serving each of brewed coffee, instant coffee, tea, cocoa, and 
cola (see Figure 13.8).
A line graph is a diagram that indicates the changes in one or more variables over 
time. In a speech on the population of the United States, for example, the line graph in 
Figure 13.9 helps by showing the population increase, in millions, from 1810 to 2000.
graph
a chart that compares 
information.
bar graphs
charts that present 
information using a series of 
vertical or horizontal bars.
line graphs
charts that indicate changes 
in one or more variables over 
time.
Chairperson
Financial Advisor
Executive Council
Space Utilization
Committee
Cultural Events
Committee
Recreation 
Committee
Student Union Board Structure
Figure 13.7
Sample organizational chart
Milligrams of caffeine
(mg)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Brewed
coffee
(100 mg)
Instant
coffee
(60 mg)
Tea
(40 mg)
Six-ounce serving
Cocoa
(5 mg)
Cola
(25 mg)
Caffeine Level Comparison
Figure 13.8
Sample bar graph

322
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
A pie graph is a chart that shows the relationships among parts of a single unit. 
Ideally, pie graphs should have two to ﬁ ve “slices,” or wedges—more than eight make 
a pie graph difﬁ cult to read during a speech. If your graph includes too many wedges, 
use a different kind of graph or consolidate several less important wedges into a cat-
egory of “Other,” as Jim did in Figure 13.10 to show the percentage of total calories 
that should come from the various components of food.
Audio aids
Audio aids enhance a verbal message through sound. They are especially useful when 
it is difﬁ cult, if not impossible, to describe a sound in words. For example, in David’s 
speech about the three types of trumpet mutes and how they alter the trumpet’s sound, 
he played his trumpet so that listeners could hear what he meant. If you can’t or don’t 
want to make your own sounds, you can use recorded excerpts from sources such as 
famous speeches, radio programs, interviews, and musical recordings or environmen-
tal sounds. Before using an audio aid, make sure you have enough time to present it 
(it should take no more than about 5 percent of your speaking time) and that you have 
access to a quality sound system.
Audiovisual aids
Audiovisual aids enhance a verbal message through sight and sound. You can use 
short clips from ﬁ lms and videos to demonstrate concepts or processes or to expose 
audiences to important people. For example, in his speech about the use of robots in 
auto mobile production, Chad, who worked as a technician at the local Ford plant, showed 
pie graphs
charts that help audiences 
visualize the relationships 
among parts of a single unit.
audio aids
a presentation aid that 
enhances a verbal message 
through sound.
audiovisual aids
a presentation aid that 
enhances a verbal message 
through sight and sound.
300
275
250
225
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
1810
1840
1870
1900
1930
1960
1990 2000
U.S. Population 1810–2000 (in millions)
Population Trends
Figure 13.9
Sample line graph
SOURCE: Business Week, December 
15, 2003.
50%
20%
10%
20%
Complex carbohydrates
Calorie Counts
Other (including protein)
Saturated fat
Unsaturated fat
Figure 13.10
Sample pie graph

323
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
a 20-second video clip of a car being painted in a robotic paint booth. As with audio 
aids, your audiovisual aid should take no more than 5 percent of your speaking time.
Criteria for Choosing Presentational Aids
Now that you understand the various types of presentational aids, you have to decide 
what content you want to highlight in a presentational aid and the best way to do so. 
Some simple guidelines can help you make good choices.
 1. Create aids for important information that the audience needs to understand and 
remember.
 2. Create aids for ideas that are complex or difﬁ cult to explain verbally but would be 
easy for members to understand visually.
 3. Create aids that are appropriate for the size of the audience.
 4. Limit the number of aids so that they do not distract from you as speaker.
 5. Use media aids only when equipment is readily available and you know how to 
operate it.
 6. Consider preparation time and expense when choosing aids.
Designing Effective Presentational Aids
However simple your presentational aids, you still need to produce them carefully. You 
may need to ﬁ nd or create charts, graphs, diagrams, maps, or drawings. You may need 
to search for and prepare photographs. You may look for audio or audiovisual snippets 
and then convert them to a format that you can use at your speech site.
Web Resource 13.1
Action Step 4.b
Adapting to Your Audience Visually
The goal of this activity is to help you decide which visual aids you will use 
in your speech.
 1. 
Identify the key ideas in your speech that you could emphasize with 
a presentational aid to increase audience interest, understanding, or 
retention.
 2. 
For each idea you have identiﬁ ed, list the type of presentational aid 
you think would be most appropriate to develop and use.
 3. 
For each idea you plan to enhance with an aid, decide on the method 
or aid you will use to present it.
 4. 
Write a brief paragraph describing why you chose the types of presen-
tational aids and methods that you did. Be sure to consider how your 
choices will affect your preparation time and the audience’s percep-
tion of your credibility.
You can use Speech Builder Express to complete this activity, or you can complete 
it online, download a Visual Aids Planning Chart to keep track of your decisions, 
view a student sample of this activity, and, if requested, e-mail your work to your 
instructor. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Action Step 
activities for Chapter 14.
What criteria can 
you use to select 
presentational 
aids?

324
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
As you approach your design task, you must ﬁ rst determine whether you will 
design your aids by hand or use computer presentation software. Regardless of which 
you choose, there are several guidelines that you will want to follow.
 1. Limit the reading required of the audience. The audience should not spend a long 
time reading your presentational aid; you want them listening to you. So limit the 
total number of lines on an aid to six or fewer, and write points as short phrases 
rather than complete sentences.
 2. Customize presentational aids from other sources. We often get ideas for our 
aids from other sources, and the tendency is to include everything that was in 
the original. But if the original source includes information that is irrelevant to 
your purpose or audience, you should customize your aid to include only the 
information you want to present. For example, Jia Li was preparing a speech on 
alcohol abuse by young adults. During her research she found a graph of the 2005 
statistics called “Current, Binge, and Heavy Alcohol Use among Persons Aged 12 
or Older by Age.” This graph presented information pertaining to drinkers from 
ages 12 to 65+, which was much more information than Jia Li needed. So she 
simpliﬁ ed it for her presentation and used only the information for young adults 
ages 16 to 29.
 3. Use a photo, print, or type size that can be seen easily by your entire audience. 
Check your photo, charts, and lettering for size by moving as far away from the 
presentational aid as the farthest person in your audience will be sitting. If you 
can see the image, read the lettering, and see the details from that distance, your 
aid is large enough; if not, create another sample and check it again.
 4. Use a print style that is easy to read. Avoid fancy print styles; your goal is 
 presentation aids that are easy to read. In addition, some people think that print-
ing in all capital letters creates emphasis, but the combination of uppercase and 
lowercase letters is easier to read than uppercase only—even when the ideas are 
written in short phrases.
 5. Make sure information is laid out in a way that is visually pleasing. Visually 
pleasing material is artistically arranged while not losing its communicative 
 function. So visuals that will appeal to the audience are neatly prepared, not 
crowded, have space separating ideas, use color strategically, and use typefaces 
and indenting to visually display the relationships between the ideas.
 6. Use pictures or other visual symbols to add interest. A presentational aid should 
consist of more than just words (Booher, 2003). Even on a word chart, visual sym-
bols can increase retention by appealing to diverse learning styles (Kolb, 1984; 
Long, 1997). If you are working with computer graphics, consider adding clip 
art. Most computer graphics packages have a wide variety of clip art that you 
can import to your document. You can also buy relatively inexpensive software 
packages that contain thousands of clip art images. A relevant piece of clip art 
can make the image look both more professional and more dramatic. Be  careful, 
though; clip art can be overdone. Don’t let your message be overpowered by 
unnecessary pictures or animations.
 7. Use color strategically. Although black and white can work well for your 
visual aids, you should consider using color. Color when used strategically can 
 emphasize points. Here are some suggestions for incorporating color in your 
graphics:
• Choose a single background color to use on all of your presentation aids. Then 
choose a different color of type for each main point and use it on all visuals 
related to that main point.
What guidelines 
should you follow 
to construct 
and integrate 
presentational aids?

325
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
• Use the same color to show similarities and opposite colors (on a color wheel) 
to depict differences between ideas.
• Use bright colors, such as red, to highlight important information. Be sure to 
avoid using red and green together, however, since audience members who are 
color-blind may not be able to distinguish them.
• Make sure that the color of the type can be easily seen on the background.
• Use no more than two or three colors on any presentation aid that is not a 
photograph.
Pretend you are your audience. Sit as far away as they will be sitting, and 
evaluate the colors. Assess your color choices for their readability and appeal from 
the perspective of your audience.
 8. Use presentation software to prepare professional looking presentational aids. 
Presentation software is a computer program that enables you to electronically 
prepare and store your visual aids using a computer. Microsoft’s PowerPoint, 
Adobe’s Captivate, and Apple’s Keynote 3 are popular presentation software pro-
grams. The visuals you create on a computer can become overhead transparencies 
or handouts, or they can be displayed directly on a screen or TV monitor as a 
computerized slide show. Aids developed with presentation software give a very 
polished look to your speech and allow you to develop and deliver complex mul-
timedia presentations that are expected in many professional settings.
Computerized slide shows have quickly become the presentational aid of choice 
today. Unfortunately, too often these shows do not adhere to the most important func-
tion of effective presentational aids: to enhance and complement the verbal message 
and not to replace it. The speaker should not be relegated to the role of projectionist. 
On the other hand, well-designed and well-presented computerized slide shows greatly 
enhance audience interest, understanding, and memory as well as the audience’s per-
ceptions of the speaker’s credibility.
When you are unfamiliar with the software, using it to prepare your presentational 
aids will be time-consuming. But if you start simply, over time you will become more 
adept at creating professional-quality aids. Like hand-prepared presentational aids, 
those you prepare with presentation software need to be created with your  speciﬁ c 
audience in mind.
Let’s see if we can put all of these principles to work. Figure 13.11 contains a lot of 
important information, but notice how unpleasant it is to the eye. As you can see, this 
visual aid ignores all principles. However, with some thoughtful simpliﬁ cation, this 
speaker could produce the visual aid shown in Figure 13.12, which sharpens the focus 
by emphasizing the key words (reduce, reuse, recycle), highlighting the major details, 
and adding clip art for a professional touch.
presentation software
a computer program that 
enables you to electronically 
prepare and store your visual 
aids using a computer.
Skill Learning Activity 13.2
Figure 13.11
A cluttered and cumbersome 
visual aid
I WANT YOU TO REMEMBER THE THREE R’S OF RECYCLING
Reduce the amount of waste people produce, like overpacking or using material 
that won’t recycle.
Reuse by relying on cloth towels rather than paper towels, earthenware dishes 
rather than paper or plastic plates, and glass bottles rather than aluminum cans.
Recycle by collecting recyclable products, sorting them correctly, and getting 
them to the appropriate recycling agency.

326
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
The Three
R’s of Recycling
Reduce waste
Recycle
Reuse
cloth towels
dishes
glass bottles
collect
sort
deliver
Methods for Displaying Presentational Aids
Once you have decided on the speciﬁ c presentational aids for your speech, you will 
need to choose the method to display them. Methods for displaying aids vary in the 
type of preparation they require, the amount of specialized training needed to use them 
effectively, and the professionalism they convey. Some methods, such as writing on a 
chalkboard, require little preparation. Other methods, such as computerized slide show 
presentations, can require extensive preparation. Similarly, it’s easy to use an object 
or a ﬂ ip chart, but you will need training to properly set up and run a computerized 
slide show presentation. Finally, the quality of your visual presentation will affect your 
perceived credibility. A well-run computerized slide show is impressive, but technical 
difﬁ culties can make you look unprepared. Hand-drawn charts and graphs that are 
hastily or sloppily developed mark you as an amateur, whereas professional-looking 
visual aids enhance your credibility. Speakers can choose from the following methods 
for displaying presentational aids.
Posters
The easiest method for displaying simple drawings, charts, maps, photos, and graphs is 
by mounting them on stiff cardboard or foamcore. Then the visual can be placed on an 
easel or in a chalk tray when it is referred to during the speech. Because posters tend 
to be fairly small, use them only with smaller audiences (30 people or less).
Whiteboards or Chalkboards
Because a whiteboard or chalkboard is a staple in every college classroom, many 
novice (and ill-prepared) speakers rely on this method for displaying their visual 
aids. Unfortunately, the whiteboard or chalkboard is easy to misuse and to over-
use. Moreover, they are not suitable for depicting complex material. Writing on a 
Figure 13.12
A simple but effective 
visual aid

327
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
whiteboard or chalkboard is appropriate only for very short items of information that 
can be written in a few seconds. Nevertheless, being able to use a whiteboard or chalk-
board effectively should be a part of any speaker’s repertoire.
Whiteboards or chalkboards should be written on prior to speaking or during 
a break in speaking. Otherwise, the visual is likely to be either illegible or partly 
obscured by your body as you write. Or you may end up talking to the board instead 
of to the audience. Should you need to draw or write on the board while you are talk-
ing, you should practice doing it. If you are right-handed, stand to the right of what 
you are drawing. Try to face at least part of the audience while you work. Although it 
may seem awkward at ﬁ rst, your effort will allow you to maintain contact with your 
audience and will allow the audience to see what you are doing while you are doing it.
“Chalk talks” are easy to prepare, but they are the most likely to result in damage 
to speaker credibility. It is the rare individual who can develop well-crafted visual aids 
on a whiteboard or chalkboard. More often, they signal a lack of preparation.
Flip Charts
A ﬂ ip chart, a large pad of paper mounted on an easel, can be an effective method 
for presenting visual aids. Flip charts (and easels) are available in many sizes. For a 
presentation to four or ﬁ ve people, a small tabletop version works well; for a larger 
audience, a larger-size pad (30˝  40˝) is needed.
Flip charts are prepared before the speech, using colorful markers to record the 
information. At times, a speaker may record some of the information before the speech 
begins and then add information while speaking.
When you are preparing a ﬂ ip chart, leave several pages between each visual 
on the pad. If you discover a mistake or decide to revise, you can tear out that sheet 
without disturbing the order of other visuals you may have prepared. After you have 
ﬁ nished all the visuals, tear out all but one sheet between each of them. This blank 
sheet serves as both a transition page and a cover sheet. Because you want your 
audience to focus on your words and not on visual material that is no longer being 
discussed, you can ﬂ ip to the empty page until you are ready to talk about the next 
visual. Also, the empty page between visuals ensures that heavy lines or colors from 
the next one will not show through.
For ﬂ ip charts to be effective, information that is handwritten or drawn must be 
neat and appropriately sized. Flipchart visuals that are not neatly done detract from 
speaker credibility. Flipcharts can be comfortably used with smaller audiences (less 
than one hundred people) but are not appropriate for larger settings. It is especially 
important when creating ﬂ ip charts to make sure that the information is written large 
enough to be easily seen by all audience members.
Handouts
At times it may be useful for each member of the audience to have a personal copy of the 
visual aid. For these situations, you can prepare a handout (material printed on sheets of 
paper). On the plus side, you can prepare handouts quickly, and all the people in the audi-
ence can have their own professional-quality copy to refer to and take with them from 
the speech. On the minus side, distributing handouts is distracting and has the potential 
for losing audience members’ attention when you want them to be looking at you.
Before you decide to use handouts, carefully consider why they would be better 
than some other method. Handouts are effective for information you want listeners to 
refer to after the speech, such as a set of steps to follow later, useful telephone numbers 
and addresses, or mathematical formulas.
ﬂ ip chart
a large pad of paper 
mounted on an easel; it can 
be an effective method for 
presenting visual aids.

328
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
If you decide on handouts, distribute them at the end of the speech. If you want 
to refer to information on the handout during the speech, create another visual aid 
that you can reveal when discussing it during your speech. Tim used a handout for his 
ﬂ ow chart about determining whether you are overweight. He wanted listeners to take 
it home with them to refer to later. But for his speech, he also created a ﬂ ow chart on 
a poster.
Document Cameras
Another simple way to project drawings, charts, photos, and graphs is using a docu-
ment camera, such as an Elmo. An Elmo is a document camera that allows you project 
images without transferring them to an acetate ﬁ lm. Be sure to transfer drawings, 
charts, photos, and graphs from their source onto a sheet of 8 1/2˝ x 11˝ piece of paper 
so that you can display them smoothly and professionally.
CD/VCR/DVD Players and LCD Projectors
To show TV, ﬁ lm, and video clips for a classroom speech, a VCR or DVD player and a 
television monitor should be sufﬁ cient. For larger audiences, however, you will need 
to use multiple monitors or, ideally, an LCD multimedia projector. An LCD projector 
connects to a VCR/DVD player or computer and projects images from them onto a 
screen, which makes the images easy to see by all members of a large audience. An 
LCD projector is also ideal for displaying computerized slideshows such as those you 
create using PowerPoint.
Computer-Mediated Slide Show
You can present computerized slide shows using an LCD projector or a large moni-
tor connected to an onsite computer that has presentation software compatible with 
the one you used in making your aids. Because you can’t always anticipate problems 
with onsite projection equipment, come with back-up aids such as transparencies or 
handouts. When you present your slide show during your speech, ensure that the audi-
ence members focus their attention on you when you’re not talking about one of your 
slides. To redirect their attention from your slide show to you, insert blank screens 
between your slides or press the B key on your computer to display a blank screen.
Web Resource 13.2
Battle of the Visual Aids
The Assignment
Form groups of four or ﬁ ve people. Your instructor will provide you with three 
sample visual aids that might be used in a speech. Based on the criteria 
and guidelines you learned in this chapter, evaluate each visual aid and 
select the best one. At your instructor’s request, one member of each team 
should go to the front of the room and give a 2- to 3-minute speech that 
makes a case for why the visual aid you selected is the best of the three. 
After all groups have made their presentations, vote as a class on the best 
one and discuss why.
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet

329
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
Summary
Audience adaptation is the process of customizing your speech to your speciﬁ c audi-
ence. You need to consider both how to adapt verbally with your supporting material 
and language choices and visually (and audiovisually) by using presentational aids to 
help the audience understand and remember what you are saying.
First, you adapt to the audience verbally by (1) demonstrating relevance through 
showing how the information you are presenting is timely, proximate, and has per-
sonal impact on the audience; (2) establishing common ground by using personal 
pronouns, asking rhetorical questions, and drawing from common experiences; (3) 
demonstrating credibility through showing your knowledge and expertise and estab-
lishing your trustworthiness; (4) ensuring that your material is easily comprehended 
by the audience; and (5) adapting to language and cultural differences between you 
and your audience.
As you plan the aids you will use with your speech, consider the time and cost 
of preparation, the impact on audience understanding and memory, and the effect on 
speaker credibility. To design effective aids: (1) use printing or type size that can be 
seen easily by your entire audience; (2) use a typeface that is easy to read and pleas-
ing to the eye; (3) use upper- and lowercase type; (4) limit the lines of type to six or 
less; (5) include only items of information that you will emphasize in your speech; (6) 
make sure information is laid out in a way that is aesthetically pleasing; (7) add clip 
art where appropriate; and (8) use color to reinforce your meaning.
You adapt to audiences by developing and using appropriate presentational 
aids. The most common types of aids are objects, models, photographs, slides, 
A Question of Ethics
Kendra, I heard you telling Jim about the speech 
you’re giving tomorrow. You think it’s a winner, 
huh?”
“You got that right, Omar. I’m going to have 
Bardston eating out of the palm of my hand.”
“You sound conﬁ dent.”
“This time I have reason to be. See, Professor 
Bardston’s been talking about the importance of 
audience adaptation. These last two weeks that’s 
all we’ve heard—adaptation, adaptation.”
“What does she mean?”
“Talking about something in a way that 
really relates to people personally.”
“OK—so how are you going to do that?”
“Well, you see, I’m giving this speech on 
abortion. Now here’s the kick. Bardston let it slip 
that she’s a supporter of Right to Life. So what I’m 
going to do is give this informative speech on the 
Right to Life movement. But I’m going to discuss 
the major beliefs of the movement in a way that’ll 
get her to think that I’m a supporter. I’m going 
to mention aspects of the movement that I know 
she’ll like.”
“But I’ve heard you talk about how you’re 
pro-choice.”
“I am—all the way. But by keeping the infor-
mation positive, she’ll think I’m a supporter. 
It isn’t as if I’m going to be telling any lies or 
anything.”
 1. In a speech, is it ethical to adapt in a way 
that resonates with your audience but isn’t in 
keeping with what you really believe?
 2. Could Kendra have achieved her goal using a 
different method? How?
What Would You Do?

330
 
Chapter 13 Adapting Verbally and Visually
simple drawings and diagrams, maps, charts, and graphs. There are various meth-
ods speakers can use to display presentational aids, including posters, whiteboards 
or chalkboards, ﬂ ip charts, handouts, document cameras, CD/VCR/DVD players and 
LCD projectors, and computer-mediated slide shows. You might also use audio or 
audiovisual materials.
Now that you have read Chapter 13, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment and Action Step activities in 
the body of the chapter.
Communicate! Active Online Learning
Key Terms
audience adaptation (305)
bar graphs (321)
charts (319)
common ground (306)
credibility (307)
diagram (318)
ﬂ ip chart (327)
ﬂ ow charts (318)
graph (321)
jargon (310)
knowledge and expertise (308)
line graphs (321)
model (318)
personal pronouns (306)
personableness (309)
personalize (000)
pie graph (322)
presentation software (325)
proximity (306)
relevance (305)
rhetorical questions (307)
sensory language (311)
slang (310)
timely (305)
trustworthiness (308)
visual aid (315)
word charts (319)
Skill Learning Activities
13.1: Creating Common Ground (307)
Search online for the article “A Question of Real 
American Black Men,” by Bailey B. Baker Jr., Vital 
Speeches, April 15, 2002. (Two good search resources 
are InfoTrac College Edition and AccessMyLibrary.com. 
You can ﬁ nd a link to the ﬁ rst on your Premium 
Website, and the second is free on the Web with reg-
istration.) Analyze how this speaker uses personal 
pronouns, rhetorical questions, common experiences, 
and personalized information to create common 
ground. Write a short essay describing the conclu-
sions of your analysis.

331
 
Chapter 13  Adapting Verbally and Visually 
13.2: Evaluating Visual Aids (325)
Analyze speeches or other public presentations 
such as lectures, articles, essays, newscasts, and 
infomercials that you can ﬁ nd on campus, in print, 
online, or via television. Evaluate the use of at least 
one item from each of the following visuals aids: (1) 
objects, (2) models, (3) photographs, (4) slides, (5) 
ﬁ lm/video clip, (6) drawings, (7) maps, (8) charts, 
and (9) graphs. How effectively does the speaker or 
author use each item to illustrate or support his or her 
speech or presentation? Are there ways the speaker 
might have used the visual aid more effectively? 
Would a different type of visual aid have conveyed 
the presentation’s message more clearly?
Web Resources
13.1: Visual Aids (323)
This site at the U.S. Department of Labor features 
a thorough discussion of the methods and guidelines 
for using visual aids in presentations.
13.2: PowerPoint Tips & Tutorials (328)
This site at Bates College provides a concise but infor-
mative list of tips for creating and displaying PowerPoint 
slides effectively. Be sure to click on the link “PowerPoint: 
Web Image Capturing and Basic Slide Show” for links to 
PowerPoint tutorials and an excellent discussion about 
copyright issues related to Web text and images.

14
Overcoming Speech 
Apprehension by Practicing 
Delivery
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What are the symptoms and causes of public speaking apprehension?
• What techniques can you use to manage public speaking apprehension?
• What can you do to use your voice effectively?
• What can you do to use your body effectively?
• What are the three most common delivery methods?
• What can you do to conduct effective rehearsal sessions?
• How can you use presentational aids effectively during your speech?
• What criteria can you use to evaluate the effectiveness of a speech?
When Gwen ﬁ nished speaking, virtually everyone in the audience reacted by 
applauding, smiling, and saying to people around them, “That was a great speech.”
Miguel turned to his friend Justin and said, “I can see why people are excited; 
the information was good and easy to follow. I thought it was excellent.”
Justin replied, “Miguel, I’ve heard many speeches that had excellent 
information and were well organized, but what made this speech so much 
better was her presentation. She talked with us, developed ideas fully, and most 
of all, used her voice and body language in ways that helped her get her point 
across—and she didn’t appear to be nervous at all!”
Mel Yates/Cultura (RF)/Jupiter Images

333
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
As Justin and his classmates have recognized, the difference between a good speech 
and a great speech is often how well it is delivered. Although delivery can’t compen-
sate for a poorly researched, poorly organized, or poorly developed speech, it can take 
a well-researched, well-organized, and well-developed speech and make it a power-
ful vehicle for accomplishing your speech goal. Although some people seem to be 
naturally ﬂ uent and comfortable speaking to a group, most of us are a bit frightened 
about the prospect and not really comfortable with our abilities to effectively present 
our ideas.
Action Step 5: Practice Presenting Your Speech
In this chapter, we’re going to explain the ﬁ fth Action Step: Practice Presenting Your 
Speech. We begin by discussing stage fright, or public speaking apprehension, which 
most of us face. Then we discuss the characteristics of an effective delivery style and 
how to use your voice and body effectively when giving a speech. Next, we describe 
the three most common methods for delivering a speech and introduce a speech prac-
tice process designed to make your rehearsal sessions productive. Finally, we offer 
some criteria you can use to evaluate your speeches and, as an example, we apply the 
criteria to a sample student speech.
Public Speaking Apprehension
Most people feel some fear about speaking in public. So if you’re a bit unnerved, you 
are in good company. In fact, as many as 76 percent of experienced public speakers 
feel fearful before presenting a speech (Hahner, Sokolof, & Salisch, 2001). Did you 
know, for example, that Academy Award–winning actress Meryl Streep, singer Barbra 
Streisand, and evangelist Billy Graham all experience fear of public speaking? In spite 
of their fear, they are all effective public speakers because they employ the strategies 
for managing nervousness that you will read about in this chapter. Public speaking 
apprehension, a type of communication anxiety (or nervousness), is the level of fear 
you experience when anticipating or actually speaking to an audience. Today, you 
can beneﬁ t from the results of a signiﬁ cant amount of research about public speaking 
apprehension and methods for managing it.
Symptoms and Causes
The symptoms of pubic speaking apprehension vary from individual to individual and 
range from mild to debilitating. Symptoms can be physical, emotional, or cognitive. 
Physical symptoms may be stomach upset (or butterﬂ ies), ﬂ ushed skin, sweating, shak-
ing, light-headedness, rapid or pounding heartbeats, and verbal disﬂ uencies such as 
stuttering and vocalized pauses (“like,” “you know,” “ah,” “um,” and so on). Emotional 
symptoms include feeling anxious, worried, or upset. Cognitive symptoms include 
negative self-talk, which is also the most common cause of speech apprehension 
(Richmond & McCroskey, 2000).
In addition to negative self-talk, previous experience, modeling, and negative rein-
forcement have also been found to be leading causes of public speaking  apprehension. 
Previous experience has to do with being socialized to fear public speaking as a result 
of modeling and negative reinforcement (Richmond & McCroskey, 2000). Modeling 
has to do with observing how your friends and family members react to speaking in 
public. If they tend to be quiet and reserved and avoid public speaking, your fears may 
public speaking 
apprehension
a type of communication 
anxiety (or nervousness), 
is the level of fear you 
experience when anticipating 
or actually speaking to an 
audience.
What are the 
symptoms 
and causes of 
public speaking 
apprehension?

334
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
stem from modeling. Negative reinforcement concerns how others have responded to 
your public speaking endeavors. If you experienced negative reactions, you might be 
more apprehensive about speaking in public than if you had been praised for your 
efforts (Motley, 1997).
Our level of public speaking apprehension is not static. Rather, it varies over the 
course of giving a speech. Research has identiﬁ ed three phases of speaking anxiety: 
anticipation, confrontation, and adaptation (Behnke & Carlile, 1971). The anticipation 
phase is the anxiety you experience before giving the speech, both while preparing it 
and waiting to speak. The confrontation phase is the surge of anxiety you feel as you 
begin delivering your speech; this usually falls once you get into your speech. The 
adaptation phase is the period during which your anxiety level gradually decreases; 
it typically begins about one minute into the presentation and tends to level off after 
about ﬁ ve minutes.
So researchers have found that the level of apprehension varies over the course of 
giving a speech and that there are various symptoms and causes of apprehension. But 
the apprehension we feel does not have to affect how well we present our speeches.
Managing Your Apprehension
Would we be better off if we could be totally free from nervousness? Based on years 
of study, Gerald Phillips (1977) concluded that “learning proceeds best when the 
organism is in a state of tension” (p. 37). In fact, it helps to be a little nervous to do 
your best. Not only that, if you are lackadaisical, you probably won’t do a good job 
(Motley, 1997).
Because at least some tension is constructive, the goal is not to eliminate nervous-
ness but to learn how to manage it. There are ﬁ ve techniques you can use to manage 
public speaking apprehension: communication orientation, visualization, systematic 
desensitization, cognitive restructuring, and public speaking skills training.
Communication orientation
Communication orientation motivation (COM) techniques help you adopt a commu-
nication rather than a performance orientation toward speeches (Motley, 1997). When 
you have a performance orientation, you see public speaking as a situation in which 
you must impress the audience with your knowledge and delivery, and you view audi-
ence members as hypercritical judges who will notice and judge even minor mistakes. 
On the other hand, when you have a communication orientation, you view your 
speech as an opportunity to talk with a number of people about a topic that is impor-
tant to you and to them. You focus on your audience and getting the message across 
so that they understand your thoughts. You are not concerned about impressing the 
audience or worried about them judging you.
Visualization
Visualization helps you develop a mental picture of yourself giving a masterful 
speech. You have probably heard reports of how athletes use visualization to improve 
sports performance, and you may have used it before athletic competitions yourself. If 
you visualize yourself going through your entire speech preparation and speech mak-
ing process successfully, research has found that you are likely to be more successful 
when you actually deliver the speech (Ayres & Hopf, 1990). By visualizing themselves 
speaking effectively, people seem to lower their general apprehension and report fewer 
negative thoughts when they actually speak (Ayres, Hopf, & Ayres, 1994). So, you will 
want to use visualization activities as part of your speech preparation.
performance orientation
seeing public speaking as a 
situation in which a speaker 
must impress an audience 
with knowledge and delivery, 
and seeing audience 
members as hypercritical 
judges.
communication 
orientation
seeing a speech situation as 
an opportunity to talk with a 
number of people about a 
topic that is important to the 
speaker and to them.
visualization
a method to reduce 
apprehension by developing 
a mental picture of yourself 
giving a masterful speech.
systematic 
desensitization
a method to reduce 
apprehension by gradually 
visualizing increasingly more 
frightening speaking events.
What techniques 
can you use 
to manage 
public speaking 
apprehension?

335
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
An interesting study of the use of visualization in sports performances looked at 
players trying to improve their foul-shooting percentages (Scott 1997). In the study 
the players were divided into three groups. One group never practiced, another group 
practiced, and a third group visualized practicing. As we would expect, those who 
practiced improved far more than those who didn’t. What seems amazing is that those 
who only visualized practicing improved almost as much as those who practiced. 
Imagine what can happen when you visualize yourself giving a great speech and you 
practice as well!
To listen to an audio exercise that guides you through a visu-
alization experience, access Web Resource 14.1: Visualizing Your 
Success.
Systematic desensitization
Systematic desensitization can help you reduce apprehension by 
gradually visualizing and engaging in increasingly more frighten-
ing speaking events. The process starts with consciously tensing and 
then relaxing muscle groups in order to learn how to recognize the 
difference between the two states. Then, while in a relaxed state, you 
ﬁ rst imagine yourself and then engage in successively more stress-
ful situations—for example, researching a speech topic in the library, 
practicing the speech out loud to a roommate, and ﬁ nally, giving a 
speech. The ultimate goal of systematic desensitization is to transfer 
the calm feelings we attain while visualizing to the actual speaking 
event. Calmness on command—it works.
Cognitive restructuring
Cognitive restructuring is designed to help you systematically 
rebuild your thoughts about public speaking by replacing anxiety-
arousing negative self-talk with anxiety-reducing positive self-talk. 
The  process consists of four steps.
 1. To change your negative thoughts, you must ﬁ rst identify them. 
Write down all the fears that come to mind when you know you 
must give a speech.
 2. Consider whether or not these fears are rational. (Most are  irrational because pub-
lic speaking is not life threatening.)
 3. Develop positive coping statements to replace each negative self-talk statement.
 4. Incorporate your positive coping statements into your life so they become second 
nature. You can do this by writing your statements down and reading them aloud 
to yourself each day, as well as before you give a speech. The more you repeat your 
coping statements, the more natural they will become (see Figure 14.1).
Public speaking skills training
Public speaking skills training is the systematic teaching of the skills associated with 
preparing and delivering an effective public speech, with the intention of reducing 
public speaking apprehension. Skills training is based on the assumption that some of 
our anxiety about speaking in public is due to not knowing how to be successful—we 
lack the knowledge and behaviors to be effective. Therefore, if we learn the processes 
and behaviors associated with effective speech making, then we will be less anxious 
(Kelly, Phillips, & Keaten, 1995). Public speaking skills include those associated with 
the processes of goal analysis, audience and situation analysis, organization, delivery, 
and self-evaluation.
Web Resource 14.1
cognitive restructuring
a method to systematically 
rebuild thoughts about public 
speaking by replacing anxiety-
arousing negative self-talk with 
anxiety-reducing positive self-talk.
public speaking skills 
training
the systematic teaching 
of the skills associated with 
preparing and delivering an 
effective public speech, with 
the intention of improving 
speaking competence and 
thereby reducing public 
speaking apprehension.
Do you use positive self-talk to 
pump yourself up before you 
have an important event? Do 
the same before you speak. If 
you believe you can, you will.
AP Photo/Mark J. Terrill

336
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
All ﬁ ve of these methods for reducing public speaking apprehension have success-
fully helped people manage their anxiety (Dwyer, 2000). For most people, using several 
of them yields the best results.
Characteristics of an Effective Delivery Style
Think about the best speaker you have ever heard. What made this person stand out in 
your mind? In all likelihood, how the speaker delivered the speech had a lot to do with 
it. Delivery is how a message is communicated orally and visually through the use of 
voice and body to be conversational and animated.
Use a Conversational Style
You have probably heard ineffective speakers whose delivery was overly dramatic, too 
formal, or affected. And you’ve probably heard ineffective speakers who just read their 
speeches or sounded mechanical. In contrast, effective delivery has a conversational 
style—your audience feels you are talking with them, not at them. The hallmark of 
a conversational style is spontaneity. Spontaneity is the ability to sound natural as 
you speak—as though you are really thinking about the ideas and about getting them 
across to your audience. Your speech doesn’t sound rehearsed, memorized, or read no 
matter how many times you’ve practiced it.
How can you make your thoroughly prepared and practiced speech sound sponta-
neous? One effectively strategy is to learn the ideas of the speech instead of trying to 
memorize its words. You develop spontaneity in public speaking by getting to know 
the ideas in your speech as well as you know the route you take to school or to work. 
When you know the ideas this well, you can focus on talking with your audience about 
your ideas in an organized, professional, and natural way.
Be Animated
Have you ever been bored by a professor reading a well-structured lecture while look-
ing at the lecture notes rather than the students and making few gestures other than 
Skill Learning Activity 14.1
delivery
how a message is 
communicated orally and 
visually through the use 
of voice and body to be 
conversational and animated.
conversational style
an informal style of presenting 
a speech so that your 
audience feels you are talking 
with them, not at them.
spontaneity
a naturalness that seems 
unrehearsed or memorized.
Figure 14.1
Negative self-talk versus 
positive coping statements
Beth decided to try cognitive restructuring to reduce her anxiety about giving 
speeches in front of her classmates. Here are the positive statements she  developed 
to counter her negative self-talk:
Negative self-talk
1. I’m afraid I’ll stumble over my words and look foolish.
2. I’m afraid everyone will be able to tell that I am nervous.
3. I’m afraid my voice will crack.
4. I’m afraid I’ll sound boring.
Positive coping statements
1.  Even if I stumble, I will have succeeded as long as I get my message across.
2.  They probably won’t be able to tell I’m nervous, but as long as I focus on getting 
my message across, that’s what matters.
3.  Even if my voice cracks, as long as I keep going and focus on getting my 
 message across, I’ll succeed at what matters most.
4.  I won’t sound bored if I focus on how important this message is to me and to 
my audience. I don’t have to do somersaults to keep their attention, because 
my topic is relevant to them.

337
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
turning the pages? Even a well-written speech given by an expert can bore an audi-
ence unless its delivery is animated, that is, lively and dynamic.
How can you be animated? The secret is to focus on conveying the passion you feel 
about your topic to your audience through your voice and body. In everyday life, all of 
us differ in how animated we are when we speak. When we are excited to share some-
thing with someone, however, almost all of us become more animated in our delivery. 
It is this level of liveliness that you want to duplicate when you deliver your speech.
For most of us, appearing conversational and animated requires considerable 
practice. So, in the next two sections, we’ll focus on how you can use your voice and 
your body to deliver your speech effectively.
Effective Use of Your Voice
Your voice is the vehicle that communicates the ideas in your speech to your audience. 
The sound of your voice affects your success in getting those ideas across. How your 
voice sounds depends on its pitch, volume, rate, and quality.
Pitch is the highness or lowness of the sounds produced in your larynx by the 
vibration of your vocal cords. Just as the pitch of a guitar string is changed by making 
it tighter or looser, so the pitch of your voice is changed by tightening and loosening 
the vocal cords. Natural pitch varies from person to person, but adult men generally 
have lower voices than women and children.
Volume is how loudly or softly you speak. You control your volume by how force-
fully you expel air through your vocal cords. When you push a lot of air through your 
vocal cords, you speak loudly. When you push less air through, your volume drops.
Rate is how fast you talk. In your speeches, you will want to vary your rate. 
Present new or difﬁ cult ideas more slowly. Speak more 
quickly when covering material that you expect to be 
more easily understood.
Quality is the tone or timbre of your voice and what 
distinguishes it from others—it’s how you sound to oth-
ers. Voices that are nasal, breathy, harsh, or hoarse can 
be unpleasant to listen to and may distract from the mes-
sage. The vocal quality that is most easily understood is 
clear and pleasant to the ear.
By effectively using your pitch, volume, rate, and 
quality, you can achieve the animated, conversational 
quality that will help your audience listen to your speech.
As you practice and deliver your speech, take note of 
how you sound. Strive to use your voice so that what you 
say is both intelligible and vocally expressive.
Speak Intelligibly
To be intelligible means to be understandable. All of 
us have experienced situations in which we couldn’t 
understand what was being said because the speaker was 
talking too softly or too quickly or had a voice that was 
compromised in some way. If you are not intelligible, 
your listeners are bound to struggle with your verbal 
message. By practicing using appropriate pitch, volume, 
rate, and vocal quality, you can improve the likelihood 
that you will be intelligible to your audience.
animated
lively and dynamic
pitch
the highness or lowness of 
the sounds produced by the 
vibration of your vocal cords.
volume
the degree of loudness of the 
tone you make as you expel 
air through your vocal cords.
rate
the speed at which you talk.
quality
the tone, timbre, or sound of 
your voice.
intelligible
understandable
What can you do 
to use your voice 
effectively?
© 2004 by Sidney Harris

338
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
Most of us speak at a pitch that is appropriate for us and intelligible to listen-
ers. However, some people naturally have voices that are higher or lower in register 
or become accustomed to talking in tones that are either above or below their natu-
ral pitch. Speaking at an appropriate pitch is particularly important if your audience 
includes people who have hearing loss because they may ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to hear a pitch 
that is too high or too low.
In normal conversation, pitch ﬂ uctuates frequently, and perhaps even a bit more 
when giving a speech. For example, in English a sentence that is meant to be a  question 
is vocalized with rising pitch. If pitch doesn’t rise at the end of a question, listeners 
may interpret the sentence as a statement instead.
The volume of your voice should be loud enough to be heard easily by the audience 
members in the back of the room but not so loud as to cause discomfort to listeners 
seated in the front. You can vary your volume to emphasize important information. 
For example, you may speak louder when as you introduce each of your main points.
The rate at which you speak should be appropriate to the information you are 
 presenting. If you peak too slowly, your listeners’ minds may wander from you and 
your message. If you speak too quickly, especially when sharing complex ideas and 
arguments, your listeners may not have enough time to process the information com-
pletely. Because nervousness may cause you to speak more quickly than normal, 
monitor your rate and adjust if you are speaking more quickly than normal.
In addition to vocal characteristics, your articulation and accent can affect intelli-
gibility. Articulation is using the tongue, palate, teeth, jaws, and lips to shape vocalized 
sounds that combine to produce a word. Many of us suffer from minor articulation and 
pronunciation problems such as adding an extra sound (“athalete” for athlete), leav-
ing out a sound (“libary” for library), transposing sounds (“revalent” for relevant), and 
distorting sounds (“truf ” for truth). Accent is the inﬂ ection, tone, and speech habits 
typical of native speakers of a language. When you misarticulate or speak with a heavy 
accent during a conversation, your listeners can ask you to repeat yourself until they 
understand you. But in a speech setting, audience members are unlikely to interrupt 
to ask you to repeat what you have just said. If your accent is strong or very different 
from that of most of your audience, practice pronouncing key words so that you are 
easily understood; speak slowly to allow your audience members more time to process 
your message; and consider reinforcing important points with visual aids.
Use Vocal Expressiveness
Vocal expressiveness is produced by the variety you create in your voice through 
changing pitch, volume, and rate, stressing certain words, and using pauses. These 
contrasts clarify the emotional meaning of your message and help animate your deliv-
ery. Generally, speeding up your rate, raising your pitch, and increasing your volume 
reinforce emotions such as joy, enthusiasm, excitement, anticipation, and a sense of 
urgency or fear. Slowing down your rate, lowering your pitch, or decreasing your vol-
ume can communicate resolution, peacefulness, remorse, disgust, or sadness.
A total lack of vocal expressiveness produces a monotone—a voice in which the 
pitch, volume, and rate remain constant, with no word, idea, or sentence differing 
signiﬁ cantly in sound from any other. Although few people speak in a true monotone, 
many severely limit themselves by using only two or three pitch levels and relatively 
unchanging volume and rate. An actual or near monotone not only lulls an audience 
to sleep but, more important, diminishes the chances of audience understanding. For 
instance, if the sentence “Congress should pass laws limiting the sale of pornogra-
phy” is presented in a monotone, listeners will be uncertain whether the speaker is 
articulation
using the tongue, palate, 
teeth, jaw movement, and lips 
to shape vocalized sounds 
that combine to produce a 
word.
pronunciation
the form and accent of 
various syllables of a word.
accent
the articulation, inﬂ ection, 
tone, and speech habits 
typical of the native speakers 
of a language.
vocal expressiveness
the contrasts in pitch, volume, 
rate, and quality that affect 
the meaning an audience 
gets from the sentences you 
speak.
monotone
a voice in which the pitch, 
volume, and rate remain 
constant, with no word, 
idea, or sentence differing 
signiﬁ cantly from any other.
Skill Learning Activity 14.2

339
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
concerned with who should be take action, what Congress should do, or what the laws 
should be.
Pauses, moments of silence strategically used to enhance meaning, can mark 
important ideas. If you use one or more sentences in your speech to express an impor-
tant idea, pause before each sentence to signal that something important is coming or 
pause afterward to allow the idea to sink in. Pausing one or more times within a sen-
tence can also add impact. Nick included several short pauses within and a long pause 
after his sentence “Our government has no compassion (pause), no empathy (pause), 
and no regard for human feeling” (longer pause).
Effective use of voice—that is, voice that is both intelligible and vocally expres-
sive—is particularly challenging when delivering speeches in a second language. Read 
Raj Gaur’s story “Mommy, Why Does Raj Talk Funny?” in the Diverse Voices feature 
to learn how he deals with these challenges.
pauses
moments of silence 
strategically used to enhance 
meaning.
“Mommy, Why Does Raj Talk 
Funny?”
by Raj Gaur
Graduate student, University of Kentucky
I grew up in India. In my home we spoke Hindi, 
but from the time I began school at 5 years old, 
I was also taught English. So, by the time I was 
14 years old I was ﬂ uent in English—at least what 
I thought of at the time as English. Ten years 
ago, I came to the United States and have since 
learned that the English I speak is somewhat dif-
ferent from the English that is spoken here in 
the United States. These differences sometimes 
make it difﬁ cult for me to be understood by some 
Americans. You see, the English I learned as a 
child is a nativization of English that might more 
accurately be called “Indian English.” What is 
nativization?
Nativization is the unconscious process of 
adapting a foreign language so it conforms to 
the linguistic style and rhetorical patterns of the 
native language spoken in a particular culture. 
Since the primary purpose of language is to cre-
ate shared meaning, it is not surprising that over 
time the new language gets modiﬁ ed in ways that 
make it easier for members of the new cultural 
group to communicate about experiences that 
may be unique to their cultural experiences. You 
are familiar with the ways American English dif-
fers between regions and among groups within 
the United States, as well as differences between 
British English and American English. If there 
are differences among native English speakers, 
imagine what happens when a cultural group like 
Indians whose native language is Hindi adopts 
English as a second language! As you would prob-
ably expect, they adapt English by using some 
of the grammar, syntax, and pronunciation rules 
that characterize their ﬁ rst language, as well as 
by adopting some of the rhetorical and idiomatic 
expressions that they use in their mother tongue. 
It’s not that Indians consciously decide to make 
these changes. Rather, the changes simply occur 
as the new language, in this case English, is used 
in everyday conversations with other Indians.
Today, more people speak English as a sec-
ond language than speak it as a native language. 
So it is not surprising that we can talk about 
British English, American English, West Indies 
Diverse Voices
(Continued )

340
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
English, Asian English, Indian English, and so 
forth. While the same basic English grammar and 
vocabulary are taught worldwide, the English 
spoken by many of us who use it as a second 
language is not exactly the “educated” English 
we were taught in school. So the Indian English 
that was commonly spoken in my neighborhood 
when I was growing up was modiﬁ ed to use some 
of the grammar, syntax, and pronunciation rules 
of our primary language, Hindi.
In India, most of the people I knew spoke 
English just like I did and I had no problem under-
standing them or being understood by them. So 
imagine my consternation when after arriving 
in the United States some of my American col-
leagues, professors, and students had trouble 
understanding me when I spoke. What made this 
particularly interesting was that I didn’t seem 
to have as much trouble understanding others 
or being understood when I wrote in English. 
Rather, it was when I spoke that I got quizzical 
looks and requests to repeat myself.
What I now understand is that there are major 
differences between the way certain words are pro-
nounced by those speaking American English and 
those speaking Indian English. Some of these dif-
ferences are due to the rules each type of English 
uses for accenting the syllables within a word. All 
words are made up of what linguists call phonemes. 
These are basic sound units like “pit,” “bit,” “can,” 
“plor,” etc. When two or more phonemes are com-
bined, they form words with one or more syllables. 
So the word that is spelled “m-a-r-b-l-e” has two 
syllables made up of two phonemes, “mar” and 
“bel.” In American English, which phonemes are 
accented depends on each phoneme’s position 
within a word—the syllable in which it occurs, not 
the phoneme itself. So a phoneme like “pho” may 
be accented in some words but not in others. For 
example, in the word photo the “pho” is accented 
and the “to” is not, while in the word photography 
the “pho” is not accented. In American English, 
as a general rule, words with more than one syl-
lable alternate between accented and unaccented 
syllables. So if the ﬁ rst syllable is accented the sec-
ond is not and vice versa. But in Hindi, whether a 
particular syllable is accented or not depends on 
the phoneme itself. Some phonemes always receive 
an accent and others do not regardless of their 
position in a word. So in Indian English, the pho-
neme “pho” is pronounced the same whether the 
speaker is using the word photo or photography. If 
you speak American English, you are used to hear-
ing “pho·tog´·ra·phy´” but when I pronounce it in 
Indian English, I say “pho´·to·graph´·y.” If you’re 
an American English speaker and you hear me say 
this, you may not understand me or may think, 
“Oh he just mispronounced that word.” But to me, 
your pronunciation sounds just as strange because 
in India, that is how we pronounce the word.
Now consider how the American English rules 
for accenting every other syllable and the Indian 
English rules that require phonemes to carry the 
same stress accent regardless of their syllable 
placement result in spoken language patterns that 
are radically different from each other in their 
cadence. Cadence includes both rhythm and into-
nation. American English sounds more rhythmic 
because of the every-other-syllable accent pattern, 
while Indian English sounds more arrhythmic. 
Since accented syllables are generally given 
emphasis by increasing the volume of the voice, 
Indian English and American English also differ 
in intonation patterns. So when I give a lecture 
or talk with an American, the manner in which 
I accent phonemes will make my English sound 
very different than what my American listeners 
are used to hearing. As a result, they sometimes 
have trouble understanding what I am saying.
There are also syntactic differences between 
Indian and American English. You will recall that 
syntax is the rules of a particular language for 
how words are supposed to be put together to form 
complete ideas. The syntactic issue that I have 
struggled most with is the use of articles (a, an, 
the, etc.). In Hindi, we may or may not use articles 
and this practice also guides our Indian English. 
So an Indian English student may say, “I go to 
university in city of Mumbai,” rather than “I go 
to the university in the city of Mumbai. Another 
syntactic difference that is common to speakers of 
Indian English is to form questions without using 
an auxiliary verb (do, should, can, must, etc.). 
In Hindi, auxiliary verbs are not required when 
forming an interrogatory sentence. So in Indian 
English I may ask, “I know you?” rather than “Do 

341
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
I know you?” or “I ﬁ nish it?” rather than “Should 
(or Can or Must) I ﬁ nish it?”
Nativization of English can also be perceived 
at the idiomatic level when I attempt to express 
Indian sensibilities and Indian realities to my 
American friends. To clarify, as a speaker of 
Indian English, I sometimes exploit the syntactic 
structures of the language by directly translating 
Hindi idioms to English. For example, I might 
say “wheatish complexion” in Indian English to 
mean “not dark-skinned, tending toward light.” 
Or I might use the phrase “out of station’” to 
mean “out of town,” which has its origins denot-
ing army ofﬁ cers posted to far-off places during 
the British rule. Indians also commonly sub-
stitute “hotel” for “restaurant,” “this side” and 
“that side” for “here” and “there,” “cent per cent” 
for “100 percent,” and “reduce weight” for “lose 
weight.”
Rhetorical devices—for instance,  metaphors, 
similes, allusions, and hyperbole—make speeches 
more interesting. Metaphors and symbols that are 
unique to Indian experience—Indian mythology, 
ﬂ ora and fauna, social customs, localized atti-
tudes and behaviors— provide a basis for some 
unique stylistic devices in Indian English. So, in 
a routinely used expression “Himalayan blunder” 
for “grave mistake,” the size of Himalaya is used 
as a metaphor to convey the gravity of mistake. 
The use of Gandhi (who is often referred to as 
Mahatma meaning the “Great Soul”) as an allu-
sion to “the great soul” is also very common in 
Indian English. The use of (the river) “Ganges” 
and “cow” as metaphors for pure is also very 
commonplace and unique to Indian English.
Any one of these English adaptations might 
not pose problems, but taken together they make 
the brand of English that I speak very different 
from that of my American friends. Indian English 
has evolved over a long period of time and English 
is now integrated into much of Indian culture. 
English is taught in schools, business is conducted 
in English, and English is used in government 
dealings. Nonetheless, the English of Delhi is not 
the English of London, or Berlin, or New York, 
or Lexington, Kentucky. And I ﬁ nd it ironic that 
after living in the United States for nearly ten 
years now and struggling to be understood by 
Americans, my friends in India now complain 
about my English too. They say it’s too American!
Used with permission
References
Don’t care for Nano or No-No: Mamta. (2009, March 23). 
Hindustan Times. Retrieved March 23, 2009, from http://www.
hindustantimes.com.
Kachru, Braj B. (1992) The Other Tongue: English Across 
Cultures. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press.
Kachru, Braj B. (1986). The Alchemy of English: the Spread, 
Functions, and Models Of Non-native Englishes. Oxford: 
Pergamon Press.
Guj riots a national shame, not IPL going abroad: PC. (2009, 
March 23). The Financial Express. Retrieved March 23, 2009, 
from http://www.expressindia.com.
Patrolling intensiﬁ ed in sea, on shores in Tamil Nadu. (2009, 
March 23). Press Trust of India. Retrieved March 23, 2009, from 
http://www.ptinews.com.
Wiltshire, C. & Moon, R. (2003). Phonetic stress in Indian English 
vs. American English. World Englishes, 22(3), 291–303.
Zardari is 5th biggest loser in world: Foreign policy maga-
zine. (2009, March 23). NDTV. Retrieved March 23, 2009, from 
http://www.ndtv.com.
Effective Use of Your Body
Because your audience can see as well as hear you, how you use your body contrib-
utes to the impression of conversational and animated delivery. The body language 
elements that affect delivery are facial expressions, gestures, movement, eye contact, 
posture, poise, and appearance.
Facial Expressions
Facial expressions are the eye and mouth movements that convey your personableness 
and can help you animate your speech. When you talk with friends, your facial expres-
sions are naturally animated. Your audiences expect your expressions to be similarly 
facial expression
eye and mouth movements.
What can you do 
to use your body 
effectively?

342
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
animated when you give a speech. Speakers who do not vary their facial expres-
sions during their speech but instead wear a deadpan expression, a perpetual grin, 
or a permanent scowl tend to be perceived as boring, insincere, or stern. Audiences 
respond positively to natural facial expressions that appear to spontaneously reﬂ ect 
what you’re saying and how you feel about it.
Gestures
Gestures—the movements of your hands, arms, and ﬁ ngers—can help intelligibility. 
You can use gestures to describe or emphasize what you are saying, refer to presen-
tational aids, or clarify structure. For example, as Aaron began to speak about the 
advantages of wireless DSL, he said, “on one hand” and lifted his right hand face up. 
When he got to the disadvantages, he lifted his left hand face up as he said, “on the 
other hand.”
Some people who are nervous when giving a speech, clasp their hands behind 
their backs, bury them in their pockets, or grip the lectern. Unable to pry their hands 
free gracefully, they wiggle their elbows weirdly or appear stiff.
As with facial expressions, effective gestures must appear spontaneous and natu-
ral even though they are carefully planned and practiced. When you practice and then 
deliver your speech, leave your hands free so that they will be available to gesture as 
you normally do.
Movement
Movement is changing the position or location of your entire body. During your 
speech, it is important to engage only in motivated movement, movement with a 
speciﬁ c purpose such as emphasizing an important idea, referencing a presentational 
aid, or clarifying macrostructure. To emphasize a particular point, you might move 
closer to the audience. To create a feeling of intimacy before telling a personal story, 
you might walk out from behind a lectern and sit down on a chair placed at the edge 
of the stage. Each time you begin a 
new main point, you might take a few 
steps to one side of the stage or the 
other. To use motivated movement 
effectively, you need to practice when 
and how you will move.
Avoid such unmotivated move-
ment as bobbing, weaving, shifting 
from foot to foot, or pacing from one 
side of the room to the other because 
unplanned movements distract the 
audience from your message. Because 
many unplanned movements result 
from nervousness, you can minimize 
them by paying mindful attention to 
your body as you speak. At the begin-
ning of your speech, stand up straight 
on both feet. If you ﬁ nd yourself ﬁ dg-
eting, readjust and position you body 
with your weight equally  distributed 
on both feet.
gestures
movements of hands, arms, 
and ﬁ ngers that illustrate and 
emphasize what is being said.
movement
changing the position or 
location of the entire body.
motivated movement
movement with a speciﬁ c 
purpose.
Using appropriate facial 
expressions, gestures, and 
motivated movement 
enhances your intelligibility 
and expressiveness.
PictureNet/Flame/Corbis

343
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
Eye Contact
Eye contact is looking directly at the people to whom you are speaking. In speechmak-
ing, it involves looking at people in all parts of an audience throughout the speech. As 
long as you are looking at someone (those in front of you, in the left rear of the room, 
in the right center of the room, and so on) and not at your notes or the ceiling, ﬂ oor, 
or window, everyone in the audience will perceive you as having good eye contact 
with them. Generally, you should look at your audience at least 90 percent of the time, 
glancing at your notes only when you need a quick reference point. Maintaining eye 
contact is important for several reasons.
 1. Maintaining eye contact helps audiences concentrate on the speech. If you do 
not look at audience members while you talk, audience members are unlikely to 
maintain eye contact with you. This break in mutual eye contact often decreases 
concentration on the message.
 2. Maintaining eye contact increases the audience’s conﬁ dence in you, the 
speaker. Just as you are likely to be skeptical of people who do not look you 
in the eye as they converse, so too audiences will be skeptical of speakers who 
do not look at them. In the United States, eye contact is perceived as a sign of 
sincerity. Speakers who fail to maintain eye contact with audiences are per-
ceived almost always as ill at ease and often as insincere or dishonest (Burgoon, 
Coker, & Coker, 1986).
 3. Maintaining eye contact helps you gain insight into the audience’s reaction to 
the speech. Because communication is two-way, audience members are communi-
cating with you at the same time you are speaking to them. In public speaking, the 
audience members typically “speak” through body language. Audience members 
who are bored might yawn, look out the window, slouch in their chairs, and even 
sleep. If audience members are confused, they will look puzzled; if they agree with 
what you say or understand it, they might nod their heads. By monitoring your 
audience’s behavior, you can adjust by becoming more animated, offering addi-
tional examples, or moving more quickly through a point.
When speaking to large audiences of 100 or more people, you must create a sense 
of looking listeners in the eye even though you actually cannot. This process is called 
audience contact. You can create audience contact by mentally dividing your audience 
into small groups. Then, at random, talk for four to six seconds with each group as you 
move through your speech.
Posture
Posture is the manner in which you hold your body. In speeches, an upright stance 
and squared shoulders communicate a sense of conﬁ dence. As you practice, be aware 
of your posture and adjust it so that you do not slouch and keep your weight equally 
distributed on both feet.
Poise
Poise is a graceful and controlled use of the body that gives the impression that the 
speaker is self-assured, calm, and digniﬁ ed. Mannerisms that convey nervousness, 
such as swaying from side to side, drumming ﬁ ngers on the lectern, taking off or 
putting on glasses, jiggling pocket change, smacking the tongue, licking the lips, 
or scratching the nose, hand, or arm should be noted during practice sessions and 
avoided.
eye contact
looking directly at the people 
to whom we are speaking.
audience contact
when speaking to large 
audiences, creating a sense 
of looking listeners in the eye 
even though you actually 
cannot.
posture
the position or bearing of the 
body.
poise
graceful and controlled use of 
the body.

344
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
Appearance
Some speakers think that what they wear doesn’t or shouldn’t affect the success of their 
speech. But your appearance—the way you look to others—is important. Studies show 
that a neatly groomed and professional appearance sends important messages about a 
speaker’s commitment to the topic and occasion, as well as about the speaker’s cred-
ibility (Bates, 1992; Lawrence & Watson, 1991). Your appearance should  complement 
your message, not detract from it. Three guidelines can help you decide how to dress 
for your speech.
 1. Consider your audience and the occasion of your speech. Dress a bit more 
formally than you expect members of your audience to dress. If you dress too 
formally, your audience is likely to perceive you to be untrustworthy and insincere 
(Phillips & Smith, 1992), and if you dress too casually, your audience may view 
you as uncommitted to your topic or disrespectful of them or the occasion (Morris, 
Gorham, Cohen, & Huffman, 1996).
 2. Consider your topic and purpose. In general, the more serious your topic, the 
more formally you should dress. For example, if your topic is AIDS and you are 
trying to convince your audience to be tested for HIV, you will want to look like 
someone who is an authority by dressing the part. In contrast, if your topic is 
skateboarding and you are trying to convince your audience that they would 
enjoy visiting the new skateboard park on campus, you might dress more casually.
appearance
the way we look to others. 
Pop Comm!
Political Comedy and the 
Credibility of Our Leaders
What was your impression of vice-presidential can-
didate Sarah Palin when she said, “I can see Russia 
from my house” in response to a question about 
her foreign policy credentials? Did her statement 
help convince you that—wait, hold on a minute. 
Did Palin really say that? No! Comedian Tina Fey 
said it when she imitated Palin on Saturday Night 
Live in 2008. What Palin actually said was “[Y]ou 
can actually see Russia from land here in Alaska, 
from an island in Alaska” (Associated Press, 2008). 
But within 48 hours after Fey’s impression was 
posted to the Web, 5 million people had watched it 
(Hinckley, 2008), and over a year later, what many 
people remember about Palin is Fey’s unﬂ attering 
impression of her.
Does biting political comedy like the kind 
featured on Saturday Night Live, The Daily 
Show, and The Colbert Report undermine the 
credibility of our political leaders? If so, is that 
okay? Mocking political ﬁ gures for entertain-
ment has been going on since at least the time 
of the ancient Greek playwrights, and most likely 
for centuries before. What’s new today is that, 
increasingly, this type of entertainment is spill-
ing into the serious commentary we receive about 
political ﬁ gures. Today, many people include the 
“fake news” provided by entertainment programs 
in their overall consumption of news (Associated 
Press Strategic Planning, 2008, pp. 5, 45; “The 
Dana Edelson/NBCU Photo Bank Via AP Images

345
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
 3. Avoid extremes. Your attire shouldn’t detract from your speech. Avoid gaudy 
 jewelry, over- or undersized clothing, and sexually suggestive attire. Remember 
you want your audience to focus on your message, so your appearance should be 
neutral, not distracting.
All speakers need to practice in order to become effective at using their voice 
and body in a speech. Even though there are best practices for using your voice 
and body effectively in a public speaking situation, each of us tends to develop 
our own unique style. Sometimes a speaker’s vocal style or mannerisms become a 
“signature” and, if the speaker is a celebrity (such as a politician, singer, actor or 
actress), comedians may impersonate him or her for a laugh. Unfortunately, doing 
so can undermine the person’s credibility. For more about this practice and its con-
sequences, read the Pop Comm! feature in this chapter, “Political Comedy and the 
Credibility of Our Leaders.”
Delivery Methods
Speeches vary in the amount of content preparation and practice you do ahead of time. 
Both of these factors inﬂ uences how a speech is delivered. The three most common 
delivery methods are impromptu, scripted, and extemporaneous.
Skill Learning Activity 14.3
Web Resource 14.2
What are the three 
most common 
delivery methods?
Daily Show,” 2008). Not only that, blogs and 
mainstream news sources such as The Hufﬁ ngton 
Post, The New York Times, and MSNBC comment 
on and air the really popular comedy bits, such 
as snippets of The Daily Show interviews, Amy 
Poehler’s SNL imitation of Hillary Clinton, and 
Will Ferrell’s impressions of George W. Bush. As a 
result, in addition to getting unbiased news about 
political ﬁ gures from mainstream sources, many 
people also see mocking portrayals.
How does the ridiculing of political ﬁ g-
ures affect our opinions? Citing a study by Jody 
Baumgartner and Jonathan S. Morris of East 
Carolina University where participants watched 
episodes of The Daily Show, The Washington 
Post’s Richard Morin (2006) wrote, “The results 
showed that the participants rated both [2004 
presidential] candidates more negatively after 
watching Stewart’s program. Participants also 
expressed less trust in the electoral system and 
more cynical views of the news media.” But on 
the blog MyDD, Matt Stoller interpreted the same 
study differently: “This is a woefully misleading 
representation of the study . . . [T]he authors of the 
study concluded that we don’t know what the 
effect of The Daily Show is on voting patterns. 
They mused that it could be positive, or it could 
be negative” (Clark, 2006). Jessica Clark (2006) of 
the newsmagazine In These Times argues that the 
fact that politically humorous TV shows decrease 
our trust is not necessarily a bad thing—skepti-
cism is a sane response to the problems in the 
media and in politics, and it encourages explora-
tions of authenticity.
Furthermore, political leaders can use satiri-
cal TV shows to enhance their credibility. For 
example, candidates John McCain and Barack 
Obama both appeared on Saturday Night Live 
during the 2008 presidential race. John McCain 
was able to poke fun at Obama’s prime-time info-
mercial with a sketch of his own, selling plates 
on the QVC network that commemorated town 
hall meetings between him and Obama—which 
were blank, because the meetings never happened 
(Bentley, 2008). McCain’s appearance increased 
his likeability. Even Obama remarked, “John 
McCain was funny yesterday . . . [T]hat’s part of 
what our politics should be about, being able to 
laugh at each other, but also laugh at ourselves” 
(Gay, 2008).

346
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
Impromptu Speeches
At times, you may be called on to speak on the spot. An impromptu speech is one 
that is delivered with only seconds or minutes of advance notice for preparation and is 
usually presented without referring to notes of any kind. You may have already been 
called on in this class to give an impromptu speech, so you know the pressure this 
delivery method creates.
You can improve your impromptu performances by practicing mock impromptu 
speeches. For example, if you are taking a class in which the professor calls on students 
at random to answer questions, you can prepare by anticipating the questions that 
might be asked on the readings for the day and practice giving your answers. Over time, 
you will become more adept at organizing your answers and thinking on your feet.
Scripted Speeches
At the other extreme, you might carefully prepare a complete written manuscript of 
each word you will speak in your presentation. Then you will either memorize or read 
the text to the audience from a printed document or teleprompter. A scripted speech is 
one that is prepared by creating a complete written manuscript and delivered by rote 
memory or reading a written copy.
Obviously, effective scripted speeches take a great deal of time to prepare because 
both an outline and a word-for-word transcript must be prepared and perhaps mem-
orized. When you memorize a scripted speech, you face the increased anxiety of 
forgetting your lines. When you read a scripted speech, you must become adept at 
looking at the script with your peripheral vision so that you don’t appear to be reading 
and you sound conversational and animated.
Because of the time and skill required to effectively prepare and deliver a scripted 
speech, scripted speeches are usually reserved for important occasions that have 
important consequences. Political speeches, keynote addresses at conventions, com-
mencement addresses, and CEO remarks at annual stockholder meetings are examples 
of occasions when a scripted speech might be worth the effort.
Extemporaneous Speeches
Most speeches, whether in the workplace, in the community, or in class, are delivered 
extemporaneously. An extemporaneous speech is researched and planned ahead of time, 
but the exact wording is not scripted and will vary from presentation to presentation. When 
speaking extemporaneously, you may refer to simple notes you have prepared to remind 
you of the ideas you want to present and the order in which you want to present them.
Extemporaneous speeches are the easiest to give effectively. Unlike impromptu 
speeches, when speaking extemporaneously, you are able to prepare your thoughts 
ahead of time, have notes to prompt you, and practice what you might actually 
say. Unlike scripted speeches, extemporaneous speeches do not require as lengthy a 
preparation process to be effective. In the next section, we describe how to rehearse 
successfully for an extemporaneous speech.
Rehearsal
Rehearsing is practicing the presentation of your speech aloud. Is it really necessary 
to practice a speech out loud? A speech that is not practiced out loud is likely to be far 
less effective than it would have been had you given yourself sufﬁ cient time to revise, 
evaluate, and mull over all aspects of the speech (Menzel & Carrell, 1994). Figure 14.2 
provides a useful timetable for preparing a classroom speech.
impromptu speech
a speech that is delivered 
with only seconds or minutes 
of advance notice for 
preparation and is usually 
presented without referring to 
notes.
scripted speech
a speech that is prepared by 
creating a complete written 
manuscript and delivered by 
rote memory or by reading a 
written copy.
extemporaneous speech
a speech that is researched 
and planned ahead of time, 
although the exact wording is 
not scripted and will vary from 
presentation to presentation.
rehearsing
practicing the presentation of 
your speech aloud.

347
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
In this section, we describe how to rehearse effectively by preparing speaking 
notes, handling presentational aids, and recording, analyzing, and reﬁ ning delivery.
Preparing Speaking Notes
Prior to your ﬁ rst rehearsal session, prepare a draft of your speaking notes. Speaking 
notes are a word or phrase outline of your speech designed to help trigger your mem-
ory. The best notes contain the fewest words possible written in lettering large enough 
to be seen instantly at a distance.
To develop your notes, begin by reducing your speech outline to an abbreviated 
outline of key phrases and words. Then, if you have details in the speech which you must 
cite accurately—such as a speciﬁ c example, a quotation, or a set of statistics—add these in 
the appropriate spots. Next, indicate exactly where you plan to share presentational aids. 
Finally, incorporate delivery cues indicating where you want to make use of your voice 
and body to enhance intelligibility or expressiveness. For example, indicate where you 
want to pause, gesture, or make a motivated movement. Capitalize, underline, or highlight 
words you want to stress. Use slash marks (//) to remind yourself to pause (see Figure 14.3).
For a three- to ﬁ ve-minute speech, you will need no more than three 3 × 5-inch 
note cards to record your speaking notes. For longer speeches, you might need one 
card for the introduction, one for each main point, and one for the conclusion. If your 
speech contains a particularly important and long quotation or a complicated set of 
statistics, you can record this information in detail on a separate card.
During practice sessions, use the notes as you will when you actually give the 
speech. If you will use a lectern, set the notes on the speaker’s stand or, alternatively, 
hold them in one hand and refer to them only when needed. How important is it to 
construct good note cards? Speakers often ﬁ nd that the act of making a note card is so 
effective in helping cement ideas in the mind that during practice, or later during the 
speech itself, they rarely use the notes at all.
Handling Presentational Aids
Many speakers think that once they have prepared good presentational aids, they will 
have no trouble using them in the speech. However, many speeches with good aids 
have become a shambles because the aids were not well handled. You can avoid prob-
lems by following these guidelines:
 1. Carefully plan when to use presentational aids. Indicate on your outline (and mark 
on your speaking notes) exactly when you will reveal and conceal each aid. Practice 
introducing and using your aids until you can use them comfortably and smoothly.
speaking notes
word or phrase outlines of 
your speech.
Figure 14.2
Timetable for preparing a 
speech
7 days before 
Select topic; begin research
6 days before 
Continue research
5 days before 
Outline body of speech
4 days before 
Work on introduction and conclusion
3 days before 
 Finish outline; ﬁ nd additional material if needed; have all visual 
aids completed
2 days before 
First rehearsal session
1 day before 
Second rehearsal session
Due date 
Give speech
What are some 
key guidelines to 
follow when using 
presentational 
aids during your 
speech?
What can you 
do to conduct 
effective rehearsal 
sessions?

348
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
Note Card 2
Body
(walk right)
1st C: Examine interest rates
IRs are % that a company charges to carry balance
• Average of 8%
• As much as 32%!! (Kiplinger’s Jan. 2007)
• Start as low as 0 up to 12 months
— Student cards higher (Business Week May 21, 2001)
— Some below 14%
IRs variable or ﬁ xed
• Variable—change month to month
• Fixed—stay same
— Even ﬁ xed rates can be raised after late payment
(walk left to VISUAL AID)
(Considered IRs: look at next criterion)
Note Card 3
2nd C: Examine the annual fee
AF charges vary
(SHOW VISUAL AID)
• Most, no annual fee
• Some companies do have fee (AMEX)
(COVER VISUAL AID)
(walk left)
(After considered interest and fees, weigh beneﬁ ts)
3rd C: Weigh incentives
• Rebates (US News July 31, 2005)
• Freq ﬂ yer miles
• Discounts
— Cash back on purchases
Incentives not outweigh other factors
Note Card 1
Intro
(PAUSE and LOOK LISTENERS IN THE EYE)
How many hounded by vendors?
credit card — answer — dreams
Three criteria: 1 IR,// 2 Fee, // 3 Incentives //
Conclusion
(walk back to center)
So, 3 criteria: IRs, annual fees, inducements
Then your credit card may truly be—answer—dreams.
Figure 14.3
Note cards

349
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
 2. Consider audience needs carefully. As you practice, eliminate any presentational 
aid that does not contribute directly to the audience’s attention to, understanding 
of, or retention of the key ideas in the speech.
 3. Share a presentational aid only when talking about it. Because presentational 
aids will draw audience attention, practice sharing them only when you are talk-
ing about them, and then removing them when they are no longer the focus of 
attention.
   
A single visual or audiovisual aid may contain several bits of information. To 
keep audience attention where you want it, you can prepare the aid so that 
you only expose the portion you are currently discussing. This is particularly 
true when using computerized slideshows. Practice using the “B” key for black 
screen when you aren’t directly referencing the aid, as well as the slideshow 
animation feature to make concepts appear only when you are ready to talk 
about them.
 4. Display visual and audio aids so that everyone in the audience can see and hear 
them. It’s frustrating not to be able to see or hear an aid. Try to practice in the 
space where you will give your speech so you will know how to adjust the equip-
ment to make visual images easily seen and sounds clearly heard from all points in 
the room. If you cannot practice in the space ahead of time, be sure to arrive early 
enough on the day of the presentation to practice quickly with the equipment you 
will use.
 5. Talk to your audience, not to the presentational aid. Although you will want to 
acknowledge the presentational aid by looking at it occasionally, it is important to 
keep your eye contact focused on your audience. As you practice, resist the urge 
to stare at your presentational aid.
 6. Resist the temptation to pass objects through the audience. People look at, 
read, handle, and think about whatever they hold in their hands. While they 
are so occupied, they are not likely to be listening to you. It is better to project 
the images in front of the audience and save handouts for distribution after the 
speech.
Recording, Analyzing, and Reﬁ ning Speech Delivery
As with any other activity, effective speech delivery requires practice, and the 
more you practice, the better your speech will be. During practice sessions, you 
have three major goals. First, you will practice wording your ideas so they are 
clear, inclusive, and vivid. Second, you will practice your speech by working 
with your voice and body so that your ideas are delivered conversationally and 
expressively. Third, you will practice using presentational aids. As part of each 
practice, you will want to analyze how well it went and set goals for the next 
practice session.
Let’s look at how you can proceed through several practice rounds.
First practice
Your initial rehearsal should include the following steps:
 1. Record (audio and video) your practice session. If you do not own a recorder, try 
to borrow one. You may also want to have a friend sit in on your practice.
 2. Read through your complete sentence outline once or twice to refresh memory. 
Then put the outline out of sight and practice the speech using only the note cards 
you have prepared.

350
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
 3. Make the practice as similar to the speech situation as possible, including using 
the presentational aids you’ve prepared. Stand up and face your imaginary audi-
ence. Pretend that the chairs, lamps, books, and other objects in your practice 
room are people.
 4. Write down the time that you begin.
 5. Begin speaking. Regardless of what happens, keep going until you have presented 
your entire speech. If you goof, make a repair as you would have to do if you were 
actually delivering the speech to an audience.
 6. Write down the time you ﬁ nish. Compute the length of the speech for this ﬁ rst 
rehearsal.
Analysis
Listen to and watch the recording and look at your complete outline. How did it go? 
Did you leave out any key ideas? Did you talk too long on any one point and not 
long enough on another? Did you clarify each of your points? Did you adapt to your 
anticipated audience? (If you had a friend or relative watch and listen to your practice, 
have him or her help with your analysis.) Were your note cards effective? How well 
did you do with your presentational aids? Make any necessary changes before your 
second rehearsal.
Second practice
Repeat the six steps outlined for the ﬁ rst rehearsal. By practicing a second time right 
after your analysis, you are more likely to make the kind of adjustments that begin to 
improve the speech.
Additional practices
After you have completed one full rehearsal session, consisting of two practices and the 
analysis in between them, put the speech away until that night or the next day. Although 
you should rehearse the speech at least one more time, you will not beneﬁ t if you cram 
all the practices into one long rehearsal time. You may ﬁ nd that a ﬁ nal practice right 
before you go to bed will be very helpful; while you are sleeping, your subconscious will 
continue to work on the speech. As a result, you are likely to ﬁ nd signiﬁ cant improve-
ment in your mastery of the speech when you practice again the next day.
How many times you practice depends on many variables, including your experi-
ence, your familiarity with the subject, and the length of your speech.
Criteria for Evaluating Speeches
In addition to learning to prepare and present speeches, you are learning to evaluate 
(critically analyze) the speeches you hear. From an educational standpoint, critical 
analysis of speeches provides the speaker with an analysis of where the speech went 
right and where it went wrong, and it also gives you, the critic, insight into the meth-
ods that you can incorporate or avoid in your own speeches. In this section, we look 
at some general criteria for evaluating public speeches.
The critical assumption is that if a speech has good content that is adapted to the 
audience, is clearly organized, and is delivered well, it is likely to achieve its goal. 
Thus, you can evaluate any speech by answering questions that relate to the basics of 
content, structure, and delivery. Figure 14.4 is a speech critique checklist. You can use 
this checklist to analyze your ﬁ rst speech during your rehearsal period and to critique 
sample student speeches at the end of this chapter as well as speeches delivered by 
your classmates.
What criteria can 
you use to evaluate 
speeches?

351
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
Action Step 5
Rehearsing Your Speech
The goal of this activity is to rehearse your speech, analyze it, and rehearse 
it again. One complete rehearsal includes a practice, an analysis, and a 
second practice.
 1. 
Find a place where you can be alone to practice your speech. Follow 
the six points of the ﬁ rst practice as listed on p. 349–350.
 2. 
Listen to and watch the recording. Review your outline as you watch 
and listen and then answer the following questions.
  
Are you satisﬁ ed with how well
  
The introduction got attention and led into the speech? _______
  
Main points were clearly stated? _______ And well developed? _______
  
Material adapted to the audience? _______
  
Section transitions were used? _______
  
The conclusion summarized the main points? _______ Left the speech 
on a high note? _______
  
Presentational aids were used? _______
  
Ideas were expressed vividly? _______ And clearly? _______
  
Sounded conversational throughout? _______
  
Sounded animated? _______ Sounded intelligible? _______
  
Used natural gestures and movement ? _______ Used effective 
eye  contact? _______ Facial expression? _______ Posture? _______ 
Appearance? _______
  
List the three most important changes you will make in your next prac-
tice session:
  
One: __________________________________________________________________
  
Two: ___________________________________________________________________
  
Three: _________________________________________________________________
 3. 
Go through the six steps outlined for the ﬁ rst practice again.
Then assess: Did you achieve the goals you set for the second practice? 
___________________________________________________________________________
Reevaluate the speech using the checklist and continue to practice until 
you are satisﬁ ed with all parts of your presentation.
You can complete this activity online, print out copies of the Rehearsal Analysis 
Sheet, see a student sample of a practice round, and, if requested, e-mail your 
work to your instructor. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to access the 
Action Step activities for Chapter 14.

352
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
Thinking Critically About Speeches
Check all items that were accomplished effectively.
Content
______ 1. Was the goal of the speech clear?
______ 2.  Did the speaker establish common ground and adapt the content to 
the audience’s interests, knowledge, and attitudes?
______ 3. Did the speaker use a variety of kinds of developmental material?
______ 4. Did the speaker use and verbally cite credible information?
______ 5. Were presentational aids appropriate and well used?
Structure
______ 6.  Did the introduction gain attention, establish relevance and goodwill, 
and lead into the speech?
______ 7.  Were the main points clear, parallel, and in meaningful complete 
sentences?
______ 8. Did section transitions lead smoothly from one point to another?
______ 9. Was the language clear, inclusive, and vivid?
______ 10.  Did the conclusion tie the speech together by summarizing the goal 
and main points and providing closure?
Delivery
______ 11. Did the speaker appear and sound spontaneous and conversational?
______ 12. Did the speaker appear and sound animated?
______ 13. Did the speaker sound intelligible?
______ 14. Did the speaker sound vocally expressive?
______ 15. Did the speaker sound ﬂ uent?
______ 16. Did the speaker look at the audience?
______ 17. Did the speaker have good posture and poise?
______ 18. Were the speaker’s gestures and movement appropriate?
______ 19. Did the speaker have good facial expressions?
______ 20.  Was the speaker’s appearance appropriate?
Based on these criteria, evaluate the speech as (check one):
______ excellent ______ good ______ satisfactory ______ fair ______ poor
Figure 14.4
Speech critique checklist
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
Presenting Your First Speech
The Assignment
 1. Follow the Action Steps to prepare an informative or persuasive 
speech. The time and other parameters for this assignment will be 
announced by your instructor.
 2. Criteria for evaluation include all the essentials of topic and  purpose, 
content, organization, and presentation, but special emphasis will 
be placed on clarity of goal, clarity and appropriateness of main 
points, and delivery (items that are grouped under the boldface 
headings in the Speech Critique Checklist in Figure 14.4). As you 

353
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
practice your speech, you can use the checklist to ensure that you 
are meeting the basic criteria in your speech. In addition, you may 
want to refer to the sample student outline and speech that follow 
this assignment box.
3. Prior to presenting your speech, prepare a complete sentence out-
line and a written plan for adapting your speech to the audience. If 
you have used Speech Builder Express to complete the action step 
activities online, you will be able to print out a copy of your com-
pleted outline. Your adaptation plan should describe how you plan 
to verbally and visually adapt your material to the audience.
If you completed the Action Step activities in Chapter 13, you can use them 
for the basis of your written adaptation plan.
Sample Informative Speech
Understanding Hurricanes
Adapted from a speech by Megan Soileau from the University of Kentucky*
This section presents a sample informative speech adaptation plan, outline, and 
 transcript by a student in an introductory speaking course.
 1. Review the outline and adaptation plan developed by Megan Soileau in preparing 
her speech on hurricanes.
 2. Then read the transcript of her speech.
 3. Use the Speech Critique Checklist from Figure 14.4 to help you evaluate this speech.
 4. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to watch a video clip of student Chet 
Harding presenting Megan’s speech in class.
 5. Write a paragraph of feedback to Megan, describing the strengths of her presenta-
tion and what you think she might do next time to be more effective.
You can use your Premium Website for Communicate! to complete this activity 
online, print a copy of the Informative Speech Evaluation Checklist, compare your 
feedback to that of the authors, and, if requested, e-mail your work to your instructor. 
Access the Interactive Video Activities for Chapter 14.
Adaptation Plan
 1. Key aspects of audience. Because audience members have probably seen televi-
sion coverage on hurricanes but don’t really know much about them, I will need 
to provide basic information.
 2. Establishing and maintaining common ground. My main way of establishing 
common ground will be by using inclusive personal pronouns (we, us, our).
 3. Building and maintaining interest. I will build interest by pointing out how hur-
ricanes even affect the weather in Kentucky and by using examples.
 4. Audience knowledge and sophistication. Because most of the class has probably 
not been in a hurricane, I will provide as much explanatory information as I can.
*Used with permission of Megan Soileau.
© Wadsworth Cengage Learning.

354
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
 5. Building credibility. I will build credibility through solid research and oral cita-
tion of sources. Early on, I’ll mention where I live on the Gulf Coast and the fact 
that I have lived through several hurricanes
 6. Audience attitudes. I expect my audience to be curious about hurricanes, espe-
cially since Hurricane Katrina received so much media attention. So I will give 
them information to help them become more knowledgeable about them.
 7. Adapt to audiences from different cultures and language communities. Because 
hurricanes occur on coasts all over the world, I don’t need to adapt to different 
cultures or language communities. However, I will consider how to make the topic 
relevant to people who do not live on a coast.
 8. Use presentational aids to enhance audience understanding and memory. I will 
use several PowerPoint slides to highlight the effects of hurricanes.
Speech Outline: Understanding Hurricanes
General purpose: To inform
Speech goal: In this speech, I am going to familiarize the audience with the overall 
effects of hurricanes: how they work, ways they affect our whole country, and the toll 
they have on the people who live in their direct paths.
Introduction
 I. Think about a time you’ve been absolutely terriﬁ ed (whether it was by a person, 
event, or situation) and all you wanted to do was go home and be with your family 
and friends. Now imagine the feeling you might have if you were that afraid, but 
you had no idea if your home would even be there when you arrived.
 II. This is the reality for many people living on the coastlines of the United States. 
Hurricanes affect the lives of those living in their direct paths, but they can also 
cause spin-off weather that affects the entire country.
 III. I have lived about 45 minutes from the Gulf Coast of Texas my entire life and have 
seen and experienced the destruction caused by hurricanes ﬁ rsthand, especially in 
the past three years. (Slide 1: Picture of hurricane that hit my hometown last year)
 IV. Today I’d like to speak with you about the way hurricanes work, the ways they 
affect our entire country, and most importantly, the toll they have on the people 
who live in their direct paths.
Body
 I. To begin, let‘s discuss how hurricanes form and the varying degrees of intensity 
of them so we can be better informed when we watch news broadcasts and read 
newspaper reports about them.
 A. Several basic conditions must be present for a hurricane to form.
 1. According to award-winning Discovery Communications Website 
 HowStuffWorks.com, hurricanes form “when an area of warm low pres-
sure air rises and cool, high pressure seizes the opportunity to move in 
underneath it.” This causes a center to develop. This center may eventu-
ally turn into what is considered a hurricane.
 2. The warm and moist air from the ocean rises up into these pressure zones 
and begins to form storms. As this happens, the storm continues to draw 
up more warm moist air, and a heat transfer occurs because of the cool 
air being heated, causing the air to rise again.

355
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
 3. “The exchange of heat creates a pattern of wind that circulates around a 
center” (the eye of the storm) “like water going down a drain.”
 4. The “rising air reinforces the air that is already” being pulled up from the 
surface of the ocean, “so the circulation and speeds of the wind increase.”
 B. Classiﬁ cations of these types of storms help determine their intensity so we 
can prepare properly for them.
 1. Winds that are less than 38 miles per hour are considered tropical 
 depressions.
 2. Tropical storms are winds ranging from 39 to 73 miles per hour.
 3. And lastly hurricanes are storms with wind speeds of 74 miles per hour 
and higher.
 4. When storms become classiﬁ ed as hurricanes, they become part of  another 
classiﬁ cation system that is displayed by the Safﬁ r-Simpson Hurricane 
Scale.
 
a. 
 Hurricanes are labeled as Categories 1–5 based on their wind-intensity 
level or speed. (Slide 2: Hurricane scale chart)
 
b. 
 Hurricane Ike was labeled differently at different places. (Slide 3: 
Map showing the different places Ike was labeled in the different 
categories)
Transition: Knowing how and where hurricanes occur help us determine how our daily 
lives, even here in Kentucky, may be affected when one hits.
 II. A hurricane can affect more than just those living in its direct path, and these ef-
fects can actually be seen across the country in terms of the environment and the 
economy.
 A. Hurricanes affect wildlife in negative ways.
 1. According to the Beaumont Enterprise on October 7, 2008; Christine 
Rappleye reported that the storm surge (a wall of water) of Hurricane 
Ike brought in up to 14 feet of water across some parts of Southeast 
Texas.
 2. Dolphins were swept inland with the surge and then, when the waters 
ﬂ owed back out to sea, dolphins were left stranded in the marsh.
 3. Some were rescued, but not all. This dolphin was rescued from a ditch. 
(Slide 4: Dolphin being rescued)
 B. Hurricanes also affect the economy as prices climb close to all-time highs 
when hurricanes hit.
 1. According to economist Beth Ann Bovino, quoted in the September 29, 
2005 issue of The Washington Post, gas prices skyrocket when a hurricane 
like Katrina, Rita, or Ike hits.
 
a. 
 Paul Davidson said, in a September 12, 2008 article in USA Today, 
that in anticipation of Hurricane Ike, 12 reﬁ neries in Texas were shut 
down. “This is 17% of the U.S. reﬁ ning capacity” he said.
 
b. 
 That’s why even residents here in Lexington saw a dramatic spike in 
gas prices immediately following Ike’s landfall.
 2. Energy costs to heat and cool our homes also rise.
 
a. 
 When we consumers have to pay more to heat and cool our homes, 
we also have less to spend eating out at restaurants.
 
b. 
 And we have less to spend on nonessentials at the mall.
 
c. 
 So, economically we all feel the ripple effect when hurricanes hit.

356
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
Transition: So, yes, we all feel the effects of hurricanes, but we should not overlook 
the dramatic ways in which people who live in the direct path of a hurricane are 
 affected.
 III. When a hurricane hits, many of these people become homeless, at least for a while, 
and suffer emotionally and ﬁ nancially as they evacuate to places all over the 
country, including Kentucky!
 A. People who go through hurricanes suffer extreme emotional effects.
 1. Evacuation is stressful because people have to pack up what they can and 
have no way of knowing if their home will still be standing or inhabit-
able when they return. (Slides 5 and 6: Before and after pictures from 
 Hurricane Ike)
 2. Even returning home is emotionally taxing because returning home 
means rebuilding homes, neighborhoods, and even memories.
 3. Though we try to get back to a “normal” life, it can never really be the 
same as it once was. Instead, it’s what Silicon Valley venture capitalist 
and investor Roger McNamee calls the “new normal” in his book: The 
New Normal: Great Opportunities in a Time of Great Risk.
 B. Because they have to rebuild their homes and lives, people also go through 
ﬁ nancial difﬁ culties.
 1. People battle with insurance companies about whether a home has wind 
or water damage as they seek ﬁ nancial assistance. (Insurance companies 
will often claim that it is the one—wind or water—the homeowner is un-
insured for.)
 2. Price gouging is another ﬁ nancial challenge hurricane victims face.
 
a. 
 When families and businesses begin the process of rebuilding, people 
come from outside areas to help with labor and materials and will 
charge exorbitant fees.
 
b. 
 An example of this is when my father needed people to help remove 
two trees from our home in September 2005 after Hurricane Rita.
Conclusion
 I. Hurricanes affect victims who live in their direct path and the country as a whole.
 II. To understand these effects, we talked about how hurricanes work, how they affect 
our country and daily lives, and the impacts they have on the lives of people who 
live through them.
 III. Maybe knowing some of these facts will help each of us appreciate our homes and 
our families just a little bit more. (Handout: Hurricane tracking charts)
References
Associated Press. (2008, October 8). Windstorm costs insurers $550M. Newark Advocate, p. x.
Bovino, B. A. (2005, September 29). Hurricanes impact national economy. The Washington Post, Retrieved 
from http://washingtonpost.com/wp-dym/content/discussion/2005/09/28/D12005092801431.html
Davidson, P. (2008, September 12). Ike blows gasoline prices higher.” USA Today, p. x.
Marshall, B., Freudenrich, C., & Lamb, R. How hurricanes work. Retrieved from http://www.howstuffworks.
com/hurricanes.htm
McNamee, R. (2004). The new normal: Great opportunities in a time of great risk. New York: Penguin.
Rappleye, C. (2008, October 7). Hurricane strands marine mammals, damages facility for the stranded. 
Beaumont Enterprise.

357
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
Speech and Analysis
Speech
Think about a time you’ve been absolutely terriﬁ ed 
whether it was by a person, event, or situation and 
all you wanted to do was go home and be with your 
family and friends.
Now imagine the feeling you might have if you 
were that afraid, but you had no idea if your home 
would even be there when you arrived. This is the 
reality for many people living on the coastlines of 
the United States. Hurricanes affect the lives of those 
living in their direct paths, but they can also affect 
the entire country.
I have lived about forty-ﬁ ve minutes from the 
Gulf Coast of Texas my entire life and have seen and 
experienced the destruction caused by hurricanes 
ﬁ rst hand, especially in the past three years. (Slide 1: 
Picture of hurricane that hit my hometown last year.) 
This is a picture of my hometown when a hurricane 
hit it last year.
Today I’d like to speak with you about the way 
hurricanes work, the ways they affect our whole 
country and, most importantly, the toll they have on 
the people who live in their direct paths.
To begin, let‘s discuss how hurricanes form and 
the varying degrees of intensity of them so we can be 
better informed when we watch news broadcasts and 
read newspaper reports about them.
Several basic conditions must be present for a 
Hurricane to form. According to award-winning Dis-
covery Communications Website HowStuffWorks.
com, hurricanes form “when an area of warm low 
pressure air rises and cool, high pressure seizes the 
opportunity to move in underneath it.” This causes 
a center to develop. This center may eventually turn 
into what is considered a hurricane. The warm and 
moist air from the ocean rises up into these pressure 
zones and begins to form storms. As this happens the 
storm continues to draw up more warm moist air and 
a heat transfer occurs because of the cool air being 
heated, causing the air to rise again. “The exchange of 
heat creates a pattern of wind that circulates around a 
center” (the eye of the storm) “like water going down 
a drain.” The “rising air reinforces the air that is al-
ready” being pulled up from the surface of the ocean, 
“so the circulation and speeds of the wind increase.”
Classiﬁ cations of these types of storms help 
 determine their intensity so we can prepare properly 
Analysis
Megan opens by using an analogy to help get her 
audience emotionally involved in her speech, then 
quickly introduces her topic.
Notice how Megan establishes her credibility by shar-
ing that grew up near the Gulf Coast of Texas and has 
been a hurricane victim herself. The ﬁ rst slide adds 
emotional appeal to her point.
Megan concludes her introduction by previewing her 
main points clearly.
Megan does a nice job of incorporating a listener 
 relevance link into her ﬁ rst main point statement.
Here Megan offers an oral footnote to add credibil-
ity. Noting that the Website is an award-winning one 
helps her here.

358
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
for them. Winds that are less than 38 miles per hour 
are considered tropical depressions. Tropical storms 
have winds that range from 39 to 73 miles per hour. 
And lastly hurricanes are storms with wind speeds of 
74 miles per hour and higher.
When storms become classiﬁ ed as a hurricane, 
they become part of another classiﬁ cation sys-
tem that is displayed by the Safﬁ r-Simpson Hurri-
cane Scale. Hurricanes are labeled as categories 1–5 
based on their wind intensity level or speed. (Slide 
2:  Hurricane scale chart) Hurricane Ike was labeled 
differently at different places. (Slide 3: Map showing 
the different places Ike was labeled in the different 
categories.)
Knowing how and where hurricanes occur helps 
us determine how our daily lives, even here in Ken-
tucky, may be affected when one hits.
A hurricane can affect more than just those liv-
ing in its direct path, and these effects can actually be 
seen across the country in terms of the environment 
and the economy.
Hurricanes affect wildlife in negative ways. 
 According to the Beaumont Enterprise on October 
7, 2008, Christine Rappleye reported that the storm 
surge, which is basically a wall of water, that Hur-
ricane Ike brought in across some parts of Southeast 
Texas was about 14 feet in some places. Dolphins 
were swept inland with the surge and then, when 
the waters ﬂ owed back out to sea, dolphins were left 
stranded in the marsh. Some were rescued, but not 
all. This dolphin was rescued from a ditch. (Slide 4: 
Dolphin being rescued)
Hurricanes also affect the economy. Prices climb 
close to all time highs when hurricanes hit. According 
to economist Beth Ann Bovino, quoted in the Sep-
tember 29, 2005 issue of The Washington Post, gas 
prices skyrocket when a hurricane like Katrina, Rita, 
or Ike hit. Paul Davidson said in a September 12, 2008 
article in USA Today that in anticipation of Hurricane 
Ike, 12 reﬁ neries in Texas were shut down. “This is 
17% of the U.S. reﬁ ning capacity,” he said. That’s why 
even residents here in Lexington saw a dramatic spike 
in gas prices immediately following Ike’s landfall.
Energy costs to heat and cool our homes also 
rise. When consumers have to pay more to heat and 
cool our homes, we also have less to spend eating out 
at restaurants. And we have less to spend on nones-
sentials at the mall. So, economically we all feel the 
ripple effect when hurricanes hit.
Showing the hurricane scale chart and the map 
depicting Hurricane Ike at different categories visu-
ally reinforces what Megan describes in her verbal 
message.
Megan does a nice job tying together the two main 
points, which makes for a ﬂ uent section transition.
Here Megan not only describes the 14-foot wall of 
water Hurricane Ike transported into Texas but also 
reinforces it with the picture on her PowerPoint slide.
By indicating that Beth Ann Bovino is an economist 
makes this oral footnote stand out as very credible.
Here Megan reminds her audience that even in 
Lexington, Kentucky, hurricanes have an impact, 
which is felt in higher gas prices and energy costs.
Here Megan could have developed her main point 
with an example or a concrete story.

359
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
So, yes, we all feel the effects of hurricanes, but 
we should not overlook the dramatic ways in which 
people who live in the direct path of a hurricane are 
affected.
When a hurricane hits, many of these people 
 become homeless, at least for a while, and suffer 
emotionally and ﬁ nancially as they evacuate to plac-
es all over the country, including Kentucky!
People who go through hurricanes suffer extreme 
emotional effects. Evacuation is stressful because 
people have to pack up what they can and have no 
way of knowing if their home will still be standing or 
inhabitable when they return, (Slides 5 and 6: Before 
and after pictures from Hurricane Ike)
Even returning home is emotionally taxing 
 because returning home means rebuilding homes, 
neighborhoods, and even memories. Though we try to 
get back to a “normal” life, it can never really be the 
same as it once was. Instead, it’s what  Silicon Valley 
venture capitalist and investor Roger  McNamee calls 
the “new normal” in his book The New Normal: Great 
Opportunities in a Time of Great Risk.
Because they have to rebuild their homes and 
lives, people also go through ﬁ nancial difﬁ cul-
ties. People battle with insurance companies about 
whether a home has wind or water damage as they 
seek ﬁ nancial assistance. (Insurance companies will 
often claim that it is the one—wind or water—the 
 homeowner is uninsured for.)
Price gouging is another ﬁ nancial challenge 
 hurricane victims face. When families and busi-
nesses begin the process of rebuilding, people come 
from outside areas to help with labor and materi-
als and will charge exorbitant fees. An example of 
this is when my father needed people to help remove 
two trees from our home in September 2005 after 
 Hurricane Rita.
To close, I’d like to remind you that hurricanes 
affect victims who live in their direct path and the 
country as a whole. To understand some of these 
 effects, we talked about how hurricanes work, how 
they affect our country and daily lives, and the 
impacts they have on the lives of people who live 
through them. Maybe knowing some of these facts 
will help each of us appreciate our homes and our 
families just a little bit more. (Handout: Hurricane 
tracking charts)
Again, Megan offers a clear and ﬂ uent section transition.
Again, Megan makes her emotional appeal stronger 
by showing before and after pictures.
Megan could have developed this point a bit more, 
perhaps by giving a speciﬁ c example.
Megan does a nice job concluding her speech by 
summarizing her main points and tieing back to her 
introduction.
Notice how Megan waits until the end of her speech 
to distribute her handout. That way, she kept the 
focus on her message during the speech
All in all, this is a well-presented, informative speech 
with sufﬁ cient documentation.

360
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
Summary
Although speeches may be presented impromptu, by manuscript, or by memory, the 
material you have been reading is designed to help you present your speeches extem-
poraneously—that is, carefully prepared and practiced, but with the exact wording 
determined at the time of utterance.
Even though almost all of us experience public speaking apprehension, only 15 
percent or less experience high levels of fear. The signs of speaking apprehension, or 
stage fright, vary from individual to individual. The causes of apprehension are still 
being studied—in fact, some speaking apprehension may be inborn. You can learn to 
manage apprehension by practicing visualization, systematic desensitization, and cog-
nitive restructuring techniques, and by preparing carefully and rehearsing your speech.
The major elements of speech delivery are embedded within your use of voice 
(pitch, volume, rate, quality, articulation, and pronunciation) and use of body (facial 
expression, gestures, movement, eye contact, posture, poise, and appearance).
Three of the most common types of speech delivery are impromptu speaking 
(talking on the spot), scripted speeches (completely written manuscripts), and extem-
poraneous speaking (speeches that are researched and planned but not scripted).
A Question of Ethics
Nalini sighed loudly as the club members of 
Toastmasters International took their seats. It 
was her ﬁ rst time meeting with the public speak-
ing group, and she didn’t want to be there, but 
her mom had insisted that she join the club in 
the hopes that it would help Nalini transfer from 
her community college to the state university. It 
wasn’t that the idea of public speaking scared 
Nalini. She had already spent time in front of an 
audience as the lead singer of the defunct emo 
band Deathstar. To Nalini’s mind, public speaking 
was just another type of performance, like sing-
ing or acting, albeit a stuffy form better suited 
to middle-aged men and women than people her 
age, a sentiment that explained why she wanted 
to be elsewhere at the moment.
After the club leader called the meeting to 
order, he asked each of the new members to stand, 
introduce themselves, and give a brief speech 
describing their background, aspirations, and 
 reasons for joining the club. “Spare me,” Nalini 
muttered loud enough for those next to her to hear. 
The club leader then called on a young woman to 
Nalini’s left, who rose and began to speak about 
her dream of becoming a lawyer and doing pub-
lic advocacy work for the poor. After the young 
woman sat down, the club members applauded 
politely. Nalini whistled and clapped loudly and 
kept on clapping after the others had stopped.
The club leader, somewhat taken aback, 
called on Nalini next. She rose from her seat and 
introduced herself as the secret love child of a 
former president and a famous actress. Nalini 
then strung together a series of other fantastic lies 
about her past and her ambitions. She concluded 
her speech by saying that she had joined the club 
in the hopes that she could learn how to hypno-
tize audiences into obeying her commands. After 
Nalini sat, a few of the club members applauded 
quietly, while others cast glances at each other 
and the club leader.
 1. Is mocking behavior in a formal public speak-
ing setting, either by an audience member or 
a speaker, an ethical matter? Explain your 
answer.
 2. What ethical obligations does an audience 
member have to a speaker? What about a 
speaker to his or her audience?
What Would You Do?

361
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery 
Effective delivery requires rehearsal. Experienced speakers schedule and conduct 
rehearsal sessions. Once their outline is complete, effective speakers usually rehearse 
at least twice, often using speech notes on cards that include key phrases and words.
In many cases, speakers may use presentational aids to help audiences understand 
and remember the material. To be effective, presentational aids need to be carefully 
planned, shared only when being talked about, and displayed so that all can see and 
hear them.
In addition to preparing and presenting, you should also evaluate speeches, focus-
ing on content, structure, and delivery.
Now that you have read Chapter 14, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment, Action Step activity, and 
speech analysis activity in the body of the chapter.
Communicate! Active Online Learning
Key Terms
accent (338)
animated (337)
appearance (344)
articulation (338)
audience contact (343)
cognitive restructuring (335)
communication orientation (334)
conversational style (336)
delivery (336)
extemporaneous speech (346)
eye contact (343)
facial expression (341)
gestures (342)
impromptu speech (346)
intelligible (337)
monotone (338)
motivated movement (342)
movement (342)
pauses (339)
performance orientation (334)
pitch (337)
poise (343)
posture (343)
pronunciation (338)
public speaking apprehension (333)
public speaking skills training (334)
rate (337)
rehearsing (346)
quality (337)
scripted speech (346)
speaking notes (347)
spontaneity (336)
systematic desensitization (335)
visualization ( 334)
vocal expressiveness (338)
volume (337)

362
 
Chapter 14  Overcoming Speech Apprehension by Practicing Delivery
Skill Learning Activities
14.1: Controlling Nervousness (336)
Interview one or two people who give frequent 
speeches (such as a minister, a politician, a lawyer, a 
businessperson, or a teacher). Ask what is likely to make 
them more or less nervous about giving the speech. 
Find out how they cope with their nervousness. Write 
a short paragraph summarizing what you have learned 
from the interviews. Then identify the behaviors used 
by those people that you believe might work for you.
14.2: Articulation Practice (338)
The goal of this activity is to practice articulating 
difﬁ cult word combinations. To ﬁ nd a list of sentences 
that are difﬁ cult to articulate, go to jimpowell.com, 
click on “Directing Tips,” and then on “Articulation 
Exercises.” Practice saying each of these sentences 
until you can do so without error.
14.3: Evaluating Speaker Vocal and Body 
Action Behaviors (345)
Attend a public speech event on campus or in 
your community. Watch and evaluate the speaker’s 
use of vocal characteristics (voice and articula-
tion), body action (facial expressions, gestures, 
movement, poise, and posture), animation, sponta-
neity, and eye contact. Which vocal or body action 
behaviors stood out and why? How did the speaker’s 
use of voice, body actions, animation, spontane-
ity, and eye contact contribute to or detract from 
the speaker’s message? What three things could the 
speaker have done to improve the delivery of the 
speech?
Web Resources
14.1: Visualizing Your Success (335)
Try out this visualization exercise. It features a 
recorded and printed script that can help you manage 
your anxiety as your prepare to deliver your speech.
14.2: Body Motions and Audience Attention 
(345)
To explore how body motions affect audience 
attention during a speech, go to the Presentation-
Pointers site and read the article “Capture an 
Audience’s Attention: Points on Posture, Eye Contact, 
and More” by Marjorie Brody. Presentation-Pointers.
com is a site that features many articles about how to 
give effective speeches.

Informative Speaking
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• What are the characteristics of informative speaking?
• What are the major methods of informing?
• What are the two most common informative speech frameworks?
• What are the major elements of process speeches?
• What are the major types of expository speeches?
For several months, a major architectural ﬁ rm had been working on designs 
for the arts center to be built in the middle of downtown. Members of the 
city council, guests from various constituencies in the city, and a number of 
concerned citizens were taking seats as the long-anticipated presentation 
was about to begin. As Linda Garner, mayor and presiding ofﬁ cer of the city 
council, ﬁ nished her introduction, Donald Harper, the principal architect of the 
project, walked to the microphone to begin his speech about the proposed 
design.
15
Carl & Ann Purcell/Encyclopedia/CORBIS

364
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
This is but one of many scenes played out every day when experts deliver speeches to 
help others understand complex information. In this chapter, we focus speciﬁ cally on 
the characteristics unique to good informative speaking and the methods you can use 
to develop an effective informative speech.
An informative speech is one whose goal is to explain or describe facts, truths, 
and principles in a way that stimulates interest, facilitates understanding, and increases 
the likelihood of remembering. In short, informative speeches are designed to educate 
audiences. Informative speeches answer questions about a topic, such as who, when, 
what, where, why, how to, and how does. For example, your informative speech might 
describe who popular singer-songwriter Lady Gaga is, deﬁ ne what Scientology is, 
compare and contrast the similarities and differences between Twitter and Facebook 
as social networking sites, narrate the story of Al Franken’s campaign for U.S. Senate, 
or demonstrate how to create and post a video on a Web site like YouTube. Informa-
tive speaking is different from other speech forms (such as speaking to persuade, to 
entertain, or to celebrate) in that your goal is simply to achieve mutual understanding 
about an object, person, place, process, event, idea, concept or issue.
In this chapter, we describe ﬁ ve distinguishing characteristics of informative 
speeches and ﬁ ve methods of informing. Then, we discuss two common types of infor-
mative speeches (process and expository speeches) and provide an example of an 
informative speech.
Characteristics of Effective Informative 
Speaking
Effective informative speeches are intellectually stimulating, relevant, creative, memo-
rable, and address diverse learning styles.
Intellectually Stimulating
Your audience will perceive information to be intellectually stimulating when it is 
new to them and when it is explained in a way that piques their curiosity and excites 
their interest. By new information, we mean information that most of your audience is 
unfamiliar with or new insights into a topic with 
which they are already familiar.
If your audience is unfamiliar with your 
topic, you should consider how you might tap 
the members’ natural curiosity. Imagine that you 
are an anthropology major who is interested in 
prehistoric humans, not an interest shared by 
most members of your audience. You know that 
in 1991, a 5,300-year-old man, Ötzi, as he has 
become known, was found surprisingly well pre-
served in an ice ﬁ eld in the mountains between 
Austria and Italy. Even though the discovery was 
big news at the time, it is unlikely that most of 
your audience knows much about it. You can 
draw on their natural curiosity, however, as you 
present “Unraveling the Mystery of the Iceman,” 
in which you describe scientists’ efforts to under-
stand who Ötzi was and what happened to him 
(“Ötzi, the Ice Man,” n.d.).
informative speech
a speech that has a goal 
to explain or describe facts, 
truths, and principles in a way 
that increases understanding.
intellectually stimulating
information that is new to 
audience members.
What are the 
characteristics 
of informative 
speaking?
Rangers, guides, and 
interpreters work to become 
experts so they can tailor 
their presentations to the 
needs of speciﬁ c audiences. 
If you were listening to this 
ranger, what would you want 
to know?
© David R. Frazier/PhotoEdit

365
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
If your audience members are familiar with your topic, you will need to identify 
information that will be new to them. Begin by asking yourself, What about my topic 
do listeners probably not know? Then consider depth and breadth as you answer the 
question. Depth has to do with going into more detail than people’s general knowledge 
of the topic. If you’ve ever watched programs on the Food Channel, that’s what they 
do. Most people know basic recipes, but these programs show new ways to cook the 
same foods. Breadth has to do with how your topic relates to associated topics. Trace 
did this when he informed his audience about type 1 diabetes. He discussed not only 
the physical and emotional effects of diabetes on the person who has it, but also the 
emotional and relational effects on family and friends. As you can see, when your 
topic is one that audience members are familiar with, you will need to explore a new 
angle on it if you are going to stimulate them intellectually.
Relevant
A general rule to remember when preparing your informative speeches is this: Don’t 
assume your listeners will recognize how the information you share is relevant to 
them. Incorporate listener relevance links, statements that clarify how a particular 
point may be important to a listener, throughout the speech. As you prepare each main 
point, ask yourself, How would knowing this information make my listeners happier, 
healthier, wealthier, and so forth? Or you can compare unfamiliar aspects of your topic 
to something your listeners are likely to be familiar with. Trace did this when he com-
pared the relational effects of living with diabetes to living with other chronic diseases 
such as heart disease and diverticulitis.
Creative
Your audience will perceive your information to be creative when it yields different or 
original ideas and insights. You may never have considered yourself to be creative, but 
that may be because you have never worked to develop innovative ideas. Contrary to 
what you may think, creativity is not a gift that some have and some don’t; rather, it 
is the result of hard work. Creativity comes from good research, time, and productive 
thinking.
Creative informative speeches begin with good research. The more you learn about 
the topic, the more you will have to think about and the more you will be able to 
develop it creatively. Speakers who present information creatively have given them-
selves lots of supporting material to work with.
For the creative process to work, you have to give yourself time. Rarely do creative 
ideas come just before a deadline. Instead, they are likely to come when we least expect 
them, when we’re driving our car, preparing for bed, or daydreaming. The creative 
process depends on having time to mull over ideas. If you complete a draft of your 
outline several days before you speak, you’ll have time to consider how to present your 
ideas creatively.
For the creative process to work, you have to think productively. Productive 
 thinking occurs when we contemplate something from a variety of perspectives. Then, 
with numerous ideas to choose from, we can select the ones that are best suited to our 
particular audience. In the article “A Theory about Genius,” Michael Michalko describes 
eight tactics that can be used to become better at productive thinking. You can access 
this article at the Premium Website for Communicate! Look for Web Resource 15.1.
Let’s look at how productive thinking can help to identify different approaches to 
a topic. Suppose you want to give a speech on climatic variation in the United States, 
listener relevance links
statements that clarify how 
a particular point may be 
important to a listener.
creative
using information in a way 
that yields different or original 
ideas and insights.
Web Resource 15.1

366
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
Yearly Temperature 
(in degrees 
Fahrenheit)
Precipitation (in inches)
City
High
Low
July
Annual
Chicago
95
−21
3.7
35
Cincinnati
98
−7
3.3
39
Denver
104
−3
1.9
15
Los Angeles
104
40
trace
15
Miami
96
50
5.7
56
Minneapolis
95
−27
3.5
28
New Orleans
95
26
6.1
62
New York
98
−2
4.4
42
Phoenix
117
35
0.8
7
Portland, ME
94
−18
3.1
44
St. Louis
97
−9
3.9
37
San Francisco
94
35
trace
19
Seattle
94
23
0.9
38
and in your research, you ran across the data shown in Figure 15.1. By looking at the 
data from different perspectives, you can identify several possible ways to develop 
your speech. For instance, you might notice that the yearly high temperatures vary less 
than the yearly low temperatures. Most people wouldn’t understand why this is so and 
would be curious about this. Or you might notice that it hardly ever rains on the West 
Coast in the summer. In fact, Seattle, a city that most of us consider to be rainy, receives 
less than an inch of rain in July, which is three inches less than any eastern city and 
ﬁ ve inches less than Miami. Again, an explanation of this anomaly would probably 
interest most audience members. Looking at these data in yet another way reveals that 
although most of us might think of July as a month that is relatively dry, cities in the 
Midwest and on the East Coast get more rainfall than we might expect in July.
Productive thought can also help us to create alternative ways to make the same 
point. Again, using the information in Figure 15.1, we can quickly create two ways 
to support the point “Yearly high temperatures in U.S. cities vary far less than yearly 
low temperatures.”
Alternative A: Of the 13 cities in this table, 10 cities, or 77 percent, had yearly 
highs of 95 degrees or more. Four cities, or 30 percent, had yearly lows above 
freezing; and only three cities, or 23 percent, had low temperatures of more than 
15 degrees below zero.
Alternative B: Cincinnati, Miami, Minneapolis, New York, and St. Louis, cities 
at different latitudes, all had yearly high temperatures of 95 to 98 degrees. In 
contrast, the lowest temperature for Miami was 50 degrees, whereas the lowest 
temperatures for Cincinnati, Minneapolis, New York, and St. Louis were -7, -27, 
-2, and -9 degrees, respectively.
Memorable
If your speech is really informative, your audience will hear a lot of new information 
but will need your help in remembering the most important. Emphasizing your  speciﬁ c 
Skill Learning Activity 15.1
Figure 15.1
Temperature and 
precipitation highs and lows 
in selected U.S. cities

367
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
goal and making sure your main points are stated in parallel language are good starting 
points. Figure 15.2 summarizes ways to use presentational aids, repetition, transitions, 
humor, and mnemonics and acronyms to help your audience remember information 
you believe to be most important.
Address Diverse Learning Styles
Because the members of your audience learn differently, you will be most successful at 
informing all your audience when you present your information in ways that appeal to 
all styles of learning. You can appeal to people who prefer to learn through the feeling 
dimension by providing concrete, vivid images, examples, stories, and testimonials. 
Address the watching dimension by using visual aids. Address the thinking dimension 
Skill Learning Activity 15.2
Web Resource 15.2
Technique
Use
Example
Presentational 
aids
To provide audience mem-
bers with a visual or auditory 
memory of important or 
difﬁ cult material
A diagram of the process of 
making ethanol
Repetition
To give the audience a 
second or third chance 
to retain important 
 information by repeating or 
 paraphrasing it
“The ﬁ rst dimension of 
romantic love is passion; 
that is, it can’t really be 
romantic love if there is no 
sexual attraction.”
Transitions
To help the audience 
understand the relationship 
between the ideas being 
presented, including primary 
and supporting information
“So the three characteris-
tics of romantic love are 
passion, intimacy, and 
commitment. Now let’s look 
at each of the ﬁ ve ways you 
can keep love alive. The ﬁ rst 
is through small talk.”
Humor and 
other emotional 
anecdotes
To create an emotional 
memory link to important 
ideas
“True love is like a pair of 
socks, you have to have 
two, and they’ve got 
to match. So you and 
your partner need to be 
 mutually  committed and 
compatible.”
Mnemonics and 
acronyms
To provide an easy memory 
prompt for a series or a list
“You can remember the 
four criteria for evaluating 
a  diamond as the four Cs: 
carat, clarity, cut, and color.”
“As you can see, useful 
goals are SMART: S for 
 speciﬁ c, M for measurable, 
A for action-oriented, R 
for reasonable, and T for 
 time-bound. That’s SMART.”
Figure 15.2
Techniques for making 
informative speech material 
memorable

368
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
by including deﬁ nitions, explanations, and statistics. Address the doing dimension by 
encouraging your listeners to do something during the speech or afterward. Rounding 
the learning cycle in this way ensures that you address the diverse learning style 
preferences of your audience and make the speech understandable, meaningful, and 
memorable for all.
Methods of Informing
We can inform through description, deﬁ nition, comparison and contrast, narration, 
and demonstration. Let’s look more closely at each of these patterns.
Description
Description is the informative method used to create an accurate, vivid, verbal picture 
of an object, geographic feature, setting, event, person, or image. This method usually 
answers an overarching who, what, or where question. If the thing to be described is 
simple and familiar (like a light bulb or a river), the description may not need to be 
detailed. But if the thing to be described is complex and unfamiliar (like a sextant 
or holograph), the description will need to be more exhaustive. Descriptions are, of 
course, easier if you have a presentational aid, but verbal descriptions that are clear 
and vivid can create mental pictures that are also informative. To describe something 
effectively, you can explain its size, shape, weight, color, composition, age, condition, 
and spatial organization. Although your description may focus on only a few of these, 
each characteristic is helpful to consider as you create your description.
You can describe size subjectively, such as large or small, and objectively by 
noting speciﬁ c numerical measures. For example, you can describe New York City 
subjectively as the largest in the United States or more objectively as home to more 
than 8 million people with more than 26,000 people per square mile.
You can describe shape by reference to common geometric forms like round, trian-
gular, oblong, spherical, conical, cylindrical, or rectangular, or by reference to common 
objects such as a book or a milk car-
ton. For example, the Lower Peninsula 
of Michigan is often described as a 
left-hand mitten. Shape is made more 
vivid by using adjectives, such as 
smooth, jagged, and so on.
You can describe weight subjec-
tively, such as heavy or light, and 
objectively by pounds and ounces or 
kilograms and grams. As with size, 
you can clarify weight with compari-
sons. For example, you can describe a 
Humvee (Hummer) as weighing about 
7,600 pounds or about as much as 
three Honda Civics.
You can describe color by cou-
pling a basic color (such as black, 
white, red, or yellow) with a com-
mon object. For instance, instead of 
describing something as puce or ocher, 
you might describe the object as “egg-
plant purple” or “clay pot orange.”
description
the informative method used 
to create an accurate, vivid, 
verbal picture of an object, 
geographic feature, setting, 
person, event, or image.
What are the 
major methods of 
informing?
How might you describe a 
NASCAR automobile?
AP Photo/Henny Ray Abrams

369
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
You can describe the composition of something by indicating what it is made of, such 
as by saying the building was made of brick, concrete, wood, or siding. In some cases, 
you might be clearer by describing what it looks like rather than what it is. For example, 
you might say something looks metallic, even if it is made of plastic rather than metal.
You can describe something by its age and by its condition. For example, describ-
ing a city as old and well kept gives different mental pictures than does describing a 
city as old and war torn.
Finally, you can describe by spatial organization going from top to bottom, left to 
right, outer to inner, and so on. A description of the Sistine Chapel, for example, might 
go from the ﬂ oor to the ceiling, and a description of a NASCAR automobile might go 
from the body to the engine to the interior.
Deﬁ nition
Deﬁ nition is a method of informing that explains the meaning of something. There are 
four ways to deﬁ ne something.
First, you can deﬁ ne a word or idea by classifying it and differentiating it from 
similar ideas. For example, in a speech on vegetarianism, you might use information 
from the Vegan Society’s Web site (http://www.vegansociety.com) to develop a deﬁ ni-
tion of a vegan: “A vegan is a vegetarian who is seeking a lifestyle free from animal 
products for the beneﬁ t of people, animals, and the environment. Vegans eat a plant-
based diet free from all animal products including milk, eggs, and honey. Vegans also 
don’t wear leather, wool, or silk and avoid other animal-based products.”
Second, you can deﬁ ne a word by explaining its derivation or history. For instance, 
the word vegan is made from the beginning and end of the word vegetarian and was 
coined in the United Kingdom in 1944, when the Vegan Society was founded. Offering 
this etymology will help your audience to remember the meaning of vegan.
Third, you can deﬁ ne a word by explaining its use or function. For example, in vegan 
recipes, you can use tofu or tempeh to replace meat and soy milk to replace cow’s milk.
The fourth, and perhaps the quickest way you can deﬁ ne something, is by using 
a familiar synonym or antonym. A 
synonym is a word that has the same 
or a similar meaning; an antonym is 
a word that has the opposite mean-
ing. So you could deﬁ ne a vegan by 
comparing it to the word vegetarian, 
which is a synonym, or to the word 
carnivore, which is an antonym.
Comparison and Contrast
Comparison and contrast is a method 
of informing that focuses on how 
something is similar to and different 
from other things. For example, in 
a speech on vegans, you might tell 
your audience how vegans are simi-
lar and different from other types of 
vegetarians. You can point out that 
like vegetarians, vegans don’t eat 
meat. In contrast, semi-vegetarians 
deﬁ nition
a method of informing that 
explains the meaning of 
something.
synonym
a word that has the same or 
similar meaning.
antonym
a word that is a direct 
opposite.
comparison and contrast
a method of informing 
that explains something by 
focusing on how it is similar 
and different from other 
things.
How might a presentational 
aid help enhance your 
informative speech on 
vegans?
Joshua Wold/veganfoodpyramid.com

370
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
eat ﬁ sh or poultry. Like lacto-vegetarians, vegans don’t eat eggs, but unlike this 
group and lacto-ovo-vegetarians, vegans don’t use dairy products. So of all vegetar-
ians, vegans have the most restrictive diet. Because comparisons and contrasts can 
be ﬁ gurative or literal, you can use metaphors and analogies as well as making direct 
comparisons.
Narration
Narration is a method of informing that recounts an autobiographical or biographical 
event, a myth, a story, or some other account. Narrations usually have four parts. First, 
the narration orients the listener by describing when and where the event took place and 
by introducing the important people or characters. Second, the narration explains the 
sequence of events that led to a complication or problem, including details that enhance 
the development. Third, the narration discusses how the complication or problem affected 
the key people in the narrative. Finally, the narration recounts how the complication or 
problem was solved. The characteristics of a good narration include a strong story line; 
use of descriptive language and detail that enhance the plot, people, setting, and events; 
effective use of dialogue; pacing that builds suspense; and a strong voice (Baerwald, n.d.).
Narrations can be presented in a ﬁ rst-, second-, or third-person voice. When you use 
ﬁ rst person, you report what you have personally experienced or observed, using the pro-
nouns I, me, and my as you recount the events. “Let me tell you about the ﬁ rst time I tried 
to water-ski” might be the opening for a narrative story told in ﬁ rst person. When you use 
second person, you place your audience at the scene by using the pronouns you and your. 
You might say, for example, “Imagine that you have just gotten off the plane in Hong 
Kong. You look at the signs, but can’t read a thing. Which way is the terminal?” When 
you use third person, you describe to your audience what has happened, is happening, or 
will happen to other people by using pronouns like he, her, and they. “When the students 
arrived in Venice for their study-abroad experience, the ﬁ rst thing they saw was . . .”
Demonstration
Demonstration is a method of inform-
ing that shows how something is 
done, displays the stages of a pro-
cess, or depicts how something works. 
Demonstrations range from very simple 
with a few easy-to-follow steps (such 
as how to iron a shirt) to very com-
plex (such as explaining how a nuclear 
reactor works). Regardless of whether 
the topic is simple or complex, effec-
tive demonstrations require expertise, 
developing a hierarchy of steps, and 
using visual language and aids.
In a demonstration, experience 
with what you are demonstrating is 
critical. Expertise gives you the nec-
essary background to supplement 
bare-bones instructions with per-
sonal, lived experience. Why are TV 
cooking shows so popular? Because 
narration
a method of informing 
that explains something by 
recounting events or stories.
demonstration
a method of informing 
that explains something by 
showing how it is done, by 
displaying the stages of a 
process, or by depicting how 
something works.
The TV program How I Met 
Your Mother is an example 
of informing using the ﬁ rst-
person narrative method. 
How does this technique 
capture and maintain 
audience interest?
Sonja Flemming/CBS/Getty Images

371
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
the chef doesn’t just read the recipe 
and do what it says. Rather, while 
performing each step, the chef shares 
tips that aren’t mentioned in any 
cookbook. It is the chef’s experience 
that allows him or her to say that one 
egg will work as well as two, or how 
to tell if the cake is really done.
In a demonstration, you organize 
the steps from ﬁ rst to last so that your 
audience will be able to remember 
the sequence of actions accurately. 
Suppose that you want to demonstrate 
the steps in using a touch-screen 
voting machine. If you present 14 
separate points, your audience is 
unlikely to remember them. However, 
if you group them under the follow-
ing four headings, chances are much 
higher that your audience will be able 
to remember most of the items: I. Get 
ready to vote; II. Vote; III. Review your 
choices; and IV. Cast your ballot.
Although you could explain a process with only words, most demonstrations show 
the audience the process or parts of the process. That’s in part why TV shows like What 
Not to Wear and Flip This House are so popular. If what you are explaining is relatively 
simple, you can demonstrate the entire process from start to ﬁ nish. However, if the 
process is lengthy or complex, you may choose to pre-prepare the material for some 
of the steps. Although you will show all stages in the process, you will not have to 
take the time for every single step as the audience watches. For example, many of the 
ingredients used by TV chefs are already cut up and measured into little bowls.
Effective demonstrations require practice. Remember that under the pressure of 
speaking to an audience, even the simplest task can become difﬁ cult. (Did you ever 
try to thread a needle with 25 people watching you?) As you practice, you will want 
to consider the size of your audience and the conﬁ guration of the room. Be sure that 
all of the audience will be able see what you are doing. You may ﬁ nd that your dem-
onstration takes longer than the time limit you have been given. In these cases, you 
might want to pre-prepare the material for a step or two.
Common Informative Speech Frameworks
Two of the most common frameworks for structuring or organizing informative speech 
ideas are process frameworks and expository frameworks.
Process Speech Frameworks
The goal of a process speech is to demonstrate how something is done or made, or 
how it works. Effective process speeches require you to carefully delineate the steps in 
the process and the order in which they occur. Then you group the steps and develop 
concrete explanations for each step and substep. Process speeches rely heavily on the 
demonstration method of informing.
Skill Learning Activity 15.3
process speech
a speech that demonstrates 
how something is done or 
made, or how it works.
A carefully prepared and 
well-organized demonstration 
can help listeners retain 
information.
What are the two 
most common 
informative speech 
frameworks?
Chris Gordon/WireImage/Getty Images

372
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
For example, Allie is a ﬂ oral designer and has been asked by her former art teacher 
to speak on the basics of ﬂ oral arrangement to a high school art class. The teacher has 
allotted ﬁ ve minutes for her presentation. In preparing for the speech, Allie recognized 
that in ﬁ ve minutes she could not complete arranging one ﬂ oral display of any size, let 
alone help students understand how to create various effects. So she opted to demon-
strate only parts of the process and bring arrangements in various stages of completion 
as additional presentational aids. For example, the ﬁ rst step in ﬂ oral arranging is to 
choose the right vase and frog (ﬂ ower holder). So she brought in vases and frogs of 
various sizes and shapes to display as she explained how to choose a vase and frog 
based on the types of ﬂ owers used and the desired visual effect. The second step is 
to prepare the basic triangle of blooms, so she began to demonstrate how to place 
the ﬂ owers she had brought to form a triangle. Rather than hurrying and trying to 
arrange everything perfectly in the few seconds she had, she brought out several par-
tially ﬁ nished arrangements that she had stored behind a draped table. These showed 
carefully completed triangles that used other types of ﬂ owers. The third step is plac-
ing additional ﬂ owers and greenery to complete an arrangement and achieve various 
artistic effects. Again, Allie demonstrated how to place several blooms, and then, as 
she described them, she brought out several completed arrangements that illustrated 
various artistic effects. Even though Allie did not physically perform all of each step, 
her visual presentation was an excellent demonstration of ﬂ oral arranging.
Although some process speeches require you to demonstrate, others are not suited 
to demonstrations. For these, you can use visual aids to help the audience see the steps 
in the process. In a speech on making iron, it wouldn’t be possible to demonstrate the 
process in a classroom; however, a speaker would be able to greatly enhance the verbal 
description by showing pictures or drawings of each stage.
In process speeches, the steps are the main points, and the speech is organized in 
time order, so the earlier steps are discussed before later ones.
To see a sample process speech, “Flag Etiquette” by Cindy Gardner, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! to access the Interactive Video Activities for 
Chapter 15. In addition to watching this speech, you can also read Cindy’s adaptation 
plan, outline, and manuscript and analyze them using the process speech evaluation 
form provided.
Expository Speech Frameworks
The goal of an expository speech is to provide carefully researched, in-depth knowl-
edge about a complex topic. For example, “understanding the health care debate,” 
“the origins and classiﬁ cation of nursery rhymes,” “the sociobiological theory of child 
abuse,” and “viewing gangsta rap as poetry” are all topics on which you could give 
an interesting expository speech. Lengthy expository speeches are known as lectures.
All expository speeches require that the speaker use an extensive research base for 
preparing the presentation, choose an organizational pattern that helps the audience 
understand the material being discussed, and use a variety of the informative methods 
to sustain the audience’s attention and comprehension of the material presented.
Even college professors who are experts in their ﬁ elds draw from a variety of 
source material when they prepare their lectures. You will want to acquire your infor-
mation from reputable sources. Then as you are speaking, you will want to cite the 
sources for the information you present. You do so in the form of oral footnotes—oral 
references to the original source of particular information at the point of presenting it 
during a speech. In this way, you can establish the trustworthiness of the information 
you present and also strengthen your own credibility.
Web Resources 15.3
expository speech
an informative presentation 
that provides carefully 
researched, in-depth 
knowledge about a complex 
topic.
oral footnotes
oral references to the 
original source of particular 
information at the point of 
presenting it during a speech.
What are the major 
types of expository 
speeches?
What are the 
major elements of 
process speeches?

373
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
Expository speakers also must choose an organizational pattern that is best suited 
to the material they will present. Different types of expository speeches are suited to 
different organizational patterns, so it is up to the speaker to arrange the main points 
of the speech so they ﬂ ow in a manner that aids audience understanding and memory.
Finally, a hallmark of effective expository speaking is that it uses various methods 
of informing for developing material. Within one speech, a speaker may use descrip-
tions, deﬁ nitions, comparisons and contrasts, narration, and short demonstrations to 
develop the main points.
Expository speeches include speeches that explain a political, economic, social, 
religious, or ethical issue; those that explain events or forces of history; those that 
explain a theory, principle, or law; and those that explain a creative work.
Exposition of political, economic, social, religious, or ethical issues
An expository speech can help the audience understand the background or context of 
a political, economic, social, religious, or ethical issue. In such a speech, you would 
explain the forces that gave rise to the issue and are continuing to affect it. You may 
also present the various positions that are held about the issue and the reasoning 
behind these positions. Finally, you may discuss various ways that have been pre-
sented for resolving the issue.
A Process Speech
 1. Follow the speech plan Action Steps to prepare a process speech. 
Your instructor will announce the time limit and other parameters for 
this assignment.
 2. Criteria for evaluation include the general criteria of topic and pur-
pose, content, organization, and presentation, but special emphasis 
will be placed on how intellectually stimulating the topic is made for 
the audience, how creatively ideas are presented, and how clearly 
the important information is emphasized.
 3. Prior to presenting your speech, prepare a complete sentence 
outline and source list (bibliography) as well as a written plan for 
adapting your speech to the audience. If you have used Speech 
Builder Express to complete the action step activities online, you will 
be able to print out a copy of your completed outline and source 
list. Your adaptation plan should describe how you plan to verbally 
and visually adapt your material to the audience and how you will 
address the following issues:
•  Establish common ground
•  Build and maintain audience interest
•  Adjust to the audience’s knowledge and sophistication
•  Build speaker credibility
•  Adapt to the audience’s attitudes toward your speech goal
•  Adapt to audiences from different cultures and language 
 communities (if relevant for you in this speech)
•  Use presentational aids to enhance audience understanding 
and memory
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet

374
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
The general goal of your speech is to inform, not to persuade. So you will want 
to present all sides of controversial issues, without advocating which side is better. 
You will also want to make sure that the sources you are drawing from are respected 
experts and are objective in what they report. Finally, you will want to present com-
plex issues in a straightforward manner that helps your audience understand them, 
while not oversimplifying knotty issues. Figure 15.3 provides examples of topic ideas 
for an expository speech about a political, economic, social, religious, or ethical issue.
For example, while researching a speech on drilling for oil and natural gas in 
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR), you need to be careful to consult articles and 
experts on all sides of this controversial issue and fairly represent and incorporate their 
Pop Comm!
Coloring the News: Is the 
Information Provided by the 
Media Biased?
When you watch a newscast or read an online 
news article, do you expect the information you 
receive to be objective and reported without any 
kind of bias? Or do you assume that all news 
is biased in some way? Or do you assume bias 
only from certain sources, such as FOX News 
or MSNBC, which have both been accused of, 
respectively, a conservative and a liberal bias.
What makes us think that the news we receive 
is biased or unbiased? One of the factors is presenta-
tion. One journalist who personiﬁ es a professional, 
unbiased delivery—even almost thirty years after 
his ﬁ nal broadcast as a news anchor—is Walter 
Cronkite. Cronkite anchored and reported for the 
CBS Evening News from 1962 to 1981 and was so 
admired and respected that he was named “the most 
trusted man in America” in a 1972 poll. He deliv-
ered the news in a calm, straightforward manner no 
matter what he was reporting, betraying emotion 
only rarely, such as when he announced the death 
of President John F. Kennedy. He also took pains 
to ensure that he would be clearly understood by 
listeners, training himself to speak 124 words per 
minute, which is 40 words per minute slower than 
the average American speaks (Hinckley, 2009). And 
he always made it very clear when he was veering 
from the reporting the news to expressing an opin-
ion. A tireless advocate of objective journalism, he 
once said, “[The journalist’s] job is only to hold up 
the mirror—to tell and show the public what has 
happened.” (Leopold, 2009).
Contrast this image of responsible, reliable 
reporting with the information we receive from 
many cable TV news programs today. In an effort 
to fulﬁ ll cable TV’s demand for 24-hour-a-day 
programming, even respected news organizations 
Kevin Lamaque/Reuters/Landov
MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty Images

375
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
Figure 15.3
Topic ideas for expository 
speeches about political, 
economic, social, religious, or 
ethical issues
gay marriage 
stem cell research 
health care
afﬁ rmative action 
school vouchers 
hate speech
school uniforms 
media bias 
home schooling
immigration 
downloading music 
eating disorders
views in your outline. You will want to discuss all important aspects of this complex 
issue, including the ecological, economic, political (national, state, and local), and 
technological aspects. If time is limited, you might discuss just one or two of these 
such as CNN must present not only the “hard 
news” but also news analysis, sensational graph-
ics, and chitchat among program hosts. As a 
result, the news many people watch blurs the lines 
between opinion, entertainment, and the straight-
forward presentation of facts. In addition, some 
cable news anchors and show hosts have become 
the subject of controversy for their on-air rants, 
partisan attacks, and melodramatic grandstand-
ing, including Bill O’Reilly, Keith Olbermann, and 
Geraldo Rivera—all of whom are reporters who 
were trained in the principles of fair reporting.
Another factor that makes us suspect the 
information in news reports is biased is how 
events are covered. News coverage during presi-
dential campaigns tends to generate a lot of 
interest and analysis. During the 2008 presiden-
tial race, some charged the media was showing 
bias in support of Democratic candidate Barack 
Obama. The Washington Post’s Deborah Howell 
(2008) reported that during the ﬁ rst week of June 
2008, Obama dominated political stories by 142 
to Republican candidate John McCain’s 96, a 
3-to-1 advantage. Although she acknowledged 
that numbers weren’t everything and that Obama 
generated a lot of coverage because he was the 
ﬁ rst African American nominee and initially less 
well-known than McCain, she argued that readers 
deserved comparable coverage of both candidates.
Nonetheless, there is little consensus in the 
debate over media bias. People disagree not only 
about the issue of bias itself, but also about how to 
determine if there is bias, or if such a determina-
tion is even possible. For example, expert statistical 
analysis of media bias, such as A Measure of Media 
Bias by Tim Groseclose and Jeffrey Milyo, has been 
disputed by other experts who believed there were 
faults in this study’s research methods (Liberman, 
2005). And Scientiﬁ c American’s Vivian B. Martin 
(2008) writes, “Most media scholars do not think 
the issue of bias can be settled by a formula.”
Whatever your thoughts about media bias, 
you’ll be a better-informed consumer if you 
learn how to evaluate news source bias critically. 
Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR) pro-
vides a helpful list of factors that can contribute 
to bias in news reporting (“What’s Wrong with 
the News?” n.d.):
• Corporate ownership
• Advertiser inﬂ uence
• Ofﬁ cial agendas
• Telecommunications policy
• The public relations industry
• Pressure groups
• The narrow range of debate
• Censorship
• Sensationalism
FAIR also recommends asking the following criti-
cal questions when evaluating news information 
(“How to Detect Bias,” n.d.):
• Who are the sources?
• Is there a lack of diversity?
• From whose point of view is the news reported?
• Are there double standards?
• What are the unchallenged assumptions?
• Is the language loaded?
• Is there a lack of context?
• Do the headlines and stories match?
•  Are stories on important issues featured 
prominently?

376
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
aspects, but you should at least inform the audience of the other considerations that 
affect the issue.
We often think of broadcast news programs as unbiased. However, as you read 
the Pop Comm! feature “Coloring the News: Is the Information Provided by the Media 
Biased?” consider how that is not necessarily true.
Exposition of historical events and forces
A second important type of expository speech is one that explains historical events 
or forces. It has been said that those who don’t understand history may be destined to 
repeat it. So an expositional speech about historical events and forces can be fascinat-
ing for its own sake, but it can also be relevant for what is happening today. As an 
expository speaker, you have an obligation during your research to seek out stories 
and narratives that can enliven your speech. And you will want to consult sources that 
analyze the events you describe so that you can discuss their impact at the time they 
occurred and the meaning they have today. Although many of us know the historical 
fact that the United States developed the atomic bomb during World War II, an exposi-
tory speech on the Manhattan Project that dramatizes the international race to produce 
the bomb and tells the stories of the main players would add to our understanding 
of the inner workings of secret, government-funded research projects and might also 
place modern arms races and the fear of nuclear proliferation in historical context. 
Figure 15.4 proposes examples of topic ideas for an expository speech about historical 
events and forces.
Exposition of a theory, principle, or law
The way we live is affected by natural and human laws and principles and is 
explained by various theories. Yet there are many theories, principles, and laws 
that we do not completely understand or we don’t understand how they affect us. 
Ann expository speech can inform us by explaining these important phenomena. 
The main challenge for an expository speaker is to ﬁ nd material that explains 
the theory, law, or principle in language that is understandable to the audience. 
You will want to search for or create examples and illustrations that demystify 
complicated concepts and terminology. Effective examples and comparing unfa-
miliar ideas with those that the audience already knows are techniques that can 
help you with this kind of speech. In a speech on the psychological principles of 
operant conditioning, a speaker could help the audience understand the difference 
between continuous reinforcement and intermittent reinforcement with the follow-
ing explanation:
When a behavior is reinforced continuously, each time the person performs 
the behavior, a reward is given, but when the behavior is reinforced inter-
mittently, the reward is not always given when the behavior is displayed. 
Behavior that is learned by continuous reinforcement disappears quickly when 
the reward no longer is provided, but behavior that is learned by intermittent 
reinforcement continues for long periods of time, even when not reinforced. 
slavery 
the papacy 
Irish immigration to the U.S.
women’s suffrage 
the colonization of Africa 
the Vietnam War
the Olympics 
building the Great Pyramids 
the Ming Dynasty
the Crusades 
the Industrial Revolution 
the Balfour Declaration
Figure 15.4
Topic ideas for expository 
speeches about historical 
events and forces

377
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
Every day you can see the effects of how a behavior was conditioned. For 
example, take the behavior of putting a coin in a machine. If the machine is 
a vending machine, you expect to be rewarded every time you “play.” And if 
the machine doesn’t dispense the item, you might wonder if the machine is 
out of order and “play” just one more coin or you might bang on the machine. 
In any case, you are unlikely to put in more than one more coin. But suppose 
the machine is a slot machine or a machine that dispenses instant winner lot-
tery tickets. How many coins will you “play” before you stop and conclude 
that the machine isn’t going to give you what you want? Why the difference? 
Because you were conditioned to a vending machine on a continuous sched-
ule, but a slot machine or automatic lottery ticket dispenser “rewards” you on 
an intermittent schedule.
Figure 15.5 provides some examples of topic ideas for an expository speech about a 
theory, principle, or scientiﬁ c law.
Exposition of creative work
Courses in art, theatre, music, literature, and film appreciation give students tools 
by which to recognize the style, historical period, and quality of a particular piece 
or group of pieces. Yet most of us know very little about how to understand a 
creative work, so presentations designed to explain creative works like poems, 
novels, songs, or even famous speeches can be very instructive for audience 
members.
When developing a speech that explains a creative work, you will want to ﬁ nd 
information on the work and the artist who created the it. You will also want to ﬁ nd 
sources that educate you about the period in which this work was created and inform 
you about the criteria that critics use to evaluate works of this type. For example, if 
you wanted to give an expository speech on Fredrick Douglass’s Fourth of July Oration 
given in Rochester, New York in 1852, you might need to orient your audience by ﬁ rst 
reminding them of who Douglass was. Then you would want to explain the traditional 
expectations for Fourth of July speakers in the mid-1800s. After this, you might want 
to summarize the speech and perhaps share a few memorable quotes. Finally, you 
would want to discuss how speech critics view the speech and why the speech is con-
sidered a great speech.
Figure 15.6 presents examples of topics for expository speeches about creative 
works. Figure 15.7 is a checklist that you can use to analyze any informative speech 
you rehearse or to critique the speeches of others.
Figure 15.5
Topic ideas for expository 
speeches about theories, 
principles, or laws
natural selection 
diminishing returns 
psychoanalytic theory
gravity 
Boyle’s law 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs
global warming 
number theory 
intelligent design
feminist theory 
color theory 
social cognitive theory
Figure 15.6
Topic ideas for expository 
speeches about creative 
works
hip-hop music 
the ﬁ lms of Alfred Hitchcock 
inaugural addresses
Impressionist painting 
the love sonnets of Shakespeare 
the Harry Potter series
salsa dancing 
Kabuki theater 
iconography
women in cinema 
children’s book illustration 
fad dances

378
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
You can use this form to critique informative speeches you hear in class. As you 
listen, outline the speech and identify which informative speech framework the 
speaker is using. Then answer the questions that follow.
Informative Speech Critique
Process Speech
Expository Speech:
_____ Exposition of political, economic, social, religious, or ethical issue
_____ Exposition of historical events or forces
_____ Exposition of a theory, principle, or law
_____ Exposition of creative work
General Criteria
_____ 1.  Was the speciﬁ c goal clear?
_____ 2.  Were the main points developed with breadth and depth of appropriate 
supporting material?
_____ 3.  Was the introduction effective in creating interest and introducing the 
main points?
_____ 4. Was the speech organized and easy to follow?
_____ 5. Was the language clear, inclusive, vivid, and appropriate?
_____ 6.  Was the conclusion effective in summarizing the main points and provid-
ing closure?
_____ 7. Was the vocal delivery intelligible, conversational, and expressive?
_____ 8.  Did the body actions appear poised, natural, spontaneous, and 
appropriate?
Speciﬁ c Criteria for Process Speeches
_____ 1.  Was the introduction clear in previewing the process to be explained?
_____ 2. Was the speech easy to follow and organized in a time order?
_____ 3. Were presentational aids used effectively to clarify the process?
_____ 4. Did the process use a demonstration method effectively?
Speciﬁ c Criteria for Expository Speeches
_____ 1.  Was the speciﬁ c goal of the speech to provide well-researched 
 information on a complex topic?
_____ 2.  Did the speaker effectively use a variety of methods to convey the 
information?
_____ 3.  Did the speaker emphasize the main ideas and important supporting 
material?
_____ 4.  Did the speaker present in-depth, high-quality, appropriately cited 
information?
Figure 15.7
Informative speech 
evaluation checklist
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet
An Expository Speech
 1. Follow the speech plan Action Steps to prepare a ﬁ ve- to eight-minute 
informative speech in which you present carefully researched, in-depth 
information about a complex topic. Your instructor will announce other 
parameters for this assignment.

379
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
2. Criteria for evaluation include all the general criteria of topic and  purpose, 
content, organization, and presentation, but special emphasis will be 
placed on how intellectually stimulating the topic is made for the  audience, 
how creatively ideas are presented, and how clearly the  important infor-
mation is emphasized. Use the informative speech evaluation checklist in 
Figure 15.7 to critique yourself as you practice your speech.
3. Prior to presenting your speech, prepare a complete-sentence outline, a 
reference list (bibliography), and a written plan for adapting your speech 
to the audience. If you have used Speech Builder Express to complete the 
action step activities online, you will be able to print out a copy of your 
completed outline and source list. Your adaptation plan should describe 
how you plan to verbally and visually adapt your material to the audi-
ence and how you will address the following issues:
• Establish common ground
• Build and maintain audience interest
• Adjust to the audience’s knowledge and sophistication
• Build speaker credibility
• Adapt to the audience’s attitudes toward your speech goal
•  Adapt to audiences from different cultures and language communi-
ties (if relevant for you in this speech)
•  Use presentational aids to enhance audience understanding and 
memory
Sample Informative Speech
Making Ethanol
by Louisa Greene*
This section presents a sample expository speech adaptation plan, outline, and 
 transcript given by a student in an introductory speaking course.
1. Review the outline and adaptation plan developed by Louisa Greene in preparing 
her speech on ethanol.
 2. Then read the transcript of her speech.
 3. Use the Informative Speech Evaluation Checklist from Figure 15.7 to help you 
evaluate this speech.
 4. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! to watch a video clip of Louisa pre-
senting her speech in class.
 5. Write a paragraph of feedback to Louisa, describing the strengths of her presenta-
tion and what you think she might do next time to be more effective.
You can use your Premium Website for Communicate! to complete this activity 
online, print a copy of the Informative Speech Evaluation Checklist, compare your 
feedback to that of the authors, and, if requested, e-mail your work to your instructor. 
Access the Interactive Video Activities for Chapter 15.
*Used with permission of Louisa Greene.

380
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
Adaptation Plan
 1. Speaking directly to the audience: I will begin my speech by asking the audience 
a question. Throughout the speech I will refer to the audience’s previous knowl-
edge and experience.
 2. Building credibility: Early in the speech I will tell the audience about how I got 
interested in ethanol when I built a still as a science fair project in high school. I 
will also tell them that I am now a chemical engineering major and am hoping to 
make a career in the alternative fuel industry.
 3. Getting and maintaining interest: Because my audience is initially unlikely to 
be interested in how to produce ethanol, I will have to work hard to interest them 
and to keep their interest throughout the speech. I will try to gain their interest 
in the introduction by relating the production of ethanol, the fuel, to the produc-
tion of “white lightning,” the illegal alcohol, which might be of more interest to 
the average college student. Throughout the speech, I will use common analogies 
and metaphors to explain the complex chemical processes. Finally, I will use a 
 well-designed PowerPoint presentation to capture attention.
 4. Facilitating understanding: Throughout the speech I will use analogies and meta-
phors and simple language to help the audience understand complex technical 
and chemical processes. I will use transitions and signposts to differentiate the 
steps in the process. The PowerPoint slides will provide a visual reinforcement for 
each step.
 5. Increasing retention: Early in the speech I will give a brief overview of the 
 four-step process used to make ethanol. Then as I speak about each step, I will use 
color-coded PowerPoint slides with headers to reinforce the step being discussed. 
Finally, I will review the steps twice during my conclusion.
Speech Outline
General goal: To inform
Speciﬁ c goal: I want my audience to understand the process for making ethanol 
from corn.
Introduction
 I. Did you know that cars were originally designed to run on ethanol?
 A. Henry Ford was an ethanol enthusiast.
 B. In World War II about 75% of German and American military vehicles were 
powered by ethanol.
 C. In 1978 Robert Warren built a still to produce what he called “liquid  sunshine,” 
which you may know as ethanol.
 II. Both moonshine and ethanol are easily produced using the same method since 
both are pure or almost pure alcohol.
 III. Today, I’m going to explain to you the commercial process that turns corn into alcohol.
 IV. The four steps in the commercial process of making ethanol are ﬁ rst, preparing the 
corn by making a mash; second, fermenting the mash by adding yeast to make beer; 
third, distilling the ethanol from the beer; and fourth, processing the remaining whole 
stillage to produce co-products such as animal feed. (Slide 1. Shows the four step ﬂ ow 
process)

381
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
Body
 I. The ﬁ rst step in the commercial process of making ethanol, preparing the mash, 
has two parts: milling the corn and breaking the starch down into simple sugars. 
(Slide 2. Title: Preparation. Shows corn ﬂ owing from a silo into a hammer mill and 
then into a holding tank where yeast is added)
 A. The corn is emptied into a bin and passes into a hammer mill where it is 
ground into coarse ﬂ our.
 B. After milling the corn ﬂ our, a starch, must be broken down so that it becomes 
simple sugars by mixing in water and enzymes to form a thick liquid called 
slurry.
 1. First the water and corn ﬂ our are dosed with the enzyme alpha-amylase 
and heated.
 2. Then the starchy slurry is heated to help the enzyme do its work.
 3. Later gluco-amylase, is added to ﬁ nish the process of turning the starch 
to simple sugar.
Transition: Once the starch has been turned to sugar, the mash is ready for  fermentation.
 II. The second step of the commercial process for making ethanol is fermenting the 
mash by adding yeast. (Slide 3. Title: Fermentation. Shows yeast added to the 
mash in a fermenter and carbon dioxide being released to form “beer”)
 A. The mash remains in the fermenters for about 50 hours.
 B. As the mash ferments, the sugar is turned into alcohol and carbon dioxide.
Transition: This fermented mash must next be distilled.
 III. The third step of the commercial process for making ethanol is distilling the fer-
mented mash, now called “beer” by passing it through a series of columns where 
the alcohol is removed from the mash. (Slide 4. Title: Distillation of Ethanol. Ani-
mated slide showing beer ﬂ owing into distillation tank, heat being applied to the 
beer, ethanol vapors being released and captured in a condenser)
 A. Distillation is the process of boiling a liquid and then condensing the resulting 
vapor in order to separate out one component of the liquid.
 B. In most ethanol production, distillation occurs through the use of cooling 
columns.
 C. Once the ethanol has reached the desired purity or proof, it is denatured to be 
made undrinkable.
Transition: Once the mash has been distilled, it is ready to be converted into co-
products.
 IV. The fourth step in commercial production is converting the remaining whole still-
age into co-products. (Slide 5. Title: Co-product. Shows a tank with remaining 
whole solids ﬂ owing into a condenser with output ﬂ owing into a bin of animal feed)
Conclusion
 I. As you can see, producing ethanol is a simple four-step process: preparing the 
corn into a slurry or mash, fermenting the slurry into “beer,” distilling the “beer” 
to release the ethanol, and processing the remaining water and corn solids into 
co-products. (Slide 6: Same as Slide 1)
 II. With today’s skyrocketing gas prices, you can see why this simple process of mak-
ing liquid sunshine has resulted in an increase of ethanol plants for cars that can 
use E-85 fuel.

382
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
Work Cited
DENCO. (n.d.). Tour the plant. Retrieved from http://www.dencollc.com/DENCO%20
WebSite_ﬁ les/Tour.htm.
Northwest Iowa Community College Business and Industry Center. (2004, May 7). 
Module 2: Science and technology. Ethanol. Retrieved from http://www.nwicc.
com/pages/continuing/business/ethanol/Module2.htm.
Renewable Fuels Association. (n.d.). The industry—Statistics. Retrieved from http://
www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/.Tham, M. T. (1997). Distillation” An intro-
duction. Retrieved from http://lorien.ncl.ac.uk/ming/distil/distil0.htm.
Warren, Robert. “Make your own fuel.” http://running_on_alcohol.tripod.com/index.
html. Last updated 8/18/2006. Accessed 2:30 p.m. CDT 7/3/2007.
Speech and Analysis
Speech
Did you know that the ﬁ rst Model Ts were designed 
to run on ethanol and that Henry Ford said that etha-
nol was the fuel of the future? Or that in World War 
II about 75 percent of the German and American 
military vehicles were powered by ethanol since oil 
for gasoline was difﬁ cult to obtain? In 1978, during 
the ﬁ rst Arab oil embargo, when gas soared from 62 
cents a gallon to $1.64, Californian Robert Warren 
and others built stills to produce what he called, no, 
not “white lightning” but “liquid sunshine,” which 
we call ethanol.
I became interested in ethanol in high school 
when I built a miniature ethanol still as a science fair 
project. I’m now a chemical engineering major and 
hope to make a career in the alternative fuel industry. 
So, today, I’m going to explain to you the simple pro-
cess that takes corn and turns it into liquid sunshine. 
Speciﬁ cally I want you to understand the process that 
is used to make ethanol from corn.
The four steps in the commercial process of making 
ethanol are ﬁ rst, preparing the corn by making a mash; 
second, fermenting the mash by adding yeast to make 
“beer”; third, distilling the ethanol from the “beer”; and 
fourth, processing the remaining whole stillage to pro-
duce co-products like animal feed. (Slide 1)
The ﬁ rst step in the commercial process of 
 making ethanol, preparing the mash, has two parts: 
milling the corn and breaking the starch down into 
simple sugars. (Slide 2)
The corn, which has been tested for quality and 
stored in a silo, is emptied into a bin and passes into 
a hammer mill where it is ground into coarse ﬂ our. 
Analysis
Louisa begins this speech with a series of rhetorical 
questions designed to pique the audience’s interest 
in her topic. Because at the time she prepared the 
speech, gasoline prices were once again soaring, 
these questions coupled with the example of Robert 
Warren’s solution to a similar problem provide a 
provocative introduction to the general topic of 
ethanol.
At this point Louisa personalizes the topic with a 
self-disclosure that also establishes her credibility.
Although the introduction does a good job of gaining 
attention and interest, it doesn’t explain why the audi-
ence should care about how ethanol is produced. So 
this transition to the thesis statement seems abrupt.
This is a clear statement of her thesis. The PowerPoint 
slide is a simple but effective tool to visually reinforce 
the verbal description.
Throughout the speech Louisa does a good job of using 
signposts to help her audience follow each step of 
the process. Notice how Louisa has nested two steps, 
milling and breaking starch into sugar under the 
more general heading of “preparation.” This grouping 
keeps the main points to a manageable number and 
will help her audience to remember the steps and sub-
steps. Her second slide is simple but effective since it 
reinforces the two substeps.
One thing Louisa could do better throughout the 
speech is to offer listener relevance links. Because 
the audience might not be interested in the topic, 

383
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
This is done to expose more of the corn’s starchy 
material so that these starches can be more easily 
broken down into sugar.
In your saliva, you have enzymes that begin to 
break the bread and other starches you eat into sugar. 
In your stomach, you have other enzymes that ﬁ n-
ish this job of turning starch to simple sugar so your 
body can use the energy in the food you eat. In the 
commercial production of ethanol, a similar transfor-
mation takes place.
To break the milled corn ﬂ our starch into sugar, the 
milled ﬂ our is mixed with water and alpha-amylase, 
the same enzyme that you have in your saliva, and is 
heated. The alpha-amylase acts as Pac-Men and takes 
bites out of the long sugar chains which are bound 
together in the starch. What results are broken bits of 
starch that need further processing to become glucose. 
So later, gluco-amylase, which is like the enzyme in 
your stomach, is added, and these new Pac-Men bite 
the starchy bits into simple glucose sugar molecules. 
Now this mixture of sugar, water, and residual corn 
solids, called slurry or mash, is ready to be fermented.
The second step in the commercial production of 
ethanol is to ferment the mash by adding yeast in an 
environment that has no oxygen and allowing the 
mixture to “rest” while the yeast “works.” (Slide 3) 
This is accomplished by piping the slurry into an 
oxygen free tank called a fermenter, adding the yeast, 
and allowing the mixture to sit for about 50 hours. 
Without oxygen, the yeast feeds on the sugar and 
gives off ethanol and carbon dioxide as waste prod-
ucts. Eventually, deprived of oxygen, the yeast dies.
This is similar to what happens when we add yeast 
to bread dough. But in bread dough, the carbon diox-
ide is trapped in the dough and causes it to rise, and 
the alcohol is burned off when the bread is baked.
In ethanol production, the carbon dioxide is not 
trapped in the watery slurry. Since it is as a gas, it 
bubbles out of mixture and is captured and released 
into the outside air. The ethanol however, remains in 
the mixture that is now called “beer” with the water 
and the nonfermentable corn solids. At the end of 
fermentation process, it is the ethanol in the mixture 
that retains much of the energy of the original sugar. 
At this point we are now ready to separate or distill 
the ethanol from the other parts of the beer.
The third step in the commercial production of 
ethanol is distillation, which is the process of purifying 
a liquid by heating it and then condensing its vapor. 
So for example, if you boiled your tap  water and con-
densed the steam that was produced, you would have 
she should remind them of its relevance whenever 
possible.
Louisa helps the audience understand the unfamil-
iar starch-to-sugar conversion by comparing it to the 
familiar process of digestion.
The Pac-Man analogy also helps the audience to visu-
alize what is occurring during the starch to sugar 
conversion.
The last sentence in this paragraph is an excel-
lent transition between the two main points.
Even though she used an effective transition state-
ment, Louisa continues to help the audience stay 
with her by using the signpost “second step.” Her 
third slide, a visual of the “fermentation equation,” 
nicely simpliﬁ es the complex chemistry that underlies 
fermentation.
By comparing fermentation in corn mash to bread 
making, Louisa is able again to make the strange 
familiar, and she contrasts what happens to the alco-
hol and the carbon dioxide in ethanol production and 
bread.
She uses another effective transition statement to sig-
nal to her audience that she will be moving to the 
third step.
Again she uses a signpost to reinforce to the audience 
that what follows is a description of the third step.

384
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
puriﬁ ed water with no minerals or other impurities. 
But distilling ethanol is a bit more complicated since 
both the ethanol and the water in the beer are liquids 
and can be vaporized into steam by adding heat.
Luckily, different liquids boil at different temper-
atures, and since ethanol boils at 173° F while water 
boils at 212°F, we can use this boiling point differ-
ence to separate the two. So to simplify what is really 
a more complex process, (Slide 4) in the commercial 
distillation of ethanol, a column or series of columns 
are used to boil off the ethanol and the water and 
then to separate these vapors so that the ethanol 
vapors are captured and condensed back into pure 
liquid ethanol. The liquid ethanol is then tested to 
make sure that it meets the speciﬁ cations for purity 
and proof. At this point, ethanol is drinkable alco-
hol and would be subject to a $20 per gallon fed-
eral excise tax. To avoid this it is “denatured”—made 
undrinkable by adding gasoline to it. After this, the 
ethanol is ready to be transported from the plant.
The fourth step in the commercial production 
process is converting the whole stillage into co-prod-
ucts. (Slide 5) One of the greatest things about pro-
ducing ethanol is that the water and nonfermentable 
corn solids which are left after the ethanol is distilled 
aren’t just thrown out as waste. Instead, the remain-
ing water and nonfermentable corn solids can also 
be processed to make co-products that are primarily 
used as animal feed.
So as you have seen, the process of making etha-
nol is really quite simple. (Slide 6) One, prepare the 
corn by milling and breaking its starch into sugar. Two, 
ferment the mash using yeast. Three, distill off the eth-
anol from the beer, and four, process the co-products.
In 1980, when Robert Warren was operating his 
still, only 175 million gallons of ethanol were being 
commercially produced in the United States. Twenty-
ﬁ ve years later, according to the Renewable Fuels 
Association, 4.85 billion gallons were produced. That’s 
a whopping 2,674% increase! And it is a trend that is 
continuing. Automobile manufacturers and service sta-
tions are gearing up to satisfy the increased demand for 
E-85, a fuel that is 85% ethanol. And you may already 
own a car that is a ﬂ exible fuel vehicle. So keep an 
eye out at your local service station for that green-
handled pump. And when you see it, think of the four 
easy steps, preparation, fermentation, distillation, and 
processing co-products that were used to produce it.
I’d be happy to answer any questions you may 
have.
Her fourth slide is much more elaborate than the oth-
ers. The animation in the slide helps the audience to 
visualize how distillation works. It would have been 
more effective, however, had she been able to control 
the motion so that each stage was animated as she 
talked about it instead of having quickly moving ani-
mation and then a static image.
The last sentence serves as an internal conclusion to 
the fourth step.
A signpost marks the beginning of her brief 
discussion of the fourth main point. The slide is so 
simple that it really isn’t needed to aid audience 
understanding, but it is a visual reinforcement of this 
step, and the audience has been conditioned to expect 
one slide per point.
Louisa begins the conclusion with a summary of 
her main points. The sixth slide, a repetition of the 
ﬁ rst slide, visually closes the loop and reinforces the 
four steps.
The conclusion then makes a circular reference 
back to Robert Warren, who was introduced at the 
beginning of the speech. Then Louisa uses the sta-
tistics on ethanol production to drive home the point 
that ethanol is once again an important fuel source 
and that in the near future ethanol may be a fuel used 
by members of the audience.
Notice how cleverly Louisa uses the ﬁ nal state-
ment to once again reinforce the four steps of the 
ethanol production process. By leaving the sixth slide 
on the screen until the end of her speech, she is able 
to point to it as she provides this quick recap.
Louisa could have offered a better ending clincher 
by tying her ﬁ nal sentence back to her introductory 
comments about Henry Ford. For example, she might 
have said, “Almost a century later, it seems that 
what Henry Ford said will be coming true. Look for 
a green-handled pump coming soon to a gas station 
near you.”

385
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
Summary
An informative speech is one that has a goal to explain or describe facts, truths, and 
principles in a way that stimulates interest, facilitates understanding, and increases 
likelihood that audiences will remember. In short, informative speeches are designed 
to educate an audience.
Effective informative speeches are intellectually stimulating, relevant, creative, 
memorable, and address diverse learning styles. Informative speeches will be perceived 
as intellectually stimulating when the information is new and when it is explained in 
a way that excites interest. Informative speeches are creative when they produce new 
or original ideas or insights. Informative speeches stimulate memory when they round 
the four-stage cycle of learning.
We can inform by describing something, deﬁ ning it, comparing and contrasting it 
with other things, narrating a story about it, or demonstrating it.
Two common frameworks for informative speeches are process speeches, in which 
the steps of something are shown, and expository speeches, which are well-researched 
explanations of complex ideas. Expository speeches can explain political, economic, 
social, religious, or ethical issues; events or forces of history; a theory, principle, or 
law; or a creative work.
A Question of Ethics
After class, as Gina and Paul were discussing 
what they intended to talk about in their pro-
cess speeches. Paul said, “I think I’m going to talk 
about how to make a synthetic diamond.”
Gina was impressed. “That sounds interest-
ing. I didn’t know you had expertise with that.”
“I don’t. But the way I see it, Professor 
Henderson will really be impressed with my 
speech because my topic will be so novel.”
“Well, yeah,” Gina replied, “but didn’t he stress 
that for this speech we should choose a topic that 
was important to us and that we knew a lot about?”
“Sure,” Paul said sarcastically, “he’s going to 
be impressed if I talk about how to maintain a 
blog? Forget it. Just watch—everyone’s going to 
think I make diamonds in my basement, and I’m 
going to get a good grade.”
 1. Is Paul’s plan unethical? Why?
 2. What should Gina say to challenge Paul’s last 
statement?
What Would You Do?
Now that you have read Chapter 15, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
Communicate! Active Online Learning

386
 
Chapter 15 Informative Speaking
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore commu-
nication concepts online (Web Resources), develop 
your speech outlines (Speech Builder Express 3.0), 
watch and critique videos of communication situ-
ations and sample speeches (Interactive Video 
Activities), upload your speech videos for peer 
reviewing and critique other students’ speeches 
Skill Learning Activities
15.1: Creating through Productive Thinking 
(366)
Use the data in the table below to practice pro-
ductive thinking. Create a list of all of the speech 
ideas suggested by these data.
Annual dropout rates of U.S. high school students, 
1999
Characteristics
Dropout rate (%)
Average total
4.7
Sex
 Male
4.3
 Female
5.1
Race and Hispanic origin
 White
4.4
 White non-Hispanic
3.8
 Black
6.0
  Asian and Paciﬁ c 
Islander
4.5
 Hispanic (of any race)
7.1
Family income
 Less than $20,000
9.0
 $20,000–$39,000
3.8
 $40,000 and over
2.3
(Speech Studio online speech review tool), and 
download chapter review so you can study when 
and where you’d like (Audio Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning  Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the  following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment and speech activity in the 
body of the chapter.
Characteristics
Dropout rate (%)
Grade level
 10th grade
2.7
 11th grade
3.7
 12th grade
8.5
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 
October 1999.
15.2: Techniques to Emphasize Important 
Information (367)
Access 
Web 
Resource 
15.2 
and 
read 
“Characteristics of Change Agents,” a speech by 
Billy O. Wireman. Analyze the techniques the speaker 
used to emphasize important points. How could the 
speaker have improved his emphasis? Can you iden-
tify speciﬁ c places and techniques where this aspect 
of the speech could have been improved? Write an 
essay in which you analyze this aspect of the speech 
and make speciﬁ c recommendations for improving it.
To help you complete this activity, you can use 
the data sheet provided in your Premium Website for 
Communicate! Look for it in the Skill Learning activi-
ties for Chapter 15.
15.3: Evaluating Demonstrations (371)
Watch an informative speech involving a 
 demonstration, and evaluate how effectively the 
speaker performed the demonstration. (Do-it-yourself 
Key Terms
antonym (369)
comparison and contrast (369)
creative (365)
deﬁ nition (369)
demonstration (370)
description (368)
expository speech (372)
informative speech (364)
intellectually stimulating (364)
listener relevance links (365)
narration (370)
process speech (371)
synonym (369)

387
 
Chapter 15  Informative Speaking 
and home improvement TV programs, like those on 
the cable DIY, Style, and HGTV channels, often feature 
demonstrations.) Did the speaker perform a complete 
or modiﬁ ed demonstration? Did the speaker use only 
the tools, equipment, or other items needed to per-
form the demonstrated task, or did he or she also use 
other items, such as visual aids? How effective was 
the demonstration overall? Were there any areas of 
the demonstration the speaker could have improved?
Web Resources
15.1: A Theory about Genius (365)
To read about techniques that can help stimu-
late “productive“ rather than “reproductive” thought, 
go to creativity expert Michael Michalko’s Website 
and ﬁ nd the article “A Theory about Genius” in the 
Library of Articles.
15.2: Change Agents (367)
To analyze a speech for its use of emphasis, use 
AccessMyLibrary.com (free with registration) to ﬁ nd 
the article “Characteristics of Change Agents” by 
Billy O. Wireman.

16
Persuasive Speaking
Questions you will be able to answer after reading this chapter:
• How do people listen to and evaluate persuasive messages?
• What are the different types of persuasive speaking goals or propositions?
• How does the target audience’s initial attitude toward your topic affect 
your proposition?
• How do you develop strong arguments to support your proposition?
• What are some common fallacies to avoid when developing your arguments?
• How can you increase audience involvement through emotional appeals?
• How can you demonstrate goodwill in your speech?
• How might you motivate your audience to act?
• What are some common organizational patterns for persuasive speeches?
As the canvassing volunteers walked out of the auditorium, Dan remarked, “Wow, 
after an hour and a half of dull speeches, I was about to go to sleep, but two 
minutes into Kate Tucker’s speech, I was wide awake.”
“Me too,” Lydia replied. “I mean, with each point she made I could see more 
people listening closely, nodding, and agreeing with what she had to say.”
“Not only were her reasons easy for me to understand,” agreed Stan, “but she 
had the facts to support each point. How could you not believe what she had to 
say and want to do what you can to help the cause?”
“Yes, and she was so passionate about what we need to do. That really got 
me pumped up to get out there and do my part,” noted Trace. “If only everyone 
who spoke tonight had been that good.”
Tiffany Michalka/AP Images

389
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
Although it is easy to get excited about a powerful speech, real-life attempts to per-
suade others require speakers to be knowledgeable about forming arguments and 
adapting them to the needs of the audience. A persuasive speech is one whose goal 
is to inﬂ uence the attitudes, values, beliefs, or behavior of audience members. It is the 
most demanding speech challenge because it not only requires the skills you’ve studied 
so far but also an understanding of how to convince audience members to alter their 
attitudes, beliefs, values, or behavior.
In this chapter, you will learn how to prepare an effective persuasive speech. 
We begin by presenting a theoretical model that explains how people process per-
suasive messages. Then, we use this model to describe how you can meet the 
challenge of developing an effective persuasive speech. To do this, you will build 
arguments that are convincing to your audience, use emotion to increase your 
audience’s involvement, develop your credibility by demonstrating goodwill, use 
incentives to motivate your audience, and choose an effective persuasive organi-
zational pattern.
How We Process Persuasive Messages: The 
Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM)
Do you remember listening carefully and thoughtfully to an idea someone was trying 
to convince you about? Do you remember consciously thinking over what had been 
said and making a deliberate decision? Do you remember other times when you only 
half-listened and made up your mind quickly based on your gut feeling about the 
truthfulness of what had been said? What determines how closely we listen to and how 
carefully we evaluate the hundreds of persuasive messages we hear each day? Richard 
Petty and John Cacioppo (1996) developed a model that explains how likely people are 
to spend time elaborating on information (such as the arguments in a speech), using 
their critical thinking skills, rather than processing the information in a simpler, less 
critical manner. Called the Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM), this theory can be 
used by speakers to develop persuasive speeches that will be inﬂ uential with audience 
members, regardless of how they process information.
The model suggests that people process information in one of two ways. One way 
is intense and time consuming. People using what is called the “central route” listen 
carefully, think about what is said, and may even mentally elaborate on the message. 
The second way, called the “peripheral route,” is a shortcut that relies on simple cues 
such as a quick evaluation of the speaker’s credibility, or a gut check on what the lis-
tener feels about the message.
According to the ELM, what determines if we use the central or peripheral route is 
how important we perceive the issue to be for us. When we feel involved with an issue, 
we are willing to expend the energy necessary for processing on the central route. When 
the issue is less important to us, we take the peripheral route. So, how closely audi-
ence members will follow the speaker’s argument depends on how involved they feel 
with the topic. For example, a person with a chronic illness that is expensive to treat is 
more likely to pay attention to and evaluate proposals to change health care beneﬁ ts. 
Listeners who are healthy will probably quickly agree with suggestions from someone 
they perceive to be credible or go along with a proposal that seems compassionate.
The ELM also suggests that when listeners form attitudes as a result of central 
processing (critical thinking), they are less likely to change their minds than when 
their attitudes are based on peripheral cues. You can probably remember times when 
you were swayed at the moment by a powerful speaker but on later reﬂ ection regret-
ted your decision and changed your mind. Likewise, you probably have some strongly 
persuasive speech
a speech that has a goal 
to inﬂ uence the attitudes, 
values, beliefs, or behavior of 
audience members.
How do people 
listen to and 
evaluate 
persuasive 
messages?

390
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
held beliefs that are based on infor-
mation you have heard and spent 
time thinking about.
When you prepare a persuasive 
speech, you will draw on this theory 
by developing your topic in a way 
that will increase the likelihood 
that your audience members feel 
personally involved with the topic. 
You will want to develop sound 
reasons so that audience members 
who use the central, critical think-
ing approach to your speech will 
ﬁ nd your arguments convincing. 
For members who are less involved, 
you will want to appeal to their 
emotions and include information 
that enables them to see you as 
credible.
What type of audience 
would this be for a speaker 
whose goal was to convince 
them that U.S. armed forces 
should pull out of Iraq and 
Afghanistan? What led you to 
your conclusion?
What are the 
different types 
of persuasive 
speaking goals or 
propositions?
Scott Olson/Getty Images
Writing Persuasive Speech Goals
as Propositions
A persuasive speech’s speciﬁ c goal is stated as a proposition. A proposition is a declar-
ative sentence that clearly indicates the speaker’s position on the topic. For example, “I 
want to convince my audience that pirating copyrighted media (illegally downloading 
music and movies) is wrong.” The goal of a persuasive speech is to get the audience to 
agree with what the speaker is advocating. The goal may focus on what the audience’s 
attitude or belief should be, what they should value, or how they should act. The three 
major types of persuasive goals are stated as propositions of fact, value, or policy.
Types of Persuasive Goals
A proposition of fact is a statement designed to convince your audience that some-
thing did or did not exist or occur in the past, is or is not true in the present, or will 
or will not occur in the future. A proposition of fact takes a position on something not 
known for certain but that can be argued for as true or plausible. Although proposi-
tions of fact may or may not be true—both positions are arguable—they are stated as 
true. For example, you could argue a proposition of fact that “Smoking marijuana 
leads to the use of more dangerous drugs” or “Smoking marijuana is less dangerous 
than drinking alcohol.” Other examples are “There is [or is not] a God”; “Thanks to 
the messaging opportunities of the Internet, the postal service will eventually cease to 
exist”; and “Global warming is destroying the earth” are propositions of fact.
A proposition of value is a statement designed to convince your audience that 
something is good, bad, desirable, undesirable, fair, unfair, moral, immoral, sound, 
unsound, beneﬁ cial, harmful, important, or unimportant (Hill & Leeman, 1997). You 
can attempt to persuade your audience that something has more value than something 
else, or you can attempt to persuade them that something meets valued standards. “A 
low-fat diet is actually better than a fat-free diet” is an example of the former, and 
“Multilingual education is beneﬁ cial to children” is an example of the latter.
proposition
a declarative sentence that 
clearly indicates the speaker’s 
position on the topic.
proposition of fact
a speech goal designed to 
convince the audience that 
something is or is not true.
proposition of value
a speech goal designed to 
convince the audience that 
something is good, fair, moral, 
sound, etc., or its opposite.

391
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
A proposition of policy is a statement designed to convince your audience that a 
speciﬁ c course of action should be taken. Propositions of policy will implore listeners 
using phrases such as do it/don’t do it, should/shouldn’t, and must/must not. “All col-
lege students should be required to take an oral communication skills course in order 
to graduate” and “We must vote for the tax levy to build a downtown entertainment 
center” are propositions of policy. Figure 16.1 provides several examples of how propo-
sitions of fact, value, and policy can be developed from the same topic idea.
Tailoring Your Proposition to Your Audience
As you consider your topic and the proposition you will argue, you’ll want to under-
stand the opinions your audience members currently have about your topic.
Audience members’ opinions about your speech topic can range from highly 
favorable to highly opposed and can be visualized as lying on a continuum like the 
one in Figure 16.2. Even though an audience will include individuals with opinions at 
nearly every point along the continuum, generally their opinions will tend to cluster 
in one area of the continuum. For instance, most of the audience members represented 
in Figure 16.2 were “mildly opposed,” even though a few people were more hostile and 
a few had favorable opinions. This cluster point would be your target audience, the 
group of people you most want to persuade.
The initial attitude of your target audience toward your topic can be classiﬁ ed 
as “in favor” (already supportive), “neutral” (uninformed, impartial, or apathetic), or 
“opposed” (against a particular belief or holding an opposite point of view). You develop 
your proposition based on where your target audience stands initially. Generally, when 
your target audience is opposed, seek incremental change. When your target audience 
is neutral, seek agreement. And when your target audience is in favor , seek action. 
So for the target audience represented on the continuum in Figure 16.2, you would 
proposition of policy 
a speech goal designed to 
convince the audience that 
a speciﬁ c course of action 
should be taken.
target audience
the group of people a 
speaker most wants to 
persuade
Propositions of fact
Propositions of value
Propositions of policy
Mahatma Gandhi was 
the father of passive 
resistance.
Mahatma Gandhi was a 
moral leader.
Mahatma Gandhi 
should be given a 
 special award for 
his views on passive 
resistance.
Pharmaceutical adver-
tising to consumers 
increases prescription 
drug prices.
Advertising of new 
prescription drugs on TV 
is better than marketing 
new drugs directly to 
doctors.
Pharmaceutical 
companies should 
be prohibited from 
advertising prescription 
drugs on TV.
Using paper ballots is 
a reliable method for 
 voting in U.S. elections.
Paper ballots are better 
than electronic voting 
machines.
Using paper ballots 
should be required for 
U.S. elections.
Figure 16.1
Examples of persuasive 
speech propositions
How does the 
target audience’s 
initial attitude 
toward your 
topic affect your 
proposition?
Highly
opposed
2
2
11
1
2
2
0
Opposed
Mildly
opposed
Neither in 
favor nor
opposed
Mildly
in favor
In favor
Highly
in favor
Figure 16.2
Sample opinion continuum

392
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
develop a proposition seeking incremental change in attitude, belief, or value. Let’s 
look a bit closer at each of these types of audiences and how you should focus your 
speech.
Opposed
If your target audience is very much opposed to your goal, it is unrealistic to believe 
that you will be able to change their attitude from opposed to in favor in only one 
short speech. Instead, when dealing with a hostile (strongly opposed) target audience, 
seek incremental change, that is, attempting them to move only a small degree in your 
direction. For example, if you determine that your audience is likely to be opposed to 
the proposition “I want to convince my audience that gay marriage should be legal-
ized,” you might rephrase your proposition to “I want to convince my audience that 
committed gay couples should be able 
to have the same legal protection that 
is afforded to committed heterosexual 
couples through state-recognized civil 
unions.” Then brainstorm potential 
objections, questions, and criticisms 
that might arise, and shape your 
speech around them.
Neutral
If your target audience is neutral, you 
can be straightforward with the rea-
sons in support of your proposition. 
But you should consider whether 
they are uninformed, impartial, or 
apathetic about your topic. If they 
are uninformed, that is, they do not 
know enough about a topic to have 
formed an opinion, you will need 
to provide the basic arguments and 
information. For example, if your tar-
get audience is uninformed about gay 
marriage, you might need to begin by highlighting the legal beneﬁ ts of marriage. 
Make sure that each of your reasons is well supported with good information. If your 
target audience is impartial, that is, they know the basics about your topic but have 
no opinion, you will want to provide more elaborate or secondary arguments and more 
robust evidence. Perhaps your audience knows the legal beneﬁ ts of marriage but needs 
to understand how gay partners who do not have these beneﬁ ts are disadvantaged. 
When target audience members have no opinion because they are apathetic, you will 
need to ﬁ nd ways to personalize the topic for them so that they see how it relates to 
them or their needs. In other words, you need to provide answers to a question such 
as, “I’m not gay, so why should I care?” You can do this by including listener relevance 
links for each main point in your speech.
In favor
If your target audience is only mildly in favor of your proposal, your task is to rein-
force and strengthen their beliefs. Audience members who favor your topic will beneﬁ t 
from an elaboration of the reasons for holding these beliefs. They may become further 
committed to the belief by hearing additional or new reasons and more recent evidence 
that supports it.
uninformed
not knowing enough about 
a topic to have formed an 
opinion.
impartial
knowing the basics about 
a topic but still having no 
opinion about it.
apathetic
having no opinion because 
one is uninterested, 
unconcerned, or indifferent to 
a topic.
Is it more challenging to 
try to change the attitude 
of a hostile audience, or to 
persuade people who are 
neutral to give money to a 
cause?
© Robert Brenner/PhotoEdit

393
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
If your target audience strongly agrees with your position, then you can consider 
a proposition that builds on that belief and moves the audience to act on it. So, for 
example, if the topic is gay marriage, and your audience poll shows that most audience 
members strongly favor the idea, then your goal may be “I want my audience members 
to walk in Saturday’s march in support of gay marriage” or “I want my audience mem-
bers to e-mail their state representatives and urge them to support legislation allowing 
our state to extend the right to marry to gay couples.”
Developing Arguments (Logos) That Support 
Your Proposition
Persuasive speeches develop an argument that is the collective reasons and evidence 
used to support the proposition. Aristotle, the ancient Greek philosopher who is cred-
ited with ﬁ rst articulating how people attempt to persuade, used the term logos to 
denote the logical reasoning used to develop an argument. So, the main points of your 
persuasive speeches are reasons that argue for your proposition. You will choose your 
reasons and the evidence that supports them from the information you have acquired 
during your research.
Finding Reasons to Use as Main Points
Reasons are main point statements that summarize several related pieces of evidence 
and show why the listener should believe or do something. For example, suppose your 
speech proposition is “I want the audience to believe home ownership is good for a 
society.” Based on your research, you develop six potential reasons:
 I. Home ownership builds strong communities.
 II. Home ownership reduces crime.
 III. Home ownership increases individual wealth.
 IV. Home ownership increases individual self-esteem.
 V. Home ownership improves the value of a neighborhood.
 VI. Home ownership is growing in the suburbs.
Once you have identiﬁ ed reasons, you can weigh and evaluate each and choose 
the three or four that have the highest quality. You can judge the quality of each rea-
son by asking the following questions:
 1. Is the reason directly related to proving the proposition? Sometimes, we ﬁ nd 
information that can be summarized into a reason, but that reason doesn’t directly 
argue the proposition. For instance, you may have uncovered a lot of research 
that supports the notion that “home ownership is growing in the suburbs.” 
Unfortunately, it isn’t clear how the growth of home ownership in the suburbs 
beneﬁ ts society as a whole. When choosing reasons, eliminate those that are only 
tangentially related to your proposition.
 2. Do I have strong evidence to support a reason? Some reasons sound impressive 
but cannot be supported with solid evidence. For example, the second reason, 
“Home ownership reduces crime,” sounds like a good one, but if the only proof 
you have is an opinion expressed by one person whose expertise is questionable, 
or if, in your research, you discover that although crime is lower in areas with high 
home ownership, there is little evidence to suggest a cause-and-effect relationship, 
you should eliminate this reason from consideration.
 3. Will this reason be persuasive for this audience? Suppose that you have a lot of 
factual evidence to support the reason “Home ownership encourages self-esteem.” 
Skill Learning Activity 16.1
Web Resource 16.1
How do you 
develop strong 
arguments to 
support your 
proposition?
argument
the collective reasons and 
evidence used to support a 
proposition.
logos
the logical reasoning a 
speaker uses to develop an 
argument.
reasons
main point statements that 
summarize several related 
pieces of evidence and show 
why you should believe or do 
something.

394
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
This reason might be very persuasive to an audience of social workers, psycholo-
gists, and teachers, but it would probably be less important to an audience of 
ﬁ nancial planners, bankers, and economists. Once you have identiﬁ ed reasons that 
are related to the proposition and have strong evidence to support them, choose to 
use as main points of your speech the three or four that you believe will be most 
persuasive for your particular audience.
Selecting Evidence to Support Reasons
Although a reason may seem self-explanatory, audience members will need informa-
tion that backs it up before they will believe it. As you researched, you may have 
discovered more evidence to support a reason than you will have time to use. So, you 
will have to select the pieces of evidence you will present.
Veriﬁ able factual statements are a strong type of evidence to support reasons. 
Suppose, for example, that you were attempting to convince people that Alzheimer’s 
research should be better funded, and you want to use the reason “Alzheimer’s disease 
is an increasing health problem in the United States.” A factual statement that sup-
ports this reason would be “According to a 2003 article in the Archives of Neurology, 
the number of Americans with Alzheimer’s has more than doubled since 1980 and is 
expected to continue to grow, affecting between 11.3 and 16 million Americans by the 
year 2050.”
Statements from people who are experts on a subject can also be used as evidence 
to support a reason. For example, the statement “According to the Surgeon General, ‘By 
2050, Alzheimer’s disease may afﬂ ict 14 million people a year’” is an expert opinion.
Let’s look at an example of how fact and expert opinion evidence can be used in 
combination to support a proposition.
Proposition: I want the audience to believe that playing violent video games leads 
children to become aggressive and violent in real life.
Reason: Playing violent video games increases aggressive emotions in children.
Support: Studies measuring the emotional responses of adolescents to playing vio-
lent video games when compared with emotional responses of children playing 
nonviolent games have shown that violent games increase aggressive emotions. 
[fact] Adolescents themselves often seem to recognize this. In their study pub-
lished in a 1998 issue of Psychological Reports, Grifﬁ ths and Hunt observed that 
when asked to name the “bad things” about computer games, many students 
reported that they make people more moody and aggressive. [opinion] And the 
same study also found that students who were more “addicted” to video games 
were signiﬁ cantly more likely to be in a bad mood before, during, and after play 
than were non-addicted students. [fact]
Regardless of whether the evidence is based on expert opinions or facts, you will 
want to use the best evidence you have found to support your point. You can use the 
answers to the following questions to help you select evidence that is likely to per-
suade your audience:
 1. Does the evidence come from a well-respected source? This question involves 
both the people who offered the opinions or compiled the facts and the book, 
journal, or Internet source in which they were reported. Just as some people’s 
opinions are more reliable than others, some printed and Internet sources are 
more reliable than others. Be especially careful of undocumented informa-
tion. Eliminate evidence that comes from a questionable, unreliable, or biased 
source.

395
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
 2. Is the evidence recent and, if not, is it still valid? Things change, so information 
that was accurate for a particular time may not be valid today. As you look at your 
evidence, consider when the evidence was gathered. Something that was true ﬁ ve 
years ago may not be true today. A trend that was forecast a year ago may have 
been revised since then. A statistic that was reported last week may be based on 
data that were collected three years ago. So whether it is a fact or an opinion, you 
want to choose evidence that is valid today.
   
For example, the evidence “The total cost of caring for individuals with 
Alzheimer’s is at least $100 billion according to the Alzheimer’s Association and 
the National Institute on Aging,” was cited in a 2003 NIH publication. But it is 
based on information from a study using 1991 data that were updated to 1994 
data before being published. As a result, we can expect that today, annual costs 
would be higher. If you choose to use this evidence, you should disclose the age of 
the data used in the study and indicate that today, the costs would be higher.
 3. Does the evidence really support the reason? Just as reasons need to be relevant 
to the proposition, evidence needs to be relevant to the reason. Some of the evi-
dence you have found may be only indirectly related to the reason and should be 
eliminated in favor of evidence that provides more central support.
 4. Will this evidence be persuasive for this audience? Finally, just as when you 
select your reasons, you will want to choose evidence that your particular audi-
ence is likely to ﬁ nd persuasive. So, if you have your choice of two quotations 
from experts, you will want to use the one from the person your audience is likely 
to ﬁ nd more credible.
Types and Tests of Arguments
An argument is the logical relationship between the proposition and the reasons or 
between the reasons and the evidence. If your audience is not convinced that your sup-
porting evidence provides a convincing argument for your reason, they will not agree 
with it. And if your audience doesn’t buy the argument from your reasons, they will 
not support your proposition.
You can develop several kinds of arguments:
 1. Arguing from example. You argue from example when the reasons you offer are 
examples of the proposition or when the evidence you offer are examples of the 
reasons. For instance, if you say, “Anyone who studies can get As” and offer as 
evidence “Tom, Jane, and Josh studied and they all got As,” you would be making 
an argument from example. An argument from example asserts that what is true 
in some instances is true in all instances. When arguing from example, you can 
make sure that your argument is valid by answering the following questions:
• Were enough instances (or examples) cited so that listeners understand that 
they are not isolated or handpicked examples?
• Were the instances typical and representative?
• Are the negative instances really atypical?
  If the answer to any of these questions is no, then consider making your argument 
in a different way.
 2. Arguing from analogy. You argue from analogy when you support your reason 
with a single comparable example that is so signiﬁ cantly similar to the subject 
that it offers strong proof. For example, if you support your proposition “Children 
who play violent video games for two or more hours per day act more aggres-
sively” by saying, “Children who watch violent television programs for two or 
arguing from example
support a claim by providing 
one or more individual 
examples.
arguing from analogy
support a claim with a single 
comparable example that 
is signiﬁ cantly similar to the 
subject of the claim.

396
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
more hours per day act more aggressively than children who don’t,” you would 
be arguing from analogy. An argument from analogy asserts that what is true or 
will work in one set of circumstances is true or will work in a comparable set of 
circumstances. When arguing from analogy, make sure your argument is valid by 
answering these questions:
• Are the subjects really comparable (for example, are video games really simi-
lar to television programs in all important ways)? If they are not, then your 
 argument is not valid.
• Are any of the ways that the subjects are dissimilar important to the  conclusion? 
If so, the reasoning is not sound.
 3. Arguing from causation. You argue from causation when you cite evidence 
that one or more events always or 
almost always bring about, lead to, 
create, or prevent a predictable event 
or set of effects. If you support your 
proposition “Fewer Americans will 
be buying new homes in the next 
year” by saying, “Unemployment is 
higher than it has been in decades” 
and “Banks are applying tougher 
standards for loan approvals,” you 
would be arguing from causation. 
Your argument can be boiled down 
to “The lack of sufﬁ cient funds 
causes a reduction in the number of 
homes being bought.” The general 
form of a causal argument is if A, 
which is known to bring about B, 
has happened, then we can expect B 
to occur. To make sure your causal 
arguments are sound, you should 
answer the following questions:
•  Are the events alone enough to 
cause the stated effect?
•  Do other events accompanying the events cited actually cause the effect?
•  Is the relationship between causal events and effect consistent?
  If the answer to one of these questions is “No,” the reasoning is not sound.
 4. Arguing from sign. You argue from sign when you offer events as outward sig-
nals of the truth of your proposition or reason. For example, you might support 
your point that the recession is worsening by noting that the local soup kitchens 
have experienced an increase in the number of people they are serving. Your argu-
ment would be “Longer lines at soup kitchens are a sign of the worsening reces-
sion.” To test this kind of argument, you should ask the following questions:
• Does the sign cited always or usually signal the conclusion drawn?
• Are a sufﬁ cient number of signs present?
• Are contradictory signs also in evidence?
If your answer to the ﬁ rst two of these questions is no or yes to the third question, 
then your reasoning is not sound.
arguing from causation
support a claim by citing 
evidence that shows one or 
more events always or almost 
always bring about, lead to, 
create, or prevent another 
event or effect.
arguing from sign
support a claim by citing 
information that signals the 
claim.
When the government 
makes manufacturers place 
warning labels on products, 
it is trying to inﬂ uence 
consumers by reasoning 
from causation. Do such 
labels work to persuade you? 
Why or why not?
James Leynse/CORBIS 

397
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
Avoiding Fallacies in Your Reasons and Argument
As you develop your reasons and the argument that you will make, you should be sure 
to avoid fallacies or errors in your reasoning. Five common fallacies are the following:
 1. Hasty generalization. A hasty generalization presents a generalization that is 
either not supported with evidence or is supported with only one weak example. 
Because the supporting material that is cited should be representative of all the 
supporting material that could be cited, enough supporting material must be pre-
sented to satisfy the audience that the instances are not isolated or handpicked. 
Because you can ﬁ nd an example or statistic to support almost anything, avoid-
ing hasty generalizations requires you to be conﬁ dent that the instances you cite 
as support are typical and representative of your claim. For example, someone 
who argued “All Akitas are vicious dogs” based on the sole piece of evidence “My 
neighbor’s Akita bit my best friend’s sister” would be guilty of a hasty general-
ization. It is hasty to generalize about the temperament of a whole breed of dogs 
based on a single action of one dog.
 2. False cause. A false cause fallacy occurs when the alleged cause fails to be related 
to or to produce the effect. The Latin term for this fallacy is post hoc, ergo propter 
hoc, meaning “after this, therefore because of this.” Just because one thing hap-
pened after another does not mean that the ﬁ rst necessarily caused the second. 
Don’t be like people who blame monetary setbacks or illness on black cats or bro-
ken mirrors, and be careful that you don’t present a coincidental event as causal 
unless you can prove the causal relationship. To claim that school violence is 
caused by listening to Marilyn Manson’s shock rock music is an example of a false 
cause fallacy. When one event follows another, there may be no connection at all, 
or the ﬁ rst event might be just one of many causes that contribute to the second.
 3. Ad hominem. An ad hominem fallacy supports a claim by attacking or praising 
the character of someone or something. Ad hominem literally means “to the man” 
[sic]. For example, if Jamal’s support for his claim that his audience members 
should buy an iPhone is that Steve Jobs, co-founder and CEO of Apple Inc., is a 
genius, he would be making an ad hominem argument. Jobs’s intelligence isn’t 
really a reason to buy a particular cell phone. Television commercials that feature 
celebrities using the product are often guilty of committing ad hominem fallacies.
 4. Either-or. An either-or fallacy supports a claim by suggesting there are only two 
alternatives when, in fact, others exist. This kind of fallacy oversimpliﬁ es a com-
plex issue. For example, when Robert argued, “We’ll either have to raise taxes or 
close the library,” he committed an either-or fallacy. He reduced a complex issue 
to one oversimpliﬁ ed solution when there were many other possible solutions for 
keeping the library open.
 5. Straw person. A straw person fallacy occurs when a speaker weakens the opposing 
position by misrepresenting it in some way and then attacking that misrepresented 
(straw person) position. For example, in her speech advocating a seven-day wait-
ing period to purchase handguns, Colleen favored regulation, not prohibition, of 
gun ownership. Bob argued in opposition claiming, “It is our constitutional right 
to bear arms.” However, Colleen did not advocate abolishing the right to bear 
arms. Bob distorted Colleen’s position, making it easier for him to refute.
Have you ever watched an infomercial and been convinced to purchase the 
 product? If so, did the product live up to your expectations? Probably not. Info-
mercials attempt to develop arguments that convince consumers to buy their prod-
ucts. Although these arguments may seem compelling, a student of persuasion will 
quickly identify common reasoning fallacies. You can read more about the history 
hasty generalization
a fallacy that presents a 
generalization that is either 
not supported with evidence 
or is supported with only one 
weak example.
false cause
a fallacy that occurs when 
the alleged cause fails to be 
related to, or to produce, the 
effect.
ad hominem
a fallacy that occurs when 
one attacks the person 
making the argument, rather 
than the argument itself.
either-or
a fallacy that occurs when 
a speaker supports a claim 
by suggesting there are only 
two alternatives when, in fact, 
others exist.
straw person
a fallacy that occurs 
when a speaker weakens 
the opposing position by 
misrepresenting it in some way 
and then attacks that weaker 
(straw person) position.
Skill Learning Activity 16.2
What are some 
common fallacies 
to avoid when 
developing your 
arguments?

398
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
of infomercials, how they’ve changed over time, and what we can expect of them 
in the future in the Pop Comm! feature “You Too Can Have Six-Pack Abs in Only 
Three Weeks.”
Increasing Audience Involvement Through 
Emotional Appeal (Pathos)
As you will recall, the ELM suggests that people are more likely to listen to and think 
about information when they feel personally involved in the topic. We are more likely 
to be involved in a topic when we have an emotional stake in it. If you can give your 
audience members an emotional stake in what you are saying, they are more likely to 
listen to and think about your arguments. Aristotle labeled these appeals to  emotion 
pathos. You can increase your audience members’ involvement by evoking negative or 
positive emotions in your speeches (Nabi, 2002, p. 292).
Negative emotions are disquieting, so when people experience them, they look for 
ways to eliminate the discomfort. You might tap any number of negative emotions in 
your speech. The ﬁ ve most common are fear, guilt, shame, anger, and sadness. Notice 
pathos
appeals to emotion.
Pop Comm!
How can you 
increase audience 
involvement 
through emotional 
appeals?
AP Photo/Chris O’Meara
You Too Can Have Six-Pack 
Abs in Only Three Weeks!
Body by Jake, Body Dome, Bun & Thigh Max, 
and Smart Abs all promise you can trim and 
tone your way to a better body in just minutes 
a day. Besides promising to be the most effec-
tive exercise equipment ever, what do all these 
products have in common? They’re the  subject 
of infomercials. Infomercials are television 
and online programs designed to look like 30- 
or 60-minute talk shows, but they’re actually 
extended  commercials that focus on a product’s 
extraordinary features and offer testimonials of 
its effectiveness.
Infomercials are a relatively new phenom-
enon in advertising—until 1984 the Federal 
Communications Commission banned program-
length commercials, and the ban is still in effect 
for products that are marketed to children (Head, 
Spann, & McGregor, 2001). Although infomercials 
are viewed with skepticism and derision by some, 
others view them as “an example of capitalism 
at its best” (“Billy Mays,” 2009). Whatever you 
think of infomercials, you can’t deny that they are 
everywhere. Even Barack Obama took advantage 
of the infomercial format when he campaigned 
for president. Providing direct communication at 
low production costs, his 30-minute commercial 
played on seven networks and was watched by 
33.55 million viewers (Carter, 2008). Democratic 
strategist Joe Lockhart thought Obama’s strat-
egy was wise: “The beneﬁ t is you get to make 
your closing argument in a dramatic way without 

399
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
in the following statement how fear personalizes the statistics on heart disease and 
piques your interest in listening to what the speaker has to say:
One out of every three Americans age 18 and older has high blood pressure. It 
is the primary cause of stroke, heart disease, heart failure, kidney disease, and 
blindness. It triples a person’s chance of developing heart disease, and boosts 
the chance of stroke seven times and the chance of congestive heart failure six 
times. Look at the person on your right; look at the person on your left. If they 
don’t get it, chances are you will. Today, I’d like to convince you that you are 
at risk of developing high blood pressure.
Positive emotional involvement can also lead audience members to more carefully 
consider your proposition and arguments. When you evoke positive emotions, audi-
ence members will look for ways to sustain or further enhance the feeling. Five of the 
most common positive emotions you can evoke are happiness/joy, pride, relief, hope, 
and compassion. For example, notice how the speaker used the emotion of pride to 
pique interest in a speech designed to get the audience to sign up for an alternative 
spring break experience with Habitat for Humanity:
Imagine you are an Olympian who has won your event and now stands on the 
podium with a medal around your neck as they play your national anthem. 
the ﬁ lter of the media. It gives you more context 
and texture than a 30-second or 60-second ad” 
(Cummings, 2008).
Infomercials have even become sources 
of entertainment. In 2008 and 2009, the 
Snuggie—“A blanket with sleeves!”—and a similar 
product, the Slanket, were frequently referenced 
in popular culture, from YouTube parodies (“The 
Cult of Snuggie”) to 30 Rock storylines (with Liz 
Lemon asserting, “It’s not product placement; I 
just like it!”). And when “infomercial king” Billy 
Mays passed away unexpectedly in June 2009, 
many were inspired to affectionately celebrate his 
inﬂ uence. A “Billy Mays Gangsta Remix” grew to 
quick popularity on YouTube (mastamokei, 2008), 
and a Facebook page “RIP Billy Mays (We Will 
Miss Your Infomercials)” (n.d.) was created, gain-
ing 175,000 fans, many of them posting about 
their favorite Billy Mays product. An Internet 
application was even created in his honor: “Billy 
Mays Caps Lock: Turn your Caps Lock key into a 
Billy Mays key!” (Haller, 2009).
Despite the fun we like to have with infomer-
cials, they have come under criticism in recent 
years. Many Americans put at least part of the 
blame for the economic recession on advertising, 
claiming that it often causes people to buy things 
they don’t need and can’t afford (Crain, 2009). 
But consumer suspicion of the ability of info-
mercials in particular to deceive is nothing new. 
For example, in 2002 Guthy-Renker, the largest 
producer of television infomercials, became the 
subject of a class-action lawsuit, which claimed 
Guthy-Renker made exaggerated claims of proﬁ t-
ability and promoted an Internet “shopping mall” 
that was simply a scam (“Timothy D. Naegele & 
Associates,” 2002).
Because advertisements are inherently per-
suasive, it’s important to view them with a 
critical eye, although certainly not all ads and 
infomercials make false claims. But with info-
mercials, it can be especially easy to overlook 
misleading claims because infomercials typi-
cally have a compelling spokesperson like Billy 
Mays or a popular celebrity like Jessica Simpson 
(Mannes, 2009). Charm and personality can dis-
tract consumers from what’s really being said 
in a persuasive message. If you suspect you see 
questionable claims in an infomercial, be careful 
before you buy. A good rule of thumb is to ﬁ rst 
contact the Better Business Bureau (www.bbb.
org) and see if there have been any complaints 
lodged about the company advertising the prod-
uct. If there have, buyer beware!

400
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
Imagine opening your mail and ﬁ nding out that you have gotten into the top 
ranked graduate program in the country. Now imagine that you are standing 
on the front porch of a brand new home that you have helped to build and are 
being hugged by the mother of four children who, thanks to your selﬂ ess work, 
will no longer have to share a one-bedroom ﬁ fth-ﬂ oor walk-up. Imagine the 
pride? How long has it been since you felt so good? Well, folks, that’s just what 
you’ll experience and much more when you sign up to work with the Habitat 
for Humanity house being constructed in your community.
Some of the techniques you might use to appeal to emotions in your speeches 
include vivid stories and testimonials, startling statistics, emotion-packed listener rel-
evance links, striking presentational aids, provocative language, and animated vocal 
delivery and body language.
Cueing Your Audience Through Credibility 
(Ethos): Demonstrating Goodwill
You cannot expect that everyone in your audience will choose the central process-
ing route when listening to your speech. Some will still pay minimal attention to 
your arguments and instead will use simple cues and process your message using the 
peripheral route. The most important cue for those who process information along 
the peripheral route is the credibility of the speaker. Aristotle used the term ethos to 
characterize such appeals to credibility. One crucial characteristic for motivating unin-
volved audience members to believe what you are saying is your goodwill. Goodwill 
is the audience members’ perception that the speaker (1) understands, (2) empathizes 
with, and (3) is responsive to them. In other words, goodwill is the audience members’ 
belief that your intentions toward them are for their good. Audience members who 
perceive the speaker as exhibiting goodwill toward them are more willing to believe 
what the speaker is saying.
You can demonstrate that you understand your audience by personalizing your 
information. Information you gleaned from your audience analysis can help you. For 
example, Meg, a union rep trying to convince the membership to accept a new con-
tract change to health care beneﬁ ts, might build goodwill by personalizing one aspect 
of the proposal:
I know that about 40 percent of you have little use for eye care, which is part 
of the new package. But for the 60 percent of you who wear glasses or have 
dependents who wear glasses, this plan will not only pay for your annual eye 
exam, but it will also pay 30 percent of the cost of new glasses or 25 percent 
of the new cost of contact lenses. This will mean about $250 in your pocket 
each year, and with less overtime predicted for this year, that’s a real beneﬁ t.
Speakers also demonstrate goodwill by empathizing with their audience. 
Empathizing requires you to go beyond understanding and to identify emotionally 
with audience members’ views. This doesn’t mean, however, that you accept their 
views as your own. It means only that you acknowledge their views as valid. Even 
when your speech is designed to change audience members’ views, the sensitivity you 
show to their feelings will demonstrate goodwill. For example, the union rep might 
demonstrate empathy by saying this:
I can imagine what it will be like for some of you who, under this new plan, 
will go to the drugstore and ﬁ nd that there is now a high co-pay required for 
a drug you take that is no longer on the formulary. But I also guarantee that 
Web Resource 16.2
ethos
appeals to credibility.
goodwill
the audience perception 
that the speaker understands, 
empathizes with, and is 
responsive to them.
How can you 
demonstrate 
goodwill in your 
speech?

401
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
the plan formulary will have drugs that your doctor can prescribe that will be 
direct substitutes, or you will be able to appeal the co-pay.
Finally, to demonstrate goodwill, you will want to show your responsiveness to 
the audience. Being responsive is showing you care about the audience by acknowl-
edging their feedback, especially subtle negative cues. The union rep can demonstrate 
responsiveness by referencing feedback that the membership had provided earlier:
Before we started negotiations, we surveyed you, asking what changes you 
wanted to see in the health care program. Seventy-ﬁ ve percent of you said that 
your number-one concern was keeping the ofﬁ ce visit co-pay at $10, and in 
this contract we were able to do that.
Or, if she notices that some members of the audience are looking disgusted and 
shaking their heads, she might respond:
I can see that some of you are disappointed with the increase in premiums. So 
am I. I wish we could have done better on this issue. But the fact is, health care 
costs have risen 15 percent nationwide this year, and our usage has exceeded 
this average.
By establishing your goodwill, you enhance your credibility with the audience, 
which is especially important for audience members who are not personally involved 
with your topic.
In addition to demonstrating goodwill, several other techniques of good speak-
ing can increase the audience’s perception of your credibility. These include doing the 
following things you have learned about in previous chapters: (1) explain your quali-
ﬁ cations, (2) establish common ground, (3) use and cite orally evidence from respected 
sources, (4) be vocally expressive, (5) dress appropriately, and (6) convey conﬁ dence 
with your posture, poise, and eye contact.
Motivating Your Audience to Act Through 
Incentives
When your speech proposition is aimed at inﬂ uencing your audience members’ atti-
tudes or beliefs, you will use emotional appeals to encourage them to become involved 
with your topic. But when you want to inﬂ uence your audience to act on what you 
have said, you will need to provide motivation by showing how what you are asking 
them to do will meet their needs. Motivation, “forces acting on or within an organism 
to initiate and direct behavior” (Petri, 1996, p. 3), is often a result of incentives that 
meet needs.
An incentive is a reward promised if a particular action is taken or goal is reached 
(Petri, 1996). Incentives can be physical (food, shelter, money, sex), psychological (self-
esteem, peace of mind), or social (acceptance, popularity, status) rewards. Incentives 
are valuable only to the extent that they can satisfy a need felt by the audience mem-
bers, and the value of the incentive for taking the action must not be outweighed by 
costs associated with the action.
Using Incentives to Satisfy Unmet Needs
Incentives are more likely to motivate people when they satisfy an important unmet 
need. Various ways for categorizing needs have been developed. One of the most 
widely recognized is Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. Abraham Maslow divided people’s 
motivation
forces acting on or within an 
organism to initiate and direct 
behavior.
incentive
a reward promised if a 
particular action is taken or 
goal is reached.
How might you 
motivate your 
audience to act?

402
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
needs into ﬁ ve categories, illustrated in Figure 16.3: (1) physiological needs, including 
food, drink, and life-sustaining temperature; (2) safety and security needs, including 
long-term survival and stability; (3) belongingness and love needs, including the need 
to identify with friends, loved ones, and family; (4) esteem needs—ego gratiﬁ cation 
including material goods, recognition, and power or inﬂ uence; (5) cognitive needs; 
(6) aesthetic needs; and (7) self-actualization needs, including the need to develop 
one’s self to realize one’s full potential and engage in creative acts (Maslow, 1954). 
Maslow believed that these needs were hierarchical; that is, that “lower order” needs 
had to be met before we would be motivated by “higher order” needs. In theory, then, a 
person cannot be motivated to meet an esteem need of gaining recognition until basic 
physiological, safety, and belongingness and love needs have been met.
The hierarchical nature of needs is still debated because there is evidence that 
at times, some people will sacriﬁ ce lower order needs to satisfy higher order ones. 
Nevertheless, as a speaker, when you can tie the incentives that accompany your pro-
posal with unmet audience needs, you increase the likelihood that the audience will 
take the action you are proposing. Let’s see how this could work in the volunteering 
for literacy speech with a college student audience. Suppose that, during the speech, 
you point out that people who volunteer 30 hours or more a year receive a recogni-
tion certiﬁ cate and are invited to attend a private dinner with the stars of the hot band 
that will be headlining the big spring campus concert. After announcing this you add,
I know that although most of you care about literacy, you’re thinking about 
what else you could do with that hour. But the really cool part of spending your 
time as a literacy volunteer is that you will feel good about yourself because 
you have improved someone’s life, and you also will be able to list this service 
and recognition on your résumé. As a bonus, you’ll get to brag to your friends 
about having dinner with several celebrities.
In the ﬁ rst part of this short statement, you have enumerated three incentives that 
are tied to volunteering: a physical incentive (a recognition certiﬁ cate), a psychologi-
cal incentive of enhanced self-concept (I feel good about myself because I have helped 
someone else), and a social incentive (having dinner with an elite group and meeting 
celebrities). In the second part you have also tied each incentive to a need that it can 
Lower needs must 
be satisﬁed ﬁrst
Self-actualization needs:
Realization of potential
Aesthetic needs:
Order and beauty
Cognitive needs:
Knowledge and understanding
Esteem needs:
Achievement and gaining of recognition
Belongingness and love needs:
Afﬁliation and acceptance
Safety and security needs:
Long-term survival and stability
Physiological needs:
Hunger, thirst, and so forth
Figure 16.3
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs

403
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
satisfy. With enhanced résumés, people are more likely to get jobs that provide money 
for food and shelter. If by helping someone else, we feel better about ourselves, then 
we have met a self-actualization need. And by attending the private dinner, we might 
satisfy both esteem needs and belongingness needs.
Creating Incentives That Outweigh Costs
As you prepare your speech, you must be concerned with presenting the incentives that 
meet the needs of your audience, and you also need to understand the potential costs 
for audience members who act in line with your proposal. For example, in the literacy 
speech, one obvious cost is the hour of free time each week that might subtract from 
time audience members spend with their friends or family. This could create a potential 
deﬁ cit in their belongingness need. To address this concern, you could point out, “Now, 
I know you might be concerned about the time this will take away from your friends 
or family, but relax. Your friends and family are likely to understand and admire you 
[esteem need substitute for belongingness]. Also, at the literacy center, you’re going to 
have time before the tutoring starts to meet other volunteers [belongingness], and they 
are some really cool people [esteem]. I know a couple who just got engaged, and they 
met through their volunteering [big-time belongingness].”
If, through your audience analysis, you discover that you cannot relate your 
proposition to meeting basic audience needs, or if the analysis reveals that the costs 
associated with your proposition would outweigh the incentives, then you probably 
need to reconsider what you are asking the audience to do. For example, if you dis-
cover that most of your audience members are overcommitted, then it is probably 
unrealistic to think you will be able to convince them to volunteer an hour a week. You 
may need to modify your proposition and persuade them to donate a book or money 
to buy a book for the literacy library.
Finally, if your incentives are going to motivate your audience members, they 
must be convinced that there is a high likelihood that if they act as you suggest, they 
will receive the incentives. It is important, therefore, that you discuss only incentives 
that are closely tied to the action you are requesting and are received by almost all 
people who act in the recommended way. Although there is an annual award for the 
literacy volunteer who has donated the most time that year, mentioning this in your 
speech is unlikely to motivate the audience because only one person receives it and 
the cost is very high.
When you want to move audience members to action, you need to understand 
their needs and explain the incentives they can receive by taking the action you sug-
gest. You also need to make sure that the incentives you mention fulﬁ ll unmet needs 
in the audience.
Organizational Patterns for Persuasive 
Speeches
Having developed a proposition, selected evidence to support your reasons, identiﬁ ed 
ways to increase audience involvement through emotional appeals, determined how 
you will enhance your credibility by developing goodwill, and identiﬁ ed the incentives 
you will use to motivate your audience, you are ready to choose a pattern to organize 
your speech. The most common patterns for organizing persuasive speeches include 
statement of reasons, comparative advantages, criteria satisfaction, refutative, problem-
solution, problem-cause-solution, and motivated sequence. In this section, we describe 
and illustrate these persuasive organizational patterns. So that you can contrast the 
Skill Learning Activity 16.3

404
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
patterns and better understand their use, we will illustrate each pattern by examining 
the same topic with slightly different propositions that use the same or similar reasons.
Statement of Reasons
The statement of reasons pattern attempts to prove propositions of fact by presenting 
the best-supported reasons in a meaningful order. For a speech with three reasons or 
more, place the strongest reason last because this is the reason you believe the audi-
ence will ﬁ nd most persuasive. Place the second strongest reason ﬁ rst because you 
want to start with a signiﬁ cant point. Place the other reasons in between.
Proposition: I want my audience to believe that passing the proposed school tax 
levy is necessary.
 I. The income will enable the schools to restore vital programs. [second strongest]
 II. The income will enable the schools to give teachers the raises they need to 
keep up with the cost of living.
 III. The income will allow the community to maintain local control and will save 
the district from state intervention. [strongest]
Comparative Advantages
The comparative advantages pattern attempts to prove that something has more value 
than something else. A comparative advantages approach to a school tax proposition 
would look like this:
Proposition: I want my audience to believe that passing the school tax levy is 
 better than not passing it. [compares the value of change to the status quo]
 I. Income from a tax levy will enable schools to reintroduce important programs 
that had to be cut. [advantage 1]
 II. Income from a tax levy will enable schools to avoid a tentative strike by 
teachers who are underpaid. [advantage 2]
 III. Income from a tax levy will enable us to retain local control of our schools, 
which will be lost to the state if additional local funding is not provided. 
[advantage 3]
Criteria Satisfaction
The criteria satisfaction pattern seeks audience agreement on criteria that should be 
considered when evaluating a particular idea and then shows how the proposition that 
the speaker is advocating satisﬁ es the criteria. A criteria satisfaction pattern is espe-
cially useful when your audience is opposed to your proposition, because it approaches 
the proposition indirectly by ﬁ rst focusing on the criteria that the audience may agree 
with before introducing the speciﬁ c solution. A criteria satisfaction organization for 
the school levy would look like this:
Proposition: I want my audience to believe that passing a school levy is a good 
way to fund our schools.
 I. We can all agree that a good school funding method must meet three criteria:
 A. A good funding method results in the reestablishment of programs that 
have been dropped due to budget constraints.
 B. A good funding method results in fair pay for teachers.
 C. A good funding method generates enough income to maintain local con-
trol, avoiding state intervention.
statement of reasons 
pattern
a straightforward organization 
in which you present the 
best-supported reasons you 
can ﬁ nd.
comparative advantages 
pattern
an organization that allows 
you to place all the emphasis 
on the superiority of the 
proposed course of action.
criteria satisfaction 
pattern
an organization that ﬁ rst 
seeks audience agreement 
on criteria that should be 
considered when they 
evaluate a particular 
proposition and then shows 
how the proposition satisﬁ es 
those criteria.
What are 
some common 
organizational 
patterns for 
persuasive 
speeches?

405
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
 II. Passage of a local school tax levy is a good way to fund our schools.
 A. A local levy will allow us to re-fund important programs.
 B. A local levy will allow us to give teachers a raise.
 C. A local levy will generate enough income to maintain local control and 
avoid state intervention.
Refutative
The refutative pattern helps you organize your main points so that you persuade 
by both challenging opposing arguments and bolstering your own. This pattern is 
particularly useful when the target audience opposes your position. Begin by acknowl-
edging the merit of opposing arguments and then provide evidence of their ﬂ aws. 
Once  listeners understand the ﬂ aws, they will be more receptive to the arguments you 
present to support your proposition. A refutative pattern for the school tax proposition 
might look like this:
Proposition: I want my audience to agree that a school levy is the best way to 
fund our schools.
 II. Opponents of the tax levy argue that the tax increase will fall only on prop-
erty owners.
 A. Landlords will recoup property taxes in the form of higher rents.
 B. Thus, all people will be affected.
 III. Opponents of the tax levy argue that there are fewer students in the school 
district, so schools should be able to function on the same amount of revenue.
A. Although there are fewer pupils, costs continue to rise.
 1. Salary costs are increasing.
 2. Energy costs are increasing.
 3. Maintenance costs are increasing.
 4. Costs from unfunded federal and state government mandates are 
rising.
 B. Although there are fewer pupils, there are many aging school buildings 
that need replacing or retroﬁ tting.
 IV. Opponents of the tax levy argue that parents should be responsible for the 
excessive cost of educating their children.
 A. A free public education is a hallmark of our democracy and ensures the 
future of our country.
 B. Parents today are already paying more than previous generations.
 1. Activity fees
 2. Lab fees
 3. Book fees
 4. Transportation fees
 C. Of school-age children today in this district, 42 percent live in families 
that are below the poverty line and have limited resources.
Problem-Solution
The problem-solution pattern attempts to argue that a particular problem can be 
solved by implementing the recommended solution. This organization works well when 
the audience is neutral or agrees only that there is a problem but has no  opinion about 
a particular solution. In a problem-solution speech, the claim (“There is a  problem that 
can be solved by X”) is supported by three reasons that take the general form: (1) There 
refutative pattern
an organization that 
challenges opposing 
arguments while bolstering 
your own.
problem-solution pattern
an organization that argues 
that a particular problem can 
be solved by implementing a 
recommended solution.

406
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
is a problem that requires action. (2) Proposal X will solve the problem. (3) Proposal X 
is the best solution to the problem, because it will lead to positive consequences and 
minimize or avoid negative ones. A problem-solution organization for the school tax 
proposition might look like this:
Proposition: The current ﬁ scal crisis in the school district can be solved through 
a local tax levy.
 I. The current funding is insufﬁ cient and has resulted in program cuts, labor 
problems resulting from stagnant wages, and a threatened state take-over of 
local schools. [statement of problem]
 II. The proposed local tax levy is large enough to solve these problems. [solution]
 III. The proposed local tax levy is the best means of solving the funding crisis.
Problem-Cause-Solution
The problem-cause-solution pattern is similar to the problem-solution pattern, but 
it has a main point about the causes of the problem and the solution is designed to 
alleviate those causes. This pattern is particularly useful for addressing seemingly 
intractable problems that have been dealt with unsuccessfully in the past as a result of 
treating symptoms rather than underlying causes. A problem-cause-solution organiza-
tion for the school tax proposition might look like this:
Proposition: The current ﬁ scal crisis in the school district can be solved through 
a local tax levy.
 I. The current funding is insufﬁ cient and has resulted in program cuts, labor prob-
lems, and a threatened state takeover of local schools. [statement of problem]
 II. These problems exist due to dwindling government support and increasing 
costs for operating expenses. [causes]
 III. The proposed local tax levy will solve these problems by supplementing gov-
ernment support and enhancing operating budgets. [solution]
Motivated Sequence
The motivated sequence pattern combines a problem-solution pattern with explicit 
appeals designed to motivate the audience to act. The motivational sequence pattern is a 
uniﬁ ed ﬁ ve-point sequence that replaces the normal introduction-body-conclusion model 
with (1) an attention step, (2) a need step that fully explains the nature of the problem, 
(3) a satisfaction step that explains how the proposal solves the problem in a satisfactory 
manner, (4) a visualization step that provides a personal application of the proposal, and 
(5) an action appeal step that emphasizes the direction that audience action should take. 
A motivational pattern for the school tax levy proposition would look like this:
Proposition: I want my audience to vote in favor of the school tax levy on the 
November ballot.
 I. Comparisons of worldwide test scores in math and science have refocused our 
attention on education. [attention]
 II. The shortage of money is resulting in cost-cutting measures that compromise 
our ability to teach basic academic subjects well. [need, statement of problem]
 III. The proposed increase is large enough to solve those problems in ways that 
allow for increased emphasis on academic need areas. [satisfaction, how the 
proposal solves the problem]
problem-cause-solution 
pattern
an organization that 
demonstrates that there is a 
problem caused by speciﬁ c 
things that can be alleviated 
with the proposed solution 
that addresses the causes.
motivated sequence 
pattern
an organization that 
combines the problem 
solution pattern with explicit 
appeals designed to motivate 
the audience to act.

407
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
 IV. Think of the contribution 
you will be making to the 
education of your  children 
and also to efforts to return 
our 
educational 
system 
to the world-class level it 
once held. [visualization of 
 personal application]
 V. Here are “Vote Yes” buttons 
that you can wear to show 
you are willing to  support 
this much-needed tax levy. 
[action 
appeal 
showing 
 speciﬁ c direction]
Because motivational patterns 
are variations of problem-solution 
patterns, the underlying assumption 
is similar: When the current means 
are not solving the problem, a new 
solution that does solve the problem 
should be adopted. Figure 16.4 is a checklist that you can use to analyze any persua-
sive speech you rehearse or to critique the speeches of others.
Skill Learning Activity 16.4
Web Resource 16.3
How would you apply each 
of the organizational patterns 
described in this chapter to a 
speech about rebuilding the 
wetlands of Louisiana to help 
reduce the effects of a large 
hurricane on New Orleans?
Figure 16.4
Persuasive speech evaluation 
checklist
You can use this form to critique a persuasive speech to convince that you hear in class. 
As you listen to the speaker, outline the speech, paying close attention to the reasoning 
process the speaker uses. Also note the claims and support used in the arguments and 
identify the types of warrants being used. Then answer the questions that follow.
General Criteria
______ 1.  Was the proposition clear? Could you tell the speaker’s position on the 
issue?
______ 2.  Was the introduction effective in creating interest and involving the 
 audience in the speech?
______ 3. Was the speech organized using an appropriate persuasive pattern?
______ 4. Was the language clear, vivid, inclusive, and appropriate?
______ 5.  Was the conclusion effective in summarizing what had been said and 
 mobilizing the audience to act?
______ 6. Was the speech delivered conversationally and expressively?
 
7. Did the speaker establish credibility by demonstrating:
 
 ______ expertise?
 
 ______ personableness?
 
 ______ trustworthiness?
Primary Criteria
______ 1.  Was the speciﬁ c goal phrased as a proposition (were you clear about 
the speaker’s position on the issue)?
______ 2.  Did the proposition appear to be adapted to the initial attitude of the 
target audience?
______ 3.  Were emotional appeals used to involve the audience with the topic?
Yann Arthus-Bertrand/Terra/Corbis

408
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
 
4.  Were the reasons used in the speech
 
 ______ directly related to the proposition?
 
 ______ supported by strong evidence?
 
 ______ persuasive for the particular audience?
 
5. Was the evidence [support] used to back the reasons [claims]
 
 ______ from well-respected sources?
 
 ______ recent and/or still valid?
 
 ______ persuasive for this audience?
 
 ______ typical of all evidence that might have been used?
 
 ______ sufﬁ cient [enough evidence cited]?
 
6. Could you identify the types of arguments that were used?
 
 ______ Did the speaker argue from example? 
______ If so, was it valid?
 
 ______ Did the speaker argue from analogy? 
______ If so, was it valid?
 
 ______ Did the speaker argue from causation? ______ If so, was it valid?
 
 ______ Did the speaker argue from sign? 
______ If so, was it valid?
 
7. Could you identify any fallacies of reasoning in the speech?
 
 ______ hasty generalizations
 
 ______ arguing from false cause
 
 ______ ad hominem attacks
 
 ______ straw person
 
 ______ either-or
______ 8. Did the speaker demonstrate goodwill?
 
9. If the speech called for the audience to take action,
 
 ______  did the speaker describe incentives and relate them to 
 audience needs?
 
 ______  did the speaker acknowledge any costs associated with the 
action?
 
10.  Did the speaker use an appropriate persuasive organizational pattern?
 
 ______ statement of reasons
 
 ______ comparative advantages
 
 ______ criteria satisfaction
 
 ______ refutative
 
 ______ problem-solution
 
 ______ problem-cause-solution
 
 ______ motivated sequence
Overall evaluation of the speech (check one):
______ excellent ______ good ______ average ______ fair ______ poor
Use the information from this checklist to support your evaluation.
Figure 16.4
(Continued)
A Persuasive Speech
 1. Follow the speech plan Action Steps to prepare a speech in which 
you change audience belief. Your instructor will announce the time 
limit and other parameters for this assignment.
 2. Criteria for evaluation include all the general criteria of topic and 
purpose, content, organization, and presentation, but special 
Speech Assignment: Communicate on Your Feet

409
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
emphasis will be placed on the primary persuasive criteria of how 
well the speech’s speciﬁ c goal was adapted to the audience’s 
 initial attitude toward the topic, the soundness of the reasons, 
the evidence cited in support of them, and the credibility of the 
arguments.
 3. Use the persuasive speech evaluation checklist in Figure 16.4 to 
 critique yourself as you practice your speech.
 4. Prior to presenting your speech, prepare a complete sentence 
 outline and source list (bibliography). If you have used Speech 
Builder Express to complete the Action Step activities online, you 
will be able to print out a copy of your completed outline and 
source list. Also prepare a written plan for adapting your speech to 
the audience. Your adaptation plan should address the following 
issues:
• 
How does your goal adapt to whether your prevailing audience 
attitude is in favor, no opinion, or opposed?
• 
What reasons will you use, and how will the organizational pattern 
you select ﬁ t your topic and audience?
• 
How will you establish your credibility with this audience?
• 
How will you motivate your audience?
• 
How you will organize your reasons?
Sample Persuasive Speech
Sexual Assault Policy a Must
by Maria Lucia R. Anton
This section presents the outline and transcript of a sample persuasive speech devel-
oped and presented by college student Maria Lucia R. Anton at the 1994 Interstate 
Oratorical Association competition. It is now published in an anthology of the winning 
speeches by college students that year. An adaptation plan was not required, so the 
one provided here has been created as an example for you to use as you develop your 
own persuasive speech.
 1. Review the outline and adaptation plan for Maria’s speech to petition her school’s 
administration to create and implement a sexual assault prevention policy.
 2. Then read the transcript of Maria’s speech.
 3. Use the persuasive speech evaluation checklist from Figure 16.4 to help you evalu-
ate this speech.
 4. Write a paragraph of feedback to Maria describing the strengths of her speech and 
what you think she might do next time to be more effective.
You can use your Premium Website for Communicate! to complete this activity on-
line, print a copy of the persuasive speech evaluation checklist, compare your feedback 
to that of the authors, and, if requested, e-mail your work to your instructor. Access 
the speech activities for Chapter 16.

410
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
Adaptation Plan
 1. Audience analysis: My audience is composed of traditional-age college students 
with varying majors and classes. Most are European Americans from working- or 
middle-class backgrounds.
 2. Background knowledge: My perception is that my audience knows about sexual 
assault on college campus, but not about the nuances of it.
 3. Creating and maintaining interest: I will involve my audience by appealing to 
several emotions including guilt, sadness, relief, hope, and most of all, compas-
sion. I will use representative examples as short stories.
 4. Organization: I have organized my speech using the motivated sequence.
 5. Building credibility: I will build credibility initially by pausing and looking listen-
ers in the eye before beginning. Throughout the speech I will cite strong sources. I 
will dress professionally and sound emotionally convinced about the topic. I will 
provide credibility at the end by pausing and looking listeners in the eye for a 
moment after appealing to them with my call to action.
 6. Motivation: The incentive that I will offer is that the audience members can act to 
create a sexual assault policy on their campuses. Doing so will appeal to hope and 
safety.
Outline
General purpose: To persuade
Speech goal: I want my audience to petition the administration on their campus to 
formulate and implement a sexual assault prevention policy.
Attention
 I. “If you want to take her blouse off, you have to ask. If you want to touch her 
breast, you have to ask. If you want to move your hand down to her genitals, you 
have to ask. If you want to put your ﬁ nger inside her, you have to ask.” [quotation 
from Antioch College’s sexual offense policy]
A. The policy consists of three major points:
 1. If you have an STD, you must disclose it to a potential partner.
 2. It is not acceptable to knowingly take advantage of someone who is  under 
the inﬂ uence of alcohol or drugs.
 3. Obtaining consent is an ongoing process in any sexual interaction.
B. The policy is designed to create a safe campus environment.
Need
 II. Sexual assault on college campuses is a problem across the nation.
A. Carlton College in Northﬁ eld, Minnesota, was sued for $800,000 in damages 
by four university women. [Time magazine article]
B. Although college administration know of enrolled rapists, they need not say 
or do anything.
C. One in every four college women have been assault victims. [Ms. Magazine 
survey]

411
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
D. Between 30 and 40 percent of male students reported they might force  someone 
to have sex if they knew they would escape punishment. [Ms.  Magazine  survey]
E. The effects of sexual assault on victims is disturbing.
Transition: Many campuses are open invitations for sexual assault. The absence of a 
policy is a grand invitation.
Satisfaction
 III. We need to push for sexual assault policies on our campuses.
A. Antioch policy example.
B. Fundamental points for any sexual assault policy.
 1. Input from students, faculty, staff, and administration is crucial when 
developing the policy.
 2. The policy must be publicized in many venues including the student 
handbook, newspaper, and radio station.
 3. Educational programs must be developed to educate the campus 
 community about the sexual assault policy.
 4. Campuses should outline a step-by-step procedure for reporting and 
 addressing sexual assault perpetrators.
Transition: It is pertinent that universities provide support to victims through such pol-
icies and procedures if college campuses are to be a safe environment for all students.
Visualization
 IV. All students should feel safe leaving the classroom at night.
A. The wheels of justice turn too slowly when sending victims to the local police.
B. Without a policy, there are no speciﬁ c penalties to prosecute offenders.
C. With a policy, would-be offenders will think twice.
D. With a policy, there is at least a chance that justice will be served.
Action
 V. We students must voice our concerns.
A. We must form petitions to demand that our universities create sexual assault 
policies.
B. We must not stop until we’ve succeeded and our campuses have sexual assault 
policies.
Speech and Analysis
Speech
“If you want to take her blouse off, you have to ask. 
If you want to touch her breast, you have to ask. If 
you want to move your hand down to her genitals, 
you have to ask. If you want to put your ﬁ nger inside 
her, you have to ask.” 
What I’ve just quoted is part of the freshman ori-
entation at Antioch College in Ohio. In the sexual 
Analysis
Attention
This opening attracts our attention by personalizing 
the Antioch sexual offense prevention policy. Notice 
how the emotional impact of the policy changes as 
the acts described become more intimate. 

412
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
offense policy of this college, emphasis is given to 
three major points: (1) If you have a sexually trans-
mitted disease, you must disclose it to a potential 
partner; (2) to knowingly take advantage of someone 
who is under the inﬂ uence of alcohol, drugs, and/
or prescribed medication is not acceptable behavior 
in the Antioch community; (3) obtaining consent is 
an ongoing process in any sexual interaction. The 
request for consent must be speciﬁ c to each act. 
The policy is designed to create a “safe” campus 
environment, according to Antioch President Alan 
Guskin. For those who engage in sex, the goal is 100 
percent consensual sex. It isn’t enough to ask some-
one if they would like to have sex; you have to get 
verbal consent every step of the way. 
This policy has been highly publicized and you 
may have heard it before. The policy addresses sexu-
al offenses such as rape, which involves penetration, 
and sexual assault, which does not. In both instances, 
the respondent coerced or forced the primary witness 
to engage in nonconsensual sexual conduct with the 
respondent or another.
Sexual assault has become a reality in many cam-
puses across the nation. Carleton College in North-
ﬁ eld, Minnesota, was sued for $800,000 in damages 
by four university women. The women charged that 
Carleton was negligent in protecting them against 
a known rapist. From the June 1991 issue of Time 
magazine: 
 Amy had been on campus for just ﬁ ve weeks 
when she joined some friends to watch a video 
in the room of a senior. One by one the other stu-
dents went away, leaving her alone with a stu-
dent whose name she didn’t even know. “It ended 
up with his hands around my throat,” she recalls. 
In a lawsuit she has ﬁ led against the college, 
she charges that he locked the door and raped 
her again and again for the next four hours. “I 
didn’t want him to kill me, I just kept trying not 
to cry.” Only afterwards did he tell her, almost 
deﬁ antly, his name. It was on top of the “cas-
tration list” posted on women’s bathroom walls 
around  campus to warn other students about 
college rapists. Amy’s attacker was found guilty 
of sexual  assault but was only suspended. 
Julie started dating a fellow cast member in a 
Carleton play. They had never slept together, she 
charges in a civil suit, until he came to her dorm room 
one night, uninvited, and raped her. She struggled to 
hold her life and education together, but  ﬁ nally could 
Maria Lucia draws on language speciﬁ c to the 
Antioch policy, referring to the “respondent” and the 
“primary witness.” This language could be confusing 
to the audience. It would have been clearer to use the 
terms “aggressor” and “victim.” 
She could have helped the audience to better under-
stand the purpose of the speech if she had previewed 
what was to come. As it is, the transition to the next 
step in the motivated sequence is very abrupt, which 
makes it difﬁ cult to follow. 
Need
Maria Lucia’s ﬁ rst subpoint in support of the need 
for campus sexual offense prevention policies is an 
excellent case example with ﬁ rst-person narratives 
that dramatize the problem and pack a powerful emo-
tional punch. 

413
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
manage no longer and left school. Only later did Julie 
learn that her assailant was the same man who had 
attacked Amy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the court held that the col-
lege knew this man was a rapist. The administration 
may have been able to prevent this from happening 
if they had expelled the attacker, but they didn’t. My 
campus has no reports of sexual assault. Is the admin-
istration waiting for someone to be assaulted before it 
formulates a sexual assault policy? This mistake has 
been made elsewhere; we don’t have to prove it again.
Perhaps some statistics will help you understand 
the magnitude of the problem. According to New 
Statesman and Society, June 21, 1991, issue: 
• A 1985 survey of sampled campuses by 
Ms. Magazine and the National Institute of 
Mental Health found that one in every four 
college women were victims of sexual assault, 
74 percent knew their attackers. Even worse, 
between 30 and 40 percent of male students 
indicated they might force a women to have sex 
if they knew they would escape punishment.
• In just one year, from 1988 to 1989, reports 
of student rape at the University of California 
increased from two to eighty. 
These numbers are indeed disturbing. But more 
disturbing are the effects of sexual assault: a victim 
feeling the shock of why something this terrible was 
allowed to happen; having intense fears that behind 
every dark corner could be an attacker ready to grab 
her, push her to the ground, and sexually assault 
her; many waking moments of anxiety and impaired 
concentration as she remembers the attack; countless 
nights of reliving the traumatic incident in her sleep; 
mood swings and depression as she tries to deal 
 internally with the physical hurt and the  emotional 
turmoil that this attack has caused. 
Many campuses are open invitations for sexual 
assault. The absence of a policy is a grand invitation. I 
have never been sexually assaulted so why do I care so 
much about a policy? You know why—because I could 
be assaulted. I won’t sit and wait to be among one out 
of every four women on my campus to be assaulted. 
The ﬁ rst step to keep myself out of the statistics is to 
push for a sexual assault policy on my campus. One 
way to do this is through a petition to the university.
Although the Antioch policy sounds a little 
 far-fetched and has been the target of criticism in 
comedy routines such as those on Saturday Night 
Here, the startling fact that administration knew 
the man was a rapist serves to heighten emotional 
appeal. 
As the second subpoint supporting the need for these 
policies on campus the speaker cites several star-
tling statistics. Although the percentage of college 
women who were victims of an attack is surprising, 
and the fact that about three quarters of them knew 
their attacker is shocking, it is the third statistic that 
stuns. 
These statistics from a sample of campuses across 
the nation demonstrate the breadth of the problem. 
The increase of rapes at the University of California, 
however, needs more explanation. 
The third subpoint describes the effects of sexual 
assault on the victim. Maria Lucia uses vivid lan-
guage to paint a picture of the aftermath of an attack 
on the life of the victim. She could have heightened 
the emotional impact by personalizing the informa-
tion using personal pronouns as she described the 
effects. 

414
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
Live, and although students feel that formalizing 
such a policy is unnatural, many campuses are tak-
ing heed and revisiting their own policies. Campuses 
like mine don’t have a sexual assault policy to revisit. 
Does yours? 
By far the most controversial policy today is the 
one established at Antioch College. I’m not saying 
that we need one as speciﬁ c as theirs, but every uni-
versity has a responsibility to provide a safe environ-
ment for its students. Universities have an obligation 
to provide a sexual assault policy. 
The following points are fundamental to the 
safety of the students and need to be addressed by 
universities:
 1. Every campus should have a sexual assault 
 policy that is developed with input from stu-
dents,  faculty, staff, and administration. The 
policy then needs to be publicized in the student 
handbook. The school newspaper should print 
and the campus radio broadcast the policy peri-
odically to heighten awareness.
 2. Campuses must institute programs to educate 
students and other campus personnel. Examples 
of these policies can include discussing the 
 sexual assault policy during mandatory student 
orientation and conducting special workshops 
for faculty and other staff.
 3. Campuses should outline a step-by-step  written 
procedure to guarantee that sexual assault 
 victims are assisted by the university. It is per-
tinent that they are not without support at this 
very critical time.
My vision is a campus where there is no place for 
any sexual assault. I want to leave the classroom at 
night knowing that my trip from the building to the 
car will not be one of fear for my personal safety. 
You may be saying to yourself that there are laws 
to handle crimes like these. In the Chronicle of Higher 
Education, May 15, 1991 issue, Jane McDonnell, a 
senior lecturer in women’s studies at Carleton, says 
colleges cannot turn their back on women. “We’d be 
abandoning victims if we merely sent them to the 
police,” she says. “the wheels of justice tend to grind 
slowly and rape has one of the lowest conviction 
rates of any crime.” 
Satisfaction
The ideal satisfaction step shows in a point-by-point 
fashion how the proposed solution, in this case a sex-
ual assault prevention policy, would satisfy the needs 
presented earlier. We would expect the speaker to tell 
us how such a policy would (1) prevent scenarios like 
the one at Carleton College, (2) change the statistics 
on date rape, (3) change male students’ perceptions 
about the likelihood of punishment, and (4) offer sup-
port for the victims.
Maria Lucia handles this step very well although 
the organization of this section could be tighter. 
Speciﬁ cally she should have laid out four points, not 
three, as fundamental to an effective policy. Point 4 
would have addressed disciplinary procedures and 
penalties speciﬁ c to sexual assault. She implies these 
are important but never makes the case.
Visualization
This section might have been more compelling had it 
been placed after the discussion of disciplinary pro-
cedures and victim support. The visualization also 
could have been developed a bit more. It would have 
been more effective had it been less “speaker speciﬁ c” 
and instead invited the audience to visualize.
Here she points to negative visualization, that is, 
what we can expect if action to create sexual assault 
policies is not taken.

415
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
Without a policy, most institutions lack speciﬁ c 
penalties for sexual assault and choose to prosecute 
offenders under the general student-conduct code. At 
Carleton College, for example, Amy’s attacker was 
allowed back on campus after his suspension, and 
consequently he raped again. 
Although the policy may not stop the actual 
assault, would-be offenders will think twice before 
committing sexual assault if they know they will be 
punished. In addition, it guarantees justice for vic-
tims of sexual assault. We need to make it loud and 
clear that sexual assault will not be tolerated. 
Yes, universities have a big task in the struggle to 
prevent sexual assault. 
You and I can actively assist in this task and can 
make a giant contribution to move it forward. On my 
campus, students have not only voiced their  concerns, 
but we have also started a petition demanding that 
the university formulate a sexual assault  policy. 
The bottom line is that we need to prevent sexual 
assault on campus. The key to prevention is a sexual 
assault policy. If your university does not have a pol-
icy, then you need to petition your administration to 
have one. I know I won’t stop my advocacy until I see 
a policy on my campus.
This transition to the action step doesn’t really follow 
from the previous discussion.
Action
Here Maria Lucia offers a speciﬁ c action to be taken 
by the audience, that is, to petition for a sexual 
assault prevention policy on their campuses. The way 
she phrases it, however, is not as compelling as it 
could be. She could have been more effective by mak-
ing her call to action more direct.
She also fails to quickly review her main points 
and she doesn’t provide much direction to the audi-
ence about how to go about petitioning.
The speech ends abruptly with an indirect emo-
tional appeal to the audience’s sense of guilt. She 
didn’t really have a clincher. The speech seems to just 
end. Perhaps a tie back to the opening quotation and 
an appeal to compassion or hope would have served 
her purpose more effectively.
Summary
Persuasive speeches are designed to inﬂ uence the beliefs and/or behavior of audi-
ence members. They present logical reasons but must also present those reasons in a 
way that motivates the audience to listen and think about what the speaker is saying. 
The elaboration likelihood model (ELM) suggests that when people hear an argument, 
they can process it one of two ways. Either they can listen carefully, think about the 
information, and elaborate its implications for themselves; or they can make decisions 
about what they are hearing based on simple cues about the speaker’s credibility. 
According to the model, people who feel personally involved with a proposition are 
more likely to process it carefully.
So in preparing a persuasive speech, the speaker must choose a proposition (goal) 
that takes into account the target audience’s initial attitude. A target audience may be 
opposed to the proposition, neutral (because they are uninformed, impartial, or apa-
thetic), or in favor.
The speaker must choose good reasons and sound evidence. Reasons are main 
point statements that support the proposition. Evidence is information (facts, opinions, 

416
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
and so on) selected to support reasons. Then the speaker needs to identify and test 
the forms of argument that will be used in supporting the proposition and in sup-
porting each reason. Four of the most common types of arguments are arguing from 
example, from analogy, from causation, and from sign. Speakers also need to check 
arguments so that they avoid ﬁ ve of the common fallacies that occur in reasoning: 
hasty  generalizations, false cause, ad hominem, straw person, and either-or.
Speakers can use emotional appeals to increase audience members’ involvement 
with the proposition. Both appeals to negative and positive emotions can be effective.
When speakers want their audience to act, they should also consider the  incentives 
the audience has for acting in accord with the speakers’ propositions and how these 
incentives meet the needs of the audience. Audience needs include physiological, 
safety, belongingness, esteem, and self-actualization. Speakers should also consider 
whether the costs that audience members may experience would outweigh the incen-
tives attached to the proposition.
The reasons that support a proposition can be organized following one of several 
patterns, which include the statement of reasons pattern, the comparative advantages 
pattern, the criteria satisfaction pattern, the refutative pattern, the problem-solution 
pattern, the problem-cause-solution pattern, and the motivational sequence pattern.
Now that you have read Chapter 16, use your 
Premium Website for Communicate! for quick access 
to the electronic resources that accompany this text. 
These resources include
• Study tools that will help you assess your learn-
ing and prepare for exams (digital glossary, key 
term ﬂ ash cards, review quizzes).
• Activities and assignments that will help you 
hone your knowledge, analyze communication 
situations (Skill Learning Activities), and build 
your public speaking skills throughout the course 
(Communication on Your Feet speech assign-
ments, Action Step activities). Many of these 
activities allow you to compare your answers to 
those provided by the authors, and, if requested, 
submit your answers to your instructor.
• Media resources that will help you explore com-
munication concepts online (Web Resources), 
develop your speech outlines (Speech Builder 
Express 3.0), watch and critique videos of com-
munication situations and sample speeches 
(Interactive Video Activities), upload your speech 
videos for peer reviewing and critique other stu-
dents’ speeches (Speech Studio online speech 
review tool), and download chapter review so 
you can study when and where you’d like (Audio 
Study Tools).
This chapter’s Key Terms, Skill Learning Activities, 
and Web Resources are also featured on the following 
pages, and you can ﬁ nd this chapter’s Communicate 
on Your Feet assignment and speech activity in the 
body of the chapter.
Communicate! Active Online Learning
Key Terms
ad hominem (397)
apathetic (392)
arguing from analogy (395)
arguing from example (395)
arguing from sign (396)
arguing from causation (396)
argument (393)
comparative advantages pattern 
(404)
criteria satisfaction pattern (404)
either-or (397)
ethos (400)
false cause (397)
goodwill (400)
hasty generalization (397)
impartial (392)
incentive (401)

417
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking 
Skill Learning Activities
16.1: A Speciﬁ c Goal Statement in a Persuasive 
Speech (393)
The goal of this activity is to ﬁ nd and analyze a 
speciﬁ c goal statement.
 1. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! 
to access Web Resource 16.1: Maintaining the 
Faith and read “Terrorism and Islam: Maintaining 
Our Faith,” a speech by Mahathir Bin Mohamad, 
Prime Minister of Malaysia, given at the OIC 
Conference of Ministers of Endowments and 
Islamic Affairs, May 7, 2002. Identify the speciﬁ c 
goal statement.
 2. Given the composition of the audience, what do 
you think their initial attitude was toward the 
speaker’s position?
 3. Write a paragraph in which you analyze the 
speaker’s goal statement. What type of speciﬁ c 
speech goal is this? Does this goal seem appro-
priate for this audience? Explain your reasoning.
16.2: Giving Good Reasons and Evidence 
(397)
The goal of this activity is to analyze reasons and 
evidence.
 1. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! 
to access Web Resource 16.1: Maintaining 
the Faith and read the speech “Terrorism and 
Islam: Maintaining Our Faith” by Mahathir Bin 
Mohamad. Identify each of the main points or 
reasons the speaker offers in support of his thesis.
 2. Are his reasons good? Are they supported? 
Relevant? Adapted to the audience?
 3. Analyze his supporting evidence. Assess the 
quality, currency, and relevance to his reasons.
 4. Identify two kinds of reasoning links that he uses, 
and then test them using the appropriate ques-
tions. Are the links you tested logical? Explain.
 5. Are there any fallacies that you can detect in his 
argument? Explain.
16.3: Motivating Audiences (403)
The goal of this activity is to analyze motiva-
tional tactics.
 1. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! 
to access Web Resource 16.1: Maintaining 
the Faith and read the speech “Terrorism and 
Islam: Maintaining Our Faith” by Mahathir Bin 
Mohamad. Analyze the incentives that Mahathir 
presents.
 2. What emotions do you think he hopes to arouse? 
What information does he present to stimulate 
emotions? Does he seem to phrase the ideas in a 
way that elicits those emotions? Explain.
16.4: Persuasive Organizational Methods (407)
The goal of this activity is to analyze organiza-
tional patterns.
 1. Use your Premium Website for Communicate! 
to access Web Resource 16.1: Maintaining 
the Faith and read the speech “Terrorism and 
Islam: Maintaining Our Faith” by Mahathir Bin 
Mohamad. Analyze the organizational methods 
Mahathir uses.
 2. How well does his pattern ﬁ t the attitudes you 
believe his audience holds toward his position? 
Are there other patterns that might have served 
him better?
Web Resources
16.1: Maintaining the Faith (393)
To read and analyze a speech about Islam in 
the modern world, go to AccessMyLibrary.com (free 
with registration) to ﬁ nd the article “Terrorism and 
Islam: Maintaining Our Faith,” given by Mahathir Bin 
logos (393)
motivated sequence pattern (406)
motivation (401)
pathos (398)
persuasive speech (389)
problem-cause-solution pattern (406)
problem-solution pattern (405)
proposition (390)
proposition of fact (390)
proposition of policy (391)
proposition of value (390)
reasons (393)
refutative pattern (405)
statement of reasons pattern (404)
straw person (397)
target audience (391)
uninformed (392)

418
 
Chapter 16 Persuasive Speaking
Mohamad, Prime Minister of Malaysia, at a confer-
ence of ministers from Muslim countries in May 2002.
16.2: Evoking Negative and Positive Emotions 
(400)
Read more about how to appeal to various 
negative and positive emotions in an online section 
called “Increasing Audience Involvement through 
Emotional Appeals.”
16.3: Motivated Sequence Speech (407)
Read a transcript of a speech that uses the moti-
vated sequence pattern. This speech includes an 
analysis by the authors of Communicate!
4
part
Public Speaking from Chapters 11 to 16
What kind of a public speaker are you? The following analysis looks at speciﬁ cs that 
are basic to a public-speaking proﬁ le. Use this scale to assess the frequency with which 
you perform each behavior: 1 = always; 2 = often; 3 = sometimes; 4 = rarely; 5 = never.
____ 
When I am asked to speak, I am able to select a topic and determine a speech 
goal with conﬁ dence. (Ch. 11)
____ 
When I speak, I use material from a variety of sources. (Ch. 11)
____ 
In my preparation, I construct clear main points and organize them to follow 
some consistent pattern. (Ch. 12)
____ 
In my preparation, I am careful to be sure that I have developed ideas to meet 
audience needs. (Ch. 13)
____ 
When I speak, I sense that my audience perceives my language as clear and 
vivid. (Ch. 13)
____ 
I look directly at members of my audience when I speak. (Ch. 14)
____ 
When I speak, my bodily actions help supplement or reinforce my ideas; I feel 
and look involved. (Ch. 14)
____ 
I have conﬁ dence in my ability to speak in public. (Ch. 14)
____ 
When I give informative speeches, I am careful to use techniques designed to 
get audience attention, create audience understanding, and increase audience 
retention. (Ch. 15)
____ 
When I give persuasive speeches, I am careful to use techniques designed to 
build my credibility, prove my reasons, and motivate my audience. (Ch. 16)
To verify this self-analysis, have a friend or fellow group member complete this 
review for you. Based on what you have learned, select the public-speaking behavior 
you would most like to improve. Write a communication improvement plan similar to 
the sample goal statement in Chapter 1 (page 18).
You can complete this Self-Review online and, if requested, e-mail it to your instructor. Use 
your Premium Website for Communicate! to access Part IV Self-Review under the chapter 
resources for Chapter 16.
Self Review
Foundations of Communication

419
References
Abrams, J. (2007, Sept. 25). House panel debates hip-hop lyrics. 
USA Today.com. Retrieved from http://www.usatoday.com/
news/washington/2007-09-25-3649050705_x.htm
African neck stretching. (2008–2009). Retrieved from African 
Tribes.Org Web site: http://www.african-tribes.org/african-
neck-stretching.html
Ahladas, J. (1989, April 1). Global warming. Vital Speeches of the 
Day (381–384).
Ali, S. (2007, October 7). Close enough to touch was too far apart. 
New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes
.com/2007/10/07/fashion/07love.html
Alsever, J. (2007, March 11). In the computer dating 
game, room for a coach. New York Times. Retrieved 
from http://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/11/business/
yourmoney/11dating.html
Altman I. (1993). Dialectics, physical environments, and personal 
relationships. Communication Monographs, 60, 26–34.
American Museum of Natural History. (1999). Exhibition 
highlights. Body Art: Marks of Identity. Retrieved from http://
www.amnh.org/exhibitions/bodyart/exhibition_highlights
.html
Andersen, P. A., Hecht, M. L., Hoobler, G. D., & Smallwood, M. 
(2003). Nonverbal communication across cultures. In 
W. B. Gudykunst (Ed.), Cross-cultural and intercultural 
communication. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Anderson, J. (1988). Communication competency in the small 
group. In R. Cathcart & L. Samovar (Eds.), Small group 
communication: A reader. Dubuque, IA: Brown.
Anzaldúa, G. (1999). Borderlands/La frontera: The new Mestiza. San 
Francisco, CA: Aunt Lute Books.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., Tudor, M., & Nelson, G. (2004). Close 
relationships as including other in the self. In H. T. Reis & C. 
E. Rusbult (Eds.), Close relationships (pp. 365–379). New York: 
Psychology Press.
Aronson, E. (1999). The social animal. New York: Worth.
Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personality. Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 9, 272–279.
Associated Press. (2008, December 17). “I can see Russia from my 
house!” Brisbane Times. Retrieved from http://www
.brisbanetimes.com.au/articles/2008/12/16/1229189584297
.html
Associated Press. (2009, July 21). Charges against Harvard scholar 
dropped. MSNBC.com. Retrieved from http://www.msnbc
.msn.com/id/32010985/
Associated Press Strategic Planning. (2008, June). A New Model 
for News Studying the Deep Structure of Young-Adult News 
Consumption pp 5, 45; retrieved from http://www.ap.org/
newmodel.pdf
Australian Museum. (2009). Shaping. Body Art. Retrieved from 
http://amonline.net.au/bodyart/shaping/
Ayres, J. (1991, June–December). Using visual aids to reduce 
speech anxiety. Communication Research Reports, 73–79.
Ayres, J., & Hopf, T. S. (1990, January). The long-term effect of 
visualization in the classroom: A brief research report. 
Communication Education, 39, 75–78.
Ayres, J., Hopf, T. S., & Ayres, D. M. (1994, July). An examination 
of whether imaging ability enhances the effectiveness 
of an intervention designed to reduce speech anxiety. 
Communication Education, 43, 252–258.
Baerwald, D. (n.d.). Narrative. Retrieved from Northshore School 
District Web site: http://ccweb.norshore.wednet.edu/
writingcorner/narrative.html.
Balgopal, P. R., Ephross, P. H., & Vassil, T. V. (1986). Self-help 
groups and professional helpers. Small Group Research, 17, 
123–137.
Baron, R. A., Byrne, D., & Branscombe, N. R. (2006). Social 
psychology (11th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Basic guidelines at Ignite Columbus. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://
ignitecbus.com/?page_id=2
Bates, B. (1992). Communication and the sexes. Prospect Heights, 
IL: Waveland Press.
Baxter, L. (1982). Strategies for ending relationships: Two 
studies. Western Journal of Speech Communication, 46, 
223–241.
Baxter, L. A., & Montgomery, B. M. (1996). Relating: Dialogues and 
dialectics. New York: Guilford.
Baxter, L. A., & West, l. (2003). Couple perceptions of their 
similarities and differences: A dialectical perspective. Journal 
of Social and Personal Relationships, 20, 491–514.
Becker, A. (2004). Television, disordered eating, and young women 
in Fiji: Negotiating body image and identity during rapid 

420
 
References
Burgoon, J. K., Coker, D. A., & Coker, R. A. (1986). Communicative 
effects of gaze behavior: A test of two contrasting 
explanations. Human Communication Research, 12, 495–524.
Burgoon, J. K., & Hoobler, G. D. (2002). Nonverbal signals. In 
M. L. Knapp & J. A. Daly (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal 
communication (3rd ed., pp. 240–299). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Burke, K. (1968). Language as symbolic action. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Burleson, B. R. (2003). Emotional support skills. In J. O. Green & 
B. R. Burleson (Eds.), Handbook of communication and social 
interaction skills (pp. 551–594). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Burleson, B. R., & Goldsmith, D. J. (1998). How the comforting 
process works: Alleviating emotional distress through 
conversationally induced reappraisals. In P. A. Andersen & 
L. K. Guerrero (Eds.), Handbook of communication and 
emotion: Research, theory, applications, and contexts
(pp. 248–280). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Callison, D. (2001). Concept mapping. School Library Media 
Activities Monthly, 17(10): 30–32.
Carr, D. (2007, April 7). Network condemns remarks by Imus. New 
York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes
.com/2007/04/07/arts/television/07imus.htm
Carter, B. (2008, October 31). Infomercial for Obama is big success 
in ratings. New York Times, 158(54480), A19. Retrieved from 
InfoTrac College Edition.
Cegala, D. J., & Sillars, A. L. (1989). Further examination of 
nonverbal manifestations of interaction involvement. 
Communication Reports, 2, 45.
Chuang, R. (2004). An examination of Taoist and Buddhist 
perspectives on interpersonal conﬂ ict, emotions and 
adversities. In F. E. Jandt (Ed.), Intercultural communication: 
A global reader (pp. 38–50). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Clark, J. (2006, August 4). In politics, comedy is central. In These 
Times. Retrieved from http://www.inthesetimes.com/
article/2745
Cleveland, H. (2009). The limits to cultural diversity. In L. A. 
Samovar, R. E. Porter, & E. R. McDaniel (Eds.), Intercultural 
communication: A reader (11th ed.; pp. 405–408). Belmont, 
CA: Thomson Wadsworth
Cohen N. (2009, August 24). Wikipedia to limit changes to articles on 
people. New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes
.com/2009/08/25/technology/internet/25wikipedia.html?_r=1
Colapinto, J. (2006, August 11). Mad dog. Rolling Stone. Retrieved 
from http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/story/6417561/
mad_dog
College learning for the new global century. (2007). A Report from 
the National Leadership Council for Liberal Education and 
social change. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 28(4), 
533–559.
Beebe, S., & Masterson, J. (2006). Communicating in groups: 
Principles and practices (8th ed.). Boston: Pearson.
Behnke, R. R., & Carlile, L. W. (1971). Heart rate as an index of 
speech anxiety. Speech Monographs, 38, 66.
Bentley, J. (2008, November 2). McCain “ﬁ ne gold” and a special 
guest on Saturday Night Live. CBS News.com. Retrieved 
from http://www.cbsnews.com/blogs/2008/11/02/politics/
fromtheroad/entry4563297.shtml
Berger, C. (1987). Communicating under uncertainty. In M. Roloff 
and G. Miller (Eds.), Interpersonal Processes: New Directions in 
Communication Research (pp. 39–62). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Beshara, T. (2006). The job search solution: The ultimate system for 
ﬁ nding a great job now! New York: AMACOM Books.
Billy Mays, the infomercial king; Death of a great American 
salesman; Want to know the secret of America’s innovation 
edge? Call now! (2009, July 1). Global Agenda. Retrieved 
from InfoTrac College Edition.
Birdwhistell, R. (1970). Kinesics and context. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bommelje, R., Houston, J. M., & Smither, R. (2003). Personality 
characteristics of effective listeners: A ﬁ ve-factor 
perspective. International Journal of Listening, 17, 32–46.
Bonito, J. (2000). The effect of contributing substantively on 
perceptions of participation. Small Group Research, 31, 
528–553.
Bonvillain, N. (2003). Language, culture and communication: 
The meaning of messages (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Booher, D. D. (2003). Speak with conﬁ dence: Powerful 
presentations that inform, inspire, and persuade [Adobe 
Digital Editions version]. New York: McGraw-Hill. doi: 
10.1036/0071420789
Boon, S. D. (1994). Dispelling doubt and uncertainty: Trust 
in romantic relationships. In S. Duck (Ed.), Dynamics of 
relationships (pp. 86–111). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Boyd, A. (1999). How to handle media interviews. London: Mercury.
Buber, M. (1970). I and thou (W. Kaufman, Trans.). New York: 
Scribner.
Burgoon, J. K., & Bacue, A. E. (2003). Nonverbal communication 
skills. In J. O. Greene & B. R. Burleson (Eds.), Handbook of 
communication and social interaction skills (pp. 179–220). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Burgoon, J. K., Blair, J. P., & Strom, R. E. (2008). Cognitive biases 
and nonverbal cue availability in detecting deception. Human 
Communication Research, 34, 572–599.

421
 
References 
421
Downey, G., Freitas, A. L., Michaelis, B., & Khouri, H. (2004). The 
self-fulﬁ lling prophecy in close relationships: Rejection 
sensitivity and rejection by romantic partners. In H. T. Reis & 
C. E. Rusbult (Eds.), Close relationships (pp. 153–174). New 
York: Psychology Press.
Drummond, D. (2004). Miracle meetings [e-book]. Retrieved from 
http://www.superteams.com.
Duch, B. J., Groh, S. E., & Allen, D. E. (eds). (2001). The power of 
problem-based learning. Sterling, VA: Stylus.
Duck, S. (1987). How to lose friends without inﬂ uencing people. In 
M. E. Roloff & G. R. Miller (Eds.), Interpersonal processes: New 
directions in communication research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Duck, S. (1999). Relating to others. Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Duck, S. (2007). Human Relationships (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, 
Calif.: Sage.
DuFrene, D. D., & Lehman, C. M. (2002). Persuasive appeal for clean 
language. Business Communication Quarterly, 65 (March), 
48–56.
Dunkel, P., & Pialorsi, F. (2005). Advanced listening comprehension: 
Developing aural and notetaking skills. Boston: Thomson 
Heinle.
Durst, G. M. (1989, March 1). The manager as a developer. Vital 
Speeches of the Day (pp. 309–314).
Dwyer, K. K. (2000, January). The multidimensional model: 
Teaching students to self-manage high communication 
apprehension by self-selecting treatments. Communication 
Education, 49, 79.
Ebeling, R. (2008, March 6). So long, Dungeon Master. Newsweek. 
Retrieved from http://www.newsweek.com/id/119782
Edens, K. M. (2000). Preparing problem solvers for the 21st century 
through problem-based learning. College Teaching, 48, 
55–60.
Eisenberg, J. (2007). Group cohesiveness. In R. F. Baumeister & 
K. D. Vohs (Eds.), Encyclopaedia of Social Psychology 
(pp. 386-388). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Estes, W. K. (1989). Learning theory. In A. Lesgold & R. Glaser 
(Eds.), Foundations for a psychology of education (pp. 1–49). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Evans, C., & Dion, K. (1991). Group cohesion and performance: 
A meta-analysis. Small Group Research, 22, 175–186.
Fairhurst, G. T. (2001). Dualism in leadership. In F. M. Jablin & 
L. M. Putnam (Eds.), The new handbook of organizational 
communication (pp. 379–439). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Farhi, P. (2009, February 19). Political pundits, overpopulating 
the news networks. Washington Post. Retrieved from 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/
article/2008/02/18/AR2008021802267.html
America’s Promise. Washington D.C.: Association of American 
Colleges and Universities.
Crain, R. (2009, May 4). Deceitful ﬁ nancial infomercial tars entire 
advertising industry. Advertising Age, 80(16), 17. Retrieved 
from InfoTrac College Edition.
Croucher, M. (2008, February 29.) I just want to be thin. If it takes 
dying to get there—so be it. The Epoch Times. Retrieved from 
http://en.epochtimes.com/news/8-2-29/66794.html
Crovitz, D., & Smoot, W. S. (2009, January). Wikipedia: Friend, 
not foe. English Journal, 98(3), 91–97. Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/learning/teachers/archival/
EnglishJournalArticle2.pdf
Cummings, J. (2008, October 29). Obama infomercial: Smart or 
overkill? Politico. Retrieved from http://www.politico.com/
news/stories/1008/15056_Page2.html
Cupach, W. R., & Metts, S. (1986). Accounts of relational 
disclosure: A comparison of marital and non-marital 
relationships. Communication Monographs, 53, 319–321.
C. Vivian Stringer took the Imus ﬁ restorm in stride. (2008, March 
1). New York Daily News. Retrieved from http://www.
nydailynews.com/entertainment/arts/2008/03/02/2008-03-
02_c_vivian_stringer_took_the_imus_ﬁ restor.html
Dahl, S. (2004). Intercultural research: The current state of 
knowledge (Middlesex University Discussion Paper no. 26). 
Available from SSRN: http://SSRN.com/abstract=658202
The Daily Show: Journalism, satire, or just laughs? (2008, May 8). 
PewResearch.org (Pew Research Center, Project for Excellence 
in Journalism). Retrieved from http://pewresearch.org/
pubs/829/the-daily-show-journalism-satire-or-just-laughs
Demo, D. H. (1987). Family relations and the self-esteem of 
adolescents and their parents. Journal of Marriage and the 
Family, 49, 705–715.
Dindia, K. (2000a). Relational maintenance. In C. Hendrick & 
S. S. Hendrick (Eds.), Close relationships: A sourcebook 
(pp. 287–300). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dindia, K. (2000b). Sex differences in self-disclosure, reciprocity 
of self-disclosure, and self-disclosure and liking: Three 
metaanalyses reviewed. In S. Petronio (Ed.), Balancing the 
secrets of private disclosures (pp. 21–36). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dindia, K., Fitzpatrick, M. A., & Kenny, D. A. (1997). Self-disclosure 
in spouse and stranger interaction: A social relations 
analysis. Human Communication Research, 23, 388–412.
Dindia, K., & Timmerman, L. (2003). Accomplishing romantic 
relationships. In J. O. Greene & B. R. Burleson (Eds.), 
Handbook of communication and social interaction 
(pp.  685–722). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Donoghue, P. J., & Siegel, M. E. (2005). Are you really listening?: Keys 
to successful communication. Notre Dame, IN: Sorin Books.

422
 
References
Hall, B. J. (2002). Among cultures: The challenge of communication. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent language. Greenwich, CT: Fawcett.
Hall, E. T. (1968). Proxemics. Current Anthropology, 9, 83–108.
Hall, E. T. (1969). The hidden dimension. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday.
Haller, J. T. (2009, July 6). Billy Mays Caps Lock. Retrieved August 
21, 2009, from http://johnhaller.com/jh/useful_stuff/
billy_mays_caps_lock.
Hanke, J. (1998). The psychology of presentation visuals. 
Presentations, 12(5), 42–47.
Hanks for the Oscars speech advice, Tom! (2006, March 4). 
Mail Online. Retrieved from http://www.dailymail.co.uk/
tvshowbiz/article-378755/Hanks-Oscars-speech-advice-
Tom.html
Hansen, R. S., & Hansen, K. What do employers really want? Top 
skills and values employers seek from job-seekers. Retrieved 
from Quintessential Careers Web site: http;//www
.quintcareers.com/job_skills_values.html
Harding, Andrew (2004, December 4). Japan’s internet ‘suicide 
clubs.’ BBC News. Retrieved http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
programmes/newsnight/4071805.stm
Hattie, J. (1992). Self-concept. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hau, L. (2008, April 28). Timber! Newspaper circulation falls again. 
Forbes.com. Retrieved from http://www.forbes
.com/2008/04/28/newspapers-circulation-advertising-biz-
media-cx_lh_0428newspapers.html
Haubegger, C. (2000). I’m not fat, I’m Latina. In M. Adams, W. J. 
Blumenfeld, R. Castañeda, H. W. Hackman, M. L. Peters, & 
X. Zúñiga (Eds.), Readings for diversity and social justice: An 
anthology on racism, anti-Semitism, sexism, heterosexism, 
ableism, and classism (pp. 242–243). New York: Routledge.
Haviland, W. A. (1993). Cultural anthropology. Fort Worth, TX: 
Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.
Head, S. W., Spann, T., & McGregor, M. A. (2001). Broadcasting 
in America: A survey of electronic media (9th ed.). Boston: 
Houghton Mifﬂ in.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. 
New York: Wiley.
Helm, B. (2005, December 14). Wikipedia: “A work in progress.” 
Business Week. Retrieved from http://www.businessweek
.com/technology/content/dec2005/tc20051214_441708
.htm?chan=db
Hendrick, S.S. (1981). Self-disclosure and marital satisfaction. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 40, 1150–1159.
Henman, L. D. (2003). Groups as systems: A functional perspective. 
In R. Y. Hirokawa, R. S. Cathcart, L. A. Samovar, & L. D. Henman 
Forgas, J. P. (1991). Affect and person perception. In J. P. Forgas 
(Ed.), Emotion and social judgments (pp. 387–406). New York: 
Pergamon Press.
Forgas, J. P. (2000). Feelings and thinking: Summary and 
integration. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Feeling and thinking: The 
role of affect in social cognition (pp. 387–406). New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Frances, P. (1994). Lies, damned lies . . . American Demographics, 
16, p. 2.
Gallagher, M. P. (2009, April 27). Wikipedia held too malleable 
to be reliable as evidence. New Jersey Law Journal. n.p. 
Retrieved from Infotrac.
Galvin, K. M., Byland, C. L., & Brommel, B. J. (2007). Family 
communication: Cohesion and change (7th ed.). Boston: 
Allyn & Bacon.
Gangestad, S. W., & Snyder, M. (2000). Self-monitoring: Appraisal 
and reappraisal. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 530–555.
Gay, V. (2008, November 3). McCain’s poignant appearance on 
Saturday Night Live. Newsday. Retrieved from InfoTrac.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. 
Boston: Houghton Mifﬂ in.
Gilbert, D., & Kahl, J. A. (1982). The American class structure: A new 
synthesis. Homewood, IL: Dorsey.
Giles, D. (2006). Constructing identities in cyberspace: The case 
of eating disorders. British Journal of Social Psychology 
45(3): 463–477. Retrieved from http://www.brown.uk.com/
eatingdisorders/giles2.pdf
Goodale, G. (2005, February 25). How to pen an Oscar speech. The 
Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved from InfoTrac College 
Edition.
Goodwin, S. (Executive Producer). (2009, July 23). Black and blue: 
Police and minorities [Radio broadcast transcript]. In Talk of 
the Nation. Retrieved from National Public Radio Web site: 
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story
.php?storyId=106928434
Graber, S. (2000). The everything get-a-job book: From resume 
writing to interviewing to ﬁ nding tons of job openings. Avon, 
MA: Adams Media.
Guzman, M. (2009, April 16). A Seattle geek fest spreads its 
wings. Seattle Pi. Retrieved from http://www.seattlepi.com/
business/405192_IGNITE16.html
Haffner, D. (2008, September 2). Bristol Palin, Mary Cheney and 
the limits of family privacy. Hufﬁ ngton Post. Retrieved from 
http://www.hufﬁ ngtonpost.com/rev-debra-haffner/bristol-
palin-mary-cheney_b_123164.html
Hahner, J. C., Sokoloff, M. A., & Salisch, S. L. (2001). Speaking 
clearly: Improving voice and diction (6th ed.). New York: 
McGraw-Hill.

423
 
References 
How to dress in women’s professional attire. (2008). eHow: How to 
do just about everything. Retrieved from http://www.ehow
.com/how_2064031_dress-womens-professional-attire.html.
Howell, D. (2008, August 17). Obama’s edge in the coverage race. 
Washington Post. Retrieved from http://www
.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/08/15/
AR2008081503100.html?sub=AR
Huling, R. (2008, May 27). “Dungeons & Dragons” owns the future. 
The Escapist. Retrieved from http://www.escapistmagazine
.com/articles/view/issues/
issue_151/4931-Dungeons-Dragons-Owns-the-Future.2
Humes, J. C. (1988). Standing ovation: How to be an effective 
speaker and communicator. New York: Harper and Row.
Ignite Seattle. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.igniteseattle
.com/
Ignite Seattle 7 is happening on 8/3. (2009). Ignite. Retrieved 
from http://ignite.oreilly.com/2009/07/ignite-seattle-7-is-
happening-on-83.html
Iorio, P. (1995, March 26). How not to blow the Oscar speech. The 
New York Times. Retrieved from InfoTrac College Edition.
Itzkoff, D. (2009, February 20). Police investigate photo in Chris 
Brown case. New York Times. Retrieved from http://www
.nytimes.com/2009/02/21/arts/music/21arts-POLICEINVEST_
BRF.html
Jackson, R. L., II (Ed.). (2004). African American communication 
and identities. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Jacobs, B. (2005, June). Adolescents and self-cutting (self-harm): 
Information for parents (Bringing Science to Your Life, Guide 
I-104). Retrieved from Cooperative Extension Service, College 
of Agriculture and Home Economics, New Mexico State 
University Web site: http://aces.nmsu.edu/pubs/_i/I-104.pdf
Jandt, F. E. (2001). Intercultural communication: An introduction 
(3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink: Psychological studies of policy 
decisions and ﬁ ascoes. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂ in.
Janusik, L. A., & Wolvin, A. D. (2006). 24 hours in a day: A listening 
update to the time studies. Paper presented at the meeting of 
the International Listening Association, Salem, OR.
Jensen, A. D., & Chilberg, J. C. (1991). Small group communication: 
Theory and application. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Johnson, D., & Johnson, F. (2003). Joining together: Group theory 
and group skills (8th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Johnson, P. (2006, September 24). Cable rantings boost ratings. 
USA Today. Retrieved from http://www.usatoday.com/life/
columnist/mediamix/2006-09-24-media-mix_x.htm
Jones, M. (2002). Social psychology of prejudice. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
(Eds.), Small group communication theory and practice: An 
anthology (8th ed., pp. 3–7). Los Angeles: Roxbury.
Henry Louis Gates, Jr., police report. (2009, July 23). The Smoking 
Gun. Retrieved from http://www.thesmokinggun.com/
archive/years/2009/0723092gates2.html
Hill, B., & Leeman, R. W. (1997). The art and practice of 
argumentation and debate. Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁ eld.
Hinckley, D. (2008, October 7). Saturday Night Live is buzzworthy 
again, thanks to Tina Fey as Sarah Palin. New York Daily 
News. Retrieved from http://www.nydailynews.com/
entertainment/tv/2008/10/07/2008-10-07_saturday_night_
live_is_buzzworthy_again_.html
Hinckley, D. (2009, July 18). Walter Cronkite remains gold standard 
for journalists. NYDailyNews.com. Retrieved from http://
www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv/2009/07/18/2009-
07-18_he_remains_the_gold_standard_among_all.html
Hip-Hop Summit Action Network. (n.d.). Mission statement. 
Retrieved from http://www.hsan.org/content/main
.aspx?pageid=7
Hip-Hop Summit Action Network. (2007, April 13) Differentiating 
between Don Imus and hip hop: A statement from Russell 
Simmons, Chairman, and Dr. Benjamin Chavis, President, of 
the Hip-Hop Summit Action Network. Retrieved from http://
hsan.org/Content/Main.aspx?PageId=242
Hip-Hop Summit Action Network. (2007, April 23). 
Recommendation to the recording and broadcast industries: 
A statement by Russell Simmons and Dr. Benjamin Chavis 
on behalf of the Hip-Hop Summit Action Network. Retrieved 
from http://hsan.org/Content/Main.aspx?PageId=246
Hirokawa, R., Cathcart, R., Samovar, L., & Henman, L. (Eds.). (2003). 
Small group communication theory and practice (8th ed.). Los 
Angeles: Roxbury.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. (Ed.). (1998). Masculinity and femininity: The taboo 
dimension of national cultures. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. (2000). The cultural relativity of the quality of life concept. 
In G. R. Weaver (Ed.), Cultural communication and conﬂ ict: 
Readings in intercultural relations. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Honeycutt, J. M. (1993). Memory structures for the rise and fall 
of personal relationships. In S. Duck(Ed.), Individuals in 
relationships (pp. 60–86).Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Holtgraves, T. (2002). Language as social action: Social psychology 
and language use. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hotz, R. L. (April 15, 1995). Ofﬁ cial racial deﬁ nitions have shifted 
sharply and often. Los Angeles Times, p. A14.
How to detect bias in news media. (n.d.) Retrieved from FAIR 
(Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting) Web site: http://www
.fair.org/index.php?page=121

424
 
References
Lawrence, S. G., & Watson, M. (1991). Getting others to help: The 
effectiveness of professional uniforms in charitable fund 
raising. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 19, 
170–185.
Leary, M. R. (2002). When selves collide: The nature of the self and 
the dynamics of interpersonal relationships. In A. Tesser, D. 
A. Stapel, & J. V. Wood (Eds.), Self and motivation: Emerging 
psychological perspectives (pp. 119–145). Washington, D.C.: 
American Psychological Association.
Leopold, T. (2009, July 18). Former CBS anchor ‘”Uncle Walter” 
Cronkite dead at 92. CNN.com. Retrieved from http://www
.cnn.com/2009/US/07/17/walter.cronkite.dead/index.html
Levin, B. B. (Ed.). (2001). Energizing teacher education and 
professional development with problem-based learning. 
Alexandria, MN: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development.
Liberman, M. (2005, December 23). Multiplying ideologies 
considered harmful. Retrieved from http://itre.cis.upenn
.edu/˜myl/languagelog/archives/002724.html
Lim, L. (Reporter). (2007, March 19). Painful memories for China’s 
footbinding survivors [Radio broadcast story]. In Morning 
Edition. Retrieved from National Public Radio Web site: 
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story
.php?storyId=8966942
Listening factoid. (2003). International Listening Association. 
Retrieved from http://www.listen.org/pages/factoids.html
Littlejohn, S. W., & Foss, K. A. (2008). Theories of human 
communication (9th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.
Long, K. (1997, August 12). Visual aids and learning. Retrieved 
from University of Portsmouth, Audio Video Homepage: 
http://www.mech.port.ac.uk/av/AVALearn.htm
Lopez, L. (2008, February 5). Attention Deﬁ cit theater. OregonLive
.com. Retrieved from http://www.oregonlive.com/
entertainment/index.ssf/2008/02/attention_deﬁ cit_theater
.html
Luckmann, J. (1999). Transcultural communication in nursing. New 
York: Delmar.
Luft, J. (1970). Group processes: An introduction to group 
dynamics. Palo Alto, CA: Mayﬁ eld.
Lulofs, R. S., & Cahn, D. D. (2000). Conﬂ ict: From theory to action 
(2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Maguire, J. (2007, February 22). Cicero’s rules of rhetoric and our 
own shout-fest. Maguire Online. Retrieved from http://www
.maguireonline.com/2007/02/ciceros_rules_of_rhetoric_and
.php
Mannes, T. (2009, May 22). Infomercials standing by! San Diego 
Union-Tribune. Retrieved from InfoTrac College Edition.
Margulis, Stephen T. (1977). Concepts of privacy: Current status 
and next steps. Journal of Social Issues 33(3), 5–21.
Jonsson, P. (2009, July 31). Was there a better way to conduct the 
Gates-Crowley debate? Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 
from http://features.csmonitor.com/politics/2009/07/31/
was-there-a-better-way-to-conduct-gates-crowley-debate/
Kaplan, R. M. (2002). How to say it in your job search: Choice words, 
phrases, sentences and paragraphs for résumés, cover letters 
and interviews. Paramus, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kapoun, J. (2000, January 25). Teaching undergrads Web 
evaluation: A guide for library instruction. College and 
Research Library News, 59(7). Retrieved from http://www
.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/publications/crlnews/1998/jul/
teachingundergrads.cfm
Kellerman, K. (1992). Communication: Inherently strategic and 
primarily automatic. Communication Monographs, 59, 
288–300.
Kelly, L., Phillips, G. M., & Keaten, J. A. (1995). Teaching people 
to speak well: Training and remediation of communication 
reticence. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.
King, A. E., Austin-Oden, D., & Lohr, J. M. (2009). Browsing for love 
in all the wrong places: Does research show that Internet 
matchmaking is more successful than traditional dating? 
Skeptic v15 i1 48(8). Retrieved from Infotrac.
Kleinman, S. (2007). Displacing Place: Mobile Communication in 
the Twenty-First Century. New York: Peter Lang.
Klyukanov, I. E. (2005). Principles of intercultural communication. 
New York: Pearson.
Knapp, M., & Daly, J. (2002). Handbook of interpersonal 
communication. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Knapp, M. L., & Hall, J. A. (2006). Nonverbal communication 
in human interaction (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson 
Wadsworth.
Knapp, M. L., & Vangelisti, A. L. (2000). Interpersonal 
communication and human relationships (4th ed.). Boston: 
Allyn & Bacon.
Koerner, A. F., & Fitzpatrick, M. A. (2002). Understanding family 
communication patterns and family functioning: The roles 
of conversation orientation and conformity orientation. In 
W.  B. Gudykunst (Ed.), Communication yearbook 26 (pp. 
36–68). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kolb, D. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of 
learning and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Koncz, A. (2008). Job outlook 2009. Bethlehem, PA: National 
Association of Colleges and Employers.
Krotz, J. (2006). 6 tips for taking control in media interviews. 
Retrieved from Microsoft Small Business Center Web 
site: http://www.microsoft.com/smallbusiness/resources/
management/leadership-training/6-tips-for-taking-control-
in-media-interviews.aspx#tipsfortakingcontrolinmediainter
views

425
 
References 
Morris, T. L., Gorham, J., Cohen, S. H., & Huffman, D. (1996). 
Fashion in the classroom: Effects of attire on student 
perceptions of instructors in college classes. Communication 
Education, 45, 135–148.
Moser, K. (2006, May 25). New memorials: t-shirts, websites, 
autodecals. Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved from 
http://www.csmonitor.com/2006/0525/p15s01-lihc.html
Motley, M. (1997). COM therapy. In J. A. Daly, J. C. McCroskey, 
J. Ayres, T. Hopf, & D. M. Ayres (Eds.), Avoiding 
communication: Shyness, reticence, and communication 
apprehension (2nd ed., pp. 379–400). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton 
Press.
Mruk, C. (1999). Self-esteem: Research, theory, and practice (2nd 
ed.). New York: Springer.
MTV Video Music Awards (2003). Retreived from http://www.imdb
.com/title/tt0375940/
Munger, D., Anderson, D., Benjamin, B., Busiel, C., & Pardes-Holt, 
B. (2000). Researching online (3rd ed.). New York: Longman.
Mutz, D., Reeves, B., & Wise, K. (2003, May 27). Exposure to 
mediated political conﬂ ict: Effects of civility of interaction on 
arousal and memory. Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the International Communication Association, San Diego, 
CA. Retrieved from http://www.allacademic.com/meta/
p111574_index.html
Nabi, R. L. (2002). Discrete emotions and persuasion. In J. P. Dillard 
and M. Pfau (Eds.), The persuasion handbook: Developments in 
theory and practice (pp. 291–299). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nelson J C. (2006). Leadership. Utah School Boards Association 
83rd Annual Conference, Salt LakeCity, Utah. Retrieved from 
http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/15860.html
Neville Miller, A. (2006). Public speaking patterns in Kenya. In 
L. A. Samovar, R. E. Porter, & E. R. McDaniel (Eds.), 
Intercultural communication: A reader (11th ed., 
pp. 238–245). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Neuliep, J. W. (2006). Intercultural communication: A contextual 
approach (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Newman, H. (2007). “World of Warcraft” players: Let’s slay 
together. Detroit Free Press. Retrieved from InfoTrac.
Newman, M. (2007, April 10). Rutgers women to meet with Imus 
over remark. New York Times. Retrieved from http://www
.nytimes.com/2007/04/10/business/media/10cnd-imus.
html?hp
Neznanski, M. (2008, November 14). Sharing ideas quickly. 
Gazette Times. Retrieved from http://www.gazettetimes.com/
articles/2008/11/14/news/community/3loc01_tech.txt
O’Connor, J. V. (2000). FAQs #1. Retrieved from Cuss Control 
Academy Web site: http://www.cusscontrol.com/faqs.html
Ogden, C. K., & Richards, I. A. (1923). The meaning of meaning. 
London: Kegan, Paul, Trench, Trubner.
Martin, J. N., & Nakayama, T. K. (2000). Intercultural 
communication in contexts (2nd ed.). Mountain View, CA: 
Mayﬁ eld.
Martin, M. M., Anderson, C. M., & Horvath, C. L. (1996). Feelings 
about verbal aggression: Justiﬁ cations for sending and hurt 
from receiving verbally aggressive messages. Communication 
Research Reports, 13(1), 19–26.
Martin, V. B. (2008, September 26). Media bias: Going beyond 
fair and balanced. Scientiﬁ c American. Retrieved 
from http://www.scientiﬁ camerican.com/article.
cfm?id=media-bias-presidential-election
Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York: 
Harper & Row.
Mason, S. (2007, April). Equality will someday come. Vital Speeches 
of the Day (pp. 159–163).
mastamokei. (2008, April 30). Billy Mays gangsta remix [Video ﬁ le]. 
Retrieved from www.youtube.com/watch?v=_tyct9l-fD8
Maul, K. (2009, February 25). Rihanna aftermath rouses ethics 
debate. PR Week. Retrieved from http://www.prweekus.com/
Rihanna-aftermath-rouses-ethics-debate/article/127824
McCarthy, E. (2008, September 24). Matchmakers, matchmakers, 
making a mint. Washington Post. Retrieved from http://www
.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/09/23/
AR2008092303669.html
McCarthy, M. (2005). New theme for Reebok. USAToday
.com. Retrieved from http://usatoday.com/money/
advertising/2005-02-09-reebok-usat_x.htm
McCartney, A. (2009, February 20). Rihanna won’t discuss Chris 
Brown, but thanks fans [Television story]. Retrieved from 
ABC News Web site: http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/
wireStory?id=6918527
McCroskey, J. C. (1977). Oral communication apprehension: 
A review of recent theory and research. Human 
Communication Research, 4, 78–96.
Mehrabian, A. (1972). Nonverbal communication. Chicago: Aldine.
Menzel, K. E., & Carrell, L. J. (1994). The relationship between 
preparation and performance in public speaking. 
Communication Education, 43, 17–26.
Merton, R. K. (1968). Social theory and social structure. New York: 
Free Press.
Michener, H. A., & DeLamater, J. D. (1999). Social psychology (4th 
ed.). Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace.
Midura, D. W., & Glover, D. R. (2005). Essentials of teambuilding. 
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Morin, R. (2006, June 23). Jon Stewart, enemy of democracy? 
Washington Post. Retrieved from http://www
.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/06/22/
AR2006062201474.html

426
 
References
and maintenance. In D. J. Canary & M. Dainton (Eds.), 
Maintaining relationships through communication 
(pp. 141–162). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Raybould, B. (2007, August 11). Gnomedex: Ignite Seattle. Bold 
Words. Retrieved from http://boldwords.wordpress
.com/2007/08/11/gnomedex-ignite-seattle/
Rayner, S. G. (2001). Aspects of the self as learner: Perception, 
concept, and esteem. In R. J. Riding & S. G. Rayner (Eds.), 
Self-perception: International perspectives on individual 
differences (Vol. 2). Westport, CN: Ablex.
Reaves, J. (2001, July 31). Anorexia goes high tech. Time. 
Retrieved from http://www.time.com/time/health/
article/0,8599,169660,00.html
Reebok marketing. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://corporate.reebok
.com/en/about_reebok/faq_section/marketing/default.asp
Reebok’s positioning. (n.d.). About Reebok. Retrieved from http://
corporate.reebok.com/en/about_reebok/default.asp
Reebok Your Move campaign [Video ﬁ le]. (n.d.). Retrieved from 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IK_5TwmvuWo
Renz, M. A., & Greg, J. B. (2000). Effective small group 
communication in theory and practice. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Richmond, V. P., & McCroskey, J. C. (1995). Communication: 
Apprehension, avoidance, and effectiveness (4th ed.). 
Scottsdale, AZ: Gorsuch Scarisbrick.
Richmond, V. P., & McCroskey, J. C. (1997). Communication 
apprehension, avoidance, and effectiveness (5th ed.). 
Scottsdale, AZ: Gorsuch Scarisbrick.
Richmond, V. P., & McCroskey, J. C. (2000). Communication: 
Apprehension, avoidance, and effectiveness (5th ed.). 
Scottsdale, AZ: Gorsuch Scarisbrick.
RIP Billy Mays (We will miss your infomercials). (n.d.). Retrieved 
from http://www.facebook.com/pages/RIP-Billy-Mays-We-
Will-Miss-Your-Infomercials/97433051622
Roloff, M.E., & Ifert, D.E. (2000). Conﬂ ict management through 
avoidance: Withholding complaints, suppressing arguments, 
and declaring topics taboo. In S. Petronio (Ed.), Balancing 
the Secrets of Private Disclosures (pp. 151–163). Mahwah, 
N.J.: LEA.
Rusbult, C. E., Olsen, N., Davis, J. L., & Hannon, P. A. (2004). 
Commitment and relationship maintenance mechanisms. In 
H. T. Reis & C. E. Rusbult (Eds.), Key readings on close 
relationships (pp. 287–304). Washington, D.C.: Taylor & Francis.
Ryan, R. (2000). 60 seconds & you’re hired. New York: Penguin Books.
Salopek, J. J. (1999). Is anyone listening? Training and 
Development, 531(9), 58–60.
Samovar, L. A., & Porter, R. E. (2001). Communication between 
cultures (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
O’Hair, D., O’Rourke, J., & O’Hair, M. (2001). Business 
communication: A framework for success. Cincinnati, OH: 
South-Western.
Olaniran, B. (2002–2003). Computer-mediated communication: 
A test of the impact of social cues on the choice of medium 
for resolving misunderstandings. Journal of Educational 
Technology Systems, 31(2), 205–222.
Omdahl, B. L. (1995). Cognitive appraisal, emotion, and empathy. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Onkvisit, S., & Shaw, J. (1987). Self-concept and image 
congruence: Some research and managerial implications. 
Journal of Consumer Marketing, 4(1), 13–23
Otzi, the ice man. (n.d.). Dig: The archaeology magazine for kids. 
Retrieved from http://www.digonsite.com/drdig/mummy/22.html.
Parks, M. R. (2006). Personal relationships and personal networks. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pascoe, C. J. (2008, January 22). Interview in Growing up online 
[Television series episode]. In D. Fanning. (Executive producer) 
Frontline. Boston, MA: WGBH. Retrieved from http://www.pbs
.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/kidsonline/interviews/pascoe.html
Patterson, B. R., Bettini, L., & Nussbaum, J. F. (1993). The 
meaning of friendship across the life-span: Two studies. 
Communication Quarterly, 41, 145.
Pearson, J. C., West, R. L., & Turner, L. H. (1995). Gender & 
communication (3rd ed.). Dubuque, IA: Brown & Benchmark.
Peng, T. (2008, November 23). Out of the shadows. Newsweek. 
Retrieved from http://www.newsweek.com/id/170528
Petri, H. L. (1996). Motivation: Theory, research, and applications 
(4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Petronio, S. (2002). Boundaries of privacy: Dialectics of disclosure. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Pew Research Center. (2007). A portrait of “Generation Next”: 
How young people view their lives, futures, and politics 
(Survey Report) . Retrieved from http://people-press.org/
report/300/a-portrait-of-generation-next
Phillips, G. (1977). Rhetoritherapy versus the medical model: 
Dealing with reticence. Communication Education, 26, 34–43.
Phillips, P. A., & Smith, L. R. (1992). The effects of teacher dress on 
student perceptions (Report No. SP 033-944). Retrieved from 
ERIC Document Services. (ED347151)
Plumb, T. (2006, August 31). Websites offer mourning for youths 
online. Boston Globe. Retrieved from http://www.boston
.com/news/local/massachusetts/articles/2006/08/31/
websites_offer_mourning_for_youths_online
Plumb, T. (2009). About Legacy.com, Inc. http://legacy.com/NS/About/
Rabby, M., & Walther, J. B. (2003). Computer mediated 
communication effects in relationship formation 

427
 
References 
Snell, W.E., Belk, S.S., & Hawkins, R.C. II (1986). The masculine and 
feminine self-disclosure scale:The politics of masculine and 
feminine self presentation. Sex Roles, 15, 249.267.
Snyder, B. (2004). Differing views cultivate better decisions. 
Stanford Business. Retreived online at:http://www.gsb
.stanford.edu/NEWS/bmag/sbsm0405/feature_workteams_
gruenfeld.shtml
Solomon, M., Bamossy, G., & Askegaard, S. (2002). Consumer 
behaviour: A European perspective (2nd ed.) . Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall Financial Times.
Spitzberg, B. H. (2000). A model of intercultural communication 
competence. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.), 
Intercultural communication: A reader (9th ed., pp. 375–387). 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Stephens, M. (1999). The new TV: Stop making sense. In 
R. E. Hiebert (Ed.), Impact of mass media: Current issues (4th 
ed.; pp. 16–22). White Plains, NY: Longman.
Stereotype. (2005). The American Heritage New Dictionary of 
Cultural Literacy (3rd ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifﬂ in. 
Retrieved from Dictionary.com Web site: http://dictionary
.reference.com/browse/stereotype
Stewart, C. J., & Cash, W. B. (2000). Interviewing: Principles and 
practices (9th ed.). Dubuque, IA: William C. Brown.
Stewart, L. P., Cooper, P. J., Stewart, A. D., & Friedley, S. A. 
(1998). Communication and gender (3rd ed.). Boston: 
Allyn & Bacon.
Stiff, J. B., Dillard, J. P., Somera, L., Kim, H., & Sleight, C. (1988). 
Empathy, communication and prosocial behavior. 
Communication Monographs, 55, 198–213.
Stokes, P. (2008, November 26). Perfectionist school girl hanged 
herself while worried about appearance. Telegraph.
co.uk. Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/
uknews/3525738/Perfectionist-schoolgirl-hanged-herself-
while-worried-about-appearance.html
Sultanoff, S. (1993). Tickling our funny bone: Humor matters 
in health. International Journal of Humor Research, 6, 
89–104.
Sundstrom, E., DeMeuse, K. P., & Futrell, D. (1990, February). 
Work teams: Applications and effectiveness. American 
Psychologist, 120–133.
Tate, R. (2009, February 20). Battered Rihanna picture 
a media ethics lightning rod. The Gawker. 
Retrieved from http://gawker.com/5157078/
battered-rihanna-picture-a-media-ethics-lightning-rod
Taylor, D. A., & Altman, I. (1987). Communication in interpersonal 
relationships: Social penetration theory. In M. E. Roloff & 
G. R. Miller (Eds.), Interpersonal processes: New directions in 
communication research (pp. 257–277). Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage.
Samovar, L. A., Porter, R. E., & McDaniel, E. R. (2007). 
Communication between cultures (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Thomson Wadsworth.
Samovar, L. A., Porter, R. E., & McDaniel, E. R. (Eds.) (2006). 
Intercultural communication: A reader (11th ed.).Belmont, CA: 
Thomson Learning/Wadsworth.
Samovar, L. A., Porter, R. E., & McDaniel, E. R. (Eds.). (2009). 
Intercultural communication: A reader (12th ed.) . Belmont, 
CA: Cengage.
Samter, W. (2003). Friendship interaction skills across the 
lifespan. In J. O. Greene & B. R. Burleson (Eds.), Handbook of 
communication and social interaction skills (pp. 637–684). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schiesel, S. (2008, March 5). Gary Gygax, Game pioneer, dies at 69. 
New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes
.com/2008/03/05/arts/05gygax.html
Schurman, A. (n.d.). A brief and rich body piercing history. Life 
123. Retrieved from http://www.life123.com/beauty/style/
piercings/body-piercing-history.shtml
Scott, P. (1997, January–February). Mind of a champion. Natural 
Health, 27, 99.
Seely Brown, J., & Hagel, J. (2009). How “World of Warcraft” 
promotes innovation. Business Week Online. Retrieved from 
Infotrac.
Seelye, K. Q. (2008, September 1). Palin’s teen daughter is 
pregnant; new G.O.P. tumult. New York Times. Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/02/us/politics/02PALINDAY
.html
Seigenthaler J. (2005, November 29). A false Wikipedia “biography.” 
USA Today. Retrieved from http://www.usatoday.com/news/
opinion/editorials/2005-11-29-wikipedia-edit_x.htm
Shaw, M. E. (1981). Group dynamics: The psychology of small group 
behavior (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Shedletsky, L. J., & Aiken, J. E. (2004). Human communication on 
the Internet. Boston: Pearson.
Shihab Nye, N. (2000). Long overdue. In Post Gibran: An anthology 
of new Arab American writing. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse 
University Press.
Shimanoff, M. (1992). Group interaction and communication 
rules. In R. Cathcart & L. Samovar (Eds.), Small group 
communication: A reader. Dubuque, IA: William C. 
Brown.
Slayter, M. E. (2006, January 14). Rehearse, rehearse, repeat: 
Have a rock-solid plan when preparing for an interview. The 
Forum, p. E3.
Smith, S. (2008). The case for using, but not citing, Wikipedia. 
Prosecutor, Journal of the National District Attorneys 
Association, 42(4), 31. Retrieved from Infotrac.

428
 
References
U.S. Census Bureau. (2007). Hispanic Americans by the numbers. 
Retrieved from http://www.infoplease.com/spot/hhmcensus1
.html
U.S. text message statistics. (2009, February 19). Text message 
blog. Retrieved from http://www.textmessageblog
.mobi/2009/02/19/text-message-statistics-usa/
Valacich, J. S., George, J. F., Nonamaker, J. F., Jr., & Vogel, D. R. 
(1994). Idea generation in computer based groups: A new 
ending to an old story. Small Group Research, 25, 83–104.
Walker, D. M. (December 2006). America at a crossroads. Vital 
Speeches of the Day (pp. 752–762).
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: 
Impersonal, interpersonal and hyperpersonal interaction. 
Western Journal of Communication, 57, 381–398.
Walther, J. B., & Parks, M. R. (2002). Cues ﬁ ltered out, cues ﬁ ltered 
in: Computer-mediated communication and relationships. 
In M. C. Knapp & J. A. Daly (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal 
communication (3rd ed.; pp. 529–563). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ward, C. C., & Tracy, T. J. G. (2004). Relation of shyness with 
aspects of online relationship involvement. Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 21, 611–623.
Watzlawick, P., Bavelas, J. B., & Jackson, D. D. (1967). Pragmatics of 
human communication. New York: Norton.
Weaver, J. B., III, & Kirtley, M. B. (1995). Listening styles and 
empathy. Southern Communication Journal, 60, 131–140.
Weill, J. (2006, December 18). All presentations should 
be ﬁ ve minutes long. Jason Weill Web Productions. 
Retrieved from http://weill.org/2006/12/08/
all-presentations-should-be-ﬁ ve-minutes-long/
Weiten, W. (1998). Psychology: Themes and variations (4th ed.). 
Paciﬁ c Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
What is Ignite? (n.d.). Ignite. Retrieved from http://ignite.oreilly.com
What’s wrong with the news? (n.d.). Retrieved from FAIR (Fairness 
and Accuracy in the News)Web site: http://www.fair.org/
index.php?page=101
Whitestone McCallum, H. (n.d.). Frequently asked questions. 
Heather. Retrieved from http://www.heatherwhitestone.com/
site/content/faqs.shtml
Widmer, W. N., & Williams, J. M. (1991). Predicting cohesion in a 
coacting sport. Small Group Research, 22, 548–570.
Wikipedia: Friend or foe? (2009). Learning & Leading with 
Technology, 36(8), 6. Retrieved from Infotrac.
Williams, J. (2009, July 31). Over beers, a taste of what’s to come. 
Boston Globe. Retrieved from http://www.boston
.com/news/nation/washington/articles/2009/07/31/
over_beers_a_taste_of_whats_to_come/
Taylor, J., & Hardy D. (2004). Monster careers: How to land the job 
of your life. New York: Penguin Books.
Teams that succeed (2004). Harvard Business Review. Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press.
The ten most memorable Oscar acceptances. (2008, February 22). 
Times Online. Retrieved from http://entertainment
.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/ﬁ lm/oscars/
article3418375.ece?token=null&offset=0&page=1
Tengler, C. D., & Jablin, F. M. (1983). Effects of question type, 
orientation, and sequencing in the employment screening 
interview. Communication Monographs, 50, 261.
Terkel, S. N., & Duval, R. S. (Eds.). (1999). Encyclopedia of ethics. 
New York: Facts on File.
Thompson, L. L. (2003). The social psychology of organizational 
behavior: Key readings. New York: Taylor and Francis.
Thorndike, E. L. (1920). A constant error on psychological rating. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 4, 25–29.
Thurlow, C., Lengel, L., & Tomic, A. (2004). Computer mediated 
communication: Social interaction and the Internet. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Timothy D. Naegele & Associates announces class action lawsuit 
against Guthy-Renker. (2002, June 26). All Business. 
Retrieved from http://www.allbusiness.com/crime-law/
criminal-offenses-cybercrime/5968871-1.html
Ting-Toomey, S. (1999). Communicating across cultures. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Ting-Toomey, S. (2004). The matrix of face: An updated face-negotiation 
theory. In W. Gudykunst (Ed.), Theorizing about Intercultural 
Communication (pp. 71–92). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ting-Toomey, S., Yee-Jung, K., Shapiro, R., Garcia, W., Wright, 
T., & Oetzel, J. G. (2000). Cultural/ethnic identity salience 
and conﬂ ict styles. International Journal of Intercultural 
Relations, 23, 47–81.
TMZ responds to LAPD internal investigation on battered 
Rihanna photo [Television story]. (2009, February 22). In 
On the Record. Retrieved from FOX News Network Web 
site: http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,498157,00
.html
Tuckman, B. W. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups. 
Psychological Bulletin, 6393, 384–399.
Tullar, W., & Kaiser, P. (2000). The effect of process training on 
process and outcomes in virtual groups. Journal of Business 
Communication, 37, 408–427.
Tversky, B. (1997). Memory for pictures, maps, environments, and 
graphs. In D. G. Payne & F. G. Conrad (Eds.), Intersections in 
basic and applied memory research (pp. 257–277). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.

429
 
References 
Wood, J. T., & Inman, C. (1993). In a different mode: Recognizing 
male modes of closeness. Journal of Applied Communication 
Research, 21, 279–295.
World Almanac and Book of Facts. Mahwah, NJ: World Almanac 
Books, 2001.
Wright, J. W. (2002). New York Times Almanac. New York: New 
York Times.
Young, K. S., Wood, J. T., Phillips, G. M., & Pedersen, D. J. (2007). 
Group discussion: A practical guide to participation 
and leadership (4th ed.). Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Young, M. (2003). Integrating communication skills into the 
marketing curriculum: A case study. Journal of Marketing 
Education, 25, 57–70.
Zempke, R., Raines, C., & Filipczak (2000). Generations at work. 
New York: AMACOM Books.
Williams, J. P., Hendricks, S. Q., & Winkler, W. K. (Eds.). (2006). 
Gaming as culture: Essays on reality, identity and experience 
in fantasy games. Jefferson, NC: McFarland.
Wilson, C. (2002). The history of corsets. eSSORTMENT: Information 
and advice you want to know. Retrieved form http://www
.essortment.com/all/historyofcors_rmue.htm
Wilson, G. L. (2005). Groups in context: Leadership and 
participation in small groups (7th ed.). New York: McGraw 
Hill.
Wolvin, A., & Coakley, C. G. (1996). Listening (5th ed.). Dubuque, IA: 
Brown & Benchmark.
Wood, J.T. Relational Communication: Continuity & Change in 
Personal Relationships, 2nd Ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 2000.
Wood, J. T. (2007). Gendered lives: Communication, gender, and 
culture (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.


431
A
Accents, 338
Accommodation, 144, 177
Accountability, 212–213
Acquaintances, 134–135
Ad hominem fallacies, 397
Adaptation phase, 334
Adaptors, 69
Adjourning, 214–215
Age, communication and, 116
Agendas, 235, 236
Aggressive behavior, 173–175
Ali, Saba, 146–147
Altruism, 128
Ambiguity, 127–128
American Psychological Association (APA), 294–295, 295
Analogy, arguing from, 395–396
Analysis, critical. See Critical analysis
Anecdotes, 268
Animation, in delivery, 336–337
Anorexia, 240–241
Anticipation phase, 334
Antonyms, 369
Anxiety
in communicating, 16, 35
intercultural communication and, 112, 121, 123
listening and, 197
managing, 334–336
in public speaking. See Public speaking apprehension
scripted speeches and, 346
symptoms/causes, 333–334
Anzaldúa, Gloría, 55–56
APA citation style, 294–295, 295
Apathetic audiences, 392
Appeals to action, 292
Appearance
gender differences in, 79
nonverbal communication and, 76
self-perceptions and, 30–31
in speech presentation, 344–345
Appreciative listening, 91
Apprehension. See Anxiety; Communication apprehension; 
Public speaking apprehension
Arguments (persuasive). See also Persuasive speaking
audience adaptation and, 391–393
deﬁ nition of, 395
emotional appeal and, 398–400
fallacies in, 397–398
main points, 393–394
persuasive goals and, 390–391
supporting evidence, 394–395
types of, 395–396
Articles, 262–263
Articulation, 338
Artifacts, 74–75, 117
Assertiveness, 173–176, 175
Assumptions, 123–124
Asynchronous technologies, 4
Attending, 92–93
Attention, 7, 24, 48
Attention, gaining, in speeches, 286–289, 305–306, 
326–328, 349
Attitudes
of audiences, 391–393
common ground and, 306
intercultural communication and, 127–128
topic selection and, 256
Attributions, 40
Audience, 401–402
Audience adaptation, 304–331
attitudes and, 391–393
audience analysis and, 254–257
common ground and, 306–307, 314
for comprehension/retention, 309–312
credibility and, 307–309
cultural diversity and, 312–315
deﬁ nition of, 305
intellectual stimulation and, 364–365
interest and, 305–306
memory aids and, 366–367
presentational aids for, types of, 315–323
presentational aids for, using, 323–328
propositions and, 391–393
relevance and, 305–306
sample plans, 353–354, 380, 410
setting and, 257
topic selection and, 258–259
Audience analysis, 254–257. See also Audience adaptation
Audience contact, 343
Audience-based communication apprehension, 16
Audiovisual materials, 322–323
Autonomy, 150
Average group opinion method, 229
Avoidance, uncertainty, 121
Index
Italicized page numbers indicate materials in ﬁ gures.

432
 
Index
Communication, 1–22
anxiety and, 16, 135
codes, 126
competence in, 15–16, 127–130
cultural inﬂ uences on, 12
deﬁ nition of, 3
elements of, 3–8
ethics and, 14–15
in groups. See Group communication
learning and, 15
nonverbal. See Nonverbal communication
paraphrasing, 96
principles, 10–15
process model, 8
in relationships. See Interpersonal communication
settings. See Contexts
skills, improving, 18, 19
verbal. See Verbal communication
Communication apprehension (CA), 16, 35. See also Public 
speaking apprehension
Communication competence, 15–16, 127–130
Communication orientation motivation (COM), 334
Communication Skills
assertiveness, 175
feelings, describing, 169
paraphrasing, 96
perception checking, 42
speciﬁ c language, using, 57
speech goals, 261
speech organization, 297
Comparative advantages pattern, 404
Comparisons, 268, 312, 369–370
Competence, communication, 15–16, 127–130
Comprehending, 91–97, 159, 309–312, 372
Comprehensive listening, 91
Comprehensive reports, 243
Compromising, 177–178
Computer-mediated communication (CMC), 59, 67, 136
Computer-mediated presentational aids, 243–244, 328
Concept mapping, 252, 253–254, 253
Conclusions, speech, 291–293
Concrete words, 53
Conﬁ dentiality, 161. See also Privacy
Conﬂ ict management, 176–180, 231
Confrontation phase, 334
Connection, 150
Connotation, 50
Consensus method, 229
Constructed messages, 11
Constructive criticism, 102, 103, 170–171
Content paraphrases, 94
Context-based communication apprehension, 16
Contexts
analyzing, 257–258
cultural differences in, 5, 51–52
deﬁ nition of, 4
B
Bar graphs, 321, 321
Barriers, 123–127
Behavior, 168–170, 376–377. See also Nonverbal
communication
Bias, media, 374–375
Bias-free language choice, 62, 313
Bibliographic style formats, 294
Biographies, 263
Blogs, 67
Body art, 80–81
Body language. See Kinesics
Body movement, 71
Body orientation, 70–71
Body type, 76
Books, 262
Boundaries, 172
Brainstorming, 228–229, 252, 253–254
Breadth, 365
Bridges, 201
Briefs, 242, 243
Buffering, 159
C
CA. See Communication apprehension
Cameras, document, 328
Causation, arguing from, 396
Causes, false, 397
CD players, 328
Chalkboards, 326–327
Channels, 6–7
Charts, 319–321, 319
Chronemics (use of time), 75–78
Chronological order, 282
Citing sources, 270–272, 294–296, 295, 296, 372
Cleveland, Harland, 13–14
Clichés, 56
Clinchers, 292–293
Clip art, 324
Closed questions, 187–188
Closedness, 150, 161
Clothing, nonverbal communication and, 76
CMC. See Computer-mediated communication
Co-cultures, 114–116
Codes, communication, 126
Cognitive restructuring, 335
Cohesiveness, 210, 231
Collaboration, 178–179, 231
Collectivist cultures, 30, 117–120,
161, 174
Color, in presentational aids, 234–325
COM. See Communication orientation motivation
Comforting, 158–161. See also Listening
Common ground, 306–307, 314

433
 
Index 
learning about, 128–129
nonverbal communication and, 68
norms and values of, 117–123, 127, 145
physical space and, 75
privacy and, 161
self-perceptions and, 30–31, 32–33
time orientation and, 75–76
touch and, 71
vocal volume and, 72. See also Vocalics
Culture-speciﬁ c skills, 129–130
Curiosity, intellectual, 287, 364
D
Dating information, 54
Decision making, 229–230, 237
Decoding, 3
Deﬁ nitions, 369
Deliverables, 242
Delivery, 336. See also Speech presentation 
Demographics, 254
Demonstrations, 370–372
Denotation, 50
Depth, 365
Descriptions, 368–369
Desensitization, 335
Deteriorating relationships, 148–149
Developing relationships, 144–145
Diagrams, 318, 319
Dialectics, 149–150
Dimensions, 310
Dimensions (learning cycle), 367–368
Direct questions, 288
Disagreement, 102
Disclosure
deﬁ nition of, 161
of feelings, 167–168
guidelines for, 161–162, 164
intimacy and, 164
maintaining privacy and, 171–172
personal feedback and, 168–171
of personal information, 165–166
reciprocity and, 164–165
in relationship life cycles, 141–143
Discrimination, 39
Discriminative listening, 91
Dissolving relationships, 148–149
Distortion, 31–34
Distractions, 7–8, 92–93
Diverse Voices
concept of time, 77–78
cultural perceptions, 32–33
diversity, 13–14
group norms, 211–212
hearing impairment, 89–90
individualism and collectivism, 119–120
disclosure and, 162
expository speeches and, 373
perception and, 40–41
types of, 4–6, 8–10
Continuity of communication, 11
Continuous reinforcement, 376–377
Continuum, opinion, 391
Contrasts, 268, 369–370
Control, 11–12
Controversial topics, 373–376
Conversation and Analysis
employment interview, 198–200
group problem solving, 239–242
interpersonal communication, 179–180
interpersonal relationships, 152–154
interviewing, 198–200
listening and responding, 104–106
Conversational style, 336
Coping statements, 335, 336
Costs, incentives and, 403
Cover letters, 192–196, 193
Creative works, expository speeches on, 377
Creativity, in expository speeches, 365–366
Credibility
appearance and, 344–345
communication competence and, 16
deﬁ nition of, 16
evoking in speeches, 400
goodwill and, 400–401
humor and, 344–345
of speakers, 307–308, 401
in speeches, 290, 372
trustworthiness and, 16, 266–267, 308, 372
Criteria, solution, 227
Criteria satisfaction pattern, 404
Critical analysis, 100, 351, 352, 357–359, 382–384, 411–415
Critical listening, 92, 99–101
Critiquing others, 102, 103, 170–171
Cronkite, Walter, 374
Cultural context, 5, 51–52, 68, 70, 315
Cultural diversity, 269, 312–314
Cultural immersion, 128
Culture shock, 112–113
Cultures
barriers to communication between, 123–127
behavior and, 174–175
co-cultures and, 114–116
comforting and, 160–161
communication and, 112–117
communication competence and, 127–130
cultural identity of, 116–117
deﬁ nition of, 12, 112
emotional responses and, 97
eye contact and, 70
gestures and, 69
language and, 51–52

434
 
Index
linguistic sensitivity, 63
nonverbal communication, 83–84
online ethics, 152
resumes, exaggerating in, 202–203
social perceptions, 43
source citations in speeches, 272
speaker/audience obligations, 360
truthfulness in speeches, 301
Ethnicity, 114
Ethnocentrism, 124
Ethos, 400
Etymology, 369
Evaluating. See Critical analysis
Evidence, to support reasons, 394–395
Example, arguing from, 395
Executive summaries, 243
Expectations, 25, 25, 164–165
Expediting (meetings), 232, 237
Experiences, perception and, 26
Experiments, 265
Expert opinion method, 229
Expert opinions, 268
Expertise, speaker credibility and, 308
Expository speeches, 372–378
Extemporaneous speeches, 346
Eye contact, 68–70, 343, 349
F
Facebook, 67
Facial expressions, 70, 341–342
Fact, proposition of, 390
Factual statements, 99–100
Fairness, 14
Fallacies (arguments), 397–398
False causes, 397
Families, 215–216
Fear
about speaking with others, 16, 35
as persuasive technique, 398–399
of public speaking. See Public speaking apprehension
Feedback, 7–8, 141–143, 168–171
Feeling dimension, 310, 367
Feelings, 167–168, 171–172, 367–368
Feelings paraphrases, 94
Figurative comparisons/contrasts, 268
Filtering, 34
First impressions, 38. See also Social perceptions
Flattery, 170
Flexibility, 130
Flip charts, 327
Flow charts, 318, 319–320, 320
Forcing, 177
Form (organization), 4
Forming, 213–214
Friends, 136–139
Diverse Voices (continued)
interpersonal relationships, 146–147
languages of Gloría Anzaldúa, 55–56
problem solving, cultural diversity and,
233–234
public speaking patterns, 314–315
second language, speaking, 339–441
self-disclosure, prejudice and, 162–163
Document cameras, 328
Doing dimension, 310, 368
Dominant cultures, 113–115
Drawings, 318, 318
Drummond, Dike, 235
DVD players, 328
E
Ectomorphs, 76
Educated guesses, 257
Ego gratiﬁ cation, 402
Egocentricity, 128
Either-or fallacies, 397
Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM), 389–390, 398
Elaborations, 268
Electronic resources, 263
ELM. See Elaboration Likelihood Model
Email, 67
Emblems, 69
Emoticons, 67, 70
Emotional support, 158–161. See also Listening
Emotions, 97, 101–102, 398–400
Empathy, 91, 95, 97, 130, 400–401
Emphasis, 57
Employment applications, 192–196
Employment interviews
conducting (interviewer), 191–192
following up (applicant), 200
interview guidelines (applicant), 197–198
preparing for (applicant), 196–197
Encoding, 3
Encyclopedias, 263
Endomorphs, 76
Esteem needs, 402
Ethics
deﬁ nition of, 14
groups and, 208
implications on communication, 14–15
Internet and, 36
in speeches, 271–272, 301, 329, 360, 385
Ethics issues
audience adaptation, 329
communication perspectives, 19–20
expository speech topics, 385
group decision making, 221, 245
intercultural communication, 130
interpersonal communication, 106, 180–181

435
 
Index 
Groups
accountability in, 212–213
cohesiveness in, 210
collectivist cultures and, 30, 118, 119–120
communicating in. See Group communication
conﬂ ict management in, 231
cultural inﬂ uences on, 112, 113
decision methods in, 229
deﬁ nition of, 208
development stages of, 213–215
dynamics of, 219
ethics and, 14, 208
goals of, 118
healthy, 208–213
interdependence in, 210
language communities, 48
leadership in, 230–234
perceptions of, 38–39
problem solving in. See Problem solving
separateness in, 13
small, 9
status in, 74
trust and, 210, 214, 216
types of, 215–219
working in, 18, 118
Groupthink, 214
H
Halo effect, 38
Handouts, 327–328
Haptics (touch), 71
Harmonizers, 232
Hasty generalizations, 397
Haubegger, Christy, 32–33
Hearing impairment, 89–90
Herakova, Lily, 233–234
Heterogeneous groups, 218–219
Hierarchy of needs, 401–402
High power-distance cultures, 121–122
High uncertainty-avoidance
cultures, 121
High-context cultures, 51, 315
Historical context, 4
Historical topics, 376
Hofstede, Geert, 117, 122
Home pages, 266
Homogeneous groups, 218–219
Honesty. See also Truthfulness
assertiveness and, 138
deﬁ nition of, 14
groups and, 210, 214, 216
halo effect and, 38
managing conﬂ ict and, 176
trust and. See Trust
trustworthiness and. See Trustworthiness
G
Gatekeepers, 232–234, 236–237
Gaur, Raj, 339–441
Gaze (eye contact), 68–70, 343, 349
Gender bias, in language, 62, 313
Gender differences
in clothing style, 79
co-cultures and, 114–115
in comforting, 160–161
in cultural norms/values,
122–123
in eye contact, 70
in gestures, 69
in intimacy, 138–139
in language styles, 52
in physical contact, 71, 145
privacy and, 162
in self-perceptions, 30–31
in voices, 72, 337
General speech goal, 259
Generalizations, 54, 397
Generic language, 59
Gestures, 69–70, 342
Goals
with acquaintances, 134–135
communication improvement, 18, 19
in constructive criticism, 171
in expository speeches, 374
in groups, 118, 218
interviewing, 186, 192, 197
language clariﬁ cation, 54, 56
listening, 91–92, 100
persuasive, 259, 390–391
in relationships, 143–144
in responding, 101–102,
159–160
of resumés, 192, 194
of speeches. See Speech goals
Goodwill, 291, 400–401
Government documents, 263
Graphs, 321–322
Grieving, 5–6
Grooming, 76, 79
Ground rules, 210
Group communication, 207–223
of decisions, 242–244
deﬁ nition of, 208
furniture placement and, 75
group development and, 213–215
group dynamics and, 219
healthy groups and, 208–213
humor in, 231, 232
problem solving and. See Problem solving
in small groups, deﬁ nition of, 9
types of groups and, 215–219
Group dynamics, 219–220

436
 
Index
Interdependence, group, 210
Interest groups, 217
Interests, 24–25
Interference (noise), 7–8
Intermittent reinforcement, 376–377
Internal noise, 7
Internal reviews, 310
Internet-based resources, 263
Interpersonal communication, 157–184
comforting, 158–161
deﬁ nition of, 9
disclosure guidelines for, 165–171
expectations and, 164–165
intimacy and, 164
negotiating in, 172–176
privacy issues in, 161–165, 171–172
Interpersonal relationships, 133–156
communication skills for. See Interpersonal
communication
conﬂ ict in, 176–180
dialectics in, 149–151
life cycles of, 141–143
stages of, 143–149
trust in, 137–138, 148
types of, 134–140
Interpreters, 231
Interpreting, 26
Interrupting, 93
Interviewees, 189–190
Interviews, 185–205, 264
barriers to, 123–127
deﬁ nition of, 186
with media, 200–202
protocols for, 186, 187
questions for, 187–188, 197
structuring, 186–189, 187, 189
Intimacy, 137–140, 164
Intimate distance, 73
Intonation, 72. See also Vocalics
Intrapersonal communication, 9
Introductions, speech, 287–291
J
Jargon, 58, 310
Job interviews. See Employment interviews
Job seeker, 192
Johari window, 141–143, 141, 143
Jokes. See Humor
K
Kinesics (use of body), 69–71, 341–345. See also Nonverbal 
communication
Knowledge, 16, 308
Kolb’s cycle of learning, 309–310, 309, 367–368
Humor
credibility and, 344–345
in group communication, 231, 232
as memory aid, 367
as speech opener, 288
as tension reliever, 232
I
“I”-centered messages, 172
Ideal self-concept, 27 
Ignite (presentation style), 316–317
Illustrators, 69
Immediacy, 11
Immersion, cultural, 128
Impartial audiences, 392
Impersonal communication, 134 
Implementing solutions, 230
Implicit personality theories, 38
Impromptu speeches, 346
Improvement plan, 18, 19
Incentives, 401–403
Inclusive language, 59
Incongruence, 31–32
Incremental change, 392 
Indexing generalizations, 54
Individualistic cultures, 30, 117–120, 161, 174
Inferences, 99–100
Infomercials, 397–398
Informal leaders, 230
Information givers/seekers/analyzers, 230–231
Information ownership, 165
Information sources, 262–272
Informational interviews, 189–190
Informative goals, 259
Informative methods, 368–371, 373
Informative speaking, 363–387
characteristics of, 364–368
deﬁ nition of, 364
evaluation checklist, 378
methods of, 368–371
sample speech, 353–359, 379–384
speech frameworks of, 371–378
Initiation, in relationships, 136
Integrity, 14
Intellectual stimulation, 364–365
Intelligible speaking, 337–338
Intercultural communication, 111–132
barriers to, 123–127
basic skills, 129–130
co-cultures and, 114–116
competence in, 127–130
cultural identity and, 116–117
cultural norms and values and, 117–123
deﬁ nition of, 113
dominant cultures and, 113–115

437
 
Index 
M
Main points
deﬁ nition of, 276
identifying, 276–279
organizing, 282–284
writing, 280–281
Maintaining relationships, 145, 148
Maintenance leadership roles,
230–231
Majority rule method, 229
Maps, 318, 319
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 401–402, 402
Meaning, 3, 49–51, 52–54
Media bias, 374–375
Media images, 34
Mediators, 232
Meetings, 235–239
Memory aids, 98, 366–367, 367
Mesomorphs, 76
Messages
comforting and, 158–161
deﬁ nition of, 3
persuasive. See Persuasive speaking
relational aspects of, 11–12
types of, 11
Metaphors, 56
Miller, Ann Neville, 314–315
MLA citation style, 294–295, 295
Mnemonic devices, 98, 367
Modeling, 333–334
Models, scale, 318
Modern Language Association (MLA), 294–295, 295
Monochronic time orientation, 75–76
Monotone, 338–339
Moral dilemmas, 14
Motivated sequence pattern, 406–407
Motivation
communication competence and, 15
deﬁ nition of, 401
disclosure and, 162
through incentives, 401–403
Mourning, 5–6
Movement, 71, 342
Multimedia projectors, 328
Multitasking, 75–76
N
Narrative order, 282–283
Narratives, 268, 370
Needs, 24, 401–402
Negative reinforcement, 334
Negotiating, 172–176
Nervousness. See Anxiety
Neutral attitudes, 391, 392
Neutral questions, 188
L
Language
appropriate use of, 58–63
audience adaptation and, 310–312
clarity of, 52–54
cultural inﬂ uences on, 51–52
deﬁ nition of, 48
electronic communication and, 59
ethnicity and, 114
gender inﬂ uences on, 52
linguistic sensitivity and, 58–63
meaning and, 49–51
memorable messages and, 56–58
purposes of, 49
Language communities, 48, 50
LCD projectors, 328
Leadership, 31, 214, 230–238
Leading questions, 188
Learning cycle, 309–310, 309, 
367–368
Learning styles, 309–310, 315, 
367–368
Lectures. See Expository speeches
Legal issues, in speeches, 376–377
Line graphs, 321, 322
Linguistic sensitivity, 58–63
Listener relevance links, 289–290, 365
Listening, 87–109, 99
attending and, 92–93
comforting and, 158–161
common ground and, 306–307
comprehension/retention and, 91–97, 309–312, 
366–368, 372
cultural diversity and, 309–312
deﬁ nition of, 88
evaluating and. See Critical analysis
intercultural communication and, 129–130
interference with, 7
nonverbal communication and, 92–93
processes, 92, 103–104
relevance and, 305–306
relevance links and, 289–290
remembering and, 97–98, 309–312, 315, 
366–368
responding and, 101–102
speaker credibility and, 307–309
types of, 88, 90–92
Literal comparisons/contrasts, 268
Liu, Min, 119–120
Logical reasons order, 283–284
Logistics (meetings), 232, 235–236
Logos, 393
Love needs, 402
Low power-distance cultures, 122
Low uncertainty-avoidance cultures, 121
Low-context cultures, 51

438
 
Index
P
Panel discussions, 243
Paralanguage, 71. See also Vocalics
Paralinguistics. See Paralanguage
Parallel, 281
Paraphrasing, 94–96
Participants, 3
Passive behavior, 173–175
Passive observation, 128
Pathos, 398
Pattern, 25
Pauses, in speech, 73, 339. See also Vocalics
Perception
checking, 41–43, 97
of communication competence, 15
deﬁ nition of, 24
false, 32
observing others, 38
of others, 38–42
process, 24–26
of self. See Self-perceptions
stereotypes and, 38–39
Performance orientation, 334
Performing, 214
Periodicals, 262
Personableness, 309
Personal distance, 73
Personal experiences, 26
Personal impact, on audiences, 306
Personal references, 288–289
Personal space, 73–74
Personality theories, 38
Personas, 36–37
Perspective taking, 97
Persuasive goals, 259, 390–391
Persuasive speaking, 388–418
audience involvement, 398–400
demonstrating goodwill, 400–401
developing arguments, 393–398
evaluation checklist, 407–408
goals, 390–393
incentives and, 401–403
organizational patterns, 403–407
presentational aids and, 315
processing persuasive messages, 389–390
sample speech, 409–415
Persuasive speech propositions, 391
Photographs, 318
Physical context, 4
Physical incentives, 402
Physical interference, 7
Physical space, 74
Physiological needs, 402
Pie graphs, 321–322, 322
Pitch, vocal, 72, 337–338
Plagiarism, 268
Neutralization, 151
Newspapers, 263
Noise, 7–8
Nonverbal communication, 66–86
body, use of. See Kinesics
characteristics of, 68
computer-mediated communication and, 67
cultural differences in, 68–70, 71, 73, 75–78, 80–81
deﬁ nition of, 67
gender differences in, 70, 71, 72, 79
how we look and, 76, 79
improving, 79–83
interpreting messages, 82
listening and, 93
personal space and, 73–75
sending messages, 79–82
time use and, 75–76, 77–78
vocal characteristics of, 71–73, 337–339
Norming, 214
Norms
of cultures, 117–123, 127
of groups, 210–211
Notes, speaking, 347, 348
Note-taking, 98
Novelty, 150
Nye, Naomi Shihab, 162–163
O
Objects, 316–317
Observing
cultural differences, 128
as data source, 242–243
ﬁ rst impressions and, 38
Oculesics (eye contact), 68–70, 343, 349
Offensive language, 60–63, 312–314
Okigbo, Charles, 77–78
Open questions, 187–188
Open-mindedness, 128
Openness, 150, 161
Operant conditioning, 376–377
Opinion continuum, 391
Opinion givers/seekers/analyzers,
230–231
Opposing attitudes, 391–392
Oral reports, 243
Organization (form), 4
Organizational charts, 320, 320
Organizational patterns
for expository speeches, 373
for main points, 282–284
for persuasive speeches, 403–407
Organizing, 276. See also Speech organization
Other-centered messages, 159, 160
Other-imposed prophecies, 33
Outlining speeches. See Speech organization

439
 
Index 
reciprocity and, 164–165
self-disclosure and, 141–143
sharing feelings and, 167–168
Privacy management, 161
Problem analysis, 226–227, 227
Problem deﬁ nition, 226
Problem solving, 224–248
brainstorming, 228–229
communicating solutions in, 242–244
decision making, 229–230
effective meetings for, 235–242
problem analysis, 226–227
problem deﬁ nition, 226
shared leadership in, 230–234
solutions, 227–230
Problem-cause-solution pattern, 406
Problem-solution pattern, 405–406
Procedural leadership roles, 232
Process speeches, 371–372
Productive thinking, 365–366
Projectors, 328
Pronouns, personal, 306
Pronunciation, 338
Prophecies, 32–33
Propositions, 390–393
Protocols, interviewing, 186, 187
Proxemics (use of space), 73–75
Proximity, 306
Psychological context, 5
Psychological incentives, 402
Psychological interference, 7
Public communication, 9
Public distance, 73
Public speaking
action steps for, 252
apprehension and. See Public speaking apprehension
audience and. See Audience analysis
developing speech content. See Speech content
organizing speeches. See Speech organization
practicing/presenting. See Speech presentation
Public speaking apprehension, 316, 333–336. 
See also Speech presentation 
Pundits, 94–95
Purposes, communication, 10
Q
Quotations, 268, 289
R
Race, 114
RAR. See Remote access reports
Rate, speaking, 72, 337–338
Reacting, 93. See also Feedback
Reactions, of others, 27
Platonic relationships, 137
Poise, 343
Policy, proposition of, 391
Political satire, 344–345
Polychronic time orientation, 75–76
Pop Comm!
acceptance speeches, 277
audience adaptation, 316–317
body art, 80–81
credibility, humor and, 344–345
infomercials, 398–399
listening, uncivil discourse and, 94–95
media bias, 374–375
mourning, 5–6
offensive language, 60–61
online dating, 138–139
online social groups, 240–241
privacy, media and, 166–167
problem solving, 209
self-concept, 28–29
stereotypes and prejudice, 124–125
Wikipedia, 264–265
Positive reinforcement, 170
Posters, 326
Posture, 70–71, 343
Power distance, 121–122
Practicing speeches. See Speech presentation
Praise, 170
Precise words, 53
Predictability, 150
Predictions, 32–33
Prejudice, 39, 124–126
Presentational aids
beneﬁ ts of, 315–316
computer-mediated aids, 243–244, 328
creativity and, 366
criteria for choosing, 323
designing, 323–326
displaying methods, 326–328
handling during speech, 347–349
in process speeches, 372
types of, 316–323
Presentations. See Speech presentation
Pride, 399–400
Primary questions, 187
Primary research, 264–265
Principles, 376–377
Privacy
deﬁ nition of, 161
disclosure rules and, 161–162, 164
gender differences and, 162
information co-ownership and, 165
intimacy and, 164
maintaining, 171–172
personal feedback and, 168–171
personal information and, 165–166

440
 
Index
gender/cultural inﬂ uences on, 30–31
and presentation to others, 36–37
Self-talk, 34–35, 333, 335, 336
Semantic noise, 7–8
Sensory language, 311–312
Sequential order, 282
Service groups, 217
Settings. See Contexts
Sex differences. See Gender differences
Sexual orientation, 115
Shared leadership, 230–234
Sign, arguing from, 396
Signposts, 287
Similes, 56
Simplicity, 25
Situational communication apprehension, 16
Skill Building
assertive messages, 176
clarifying general statements, 57
feelings, 169
paraphrasing, 96
perception checking, 43
questions, 96
Skills, communication, 16
Slang, 59, 310
Slide, example of RAR, 244
Slide shows, 328
Small group communication. See Group communication 
Social class, 115–116
Social construction, 36–37
Social context, 4
Social distance, 73
Social ease, 16
Social environment, 37
Social friendship groups, 216
Social incentives, 402
Social perceptions, 38–42
Solution criteria, 227–228, 228
Solution evaluation, 229
Sources, citing, 270–272, 294–296, 295, 296, 372
Space, use of, 73–75
Speaking anxiety. See Public speaking apprehension
Speaking notes, 347, 348
Speciﬁ c speech goal, 259
Speciﬁ c words, 53
Speech, critiquing, 103
Speech adaptation. See Audience adaptation
Speech Assignments
citing oral footnotes, 271
communicating emotions nonverbally, 83
critical listening, 100–101
cultural knowledge, 129
expository speech, 378–379
friendship, 140
introducing a classmate, 17–18
meaning clariﬁ cation, 62
Reasons, 393–398, 404
Recorders, 234
Recording information, 269–270
Reframing, 151, 160
Refutative pattern, 405
Rehearsing speeches, 346–351. See also Speech presentation
Relational dialectics, 149–150
Relationship transformation, 149
Relationships, 134. See also Interpersonal relationships
Relevance, 305, 365
Religion, 115
Remembering, 97–98, 309–312, 315, 366–368
Remote access reports (RAR), 243–244
Repetition, as memory aid, 98
Reports, 243–244
Research cards, 269–270
Respect, 14
Responding, 101–102. See also Feedback
Responses, of others, 27
Responsibility, 15
Responsiveness, 136, 401
Restructuring, cognitive, 335
Résumés, 192–196, 195
Retention, 97–98, 309–312, 315, 366–368
Rhetorical questions, 288, 307
Roles, 36–37, 230–234
Romantic relationships, 137
S
Safety needs, 402
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 48
Saving face, 135 
Scripted messages, 11
Scripted speeches, 346
Secondary questions, 187
Secondary research, 262–263
Section transitions, 286
Selection, 24
Self Reviews
Part I: Foundations of Communication, 110
Part II: Interpersonal Communication, 206
Part III: Group Communication, 249
Part IV: Public Speaking, 418
Self-actualization needs, 402
Self-concept, 26–35
Self-created prophecies, 32–33
Self-disclosure, 136, 141–143, 161
Self-esteem, 26, 28–31, 34–35
Self-fulﬁ lling prophecies, 32
Self-monitoring, 36
Self-perceptions, 26–37
accuracy of, 31–34
developing, 28–30
effects on communication, 34–35
forming, 26–27

441
 
Index 
Speech rehearsing, 346–351. See also Speech 
presentation
Speech research, 261–272
citing sources, 270–272
cultural diversity and, 269
experiments, 265
expository speeches and, 372
locating information sources, 
261–265
recording information, 269–270
selecting relevant information, 267–268
sources, evaluating, 265–267
sources, types of, 262–265
Speech setting, 257–258, 259 
Speech topics
audience analysis and, 254–257
brainstorming/concept mapping, 253–254
content development of. See Speech content
for expository speeches, 377
goals of. See Speech goals
identifying, 252–254
selecting, 258–259
setting analysis, 257–258
Spontaneity, 336
Spontaneous expressions, 11
Statement of reasons pattern, 404
Statistical sources, 263
Stereotypes, 38, 124–126
Stimuli, 25–26
Stories, in speeches, 289
Storming (group development), 214
Straw person fallacies, 397
Streaming videos, 244
Subject lists, 252
Subjects, 252. See also Topics
Summaries, 292
Support groups, 216–217
Supporters, 231
Supporting material, 284–285, 287, 314
Supportive attitudes, 391, 392–393
Supportive messages, 101
Surveys, 255–256, 255, 256, 264
Suspense, in speeches, 289
Symbols, 3
Sympathy, in responding, 97
Symposia, 243
Synchronous technologies, 4
Synergy, 213
Synonyms, 369
Syntactic context, 50
Systematic desensitization, 335
T
Talk show hosts, 94
Talking points, 201
panel discussion, 244–245
personal narrative, 173
persuasive speech, 408–409
process speeches, 373
self-concept, 35
speech presentation, 352–353
thesis statements, 293
visual aids, 328
Speech communities, 48, 50
Speech content, 261–272
citations in, 270–272
cultural inﬂ uences on, 269
information sources/types, 261–268
record keeping and, 269–270
Speech goals, 251–261
audience and, 254–257
setting and, 257–258
topics and, 252–254, 258–259
types of, 259
writing, 259–261
Speech organization, 275–303
audience analysis and, 276
citing sources, 294–296
conclusions, 291–293
introductions, 287–291
main points, identifying, 276–281
organization patterns and, 280–284
outlines, 281, 296–298, 299–301, 354–356, 380–382, 
410–411
section transitions, 286
signposts, 287
speech body, outlining, 280–284
supporting materials, 284–285
thesis statement, 279–280
Speech outlines, 280. See also Speech organization
Speech Planning Action Steps, 251
Step 1: determining speech goal. See Speech goals
Step 2: developing speech content. See Speech content
Step 3: organizing speech. See Speech organization
Step 4: adapting speech to audience. See Audience 
adaptation
Step 5: practicing speech delivery. See Speech 
presentation
Speech practicing. See Speech presentation
Speech presentation, 336–362
apprehension and, 316, 333–336
body language and, 341–345
critique checklist, 352
critiquing, 351, 357–359, 382–384,
411–415
delivery, 336–337, 345–346
humor in, 288, 367
rehearsing, 346–351
skills training for, 335
speech samples, 353–359, 379–384, 409–415
voice and, 337–341

442
 
Index
V
Value, proposition of, 390
Values, cultural, 117–123, 127
VCRs, 328
Vegans, 369
Verbal communication, 47–65
appropriate language use, 58–63
clarity of, 52–54
cultural context and, 51–52
gender differences in, 52
meaning and, 49–51
memorable messages and, 56–58
purposes of, 48–49
Video cassette players, 328
Video reports, 244
Virtual reports, 243–244
Visual aids, 325, 326
computer-mediated aids, 243–244, 328
criteria for choosing, 323
deﬁ nition of, 315
designing, 323–326
display methods for, 326–328
in process speeches, 372
types of, 316–323
Visualization, 334–335
Vividness, 56, 289, 291–292, 311–312
Vocal characteristics, 71–73, 337–339
Vocal expressiveness, 338–339
Vocal quality, 72, 337–338
Vocalics (use of voice), 71–73, 337–339
Vocalized pauses, 333
Voice characteristics, 71–73, 337–339
Volume, vocal, 72, 337–338
W
Watching dimension, 310, 367
Web research sources, 263
White lies, 172
Whiteboards, 326–327
Wikipedia, 264–265
Withdrawing (interpersonal conﬂ ict), 177
Word charts, 319, 320
Words, 48, 53
Work groups, 217–219
Workplace humor, 231, 232
Written reports, 242–243
Target audiences, 391
Task leadership roles, 230–231
Temporal selection, 151
Tension relievers, 232
Territory, marking of, 74
Texting, 59, 67
Theoretical topics, 376–377
Thesis statements, 279–280, 282–283, 290
Thinking dimension, 310, 368
Timbre, vocal, 72. See also Vocalics
Time, 75–78
Time order, 282
Timeliness, 305
Timetable, speech preparation, 347
Tone setting, 290
Topic order, 283
Topical segmentation, 151
Topics, 252. See also speech topics
Touch, 71
Traitlike communication apprehension, 16
Transformation, relationship, 149
Transitions, 286
Trust. See also Trustworthiness
disclosure and, 143, 166
in groups, 210, 214
in interpersonal relationships, 137–138, 148
intimacy and, 139–140
Trustworthiness. See also Truthfulness
appearance and, 344
of sources, 266–267
speaker credibility and, 16, 308, 372
Truthfulness. See also Honesty; Trust
critical listening for, 92
deﬁ nition of, 14
evaluating, 99
responding with, 101
Tsay, Mina, 211–212
U
Unanimous decision method, 229
Uncertainty avoidance, 121
Uncertainty reduction, 37
Uncivil discourse, 95–96
Understanding, 91–97, 159, 309–312, 
366–368, 372
Uninformed audiences, 392

1
Foundations of Communication
Communication Skills
P U L L  O U T  S E C T I O N☛
Skill
Making a verbal 
statement that reﬂ ects 
your understanding 
of another person’s 
behavior.
Use
To enable you to test 
the accuracy of your 
perceptions.
Procedure
1.  Describe the 
behaviors of the 
other person that 
have led to your 
perception.
2.  Add your 
interpretation of 
the behavior to 
your statement.
Example
After taking a phone 
call, Shimika comes 
into the room with 
a completely blank 
expression and neither 
speaks to Donnell 
nor acknowledges 
that he is in the room. 
Donnell says, “Shimika, 
from your blank look, 
I get the feeling that 
you’re in a state of 
shock. Has something 
happened?”
Perception Checking (page 42)

2
Skill
Clarify meaning by 
narrowing what is 
understood from a 
general category to 
a particular group 
within that category, 
by appealing to the 
senses, by choosing 
words that symbolize 
exact thoughts and 
feelings, or by using 
concrete details or 
examples.
Use
To help the listener 
picture thoughts 
analogous to the 
speaker’s.
Procedure
1.  Assess whether 
the word or phrase 
to be used is 
less speciﬁ c (or 
concrete or precise) 
than it could be.
2.  Pause to consider 
alternatives.
3.  Select a more 
speciﬁ c (or 
concrete or 
precise) word, or 
give an example or 
add details.
Example
Instead of saying, 
“Bring the stuff for the 
audit,” say, “Bring the 
records and receipts 
from the last year for 
the audit.” Or instead 
of saying, “Make sure 
you improve your 
grades,” say, “This 
term, we want to see 
a B in Spanish and at 
least a  C in algebra.”
Using Speciﬁ c Language (page 55)

3
Interpersonal Communication
Skill
A response that 
conveys your 
understanding of 
another person’s 
message.
Use
To increase listening 
efﬁ ciency; to avoid 
message confusion; 
to discover the 
speaker’s motivation.
Procedure
1.  Listen carefully to 
the message.
2.  Notice what 
images and 
feelings you have 
experienced from 
this message.
3.  Determine what 
the message 
means to you.
4.  Create a message 
that conveys these 
images or feelings.
Example
Grace says, “At 
two minutes to ﬁ ve, 
the boss gave me 
three letters that 
had to be in the 
mail that evening!” 
Bonita replies, “If I 
understand, you were 
really resentful that 
your boss dumped 
important work on 
you right before 
quitting time when 
she knows you have 
to pick up the baby at 
day care.”
Paraphrasing (page 95)

4
Skill
Naming the emotions 
you are feeling 
without judging them.
Use
For self-disclosure; to 
teach people how to 
treat you.
Procedure
1.  Identify the 
behavior that 
has triggered the 
feeling.
2.  Identify the speciﬁ c 
emotion you are 
experiencing as 
a result of the 
behavior. Anger? 
Joy? Be speciﬁ c.
3.  Frame your 
response as an “I” 
statement. 
“I feel _____.”
4.  Verbalize the 
speciﬁ c feeling.
Example
“I just heard I didn’t 
get the job, and I feel 
cheated and bitter” 
or “Because of the 
way you defended 
me when I was being 
belittled by Leah, 
I feel both grateful 
and humbled.”
Describing Feelings (page 169)

5
Interpersonal Communication (continued)
Skill
Standing up for 
yourself and doing 
so in interpersonally 
effective ways that 
describe your feelings 
honestly and exercise 
your personal rights 
while respecting the 
rights of others.
Use
To show clearly what 
you need, want, or 
prefer.
Procedure
1.  Identify what you 
are thinking or 
feeling.
2.  Analyze the cause 
of these feelings.
3.  Identify what your 
real preferences 
and rights are.
4.  Use  describing 
feelings and 
describing 
 behavior skills 
to make “I” 
statements that 
politely explain 
your position.
Example
When Gavin believes 
he is being charged 
too much, he says, 
“I have never been 
charged for a reﬁ ll on 
iced tea before—has 
there been a change 
in policy?”
Assertiveness (page 173)

6
Public Speaking
Skill
The process of 
identifying a speech 
purpose that draws 
on the speaker’s 
knowledge and 
 interests and is 
adapted to a speciﬁ c 
audience and 
setting.
Use
To identify a speaking 
goal that matches 
speaker interest and 
expertise, audience 
needs and interests, 
and setting.
Procedure
1.  Identify topics 
within subject 
areas in which you 
have interest and 
expertise.
2.  Analyze your 
audience’s 
demographic 
characteristics, 
interests, and 
 attitudes toward 
your subject.
3.  Understand the 
occasion and the 
location for the 
speech.
4.  Select a topic 
that will meet 
the  interests and 
needs of your 
audience and 
setting.
5.  Write a speciﬁ c 
speech goal that 
clearly states the 
exact response 
you want from your 
audience.
Example
Ken ﬁ rst writes, 
“I want my audience 
to know what to 
look for in buying 
a dog.” As he 
revises, he writes, “I 
want my audience 
to understand 
four important 
considerations in 
buying the perfect 
dog.” Once Ken has 
a goal with a single 
focus and a clearly 
speciﬁ ed, desired 
audience reaction, 
he tests his ﬁ rst 
version by writing two 
differently worded 
versions.
Crafting a Speciﬁ c Speech Goal That 
Meets Audience Needs (page 261)

7
Skill
The process of 
identifying main points, 
constructing a thesis 
statement, outlining the 
body of the speech, 
developing section 
transitions, creating an 
introduction, crafting 
a conclusion, and 
cataloguing a list of 
sources.
Use
To create a hierarchy 
and sequence of 
ideas that help a 
particular audience to 
easily understand the 
speaker’s ideas and 
the goal of the speech.
Procedure
1.  Identify your main 
ideas.
2.  Write a thesis 
statement.
3.  Outline the body 
of the speech by 
carefully wording 
main points, 
selecting an 
organizational 
pattern, selecting 
and organizing 
support, and 
preparing section 
transitions.
4.  Create introductions 
and select the best 
one.
5.  Create conclusions 
and select the best 
one.
6. List sources.
Example
The three aspects 
of romantic love are 
passion, intimacy, and 
commitment.
 I. Passion is the ﬁ rst 
aspect of romantic 
love to develop.
 II. Intimacy is the 
second.
 III. Commitment is the 
third.
Example for “passion”:
A. Passion is a 
compelling feeling of 
love.
B. (Focus on function.)
C. (Discuss 
maintenance.)
Transition from I to II: 
Although passion is 
essential to a relationship, 
passion without intimacy 
is just sex.
Possible introduction:
What does it mean 
to say “I’m in love”? 
And how can you 
know if what you are 
experiencing is not just 
a crush?
Possible conclusion: 
Developing romantic love 
involves passion, intimacy, 
and commitment.
Sample entry: 
Sternberg, Robert J., 
and Michael L. Barnes, 
eds. The Psychology of 
Love. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 
1988.
Organizing the Speech (page 297)


