L E T T E R S 
T O 
T H E 
E D I T O R 
319 
Substitution into the Schrodinger equation permits solving for 
^ k ) = (2,)3{A-W 
+^^k'Tp)\Vp^VNp\^ifdW^lAl(kf)ei^,'rF))}} 
(3) 
where 
T(k)=h2k2/2M. 
(4) 
An alternative form is 
,4o(k)= 
{(ypiei(X-tp)\Vp^-\-VNp\^) 
+^iei^'Tp)\VN^-VNP\<p^D)}. 
(5) 
Finally, Eq. (5) is substituted into Eq. (2), giving an integral 
equation for the problem: 
* - 
rtn+ZtJ 
*\2ryiz_Ei_TW) 
X{(+je«k'xp')\Vpi+VNp\*) 
+ < V ^ k ' r ^ | VNS- VNP\<PVPD)1 
(6) 
It is a very basic approximation in stripping that Vp% is unim-
portant, so it will be ignored without any further justification. To 
achieve Born approximation, it is only necessary to replace ty by 
ipvpD. Then VNP goes out, and Eq. (6) gives directly the starting 
point of Daitch and French. The connection with Butler's paper is 
obtained by observing that the final state wave function, \pj, 
localizes the neutron; hence VNP has no matrix elements to pro-
tons which pass far from the nucleus, as happens in stripping. 
Thus Butler's assumptions prescribe that we should immediately 
strike VNP from Eq. (6), and we return once again to the Born 
result. 
Equation (6) appears hopeful as a starting point for the in-
vestigation of corrections to the simple stripping calculation, and 
such an investigation is planned. 
This paper is the outcome of a conversation with Professor J. B. 
French, and of many discussions with Dr. S. T. Butler. 
* This work was performed while the author held a U. S. Atomic Energy 
Commission. Postdoctoral Fellowship. 
i Bhatia, Huang, Huby, and Newns, Phil. Mag. 43, 485 (1952). 
2 P. B. Daitch and J. B. French, Phys. Rev. 87, 900 (1952). 
*S. T. Butler, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) 208, 559 (1951). 
The Causal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics 
SAUL T. 
EPSTEIN 
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 
(Received October 16, 1952) 
R
ECENTLY Bohm1 has proposed a causal interpretation of 
quantum mechanics. It is based on the following observa-
tion : If one writes the Schrodinger function in coordinate space as 
\f/ = Rsexp(iSs/h) 
(the subscript 5 denotes Schrodinger), then Ss 
satisfies an equation of the classical Hamilton-Jacobi type but 
containing, in addition to the ordinary potential, a "quantum-
mechanical potential.', 
This suggests that one can consider \p to describe the motion of a 
classical particle in the combined field of these potentials with, 
however, the "quantum condition" that one chooses only those 
solutions of the equations of motion such that the particle's 
momentum is given by 
P=dSs/dq. 
(1) 
Alternatively, one may say that one picks out only the trajectories 
described by the particular solution S=SS 
of the associated 
Hamilton-Jacobi equation.1-2 
In this note we would like to point out another possibility of this 
type. We write the Schrodinger function in momentum space as 
0 = ps exp(i<rs/h)(ps and as real). One then finds that <r8 satisfies an 
equation of the classical Hamilton-Jacobi type but containing, in 
addition to the ordinary potential, a momentum-dependent 
"quantum-mechanical potential."3 
This suggests that one can consider <j> to describe the motion of a 
classical particle in the combined field of these potentials with, 
however, the "quantum condition" that one chooses only those 
solutions of the equations of motion such that 
q=-d<rs/dP. 
(2) 
Alternatively, one may say that one picks out only the trajectories 
described by the particular solution a = o-s of the associated 
Hamilton-Jacobi equation. 
In general, one must of course integrate the equations of motion 
to find P as a function of time and then use (2) to find gasa func-
tion of time. However, there is one case where this is unnecessary, 
and one sees that the present description gives different motions 
than Bohm's description. We consider a bound state of zero 
angular momentum. Then 
Ss=as=-Et. 
Therefore, in B ohm's case P = 0, q — constant, and the particle can 
be at rest anywhere; while in the present case q = 0, the particle 
stays at the origin (and for the particular case of a harmonic 
oscillator, P = constant). 
There are three further points we wish to mention: 
(a) By starting from representations intermediate between the 
coordinate and momentum representations, it would seem that we 
could generate any number of such descriptions. 
(b) It is tempting to speculate that this apparent multiplicity 
of causal descriptions is connected with the multiplicity of phase 
space-descriptions found by Moyal.4 
(c) Finally we have not investigated whether any of these 
alternative descriptions can, when combined with the hypothesis 
of molecular chaos, yield the conventional probability interpreta-
tion of quantum-mechanics. 
iD. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166, 180 (1952). 
2 O. Halpern, Phys. Rev. 87, 389 (1952); D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 87, 389 
(1952). 
3 To get the classical Hamilton-Jacobi equations in momentum space one 
inserts q = — da/dP in 
H(P, q) +d<r/dt =0. 
Since we have momentum-dependent potentials, P is the canonical mo-
mentum and not necessarily mq as in Bohm's description. 
4 J. E. Moyal, Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 45, 99 (1949). 
Comments on a Letter Concerning the Causal 
Interpretation of the Quantum Theory 
DAVID BOHM 
Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciincias e Letras, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 
Sao Paulo, Brazil 
(Received November 17, 1952) 
I
N a recent letter,1 Epstein has made the interesting suggestion 
that alternative causal interpretations2 of the quantum theory 
may be possible, starting, for example, from a momentum represen-
tation of the wave function, or from other representations be-
tween that of position and momentum. In the present letter, the 
author would like to give the reasons why he thinks that this 
proposal cannot, in fact, be carried out. 
To illustrate the difficulties involved, let us consider the problem 
of the hydrogen atom. In the momentum representation, the 
potential energy, e2/r, takes the form of an integral operator which 
cannot be expressed as a convergent series of the operators, 
Xi = ihd/dpi. As a result, when the wave function is expressed as a 
product, ReiSlH, it does not seem to be possible to obtain the 
equivalent Hamilton-Jacobi equation for S, and the conservation 
equation for R2. Moreover, without such a conservation equation, 
it is difficult to see how one could, with the aid of the hypothesis of 
molecular chaos, demonstrate that the probability density ap-

320 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
proaches R2, as can be done with a causal interpretation based on a 
position representation of the wave function.3 
If one starts with the causal interpretation of the quantum 
theory obtained in the position representation, with the quantum 
potential, U— —h2V2R/2niR, one can naturally make an arbitrary 
canonical transformation on the particle variables. Because it does 
not alter the quantum potential, however, such a transformation 
does not lead to an alternative causal interpretation of the 
quantum theory, but only to a redescription of the same causal 
interpretation in new mathematical terms, which are, however, 
usually a great deal more complicated than were the original 
terms. A new causal interpretation could come from such a 
procedure only if the canonical transformation on the particle 
variables were simultaneously accompanied by a corresponding 
linear transformation on the wave function. But such a linear 
transformation does not seem even in the simplest cases to lead to an 
acceptable causal interpretation. It would appear, therefore, that 
a causal interpretation of the quantum theory can be obtained only 
if we use the space-time representation of the wave function as a 
basis. This result is perhaps not too surprising, if one considers the 
fact that in all fields other than the quantum theory, space and 
time have thus far stood out as the natural frame for the descrip-
tion of the progress of physical phenomena. 
The author would also like to express his disagreement with 
Epstein's (and Halpern's4) statement that the relation, p = dS/dq, 
constitutes a "quantum condition." Actually, it is a consistent 
subsidiary condition on the equations of motion, which if adopted 
at any time, say / = 0, permits one to explain causally and con-
tinuously such processes as transitions between stationary states 
and interference in scattering problems.2 On the other hand, 
Bohr's original quantum conditions were restrictions contradicting 
the equations of motion (which predicted continuous radiation in 
the case of the hydrogen atom, for example), and which could not 
explain either the process of transition or the appearance of 
interference in scattering problems. It would seem preferable to 
use different words to describe concepts which are so different. 
IS. Epstein, preceding letter [Phys. Rev. 89, 319 (1952). 
2D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166 (1952). 
3 D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. (to be published). 
4 O. Halpern, Phys. Rev. 87, 389 (1952). 
The Thermal Neutron Fission and Capture 
Cross Section of U232 
R. 
E L S O N , * W. 
BENTLEY, A. 
GHIORSO, AND Q. 
V A N 
W I N K L E 
Argonne 
National 
Laboratory, 
Lemont, 
Illinois 
(Received November 19, 1952) 
I
T has been shown1 that Pa232 is a short-lived beta-emitter which 
decays to U232, a long-lived alpha-emitter. U232 of good isotopic 
purity, therefore, can be prepared by the neutron irradiation of 
Pa231, which has been shown to have a capture cross section for pile 
neutrons of 290 barns.2 
Three samples of Pa231 were subjected to three widely different 
total neutron fluxes, and the resulting U232 was examined for 
fissionability. The Pa231, irradiated as the oxide, was dissolved in a 
mixture of nitric and hydrofluoric acids, heated to near dryness to 
remove fluoride, and dissolved in 0.1M nitric acid. The uranium 
was extracted from this solution with diethyl ether after saturation 
with ammonium nitrate. The ether was washed with saturated 
TABLE I. Fission cross section of U232 resulting from irradiations of Pa231. 
Sample 
Weight of U232 
Fission cross 
No. 
Total nvt 
formed, jug 
section XlO24, cm2 
1 
3.41X1016 
2.3X10-3 
82.9±1.5 
2 
8.87X1017 
0.32 
83.1 ±1.5 
3 
4.06X1019 
26.2 
84.6 ±1.5» 
a Corrected for contribution of U233 known to be present from the decay 
of Pa23*. 
ammonium nitrate and thin samples were prepared for alpha-
counting and fission counting both by direct evaporation and by 
electroplating on platinum disks. 
The weight of U232 on each plate was determined from the a-
emission rate, assuming a half-life of 70 years.3 The fissionability of 
each sample was then determined4 in the thermal column of the 
Argonne heavy water pile. The rate of fission was compared with a 
sample of Pu239 of known weight, and the fission cross section of the 
U232 determined from the known fission cross section of Pu239 and 
the rate of fission in each sample of known weight. The data are 
summarized in Table I. 
The indicated error in fission cross section values is limited to the 
probable errors in fission rate counting and alpha-emission rate 
counting. In addition, an uncertainty3 of about 15 percent in the 
value for the half-life of U232 results in a corresponding uncertainty 
in the absolute value of the fission cross section. These measure-
ments therefore yield a value of 83 zk 15 barns for the thermal 
neutron fission cross section of U232. 
The consistency of the results under conditions of large variation 
in total flux and amount of U232 formed seems to rule out any 
important effect from a fissionable contaminant present either as 
an impurity or formed during the irradiation. The 
fissionable 
isotope U233 would be formed by a second-order capture on either 
XJ232 o r pa232j t h e l a t t e r g i v i n g pa233> a 27.4-day beta-emitter which 
decays to U233. Sample 3 was examined for Pa233, and the amount 
present indicated an amount of U233 sufficient to increase the 
apparent fission cross section of U232 by 0.50 barn. If one assumes 
that the remaining small increase in the observed fission cross-
section value for sample 3 over those for samples 1 and 2 is real and 
further assumes that the increased value is due only to U233 formed 
by U232(W,Y)U233, then a rough estimate can be made of the pile 
neutron capture cross section of U232. A value of about 200 barns is 
indicated, but since the observed differences are not outside the 
limits of experimental error, we conclude only that the capture 
cross section of U232 probably does not exceed 500 barns. 
* Present 
address: 
California 
Research 
and 
Development 
Company, 
Livermore, 
California. 
1 J. W. Gofman and G. T. Seaborg, The Transuranium 
Elements: 
Research 
Papers 
(McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948), Paper No. 19.14, 
National 
Nuclear Energy Series, Plutonium 
Project Record, Vol. 
14B, 
Div. IV. 
2 Elson, John, and Sellers, Argonne National Laboratory Report 
4282 
(1951), to be published. 
3 James, Florin, Hopkins, and Ghiorso, The 
Transuranium 
Elements: 
Research 
Papers 
(McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948), Paper 
No. 22.8, National Nuclear 
Energy Series, Plutonium 
Project 
Record, 
Vol. 14B, Div. IV. 
4 For a description of the apparatus, see reference 3, Paper 22.29. 
A Criticism of a Recent Unified Field Theory 
C. PETER JOHNSON, JR.* 
Department 
of Chemistry, 
Harvard 
University, 
Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 
(Received September 26, 1952) 
I
WOULD like to show by an example that Dr. Albert Ein-
stein's recent unified field theory is apparently not in agree-
ment with the Newtonian and Coulomb laws of force between 
charged masses. 
Consider two charged and one uncharged mass, separated by 
distances large compared with their physical dimensions, all 
substantially at rest at time / = 0. Under the influence of their 
mutual attractions and repulsions, the three masses will undergo 
accelerations closely predicted by Newton's and Coulomb's laws. 
Corresponding to this motion, there will be (let us assume) a 
solution in Einstein's theory for all the quantities in it, in-
cluding the gravitational and electromagnetic potentials which he 
indicates by the symbols gij and gij, as functions of the four 
chosen coordinates of space-time: 
8*i-ff±(Xl> 
X2> x*> x^ ft ./= 1> 2> 3, 4), 
gii^fu&i, 
%2, xit x4) 
(i7 j = 1, 2, 3, 4). 

