COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 
AND COMPUTER SYSTEMS 
A Tribute to Professor Erol Gelenbe 
Javier A Barria 
baiter 
Imperial College Press 

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 
AND COMPUTER SYSTEMS 
A Tribute to Professor Erol Celenbe 

This page is intentionally left blank

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 
AND COMPUTER SYSTEMS 
A Tribute to Professor Erol Gelenbe 
Editor 
Javier A Barria 
Imperial College London, UK 
4ff^ 
Imperial College Press 

Published by 
Imperial College Press 
57 Shelton Street 
Covent Garden 
London WC2H9HE 
Distributed by 
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. 
5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224 
USA office: 27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601 
UK office: 57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND COMPUTER SYSTEMS 
A Tribute to Professor Erol Gelenbe 
Copyright © 2006 by Imperial College Press 
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval 
system now known or to be invented, without written permission from the Publisher. 
For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to 
photocopy is not required from the publisher. 
ISBN 1-86094-659-3 
Printed in Singapore by World Scientific Printers (S) Pte Ltd 

PREFACE 
Networked systems are at the core of a wide range of human activity, includ-
ing health, business, science, engineering and social interaction. It is hence 
not surprising that the Internet, as well as social and biological networks, 
have been the focus of intense research in recent years. In this context 
communication networks and computer systems research is entering a new 
phase in which many of the established models and techniques of the last 
twenty years are being challenged. 
Industry is now introducing and proposing a wide range of new com-
munication technologies, many of which are based on the wireless and mo-
bile revolution, while governments and funding agencies, such as the Euro-
pean Union's Framework Programmes, the UK Engineering and Physical 
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), the US National Science Foundation 
and Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), are support-
ing research on new paradigms that better exploit these opportunities to 
respond to the need for ubiquitous networking in both the civilian and 
defence sphere. At the same time, users are now becoming more aware of 
the usefulness of emerging services and are taking better advantage of the 
convergence between the Internet and the telecommunications industry. As 
a consequence, the research community is continuing to free itself from 
past intellectual constraints, so that it may fully exploit the convergence of 
computing and communications. 
As computer and communication networks such as the Internet grow, 
they are naturally evolving towards decentralised and weakly cooperative 
environments operated by heterogeneous administrative and physical en-
tities. In these environments, extremely large numbers of diverse mobile 
devices, from powerful laptops through pocket PCs to micro-devices em-
bedded objects, will interact and connect spontaneously. Evaluating the 
performance of these systems constitutes a huge challenge and current net-
work modelling research provides a set of heterogeneous tools and tech-

VI 
Preface 
niques to address such systems, rather than the systematic approach that 
is needed. 
The discipline of network modelling and performance evaluation is thus 
being challenged by the increased availability of wireless and ad hoc net-
works with their embedded spatially dependent, time-varying, and non-
stationary nature of their traffic and interconnections. In this context, novel 
performance evaluation and optimisation techniques must be developed 
which are able to take into account the uncertainties of time and space 
varying environments where the requests for diverse services will be made 
in real time, and with very different quality of service expectations. 
This book is the result of seminars that touched upon this broad and 
challenging field. These seminars were held at a workshop on the occasion 
of Erol Gelenbe's inauguration as the Dennis Gabor Chair Professor at 
Imperial College London in April 2004. The book is divided into three 
parts. It begins with an introduction based upon the vote of thanks given 
which followed Prof. Erol Gelenbe's Inaugural Lecture, summarising his 
contributions to the field of Computer and Network Performance, his work 
as a mentor and advisor to numerous young researchers, and his other 
academic contributions. 
In Part I of the book we address aspects of resource management in 
current computer and communication networks. First, we consider the im-
pact of incentive systems in an ad hoc network as an enabler of relaying 
functions. This is followed by a study of resource allocation using social 
choice theory and welfare economics as a mechanism to mediate the allo-
cation of resources in networks shared by multiple types of applications. 
Next, a discussion of the historical perspective of the Locality Principle is 
presented and how our understanding of locality has evolved beyond the 
original idea of clustering of reference. This part ends with a study of the 
efficient scheduling of parallel jobs on distributed processors. 
In Part II new modelling paradigms and challenges are presented. This 
part starts with a note of caution about attempting to draw certain infer-
ences about the nature of a stochastic process by analysing the properties of 
its associated steady state distributions. Next, a review of several approxi-
mation methods to solve the non-stationary loss queue problem is presented. 
This is followed by a review of the numerical instabilities of computational 
algorithms for product-form queuing systems. Stabilisation techniques for 
load-dependent models are discussed. The importance of understanding 
the behaviour of the increasingly complex network of interdependent 
critical infrastructure is discussed and an overview of emerging methods 

Preface 
vn 
and tools is presented next. This is followed by a discussion of the numerical 
difficulties faced when solving large-scaled Markov chain models. Bounding 
procedures are presented as a means of circumventing these difficulties. Fi-
nally, aggregation techniques for solving large-scaled complex systems are 
reviewed and their suitability for a cross-layer simulation environment is 
discussed. 
In Part III, the network modelling of emergent computer and commu-
nication networks is considered. First, the space capacity paradox and the 
time capacity paradox in mobile ad hoc networks are discussed and a precise 
quantification of these properties is provided. This is followed by a study 
of the benefits and possible vulnerabilities of a peer-to-peer enabled control 
and command structure for a time critical mission. Next, a real time mech-
anism that quantifies the users' subjective perception of quality of audio 
and video is presented. This part concludes with a study of the dynamic 
behaviour of the content of a popular news web site. 
All the above studies highlight the scientific and technical challenges 
faced by current and future networks, and the need to support them through 
research on novel modelling and performance evaluation techniques. As we 
conclude this preface, let us note that enhanced network modelling tech-
niques can lead to fast and economic service deployment and effective dy-
namic resource management, and that they can also enable new business 
strategies and infrastructures that will facilitate the emergence of future 
services and applications. 
J.A. Barria 
Imperial College London 
London, U.K. 

This page is intentionally left blank

CONTENTS 
Preface 
v 
1. Erol Gelenbe's Contributions to Computer and 
Networks Performance 
1 
Alain 
Bensoussan 
1.1 Introduction and Background 
1 
1.2 Technical Contributions 
2 
1.3 
Contributions as a Research Leader and Mentor 
4 
1.4 
Service to the Profession 
5 
References 
5 
Resource Management 
9 
2. Rethinking Incentives for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
11 
Elgan Huang, Jon Crowcroft 
and Ian 
Wassell 
2.1 Introduction 
11 
2.2 Token Based Incentive Systems 
12 
2.2.1 Quality of Service Problems 
12 
2.2.2 Technical Conundrums 
13 
2.3 Trust Management Systems 
15 
2.4 Transparency vs Choice 
16 
2.5 Proposed Solution 
17 
2.5.1 Adoption Cycle For Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
. . . 
18 
2.5.2 Do We Really Need Incentive Systems? 
20 
2.6 Conclusions 
22 
References 
23 
ix 

x 
Contents 
3. Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the Internet 25 
Ronaldo 
M. Salles and Javier A. 
Barria 
3.1 Introduction 
25 
3.2 Fairness, Efficiency and Utility Functions 
26 
3.3 Utility-Based Bandwidth Allocation 
29 
3.3.1 Utility of the Aggregate 
30 
3.3.2 Limiting Regime Approximation 
32 
3.3.3 Offered Load Estimation 
33 
3.4 Utility-Based Admission Control 
35 
3.5 Utility-Based Scheduling 
37 
3.5.1 Measuring Class Delays 
38 
3.6 Conclusion 
40 
Acknowledgements 
40 
References 
41 
4. The Locality Principle 
43 
Peter J. 
Denning 
4.1 Introduction 
43 
4.2 Manifestation of a Need (1949-1965) 
44 
4.3 Discovery and Propagation of Locality Idea (1966-1980) . . 
47 
4.4 Adoption of Locality Principle (1967-present) 
56 
4.5 Modern Model of Locality: Context Awareness 
57 
4.6 Future Uses of Locality Principle 
60 
References 
62 
5. A Simulation-Based Performance Analysis of 
Epoch Task Scheduling in Distributed Processors 
69 
Helen 
Karatza 
5.1 Introduction 
69 
5.2 Model and Methodology 
71 
5.2.1 System and Workload Models 
71 
5.2.2 Task Routing Methods 
72 
5.2.3 Scheduling Strategies 
73 
5.2.4 Performance Metrics 
73 
5.2.5 Model Implementation and Input Parameters . . . . 
73 
5.3 Simulation Results and Performance Analysis 
74 
5.3.1 Probabilistic Routing 
75 
5.3.2 Shortest Queue Routing 
80 

Contents 
xi 
5.4 Conclusions 
84 
References 
85 
New Challenges on Modelling and Simulation 
87 
6. Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical Indepen-
dence in Steady State Distributions 
89 
Jeffrey P. 
Buzen 
6.1 Introduction 
89 
6.2 A System of Two Independent M/M/l Queues 
90 
6.3 A System of Two Queues in Tandem 
93 
6.4 Statistical and Dynamic Independence 
96 
6.5 Beyond Stochastic Modelling 
98 
6.5.1 
Central Role of Steady State Distributions 
98 
6.5.2 
Generality, Robustness and Level of Detail 
100 
6.5.3 Operational Analysis 
101 
6.6 Conclusions 
103 
References 
103 
7. The Non-Stationary Loss Queue: A Survey 
105 
Khalid A. Alnowibet 
and Harry 
Perros 
7.1 Introduction 
105 
7.2 The Simple Stationary Approximation (SSA) Method . . . 
108 
7.3 The Stationary Peakedness Approximation (PK) Method . 109 
7.4 The Average Stationary Approximation (ASA) Method . . 
I l l 
7.5 The Closure Approximation for Non-Stationary Queues . . 112 
7.6 The Pointwise Stationary Approximation (PSA) Method . 114 
7.7 The Modified Offered Load Approximation (MOL) Method 118 
7.8 The Fixed Point Approximation (FPA) Method 
121 
7.9 Conclusions 
123 
References 
124 
8. Stabilization 
Techniques 
for 
Load-Dependent 
Queuing Networks Algorithms 
127 
Giuliano 
Casale and Giuseppe 
Serazzi 
8.1 Introduction 
127 
8.2 Preliminaries 
128 
8.2.1 Numerical Exceptions 
128 

xii 
Contents 
8.2.2 
Closed Product-Form Queuing Networks 
129 
8.3 Numerical Instabilities in PFQN Algorithms 
130 
8.3.1 Convolution Algorithm 
130 
8.3.1.1 Static and Dynamic Scaling Techniques . . 131 
8.3.2 Load Dependent Mean Value Analysis (MVA-LD) . 133 
8.4 Improved Stabilisation Techniques 
134 
8.4.1 Software Stabilisation 
134 
8.4.2 
Stabilisation of MVA-LD with Two Customer Classes 136 
8.4.2.1 Numerical Example 
137 
8.5 Conclusions 
140 
References 
140 
9. Modelling and Simulation of Interdependent 
Critical Infrastructure: The Road Ahead 
143 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, 
Paolo Donzelli, 
Roberto 
Setola 
and Salvatore 
Tucci 
9.1 Introduction 
144 
9.2 Modelling and Simulation of Interdependent Infrastructures 146 
9.2.1 Interdependency Analysis 
146 
9.2.2 
System Analysis 
150 
9.3 Conclusions 
154 
References 
157 
10. Stochastic Automata Networks and Lumpable 
Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
161 
J.M. Foumeau, 
B. Plateau, 
I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
10.1 Introduction 
162 
10.2 Stochastic Automata Networks and Stochastic Bounds . . 163 
10.2.1 SANs and their Tensor Representations 
164 
10.2.2 Stochastic Bounds: An Algorithmic Presentation. 
. 165 
10.3 LIMSUB and Analysis of Transient Availability 
169 
10.4 Algorithm GetCol and its Complexity 
172 
10.4.1 Computation of a Column 
174 
10.4.1.1 Computation of the Synchronised Part Cs . 175 
10.4.1.2 Computation of the Local Part C; 
176 
10.4.2 Sorting and Uniformisation 
177 
10.5 Example: A Resource Sharing Model Subject to Failure . . 177 
Acknowledgements 
179 
References 
179 

Contents 
xiii 
11. Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer Simulations 
183 
Monique 
Becker, 
Vincent Gauthier, 
Andre-Luc 
Beylot 
and Riadh 
Dhaou 
11.1 Introduction 
183 
11.2 Aggregation Methods 
184 
11.3 Aggregation of Markov Chains 
185 
11.3.1 Introduction 
185 
11.3.2 Decomposability Method of Kemeny and Snell: Theoryl85 
11.3.3 Example of the Method of Kemeny and Snell . . . . 
186 
11.3.4 Decomposition Method of Courtois: Theory 
188 
11.3.5 Example of the Decomposition Method of Courtois 
190 
11.4 Aggregation of Physical Sub-System 
191 
11.5 Time-Space Aggregation 
195 
11.6 Layer Aggregation 
196 
11.6.1 Dynamic Simulations 
197 
11.6.2 Example of Inter-Layer Design 
197 
11.6.3 Network Protocols which use Inter-Layer Interactions 198 
11.7 Conclusion 
202 
References 
202 
Modelling of Emerging Networks 
205 
12. Space 
and Time 
Capacity 
in Dense 
Mobile 
Ad Hoc Networks 
207 
Philippe 
Jacquet 
12.1 Introduction 
207 
12.2 Gupta and Kumar Scaling Property 
209 
12.3 Massively Dense Networks 
211 
12.3.1 Tractable Case with Curved Propagation Lines . . . 213 
12.3.2 Practical Implementation of Shortest Path Protocol 
214 
12.4 Introduction of Time Component 
215 
12.5 Information Flow Tensor and Perspectives 
220 
References 
220 
13. Stochastic Properties of Peer-to-Peer Communi-
cation Architecture in a Military Setting 
223 
Donald P. Gaver and Patricia 
A. 
Jacobs 
13.1 Problem Formulation 
223 

xiv 
Contents 
13.2 A Renewal Model for Blue vs Red in a Subregion 
225 
13.2.1 The Visibility Detection Process 
225 
13.2.2 The Model 
226 
13.2.3 The Probability an EP of Size 6 Attaches to the 
Detected RA Before it Hides 
227 
13.2.4 The Probability the Detected RA is Killed Before it 
Hides 
228 
13.2.5 Model with Additional C2 Time 
228 
13.2.6 Numerical Illustration 
229 
13.3 Conclusions 
231 
References 
232 
14. Quantifying the Quality of Audio and Video 
Transmissions over the Internet: The PSQA Approach 
235 
Gerardo 
Rubino 
14.1 Introduction 
235 
14.2 The PSQA Technology 
236 
14.3 The Random Neural Networks Tool 
239 
14.3.1 G-networks 
240 
14.3.2 Feedforward 3-layer G-networks 
242 
14.3.3 Learning 
243 
14.3.4 Sensitivity Analysis 
245 
14.4 Applications 
246 
14.5 Conclusions 
249 
References 
249 
15. A Study of the Dynamic Behaviour of a Web Site 
251 
Maria 
Carla Calzarossa 
and Daniele 
Tessera 
15.1 Introduction 
251 
15.2 Data Collection 
253 
15.3 Results 
254 
15.4 Conclusions 
259 
Acknowledgements 
260 
References 
260 

CHAPTER 1 
Erol Gelenbe's Contributions to Computer and Networks 
Performance 
Alain Bensoussan 
Former President of INRIA and of the European Space Agency 
Member of the Academia Europaea and of the Academic des Sciences de Paris 
This note, which is based on a speech given by the author on the occasion 
of Erol Gelenbe's inauguration as the Dennis Gabor Chair Professor at 
Imperial College London in April 2004, describes his manifold contribu-
tions to the performance evaluation field and the scientific community. 
1.1. Introduction and Background 
Born in Istanbul where a Lycee and a neighbourhood carry the family name, 
and a direct descendant of the 18"1 century Ottoman cleric and mathemati-
cian Ismail Gelenbevi Efendi (1730-1790) who taught at the Imperial 
War College in Istanbul, Erol entered the Middle East Technical University 
in Ankara as 4t/l ranked, and graduated as 2nd ranked in 1966. In his first 
year he hesitated to switch from engineering to pure mathematics, but he 
ended up staying in Engineering, and received a BS with High Honours in 
Electrical Engineering and the Clarke Award for Research Excellence for 
his Bachelor's thesis on Partial Flux Switching Memory. After receiving his 
MS and PhD in three years as a Fulbright and NATO Science Fellow at 
Brooklyn Poly in New York, and publishing several papers on automata 
and language theory in journals such as Information and Control and the 
IEEE Trans, on Computers, he briefly joined the University of Michigan in 
Ann Arbor and then left the US because of the foreign residency require-
ments of the fellowships he had held. He was invited by IRIA to spend six 
months in 1972, before he was to join the University of Liege in Belgium as 
a very young chaired professor in 1974. The attraction of Paris proved too 
strong, and under the influence of my late teacher Jacques Louis Lions, the 
1 

2 
Alain 
Bensoussan 
next twenty years were spent in Paris, at INRIA as well as teaching at the 
University and at Ecole Poly technique. 
From the early 70s to today, working first at INRIA and in France, and 
then later in the US and now the UK, Erol has made seminal contributions 
to computer systems and networks, and in stochastic modelling. He has 
published four books which have appeared in English, French, Japanese 
and Korean. His numerous students are now senior researchers in industry 
and academia, in leading institutions in France, Italy, Belgium, Greece, 
Turkey, Canada and the US. 
1.2. Technical Contributions 
Internationally recognised as a founder of his field, Erol's work contains 
many "firsts" in tackling computer and network performance problems and 
developing new stochastic models and their solutions. 
In his initial work on performance modelling in the early 70s, he devel-
oped, concurrently with Frank King of IBM Research, a finite state model 
of paged memory management1. Erol proved the surprising result that the 
FIFO paging algorithm is strictly equivalent to a random page replace-
ment choice for the independent reference model of program behaviour, for 
all possible page reference frequencies1. He also established a hierarchy of 
memory management policies, going from random choice to optimal, and 
derived the page fault ratio in explicit form. This approach was later taken 
up by leading figures in the analysis of algorithms such as Flajolet, Hofri 
and Szpankowski, and extended to many other algorithms. 
In the mid-70s he made two seminal contributions. Concurrently with 
H. Kobayashi, he derived the first diffusion approximations for queuing 
systems but suggested a model with holding times at the boundaries pro-
viding better accuracy at light traffic, and good accuracy at heavy traffic2. 
This work was used later3'4 and in a fairly recent IBM Patent5 on call ad-
mission control for ATM networks. Secondly, together with G. Fayolle and 
J. Labetoulle, he showed that the random access ALOHA channel can only 
be stabilised by a control policy in which the retransmission time is pro-
portional to the number of blocked transmissions6-8. This work was later 
extended by researchers, both the in analysis of algorithms and communi-
cations theory (Hajek, Gerla, Gurcan, Szpankowski, Hofri). In the late 70s 
Erol and some students built the "first ever" random access network on a 
fibre optic channel (the Xantos system) using these results. 

Erol Gelenbe's Contributions 
to Computer and Network Performance 
3 
In the late 70s Erol proved9 a fundamental result on reliable database 
operation10: in a database subject to random failures, the optimum check-
point interval is a deterministic quantity expressed in terms of the amount 
of work that the database has accomplished since the most recent check-
point. He also derived an analytical expression for the value of the optimum, 
in terms of the transaction processing rate, the failure rate, and the cost 
of carrying out a checkpoint. This work later gave rise to applications in 
control theory (for instance, in Maurice Robin's thesis on impulse control), 
and I followed this with interest, and further developed in several theses by 
Erol's students (Francois Baccelli, Marisela Hernandez)11,13'14 and in the 
US12 (David Finkel, Satish Tripathi). Also during that time, together with 
his students J. Labetoulle and G. Pujolle he published some of the very 
first performance analyses of communication protocols. 
The Gelenbe-Mitrani15 graduate level book that appeared in 1980, and 
which was translated into Japanese in 1988, is a classic text in computer per-
formance analysis that has been used at many universities, including MIT. 
The early and mid-80s saw him make other pioneering contributions: (a) 
the classical Gelenbe-Iasnogorodski16 result characterising, under general 
arrival and service conditions, the long run waiting time at a paging disk 
server, (b) the first ever work on the analytical estimation of the space and 
time cost of relational database operations (with his student D. Gardy)17 
which was also presented at VLDB'82 (and which gave rise to subsequent 
work in the community on analysis of algorithms), and the paper (with his 
students F. Baccelli and B. Plateau) on the end-to-end performance of the 
packet re-sequencing protocol18. A Chesnais-Gelenbe-Mitrani paper19 was 
the first model and analysis of the performance of interfering reads and 
writes during parallel access to shared data, and the first instance of the 
use of "mean field techniques" in performance modelling. In the late 80s 
the Gelenbe-Pujolle book20'21 appeared in French and was soon translated 
into English for publication by Wiley. This book has gone through several 
editions (1998, 1999) and was published in Korean in the year 2000. 
Over the last decade, Erol's invention of work removing "negative 
customers"22 has produced a resurgence of research on "product form 
networks", a subject that had remained relatively inactive since the ma-
jor results of the 70s and early 80s. His papers on "G-networks", which 
have appeared in applied probability journals and in performance evalua-
tion conferences18-26 have opened a new chapter in queuing network the-
ory. This highly innovative work which is motivated by the need to intro-
duce control functions in queuing systems, introduces several new customer 

4 
Alain 
BensoiLssan 
types: "negative" customers represent decisions to destroy traffic, "triggers" 
represent decisions to move customers in the network, and "resets" repre-
sent customers that can replenish the contents of an idle queue. For each of 
these models, he showed product form. An interesting mathematical twist 
is that G-networks have non-linear traffic equations, while the traditional 
Jackson networks which are a special case, and BCMP networks, have lin-
ear traffic equations. This non-linearity raises questions of existence and 
uniqueness of solutions to G-networks. Erol investigated the use of homo-
topy theory in this context, and then developed the framework to prove 
the existence and uniqueness of the solutions to G-networks whenever the 
traffic intensity of each queue is less than one. 
His technical contributions are not limited to these salient points. His 
work on G-networks has had a parallel development in the field of neu-
ral computation, where "negative customers" are models of the inhibitory 
spikes in biophysical neurons27-29'31-45. Erol has developed related learn-
ing algorithms and his group has come up with many novel applications. 
In the last ten years he has established an enviable reputation in the area 
of neural computation, and together with T. Kohonen and S.I. Amari, he 
was a keynote speaker at the ICANN'03/ICONIP (joint Asian/European) 
conference on neural networks. Erol's neural networks research is also be-
ing brought back to its source, impacting performance analysis: Gerardo 
Rubino's group at IRISA (France) applies Erol's neural models to evaluate 
the user's perceived quality of audio and video traffic. 
Erol is currently conducting innovative experimental work on computer 
network design46'47,49, using performance and quality of service as the driv-
ing element. His group has designed and built an experimental "self-routing 
packet" test-bed based on his Cognitive Packet Network patent that has 
won him invitations to deliver keynote lectures in 2002 and 2003 at six 
US and European conferences. Related to this, Erol is also developing a 
theory of "sensible"48 network routing. This gives a flavour of the creativ-
ity of Erol, of his talent and of his capacity to solve hard problems. But 
Erol is also a Manager and an Entrepreneur, the author of several US and 
European patents, and a capable fund raiser. 
1.3. Contributions as a Research Leader and Mentor 
In the early 70s Erol founded a research laboratory at INRIA (France), 
and then also at the University of Paris in the 80s. These were undeniably 
the best such groups in Europe at the time. Many international researchers 

Erol Gelenbe 's Contributions 
to Computer and Network Performance 
5 
were in fact introduced to the field of performance evaluation through their 
contacts or visits with Erol's activities. Erol developed the first graduate 
program in computer and network performance in France and revitalised 
performance evaluation research within France-Telecom. Since then, these 
efforts have given rise to many groups in the Paris area (INRIA, Paris VI, 
ENS, Versailles, INT, France Telecom) as well as in Sophia Antipolis and 
Grenoble, and some of them are still among the best in the world. Cur-
rent research at four of INRIA's centres, Rocquencourt, Sophia Antipolis, 
Rennes and Grenoble bears the mark of Erol's influence. 
Erol has a remarkable track record at attracting and mentoring PhD 
students and younger researchers, many of whom have become technical 
and organisational leaders. He deploys considerable effort to secure the 
intellectual and material resources to support graduate students, and has 
graduated over 50 PhDs. He may also be commended for having graduated 
numerous women PhDs, many of whom are well known academics. 
1.4. Service to the Profession 
Finally, Erol has made seminal contributions to the organization of his 
field by being a founding member of ACM SIGMETRICS, and the founder 
(together with Paul Green of IBM) of IFIP WG7.3. A founder of the jour-
nal Performance 
Evaluation, 
he has been active in editorial boards such 
as Acta Informatica, 
IEEE 
Trans, on Software 
Engineering., 
Telecommu-
nication 
Systems, 
the Computer 
Journal of the British Computer Society, 
Recherche 
Operationnelle 
and Annales 
des Telecommunications 
(France), 
and the Proceedings 
of the IEEE. He has served on the programme com-
mittee as a conference or programme committee chair of numerous IEEE, 
ACM, and IFIP conferences in Europe and the US. He has also founded and 
helped organise for twenty years the International Symposia on Computer 
and Information Sciences series in Turkey. 
References 
1. Gelenbe E., "A unified approach to the evaluation of a class of replacement 
algorithms", IEEE Trans. Computers, 22(6), (1973), 611-618. 
2. Gelenbe E., "On approximate computer system models", Journal 
ACM, 
22(2), (1975), 261-269. 
3. Gelenbe E., Mang X., Onvural R., "Diffusion based call admission control in 
ATM", Performance Evaluation, 27&28, (1996), 411-436. 
4. Gelenbe E., Mang X., Onvural R., "Bandwidth allocation and call admission 
control in high speed networks", IEEE Communications 
Magazine, 35(5), 
(1997), 122-129. 

6 
Alain 
Bensoussan 
5. Marin G.A., Mang X., Gelenbe E., Onvural R., U.S. Patent No. 6,222,824., 
2001. 
6. Fayolle G., Gelenbe E., Labetoulle J., "Stability and optimal control of the 
packet switching broadcast channel", Journal ACM, 24(3), (1977), 375-386. 
7. Banh-Tri-An, Gelenbe E., "Amelioration d'un canal de diffusion sous 
controle", Revue d'Informatique 
(R.A.I.R.O), 
11(3),(1977), 301-321. 
8. Gelenbe E., "On the optimum checkpoint interval", Journal ACM, 26(2), 
(1979), 259-270. 
9. Gelenbe E., Tripathi S., Finkel D., "Performance and reliability of a large 
distributed system", Acta Informatica, 23, (1986), 643-655. 
10. Gelenbe E., Hernandez M., "Optimum checkpoints with time dependent fail-
ures", Acta Informatica, 27, (1990), 519-531. 
11. Gelenbe E., Hernandez M., "Virus tests to maximize availability of software 
systems", Theoretical Computer Science, 125, (1994), 131-147. 
12. Gelenbe E., Mitrani I., Analysis and Sythnesis of Computer Systems, (Aca-
demic Press, New York & London), 1980. 
13. Gelenbe E., Iasnogorodski R., "A queue with server of walking type", Annates 
de I'Institut Henri Poincare, Serie B, 16(1), (1980), 63-73. 
14. Gelenbe E., Gardy D., "On the size of projections I", Information 
Processing 
Letters, 14(1), (1982), 18-21. 
15. Baccelli F., Gelenbe E., Plateau B., "An end-to-end approach to the rese-
quencing problem", Journal ACM, 31(3), (1984), 474-485. 
16. Chesnais A., Gelenbe E., Mitrani I., "On the modelling of parallel access to 
shared data", Comm. ACM, 26(3), (1983), 196-202. 
17. Gelenbe E., Pujolle G., Introduction to Networks of Queues, 2nd Edition, 
(John Wiley Ltd, New York & Chichester), 1998. 
18. Gelenbe E., "Queueing networks with negative and positive customers", 
Journal of Applied Probability, 28, (1991), 656-663. 
19. Gelenbe E., Glynn P., Sigman K., "Queues with negative arrivals", Journal 
of Applied Probability, 28, (1991), 245-250. 
20. Gelenbe E., Schassberger M., "Stability of product form G-Networks", Prob-
ability in the Engineering and Informational Sciences, 6, (1992), 271-276. 
21. Gelenbe E., "G-networks with instantaneous customer movement", Journal 
of Applied Probability, 30(3), (1993), 742-748. 
22. Gelenbe E., "G-Networks with signals and batch removal", Probability in the 
Engineering and Informational Sciences, 7, (1993), 335-342. 
23. Gelenbe E., "G-networks: An unifying model for queueing networks and neu-
ral networks," Annals of Operations Research, 48(1-4), (1994), 433-461. 
24. Fourneau J.M., Gelenbe E., Suros R., "G-networks with multiple classes of 
positive and negative customers," Theoretical Computer Science, 155, (1996), 
141-156. 
25. Gelenbe E., Labed A., "G-networks with multiple classes of signals and pos-
itive customers", European Journal of Operations Research, 108(2), (1998), 
293-305. 

Erol Gelenbe's Contributions 
to Computer and Network Performance 
7 
26. Gelenbe E., Shachnai H., "On G-networks and resource allocation in multi-
media systems", European Journal of Operational Research, 126(2), (2000), 
308-318. 
27. Gelenbe E., Fourneau J.M., "G-Networks with resets", Performance 
Evalu-
ation, 49, (2002), 179-1922. 
28. Gelenbe E., "Reseaux stochastiques ouverts avec clients negatifs et positifs, 
et reseaux neuronaux", Comptes-Rendus 
Acad. Sci. Paris, t. 309, Serie II, 
(1989), 979-982. 
29. Gelenbe E., "Random neural networks with positive and negative signals and 
product form solution", Neural Computation, 1(4), (1989), 502-510. 
30. Gelenbe E., "Stable random neural networks", Neural Computation, 
2(2), 
(1990), 239-247. 
31. Gelenbe E., "Distributed associative memory and the computation of mem-
bership functions", Information Sciences, 57-58, (1981), 171-180. 
32. Gelenbe E., "Une generalisation probabiliste du probleme SAT", Comptes-
Rendus Acad. Sci., t 313, Serie II, (1992), 339-342. 
33. Atalay V., Gelenbe E., "Parallel algorithm for colour texture generation us-
ing the random neural network model", International 
Journal of Pattern 
Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, 6(2&3), (1992), 437-446. 
34. Gelenbe E., "Learning in the recurrent random network", Neural Computa-
tion, 5, (1993), 154-164. 
35. Gelenbe E., Koubi V., Pekergin F., "Dynamical random neural approach to 
the traveling salesman problem," ELEKTRIK, 
2(2), (1994), 1-10. 
36. Gelenbe E., Cramer C, Sungur M., Gelenbe P. "Traffic and video quality in 
adaptive neural compression", Multimedia Systems, 4, (1996), 357-369. 
37. Gelenbe E., Feng T., Krishnan K.R.R., "Neural network methods for volu-
metric magnetic resonance imaging of the human brain," Proceedings of the 
IEEE, 84(10), (1996), 1488-1496. 
38. Gelenbe E., Ghanwani A., Srinivasan V., "Improved neural heuristics for mul-
ticast routing", IEEE Journal of Selected Areas of Communications, 
15(2), 
(1997), 147-155. 
39. Gelenbe E., Harmanci K., Krolik J., "Learning neural networks for detection 
and classification of synchronous recurrent transient signals", Signal Process-
ing, 64(3), (1998), 233-247. 
40. Bakircioglu H., Gelenbe E., Kocak T., "Image processing with the Random 
Neural Network model", ELEKTRIK, 
5(1), (1998), 65-77. 
41. Gelenbe E., Cramer C , "Oscillatory corticothalamic response to somatosen-
sory input", Biosystems, 48(1-3), (1998), 67-75. 
42. Gelenbe E., Mao Z.-H., Li Y.-D., "Function approximation with spiked ran-
dom networks", IEEE Trans, on Neural Networks, 10(1), (1999), 3-9. 
43. Gelenbe E., Fourneau J.M., "Random neural networks with multiple classes 
of signals", Neural Computation, 11(4), (1999), 953-963. 
44. Cramer C , Gelenbe E., "Video quality and traffic QoS in learning-based 
sub-sampled and receiver-interpolated video sequences", IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, 
18(2), (2000), 150-167. 

8 
Alain Bensoussan 
45. Gelenbe E., Hussain K., "Learning in the multiple class random neural net-
work", IEEE Trans, on Neural Networks, 13(6), (2002), 1257-1267. 
46. Gelenbe E., Lent R., Xu Z., "Measurement and performance of a cognitive 
packet network", Computer Networks, 37, (2001), 691-791. 
47. Gelenbe E., Lent R., Xu Z., "Design and performance of cognitive packet 
networks", Performance Evaluation, 46, (2001), 155-176. 
48. Gelenbe E., "Sensible decisions based on QoS", Computational 
Management 
Science, 1(1), (2004), 1-14. 
49. Gelenbe E., Lent R., "Ad hoc power aware Cognitive Packet Networks", Ad 
Hoc Networks Journal, 2(3), (2004), 205-216. 

Resource Management 

This page is intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 2 
Rethinking Incentives for Mobile A d H o c Networks 
Elgan Huang, Jon Crowcroft and Ian Wassell 
University of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory, Cambridge, U.K. 
E-mails: Elgan.Huang@cl.cam.ac.uk, 
Jon.Crowcroft@cl.cam.ac.uk, 
ijw24 Qcam. ac.uk 
Without sufficient nodes cooperating to provide relaying functions, a 
mobile ad hoc network cannot function properly. Consequently various 
proposals have been made which provide incentives for individual users 
of an ad hoc mobile network to cooperate with each other. In this chapter 
we examine this problem and analyse the drawbacks of currently pro-
posed incentive systems. We then argue that there may not be a need for 
incentive systems at all, especially in the early stages of adoption, where 
excessive complexity can only hurt the deployment of ad hoc networks. 
We look at the needs of different customer segments at each stage of the 
technological adoption cycle and propose that incentive systems should 
not be used until ad hoc networks enter mainstream markets. Even then, 
incentive systems should be tailored to the needs of each individual appli-
cation rather than adopting a generalised approach that may be flawed 
or too technically demanding to be implemented in reality. 
2.1. Introduction 
Mobile ad hoc networks are fundamentally different from conventional in-
frastructure based networks in that they are self-organising and formed 
directly by a set of mobile nodes without relying on any established in-
frastructure. The network thus relies on the cooperation of individual users 
whose devices perform the forwarding that is necessary to achieve network 
capability. Without sufficient nodes providing relaying functions, the net-
work cannot function properly. 
When all the nodes of an ad hoc network belong to a single authority, 
e.g. a military unit or a rescue team, they have a common goal and are thus 
11 

12 
E. Huang, J. Crowcroft and I. Wassell 
naturally motivated to cooperate. However, for general applications with 
large numbers of unrelated users, if battery power, bandwidth, processor 
clock cycles and other resources are scarce, selfish users might not wish 
to forward packets for other users as it would impact their own ability to 
transmit traffic. 
These concerns have resulted in a number of efforts to design incentive 
systems for mobile ad hoc networks that encourage users to cooperate, as 
well as trust management systems that identify non-cooperating nodes and 
punish them. However these incentive systems have a number of inherent 
flaws that make them difficult and undesirable to implement in practice. 
Ironically, if badly implemented, some of them even have the potential to 
backfire by offering an incentive to cheat the incentives system in order to 
gain further benefits. 
2.2. Token Based Incentive Systems 
2.2.1. Quality of Service 
Problems 
With token-based incentive systems6,8-11'14'15, the basic idea is to use no-
tional credit, monetary or otherwise to pay off users for the congestion costs 
(transmission and battery costs) they incur from forwarding packets from 
other users. These credits can then be used to forward their own packets 
through other users, resulting in an incentive to act as relay points, espe-
cially where there is the greatest excess demand for traffic since this is when 
they earn the most. Users who do not cooperate will not be able to use the 
network themselves, having not earned any credits. 
This idea makes a lot of sense in theory, but when practically imple-
mented is likely to run into a number of problems. 
Under the general token mechanism, a user's token count is increased 
when it forwards, and decreased proportionally to the number of hops it 
needs when it sends. This inevitably means that a user needs to forward 
more than he sends and also limits the amount of information that any 
user can send at any given time, dependent on their store of tokens. In 
principle the node may be able to buffer packets until it earns enough 
to send, but this works only as long as the buffer is large enough and 
there are no delay constraints on the packets, which rules out many real 
time applications. Therefore, practically speaking, packets could often be 
dropped at the source, rendering it somewhat ineffective and inefficient for 
many types of communications. 

Rethinking 
Incentives for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
13 
The system also puts users on the outskirts of a network at a disadvan-
tage unrelated to their willingness to participate. Those users will not have 
as much traffic routed through them due to their location and furthermore 
will have lower congestion prices because of that. They will thus earn sig-
nificantly less than a node at the centre of the network. The system might 
indeed stabilise overall, but not at a point that is beneficial to everyone. 
To pay out credit to forwarding nodes, the transmitting node must es-
timate the number of hops required so that it can load sufficient credit 
onto its packet to pay each of the nodes. This calculation not only takes 
up resources but if done incorrectly will result in packets that have insuffi-
cient credit being dropped, as well as wasted credit, decreasing QoS for all 
concerned. 
Another concern is that a significant amount of energy is thus wasted in 
the system transmitting dropped packets that would not have been dropped 
had the incentives scheme not been in place. Because of the wasted energy, 
a user might find that his battery drained faster than if he were to cooperate 
with no incentives system in place, as in both cases he would be forward-
ing packets for others but with the incentives system he suffers additional 
energy loss from dropped packets. 
From a general consumer's point of view, these problems collectively 
result in dropped packets, excessive consumption of resources and gener-
ally poor quality of service for no apparent reason, representing a rather 
significant drawback to the use of ad hoc devices. Users with poor quality 
of service are unlikely to be sympathetic (or even aware) to arguments that 
the system works in such a way for the greater good. This would cause 
problems not only for individual users, but also for the overall network as 
unsatisfied users leave the system completely and bad word of mouth dis-
courages new users to join. Ad hoc networks need a critical mass of users 
to function well, with the utility of the network increasing proportionally 
to the square of the number of nodes, as stated by Metcalfe's Law5. 
2.2.2. Technical 
Conundrums 
When using tokens, there is also the question of how the balance of tokens 
can be maintained for users. The average token level within the system 
needs to be kept at a reasonable level in order for incentives to work prop-
erly. If it grows too high, everyone will be rich in tokens and no longer 
have an incentive to cooperate, and conversely, if there is not enough credit 
within the system then hardly anyone will be able to transmit. However, 

14 
E. Huang, J. Crowcroft and I. Wassell 
if an individual's token level is regularly reset (as proposed in current sys-
tems) in order to maintain a certain token level, then there is no incentive to 
cooperate in the long term. Nodes are free to stop cooperating once enough 
credit is earned to complete their transmission, since excess credit will be 
lost anyway. 
Some systems propose using real money as credit, either directly or 
indirectly6 (to buy virtual credit). In an incentives system this could prove 
very dangerous, because it would in itself be a strong incentive for users to 
game the system in order to derive monetary gains. Unless a perfect cheat 
proof system can be designed, which is rather unlikely, such an incentives 
system would ironically make it more worthwhile for users to attempt to 
cheat. The need to pay to communicate would also negate one of the key 
advantages of ad hoc networks and make it less appealing with respect to 
competing technologies. Also, any system that involves real money and does 
not incorporate tamper proof hardware requires a centralised authority. 
This would undermine the self-organising, decentralised nature of ad hoc 
networks, as well as requiring suitable infrastructure to be built, making the 
networks less easily deployable and less scalable. It would also be difficult 
in an ad hoc network to ensure that centralised authorities would always 
be within coverage. 
Tamper proof hardware in turn is very difficult to achieve as suggested 
in3; virtually any system can be modified. A determined hacker would be 
able to compromise a system regardless of whether there was a 'tamper 
proof module in place (even if the module was truly tamper proof the 
hacker might simply replace it with one of his own design). In the end this 
might only discourage less technically capable users who would not have 
tampered with the devices in the first place. 
Another problem with such systems is that it is very difficult to charge 
users fairly, without introducing additional complexity. In most systems 
presented to date it is the sender that always pays, although it is tech-
nically possible to also charge either just the destination or both. This is 
mainly to prevent the sender from sending useless messages and flooding the 
network. However, in many cases it is the destination that stands to benefit 
from a transmission and charging only the sender may thus lead to incon-
venience to the user and thereby discourage use of the system. In the same 
vein, charging just the destination or even both parties would not be per-
fect solutions either, as the beneficiary changes with each application. (An 
alternative method of preventing useless messages from being sent might 
simply be a hardwired mechanism that throttles communications exceeding 

Rethinking 
Incentives for Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks 
15 
a certain rate/amount). It is also unclear how this payment issue scales to 
two-way communications, especially when one side has enough credit and 
the other does not. 
Complexity of solutions is another issue. The mechanisms used to en-
force these incentives systems take up resources themselves. If the propor-
tion of freeloaders is not high then the benefit derived from the incentive 
systems may be outweighed by the resources expended implementing them. 
This is analogous to hiring security guards at a cost that is greater than 
the value of what they have been hired to guard. 
2.3. Trust Management Systems 
The other main form of inducing cooperation is trust management 
systems2'4,7'16. Generally, these systems work by having nodes within the 
network exchange reputation information. When a node detects uncooper-
ative behaviour it disseminates this observation to other nodes which take 
action to avoid being affected by the node in question by changing traffic 
routes. In addition, some systems punish misbehaving nodes by isolating 
them from the network for a certain period of time in order to provide an 
incentive for users to cooperate. Note that although some trust manage-
ment systems are also used to prevent malicious attacks, in this paper we 
are only concerned with the incentives aspects. 
As with the token-based incentives system, trust management systems 
are subject to some significant problems. The first problem is that they take 
up considerable resources due to the constant transmission of observation 
data, which serves no purpose other than to monitor node behaviour. This 
hogs valuable processor clock cycles, memory, bandwidth and battery power 
that could be used to send actual data. 
Trust management systems also suffer from vulnerabilities due to ex-
changing second hand information. Nodes may falsely accuse other nodes 
of misbehaving or collude with each other to cheat other users on the net-
work. Although systems which rely only on first hand information have 
been investigated, they suffer from sensitivity to parameter settings as well 
as a lessened ability to punish uncooperative nodes4. They also do not take 
collusion of nodes into account. 
Making decisions on whom to believe in a self-organising ad hoc net-
work is very hard, requiring authentication as well as trust information 
about the accusing node. In practice this is extremely difficult to achieve, 
requiring either nodes which are known to be trustworthy (impractical for 

16 
E. Huang, J. Crowcroft and I. 
Wassell 
ad hoc networks) or bootstrapping trust relationships which involve signif-
icant complexity and risk, and may not be possible at all for dynamic or 
short-lived networks4. 
These factors make it questionable whether a trust management system 
could be effectively implemented in reality at a reasonable cost. 
In addition, there have been very few experimental tests of either type 
of incentives systems to date. Almost all results come from simulations, 
which operate under assumptions and limited conditions that do not ac-
curately reflect reality, and most importantly do not take user behaviour 
into account. Real life situations are invariably more complex and humans 
are often irrational and unpredictable, therefore, although the systems can 
be shown to work reasonably in simulations, real life implementations may 
show completely different results. 
2.4. Transparency vs Choice 
Incentives are by definition an inducement to stimulate or spur-on activity. 
In this case, we seek a method to induce users to cooperate with other 
users by allowing their devices to forward messages. Broadly speaking, this 
means that if given a choice, we want users to choose to allow forwarding 
the majority of the time, and to keep their devices on for forwarding even 
when they are not being used by the user. 
It thus makes sense to consider how much choice a user should be given 
in the first place. We can choose to either have a system which is completely 
transparent and operates behind the scenes without the knowledge of users, 
or a system that users are aware of and can adjust themselves. 
The less transparent the system is, the more complex it becomes for the 
user. At one extreme we might imagine a sending node having the option 
to choose between paths every time it sends information, with faster routes 
being more expensive and slower paths being cheaper. At the same time, 
every user of every intermediate node might have the option of choosing 
whether or not they wished to allow the hop and how much to charge for 
it. Considering how many times this process would need to repeated, if 
user intervention was needed each time this occurred it would be extremely 
inconvenient in practice. 
A more reasonable middle ground would be to have agents which han-
dled forwarding decisions according to preset rules, based on criteria such 
as the battery level and the current token store. However, given that the 
incentives system makes cooperation mandatory in order to forward, there 

Rethinking 
Incentives for Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks 
17 
would be little difference in the way that an agent made decisions com-
pared with a human user, since they would both inevitably have to choose 
to forward most of the time and only stop when battery levels were low. 
This then almost completely nullifies the whole point of having an in-
centives system since the user is essentially unaware of what is going on, 
and the agent behaviour (to forward the majority of the time and only 
stop or minimise forwarding when resources are scarce) might as well be 
hardwired into the system and work transparently behind the scenes. Users 
therefore do not need to be given any choice in the matter as it does not 
provide any additional utility to them and in fact may make devices less 
user friendly. 
2.5. Proposed Solution 
Given all the issues highlighted previously, it seems that ad hoc incentive 
systems as currently envisioned will not work successfully and ironically 
may cause more problems than they solve. In fact it is questionable whether 
incentive systems are necessary at all. 
As stated in the introduction, user cooperation is only an issue when 
battery or other resources are scarce. Depending on the application, devices 
and users concerned, this may not even be an issue. As long as users are not 
unduly affected by forwarding for others, there should be little reason why 
they should not want to cooperate, especially if not cooperating requires 
more effort than cooperating. 
In order for mobile ad hoc networks or indeed any new technology to 
move from concept to reality, it needs to go through successive phases of 
development, deployment and adoption in order to eventually achieve crit-
ical mass and enter the mainstream market. At each phase of technology 
adoption, there is a different target customer segment with different needs 
and preferences. Solutions should therefore be designed and implemented 
with each segment's unique needs in mind. 
For ad hoc networks in particular, there is a need to work in distinct 
phases with the aim of steadily building up users. There is a chicken and 
egg situation where the usefulness of the network increases with the num-
ber of users forming and contributing to the network, but without enough 
users joining in initially, it will not be useful enough to attract more users. 
That is why a phased deployment makes much more sense than a full-scale 
deployment. Trying to run before being able to walk may result in the 
technology never taking off at all. 

18 
E. Huang, J. Crowcroft and I. Wassell 
Unfortunately, current research into mobile ad hoc networks has mainly 
been conducted under the assumption that the networks will be mainly used 
for large-scale general consumer applications, and that nodes will be ubiqui-
tous and reasonably dense. Both of these assumptions are considerably far 
from reality and will certainly not be true for initial phases of deployment; 
if the networks are designed and implemented with these assumptions in 
mind they run a high risk of failing. It is unreasonable to make plans for a 
bright future without first considering how to get there in the first place; 
the needs of the early market must not be ignored. 
Given the strengths and weaknesses of ad hoc networks, it is unlikely 
that they will be able to be deployed on a large scale for general applications 
until much further down the adoption cycle. In the early stages, it is much 
more reasonable to expect ad hoc networks to be used for specific applica-
tions which fully capitalise on their strengths, with solutions that are both 
useful and financially sustainable13. In the same vein, it is unrealistic to 
expect a sudden proliferation of devices and networks having hundreds or 
thousands of nodes, especially with general applications that do not belong 
to a single authority. 
In order to bootstrap adoption of the technology, it is therefore impera-
tive that issues such as overly complex incentive systems do not cause early 
adopters of the technology to shun it. Early stage networks will most likely 
either be formed for specific applications under a single authority, where 
incentives are not needed, or by small groups of pioneering, technologically 
savvy users. 
2.5.1. Adoption 
Cycle For Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks 
We therefore propose a solution that evolves according to the adoption cycle 
of mobile ad hoc networks, loosely based on Geoffrey Moore's Crossing 
the Chasm model12. In the earliest stage, we expect users to mainly be 
comprised of pioneers, technologically savvy users who are very enthusiastic 
about new technology and are more interested in exploring technology than 
actually benefiting from it. These users are very cooperative by nature and 
in addition are likely to be much more forgiving of faults in developing 
technologies; in many cases actually contributing to its development. We 
can draw parallels with the case of Peer-to-Peer networks, which usually 
see an extremely high level of cooperation in the early days, which declines 
slowly as they become more mainstream and attract more general users. 

Rethinking Incentives for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
19 
At this stage, we argue that incentive systems are not needed at all; 
the desired behaviour for nodes can simply be hardwired into nodes at a 
hardware as well as a protocol level and trust that the majority of users 
will not tamper with the devices. This will avoid all the problems discussed 
previously, ease implementation, reduce complexity and allow all forwarding 
functions to be handled automatically within the network for it to be fully 
self-organising. 
Pioneering users have little incentive to hack the system and early ap-
plications are likely to be both specific and limited to small groups of users 
with common goals. By reducing problems and limitations for users, pio-
neers will become champions of the technology and introduce it to the next 
customer segment down the adoption cycle, the visionaries. 
Visionaries are different from pioneers in that they are not interested 
in technology for technology's sake but rather see the potential in new 
technology and are willing to make sacrifices in order to be amongst the 
first to see that potential realised, and thereby get a head start in reaping 
the benefits. Visionaries are also likely to use the technology for specific 
applications, although the number of users may be significantly larger. 
At this stage, incentive systems are again unnecessary as users of specific 
applications have implicit shared goals. There is also an inherent self interest 
for visionaries to see the technology that they choose succeed. Once there 
is a strong enough build up of visionaries and the technology has proven 
its worth, it is then possible to make the leap from the early market to the 
mainstream market, where the pragmatists await. 
Pragmatists want a product that works and unlike the customers in the 
early market are much less tolerant of faults. They want to be able to buy 
products that meet their needs out of the box and easily get support from 
people who have used the technology before as well as find books about 
it in the bookstore. In short, they want a complete solution rather than a 
product that is still in development. 
At this point of the technology's adoption, devices are reasonably ubiq-
uitous and the technology has advanced beyond what was available in the 
early days. Most importantly, there are now a lot of experimental results 
and experience with real life implementations of the technology; it is also 
better understood how people actually use and abuse the system. 
It is only at this point in the adoption cycle that it may make sense to 
introduce some form of incentives system. Even then, it would be better 
to design these incentives specifically for individual applications, based on 
what has been learned about how people abuse the networks, rather than 

20 
E. Huang, J. Crowcroft and I. Wassell 
a general incentives system that would possess the flaws discussed previ-
ously. As discussed in13, it is unlikely that large-scale ad hoc networks will 
be deployed for general consumer applications due to their limitations in 
comparison to competing technologies. Their strengths will best be shown 
in either small-scale general applications or specific larger scale applica-
tions. In both cases, incentives can stem from common interest rather than 
an enforced system. 
Finally, should mobile ad hoc networks become truly ubiquitous and 
used for general applications, conservatives will hop onto the bandwagon, 
simply because they have no choice. Conservatives want products that are 
cheap and simple; they buy products only after everyone they know already 
owns one. 
2.5.2. Do We Really Need Incentive 
Systems? 
It is of course still possible that in practice users will not wish to cooperate, 
even in the early stages of adoption. One of the main reasons behind the 
research of these systems is that the hardware and software of nodes can be 
tampered with and their behaviour modified by users in such a way that the 
devices do not cooperate with others, in order to save resources. Although 
it is generally recognised that most users do not have the required level of 
knowledge and skills to modify nodes, there is concern that criminal organ-
isations will have the resources and interest to produce and sell modified 
nodes on a large scale. 
Our position is that the majority of users will only cheat when it is 
clearly beneficial to them and relatively easy to do. In the case of mobile 
ad hoc devices, it is unclear that there is significant benefit to be had 
from going to the trouble to modify devices just to save resources such 
as battery power, memory and processor clock cycles. Battery power is 
probably the most limited resource, and even that may not prove to be an 
issue to most users, as long as the devices do not require constant charges. 
Devices might also be designed with docking capabilities such that when 
the devices are stationary their reliance on battery power is reduced as well 
as improving functionality. This will also encourage users to keep devices 
on to forward data for others even when not in use. Also, if devices become 
truly ubiquitous the power needed for forwarding will decrease anyway as 
the distance from one hop to another becomes minimal. 
While there are certainly many criminal organisations with the ability 
to modify devices on a large scale, there is very little incentive for them to 

Rethinking 
Incentives for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
21 
do so, since it is doubtful that a large enough market will exist to make 
the exercise profitable. A prominent example of a consumer device that 
has fallen victim to large scale tampering is the Sony Playstation 2 which 
has spawned an entire side industry of illegal modifications. Mod chips are 
widely available to buy on the Internet for home modification, as are full 
service organisations that modify units on behalf of consumers for a fee. 
In the case of the Playstation, there are compelling reasons for both 
individual consumers and criminal organisations to engage in modification. 
Although the cost is relatively high, consumers who modify their devices can 
subsequently make significant savings by buying pirated games at a fraction 
of the original price. The organisations thus have a large and willing market 
of customers for their modifications, and are able to charge a significant sum 
to make large profits. 
Conversely, in the case of mobile ad hoc devices, practically the only 
benefit to consumers would be longer battery lives. It is somewhat unlikely 
that they would go out of their way and pay a premium to modify their 
devices to this end, especially when it might cost the same to simply buy 
an extra battery with the added benefit of not voiding the device warranty 
or breaking the law. With little demand and potential for profitability, 
criminal organisations will not go to the trouble to reverse engineer and 
modify devices. 
In any case, it would be necessary to produce a unique ad hoc device 
for each different type of application (e.g., a multiplayer ad hoc gaming 
device would be significantly different from an in-car ad hoc communica-
tions system). The need to reverse engineer each type of device as opposed 
to just one standard device would further increase costs and complexity 
for criminals and make it even less feasible for large scale modifications to 
occur. 
Finally, any organisation with the knowledge to tamper with these de-
vices would know (or soon learn) that there is no long-term value propo-
sition to be gained from large-scale modifications. Unlike peer-to-peer file 
sharing networks such as Kazaa or Gnutella that can function reasonably 
well even with a large number of freeloaders1, mobile ad hoc networks rely 
on cooperation for basic functionality. The more devices that do not cooper-
ate by relaying messages, the worse the overall performance of the network 
will be, until finally the network is completely useless. Therefore, whilst a 
few isolated individuals might choose to modify their devices, a criminal or-
ganisation would gain no long-term benefit from doing so since they would 
rapidly destroy the network along with their own customers. 

22 
E. Huang, J. Crowcroft and I. Wassell 
2.6. Conclusions 
In this chapter we have looked at the problem of cooperation within mobile 
ad hoc networks and hfwe analysed the drawbacks of currently proposed 
incentive systems. We then argued that there might not be a need for incen-
tive systems at all, especially in the early stages of adoption, where excessive 
complexity can only hurt the technology's deployment. We looked at the 
needs of different customers segments for each stage within the projected 
technology adoption cycle and proposed that incentive systems not be used 
until ad hoc networks enter mainstream markets. 
Even then, incentive systems should be tailored to the needs of each 
individual application rather than a general solution that may be too 
flawed or technically demanding to be implemented in reality. Punish-
ments/incentives other than the denial of service to misbehaving nodes 
might be considered as an alternative. For example, within a file sharing 
application, users might be punished by limiting their query returns, rather 
than ostracising them from the network completely. 
History is littered with examples of great technologies that never saw 
the light of day due to deployments that attempted to achieve too much 
too fast, with no way of successfully monetising the technology or to build 
up acceptance; all of which are dangers that ad hoc networks face. It is 
important to remember that mobile ad hoc networks are only one of a 
host of competing technologies, and in order to successfully make it to the 
mainstream market its worth over competing technologies needs to be clear 
and proven to consumers. 
An important caveat to note is that the problem of providing incentives 
to selfish nodes is a somewhat separate issue from preventing malicious 
attacks on the network. In this chapter we have addressed the problem of 
nodes that wish to maximise their personal utility of the network, whereas 
malicious users may be less concerned with personal gain and simply wish 
to attack the network. Therefore, whilst we argue that incentive systems 
may not be necessary, it is still imperative that there are mechanisms to 
guard against malicious attacks in order to maintain the reliability of the 
network. 
Future work could include experimental trials with two separate mobile 
ad hoc networks; one with an incentives system and the other without. 
Comparisons might then be made to confirm whether an incentive-less sys-
tem would work as well or better than one with an incentives system in 
place. However, the experiment would need to be carefully designed such 

Rethinking Incentives for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
23 
that users would behave in the same way as normal users along the adop-
tion cycle, as experimental volunteers are likely to be cooperative by nature. 
Indeed, there are a number of as yet unsolved technical barriers to creating 
a cheat-proof incentive system for a fully decentralised, ad hoc network: 
some type of tamper proof token system is required; such a system would 
need a mechanism to prevent forged tokens or double spending of tokens; a 
decentralised witness system could work statistically to mitigate problems, 
but would itself consume scarce resources (none the least, battery power). 
In conclusion, it is unlikely that there is a perfect solution to the ad hoc 
incentives problem. Implementations of technology are always limited in 
reality by cost, human behaviour, complexity and resources. Indeed, there 
is often only a least bad solution that provides the best cost benefit ratio 
rather than a best solution. It is more important at this point that mobile 
ad hoc networks be given the space to grow and develop rather than to 
choke it with complicated solutions to problems that may not even exist, 
causing users to shun the technology. 
References 
1. Adar, E. and Huberman, B. A., "Free riding on Gnutella" First Monday, 
5(10), 2000, http://www.firstmonday.org. 
2. Anderegg, L., Eidenbenz, S., "Ad hoc VCG: A Truthful and Cost-Efficient 
Routing Protocol for Mobile Ad hoc Networks with Selfish Agents" 2003, 
245-259. (Proc. of the 9th annual international conference on Mobile com-
puting and networking (Mobicom), 2003) 
3. Anderson, R. and Kuhn M., "Tamper Resistance - A Cautionary Note", 
1996, 1-11. (USENIX Workshop on Electronic Commerce, 1996), h t t p : / / 
www.usenix.org 
4. Bansal, S. and Baker, M., "Observation based cooperation enforcement in 
ad hoc networks" Stanford University Technical Report, 2003. 
5. Boyd, C , 
"Metcalfe's Law" 2004, http://www.mgt.smsu.edu/mgt487/ 
mgtissue/newstrat/metcalfe.htm 
6. Zhong, S., Yang, R., Chen, J., "A Simple, Cheat-Proof, Credit-Based Sys-
tem for Mobile Ad-hoc Networks" March 2003, (Proc. of INFOCOM 2003), 
http://www.ieee-infocom.org. 
7. Buchegger, S., Boudec, J.L., "Performance Analysis of the CONFIDANT 
Protocol: Cooperation Of Nodes - Fairness in Dynamic Ad-hoc Networks" 
2002, 226-236. (Proc. of IEEE/ACM Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Net-
working and Computing, 2002) 
8. Buttyan, L. and Hubaux, J.P., "Enforcing Service Availability in Mobile 
Ad-Hoc WANs" 2000, 87-96. (Proc. of IEEE/ACM Workshop on Mobile 
Ad Hoc Networking and Computing, 2000) 
9. Buttyan, L. and Hubaux, J.P., "Nuglets: a Virtual Currency to Stimulate 

24 
E. Huang, J. Crowcroft and I. Wassell 
Cooperation in Self Organised Mobile Ad Hoc Networks" Technical Report 
EPFL, January 2001. 
10. Buttyan, L. and Hubaux, J.P., "Stimulating Cooperation in Self-organising 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks" ACM/Kluwer Mobile, October 2003. 
11. Crowcroft, J., Gibbens, R., Kelly, F., and Ostring, S., "Modelling incentives 
for collaboration in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks" March 2003, (Proc. of Mod-
eling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks (WiOpt), 
2003), http://www-sop.inria.fr 
12. Moore, G.A., Crossing the Chasm, (HarperBusiness), 1991. 
13. Huang, E., Ostring, S., Crowcroft, J. & Wassell, I., "Developing Business 
Models for MobileMAN" (Technical Report, Cambridge University Engi-
neering Library, CUED/FINFENG/TR.475, Jan 2004). 
14. Jakobsson, M., Buttyan, L. and Hubaux, J.P., "A micro-payment scheme 
encouraging collaboration in multi-hop cellular networks" LNCS 2742-
Springer, 2003, 15-33 (Proc. of Financial Crypto, 2003). 
15. Lamparter, B., Paul, K. and Westhoff, D., "Charging Support for Ad Hoc 
Stub Networks" Computer Communications, 26, (2003), 1504-1514. 
16. Michiardi, P., Molva, R., "CORE: A Collaborative Repudiation Mechanism 
to enforce node cooperation in Mobile Ad hoc Networks" 2002, 107-121. 
(Sixth IFIP conference on communications and multimedia security (CMS 
2002)). 

C H A P T E R 3 
Fair and Efficient Allocation of 
Resources in the Internet 
Ronaldo M. Salles 
Dept. de Engenharia de Sistemas, Institute) Militar de Engenharia 
22290-270, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
Email: salles@ieee.org 
Javier A. Barria 
Dept of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London 
London SW7 2BT, United Kingdom 
E-mail: 
j.barria@imperial.ac.uk 
This chapter proposes mechanisms to mediate the allocation of resources 
in networks shared by multiple types of applications as the Internet 
today. Social Choice Theory and Welfare Economics provide the foun-
dations for the decision criteria used. Three different mechanisms are 
studied: Utility-Based Bandwidth Allocation (UBBA), Utility-Based 
Admission Control (UBAC) and Utility-Based Scheduling (UBS). Such 
mechanisms can be employed to sort out trade-offs in various resource 
allocation problems found in the Internet environment. 
3.1. Introduction 
This chapter proposes mechanisms to mediate the allocation of resources in 
networks shared by multiple types of applications. As IP technology turned 
out to be the common transport to all sorts of traffic, multi-application net-
work environments become increasingly predominant in todays telecommu-
nication enterprises. However, the diverse set of QoS requirements posed by 
applications makes the resource allocation problem difficult to be worked 
out, especially when degradation on performance becomes mandatory. 
An adequate solution to the resource allocation problem can be quali-
fied according to two important principles: efficiency, 
there should be no 
25 

26 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. 
Barria 
other allocation able to improve the performance of all applications, and 
fairness, the allocation should not deliberately penalise an individual or 
group in the name of efficiency. Social Choice Theory and Welfare Eco-
nomics are applied to study such trade-off, quantify both principles, and 
formalise the resource allocation problem. From this study three different 
mechanisms are derived to enforce a solution for resource allocation prob-
lems in multi-application network environments, the mechanisms are based 
on utility functions informationa. 
The first mechanism1, Utility-Based Bandwidth Allocation (UBBA), 
provides bandwidth allocation for the integration of elastic (continuous 
utility) and inelastic (discontinuous utility) applications. Hence, this mech-
anism can be applied as a solution for the best-effort starvation problem 
(when strict-QoS applications dominate the use of network resources and 
starve best-effort traffic) found on the Internet today. 
The second mechanism2, Utility-Based Admission Control (UBAC), 
controls the admission of different application traffic to the links using as-
sociated utilities as functions of blocking probability. UBAC employs load 
estimation techniques and use asymptotic theory to simplify the problem 
of link partition. Blocking under UBAC is such that a fair and efficient use 
of resources is maintained. 
Finally the last mechanism3, Utility-Based Scheduling (UBS), uses util-
ity functions expressed in terms of delays associated to each application in 
order to schedule packets on nodes. A measurement procedure computes 
such delays from the statistics involving packet arrivals and departures. 
From the utility functions, a decision procedure is employed so that pack-
ets are scheduled providing fair and efficient use of resources among all 
applications sharing the link. 
3.2. Fairness, Efficiency and Utility Functions 
Fairness is naturally associated to the concept of equality, while efficiency 
is a common engineering goal in the solution of a problem. For instance, 
consider a situation where goods are to be divided among identical agents, 
it is expected that a fair decision would be: "divide goods in equal parts". If 
this is done with minimum waste - e.g. if no goods are left, we may say that 
aIn Economics, utility is generally defined as a measure of the happiness or satisfaction 
gained from a good or service. In computer networks we adopt a more precise defini-
tion: utility function 
represents how each particular application (user) perceives quality 
according to the amount of allocated resources. 

Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the 
Internet 
27 
the solution is also efficient. However, such symmetrical distribution does 
not seem to hold as a fair and efficient solution for every situation, partic-
ularly the ones where agents have different characteristics and preferences. 
For these cases a more elaborated approach is necessary. 
In the above-mentioned division problem it is assumed the multiplicity 
of agents (which are not necessarily identical), and the limited amount of 
resources to be divided. Each agent has his own preferences according to 
the benefit he extracts from the resources. Preferences are ranked through 
a function, agent's utility function. 
The division problem is usually studied under the the framework of 
social choice theory and welfare economics4. In this chapter we are going 
to apply such theory and framework to provide insights and help us sort 
out resource allocation problems over the Internet. 
First, it is important to elaborate the notion of utility functions ap-
plied to networks. According to Shenker5, utility functions are defined for 
networking applications as functions that map a service delivered by the 
network into the performance of the application. For instance, if we take 
the bandwidth as service we may have in the network a given application 
that tolerates well variations on bandwidth, while other applications are 
very sensitive to such variations. Figure 3.1 illustrates different types of 
applications along with the respective utilities as functions of bandwidth. 
u 
u 
I 
u 
BW 
BW 
BW 
BW 
(a) elastic 
(b) inelastic 
(c) delay adaptive 
(d) rate adaptive 
Fig. 3.1. 
Example of utility functions associated to current Internet applications 
Traditional Internet applications such as web, email and ftp are re-
ported to be highly adaptive to the amount of bandwidth (elastic) being 
better described by strictly concave utility functions Fig. 3.1(a). Appli-
cations with hard real-time requirements (mission critic data, traditional 
telephony, high-quality video, CBR traffic) can be expressed by utilities on 
the form of Fig. 3.1(b), while delay and rate adaptive utilities can be as-

28 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. Barria 
sociated to some multimedia applications - audio and video with "Internet 
quality". 
Other examples of utility functions applied to networks are widespread 
in the literature and will be also presented here in the following sections. 
However to formalise the idea we present the definition used in this chapter 
which was extracted from the work of Sairamesh et al.6. 
Definition 3.1: Utility Functions for Computer Network Applications. 
Let x = {x\,x-2, • • • ,XM} be the vector of allocated network resources. 
From that vector the corresponding set of QoS parameters is computed: 
<7 = {ill 12, • • • ,Qn}, where each qi is a function of #lM —> 5i. The utility 
function is defined by: u(q), *ftn —> V C 5R. 
The only requirements we impose on the utility functions, u(q), is mono-
tonicity. 
Associating the most adequate utility function for each application we 
are ready to employ the theory of welfare economics to support the solution 
of resource allocation problems in multi-application network environments 
as the Internet. 
As already mentioned the solution for a resource allocation problem 
should be efficient. In social choice theory and welfare economics efficiency 
is usually associated to the concept of Pareto Efficiency7: "an allocation is 
Pareto Efficient if no one can improve his benefit without decreasing the 
benefit of another". A solution based on this criterion can be achieved from 
the maximisation of the sum8 of all agent utility functions, 
N 
m a x ^ u ( : M ) 
(1) 
where u(x, i) is the utility function associated to agent i, x the allocation 
vector (in this case q = x), and S the set of feasible allocations given by 
the limited network resources. 
The main concern, however, is that there is no fairness component em-
bedded in the solution since the Pareto Criterion takes no interest in dis-
tributional issues no matter how unequally the solution may arise9. For 
instance, an allocation where agent 'A' gets all resources while agent 'B' 
gets nothing may still be Pareto Efficient (may still solve (1)). Moreover, 
there may be several Pareto solutions or even infinite depending on the 
type of utility functions and problem considered. 
Fairness theory provides other better suited criteria to sort out the allo-
cations specially when agents are different (different applications). One of 

Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the 
Internet 
29 
the most widely accepted concept of fairness is due to Rawls10: "the system 
is no better-off than its worse-off individual", i.e. it implies the maximisa-
tion of the benefit (utility) of the worse-off agent, 
maxmin{u(a:,z)} 
(2) 
a;€S 
i 
This criterion usually leads to the equalisation of utility functions, in this 
case it is also known as the egalitarian principle. Note that utility equalisa-
tion has already been applied to network bandwidth allocation problems11. 
The problem on choosing one of the criterion above to sort out resource 
allocation problems is that with (2) efficiency can not be guaranteed, while 
with (1) fairness is often not achieved. This established the well-known 
trade-off9 between fairness and efficiency. One alternative is to consider 
the lexicographic extension12 of the Rawlsian criterion since it enjoys both 
fairness and efficiency properties discussed. A formal definition for the 
lexicographic allocation is presented below. 
Definition 3.2: A feasible allocation x : (x\,X2,... 
,xj) is lexicographi-
cally optimal if and only if an increase of any utility within the domain of 
feasible allocations must be at the cost of a decrease of some already smaller 
utility. Formally, for any other feasible allocation y, iiu(y,j) 
> u(x,j) 
then 
there must exist some k such that u(x, k) < u(x,j) and u(y, k) < u(x, k). 
It is important to note that when the egalitarian criterion produces a 
solution where all the available resources are allocated, this solution also 
satisfies Def. 3.2 and so for this case egalitarian and lexicographic criteria 
are equivalent. We also explore this condition in the mechanisms described 
in the following sections. 
3.3. Utility-Based Bandwidth Allocation 
In this section we study the problem of bandwidth allocation in a network 
environment such as the Internet where elastic and inelastic applications 
coexist. We consider the utility functions associated to the applications as 
illustrated in Fig. 3.1(a) and Fig. 3.1(b) respectively. 
It is important to note that while elastic applications may tolerate 
changes in performance and adapt to current network state, inelastic ap-
plications are non-adaptive in the sense that if the network is not able to 
provide the requested amount of bandwidth, utility will be zero. This be-
haviour is represented by the step functions in Fig. 3.1(b). Such functions 

30 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. 
Barria 
do not facilitate the allocation problem and the integration with elastic ap-
plications. For instance, there is no way to apply the egalitarian principle 
unless all utilities are 1 (100% of performance). Utility aggregation tech-
niques studied next overcome this difficulty and also guarantee scalability 
to the approach. 
3.3.1. Utility of the 
Aggregate 
Applications may have their individual traffic flows aggregated into a single 
flow to reduce the amount of information used by management procedures 
and to simplify network mechanisms over the Internet. In this case, to apply 
the allocation criterion an utility function should be also determined for the 
aggregated flow. 
For elastic applications it can be seen that the same type of utility 
function can be used for the aggregate. Let us assume that n adaptive flows 
are using the end-to-end path p, let Xi be the allocation of flow i and u(xi,i) 
its utility function. By the egalitarian criterion we must have u(xi,i) 
= 
u(xj,j) 
for any other flow j , and thus Xi — Xj = x since their utility 
functions are identical. Hence, the aggregate flow on path p is allocated 
Xp = nx and can be associated to an utility function u(Xp,p) 
which is 
identical to any u(xj,j) 
with the x-axis multiplied by n. 
The procedure just described does not serve for the case of inelastic ap-
plications since it will also produce a step utility function for the aggregate. 
The utility of an aggregate of inelastic flows does not seem to be described 
by such binary relations. Given their strict requirements such flows are sub-
jected to admission control procedures in order to guarantee the requested 
QoS (step utility function). The relationship between flows that go through 
and flows that are blocked provides the key issue to establish the aggregate 
utility. In other words, the amount of aggregate traffic effectively trans-
mitted through the network should indicate the utility experienced by the 
aggregate as a whole according to network services. 
From the aggregate viewpoint the utility should be expressed by the re-
lation between the aggregate carried traffic (C.T.) and the aggregate offered 
traffic (O.T.) so that if all offered traffic is accepted and resources allocated 
to conform with individual requirements, the aggregate may have reached 
100% of satisfaction. In this sense, different levels of satisfaction (utility) 
can be associated to other percentages. Figure 3.2 illustrates such function 
where r is given by the ratio C.T./O.T. In this particular case the aggregate 
level of satisfaction (utility) increases in the same proportion (linear) as the 

Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the 
Internet 
31 
network is able to carry more of its traffic. Also, when just 50% or less of 
its offered traffic is carried there will be no utility for the aggregate. 
0.2 
0.3 0.4 
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 
1 
r = C.T./O.T. 
Fig. 3.2. 
Utility function for the aggregate of inelastic flows. 
Note that the parameter 1 — r represents the blocking probability and 
can be used to relate the aggregate utility with the allotted bandwidth. 
Assume that each aggregate s is allocated a certain amount of bandwidth 
Xs in all the links along its path so that links reserve the required resources 
based on a complete partitioning approach. This system can be described 
by the Erlang Model13 with blocking probabilities given by 
1 
fa 
(3) 
where ps represents the offered traffic (O.T.), and Ns = [Xs/bs\ 
the maxi-
mum number of individual flows that aggregate s may have for the reserved 
Xs. Once ps is determined, the utility function for the aggregate can be ex-
pressed as a composite function of Xs: 
aggregate utility: u(rs(Xs, ps), s) 
(4) 
Note that this function conforms with Def. 3.1. 
From the egalitarian principle the bandwidth allocation solution for a 
system where an aggregate j of adaptive flows and an aggregate s of non-
adaptive flows share the same path, is given by: 
uiXjJ) 
= u{rs(Xs,ps),s) 
(5) 
Thus, Xj and Xs must satisfy 
„ L X s / b 3 J 
(6) 
\^M- 
+ u-\u(XjJ),s) 
= l 
Xj + X: 
c 
(7) 

32 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. 
Barria 
where C is the minimum capacity among the links along the path. Given ps 
and bs, it is difficult to find and also unlikely to exist Xa and Xj satisfying 
(6)-(7). Although we managed to derive utility functions for the aggre-
gates of non-adaptive flows that could be expressed in terms of the allotted 
bandwidth Xs, the composite relation in (4) make those utility functions 
not directly applicable to our allocation scheme. 
3.3.2. Limiting 
Regime 
Approximation 
It can be shown that expressions can be strongly simplified if the network 
is assumed to be in the limiting regime, i.e. when iVg = [Xs/bs\ 
is large and 
ps > Ns (these two conditions are likely to be verified in today's backbone 
links). In this case the following approximation is valid (see proof in the 
Appendix): 
r~TP
 
(8) 
With the approximation above, 
u(rs(Xs,ps),s) 
~ u ( — - , s j 
(9) 
\OsPs 
J 
Therefore we eliminate the need for the composite relation and the util-
ity of the aggregate can be directly obtained as a function of bandwidth 
without using the intermediate equation in (3). Equation (8) provides a 
straightforward way to relate the parameter r with the bandwidth allot-
ted to the aggregate. From the egalitarian criterion, Xj and Xs are now 
obtained from: 
uixjJ) 
= u(Xs/bsps, 
s) 
(10) 
Xj+Xs 
= C 
(11) 
which can be solved for continuous and monotone utility functions em-
ploying simple computational methods (e.g. Newton's method, non-linear 
programing techniques14, piecewise linear approximation11). 
The solution of (10) provides a fair (in the Rawlsian sense) allocation 
of network resources between elastic and inelastic flows. Moreover, if all 
resources are allotted the solution is also efficient. Note that our approach 
works at the aggregate level and so it is only necessary to use information 
from aggregate utility functions. The number of adaptive flows n and of-
fered traffic p should be determined in advance in order to obtain aggregate 

Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the 
Internet 
33 
utilities for adaptive and non-adaptive flows respectively. After new esti-
mates are obtained, (10) should be solved again to generate updated alloca-
tions. Finally those allocations can be implemented in network links using 
scheduling mechanisms, for instance weighted fair queuing with weights 
Wj — Xj/C 
and ws = Xs/C. 
The next subsection proposes a way to esti-
mate the offered load p 
3.3.3. Offered Load 
Estimation 
In order to obtain the aggregated utility functions for non-adaptive appli-
cations as in (9) it is necessary to first compute the offered load p of each 
aggregated flow. Since aggregated loads are not known in advance and may 
vary from time to time, it is necessary to update them so as to provide the 
correct information to the allocation schemes. We present in this Subsec-
tion a technique based on the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) that 
continuously estimate aggregate loads from network observed states. 
The complete network state at time U is given by the number of 
individual connections being served inside the aggregated flows, n(i): 
(ni(i),ri2(i),.. 
.,rik(i)), where each ns(i) indicates the observation at time 
U for aggregated flow s. Let us focus on a single aggregated flow and its 
state n{i). We assume the state sampled at each time window, t, and the 
estimator updated using R = T/t samples as depicted in Fig. 3.3. 
tO 
t1 
t2 
t3 
t4 
t5 
t6 
t7 
t8 
-I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 — • 
"*~7*" 
time axis 
Fig. 3.3. 
Time windows used for load estimation 
We assume that we have at each time a set of R independent samples 
which can be used to estimate the aggregate loads. The aggregate of non-
adaptive flows is reserved a portion of link resources along all its path, so 
that each link operates under a complete partitioning (CP) policy. The CP 
policy is equivalent to a set of independent Erlang systems13, therefore the 

34 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. Barria 
following likelihood function is applied to the aggregate samples, 
nn(i) 
^ 
oj 
p{n^6) 
= ^j)\G~1{e)' 
G W 
= ^ j ! 
( 1 2 ) 
Taking all the R samples, the likelihood and log-likelihood functions 
are 
given by: 
P^9) 
= -R=i 
G 
W 
(13) 
i=0 
R-l 
R-ln(i)-l 
log p(n; 9) = log 0 £ 
n(t) ~ J2 
J2 
lo^n^ 
~ J) ~ R 
loS G(6) 
(14) 
i=0 
i=0 
j=0 
The MLE is computed from 
c 
log p(n; 9) = "- J2 "(0 - ^ ^ 
(15) 
0 »=o 
v « i 
3=0 
The fraction in the right hand side term is simply the probability of 
connection acceptance: r. Thus the algorithm is reduced to 
R-l 
d_ 
i=0 
log p(n; 0) = \ Y , 
n W ~Rr 
= ° 
(16) 
R-l 
'-fr« 
< 1 7 ) 
The parameter q can be directly computed at each time window T 
through the ratio between the number of blocked connections and the total 
number of connection arrivals. In fact the input data should also include this 
measure: [n(0),n(l),...,n(R— 
l),q\. Therefore, 9 provides an estimate for 
the missing parameter in the utility of the aggregate of inelastic flows (9). 

Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the 
Internet 
35 
3.4. Utility-Based Admission Control 
In this section utility function information is used to support admission 
control decision for different types of inelastic application flows that enters 
the network. Based on such information, admission control decisions provide 
a fair and efficient use of available resources. 
One important performance parameter for the case of admission control 
is blocking probability, utility functions should be expressed in terms of this 
parameter. Similarly to what has been done in Sec. 3.3, for an aggregate 
of inelastic flows s the utility function is given by u(qs,s), 
where qs is 
the blocking probability associated to flows. Note that this type of utility 
function conforms with Def. 3.1. 
To simplify the analysis and use the formulation introduced in the pre-
vious section we assume utilities are linear on qs, u(qs, s) = 1 — 6s.qs, where 
the weight 5S indicates the sensitivity of the aggregate in relation to blocking 
probability. The lower the blocking probability, the higher the utility. When 
qs — 0 we have u = 1. 
The weight Ss may also serve to give preferences for some aggregate 
traffic over others on the access to the network. From the limiting regime 
approximation presented in Subsection 3.3.2 we have: 
u(qs,s) = l-Ss(l-^-) 
(18) 
Let us assume that K aggregates access a network link I with available 
bandwidth C, using utility equalisation it follows that, 
u{n,l) 
= u{r2,2) = ...=u{rK,K) 
(19) 
5 (l - -^-\ 
=5 (l- 
— ^ 
= 
= S (l - 
XK 
\ 
(20) 
\ 
oipi) 
2 \ 
b2p2j 
'" 
V 
°KPK) 
K 
X>i<C 
(21) 
If condition (20) is satisfied as an equality, the allocation returned 
{X\,... ,XK} by utility equalisation is also lexicographically optimal (see 
Def. 3.2). 
However, there is a fundamental issues that makes the approach above 
not straightforward. It is not always possible for any set of weights 
{5i,..., 
5K} to have the equality on (19) being satisfied. For instance, tak-
ing the aggregate of minimum weight (5j < 8k) as reference the partitions 

36 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. Barria 
that solve (19) are given by: 
-Xk = hPk 
K 
i-^"-™ 
k^j 
(22) 
^ X f c < C 
(23) 
In order to guarantee Xj > 0 =£• 
Xfc > 6fc/3fc U~^)=*C>f2 
bkpk (l - Q 
(24) 
Given the reserved link bandwidth C, it is not always possible to solve (19) 
for general values of 6^, pk and 5^. It is necessary to apply another criterion 
to relax the equality condition on (19). Hence, we build up the Utility-Based 
Admission Control (UBAC) service through the Rawlsian criterion so that 
fairness is achieved although efficiency is not guaranteed. 
Recalling the Rawlsian criterion defined in Sec. 3.2, link partitions in 
the UBAC are then obtained from the problem: 
Znd:(X1,X2,...,XK) 
Nk=lXk/bk\ 
(25) 
s.t.: maxmin {u(qk,k)} 
k — l,2,...,K 
(26) 
k 
K 
J2X^C 
(27) 
Substituting (18) in (26) we have, 
max min {1 — Jfc.gfc} k = 1,2,... ,K 
(28) 
k 
which can be transformed to, 
min max {(5^.^} k = l,2,...,K 
(29) 
k 
Finally, with the introduction of an extra variable (£), the minmax in (29) 
can also be written as: 
!;*= mm {£ \ 5kqk < £, 
k = 1,2,... ,K) 
(30) 
Since there is no restriction on £ apart from being a real number, it is always 
possible to return a solution for (30). The blocking probability for aggregate 
k is given by, 
qk<j-k 
(31) 

Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the 
Internet 
37 
Substituting qk in (30) by the corresponding expression given by the limiting 
regime approximation, we end up with the following linear programming 
problem, 
min < £ SkXk + £a,k > 5ka,k, Xk < <2fc, ^2 Xk < C > 
(32) 
fe=i 
' 
where: k = {1,..., K}, ak = bkpk, and £ £ 3?. The above problem has K + 1 
variables (all Xfc's plus £) and IK + 1 constraints, demanding low compu-
tational time to find a solution (K is the number of aggregates crossing 
the link which is assumed to be small). Thus, the UBAC is implemented 
through the partitions computed from (32). The partitions should be re-
computed (problem (32) solved again) whenever the offered traffic load pk 
of the aggregates changes. 
3.5. Utility-Based Scheduling 
In this section Utility-Based Scheduling (UBS) disciplines are proposed to 
support different classes of adaptive applications over the Internet. The 
disciplines differ from other well known techniques (e.g. WFQ, WRR) since 
scheduling decisions are directly controlled by utility function information. 
In this case utility functions describe the expected level of performance of 
each class, and rely on the acquisition of on-line traffic statistics to trigger 
scheduling decisions. 
Although the formulation on Sec. 3.3 and Sec. 3.4 were similar, the ap-
proach here is different since UBS deals with packet level procedures. Given 
that the services in this section are expressed in terms of class (aggregate) 
packet delays, it is natural to associate to the classes utility functions that 
depend on those delays. Hence, in the point of view of each class the re-
source that is being allocated represents the "promptness" of the scheduler 
to deliver its packets. 
There should be a maximum delay that each class tolerates, from that 
point there will be no utility for the class. For all other situations the 
class as an entity may associate a level of satisfaction corresponding to the 
promptness offered by the scheduler. Promptness can be measured by the 
expression, 
ft = %^F" 
(33) 
uk 
where Dk is the current delay and D™ax the maximum delay class-fc 
tolerates. 

38 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. 
Barria 
When Dk = 0, Pk = 1 (100%) which means that the scheduler is always 
available to serve class-fc packets. On the other hand, when Dk — Z)^ax 
class-fc is completely starved resulting in Pk = 0. In between these two 
extreme scenarios different levels of performance are achieved and can be 
associated to a general utility function that depends on P&: u{Pk,k). To 
be consistent the utility should be monotonically increasing on Pk, or in 
the other way around monotonically decreasing in Dk- Again, such utility 
function conforms with Def. 3.1. 
The goal defined for the scheduler may be to guarantee utility equalisa-
tion. The only action the scheduler may perform to equalise those utilities 
is to select at each departure epoch an adequate class to be served. Given 
packet dynamics and the limited control of the scheduler over Dk, such 
equalisation at any time instant t is virtually impossible. The best the 
scheduler can do is to select for service at each departure epoch the class 
of minimum utility in an attempt to increase its utility and move towards 
equalisation. The UBS is defined in this way as seen in (34) for general 
utility functions u(Pk, k). 
maxmin {u(Pk,k)} 
k = l...K 
(34) 
t 
k 
Note that the objective of the UBS is to maximise the minimum utility 
in the system and so it conforms with the fairness concept introduced 
(Rawlsian criterion). Note also that the UBS may emulate the Proportional 
Differentiated Services (PDS) proposed by Dovrolis15 if utility functions are 
such that: 
uk = 5kDt^{\ 
- Pk) 
(35) 
In this way, the scheduler will be always enforcing the PDS equality 6i .D\ = 
62.-D2, • • •, $K-DK, 
where dk is the weight associated to class-/c and Dk the 
respective delay. 
3.5.1. Measuring 
Class 
Delays 
The utilities defined for the UBS use class packet delays Dk as argument 
for the functions, therefore it is necessary to derive a procedure to obtain 
such delays. 
Each parameter Dk is defined in the UBS as the average time a packet 
from class-/c has to wait on a queue before starting transmission. If this 
measure is computed only for long-term scales, applications that lasts a 
shorter period of time may not benefit from UBS services. We propose a 

Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the 
Internet 
39 
measure scheme for the class delays that takes into account current and 
past packet queueing delays. The approach can be configured to the time 
scale of interest and provides low overhead on computations. 
For each class in the system we define a measurement window to store 
information about most recent arrival/departure statistics. The window is 
implemented by a circular list with two pointers: head-of-window ( hw) and 
head-of-queue (hq). Figure 3.4 illustrates the mechanism of the windows. 
Fig. 3.4. 
Measurement window implemented by a circular list. 
Both pointers move in the counter clockwise direction as packets enter 
and leave the system, when the system is empty the pointers are aligned. 
An incoming packet overwrites the hw register with its new information 
and shifts the pointer to the next position. The hq points to the oldest 
packet in the queue and when this packet is served it is also shifted. The 
information stored consists of time-stamps of packets in queue, and waiting 
times of packets that have already been served. For each class-/c we have 
an associated window Tfc of size \Tk\ and the following notation, 
Thus, the mean delay on window A; is a function of time and can be 
computed from: 
^w-]SiE4-isi(.E4 +E«) 
= jii[n*«-£T*+ £ 4 ] 
1 
' \ 
*eSfc 
i£Bk 
J 
= -L(„ f et-S f c+ £>**) 
(36) 

40 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. 
Barria 
where the variables nk, Sk, Dk
ep are updated as indicated next. 
At each arrival epoch 
nk <— nfc + 1 
Sk <— Sk + clock 
Ddep 
^_ Ddep 
_ 
dhw 
Note that the measure procedure does not need to set or modify any 
packet field, and that the mean delay as a function of time is readily ob-
tained from simple computations. The size of the windows \Tk\ can be 
changed as desired to capture the time-scale of interest for the service. 
3.6. Conclusion 
This chapter studied the problem of resource allocation in multi-application 
network environments such as the Internet. We applied the theory of Social 
Choice and Welfare Economics to derive some useful criteria that could 
be applied to our problem. Two important properties, fairness and ef-
ficiency, were defined and used to qualify the solution able to mediate 
inherent trade-offs found in resource allocation problems. Three different 
mechanisms were studied: bandwidth allocation (UBBA), admission control 
(UBAC) and packet scheduling (UBS). Such mechanisms provide invaluable 
solutions for current resource allocation problems and can be directly im-
plemented in the network. Simulation results evaluating the performance of 
all mechanisms can be found in the PhD thesis16 that originated this work. 
Future work will be done in the practical implementation of the approach 
in real network scenarios. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported in part by CNPq Brazil, under Grant: 200049/99. 
Appendix - Limiting Regime Approximation 
Let N = \_X/b\, the Limiting Regime is achieved when N -^ oo with p > N, 
which represents congested network backbone links. From Jagerman17 we 
have the following Erlang B equivalent formula, 
B{N, a)'1 = r 
e~* (l + - \ 
dt 
(37) 
At each 
nk 
Sk *• 
"it 
*^ 
Diep <• 
service 
*- nk -
- Sk -
clock 
_Ddep 
epoch: 
-1 
hq 
Tk 
hq 
~ ~k 
+ 4" 

Fair and Efficient Allocation of Resources in the Internet 
41 
Let a = f < 1, 
e V1 + !vJ dt 
(38) 
in the limit as N grows, 
lim B(N, - ) - 1 = / 
e"*. lim 
1 + ^ 
dt 
(39) 
poo 
POO 
= / 
e~t.eatdt 
= / 
e ( Q - 1 ) f ^ 
(40) 
7o 
Jo 
Since (a — 1) < 0 we have, 
lim B(N, — ) = - ( a - l ) = l - a 
(41) 
JV—»oo 
Q; 
Thus, blocking probabilities 
converges to 1 — jp, which completes the 
proof. • 
References 
1. Salles, R.M. and Barria, J.A./'Fair bandwidth allocation for the integration 
of adaptive and non-adaptive applications" LNCS 3126- Springer, 2004, 1-
12. (Proc. of the 8th IEEE Inter. Conf. on Telecomm.,2004) 
2. Salles, R.M. and Barria, J.A./'Proportional differentiated admission con-
trol", IEEE Comm. Let, 8(5), (2004) 320 -322. 
3. Salles, R.M. and Barria, J.A., "Utility-based scheduling disciplines for adap-
tive applications over the internet",IEEE Comm. Let, 6(5), (2002) 217 -219. 
4. Sen, A.K., Collective Choice and Social Welfare, (Ed. North-Holland Pub-
lishing) 1995. 
5. Shenker, S., "Fundamental design issues for the future internet" 
IEEE 
JSAC, 13(7), (1995) 1176-1188. 
6. Sairamesh, J., Ferguson, D.F. and Yemini, Y.,"An approach to pricing, op-
timal allocation and quality of service provisioning in high-speed packet 
networks", 1995, 1111-1119, (Proc. of the IEEE INFOCOM'95, 1995). 
7. Mas-Colell, A., Whinston, M.D. and Green, J.R., Microeconomic 
Theory, 
(Oxford University Press), 1995. 
8. Kelly, F.P., Maulloo, A.K. and Tan, D.K.H., "rate control for communica-
tion networks: shadow prices proportional fairness and stability" J. of the 
Oper. Res. Soc, 49, (1998) 237-252. 
9. Sen, A., "The possibility of social choice" The Amer. Econ. Rev., 89(3), 
(1999) 349-378. 
10. Rawls, J., A Theory of Justice,(Oxford University Press), 1999. 
11. Bianchi, G. and Campbell, A.T./'A programmable MAC framework fir 
utility-based adaptive quality of service support" IEEE JSAC, 18(2),(2000) 
244-255. 

42 
Ronaldo M. Salles and Javier A. 
Barria 
12. Roberts, K.W.S., "Interpersonal comparability and social choice theory" 
Review of Economic Studies, 47(2), (1980) 421-439. 
13. Ross, K.W., Multiservice Loss Models for Broadband 
Telecommunication 
Networks, (Springer-Verlag), 1995. 
14. Fletcher, R., Practical Methods of Optimization, (John Wiley & Sons), 2000. 
15. Dovrolis, C. and Ramanathan, P.,"A case for relative differentiated ser-
vices and the proportional differentiation model " IEEE Network Magazine, 
13(5),(1999) 26-34. 
16. Salles, R.M., Fair and Efficient Resource Allocation Strategies in Multi-
Application Networks using Utility Functions, (Ph.D. Thesis, DEEE, Impe-
rial College London), 2004. 
17. Jagerman, D.L.,"Some Properties of the Erlang Loss Function" The Bell 
Sys. Tech. J., 53 (1974) 525-550. 

CHAPTER 4 
The Locality Principle 
Peter J. Denning 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943 USA 
Email: pjd@nps.edu 
Locality is among the oldest systems principles in computer science. It 
was discovered in 1967 during efforts to make early virtual memory sys-
tems work well. It is a package of three ideas: (1) computational processes 
pass through a sequence of locality sets and reference only within them, 
(2) the locality sets can be inferred by applying a distance function to 
a program's address trace observed during a backward window, and (3) 
memory management is optimal when it guarantees each program that 
its locality sets will be present in high-speed memory. Working set mem-
ory management was the first exploitation of this principle; it prevented 
thrashing while maintaining near optimal system throughput, and even-
tually it enabled virtual memory systems to be reliable, dependable, 
and transparent. Many researchers and system designers rallied around 
the effort to understand locality and achieve this outcome. The princi-
ple expanded well beyond virtual memory systems. Today it addresses 
computations that adapt to the neighbourhoods in which users are sit-
uated, ways to infer those neighbourhoods by observing user actions, 
and optimising performance for users by being aware of their neighbour-
hoods. It has influenced the design of caches of all sorts, Internet edge 
servers, spam blocking, search engines, e-commerce systems, email sys-
tems, forensics, and context-aware software. It remains a rich source of 
inspirations for contemporary research in architecture, caching, Bayesian 
inference, forensics, web-based business processes, context-aware soft-
ware, and network science. 
4.1. Introduction 
Locality of reference is one of the cornerstones of computer science. It 
was born from efforts to make virtual memory systems work well. Virtual 
43 

44 
Peter J. Denning 
memory was first developed in 1959 on the Atlas system at the University of 
Manchester. Its superior programming environment doubled or tripled pro-
grammer productivity. But it was finicky, its performance sensitive to the 
choice of replacement algorithm and to the ways compilers grouped code 
on to pages. Worse, when it was coupled with multiprogramming, it was 
prone to thrashing, the near-complete collapse of system throughput due to 
heavy paging. The locality principle guided us in designing robust replace-
ment algorithms, compiler code generators, and thrashing-proof systems. It 
transformed virtual memory from an unpredictable to a robust technology 
that regulated itself dynamically and optimised throughput without user 
intervention. Virtual memory became such an engineering triumph that it 
faded into the background of every operating system, where it performs so 
well at managing memory with multithreading and multitasking that no 
one notices. 
The locality principle found application well beyond virtual memory. 
Today it directly influences the design of processor caches, disk controller 
caches, storage hierarchies, network interfaces, database systems, graph-
ics display systems, human-computer interfaces, individual application pro-
grams, search engines, Web browsers, edge caches for Web based environ-
ments, and computer forensics. Tomorrow it may help us overcome our 
problems with brittle, unforgiving, unreliable, and unfriendly software. 
I will tell the story of this principle, starting with its discovery to solve a 
multimillion-dollar performance problem, through its evolution as an idea, 
to its widespread adoption today. My telling is highly personal because 
locality, and the attending success of virtual memory, was my focus during 
the first part of my career. 
4.2. Manifestation of a Need (1949-1965) 
In 1949 the builders of the Atlas computer system at University of Manch-
ester recognised that computing systems would always have storage hier-
archies consisting of at least main memory (RAM) and secondary memory 
(disk, drum). To simplify management of these hierarchies, they introduced 
the page as the unit of storage and transfer. Even with this simplification, 
programmers spent well over half their time planning and programming 
page transfers, then called overlays. In a move to enable programming pro-
ductivity to at least double, the Atlas system builders therefore decided to 
automate the overlaying process. Their "one-level storage system" (later 
called virtual memory) was part of the second-generation Atlas operating 

The Locality 
Principle 
45 
system in 195930. It simulated a large main memory within a small real one. 
The heart of their innovation was the novel concept that addresses named 
values, not memory locations. The CPU's addressing hardware translated 
CPU addresses into memory locations via an updatable page table map 
(Fig. 4.1). By allowing more addresses than locations, their scheme enabled 
programmers to put all their instructions and data into a single address 
space. The file containing the address space was on the disk; the operat-
ing system copied pages on demand (at page faults) from that file to main 
memory. When main memory was full, the operating system selected a main 
memory page to be replaced at the next page fault. 
The Atlas system designers had to resolve two performance problems, 
either one of which could sink the system: translating addresses to locations; 
and replacing loaded pages. They quickly found a workable solution to the 
translation problem by storing copies of the most recently used page table 
entries in a small high speed associative memory, later known as the address 
cache or the translation lookaside buffer. The replacement problem was a 
much more difficult conundrum. 
Because the disk access time was about 10,000 times slower than the 
CPU instruction cycle, each page fault added a significant delay to a job's 
completion time. Therefore, minimising page faults was critical to system 
performance. Since minimum faults means maximum inter-fault intervals, 
the ideal page to replace from main memory is the one that will not be used 
again for the longest time. To accomplish this, the Atlas system contained a 
"learning algorithm" that hypothesised a loop cycle for each page, measured 
each page's period, and estimated which page was not needed for the longest 
time. 
The learning algorithm was controversial. It performed well on pro-
grams with well-defined loops and poorly on many other programs. The 
controversy spawned numerous experimental studies well into the 1960s 
that sought to determine what replacement rules might work best over the 
widest possible range of programs. Their results were often contradictory. 
Eventually it became apparent that the volatility resulted from variations 
in compiling methods: the way in which a compiler grouped code blocks 
onto pages strongly affected the program's performance under a given re-
placement strategy. 
Meanwhile, in the early 1960s, the major computer makers were drawn 
to multiprogrammed virtual memory because of its superior programming 
environment. RCA, General Electric, Burroughs, and Univac all included 
virtual memory in their operating systems. Because a bad replacement 

46 
Peter J. Denning 
CPU 
MAIN 
Fig. 4.1. The architecture of virtual memory. The process running on the CPU has 
access to an address space identified by a domain number d. A full copy of the address 
space is stored on disk as the file AS[d]; only a subset is actually loaded into the main 
memory. The page table PT[d] has an entry for every page of domain d. The entry for 
a particular page (i) contains a presence bit P indicating whether the page is in main 
memory or not, a usage bit U indicating whether it has been accessed recently or not, a 
modified bit M indicating whether it has been written into or not, and a frame number 
FN telling which main memory page frame contains the page. Every address generated 
by the CPU is decomposed into a page number part (i) and a line number part (x). The 
memory mapping unit (MMU) translates that address into a memory location as follows. 
It accesses memory location d+i, which contains the entry of page i in the page table 
PT[dJ. If the page is present (P=l), it generates the memory location by substituting the 
frame number (f) for the page number (i). If it is not present (P=0), it instead generates 
a page fault interrupt that signals the operating system to invoke the page fault handler 
routine (PFH). The MMU also sets the use bit (U=l) and on write accesses the modified 
bit (M=l). The PFH selects a main memory page to replace, if modified copies it to the 
disk in its slot of the address space file AS[d], copies page i from the address space file 
to the empty frame, updates the page table, and signals the CPU to retry the previous 
instruction. As it searches for a page to replace, the PFH reads and resets usage bits, 
looking for unused pages. A copy of the most recent translations (from page to frame) 
is kept in the translation lookaside buffer (TLB), enabling the MMU to bypass the page 
table lookup most of the time. 
algorithm could cost a million dollars of lost machine time over the life of 
a system, they all paid a great deal of attention to replacement algorithms. 
Nonetheless, by 1966 these companies were reporting their systems were 
susceptible to a new, unexplained, catastrophic problem they called thrash-
ing. Thrashing seemed to have nothing to do with the choice of replacement 

The Locality 
Principle 
47 
policy. It manifested as a sudden collapse of throughput as the multipro-
gramming level rose. A thrashing system spent most of its time resolving 
page faults and little running the CPU. Thrashing was far more damag-
ing than a poor replacement algorithm. It scared the daylights out of the 
computer makers. 
The more conservative IBM did not include virtual memory in its 360 
operating system in 1964. Instead, it sponsored at its Watson laboratory 
one of the most comprehensive experimental systems projects of all time. 
Led by Bob Nelson, Les Belady, and David Sayre, the project team built 
the first virtual-machine operating system and used it to study the per-
formance of virtual memory (The term "virtual memory" appears to have 
come from this project). In 1966 Belady published a landmark study in 
which he tested every replacement algorithm that anyone had ever pro-
posed and a few more he invented. Many of his tests involved the use bits 
built into page tables (see Fig. 4.1) By periodically scanning and resetting 
the bits, the replacement algorithm distinguishes recently referenced pages 
from others. Belady concluded that policies favouring recently used pages 
performed better than other policies; LRU (least recently used) replacement 
was consistently the best performer among those tested5. 
4.3. Discovery and Propagation of Locality Idea 
(1966-1980) 
In 1965,1 entered my PhD studies at MIT in Project MAC, which was just 
undertaking the development of Multics. I was fascinated by the problems 
of dynamically allocating scarce CPU and memory resources among the 
many processes that would populate future time-sharing systems. 
I set myself a goal to solve the thrashing problem and define an effi-
cient way to manage memory with variable partitions. Solutions to these 
problems would be worth millions of dollars in recovered uptime of virtual 
memory operating systems. Little did I know that I would have to devise 
and validate a theory of program behaviour to accomplish this. 
I learned about the controversies over the viability of virtual memory 
and was baffled by the contradictory conclusions among the experimen-
tal studies. All these studies examined individual programs assigned to a 
fixed memory partition managed by a replacement algorithm. They shed 
no light on the dynamic partitions used in multiprogrammed virtual mem-
ory systems. They offered no notion of a dynamic, intrinsic memory de-
mand that would tell which pages of the program were essential and which 

48 
Peter J. Denning 
were replaceable - something simple like, "this process needs p pages at time 
t." Such a notion was incompatible with the fixed-space policies everyone 
was studying. I began to speak of a process's intrinsic memory demand as its 
"working set". The idea was that paging would be acceptable if the system 
could guarantee that the working set was loaded. I combed the experimen-
tal studies looking for clues on how to measure a program's working set. All 
I could find were data on lifetime curves (mean time between page faults 
as a function of average memory space allocated to a program). These data 
suggested that the mean working set size would be significantly smaller 
than the full program size (Fig. 4.2). 
In his 1966 study, Belady showed that clustering of references was fun-
damental to the performance of replacement algorithms. He used the term 
"locality" to characterise the clustering and showed that the FIFO algo-
rithm systematically outperforms a random selection algorithm by captur-
ing "locality sets" in memory. He found that LRU (least recently used) 
performed better than FIFO and introduced the use bit as a practical way 
to implement LRU. He invented the MIN algorithm, which minimised page 
faults by replacing the page with maximal forward time until next reference. 
In an "Aha!" moment in the waning days of 1966, inspired by Belady's 
observations, I hit on the idea of defining a process's working set as the set 
of pages used during a fixed-length sampling window in the immediate past. 
A working set could be measured by periodically reading and resetting the 
use bits in a page table. The window had to be in the virtual time of the 
process - time as measured by the number of memory references made -
so that the measurement would not be distorted by interruptions. This led 
to the now-familiar notation: the working set W(t, T) is the set of pages 
referenced in the virtual time interval of length T preceding time t14. 
By spring 1967,1 had an explanation for thrashing15. Thrashing was the 
collapse of system throughput triggered by making the multiprogramming 
level too high. It was counterintuitive because we were used to systems 
that would saturate under heavy load, not shut down (Fig. 4.3). When 
memory was filled with working sets, any further increment in the multi-
programming level would simultaneously push all loaded programs into 
a regime of working set insufficiency, where they paged excessively and 
could not use the CPU efficiently (Fig. 4.4). I proposed a feedback control 
mechanism that would limit the multiprogramming level by refusing to 
activate any program whose working set would not fit within the free space 
of main memory. When memory was full, the operating system would defer 

The Locality 
Principle 
49 
mean lime between 
page faults 
slope - L(k)/'k 
Fig. 4.2. 
A program's lifetime curve plots the mean time between page faults in a virtual 
memory system with a given replacement policy, as a function of the amount of space 
allocated to it by the system. It has an S-shape. The knee, defined as the point at which 
a line emanating from the origin is tangent to the curve, is the point of diminishing 
returns for increased memory allocation. The knee memory size is typically considerably 
smaller than the total program size, indicating that a replacement policy can often do 
quite well with a relatively small memory allocation. A further significance of the knee is 
that it maximises the ratio L(x)/x 
for all points on the curve. The knee is therefore the 
most desirable target for space allocation: it maximises the mean time between faults 
per unit of space. 
throughput 
multiprogramming 
level, MPL 
Fig. 4.3. 
A computer system's throughput (jobs completed per second) increases with 
multiprogramming level up to a point. Then it decreases rapidly to throughput so low 
that the system appears to have shut down. Because everyone was used to systems 
that gradually approach saturation with increasing load, the throughput collapse was 
unexpected. The thrashing state was "sticky" - we had to reduce the MPL somewhat 
below the trigger point to get the system to reset. No one knew how to predict the 
optimal MPL or to find it without falling into thrashing. 

50 
Peter J. Denning 
efficiency 
fault rate, m 
Pig. 4.4. 
The first rigorous explanation of thrashing argued from efficiency. The effi-
ciency of a program is the ratio of its CPU execution time to its real time. Real time 
is longer because of page-fault delays. Denote a program's execution time by E, the 
page fault rate by m, and the delay for one page fault by D; then the efficiency is 
E/(E 
+ mED) 
= 1/(1 + mD). For typical values of D - 10,000 memory cycle times or 
longer — the efficiency drops very rapidly for a small increase of m above 0. In a memory 
filled with working sets (high efficiency), loading one more program can squeeze all the 
others, pushing everyone into working set insufficiency, collapsing efficiency. 
Waiting Programs 
^ 
Active Programs: 
hold memory 
use CPU. dsks, etc. 
Fig. 4.5. 
A feedback control system can stabilise the multiprogramming level and pre-
vent thrashing. The amount of free space is monitored and fed back to the scheduler. 
The scheduler activates the next waiting program whenever the free space is sufficient 
for its working set. With such a control, we expected that the multiprogramming level 
would rise to the optimal level and stabilise there. 
programs requesting activation into a holding queue. Thrashing would be 
impossible with a working set policy (Fig. 4.5). 
The working set idea was based on an implicit assumption that the pages 
seen in the backward window were highly likely to be used again in the 
immediate future. Was this assumption justified? In discussions with Jack 
Dennis (MIT) and Les Belady (IBM), I started using the term "locality" 

The Locality 
Principle 
space (addresses) 
time 
^(phases) 
Fig. 4.6. 
Locality sequence behaviour observed by sampling use bits during program 
execution. Programs exhibit phases and localities naturally, even when overlays are not 
pre-planned. 
for the observed tendency of programs to cluster references to small subsets 
of their pages for extended intervals19. We could represent a program's 
memory demand as a sequence of locality sets and their holding times: 
(Ll,T2),(L2,T2),(L3,T3),.. 
.,(Li,Ti),... 
This seemed natural because we knew that programmers planned overlays 
using diagrams that showed subsets and time phases. But what was strik-
ingly interesting was that programs showed the locality behaviour even 
when it was not explicitly pre-planned. When measuring actual page use, 
we repeatedly observed many long phases with relatively small locality sets 
(Fig. 4.6). Each program had its own distinctive pattern, like a voiceprint. 
We saw two reasons that this would happen: (1) temporal clustering due 
to looping and executing within modules with private data, and (2) spa-
tial clustering due to related values being grouped into arrays, sequences, 
modules, and other data structures. Both these reasons seemed related to 
the human practice of "divide and conquer" - breaking a large problem 
into parts and working separately on each. The locality bit maps captured 
someone's problem-solving method in action. These underlying phenomena 
gave us confidence to claim that programs have natural sequences of lo-
cality sets. The working set sequence is a measurable approximation of a 
program's intrinsic locality sequence. 
As we developed and refined our understanding of locality during the 
1970s, I continued to work with many others to refine the locality idea and 
turn it into a behavioural theory of computational processes interacting 
with storage systems. By 1980 we articulated the principle as a package 

52 
Peter J. Denning 
of three ideas: (1) computational processes pass through a sequence of lo-
cality sets and reference only within them, (2) the locality sets can be 
inferred by applying a distance function to a program's address trace ob-
served during a backward window, and (3) memory management is optimal 
when it guarantees each program that its locality sets will be present in 
high-speed memory17. A distance function D(x,t) 
measures the distance 
from a processor to an object x at time t. Distances could be temporal, 
measuring the time since prior reference or access time within a network; 
spatial, measuring hops in a network or address separation in a sequence; 
or cost, measuring any non-decreasing accumulation of cost since prior ref-
erence. We said that object x is in the locality set at time t if the distance 
is less than a threshold: D(x,t) < T. The storage system would maximise 
throughput by caching locality sets close to the processor. 
By 1975, the queuing network model had become a useful tool for 
understanding the performance of computing systems, and for predicting 
throughput, response time, and system capacity. In this model, each com-
puting device of the real system is represented as a server with a queue; the 
server processes a job for a random service time and then sends it to another 
server according to a probability distribution for the inter-server transition. 
The parameters of the model are the mean service times for each server, 
the mean number of times a job visits a server, and the total number of 
jobs circulating in the system. We began to use these models to study how 
to tell when a computing system had achieved its maximum throughput 
and was on the verge of thrashing. The results were eye-opening. 
In the simplest queuing model of a virtual memory system, there is a 
server representing the CPU and a server representing the paging disk. A 
job cycles between the CPU and the disk in the pattern 
(CPU, 
Disk)*CPU 
meaning a series of CPU-Disk cycles followed by a CPU interval before 
completing. The number of CPU-Disk cycles is the number of page faults 
generated by the system's replacement policy for the mean memory space 
allocated to jobs. Queuing network theory told us that every server poses a 
potential bottleneck that imposes an upper limit on the system throughput; 
the actual bottleneck is the server with the smallest limit. We discovered 
that the well-known thrashing curve (Fig. 4.3) is actually the system doing 
the best it can as the paging-disk bottleneck worsens with increasing load 
(Fig. 4.7) 
Once we saw that thrashing is a bottleneck problem, we studied whether 
we could use bottleneck parameters as criteria for load controls that 

The Locality 
Principle 
53 
throughput 
disk 
\ 
CPU 
multiprogramming 
level, N 
Fig. 4.7. 
System throughput is constrained by both CPU and disk capacity. The CPU 
imposes a throughput limit of 1/fi, where R is the average running time of programs. The 
disk imposes a throughput limit of 1/SF, where S is the mean time to do a page swap 
and F is the total number of page faults in a job. Thrashing is caused by precipitous drop 
of disk capacity as increased load squeezes space and forces more paging. The crossing 
point occurs when R = SF; since F = R/L 
(lifetime, L), the crossing is at L — S, 
i.e., when the mean time between faults equals the disk service time of a fault. Thus a 
control criterion is to allow N to increase until L decreases to S. Unfortunately, this was 
not very precise; we found experimentally that many systems were already in thrashing 
when L = S. Moreover, the memory size at which L = S may bear no relation to the 
highly desirable lifetime knee (Fig. 4.2). 
prevented thrashing. One such criterion was called "L = S" because it 
involved monitoring the mean lifetime L between page faults and adjust-
ing load to keep that value near the paging disk service time S (Fig. 4.7). 
This criterion was not very reliable: in some experiments, the system would 
already be thrashing when L = S. We found that a "knee criterion" - in 
which the system adjusted load to keep the observed lifetime near the knee 
lifetime (Fig. 4.2) - was consistently more reliable, even though knee life-
time was not close to S. Unfortunately, it is not possible to know the knee 
lifetime without running the program to completion. 
Our theory told us that system throughput would be maximum when 
space-time for each job is minimum, confirming our claim that a knee cri-
terion would optimise throughput. How well can a working-set policy ap-
proach this ideal? In a line of experimental studies we found that the interval 
of window values that put the space-time within 10% of its minimum was 
quite wide (Fig. 4.8)27. Then we found that many workloads, consisting of 
a variety of programs, often had global T values that fell in all the 10% 

54 
Peter J. Denning 
space-time 
10% confidence interval 
10% of min 
space-time 
window, T 
Fig. 4.8. 
System throughput is maximised when the memory space-time consumed by 
a job is minimum. The memory allocation that does this is near the knee (Fig. 4.2). Our 
experimental studies of working-set windows near the knee of its lifetime curve yielded 
two useful results. One is that a program's space-time is likely to be flat (near minimum) 
for a broad range of window sizes, the picture shows how we define a 10% confidence 
interval of window sizes. 
confidence intervals. This meant that a single, fixed, properly chosen value 
of T would cause the working set policy to maintain system throughput to 
within 10% of its optimum. The average deviation was closer to 5%. The 
conclusion was that systems with a properly adjusted, single global T value 
would achieve a working-set throughput within 5-10% of optimal. 
The final question was: is there another policy that would deliver a lower 
space-time per job and therefore a higher optimum throughput? Obviously, 
the VMIN (variable space minimum37) would do the job; but it requires 
lookahead. We discovered that the working set policy has exactly the same 
page-fault sequence as VMIN. Therefore the difference of space-time be-
tween WS and VMIN is completely explained by working-set "overshoot-
ing" in its estimates of locality at the transitions between program phases. 
Indeed, VMIN unloads pages toward the ends of their phases after it sees 
they will not be referenced in the next phase. Working set cannot tell this 
until time T after the last reference. Experiments by Alan Smith to clip off 
these overshoots showed only a minor gain42. We concluded that it would be 
unlikely that anyone would find a non-lookahead policy that was noticeably 
better than working set. 
Thus, by 1976, our theory was validated. It demonstrated our original 
postulate: that working set memory management would prevent thrashing 
and would allow system throughput to be close to its optimum. 

The Locality 
Principle 
55 
The problem of thrashing, which originally motivated the working set 
theory, has occurred in other contexts as well as storage management. It can 
happen in any system where contention for a shared resource can overwhelm 
the processes' abilities to move forward. It was observed in the first packet-
radio communication system, ALOHA, in the late 1960s. In this system, 
the various contenders could overwhelm the shared spectrum by retransmit-
ting packets when they discovered their transmissions being inadvertently 
jammed by other transmitters1. A similar problem occurred in the Ether-
net, where it was solved by the "back-off" protocol that makes a transmitter 
wait a random time before retrying a transmission35. A similar problem oc-
curred in database systems with the two-phase commit protocol45. Under 
this protocol, transactions try to collect locks on the records they will up-
date; but if they find any record already locked, they release all their locks 
and try again. When too many transactions try to collect locks at the same 
time, they spend most of their time gathering and releasing locks. 
Although it is not critical to the theory and conclusions above, it is 
worth noting that the working-set analysis applies even when processes 
share pages. Among its design objectives, Multics supported multiprocess 
(multithreaded) computations. The notions of locality and working sets had 
to apply in this environment. The obvious approach was to define a com-
putation's working set as the union of its constituent process working sets. 
This approach did not work well in the standard paging system architec-
ture (Fig. 4.1) because the use bits that had to be OR'd together were in 
different page tables and a high overhead would be needed to locate them. 
Fortunately, the idea of capability-based addressing, a locality-enhancing 
architecture articulated by colleagues Dennis and Van Horn in 196622, of-
fered a solution (Fig. 4.9). Working sets could be measured from the use 
bits of the set of object descriptors. 
The two-level mapping inherent in capability addressing is a principle 
in its own right. It solved a host of sharing problems in virtual memories 
of multiprocess operating systems23. It stimulated a line of extraordinar-
ily fault tolerant commercial systems known as "capability machines" in 
the 1970s47'49. The architecture was adopted into the run time environ-
ments of object oriented programming systems. The principle was applied 
to solving the problem of sharing objects in the Internet29. Thus the situa-
tions in which working sets and localities of multithreaded and distributed 
computations apply are ubiquitous today. 

56 
Peter J. Denning 
0T[d1] 
H 
P U B 
OT[d2] 
Fig. 4.9. 
Two-level mapping enables sharing of objects without prior arrangements 
among the users. It begins with assigning a unique (over all time) identifying handle h 
to an object; objects can be of any size. Object h has a single descriptor specifying its 
status in memory: present (P = 0 or 1), used (U = 0 or 1), base address (B, defined 
only when P = 1), and length (L). The descriptors of all known objects are stored in a 
descriptor table DT, a hash table with the handle as a lookup key. When present, the 
object is assigned a block of contiguous addresses in main memory. Each computational 
process operates in its own memory domain (such as d\ or d2), which is specified by an 
object table (OT), an adaptation of the page table (Fig. 4.1). The object table, indexed 
by an object number (such as i or j), retrieves an object's access code (such as rw) and 
handle. The memory mapping unit takes an address (i,x), meaning line x of object i, 
and retrieves the handle from the object table; then it looks up the descriptor for the 
handle in the descriptor table; finally it forms the actual memory address b + x provided 
that x does not exceed the object's size a. Any number of processes can share h, simply 
by adding entries pointing to h as convenient in their object tables. Those processes can 
use any local name (i or j) they desire. If the system needs to relocate the object in 
memory, it can do so by updating the descriptor (in the descriptor table). All processes 
will get the correct mapping information immediately. Working sets can be measured 
from the use bits ([/) in the descriptor table. 
Appendix 1 summarises milestones in the development of the locality-
idea. 
4.4. Adoption of Locality Principle (1967-present) 
The locality principle was adopted as an idea almost immediately by oper-
ating systems, database, and hardware architects. But it did not remain a 
pure idea for long. It was adopted into practice, in ever widening circles: 
• In virtual memory to organise caches for address translation and 
to design the replacement algorithms. 
• In data caches for CPUs, originally as mainframes and now as 
microchips. 

The Locality 
Principle 
57 
• In buffers between main memory and secondary memory devices. 
• In buffers between computers and networks. 
• In video boards to accelerate graphics displays. 
• In modules that implement the information-hiding principle. 
• In accounting and event logs in that monitor activities within a 
system. 
• In alias lists that associate longer names or addresses with short 
nicknames. 
• In the "most recently used" object lists of applications. 
• In web browsers to hold recent web pages. 
• In search engines to find the most relevant responses to queries. 
• In classification systems that cluster related data elements into 
similarity classes. 
• In spam filters, which infer which categories of email are in the 
user's locality space and which are not. 
• In "spread spectrum" video streaming that bypasses network con-
gestion and reduces the apparent distance to the video server. 
• In "edge servers" to hold recent web pages accessed by anyone in 
an organisation or geographical region. 
• In the field of computer forensics to infer criminal motives and 
intent by correlating event records in many caches. 
• In the field of network science by defining hierarchies of self-similar 
locality structures within complex power-law networks. 
Appendix 2 summarises milestones in the adoption of locality in systems. 
The locality principle is today considered as a fundamental principle for 
systems design. 
4.5. Modern Model of Locality: Context Awareness 
As the uses of locality expanded into more areas, our understanding of 
locality has evolved beyond the original idea of clustering of reference. To-
day's understanding embraces four key ideas that enable awareness of, and 
meaningful response to, the context in which software is situated (Fig. 4.10): 
• An observer; 
• Neighbourhoods: One or more sets of objects that are most rel-
evant to the observer at any given time; 
• Inference: A method of identifying the most relevant objects by 
monitoring the observer's actions and interactions and other infor-

58 
Peter J. Denning 
Fig. 4.10. 
The modern view of locality is a means of inferring the context of an observer 
using software, so that the software can dynamically adapt its actions to produce optimal 
behaviour for the observer. 
mation about the observer contained in the environment; and 
• Optimal actions: An expectation that the observer will complete 
work in the shortest time if neighbourhood objects are ready ac-
cessible in nearby caches. 
The observer is the agent who is trying to accomplish tasks with the help 
of software, and who places expectations on its function and performance. 
In most cases, the observer is the user who interacts with software. In 
some cases, especially when a program is designed to compute a precise, 
mathematical model, the observer can be built into the software itself. 
A neighbourhood is a group of objects standing in a particular rela-
tion to an observer, and valued in some way by the observer. The historical 
example is the locality set associated with each phase of a program's execu-
tion; the observer is the process evoked by the program. Modern examples of 
neighbourhoods include email correspondents, non-spam email, colleagues, 
teammates, objects used in a project, favourite objects, user's web, items 
of production, texts, and directories. 
Some neighbourhoods can be known by explicit declarations; for exam-
ple a user's file directory, address book, or web pages. But most neigh-
bourhoods can only be inferred by monitoring the event sequences of an 
observer's actions and interactions. The event sequences can be measured 

The Locality Principle 
59 
either within the software with which the observer is interacting, or outside 
that software, in the run-time system. 
Inference can be any reasonable method that estimates the content of 
neighbourhoods, or at least the most relevant parts. The original work-
ing estimated locality sets by observing page reference events in a back-
ward looking window. Modern inference is by a variety of methods such 
as Google's counting of incoming hyperlinks to a web page, connectionist 
networks that learn patterns after being presented with many examples, or 
Bayesian spam filters. 
The optimal actions are taken by the system or the software on behalf 
of the observer. As with the data collection to support neighbourhood in-
ference, these actions can come either from inside the software with which 
the observer is interacting, or from outside that software, in the run-time 
system. The matrix below shows four quadrants corresponding to the four 
combinations of data collection and locus of action just mentioned. 
Locus 
of 
Adaptive 
Action 
Inside 
outside 
Origin of Data for Inference 
Inside 
Amazon.com, 
Bayesian spam filter 
Linkers and loaders 
Outside 
Semantic web 
Google 
Working sets, 
Ethernet load control 
Examples of software are named in each quadrant and are summarised 
below. 
• Amazon.com; Bayesian spam filters. 
This system collects 
data about user purchasing histories and recommends other pur-
chases that resemble the user's previous purchases, or purchases by 
other, similar users. Bayesian spam filters gather data about which 
emails the user considers relevant and then block irrelevant emails. 
(Data collection inside, optimal actions inside.) 
• Semantic web; Google. Semantic web is a set of declarations 
of structural relationships that constitute context of objects and 
their connections. Programs read and act on it. Google gathers 
data from the Web and uses it to rank pages that appear to be 
most relevant to a keyword query posed by user. (Data collection 
outside, optimal actions inside.) 

60 
Peter J. Denning 
• Linkers and Loaders. These workhorse systems gather library 
modules mentioned by a source program and link them together 
into a self-contained executable module. The libraries are neigh-
bourhoods of the source program. (Data collection inside, optimal 
action outside.) 
• Working sets, Ethernet load controls. Virtual memory sys-
tems measure working sets and guarantee programs enough space 
to contain them, thereby preventing thrashing. Ethernet prevents 
the contention resolving protocol from getting overloaded by mak-
ing competing transactions wait longer for retries if load is heavy. 
(Data collection outside, optimal action outside.) 
In summary, the modern principle of locality is that observers operate 
in one or more neighbourhoods that can be inferred from dynamic action 
sequences and static structural declarations. Systems can optimise the ob-
server's productivity by adapting to the observer's neighbourhoods, which 
they can estimate by distance metrics or other inferences. 
4.6. Future Uses of Locality Principle 
Locality principles are certain to remain at the forefront of systems design, 
analysis, and performance. This is because locality flows from human cog-
nitive and coordinative behaviour. The mind focuses on a small part of the 
sensory field and can work most quickly on the objects of its attention. 
People organise their social and intellectual systems into neighbourhoods 
of related objects, and they gather the most useful objects of each neigh-
bourhood close around them to minimise the time and work of using them. 
These behaviours are transferred into the computational systems we de-
sign and into the expectations users have about how their systems should 
interact with them. 
Here are seven modern areas offering challenging research problems that 
locality may be instrumental in solving. 
Architecture. Computer architects have heavily exploited the local-
ity principle to boost the performance of chips and systems. Putting cache 
memory near the CPU, either on board the same chip or on a neighbour-
ing chip, has enabled modern CPUs to pass the 1 GHz speed mark. Lo-
cality within threaded instruction sequences is being exploited by a new 
generation of multi-core processor chips. The "system on a chip" concept 
places neighbouring functions on the same chip to significantly decrease de-
lays of communicating between components. Locality is used to compress 

The Locality 
Principle 
61 
animated sequences of pictures by detecting the common neighbourhood 
behind a sequence and transmitting it once and then transmitting the dif-
ferences. Architects will continue to examine locality carefully to find new 
ways to speed up chips, communications, and systems. 
Caching. The locality principle is useful wherever there is an advantage 
in reducing the apparent distance from a process to the objects it can access. 
Objects in the process's neighbourhood are kept in a local cache with fast 
access time. The performance acceleration of a cache generally justifies 
the modest investment in the cache storage. Novel forms of caching have 
sprung up in the Internet. One prominent example is edge servers that store 
copies of web objects near their users. Another example is the clustered 
databases built by search engines (like Google) to instantly retrieve relevant 
objects from the same neighbourhoods as the asker. Similar capabilities are 
available in MacOS 10.4 (Tiger) and will be in Windows 2006 to speed up 
finding relevant objects. 
Bayesian Inference. A growing number of inference systems exploit 
Bayes's principle of conditional probability to compute the most likely in-
ternal (hidden) states of a system given observable data about the system. 
Spam filters, for example, use it to infer the email user's mental rules for 
classifying certain objects as spam. Connectionist networks use it for learn-
ing: the internal states that abstract from desired input-output pairs shown 
to the network; the network gradually acquires a capability for new action. 
Bayesian inference is an exploitation of locality because it infers a neigh-
bourhood given observations of what a user or process is doing. 
Forensics. The burgeoning field of computer forensics owes much of its 
success to the ubiquity of caches. They are literally everywhere in an oper-
ating systems and applications. By recovering evidence from these caches, 
forensics experts can reconstruct (infer) an amazing amount of a criminal's 
motives and intent24. Criminals who erase data files are still not safe be-
cause experts use advanced signal-processing methods to recover the faint 
magnetic traces of the most recent files from the disk11. Learning to draw 
valid inferences from data in a computer's caches, and from correlated data 
in caches in other computers with which the subject has communicated, is 
a challenging research problem. 
Web Based Business Processes. The principle of locality has per-
vaded the design of web based business systems, which allow buyers and 
sellers to engage in transactions using web interfaces to sophisticated 
database systems. Amazon.com illustrates how a system can infer "book 
interest neighbourhoods" of customers and (successfully) recommend ad-

62 
Peter J. Denning 
ditional sales. Many businesses employ customer relationship management 
(CRM) systems that infer "customer interest neighbourhoods" and allow 
the company to provide better, more personalised service. Database, net-
work, server, memory, and other caches optimise the performance of these 
systems34. 
Context Aware Software. A growing number of software designers 
are coming to believe that most software failures can be traced to the inabil-
ity of software to be aware of and act on the context in which it operates. 
The modern locality principle is beginning to enable software designers to 
reconstruct context and thereby to be consistently more reliable, depend-
able, usable, safe, and secure. 
Network Science. Inspired by A. L. Barabasi, many scientists have 
begun applying statistical mechanics to large random networks, typically 
finding that the distribution of node connections is power law with degree 
-2 to -3 in most cases4'18. These networks have been found to be self-similar, 
meaning that if all neighbourhoods (nodes within a maximum distance of 
each other) are collapsed to single nodes, the resulting network has the 
same power distribution as the original43. The idea that localities are nat-
ural in complex systems is not new; in 1976 Madison and Batson reported 
that program localities have self-similar sub-localities32, and in 1977 P. J. 
Courtois applied it to cluster similar states of complex systems to simplify 
their performance analyses13. The locality principle may offer new under-
standings of the structure of complex networks. 
Researchers looking for challenging problems can find many in these 
areas and can exploit the principle of locality to solve them. 
References 
1. Abramson, N., "The ALOHA System-Another Alternative for Computer 
Communication" 1970, 281-285. (Proc. AFIPS Fall Joint Computer Confer-
ence 37, 1970) 
2. Aho, A. V., P. J. Denning, and J. D. Ullman., "Principles of optimal page 
replacement" J ACM 18, (Jan 1971), 80-93. 
3. Badel, M., E. Gelenbe, J. Lenfant, and D. Potier., "Adaptive optimization 
of a time sharing system's performance" Proc. IEEE 63, (1975) 958-965. 
4. Barabasi, A. L., Linked: The New Science of Networks, (Perseus Books), 
2002. 
5. Belady, L. A., "A study of replacement algorithms for virtual storage com-
puters" IBM Systems J. 5(2), (1966), 78-101. 
6. Blake, R., "Optimal control of thrashing" 1984, 1-10. (ACM SIGMETRICS 
Proc. Conf. on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, 1984) 
7. Brawn, B., and F. G. Gustavson., "Program behavior in a paging 

The Locality 
Principle 
63 
environment" Thompson 1968, 1019-1032. (Proc. AFIPS Fall Joint Com-
puter Conference 33, 1968) 
8. Buzen, J. P., "Optimising the degree of multiprogramming in demand pag-
ing systems", 1971, 139-140 (Proc. IEEE COMPCON, Sep 1971). 
9. Buzen, J. P., "Fundamental laws of computer systems performance" Acta 
Informatica 7(2), (1976), 167-182. 
10. Carr, J., and J. Hennessy., "WSCLOCK - a simple and effective algorithm 
for virtual memory management" 1981, 87-95. (ACM SIGOPS Proc. 8th 
Symp. on Operating Systems Principles, 1981) 
11. Carrier, Brian., File System Forensic Analysis, (Addison Wesley), 2005. 
12. Corbato, F. J., "A paging experiment with the Multics system" In Honor 
of P. M. Morse, K. U. Ingard, Ed. MIT Press, (1969), 217-228. 
13. Courtois, P. J., Decomposability, (Academic Press), 1977. 
14. Denning, P. J., "The working set model for program behavior" ACM Com-
munications 11(5), (May 1968), 323-333. 
15. Denning, P. J., "Thrashing: Its causes and prevent" Thompson 1968, 915-
922. (Proc. AFIPS Fall Joint Computer Conference 33, 1968) 
16. Denning, P. J., "Virtual memory" ACM Computing Surveys 2(3), (Sept 
1970), 153-189. 
17. Denning, P. J., "Working sets past and present" IEEE Transactions 
on 
Software Engineering 6(1), (January 1980), 64-84. 
18. Denning, P. J., "Network Laws" ACM Communications 
47, (Nov 2004), 
15-20. 
19. Denning, P. J., and S. C. Schwartz., "Properties of the working set model" 
ACM Communications 
15, (March 1972), 191-198. 
20. Denning, P. J., K. C. Kahn, J. Laroudier, D. Potier, and R. Suri., "Optimal 
multiprogramming" Acta Informatica 7(2), (1976), 197-216. 
21. Denning, P. J., and D. R. Slutz., "Generalised working sets for segment 
reference strings" ACM Communications 21(9), (September 1978), 750-759. 
22. Dennis, J. B., and E. C. van Horn., "Programming semantics for multipro-
grammed computations" ACM Communications 
9(3), (March 1966), 143-
155. 
23. Fabry, R. S., "Capability-Based Addressing" ACM Communications 
17(7), 
(July 1974), 403-412. 
24. Farmer, D., and W. Venema. Forensic Discovery, (Addison Wesley), 2004. 
25. Ferrari, D., "Improving locality by critical working sets" ACM 
Communi-
cations 17, (Nov 1974), 614-620. 
26. Gelenbe, E., J. Lenfant, and D. Potier., "Analyse d'un algorithme de ges-
tion de memoire centrale et d'un disque de pagination" Acta Informatica 3, 
(1974), 321-345. 
27. Graham, G. S., and P. Denning., "Multiprogramming and program behav-
ior" 1974, 1-8. (Proc ACM SIGMETRICS Conference on Measurement and 
Evaluation, 1974)) 
28. Hatfield, D., and J. Gerald., "Program restructuring for virtual memory" 
IBM Syst. J. 10, (1971), 168-192. 
29. Kahn, R., and R. Wilensky., "A framework for distributed digital object 

64 
Peter J. Denning 
services" Corporation for National Research Initiatives, (1995) http://www. 
cnri.reston.va.us/k-w.html. 
30. Kilburn, T., D. B. G. Edwards, M. J. Lanigan, F. H. Sumner., "One-level 
storage system" IRE Transactions EC-11, (April 1962), 223-235. 
31. Leroudier, J., and D. Potier., "Principles of optimality for multiprogram-
ming" 1976, 211-218. (Proc. Int'l Symp. Computer Performance Model-
ing, Measurement, and Evaluation, ACM SIGMETRICS and IFIP WG 7.3, 
March 1976) 
32. Madison, A. W., and A. Batson., "Characteristics of program localities" 
ACM Communications 
19(5), (May 1976), 285-294. 
33. Mattson, R. L., J. Gecsei, D. R. Slutz, I. L. Traiger., "Evaluation techniques 
for storage hierarchies" IBM Systems J. 9(2), (1970), 78-117. 
34. Menasce, D., and V. Almeida., Scaling for E-Business: Technologies, Mod-
els, Performance, and Capacity Planning, (Prentice-Hall), 2000. 
35. Metcalfe, R. M., and D. Boggs., "Ethernet: Distributed packet switching for 
local networks" ACM Communications 19(7), (July 1976), 395-404. 
36. Morris, J. B., "Demand paging through the use of working sets on the 
MANIAC IF ACM Communications 15, (Oct 1972), 867-872. 
37. Prieve, B., and R. S. Fabry., "VMIN - An optimal variable space page 
replacement algorithm" ACM Communications 
19, (May 1976), 295-297. 
38. Roberts, L. G., "ALHOA packet system with and without slots and capture" 
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 5(2), (April 1975), 28-
42. 
39. Rodriguez-Rosell, J., and J. P. Dupuy., "The design, implementation, and 
evaluation of a working set dispatcher" ACM Communications 
16, (Apr 
1973), 247-253. 
40. Sayre, D., "Is automatic folding of programs efficient enough to displace 
manual?" ACM Communications 
13, (Dec 1969), 656-660. 
41. Shore, J. E., "The lazy repairman and other models: performance col-
lapse due to overhead in simple, single-server queueing systems" 1982, 217-
224. (ACM SIGMETRICS Proc. Intl. Symp. on Performance Measurement, 
Modeling, and Evaluation, May 1982) 
42. Smith, A. J., "A modified working set paging algorithm" IEEE Trans. Com-
puting 25, (Sep 1976), 907-914. 
43. Song, C , S. Havlin, and H. Makse., "Self-Similarity of Complex Networks" 
Nature 433, (Jan 2005), 392-395. 
44. Spirn, J., Program Behavior: Models and Measurements, (Elsevier Computer 
Science), 1977. 
45. Thomasian, A., "Two-phase locking performance and its thrashing behav-
ior" ACM Trans. Database Systems 18(4), (December 1993), 579-625. 
46. Wilkes, M. V., "Slave memories and dynamic storage allocation" 
IEEE 
Transactions Computers 14, (April 1965), 270-271. 
47. Wilkes, M. V., Time Sharing Computer Systems, (Elsevier), 1972. 
48. Wilkes, M. V., "The dynamics of paging" Computer J 16, (Feb 1973), 4-9. 
49. Wilkes, M. V., and R. Needham., The Cambridge CAP Computer and Its 
Operating System, (Elsevier North-Holland), 1979. 

The Locality 
Principle 
65 
Appendix 1 — Milestones in Development of Locality Idea 
1959 
1961 
1965 
1966 
1966 
1968 
1969 
1970 
1970-71 
1971 
1972 
1970-74 
1976 
1976 
Atlas operating system includes first virtual memory; a "learning algo-
rithm" replaces pages referenced farthest in the future [30]. 
IBM Stretch supercomputer uses spatial locality to prefetch instructions 
and follow possible branches. 
Wilkes introduces slave memory, later known as CPU cache, to hold most 
recently used pages and significantly accelerate effective CPU speed [46]. 
Belady at IBM Research publishes comprehensive study of page replace-
ment algorithms, showing that those with use bits outperform others and 
proposing an initial definition of locality to explain why [5]. Corbato recon-
firms for Multics [12]. 
Denning proposes working set idea: the pages that must be retained in main 
memory are those referenced during a window of length T preceding the 
current time. In 1967 he postulates that working set memory management 
will prevent thrashing [14,15,17]. 
Denning shows analytically why thrashing precipitates suddenly with any 
increase above a critical threshold of number of programs in memory [15]. 
Belady and Denning use term locality for the program behaviour property 
working sets measure. 
Sayre, Brawn, and Gustavson at IBM demonstrate that programs with good 
locality are easy to design and cause virtual memory systems to perform 
better than a manually design paging schedule [7, 40]. 
Denning gathers all extant results for virtual memory into Computing 
Surveys paper "virtual memory" that was widely used in operating sys-
tems courses. This was first coherent scientific framework for designing and 
analysing dynamic memories [16]. 
Mattson, Gecsei, Slutz, and Traiger of IBM publish "stack algorithms", 
modelling a large class of popular replacement policies including LRU and 
MIN and offering surprisingly simple algorithms for calculating their pag-
ing functions in virtual memory [33]. Aho, Denning, and Ullman prove a 
principle of optimality for page replacement [2]. 
Hatfield and Gerald demonstrate compiler code generation methods for 
preserving locality in executable files [28]. Ferrari shows even greater gains 
when working sets measure locality [25]. 
Spirn and Denning conclude that locality sequence (phase-transition) be-
haviour is the most accurate description of locality [44]. 
Abramson, Metcalfe, and Roberts report thrashing in Aloha and Ethernet 
communication systems; load control protocols prevent it [1,35,38], 
Buzen, Courtois, Denning, Gelenbe, and others integrate memory manage-
ment into queuing network models, demonstrating that thrashing is caused 
by the paging disk transitioning into the bottleneck with increasing load 
[3,8,9,13,20,26,31]. System throughput is maximum when the average work-
ing set space-time is minimum [9,27]. 
Madison and Batson demonstrate that locality is present in symbolic execu-
tion strings of programs, concluding that locality is part of human cognitive 
processes transmitted to programs [32]. They show that locality sequences 
have self-similar substructures. 

66 
Peter J. Denning 
1976 
Prieve and Fabry demonstrate VMIN, the optimal variable-space replace-
ment policy [37]; it has identical page faults as working set but lower space-
time accumulation at phase transitions [17]. 
1978 
Denning and Slutz define generalised working sets; objects are local when 
their memory retention cost is less than their recovery costs. The GWS 
models the stack algorithms, space-time variations of working sets, and all 
variable-space optimal replacement algorithms [21]. 
1980 
Denning gathers the results of over 200 virtual-memory researchers and 
concludes that working set memory management with a single system-wide 
window size is as close to optimal as can practically be realised [17]. 
1981 
Carr and Hennessy offer effective software implementation of working set 
by applying sampling windows in CLOCK algorithm [10]. 
1982-84 
Shore reports thrashing in large class of queuing systems [41]. Blake offers 
optimal controls of thrashing [6]. 
1993 
Thomasian reports thrashing in two-phase locking systems [45], 

The Locality 
Principle 
67 
Appendix 2 — Milestones in Adoption of Locality 
1961 
1964 
1965-
1969 
1968 
1969-
1972 
1972 
1978 
1974-79 
1981 
early 
1980s 
late 
1980s 
1987-
1990 
Early 
1990s 
1990-
1998 
1993 
1995 
1998 
IBM Stretch computer uses spatial locality for instruction lookahead. 
Major computer manufacturers (Burroughs, General Electric, RCA, Uni-
vac but not IBM) introduce virtual memory with their "third generation 
computing systems". Thrashing is a significant performance problem. 
Nelson, Sayre, and Belady, at IBM Research built first virtual machine 
operating system; they experiment with virtual machines, contribute sig-
nificant insights into performance of virtual memory, mitigate thrashing 
through load control, and lay groundwork for later IBM virtual machine 
architectures. 
IBM introduces cache memory in 360 series. Multics adopts "clock", an 
RLU variant, to protect recently used pages. 
Operating systems researchers demonstrate experimentally that the work-
ing set policy works as advertised. They show how to group code segments 
on pages to maximise spatial locality and thus temporal locality during 
execution [36, 39, 48]. 
IBM introduces virtual machines and virtual memory into 370 series. Bayer 
formally introduces B-tree for organising large files on disks to minimise 
access time by improving spatial locality. Parnas introduces information 
hiding, a way of localising access to variables within modules. 
First BSD Unix includes virtual memory with load controls inspired by 
working set principle; propagates into Sun OS (1984), Mach (1985), and 
Mac OS X (1999). 
IBM System R, an experimental relational database system, uses LRU man-
aged record caches and B-trees. 
IBM introduces disk controllers containing caches so that database systems 
can get records without a disk access; controllers use LRU but do not cache 
records involved in sequential file accesses. 
Chip makers start providing data caches in addition to instruction caches, 
to speed up access to data and reduce contention at memory interface. 
Application developers add "most recent files" list to desktop applications, 
allowing users to more quickly resume interrupted tasks. 
Microsoft and IBM develop OS/2 operating systems for PCs, with full 
multitasking and working set managed virtual memory. Microsoft splits 
from IBM, transforms OS/2 into Windows NT. 
Computer forensics starts to emerge as a field; it uses locality and signal 
processing to recover the most recently deleted files; and it uses multiple 
system and network caches to reconstruction actions of users. 
Beginning with Archie, then Gopher, Lykos, AltaVista, and finally Google, 
search engines compile caches that enable finding relevant documents from 
anywhere in the Internet very quickly. 
Mosaic (later Netscape) browser uses a cache to store recently accessed web 
pages for quick retrieval by the browser. 
Kahn and Wilensky show a method of digital object identifiers based on 
the locality-enhancing two-level address mapping principle. 
Akamai and other companies provide local web caches ("edge servers") to 
speed up Internet access and reduce traffic at sources. 

This page is intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 5 
A Simulation-Based Performance Analysis of 
Epoch Task Scheduling in Distributed Processors 
Helen Karatza 
Department of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 
54124 Thessaloniki, Greece 
E-mail: 
karatza@csd.auth.gr 
Efficient scheduling of parallel jobs on distributed processors is essential 
for good performance. In this article parallel jobs that consist of indepen-
dent tasks are considered and a special type of task scheduling referred 
to as epoch task scheduling is studied. With this policy processor queues 
are rearranged according to the Shortest Task First (STF) method only 
at the end of predefined intervals. The time interval between successive 
queue rearrangements is called an epoch. The objective is to examine 
if epoch scheduling can perform well as compared to the STF method, 
i.e. reduce significantly the number of queue rearrangements and achieve 
fairer service than that of STF. A simulation model is used to address 
performance issues associated with epoch scheduling. Simulated results 
indicate that there are cases where epoch scheduling can succeed in these 
pursuits. 
5.1. Introduction 
It is still not clear how to efficiently schedule parallel jobs in distributed 
systems. To schedule them, it is necessary to divide programs into tasks, 
assign the tasks to distributed processors and then schedule them on proces-
sors. Good scheduling policies can maximise both system and application 
performance, and avoid unnecessary delays. Many papers study distributed 
system scheduling algorithms. The reference section lists a few of t h e m 1 - 1 8 . 
Most research into distributed system scheduling policies focuses on 
improving performance metrics where scheduling overhead is assumed to 
be negligible. However, the overhead can seriously degrade performance. 
Also, fairness among individual jobs is often not considered. 
69 

70 
Helen 
Karatza 
FCFS (First Come First Served) is the simplest scheduling algorithm. It 
is fair to individual jobs but often produces sub-optimal performance and 
it incurs no overhead. Many scheduling algorithms have been proposed to 
achieve higher performance by considering information regarding individual 
requests. 
STF (Shortest Task First or Shortest Time First) is a non-preemptive 
algorithm that minimizes average delay in the case of single task jobs. 
One disadvantage of STF is unfairness: some tasks may starve or suffer 
inordinate queuing delays particularly at high system loads. Since short 
tasks are given priority over long tasks, it is possible to starve a task if its 
service time is very large in comparison to the mean service time. 
When parallel jobs consisting of independent tasks are assigned to dis-
tributed processors, the performance of STF method varies widely depend-
ing on the workload. This is because STF may assign different priorities 
to tasks within the same job. This can cause large synchronisation delays 
among sibling tasks4'7. 
To implement STF, a priori knowledge about task service times is 
needed. This requirement causes implementation problems since a priori 
knowledge is often not available in practice. However, policies like this are 
often studied to determine how much benefit is possible if service times are 
known in advance. STF is often used as a yardstick to compare performance 
of other scheduling policies. 
Another disadvantage of STF is that it requires a considerable amount 
of overhead because processor queues are rearranged each time new tasks 
are added. 
To address the problems of unfairness and queue rearrangement over-
head, this article studies a version of STF called Epoch STF scheduling. 
Processor queues are rearranged only at the end of epochs, and then the 
scheduler recalculates the priorities of all tasks in the system queues using 
the STF criterion. 
This type of scheduling is different from epoch scheduling that is studied 
in McCann and Zahorjan14 where co-scheduling is considered and all nodes 
are reallocated to jobs at each reallocation point. 
Other papers that study epoch scheduling include Karatza8-11. In 
Karatza8 a closed queuing network model is considered with various de-
grees of multiprogramming, while in this paper an open queuing network 
model is studied with various job arrival rates. In Karatza9 tasks of a job 
perform clusters at different processors, where the tasks in each cluster 
have to be executed in sequence one after the other. In Karatza9 cluster 

A Simulation-Based 
Performance 
Analysis of Epoch Task Scheduling 
71 
scheduling is examined. In this chapter, all tasks of a job are independent 
without any precedence constraints and scheduling occurs at the task level. 
In Karatza10 jobs are not parallel and therefore scheduling occurs at the 
job level. Epoch scheduling of parallel jobs consisting of independent tasks 
is also examined in Karatza11 where the probabilistic task routing is em-
ployed and tasks with exponential service demands are considered. This 
research is an extension of Karatza11 in that it also employs the "join the 
shortest queue" routing criterion and furthermore it examines tasks with 
high service demand variability. 
The goal of this research is to investigate whether epoch STF schedul-
ing can combine good performance, significant reduction in the number of 
queue rearrangements and fairer service as compared to STF. Performance 
is examined for various workloads. To our knowledge, such an analysis of 
epoch task scheduling has not appeared in the research literature for this 
type of system operating with our workload models. 
The structure of this chapter is as follows: Section 5.2 specifies system 
and workload models, describes task routing and task scheduling strategies, 
presents the performance metrics and also describes model implementation 
and input parameters. In Sec. 5.3 experimental results and performance 
analysis are presented. The last section contains conclusions and suggestions 
for further research. 
5.2. Model and Methodology 
The technique used to evaluate the performance of the scheduling disciplines 
is experimentation using a synthetic workload simulation. 
5.2.1. System 
and Workload 
Models 
An open queuing network model of a distributed system is considered 
(Fig. 5.1). Jobs arrive to the system with mean arrival rate A. P — 16 
homogeneous processors are available, each serving its own queue. 
Jobs consist of a set of n > 1 tasks that can be run in parallel. The 
number of tasks that a job consists of is this job's degree of parallelism. 
Each task is assigned to a processor queue according to the routing policy 
employed. Tasks are processed according to the current scheduling method. 
No migration or pre-emption is permitted. More than one tasks of the 
same job may be assigned to the same processor. On completing execution, 
a task waits at the join point for sibling tasks of the same job to complete 

72 
Helen 
Karatza 
FCFS 
STF 
Epoch=5 
Epoch=10 
Epoch=15 
>( 
X 
ta 
sp 
1 
-
/ A II 
2\ 
lit 
\ 
T 
Fig. 5.1. The queuing network model. FCFS, STF, Epoch=5, Epoch=10, Epoch=15 
are the scheduling methods, and A is the job mean arrival rate. 
execution. Therefore, task synchronisation is required which can seriously 
degrade parallel performance. 
The workload considered here is characterised by three parameters: the 
distribution of job arrival, the distribution of the number of tasks per job, 
and the distribution of task service demand. 
Distribution of Job Arrival. Job inter-arrival times are exponential ran-
dom variables with a mean of 1/A. 
Distribution of the Number of Tasks per Job. The number of tasks per 
job is uniformly distributed in the range of [1..P]. The mean number of 
tasks per job is equal to the rj = (1 + P)/2. 
Distribution of Task Service Demand. The impact of the variability in 
task service demand on system performance is examined. The following 
cases with regard to task service demand distribution are examined (/i rep-
resents the mean processor service rate): a) task service demands are ex-
ponentially distributed with a mean of l/fi, and b) task service demands 
have a Branching Erlang distribution with two stages. The coefficient of 
variation is C, where C > 1 and the mean is l//i. 
5.2.2. Task Routing 
Methods 
Probabilistic Routing. With this method, a task is dispatched randomly to 
processors with equal probability. 
Shortest Queue Routing. This policy assigns each ready task to the 
currently shortest processor queue. 

A Simulation-Based 
Performance 
Analysis of Epoch Task Scheduling 
73 
5.2.3. Scheduling 
Strategies 
First-Come-First-Served 
(FCFS). With this strategy, tasks are scheduled 
in a queue in the order of their arrival. 
Shortest-Task-First 
(STF). This policy assumes that a priori knowledge 
about a task is available in form of service demand. When such knowledge 
is available, tasks in the processor queues are ordered in a decreasing order 
of service demand. 
Epoch STF (ESTF) - Epoch = x. With this policy, processor queues are 
rearranged only at the end of epochs using the STF criterion. The size of 
an epoch is x. 
5.2.4. Performance 
Metrics 
Response time of a random job is defined as the interval of time from the 
dispatching of this job tasks to processor queues to service completion of 
the last task of this job. Parameters used in simulation computations are 
shown in Table 5.1. -RTrepresents overall performance, while MRTprovides 
an indication of fairness in individual job service. 
5.2.5. Model Implementation 
and Input 
Parameters 
The queuing network model described above is implemented with discrete 
event simulation using the independent replication method. For every mean 
value, a 95% confidence interval was evaluated. All confidence intervals were 
found to be less than 5% of the mean values. 
Mean processor service time is chosen as l//tx = 1. Since there are on 
average 8.5 tasks per parallel job ((P + l)/2), if all processors are busy, 
then an average of P/8.5 — 1.88235 parallel jobs can be served each unit 
of time. This implies that it must be chosen A < 1.88235, and consequently 
1/A 
> 
0.531. For this reason it has been set 1/A = 0.62, 0.60, 0.58, 
0.56, which corresponds to A = 1.613, 1.667, 1.724, 1.786. Mean processor 
utilisation is given by the following formula: 
For the given values of [i and A the expected mean processor utilisation is 
given in Table 5.2. 
Epoch size is 5, 10, and 15. Epoch size 5 has been chosen as a starting 
point for the experiments because the mean processor service time is equal 
to 1, and also because with this epoch size NQR is significantly smaller 

74 
Helen 
Karatza 
Table 5.1. 
Notations 
Parameter 
A 
1//* 
>? 
C 
U 
RT 
MRT 
NQR 
E 
DRT 
DNQR 
MRT 
Ratio 
Definition 
Mean job arrival rate 
Mean task service demand 
Mean number of tasks per job 
Coefficient of variation of task service demand 
Mean processor Utilisation 
Mean Response Time 
Maximum Response Time 
Number of Queue Rearrangements 
Estimation error in service time 
Relative (%) decrease in RT when the STF or the ESTF 
method is employed instead of FCFS 
Relative (%) decrease in NQR when ESTF scheduling is 
employed instead of the STF policy 
The ratio of MRT in the STF or ESTF scheduling case over 
MRT in the FCFS case 
Table 5.2. 
Mean pro-
cessor utilisation. 
1/A 
0.62 
0.60 
0.58 
0.56 
U 
0.8569 
0.8856 
0.9106 
0.9488 
than in the STF case. Therefore it was expected that larger epoch sizes 
would result in even smaller NQR. 
Experiments for C — 1, 2, and 4 have been conducted. Also, service 
time estimation error E = ±10% and ±20% has been examined. 
5.3. Simulation Results and Performance Analysis 
Results of the probabilistic and shortest queue routing are presented next. 
Simulation experiments accessed the impact of service time estimation er-
ror on the performance of the scheduling methods in both routing cases. 
The simulation results (not shown here) indicated that estimation error in 
processor service time slightly affected performance when E = 10, 20. This 
is in accordance with other results reported in the literature which are re-
lated to estimation of service time.3'7 For this reason results only for E = 0 
are included. 

A Simulation-Based 
Performance 
Analysis of Epoch Task Scheduling 
75 
5.3.1. Probabilistic 
Routing 
As it is shown in Figs. 5.2 and 5.3 the worst performance for C = 1 appears 
with the FCFS policy because this method yields the highest mean response 
time. It is obvious that with FCFS scheduling, tasks with small service 
demand get blocked behind a task that has a large service demand and is 
waiting in the queue. Blocking behind a large task introduces inordinate 
queuing delays and also synchronisation delay to the sibling tasks. 
• FCFS M S T F • Epoch=5 E3Epoch=10 [Z]Epoch=15i 
Fig. 5.2. 
RT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 1, probabilistic routing. 
• STF versus FCFS 
• E p o c h = 5 versus FCFS 
CZ]Epocri=10 versus FCFS • Epoch=15 versus FCFS 
Fig. 5.3. 
DRT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 1, probabilistic routing. 
It is also shown that mean response time with ESTF in some cases is 
lower than that of the STF method while in some other cases is very close 
to that of the STF method. This is due to the following reason. With the 
STF method tasks that have a small service demand do not delay behind a 

76 
Helen 
Karatza 
large task. However, this does not necessarily mean that the job to which 
they belong to will have a shorter response time. This is because there 
might be a case where some sibling tasks of the same job may have to 
delay longer in other queues due to the STF criterion. This may result in 
increased synchronisation delay of sibling tasks and therefore in increased 
response times of the respective jobs. 
At each load RT does not differ significantly at different epoch sizes. For 
1/A = 0.62 RT slightly increases with increasing epoch size, while as 1/A 
decreases there is a tendency in the ordering of RT at different epochs to 
change from increasing to decreasing. For 1/A = 0.56 RT slightly decreases 
with increasing epoch size. 
With all methods, DRT increases with increasing load (Fig. 5.3). This 
is because there are more tasks in the queues when 1/A is small than when 
is large and therefore there are then more opportunities to exploit the ad-
vantages of the STF and ESTF strategies over the FCFS method. 
For all A, the relative decrease in the number of queue rearrangements 
due to epoch scheduling is significant (Fig. 5.4). For all epoch sizes 
DNQR 
varies in the range of 80.05% - 93.34%. For each A, D^QR increases with 
increasing epoch size. DNQR increase is larger when epoch size is small than 
when is large. That is, in all cases the difference in DNQR between epochs 
5 and 10 is larger than the difference between epochs 10 and 15. For each 
epoch size, D^QR is almost the same at different loads. 
0,62 
0,6 
0,58 
0,56 
|MEpoch-5 versus STF PEpoch=10 versus STF •Epoch=15 versus STF | 
Fig. 5.4. 
DNQR 
versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 1, probabilistic routing. 
In Fig. 5.5 it is shown that STF and ESTF yield larger maximum re-
sponse time than the FCFS method does. This is due to the fact that with 
the STF and ESTF policies, some tasks with large service demands suffer 

A Simulation-Based 
Performance 
Analysis of Epoch Task Scheduling 
77 
MRT Ratio 
|MSTF/FCFS •Epoch=5/FCFS E3Epoch=10/FCFS • Epoch=15/FCFS | 
Fig. 5.5. 
MRT Ratio versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 1, probabilistic routing. 
long delays in their respective queues and this results in large synchroni-
sation delays of their sibling tasks and therefore in large response times of 
the respective jobs. 
In all cases that are examined, ESTF is fairer than STF because the 
former method prevents tasks from unbounded delays. For any A, the 
MRT Ratio decreases with increasing epoch size. Therefore, fairer service is 
provided to jobs when queue rearrangements take place after long epochs 
than after small ones. 
From the results presented in Fig. 5.5 it is also shown that with each 
of the STF and ESTF methods, MRT Ratio increases with increasing load. 
This is due to the fact that when a task has a large service demand, then 
it is more probable to be bypassed by many tasks when the system load is 
high, then when the system load is low. 
As shown in Figs. 5.6 and 5.7 the superiority of each of STF and ESTF 
over FCFS is more significant in the C — 2 case than in the C — 1. This is 
due to the fact that as C increases the variability in task service demand 
increases too and this results in better exploitation of the STF and ESTF 
strategies abilities. Also the results reveal that STF performs better than 
ESTF and that RT increases with increasing epoch size. In all cases ESTF 
for epoch size 5 performs close to STF. As in the C = 1 case, DRT also 
increases with increasing load. 
For all A, simulation results (not shown here) reveal that D^QR is almost 
the same as in the C = 1 case. 
In Fig. 5.8 it is shown that the observations about MRT Ratio that 
hold for the C = 1 case also hold for C = 2. Furthermore, by comparing 
the results presented in Figs. 5.5 and 5.8 it is apparent that at each load 

78 
Helen 
Karatza 
12(fT 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 L b ^^•urTl • € ) 
• FCFS M S T F MEpocrfeS E3Epoch=10 a E p o c h ^ l s l 
Fig. 5.6. 
RT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 2, probabilistic routing. 
M M 
• STF versus FCFS 
«Epoch=5 versus FCFS 
E3Epoch=10 versus FCFS • E p o c h = 1 5 versus FCFS 
Fig. 5.7. 
DRT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 2, probabilistic routing. 
MRT Ratio is larger in the C = 1 case than in the C = 2. It is also shown 
that for each epoch size the difference in MRT Ratio between STF and 
ESTF is smaller in the C — 2 case than in the C = 1. 
As shown in Figs. 5.9 and 5.10 the superiority of each of STF and ESTF 
over FCFS is more significant in the C = 4 case than in the C = 2, due to 
the larger variability in task service demand in the former case. Also the 
results reveal that STF performs better than ESTF and that RT increases 
with increasing epoch size. ESTF for epoch size 5 performs close to STF. 
As in the other C cases DRT increases with increasing load. 
For all A, DNQR is almost the same as in the C = 1 and C = 2 cases. 
In Fig. 5.11 it is shown that for each load all scheduling methods yield 
almost the same MRT Ratio. Therefore, for C = 4 STF and ESTF do not 
differ in fairness. The increase in MRT Ratio due to increasing load is less 
significant than in the C = 1 and C = 2 cases. 

A Simulation-Based 
Performance 
Analysis of Epoch Task Scheduling 
79 
• STF/FCFS •Epoch=5/FCFS BEpoch=10/FCFS •Epoch=15/FCFS 
Fig. 5.8. 
MRT Ratio versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 2, probabilistic routing. 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 LrrrLrn Irnlm 
iFCFS M S T F HIEpoch=5 E3Epoch=10 a E p o c r f e l S l 
Fig. 5.9. fiT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 4, probabilistic routing. 
• STF versus FCFS 
«Epoch=5 versus FCFS 
• Epoch=10 versus FCFS • Epoch=15 versus FCFS 
Fig. 5.10. 
DfiT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 4, probabilistic routing. 

Helen 
Karatza 
MRT Ratio im 
0,62 
0,6 
0,58 
IMSTF/FCFS • Epoch=5/FCFS E3Epoch=10/FCFS DEpoch=15/FCFS | 
Fig. 5.11. 
MRT Ratio versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 4, probabilistic routing. 
5.3.2. Shortest 
Queue 
Routing 
For all C, D^QR is almost the same as that of the probabilistic routing 
case, for this reason we do not include related results. 
In Figs. 5.12 and 5.13 it is shown that for C = 1 the worst performance 
appears with the STF policy. ESTF for epoch size 5 performs slightly worse 
than FCFS but for epoch sizes 10 and 15 performs slightly better than 
FCFS. For 1/A = 0.62, 0.60 ESTF performs almost the same for epoch 
sizes 10 and 15. For 1/A = 0.58, 0.56 epoch size 15 performs slightly better 
than epoch size 10. 
• FCFS MSTF «Epoch=5 ElEpoch=10 aEpoch^lSl 
Fig. 5.12. 
RT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 1, shortest queue routing. 
There is the following explanation for the different relative performance 
of the scheduling methods under the probabilistic and the shortest queue 
routing. In the probabilistic routing case when the FCFS scheduling method 

A Simulation-Based 
Performance 
Analysis of Epoch Task Scheduling 
81 
• STF versus FCFS 
•Epoch=5 versus FCFS 
HEpoch=10 versus FCFS PEppcri^s versus FCFS 
Fig. 5.13. 
DRT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 1, shortest queue routing. 
• STF/FCFS MEpoch^S/FCFS E3Epoch=10/FCFS aEpoch=15/FCFS 
Fig. 5.14. 
MRT Ratio versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 1, shortest queue routing. 
• ikh 
0,56 
| l F C F S M S T F MEpoch=5 E3Epoch=10 • E p o c h = 1 5 | 
Fig. 5.15. 
RT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 2, shortest queue routing. 

82 
Helen 
Karatza 
is employed, tasks with small service demand get blocked behind a task 
that has a large service demand and is waiting in the queue. However, the 
shortest queue routing policy prevents many small tasks getting blocked in 
that queue and therefore prevents excessive delays of their sibling tasks. On 
the other hand the reordering of queued tasks in the STF case may cause 
synchronisation delays to the sibling tasks. This may have as a result better 
performance with the FCFS method than with the STF. Since reordering 
of tasks with the ESTF method takes place in fewer cases than with the 
STF method, ESTF performs better than STF. However, for epoch sizes 
10 and 15 task reordering due to epoch scheduling results in some small 
performance improvement as compared to the FCFS case. 
In Fig. 5.14 it is shown that regarding maximum response time the same 
comments that hold for the probabilistic case also hold here. 
20 
H 
"_ 
}wtrimVim t]I 
0,62 
0,6 
0,58 
0,56 
1/X 
• STF versus FCFS 
•Epoch=5 versus FCFS 
• Epoch=10 versus FCFS •Epoch=15 versus FCFS 
Fig. 5.16. 
DRT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 2, shortest queue routing. 
As shown in Figs. 5.15 and 5.16 the relative performance of the schedul-
ing policies for C = 2 is different than that of the C = 1 case due to the 
variability of task service demand. Here the worst method is FCFS and 
the best is STF. Also the results reveal that RT increases with increasing 
epoch size. As in the corresponding probabilistic case DRT also increases 
with increasing load. 
Regarding MRT Ratio the same comments that hold for the correspond-
ing probabilistic case also hold here (Fig. 5.17). 
As shown in Figs. 5.18 and 5.19 all comments about RT a,nd DRT that 
hold for C = 2 also hold for C = 4. Also the results reveal that the superi-
ority of each of STF and ESTF over FCFS is more significant in the C — 4 
case than in the C = 2 case. 

A Simulation-Based 
Performance 
Analysis of Epoch Task Scheduling 
83 
tantoi 
[•STF/FCFS • Epoch=5/FCFS E3Epoch=10/FCFS • Epoch=15/FCFS | 
Fig. 5.17. 
MRT Ratio versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 2, shortest queue routing. 
40 
30 
1 
0,62 
• FCFS MSTF MEpoch=5 ElEpoch-10 • Epocfeisl 
Fig. 5.18. 
RT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 4, shortest queue routing. 
In Fig. 5.20 it is shown that MRT Ratio is smaller here than in the 
C = 1 case. Therefore regarding fairness FCFS differs from STF and ESTF 
in a smaller degree here than in the C = 2 case. Also STF and ESTF for all 
epoch sizes differ between each other in fairness in a smaller degree when 
C = 4 than when C = 2. For 1/A = 0.62 MRT Ratio is almost the same in 
all methods cases. For 1/A > 0.62 MRT Ratio in the ESTF cases is smaller 
than in the STF case. Furthermore MRT Ratio generally slightly decreases 
with increasing epoch size. As in the other cases MRT Ratio increases with 
increasing load. The increase is less significant here than in the C = 1 and 
C — 2 cases. 

84 
Helen 
Karatza 
• S T F versus FCFS 
EEpoch=5 versus FCFS 
HI]Epoch=10 versus FCFS • E p o c h = 1 5 versus FCFS 
Fig. 5.19. 
DRT versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 4, shortest queue routing. 
•STF/FCFS • Epoch=5/FCFS E3Epocri=1Q/FCFS OEpocri=15/FCFS| 
Fig. 5.20. 
MRT Ratio versus 1/A, E = 0, C = 4, shortest queue routing. 
5.4. Conclusions 
Distributed computing promises to meet increasing computational needs 
required in scientific research. A range of applications consisting of inde-
pendent tasks can be assigned to distributed processors and run in parallel. 
Efficient task scheduling is very important because inappropriate schedul-
ing may not exploit the potential of a distributed system limiting the gains 
of parallelisation. 
STF is often used as a benchmark in scheduling studies. By using simu-
lation over a spectrum of workload parameters, this article is able to evalu-
ate the advantages and disadvantages of an alternative to the STF method, 
called epoch STF (ESTF), in comparison to traditional STF. 
The simulation results reveal that the relative performance of STF and 
ESTF depends on the workload. In some cases ESTF (for some epoch sizes) 

A Simulation-Based 
Performance 
Analysis of Epoch Task Scheduling 
85 
performs close to or even better than STF. In all cases, epoch scheduling 
requires significantly fewer queue rearrangements (overhead) than STF. 
Large epochs involve smaller overhead than short epochs. Also, in most 
cases epoch scheduling is fairer than STF, while in the remaining cases the 
two methods do not differ significantly. 
However, when exponential distribution is employed, the shortest queue 
routing simulation reveals that neither STF nor ESTF should be used. 
This is because STF performs worse than FCFS and ESTF performs either 
slightly worse or slightly better than FCFS. 
Therefore, there are cases where ESTF is a better option for distributed 
systems than conventional STF scheduling. It is also interesting to compare 
"epoch" versions of other scheduling policies with the original methods. 
This chapter presents cases where the number of tasks per job is 
bounded by the number of distributed processors in the system. It is inter-
esting to consider cases where the number of tasks per job can be larger 
than the number of processors. 
References 
1. Aguilar J., Gelenbe E., "Task Assignment and Transaction Clustering 
Heuristics for Distributed Systems" Information Sciences, Elsevier Science, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 97(2), (1997), 199-219. 
2. Dail H., Berman F. and Casanova H., "A Decoupled Scheduling Approach 
for Grid Application Development Environments" J. Parallel Distrib. Corn-
put, Academic Press, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 63, (2003), 505-524. 
3. Dandamudi S., "A Comparison of Task Scheduling Strategies for Multipro-
cessor Systems" IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, 1991, 423-426. 
(Proc. of the IEEE Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Processing, 
1991) 
4. Dandamudi S., "Performance Implications of Task Routing and Task 
Scheduling Strategies for Multiprocessor Systems" IEEE Computer Society, 
Los Alamitos, CA, 1994, 348-353. (Proc. of the IEEE-Euromicro Conference 
on Massively Parallel Computing Systems, 1994) 
5. Dandamudi S., Hierarchical Scheduling in Parallel and Cluster Systems (1st 
Ed. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York) 2003. 
6. Prachtenberg E., Feitelson D. G., Petrini F. and Fernandez J., "Flexible 
CoScheduling: Mitigating Load Imbalance and Improving Utilization of Het-
erogeneous Resources" IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, 2003, 
85b. (Proc. of the International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sym-
posium, 2003) (full paper in IEEE Computer Society Digital Library) 
7. Karatza H. D., "Simulation Study of Task Scheduling and Resequencing in 
a Multiprocessing System" Simulation Journal, SCS, San Diego, CA, 68(4), 
(1997), 241-247. 

86 
Helen 
Karatza 
8. Karatza H. D., "Epoch Scheduling in a Distributed System" Eurosim, Delft, 
Netherlands, 2001, 1-6. (Proc. of the Eurosim 2001 Congress, 2001) 
9. Karatza H. D., "Epoch Task Cluster Scheduling in a Distributed System" 
SCS, San Diego, CA, 2002, 259-265. (Proc. of the 2002 International Sym-
posium on Performance Evaluation of Computer and Telecommunication 
Systems, 2002) 
10. Karatza H. D., "A Comparison of Load Sharing and Job Scheduling in 
a Network of Workstations" Intern. J. of Simulation: Systems, Science & 
Technology, UK Simulation Society, Nottingham, UK, 4(3&4), (2003), 4-11. 
11. Karatza H. D., "Epoch Task Scheduling in Distributed Server Systems" SCS 
Europe, Erlangen, Germany, 2004, 103-108. (Proc. of the 18th European 
Simulation Multiconference, 2004) 
12. Kwok Y.-K., "On Exploiting Heterogeneity for Cluster Based Parallel Multi-
threading Using Task Duplication" The J. of Supercomputing, Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers, The Netherlands, Amsterdam, 25, (2003), 63-72. 
13. Legrand A., Marchal L. and Casanova H., "Scheduling Distributed Appli-
cations: the SimGrid Simulation Framework" IEEE Computer Society, Los 
Alamitos, CA, 2003, 145-152. (Proc. of the 3rd IEEE/ACM International 
Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid, 2003) 
14. McCann C. and Zahorjan J., "Scheduling Memory Constrained Jobs on 
Distributed Memory Parallel Computers" The Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, USA, 1995, 208-219. (Proc. of the 1995 ACM Sig-
metrics Conference, 1995) 
15. Nikolopoulos D. S. and Polychronopoulos C. D., "Adaptive Scheduling Un-
der Memory Constraints on Non-Dedicated Computational Farms" Future 
Generation Computer Systems Elsevier, Amsterdam, 19, (2003), 505-519. 
16. Sabin G., Kettimuthu R., Rajan A. and Sadayappan P., "Scheduling of Par-
allel Jobs in a Heterogeneous Multi-Site Environment" in "Job Scheduling 
Strategies for Parallel Processing", LNCS 2862 - Springer, 2003, 87-104. 
17. Weissman J. B., Abburi L. R. and England D., "Integrated Scheduling: the 
Best of Both Worlds" J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., Elsevier Science, New 
York, USA, 63, (2003), 649-668. 
18. Zhang Y., Franke H., Moreira J. and Sivasubramaniam A., "The Impact of 
Migration on Parallel Job Scheduling for Distributed Systems" LNCS 1900 
- Springer, 2000, 242-251. (Proc. of Europar, 2000) 

New Challenges on Modelling and Simulation 

This page is intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 6 
Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical Independence in Steady 
State Distributions 
Jeffrey P. Buzen 
12 Mountain Laurels 
Nashua, NH 03062 USA 
E-mail: 
jeffbuzen@comcast.net 
Stochastic processes that differ materially from one another can some-
times possess exactly the same steady state distribution. This makes it 
dangerous to draw certain inferences about the nature of a stochastic 
process by analysing the properties of its associated steady state distri-
bution. Product form queuing networks provide a concrete example of 
this phenomenon by demonstrating that statistical independence among 
the states of individual queues does not necessarily imply that these 
queues operate independently in the associated stochastic process. The 
distinction between statistical independence and dynamic independence 
is introduced clarify the issues involved. 
6.1. Introduction 
The observed behaviour of real world systems often exhibits noteworthy 
degrees of variability. For example, the time between successive arrivals of 
customers at a queue is seldom the same from one customer to the next. 
Similarly, the time required to complete individual service requests often 
differs significantly among customers. 
The most common approach for representing this type of variability 
is to assume that the real world system being studied can be modelled 
mathematically by a stochastic process. If an appropriate model can be 
formulated, the behaviour sequences (sample paths) that are associated 
with the stochastic process will exhibit the same type of variability that 
the system itself exhibits. 
Once this initial objective has been achieved, the stochastic process can 
then be used to analyse, understand and predict the performance of the 
89 

90 
Jeffrey P. Buzen 
original real world system. Analysts pursuing this basic approach typically 
begin by deriving the steady state distribution of the underlying stochastic 
process. Mathematical expressions that characterise the behaviour of the 
system itself are then expressed as functions of this distribution. 
Steady state stochastic models have been employed successfully for 
many decades in a number of branches of science and engineering. As a 
result, many analysts have become highly proficient in the required math-
ematical techniques. However, applying these techniques without fully un-
derstanding all assumptions implicit in the analysis can sometimes lead to 
confusing and erroneous conclusions. This discussion will explore some of 
the less well understood assumptions used in stochastic modelling with the 
goal of shedding light on areas of potential misunderstanding. 
6.2. A System of Two Independent M / M / l Queues 
The main points in this paper can be illustrated through a few simple 
examples. Begin by considering Fig. 6.1, which represents two completely 
independent M/M/l queues. Following the standard conventions of queu-
ing theory, assume that arrivals at Queue 1 are generated by a Poisson 
process with mean rate Ai. Assume also that Queue 1 is served by a single 
server whose service times are characterised by a sequence of independent 
exponentially distributed random variables with mean l//ii. 
Queue 2 is characterised in a similar manner. Arrivals are assumed to be 
generated by a Poisson process with the same mean rate Ai, while service 
times for the single server at Queue 2 are characterised by a sequence of 
independent exponentially distributed random variables with mean 1//J2-
The steady state distribution of an individual M/M/l queue is perhaps 
the most widely studied result in queuing theory. Extending this result to 
the case of the two independent M/M/l queues shown in Fig. 6.1 is straight-
forward. The details are presented here to provide a point of reference for 
the subsequent discussion. 
Begin by representing the state of this system as (711,712), where ri\ 
corresponds to the number of customers at Server 1 and n-i corresponds to 
the number of customers at Server 2. Thus, n\ and ni both range over the 
set of non-negative integers: {0, 1, 2, ... }. 
Let P(ni,ri2) 
denote the steady state distribution for this system of 
queues. That is, P(ni,ri2) is the steady state probability that there are n\ 
customers at Server 1 and 712 customers at Server 2. 
The key to deriving an expression for P(n 1,712) is to write down a set 

Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical 
Independence 
91 
Queue 1 
Queue 2 
Server 1 
Stwer 2 
Fig. 6.1. 
Two independent M / M / l queues. 
of equations representing the fact that, in steady state, the rate of tran-
sition into each system state is equal to the rate of transition out. Only 
transitions that occur as a result of single arrivals or departures need be 
considered. Transitions that result from simultaneous arrivals and depar-
tures of multiple customers are ignored since such simultaneous events occur 
with probability zero. 
Under these assumptions, there are exactly four transitions into each 
"non-boundary" state where n\ > 0 and ri2 > 0. There are also exactly four 
transitions out. The eight transitions into and out of each non-boundary 
state are represented by arrows in Fig. 6.2 and specified as follows: 
0,0 
i 
1,0 
i 
2,0 
• 
I 
3,0 
! 
' 4,0 
I 
B,0 
ft 
x 
i« 
: 
0,1 
I 
1,1 
I 
2,1 
8,1 
, 
i 4,1 
I 
) 5,1 
D O C 
0,2 
I 
1,2 
, 
i 2,2 
• J.2 
I 
, 4,2 
I 
8,2 , 
k- 
|* 
* - 
|* 
* -. f 
V 
1* 
J. .- |* 
* -. f 
f 
* 
I 
* 
y 
*• 
•r 
Pig. 6.2. 
State transition diagram for two independent M / M / l queues. 
Transitions out of state (rai, 712): 
1. An arrival at Queue 1 causes a transition from (711,712) to {n\ + 1,712). 
2. An arrival at Queue 2 causes a transition from (711,712) to (ni,7i2 + 1)-
3. A departure at Server 1 causes a transition from (711,712) to {n\ — 1,712). 
4. A departure at Server 2 causes a transition from (711,712) to (ni,7i2 — 1). 

92 
Jeffrey P. Buzen 
Transitions into state (711,712): 
5. An arrival at Queue 1 causes a transition from (nx — 1,712) to (ni,n 2). 
6. An arrival at Queue 2 causes a transition from (711,712 — 1) to (711,712). 
7. A departure at Server 1 causes a transition from {n\ + 1,712) to (711,712). 
8. A departure at Server 2 causes a transition from (n 1,712 + 1) to (711,712). 
For each boundary state where either Tii = 0 or 712 = 0 (but not both), 
two of the above transitions become impossible: a departure cannot occur 
at a server that has zero requests to process (eliminating the possibility of 
Transitions 3 or 4), and an arrival cannot cause queue length to increase 
from minus one to zero since queues of length minus one cannot exist (elim-
inating the possibility of Transitions 5 or 6). The top row and left column of 
Fig. 6.2 illustrate the six remaining transitions for each of these boundary 
states. 
Finally, in the special origin state (0,0), both servers are idle and both 
queues are empty. This eliminates the possibility of Transitions 3, 4, 5 and 
6, leaving only the four transitions shown in the upper left corner of Fig. 6.2. 
The next step in deriving the steady state distribution for P (711,712) is 
to write down the set of equations expressing the fact that, in steady state, 
the aggregate rate of transition into each state is equal to the aggregate 
rate out. To calculate individual transition rates, multiply the proportion 
of time spent in a state by the rate at which the corresponding transition 
occurs. For example, since arrivals to Queue 1 occur at rate Ai, the rate 
at which transitions from state (711,712) to (TII + 1,712) occur as a result of 
arrivals to Queue 1 is equal to AIP(TII,712). 
For non-boundary states where Tii > 0 and 712 > 0, each equation 
expressing a balance between the total transition rates in and out involves 
eight separate transitions: 
[Ai + Ai + m + H2\P(ni, TI2) = 
AiP(ni - l,n2) + AIP(TII,TI 2- 1) + /JIP(TII + l,n 2) + fi2P(ni,™2 + 1) 
For the boundary states where either TII or 712 equals 0 (but not both), each 
equation involves six separate transitions: 
[Ai + Ai + MI]P(TII,0) = AIP(TII - 1 , 0 ) + ^P(ni 
+ 1,0) + /i 2P(ni, 1) 
[Ai + Ai + /x2] P(0,7i2) - AiP(0,712 - 1) + HiPQ., n2) + /i2P(0, n2 + l) 
Finally, only four transitions are involved in balancing the aggregate flow 
into and out of the origin state (0,0): 
[Ai + Ai]P(0,0) = (nP(l, 0) + fi2P(0,1) 

Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical 
Independence 
93 
Assuming \i < /ii and Ai < /x2, it is easy to show that this set of linear 
equations has the following product form solution. 
P(m, n2) = N1N2(\i/^r 
(A1/M2)"2 
(1) 
where Nx = (1 - \\/^i) 
and iV2 = (1 - A1//Z2). The solution can be verified 
by simply substituting it into the balance equations on the previous page. 
Note that iVi and iV2 have no impact on the balance equations. Instead, 
these two factors are normalising constants, chosen to insure the sum of 
P(ni,n 2) over all non-negative values of n\ and n2 is equal to 1. 
The fact that P(ni,n 2) has this particular form should come as no 
surprise. Since the two queues in Fig. 6.1 are independent, one would expect 
P(ni,n 2) to be the product of P{n{) and P(ri2), where P(ni) and P(n 2) 
are the steady state distributions associated with Queue 1 and Queue 2 
respectively. In fact, this assumption is easy to demonstrate since the well 
known solution to the M/M/l queue yields: 
P(ni) = JVi(Ai//xi)ni 
(2) 
P(n2)=JV2(A1//i2)n» 
(3) 
Thus, 
P(n 1,n 2) = P(n 1)P(n 2) 
(4) 
6.3. A System of Two Queues in Tandem 
Now consider the system of queues shown in Fig. 6.3. Queue 1 has exactly 
the same properties as Queue 1 in Fig. 6.1. Arrivals are generated by a 
Poisson process with mean rate Ai, and service times are characterised by 
a sequence of independent exponentially distributed random variables with 
mean 1/jUi. 
In the case of Queue 2, service times are again characterised by a se-
quence of independent exponentially distributed random variables with 
mean l//i2. However, the arrival process for Queue 2 in Fig. 6.3 is speci-
fied in a new manner. Instead of being characterised by a Poisson arrival 
process with rate Ai, it is assumed that arrivals at Queue 2 are generated 
by departures from Queue 1. Thus, if the state of these two queues is again 
represented as (ni,n 2), each time n\ is reduced by 1 (due to a departure 
at Queue 1), there is a simultaneous increase of plus 1 in the value of 
n2. It is clear that the two queues are tightly linked and do not operate 
independently. 

94 
Jeffrey P. 
Buzen 
Queue 1 
Server 1 
> 
Queue 2 
< 
[ 
j — » • 
i 
.. 
, '' 
Server 2 
Fig. 6.3. 
Two queues in tandem. 
As before, the key to deriving an expression for P(m,ri2) is to write 
down a set of equations representing the fact that, in steady state, the rate of 
transition into state (711,712) is equal to the rate of transition out. Applying 
the assumptions used in the previous section, there are now exactly three 
transitions into each "non-boundary" state where Tii > 0 and n? > 0. There 
are also exactly three transitions out. The six transitions into and out of 
each non-boundary state are represented by arrows in Fig. 6.4 and specified 
as follows: 
Transitions out of state (711,712): 
1. An arrival at Queue 1 causes a transition from (711,712) to (TII 4-1,712). 
2. A departure at Server 1 causes a transition from (711,712) to (711 — 1,712+1). 
3. A departure at Server 2 causes a transition from (711,712) to (711,712 — 1). 
Transitions into state (711,712): 
4. An arrival at Queue 1 causes a transition from (TII — 1,712) to (711,712). 
5. A departure at Server 1 causes a transition from (ni +1,712 — 1) to (711,712). 
6. A departure at Server 2 causes a transition from (n 1,712 + 1) to (711,712). 
Note that Transitions 2 and 5 reflect the tandem coupling between the 
two queues. These transitions correspond to the diagonal arrows in Fig. 6.4. 
As in the previous example, two of these transitions become impossible 
in those boundary states where either Tii = 0 or 712 = 0 (but not both): 
a departure cannot occur at a server that has zero requests to process 
(eliminating the possibility of Transitions 2 or 3), and an arrival cannot 
cause queue length to increase from minus one to zero since queues of 
length minus one cannot exist (eliminating the possibility of Transitions 4 

Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical 
Independence 
95 
Fig. 6.4. 
State transition diagram for two queues in tandem. 
or 5). The top row and left column of Fig. 6.4 illustrate the four remaining 
transitions for each of these boundary states. 
Finally, in the special origin state (0,0), both servers are idle and both 
queues are empty, leaving only the two transitions shown in the upper left 
corner of Fig. 6.4. 
Once again, the next step in deriving the steady state distribution for 
P(ni,ri2) is to write down the set of equations specifying that the transition 
rate into each state is equal to the transition rate out. For non-boundary 
states where n\ > 0 and ri2 > 0, each equation involves six separate tran-
sitions: 
\Xi+fJ-i+^2}P{ni,n2) 
= 
XiP{ni-l,n2)+HiP{n1+l,n2-l)+tJ.2P{ni,n2+l) 
For the boundary states where either n\ or n2 equals 0 (but not both), each 
equation involves four separate transitions: 
[Ai +/ii]P(m,0) = AiP(ni - 1,0)+ fi2P(n1, 
l) 
[Ai + A*2] P{0, n2) = fMiP(l, n2 - 1) + ^ ( 0 , n2 + 1) 
Finally, only two transitions are involved in balancing the aggregate flow 
into and out of the origin state (0,0): 
A 1P(0,0)=/i 2P(0 )l) 
Assuming Ai < /xi and Ai < fi2, it is easY to verify that (5) represents the 
solution to this set of linear equations. Note that (5) is exactly the same as 
(1), even though the systems shown in Figs. 6.1 and 6.3 are modelled by 
different stochastic processes. 
P(m, n2) = N1N2(X,/^r 
(Ai/^)" 2 
(5) 

96 
Jeffrey P. Buzen 
6.4. Statistical and Dynamic Independence 
The fact that Eqs. (1) and (5) have identical forms is noteworthy for a 
number of reasons. First, it demonstrates that a steady state distribution 
does not contain enough information to reconstruct a detailed description 
of the underlying stochastic process. Given the steady state distribution 
presented in (5), there is simply no way to tell whether the real world 
system being analysed corresponds to Fig. 6.1 or Fig. 6.3. 
Another highly significant observation is that the random variables rep-
resenting the lengths of Queue 1 and Queue 2 are statistically independent 
in the steady state distributions presented in Eqs. (1) and (5). This follows 
immediately from (4), which states that the joint distribution P(ni,ri2) 
is 
the product of P(ni), the unconditional distribution of m, and P(n,2), the 
unconditional distribution of n-2.. 
The fact that random variables ri\ and n^ are statistically indepen-
dent is not surprising in the case of Fig. 6.1 since queues 1 and 2 operate 
independently in this example. However, queues 1 and 2 do not operate 
independently in Fig. 6.3. They are linked by the fact that a service com-
pletion at Queue 1 triggers an immediate arrival at Queue 2. Given this 
linkage, it may be difficult to understand why random variables n\ and n<i 
are statistically independent in the corresponding steady state distribution. 
This counter intuitive observation can, of course, be explained in purely 
algebraic terms by considering the balance equations. It has already been 
shown that the product form solution in (5) satisfies the balance equations 
for each node in the state transition diagram of Fig. 6.4. Since Fig. 6.4 is the 
state transition diagram for the system illustrated in Fig. 6.3, the random 
variables n\ and n^ that are associated with Fig. 6.3 must satisfy (5) and 
thus must be statistically independent. 
To develop a more intuitive understanding of this surprising result, begin 
by assuming that the system in Fig. 6.3 is in steady state and is observed 
for some interval of time. If the observer happens to know the number of 
customers at Server 1 at any given instant, it is reasonable to ask whether 
this knowledge provides the observer with any additional information about 
the corresponding number of customers at Server 2. 
The fact that n\ and 712 are statistically independent implies that this is 
not the case. Knowing the number of customers at Server 1 at any particular 
instant does not provide any additional information about the number of 
customers at Server 2. This tightly focused observation, which represents 
the essence of statistical independence, is entirely compatible with the fact 
that queues 1 and 2 are linked to one another as shown in Fig. 6.3. 

Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical 
Independence 
97 
Even though the obvious dependency that exists between Queue 1 and 
Queue 2 in Fig. 6.3 cannot be detected by studying the steady state dis-
tribution in (5), the relationship is displayed clearly in the state transition 
diagram of Fig. 6.4. The diagonal lines in the diagram represent transitions 
that occur when customers complete service at Queue 1 and proceed im-
mediately to Queue 2. Queues that operate in a completely independent 
manner never have such diagonal lines in their state transition diagrams. 
For example, the state transition diagram in Fig. 6.2 contains only hori-
zontal and vertical transitions, which is as expected since the two queues 
in Fig. 6.1 really do operate independently. 
Another implication of the complete independence that exists between 
the two queues in Fig. 6.1 is that arrival rates at each queue are independent 
of the number of customers at the other queue. Specifically, the rate of 
transition from {n\,ri2) to (ni + l,ri2) is independent of ri2, and the rate 
of transition from (ni, n?) to (ni,n,2 + 1) is independent of m. 
In addition, completion rates (reciprocals of service times) at each queue 
are also independent of the number of customers at the other queue. Thus, 
the rate of transition from (ni, 712) to (ni — 1,712) is independent of ri2, and 
the rate of transition from (ni,ri2) to (ni,ri2 — 1) is independent of n\. 
These assumptions regarding transition rates, coupled with the assump-
tion that there are no diagonal lines in the state transition diagram, imply 
that each queue operates in manner that is truly independent of the other. 
To distinguish this "true independence" from the more restrictive notion 
of statistical independence, it would seem appropriate to introduce a new 
term, dynamic independence, to denote this concept. Note that dynamic 
independence is a property of stochastic processes, whereas statistical in-
dependence is a property of random variables. 
Figures 6.1 and 6.2, together with (1), illustrate that dynamic inde-
pendence in a stochastic process implies statistical independence in the 
associated steady state distribution. However, Figs. 6.3 and 6.4, together 
with (5) illustrate that the converse is not true: statistical independence in 
the steady state distribution does necessarily imply dynamic independence 
in the associated stochastic process. 
Although this discussion has been based on the simple queuing networks 
shown in Figs. 6.1 and 6.3, the points raised here actually apply to very 
broad class of queuing networks. In particular, Jackson8 has shown that 
product form solutions can be derived for networks of the type shown in 
Fig. 6.2 that contain an arbitrary number of servers interconnected through 
an arbitrary set of linkages. Jackson's results have been generalised further 

98 
Jeffrey P. 
Buzen 
by other researchers, notably Baskett, Chandy, Muntz and Palacios1 and 
Gelenbe6'12"15. Replacing Fig. 6.3 by one of these more complex product 
form queuing networks would leave the main points of this discussion en-
tirely unchanged. 
6.5. Beyond Stochastic Modelling 
Even though this discussion has focused exclusively on stochastic modelling, 
the results have implications for a broad range of models and analysis proce-
dures. For example, the two systems of queues depicted in Figs. 6.1 and 6.3 
can be analysed using a number of alternative approaches. In addition to 
a purely mathematical approach based on stochastic models, these sys-
tems can also be analysed by running computer simulation programs, by 
measuring performance within specially constructed experimental test beds 
7'9'17'18, or by going out into the field and measuring the performance of 
actual systems operating under real word conditions. 
If the assumptions of Poisson arrivals and exponentially distributed ser-
vice times were incorporated into the simulations programs, the experi-
mental test beds and the real world systems being measured, the two main 
conclusions discussed in the previous section would remain the same: mea-
sured or computed steady state distributions would be essentially identical 
for both Fig. 6.1 and Fig. 6.3, and this steady state distribution would 
have the product form, implying that queue lengths are independently dis-
tributed in both networks. 
The fact that these main conclusions have been demonstrated in the 
context of a stochastic model provides certain immediate benefits. Using 
an analytic model eliminates concerns about measurement accuracy, and 
about transient effects associated with the duration of the simulation or 
measurement interval. However, the two main conclusions cited in the pre-
vious paragraph do not really depend upon the fact that stochastic models 
were used to analyse the systems in Figs. 6.1 and 6.3. They are equally valid 
under several alternative modelling and analysis procedures, assuming of 
course that the systems illustrated in Figs. 6.1 and 6.3 are the same for all 
analyses. 
6.5.1. Central Role of Steady State 
Distributions 
The key factor that leads all these procedures to a common set of conclu-
sions is the use of steady state distributions to characterise the performance 

Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical 
Independence 
99 
of complex systems. While the use of these distributions is both intuitively 
appealing and mathematically sound, it also raises a set of subtle issues 
that are worthy of further discussion. 
For analysts working with real systems or experimental test beds, the 
collection and analysis of performance measurements leads naturally to the 
construction of steady state distributions. The first step in measuring the 
performance of any system operating over time is to specify the beginning 
and ending points of the measurement interval. Instruments (or software 
monitors) then continuously record the "state" of the system (e.g., the 
lengths of Queue 1 and Queue 2) throughout the interval. After the mea-
surement interval has elapsed, it is reasonable to summarise the collected 
measurement data by dividing the total amount of time spent in each state 
by the length of the measurement interval. This results in a distribution 
that specifies the proportion of time the system spends in each state. Per-
formance statistics such as mean queue length and response time can then 
be readily derived from this distribution. 
This measurement-oriented steady state distribution, which can also be 
generated by running a computer simulation program, does not require the 
powerful mathematical constructs needed to define the steady state distri-
bution associated with a stochastic process. From a mathematical perspec-
tive, a stochastic process is associated with a random variable (or a vector 
of random variables) whose distribution varies as a function of time. If this 
distribution converges to some stable distribution as time increases, and 
if this stable distribution is independent of the initial distribution at time 
zero, the stochastic process is said to be Ergodic. An Ergodic stochastic 
process whose distribution has stabilised (become independent of time) is 
said to be in equilibrium or in steady state. The resulting stable distribution 
is known as a steady state distribution. 
Although measurement-oriented steady state distributions may seem 
very different from the mathematical steady state distributions associated 
with stochastic processes, they are tightly linked by an important result 
known as the Ergodic theorem. This theorem demonstrates that, if a Er-
godic stochastic process in is steady state and is observed for a sufficiently 
long period of time, the measurement-oriented steady state distribution 
computed during the observation interval will converge (with probability 
one) to the underlying mathematical steady state distribution. 
The basic mechanism that leads to the proof of the Ergodic theorem 
has a simple intuitive interpretation. It is well known that the empirical fre-
quency distribution obtained by sampling any random variable for a large 

100 
Jeffrey P. Buzen 
number of times will converge (with probability one) to the mathematical 
distribution associated with that random variable. Measuring the state of 
a stochastic process over a long observation interval is the continuous-time 
counterpart of constructing a frequency distribution by drawing a large 
(but discrete) number of samples from an ordinary random variable. If 
the stochastic process has reached steady state, the same random variable 
(i.e., the same distribution) will be sampled at each point in the continuous 
observation interval. Thus, the measurement-oriented steady state distribu-
tion will converge to the mathematical steady state distribution associated 
with the stochastic process. 
As a result of this tight coupling between mathematical theory and em-
pirical measurement procedures, the derivation and estimation of steady 
state distributions have become primary objectives in most analyses of sys-
tem performance. This is true for analyses based on stochastic models, 
computer simulations, and measurements taken in experimental test beds 
and in real world operating environments. 
6.5.2. Generality, 
Robustness 
and Level of 
Detail 
Every model involves some form of abstraction that retains certain essen-
tial properties of the object being studied while discarding other details. 
By reducing highly detailed state-by-state measurement traces to a few 
numbers in an empirical distribution, steady state distributions can simi-
larly be regarded as summaries that retain certain essential properties of 
an underlying system while eliminating others. 
The notion of dynamic independence is a potentially important detail 
that is lost during the summarisation process followed when constructing a 
steady state distribution. As Fig. 6.1 and (1) illustrate, dynamic indepen-
dence in the underlying system results in statistical independence in the 
steady state distribution. However, Fig. 6.3 and (5) illustrate that statisti-
cal independence in the steady state distribution can also arise even though 
there is no dynamic independence in the underlying system. 
This means that researchers concerned about issues such as dynamic in-
dependence should not be content with analyses that yield only steady state 
distributions and derived quantities. Such researchers should remain alert 
to the fact that detecting subtle interactions among variables may require 
returning to the original measurement data and applying more powerful an-
alytic techniques that can discover time dependent correlations that may 
exist even though a system has reached steady state. Detailed trace data 

Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical 
Independence 
101 
generated by simulations and studies involving experimental test beds are 
especially well suited to such refined analyses. 
On the other hand, it is also important to avoid being overly zealous 
in the extraction of highly detailed information from any analytic model, 
computer simulation or experiment conducted with a test bed or a real 
world system. To illustrate the essence of the problem, consider a simple 
variable such as the response time at a single queue. Since it is typical to 
assume that both service times and inter-arrival times are variable, one 
would not expect the response times of all customers to be identical. 
The simplest way to characterise response time in this case is to report 
the mean. If more detail is desired, the standard deviation can also be 
computed. It is, of course, possible to go further by computing response time 
percentiles for any degree of granularity. At some point, these successively 
finer levels of detail can become essentially meaningless, reflecting highly 
specialised artifacts of the modelling assumptions or the measurement data. 
These details can seldom be generalised robustly to other cases. In addition, 
they are subject to dramatic change as a result of slight alterations in 
modelling assumptions. 
In this context, metrics such as means and standard deviations that 
are derived directly from steady state distributions have the advantage of 
being relatively robust. This is due in part to the fact that the steady 
state distributions that these metrics depend upon are not sensitive to 
certain details of system behaviour such as the linkage between Queue 1 
and Queue 2 that is illustrated in Fig. 6.3. 
Thus, the fact that such linkages have no direct impact on the steady 
state distributions of the associated stochastic processes should not be con-
strued as a negative observation. There is a natural tension between the 
level of detail captured in a solution and the generality and robustness 
of that solution. Following the principle embodied in Occam's razor, one 
can maximise generality and robustness by seeking a model with the least 
restrictive set of assumptions needed to derive the desired result. This prin-
ciple has applications in the formulation of analytic models, the design of 
simulation programs and the construction of test beds for experimental 
studies. 
6.5.3. Operational 
Analysis 
One instructive illustration of this principle is the use of operational analysis 
to derive steady state distributions and related statistics without making all 

102 
Jeffrey P. Buzen 
the assumptions required in a conventional stochastic model. Operational 
analysis is an alternative mathematical framework for formulating and de-
riving equations that characterise system performance. The conceptual ba-
sis for this framework is provided by the measurement-oriented discussion 
of steady state distributions presented earlier. 
Operational analysis begins with the simple assumption that an analyst 
is measuring the behaviour of a real system or an experimental test bed 
during an interval of time. There is no need to assume that the real system 
or experimental test bed is related in any way to an underlying stochastic 
process. All that is necessary is to assume that measurements are being 
made during an observation interval, and that an analyst is interested in 
equations that relate these measurements to one another. Note that this 
direct approach avoids the need to invoke the Ergodic theorem when ap-
plying the resulting equations to measurement data collected under real 
world conditions and in experimental test beds. 
It might seem that few, if any, interesting relationships among measured 
variables can be derived without any assumptions whatsoever. However, the 
first published paper on operational analysis2 demonstrated that a number 
of results that are traditionally regarded as the cornerstones of stochastic 
queuing theory (Little's Law, the Utilisation Law, etc.) can in fact be de-
rived under operational analysis with a minimum number of very simple 
assumptions. The robustness and generality of these results can thus be 
explained by the fact that they can be formally derived without appealing 
to the Ergodic theorem or the subtle statistical assumptions inherent in the 
concept of steady state stochastic processes. 
Operational assumptions necessary to derive the steady state distribu-
tion of the M / M / 1 queue (see (2)) were introduced almost immediately in 
a follow-on paper 3. This paper demonstrated that the balance equations 
associated with the single queue version of Fig. 6.1 can be deduced from 
simple assumptions about observable system behaviour. In other words, the 
mathematical equations used to characterise the steady state distribution 
of an M / M / 1 queue can be derived without requiring the assumption of 
an underlying stochastic process. These early results were subsequently ex-
tended to networks of queues4 and to more general categories of models5 
and to stationary deterministic flows10'11. 
The fact that Eqs. (1) and (5) can be derived through operational 
analysis without appealing to any stochastic assumptions underscores a 
point made earlier: the inability of steady state distributions to distin-
guish between Fig. 6.1 and Fig. 6.3 reflects an inherent property of these 

Counter Intuitive Aspects of Statistical 
Independence 
103 
distributions, and applies whether these distributions are measured exper-
imentally or derived analytically within the formal mathematical frame-
works provided by either stochastic modelling or operational analysis. 
6.6. Conclusions 
A steady state distribution characterises certain important properties of its 
associated stochastic process, but does not reflect all significant properties. 
Thus, two or more stochastic processes with materially different structures 
can have exactly the same steady state distribution. This fact limits the 
nature of the inferences that can be drawn regarding real world systems that 
are modelled as stochastic processes and analysed solely through steady 
state distributions. 
In particular, the observation that two random variables are statistically 
independent in a steady state distribution does not automatically imply 
that the processes represented by these random variables operate indepen-
dently in the real world. A new concept, dynamic independence, is intro-
duced to characterise this type of independence. Dynamic independence is 
a property of a stochastic process rather than a steady state distribution. 
Steady state distributions obtained by directly measuring performance 
in real world settings or experimental test beds, or by running simulation 
programs, exhibit the same property. Random variables associated with 
these measurement-oriented distributions can be statistically independent 
even though their counterparts are tightly linked to one another in the ac-
tual systems being investigated. Analysts interested in investigating such 
linkages need to go beyond the information contained in measurement-
oriented steady state distributions. They may need to consider applying 
more powerful analytic techniques to the detailed traces that are capable of 
being generated by computer simulations and experimental test beds. The 
development of new analytic techniques for addressing these issues, espe-
cially techniques that do not require the complex assumptions of stochastic 
modelling but employ instead the less restrictive framework of operational 
analysis, represents a promising area for future research. 
References 
1. Baskett, F., Chandy, K.M., Muntz, R.R. and Palacios, J., "Open, Closed 
and Mixed Networks with Different Classes of Customers" J. ACM., 22(2), 
(April 1975), 248 - 260. 
2. Buzen, J.R, "Fundamental Operational Laws of Computer Systems Perfor-
mance" Acta Informatica 7(2), (June 1976), 167-182. 

104 
Jeffrey P. 
Buzen 
3. Buzen, J.P., "Operational Analysis: The Key to the New Generation of Per-
formance Prediction Tools" Washington, DC, 1976, 166-171. (Proc. IEEE 
COMPCON 76, Sep. 1976) 
4. Denning, P.J. and Buzen, J.P., "Operational Analysis of Queuing Networks" 
in "Modelling and Performance Evaluation of Computer Systems" Beilner, 
H. and Gelenbe, E., eds. (North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam) 
1977, 151-172. (Proc. 3rd Int'l Symposium on Modeling and Performance 
Evaluation of Computer Systems, Oct. 1977) 
5. Denning, P.J. and Buzen, J.P., "The Operational Analysis of Queuing Net-
work Models" ACM Computing Surveys, 10(3), (Sept. 1978), 225-261. 
6. Gelenbe E. "G-networks with instantaneous customer movement", Journal 
of Applied Probability, 30(3), (1993), 742-748. 
7. Gelenbe, E., "Research and Development Test-Beds for Future Networks" 
Keynote Address. 2005, (1st Conf. on testbeds and research infrastructures 
for the development of network and communities, Trento, Italy, Feb. 2005) 
8. Jackson, J.R., "Jobshop-like Queuing Systems" Management 
Science, 
10(1), (Oct. 1963), 131 - 142. 
9. Newman, M.E., "The Structure and Function of Complex Networks" SIAM 
Review, 45, (2003), 167-256. 
10. Gelenbe E., "Stationary deterministic flows", Theoretical Computer Science, 
23,(1983), 107-128. 
11. Gelenbe E., Finkel D., "Stationary deterministic flows II: the single server 
queue" Theoretical Computer Science, 52, (1987), 269-280. 
12. Gelenbe E. "Queueing networks with negative and positive customers", 
Journal of Applied Probability, 28, (1991), 656-663. 
13. Gelenbe E. "G-Networks with signals and batch removal", Probability in the 
Engineering and Informatonal Sciences, 7, (1993), 335-342. 
14. Gelenbe E., Fourneau J.M. "G-Networks with resets", Performance 
Evalu-
ation, 49, (2002), 179-192. 
15. Fourneau J. M., Gelenbe E. "Flow equivalence and stochastic equivalence in 
G-Networks", Computational Management Science, 1(2),(2004), 179 -192. 
16. Gelenbe E."Learning in the recurrent random network", Neural Computa-
tion, 5, (1993), 154-164. 
17. Gelenbe E., Lent R., Xu Z., "Measurement and performance of a cognitive 
packet network", Computer Networks, 37, (2001), 691-791. 
18. Gelenbe E., Lent R., Nunez A. "Self-Aware networks and QoS", Proceedings 
of the IEEE, 92(9), (2004), 1478-1489. 

C H A P T E R 7 
T h e Nonstationary Loss Queue: A Survey 
Khalid Abdulaziz Alnowibet 
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, King Saud University 
Riyadh 1145 , Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
E-mail:knowibet@ksu. edu.sa 
Harry Perros 
Computer Science Department, NC State 
University 
Raleigh, NC 27695-7534, USA 
E-mail:hp@csc.ncsu. edu 
The nonstationary loss queue is of great interest since the arrival rate 
in most communication systems varies over time. In view of the dif-
ficulty in solving the nonstationary loss queue, various approximation 
methods have been developed. In this paper, we review several of these 
approximation methods and present a new technique, the fixed point ap-
proximation (FPA) method. Numerical evidence points to the fact that 
the FPA method gives the exact solution. 
7.1. Introduction 
The loss queue is a queuing system consisting of s servers and no waiting 
room. A customer is lost if it arrives at a time when all servers are busy. The 
loss queue is commonly used to model the telephone network. It has also 
been recently used to model traffic-groomed optical networks and optical 
burst switching (OBS) networks, see for instance Washington and Perros 1 
and Battestilli and Perros2, and references within. 
The loss queue has been extensively studied in the stationary case, i.e., 
assuming that the arrival rate and the service rate are time invariant. The 
nonstationary loss queue, where the arrival rate is time-dependent is also of 
great interest, since in most communication systems the arrival rate varies 
over time. 
105 

106 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
Consider a nonstationary loss queue M(t)/M/s/s 
with a Poisson arrival 
process with a time-dependent rate \{t). Each arrival requests a service 
that requires an exponential amount of time with mean 1/(J.. The service 
requested by an arriving customer is performed by a single server. The 
system has s identical servers, and there is no waiting room. The probability 
that there are n, n = 0 , 1 , . . . , s, customers in the system at time t, 
Pn{t), 
is represented by the following set of forward differential equations: 
| P o ( t ) = /xi'i(t)-A(t)Po(t), 
jtPn(t) 
= A(t)Pn_i(*) + (n + l)/iP„+i(t) 
- (A(t) + n/i)Pn(t), 
0 < n < s , 
d 
(1) 
diP,{t) 
= A(t)P._i(t) - 
sfiPs{t), 
where P0(t) + Px{t) + P2(t) + ••• + Ps(t) = 1, t > 0, and 0 < Pn{t) < 1 
for t > 0 and n — 0,1,2, . . . , s , with initial conditions: Po(0) = 1 and 
P n ( 0 ) = 0 ; n = l,2,3,...,s. 
In the stationary case, where the arrival rate is constant, that is X(t) = A 
for all t, we have that (d/dt)Pn(t) 
—> 0 for all n as t —» oo. The above system 
of differential equations reduces to a set of linear equations from which we 
can obtain the familiar closed-form solution for the probability Pn that 
there are n customers in the system: 
Pn(t)= 
lim V {Q(t) = n} = - f ^ - , 
n = 0,l,2,...,s 
(2) 
E'Vd 
i=0 
where p = X/p,, and Q(t) is the number of customers in the system at 
time t. The probability of blocking BP is: 
BP= 
lim P{Q(t) = s} = J ^ - 
(3) 
t—*oo 
5>7< 
i=0 
and the average number of customers in the system (i.e. the average number 
of busy servers) is: 
lim E[Q(t)]=E[Q] 
= (l-BP)p. 
(4) 
t—KX> 

The Nonstationary 
Loss Queue 
107 
The expression for Pn(t) is independent of time, for sufficiently large t, 
due to the stationary arrival process. 
In the case of the nonstationary arrival rate, (d/dt)Pn(t) 
will converge 
to some value which is not necessarily zero at all time. In fact, 
(d/dt)Pn(t) 
will converge to some function of time depending on the structure of X(t). 
Therefore, in order to obtain the queue-length distribution, one must solve 
the set of differential in (1). The solution to these differential equations is 
complex even for fairly small systems with special arrival rate functions 
X(t). For example, let us consider the simplest case where there is only one 
server in the system. Let X(t) and \i be the arrival rate function and service 
rate respectively. Then, the forward equations in (1) become: 
jtP0(t) 
= nPi(t) ~ \(t)Po(t) 
and 
j^it) 
= X{t)P0{t) - 
^(t) 
where Po(0) = 1 and Po(t) + Pi{t) = 1, t > 0. This system can be reduced 
to solving a single differential equation: 
^ P i ( t ) + [X(t) + /i]P!(t) = X(t), 
with Pi(0) = 0 
which can be done as follows. Multiplying both sides by e' x(r>)+^dri we 
have: 
jPi{t)e$ 
*<»»)+/**» + [A(t) +fl]efxM+^dr>P1(t) 
= 
X(t)efXM+»dn 
or 
— (P!(t)el 
x{v)+>ldT>\ = X(t)e! x^)+»dn ^ 
Given that Pi(0) = 0, we finally have the blocking probability, BP(t): 
BP(t) = Pi(t)= 
f 
X(u)e^x^)+^dr,due-jx(t)+IJ,dt^ 
Jo 
In view of the difficulty in solving the nonstationary loss queue, various 
approximation methods have been developed. In this chapter, we review 
several of these approximation methods and we also present a new tech-
nique, the fixed-point approximation (FPA) method, which yields the mean 

108 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
number of customers and the blocking probability functions in a nonsta-
tionary loss queue. Numerical evidence points to the fact that the FPA 
method gives the exact solution. 
The chapter is organised as follows. In Sees. 7.2 to 7.7 we describe the fol-
lowing approximation methods: the simple stationary approximation (SSA), 
the stationary peakedness approximation (PK), the average stationary ap-
proximation (ASA), the closure approximation for nonstationary 
queues, 
the pointwise stationary approximation (PSA), the modified offered load 
approximation (MOL). In Sec. 7.8, we present the fixed point approxima-
tion (FPA) method, and finally the conclusions are given in Sec. 7.9. 
7.2. The Simple Stationary Approximation (SSA) Method 
This method uses the average arrival rate of the nonstationary model to 
obtain the steady-state results. The average arrival rate for a cycle of length 
T i s 
*=ffQ 
Ht)dt. 
(5) 
Let Q(t) be number of customers in the system at time t. Then, the steady-
state distribution can be obtained using the expression: 
pn ln\ 
A 
P{Q(t) = n) = 
H
s ' 
, 
n = 0,1,2,..., s, where p = -
i=0 
and the blocking probability, BP(t), at time t is the Erlang loss formula 
with parameter (s,p), as follows: 
BP(t) = P{Q(t) = s} = 
f/sl 
, 
for all t. 
5>7i! 
i=0 
The SSA method is simple and can be applied to a wide range of 
queuing systems. It provides a reasonable approximation for the nonstation-
ary system with a weakly varying arrival rate. (An arrival rate is considered 
weakly varying over time if the arrival rate function remains within ±10% 
interval from the average arrival rate for all t.) However, this method no-
ticeably underestimates the average performance measures of a nonstation-
ary system with a strongly varying arrival rate. Green et al.3 numerically 
investigated the level of nonstationarity at which this method provides a 
reasonable accuracy assuming a sinusoidal arrival rate function. The effect 

The Nonstationary Loss Queue 
109 
of nonstationarity with respect to amplitude, frequency of events and the 
size of the system (i.e. number of servers) was studied numerically. The 
authors showed that this method is applicable to relatively small systems 
(e.g. one or two servers) with small relative amplitude (e.g. less than 10%), 
and short cycle length (equivalently infrequent events). 
Abdalla and Boucherie4 used the SSA method to analyse a network 
of nonstationary loss queues. Consider a network of N independent loss 
queues, each with a time-dependent Poisson stream of external arrivals 
at rate Xi(t) and s^ servers, i = 1,2,... ,N. Upon service completion at 
Queue i, a customer moves to node j with probability q^ or it depart from 
the system with probability qi0. Any external or internal arrival to Queue i 
finds all servers busy is lost. 
The arrival rate to each queue in the network is averaged over time 
using (5). Then the probability that the system is in state n where n G 5, 
S = { n £ N w: 0 < n* < su i = 1, 2,..., N} is: 
N 
„"< 
/ 
N 
nnj 
^o-nSr/EII^-
i = l 
/ 
n g S j = l •> 
The offered load of Queue j , pj, satisfies the solution of the following 
traffic equations: 
N 
0 = h + "52 HiQijPi ~ PjPj , J = 1.2, • • •, N. 
i=l 
It is worth mentioning that this method is an exact solution for loss 
networks with Markovian branching and stationary arrivals if and only 
the rates of Queue j , j = 1,2,..., JV, in the network satisfy the following 
conditions: 
Xj = qjjpj 
and qtjPi = qjiPj , j = 1,2,..., N. 
The SSA underestimates the average performance measure of nonsta-
tionary systems even when the above two conditions are satisfied. 
7.3. The Stationary Peakedness Approximation (PK) 
Method 
The SSA method presented above does not consider the nonstationarity 
of the system. This can be done by using a non-Poisson stationary point 
process to approximate the time-dependent Poisson arrival process. Massey 
and Whitt5 presented two approaches and used the heavy traffic peakedness 

110 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
to approximate the blocking probability of the nonstationary loss queue. 
(The peakedness is defined as the ratio of the variance to the mean of the 
steady-state number of customers in an infinite-server model with the same 
service time distribution and arrival process.) 
To explain how this method works we consider a periodic Poisson arrival 
process with period T. The nonstationary arrival process is approximated 
by dividing the cycle T into n subintervals. It is assumed that the arrival 
rate at each subinterval is approximately constant. The arrival rate in any 
one subinterval is: 
j-kT/n 
Afc = / 
X{u)du, 
1 < k < n. 
J(k-l)T/n 
Then, the mean number of arrivals is: 
1 ."^ 
AT 
- 
1 
fT 
A„ = - y ^ Afc = — , 
where A = — / 
\{u)du , 
nt[ 
n 
TJ° 
and its variance is: 
cr„ = Xr, + - V(Afc - \nf 
rt. 
*•—* 
n 
fc=l 
Based on the above analysis, the overall arrival process M(£) in the in-
terval (0, T] is approximated by the stationary point process {N(t) : t > 0} 
with mean and variance: 
n 
n\n 
= XT 
and 
na2
n = XT + ^(A f c - A„)2 . 
fc=i 
One may notice that the variance depends heavily on n. For example, 
for n = 1, na\ = AT; while na\ —» AT as n —> oo. Therefore, n should 
be an intermediate point to capture the variability in arrival process. Next, 
the peakedness c2 for number of customers in the infinite server system, 
Q(t), 
is calculated: 
c2 = Var[N(T)} 
l + 4£>*-*n)2 
E[N(T)\ 
ATfc=Q 
Assuming that the arrival rate over each subinterval is constant, c2 could 
be approximated as follows: 
l-T 
1 
rT 
c2 
1 + M ^ ) l (A<")-Vd"ssl + s / w>-*>'*•• 

The Nonstationary 
Loss Queue 
111 
It is always possible to rescale the problem to make the unit time equal to 
the mean service time. This means that /i = 1. In this case, a good choice 
for n is to be equal to T. Thus, 
/ 
(A(tz)-A)2 
Jo 
c 2 « i + ^ / 
(\(u)-\ydu. 
Then, c2 is used to compute the heavy traffic peakedness of the nonsta-
tionary process. The heavy-traffic peakedness for an infinite-server system 
with exponential service distribution (/i = 1) is: 
l + ^± = l + 
±£{\M-\)2du. 
2 
2AT, 
Finally, the approximate blocking probability for the M(t)/M/s/0 
queue 
with time unit equals to the mean service time (i.e. /i = 1) is given by the 
Erlang loss formula with updated number of servers s/z (s/z is integer) 
and updated offered load X/z as follows: 
BP{t) = pm) = s} = Cx!/fz/{s/z)l. 
E(A»7*! 
The average number of customers is: 
E[Q{t)] = 
{l-BP{t))-z. 
This method is a stationary approximation of the original system. In 
other words, the PK method finds non-Poisson stationary parameters that 
better approximate the time-dependent arrival process. Therefore, the re-
sulting approximation with the new parameters is a time reversible process. 
Although this approximation does not provide a solution for the system as a 
function time, it provides a better approximation than the SSA method for 
the average measure of performance of nonstationary Erlang loss models. 
7.4. The Average Stationary Approximation (ASA) 
Method 
This method was introduced by Whitt6 for loss queues with periodic arrival 
rates. This approximation starts by dividing the arrival rate cycle T into 
sub-intervals each of length r, where r is proportional or equal to the mean 

112 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
service time. The arrival rate A(£) over subinterval [t — r, t] is taken to be 
equal to the average arrival rate during [t — r, t] as follows: 
1 
ftk 
Afc(<) = 
r / 
X(u)du, 
t &[tk — afi~1,tk], 
otfi~l — T . 
The stationary results are used as a function of t and \(t) to approxi-
mate the performance measures. Namely, the blocking probability, BP(t, k), 
during sub-interval k is approximated as follows: 
BP(t,k) = -f&L, 
Pk = ^ - , 
te[tk-a^\tk] 
EM* 
i=0 
and the average number of customers, E[Q(t,k)], during sub-interval k: 
E[Q{t,k)] = (1 - BP(t,A;)) — , 
for t € [tk 
-a^1,tk]. 
A* 
Obviously, the performance measures are going to be step functions 
due to the discretisation of the arrival process. This method is simple to 
apply and it produces an insight into the behaviour of the performance 
measures over time. In addition, this method provides an exact solution 
for the M(t)/D/oo 
queue when a = 1. This method depends mainly on the 
choice of the subinterval length (r) which is strongly related to the choice of 
a. If a is chosen to be small when it should not be, the approximation will 
pick up more variability from the arrival process than needed. In contrast, 
if a is chosen to be large then this method will approach the stationary 
approximation which kills the variability of the performance measures over 
time. 
7.5. The Closure Approximation for Non-Stationary 
Queues 
This method reduces the number of differential equations needed to be 
solved by considering the differential equations of the mean and the variance 
of the number of customers in the system. In many systems, the equations 
for the mean and the variance involve more variables than the number 
of equations. Consequently, additional equations are required in order to 
obtain a unique solution. 
Consider an M(t)/M/1 
queue with arrival rate X(t) and service rate fi. 
The probability Pn(t) of having n in the system at time t is given by the 

The Nonstationary 
Loss Queue 
113 
following set of differential equations: 
lp0(t) 
= -\(t)P0(t) 
+ 
fiP1(t), 
d 
( 6 ) 
-Pn(t) 
= -(X(t) + fi)Pn(t) + A(t)Pn_i(t) + nPn+i(t), 
n > 0. 
Multiplying (6) by n and summing over all n gives: 
I 
0 0 
, 
- £ [ n ] = 5 > ^ P „ ( * ) = A(0 - Ml - P0(t)). 
(7) 
n=0 
Multiplying (6) by n2 and summing over all n gives: 
- £ [ n 2 ] = ^ 
n 2 - P „ ( i ) = A(t) - „(1 - Po(*)) + 2E[n](A(t) - /i). 
n=0 
Hence, the variance is as follows: 
| 
Var[n] = ^E[n 2] - | £ [ n ] 2 = A(t) + /i^o(t)(2E[n] + 1). 
(8) 
Equations (7) and (8) provide a system of two differential equations in 
three unknowns (Var[n], E[n] and Po(t)). To obtain a unique solution using 
these equations an additional equation of Var[n], E[n] and Po(t) is required 
to bound the solution. 
Rothkopf and Oren7 consider the negative binomial distribution to pro-
vide a closure function for the M(t)/M(t)/s 
system. The negative binomial 
with probability of success q and parameters n and r has the form: 
Pn(q,r)=(r 
+ l~1^qr(l-q)n, 
n = 
0,l,2,..., 
with mean r(l — q)q~1 and variance is r(l — q)q~2. 
The negative binomial reduces to the geometric distribution if its pa-
rameters (q and r) are chosen such that: 
Varin] = E[n](l + E[n]). 
(9) 
The number of customers in an M/M/l system has a geometric distri-
bution. Therefore, the parameters q and r can be chosen as functions of the 
mean and variance of the system so that the resulting negative binomial 
satisfies property (9). The new negative binomial distribution will have the 
following parameters: 
q(t) = 
L J 
and 
r(t) - 
l J 
Var[n] 
Var\n] - E[n) 

114 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
where Var[n] and E[n] are functions of time. The closure function Po(t) of 
(6) is obtained by setting n equals to zero in the negative binomial with 
the parameters q(t) and r(t): 
Po(t)=p0(q(t),r(t))=q(t)r{t). 
Similarly, the mean and variance of M(t)/M/s 
system are: 
d 
s~1 
-E{n] = \{t) - tis + fiJ2(s - n)pn(t) 
(10) 
n=0 
and 
d 
s _ 1 
— Var\n] = \{t) + fis - /i ^(2Et[n] + 1 - 2n)(s - n)Pn{t). 
(11) 
n=0 
The closure functions (Pn(t) for n = 0,1, 2,..., s—1) of (10) and (11) are 
obtained by evaluating the negative binomial distribution described earlier 
at n = 0,1,2,... ,s — 1. 
This method provides an exact solution for the stationary M/M/l queue 
and a very good approximation for the M(t)/M/1 
queue due to the fact that 
the stationary system has a geometric steady-state solution. However, for 
the M(t)/M/s 
queue the error of the approximation increases very quickly 
as the number of servers increases. Rothkopf and Oren7 provided an er-
ror correction term to improve the accuracy of the approximation for the 
M(t)/M/s/s 
queue. 
7.6. The Pointwise Stationary Approximation (PSA) 
Method 
This method is based on the idea that the nonstationary loss queue approx-
imately behaves like a stationary model at each instance of time. Thus, the 
steady-state results of the stationary loss queue can be used to approxi-
mate the nonstationary loss queue at each point on time. This method was 
first introduced by Grassman8 in 1983 as a way of constructing an upper 
bound on the expected number of customers in the queue. Green et al.3 
showed numerically that PSA gives an upper bound on the expected num-
ber of customers in the system and probability of delay, if the maximum 
traffic intensity is strictly less than one. In addition, Green and Kolesar10 
used the PSA method to approximate the steady-state average performance 
measures of the periodic M(t)/M/s/s 
queue. 
Consider a stationary loss queue with arrival rate A and service rate 
fi. Let Q(t) be number of customers in the system at time t. Then, the 

The Nonstationary 
Loss Queue 
115 
probability Pn that there are n customers in the system is: 
Pn = lim P{Q{t)=n} 
= -^L~ 
, 
t—too 
i=0 
p = - , 
n = 0,l,2,...,s. 
The probability of blocking BP is: 
BP = lim P{Q(t) = s}= -f^~ 
, 
t—tOO 
i=0 
and the average number in the system (i.e. average number of busy servers) 
is: 
lim E[Q(t)]=E[Q] 
= 
(l-BP)p. 
t—>00 
In the PSA method, the time dependent-steady state distribution of 
the nonstationary Erlang loss system, given that the arrival rate is X(t) 
and service rate is p,, is calculated as follows: 
p(t)n/n\ 
, N 
X(t) 
Pn{t) = 
s 
, 
p(t) = -^- 
and 
n = 0,l,2,...,s 
EPW'A! 
M 
i=0 
the time-dependent steady-state blocking probability is 
BP(t) = Ps{t) = 
-pWL, 
i=0 
and the time-dependent steady-state average number in the system is: 
E[Q(t)} = (1 - 
BP(t))p(t) 
where p(t) = X(t)/p. 
The PSA method can be easily generalised to most of the queuing sys-
tems, as long as p < 1 for all t is required for the stability of the equivalent 
stationary system. 
An important factor that affects the accuracy of the PSA is the arrival 
rate function. The PSA method will provide a good approximation as the 
arrival rate increases. For example, consider two nonstationary loss queues 
with sinusoidal arrival rate function A(£) = A + f3sin(jT) 
where A is the 

116 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
average arrival rate, f3 is the amplitude and 7 is the frequency set equal to 
27r/T, T being the cycle length. Let {X(t) = 5 + 2.5 sin(i), /x = 0.5, s = 10} 
and {A(i) = 20 + 10sin(i), ji = 2, s = 10} be the parameters of loss queues 
1 and 2 respectively. Then according to PSA, the time-dependent offered 
load for both systems is 
p(i) = ^ 
= 10 + 5sin(t). 
A* 
Although both systems have the same offered load, PSA will provide a 
better approximation for loss Queue 2, since it needs shorter time to reach 
the steady state due to the higher arrival and service rates. This means that 
loss Queue 2 will behave more like a stationary system within reasonably 
small interval of time than Queue 1. 
In Fig. 7.1, we plot the exact time-dependent average number E[Q(t)] for 
loss queue 1, 2 (labelled "Queue 1" and "Queue 2" respectively in Fig. 7.1) 
and the PSA values as a function of time t. As expected, PSA provides 
better approximation for loss Queue 2 than for loss Queue 1. 
Fig. 7.1. 
PSA and exact values of the average number of customers in loss queues 1 
and 2. 
As can be seen in Fig. 7.1, the PSA method overestimates the peak of the 
average number of customers. In addition, the PSA peak lags the peak of the 
average number of customers. (The same also applies to other performance 
measures.) These two problems become negligible as the arrival and service 

The Nonstationary 
Loss Queue 
117 
Fig. 7.2. 
Exact and PSA values of the average number of customers. 
rates increase. Whitt6 showed that the PSA solution for an M(t)/M(t)/s 
queue is asymptotically correct as the rates increase. 
Green and Kolesar12'13 proposed the Simple Peak Hour Approximation 
(SPHA) technique for the computation of average performance measures 
of periodic systems during the peak period. SPHA starts by obtaining the 
measure of interest, say X(t), using the PSA method. Next, the peak time 
t* at which the X(t) achieves its maximum is determined. The average of 
X(t) over the interval [a, b] where t* is the center of the interval is the 
SPHA value for X(t). 
SSA and PSA can be seen as two extreme cases of averaging out the 
arrival rate. The SSA method averages the arrival rate X(t) over a period of 
time equal to the cycle length T, whereas the PSA method uses the average 
arrival rate over an infinitesimally small interval. 
Finally, the PSA method has also been used to analyse a network nonsta-
tionary loss queues, see Massey and Whitt14 and Abdalla and Boucherie4. 
The same system of traffic equations is used as in the SSA method only the 
arrival rates are taken to be functions of time instead of averages. That is, 
the time-dependent offered loads pj (t) are obtained by solving the following 

118 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
system of traffic equations in time t: 
N 
0 = \j{t) + Y,m<liJPi(t)-V3Pi(t); 
3 = 1,2,..-,N. 
(12) 
i=l 
Then, the probability, P(n;t), 
of having n in the system, for n £ S, 
S= 
{ n e N N : 0 < ni < s^ i = 1,2,..., iV}, is 
i=l 
l 
/ 
n€S j=l 
J 
7.7. The Modified Offered Load Approximation (MOL) Method 
Let us first consider the stationary loss queue M/M/s/s and the stationary 
infinite server queue M/M/oo. Let Qoo(t) be the number of customers in 
the infinite server queue at time t. The probability Pn that there are n 
customers in an M/M/oo with an arrival rate A and a service rate {/, is: 
Pn = lim P{Qoo(t) = n} = Z-re-P , 
where p = X//J,. Likewise, let Q(t) be number of customers in the loss queue 
with s servers at time t. The probability Pn that there are n customers in 
an M/M/s/0 with an arrival rate A and a service rate fi, is: 
Pn = lim P{Q(t) = n}= f ' 
, 
i=0 
where p = A//u and n — 0,1,2,..., s. 
Another way to obtain the stationary distribution of the M/M/s/0 
queue is to use the fact that the M/M/s/0 queue is a truncated process of 
an M/M/oo queue which is a reversible Markov process. Since the arrival 
rates are time invariant we dropped the time variable from the random 
variables. Then, we have: 
P{Q = n} = P{Qx=nlQx<s} 
= ^f^ 
= J ^ . 
In the M(t)/M/oo queue, the rate of change in the average number of 
customers at time t is equal to the difference between the arrival rate and 
the departure rate due to the Markovian property. That is, 
jtE[Q00(t)] 
= 
X(t)-liE[Q00(t)]. 

The Nonstationary 
Loss Queue 
119 
Recall that there is always an idle server for each arriving customer 
to the M(i)/M/oo queue. This means that no customers are lost and all 
customers in the system at time t are being served. Therefore, the average 
number of customers at time t is equal to the average number of customers 
in the system at time t which equals to the offered load p(t). We have the 
following differential equation for p(t): 
jtp(t) 
= X(t) - np(t). 
(14) 
Analogous to the stationary queues, one can approximate the 
M(t)/M/s/0 
by truncating the M(i)/M/oo queue. This method is called the modified 
offered load method (MOL). The MOL approximation was first developed 
by Jagerman15 in 1975. The probability Pn(t) that there are n customers 
in the system using MOL is: 
o(t)n /n' 
Pn(t) « P{Qoo(t) = n\Qoo(t) <s}= 
;V 
' , 
n = 0,1,2,..., s 
i=0 
where p(t) is determined from (14). 
The truncated M/M/co queue provides an exact solution to the 
M/M/s/0 queue due to the reversibility property. In the case of nonstation-
ary arrival process, the reversibility property is lost and hence the truncated 
M(i)/M/oo will not provide an exact solution to the M(t)/M/s/0. Massy 
and Whitt16 developed analytical bounds on the error between the MOL 
approximation and the exact solution of the M(£)/M/s/0 system. 
The MOL method can be seen as averaging out the arrival rate over 
an interval that depends on the mean and the distribution of the service 
time. This is in contrast to the SSA method where the arrival rate X(t) is 
averaged over the cycle length T, and the PSA method where the arrival 
rate is averaged over an infinitesimally small interval. 
The M(t)/M/s/s 
behaves like M(i)/M/oo as the blocking probability 
gets smaller. In view of this, the MOL method provides a good approx-
imation for the M(t)/M/s/s 
as long as the system has a small blocking 
probability. Experiments showed that the actual blocking probability of 
the M(t)/M/s/s 
queue should be less than 0.1 in order for the MOL to 
provide a good approximation. As expected, the MOL underestimates the 
blocking probability of a loss queue with a high load, i.e. when the exact 
blocking probability is high. 
The MOL method provides a good estimation for the peak time for a 
loss queue with a small blocking probability. This is due to the fact that 

120 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
the MOL method is sensitive to the service process through its mean and 
distribution. The PSA method depends on the service distribution only 
through its mean. As a result, PSA appears to lag the actual performance 
measures values of the system. Figure 7.3 shows the exact, PSA, and MOL 
values of the average number of customers in an M(t)/M/s/s 
queue with 
\{t) = 20 + 15sin(2t), \i = 2 and s = 15. 
0 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Time 
Fig. 7.3. 
Exact, PSA and MOL values of the average number of customers. 
The MOL method has also been used to analyse networks of non-
stationary loss queues. Whitt17 described how the MOL method can be 
used in a decomposition algorithm for the analysis of a nonstationary loss 
network. Jennings and Massey18 used the MOL method to analyse time-
dependent circuit-switched networks. Abdalla and Boucherie4 applied the 
MOL method to a mobile communication network with time-varying ar-
rival rates and redialing. The authors established an exact expression for 
the error in the MOL approximation as well as bounds on the error. 
The MOL method is used to analyse a network of nonstationary loss 
queues as follows. Consider a network consisting of N independent loss 
queues, each with a time dependent Poisson stream of external arrivals 
at rate Aj(£) and Si servers, i = 1,2,...,N. 
Upon service completion at 
Queue i, a customer moves to Queue j with probability qij or it depart 
from the system with probability q^. Any external or internal arrival to 

The Nonstationary Loss Queue 
121 
Queue i finds all servers busy is lost. The traffic equations of the equivalent 
network consisting of nonstationary infinite server queues are first solved in 
order to obtain the time-dependent offered loads pi(t),i = 1,2,...,N. 
This 
system of traffic equations is the same as in (12) used in the PSA method 
except that the (d/dt)pi(t), i = l,2,...,N, 
are not taken to be zero. That is, 
the time dependent offered loads pj (t) are obtained by solving the following 
system of differential equations in time t: 
d 
N 
-rpj{t) = Xj{t) + ^2mijPi(t) 
~ HPj(t); 
3 = 1,2, • • •, N. 
dt 
t = i 
Then, for n € {n € NN: 0 < m < s^; i = 1,2,..., N} 
i=l 
/ 
neS j=l 
3 
It is worth mentioning that the M t/M/s/0 behaves like Mt/M/oo as 
the blocking probability gets smaller. Then, it is expected that the MOL 
method will provide a good approximation for the nodes in the system that 
has a small blocking probability. 
7.8. The Fixed Point Approximation (FPA) Method 
The fixed point approximation (FPA) method was proposed by Alnowibet 
and Perros19. This method calculates numerically the time-dependent mean 
number of customers and blocking probability functions in a nonstationary 
multi-rate loss queue. Experimental results showed that the FPA algorithm 
provides an exact solution. The FPA method has also been extended to non-
stationary queuing networks of multi-rate loss queues, see Alnowibet and 
Perros19, and nonstationary queuing networks with population constraints, 
see Alnowibet and Perros20. In this chapter, we describe the FPA method 
for the analysis of the nonstationary (single-class) loss queue. Consider a 
loss queue M(t)/M/s/s 
with a Poisson arrival process with timedependent 
rate X(t). The time-dependent average number of customers E[Q(t)} in an 
M(t)/M/s/s 
queue can be expressed as the difference between the effective 
arrival rate and the departure rate at time t. We have: 
jtE[Q(t)\ 
= A(t)(l - BP(t)) - \piP{Q{t) = 1} + 2nP{Q(t) = 2} + • • • 
+ SfiP{Q(t) = s}} 

122 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
where BP(t) is the blocking probability at time t. The above equation can 
be written as follows: 
jtE[Q{t)} = A(t)(l - BP(t)) - nE[Q(t)]. 
(15) 
We note that the time-dependent mean number of customers is given by 
the expression: E[Q(t)] = p{t){l — BP{t)), from which we have the following 
expression for the offered load p(t): 
BP(t) = - Z ® ^ - . 
(17) 
£p(*)7* 
i=0 
Using expressions in (15), (16), and (17), we can calculate the blocking 
probability iteratively. The steps of the algorithm are as follows: 
1. Choose an appropriate At, final time Tf and tolerance e. 
2. Choose initial conditions for E[Q{t)]. Set E[Q(0)] = 0. 
3. Evaluate A(t) at t = 0, At, 2At, ...,Tf. 
4. Start with an initial blocking probability BP°(t) 
— 0, t — 0, At, 
2At,...,Tf. 
5. Set the iteration counter k = 0. 
6. Solve numerically for E[Qk(t)} using the following equation: 
E[Qk(t + At)] = E[Qk(t)} + A(t)(l - BPk(t))At 
- 
^E[Qk(t)}At. 
7. Calculate pk(t) = ^
^ 
, 
* = 0, At, 2At,..., Tf. 
8. Update 
blocking 
probability 
BPk+1(t) 
= 
\P ^ ' / a ! , 
t= 
0,At,...,Tf. 
9. If \\BPk{t) - BPk+1(t)\\ 
< £, then BPk{t) has converged and the algo-
rithm stops. Else, set k = k + 1 and go to step 6. 
The algorithm does not require a closed-form expression for the arrival 
rate function. It only needs that the arrival rate function be defined at 
time points equally spaced by At. In view of this, any periodic arrival rate 
function can be used irrespective of whether we know its closed-form or not. 

The Nonstationary Loss Queue 
123 
Since this algorithm discretises the arrival rate function, the continuity and 
differentiability properties of the arrival rate function are not necessary. 
We also note that the algorithm can be easily extended to the case where 
the service rate is also time-dependent by simply defining the service rate 
as a vector corresponding to the same time points used for the arrival rate 
function. 
In all the experiments the FPA results were very close to the exact 
numerical results or within the simulation confidence intervals. This lead us 
to the conjecture that (17) for the nonstationary blocking probability used 
in the FPA method is in fact correct. However, due to the discretisation 
process, the FPA and the exact numerical results never matched, which 
prevented from establishing beyond doubt the correctness of (17). As an 
example, let us consider a loss queue with a sinusoidal arrival rate function 
\(t) = A + /3sin(7*), where A = 20, j3 = 15 and 7 = 2, s = 10, and the 
service rate fi = 1. The FPA method was applied with tolerance e = 0.01 
for different values of At. The average absolute error between the exact 
and the FPA solutions for the blocking probability and the average number 
of customers are given in Table 7.1. As can be seen the absolute error 
decreases as At decreases. Due to the CPU and memory limitations, it was 
not possible to consider At values less than 0.0001. 
Table 7.1. Average absolute error of FPA as At —> 0. 
ABP(t) 
E[Q(t)] 
At = 
0.1 
0.269 
0.0992 
At = 
0.05 
0.0165 
0.692 
At = 
0.01 
0.0123 
0.0507 
At = 
0.005 
0.0118 
0.0474 
A4 = 
0.001 
0.0115 
0.0447 
At = 
0.0005 
0.0114 
0.0445 
At = 
0.0001 
0.0114 
0.0445 
7.9. Conclusions 
The loss queue has been extensively studied in the stationary case, i.e., 
assuming that the arrival rate and the service rate are time invariant. The 
nonstationary loss queue, where the arrival rate is time-dependent is also 
of interest, since the arrival rate in most communication systems varies 
over time. In view of the difficulty in solving the nonstationary loss queue, 
various approximation methods have been developed. In this chapter, we 
reviewed the following approximation methods: the simple stationary ap-
proximation (SSA), the stationary peakedness approximation (PK), the av-
erage stationary approximation (ASA), the closure approximation for non-

124 
K. A. Alnowibet and H. Perros 
stationary queues, the pointwise stationary approximation (PSA), and the 
modified offered load approximation (MOL). We also presented a new tech-
nique, referred to as the fixed-point approximation 
(FPA) method, which 
yields the mean number of customers and the blocking probability func-
tions in a nonstationary loss queues. Numerical evidence points to the fact 
that the FPA method gives the exact solution. 
References 
1. Washington, A. N. and Perros, H. G., "Call blocking probabilities in a traffic 
groomed tandem optical network", Special issue dedicated to the memory of 
Professor Olga Casals, Blondia and Stavrakakis (Eds.) Journal of Computer 
Networks, 45 (2004), 281-294. 
2. Battestilli, L. and Perros, H. G., "End-to-End Burst Probabilities in an OBS 
Network with Simultaneous Link Possession" Workshop on OBS, BroadNets 
2004. 
http://www.csc.ncsu.edU/faculty/perros//recentpapers.html. 
3. Green, L. V., Kolesar, P. J. and Svoronos, A., "Some Effects of Nonstation-
arity On Multiserver Markovian Queues Systems", Operations Research, 39 
(1991), 502-511. 
4. Abdalla, N. and Boucherie R. J., "Blocking Probabilities in Mobile Com-
munications Networks with Time-Varying Rates and Redialing Subscribers", 
Annals of Operations Research, 112 (2002), 15-34. 
5. Massey, W. A. and Whitt W., "Stationary-Process Approximation for the 
Nonstationary Erlang Loss Model", Operations Research, 44 (1996), 976-983. 
6. Whitt W., "The Pointwise Stationary Approximation for Mt/Mt/s Queues 
is Asymptotically Correct as the Rates Increase", Management Sciences, 37 
(1991), 307-314. 
7. Rothkopf, M. H. and Oren, S. S., "A Closure Approximation for the Nonsta-
tionary M/M/s Queue", Management Sciences, 25 (1979), 522-534. 
8. Grassmann, W., "The Convexity of the Mean Queue Size of the M/M/c 
Queue with Respect to the Traffic Intensity", Journal of Applied Probability, 
20 (1983), 916-919. 
9. Green, L.V. and Kolesar, P. J., "The Pointwise Stationary Approximation 
for Queues with Nonstationary Arrivals", Management Sciences, 37 (1991), 
84-97. 
10. Green, L.V. and Kolesar, P. J., "The Lagged PSA for Estimating Peak Con-
gestion in Multiserver Markovian Queues with Periodic Arrival Rates", Man-
agement Sciences, 43 (1997), 80-87. 
11. Green, L.V. and Kolesar, P. J., "On the Accuracy of the Simple Peak Hour 
Approximation for Markovian Queues", Management Sciences, 41 (1995), 
1353-1370. 
12. Massey, W. A. and Whitt W., "Networks of Infinite-Server Queues with Non-
stationary Poisson Input", Queuing Systems, 13 (1993), 183-251. 
13. Jagerman, D. L., "Nonstationary Blocking in Telephone Traffic", The Bell 

The Nonstationary Loss Queue 
125 
System Technical Journal, 54 (1975), 626-661. 
14. Massey, W. A. and Whitt W., "An Analysis of the Modified Offered-load 
Approximation for the Nonstationary Loss Model", Annals of Applied Prob-
ability, 4 (1994), 1145-1160. 
15. Whitt, W., "Decomposition Approximation for Time-Dependent Markovian 
Queuing Networks", Operations Research Letters, 24 (1999), 97-103. 
16. Jennings, O. B. and Massey, W. A., "A Modified Offered Load Approximation 
for Nonstationary Circuit Switched Networks", Telecommunication 
Systems, 
7 (1997), 229-251. 
17. Alnowibet, K. and Perros, H.G., "Nonstationary Loss Queues and Loss Que-
ueing Networks", 
http://www.esc.ncsu.edu/faculty/perros//recentpapers.html 
18. Alnowibet, K. and Perros, EL, "Nonstationary Analysis of Circuit-Switched 
Communication networks" 
http://www.esc.ncsu.edu/faculty/perros 

This page is intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 8 
Stabilisation Techniques for Load-Dependent Queuing 
Networks Algorithms 
Giuliano Casale and Giuseppe Serazzi 
Politecnico di Milano, Dip. di Elettronica e Informazione 
Via Ponzio 34/5, 1-20133 Milano, Italy 
{giuliano. casale, giuseppe. serazzi} Qpolimi. it 
Product-Form (PF) queuing networks are one of the most popular mod-
elling techniques for evaluating the performances of computing and 
telecommunication infrastructures. Several computational algorithms 
have been developed for their exact solution. Unlike the algorithms for 
load-independent models, the ones for models with queue-dependent 
servers, either with single class or multiclass workloads, are numeri-
cally unstable. Furthermore, existing numerical stabilisation technique 
for multiclass load-dependent models are not always efficient. The search 
for such result is motivated by the complexity of nowadays systems, 
which often require the use of load-dependent models. 
In this work we review numerical instabilities of computational algo-
rithms for product-form queuing networks. Then, we propose a general 
solution to the problem based on arbitrary precision arithmetics. Fi-
nally, we discuss a new specialised stabilisation technique for two class 
load-dependent models. 
8.1. Introduction 
Closed queuing network models10 have played an important role in 
the performance evaluation of complex computer and telecommunica-
tion systems17. Their applications14,4'13 span over several types of perfor-
mance evaluation studies, such as system tuning, optimisation and capacity 
planning. 
Among the most important reasons of this success is the availability 
of a simple product-form expression of the exact steady-state probability 
127 

128 
G. Casale and G. Serazzi 
distribution of network states3. The queuing networks that have such 
closed form expression are referred to as Product-Form Queuing Networks 
(PFQN). This property has led to the definition of efficient exact algo-
rithms, including the Convolution Algorithm6, the Mean Value Analysis20 
(MVA) and algorithms that work by recursion on the number of customer 
classes, e.g. RECAL8. An important feature of the MVA algorithm, com-
pared to the others, is that it grants the numerical stability of the compu-
tation, meaning that: (i) the quantities computed at each step always lie 
within the floating-point range allowed by the computer architecture; (ii) 
no significant precision loss due to numerical round-offs is suffered. Unfor-
tunately, this interesting property holds only for load-independent models, 
i.e. models where the rate at which the jobs are served are processed at each 
server is assumed to be constant. Indeed, exact solution algorithms for load-
dependent models, i.e., models comprising servers with queue-dependent 
service rates, either with a single class or multiclass customers, frequently 
exhibit numerical instabilities. 
Nevertheless, models of Web architectures contain a large number of 
heterogenous components that often require the use of load-dependent 
servers. For example, approximations of subsystems including population 
constraints (e.g. maximum number of HTTP connections) may be obtained 
with load-dependent PF flow-equivalent servers14. In this work we review 
numerical instabilities of computational algorithms for PFQN. Then, we 
propose a general solution to the problem based on arbitrary precision 
arithmetics. Finally, we consider a stabilisation technique for two class load-
dependent models. The paper is organised as follows: Section 8.2 gives pre-
liminary concepts on numerical instabilities and queuing networks. Section 
8.3 explores instabilities in the Convolution Algorithm and in the load-
dependent MVA. Section 8.4 discusses two new stabilisation techniques. 
Finally, Sec. 8.5 concludes the chapter. 
8.2. Preliminaries 
8.2.1. Numerical 
Exceptions 
In this section we give a brief overview of numerical instabilities in floating-
point computations. In actual computer architectures a floating point 
number1 is represented using three elements: a sign, an exponent e and a 
mantissa m. For instance, the number x = —1.04 • 10~12 has negative sign, 
mantissa m — 1.04 and exponent e = —12. Looking at the binary represen-
tation, the sign takes a single bit while the remaining bits, whose number 

Stabilisation 
Techniques for Load-Dependent 
Queuing Networks Algorithms 
129 
depends on the data type, are split between the mantissa and the exponent. 
For instance, the double precision arithmetics is implemented with 53 bits 
(i.e. 16 decimal digits) in the mantissa and 11 bits in the exponent, with 
the representable numbers ranging approximately in [10~308,10+308]. De-
spite this floating-point range may appear sufficient for most algorithms, 
numerical exceptions frequently arise. In general, an algorithm A(x) for 
computing a function /(x) is said to be numerically stable if 
A(x)*f(x 
+ e), 
where e is a small perturbation of the input vector. Informally, this def-
inition wishes to capture that arbitrary small perturbations of the input 
parameters, like those implied by limited machine accuracy, should not af-
fect macroscopically the output of A(x). Unfortunately, several numerical 
exceptions may prevent A(x) from returning a correct result: 
• round-off errors: errors associated with the existence of a limited num-
ber of digits for representing the mantissa. For instance, some irrational 
numbers, like -K = 3.1415..., cannot be represented with a finite num-
ber of digits. Thus, rounding schemes (like toward zero or nearest-value 
rounding1) are required to achieve the best possible approximation. As 
an example of the problems that may arise with double precision arith-
metics, let y = 10+23 and x = 1, define w = (y—y)+x and z = (y+x)—y, 
then due to round-off errors we get w = 1 and z = 0! Note that even if 
rounding schemes may result in small errors for a single operation, e.g. of 
the order of 10~16 for double precision arithmetics, they can accumulate 
during execution and yield macroscopic errors on A{x)\ 
• underflow/overflow errors: underflow and overflow errors occur when the 
number to be represented is outside the allowed floating-point range. The 
limiting factor in this case is the number of digits of the exponent. For 
instance, let x = 10 + 2 5 r and y = 10+52, it is straightforward to see that 
the product z = xy = 10+309 exceeds the IEEE double precision range. 
Thus it is internally represented as an infinite (Inf) that cannot be used 
in other arithmetics operations. 
The effect of the above exceptions on computational algorithms for 
product-form queuing networks are discussed in the following sections. 
8.2.2. Closed Product-Form 
Queuing 
Networks 
From now on, we consider closed PFQN composed of M servers that 
process the request of N customers. We assume that MQ > 0 queue-

130 
G. Casale and G. Serazzi 
dependent servers are present in the network. Customers are partitioned 
in R classes, each with a constant population Nr. Network population is 
therefore described by a population vector N = (Ni,..., NR) and we define 
N = J2r=i Nr- The vector 0 = (0,..., 0) denotes an empty population; l r 
is, instead, the r-dimensional unit vector. We denote Ljr the class r loading 
at server i, i.e., the average time spent by class r customers at server i if 
no queuing is experienced. Note that this term also accounts for network 
topology9. For queue-dependent servers, the rate at which request are pro-
cessed when n customers queue at server i is expressed through the capacity 
function5 c.j(n). Later, we refer to the following mean performance indices: 
Xr(N) 
= mean throughput of class r 
Qtr(N) = mean queue length of class r at server i 
Finally, if not otherwise specified, i,m — 1,.., M and r,s = 1,.., i? should 
be intended as servers and customer classes indices, respectively. 
8.3. Numerical Instabilities in PPQN Algorithms 
8.3.1. Convolution 
Algorithm 
The Convolution Algorithm6,18 allows to recursively compute the normal-
isation constant G(N) for load-dependent and load-independent multiclass 
PFQN. Simple analytical expression allow to derive any Xr(N) 
or Qir(N) 
from the knowledge of a set of normalisation constants. For instance, the 
throughput can be computed using the following formula: 
The Convolution Algorithm for load-dependent models is based on the fol-
lowing recursion: 
G(N) = G(M,N)= ^ F M ( n ) G ( M - l , N - n ) 
(2) 
n<N 
with initial condition G(1,N) = .Fi(N) and where n = (ni,... ,TCR) is a 
vector of positive integers. In the above formula, the term G(M — 1, N - n) 
refers to the normalisation constant of the M-complement system, i.e. the 
network obtained from the original one by removing the server indexed 
with M. Instead, the product-form factor (PF factor) FM(^) for queue M 
accounts for the probability that server M contains a population n3. Alter-
native forms of load-dependence are possible14,5. Let |N| = Y\r{Nr + 1) be 
the number of populations vectors n such that 0 < n < N. Let M > 2, then 

Stabilisation 
Techniques for Load-Dependent 
Queuing Networks Algorithms 
131 
the time complexity of a recursive computation of (2) for a network con-
sisting of queue-dependent stations (M = MQ) is bounded by 0(MQ |N| ), 
while the space complexity is 0(2 |N|). Multiclass models that contain both 
open and closed classes can be solved with a slightly modified version of (2) 
and with a similar computational effort. Note that, for load-independent 
models, (2) can be simplified to 
G(N) = G{M, N) = G(M - 1, N) + ^ 
LmrG{M, N - l r) 
(3) 
r 
and its solution requires 0(M F]r(Nr + 1)) time and 0(2 n r C ^ + l)) sP a c e-
As discussed in several works15, a major problem connected to the use 
of normalisation constants is that their growth can easily led to buffer 
overflows or underflows. For example, for M = R = 3, Ni = N% — N3 = 100 
and all loadings Ljr equal to 100, the normalisation constant has value 
G = 1.7 • 10445, which exceeds the IEEE double precision range. Scaling 
techniques, described in the next section, are effective in addressing the 
problem. 
8.3.1.1. Static and Dynamic Scaling Techniques 
Several solutions have been proposed in literature for range extension prob-
lems on the basis of the following observation: assume that, for each class 
r, the loadings Ljr of all servers are initially scaled by some common factor 
(3r, then the normalisation constant can be rescaled through the following 
relation: 
G(a,N) = r(/?,N)G(/31,..,/3fl,N) 
(4) 
where a = (ai,..,«/?) and /? = (/?i, ..,/?#) are two scaling vectors and 
is a conversion function between normalisation constants employing differ-
ent scaling vectors. For instance, for the three servers and three classes 
example considered before, assume that the class-1 loadings Lk\ are all 
multiplied by ax = 0.001. Let a = (0.001,1,1) and f3 = (1,1,1), then the 
resulting normalisation constant G(a, N) is computed as 
G(a,N) = 10-3O0G(/3, N) = 1.7-10145 
that now lies in the range [10~308,10+308]. Mean performance measures 
are easily obtained from the computed normalisation constants and the 

132 
G. Casale and G. Serazzi 
associated scaling vectors. Thus, a non-negligible memory overhead may be 
associated with the use of scaling techniques. However, this may be limited 
by employing for all classes a same scaling factor a = a.\ = ... = an that 
can be computed as a function of N and of the floating-point range15. 
A problem that may arise in the implementation of scaling techniques 
is the choice of an initial a = a\ = ... = CIR everytime the normalisa-
tion constant of a new population is evaluated. Empirically, if in (3) the 
scaling factor a is initially assumed to be a = 1, then the resulting compu-
tation remains numerically unstable because r(a, N) may produce buffer 
overflows/underflows for large populations. Thus, a should be evaluated as 
a function of the scaling factors of the normalisation constants involved in 
(3). We observed that if a is set to the maximum of the scaling factors /?, 
then no stability problems arise. 
Following a simpler approach, it also possible to scale the loadings Lir 
before algorithm execution. This form of scaling is commonly referred to as 
static scaling, while the one described above is known as dynamic scaling. 
Previous works19'15 have shown the effectiveness of static scalings for load-
independent models. In particular, the following scaling can often limit the 
growth of G(N) in multiclass models: 
£ i r ^ f ^ " ^ r W 
Vt = l,...,M; Vr = !,...,#; 
\ Z^fc l^c hkc J 
For instance, applying the above transformation on the previous exam-
ple, all loadings are scaled to Lir = 1 and the output becomes again 
G(N) = 
1.7 • 10145 with a negligible time overhead. However, this form 
of static scaling, compared to the dynamic scaling technique of (4), cannot 
prevent the occurrence of range exceptions and, more seriously, is applicable 
only to load independent models. More complex scalings for load-dependent 
models that are have been proposed16, but anyway do not represent a gen-
eral solution to numerical instabilities. 
Finally, we report another type of overflow problem that should be ac-
counted when solving (2). Consider a PFQN with R = 2 classes and assume 
that a large population vector n = (600,600) requires the evaluation of the 
product-form factor FM(n). 
Since (600 + 600)! > 
(600 + 600)1/600! > 
10+308, the computation of the factorial FM{B) yields a buffer overflow. A 
possible solution consists in recursively evaluate FM(^) from FM{H — l s) 
for any class s such that ns =£ 0 using the following relation22: 
FM(n) = LMsC-'^FMin 
- ls) 
(5) 
Nevertheless, (5) does not guarantee that Fjvf(n) lies in the allowed floating 

Stabilisation Techniques for Load-Dependent Queuing Networks Algorithms 
133 
point range. For instance, consider a model with M — 2, R = 2 and the 
loadings L12 — £21 = 5, L\\ = 10 and L22 = 9- Let the station 1 be a queue-
dependent station with c(n) = n (i.e. a delay station), and let station 2 be 
a load-independent station. For a population vector N = (150,150) it is 
F2(N) = 8.99 • 10+336 which generates a buffer overflow. 
Summing up, the exact solution of networks including queue-dependent 
servers with (2) may require also the scaling of possibly thousands of PF fac-
tors. Furthermore a study on the mutual interaction between the dynamic 
scaling of Lam and the numerical range of the PF factors is missing. These 
problems sensibly limit the ease of implementation and the applicability of 
(2) on complex models. 
8.3.2. Load Dependent 
Mean 
Value Analysis 
(MVA-LD) 
The Mean Value Analysis (MVA) algorithm20 relates the computation of 
the average performance measures at population N with the ones computed 
for the populations N — l s. The following MVA formulas allow the exact 
solution of a load-dependent model and will be referred to as the MVA-LD 
algorithm: 
N 
xr(N) = 
s 
i-: 
(6) 
Z)i En=i r n rL i rc- 1(n)p i(n - l r | N - l r) 
Pi(n\N) 
= J2LirC~1(n)Xr(N)pi(n 
- l r | N - l r) 
(7) 
r 
P i(0|N) = l - 
^ 
P i(n|N) 
(8) 
0<n<N 
where p,(n|N) is the probability that server i contains a population n when 
N jobs are present in the network. Compared to the Convolution Algorithm, 
the MVA-LD shares a similar computational complexity, but it may require 
less space since only the performance measures for the the populations 
N — l s must be kept in memory. 
In the case of a load-independent model, Eqs. (6)-(8) simplify to 
X r ( N ) = E i M i + £ s Q i . ( N - i r ) ] 
( 9 ) 
Qir(N) = L i rX r(N)[l + Q i r(N - lr)] 
(10) 
Note that the algorithm resulting from Eqs. (9)-(10) is numerically robust. 
Instead, numerical exceptions may affect the MVA-LD algorithm, where 

134 
40 
20 
0 
-20 
-40 
S. -60 
X 
-80 
-1O0 
-120 
-140 
-160 I 
Fig. 8.1. 
Effects of round-off errors on a single-class throughput X(N) of a load-
dependent model. 
(8) has been frequently addressed as a source of instability. In particular, if 
the bottleneck server is a load-dependent server, then the narrow difference 
between £>j(0|N) and zero may produce underflow errors and round-offs to 
negative numbers (note that overflows cannot occur being pj(n|N) < 1 for 
all n). These may result on a wrong evaluation of the performance indices as 
shown in Fig. 8.1 for a single-class throughput X(N) of a load-dependent 
model. More importantly, round-off errors and underflows cannot be ad-
dressed by static or dynamic scaling since queue-lengths are unaffected 
by such transformations. Reiser21 have proposed a general variable scal-
ing technique to avoid underflow exceptions. The stabilisation of round-off 
errors is instead discussed in the next section. 
8.4. Improved Stabilisation Techniques 
8.4.1. Software 
Stabilisation 
As seen in the previous sections, numerical issues of various types may occur 
during the implementation of queuing-networks algorithms. Despite static 
and dynamic scaling may be prevent some overflows and underflows, they 
do not constitute a final solution to the problem. We now discuss a general 
solution to numerical exceptions in queuing networks algorithms. 
Most of the existing algorithms for load-dependent models have been 
defined during the 70s and 80s. Since then, a number of software libraries for 
arbitrary precision arithmetics have been developed2, e.g. the GNU GMP 
G. Casale and G. Serazzi 

Stabilisation 
Techniques for Load-Dependent 
Queuing Networks Algorithms 
135 
library11. These allow to prevent round-off and range exceptions at software 
level. The basic idea behind arbitrary precision arithmetics is providing 
library functions for storing and manipulating floating-point numbers with 
a user-customizable number of precision bits. In this way operations are 
performed through a software layer and precision is obtained at the expense 
of an increased computational effort. 
Such operations can be handled either with straightforward or state-
of-the-art algorithms. If the required precision increase during computa-
tion, the latter can limit the overheads. For example, a multiplication be-
tween numbers with N precision bits can be performed with the Karatsuba 
multiplication12 in 0(JV1585), much less than the 0(N2) 
of a traditional 
multiplication. 
It is clear that the major advantage of arbitrary precision arithmetics 
over the techniques presented in queuing networks literature is the ease of 
implementation. Scalings and round-offs are automatically handled by the 
software library. Nevertheless, we can show that the overhead connected 
to the use of arbitrary arithmetics is almost equivalent to that of dynamic 
scaling. Table 8.1 and Table 8.2 report CPU times for the Normalisation 
Constants algorithm for two groups of networks where M = 2, MQ = 0 and 
M = 2, MQ = 2. In all cases, we considered a set of 30 random matrices with 
R = 2, Nr = N/R for all r = 1,..., R. Three versions of the Convolution 
Algorithm have been tested: 
• NC does not use any scaling technique for G(N); 
• NC-DS implements a dynamic scaling15 of G(N); 
• NC-GMP employs arbitrary precision arithmetics for G(N); 
Equation (3) was used to solve the models in which MQ = 0. Since we 
were interested in timing results, we measured the execution times of NC 
regardless of the correctness of the results. For the same reason the queue-
dependent stations have been set to Cj(n) = n. We considered a maximum 
timeout of 1500s for each algorithm. We point out that the implementations 
of NC-DS and NC-GMP were obtained with minor modifications from the code 
of NC, and no additional optimisations were employed. 
As we can see from the reported CPU times, the overhead introduced 
in load independent models (see Table 8.1) by arbitrary precision arith-
metics is comparable to that produced by dynamic scaling. However, the 
implementation of NC-GMP has been straightforward, compared to the time 
required by the implementation of NC-DS. Furthermore, if we look at the 
load-dependent models of Table 8.2, we see that the amount of overhead of 

136 
G. Casale and G. Serazzi 
Table 8.1. 
Execution times for unstable and stabilised load 
independent 
(M = 2, MQ = 0 and N\ = N2 = N/2) multiclass normalisation constant 
algorithms. 
N 
1000 
NC 
0.08s 
NC-DS 
0.40s 
NC-GMP 
0.50s 
Table 
8.2. 
Execution 
(M = MQ = 2 and Ni = 
N 
50 
NC 
0.02s 
NC-DS 
0.11s 
NC-GMP 
0.13s 
2000 
0.33s 
1.97s 
1.99s 
3000 
0.74s 
4.82s 
4.47s 
4000 
1.32s 
8.89s 
8.16s 
5000 
2.06s 
14.24s 
12.80s 
times 
for 
unstable 
and 
stabilised 
load 
= jV2 = N/2) multiclass normalisation constant 
100 
0.19s 
1.52s 
0.41s 
200 
2.58s 
24.71s 
7.68s 
300 
17.91s 
127.68s 
47.90s 
400 
63.07s 
415.99s 
168.47s 
6000 
2.95s 
20.75s 
18.52s 
dependent 
algorithms. 
500 
159.38s 
> 1500s 
459.47s 
the dynamic scaling is sensibly bigger than that of NC-GMP. This is easily 
explained by noting that while performing the convolution (2), an increas-
ing number of rescalings (4) must be applied at each step in NC-DS. Thus, 
our experimental results show that the software stabilisation approach is 
more efficient (and in our practice simpler to implement) than dynamic 
scaling. 
8.4.2. Stabilisation 
of MVA-LD 
with Two 
Customer 
Classes 
Currently, the best approach for dealing with round-off errors consists in 
replacing (8) with the generalised Reiser's equation21: 
Pi(0|N) = - ^ ^ P i ( 0 | N - l r ) 
(11) 
for each server i = 1,...,M 
and for any class r such that Nr > 1. In 
(11) X~'(N) 
denotes the class-r throughput of the i-complementary sys-
tem. Note that since MVA-LD requires the evaluation of MQ probabilities 
Pi(0|N), MQ complementary systems have to be evaluated with (11). Since 
each of these complementary systems suffer the same instability problems of 
the original MVA-LD, this would lead to a repeated application of (11) with 
a combinatorial growth of the number of systems to be solved. Specifically, 
for a model consisting of M = MQ queue-dependent servers the number 
E(M) of complementary systems to be evaluated with (11) is 
m = l 
x 
7 

Stabilisation 
Techniques for Load-Dependent 
Queuing Networks Algorithms 
137 
which grows exponentially with M. Thus, it is clear that if the number of 
queue-dependent servers is greater than two or three, then MVA-LD has 
probably no advantage over (2). 
In order to avoid this difficulty, the following solution has recently been 
proposed7 for load-dependent models with R = 2 customer classes. Define 
L*r(N) = ] T LirCrl(n)Pi(n 
- l r | N - l r) 
n 
for Nr > 1, and £*r(N) = Lirc~x(n) 
otherwise. Let also 
^ ( N ) = tt(°|N-lr) 
V ' 
Xrk(N) 
Then, it is possible to show that if JVi > 0 and JV2 > 0, then 
XCN) = 
^ ( N ) 
/121 
11 ' 
7 r f c l(N)^ 2(N) + 7rfc2(N)L*1(N) + 7rfcl(N)7rfc2(N) 
K ' 
X2(N) - 
"
k ^ 
7rfcl(N)L*2(N) + 7rfc2(N)L*1(N) +7rfcl(N)7rfc2(N) 
^ ^ ( N ) 
(13) 
7Tfc2(N) 
For the special case Ni = 0 we have 
X1(N)=0, 
X2(N)= 
] 
(14) 
Similarly, when N2 = 0 it is 
X 2 ( N ) = 0 , *i(N) = 
] 
(15) 
The computational requirements of the algorithm resulting from the 
above formulas are similar to those of MVA-LD. Nevertheless, the computa-
tion is stable with respect to round-off errors without resorting to arbitrary 
precision libraries. Thus, for reasonable population size, no underflows are 
generally experienced. The effect of the stabilisation algorithm is shown in 
Fig. 8.2 for the example considered in the next section. 
8.4.2.1. Numerical Example 
Let us consider a closed load-dependent queuing network model with R = 2 
customer classes and with M = MQ = 2 queue-dependent stations. Station 
loadings are: 
I n = 10, L12 = 5 
L21 = 5, L22 = 9 

138 
G. Casale and G. Serazzi 
3.5 
3 
2.5 
2 
%. 
1.5 
X 
1 
0.5 
0 
"'"0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
N 
Fig. 8.2. 
Effect of stabilisation of Xi(N) as N\ = N2 = N grow for the system of 
Sec. 8.4.2.1 with two queue-dependent servers. After the population N = (12,12) the 
MVA-LD algorithm exhibits fatal round-off errors. 
while the capacity functions are ci(n) = n2 and 02(11) = n. We show how 
to apply the algorithm defined in previous section for a simple population 
vector is N = (2,1). 
We begin the recursion on the number of stations m = 1,..., M. We 
denote with M. = {i,k} a model with two stations labelled by i and k. 
Complementary system .Mi = {1}. 
Note that .Mi is the 2-complementary system. Since only a single station is 
present, all jobs are in the same resource. Thus, the throughputs are easily 
computed as 
X" 2(N) = 
^ 
and for the populations under consideration we get 
Xf 2(l, 0) = 0.100, Xf 2(l, 0) = 0.000 
A72(0,1) = 0.000, Xf2(0,1) = 0.200 
Xf 2(l, 1) = 0.200, X2
_2(l, 1) = 0.400 
Xf2(2,1) = 0.600, X2~2(2,1) = 0.600 
No other information is kept in memory for .Mi. 
• 
MVA-LD Unstabilized 
Stabilization Technique 
..••-
\ 

Stabilisation 
Techniques for Load-Dependent 
Queuing Networks Algorithms 
139 
Complete system M% — {1,2}. 
Population n=(0,0): initialise p2(0,0|0,0) = 1. 
Population 
n=(l,0): 
from 
equations 
(15) 
and 
(7) 
we 
get 
Xi(l, 0) = 0.067, X2(l, 0) = 0, p 2(l, 0|1,0) = 0.330. Finally, using Reiser's 
equation (11) we get p2(0,0|l,0) = X1(1,0)X^2(l,0)p2(0,0|0,0) 
= 0.670. 
Population n=(0,l): similarly to n=(l,0), we exploit (14) to com-
pute Xi(l,0) 
= 
0, X2(1,0) 
= 
0.071, p 2(0,l|0,l) 
= 
0.643, 
p2(0,0|0,1) = X2(0, l)X2-2(0, l)p2(0,0|0,0) = 0.357. 
Population n=(2,0): the computation is analogous to that of n=(l,0) 
and we obtain Xi(2,0) = 0.171, X2(2,0) = 0, p2(2,0|2,0) = 0.286, 
p2(l,0|2,0) = 0.143, p2(0,0|2,0) = 0.571. 
Population n=(l,l): the computation is analogous to that of n=(l,0) 
and we obtain Ai(2,0) = 0.171, X2(2,0) = 0, p2(2,0|2,0) = 0.286, 
p 2(l, 0|2,0) = 0.143, p2(0,0|2,0) = 0.571. 
Population 
n=(2,l): using (12) we compute Xi(2,l) 
= 
0.182 
and X2(2,l) 
= 0.086. From (7) we compute p 2(0,l|2,l) 
= 
0.221, 
p 2(l,0|2,l) = 
0.123, p 2(l,l|2,l) = 0.443, p2(2,0|2,l) = 0.061 and 
p 2(2,l|2,l) = 0.111. Finally, we can apply Reiser's equation (11) to de-
rive p2(0,0|2,1) either from p2(0,0|l, 1) orp2(0,0|2,0). In general, in order 
to let p2(0,0|n) —> 0 smoothly also after one between p2(0,0|n — l r) or 
P2(0,0|n — l s) as produced an underflow, it is sufficient to choose the max-
imum between the two obtained values of p2(0,0|n). In this case, since 
P2(0,0|l, 1) and £>2(0,0|2,0) are far from the bounds of the representation 
range, the choice is indifferent and we finally get p2(0,0|2,1) = 0.041. 
Output: The throughputs are Xi(2,l) = 0.182, X2(2,l) = 0.086. The 
queue-length probabilities are available only for station 2. However, in the 
special case M = 2 the probabilities for station 1 are easily computed from 
the relation 
p 1 ( n | N ) = p 2 ( N - n | N ) 
If other queue-lengths are required, these must be computed using (7) and 
the computed throughputs of system M.2-

140 
G. Casale and G. Serazzi 
8.5. Conclusions 
In this chapter we considered numerical instabilities that arise in computa-
tional algorithms for product-form queuing networks. In particular we fo-
cused on load-dependent models, showing how the application of arbitrary 
precision arithmetics can solve the problem more efficiently than previously 
proposed techniques. Furthermore, we gave an illustrative example of a new 
technique for avoiding round-off exceptions in load-dependent MVA when 
only two customer classes are present. 
References 
1. ANSI/IEEE, "IEEE Standard for Binary Floating Point Arithmetic" Std 
754-1985 edition (New York) 1985. 
2. Bailey, D.H., "High-Precision Arithmetic in Scientific Computation, Comput-
ing in Science and Engineering" AIP/IEEE 
Comp. Soc, (2005) (to appear). 
3. Baskett, F., Chandy, K. M., Muntz, R. R., Palacios, F.G., "Open, Closed, 
and Mixed Networks of Queues with Different Classes of Customers" Journal 
of the ACM, 22(2), (1975) 248-260. 
4. Berger, A.W., Kogan, Y., "Dimensioning Bandwidth for Elastic Traffic in 
High-Speed Data Networks" IEEE Trans, on Networking, 8(5), (2000), 643-
654. 
5. Bruell, S.C., Balbo, G., Afshari, P.V., "Mean Value Analysis of Mixed, Multi-
ple Class BCMP Networks with Load Dependent Service Stations" Perform. 
EvaL, 4, (1984), 241-260. 
6. Buzen, J. P., "Computational algorithms for closed queueing networks with 
exponential servers" Commun. ACM, 16(9), (1973), 527-531. 
7. Casale, G., The Throughput Analysis of Product-form 
Queueing 
Networks 
(Ph.D. Thesis, Dip. di Elettronica ed Informazione, Politecnico di Milano, 
Milan, Italy) 2006 (to appear). 
8. Conway, A. E., Georganas, N.D., "RECAL - A New Efficient Algorithm for 
the Exact Analysis of Multiple-Chain Closed Queueing Networks" J ACM, 
33(4), (1986), 768-791. 
9. Denning, P. J., Buzen, J. P., "The Operational Analysis of Queueing Network 
Models" ACM Computing Surveys,10{3), (1978), 225-261. 
10. Gordon, W.J., Newell, G.F., "Closed Queueing Systems with Exponential 
Servers" Operations Research, 14(2), (1967), 254-265. 
11. Granlund, T.,"GNU MP: The GNU multiple precision arithmetic library 
Version 4.1.2" 2003. http://www.swox.com/gmp/. 
12. Karatsuba, A., Ofman, Yu, "Multiplication of Many-Digital Numbers by 
Automatic Computers" Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR 145, (1962), 293-294. 
(Translation in Physics-Doklady 7, (1963), 595-596) 
13. Kobayashi, H., Gerla, M., "Optimal routing in closed queuing networks" 
ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, 1(4), (1983), 294-310. 
14. Lazowska, J., Zahorjan, J., Graham, G.S., Sevcik, K.C., 
Quantitative 

Stabilisation 
Techniques for Load-Dependent 
Queuing Networks Algorithms 
141 
System Performance: Computer System Analysis 
Using Queueing 
Network 
Models (Prentice-Hall) 1984. 
15. Lam, S. S., "Dynamic scaling and growth behavior of queuing network nor-
malization constants" Journal of the ACM, 29(2), (1982), 492-513. 
16. Lavenberg, S.S., Computer Performance 
Modeling Handbook (Academic 
Press, Inc) 1983. 
17. Lavenberg, S.S., 
"A Perspective on Queueing Models of 
Computer 
Performance" Perform. Eval., 10(1), (1989), 53-76. 
18. Reiser, M., Kobayashi, H., "Queueing networks with multiple closed chains: 
Theory and computational algorithms" IBM J. Res. Dev., 19, (1975), 283-
294. 
19. Reiser, M., Kobayashi, H., "Numerical methods in separable queueing net-
works" Studies Manage Sci., 7, (1977), 113-142. 
20. Reiser, M., Lavenberg, S.S., "Mean-value analysis of closed multichain queue-
ing networks" Journal of the ACM, 27(2), (1980), 312-322. 
21. Reiser, M., "Mean-value analysis and Convolution Method for Queue-
Dependent Servers in Closed Queueing Networks" Perform. 
Eval., 1(1), 
(1981), 7-18. 
22. Sauer, C.H., Chandy, K.M., Computer 
System 
Performance 
Modeling 
(Prentice-Hall, Englewoods Cliffs, N.J.) 1981. 

This page is intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 9 
Modelling and Simulation of Interdependent 
Critical Infrastructure: The Road Ahead 
Emiliano Casalicchio1, Paolo Donzelli2, Roberto Setola3, 
and Salvatore Tucci1,4 
Dipartimento di Informatica Sistemi e Produzione, 
Universita di Roma Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy 
E-mail: {casalicchio, tucci} @ing.uniroma2.it 
Computer Science 
Department, 
University of Maryland-College Park, 20742 MD, USA 
E-mail: 
donzelli@cs.umd.edu 
Complex Systems & Security Lab., 
Universita CAMPUS Bio-Medico, Roma, Italy 
E-mail: 
r.setola@unicampus.it 
Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri, 
Ufficio per I'Informatica, Roma, Italy 
E-mail: 
s.tucci@governo.it 
Developed societies base their existence on services and resources pro-
vided by an increasingly complex network of interdependent critical in-
frastructures, from power distribution and communication networks, to 
logistics and healthcare systems, to the Internet. Understanding the be-
haviour of this system of systems under normal and exceptional cir-
cumstances is a mandatory step in order to reduce our dependence and 
design strategies to increase its dependability. Unfortunately, its com-
plexity overcomes the capability of available methods. In the chapter, 
we provide an overview of the emerging methodologies and tools, dis-
cussing relative potentials and limits. 
143 

144 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, Paolo Donzelli, Roberto Setola and Salvatore 
Tucci 
9.1. Introduction 
In contemporary societies, individuals and organisations increasingly de-
pend on availability, reliability, robustness, security, and safety (i.e., 
dependability) of many technological infrastructures. Ranging from elec-
tricity, gas, fuel, and water distribution networks, to transportation, com-
munication, and healthcare systems, to banking and financial networks, 
they are generally referred to as critical 
infrastructures1. 
Although designed as logically separated systems to deliver different ser-
vices, over the years these infrastructures have become highly interdepen-
dent: each of them relying (directly or indirectly) on the services provided 
by the others. The large number of interdependencies makes these infras-
tructures a complex and highly vulnerable system of systems2. Indeed, a 
failure in any of them may easily propagate to the others, with the result of 
affecting a large, geographically distributed, and largely unforeseeable set 
of users3. 
Various accidents have demonstrated this scenario. The failure of the 
telecommunication satellite Galaxy IV in 1998, for example, beside creat-
ing communication problems (almost 90% of the pagers were affected), led 
to significant difficulties also in the transportation system: numerous flights 
were delayed due to the absence of high-quote weather information, while 
refuel operations on highways became difficult as gas stations could not 
process credit card transactions. Another example is provided by the worm 
slammer that rapidly spread worldwide in 2003. It caused problems to fi-
nancial networks (in US and Canada about 11.000 ATM machines went 
out-of-service), to air traffic management systems (many flights were de-
layed or cancelled), to emergency services (the Seattle 911 service became 
unavailable), and to energy distribution infrastructures (the tele-control 
systems of two US-utilities firms were affected). Finally, the criticality of 
these infrastructures has been demonstrated also by the communication 
blackout occurred in Rome, Italy, at the beginning of 2004. In this case, 
the air-conditioning failure of a major node of the telecommunication net-
work resulted in a 5-hour black-out of land and wireless telecommunications 
(affecting almost all the telecom providers), malfunctions of the financial 
circuits, and problems at the Rome international airport, where 70% of the 
check-in desks became unavailable. 
As well as being highly vulnerable to internal failure, critical infrastruc-
tures, due to their increased relevance, might become targets for terrorist 
and criminal actions. Indeed, attacks could be carried on against infras-
tructures to create damage, panic, mistrust, or even to increase the effect 

Modelling and Simulation 
of Interdependent 
Critical Infrastructure 
145 
of other initiatives, e.g., slowing down emergency services and delaying res-
cue operations in concomitance with more traditional acts of terrorism. 
These evidences have contributed to raise the level of attention of gov-
ernments and international organisations (UN, NATO, EU, etc.) on the 
need to improve the dependability of these infrastructures1,4. The related 
strategies are usually referred to as Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP). 
In this context, Information & Communication Technologies (ICT) play 
a double role. In order to improve efficiency and flexibility, ICT are largely 
adopted at all levels of infrastructures governance (including field and op-
erational control): the massive amount of information to be managed and 
the tight time constraints overcome the capabilities of human operators 
and require the adoption of sophisticated ICT solutions. As result, due to 
their pervasiveness, any ICT failure may have dramatic consequences, as 
shown, for example, by the 2003 blackout in North-Eastern American: the 
US-Canada Commission recognised that the failure of some modules of the 
control systems played a fundamental role in the chain of events that led 
to the power outage. 
Thus, ICT are by themselves the reason for new and unpredictable vul-
nerabilities and threats that should be taken into account together with 
the most traditional ones. Recent statistics show a surge of attacks to in-
formation systems and a change in their origin: if until 2000 the majority of 
the attacks have been launched by insiders, in the period 2001-2003 attacks 
generated by outsiders have become predominant. 
In addition to introduce specific vulnerabilities, the spread of ICT, the 
convergence of communication and information systems, and the increased 
need for interoperable systems are producing an unprecedented level of 
interdependency between these infrastructures. 
The need to increase the security of the ICT component of critical in-
frastructures has led to the development of specific strategies, generically 
indicated as Critical Information Infrastructures Protection (CUP). 
To develop strategies suitable to improve the dependability of these in-
frastructures we need to be able to understand the global behaviour of this 
complex system of systems. This is a very challenging task, and we are 
in large part unready because "the conventional mathematical methodolo-
gies that underpin today's modelling, simulation and control paradigms are 
unable to handle the complexity and interconnectedness of these critical in-
frastructures"5. 
In this contest, we need to "develop creative approaches", 
suitable to be adopted as decision support systems for risk management 
and resource investment2. 

146 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, Paolo Donzelli, Roberto Setola and Salvatore 
Tucci 
9.2. Modelling and Simulation of Interdependent 
Infrastructures 
Whereas modelling and simulation techniques of individual infrastructures 
represent a rather well developed field (and numerous tools are available 
on the market), techniques for multiple, interdependent infrastructures are 
still immature. 
In the following, we describe some of the approaches currently under 
development. These studies are primarily devoted to understanding the 
consequences of a failure element in an infrastructure: for example, which 
other infrastructures could be affected (through domino or higher order 
effects), the geographical extension of the phenomenon, the economic im-
pacts, and so on. In particular, current approaches aim to provide insights 
into infrastructures operations during extreme and rare events, such as ma-
jor natural disasters or terrorism attacks. Given the rarity of these events, 
and the great and rapid innovation that characterise the today techno-social 
scenario, we cannot base our strategies only on record of historical data, 
but multiple simulations with stochastic variations need to be adopted to 
obtain useful information on structural characteristics of these events and 
their impact2,7. The goal of these tools is not to portray the exact con-
sequences associated with each single event, but provide useful inputs to 
recovery plans, reconstruction, and mitigation strategies. 
In the literature, there are two main classes of modelling techniques: 
Interdependencies Analysis and System Analysis. 
Interdependencies analysis techniques are mainly qualitative approaches 
used to identify critical infrastructures, to discover their interdependencies 
and to generate macro-analysis scenario. On the other side, System Analysis 
techniques are simulation-intensive approaches, generally developed using 
agent-based approaches6, suitable for more detailed and quantitative stud-
ies and able to generate (more or less precise) crisis scenarios. 
9.2.1. Interdependency 
Analysis 
A simple way to study failure propagation among interdependent in-
frastructures is to analyse how inoperability, i.e. inability of an element 
to perform its intended function, is propagated through interconnected 
infrastructures8. Let us denote x\+1 
the inoperability of the i-th infras-
tructure at time k + 1; it depends on the level of inoperability of other 
infrastructures: 
4 + 1 = rain {fi(xl,xl, 
...,xl) + a,l} 
0 < xi < 1 

Modelling and Simulation 
of Interdependent 
Critical Infrastructure 
147 
where the min operator formalises the constraint on xx, and c» is the risk of 
inoperability inherent in the i-th infrastructure (due to accidental events, 
natural disaster or acts of terrorism). Assuming that /* might be approxi-
mated as a linear function, the whole model can be represented as 
xk+i = Axfc + c 
(1) 
where the entries {a^} of matrix A represent the degree of incidence of 
inoperability of j-th infrastructure on the i-th one. Then the overall conse-
quences of a failure is the steady-state solution of (1), i.e., x = (I — A) _ 1c. 
Notice that this very simple formulation, as illustrated by the following 
example, is able to emphasise the dangerous consequences of interdepen-
dencies. Let us consider four interdependent infrastructures: a Power Plant, 
a Transportation system, a Hospital, and a Grocery8. The impact of a hurri-
cane that destroyed the 50% of the transportation system can be calculated 
as the steady-state solution of the following system: 
Xfc+l = 
( 0 0.9 0 0 ^ 
0.4 0 0 0 
1 0.8 0 0 
\ 1 0.9 0 0 / 
xfc + 
0.5 
0 
W 
The steady-state solution x = (0.7 0.78 1 l ) r shows that the Hospital and 
the Grocery are completely inoperable but also, due to interdependencies, 
that the transportation system is further degraded, reaching the 78% of 
inoperability. 
A similar, but more general approach is represented by the influence 
model9 where each infrastructure is modelled as a Markov chain whose 
evolution is influenced not only by its own state, but also by the states of 
the chain of the neighbouring sites. 
Petri nets10 have been also proposed for the study of failure propaga-
tion, but this approach requires the analyst to consider, besides the places 
representing the different infrastructures, also a large number of phantom 
places needed to represent propagated failures. 
Failure propagation and performance degradation may be investigated 
via a multi-layer model11. In this formulation each layer represents a single 
infrastructure described in term of nodes (active element), intra-links (func-
tional dependencies inside the infrastructures), and inter-links (functional 
dependencies with respect to elements belonging to other infrastructures). 

148 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, Paolo Donzelli, Roberto Setola and Salvatore 
Tucci 
As noted by many authors, one of the hardest challenges with this type 
of model is the definition of the correlation terms that describe infrastruc-
tures interdependencies. 
Indeed to correctly understand interdependencies existing among the 
different infrastructures, one has to consider a multitude of "dimensions" 
in order to take into account the technical, economic, business, social, and 
political factors that affect infrastructure operations7: 
Environment. Infrastructures operate in an environment that affects and 
is influenced by them. 
Level of coupling. Systems are tight or loosely linked; their interactions 
are linear or complex, etc. 
Infrastructure characteristics. Infrastructures analysis can be performed 
on different "scales", depending on the objectives of the analysis, e.g.: 
• Geographic scale - infrastructures span physical spaces ranging from 
cities, to regions, national and international level 
• Spatial scale - infrastructure are composed by a hierarchy of elements12: 
parts are aggregated in units that compose subsystems. Subsystems are 
grouped into systems and a collection of systems forms an infrastructure. 
• Temporal range - Infrastructure dynamics span from milliseconds (e.g., 
power system operation), to hours (e.g., gas, water, and transportation 
system operations), to years (e.g., infrastructure upgrades and new ca-
pacity). 
Type of failure. Interdependence-related disruptions or outages can be 
classified into three main cases: 
• Cascading. A cascading failure occurs when a disruption in one infras-
tructure causes the failure of a component in a second infrastructure. 
• Escalating. An escalating failure occurs when an existing disruption in 
one infrastructure exacerbates an independent disruption of a second 
infrastructure. 
• Common cause. A common cause failure occurs when two or more in-
frastructures are disrupted at the same time due to some common event. 
Type of interdependency. Linkages among infrastructures can be classi-
fied accordingly to their nature: 
• Physical Interdependency. Two infrastructures are physically interde-
pendent if functioning of one infrastructure depends on the physical 
output(s) of the other. 

Modelling and Simulation 
of Interdependent 
Critical Infrastructure 
149 
• Cyber Interdependency. An infrastructure presents a Cyber dependency 
if its state depends on information transmitted through the information 
infrastructure. 
• Geographical Interdependency. A geographic interdependency occurs 
when elements of multiple infrastructures are in close spatial proxim-
ity. In this case, particular events, such as an explosion or a fire could 
create correlated disturbances or failures in these geographically inter-
dependent infrastructures. 
• Logical Interdependency. Two infrastructures are logically interdepen-
dent if the state of each depends on the state of the other via control, 
regulatory or other mechanisms that cannot be considered physical, ge-
ographical or cyber. 
Cyber interdependency is a relatively new phenomenon strictly related with 
the pervasiveness of ICT and specifically with the integration of comput-
erised control systems (e.g., Supervision Control and Data Acquisition, 
SCADA, or Distributed Control Systems, DCS) with other information 
system, or public communication networks (e.g., Internet). In this way, 
cyber-interdependency tends to become an absolute and global character-
istic of infrastructures, while the other types of interdependency are rela-
tive properties. An infrastructure may be physically, logically or geographi-
cally interdependent with a specified (generally small) set of infrastructures, 
while cyber-interdependency potentially couples an infrastructure with ev-
ery other infrastructure that uses the cyberspace and this in spite of their 
nature, type or geographical location. Incidentally, note that considera-
tions of this kind suggested to many Governments to pay great attention 
to cyber-threats, and specifically to the vulnerability that SCADA exposed 
to cyberspace could induce on critical infrastructures3. 
Notice that a different classification of type of interdependencies13 dis-
tinguish them in direct and indirect links. The first ones are conceived and 
voluntarily constructed to directly contribute to normal operations, of in-
frastructure, while indirect link does not normally exist, neither specifically 
constructed nor planned. They are created due a failure and emerge from 
the modification of the "area" in which infrastructures operate. 
The difficulties to integrate into a single model all the elements needed to 
understand the behaviour of critical infrastructures suggested to some au-
thors to adopt a Hierarchical Holographic Modelling (HHM) approach14,15. 
In HHM, the analyst defines a multitude of (mathematical) models each 
of them able to clarify and describe some aspects of the problem. Even if 

150 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, Paolo Donzelli, Roberto Setola and Salvatore 
Tucci 
each model addresses a different aspect of the systems (components, func-
tions, hierarchical structure, etc.), the overall model offers an acceptable 
representation of the system. This kind of approach has been used to anal-
yse the transportation system of the state of Virginia in the US and its 
interdependencies with other infrastructures16. 
Similarly, infrastructures can be modelled as a stack of layers17. At the 
bottom of the stack, there are Physical Infrastructures, e.g. roads, pipelines, 
cables, and electricity generators. The second layer groups the Operation 
and Management of Infrastructures, which encompasses the network con-
trol, capacity and routing management. On the top of the stack, there 
are the Products and Services of Infrastructures, which concerns the sup-
ply and the use of infrastructure-based products and/or services, such as 
energy provision or public transportation. 
This approach can be further generalised, in order to describe each in-
frastructure via a three-layer model18 (see Fig. 9.1): 
• Physical Layer: The physical component of the infrastructure, e.g., the 
grid for the electricity network; 
• Cyber Layer: Hardware and software components of the system devoted 
to control and manage the infrastructure, e.g., SCADA and DCS; 
• Organisational Layer: Procedures and functions used to define activities 
of human operator and to support cooperation among infrastructures. 
Within each infrastructure, elements belonging to different layers inter-
act via intra-dependency links, while elements of the same layer but belong-
ing to different infrastructure may interact via inter-dependency links. 
As evident, these approaches are very attractive to emphasise macro-
scale consequences of interdependencies allowing stakeholders and experts 
from different areas to share a common framework. 
Unfortunately, due to their oversimplified and abstract nature, they 
appear to be inadequate to support definition of implementable strategies 
to improve dependability of critical infrastructures. 
9.2.2. System 
Analysis 
Agent-Based Modelling (ABM) is at the moment the most promising tech-
nology to model and simulate interdependent infrastructures6'7,19. 
ABM uses a bottom-up modelling approach: the whole model is obtained 
considering a population of agents that autonomously elaborate informa-
tion and resources in order to produce their outputs. Interactions among 

Modelling and Simulation 
of Interdependent 
Critical Infrastructure 
151 
Fig. 9.1. 
An infrastructure may be decomposed into three layers: Physical, Cyber and 
Organisational layer. Each element inside to an infrastructure may have relations (depen-
dency) , with other elements of the same infrastructure and layer, with elements belonging 
to the same infrastructure but at different layer (intra-dependency links) or with element 
belonging to different infrastructures but of the same layer (inter-dependency links). 
them results in emerging of behaviours that cannot be predicted by any 
single agent7. 
In this framework, an agent is an entity with location, capabilities, and 
memory. The location defines where the agent is in the space (a physical or 
an abstract space such as Internet). What the agent can perform is defined 
by its capabilities. An agent can modify its internal data representation 
(perception capability), can modify its environment (behaviours capability), 
can adapt itself to environment's changes (intelligent reaction capability), 
can share knowledge, information and common strategies with other entity 
(cooperation capability), and can execute actions without external interven-
tion (autonomy capability). Finally, past experience (for example, overuse 
or aging) and data defining the entity state represent the agent's memory. 
Using these capabilities, ABM allows to capture aggregation phenomena 
and to provide a natural framework to describe very complex systems. 
ABM has been applied by the Argonne national laboratory to build EM-
CAS (Electricity Market Complex Adaptive System Model)a, a simulator 
awww.dis.anl.gov/CEEESA/EMCAS.html 

152 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, Paolo Donzelli, Roberto Setola and Salvatore 
Tucci 
of electricity market. Similarly, ABM is currently used within the Sandia 
national laboratory for modelling Adaptive Intelligence Aggregation, Eco-
nomic Systems, and Infrastructuresb. 
The implementation of ABM exploits the advantages of agent-based 
computing20. The agent-based programming technology allows production 
and reuse of simulation libraries: the most widely used are Repast22 and 
Swarm21. 
ABM can be implemented also using distributed computing paradigms. 
For example, the use of Grid, service-oriented and distributed computing 
technologies allow to build-up the agent infrastructure to run distributed 
simulation on computer networks, that aggregate enough computational 
power to simulate the behaviour of systems composed of thousand of hun-
dred of agents. 
A different ABM-based formulation for simulation of interdependent 
infrastructures is given by EPOCHS24. EPCHOS is designed to provide 
high-quality simulations of electric power scenarios while simultaneously 
modelling the behaviour of computer communications protocols in realistic 
networks. To this end, three commercial and widely used simulators have 
been federated into a message-broker framework. In particular, this frame-
work integrates the electromagnetic transient simulator PSCAD/EMTCD, 
which provides detailed simulations of power systems, with the electrome-
chanical transient simulation engine PSLF, used by energy industries to 
simulate real-world situations, and with the communication simulator Net-
work Simulator 2 (NS2). NS2 is the most widely used simulator for com-
munication networks based on Internet standard protocols (e.g., TCP/IP). 
Each of these simulators is considered as an agent that interacts with the 
others, exchanging results through a proxy agent that works also as time 
scheduler for the whole simulator. 
A similar approach has been proposed to analyse the impact of elec-
tric power blackout on transportation and health care systems, federating 
simulators of the different infrastructures via a Java message broker18. 
One disadvantage of these simulation models is that the complexity of 
the software programs tends to obscure the underlying assumptions and 
the inevitable subjective inputs1. 
Moreover, these approaches suffer from the difficulties of acquiring de-
tailed information about each infrastructure. Indeed, infrastructures' own-
ers often consider these data very sensitive and are generally reluctant to 
make them available. 
b www. cs.sandia.gov/capabilities/AgentBasedModeling/index. html 

Modelling and Simulation 
of Interdependent 
Critical Infrastructure 
153 
QUT.R 
IN-OL 
. 
OLT.OL 
^-#- Element dynamic 
«. - #. Failure dynamic i* 
IN.F 
*' 
OL'T.F 
1X.R 
Fig. 9.2. 
Active element's dynamic proposed in CISIA23 
In order to partially overcome these drawbacks some authors have 
proposed CISIA (Critical Infrastructure Simulation by Interdependent 
Agents). This is a methodology for evaluate short-term effects, i.e. with-
out take into account fixing activities and plant wearing, of one or more 
failures in heterogeneous interdependent infrastructures in terms of both 
failure propagation and performance degradation19,23. 
In CISIA, infrastructures are modelled via highly abstract active el-
ements (agents) which exchange a limited and common set of quantities 
(messages). The internal behaviour of each agent is described via the in-
terconnected dynamics shown in Fig. 9.2: one models the dynamics associ-
ated with the service provided by the agent, while the other considers the 
evolution of the failures (this is a mix of propagation and internally gener-
ate events). CISIA consider five different kinds of dependencies (relations) 
among agents, each of them is described via an incidence matrix: 
An Operative Incidence Matrix; where the i-th row represents the 
set of agents that need the output of the i-th agent to perform their activ-
ities; 
A Requirement Incidence Matrix; where the i-th row represents 
the set of agents providing the resources needed by the i-th agent. 
Three Fault Incidence Matrices (FIMs); where the presence of a 1 
in the ij-th position means that a failure may be propagated from the i-th 
agent to the j-th agent. Notices that in this model the existence of propaga-
tion path does not imply straight fault propagation, but the model consider 
also the nature of the failure and the type of corresponded target agent. 
Each fault incidence matrix highlight a different type of inter dependencies7: 

154 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, Paolo Donzelli, Roberto Setola and Salvatore 
Tucci 
• Physical: models faults propagated via physical linkages (i.e., those re-
lated to exchange of physical quantities); 
• Geographical: emphasises that faults may propagate among agent that 
are in close spatial proximity. Events such as an explosion or fire could 
create correlated disturbances to all the systems localised in the spatial 
neighbour. 
• Cyber: used to describe propagation of faults associated with the cy-
berspace (e.g., virus, worm, etc.). 
The authors use three different FIM matrices to simplify the interdepen-
dencies' discovery. Indeed, physical interdependencies, and then the possi-
bility of failure propagation across the underlined channels, are, generally, 
well known to infrastructure's experts and could be read from the func-
tional schemas. On the other side, experts less understand geographical 
interdependencies, but they can be discovered superimposing infrastruc-
tures' maps. Cyber interdependencies are the less understood and the less 
considered into risk management plans, but, for some aspects, the most 
important from a security point of view3 and the most difficult to model 
too. 
9.3. Conclusions 
While providing an overview of the emerging methodologies and tools, and 
discussing relative potentials and limits, in this chapter we have highlighted 
how modelling and simulation analysis techniques currently available lack 
the capabilities necessary to represent, study, and analyse critical infras-
tructures. 
New approaches and new synergic combinations of existing approaches 
need to be explored. In addition, a change of perspective could result nec-
essary in order to extend the currently mainly technical oriented analysis 
methods to encompass also business and social related issues. 
Appendix - National and International Initiatives 
The first official act on CUP was the institution of the President's Commis-
sion on Critical Infrastructure Protection in 1996 by President Clinton (for 
more information see the CUP Handbook1). The work of this commission is 
at the base of the Presidential Decision Directives 62 and 63 (1998). These 
directives impose to develop and implement plans to protect government-
operated infrastructure, and called for a dialog between the government and 
the private sector to develop a National Infrastructure Assurance Plan. 

Modelling and Simulation 
of Interdependent 
Critical Infrastructure 
155 
These Directives produced great attention on the problem world-
wide and many countries established working groups and structures de-
voted to the definition of strategies to protect their critical information 
infrastructures25. 
The events of 11th September 2001 impressed new attention on CUP. In 
US was established the Department of Homeland Security and on February 
2003 two complementary strategic documents were realised: 
• The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace3 which recognises how se-
curing the cyberspace is an extraordinary challenge that requires a co-
ordinated effort from the entire society and government. The document 
defines the cyberspace as an "interdependent network of information 
technology infrastructures," and depicts cyberspace as the nervous sys-
tem or control system of the society. 
• The National Strategy for Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructure 
and Key Assets2 devoted to define a strategy to reduce the nation's 
vulnerability w.r.t. acts of terrorism by protecting the national critical 
infrastructure and key assets from physical attacks. 
Many countries increased the level of awareness on the problem, and 
created dedicated coordination structures; among others: in Germany was 
established the Federal Office for Information Security (BSI), in Sweden 
the Swedish Emergency Management Agency (SEMA), in the United King-
dom the National Infrastructure Security Co-ordination Centre (NISCC), 
in Canada the Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Emergency 
Preparedness (OCIPEP), in Italy the Working Group on Critical Informa-
tion Infrastructure Protection (PIC). 
The activities of these structures (and of that instituted in other coun-
tries) were mainly devoted to: 
• Understand risks related to national critical infrastructures, emphasising 
their criticalities, their interdependencies, and their vulnerabilities; 
• Define strategies to mitigate these vulnerabilities; 
• Improve infrastructures' robustness with respect to physical and cyber 
threats; 
• Define emergency, contingency and continuity plans; 
• Support R&D on CUP, and specifically that devoted to better under-
stand interdependent infrastructure's behaviours, and to develop tech-
nologies intrinsically robust, secure and safe. 

156 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, Paolo Donzelli, Roberto Setola and Salvatore 
Tucci 
Even international organisations have focused their attention on the 
problem. The G8 organised in March 2003 the first international confer-
ence of G8's CUP senior experts that released the G8 eleven principles on 
CIIP26, the 58th General Assembly of United Nation adopted resolution n. 
58/199 on Creation of a global culture of cybersecurity and the protection 
of critical information infrastructures27, 
the EU Commission released the 
communication COM(2004)702 on Critical Infrastructure Protection in the 
fight against terrorism28 and establish ENISA (European Network & In-
formation Security Agency), NATO has analysed CUP in the "Information 
Operation" considering both civil protection and anti-terrorism29. 
In all these initiatives, R&D represents a corner-store. Indeed, there is 
no doubt that CUP will be one of the major R&D challenge in the future. 
Recent publications and overviews show that R&D in the field of CIP/CIIP 
is undertaken by a large variety of actors in each country: research institu-
tions, universities, private sector research institutes, etc. Since CUP issue 
is largely interdisciplinary, cooperation is a constant element in all the ap-
proaches in R&D. Moreover, the inherently trans-national nature of critical 
infrastructures and the international nature of threats and vulnerabilities 
(a good example is the big blackout in Italy in September 2003) make the 
R&D on CIP/CIIP an obvious element for international cooperation. 
In this field, the US is definitively the more active player. Their efforts 
deal with a large variety of issues such as interdependency analyses, threat 
analysis, vulnerability and risk assessments, system protection and infor-
mation assurance. Even there are many actors involved in R&D, the degree 
of coordination is considerable. Among other initiatives, we can cite: 
Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency (HSARPA) de-
voted to jump-start and facilitate early research and development efforts to 
address critical needs in homeland defence on the scientific and technolog-
ical front. 
Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) within the De-
partment of Defence sponsors "revolutionary, high-payoff research that 
bridges the gap between fundamental discoveries and their military uses." 
The DARPA research and development in the CUP arena is specifically 
focused on the security and reliability of US military networks. 
National Infrastructure 
Simulation 
and Analysis 
Center 
(NISAC) 
founded to promote R&D on CIP/CIIP by Los Alamos National Labora-
tories and Sandia National Laboratories with the cooperation of other re-
search centres as Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Purdue University, 
Cornell University, Lucent Technologies and Argonne National Laboratory. 

Modelling and Simulation of Interdependent Critical Infrastructure 
157 
Recently EU Commission funding the Co-ordinated Action C I 2 R C O 
specifically devoted to build up a Europe-wide approach for research and 
development on Critical Information Infrastructure Protection. Moreover, 
in the last years, there ware different EU projects related the topic as: 
DDSIC, ACIP d, AMSD e and SafeGuardf. 
References 
1. Wenger A., Metzger J., Dunn M., Wigert I., "International CUP Handbook 
2004" (ETH, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich) 2004, http: / / 
www.isn.ethz.ch/crn/publications/publications_crn.cfm?pubid=224 
2. "U.S. The National Strategy for The Physical Protection of Critical In-
frastructures and Key Assets", 2003, http://www.whiteh.ouse.gov/pcipb/ 
physical.html 
3. "U.S. The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace", 2003, http://www. 
whitehouse.gov/pcipb 
4. MotefF J., Copeland C , Fisher J., "Critical Infrastructures: What Makes 
an Infrastructure Critical?" Report for Congress RL31556, The Library of 
Congress, 2003. 
5. Amin, M. "Modelling and Control of Complex Interactive Networks" IEEE 
Control System Magazine, (2002), 22-27. 
6. Bonabeau E., "Agent-based modelling: methods and techniques for simulat-
ing human systems" 2002, 7280-7287. (Proc. National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America, 2002) 
7. Rinaldi S., Peerenboom J., Kelly T., "Identifying, Understanding and An-
alyzing Critical Infrastructure Interdependencies" IEEE Control 
Systems 
Magazine, (2001), 11-25. 
8. Haimes Y., Jiang P., "Leontief-based model of risk in complex intercon-
nected infrastructures" Journal of Infrastructure Systems, (2001), 1-12. 
9. Asavathiratham S., Leiseutre B., Verghese G., "The Influence Model" IEEE 
Control System Magazine, (2001), 52-64. 
10. Gursesli O., Desrochers A., "Modelling Infrastructures Interdependencies 
Using Petri Nets", 2003, 1506-1512. (IEEE Int. Conf. on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, 2003) 
11. Setola R., Ulivi C , "Modelling Interdependent Critical Infrastructure" in 
Recent Advances in Intelligent Systems and Signal Processing Mastorakis, 
N. E., et al. ed (WSEAS press) 2003, 366-372. 
12. Perrow C , "Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk Technologies" (New 
York: Basic Books) 1984, 89-100. 
cwww.ddsi.org/DDSI-F/main-fs.htm 
www.iabg.de/acip/index.html 
ewww.am-sd.org 
'www.ist-safeguard.org 

158 
Emiliano 
Casalicchio, Paolo Donzelli, Roberto Setola and Salvatore 
Tucci 
13. Benoit R., "A method for the study of cascading effects within lifeline net-
works" Int. Journal Critical Infrastructures, 1 (1), (2004), 86-99. 
14. Ezell B., Farr J., Wiese I., "Infrastructure Risk Analysis Model" Int. Journal 
of Infrastructure Systems, 6(3), (2000), 114-117. 
15. Haimes Y., Risk modelling, assessment and management (Wiley, New York) 
1998. 
16. Dryden L., Haggerty M., Lane L., Lee C, "Modelling the Impact of Infras-
tructure Interdependencies on Virginia's Highway Transportation System", 
2004, 275-280. (Proc. of the 2004 Systems and Information Engineering De-
sign Symposium, 2004) 
17. Thissen W., Hender P., "Critical Infrastructures: Challenges for Systems 
Engineering", 2003, 2042-2047. (Proc. IEEE Conf. on System, Man and 
Cybernetics, 2003) 
18. Bologna S., Vicoli G., "Interacting Agents Modelling and Simulation of 
Large Complex Critical Infrastructures Interdependencies" Italy, 2003, 117-
122. (Proc. of Italian Society for Computer Simulation Conference - ISCS 
2003) 
19. Panzieri S., Setola R., Ulivi G., "An agent based simulator for critical in-
terdependent infrastructures", 26-28 October, Grenoble (FR), 2004. (Proc. 
2nd Int. Conf. on Critical Infrastructures, 2004) 
20. Luck M., McBurney P., Preist C, "A Roadmap for Agent Based Com-
puting" in "Agent Technology: Enabling Next Generation Computing" 
AgentLink II, 2003. http://www.agentlink.org/roadmap/roadmap.pdf 
21. Swarm Development Group (SDG), "Swarm Simulation System (Swarm)", 
http://www.swarm.org 
22. Repast Organization for Architecture and Development, "Recursive Porous 
Agent Simulation Toolkit (Repast)", http://repast.sourceforge.net 
23. Panzieri S., Setola R., Ulivi G., "An Approach to Model Complex Interde-
pendent Infrastructures" Praha, 2005. (Proc. of 16th IFAC world-congress, 
2005) 
24. Hopkinson K., Birman K., Giovanini R., Coury D., Wang X., Thorp J., 
"EPOCHS: Integrated Commercial Off-the-Shelf Software for Agent-Based 
Electric Power and Communication", 2003, 1158-1166. (Proc. Winter Sim-
ulation Conference, 2003) 
25. Ritter S., Weber J., "Critical Infrastructure Protection: Survey of world-
wide Activities", 2003, (in Proc. of Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) 
Workshop, Frankfurt, 2003). 
26. G8 Principles for Protecting Critical Information Infrastructures, March 
2003, 
http://www.usdoj.gov/ag/events/g82004/G8_CIIP_Principles.pdf 
27. U.N. Resolution n. 58/199, "Creation of a global culture of cybersecurity and 
the protection of critical information infrastructures", General Assembly, 
2003, http://www.un.org/Depts/dhl/resguide/r58.htm 
28. E.U. Communication from the Commission to the Council and the Euro-
pean Parliament, "Critical Infrastructure Protection in the fight against 
terrorism" COM(2004)702, 20th October 2004 

Modelling and Simulation of Interdependent Critical Infrastructure 
159 
29. CiSP Proceedings, Ed. by Stefan Brem, 2004 (EAPC/PfP Workshop on 
Critical Infrastructure Protection & Civil Emergency Planning: Dependable 
Structures, Cybersecurity and Common Standards, 2004) 

This page is intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 10 
Stochastic Automata Networks and Lumpable Stochastic 
Bounds: Bounding Availability 
J.M. Fourneau^, B. Plateau'2), I. Sbeity'2) and W.J. Stewart'3) 
' ' PRiSM, Universite de Versailles Saint- Quentin, 
45 Av. des Etats Unis, 78000 Versailles, France 
E-mail: jmf@prism. uvsq.fr 
' ' Informatique et Distribution, INRIA Rhones Alpes 
51, Av. Jean Kuntzman, 
38330 Montbonnot, France 
E-mail: Brigitte.Plateau@inria.fr 
& ihab.sbeity@imag.fr 
' ' Department of Computer Science, NC State University, Raleigh, NC, USA 
E-mail: 
billy@csc.ncsu.edu 
The use of Markov chains to model complex systems is becoming increas-
ingly common in many areas of science and engineering. The underlying 
transition matrix of the Markov chain can frequently be represented in 
an extremely compact form - a consequence of the manner in which the 
matrix is generated. This means that the definition and generation of 
large-scale Markov models is relatively easy and efficient in both time 
and memory requirements. The remaining difficulty is that of actually 
solving the Markov chain and deriving useful performance characteristics 
from it. 
The use of bounding procedures is one approach to alleviating this 
problem. Such bounds are frequently more easily obtained than the exact 
solution and provide sufficient information to be of value. In this chap-
ter, we show how to bound certain dependability characteristics such as 
steady-state and transient availability using an algorithm based on the 
storage of the Markov chain as a sum of tensor products. Our bounds 
are based on arguments concerning the stochastic comparison of Markov 
matrices rather than the usual approach which involves sample-path ar-
guments. The algorithm requires only a small number of vectors of size 
equal to the number of reachable states of the Markov chain. 
161 

162 
J.M. Fourneau, B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
10.1. Introduction 
Markov chains have long been used to model availability, performability 
and dependability of complex networks and computer systems. There are 
two major steps in their application to modelling problems, the first being 
the derivation of the states of the Markov chain and the transition matrix 
P which describes the transitions among states. The second is the compu-
tation of performance measures from this matrix. 
The approach of using Stochastic Automata Networks (SAN)24 is one of 
several high level formalisms designed to overcome the first problem since 
it requires a minimum of memory. Other high level formalism such as Petri 
nets and Stochastic Process Algebra are now also able to store the tran-
sition matrix in tensor form15'20. Thus, we know how to design and store 
huge states spaces and transition matrices. However, tensor-based represen-
tations do little to help with the second major step of a Markovian analysis, 
the derivation of performance measures, despite considerable research in re-
cent years4,16,26'1. It is quite impossible to obtain analytic solutions for the 
steady-state or transient distribution of complex Markov chains. Numeri-
cal analysis is possible but the memory space requirements and the time 
complexity are often too great to allow real problems to be solved in a rea-
sonable time period, (see Stewart25 for an overview of standard numerical 
procedures for solving Markov chains). 
In this chapter, our concern is not in the computation of the stationary 
or transient distributions per se, but rather in the computation of measures 
defined on such distributions. In particular, we shall concern ourselves only 
with obtaining a measure of the steady state availability. However, rather 
than compute the exact value of availability we shall instead focus on ob-
taining an upper bound, since in practical applications it is sufficient to 
know that the availability is larger than the system requirements. In addi-
tion, we shall employ a tensor representation of the Markov chain. 
Bounding algorithms for steady-state distributions have been success-
fully used in the past. They are particularly appropriate for availability 
models because in these models the probability mass is usually concen-
trated in a small set of states and the algorithms perform well so long 
as they do not modify the steady-state balance equations on this subset. 
The first algorithm was proposed by Muntz et al.2Z and was based on the-
oretical results of Courtois and Semal11. This algorithm has since been 
improved7'21,22 to reduce the complexity of the computations, improve the 
accuracy and consider more complex repair service distributions. These 

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
163 
algorithms are based on a perturbation of the steady-state balance equa-
tions. The approach we adopt in this chapter is rather different. It is based 
on the stochastic comparison of sample paths of Markov chains but, unlike 
the usual approach to sample path arguments, our approach is purely al-
gebraic and algorithmic. The comparison we establish is applicable to both 
transient and steady-state distributions. 
Our approach is to develop algorithms that will allow us translate the 
transition probability matrix of an irreducible, aperiodic Markov chain into 
a new probability matrix that is a stochastic bound on the original chain and 
which, in addition, is ordinary lumpable. The solution of this lumped chain, 
which is usually very small and whose solution may be trivially computed, 
provides the bounds that we seek. The algorithmic aspects of the stochas-
tic comparison of Markov chains have been surveyed recently17, some algo-
rithms have been developed19 and a tool implemented18. These algorithms 
are founded on the basis that the transition matrix of the Markov chain 
is stored in a compact row wise format. A major result of this chapter 
is to show how related algorithms may be developed which use the much 
more efficient SAN formalism. Additionally, the algorithms we develop are 
computationally more efficient and they can be used to obtain bounds on 
transient measures. 
10.2. Stochastic Automata Networks and Stochastic 
Bounds 
Consider an irreducible and aperiodic Markov chain whose stochastic tran-
sition probability matrix is given by P. Then there exists a unique solution 
to the system of equations 7r = 7rP: the row vector TV is the stationary distri-
bution of the Markov chain and its ith element denotes the probability that 
the Markov chain is in state i at statistical equilibrium. An availability mea-
sure is defined by separating the states into two classes, UP states and DOWN 
states. A state said to be UP if the system is UP for that state; otherwise it 
is DOWN. The steady-state availability is then given by A = Yli\i is UP 7r(*)-
Notice that if we order the states such that the UP states have indices that 
are smaller than the indices of the DOWN states, then we can define A as: 
A — J2i 7r(i)r(^) where the reward r(i) is a non-increasing function which 
is equal to 1 for the first states of the chain (the UP states) and 0 for all the 
other states. When the stochastic bound is computed, the states must be 
ordered this way, even if the natural SAN lexicographical ordering does not 
satisfy this property. This implies a reordering phase during the execution 
of the algorithm. 

164 
J.M. Foumeau, 
B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
10.2.1. SANs 
and their Tensor 
Representations 
A SAN27,24 is a set of automata whose dynamic behaviour is governed by 
a set of events. Events are said to be local if they provoke a transition 
in a single automaton, and synchronising if they provoke a transition in 
more than one automaton. A transition that results from a synchronising 
event is said to be a synchronised transition; otherwise it is called a local 
transition. We shall denote the number of states in automaton i by rij and 
we shall denote by N the number of automata in the SAN. The behaviour 
of each automaton, A^l\ for i = 1,..., N, is described by a set of square 
matrices, all of order rij. In the literature, SANs are usually associated with 
continuous-time Markov chains. The rate at which event transitions occur 
may be constant or may depend upon the state in which they take place. In 
this last case they are said to be functional (or state-dependent) transitions. 
Synchronised transitions may be functional or non-functional. 
In the absence of synchronising events and functional transitions, the 
matrices which describe A^ 
reduce to a single infinitesimal generator ma-
trix, Q(l\ and the global Markov chain generator may be written as 
N 
N 
Q = 0 Q { i ) = 5Z 7»i ®' •' ® 7"i-i ® Q{i) ® J"M-I ® ' ' • ® 7»iv- 
(!) 
i=l 
i=l 
The tensor sum formulation is a direct result of the independence of the 
automata, and the formulation as a sum of tensor products, a result of the 
defining property of tensor sums12. 
Now consider the case of SANs which contain synchronising events but 
no functional transitions and let us denote by Q\ , i = 1,2, ...,N, 
the 
matrix consisting only of the transitions that are local to A^. 
Then, the 
part of the global infinitesimal generator that consists uniquely of local 
transitions may be obtained by forming the tensor sum of the matrices 
Q\ , Q\I ,..., Q\ 
. Stochastic automata networks may always be treated 
by separating out the local transitions, handling these in the usual fashion 
by means of a tensor sum and then incorporating the sum of two additional 
tensor products per synchronising event24. The first of these two additional 
tensor products may be thought of as representing the actual synchronis-
ing event and its rates, and the second corresponds to an updating of the 
diagonal elements in the infinitesimal generator to reflect these transitions. 
Equation (1) becomes 

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
165 
Q= © « I W + £ ( ® G 2 + ® O 5 ? Y 
(2) 
i=l 
eeSS 
\i=l 
i=l 
/ 
Here £S is the set of synchronising events. This formula is referred to as 
the descriptor oi the stochastic automata network16,24. 
10.2.2. Stochastic 
Bounds: 
An Algorithmic 
Presentation. 
Stoyan28 defines a strong stochastic ordering ("st-ordering" for short) by 
means of the set of non-decreasing functions. Observe that performance 
measures such as average population size, tail probabilities and so on are 
non-decreasing functions. Bounds on the distribution imply bounds on per-
formance measures that are non-decreasing functions of the state indices. 
In our context, the reward that we wish to bound (i.e., 1 — A) is a non-
decreasing function once the state space has been correctly ordered. In the 
definition given below, the second part concerning discrete random variables 
is much more convenient for our algebraic formulation and algorithmic set-
ting, as Example 10.2 clearly illustrates. 
Definition 10.1: 
(a) Let X and Y be random variables taking values on a totally ordered 
space. Then X is said to be less than Y in the strong stochastic sense, 
that is, X <st Y iff E[f(X)] < E[f(Y)] for all non-decreasing functions 
/ whenever the expectations exist. 
(b) If X and Y are random variables taking values on a finite state space 
{1,2,..., n) and respectively having p and q as probability distribution 
vectors, then X is said to be less than V in the strong stochastic sense, 
that is, X <„t Y iff YTj=k Pi ^ YJj=k 9j for A; = 1,2,..., n. 
Example 10.2: Let a = (0.1,0.3,0.4,0.2) and (3 = (0.1,0.1,0.5,0.3). It 
follows then that a <st (3 since: 
"0.2 
< 0.3 
0.2 + 0.4 
< 0.3+ 0.5 
.0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 < 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 
It has been known for some time that monotonicity17 and compara-
bility of transition probability matrices yield sufficient conditions for the 

166 
J.M. Fourneau, B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. Stewart 
stochastic comparison of Markov chains and their transient and steady-
state distributions. Furthermore, st-monotonicity and st-comparability of 
matrices may be completely characterised by linear algebraic constraints 
(which is not true for other types of ordering)17. Assuming that P is not 
"st"-monotone, then our goal is to find another matrix R such that 
\ E L j RiM < E L j Ri+hk 
V i, j 
The first set of inequalities states that P is stochastically smaller than R 
while the second set shows that R is st-monotone. Another small example 
will help illustrate this 
Example 10.3: Consider matrices P, R l , R2 and R3. 
(3) 
R2 
0.2 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.2 
0.1 0.2 0.1 0.5 0.1 
0.0 0.3 0.5 0.1 0.1 
0.1 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.0 
0.0 0.1 0.0 0.9 0.0 
0.2 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.2 
0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 0.2 
0.0 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.2 
0.0 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.2 
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.2 
Rl = 
R3 = 
0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 0.2 
0.0 0.2 0.1 0.5 0.2 
0.0 0.3 0.5 0.1 0.1 
0.1 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.0 
0.0 0.1 0.0 0.9 0.0 
0.2 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.2 
0.1 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.2 
0.0 0.3 0.1 0.4 0.2 
0.0 0.3 0.1 0.4 0.2 
0.0 0.1 0.0 0.7 0.2 
Matrix R l is an upper bound of P but is not st-monotone (the second row 
is not st-smaller than the third row). R2 is monotone but is not an upper 
bound (the second row of R2 is not an upper bound of the second row of 
P). Finally R3 is a monotone upper bound of P. 
In our research, we seek not only to determine matrices R that con-
stitute upper bounds on P and which are st-monotone but we shall also 
impose additional restrictions on the structure of R in order to facilitate 
the computation of the bounds. Specifically, we shall insist that the ma-
trix R be ordinary lumpable. Fourneau et al.19 has shown that ordinary 
lumpability constraints are consistent with the relations specified by (3). 
Furthermore, we have designed and implemented an algorithm, called LIM-
SUB, which constructs a matrix R that possesses all these properties. This 
algorithm requires memory storage for only two vectors of size equal to the 
size of the number of states in the Markov chain and storage for the lumped 
matrix which is much much smaller than the original matrix. This lumped 

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
167 
matrix is readily solved and the bounds obtained from it may be applied to 
the original Markov chain. The concept of Markov chains that are lumpable 
in the ordinary sense has proved valuable in the past. Its definition is now 
given. 
Definition 10.4: (Ordinary lumpability) Let Q be the transition 
probability matrix of an irreducible finite DTMC and let pk, k = 
1,2,...,M be a partition denned on the states of this Markov chain. 
Thus, each state of the Markov chain belongs to one, and only one 
of the so-called macro-states pk- The chain is said to be ordinary 
lumpable with respect to the partition pk, if and only if, for all states 
e and / belonging to the same arbitrary macro state pi, we have 
T,jepi 1e<i = 
^jePi 
QfJ'for 
a11 m a c r 0 s t a t e s Vi, 
i = 1,2,..., M. 
LIMSUB computes the lumped matrix column by column. It also re-
quires some additional computations at the boundaries of the blocks. As 
indicated in Fig. 10.1, two distinct steps are associated with each block. 
In this table, firstk 
and lastk are respectively the first and last indices of 
macro-state k and it is assumed that the states are ordered according to 
macro state. We stress that this is for illustration purposes only and that 
the algorithm works with any arbitrary partition. 
For k = M, M - 1. • • • . 1 Do 
For I = last),, • • • , firsts 
Do 
r0,( = max(0, J2?=i Pi,j) - SjLi+l 
nj) 
For i 
:2,3, 
,N Do 
If (ru = 0) and (Y.f=i+i ritj < 1) and ((pi|( > 0)or(i = 1 + 1)) Then 
End If 
End For 
End For 
For y = l,-- ,M Do 
E lastk 
j=firstk
 
r'aaty,j ', 
For i = firsty, • • • , lasty - 1 Do 
L 
,!%rstk — <• 2^j=fir,tk 
+ l ''•] 
nd For 
End For 
End For 
Fig. 10.1. L I M S U B Construction of an ordinary lumpable st-monotone upper bound-
ing DTMC R 

168 
J.M. Fourneau, B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
The first step is based on (3) in which inequalities are replaced by equali-
ties. The relations are unrolled and the equalities are arranged in increas-
ing order for i and in decreasing order for j . Furthermore, to ensure that 
the irreducibility property is maintained during the bounding process, we 
avoid deleting transitions and if necessary, we add small sub-block diagonal 
transitions (step l.b) that are proportional to a parameter e of order ap-
proximately 10 - 7. The second step modifies the first column of the block in 
order to satisfy the ordinary lumpability constraint i.e., it assures that each 
block has the same constant row sum. This constraint is only known at the 
end of the first step. Thus after the first step, we know how to modify the 
first column of the block to obtain a constant row sum. Furthermore due 
to st-monotonicity, we know that the maximal row sum is obtained with 
the last row of the block (step 2.a). In step 2.b, we modify the first column 
of the block according to the value of the sum of elements in the last row 
of the block (variable c in Fig. 10.1). In our algorithmic description, for 
the sake of simplicity, we use a full matrix representation for P and R. 
Naturally, the program uses a sparse matrix representation. Finally, notice 
that, due to the ordering of the indices, the summations have already been 
computed and are ready for when we need them. We let them appear as 
summations to show the relations with the sets of inequalities. 
We now illustrate these two steps on the simple example using matrix P 
defined above. Assume that the state-space is partitioned into two macro-
states: (1,2) and (3,4,5). The matrices below show the first block after the 
first step (the matrix on the left) and after the second step (the matrix on 
the right). The values modified during the second step are boxed. 
0.2 
0.1 
0.3 
0.3 
0.0 
0.3 0.2 
0.4 0.2 
0.4 0.2 
0.4 0.2 
0.7 0.2 
0.1 0.3 0.2" 
0.1 0.4 0.2 
0.1 0.4 0.2 
0.1 0.4 0.2 
0.0 0.7 0.2 
For an arbitrary stochastic matrix P, it has recently been shown that, 
under easily checkable assumptions on a partition of the state space, the 
LIMSUB algorithm computes an irreducible and ordinary lumpable st-
monotone upper bound matrix R19. 
Theorem 10.5: Let P be an irreducible DTMC, let A\,.., 
Ap be an arbi-
trary partition of the state space and let e be positive and smaller than 1.0, 
If the following two conditions are satisfied: 

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
169 
(1) For any n and any state i in macro An, there exists a transition 
P{i,j) 
with j in Aq and q < n (In other words, there exists a transition to the 
left at the macro-state level) 
(2) For any state i in macro A\, there exists a transition P(i,j) 
with j in 
A\ and j < i (In other words, there exists a transition to the left within 
the state level for macro state A\) 
Then, the matrix R computed by LIMSUB is a monotone irreducible 
and ordinary lumpable stochastic upper bound of P. 
We now show how the algorithm and this theorem establish a common 
methodology for computing both transient and steady-state bounds. 
10.3. LIMSUB and Analysis of Transient Availability 
The relevant theorem for the stochastic comparison of Markov chains is 
now presented28. The statement below assumes that P the original matrix 
we want to bound, is not monotone. 
Theorem 10.6: Let X(t) and Y(i) be two DTMC and P and R be their 
respective stochastic matrices. If 
. X(0) < s t Y(0), 
• R is st-monotone 
• P <st R 
Then X(t) <st Y(t), for all t > 0. 
In Fourneau et a/.19, only the steady-state version of this comparison of 
distributions was considered. However, the theorem states that the sample-
paths are ordered. Thus the comparison of distribution is also true for 
transient distributions and rewards. We know that "st"-bounds are associ-
ated with non-decreasing rewards. Then, if X <st Y at time t and r(i) is a 
non-decreasing reward function, it follows that 
Y,Prob(X{t) 
= i)r{i) < J2Prob(Y{t) 
= i)r(i) 
i 
i 
Now consider the partition we have used to build a lumpable bound and 
let us construct a new reward function. Let Ap be an arbitrary macro-state 
and define the reward s(p) as the maximum of r(i) for state i in Ap. Clearly: 
• s(p) is non-decreasing because the states are initially ordered according 
to the macro-state. 

170 
J.M. Fourneau, B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
• for an arbitrary time step t, 
s(p)Prob(Y{t) 
€AP)>J2 
r{i)Prob(Y(t) 
= i) 
i£Ap 
At each moment, the probability of being in macro state p multiplied 
by the reward s(p) is greater that the sum of the individual rewards 
multiplied by the probabilities of all the states in macro state p. 
As the stochastic matrix associated with Y is lumpable, the left hand-side of 
the former inequality can be computed using the lumped chain. Combining 
both inequalities we get, for all t, 
J2r(i)Prob(X(t) 
= i) <Y^s{p)Prob{Y{t) 
G Ap) 
i 
p 
Putting everything together, we obtain the following, more general result 
concerning algorithm LIMSUB. 
Theorem 10.7: If the assumptions of Theorem 10.5 are satisfied, if r() 
are non-decreasing rewards and if the rewards s() at the macro state level 
are the maximal reward for the individual states, then we can bound the 
expected rewards E(r) by E(s) at any time t, and the expectation of reward 
(s) is based on the lumped matrix R. 
The algorithm LIMSUB allows us to compute both transient and steady-
state rewards and indeed this result is one of the main contributions of this 
paper. Let us now return to the definition of the transient, cumulative and 
steady-state availability. Clearly, they are associated with non-decreasing 
rewards and LIMSUB computes an upper bound for all of them. Natu-
rally, the final numerical solution that is extracted from the lumped matrix 
depends on the particular problem we want to solve. However, the initial 
part, i.e., the computation of the bounding matrix, is always the same. The 
rewards r(i) are equal to 1 if the system is UP in state i and 0 otherwise. 
The upper bound s(p) is 0 if at least one of the states in macro-state p is 0. 
One of the major assumptions of the bounding algorithm is the ordering 
of the states. First, the rewards must be a non-decreasing function of the 
state-index. Furthermore, the algorithm is based on a partition of states 
and assumes that states which belong to the same set have contiguous 
indices. Finally, it must be clear that the state ordering is a crucial issue 
for stochastic bounds14. The accuracy of the bound is directly influenced 
by the ordering and hence on the manner in which the bounding matrix is 
constructed. This implies that we have to reorder the states of the matrix. 

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
171 
Since we represent the transition matrix by a SAN, it is possible to obtain 
an arbitrary column and to reorder it on the fly. Such an operation is not 
possible when the matrix is stored on disk. 
We now present an overview of algorithm LIMSUB. The macro-states 
are defined by the first and last indices for each macro-state (the vectors 
first and last in Algorithm LIMSUB). These vectors are built directly 
from the SAN specification. 
For k = M, • • • , 1 D o 
For / = lastly, • • • , firsts 
Do 
colLimsub = GetCol(l, SAN) 
refresh(l, colLimsub, sumP, sumR, firstElementP, endR) 
End For 
normalise(k, endRnorm, endR, firstElementP, sumR, lumpee, 
sumlumpeeR) 
End For 
Fig. 10.2. 
Implementation of algorithm LIMSUB 
The algorithm computes the bounding matrix column per column be-
ginning with the last column. From the presentation of the algorithm LIM-
SUB (see Fig. 10.1), it is clear that it is necessary to store only one column 
of the matrix P at a time. At the boundary of macro-states, a second com-
putation step must be performed. The algorithm is divided into three parts 
(see Fig. 10.2): 
(1) The first step is to obtain a column of the initial matrix from the SAN 
input. The columns are required in no particular order. Furthermore, 
as the SAN contains a CTMC and LIMSUB inputs a DTMC, the algo-
rithm must perform an uniformisation procedure. It is known that raw 
diagonally dominant (RDD) matrices provide more accurate bounds13. 
Thus the uniformisation makes the matrices RDD. In Section 10.4 we 
describe the function GetCol that performs this step. 
Since we work on sparse matrices, we store a column of P as a linked 
list using a structure named ColumnLimsub. This structure contains 
2 fields: one value field, val, and a corresponding row index field, index. 
(2) For the computation part, we require only two vectors, sumP 
and 
sumR, of size N to represent respectively sumP[i] = J22=i Rj 
an<^ 
sumR[i] = Sfc=7 Ri,j- The function refresh() computes a column of 
the bounding matrix R and updates vectors sumP and sumR. An 

172 
J.M. Fourneau, B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
efficient implementation of this function has been developed and in-
corporated into the PEPS tool3 but, for the sake of readability, this is 
not detailed here. All relevant information concerning an efficient imple-
mentation of LIMSUB based on sparse matrix representation for P and 
R may be found in the literature6. Furthermore, we have established 
the following property concerning the complexity of the algorithm: 
Let x be the number of non-zero elements in an arbitrary column P 
(say i) and let y be the number of non-zero elements in column i of R. 
Then our refresh algorithm requires less than x + y steps to compute 
the ith row of R. 
There is no simple relation between x and y because the entries in R 
are based not only on the indices of non-zero elements of matrix P but 
also on their values. 
(3) For step three, we store the lumped matrix Rlumpee instead of R. This 
requires an array of size M x M to store the elements of Rlumpee and 
a vector of size M to compute them: sumRLumpee 
which contains the 
sum: 2^fc=, Rlumpeeij. 
The computation of a column of the lumped 
matrix is performed by the function normalise. 
10.4. Algorithm GetCol and its Complexity 
Our objective in this section is to show how to extract any individual col-
umn in a sparse format and with a ranking of entries coherent with the 
partition related to the LIMSUB algorithm. The strategy used by Ciardo10 
appears to be an effective method to generate a column from a MDD data 
structure but requires more memory than the Kronecker approach8. The ef-
ficiency of this approach comes from avoiding duplicate computation when 
generating sequential columns. As we have to compute columns accord-
ing to the partition ordering, this benefit may not materialise. In addition, 
within the SAN formalism, individual matrices even though they may be 
relatively small, are stored in a sparse row-wise compact format. An ele-
ment of any column c is stored using two fields: a value field [val) and a 
row index field (ind). With functional transitions, the value field contains 
a function, which prohibits the approach developed for functionless Petri 
nets5. For a sparse matrix Q, we shall denote the cth column, by <2[*,c]. 
The nonzero elements within a column, (vali,indi), 
are ordered according 
to increasing values of indi. Note that vali is either a positive real or a 
function of the state space with positive real value and indi is a local state 
index. This may be generalised to elements of the type S given by {(vali, 
val2, • • •, vald), (indi, indi, • • •, indd)}-

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
173 
We now define an operator on elements of type S, an operator that is a 
simple concatenation of both subparts. 
Definition 10.8: Let x1 = (val1,ind1) 
and x2 = (val2,ind2) 
be two ele-
ments of type S where val1 = (val1, • • • , val\ ), ind1 = (c{, • • •, c\ ) and 
vol2 = (val2,--- 
,val2
2), ind2 = (c2,--- ,c2
di) and d\ and di are the di-
mensions of xl and x2 respectively. The operator * is defined such that 
if X = (VAL, IND) 
= x1 * x2 then X is an element of type S having 
dimension equal to di + c?2 and 
VAL = (val{,--- ,vall
dl,val\,--- 
,val\) 
IND = 
(c\,.-.,cdl,c2,...,c2
2) 
From this first definition, we now derive a pseudo-tensor form. We shall 
let \C\ denote the length of a vector C. 
Definition 10.9: Given an element of type S and of dimension N (the 
number of automata of the SAN) (val\, • • • , valj^), (c\, • • • , CN), then 
Evaluate((ua/i,--- ,valN), (a, • • • ,cN)) = (JJ vak(ci, - • • ,cN),(clr-- 
,cN)). 
t = i 
The term vali (ci, • • • , CN ) denotes the evaluation of the val, function (which 
can be a constant function). If C is a vector of elements of type <S, 
Evaluate(C) evaluates all its entries. 
Definition 10.10: Given vectors B = {bl \i = 1, 2, • • • , \B\, V of type S} 
and C = {cj \j = 1,2, • • • , \C\, cj of type S}. Then A = B * C, is a vector 
of length \A\ = \B\ x \C\ and equal to the vector bl * c>, ranked according 
to the lexicographic ordering on i,j, i = 1,2, • • • , \B\ and j = 1,2, • • • , |C|. 
The cost of this operation is of the order of \B\ x |C| a. 
These definitions will be used to introduce the sparse generalised tensor 
product of columns of SAN matrices. In this context, it is necessary, at 
some point, to evaluate the functions. 
Let PSS 
and S respectively denote the SAN potential state space 
and the reachable state space of the Markov chain. Let indexiex(x) 
de-
note the lexicographic index of x in the SAN, given by indexiex(x) 
= 
aNote the limiting case when one or both vectors have only one entry. 

174 
J.M. Fourneau, B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
), where Xi is the index of the local state of automaton i. 
Thus indexiex(x) 
is an index in PSS and defines an ordering of states. We 
shall let indexpss{x) 
denote the integer indexing of states in 1,2,..., \PSS\ 
with the same ordering of states. Then indexs{x) 
is an integer index-
ing in 1,2,..., |5| for reachable states in the same ordering. Finally, let 
Par = {pi,P2, • • • ,PM} be the partition of S on which the Markov chain is 
lumped. This partition is given by the user and depends on the problem. 
Thus it might not respect the required lexicographic ordering specified pre-
viously. Each subset pt is denned as a function (/,) with an argument of 
type indexiex (as is the case of all functions in SANs). For this partition, we 
define a new set of indices, denoted indexpar, 
corresponding to the ordering 
of states employed by algorithm LIMSUB. This ordering (orderpar) is such 
that the indices of the elements of subset pt are contained in the interval 
[firsti 
... lasti] where firsto = 1, lasto = \po\, firsti = first^i 
+ 1 and 
lasti = firsti + \Pi\, for i > 1. 
As an example, consider a SAN consisting of two automata A\ and A-i 
of size m = rz2 = 2. The states of each automaton are denoted 1 and 2 and 
the potential state space is PSS = {1,2,3,4}. Assume that S = {1,3,4}, 
meaning that state 2 is not reachable. Let Par = {pi,P2} so thatp 2 = {3,4} 
and pi = {1}. Table 10.1 shows the correspondence among indices. 
Table 10.1. Correspondence among indices. 
index pss (x) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
index s(x) 
1 
-
2 
3 
indexiex(x) 
(1,1) 
(1,2) 
(2,1) 
(2,2) 
index par (x) 
3 
-
1 
2 
10.4.1. Computation 
of a 
Column 
From (2), Q can be seen as the sum of two matrices Qi and Q3, where Qi 
is the matrix corresponding to local transitions ( © i = 1 Q\ ) and Qs is the 
matrix corresponding to synchronised transitions. A column C of Q is the 
(sparse) sum of two parts C; (local part) and Cs. Figure 10.3 outlines the 
different steps that must be performed in obtaining a column. 

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
175 
GetCo\(indexPar 
(C) ,S A N ) 
indexiex (C)=GeiLex(index 
paT (C)) 
Cj = GenerateJocal(mdex;ex(C), SAN) 
C3 = Generate_sync(indexfex(C), SAN) 
C = Sum(C,, C.) 
colLimsub= sorting(C) / / Sort according to 
return(colLimsub) 
/ / Generation of C; 
/ / Generation of Cs 
order par 
and uniformize 
Fig. 10.3. 
Function GetCol(indexPar(C), 
SAN) 
The index of a column in the entry of function GetCol is of type 
indexpar, as required by the algorithm LIMSUB, but the algorithm to build 
Ci and Cs is based on the indexiex. The solution that we adopt to translate 
an indexpar 
into an indexiex is to define an array (called SAN2Par), 
in-
dexed by indexpar, 
which maps into indexpssh- 
In this way, indexiex can 
be computed from indexpss 
using a function SAN2Lex(indexpss(x)) 
— 
a standard procedure whose cost is N2 where N is the number of automata. 
In the array SAN2Par, 
we know the limits of each partition pi. These are 
the parameters firsti and lasti denned previously. Thus, SAN2Par 
can be 
seen as the union of M subarrays SAN2Pari, 
and each subarray is sorted in 
increasing order according to the lexicographic order of the SAN (which is 
also the order of the indexpss 
indexing). The different steps of the above al-
gorithms are detailed in the following subsections. In what follows, the lexi-
cographic index of column C is given by indexiex (C) = (ci, • • • , Cj, • • • , c^). 
10.4.1.1. Computation of the Synchronised Part Cs 
The synchronised part of the descriptor presented in (2) is 
e££S 
i-\ 
i-\ 
From this equation, it may be observed that the synchronised part Cs 
of column C is given as the sum of two parts (Cs — Cs+ + Cs~) called 
respectively the positive part and the negative part. The positive part cor-
responding to a synchronising event e, called Ce+, is the tensor product 
of columns Q +[*,Ci] of each positive matrix Q^l and hence Cs+ is the 
(sparse) sum of all the Ce+ (e G £S). The negative matrices are diagonal 
'It is cheaper to store indexpss 
than 
indexi, 

176 
J.M. Foumeau, 
B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
matrices used for the normalisation of positive matrices. The negative part 
corresponding to a synchronising event e, called Ce-, is a vector containing 
a single element (the diagonal element of the matrix) which is equal to the 
product n»=i Q - \ci-> ci\- I t s hidex is equal to the index of column C. Cs-
is the sum of the Ce~ for all e £ £S. The algorithm is presented in Fig. 
10.4, and uses the definitions 10.8, 10.9 and 10.10. 
Generate_sync(inde:r(e3. (C) ,S AN) 
Ce+ .Empty();Ce- .Empty();Cs+ .Empty();Cs- .EmptyQ / / these vectors are of type S 
P t o t = 1,2,...,|£S| Do 
For i = 1,2, ••• .N Do 
If Q^l is not identity Then 
|_ 
Cc+=Ce+*Q<$[*,Ci] 
Else 
| 
C e + = C e + * ( l , c 0 
End If 
End For 
Evaluate Ce+; Evaluate Ce-// Evaluate functional elements 
C,+ 
=Sum{Ca+,Cc+) 
C„- 
=Sum(C„-,Ce-) 
End For 
C,= Sum(C s +,C s-) 
return(Cs) 
Fig. 10.4. 
Function Generate jsync - Generation of synchronised part of the column 
The complexity of this algorithm is of order X] e g £ 5 x f|i=i 1^1+ [*' CiH 
to which must be added the cost of the K function evaluations. 
10.4.1.2. Computation of the Local Part Ci 
As a tensor sum is a sum of tensor products, the previous algorithm could 
be used for the local part. However a much simpler scheme can be derived 
as shown in Fig. 10.5. For each local matrix Q\ , this algorithm consists of 
putting all entries of Qf' [*,Ci], into a particular structure temp, by means 
of function Change. To each element (val,bi) of column Q\[ [*,c,], there 
corresponds an element (val, C\ • • • CJ_I6JC,+I • • • cjv) in the set temp. The 
elements in this set temp are ordered according to the lexicographic order 
of the SAN. The complexity of this algorithm is £) i = 1 \Q\ [*, Cj] |. The cost 
of evaluating functional transitions must be added to this cost. 

SANs 
and Lumpable 
Stochastic 
Bounds: 
Bounding 
Availability 
177 
Generate Joca\(indexiex(C), 
SAN) 
C|.Empty() 
Fori = 1,2, ••• ,JVDo 
temp.Empty() 
For each element (val, bi) of column Q^' [*, Ci] Do 
| 
temp.add(va/(ci • • • Ci-ibid+i • • • cjv), 
Change(indexiex(C),bi,Ci)) 
End For 
C\ = Sum (C/,temp) 
End For 
return(C|) 
Fig. 10.5. 
F u n c t i o n G e n e r a t e J o c a l - Generating the local part of a column 
10.4.2. Sorting and 
Uniformisation 
The procedure refresh, used in the main algorithm (Fig. 10.2), requires 
a column colLimsub of type ColumnLimsub to be sorted according to 
order par, where each entry is associated with its index index par- Thus we 
must transform a list of (entry, indexiex) into a list (entry, indexpar) 
sorted 
according to orderpar. 
This is done in two steps: first, using the function 
Lex2S AN (index iex(x)) (the inverse of function 
SAN2Lex(indexpss{x)) 
previously used in Subsection 10.4.1) indexpss 
is computed from 
indexiex, 
and from the indexiex 
of an element, we can also know the subset pi to 
which it belongs (using the functions /,). Secondly, a dichotomic search of 
indexpss 
is performed in the subarray SAN2Pari 
(as described in Sub-
section 10.4.1). 
Assume that \pi\ — jj- (i = 1 • • • M), the complexity of sorting all ele-
ments of the columns C according to orderpar is \C\ x {log'jj- + T + N2), 
where T is the cost of evaluating the functions fic. We also have to uni-
formise colLimsub before passing it to the procedure refresh: all elements 
are divided by the maximum diagonal element multiplied by 2, which must 
be nonzero since all states indexed by indexpar 
are reachable. 
10.5. Example: A Resource Sharing Model Subject to 
Failure 
In this section we examine the performance of our algorithm when ap-
plied to a resource sharing model that is subject to failure. Our interest 
in this experiment is in obtaining some idea of the closeness of the bounds 
c[This cost can be reduced using a M D D to store the reachable state space9,10] 

178 
J.M. Fourneau, B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. 
Stewart 
generated by the algorithm and in estimating the computation time needed 
by the algorithm in computing these bounds. In this model, TV" distin-
guishable processes share P identical units of a certain resource, where 
0 < P < N. Each process alternates between a sleeping state and a re-
source using state. The number of processes that may simultaneously use 
the resource is limited to P, so that when a process wishing to move from 
the sleeping state to the active using state finds that all P units of resource 
are occupied, that process instantaneously returns to the sleeping state. All 
probability distribution functions in this model are assumed to be negative 
exponential distributions. For each process i, i — 1,2,... ,N, we shall let 
A^ be the rate at which process i awakens from the sleeping state wishing 
to access the resource, and fi^ the rate at which this same process releases 
the resource when it has possession of it. 
We add one further property to this system, which to this point is a 
simple resource sharing model. In addition to the two states using and 
sleeping, each process may transit to a third state called fail. This state is 
entered instantaneously from either the sleeping or using state as a result of 
a failure signal being received from a synchronising transition. This models 
the case of a system subject to some global failure, such as an electricity 
power failure. The rate of occurrence of these failures, i.e., the rate at which 
this synchronising transition occurs is given by Tf and its value depends 
from the number of processes using the resource (ry = (fusing).a 
). The 
rate at which the repair is carried out is denoted by rr. Once the failure 
has been repaired, all processes return to the sleeping state to once again 
begin the resource sharing procedure. 
The particular case in which A^ = A and fj,^ = \i for alH = 1,2,... 
,N 
can be shown to be strongly aggregatable2, and this model becomes trivial 
to analyse. However, if we assume that A^ = X + iS, i = 1,2,... ,N, the 
model cannot be aggregated and requires much more computation time to 
obtain its solution. Furthermore, since the failure rate is a functional rate, 
no product-form solution is available for this model. The specific parameter 
values used in these experiments are given by A = // = 5.0; , r r = 1.0 and the 
constant of the failure rate equal to a = 10 - 3, for a model with N = P = 10. 
The number of partitions is taken to be equal to P + 2 and is defined so 
that partition k, k = 0,1,... ,P contains all states in which the number of 
processes in the active using state is equal to k\ the final partition consists 
of a single state, the failure state. To judge the effectiveness of our bounding 
approach, we compared it with the exact results for different values of 5i. 
Since the exact results cannot be obtained for large models, our comparisons 

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
179 
were conducted on models with the relatively small reachable state space 
of 1,024 states. For values of S = 0.001, 0.01, 0.1 and 1, we found the exact 
value and our computed bounds to be respectively, (4.93E — 03,5.02.E —03), 
(5.10£-03,5.18£-03), (5.98£-03,6.45£-03) and (8.32£-03,9.05£-
03). The time to compute the bound in all four cases was 0.44 seconds. In 
summary, the algorithm performs extremely well. 
Acknowledgments 
This work is supported by ACI Sure-Paths and, in part, by the NSF under 
research grant number ACI 0203971 
References 
1. Benoit, A., Plateau, B., and Stewart, W.J., "Memory Efficient Iterative 
Methods for Stochastic Automata Networks" Technical report INRIA n. 
4259, France, (Sept. 2001). 
2. Benoit, A., Brenner, L., Fernandes, P. and Plateau, B., "Aggregation 
of Stochastic Automata Networks with Replicas" Linear Algebra and its 
Applications 386, (2005), 111-136. 
3. Benoit, A., Brenner, L., Fernandes, P., Plateau, B. and Stewart, W.J., "The 
PEPS Software Tool" (Springer-Verlag) LNCS 2794, 2003, 145-166 (4th 
International Conference on Modeling Techniques and Tools for Computer 
Performance Evaluation (Urbana, Illinois, USA), September 2003). 
4. Buchholz, P., "An aggregation\disaggregation algorithm for stochastic au-
tomata networks" Probability in the Engineering and Informational 
Sciences, 
11, (1997), 229-253. 
5. Buchholz, P., Ciardo, G., Donatelli, S. and Kemper, P., "Complexity of Kro-
necker Operations on Sparse Matrices with Applications to the Solution of 
Markov Models" (NASA/CR-97-206274 ICASE Report No. 97-66, December 
1997). 
6. Busic, A. and Fourneau, J.M., "Bounds for point and steady-state avail-
ability: an algorithmic approach based on lumpability and stochastic order-
ing" (Springer-Verlag) LNCS 3670, 2005, 94-108, (2nd European Performance 
Engineering Workshop, France 2005). 
7. Carrasco, J.A., "Bounding steady-state availability models with group repair 
and phase type repair distributions" Performance Evaluation, 35, (1999), 
193-204. 
8. Ciardo, G., Forno, M., Grieco, P., and Miner, A, "Comparing implicit repre-
sentations of large CTMCs" A.N. Langville and W.J. Stewart eds, 2003, 323-
327, (Fourth International Conference on the Numerical Solution of Markov 
Chains NSMC'03 (Urbana, Illinois, USA), September 2003). 
9. Ciardo G. and Miner, A.S., "Storage alternatives for larger structured state 
spaces" (Springer-Verlag ) LNCS 1245, 1997, 44-57 (Proc. 9th Int. Conf. 

180 
J.M. Fourneau, B. Plateau, I. Sbeity and W.J. Stewart 
on Modelling Techniques and Tools for Computer Performance Evaluation, 
1997). 
10. Ciardo, G. and Miner, A., "A data structure for the efficient Kronecker solu-
tion of GSPNs" IEEE Comp. Soc. Press, Buchholz, P. ed., 1999, 22-31 (Proc. 
8th Int. Workshop on Petri Nets and Performance Models (PNPM'99), Sept. 
1999). 
11. Courtois, P.J. and Semal, P., "Bounds for the positive eigenvectors of non-
negative matrices and their approximations" J. ACM, 31(4), (1984), 804-825. 
12. Davio, M., "Kronecker products and shuffle algebra" IEEE Transactions on 
Computers, 30(2), (1981), 116-125. 
13. Dayar, T., Pourneau, J.M., Pekergin, N., "Transforming stochastic matrices 
for stochastic comparison with the st-order" RAIRO-RO, 
37, (2003), 85-97. 
14. Dayar T., Pekergin, N.: "Stochastic comparison, reorderings, and nearly 
completely decomposable Markov chains" Plateau, B. and Stewart, W. 
eds. (Prensas universitarias de Zaragoza) 1999, 228-246. (Proceedings of 
the International Conference on the Numerical Solution of Markov Chains 
(NSMC'99), 1999). 
15. Donatelli, S., "Superposed generalized stochastic Petri nets: definition and 
efficient solution" (Springer-Verlag) LNCS 815, 1994, 258-277 (Proc. 15th 
Int. Conf. on Application and Theory of Petri Nets, Zaragoza, Spain, June 
1994). 
16. Pernandes, P., Plateau, B., Stewart, W.J., "Efficient descriptor-vector multi-
plications in stochastic automata networks" J ACM, 45, (1998), 381-414. 
17. Pourneau, J.M., Pekergin, N., "An algorithmic approach to stochastic 
bounds" (Springer Verlag) LNCS 2459, 2002, 64-88 (Performance evaluation 
of complex systems: Techniques and Tools, 2002). 
18. Pourneau, J.M., Lecoz, M., Pekergin, N. and Quessette, F., "An open tool 
to compute stochastic bounds on steady-state distributiuon and rewards", 
2003, 219-224 (IEEE Mascots 2003). 
19. Fourneau, J.M., Lecoz, M., Quessette, F., "Algorithms for an irreducible and 
lumpable strong stochastic bound" Linear Algebra and its Applications 386, 
(2005), 167-185. 
20. Hillston, J., Kloul, L., "An Efficient Kronecker Representation for PEPA 
Models" (Springer Verlag) LNCS 2165, 2001, 120-135 (Proc. of the Joint 
International Workshop on Process Algebra and Probabilistic Methods, Per-
formance Modeling and Verification, Germany, Sept. 2001). 
21. Lui, J.C.S., Muntz, R., "Computing bounds on steady state availability of 
repairable computer systems" J. ACM, 41(4), (1994), 676-707. 
22. Mahevas, S., Rubino, G., "Bounding asymptotic dependability and perfor-
mance measures", 1996, 176-186 (Second IEEE International Performance 
and Dependability Symposium, USA, 1996). 
23. Muntz, R., de Souza e Silva, E., Goyal, A., "Bounding availability of re-
pairable computer systems" IEEE Trans, on Computer, 38(12), (1989), 1714-
1723. 
24. Plateau, B., "On the stochastic structure of parallelism and synchroniza-
tion models for distributed algorithms" SIGMETRICS, Texas, 1985, 147-154 

SANs and Lumpable Stochastic Bounds: Bounding Availability 
181 
(Proc. of the SIGMETRICS Conference, Texas, 1985). 
25. Stewart, W.J., Introduction 
to the Numerical Solution of Markov 
Chains 
(Princeton University Press) 1994. 
26. Stewart, W.J., Atif, K., Plateau, B., "The numerical solution of stochastic 
automata networks" European Journal of Operational Research, 86, (1995), 
503-525. 
27. Stewart, W.J. and Plateau, B., "Stochastic Automata Networks for Depend-
abillity Modelling" 2000 (IEEE Aerospace Conference, USA, 2000). 
28. Stoyan, D., Comparison Methods for Queues and Other Stochastic Models 
(Wiley) 1983. 

This page is intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 11 
Aggregation M e t h o d s for Cross-Layer Simulations 
Monique Becker, Vincent Gauthier 
GET/INT, 
Samovar Lab., Evry, Prance 
E-mail: {Monique.Becker, 
Vincent.Gauthier}@int-evry.fr 
Andre-Luc Beylot, Riadh Dhaou 
INPT/ENSEEIHT, 
IRIT Lab., Toulouse, France 
E-mail: {Andre-Luc.Beylot, 
Riadh.Dhaou} ©enseeiht.fr 
The behaviour of ad hoc networks is very difficult to predict due to 
its dynamic characteristics. In this chapter we assess the relevance of 
including inter-layer interactions to analyse quality of service (QoS) is-
sues in wireless networks so that upper layer(s) processes could take into 
account the performance of the lower layer when, for example, select-
ing paths which provide some QoS guaranties. These interactions in-
troduce time-level-space-scale dependencies. Moreover, mobility of such 
systems make an experimental approach, based on measurements and 
testing, time consuming. Hence, we advocated that analytic or simu-
lation techniques could be developed instead. Aggregation techniques 
have been widely proposed to solve large scaled and complex systems 
and in this chapter we study their suitability in a cross-layer simulator 
environment. 
11.1. Introduction 
The performance of wireless systems is extremely sensitive to nodes' mobil-
ity, and to the dynamic nature of the traffic and environment. In the recent 
past the concept of a layered network stack has been at the core of devel-
opment of networks and standard protocols. However, with the emergence 
of ad hoc and wireless networks, it has become apparent that the perfor-
mance of a layered stack approach can be compromised by the specificity 
183 

184 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
of the wireless networks, their interconnection with wired networks and 
early attempts to just adapt previously proposed quality of service (QoS) 
mechanisms to wireless environments. 
Recently cross layer based approaches have been suggested as a new way 
of studying and assessing novel QoS mechanisms in heterogeneous network. 
These mechanisms do not consist of adding extra features like e.g. band-
width reservation mechanisms or any other ad hoc mechanism, but attempt 
to adapt the currently available mechanisms at one layer of the stack to its 
underlying layers. Cross layer concept implies sharing pertinent information 
between not necessarily adjacent layers with the aim of optimising a global 
objective, as opposed to the traditional multiple-layer optimisations. 
Performance evaluation and optimisation of the whole system is a cru-
cial step in the process of design and validation of these emerging systems.1 
Decomposition has long been recognised as a powerful tool for the analysis 
of large and complex systems where models of large, complex and dynamic 
systems can often be reduced to smaller sub-models, for easier analysis, us-
ing aggregation/dis-aggregation (decomposition) techniques. However be-
fore applying these techniques, the system under analysis should possess 
some key underlying near-decomposable characteristics2. 
In this chapter we assess the usefulness of including aggregation/dis-
aggregation techniques when simulating complex wireless communication 
systems. We implement these techniques in a simulation environment which 
is driven by dynamic data and entail the ability to incorporate additional 
data (either archived or collected online) so that the simulator tool would 
be able to steer the evaluation process dynamically. 
In the first part of this chapter, we review aggregation techniques pre-
viously suggested to solve complex Markov chains, queuing networks and 
physical systems. In the second part, we present cross layer interaction case 
studies, using the developed dynamic simulation tool. 
11.2. Aggregation Methods 
The underlying idea of aggregation/dis-aggregation techniques is that large 
complex systems may share some features of nearly/totally decomposable 
systems2. If this is the case, a large scale and complex system may be 
divided into subsystems which are easier and faster to solve. Aggregation 
techniques are in the more basic a two step procedure. 
Aggregation step: the solution of each subsystem is derived inde-
pendently from the other subsystems, or if there are relations between 
subsystems, they are simplified. 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
185 
Dis-aggregation step: the global solution is derived from the solutions 
of the previous step. 
Aggregation may be exact or approximate. When it is approximate, the 
two steps may be used iteratively until convergence3. Some examples of 
communication systems which could resort to aggregation techniques are: 
An example of space type aggregation is the analysis of a GSM system. 
In these systems, a base-station controller coverage is an aggregate of base 
tranceiver coverage and switching centre coverage is an aggregate of base 
station controller coverage. An example on when time scale aggregation 
techniques could be of great value is in the analysis of ATM systems4-6. 
The analysis of an ATM network at call level and at cell level simultaneously 
using, for example, Markov chain models can become very time consuming. 
The underlying problems lies in the time-scale difference between the two 
stochastic processes involved. 
11.3. Aggregation of Markov Chains 
11.3.1. 
Introduction 
In the case of Markov chain models, several methods have been proposed 
in order to benefit from the structural features of the graph associated with 
the underlying model transition matrix (or infinitesimal generator)7. 
11.3.2. Decomposability 
Method of Kemeny 
and Snelk 
Theory 
Kemeny and Snell8 aggregation method is based on the property known as 
decomposability (or lumpability). In this case, the state space is partitioned 
into disjoined subsets called aggregates. 
E=\jAn, 
V(i,j)€T2,i^j, 
AiDA^t 
(1) 
where, T is finished or countable. In this framework a system is decompos-
able if the sum of the rates of transitions from a state of an aggregate Ai 
towards the states Aj of an aggregate is the same one for all the states of 
the aggregate Ai. 
V (i, j) G T2 , i ^ j , V (eu fi) e A\ , 
J2 qei,ej = ^Z 1f„^ ~ lX,Aj • 
(2) 

186 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
The method of Kemeny and Snell then makes it easy to determine the 
stationary probabilities of the various aggregates (i.e. the sum of stationary 
probabilities of the states of an aggregate). For that, let us consider the 
process {Y(t), t > 0} with space of states F = {Ak} defined in the following 
way: Y(t) = Ak —> X(t) G Ak. Hence, {Y(t),t 
> 0} is then a Markov 
process with an infinitesimal generator Q* = {q*Ai A.). And we can obtain 
Pv{Y(t + dt) = Aj\Y{t) = M) = Vv{X{t + dt) G Aj\X(t) 
G At) 
= Q*Ai,Ajdt + o(dt). 
(3) 
Then the distribution 7r* = (TTA ) where nA 
= ^ e 
€A Trek is the solution 
of: 
7r*Q*=0, 
^ T T ^ = 1 . 
(4) 
Finally, the distribution n* verifies the system (4). Note that this 
method determines in a relatively simple way, the stationary probabilities 
of the various aggregates, but, we do not obtain the probabilities of the 
states inside an aggregate. 
11.3.3. Example 
of the Method of Kemeny 
and Snell 
The proposed model consists of studying a switch of packets with two input 
ports and two output ports (see Fig. 11.1). The packets are sorted upon 
arrival according to their destination into two virtual sub-queues. Let us 
note Q\ and Qi the two queues and Q\\ , Q12, Qi\ and Q22 the four virtual 
sub-queues. Qij is the set of packets arriving on input i and served by the 
output port j server. The ingress queues are continuously polled in parallel 
(separately for the two outputs). When a queue is not empty, a packet is 
XI2A ! 
vHil 
! 1 i ' i ! ! 
/ 
I I I 
1 1 1 1 
fi Y" 
^^ 
s-—J 
Fig. 11.1. Packets switch with ingress queues. 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
187 
emptied; if the queue is empty, the other queue is polled. The switching 
time between queues is negligible (it's a two queue polling system with a 
null switching time between queues and between cycles). 
The arrivals on the input queues are assumed to be Poisson with rate 
A on each of the two entries and we assume that the traffic is randomly 
equitably distributed on the two output ports. So the input traffic into 
each of the virtual sub-queue is A/2. The length of the packets is supposed 
to be exponentially distributed with mean length 1/fi. In this case, we can 
separately analyse the behaviour of the two output ports. Let us analyse 
what occurs on the first exit. Let us note Ni(t) the number of packets in 
virtual sub-queue Qm ^(t) 
the number of packets in virtual sub-queue Q12 
and K(t) the number of the port which is actually polled. Let us note that 
when a queue is empty the virtual sub-queues have no real meaning. The 
polling operation has a meaning only if the system is not empty. There is no 
switching time, so if a packet arrives to an empty queue it is immediately 
transferred. Then the process {Ni(t),N2(t),K(t),t 
> 0} can be described 
by a Markov chain. Let N, 1 < N < +00 be the capacity of the buffers. 
Then the Markov chain state space is: 
E = {(i,j,k),l 
<i<N,l<j<N,l<k<2} 
U{(0,j,2),l<j<N}U{(i,0,l),l<i<N}u{(0,0,0)}. 
(5) 
The decomposition method suggested identifies states aggregates in 
which there are M packets in the two queues. Note that the method is 
exact in the two limit cases iV = 1 and N = +00. For N = +00, the system 
is equivalent to a M/M/l queue where the discipline of service is changed. 
It is FIFO on each queue, but not necessarily overall, if a packet arrives 
at a queue which is relatively highly loaded it may be overtaken by pack-
ets which would arrive at the other queue while it waits. Globally, insofar 
as discipline is work-conserving, and the number of packets waiting for an 
emission on the first exit (the sum of the numbers of packets waiting at 
<3n and Q21) constitutes a Markov process with a total arrival rate A and 
a service rate /1. We obtain exactly the same graph as that obtained for an 
M/M/l queue. 
Let us verify it from the transition rates: 
— the aggregate AQ = {(0,0,0)}. It is a singleton, hence there is no need 
to verify any property. With a rate A/2, there are transitions towards 
the states (1,0,1) and (0,1,2) which belong to the aggregate A\. We 
obtain: q*AoAi = A; 
— generally, starting from any state {i,j, k) of an aggregate Ai+j there are 

188 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
transitions, with arate A/2, towards the states (i+l,j, k) and 
(i,j+l,k) 
both of which belong to the aggregate Ai+j+\. Then, qA 
An 
= A; 
— for the departure rates, let us verify that qA 
A 
= /x. For that, we 
have to distinguish in each aggregate An, n > 0, the states where one 
of the queues is empty, from the states where the two queues are not 
empty; 
— from states (0, n, 2) and (n, 0,1) one will go towards the states 
(0,n— 1,2) and with a rate fj,. These states belong to the aggregate 
•A-n— 1) 
— from states (k, n — k, 2) and (k, n — k, 1) where 0 < k < n, there is a 
transition towards the states (k, n — k — 1,1) and (k — 1, n — k, 2) with 
a rate fi. These states belong to the aggregate A n_i. 
The property (2) is thus verified and the aggregated graph shown in 
Fig. 11.2 is obtained: 
Fig. 11.2. 
Aggregate process, infinite length queues. 
Note that this aggregation method does not permit us to obtain neither 
the marginal probabilities of occupation of each buffer, nor the probabilities 
of each state of the initial process. 
For the other limit case (buffer size equal to one) the transition diagrams 
shown in Fig. 11.3 are then obtained. 
Finally, the method of Kemeny and Snell makes it possible to obtain 
the probabilities in stationary regime of each aggregate. Since the system 
is balanced, the expected number of packets in each queue and the loss 
probability may then be derived. 
11.3.4. Decomposition 
Method of Courtois: 
Theory 
The decomposition method suggested by Courtois is an approximated 
method for which an error bound can be calculated. A system is known 
as completely decomposable if variables within constituent sub-systems do 
not relate to variables of other sub-systems. Almost completely (or nearly) 
decomposable systems have been referred as systems in which the relation 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
189 
Fig. 11.3. 
Initial process and aggregated process, queues with size 1. 
between the sub-systems' variables are weak9. In the case of a Markov pro-
cess, we will thus say that it is decomposable if the infinitesimal generator 
may be put in the block diagonal form. In a Markov chain model frame-
work these systems are not interesting since it means that the underlying 
process is not ergodic (as the associated graph is not strongly connected). 
Nearly decomposable systems on the other hand are hence more interest-
ing. A Markov process is nearly completely decomposable if its associated 
infinitesimal generator can be put in the form: 
Q = Q* + eC 
(6) 
where Q* is completely decomposable and e very small. 
The method of Courtois is carried out then in two steps known as ag-
gregation and dis-aggregation. 
Step No. 1: Aggregation 
The first step consists of determining the conditional stationary probabil-
ities for each aggregate in isolation. Hence for i £ T the following linear 
systems is then solved: 
^QA, 
= O, 
£ < 
= 1- 
(7) 
Step No. 2: Dis-aggregation 
The second step consists of determining the stationary probabilities of the 
different aggregates. For that, we determine in an approximate way the 

190 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
rates of transition between aggregates in the following way: 
TAi.A, « Y, 
<i J2 «*.«i • 
W 
ei€Ai 
ejGAj 
We thus build an infinitesimal generator R = (rAi iAj) related to the aggre-
gate process. The linear system then has to be solved 
(9) 
TTR = 0 , 
^irAi=l. 
ier 
This leads to an approximate value of the stationary probabilities of 
the different aggregates. In the final step an approximate unconditional 
probability of the different states is calculated that is, for i £ T, ej £ Af. 
ita « K^Ai 
• 
(io) 
This method determines in an approximated way the unconditional sta-
tionary probabilities of all states. Courtois also showed that the incurred 
error was of the order of 0(e). 
11.3.5. Example 
of the Decomposition 
Method of 
Courtois 
Let us consider the Markov process characterised by the graph shoun in 
Fig. 11.4. 
Fig. 11.4. 
Initial process. 
If we assume that 7 is comparatively small in magnitude when compared 
to A and fi , then the infinitesimal generator: 
/ - ( A + 7) 
A 
7 
0 
\ 
M 
- ( ^ + 7) 
0 
7 
7/2 
7/2 
- ( A + 7) 
A 
V 
7/2 
7/2 
n 
-(M + 7 ) / 
Q 
(11) 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
191 
can be reduced to 
Q* 
0 
A 
0 
-fj, 
0 
0 
- A 
0 
n 
which leads at the dis-aggregation step to: 
n 
X + H 
A 
* 
2 
7T5 
= 
^3 
= 
o \ 
0 
A 
- M / 
X + fj. 
A 
X + fi 
(12) 
(13) 
1 
X + fx 
Note that in this case the step of determination of the rates of transition 
between the aggregates is exact (that is, we could have applied the method 
of Kemeny and Snell): 
n,2 = 7^0 +1^1 = 7 
»"2,i = 77r2 + 77r3 = 7 
From (14), we get: 
R = 
-7 
7 
and finally while applying (15): 
7Ti = 
7T2 
= 
(14) 
(15) 
5T0 ~ 
X 
TTl 
2 A + /x 
1 
A 
2A + /z 
T2 
7T3 
1 
/X 
2A + fi 
1 A 
(16) 
2 A + /x 
11.4. Aggregation of Physical Sub-System 
The aggregation methods presented in previous sections are based on 
mathematical and structural properties of the underlying models. In this 
section, we present an example on how decomposition can appear naturally 
when analysing communication systems. Let us consider a GSM cellular 
network10,11. In a GSM cellular network, users are allowed to move and 
the network providers' aim is to ensure the continuity of intercellular com-
munication throughout the duration of the call. If the movement patterns 
are analysed (see Fig. 11.5), it can be noted that movement follows certain 
specific patterns and hence, it may be possible to regard groups of cells as 
systems aggregates. 

192 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
— 
Primary path 
Secondary path 
-3»- 
One-way path 
Fig. 11.5. GSM Network example. 
When a user goes from one cell to another cell, there is a handoff. When 
there are many handoffs between two cells, it will be suitable to aggregate 
them. 
In Ref. 4 a network composed of m cells and N mobiles moving between 
the various cells is considered. The assumptions are the following: 
— the residence time in a cell i follows an exponential distribution with 
holding time l/nt; 
— the probability that a mobile leaving out cell i and going towards cell j 
is given by pij. 
The objective of the work reported in Ref. 10 is to determine the av-
erage numbers of mobiles in each cell Ni by supposing that there is no 
blocking in any cell (there are sufficient resources there). In this case, it 
may be sufficient to determine for each one of the N users the steady state 
probability 7Tj that he is in cell i. This can be obtain directly by resorting 
to the relation Ni = itiN. 
The total residence time rate is then [i = ]T^ fii and the a^ elements of 
the transition matrix A are: 
*33 
1 
(17) 
i^J 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
193 
which has a steady state solution given by the linear system: 
m 
7TA = 
7T, 
^ 7 T i = l . 
(18) 
i=l 
From the physical characteristic of the system under analysis and empir-
ical evidence gathered so far, it appears that the matrix A is very sparse and 
hence aggregation techniques may be employed to obtain an approximated 
solution by aggregating cells between which the probabilities of handoff are 
high. For a 79 cells configuration, covering France, several aggregates were 
examined successively. One aggregate was Paris region. The other aggre-
gates were corresponding to large areas. Two methods of resolution were 
then used: Courtois method and a numerical solution of a block diagonal 
system by power method12. 
In Ref. 11 we considered this time that the number of users varies in 
each cell and that the network operator has a limited number of resources 
in each cell (recall that if the access method used is F-TDMA, time slots 
are allocated to frequencies). Consequently, it will be necessary to take into 
account new call arrivals, intercellular call transfers, ends of communica-
tions and potential failures. Using the notation already introduced, we also 
need to consider the following parameters: 
— duration of communications follows a negative exponential distribution 
with mean holding time 1/7; 
— the new connection arrivals is a Poisson process with rate A,; 
— a cell can accept up to Cj simultaneous connections. 
Even though other solutions are possible11, in this example, we present 
the simplest version which does not use priority mechanisms between the 
various types of communications (new calls, intercellular transfers). We then 
try to determine: 
— the blocking probabilities of new calls in each cell: TJ; 
— the blocking probabilities of transfers of calls between the various cells: 
Under these assumptions, the vector {N(t) = (N\(t),..., 
Nm(t)), t > 0} 
corresponding to the number of calls in each cell constitutes a continuous 
time Markov process whose state space size f2 is equal to Ilm
=1(Ci + 1). 
Note that if traffic is asymmetric and communications are routed be-
tween unbalanced cells, the near-decomposable feature that the previous 

194 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
model transition matrix possesses is lost and the methods here discussed 
may not be valid. 
The proposed decomposition technique for the simple case focuses on 
one cell at the same time. To make the analysis more tractable, it is assumed 
that the intercellular traffic is Poisson with rate Aj,j. If this is the case, we 
can resort to the underlying property of Poisson traffics which makes it 
possible to equalise the probabilities of blocking of the new calls and of the 
intercellular transfers: Tj = r,^. 
We obtain, then, a very simple model of a cell which behaves exactly 
like a M/M/Ci/Ci 
queue with arrival rate at = A* + J2j^a ^j,i an<^ service 
rate Vi = \ii +7. We then obtain a load pi = cti/vi for which the probability 
of blocking equals: 
(19) 
The problem is that in this formula, the intercellular transfer rates are 
not known because of potential blocking due to lack of resources. We could 
however calculate these rates according to the blocking probabilities and 
the characteristic parameters of the system: 
AJ-ii(l 
-Tjti))—pitk 
3 
= I Aj + ^ 
^J4 I —PiA1 
~ Ti) • 
p?< 
ct\ 
g« 
J 
i=o J-
(20) 
An iterative solution in which we apply successively the aggregation 
step (19) followed by the dis-aggregation step (20) is envisaged. Note that 
we can start from an initial solution in which all blocking probabilities are 
set to zero. In this case the resolution of the linear system (20) is equal to 
the determination of the average number of passages in each cell if there is 
no blocking. In this case (20) changes into: 
K,k = I Aj + 2_, ^j,i I ~Pi,k • 
(21) 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
195 
11.5. Time-Space Aggregation 
There are phenomena for which events at many scales of length or time 
do make contributions of comparable importance, or at least have a non 
negligible influence on each other. Hence, any evaluation framework that 
describes these phenomena must take into account these multi scale contri-
butions. 
A typical example of multiple-time-layer-space-scale dependence be-
haviour is provided by ad hoc13 and sensor systems14'15. When analysing 
these systems, the choice of granularity depends on the nature of the study. 
In some cases several levels of modelling of the same set of functions may be 
necessary, and multiple correlated processes may be identified. The identi-
fication of these dependencies and the way in which they should be treated 
will then become mandatory. 
The system is composed of a set of sub-systems distributed in the space 
(see Fig. 11.6). Each sub-system (e.g. mobile node and/or sensor) is com-
posed of one or more layers (but not necessarily all the layers). There is a 
cyclic dependence16 between the various layers ((l,i),(2,i)... and 
(N,i)) 
of each sub-system. This cyclic dependence occurs when several parts of the 
sub-system are correlated (for example, the performance of the radio chan-
nel depends on the traffic while the traffic itself depends on the performance 
of the radio channel). This dependence can also be characterised between 
two layers which are not directly adjacent (for example for sub-system i 
Layer i space aggregates 
n = Max of elements (layer i). 
i=l..N 
Fig. 11.6. 
Space and layer aggregations. 

196 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
there may be a dependence between layers 7 and 1 (7, i) and (l,i) in the 
case of cross layer systems17. Indeed, the cross layer simulator should allow 
the consultation — in real time — of information available on any network 
layer. This will enhance the simulator capabilities making it more sensitive 
to the specificity of the support and mechanisms used on each layer and 
find optimal conditions considering the whole system instead of optimising 
each layer locally. 
Within each layer of the system, it is possible to aggregate the sub-
systems. In this example, we refer to space aggregation which may rely on 
the physical distance between elements but which can also take into ac-
count the intrinsic characteristics of each layer. For example, if we consider 
a cellular system aggregates may correspond to cells. But, generally, aggre-
gates depend on the layers. The aggregates obtained on the layer 2 and on 
the layer 7 may be different from each other because the dependence (e.g. 
distance and/or time) between the different sub-systems on those layers 
may be different. Finally note that by increasing the number of elements of 
the system, we do not have any guarantee to preserve the space aggregates. 
11.6. Layer Aggregation 
Telecom networks were designed as layered systems. In this context, proto-
cols were planned to operate on only one layer. However, for some emergent 
networks, like for example, ad hoc networks, networks operation is becoming 
more complex and cross layer operations have been suggested. Ad hoc wire-
less networks are self organizing multi-hop wireless networks where all nodes 
take part in the process of forwarding packets, hence they are very different 
from conventional computer networks. First, radio resources are rare and 
time varying. Second, the network topology is mobile and the connectivity 
is unpredictable. Third, if we consider, for example, an architecture-based 
on 802.11 WLAN further problems appear due to, for example, the presence 
of hidden stations, exposed stations and the capturing phenomena. 
Due to the complex interactions between processes and protocols in 
a traditional layered architecture, the intrinsic dynamic characteristics of 
resource availability in an ad hoc wireless environment and the emerging 
end-users' requirements, hence we advocate that a simulation environment 
that takes into account inter-layer interaction can provide a suitable frame-
work to analyse and design wireless networks that need to maintain the 
quality of the service (QoS) offered to end-users. The proposed approach 
allows upper layer(s) to consider the performance of lower layers in order 
to, for example, select a path which provides QoS guarantees. 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
197 
11.6.1. Dynamic 
Simulations 
If inter-layer interactions are readily available feedback between layers im-
plicitly creates a controlled set of interactions to enable a particular layer 
to work with the rest of the stack. This feedback is not easy to implement 
in a network simulator because each layer works sequentially with it own 
time-scale, but with a feedback mechanism each layer may not be working 
sequentially and might have a different time-scale. For example the time 
scale of a simple 801.11 session is different from a time-scale of a TCP ses-
sion. To avoid this problem when two entities share the same variable but 
update or read this value at different time-scales, it is necessary to work 
with time averaging value. The slowest layer will determine if the layer 
stack is stable or not18. Hence when simulating a network which takes into 
account a feedback mechanism we need to have a dynamic simulator which 
creates dynamically feedback information by itself. 
11.6.2. Example 
of Inter-Layer 
Design 
This section reports on the inter-layer interaction between the physical layer 
and the routing layer that we have implemented in our proposed simulator 
tool. Our approach differs from Raisinghani's19 in that our simulator takes 
into account the time-scale differences between layers. With the structure 
design proposed by Raisinghani19 there is no time information stored in the 
DME (Data Management Entity) and we must work with a time average 
value, but in many cases we need to work with values which are context 
aware and time aware (it is not enough to know values it may be neces-
sary to know the context and the time). Any piece of information needs 
to have a context: for example, at MAC layer, each piece of information 
is related to a link, but in the routing layer, each piece of information is 
related to a path, if we want to exchange information between layers, we 
need also to exchange the context (exchange information about the layer 
knowledge example: routing information, session information). In our case, 
for an interaction (feedback information) between the physical layer and 
the routing layer, routing cannot be aggregated into an average because 
each piece of information associated to each path has its own context and 
it own time-scale. We have developed another approach to avoid the time-
scale problem and context problem. In this implementation of cross-layer 
design, the inter-layer information is exchanged through the same path and 
at the same time as a normal packet through each layer. In each layer a 
new component is implemented to store and schedule the information which 

198 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
comes from the lower layer to the upper layer (DME). Each piece of infor-
mation is synchronised with the packet flow through the network stack. 
This framework permits us to create an inter-layer interaction (feedback 
relation between layers) between the physical layer and the routing layer 
without loss of context information and also allows the right synchronisa-
tion with the rest of the data flow. Each piece of information can now be 
linked with routing layer information without any complex synchronisation 
mechanism. The inter-layer interaction flow (flow of feedback information) 
is storing and forwarding along the parallel way of the usual data flow (flow 
of packets in the network stack). The implementations of this inter-layer 
interaction have been made with JIST and SWANS20, a Java event driven 
network simulator. 
11.6.3. Network 
Protocols 
which use 
Inter-Layer 
Interactions 
Ad hoc networks require adaptive routing schemes to deal with the fre-
quent topology changes and end-user demand requirement. In this section 
we study a routing protocol which uses inter-layer information to select 
the route: a trade-off between the number of hops, the theoretical available 
bandwidth and the stability of the route (it is stable if there is no change 
about availability of the route when time is running). This inter-layer in-
formation includes the signal strength and Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) 
available at the MAC layer of an individual host. A new network metric is 
defined such that a trade-off between the number of hops and the SNR of 
each individual route is considered. The new metric, available at the net-
work layer, allows us to have a global overview of the best available path. 
In this protocol, a host initiates route discovery on-demand by broadcast-
ing a route-search packet which propagates to the destination, allowing the 
destination node to choose a route and return a route reply. In this section 
we focus on the implementation of the ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector 
(AODV) routing protocol that takes into account cross layer information 
to obtain better routing decisions. To do so, we use the SNR of each node 
to determine the route which will have the best SNR along the available 
paths. For this purpose we have added the probability of packet drop based 
on SNR information, in each Route REQuest packet (RREQ packet). Each 
node that forwards these packets adds its own SNR information, thus up-
dating the SNR of each link along the route. When the destination node 
receives the RREQ packet, it directly obtains the information about the 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
199 
quality of the route. The destination node then determines the best route 
and replies by sending a RREP packet so that each node on the route can 
save the relevant QoS information in its routing table. This route decision 
mechanism takes advantage of the cross layer information and hence we 
should expect the quality of the route and the network throughput to be 
improved. The decision criteria takes into account frame error rate (FER), 
bit error rate (BER) and signal to interference ration (SIR) information as 
stated in Eqs. (22)-(24). 
FERi = 1 - (1 - BERi)n 
, 
(22) 
BERi = aMQ (jpMSIRi{P)\ 
, 
(23) 
SIRl(P) 
= 
^ 
, 
(24) 
k^tl 
where; 
n 
: Number of bits in a packets, 
Gik 
: Path losses from the transmitter on the logical link I to the 
receiver on the logical link k, 
Pi 
: Transmission Power from the transmitter on the logical 
link I, 
Background noise on the logical link I, 
Frame error rate on the logical link I, 
Bits error rate on the logical link /. 
FERt 
BERt 
Equations (22)-(24) consider a wireless network with N nodes, and an 
established logical topology, where some nodes are sources of transmission, 
and a sequence of connected links I £ L(s) determines a route originating 
from source s21. &M = aM/\og2(M) 
where au is the number of nearest 
neighbours to constellation at the minimum distance, and (3M in $M = 
(log2 M)/PM is a constant that relates minimum distance to average symbol 
energy, (3M and OCM are constants depending on the modulation and the 
required bit error rate is given by BER. The BER is derived from the signal 
to interference ratio for link I (SIRi) for a given set of path losses Gik (from 
the transmitter on the logical link k to the receiver on the logical link /) 
and a given noise Ni for the receiver on the logical link I. 
Each node computes the BER and the FER of each input and each 
forward flow I as a function of the frame size n in bits and BER and SIR 

200 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
Throughput vs SNR in 802.11b 
SNR (dB) 
Fig. 11.7. 
Throughput as a function of the SNR. 
which will become an inter-layer information. Hence, the probability of 
frame dropping on the logical link I e L(s) could be readily available for 
the routing protocol. 
In our simulations we have modelled the AODV protocol to carry in-
formation concerning the probability of frame drop over the path. During 
the route discovery phase the AODV protocol broadcasts a route-request 
packet looking for the destination. In our proposed solutions, each node 
along the path between the source and the destination piggy-backs (in the 
route-request packets) information about the probability of frame drop. As 
a result the destination node calculates the probability of a frame drop for 
the chosen path, P, 
P= JJ FERi, 
ieP(i) 
where I is a sequence of connected links belonging to path P(l). The results 
obtained from the cross-layer simulations are promising and a highlight of 
these follows. Let us first show results that prove that it is adequate to 
design cross-layer models. On Fig. 11.7 the throughput between two nodes 
with a single hop is presented as a function of the SNR. Figure 11.8 shows 
the throughput of a two nodes single hop also for a multi-rate protocol like 
802.11b. 
(25) 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer 
Simulations 
201 
Throughput vs SNR 802.11b 
10 
12 
14 
16 
Fig. 11.8. 
Throughput as a function of the SNR for various data rate (1,2, 5.5,11 Mbps). 
9 
AODV with Cro5sLay«r 
AODV 
10000 
Offered Load (pazkete) 
Fig. 
11.9. 
Performance 
comparison 
for 
models 
with 
and 
without 
cross-layer 
optimisation. 
These results show that in this type of scenario it is advisable to se-
lect the route considering SNR due to its observed impacts on the avail-
able throughput. Figure 11.9 presents the normalised throughput (through-
put/load) as a function of the offered load for the case of AODV without 

202 
M. Becker, V. Gauthier, A.-L. Beylot and R. Dhaou 
and with cross-layer optimisation, from an average of 30 simulations per 
points for a 50 nodes network without mobility. It is clear that cross-layer 
optimisation improves the performance. 
Note that the example presented here was solved by writing simulation 
modules for each layer and having them communicate adequately. In fact it 
would be useful to use a more generic tool: a dynamic and autonomic simu-
lator, i.e. an on demand operating environment that responds automatically 
to change in the set of performance criteria evaluations. 
11.7. Conclusion 
When solving a complex problem it is often necessary to divide it into sub-
problems. This is a well known and studied technique, and we have showed 
that it is still very relevant in solving outstanding problems like routing in 
ad hoc and wireless networks. Various numerical methods have been pro-
posed to take into account structural and time scale characteristics of the 
underlying models and they are normally referred to as aggregation meth-
ods. We have presented a few of these methods and assess their applicability 
when analysing wired and wireless networks. Aggregates have to be ade-
quately chosen. They may be sets of states of a Markov Chain, subsets of 
queues or other sub-systems, or sub-models corresponding to several time 
scales. 
These methods are even also relevant for self organising wireless net-
works for which cross-layer information may be readily available to the 
delivery mechanisms. A methodology for cross-layer simulations has been 
presented. The results are promising and lead us to suggest that dynamic 
autonomic simulations are a serious candidate to solve models of large self 
organising networks like for example ad hoc networks. Therefore, a generic 
tool should be designed. It should be a dynamic and autonomic simulator 
environment. Each simulation module should have the ability to manage 
itself and to dynamically adapt to changes according to criteria it observes 
or senses in the model environment rather than requiring the simulation 
designer to initiate the changes. 
References 
1. Gelenbe, E., Pujolle, G., Introduction to Queueing Networks, (Wiley), 1987. 
2. Courtois, P. J., "On the time and space decomposition of complex struc-
tures", Communication of the ACM, 28(6) 1985, 590-603. 
3. Dudkin, L. M., Rabinnovich, H., and Vakhutinsky, I., "Iterative aggregation 
- A new approach to the solution of large scale problems", Econometrica, 
47(4), 1979, 821-842. 

Aggregation Methods for Cross-Layer Simulations 
203 
4. Roberts, J.,"A service system with heterogeneous user requirements", in 
"Performance of data comm. systems and their applications", G. Pujolle, 
Ed., (North Holland), 1981, 423-431. 
5. Ziram, A., Aspects multiservices des reseaux large bande: application a I'etude 
des performances au niveau appel des commutateurs ATM, (Ph.D. Thesis in 
Computer Science, U. Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6), 1998. 
6. Ziram, A., Beylot, A.-L., and Becker, M., "Using an Aggregation Method 
for the Multiple Resource Sharing Problem in a Multi-service Environment", 
1998, 176-182 (6th International Conference on Telecom Systems, Nashville, 
USA). 
7. Moulki, M., Beylot, A.-L., Truffet, L., and Becker, M., "An aggregation tech-
nique to evaluate the performance of a two-stage buffered ATM switch", 
Annals of Operations Research, 79, (1998), 373-392. 
8. Kemely, J. G., Snell, J.L., Finite Markov Chains, (Van Nostrand-Reinhold, 
Princeton), 1960. 
9. Courtois, P. J., Decomposability: Queuing and computer system 
applications, 
ACM Monograph Series, (Academic Press), 1977. 
10. Mazel, C , Evaluation des performances par simulations: Application 
aux 
canaux de signalisation de systemes radiotelephoniques, (These de docteur-
ingenieur de l'lnstitut National Polytechnique de Grenoble), 1988. 
11. Boumerdassi, S. and Beylot, A.-L., "Adaptive Channel Allocation for 
Wireless PCN", ACM Journal on Special Topics in Mobile Networks and 
Applications, MONET, 4(2), (1999), 111-116. 
12. Stewart, W. J., "Numerical methods for computing stationary distributions 
of finite irreducible Markov chains", in "Advances in computational probabil-
ity" (Chap. 4), W. Grassman, Ed., (Kluwer Academic Press), 2000, 81-112. 
13. MANETs, Mobile Ad hoc NETwork 
Group, http://www.ietf.org/htinl. 
charters/manet-charter.html. 
14. Xbow, http://www.xbow.com. 
15. Zigbee Alliance, http://www.zigbee.org/. 
16. Becker, M., Beylot, A.-L., and Dhaou, R., "Aggregation Methods for 
Performance Evaluation of Computer and Communication Networks", in 
"Performance Evaluation - Stories and Perspectives", Ed. Gabriele Kotsis, 
(Oesterreichische Computer Gesellschaft), 2003, 215-230. 
17. Dhaou, R., Gauthier, V., Becker, M., and Beylot, A.-L., "Cross Layer Sim-
ulation: Application to Performance Modelling of Networks Composed of 
MANETs and Satellites", 2004, T11.1-T11.30, (2nd Conference HetNet'04, 
Ilkley, U.K.). 
18. Ljung, L., "Analysis of Recursive Stochastic Algorithm", IEEE Trans. Auto. 
Control, AC-22, (1977), 551-575. 
19. Raisinghani, V.T. and Iyer, S., "Cross-Layer Design Optimisation in Wireless 
Protocol Stacks", Computer Communication, 27,(2003), 720-725. 
20. JIST/SWANS, Java in Simulation 
Time Scalable Wireless Adhoc Network 
Simulator, http: / / j i s t . ece. Cornell. edu/. 
21. Goldsmith, A., Wireless Communications, 
(Cambridge University Press), 
2004. 

This page is intentionally left blank

Modelling of Emerging Networks 

This page is intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 12 
Space and T i m e Capacity in D e n s e Mobile A d H o c Networks 
Philippe Jacquet 
INRIA and Ecole Polytechnique 
91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France 
E-mail: 
philippe.jacquet@inria.fr 
In this paper we revisit the two main paradoxes of mobile ad hoc net-
works: the space capacity paradox and the time capacity paradox. Gupta 
and Kumar have shown that density increases wireless capacity. Gross-
glauser and Tse have shown that mobility also increases capacity. We 
quantify more precisely this properties by setting up the general laws 
that propagation path must satisfy in presence of traffic flow density. 
Introducing time constraint in packet delivery, we generalise to a space-
time problem with mobile networks. 
12.1. Introduction 
Mobile ad hoc networks involve nodes that are moving on a network do-
main and communicate via radio means. The domain of a network can be 
indifferently a battlefield, a urban quarter, a building floor, etc. The mobile 
ad hoc networks bring two fundamental paradoxical properties: 
• The space capacity paradox; 
• the time capacity paradox. 
The illuminating result of Gupta and Kumar 2 states that the maximum 
capacity per node in a flat domain is in @{y TvToglv)' ^ being the network 
size. Multiplying by N we get the total capacity of a wireless ad hoc network 
which is in 0(yjN/logN) 
and therefore increases in N. This result is in 
sharp contrast with what can be obtained in a wired network. Assume N 
nodes connected by wire to the same communication resource (e.g. a cable 
headend). The resource share per node is in average O(JJ) and therefore 
207 

208 
P. 
Jacquet 
the total capacity remains bounded when N increases. In other words, 
wireless networks create capacity when the density increases. Therefore 
adding space to a multihop wireless network increases the capacity: this is 
the space capacity paradox. 
Figure 12.1 displays an example of the space capacity gain in an uniform 
traffic model described in Ref. 7 for Fisheye-OLSR. OLSR is a proactive 
link state protocol for mobile ad hoc networks6, and Fisheye-OLSR is an 
adaptation of OLSR protocol to very large networks. 
~ i — n — i — i — i — n — i — i — i — n — i — i — i — n — i — i — i — i — i — i — i 
2000 
4000 
6000 
8000 10000 
N 
Fig. 12.1. Capacity gain factor with network size for Fisheye-OLSR. 
When nodes randomly move, it turns to be more advantageous to store 
packets for a while on mobile routers instead of forwarding them immedi-
ately like hot potatoes. When the mobile router moves closer to the des-
tination, then it can delivers packets on a much smaller number of hops. 
Of course the delivery delay is much longer, but the network capacity also 
increases by slowing non urgent packets. This is the time capacity paradox: 
by delaying packets, nodes mobility increases network capacity. This was 
hinted the first time by Grossglauser and Tse in 2002. 

Space and Time Capacity in Ad hoc Networks 
209 
All of these results have been obtained assuming very strict assumptions 
of traffic density uniformity and ergodic motion. In this paper we will depart 
from the uniform models and assume that the traffic density varies with 
node location. We will provide results on how shortest path are affected 
by traffic density gradients. In particular we will show that in asymptotic 
conditions the routing paths obey to similar laws as in non linear optic. 
Therefore the scaling property of Gupta and Kumar is very general and can 
be interpreted by the inherent ability of wireless network to create capacity 
from the spatial density of nodes: this is the space capacity paradox of 
wireless networks. 
We also generalise this result to the case where nodes are mobile and can 
hold the packet for some time before retransmitting it. Relaxing time con-
straint in the packet delivery and introducing mobility pattern depending 
on node position, we generalise the equation we obtained for a stationary 
network and prove that mobility can actually sharply increase the network 
capacity. 
In conclusion we can say that space-time is in theory a source of capacity 
in wireless networks. The problem is to find the appropriate algorithms that 
allow to benefit from these properties. In this chapter we will show that a 
shortest path algorithm such as OLSR6 can fullfill these conditions. 
12.2. Gupta and Kumar Scaling Property 
In their reference paper on the capacity of mobile ad hoc networks, Gupta 
and Kumar2 showed that in presence of traffic density of A bit per time 
unit per square unit area, the typical radius of correct reception decays in 
O(-jj). This result assumes an uniform density model and quantity A is the 
density of traffic including the load generated by packet that are retrans-
mitted on their way to their destination on multihop paths. As a direct 
consequence the average number of hops needed to connect two arbitrary 
points in a bounded domain is therefore 0(\f\L), 
where L is the diameter 
of the network domain, since the distance must be divided by the radio 
ranges. As pointed out by Gupta and Kumar, this property has a strong 
implication in the evaluation of the maximum capacity attainable by a ran-
dom node when the node density increases. If C is the capacity generated 
by each node and N is the number of nodes in the network, Gupta and Ku-
mar found that the maximum bandwidth attainable is CJV = 0{ ,„} 
.,). 
The order of magnitude is obtained via the following milestones: the den-
sity of traffic generated per unit square are is 0(CN). 
Let r(C,N) 
be the 

210 
P. Jacquet 
typical radio range, thus the number of retransmissions needed to route a 
packet from its source to its destination is 0 ( r ( J J V ) ) . The latter estimate, 
in turn, yields a traffic density (including retransmissions) of 
O(^fjpr). 
Therefore r(C,N) = 0(y/^§^), 
namely r(C,N) = O^CN)-1). 
The av-
erage number of neighbour per node is 0(7rr(C, N)2N); 
it should be larger 
than log N in order to guarantee connectivity, which leads to the estimate 
C = 0((N log iV)-1/2). 
Kumar and Gupta estimates were originally derived from information 
theory considerations and are not related to any particular network imple-
mentation. If we assume a specific implementation and propagation model, 
then there will be a quantity (3 such that the typical radius of correct re-
ception of a packet is equal to -4=. By typical radius we mean the radius 
below which probability of correct reception of a packet is above a given 
threshold. The quantity /3 will depend on many parameters such as the 
probability threshold, the attenuation coefficient of wave propagation and 
the minimum signal-over-noise ratio required for correct reception. Notice 
that the typical disk of correct reception contains in average a finite number 
of transmitters per time unit, since the area is proportional to j . 
If we consider a network dispatched in a domain of dimension D then 
the estimate of the radius will be jjjo- In the sequel we will look at 2D 
domains generalising occasionnaly the results on other dimensions. 
When the density A increases in a fixed domain, then the minimum num-
ber of hops connecting two points A, B tends to be equivalent to d(A, B) ^ 
where d(A, B) denotes the euclidian distance between mobile node A and 
mobile node B. Meanwhile, the increase of the number of relays naturally 
increases the traffic density. If v is the actual traffic density generation per 
unit area, i.e. the traffic locally generated on mobile nodes, not the traffic 
relayed by the mobile nodes, then the average density traffic will satisfy the 
identity: A = V^Q 
where d is the average euclidian distance between two 
end points in a connection. 
This previous identity assumes that the pattern of path between points 
covers the domain in an uniform manner so that the traffic density, gener-
ated and relayed, is constant on the whole domain. In this case the path 
that connect two points with the minimum number of hops is very close to 
the straight line. But the question arises about the shape of the shortest 
path when the traffic density is not uniform. We will show that when the 
density increases while keeping proportional to a given continuous function, 
then the propagation paths tend to conform to continuous line, that we call 

Space and Time Capacity in Ad hoc Networks 
211 
propagation lines. Under these assumptions we will provide the general 
equations that the propagation lines must satisfy. We will show that vari-
able traffic densities affect shortest path the same way as variable optical 
indices affect light path in a physical medium. 
12.3. Massively Dense Networks 
We now consider massively dense networks on a 2D domain. We denote 
by X(x, y) the traffic density at the point of coordinate (x, y) on the do-
main. We suppose that function X(x,y) is continuous in (x,y), or at least 
Lebesgue integrable. When X(x, y) are uniformly large, the results of Gupta 
and Kumar together with the result of the previous section state that the 
radio ranges tend to be "microscopic" and routes can be considered as con-
tinuous lines between nodes. Packets travelling on a route C passing on the 
point of coordinate (x, y) will experience hops of length 
, " 
passing in 
VM1.!/) 
the vicinity of point (x, y). Let n(x, y) = v ^'v . The number of hops that 
a packet will experience on route C is something close to 
fcn(x(s),y(s))ds 
where s is a curvilign absciss on route C. 
In the sequel we are looking for route with the shortest hop number. 
Searching the path that minimise the hop number between two points A 
and B is therefore equivalent for looking for the path light between A and 
B in a medium with non-uniform optical index X(x,y). There is a known 
result about the optimal path that minimise a path integral Jc nds. 
Theorem 
12.1: The optimal path satisfies on each of its point 
z(s) = (x(s), y(s)) such that s is acurvilign absciss (ds = y/(dx)2 + (dy)2 = 
\dz\y. 
^ ( n ( z ( S ) ) ^ ) = Vn(z(S)) 
(1) 
where V is symbol of gradient vector. 
The proof is classical. If we consider a small perturbation C* of optimal 
path C where z*(s) = z(s) + <5z(s) we should have j c , nds* — fcnds 
= 
S[Jcnds] = 0. We have 5[fcnds] — JcS[nds}. Since S[n] = Vn.Sz(s) 
and 
S[ds] — ^-dSz we get 
S[ / nds] = / Vn.Sz(s)ds + / n—.—— ds 
Jc 
Jc 
Jc 
ds ds 

212 
P. Jacquet 
Integrating by part the second right hand side integral of the above and 
assuming that both C and C* share the same end points (i.e. Sz(s) = 0 at 
both ends), we get: 
S[ f nds] = / ( V n - 
^-{n^)).6z(s)ds. 
Jc 
Jc 
ds 
ds 
Since 6z(s) can be arbitrary, and that in all case S[fc nds] = 0, then 
Vn - gj(n^f) = 0 on the optimal path. 
Therefore finding the optimal path is just an application of geometric 
optics. Notice that when Vn — 0 (uniform traffic density) propagation lines 
are straight lines (no curvature). 
However we face a major problem in the fact that the distribution of 
path is actually impacting traffic density. This lead to an egg-and-chicken 
problem which may not be that easy to solve. We call $(#, y) the flow 
density of information transiting in the vicinity of point (x,y). 
Quantity 
<fr(x,y) is expressed in bit per meter, since it expresses the flow of packet 
crossing a virtual unit of segment of length of 1 meter centered on point 
(x, y). This flow impact the traffic density by the fact that each packet must 
be relayed every j3/^/X(x,y) 
meter in the vicinity of point (x, y). Therefore 
locally: 
A(z) = *(Z)VS 
(2) 
In other words A(z) = (-^p) 2 and 
*(z) 
"(*) = 4-r 
(3) 
When considering domain of dimension D we have A = $^-g— and 
n = ( J r r ) " ^ - Notice that the equations are singular when D = 1. 
As an example we can assume a planar domain massively and uniformly 
filled with mobile nodes and gateway nodes. We denote by /XG the spatial 
density of gateways. We assume that the mobile nodes are much more 
dense than the gateways. We denote by v the traffic density generated 
in any point, v is expressed in bits per square meters per slot. The flow 
density $ is constant in the domain and is equal to vd. We suppose that 
mobile nodes sends and receives flows from their closest gateway. Therefore 
d= f™exp(-TTHGr2)dr 
= 2VM5--
$ = 
(4) 
But in this case Vn — 0 and propagation lines are straight lines. 

Space and Time Capacity in Ad hoc Networks 
213 
12.3.1. Tractable 
Case with Curved Propagation 
Lines 
We exhibit two cases where the propagation lines are not straight lines. 
These cases are tractable because we will assume that we compute shortest 
path for additional light traffics that do not significantly impact the net-
work traffic density. 
The central gateway We assume a dense wireless network inside a disk. 
The main traffic comes from the boundary to the center G of the disk, where 
we assume there is a gateway to the wired backbone Internet. Assuming 
that the source of traffic are uniformly dispatched on the external circle and 
hinting that the propagation lines to the gateways are the straight lines, 
the flow density on a point z inside the disk is of the form 
*( z) = &r 
(5) 
I
ZI 
for some a. Using Theorem 12.1 (see Ref. 5 for details), it comes that the 
shortest path between two points A and B are the branch of logarithmic 
spiral centered on G that connect A and B (see Fig. 12.2). When node 
A and B are at same distance to center G, then the shortest path is the 
fraction of arc that contains A and B. Consequently when A and B are 
symmetric with respect to point G, then surprisingly the shortest path 
starts orthogonally to the straight line connected the two points. 
Fig. 12.2. 
Propagation lines in the central gateway wireless network. 

214 
P. Jacquet 
The border gateways In this case we assume that the network contains 
multiple gateways to the backbone internet and all are located on the ex-
ternal circle. We assume that the gateways are uniformly dispatched on the 
circle. We also assume that the other nodes in the network are uniformly 
distributed in the disk and that most of their traffic are addressed to the 
external internet via the gateways. To this end every node selects the clos-
est gateway, i.e. the gateway which is on the radius line that starts from 
center G and contains the node. Assuming the flows are straight lines to 
the gateways, the flow density satisfies: 
$(z) = a\z\ . 
(6) 
The equations of Theorem 12.1 can again be solved and it turns out that 
the propagation lines between two point A and B is 
• an hyperbol branch if the angle between GA and GB is smaller than ^ 
(see Fig. 12.3); 
• the union of segment AG and GB, otherwise. 
Fig. 12.3. 
Propagation lines in the border gateway wireless network. 
12.3.2. Practical 
Implementation 
of Shortest 
Path 
Protocol 
Implementing a routing protocol that follows the geodesic lines is not a 
difficult task. Indeed there is no need that nodes monitor their local traf-
fic density n nor to advertise the gradient vector. In fact a shortest path 

Space and Time Capacity in Ad hoc Networks 
215 
algorithm, such as OLSR6, will suffice. Of course one will need to limit the 
neighbourhood of the node to those whose hello success rate exceeds po- To 
this end we make use of Hysterisis Strategy in advanced link sensing option 
and set up HYST-THRESHOLD-HIGH parameter to value p0 that provides 
the best success rate, hop distance compromise. Tuned that way OLSR will 
automatically provide the shortest path that fit the traffic density gradient 
curvature. 
12.4. Introduction of Time Component 
In the previous section we were assuming very strict timing constraints so 
that packets are forwarded like hot potatoes without any pause between 
retransmissions. Recently Grossglauser and Tse4 showed that mobility in-
creases the capacity of wireless ad hoc networks. This due to the fact when 
nodes are moving one just wait that nodes come closer instead of imme-
diately starting relaying when nodes are far apart. In particular the in-
crease in capacity can be dramatic (in 0(1) instead of 0(A - 1/ 2)) if one 
considers ergodic mobility patterns. Unfortunately the delay for packet be-
comes unbounded when the density increases. The aim of this section is to 
quantify the gain in retransmissions number while we let the time constraint 
on delay delivery T vary. 
Although basic sensors networks or other smart dust are not expected 
to be mobile, however one can imagine more sophisticated sensors pro-
duced by nanotechnology that can be mobile by themselves. The sensors 
can also travel because they are embedded in a mobile device or because 
the background medium is mobile (think about a sensor in a river stream) 
Interestingly intermediate nodes can choose to store packet while moving 
instead of immediately retransmitting it. As long as they move in the right 
direction this may considerably reduce the average number of retransmis-
sions between source and destination. Of course the consequence is that 
packet delay delivery will considerably increase. This may be a solution for 
non urgent background traffic to take advantage of mobility and therefore 
have much less impact on global network load. Therefore we will model this 
very property by introducing space-time considerations in the framework 
presented in this paper. 
Throughout this section we will assume that a node has a packet (or a 
sequence of packets) to transmit to a destination node with a time delivery 
constraint of T. In other words, each packet should arrive at its destination 
no later than after a delay T. It basically means that we add the time 

216 
P. Jacquet 
dimension to our 2D problem. A path now contains the time dimension 
and will connect a source space-time point (zo,*o) to a destination space-
time point (zi,ti), given that t\ — t0 + T. When T = 0, and neglecting 
propagation delays and processing in relay nodes, we get to our previous 
analysis restricted to space components. Our aim is to show that with some 
mobility models, when T tends to infinity, the number of retransmissions 
needed to connect point (zo,to) to point (zi,*i) tends to be negligible 
compared to the number of retransmissions needed to connect point (zo, to) 
to point (zi,io)> (*-e- same spatial point but zero delay). 
In order to set up notations and convention for this very general prob-
lem, we will first start with an unrealistic mobility model. 
In this first example, we make the assumption that a node which has 
a packet to transmit or to relay can also travel with its packet at speed 
v. Therefore at any time the node that carries the packet has to make the 
decision of either transmitting it to the next hop or to travel with it during 
a certain duration. When the node chooses to hold the packet, we say that 
the packet is in hold state. We consider the optimal path C when T = 0 
which connects zo to Zi, we assume that the space time path will be the 
path C plus a time component. In order to avoid too many notations we 
will still denote the space-time path by C . 
With these very hypotheses, the number of actual hops the packet will 
experience during its propagation on path C is equal to Jc n\dz — vdt\ where 
v is the vector speed at point z. In the following we call h = -m the average 
(local) packet holding time per distance unit, or we will denote by 7 = £ the 
average fraction of distance traveled in hold state by a packet per distance 
unit. 
In the sequel we consider a mobility model where the nodes are subject 
to random walks that are independent to data traffic conditions. In this 
model we assume that at any time node travels at a random speed toward 
a random direction and keep its speed and heading during a time duration 
T. After time r it randomly change speed and heading. This like a parti-
cle in motion in a gas. Quantity r refers to the free space motion delay 
during which the particle moves in straight line. At the end of period r 
the particle experiences a collision that changes its motion vector in a ran-
dom way. Notice that r can be made random as well (we may assume that 
it is exponentially distributed). We assume that the expectation of speed 
vector E[v] = 0. We also assume that the speed vectors have isotropic 
direction and C2I is the covariance matrix, I being the identity matrix. 
We could accept some un-isotropic aspects so that covariance could depart 

Space and Time Capacity in Ad hoc Networks 
217 
from colinearity with identity matrix, but we will not do it for the sake of 
presentation. 
Quantity sjc^r is the standard deviation of node location after one free 
space travel. We assume that this quantity is of the same order as of hop 
distance r (remaining that r = ^). In other words the free space travel 
distance is of the same order as the hop distance. It is also instrumenetal 
in our proof that the speed is distributed on values that are not bounded 
by a finite number. 
When a packet arrive in a mobile node, the router has to select whether 
it will transmit the packet to the next hop or keep it in hold state. We 
define a decision process which is based on the localisation of the next hop 
and the speed vector of the host node. If the node decides set the packet 
in hold state it will keep it as long its speed does not change. Therefore a 
hold state will last at least one r period. The decision making automaton 
use a parameter x that is a positive real number and which depends on 
the delivery delay constraint T of the packet. Let 6 be the angle made by 
the direction to the next hop. The node decide to immediately transmit its 
packet to the next hop iff the two following conditions hold: 
(1) its speed is larger than parameter x; 
(2) the speed direction angle is contained in interval [—6 — JT^, —9 + xfj]i 
otherwise the packet stays in hold state. If the node keeps the packet in 
hold state it will keep it to its next motion vector change. At this mo-
ment it will proceed to a new packet state decision according to its new 
motion vector and to the localisation of the current potential next hop. 
If the node has been decided to be transmitted immediately then the re-
ceiver will also proceed to a state selection. A packet may be transmit-
ted over several hops before returning back in hold state. Basically when 
x = 0, then the packet is always immediately retransmitted to its next 
hops as with T = 0; and when x —> oo, then the packet is less likely 
retransmitted and stay longer in hold state. The probability that a node 
chooses to immediately transmit the packet is p(x) = JT^P(\V\ 
> x) and 
let v(x) = E[\v\ , |v| > x]^^ 
sintj^-), it is clear that v(x) > % s i n ( i ^ ) , 
since the computation is done on speed greater than x with direction uni-
formly distributed in [—6 — yx^,— 0 + JXJ]- The average motion vector 
when the packet is in hold state is colinear with the direction to the next 
hop and has modulus equal to p(x)v(x). According to hypothesis we have 
lim^-joo p(x) = 0 and lim^-too v(x) = oo. 

218 
P. Jacquet 
The average distance the packet will travel before a new decision has to 
be taken (either in hold state or in immediate retransmission) is p(x)r + 
(1 — P(X))P(X)V(X)T 
with variance V2(x). Notice that lim:c_00 V2(x) = C2T2. 
It comes that the average fraction of hold state travel per unit distance is 
(1 - p(x))v(x)T 
. 
r + (1 - p(x))v(x)r 
y 
We have clearly lima:-»oo 7 = 1 since v(x) tends to infinity, in this case we 
also have 
d-p(x)Hxy 
(8) 
Jc(r + (1 - 
P(X))V(X)T)2P(X) 
which also tends to infinity since the product p(x)v(x) tends to zero. How-
ever we cannot be sure that the packet actually reaches its destination. 
We know that the packet is on average on the path C. In order to check 
how far from path it is actually we have to look at the variance of packet 
localisation. After each decision step, the packet travels in average a dis-
tance p{x)r + (1 — P(X))P(X)V(X)T 
with a variance V2(x). Therefore in order 
to travel a distance of one unit the packet will have go through an aver-
age number of decision steps equal to p(:r)T.+(l_p(l
x))p(a.)1,(J.)r- Therefore the 
variance of its position is close to , . . ,. V2,X , w % . In order to be safe 
we have to prove that this variance is small, so that the packet does not 
evade too far from the path and that when time limit will be critical the 
number of hops it will have to travel in emergency to reach its destination 
won't be too long. Since V2(x) ~ C2T2 which is of order of r2 the variance is 
at most equal to i^y 
which is order r/p(x) which is small. In other words 
the number of hops is (using identity r = - ) : 
L 
dz\+0{\dz\. 
—) 
(9) 
e 1 + n ( l -p{x))v{x)rn 
\j p(x) 
Similarity the delivery delay T = fc {1+™$<:£$ 
p{x) \dz\. When the 
parameter V{X)T is large compared to 1/n then the number of hops is equiv-
aknt to Jc ^ 
which is in 0{V\L) 
and T ~ JC ^ g ^ 
w h i c h i s i n 
0 ( _ y , 
where L is the physical diameter of the network. Notice that the optimal 
path may vary when T changes, for example if mobility model is uniform 
on the network domain then when T is large optimal path will be straight 
lines. In other word the curvature of optimal paths may also depend on 
the time component. Of course all the quantities x, v(x) and p{x) may also 
vary on the spatial domain leading to further optimisation. 

Space and Time Capacity in Ad hoc Networks 
Fig. 12.4. 
Delay T versus the reduction factor of the number of retransmissions when 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Fig. 12.5. 
Capacity gain factor versus Delay T for mobile nodes. 
Figure 12.4 shows the gain in retransmission to the destination, and 
similarly the gain in capacity that can be achieved by tuning the factor x. 
When i - > o o w e have T —> oo, T being a fraction of g,f„ For this plot 
we have taken a speed distribution in power law: P(|v| > x) = , }_i. In 
l+x 2 
the next Fig. 12.5 we display the capacity gain factor with respect to delay 
T. Notice that the time delay unit coincides with the average time a node 

220 
P. Jacquet 
would take to carry its packet to its destination if it were driven straight 
instead of a random walk. 
12.5. Information Flow Tensor and Perspectives 
The previous examples are tractable because the path to the gateways were 
determined a priori by symmetry considerations and were not disturbed by 
the variation of parameter n(z). In fact the problem is that propagation 
lines and the traffic densities mutually affect each other. We have to describe 
the information flow in more details. Let consider a point z, let Uj be the 
sequence of information flow vectors passing in the vicinity of this point, 
each vector is expressed in bit per meter. We define the tensor of information 
flow vector T the following: 
T(z) = Y] j^-Ui ® Ui 
(10) 
The definition is equivalent to the tensor stress-energy in physics. We have 
$ = tr(T) = J2i lu*'l- The divergence of T can be interpreted as local gen-
eration of information flow: V • T = v where v is the sum of all information 
vectors generated in the vivinity of point (z). An information vector v is 
when information is generated in volume |v| on point z and is transmitted 
toward a path with initial vector A-. 
It seems also that propagation lines don't change when the route opti-
misation criterium changes. For example if hop number is changed in packet 
total delay time, the route should basically remains the same. The reason 
for this conjecture is that the condition of traffic at any given point in the 
network location is basically the same modulo an homothetic factor A(z). 
The only aspect which changes is the distance travelled by the packet per 
hop, but the delay per hop will be the same in distribution. We have a sim-
ilar point about bandwidth allocation criterium. The transmission at any 
point will take the same amount of bandwidth, only the per hop distance 
travelled by the packet will differ. Under this perspective simple shortest 
path algorithms such as OLSR6 should be asymptotically close to optimal. 
References 
1. Jacquet, P., "Element de theorie analytique de l'information, modelisation 
et evaluation de performances," INRIA Research Report (1998) RR-3505. 
http://www.inria.fr/rrrt/rr-3505.html 
2. Gupta, P. and Kumar, P.R., "Capacity of wireless networks" Technical re-
port, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, (1999). http://citeseer. 
nj.nee.com/gupta99capacity.html 

Space and Time Capacity in Ad hoc Networks 
221 
3. Baccelli, F., Blaszczyszyn, B., Muhlethaler, P., "A spatial reuse Aloha MAC 
protocol for Multihop wireless mobile networks" INRIA 
Research Report 
(2003) RR-4955. http://vww.inria.fr/rrrt/rr-4955.html 
4. Grossglauser, M., Tse, D., "Mobility increases the capacity of ad hoc wireless 
networks", 2001, 1360-1369, (INFOCOM, 2001). 
5. Jacquet, P., "Geometry of information propagation in massively dense ad 
hoc networks" INRIA research repport RR-4992, 2003. 
6. Clausen, T., Jacquet, P., "The Optimized Link State Routing protocol 
(OLSR)" IETF RFC 3626, 2003. 
7. Adjih, C , Baccelli, E., Clausen, T., Jacquet, P., Rodolakis, R., "Fish 
Eye OLSR Scaling Properties" Journal of Communications 
and Networks, 
Special Issue on Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, (Dec. 2004). 

This page is intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 13 
Stochastic Properties of Peer-to-Peer Communication 
Architecture in a Military Setting 
Donald P. Gaver and Patricia A. Jacobs 
Department of Operations Research, Naval Postgraduate School 
1411 Cunningham Road, Monterey CA 93943-5214, USA 
E-mail: dgaver@nps.edu, pajacobs@nps.edu 
A time-critical military mission must be completed before a random 
deadline to be successful. The mission requires a number of Blue assets; 
the more assets that can be assembled before the deadline, the greater the 
possibility of mission success. Traditionally, military Command and Con-
trol (C2) has a hierarchical structure; information is centrally stored and 
decision makers are also centralised. The paradigm of Network-Centric 
Warfare (NCW) implies a more horizontal C2 structure. There is of-
ten little communication infrastructure on the battlefield. Peer-to-Peer 
(P2P) communication networks are attractive enablers of a horizontal 
C2 structure. A stochastic model is used to discuss the benefits and 
possible vulnerabilities of a P2P-enabled C2 structure for a time-critical 
mission. The P2P architecture can result in larger probabilities of mis-
sion success than centralised C2. However, its benefits are nullified if the 
time it takes to assemble the needed Blue assets becomes larger than 
that for the centralised C2. 
13.1. Problem Formulation 
We consider here the situation in which a single opponent Red Agent (RA) 
moves surreptitiously in a designated subregion, either on earth/terrain or 
on or below a maritime littoral surface. Its mission may be any of a va-
riety of options. For instance, a TEL (Transportable Erectable Launcher) 
is a land based SCUD missile launcher that tries to elude detection by 
hiding under bridges or trees, or in caves, or even in partially empty build-
ings, such as barns. It becomes visible (vulnerable to attack) when it sets 
up to shoot at remote Blue assets, or when it is in motion across terrain 
223 

224 
D. P. Gaver and P. A. Jacobs 
(along a road) in its assigned subregion or sector. Otherwise it is invisible 
(hiding or concealed). This type of target is called a time-sensitive 
target1. 
Alternatively, Blue is protecting a littoral domain, and an overhead sensor 
is searching for a Red (hostile and possibly lethal) platform attempting to 
reach, and damage, Blue assets. Overhead sensors identify the Red amongst 
a large background of harmless White/Friendly vessels; once identified (pos-
sibly incorrectly) reinforcement Blue surface (or air) platforms assemble to 
divert or destroy the suspected threat. 
Another interpretation is that "the Red" is actually a friendly (Blue) 
downed pilot in hostile territory, and is moving about to avoid capture by 
opponent-Reds. Blue rescuers/recovery teams try to find and recover the 
pilot before hostile capture occurs. 
Each subregion (one of many that comprise a larger total region) is 
assumed for the present to be covered by two Blue Agent (BA) types: 
there are ns Blue Surveillance Agents (BSAs) and rib Blue Attack Agents 
(BAAs); it is possible that the BAs are equipped both to see and to shoot, 
for example, be Un-Manned Combat Aerial Vehicles (UCAVs), or armed 
Fixed Wing Manned Aircraft, or combinations thereof. The BSAs search 
the subregion "at random," and then signal, either through a central C2 
authority, or directly, for example, by "chat"2, to loitering BAAs when 
the RA is detected. Once signaled, the BAAs are given the detected RA's 
location and proceed thereto. 
Assume the rate of arrival near to Red's location of any BAA after being 
signaled is Markovian with rate A (which may depend on region or terrain), 
so the time a typical BAA requires finding and "attaching to" the visible 
RA, initiating the formation of an Engagement Pack (EP)3, has an expo-
nential distribution with mean 1/A independently of the other BAAs. This 
formulation may be altered to reflect the particular behaviour of various 
communication-network-forming (Peer-to-Peer (P2P)) protocols4-7. When 
an EP has reached a to-be-determined size b it (the entire EP) attacks/fires 
upon the RA if the RA remains visible. If the RA senses an EP, or if it 
finishes its assigned mission before the EP(6) fully forms, it immediately 
hides; the BSA-BAA mission is a failure, and the Red-Hide, Blue-Seek pro-
cess begins again. There are certain tradeoffs: if ns » rib then a visible 
RA may be found quickly, but relatively small EPs may be optimal be-
cause larger assemblies could alert the visible Red to hide; this lowers the 
lethality of B on R (but deters hostile SCUD launches). It is clear that if 
b < rib is too small, low Blue-on-Red attack lethality may occur, while if b 
is set too large the chance increases that the visible RA (potential target) 
senses the threat, or hastily completes its mission, and disappears. There 

Stochastic Properties of P2P Communication 
Architecture 
225 
can clearly be an optimal EP size, and the latter may realistically evolve 
over time as learning by both sides occurs. Also, the latter may depend on 
physical/environmental conditions, such as ducting8. 
13.2. A Renewal Model for Blue vs Red in a Subregion 
Let there be ns BSAs, and suppose each independently searches for a visible 
RA over the distinguished subregion, and let a typical random visible period 
for the RA be of independent random duration V with distribution Fv 
with Fv(0) — 0; (it is realistic that Red may alter the latter over time and 
experience with near-misses by Blue, but we do not address this gaming 
aspect of the problem at this stage). If the RA becomes visible (at t = 0), 
then some BSA detects it at time D = x if D(= x) < V ; let the Poissonian 
search rate of the BSA force be £ = ns£; independence then implies that 
the probability the RA is detected before it hides is 
/»oo 
Pd(BR) 
= / 
[1 - Fv(x)]£e-*x 
dx = l~ Fv(£) 
(1) 
Jo 
where 
F V ( 0 = / 
e-**Fv(dx) 
= £[e-« v]; 
(2) 
Jo 
coincidentally the Laplace-Stieltjes transform for the distribution function 
ofV. 
Let H with distribution function Fa having Laplace-Stieltjes transform 
H(s) denote an arbitrary hiding time; and let {H(n)} and {V(n)} be mutu-
ally independent sequences of independent identically distributed random 
variables. It is easily possible to allow their distributions to be conditional 
on, say, environmental factors (ducting, sea state, terrain, etc.) and on the 
actual types of RAs and BAs in play. 
13.2.1. The Visibility 
Detection 
Process 
The temporal history of a RA can be (initially) modelled and analysed, for 
example, by probabilistic mathematics or Monte Carlo simulation, as an 
alternating renewal process9. Suppose the RA initially begins hiding. Then 
assume it is in hiding during the random intervals 
[0,H(1)],[H(1) + V(1),H(1)+V(1) + H(2)],.... 

226 
D. P. Gaver and P. A. Jacobs 
It is visible on the complementary intervals 
[H(1),H(1) + V(1)], 
[H(l) + V(l) + H(2), H(l) + V(l) + H(2) + V(2)],.... 
To model detection of the RA requires the BSA surveillance capability, 
which is represented as occurring at rate £ = ns£ over the subregion. 
13.2.2. The Model 
Take this convenient if simplified approach to BSA detection. If an element 
of BSA force arrives when the RA is hiding, no detection of the RA is 
possible, whereas if the hidden RA becomes visible (for time V) then assume 
that its detection occurs if a BSA unit arrives near the RA location at time 
D after the RA emerges and before it hides again. The probability of this 
event is given by (1) above (assume that the RA does not detect the BSA 
and immediately hide; such capability could induce a more surreptitious 
BSA concept of operations (CONOPS)). 
Let T D denote the random first BSA detection time of a visible RA, 
given that RA has initially become visible at time 0. Then 
T 
( D 
i f D < V ( l ) , 
D 
\V(1) + H(1) + T'D 
i f D > V ( l ) 
{ ) 
where T^, is an independent replica of To. It is straightforward to calculate 
the Laplace-Stieltjes transform 
E[e~sTD]: 
*TM- 
f | 1 - ^ 
+ l " . 
(4) 
( » + { ) [ l - F ( » + {)*(»)! 
where f = £ns. Setting s = 0 shows that T o terminates in finite time with 
probability one. The Laplace transform of P{TD > t} is 
1 - V>TD(S) _ s[l - Fy(s + Qfl(a)] + jFy(8 + Q[l - H(s)] 
s 
s(s + £)[l-Pv{3 
+ g)H{s)] 
1 
i 
f - 
Pw{s+iK 
1 - ^ ( s ) . 
(5) 
s + Z 
{s + £)[l-Fv(8 
+ g)H(s)] 
s 
Let s —> 0 to see that 
E[TD] = i + 
FvP- 
E[K]. 
(6) 
£ 
(1-*V(0) 

Stochastic Properties of P2P Communication 
Architecture 
227 
On the set D < V let V 0 = V - D , the remaining time the RA is visible. 
The Laplace transform of the remaining time the RA is visible on the set 
the RA is detected before it hides is 
/»oo 
__ 
/»oo 
£ [ e - s V o ; D < V] = / 
&-& dy 
e-^z-y)Fw{dz) 
J0 
Jy 
- 
* -Fv(s)-J-Fv&; 
(7) 
*{s) = E[e-v*\B <V\ = X l M l M l . 
(8) 
1 
' 
J 
Z-s 
1 - F V ( 0 
This development assumes that just one detection by a BSA (the first such) 
is sufficient to begin to enroll an Engagement Pack (capable of lethal action, 
or possibly pilot recovery). Otherwise, Peer-to-Peer communication could 
be used to develop a corroborative group of observers10-12. 
13.2.3. The Probability 
an EP of Size b Attaches 
to the 
Detected 
RA Before it Hides 
Assume once the RA is detected, BAAs attach to it after independent 
exponential times each having mean 1/A while the RA is visible. Note that 
more rapid EP assembly may be achieved by using a more sophisticated 
and situationally adapted P2P discipline. Many alternatives are possible 
and adaptable to changed circumstances; these are under investigation. 
The conditional probability an EP of size b forms before the RA hides 
given VQ is 
P{T-b < Vo|V 0,D < V} = J2 (I) 
I1 ~ e- A V°]V A V°] 5- f c 
k=b 
= E Q £ (*) (-D'e--M^-*1 (9) 
k=b 
3=0 
where Tj, is the time to form an EP of size b and 6 is the number of BAAs 
in the subregion for b <b. 

228 
D. P. Gaver and P. A. Jacobs 
13.2.4. The Probability 
the Detected 
RA is Killed Before 
it 
Hides 
Given b, the number of BAAs in a region, we calculate the probability of 
Blue's successful kill of a discovered RA. Mathematically, this amounts to 
PK(b, b) = £Vo|(D<v) [P{T-b < V0|V0}(JL)S(1 - (1 - PK)'b)} 
(10) 
where Tj is the time of first passage to b present in an EP, b < b, and h 
is the probability that an individual BAA's arrival does not cause the RA 
to hide. The term 1 — (1 — PK)b denotes the probability that if all b BAAs 
attached to the RA shoot, at least one hits/kills the RA; this assumes inde-
pendence and simultaneous independent Blue firing success probabilities, all 
of which can be modified for more realism. The conditional probability the 
RA is killed before it hides given the RA is detected during a visible period 
is thus 
PK(1, b) = (hf (I - (i - P*)B) £ (Y) E (*) (-WW 
+ ~b - fcD 
(11) 
where </>(s) is defined in (8). 
13.2.5. Model with Additional 
C2 
Time 
In addition to the time to assemble an EP there can be an additional plan-
ning/command time, S, which we assume has an exponential distribution 
with mean 1/a, independent of the time to assemble the EP. This assump-
tion can be justified on the basis of heavy-traffic queuing theory13. This 
is the traditional C2/I or C4ISR Central Command Time/latency; it may 
conservatively ensure against errors, but adds a latency penalty to Blue 
response. A visible RA is engaged if the time to assemble the EP plus the 
planning/command time is less than the remaining time the RA is visi-
ble. See detailed modelling of a more complex version of this problem by 
Brickner1. 

Stochastic Properties of P2P Communication 
Architecture 
229 
P{S + T^<V 0|Vo,D<V} 
k=b 
= E C) £ (*) (-
1)' f'' ae~
aSe~
X[J+l~
kKV°~
S)ds 
= ? W 5 \j) {~1)Ja-X(b + j - k ) 
e-A(6+j-fc)Vo _ 
e - a V o 
k=~b 
J=° 
(12) 
In this case, the conditional probability the RA is killed before it hides, 
given it is detected, is 
PK(b,b;a) = 
(h)i(l-(l-PK)i) 
* /fc\ * /fc\ 
-a[0(A[j + S-fc])-fla)] 
Mv^W( 
} 
«-A(S+i-*) 
• (13) 
x 
fc=6 
v _ / 
j=0 
13.2.6. Numerical 
Illustration 
In this example the time to detect a visible RA is given an exponential dis-
tribution with mean 4 minutes. The RA is visible for a random time having 
a gamma distribution with mean 15 minutes and shape parameter 50. The 
probability the target hides when a new BAA joins the EP is 0. Table 13.1 
displays the probabilities a visible RA is killed when it is engaged by vari-
ous sizes of engagement packs. The time for a BAA to join an engagement 
pack has an exponential distribution independent of the other BAAs. 
Figure 13.1 displays the probability of killing the RA during its visible 
period for 3 different mean additional C2 times; the mean times are 0, 1.5 
minutes, and 3 minutes. In all cases the mean time until a BAA joins an 
engagement pack is 3 minutes. For each EP size the number of BAAs in 
the region equals the needed size of the EP. The probability of killing the 
detected RA during its visible period is maximised for an engagement pack 
of size 3 for all cases. The probability the RA will hide before a 4th BA joins 
an EP of size 3 nullifies the benefit of the increased probability of kill that 
an EP of size 4 has. Increasing the mean C2 time decreases the probability 
of killing the RA during its visible period for all engagement pack sizes. 

230 
D. P. Gavtr and P. A. Jacobs 
* 
£ , 
Table 13.1. Conditional 
proba-
bility an engaged visible target is 
killed given the size of the engage-
ment pack. 
Size of EP 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Cond. prob. 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
of kill 
Mean additional C2 time 
/ 
/ / 
1 / •' 
/ / • 
• 
0 
1 
2 
| — * — Mean additional C2 time=0 min. - • -
^"^ 
. . . • - . . . 
* ^ 
Mean 
Mean additional C2 time=3 
mm. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Size of Engagement Pack 
- Mean additional C2 time=1.5 min. - • B - • Mean additional C2 time=3 min. | 
Fig. 13.1. 
Probability of killing a detected RA during its remaining visible period ver-
sus the size of the engagement pack. The length of the visible period has a gamma 
distribution with mean 15 min and shape 50. The time to detect a visible target has an 
exponential distribution with mean 4 min. The time for a BAA to join an engagement 
pack has an exponential distribution with mean 3 min. Note that the optimal EP size is 
about the same for all cases, but the actual kill probabilities are highly time-sensitive. 
Figure 13.2 displays the probability the detected RA is killed during 
its remaining visible period for three cases with different mean times for a 
BAA to join an engagement pack: 3 minutes, 4.5 minutes, and 6 minutes; 

Stochastic Properties of P2P Communication 
Architecture 
231 
the additional C2 time is equal to 0 for all three cases. For each EP size, the 
number of BAAs in the region is equal to the EP size. Note that the mean 
time to form an EP of size one for each case is the same as that in Fig. 13.1. 
The probability of killing the detected RA during its remaining visible time 
is maximised for an engagement pack of size 3. Increasing the mean time for 
a BA to join an EP decreases the probability of kill. The decrease becomes 
larger the larger the size of the engagement pack. Comparison with Fig. 13.1 
reveals that for an engagement pack of size 5, increasing the mean time for 
a BAA to join an engagement pack results in a smaller probability of kill 
than increasing the mean additional C2 time for the cases considered. 
0.9 
08 
07 
— 
Ki 
5 
* ( ! • • 
e 
0-
Mean time to join EP 
* • • - . 
\ 
* * " * 
"* 
\ 
Mean time to join EP=6 min. 
'. 
^ v 
m 
fc 
Mean time to 
N. join EP =4.5 
min. 
'to 
0 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Size of Engagement Pack 
|—*—Mean time to join EP=3 min. — -•— Maantimsto join EP=4.5 min. •••>• Meantime to join EP=6 min. | 
Fig. 13.2. 
Probability of killing the detected RA during its remaining visible period 
versus the size of the engagement pack. The length of the visible period has a gamma 
distribution with mean 15 min. and shape 50. The time to detect a visible target has an 
exponential distribution with mean 4 min. There is no additional C2 time. 
13.3. Conclusions 
A stochastic model for the effect of a P2P-enabled C2 architecture on the 
effectiveness of time-critical targeting has been presented. The numerical 
example suggests that P2P can result in increased targeting effectiveness 
over a centralised C2 architecture. However, if P2P results in an increased 

232 
D. P. Gaver and P. A. Jacobs 
time to assemble an engagement pack to engage the target over that using 
a centralised C2 architecture or if there are too many errors or too much 
jamming or interference, then its benefits can be nullified. The model is 
optimistic in that it assumes that all BAAs are available to join an en-
gagement pack when a target is detected and Red is not attempting to 
disrupt the P2P communication. The model can be modified to represent 
the consequences of different P2P communication networks. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the Center for Defense Technology and Edu-
cation for the Military Services Initiative (CDTEMS) and the Cebrowski 
Institute at the Naval Postgraduate School as well as the Joint Personnel 
Recovery Agency. 
References 
1. Brickner, W., An Analysis of the Kill Chain for Time Sensitive Strike (M.S. 
Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 2005). 
2. Brutzman, D., McGregor, D., DeVos, D.A., Lee, C.S., Armsden, S., Blais, C , 
and Hittner, B., XML-Based 
Tactical Chat (XTC): Requirements, 
Capabili-
ties, and Preliminary Progress (Technical Report, NPS-MV-2004-01, Naval 
Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 2004). 
3. Hesser, R.W. and Rieken, D.M., FORCEnet 
Engagement 
Packs: "Opera-
tionalizinfp FORCEnet to Deliver Tomorrow's Naval Network-centric 
Reach 
Capabilities...Today 
(M. S. Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, 
CA 2003). 
4. Ge, Z., Figueiredo, D.R., Jaiswal, S., Kurose, J. and Towsley, D., "Modelling 
Peer-Peer File Sharing Systems" (IEEE, New York), 2003, (Proc. of INFO-
COM 2003). 
http://www-net.cs.umass.edu/~gezihui/publication/p2pmodel.pdf. 
5. Qiu D. and Srikant R., "Modelling and Performance Analysis of BitTorrent-
Like Peer-to-Peer Networks" (ACM, New York), 2004, 367-368, (Proc. ACM 
SIGCOMM 2004). 
http://comm.csl.uiuc.edu/~srikant/Papers/sigcomm04.pdf. 
6. Manoski, S., "Eliminating the Middleman: Peer-to-Peer Technology for Com-
mand and Control" MITRE-The-Edge, 
6(2) (The MITRE Corporation, 
Bedford, MA), 2002, 8-9. 
http://www.mitre.org/news/the\_edge/summer\_02/manoski.html. 
7. Gelenbe, E., Lent, R., Monturo, A., and Xu, Z., "Cognitive Packet Networks: 
QoS and Performance", (IEEE, New York), 2002, 3-12, (Proceedings of the 
IEEE MASCOTS 2002 Conference). 
http://www.cs.ucf.edu/~erol/Mascots02.pdf. 

Stochastic Properties of P2P Communication Architecture 
233 
8. Prederickson, P.A., and Davidson, K.L.,An Operational Bulk 
Evaporation 
Duct Model (Meteorology Dept., Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 
2003). 
9. Feller W., An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Vol. II 
(Wiley), 1966. 
10. Anwar, Z., Yurcik, W., and Campbell, R.H.,"A Survey and Compari-
son of Peer-to-Peer Group Communication Systems Suitable for Network-
Centric Warfare" in "Visual Information Processing XIV" Rahman, Z., 
Schowengerdt, R.A., and Reichenbach, S.E. ed (SPIE, Bellingham, WA) 2005, 
33-44, (Proc. of the SPIE, Vol. 5820). 
http://www.ncassr.org/projects/multicast/papers/spie05-p2p.pdf. 
11. Gelenbe, E., Gellman M., and Loukas, G., "An Automatic Approach to De-
nial of Service Defence", (IEEE, New York), 2005, 537-541,(Proceedings of 
the IEEE International Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Mul-
timedia Networks). 
http://san.ee.ic.ac.uk/publications/dos\_acc05.pdf. 
12. Gelenbe, E. and Liu, P.,"QoS and Routing in the Cognitive Packet Network", 
(IEEE, New York), 2005, 517-521, (Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks 2005). 
http://san.ee.ic.ac.uk/publications/sp\_acc05.pdf. 
13. Whitt, W., Stochastic-Process Limits (Springer-Verlag, New York), 2002. 

This page is intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 14 
Quantifying the Quality of Audio and Video Transmissions over 
the Internet: T h e P S Q A Approach 
Gerardo Rubino 
INRIA / IRIS A, 
Campus de Beaulieu 
35042 Rennes Cedex, France 
E-mail: 
rubinoQirisa.fr 
Consider the problem of delivering multimedia streams on the Inter-
net. In order to decide if the network is working correctly, one must be 
able to evaluate this delivered quality as perceived by the end user. This 
can be done by performing subjective tests on samples of the received 
flows, but this is expensive and not automatic. Being able to perform 
this task in an automatic way and efficiently, such that it can be done 
in real time, allows multiple applications, for instance in network con-
trol. Such a goal is achieved by our PSQA metric: Pseudo-Subjective 
Quality Assessment. It consists of training a Random Neural Network 
(RNN) to behave as a human observer and to deliver a numerical eval-
uation of quality, which must be, by construction, close to the average 
value a set of real human observers would give to the received streams. 
This chapter reviews our previous work on PSQA, and provides some 
new elements about this technology. The use of RNN is justified by its 
good performance as a statistical learning tool; moreover, the model has 
nice mathematical properties allowing using it in many applications and 
also obtaining interesting results when PSQA is coupled with standard 
modelling techniques. 
14.1. Introduction 
Consider an audio stream sent through an IP network, or a video one, or 
consider an interactive voice communication over the Internet. When qual-
ity varies, which is today very often the case (think of a wireless segment, for 
instance), it is useful to be able to quantify this quality evolution with time, 
in order to understand how the global communication system works, why 
235 

236 
G. Rubino 
the performance is as observed, how it can be improved, how the system 
can be controlled to optimise quality, etc. Observe that we are here inter-
ested in quantifying the quality as perceived by humans users. This task is 
so useful when analysing a networking application dealing with these kinds 
of flows that it has been standardised (some examples are for audio flows1 
and for video ones2). The corresponding area is called subjective testing. In 
a nutshell, it consists of taking a panel of human observers (say, around 
10 to 20 persons sampled from the global population of observers, or a few 
experts, say 3 or 4, the choice between random observers or experts de-
pending on the goals), and making them evaluate numerically the quality 
as they perceive it, by comparing an important number of sequences. The 
main problem with this approach is that it is expensive and, by definition, 
it is not an automatic process (and a fortiori not a real-time one). 
If we try to perform this quality quantyfying process automatically, a 
first idea is to use objective tests. This basically refers to using techniques 
coming from coding, where the original sequence a and the received one 
a' are compared by computing some distance between them. A typical 
example of this is the PSNR metric (Peak Signal to Noise Ratio). It is well 
known that this approach does not correlate well with subjective ones, that 
is, with values coming from real human observers*. 
In a series of papers3-5 we developed a new methodology called PSQA 
(see next section). It allows to reach the objective of being able to measure 
quality as perceived by the users, automatically and accurately. This chapter 
describes the approach and some of its applications. Next section describes 
PSQA. Section 14.3 is a short presentation of Random Neural Networks, 
the mathematical tool used to implement the PSQA technology, with some 
new elements concerning sensitivity analysis. In Section 14.4 we explain 
how we couple PSQA with standard performance evaluation techniques, 
close to the work presented by Rubino and Varela5. Section 14.5 concludes 
the chapter. 
14.2. The PSQA Technology 
PSQA stands for Pseudo-Subjective Quality Assessment, and it is a tech-
nology proposed first in Mohamed and Rubino3 (under the name QQA: 
Quantitative Quality Assessent), in order to perform this quantifying task 
aWhat we say is that objective measures are not good to quantify quality when consider-
ing flows that have been perturbed by travelling through a network where they can suffer 
from losses, delays, etc. They are of course very useful when analysing coding effects. 

RNN and the PSQA Approach 
237 
automatically, in real-time if necessary, and accurately. This last condition 
means that a PSQA metric must give to a stream a value close to the value 
an average human observer would give to it (or, in other cases, a pessimistic 
expert, or an optimistic one, depending on the goals of the study), as com-
ing out of a subjective testing experiment. To describe how PSQA works, 
let us consider the following example, which a simplified version of the one 
used in Mohamed and Rubino3. We want to analyse a video streaming 
application, sending its flows from a source to a receiver. We proceed as 
follows: 
(1) We first identify a set of parameters which, beforehand, we think have 
an (important) impact on the perceived quality. Observe that this is an 
a priori assumption. These parameters are of two classes: those related 
to the codec, which we assimilate to the source sending the stream, and 
those associated with the network transporting the data. 
In our example, let us consider that the sending process can work at 
different bit rates BR, given in bps (bits per second), and at differ-
ent frame rates, FR, in fps (frames per second). Assume that (i) the 
frames have all the same size in bits, (ii) there is no protection against 
losses (such as FEC - Forward Error Correction), (iii) the player at the 
receiver side can play a sequence with missing frames. 
Concerning the network, we assume that the main problem is loosing 
packets since the receiver has a large buffer to absorb the possible 
variations in delay (jitter). For the loss process, given its importance 
we decide to characterise it by two parameters, the packet loss rate 
LR and the mean loss burst size MLBS, the latter giving an indication 
about how the losses are distributed in the flow. 
(2) For each selected parameter we choose a range, corresponding to 
the system to be analysed and the goals; we also choose a dis-
crete set of values, which make the rest of the process simpler. 
For instance, in Mohamed and Rubino3 it is considered that LR 
G {0 %, 1 %, 2%, 3%, 5 %, 10 %}. Each combination of values for these 
parameters is called a configuration of the system. The total number of 
configurations can be high (in our previous applications of PSQA we 
always had spaces with thousands of points). 
(3) We perform a selection of M configurations among the set of all possible 
ones. Typically, for 4 to 6 parameters we used M around 100 to 150. 
This selection process is made by a merge of two procedures: (i) different 

238 
G. Rubino 
configurations are built by randomly choosing the parameters' values in 
the given space and (ii) several configurations are choosen by covering 
in some way the extremities of the parameters' ranges3. 
We randomly separate the set of M selected configurations into two 
subsets C = {71,-•• ,1K} 
a n d C = {7i,-"" ilk'}- 
We t n u s 
n a v e 
K + K' = M (for instance, in our applications, if M « 100 we will 
take, say, K « 80, or 85, and K' « 20, or 15. Set C will be used to learn 
and set C to validate (see step (7)). 
(4) We build a platform allowing (i) to send a video sequence through an 
IP connection, (ii) to control the set of parameters chosen in the first 
step; in the example, we must be able to choose simultaneously any 
values of the four parameters BR, FR, LR, MLBS. 
(5) We choose a sequence a representative of the population of sequences to 
be considered1"; according to the norms used in video subjective testing, 
a must be about 10 seconds length. We send a exactly M times from 
sender to receiver, using the platform, and each time using the values 
in each of the selected configurations (sets C and C). We obtain two 
sets of distorted copies of a: the copy corresponding to configuration 
li, 1 < i < K (resp. 7', 1 < j < K') is denoted by <7j (resp. by cr'A. 
(6) We perform a subjective testing experiment using the M sequences 
o~i,--- ,<TK,G'I,-" 
>ak'- This c o n si sts of selecting a panel of human 
observers and asking them to numerically evaluate the quality of the 
M sequences as they perceive them. For this purpose an appropriate 
norm must be followed. In our video experiments, we used ITU-R Rec-
ommendation BT.500-102. 
Each sequence will thus receive a value usually called MOS (Mean Opin-
ion Score). We denote the MOS of sequence <7j (resp. of <r') by Qi (resp. 
by Q'j). In more detail, assume there are R observers (typically, R w 20 
if the observers are random elements of the population, or R w 4 if they 
are experts) and that observer r gives, at the end of the experiment, 
value qri to sequence Uj (and value q'rj to sequence cr'j). Then, we must 
perform a statistical test to detect bad observers in the panel (case of 
random observers); in words, a bad observer is one that does not (sta-
tistically) agree with the majority3. Assume (after a re-ordering of the 
observers' indexes) that observers R' + 1, • • • , R are bad ones. Then, 
their scores are taken out of the set, and the sequences receive as MOS 
bActually, we must do the whole process with several different sequences; we just present 
the technique for one of them. 

RNN and the PSQA 
Approach 
239 
the average of the values given to it by the good observers; that is, 
Qi = £? = 1 Qn/R' (and Q\ = Ylti &/#)• 
(7) We now identify configuration 7* with quality value Qi (and 7^ with 
Q'j), and look for a real function u() of 4 variables associated with the 
four selected parameters, such that for any set of values in the set C 
the function returns a number close to the associated MOS value. That 
is, for any 7J € C, v{"fi) & Qi- This is the learning phase. It can be 
done with different tools. We tried standard Artificial Neural Networks 
(ANN), Bayesian Networks and RNN. As illustrated in Mohamed and 
Rubino3, RNN performed by far the best, and that is the main reason 
why we used that tool. 
Remark: before the learning phase, it is more comfortable to scale the 
input variables by dividing them by their maximal possible value (recall 
that in the second step we associate a range with each variable). This 
way, all input variables are in [0..1]; the same is done with the output, 
which corresponds to the normalised quality value. 
(8) After having found the u() function, we must go through the validation 
phase consisting of testing its value on the set of configurations in C. 
If for 7! € C it is i^iji) « Qi, then i/() is validated and the process is 
finished. 
Of course, if this is not the case, something was wrong in the previous 
process (not enough data, bad sampling of configurations, etc.). 
(9) Using the evaluator consists now of measuring BR, FR, LR and MLBS, 
for instance at the receiver of a communication, and calling v() with 
the measured values as input. This can be done in real time since the 
inputs can be collected in real time, and the evaluation of u() is not 
expensive. 
The next section briefly explains what is a RNN and how it is used in 
learning (phase (7)). 
14.3. The Random Neural Networks Tool 
We first present the mathematical RNN model and the particular case we 
use in the application presented in this chapter. Then, some elements about 
the use of the model as a learning tool are given. To have an idea about 
the multiple applications of this tool that have been already published10. 

240 
G. Rubino 
14.3.1. 
G-networks 
A Random Neural Network is a queuing network (also called a G-network), 
invented by E. Gelenbe in a series of papers7'9 by merging concepts from 
neural networks and queuing theory. Its nodes are called queues or neurons, 
depending on the context, but they are the same mathematical object. The 
customers or units of the queuing network are called "signals" at the neural 
side. In this chapter, we will use both terminologies, the neural one and 
the concepts from queuing models, depending on the specific topic we are 
speaking about. 
The set of nodes in the network is N = {1, • • • , N}. The queuing net-
work receives two types of customers from outside, called positive and neg-
ative. Neuron i receives positive units from outside with rate Xf > 0 and 
negative units from outside with rate A~ > 0. Both arrival processes are 
Poisson. At least one neuron receives positive units from outside; that is, 
Nodes are FIFO queues (this is not essential but it simplifies the presen-
tation) with a single exponential server and infinite room. The service rate 
at neuron i is fr > 0. Positive units behave as usual customers in queuing 
networks: they arrive at the node and wait in the queue until the server is 
available, then get service and are sent to another queue or to outside. When 
a negative customer arrives at a queue, it destroys itself instantaneously, 
and if the queue was not empty, the last customer in it is also destroyed. 
Moving from a queue to another or to outside is an instantaneous process, 
as usual. 
Observe that the previous description means that negative units can 
not be observed, only their effects can; the network never has negative 
customers in it. Denote by Xi{i) the number of (positive) units in neuron i 
at time t, also called the potential of neuron i. Neuron i is said to be 
active at time t iff X;(£) > 0. When neuron i is active, it sends units 
(positive or negative) to other neurons or to outside (with rate /ij). When 
a (positive) customer ends getting service at neuron i, it goes to neuron j 
as a positive one with (routing) probability pf, and as a negative one with 
(routing) probability p~y The unit leaves the network with probability 
The previous description means that when neuron i is active, it sends 
positive signals to neuron j with rate (also called here weight) wf, = fiipfj 
and negative ones to neuron j with rate w~ • — ynp~ A; it sends units outside 
with rate St = /Xjdj. Observe that 6i + J2jert(wtj 
+ wT,j) = 
/•*»• 

.RAW and the PSQA 
Approach 
241 
In the stable case, the activity rate of neuron i (the 
utilisation 
rate of queue i) is Qi = limt->oo Pr(Xi(t) 
> 
0) > 
0; also, the 
mean throughput of positive units or signals that arrive at neuron i is 
T* 
= A+ 4- J2jeM~ 6jwXn 
a nd t n e mean arrival throughput of negative 
units at i is T[~ = \~ + 2jejv 6jwZi- Look at neuron i as a queue 
and assume process Xi () is stationary. Consider that destroyed customers 
are departures and apply the mean flow conservation theorem: we obtain 
Tt
+ = Qi(/* + Tr) and thus, 
Tt 
Last, we place ourselves in the standard independence conditions concern-
ing all arrival, service and switching (choosing next node and class, or out-
put, for a signal leaving a neuron) processes (as usual in queuing network 
models). A basic result is then the following. 
Theorem 14.1: The vector occupation process of this network is a Markov 
chain with state space N w. Assume it is irreducible (this depends on the 
routing probabilities of the model and on the arrival rates), and consider 
the relations 
T? = xt+Y<ejwt> 
Ti = K + E Qiwli and ei= 
2T-
as a 
(non-linear) system of equations in the set of 
unknowns 
(T+, Tr, 
Qi)i=1,..,N. 
Then, 
(i) The network is stable iff the system of equations has a solution where 
for i = 1, • • • , N we have Qi < 1; in this case, the solution is unique, 
(ii) In the stable case, the network is of the product-form type, and we have 
JV 
lim Pr(Jfi(4) =nu--- 
,XN(t) 
= nN) = TT(1 - 
ei)e?. 
Proof: The proof is based on standard properties of Markov chains. See 
papers7'8. 
• 
For instance, consider a single G-queue with arrival rate of positive 
(resp. negative) customers equal to A+ > 0 (resp. to A - > 0) and service 
rate fi > 0. Then, applying Theorem 14.1 we have that the queue is stable 
iff A+ < fi + A-, and in that case, its stationary state distribution is n (-* 
(l-Q)gn, 
where Q = A+/(/x+A"). The mean backlog at the queue (the mean 

242 
G. Rubino 
potential of the neuron) is A+/(/x + A — A+). Observe that its occuppation 
process is that of a M/M/1 
queue with arrival rate A+ and service rate 
/J. + X". 
14.3.2. Feedforward, 
3-layer 
G-networks 
In a feedforward queuing network, a customer never visits the same node 
twice. This makes the analysis simpler. In the case of a G-network, the 
non-linear system presented in Theorem 14.1 has an "explicit" solution. 
A 3-layer model is a particular case of feedforward networks. There 
are three types of nodes: the "input" nodes (their set is X), which are the 
only ones receiving signals from outside, the "hidden" ones (their set is 
H) receiving all the signals leaving input nodes, and the "ouput" nodes 
(their set is O), receiving all the signals leaving hidden ones, and sending 
all their signals outside. There is no connection between nodes in the same 
subset. Moreover, for learning applications, it is usually assumed that there 
is no negative unit coming to the network from outside; we make the same 
assumption here. 
The particular topology of the network makes that we have explicit 
expressions of the activity rates of all neurons, starting from set I, then 
going to H and last to O. Consider an input neuron i. Since no other neuron 
can send units to it, we have Qi = \f /Hi. Now, for a hidden neuron h, we 
have 
n 
l^iex 6iwih 
iex 
Qh 
Last, for any output neuron o, the corresponding expression is 
„ 
. 
Ph + Z , 
XiWih/»i 
n _ 
2-,hen QhWho 
_ 
ieI 
Mo + Ehew 6hwh0 
Yl Kwth/m 
Mo + Ehen 
—l^^TT^^who 
As we will see next, when this queuing network is used to learn, it is seen 
as a function mapping the rates of the arrival processes into the activ-
ity rates of the nodes. In this 3-layer structure, we see that the function 

RNN and the PSQA 
Approach 
243 
A+ = 
(Aj1-, • • • , XN) 1-4 Q0 is a rational one, and it can be easily checked 
that both its numerator and denominator are in general polynomials with 
degree 2H and non-negative coefficients. 
14.3.3. 
Learning 
Assume we are interested in some real function /() from [0..1]2Ar into [O.-l]^. 
Function /() itself is unknown, but we have K input-output values whose set 
is V = (fW, c W),- •• ,(f(*>,cW) (that is, /(f(fc)) = c(fc>,fc = l,--- 
,K). 
We can use a stable G-network to "learn" /() from the data set V. For this 
purpose, consider a general RNN (not necessarily fedforward) with N nodes 
and all arrival rates in [0..1]. Now look at it as a black-box mapping the rates 
of the arrival process (the 2N numbers Af, • • • , A^, Aj~, • • • , A^) into the 
activity rates (the N numbers g\,- • • , gjy). We associate, for instance, the 
first AT input variables of /() with the arrival rates of positive units to nodes 
1 to N, then the next N input variables with the arrival rates of negative 
units, last the N output variables of /() with the activity rates of the G-
network. The service rates and the routing probabilities (or equivalently, the 
weights) are seen as parameters of the mapping. The latter is here denoted 
as v(X), or J?(W,/7; A), etc., depending on making explicit the parameters 
or not, with W = {W+,W~), 
W+ = («;+), W~ = (u;^, A = (X+,X~), 
A+ = (Af ,••• ,A^), A- = (AjV-- ,A^), and jl=(m,--- 
,fiN). 
Learning means looking for values of the parameters such that (i) for 
all k = 1, • • • , K we have v{l (fc)) w c^ 
and, moreover, (ii) for any other 
value x G [0..1]2W we have v(x) w f(x). This last condition is experimen-
tally validated, as usual in statistical learning, even if there are theoretical 
results about the way these v() functions can approximate as close as de-
sired any /() function having some regularity properties. In order to find an 
appropriate G-network, the standard approach is to look only for network 
weights (matrix W), the rest of the parameters being fixed. To do this, we 
consider the cost function 
IS 
c(w) = 5EEh(w;r(fc))-^fc)]2' 
fc=ioee> 
and we look for minima of C() in the set {W > 0}c. A basic way to find 
cThere can be stability issues here, depending on how we deal with the remaining param-
eters (service rates or departure probabilities), but we do not develop the point further 
for lack of space. Just observe that fixing the service rates high enough allows to control 
stability. For instance, m = N for all neuron i is trivially sufficient for stability (recall 
we assume all arrival rates in [0..1]). 

244 
G. Rubino 
good values of W is to follow a gradient descent approach. This process 
helps in understanding the algebraic manipulations of these models while 
much more efficient procedures exist (for instance, quasi-Newton meth-
ods). For the basic approach, we build a sequence of matrices W(0), W(l), 
..., (hopefully) converging to a pseudo-optimal one (that is, a matrix W 
such that C(W) « 0). For instance, for all j , j £ TV, the typical update 
expressions for the weights between neurons i and j are 
dC 
wtj(m + 1) = wtj(.m) - *?0^r(w("»)). 
dC 
wi,j(m+1) 
= wi,j(m) 
- ? 7 ^ - ^ ( w ( m ) ) 
dWi,3 
Factor r\ > 0 is called the learning factor; it allows to tune the convergence 
process. Observe that the previous expression can lead to a negative value 
for wfAm + 1) or for w^Am + 1). An usual solution to this is to use the 
iterations 
, ( m + l ) 
oc 
wtj(m) 
- 
V-^r(w(™)) 
dw. *,J 
vo, 
w i , j ( m + l) = 
dC 
dwi,j 
VO. 
Another possible decision is to freeze the value of an element of W(m) 
when it reaches value zero. These are standard points in basic optimisation 
methodology. 
It remains how to compute the partial derivative in the previous expres-
sion. Writing 
£ - £ : £ [ M W : !•»>)-#>] 
* 
fc=lo£0 
we see that we still need to calculate the partial derivatives of the outputs, 
that is, of the activity rates, with respect to the weights. 
After some algebra we can write the following relations: if ^is the vector 
Q= (Qi,--- 
,0N)d, 
% 
= 7 + ( i - n ) - 1 , 
^ 
= ^-„(i_n)- 1
) 
dvo 
dw*' 
All vectors are row vectors in this chapter. 

RNN and the PSQA 
Approach 
245 
where 
n'fc = ^ ^ T ' 
X+ _ 
fa 
7 
-.- _ 
QuQv 
J* _ _ 
-*-|-
fJ'V T i n 
^/u ~Y J-v 
vector lj being the jth vector of the canonical base of M.N. 
A compact way of writing these derivatives is as follows. Denote by 
R the diagonal matrix R = diag(£>j)j£j\/- and by D the diagonal matrix 
D = diag(/x, + T~)iex. 
Now, let i be fixed and let A^ 
= (Aul) and 
B « = (B$) be given by 
4(0 = ^L 
fl(0 
- £EL 
•ri-uv 
-j- J 
^ w 
— ' 
w 
We have 
where M = (I - SI) - 1. Vector (Mu, • • • , Mm)T, the «th column of M, can 
be written M l ? . We now can write 
A® = gT ( M I 7 ' ) T D - 1 = ^ l ^ D " 1 . 
In the same way, 
B$ = - ^ l i M T D ^ R . 
Resuming, learning means minimising and minimising means in this con-
text, computing derivatives. This in turn means, in the general case, invert-
ing a matrix whose dimension is equal to the number of parameters (the 
variables in the minimisation process). In the particular case of feedforward 
models, the inversion can be done very easily (with an appropriate order in 
the variables, the matrix to invert is a triangular one). 
14.3.4. Sensitivity 
Analysis 
One of the consequences of the nice mathematical properties of G-networks 
is that they allow to perform sensitivity analysis in a systematic way. Sen-
sitivity analysis means here to be able to compute the derivatives of the 
activity rates with respect to the arrival rates. 

246 
G. Rubino 
After some straightforward algebra, we get the following relations: if 
dQi_ _ V^ j % o 
and 
dXf 
^dX+ 
]l 
ni + Tr 
In the same way, if u ^= i, 
dQj _ y > dQj r, 
and 
In matrix form, let us denote F = (Fiu) and G = (Giu) where 
Fm = d@i/dX+ and Giu = dgi/dX~. If u =£ i, we have 
Xiu — / j j ^ j ^ = / j ij 3u ana (-JIU ~ 2_J iu i^ == / ^'ii^ji*' 
When u = i, 
^ = ^ n ^ . u + _ i 
a n d 
G.. = £fiTG.u_^i 
j 
Mi + J i 
j 
Pi + l-i 
Using the same notation than in previous subsection, this leads to the 
expressions 
F = D _ 1 M T 
and G = D ^ R M T . 
As we see, the general formulae for performing sentitivity analysis in the 
general case need the inversion of the same matrix as for the learning pro-
cess. As before, a feedforward network structure simplifies considerably the 
computations (only a triangular matrix must be inverted). 
14.4. Applications 
In the case of the example described in Section 14.2, we use a RNN having 
4 input nodes (corresponding to the 4 selected variables, BR, FR, LR and 
MLBS) and one output node, corresponding to the quality of the flow. 
Some details about the performance of RNN in the learning phase, their 

.RAW and the PSQA 
Approach 
247 
relative insensitivity with respect to the size of the subset of hidden nodes 
(in a reasonable range), and in general, their main properties, can be seen 
in Mohamed and Rubino3. For audio flows, see Mohamed, Rubino and 
Varela4. 
The first direct application of the PSQA technology is to analyse the 
impact of the selected variables on perceived quality. Since once the RNN 
has learnt from data we have a function giving quality values for any con-
figuration in the space we defined at the beginning of the process, we are 
able to analyse this quality function as a function of a part of the input 
vector, to compute its sensitivity with respect to the input variables, etc. 
Again, we refer to the given papers to see details about these results. 
A second and richer set of results is as follows. Suppose you are inter-
ested in analysing the impact of some specific part of the communication 
structure on quality. For instance, consider again our video example, and 
assume you want to analyse the impact of the size H of a specific buffer on 
quality. If you have a model that is able to evaluate the impact of H on the 
network parameters you selected when applying PSQA (LR and MLBS in 
our example), then you can map H into quality and perform your analysis 
efficiently. An example of this is Rubino and Varela6, where we analyse the 
effect of FEC (Forward Error Correction) on the quality of voice flows. The 
basis of the approach are in Rubino and Varela5. Let us explain here this 
approach with more details, but keeping our video example of Section 14.2. 
Assume we send a video stream using packets of constant length B bits 
through the Internet, from some source S to a receiver R. Applying the 
PSQA methodology, we get an explicit function Q = z/(BR, FR, LR, MLBS) 
where BR is the bit rate of the connection, FR its frame rate, LR is its end-
to-end loss probability and MLBS the average size of its bursts of losses. 
The connection has a bottleneck with capacity c bps, and it is able to 
store up to H packets. For simplicity, assume that a packet contains exactly 
one frame. The flow of packets arriving to this bottleneck is Poisson with 
rate A pps (packets per second). With the standard assumptions, this node 
is a M/M/l/H 
queue (at the packet level), leading to simple expressions 
of the loss probability p and (see Rubino and Varela5) mean loss burst 
size M. We have p = (1 — g)gH/(l — gH+1) and, after analysing the Markov 
chain, M = 1 + g, where the load g = XB/c is assumed to be ^ 1. If our 
flow is the only one using the bottleneck node, its quality can be written 
Q = v{XB, X,p, M). More explicitly, this gives 
/ . _ . (l-XB/c)(XB/c)H 
. 
, _ . \ 
Q = " ( A B ' A ' 
1 - (XB/c)^ 
>X + XB/C) 
• 

248 
G. Rubino 
If other flows share the same bottleneck, then the difficulty lies in analysing 
the loss rate and the mean loss burst size of our connection at that node. 
For instance, consider the case of K different flows sharing the node, with 
troughputs Ai, • • • , XJC. Our flow is number 1. For simplicity, let us consider 
that all packets sizes are the same, B bits, and that the node can handle up 
to H packets of all types. With the standard exponential assumptions, we 
have now a multiclass FIFO M/M/l/H 
model with input rates Ai, • • • , \K 
and service rate /z = c/B. We need now to compute the loss probability for 
class 1 customers and the mean loss burst size of these customers. Since 
we assume Poisson arrivals, the loss probability is the same for all classes 
and thus can be computed from the M/M/l/H 
single class formula with 
A = Ai 4- • • • + \K . It remains the problem of the mean burst loss size 
for class 1 customers. The first sub-problem is to define a burst in this 
multiclass context. Following Rubino and Varela6, we define a burst in the 
following way. Assume a packet of class 1 arrives at a full queue and is lost, 
and assume that the previous class 1 packet that arrived was not loss. Then, 
a burst of class 1 losses starts. The burst ends when a packet is accepted, 
whatever its class is. See Rubino and Varela6 for a discussion about this 
definition. 
Let us denote by LBS the loss burst size for class 1 units. We have that 
Pr(LBS >n) = qn, where 
_ v-* f^~^i\ 
^i 
_ 
Ai 
q ~ £>o V A + ^ / 
A T M ~ Ai+/i-
The last relationship comes from the fact that we allow any number of 
class k ^ 1 units to arrive as far as their are lost, between two class 1 losses 
(that is, while the burst is not finished, no departure from the queue is 
"allowed"). Using the value of q, we have 
E(LBS) = Y^ Pr(LBS > n) = • • • = 1 + —. 
n>0 
^ 
With a straightforward extension of the results in Marie and Rubino11, 
the analysis can be extended to the case of packets with different sizes for 
different flows. The discussion's aim was to show the kind of difficulty we 
may have to face at, when coupling PSQA to standard performance models. 
In some more complex cases the mapping from the variables the users wants 
to analyse and the inputs to the f () function will need a simulator. 

RNN and the PSQA 
Approach 
249 
14.5. 
Conclusions 
Using RNN, we have developed a technology allowing to put the perceived 
quality of a video (or audio, or multimedia) stream (that is, a subjective 
object, by definition) into numbers, after the flow arrives at the receiver 
through the Internet, and automatically. 
This evaluation process is not 
time consuming and can therefore be done in real time, if necessary. 
When coupled with a standard performance model, this approach can 
allow the analyst to dimension a system adressing directly quality and not 
indirected metrics (such as those related to losses, delays, etc.). For instance, 
he/she will find the optimal channel speed (or buffer size, or number of 
terminals) that allows keeping quality over some threshold, instead of doing 
the same with loss rates, or delays, or jitter. The approach allows to work 
directly with quality, the "ultimate target". 
Ongoing work with this technique includes applying it to control ex-
periments, or to quality assessment in an operating network. Concerning 
the methodology itself and in particular the RNN tool, ongoing efforts are 
being done in order to explore efficient learning algorithms together with 
analysing the mathematical properties of these specific dynamic models. 
References 
1. ITU-T Recommendation P.800, "Methods for subjective determination of 
transmission quality" (http: //www. i t u . int/). 
2. ITU-R Recommendation BT.500-10, "Methodology for the subjective assess-
ment of the quality of television pictures" (h.ttp://www.itu.int/). 
3. Mohamed, S. and Rubino, G., "A study of real-time packet video quality us-
ing Random Neural Networks" IEEE Transactions On Circuits and Systems 
for Video Technology, 12 (12), (Dec. 2002), 1071-1083. 
4. Mohamed, S. and Rubino, G. and Varela, M., "Performance evaluation of 
real-time speech through a packet network: a Random Neural Networks-based 
approach" Performance Evaluation, 57(2), (2004), 141-162. 
5. Rubino, G. and Varela, M., "A new approach for the prediction of end-
to-end performance of multimedia streams",IEEE CS Press, 2004, 110-
119. (1st International Conference on Quantitative Evaluation of Systems 
(QEST'04),University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands , Sept. 2004) 
6. Rubino, G. and Varela, M., "Evaluating the utility of media-dependent PEC 
in VoIP flows", in Quality of Service in the Emerging Networking Panorama, 
LNCS 3266, 2004, 31-43. 
7. Gelenbe, E., "Random Neural Networks with negative and positive signals 
and product form solution" Neural Computation,l(A), 
(1989), 502-511. 
8. Gelenbe, E., "Stability of the Random Neural Network model" ISBN 
3540522557, 1990, 56-68. (Proc. of Neural Computation Workshop, Berlin, 
Germany, Feb. 1990). 

250 
G. Rubino 
9. Gelenbe, E., "Learning in the recurrent Random Neural Network" Neural 
Computation, 5(1), (1993), 154-511. 
10. Bakircioglu, H. and Kocak, T., "Survey of Random Neural Network applica-
tions" European Journal of Operational Research, 126(2), (2000), 319-330. 
11. Marie, R. and Rubino, G., "Semi-explicit formulas for the M/M/1 Multi-
class Queue" Journal of the Theoretical Computer Science Institut, Polish 
Academy of Sciences, 2(1-2), (1990), 7-18. 

C H A P T E R 15 
A S t u d y of the D y n a m i c Behaviour of a W e b Site 
Maria Carla Calzarossa 
Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica, 
Universita di Pavia 
via Ferrata 1, I - 27100 Pavia, Italy 
E-mail: mcc@unipv.it 
Daniele Tessera 
Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Universita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore 
via Musei 41, I - 25121 Brescia, Italy 
E-mail: d. tessera@dmf. unicatt. it 
Interactive Web services make use of highly dynamic contents. To de-
sign efficient mechanisms for the replication and distribution of these 
contents and improve the QoS perceived by the users, it is important to 
understand how often and to what extent contents change. This chapter 
addresses these issues by studying the dynamic behaviour of the con-
tents of a popular news Web site. We analysed the contents of the news 
in terms of various metrics to assess the similarity of their successive 
versions. Moreover, we identified groups of news characterised by simi-
lar behaviour. 
15.1. Introduction 
The increased pervasiveness of interactive services offered over Internet 
opens new performance challenges. These services are typically used by 
a large number of users who share various types of contents that are up-
dated as a consequence of external events or of actions performed by the 
users themselves. The peaks of load on the servers and the peaks of traffic 
over the network can cause delays in delivering the requested contents and 
propagating the updates. These delays have a negative impact on the QoS 
perceived by the users who might even end up by accessing out of date 
contents. 
251 

252 
M. Calzarossa and D. Tessera 
To cope with QoS requirements without overprovisioning the systems, 
solutions, such as, Content Distribution Networks, and peer-to-peer sys-
tems, have been adopted. These solutions allow the large scale replication 
of shared contents, hence, require efficient data distribution mechanisms. 
The analysis of the update process of Web contents is the starting 
point of any study aimed at assessing the performance and scalability of 
the proposed solutions. These issues have been addressed from different 
perspectives1-3'7,8'15 A combination of empirical data and analytic mod-
eling is used to estimate the change rate of Web pages2. The stochastic 
properties of the dynamic page update patterns and their interactions 
with the corresponding request patterns are addressed by Challenger et 
al.4 Their study shows that the pages of highly dynamic sport sites are 
characterised by relatively large bursts of updates and periodic behaviour. 
Cho and Garcia-Molina7 introduce estimators to study the frequency of 
change to a data item (e.g., a Web page) in the presence of incomplete 
change history of the item itself. The process of creation and modification 
of HTML files of the MSNBC news Web site is addressed by Padmanabhan 
and Qiu13. Their study shows that files tend to change little when they are 
modified and modification events tend to concentrate on a small number of 
files. Metrics that consider the introduction of new files and their influence 
on the requests to the Web site are introduced by Cherkasova and Karlsson 
to study the dynamics and evolution of Web sites6. The impact of new files 
is also addressed in the framework of media sites5. Fetterly et al.9 analyse 
the rate and degree of change of Web pages and the factors correlated with 
change intensity. The study shows that document size is strongly related to 
both frequency and degree of change. In particular, large documents change 
more often and more extensively than smaller documents. 
This chapter studies the evolution of a news Web site with the objective 
of analysing how often and to what extent the contents of Web pages change. 
We chose the MSNBC Web site as we consider it a good representative of 
the news Web sites. Since we did not have access to any server log, we 
had to monitor the site. In this respect and many others, our study differs 
from a previous study on the same site13. In particular, we focused on the 
"core" of the HTML files, that is, the text of the news, and we studied 
the change frequency and the amount of change to each news between two 
successive downloads. We used various metrics to analyse the core of the 
news and assess the similarity of their successive versions. Moreover, by 
applying clustering techniques, we identified groups of news characterised 
by similar behaviour. 

A Study of the Dynamic Behaviour of a Web Site 
253 
The chapter is organised as follows. Section 15.2 presents the experimen-
tal set up used for the data collection. Section 15.3 describes the results of 
our analysis. Finally, conclusions and future research directions are outlined 
in Sec. 15.4. 
15.2. Data Collection 
Our study relies on data collected from the MSNBC news Web site12. Since 
we were interested in the actual contents of Web pages, we resorted to active 
monitoring and we downloaded the HTML files from the site. From these 
repeated accesses we could detect changes to each file and estimate the 
change frequency and the extent of each change. Let us remark that by 
change we mean any modification to the file. 
Our monitoring adopted a conservative approach in that at each access 
we downloaded all the HTML files that were on the site, including the 
set of files uploaded to the site since the last access. Note that we only 
downloaded the HTML files classified on the MSNBC Web site under five 
major categories, namely, news, business, sports, entertainment, health. On 
the average the number of new files downloaded over a 24 hour period is 
equal to 104.36, with a distribution characterised by low variability. Even 
though the number of new files can be as large as 156 and as small as 
33, its standard deviation is equal to 29.93, that is, much lower than the 
corresponding mean. 
To avoid an uncontrolled increase of the download time, we did some 
post-processing of the files as to identify the files still worth monitoring. In 
particular, we decided to filter out from the list of files to be downloaded, 
the files that were not active, that is, did not receive any update over a 
period of five consecutive days. 
Let us remark that the size of the HTML files was not a good indicator 
of the actual updates, due to the presence of various types of contents, 
e.g., advertisement, that typically change at every access. Hence, we did 
parse the files to identify changes to their core. Note that at each access we 
downloaded on the average about 500 files. 
News Web sites tend to update their contents periodically whenever 
something new happens. Hence, the granularity of the monitoring interval, 
that is, how often to download a particular file, was a crucial issue for 
the accuracy of our analysis. If a file changes once a hour, it might be 
unnecessary to download it every minute, whereas it might be insufficient to 
download it once a day. As a consequence, the granularity of the monitoring 

254 
M. Calzarossa and D. Tessera 
has to be fine enough to capture all updates and coarse enough to minimise 
the time spent to download all files over the network. 
For this purpose, we monitored the MSNBC Web site over intervals of 
various lengths. Our analysis has shown that a granularity of 15 minutes is 
a good tradeoff between the frequency of changes and the download time. 
The measurements were then collected at regular intervals of 15 minutes 
from the middle of November 2004 for a period of approximately 16 weeks. 
To remove the fluctuations due to the warm-up effects of the moni-
toring process, we discarded the first week of measurements. Similarly, we 
discarded the "tail" of the measurements. The total number of HTML files 
successfully downloaded was about 5 millions. Among them, the number of 
unique files was equal to 9,209. Note that each file was downloaded at least 
480 times, that is, we collected at least 480 versions of the same file. 
15.3. Results 
As a preliminary exploratory analysis, we focused on the overall charac-
teristics of the HTML files. Table 15.1 presents some descriptive statistics 
of the size of the HTML files, with a breakdown into the five news cate-
gories considered in our study. As can be seen, files tend to be rather small, 
their average size is about 42Kbytes, and there is little variation across 
categories. The table also shows the number of unique files downloaded for 
each category. 
Table 15.1. Descriptive statistics of the size, expressed in bytes, of the HTML files. 
Category 
News 
Business 
Sports 
Entertainment 
Health 
Global 
mean 
40,812 
39,863 
45,425 
43,557 
39,636 
42,524 
standard dev. 
4,321 
3,173 
4,777 
4,277 
4,028 
4,949 
min 
13,895 
13,849 
13,894 
28,164 
14,295 
13,894 
max 
83,980 
57,963 
72,175 
92,018 
59,942 
92,018 
unique files 
3,393 
1,448 
2,588 
915 
865 
9,209 
Since we were interested in analysing the core of the news, that is, their 
actual contents, we did some preprocessing of each HTML file to extract 
the text of the news and the HTML tags making up its layout. Moreover, 
as we did not download the objects, e.g., images, videos, embedded in the 
HTML files, we considered as part of the core of the news the HTML tags 
and URLs of all embedded objects, but advertisement. Indeed, we have seen 

A Study of the Dynamic Behaviour of a Web Site 
255 
that tags and URLs are good indicators of the contents of the corresponding 
objects. In what follows, our analysis then focuses on the core of the news. 
The number of dynamic news, that is, news that received at least one 
update over their monitoring period, is equal to 4,252, and accounts for 
about the 46.2% of the total number of unique files downloaded during the 
entire monitoring interval. The remaining 4,957 news can be classified as 
static, in that they did not receive any update during their monitoring pe-
riod. Note that the number of dynamic news is not evenly distributed across 
the five categories. For example, 39% of the dynamic news belong to the 
sports category, whereas less than 7.4% belong to the entertainment cate-
gory. Moreover, 63.8% of the news within the sports category are dynamic. 
On the contrary, the percentage of dynamic news within the entertainment 
category is equal to 34.3. 
Table 15.2 presents the statistics of the number of changes to the 4,252 
dynamic news. As can be seen, this number varies across the categories. On 
the average, each news received 2.732 changes, even though there are news 
that received as many as 118 changes. 
Table 15.2. 
Descriptive statistics of the number of changes to the dynamic news. 
Category 
News 
Business 
Sports 
Entertainment 
Health 
Global 
mean 
2.738 
2.398 
3.077 
2.650 
1.761 
2.732 
standard dev. 
3.871 
2.905 
4.575 
2.918 
1.504 
3.859 
max 
49 
48 
118 
22 
13 
118 
total number of changes 
3,431 
1,698 
5,084 
832 
572 
11,617 
The distribution of the intervals between two successive changes to a 
news is characterised by a mean value equal to 214.18 minutes and a stan-
dard deviation about four times larger. This distribution is highly positively 
skewed. Note that the time stamp associated to each news corresponds to 
the time measured when the first byte of the corresponding HTML file was 
received from the site. 
Figure 15.1 shows the distribution of the changes detected on all news 
as a function of the time elapsed since the news was uploaded into the site. 
The figure plots the changes occurred within 72 hours, that account for 
99.6% of the total number of changes. As can be seen, a large fraction of 
the changes, namely, 78%, occurs within 12 hours, and 97% within 48 hours. 
The distribution of number of changes varies across the five categories of 

256 
M. Calzarossa and D. Tessera 
news considered in our analysis. For example, 80% of changes to the health 
news occur within six hours, and about 98% within 12 hours. For the sports 
news, 76% of the changes occur within 12 hours and 96% within 48 hours. 
1.00 H 
^ _ _ _ _ _ 
0.75 • 
^ T 
0.50 • 
r1 
0.25 -J 
0 
"T 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
6 
12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 66 
72 
time [hours] 
Fig. 15.1. Distribution of the number of changes as a function of time. 
Similarly, our analysis has shown that the majority of the news, namely, 
80%, received all their updates within 12 hours. This percentage goes up 
to 96% if we consider an interval of 48 hours. 
To discover similarities in the characteristics of the news, we ap-
plied clustering techniques. Each news was described by three parameters, 
namely, number of changes, average time between two successive changes, 
and average size of the core of the news. Clustering yields a partition of the 
news into four groups. Table 15.3 presents the centroids, i.e., the geometric 
centers, of the groups. As can be seen, the news belonging to group 1, that 
accounts for about 62% of the news, are characterised by a small number 
of changes and by an interval between changes of approximately two hours. 
Group 4, the smallest group that accounts for the 7% of the news, contains 
the news characterised by a number of changes, namely, 11.587, more than 
four times larger than the global average of all news (equal to 2.732). The 
news with the largest size are grouped in cluster 2, whereas the news with 
the longest interval between successive changes belong to cluster 3. 
The analysis of the composition of each cluster in terms of the categories 
of the news has shown that about 52% of the news of cluster 4 belong to 
the sports category, whereas the majority of the news of clusters 2 and 3 

A Study of the Dynamic Behaviour of a Web Site 
257 
Table 15.3. 
Centroids of the four groups obtained for the dynamic news. 
Group 1 
Group 2 
Group 3 
Group 4 
number of changes 
1.871 
2.688 
2.253 
11.587 
time between changes 
[min] 
111.929 
154.711 
587.184 
121.889 
size 
[bytes] 
3,303 
6,872 
3,785 
4,911 
fraction of news 
62% 
20% 
11% 
7% 
belong to the news category. About 65% of the business news and 76% of 
the health news belong to cluster 1. 
To better understand the dynamic behaviour of the news, we have anal-
ysed to what extent their contents change in terms of size. On the average, 
the size of the core of two successive versions of a news differs by 480.45 
bytes. This value varies across the categories. For example, for the news 
category, the average difference is equal to 556.6 bytes. Moreover, the anal-
ysis has shown that, as expected, the size of successive versions tends to 
increase. To quantify the extent of the changes, we have also studied the 
relative variation of the size of the core of successive versions of each news, 
namely: 
sj ~ 
sj+i 
SJ 
where Sj and Sj+\ denote the size of the j-th and of the (j + l)-th version 
of a news, respectively. Figure 15.2 shows the distribution of the relative 
variation computed over all news belonging to the news category. The aver-
age variation is equal to 0.19. Note that this value corresponds to the 75-th 
percentile of the distribution. On the contrary, the median of the distribu-
tion is equal to 0.066. Let us remark that the figure shows the distribution 
in the range [0,2], that accounts for approximately 99% of the values. 
To further analyse the amount of change to successive versions of a 
news, we represented the news through the words that they contained us-
ing the vector space model typical of information retrieval14. Let N denote 
the size of the vocabulary, that is, the global number of distinct words 
in all versions of a specific news. The j—th version of a news is then 
mapped into an Af-dimensional space, namely, it is represented by a vector 
dj = (wij,W2j, 
• • • ,WNJ), 
where Wij denotes the weight of word i in the 
j—th version of the news. In our analysis, as weight we used the raw term 
frequency, that is, the number of times each word occurred in the core of 
the news. Hence, words that occur frequently in a news are more important 
than infrequent words. Moreover, despite information retrieval applications, 

258 
M. Calzarossa and D. Tessera 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
2 
relative variation 
Fig. 15.2. 
Distribution of the relative variation of the size of successive versions of all 
news in the news category. 
we considered all words including the so-called "stop words". 
The similarity measures are based on the various metrics, e.g., cosine, 
Jaccard and Dice coefficients10,11>16. In our analysis we used the cosine 
metrics. According to this metrics, the similarity between two documents 
dj and d\. is given by: 
sim(dj,dk) — 
dj • dk 
2^»=1 Wi,j 
X 
Wi,k 
\dj 
ldkl
 vS^xv /S^S 
The values of this metrics are in the range [0,1]. The cosine coefficient is 
equal to 0 whenever there are no words in common between two successive 
versions of a news. On the contrary, it is equal to 1 for two identical versions, 
that is, with the same word frequency. 
Figure 15.3 shows the distribution of the cosine coefficient of similarity 
computed for all the dynamic news considered in our analysis. The values 
refer to the similarity between pairs of successive versions of the news. The 
figure plots the distribution in the range [0.6,1], that accounts for 99.4% 
of the values. As can be seen, the distribution is skewed towards 1. Its 
average is equal to 0.96125. This means that in terms of words, successive 
versions of the news are rather similar. It is interesting to point out that 
the minimum of the distribution, that is equal to 0.02916, corresponds to 
news belonging to the business category. Similarly, the minimum values 
of the cosine coefficient computed for the news belonging to the news and 

A Study of the Dynamic Behaviour of a Web Site 
259 
0 4 . 
0.3 • 
c 
° 
0.2 -
g 
B 
2 
0.1 • 
0 -I 
, 
-T 
—p 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1 
cosine coefficient 
Fig. 15.3. Distribution of the cosine coefficient of similarity computed between pairs of 
successive versions of each individual news. 
health categories are rather small, i.e., 0.03275 and 0.03469, respectively. On 
the contrary, the minimum values for the sports and entertainment news 
are about one order of magnitude bigger, namely, 0.31885 and 0.57093, 
respectively. 
Another application of the cosine coefficient of similarity was aimed at 
testing to what extent a news changes with respect to its first version, that 
is, which version is the closest to the first version. For this purpose, we 
computed the cosine coefficients between the first version of a news and all 
its successive versions. The average value of the cosine coefficient is equal 
to 0.84887, that is, much lower than the value previously computed for 
the pairs of the successive versions of each news. Figure 15.4 shows the 
distribution of the cosine coefficient of similarity for the news belonging 
to the news category. As can be seen, successive versions tend to differ 
significantly from the first version of the news. The average coefficient of 
similarity is equal to 0.80038. 
15.4. Conclusions 
Dynamics of Web contents have to be taken into account when making a 
decision about caching, content distribution and replication. We studied the 
evolution of a popular news Web site with the objective of understanding 
how often and to what extent its contents change. Despite what expected, 
our exploratory analysis has shown that the core of most of the news tends 

260 
M. Calzarossa and D. Tessera 
0.15 f 
% 
0.10 -
o 
I 
£ 
0.05 -
0 +-
0 
Fig. 15.4. 
Distribution of the cosine coefficient of similarity for the news category com-
puted between the first version of a news and all its successive versions. 
to change little and not very often, even though this behaviour varies across 
news categories. For example, sports news change more frequently. On the 
contrary, news belonging to the news category tend to change to a larger 
extent. Similarity measures have also shown that successive versions of the 
same news do not differ significantly, whereas the difference increases when 
we compare the first version with all its successive versions. 
As a future work, we plan to derive models able to capture and reproduce 
the dynamic behaviour and the evolution of the contents of the Web site. 
Moreover, we plan study the performance implications of this behaviour. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities 
and Research under the FIRB programme. Authors wish to thank Clara 
Parisi for her valuable help in setting up the experimental environment. 
References 
1. Barili, A., Calzarossa, M.C. and Tessera, D., "Characterization of Dynamic 
Web Contents" LNCS 3280 - Springer, 2004, 648-656. (In Computer and 
Information Sciences - ISCIS 2004). 
2. Brewington, B.E. and Cybenko, G., "How Dynamic is the Web?" Computer 
Networks, 33(1-6), (2000), 257-276. 
3. Brewington, B.E. and Cybenko, G., "Keeping Up with the Changing Web". 
IEEE Computer, 33(5), (2000), 52-58. 
0.50 
cosine coefficient 

A Study of the Dynamic Behaviour of a Web Site 
261 
4. Challenger, J.R., Dantzig, P., Iyengar, A., Squillante, M.S. and Zhang, 
L., "Efficiently Serving Dynamic Data at Highly Accessed Web Sites". 
IEEE/ACM 
Transactions on Networking, 12(2), (2004), 233-246. 
5. Cherkasova, L. and Gupta, M., "Analysis of Enterprise Media Server Work-
loads: Access Patterns, Locality, Content Evolution, and Rates of Change". 
IEEE/ACM 
Transactions on Networking, 12(5), 2004, 781-794. 
6. Cherkasova, L. and Karlsson, M., "Dynamics and Evolution of Web Sites: 
Analysis, Metrics and Design Issues", 2001, 64-71. (In Proc. of the 6th IEEE 
Symposium on Computers and Communications, 2001). 
7. Cho, J. and Garcia-Molina, H., "Estimating Frequency of Change". ACM 
Transactions on Internet Technology, 3(3), 2003, 256-290. 
8. Doughs, F., Feldmann, A., Krishnamurthy, B. and Mogul, J., "Rate of 
Change and other Metrics: A Live Study of the World Wide Web", 1997, 
147-158. (In Proc. of the First USENIX Symposium on Internet Technolo-
gies and Systems, 1997). 
9. Fetterly, D., Manasse, M., Najork, M. and Wiener, J., "A Large-Scale Study 
of the Evolution of Web Pages". Software - Practice and Experience, 34(2), 
(2004), 213-237. 
10. Lee, D.L., Chuang, H. and Seamons, K., "Document Ranking and the 
Vector-Space Model". IEEE Software, 14(2), (1997), 67-75. 
11. Lee, L., "Measures of Distributional Similarity", 1999, 25-32. (In Proc. of 
the 37th Meeting of Association for Computational Linguistics, 1999). 
12. "MSNBC Web site", http://www.msnbc.com. 
13. Padmanabhan, V.N. and Qiu, L., "The Content and Access Dynamics of a 
Busy Web Site: Findings and Implications", 2000, 111-123. (In Proc. of the 
ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, 
and Protocols for Computer Communication, 2000). 
14. Salton, G. and McGill, M.J., Introduction to Modern Information 
Retrieval. 
(McGraw-Hill, New York), 1983. 
15. Shi, W., Collins, E. and Karamcheti, V., "Modeling Object Characteristics 
of Dynamic Web Content". Journal of Parallel and Distributed 
Computing, 
63(10), (2003), 963-980. 
16. Zobel, J. and Moffat, A., "Exploring the Similarity Space". ACM 
SIGIR 
Forum, 32(1), (1998), 18-34. 

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 
AND COMPUTER SYSTEMS 
A Tribute 
nbe 
Communication networks and computer systems research is 
entering a new phase in which many of the established models and 
techniques of the last twenty years are being challenged. The 
research community is continuing to free itself from past intellec-
tual constraints so that it may fully exploit the convergence of 
computing and communications. Evaluating the performance of 
emerging communications and computer systems constitutes 
a huge challenge. Thus, current research provides a set of hetero-
geneous tools and techniques embracing the uncertainties 
of time and space varying environments when the requests for 
diverse services are made in real time, and with very different 
quality of service expectations. 
These novel techniques will lead to fast and economic service 
deployment and effective dynamic resource management, and 
hence to new business strategies and infrastructures that will 
facilitate the emergence of future services and applications. 
This volume contains contributions and presentations made by 
leading international researchers at a workshop which was held 
in April 2004 to honour Professor Erol Gelenbe on the occasion 
of his inaugural lecture as the Dennis Gabor Chair at Imperial 
College London. 
Key Features 
• A selection of outstanding research contributions by international 
experts in the field of networks and computer systems 
• Useful for graduate students, researchers and experts 
Imperial College Press 
Hlilillll 
• 
iinii]i| III I'm liiiiii) 
www.icpress.co.uk 
WErfflfflWWt&m 

