Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Ben Jones
Communicating Data
with Tableau
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Communicating Data with Tableau
by Ben Jones
Copyright © 2014 Ben Jones. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938
or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Julie Steele
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Copyeditor: Jasmine Kwityn
Proofreader: Eliahu Sussman
Indexer: Lucie Haskins
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Interior Designer: David Futato
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
June 2014:
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2014-06-12: First release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781449372026 for release details.
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Communicating Data with Tableau, the image of a
turquoise parrot, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod‐
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and
O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed
in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher
and author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting
from the use of the information contained herein.
ISBN: 978-1-449-37202-6
[LSI]
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Table of Contents
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ix
1. Communicating Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
A Step in the Process                                                                           2
A Model of Communication                                                              3
Three Types of Communication Problems                                      4
Six Principles of Communicating Data                                            5
Principle #1: Know Your Goal                                                        6
Principle #2: Use the Right Data                                                    7
Principle #3: Select Suitable Visualizations                                  8
Principle #4: Design for Aesthetics                                                9
Principle #5: Choose an Effective Medium and Channel        11
Principle #6: Check the Results                                                    13
Summary                                                                                             13
2. Introduction to Tableau. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
Using Tableau                                                                                     15
My Tableau Story                                                                            16
Tableau Products                                                                                16
Connecting to Data                                                                           18
The Tableau User Interface                                                           18
Summary                                                                                         29
3. How Much and How Many. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
Communicating “How Much”                                                         32
An Example of How Much                                                           33
Comparing Comparisons                                                              35
iii
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Fine-Tuning the Default                                                                36
Sorting                                                                                             37
The Dot Chart                                                                                39
Communicating “How Many”                                                         42
A Tale of Two Formats                                                                  43
Counting Dimensions                                                                   43
Histograms: How Many of How Much?                                     46
Summary                                                                                             50
4. Ratios and Rates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
Ratios                                                                                                   52
Two Ways of Adding Rank                                                           60
Rates                                                                                                     63
Blending Data Sources                                                                  64
Visualizing Rates                                                                            65
Summary                                                                                             67
5. Proportions and Percentages. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  69
Part-to-Whole                                                                                    69
Introducing Filters and Quick Filters                                         71
Introducing Table Calculations                                                    74
Proportions as Waterfall Charts Using Gantt                            79
Current-to-Historical                                                                        82
The Bullet Graph                                                                            82
Reference Lines                                                                               84
Actual-to-Target                                                                                 85
Summary                                                                                             86
6. Mean and Median. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  87
The Normal Distribution                                                                 88
An Example of “Normal” Data                                                     89
Box Plots                                                                                          90
An Example of “Non-Normal” Data                                           96
Sensitivity to Outliers                                                                    97
Visualizing Typical Values of Non-Normal Distributions       98
Summary                                                                                             99
7. Variation and Uncertainty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
Respecting Variation                                                                       101
Visualizing Variation                                                                   104
iv 
| 
Table of Contents
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Variation Over Time: Control Charts                                           106
Anatomy of a Control Chart                                                      107
How to Create a Control Chart in Tableau                              107
Understanding Uncertainty                                                           115
Summary                                                                                           123
8. Multiple Quantities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  125
Scatterplots                                                                                       126
Who Is Who?                                                                                130
Making it Exploratory                                                                 134
Adding Background Images                                                       136
Stacked Bars                                                                                      137
Regression and Trend Lines                                                           141
The Quadrant Chart                                                                        146
Summary                                                                                           148
9. Changes Over Time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  149
The Origin of Time Charts                                                             150
The Line Chart                                                                                 151
The Dual-Axis Line Chart                                                              154
The Connected Scatterplot                                                             158
The Date Field Type and Seasonality                                            162
The Timeline                                                                                    166
The Slopegraph                                                                                171
Step 1: Get the Data                                                                     171
Step 2: Connect Tableau                                                              172
Step 3: Create a Parameter and Matching Calculated Field   172
Step 4: Create the Basic Slopegraph                                          174
Step 5: Add Line Coloring and Thickness                                175
Step 6: Design the Dashboard                                                    178
Summary                                                                                           179
10. Maps and Location. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  181
One Special Map                                                                              182
Circle Maps                                                                                       183
Adding a Second Encoding                                                        185
When Marks Multiply                                                                 186
Filled Maps                                                                                       190
Dual-Encoded Maps                                                                        196
A Dual-Axis Map                                                                         197
Table of Contents 
| 
v
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A Dual-Encoded Circle Map                                                      199
Summary                                                                                           201
11. Advanced Maps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  203
Maps with Shapes                                                                            204
Maps Showing Paths                                                                       211
Plotting Map Shapes Using Axes                                                   216
Summary                                                                                           223
12. The Joy of Dashboards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  225
Dashboards in Tableau                                                                    226
A Word of Caution                                                                          228
“Begin with the End in Mind”                                                    229
Types of Dashboards                                                                       230
Context Is King                                                                             235
Summary                                                                                           238
13. Building Dashboards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  239
Building an Exploratory Dashboard                                             243
Step 1: Design                                                                               243
Step 2: Sheets                                                                                243
Moving Things Around                                                              248
Step 3: Annotations                                                                     250
Step 4: Objects                                                                              253
Step 5: Actions                                                                              258
Step 6: Formatting                                                                        270
Steps 7 and 8: Delivery and Results                                           271
Building an Explanatory Dashboard                                            272
A Key Point to Explain: Nordic Countries in the Lead          272
Another Key Point to Explain: The Emergence of China      274
Summary                                                                                           275
14. Advanced Dashboard Features. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  277
Animating Dashboards                                                                   278
Showing Multiple Tabs                                                                   282
Adding Navigation with Filters                                                     285
Adding Custom Header Images                                                    290
Adding Google Maps to Dashboards                                            292
Create the URLs                                                                           294
vi 
| 
Table of Contents
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Adding Dynamic Google Maps Satellite Images to Our
Dashboard                                                                                 295
Adding YouTube Videos to Dashboards                                      297
Summary                                                                                           302
A. Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  303
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  305
Table of Contents 
| 
vii
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Preface
There is a huge opportunity to find and share the insights contained
in data. This is not a new development. People from Florence Night‐
ingale to William Playfair to Dr. John Snow and countless others have
been changing the world with data for centuries.
The challenges we face today are different, and so are the tools at our
disposal. But just as back then, the person who would perfect the art
of communicating data in our time must be at once analytical, artic‐
ulate, and creative. That is to say: the result, when done well, often
involves a combination of numbers, words, and images.
More than anything, however, empathy is required. The person doing
the communicating must understand the members of the audience:
what will make sense to them, what motivates them, and what con‐
cerns them. The inherent challenge and the resulting satisfaction of
making a meaningful impact with data are what draw me to this en‐
deavor more than anything else.
Tableau Software has developed and created a visualization querying
engine and user interface that make it easy to discover and commu‐
nicate with data. Once you get the hang of it, it can be a real pleasure
to use. Tableau makes it possible to quickly view data from a number
of different angles, to combine it with additional data sets and conduct
a more sophisticated analysis, and to craft a message that will really
hit home.
But to fully unlock the power of Tableau, the communicator of data
needs to appreciate what will work well in each particular situation.
The software is designed to steer the user down the straight and narrow
pathway of best practices, but it is up to the user to know when to
ix
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
adhere to rules of thumb, and when to break them. Also, there are
many options to choose from, and many decisions to make when
crafting a message. It’s important to understand the range of alterna‐
tives, how to use each one well, and which to employ.
In my current role as Tableau Public Product Manager at Tableau, I
have the privilege of interacting with a host of talented individuals who
are setting data free from the confines of spreadsheets and tables and
making it easy to see what the data shows about our world. On my
own blog, I have been attempting to do the same thing for the past
three years, and after dozens of projects and experiments, I have
learned a number of techniques that work well, and some that don’t
work so well.
In this book, I have attempted to provide advice to the would-be com‐
municators of data, to guide them in the proper usage of Tableau to
achieve the desired effect. My hope is that this book will help others
learn what I have learned, and avoid the mistakes I wasn’t wise enough
to dodge the first time around.
Intended Audience
This book is for anyone who has data and who wants to use it to learn
something about their world, which they can then share with others
around them. More particularly, it’s for people who are brand new to
Tableau, or who have been using it for a while but are looking to im‐
prove the outcome of their communication efforts. That applies to
analysts and managers in corporations, journalists within media or‐
ganizations, leaders of nonprofits, researchers, teachers, and anyone
else who is passionate about a subject for which data is available.
Tableau is a software tool for programmers and nonprogrammers
alike. It does not require knowledge of any computer programming
languages as a prerequisite, but a basic familiarity with data types,
spreadsheets, and statistics is necessary. The examples used through‐
out the book can be re-created by connecting to Excel spreadsheets
that are available for download on http://dataremixed.com/books/
cdwt. While Tableau Desktop allows users to connect to data in a wide
variety of databases, cloud sources, and Hadoop technologies, the goal
is to provide material that anyone can follow along with.
x 
| 
Preface
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Although even experts can learn from others, I haven’t particularly
geared this book toward the guru-level Tableau user. Furthermore, it’s
not intended to be an exhaustive manual that covers every function
and feature in the software.
At the time of writing of the first version of this book, Tableau Desktop
8.1 and Tableau Public 8.1 are available for purchase and download,
respectively. A free trial version of Tableau Desktop 8.1 can also be
downloaded and installed. Tableau is currently available for Windows
only.
Assumptions This Book Makes
This book assumes that the reader has data and that it’s ready to use.
Example files are available in a formatted and cleaned state, but this
book will not cover all of the steps necessary to get a data set into this
state. While these data wrangling tasks often account for much of the
time and effort involved in any project, they go beyond the scope of
what’s covered in this book.
This book further assumes that the reader has access to Tableau Desk‐
top 8.1 or Tableau Public 8.1, which is currently only available to install
on Windows.
Contents of This Book
Chapter 1, Communicating Data, discusses the basic process of en‐
coding a data-driven message into a signal and transmitting (present‐
ing) it to receivers (audience members), who then decode it and take
some action based on their understanding of the message.
Chapter 2, Introduction to Tableau, deals with the different software
products that Tableau offers, as well as the basics of the Tableau user
interface.
Chapter 3, How Much and How Many, teaches how to communicate
a single group of absolute numerical quantities in the form of meas‐
urements (how much) and counts (how many).
Chapter 4, Ratios and Rates, covers normalized comparisons of a sin‐
gle group of quotients that either have the same units (ratios) or dif‐
ferent units (rates). Calculated fields and ranks are introduced, and a
simple data blending example is included.
Preface 
| 
xi
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Chapter 5, Proportions and Percentages, covers another kind of nor‐
malized comparison: part-to-whole relationships per unit and per one
hundred. We’ll introduce Quick Filters, Table Calcs, and reference
lines in this chapter.
Chapter 6, Mean and Median, deals with the important topic of meas‐
ures of central tendency, featuring the new box-and-whisker plot chart
type, as well as the oft-used dual-axis chart.
Chapter 7, Variation and Uncertainty, addresses a challenging but
important topic by showing readers how to give an accurate and hon‐
est view of the real world, instead of painting an overly simplistic
picture.
Chapter 8, Multiple Quantities, takes the analysis to a new dimension
by considering how to effectively communicate more than one vari‐
able at a time. Scatterplots, tooltips, and trend lines feature promi‐
nently in this chapter.
Chapter 9, Changes Over Time, tackles a critical element of every data
visualization: time. Simple methods like line plots are included as well
as more advanced chart types like connected scatterplots, Gantt bar
charts, and slopegraphs.
Chapter 10, Maps and Location, walks the reader through the funda‐
mental concepts of visualizing geospatial data by creating both circle
maps and filled maps.
Chapter 11, Advanced Maps, covers more sophisticated map types
such as shape maps, maps with paths, custom background images, and
mapping shape files on axes.
Chapter 12, The Joy of Dashboards, is a tour of different styles of dash‐
boards: explanatory, exploratory, storytelling, and infographics. This
chapter gives a sense of the different ways people combine multiple
charts and objects into a single view.
Chapter 13, Building Dashboards, shows readers how to employ an
eight-step process to build richly interactive dashboards in Tableau.
Chapter 14, Advanced Dashboard Features, gives readers a sense of
how dashboards can be enhanced with web pages, tabs, navigation
affordances, and animation.
xii 
| 
Preface
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Plain text
Indicates keyboard accelerators (such as Alt and Ctrl).
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, file ex‐
tensions, pathnames, directories, menu titles, menu options, and
menu buttons.
Constant width
Indicates commands, options, fields, types, properties, parame‐
ters, values, objects, events, event handlers, the contents of files,
or the output from commands.
Constant width bold
Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by
the user.
Constant width italic
Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values.
This element signifies a tip, suggestion, or general note.
This element indicates a warning or caution.
Using Code Examples
Supplemental material (examples, exercises, etc.) is available for
download at http://dataremixed.com/books/cdwt.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you may
use the code in this book in your programs and documentation. You
do not need to contact us for permission unless you’re reproducing a
significant portion of the code. For example, writing a program that
Preface 
| 
xiii
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
uses several chunks of code from this book does not require permis‐
sion. Selling or distributing a CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly
books does require permission. Answering a question by citing this
book and quoting example code does not require permission. Incor‐
porating a significant amount of example code from this book into
your product’s documentation does require permission.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Com‐
municating Data with Tableau by Ben Jones. Copyright 2014 Ben
Jones, 978-1-449-37202-6.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the per‐
mission given above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.
Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online (www.safaribooksonline.com)
is an on-demand digital library that delivers ex‐
pert content in both book and video form from the
world’s leading authors in technology and business.
Technology professionals, software developers, web designers, and
business and creative professionals use Safari Books Online as their
primary resource for research, problem solving, learning, and certif‐
ication training.
Safari Books Online offers a range of product mixes and pricing pro‐
grams for organizations, government agencies, and individuals. Sub‐
scribers have access to thousands of books, training videos, and pre‐
publication manuscripts in one fully searchable database from pub‐
lishers like O’Reilly Media, Prentice Hall Professional, Addison-
Wesley Professional, Microsoft Press, Sams, Que, Peachpit Press, Focal
Press, Cisco Press, John Wiley & Sons, Syngress, Morgan Kaufmann,
IBM Redbooks, Packt, Adobe Press, FT Press, Apress, Manning, New
Riders, McGraw-Hill, Jones & Bartlett, Course Technology, and doz‐
ens more. For more information about Safari Books Online, please
visit us online.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the
publisher:
xiv 
| 
Preface
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and
any additional information. You can access this page at http://bit.ly/
comm-data-tableau.
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to
bookquestions@oreilly.com.
For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and
news, see our website at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia
Acknowledgments
I’d like to thank the founders and developers of Tableau Software for
making the product that makes this book possible, and for being bold
enough to make such a highly functional version of the product, Ta‐
bleau Public, entirely free. I wouldn’t have gotten started without it.
I’d like to thank O’Reilly Media for agreeing to work with this first-
time author, and my editor, Julie Steele, for helping me navigate what
turned out to be a much more challenging and time-consuming en‐
deavor than I expected.
I’d also like to thank all the people who have taught me what I know
over the years: the gracious and welcoming community of data visu‐
alization enthusiasts and professionals like Andy Kirk, Alberto Cairo,
and Santiago Ortiz; the incredibly talented community of Tableau
Public authors like Joe Mako, Andy Kriebel, Peter Gilks, Jonathan
Drummey, Ramon Martinez, Kelly Martin, Anya A’Hearn, Robb Tufts,
Ryan Sleeper, and countless others; and my colleagues within Tableau
who share my passion for data, like Ellie Fields, Andy Cotgreave, Mike
Klaczynski, Jewel Loree, Daniel Hom, and Dustin Smith, to name just
a few.
Preface 
| 
xv
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Lastly, and most importantly, I’d like to thank my wife, Sarah, and our
two wonderful sons, Aaron and Simon, who supported me in so many
ways throughout the writing of this book, which was also our first year
in the Seattle area. You three mean everything to me.
Sarah, I dedicate this book to you.
xvi 
| 
Preface
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“As the cathedral is to its foundation
so is an effective presentation of facts
to the data.”
—Willard Cope Brinton
CHAPTER 1
Communicating Data
There’s something breathtaking about witnessing data communicated
well—it’s a lot like encountering an architectural wonder. Think of the
first time you saw the video of Hans Rosling interacting with global
development data on stage, or when you first viewed a well-designed
New York Times visualization online. When data is communicated
well, it’s easy to appreciate both the data itself and the delivery of that
data at the same time. Those two elements can be fashioned together
into an overall experience that makes you feel that you understand the
world better, and that you want to do something with your newfound
understanding.
On the other hand, think of a time when you suffered through a pre‐
sentation at work that included poorly designed charts and graphs
containing extraneous information, or all those infographics you wish
you never laid eyes on that skewed the figures horribly and left you
feeling dumber. Either the foundation was hopelessly cracked or the
building itself was inexcusably shabby, or both. Not every building is
a cathedral.
What’s the difference between these two types of experiences? It’s a
question of whether those who designed and delivered the message
were adept at communicating data.
1
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This is a book about just that. Communicating data is simply a special
case of communicating in general (more about that in a minute)—one
that incorporates quantitative statements about the universe. In this
context, we aren’t using the word “data” in the general sense of factual
information, but in the more specific sense of “information in nu‐
merical form that can be digitally transmitted or processed”—ones
and zeros in databases, spreadsheets, and tables.
This is also a book about using Tableau. This book will show you how
to use Tableau to communicate data well, though you can apply the
principles and methods covered in this book to using other tools. It’s
not intended to be an exhaustive Tableau manual, nor is it intended to
guide you in the actual acquiring and storing of your data. While those
are necessary steps, the goal of this book is to help you take all that
data you have and convey its message with efficiency and impact.
A Step in the Process
How is “communicating data” distinct from the other steps in the
overall process that begins with a question and ends with a shared
insight? Figure 1-1 presents the overall data discovery process, and
shows where communicating data fits in that process.
Figure 1-1. The data discovery process
The highly iterative process often begins with a question, which can
be specific (“which combination of products occurs the most often?”)
or general (“what can we learn about historical sales of our prod‐
ucts?”). The next step is gathering data if it’s available (e.g., historical
sales). Then comes the often arduous process of structuring data, also
called “data munging” or “data wrangling.” In this step, data is format‐
ted, shaped, merged, converted, and otherwise manipulated into a
form that is amenable to the next step, exploring data. In this step, the
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Communicating Data
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
data is viewed and analyzed from a number of angles until one or more
insights are gleaned. These insights form the message involved in
communicating data, the step at which quantitative statements are
shared with others. While this book primarily concerns this final step,
it will also touch on the other steps in the process, as they contribute
to the formation of the message to be communicated.
In order to examine the idea of communicating data in greater detail,
let’s return to the birthplace of information theory: Bell Laboratories.
A Model of Communication
The year was 1949, and two employees at Bell Laboratories—Claude
Elwood Shannon and his coauthor Warren Weaver—published a
seminal article in the University of Illinois Press called The Mathe‐
matical Theory of Communication. In it, they introduced a model of
communication systems in which an “information source” selects a
message and then a “transmitter changes this message into the signal
which is actually sent over the communication channel from the
transmitter to the receiver” (see Figure 1-2).
Figure 1-2. A model of communication systems
To illustrate the model, consider oral speech: the information source
is the brain of a certain person; the transmitter is this person’s vocal
system; the channel is the sound waves that travel as particles in the
air collide; the receiver is the auditory system of a second person; and
the destination is this second person’s brain. The noise source includes
other sounds present at the time the first person speaks.
Shannon and Weaver describe how this model can apply to a wide
variety of cases, including those in which the symbols are “written
letters or words, or musical notes, or spoken words, or symphonic
music, or pictures.” Put simply, the model describes the process of one
mind attempting to affect another, and it’s the very essence of the hu‐
man experience.
A Model of Communication 
| 
3
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In this book, we’re dealing with the case in which the symbols com‐
municated are abstract graphic representations of data in the form of
charts, graphs, and maps: data visualizations. Viewing the communi‐
cation of data in this conceptual framework is helpful because it re‐
minds us of what we should be taking into account. Knowing how the
system can fail is a key first step.
Three Types of Communication Problems
In order to begin to understand how we can communicate data well,
it’s helpful to consider the types of communication problems that
Shannon and Weaver identified:
The technical problem
How accurately can the symbols of communication be
transmitted?
The semantic problem
How precisely do the transmitted symbols convey the desired
meaning?
The effectiveness problem
How effectively does the received meaning affect conduct in the
desired way?
As far as technology has advanced since these problems were outlined,
we still often suffer from technical problems—inadequate screen res‐
olution, broken audio, grainy video, poor print quality—anything that
results in the receiver receiving something different than what was
originally crafted. Considering all the different devices, operating sys‐
tems, and software the person on the receiving end could be using, it
can be challenging to make sure the message itself is intact.
The semantic problem occurs when we encode the message using in‐
appropriate visualization types, or when the symbols chosen won’t be
understood by the person on the receiving end. For example, encoding
a value using a circle’s diameter rather than its area will skew the per‐
ceived proportions (see Figure 1-3).
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Communicating Data
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 1-3. Sizing proportional to area rather than diameter
Another example of the semantic problem occurs when symbols are
used that are only understood by a subset of all the audience members,
such as the donkey and elephant icons that represent the Democratic
and Republican parties of the American political system.
The effectiveness problem is the “so what?” problem, and it might be
the most important. If everything falls into place, and the message is
perfectly encoded, transmitted, decoded, and understood, but the re‐
cipient doesn’t care, or doesn’t take the desired action, then the com‐
munication ultimately failed.
Six Principles of Communicating Data
In order to address these three types of communication problems, I’d
like to propose six principles to consider when communicating data.
They are numbered in the general order that they transpire, though
it’s fully recognized that this process is highly iterative and rarely pro‐
ceeds in a straight line. Communicating is a creative process—one that
involves crafting and refining a message—and as such it will neces‐
sarily involve many loops:
1. Know your goal
2. Use the right data
3. Select suitable visualizations
4. Design for aesthetics
Six Principles of Communicating Data 
| 
5
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5. Choose an effective medium and channel
6. Check the results
Let’s look at these principles in detail.
Principle #1: Know Your Goal
It’s important to note that “information” and the “message” are not
synonymous. Information is the set of all possible messages that can
be selected by the information source. The message is what was se‐
lected from this set to be communicated. Why does this matter? In a
world where information is increasing exponentially, choosing your
message is an important first step.
Before you choose your message, however, it’s critical to know your
goal, which you can articulate by answering a few key questions up
front (see Figure 1-4):
• Who are you trying to communicate with? (target audience)
• What do you want them to know? (intended meaning)
• Why? What do you want them to do about it? (desired effect)
Figure 1-4. Elements of the goal
The answers to these questions may be very different for different
disciplines. A data journalist working on a breaking story doesn’t have
the same goal as a business intelligence analyst working in a corpora‐
tion. That they would communicate data differently shouldn’t be sur‐
prising, and may be entirely appropriate.
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Communicating Data
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The important part is articulating your goal—actually writing out the
answers to the three questions just listed. If you’re not certain about
the answer to any one of these questions, don’t go any further until
you’re sure. (And it’s OK if your sole purpose is to make someone
laugh. You don’t have to be trying to achieve world peace with every
data message.)
Principle #2: Use the Right Data
As the saying goes, sometimes less is more. One of the most impactful
examples of communicating data that I’ve ever seen involved the pre‐
sentation of a single number: 14. That was the single data point shared
with a group of managers assembled to discuss customer service with‐
in an organization. The group of managers came to learn that this
number represented the number of times a particular customer had
been transferred between departments during a single call to a help‐
line. It motivated an entire organization to revamp the customer
experience.
Sometimes less is really less, though. While driving in the car, I heard
a report on the radio in which a number of cities were compared based
on the percentage of fish packages that were mislabeled. Digging into
the data myself later that day, I found that the sample sizes were too
small to infer much of anything about the relative mislabeling rates in
the cities. A whole host of listeners were misled by the story at least as
much as by the fish labels.
And more is often less. It’s possible, and actually quite typical, to over‐
whelm the audience with data. It’s easy to see why this happens: you
worked hard to gather the data, and it feels like that data increases the
weight of your message and lends additional credibility. But all that
extra data only serves to drown out the message. Shannon and Weaver
identified this problem: “if you overcrowd the capacity of the audience,
you force a general and inescapable error and confusion.” In other
words, if a data point doesn’t add to your message, then it detracts from
it.
The last and most important point about selecting data is that your
message must be both ethical and based on sound epistemology. In
other words: don’t lie with statistics—we have enough of that to con‐
tend with already. Don’t fall prey to the many and various forms of
statistical and logical fallacies, such as mistaking correlation for cau‐
sation, taking unreasonable inductive leaps, applying the Gaussian
Six Principles of Communicating Data 
| 
7
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
when it doesn’t apply, inferring more than the sample size allows, and
so on. These are just a few of the many icebergs to avoid (in this book,
I hope to show you how to avoid some of them when you use Tableau).
Principle #3: Select Suitable Visualizations
Once you’ve identified the data that you’ll need to make your point,
the next step is deciding how to encode the message. Encoding the
data means converting the data values themselves into abstract graph‐
ical representations, like size or color or shape.
Knowing how the human mind makes use of different graphical dis‐
plays of information to perform specific tasks is the key to avoiding
the semantic problem (wherein the symbols don’t convey the intended
meaning precisely). Luckily for us, the last half-century has produced
pioneers in the field of information visualization who have shed con‐
siderable light on this topic.
What type of data do you have?
Tableau’s own Jock Mackinlay has produced a helpful framework for
identifying the order of effectiveness of different encoding variables
based on the type of data being used. First, let’s start with a description
of the different types of data: quantitative, ordinal, and nominal (see
Figure 1-5).
Figure 1-5. Different types of data
What are the most effective types of visualizations for your data type?
Once you’ve identified what data type or types you will need to get
your point across, you need to decide what variables you will use to
encode the data (see Figure 1-6).
8 
| 
Chapter 1: Communicating Data
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 1-6. Effectiveness of data encoding
A few points are immediately obvious:
• Position is the most effective form of encoding for all data types.
• Length, angle, and area decrease in effectiveness from quantitative
to ordinal to nominal.
• Color hue increases in effectiveness from quantitative to ordinal
to nominal.
Keeping this ranking in mind as you select your visualization type will
help ensure you are crafting a message that will be easily decoded and
understood by your audience.
If the overall quality of the communication were only affected by the
ease of decoding, we would not need any more principles. In actuality,
we also need to consider aesthetics, media and channel, and the actual
impact.
Principle #4: Design for Aesthetics
Let me play devil’s advocate: Why consider aesthetics at all? Isn’t any
attempt to make a visualization “look better” just chart junk or design
fluff? Won’t graphic elements that aren’t data just get it the way?
Shouldn’t the data itself be beautiful enough for readers?
I understand this viewpoint, I really do. I’ve seen plenty of attempts to
beautify data visualizations that either distract the audience or, worse,
distort the data so as to completely mislead the audience. We all agree
that this result must be avoided. One way to avoid it is to banish all
aesthetic elements forevermore. And yet, that’s not a world I’d want to
live in, because there is a clear value to elegant design and what Willard
Cope Brinton called “judicious embellishment of charts”.
Six Principles of Communicating Data 
| 
9
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The value? Aesthetic elements can arouse interest and enhance mem‐
ory. So long as they do so without overly hampering cognition, they
can be used to achieve the goal.
There are a number of aesthetic elements of every data visualization,
and a handful of common mistakes people make when creating them:
• Poor color schemes
• Distracting fonts
• Many different fonts
• Sloppy alignment
• Vertical or angled labels
• Dark background colors
• Thick borders or grid lines
• Useless images and clip art
• Lazily accepting most software defaults
Consider Figure 1-7, which shows two charts that illustrate the growth
of the number of possible moves in a chess game as the game pro‐
gresses. The default Excel chart is on the left and a redesigned version
is on the right.
Figure 1-7. Two versions of the same line plot
In both cases, it’s just a line on a log-linear scale, but which are you
more likely to pay attention to? Aesthetics matters.
10 
| 
Chapter 1: Communicating Data
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 1-8 shows another example of poor design and improved de‐
sign, this time showing the growth of employment at Apple after the
return of Steve Jobs in 1997.
A little design goes a long way. If you know a good graphic artist, take
her out for coffee and get her input. Design is a whole separate disci‐
pline that you could spend a lifetime learning about and perfecting,
but paying even a small amount of attention to how your data visual‐
izations look can mean the difference between being ignored and
arousing interest, or between being quickly forgotten and being re‐
membered for a while to come.
In this book, we’ll cover how to address the aesthetics of visualizations
created in Tableau.
Figure 1-8. Two versions of the column graph
Principle #5: Choose an Effective Medium and Channel
What form the message takes (medium) and how it gets delivered to
the audience (channel) are critical elements of any data communica‐
tion effort. Care needs to be taken in selecting the “how,” the “when,”
and the “where” to improve the chances that your audience is reached
and your goals are met.
Earlier, I referred to Hans Rosling’s famous presentation at TED in
February of 2006: the animation of the GapMinder scatterplot, along
Six Principles of Communicating Data 
| 
11
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
with the narration and the pointing and arm waving, are key features
of the communication effort. The data set he was presenting was com‐
plex, and the communication effort was also complex. He pulled it off,
and the impact has been incredibly deep.
When you communicate data, there are a few choices to make about
how you will do it:
• Standalone graphics or narrated?
• Static, interactive, animated, or combined graphics?
• If narrated: recorded, live, or both?
• If live: remote, in person, or both?
• In all cases: broadcast, directed, or both?
The framework in Figure 1-9 shows how these choices typically relate
in terms of effort, reach, and likely impact.
Figure 1-9. A spectrum of data communication types
On the one hand, it’s obviously very simple and easy to create a static
chart and send an email to a group of colleagues or publish it to the
Web as a standalone graphic. This approach to communicating data
could have a very deep impact on your target audience, but it most
likely will not. It’s also important to note that the cost in time and effort
is very low.
On the other hand, narrating a combined set of static and dynamic
graphics in person to a live audience is a very complex endeavor. A
limited number of people will be present, but if you pull it off like Hans
Rosling has, the impact could be enormous. The effort is high (and
don’t forget to rehearse).
These are both extreme examples of communicating data. The area in
between these two extremes includes publishing blog posts that
12 
| 
Chapter 1: Communicating Data
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
combine interactive data visualizations and detailed commentary—
something Tableau Public makes very easy to do.
As with anything, there is a trade-off between cost and impact at play
here. If your target audience is a small firm in South Africa and the
stakes are high, for example, getting on an airplane to walk them
through the data may be a good investment. On the other hand, if you’d
like as many people as possible in the general public to receive a data
message, you’ll have to find an effective way to broadcast the message.
Knowing your goal, and knowing who makes up your target audience,
informs these decisions.
Principle #6: Check the Results
It is a good habit in general to incorporate into your efforts feedback
loops and checkpoints that help you gauge whether you’ve achieved
your intended results or not. This allows for course correction in the
case of woefully unmet goals, or fine-tuning in the case of slight
miscues.
There are a few questions to ask when you check the results. We’ll call
this the “RUI”:
Reach
Did the audience even receive your message at all? Who did and
who didn’t?
Understanding
Did the audience interpret the data message in the way you in‐
tended?
Impact
Did the audience react in the way you wanted them to react?
Asking these questions will help you hone your message and com‐
municate data better, and it also will show an appropriate degree of
respect to your audience.
Summary
In this chapter, we considered the act of communicating data as an
integral step in a larger data discovery process, and an important type
of communication in general. We also considered three problems that
can get in the way of communicating data well—the technical problem,
the semantic problem, and the effectiveness problem. Lastly, we
Summary 
| 
13
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
considered six principles to overcome these problems and achieve our
goals. These six principles can be applied regardless of the tool or
software used.
In the next chapter, we’ll provide a general overview of one particular
software tool for communicating data: Tableau.
14 
| 
Chapter 1: Communicating Data
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“We help people see and understand data.”
—Tableau Software mission statement
CHAPTER 2
Introduction to Tableau
Tableau software helps people communicate data through an innova‐
tion called VizQL, a visual query language that converts drag-and-
drop actions into data queries, allowing users to quickly find and share
insights in their data. The version of Tableau available at the time of
writing is Tableau 8.
The goal of this chapter is to help you understand the different types
of Tableau software, the basic user interface, how Tableau deals with
data, and how data can be visualized in a variety of different ways. If
you are already an intermediate Tableau user, you may want to skip
this chapter and move on to Chapter 3.
Using Tableau
With Tableau, “data workers” first connect to data stored in files, cubes,
databases, warehouses, Hadoop technologies, and even some cloud
sources like Google Analytics. They then interact with the Tableau user
interface to simultaneously query the data and view the results in
charts, graphs, and maps that can be arranged together on dashboards.
When it’s time to communicate key insights, there are a variety of
options depending on the product being used, from sending files to
embedding interactive visualizations online to sharing via social
media.
Tableau facilitates the data discovery process (finding insights in data)
as well as the data communication process (creating explanatory
15
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
graphics, exploratory dashboards, and data storytelling) with no pro‐
gramming required.
My Tableau Story
The first time I encountered Tableau, I was researching data visuali‐
zation tools and methods because I recognized a huge gap between
what I could do with the tools at my disposal and what I wanted to do.
It was 2011, and I had come to accept that sharing richly interactive
data dashboards on the Web would require me to learn a programming
language like D3 or Processing. Having done just enough program‐
ming in engineering school (if Fortran still counts as programming)
and beyond to feel up for the challenge, I set about to see what I could
do.
In the early stages of learning to code, a contact of mine recommended
that I download Tableau Public, the freely available version of the data
visualization PC software, and experiment with the user interface. I
did, and after watching a few online training videos, I was amazed at
what I could do in my very first session. I began creating data visual‐
izations and embedding them in a WordPress site, and connecting
with an online community of enthusiasts and experts.
Tableau Products
Chances are you bought this book because you already have one or
more Tableau products and you’d like to learn how to use them better.
For those who aren’t already familiar with the different data visuali‐
zation software products Tableau offers, there are four main types:
Tableau Desktop
A Windows application that comes in two editions (Personal and
Professional), and is most useful for analysts and business users.
Personal allows connection to files and local saving only, while
Professional also allows individuals to connect to a wider variety
of data sources and save to your own server, Tableau Online
servers, or Tableau Public servers.
16 
| 
Chapter 2: Introduction to Tableau
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tableau Server
Best suited for enterprise-wide deployments, this is a business in‐
telligence system for secure access to enterprise data and user in‐
teraction via web portals on a company intranet (requires Desktop
Professional).
Tableau Online
A new hosted solution for storing and accessing data dashboards
in the cloud (requires Desktop Professional), this is geared toward
consultants and companies.
Tableau Public
The best option for journalists and bloggers, Tableau Public is a
free application and visualization hosting service for sharing of
publicly available data on the Web (exists as a standalone Win‐
dows application, or can be published to via Desktop Professio‐
nal).
All four of these products incorporate essentially the same data visu‐
alization user interface and VizQL engine. As you can see from this
list, Tableau Desktop Professional is the cornerstone product that al‐
lows users to access the other products. The products differ in the types
of data sources users can connect to and how visualizations can be
shared with others.
There are two other minor products that round out the offerings:
Tableau Public Premium
An annual subscription service that allows customers to prevent
viewers of visualizations hosted on Tableau Public from down‐
loading the workbook and accessing the underlying data (also re‐
quires purchase of Desktop Professional).
Tableau Reader
A free Windows application that allows users to open saved Ta‐
bleau workbook files (.twbx) and to view and interact with visu‐
alizations that have been created and saved locally with Tableau
Desktop or downloaded from the Web via Tableau Public. Users
of Tableau Reader cannot create new visualizations or change the
design of existing ones.
Figure 2-1 illustrates how these products interact to allow the user to
convert data stored in various formats into visualizations and then
share them with others.
Tableau Products 
| 
17
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 2-1. Tableau product diagram
Connecting to Data
Tableau Desktop Professional allows users to connect to an unlimited
amount of data stored in the following types of data sources:
• Files such as Excel, Access, comma-delimited files, and Tableau
Data Extracts
• Traditional relational databases such as MySQL and Oracle
• Hadoop technologies such as Hortonworks Hadoop Hive and
Cloudera Hadoop
• Cloud sources such as Google Analytics and Salesforce
For a complete list, see the online Tableau Product technical specifi‐
cation sheet.
Tableau Desktop Personal and Tableau Public only allow users to con‐
nect to Excel, Access, comma-delimited files, and OData sources. Ta‐
bleau Reader only opens packaged Tableau workbooks (.txbx), and as
previously mentioned, is “read-only.”
The Tableau User Interface
Every Tableau workbook contains both sheets and dashboards. Sheets
are for creating individual visualizations, and dashboards are for com‐
bining sheets and other objects like images, text, and web pages on the
18 
| 
Chapter 2: Introduction to Tableau
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
same canvas, and adding interactions between them such as filtering
and highlighting. Let’s consider these elements separately.
Sheets
After connecting to a data source in Tableau, the user will be presented
with the Tableau user interface for a Sheet (Figure 2-2 shows it con‐
nected to the sample data set “World Bank Indicators” that comes with
Tableau Desktop).
Figure 2-2. The Tableau user interface for a new Sheet
The following are the major components of the Sheet view, as indicated
in the screen shot in Figure 2-2:
1. The list of data sources (can be more than one)
2. Dimensions and Measures: fields available to visualize in the se‐
lected data source
3. The “Show Me” card (shown opened): view applicable visualiza‐
tion types for selected fields
4. The Columns and Rows shelves: controls grouping headers
(Dimensions) and axes (Measures)
5. The Marks card: control visualization encoding of color, size, label
text, tooltip text, and shape
6. The Filters shelf: filters visualizations by Dimensions or Measures
Connecting to Data 
| 
19
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7. The Pages shelf: filters the visualization by stepping or animating
based on a particular field
8. The view itself: this is the “canvas” where the data visualizations
will appear
9. Sheets and Dashboard tabs: show what has been created or create
new Sheets or Dashboards
10. The session tabs: connect to data, show all tabs in a workbook, or
see all workbooks for a user
The drag-and-drop user interface allows users to click on the fields in
the Dimensions and Measures shelves (2) and drag them onto the
various other shelves and cards to create views of the data. The Show
Me card (3) also allows users to select multiple fields in the Dimensions
and Measures shelves and select applicable visualization types. Each
workbook can contain multiple sheets, each with a different view of
the data. Multiple sheets can then be brought together onto a dash‐
board, in which interactions with data elements on one sheet can filter
or highlight data on other sheets. This rich interactivity is what can
allow for in-depth exploration, and ultimately, powerful communica‐
tion of data to others.
Dashboards
If the user clicks on the New Dashboard icon, or selects Dashboard →
New Dashboard, a new user interface will appear, as shown in
Figure 2-3.
The following are the major components of the Dashboard view:
1. The list of Sheets created in the current workbook
2. Dashboard objects to add (images, text, etc.)
3. Tiled versus Floating object control: affects the object being drag‐
ged onto the dashboard
4. Dashboard Layout outline: shows all sheets and objects included
on a dashboard
5. Dashboard size control: allows the users to specify the width and
height of the dashboard
6. Sheets and Dashboard tabs: show what has been created or create
new Sheets or Dashboards
7. The Dashboard itself
20 
| 
Chapter 2: Introduction to Tableau
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8. The session tabs: connect to data, show all tabs in a workbook, or
see all workbooks for a user
Figure 2-3. The Tableau user interface for a new Dashboard
In this book, we will make extensive use of the dashboard view, com‐
bining multiple visualizations on one canvas to allow for rich inter‐
activity.
The toolbar
In addition to the components just listed, both the Sheet view and the
Dashboard view include a toolbar and menu items at the top, by de‐
fault. The toolbar includes the all-important Undo (left arrow) and
Redo (right arrow) controls in the upper left, which allow users to step
backward and forward in the current session from the time the work‐
book was opened to the most recent step taken. Also included in the
toolbar are controls to Save, Connect to Data, Sort, Group, Show La‐
bels, Toggle to Presentation Mode, and change the Fit of the sheets,
among a few other icons.
Data types
When a user connects to a data source, Tableau automatically classifies
each field as either a Dimension or a Measure. It’s helpful to think of 
Dimensions as fields you can use to group or categorize your data;
Measures are fields you can do math with, like summing or averaging.
Connecting to Data 
| 
21
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Dimensions can be further grouped into strings, dates, and geographic
fields (which generate latitude and longitude Measures based on in‐
ternal lookup tables native to Tableau). Measures can be either discrete
or continuous (more about this later).
To illustrate the difference between the different data types in Tableau,
let’s consider a very simple data table: the population and surface area
of the boroughs of New York, as shown in Figure 2-4.
Figure 2-4. Data table showing population and area in New York
boroughs
In this simple data set, Tableau interprets each column as a distinct
field, and uses the column headers (the values in the first row) as the
field names. Figure 2-5 shows how these different fields appear in
Tableau.
Figure 2-5. Tableau’s default interpretation of the boroughs table
22 
| 
Chapter 2: Introduction to Tableau
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
By default, Tableau interprets Borough as a string (as indicated by the
blue Abc to the left of the field name); County and State as geographic
data types (as indicated by the blue globes next to these field names);
and Population, Area sq-mi, and Year as continuous measures (as
indicated by the green # to the left of these field names).
Notice that a few other fields appear in italics in the Dimensions and
Measures areas. These fields aren’t included in the originial table, but
are rather generated by Tableau. The generated dimensions include:
Measure Names
This field is a string type that provides a list of all of the names of
the fields in the Measures section (in this case, Area sq-mi, Popu
lation, Year, and Number of Records).
The generated measures include:
Measure Values
This continuous numeric field contains all of the numerical values
of the Measures: every number included in the table, whether
population, area, or year.
Number of Records
This numeric field is a count of the entries in the data source. This
field is useful for showing how many of each dimension exists in
the data set. Figure 2-6 shows how the Number of Records for
each borough is 1 (there is 1 row for each borough) and the Number
of Records for the state of New York is 5 (there are 5 rows that
all have the string value “New York” in the State field).
Latitude (generated) and Longitude (generated)
These fields are the coordinates that correspond to the fields rec‐
ognized as geographic data types (County and State). Tableau
automatically recognizes a number of geographic fields and gen‐
erates latitidue and longitude coordinates. For example, as shown
in Figures 2-7 and 2-8, double-clicking on County creates a symbol
map with a single circle in the center of each county, and double-
clicking State creates a symbol map with a single circle in the
center of the state of New York.
Connecting to Data 
| 
23
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 2-6. Illustration of the Number of Records field
Figure 2-7. Symbol map for the geographic field “County”
24 
| 
Chapter 2: Introduction to Tableau
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 2-8. Symbol map for the geographic field “State”
Changing data types
Tableau allows you to convert Dimensions to Measures and vice versa.
Simply drag a field from one area of the screen to another, as shown
in Figure 2-9.
Figure 2-9. Changing a field from a Measure to a Dimension
Notice how the color of the # symbol next to the field name changes
from green (for continuous) to blue (for discrete). This is another im‐
portant distinction between data types. Tableau draws axes when con‐
tinuous data types are used in visualizations (resulting in lines and
Connecting to Data 
| 
25
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
scatterplots), and it creates headers when discrete data types are used
(resulting in bars, columns, and tables).
For example, consider the two visualizations in Figure 2-10, which
show Area on the Columns shelf (the horizontal or x-axis) and Pop‐
ulation on the Rows shelf (the vertical or y-axis).
Figure 2-10. Area as a continuous data type (left); area as a discrete
data type (right)
On the left, Area is plotted as a continuous axis (the Area “pill” on the
left is green), while on the right, each value for Area is given its own
discrete column (the Area “pill” on the right is blue). This illustrates
the effect of changing data types in Tableau. In this case, both Area
and Population should probably be treated as continuous data types,
but there are times when a numerical data field (a dimension) should
be treated as discrete, such as when the numbers are actually codes for
different categories (e.g., 0 = type 1, 1 = type 2, etc., where type 1 and
type 2 aren’t in any particular order).
Calculated fields
The ability to create calculated fields from the fields in your workbook
is a very useful feature of Tableau. For instance, what if you wanted to
figure out which borough in our example data table had the highest
population density? The workbook already includes both population
and area, so all you need to do is divide them to answer your question.
With calculated fields, you can do just that. Right-click anywhere in
26 
| 
Chapter 2: Introduction to Tableau
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the Dimensions or Measures area and select Create Calculated Field.
Then, complete the Calculated Field dialog, as shown in Figure 2-11.
Figure 2-11. Creating a calculated field
After clicking OK, you will notice that a new continuous field called
Population Density appears in the Measures area with an = to the
left of it, indicating a calculated field.
Creating visualizations
Tableau features a simple drag-and-drop interface that allows the user
to quickly explore different data visualization types. For example,
dragging Borough onto the Columns shelf, Population onto the Rows
shelf, and Population Density onto the Color shelf results in the
column chart shown in Figure 2-12.
This chart shows that while Brooklyn has the largest population as
indicated by the tallest column, Manhattan has the highest population
density as indicated by the darkest green shade.
Connecting to Data 
| 
27
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 2-12. Creating a simple column chart in Tableau
Show Me
Another way to create a visualization in Tableau is to use the Show Me
card. Show Me indicates which chart types are applicable based on the
fields selected. Select multiple fields by holding the Control key. For
example, if you select County, hold the Control key, and then select
Population Density, the Show Me card will show a number of pos‐
sible visualizations. Selecting the filled map icon in the top right results
in the choropleth map of New York counties shown in Figure 2-13.
This simple user interface allows for fast visual analytics. Users can
explore their data in a visual way, creating various chart types and
encoding variables like size and color based on the different data fields
themselves.
In Chapter 1, I made the point that in an age of increasing information,
it’s critical to choose a message from the information set that is both
meaningful and impactful. Finding a compelling message is the critical
first step in communicating data well. By facilitating the data explo‐
ration and discovery process, Tableau allows users to quickly find the
most compelling message to share.
28 
| 
Chapter 2: Introduction to Tableau
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 2-13. Creating a filled map in Tableau using Show Me
Summary
In this chapter, we were introduced to the different Tableau product
offerings. We then covered the Tableau user interface, starting with an
introduction to Sheets and Dashboards, and then moving on to a dis‐
cussion of different data types. Finally, we created a simple visualiza‐
tion on a Sheet by both dragging and dropping fields onto the Rows
and Columns shelves, and using the Show Me card.
In the next chapter, we’ll cover in more detail how to discover rela‐
tionships within our data.
Connecting to Data 
| 
29
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“Numerical quantities focus on expected values,
graphical summaries on unexpected values.”
—John Tukey
CHAPTER 3
How Much and How Many
Communicating data is sharing comparisons, and comparisons are
examinations of relative amounts. We make comparisons all day long,
without consciously deciding to do so. We love to explore how things
are similar or how they are different. Whether we discover something
unexpected or confirm a long-held belief, we walk away with a satis‐
fying feeling of knowing.
But we can be highly skeptical of comparisons that others communi‐
cate to us. “Our product is better than our competitor’s.” “The economy
has gotten worse since my opponent took office.” We’re exposed to
comparisons such as these constantly, so it’s natural for us to be wary
of them. Some comparisons are definitely odious.
What does this mean when it comes to communicating data? The onus
is on the communicator to convey the message accurately and effec‐
tively, in order to earn the trust and attention of the target audience.
It starts with understanding the nature of the comparison to be made.
Comparisons can include multiple layers, but at their core they always
reduce to either how much or how many.
31
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
How much involves noncountable nouns like revenue or measure‐
ments:
• “How much money did we earn this past quarter?”
• “How much carbon dioxide is in the atmosphere?”
How many involves countable nouns like people or distinct events:
• “How many customers do we have?”
• “How many goals did players score this season?”
Often, these two types of comparisons are visualized using the same
chart types, but the way they are created in Tableau can differ depend‐
ing on how your data is arranged (more on that soon).
In this chapter, we’ll cover the simplest of quantitative comparisons:
single variables as either measurements (how much) or counts (how
many). In later chapters, we’ll focus on elements such as time and
location, and then we’ll explore how to best apply these techniques to
fields such as statistics, finance, and data journalism.
Communicating “How Much”
To start with, let’s consider comparisons involving quantities that are
measured rather than counted. This includes fields such as revenue,
weight, distance, and time, among countless others. Most likely, your
data source doesn’t include a record for each dollar, pound, mile, or
hour. Rather, a single record could be a transaction like a sale or a
shipment, each having a measurement associated with it:
• A sales order resulting in revenue of $95
• An overnight shipment weighing 5.2 lbs.
• A flight covering 2,408 miles in 5 hours and 28 minutes
Additionally, your data source could be a summary table, such as total
monthly revenue for a number of months, or shipping weight for all
packages. In this format, each row in the data set is an aggregation of
a number of individual records. It’s important to understand the level
of aggregation of your underlying data set.
You already know from Chapter 1 that these measurements form
quantitative data types, as opposed to ordinal or nominal. And you
32 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
know from Chapter 2 that Tableau sees them as continuous Measures
(green pills), like the Area sq-mi field for each of New York’s boroughs.
An Example of How Much
Staying with the New York theme in our example data, let’s consider
garbage. How much garbage does the City of New York Department
of Sanitation (DSNY) collect from each borough? Well, each borough
is further divided into community districts. A summary table of the
total tonnage collected from each of the 59 community districts during
September 2011 is available on the NYC Open Data site.
Figure 3-1 shows a portion of the data table.
Figure 3-1. DSNY Collection Tonnages data table
The first question to ask of the data set is a rather simple one, but let’s
state it as precisely as possible:
“How does the amount of refuse (in tons) that DSNY reportedly col‐
lected from each borough during September 2011 compare?”
To find the answer, we’ll start by connecting Tableau to the data set by
clicking Connect to Data and browsing to the file. Once you have
Tableau connected to the DSNY Collection Tonnages data set, you will
Communicating “How Much” 
| 
33
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
see Sheet 1 as a blank canvas with the data fields arranged, as shown
in Figure 3-2.
Figure 3-2. Connected to the DSNY Collection Tonnages data set
Notice that Tableau has decided that Borough and Month are discrete
(blue) string Dimensions, and that CommunityDistrict and the three
forms of garbage (MGP stands for “Metal, Glass, and Plastic”) collec‐
ted are continuous (green) numerical Measures.
To begin, click Borough, hold down the Control key, click RefuseTon
sCollected, and then click Show Me in the upper-right corner of the
screen. Notice that a number of options are highlighted, and that there
is a blue box around the horizontal bars option. This is Tableau’s way
of suggesting you use that chart type, based on the principles of data
encoding effectiveness outlined in Figure 1-6.
34 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Comparing Comparisons
Before blindly accepting any recommendation, let’s consider all the
different ways we could show the comparison of refuse collected in
the boroughs. Figure 3-3 shows 11 different options (we’ll consider
maps in Chapter 10).
Figure 3-3. Eleven ways to show a simple quantitative (noncounting
noun) comparison
All 11 chart types were created by Ctrl-selecting both Borough and
RefuseTonsCollected, selecting a view from the Show Me panel, and
sorting in descending order (except the vertical bars and the word
cloud, which were made from slight modifications to the horizontal
bars and packed bubbles charts, respectively). No additional chart
components were added, such as labels. The defaults were accepted.
Which view gives the best sense of the relative amounts collected?
Most likely you’d agree that it’s the horizontal bar chart (chart 1). Its
advantage over the vertical bar chart (chart 2) is that the bar labels are
easier to read. Both make use of length to encode the amounts. As it
turns out, we’re pretty good at comparing lengths.
Communicating “How Much” 
| 
35
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In which other view can you tell, for example, that Manhattan pro‐
duced slightly more refuse than the Bronx, and that both yielded about
twice as much as Staten Island? Not in the pie chart (chart 7), where
it’s even difficult to discern which slice is the biggest. Refer again to
Figure 1-6 for a reminder of why this is the case.
But in which views can you speak to the precise amounts collected? If
you needed to know, for example, exactly how much more than 70,000
tons were collected in Brooklyn, which would you use? Without
adding data labels to the other views, the only ones that can help with
this task are the text table (chart 4), and the highlight table (chart 11).
When precision is required, tables work best, which is why finance
departments make such wide use of them. The highlight table adds
some comparative value with the “color ramp” encoding. At a glance,
the color gradient gives a very general sense of which yielded the most,
and whether the amount collected was slightly more (Manhattan over
the Bronx) or a great deal more (Brooklyn over Staten Island).
The point here is that your choice of view type should depend largely
on the message to be communicated, which in turn depends on the
task to be accomplished. Who are you communicating with, and how
does the presentation of the data relate to the tasks at hand? These are
critical questions to answer.
Fine-Tuning the Default
If we decide to go with the recommended horizontal bar chart, we will
get a view that is sorted in alphabetical order, as shown in Figure 3-4.
Notice that Tableau has placed a green pill on the Columns shelf and
a blue pill on the Rows shelf. The Rows shelf contains the Dimension
(or nominal field) Borough, and you can see that there is a different
row for each borough. The Columns shelf contains SUM(RefuseTon
sCollected), which indicates that Tableau has added the amounts in
the RefuseTonsCollected field for all of the community districts in
each borough, and is displaying the total (we’ll explore other measures
such as averages and medians later).
Rather than using the Show Me drawer, you could have manually
dragged both fields from the Dimensions and Measures sections on
the left side onto the Rows and Columns shelf, respectively. Click the
left Undo button and try it out.
36 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 3-4. Horizontal bar chart of refuse tons collected
Unless another more compelling sort presents itself, it’s standard con‐
vention for horizontal and vertical bar charts to be sorted in descend‐
ing order (i.e., with the longest bars at the top for horizontal bar charts
and the tallest bars at the left for vertical bar charts.) How do we do
that in Tableau?
Sorting
To sort the bars by length, simply click the Sort icons in the toolbar
above the canvas, as shown in Figure 3-5.
Figure 3-5. Sorting using the toolbar icons
Communicating “How Much” 
| 
37
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Now it’s more organized and easier to see not only the relative amounts
of refuse collected, but also the order from most to least. Clicking on
the “Sort ascending” icon in the toolbar reverses the order and posi‐
tions the smallest bar at the top.
Also notice the appearance of the small sorted bar icon in‐
side the blue Borough pill on the Rows shelf. This is Tableau’s
way of informing you that the chart is sorted based on borough.
To find out more information about the current sort rule, or to modify
it in any way, hover over the Borough pill, click the down arrow that
appears to the right of the pill, and select Sort. The window shown in
Figure 3-6 appears.
Figure 3-6. The Sort dialog box
This dialog box is informing you that the chart is currently sorting
Borough in descending order based on the sum of the RefuseTonsCol
lected field. Go ahead and try some different options and see how the
chart changes. You can even create your own manual sort by using the
section at the bottom. After playing around with some different sorts,
use the Undo button to return to the sort shown in Figure 3-5.
38 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1. Naomi B. Robbins, Creating More Effective Graphs (Chart House, 2013).
We’ve seen a number of different ways to show the refuse collection
amounts by borough, but is there an even more effective way to com‐
municate this data? In the next section, we’ll explore a chart type called
the dot chart, the use of which is advocated by Naomi Robbins.1
The Dot Chart
Going back to Figure 1-6 yet again, we see that the most effective way
of encoding quantitative information is to use position. Which of the
chart types in Figure 3-4 utilizes position to encode the amount of
refuse collected? Only the circle view (chart 9). And yet its effectiveness
is limited by the fact that all of the circles are in the same column,
meaning the green circle for Manhattan and the blue circle for the
Bronx are overlapping, and making it virtually impossible to tell them
apart.
One way to resolve this is to drag the blue Borough pill from the Color
shelf to the Column shelf, as shown in Figure 3-7.
Figure 3-7. Resolving overlapping circles
The resulting chart is almost identical to the vertical bar chart, except
that instead of using bars as the Mark type, it makes use of rings, or
circles. Each borough has its own column, so there is no need to use
color to differentiate them from one another.
Communicating “How Much” 
| 
39
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Before, we decided that the horizontal bar layout was superior to the
vertical bar layout, so a further improvement to this layout would be
to flip the chart 90 degrees by using the Swap function, as shown in
Figure 3-8.
Figure 3-8. Using the Swap function to rotate view
To complete the dot chart, all we need to do is add horizontal lines
extending across each row. Typically, dot charts include on-center grid
lines that pass through each dot. Adding grid lines that pass between
each dot involves using the built-in Format function, so we’ll start
there.
To edit the format, right-click anywhere in the chart itself and select
Format. Notice that the lefthand panel changes from Dimensions and
Measures to the Format panel, as shown in Figure 3-9.
To add grid lines between the dots, click the paintbrush icon, then click
the Rows tab, and choose a line type from the Grid Lines drop-down
selector. Choosing the straight line yields the chart shown in
Figure 3-10.
40 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 3-9. The Format panel
Figure 3-10. Adding grid lines to form the dot chart
With some extra formatting that we’ll discuss later when we cover
dual-axis charts, Figure 3-11 shows the final dot chart, complete with
on-center grid lines and closed gray dots.
Communicating “How Much” 
| 
41
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 3-11. The formatted dot chart
The dot chart could have also been created by starting with the hori‐
zontal bar chart and changing the Marks type from Automatic or Bars
to Circle (for closed dots) or Shape (for open dots or other shapes).
Whichever way you make it, the dot chart is a great way to show
quantities as it leverages the strength of the human visual system to
compare quantities based on a symbol’s position.
We’ve considered a very basic case of communicating how much in‐
volving collection of garbage in New York boroughs. We’ll come back
to this data set in later chapters as we seek to answer more interesting
questions, like which borough yields the most garbage per person, and
which recycles the most.
For now, let’s move on to learn how to communicate counts with a
highly related topic—rat sightings in New York City.
Communicating “How Many”
Recall that communicating “how many” is pertinent to countable
nouns like people and events. The previous example used a very simple
and highly summarized data set—garbage tons per community district
and borough for a whole month. But data sets don’t start that way very
often, at least not in today’s world. Data is captured at the transaction
level in business (e.g., sales orders) or at the incident level in govern‐
ment (e.g., arrests).
Communicating “how many” is very common and useful for data at
the most granular possible level. For example, perhaps you want to
show how many sales orders involved customers who are retired, or
maybe you’re interested in presenting how many arrests were DUIs.
42 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Customers and arrests are not things you measure, like tons of refuse
in the previous section, they’re things you count. While the visualiza‐
tion types are the same, the method to create them in Tableau can be
different.
A Tale of Two Formats
Let’s consider an example of the same data structured two ways.
Figure 3-12 shows the raw data for rat sightings as captured by the 311
call center in New York on the lefthand side, and a pivot table of this
data set by borough on the righthand side.
Figure 3-12. Data at the incident level and aggregate level
If your data is at the aggregate level (like the Excel pivot table on the
righthand side of Figure 3-12), you will deal with it in Tableau similar
to the garbage collection data. Tableau will recognize Count of Unique
Key (which you will probably rename something like Rat Sight
ings) as a continuous Measure, exactly like RefuseTonsCollected in
the previous example.
But if your data looks like the raw data table on the left, which is far
more common, how can you communicate how many rat sightings
were reported in each borough? There are two ways: Number of Re
cords and Count.
Counting Dimensions
We introduced the concept of the Number of Records in the previous
chapter. To review, Number of Records is a Measure field that Tableau
generates when you connect to a data source, and it tells you how many
Communicating “How Many” 
| 
43
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
individual records, or rows, are present for each Dimension (or nom‐
inal data type).
To see how it works, connect to the rat sighting data set, and drag the
Number of Records field onto the Text shelf within the Marks card.
You will see that there are 35,655 total records in the rat sightings data
set. If you then drag Borough onto the Rows shelf, you will reproduce
the pivot table shown in Figure 3-13.
Figure 3-13. Using Number of Records to show counts
Notice how the Number of Records pill is a summation. To under‐
stand how Number of Records behaves, imagine a field in the data set
of 1s. Summing this field for Brooklyn, for example, shows that there
are 11,887 times that “Brooklyn” appears in the Borough field. This can
be a very helpful way to find anomalies or errors in the data set. For
example, if you replace Borough in the Rows shelf with City, you will
see the table shown in Figure 3-14. Notice anything wrong with the
highlighted city name?
44 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 3-14. Using Number of Records to check for errors
Evidently, there was one record in which the city name was incorrectly
recorded as BROOLKYN. These types of errors are ubiquitous, especially
in human-recorded data sets. Checking for them is an important part
of the “exploring data” step outlined in Figure 1-1.
Returning to the boroughs analysis, you can see how the Number of
Records field can now be used just like the RefuseTonsCollected field
in our previous example. In fact, Ctrl-selecting Borough and Number
of Records and then clicking the Show Me panel allows for creation
of all of the same chart types shown in Figure 3-4.
In this way, you can follow the same steps as in the previous example
to create the dot chart of rat sightings by borough shown in
Figure 3-15.
Alternatively, you can create identical views to the ones shown by re‐
placing SUM(Number of Records) with CNT(Unique Key). Each re‐
cord has a unique identification key, and counting how many unique
keys are associated with each borough is identical to summing the
number of records.
To do this, right-click on Unique Key and drag it over the pill in the 
Columns shelf. When you drop the field by releasing the right mouse
button, a menu will appear that allows you to specify how Tableau
should deal with the Unique Key field. Choose CNT(Unique Key) and
Communicating “How Many” 
| 
45
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
notice that the only thing that changes is the green pill in the Columns
shelf.
Figure 3-15. Dot chart of count of rat sightings by borough
Histograms: How Many of How Much?
In both of the previous examples—garbage collection and rat sightings
—the independent variable in the category was borough, which is a 
nominal variable. It was fairly easy to sum measurements or count
instances for each borough.
But what if the independent variable is ordinal or quantitative? For
example, returning to the garbage collection example, what if I wanted
to show how many community districts yielded certain amounts of
refuse?
One way to show counts of quantitative variables is the histogram,
which was first introduced by the father of mathematical statistics, Karl
Pearson, in 1895. The histogram is very straightforward to build in
Tableau using the Show Me panel. In the DSNY workbook, click the
RefuseTonsCollected field in the Measures panel, click to open the
Show Me panel in the upper right, and then select histogram in the
bottom row of options.
Tableau creates the histogram shown in Figure 3-16.
46 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 3-16. The histogram
Notice that Tableau has automatically created a new field in the Di‐
mensions area called RefuseTonsCollected (bin). This data field
type is used to determine the discrete intervals into which the indi‐
vidual records are bucketed. The Rows shelf, which in this case deter‐
mines the height of each bar, includes CNT(RefuseTonsCollected).
This field gives a value according to the number of records in each bin.
How can we read this chart? The first bar of the chart shows that there
were two records (community districts, in this case) that produced
between 1,000 and 1,500 tons of refuse (technically 1,000 ≤ x < 1,500).
The second bar, with a height of three, is for community districts pro‐
ducing between 1,500 and 2,000 tons of refuse, and so on. The bin size
is therefore 500 tons. You can easily see that the most common amount
of refuse to be collected during the month of September 2011 was
between 2,000 and 2,500 tons (eight community districts fell in that
range).
If you would prefer to show more or fewer bars in the histogram, you
can modify the bin size by right-clicking on the newly created Refu
seTonsCollected (bin) field in the Dimensions area and then se‐
lecting Edit. The dialog box shown in Figure 3-17 opens, allowing you
to change the size of the bins.
Communicating “How Many” 
| 
47
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 3-17. The Edit dialog box for the histogram bin field
Play with some different bin sizes and see if you can create a better
histogram than the default view. Figure 3-18 shows two different his‐
tograms: one with more bins (bin size = 100) and the other with fewer
bins (bin size = 1,000).
Figure 3-18. Histograms with different bin sizes
It’s a case of Goldilocks and the three bears, wouldn’t you say?
There’s one thing to watch out for with histograms made in Tableau.
If you look closely at the histogram with bins sized at 100 tons, you’ll
notice that some intervals are missing. The first bar is for 1,200–1,300
tons and the second is for 1,300–1,400 tons. You’d expect the third bar
to be for 1,400–1,500 tons, but it isn’t. It’s for 1,600–1,700 tons. Why
is this? It’s because there aren’t any community districts that produced
between 1,400 and 1,500 tons of refuse. There should still be a column
48 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
there, but with a bar height of zero. How can we make this adjustment?
Right-click in the bar labels and check the Show Missing Values box,
as shown in Figure 3-19.
Figure 3-19. The Show Missing Values box for histograms
What results is a version of the smaller bin size histogram that I still
wouldn’t recommend using, but at least it’s accurate. Figure 3-20 now
shows the intervals of refuse tonnage that have no community districts
falling into them.
Figure 3-20. Histograms should be shown with missing values
Lastly, I prefer to edit the bar sizes and colors to look more like a
histogram made in a standard statistical graphics tool. Clicking on the
Size card and moving the slider all the way to the right, changing the
color from blue to gray, and adding a dark gray border color yields the
version shown in Figure 3-21.
Communicating “How Many” 
| 
49
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 3-21. A histogram with improved formatting
Summary
How much and how many are foundational types of comparisons that
we make every day. Whenever data is communicated, one of these two
comparisons (or both) is being made. Knowing your options, and
evaluating which will work best for the task at hand, is an important
first step in encoding the message.
We’ve seen how to work with Tableau when communicating the most
basic of comparisons: those in which only one variable is involved.
Now, let’s move on to explore how to communicate data when more
than one comparison is being made.
50 
| 
Chapter 3: How Much and How Many
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“We are the safest large city in America,
but any crime rate is too high.”
—Michael Bloomberg, former mayor
of New York City
CHAPTER 4
Ratios and Rates
Until now, we’ve considered absolute amounts of countable and meas‐
urable nouns, like population, tons of garbage collected, and number
of rat sightings by borough. Pleasant, I know.
But not all boroughs are created equal. As we saw in Chapter 1, they
have different surface areas and different numbers of people living in
them. The fact that they produce different amounts of garbage isn’t
surprising, and probably doesn’t make for a very interesting message
to communicate to an audience.
These absolute comparisons, while helpful for showing the big picture,
aren’t generally considered “apples-to-apples” comparisons. There are
apples, and, well, there are Big Apples.
A helpful way to “normalize” comparisons is using ratios, rates, pro‐
portions, and percentages. What’s the difference between these four?
• A ratio is a comparison of two terms expressed as a quotient. For
example, Manhattan produced 0.264 tons of recycle for every ton
of refuse. Ratios can be expressed as “x to y,” “x:y,” “x/y,” or as a
decimal.
• A rate is a ratio in which the two terms have different units. For
example, the population density of Brooklyn is 36,136 residents
per square mile. Rates are often predictive because time can be
51
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
used as the denominator (crime rates, population growth rates,
etc.).
• A proportion is a ratio in which the numerator is a partial amount
and the denominator is the total amount (expressed as a number
between 0 and 1). For example, the proportion of the NYC pop‐
ulation living in the Bronx is 0.169. A proportion is expressed as
a number between 0 and 1.
• A percentage is a ratio comparing a number to 100. For example,
16.9% of NYC residents live in the Bronx. A percentage is generally
a number between 0 and 100, but can be larger than 100 (e.g.,
“sales have increased by 150% year-over-year”).
These types of normalized comparisons can make for much more in‐
teresting messages to communicate. Luckily, they are quite easy to
create in Tableau. We’ll explore the first two in this chapter, and the
last two in the next.
Ratios
The data source itself may include a field that is a ratio, but most often
the raw data includes terms that an analyst needs to combine to create
a ratio. Tableau can handle these types of computations with Calcula‐
ted Fields, in which new fields can be created by combining existing
fields using a variety of operations. We introduced the concept in
Chapter 2, and now we’ll build on it.
Let’s return to the DSNY data set to illustrate the technique, and we’ll
see if the ratio comparison is any more interesting than the absolute
figures.
The data reported by DSNY includes three continuous Measures
(quantitative fields) for each community district:
RefuseTonsCollected
Amount of nonrecyclable garbage
PaperTonsCollected
Amount of recyclable paper
MGPTonsCollected
Amount of recyclable metal, glass, and plastic
The second two data types (paper and MGP) are both recyclable, and
so can be summed to create a new variable for each community district
52 
| 
Chapter 4: Ratios and Rates
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that we will call RecyclableTonsCollected to stay consistent with the
provided nomenclature.
A comparison of the ratio of recyclable material to refuse would be
interesting to consider, as it would indicate which communities in New
York City are doing a better job recycling.
First, we’ll need to create a new calculated field that sums the two
recyclable fields. Right-click anywhere in the lefthand Dimensions or
Measures panels, and select Create Calculated Field. Then, fill out the
resulting dialog box, as shown in Figure 4-1.
Figure 4-1. Summing two fields with a Calculated Field
Next, let’s create a second calculated field that creates the ratio of re‐
cyclable material to refuse. Right-click in the Dimensions or Measures
area again and fill out the dialog box as shown in Figure 4-2.
Notice that we put the numerator and denominator in brackets, pre‐
ceded by SUM. This is critical, because as we move up a level of from
community district to borough, we don’t want to add the individual
ratios of each community district; we want to create a new ratio that
represents the quotient of the aggregate amounts. The first approach
would create a larger ratio that is misleading.
Ratios 
| 
53
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 4-2. Creating a ratio with a Calculated Field
Now that we’ve created the ratios, how can we best visualize them?
Let’s start with a simple bar chart of the aggregate ratios of each of the
boroughs. To create one, we’ll drag the Borough field from the Di‐
mensions area on the left to the Rows shelf, and we’ll drag the Recycle
to Refuse Ratio calculated field to the Columns shelf. Color wouldn’t
strictly be needed, but we’ll add it anyway for aesthetics by dragging
Borough to the Color shelf. Lastly, we’ll sort the bars in descending
order to put the borough with the highest recycle ratio at the top. The
screen shot in Figure 4-3 shows the resulting view.
We can easily see from this simple bar chart that Manhattan has the
highest ratio of recycle to refuse, but that it still only recycles about
one ton of material for every four tons of trash. The ratio for Man‐
hattan is about twice as great as the ratio for the Bronx.
Does this mean each community district in Manhattan had a higher
recycle ratio than each community district in the Bronx? Not neces‐
sarily, as we’re dealing with the terms in the aggregate.
How would we communicate the results at a community district level?
If we just replace Borough with CommunityDistrict in the Rows shelf,
then we’ll get a bar chart where all the community district #1s will be
aggregated, and all the community district #2s will be aggregated,
and so on. Aggregating community districts in this way isn’t very
54 
| 
Chapter 4: Ratios and Rates
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
meaningful. Instead, we’d like to see community district ratios for each
borough.
Figure 4-3. Visualizing the ratio of recycle to refuse for each borough
To make this comparison, let’s click and drag the Borough pill from
the Rows shelf up to the Columns shelf, and add the CommunityDis
trict field from the Measures panel to the Rows shelf to create a grid
of bar charts, as shown in Figure 4-4.
Figure 4-4. Ratios by community district and borough
From this view, we can now see that even within boroughs, not all
community districts are created equal. Manhattan community district
Ratios 
| 
55
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
#1 has the highest ratio overall, but it’s clear that some community
districts in the Bronx have higher ratios than some in Manhattan.
But what if we wanted to know the exact ratios? The bar charts in
Figure 4-4 make it fairly easy to get a general sense of the relative ratios
for the community districts, but precision isn’t easily obtained, is it?
Can you tell the exact ratio for Manhattan community district #1? I
can’t. If knowing the precise amounts is a task our audience will want
to perform, we’ll need to think about how to make it easy for them to
accomplish that task.
We could increase precision by dragging the Recycle to Refuse Ra
tio from the Measures area to the Label shelf (or Ctrl-selecting
AGG(Recycle to Refuse Ratio) and dragging it from the Columns
shelf to the Label shelf to duplicate). The resulting bar chart grid with
labels is shown in Figure 4-5.
Figure 4-5. Adding labels to the bar chart grid
That’s a lot of decimal places, isn’t it? Our audience probably doesn’t
need to know the ratio to the fourth decimal place (ten-thousandths).
We can change the number of digits shown by right-clicking the
Recycle to Refuse Ratio in the Measures panel, selecting Default
Properties, then Number Format, and choosing Number (Custom). In
the resulting dialog box, we’ll change the decimal places to three, as
shown in Figure 4-6.
56 
| 
Chapter 4: Ratios and Rates
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 4-6. Specifying the number of decimal places in the Measures
panel
Notice that the labels in the bar chart grid change accordingly.
What we really have here is a table that has been augmented by adding
bars with lengths proportional to the values in each cell. Another way
to show this precise comparison is by getting rid of the bars and instead
coloring each cell by the ratio—a highlight table.
Let’s make a highlight table by starting with a new sheet. Ctrl-click
Borough, CommunityDistrict, and Recycle to Refuse Ratio, and
then open the Show Me panel and select highlight table. Tableau creates
the view shown in Figure 4-7.
Figure 4-7. The default highlight table for Recycle to Refuse Ratio
Notice that Tableau created a highlight table that’s “flipped” compared
to our bar chart grid shown in Figure 4-5 (Borough is in Rows instead
Ratios 
| 
57
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
of Columns, and CommunityDistrict is in Columns instead of Rows).
To flip it to match, we’ll just click the Swap button in the toolbar,
, resulting in the taller table shown in Figure 4-8.
Figure 4-8. The highlight table with Rows and Columns swapped
Tableau has defaulted to a sequential green color palette, meaning the
gradient increases proportionately with increasing Recycle to Re
fuse Ratio. Our eyes can easily pick out the darkest cell, and we also
find the lightest rather easily. Most people can distinguish between
about six different levels of intensity. If the goal were to communicate
the precise values, we could have created a simple table without the
highlights. Adding the highlights makes it easier to quickly compare
cells and find the highest and lowest values.
It’s still not immediately obvious which community district has the
second-highest ratio, though. Our eyes have to dart around to all the
dark cells and read and memorize the values. Eventually we settle on
Brooklyn community district #6 as having the second-highest ratio,
but the task gets harder as we move along. Which has the third highest?
The fourth? Is there an easier way to facilitate this assessment of rank?
58 
| 
Chapter 4: Ratios and Rates
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
What we’d like is a simple list of community districts in descending
order of the ratio. To make this list, let’s first create a new field that
combines the Borough and CommunityDistrict fields into a single
Dimension.
Ctrl-click Borough and CommunityDistrict so they are both selected,
then right-click on one of the two selected fields (either will do fine)
and select Combine Fields. A new string field will appear in the Di‐
mensions area called Borough & CommunityDistrict (Combined).
Create the list shown in Figure 4-9 by dragging Borough & Communi
tyDistrict to the Rows shelf, Recycle to Refuse Ratio to the Col‐
umns shelf, and Borough to the Color shelf, sorting in descending
order.
Figure 4-9. Bar chart of community districts
Now we can quickly tell which are the top four or five districts, and
which are the bottom four or five. Using the colored bars, we also can
see some patterns, like that the districts with the lowest ratio are all in
the Bronx (blue), and most of the top ten are in Manhattan (green).
Ratios 
| 
59
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
But if I asked you to pick out the tenth or the fifteenth districts, you’d
have to count down from the top, right? Not the easiest task to perform.
How can we add rank to this list to easily pick out the order from 1 to
59?
Two Ways of Adding Rank
Let’s create a Rank field. To do so, right-click anywhere in the Dimen‐
sions or Measures panel on the left and select Create a Calculated
Field once again. This time, name the field Rank and enter INDEX().
As soon as the message appears in the bottom left indicating “the cal‐
culation is valid,” blue text will also appear in the top right that says
“Default Table Calculation.” Click on this blue text and change the
Compute using drop-down to Borough & CommunityDistrict (Com
bined), as shown in Figure 4-10.
Figure 4-10. Creating a rank for each of the 59 community districts
This tells Tableau that the rank should apply to the combination of
Borough and CommunityDistrict.
60 
| 
Chapter 4: Ratios and Rates
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
After clicking OK twice, we now see a new field in the Measures panel
called Rank. Notice that this field is continuous (the # symbol is green),
but we can consider the rankings to be discrete integers, because there
is no rank between any two successive ranks. To change the Rank data
field type, right-click on it in the Measures panel and select Convert to
Discrete. The # symbol next to Rank will turn blue, indicating that it’s
discrete. We’re now ready to add Rank to the chart.
To add the Rank field to the bar chart, simply drag it to the left of
Borough & CommunityDistrict (Combined) on the Rows shelf. After
removing the row dividers, we have the colored, sorted, and now
ranked bar chart shown in Figure 4-11.
Figure 4-11. Adding the Rank field to the bar chart
Alternatively, since the launch of Version 8.1, users can create a similar
Rank field by making use of the new Rank Table Calculation. To do so,
drag another instance of Recycle to Refuse Ratio to the columns
shelf, click in the down arrow of the new pill, and change it to Dis
crete, and then click the down arrow again and select Quick Table
Calculation and then Rank. Finally, click the down arrow once more
Ratios 
| 
61
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and select Compute using, then choose Borough CommunityDistrict
(combined). (This calcuated field also lets you handle ties in different
ways.)
Now the only task this chart doesn’t facilitate is gleaning precise values.
We could add the labels to the right of the bars as we did in Figure 4-5
by simply dragging the Ratio field to the Label shelf, but perhaps a
better approach would be to add the labels to the left of the bars so as
not to interfere with the perception of the bars’ lengths.
Because Recycle to Refuse Ratio is a continuous data field (the #
symbol is green), if we just drag it out onto the Rows shelf to the right
of Borough & CommunityDistrict, Tableau will create 59 y-axes for
each of the bars. Try it and see what I mean.
We just want the ratio value itself to appear, so we’ll first convert
Recycle to Refuse Ratio to a discrete field the same way we con‐
verted Rank, and then we’ll drag the ratio onto the Rows shelf to the
far right, leaving a blue pill and creating the updated view shown in
Figure 4-12.
Figure 4-12. Precise values added to the left of the bars
62 
| 
Chapter 4: Ratios and Rates
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
We’ve now visualized the ratio in a way that makes it easy for our
audience to perform a number of different tasks very quickly:
• Get a general sense of how the 59 community districts compare
relative to one another
• Determine which districts have the highest ratios, and which have
the lowest
• Get a general sense of which boroughs have districts at the top of
the list, and which have districts at the bottom
• Know the precise ratio for any district
• Pick out any district in rank order (e.g., the 12th or the 28th)
This view is a very versatile and useful way to communicate the ratio
of recycle to refuse. But it doesn’t tell us which community districts
produced more trash overall per person. For all we know, the districts
at the top may be recycling a lot, but they may also be producing a
much higher amount per person. That’s where rates come into play.
Rates
Recall that a rate is just a special type of ratio in which the numerator
and the denominator have different units. In the previous example,
the ratio of recycle to refuse involved terms with the same units—
namely, tons. When we consider the trash production rate per person,
our numerator is still tons, but now our denominator is the number
of people.
But the data set we have been working with so far doesn’t include
community district population. In order to determine trash produc‐
tion per person, we’ll need to find a way to include population data in
our analysis.
Going back to the data discovery process in Figure 1-1, we’ve gone all
the way around the horse track, and now we have a brand-new ques‐
tion that involves gathering new data.
Ideally, we would find population by community district for Septem‐
ber 2011, which is when the DSNY collection data was taken. We can’t
find that, but we came come close: 2010 census data puts us within a
year’s time of the trash collection data, and is probably suitable to get
a reasonable approximation of the trash production rate.
Rates 
| 
63
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Now that we found population data, how can we create rates with it?
Luckily, Tableau allows us to connect our current workbook to this
new data set and “blend” it with the existing data in the workbook.
Blending Data Sources
From the Data menu of our current workbook, select Connect to Da
ta and then Microsoft Excel, and browse to the population data file,
connecting to the correct sheet in the file and importing the data as an
extract. We now see the new data source appear in the Data area along
with the DSNY data, as shown in Figure 4-13.
Figure 4-13. Adding a second data source to a workbook
The newly imported data set is highlighted in the Data area, and the
fields for that data set are shown in the Dimensions and Measures
panels below. If we click on the DSNY data set, the data fields for that
data set will show below.
Notice that CommunityDistrict is in the Dimensions panel of the
DSNY set, but it’s in the Measures area of the new population data
source. Let’s match them up by dragging CommunityDistrict from the
Measures panel of the population table into the Dimensions area.
64 
| 
Chapter 4: Ratios and Rates
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Because both data sources now have a Dimension called Borough and
a Dimension called CommunityDistrict, Tableau will link them to‐
gether for us. If the fields to link had different names, we would have
to manually link them using Data → Edit Relationships.
Visualizing Rates
Now that we have linked these two data sources, our updated Tableau
workbook contains both terms of the refuse per person ratio: the
measurement of the amount of refuse in tons (the numerator) and the
count of the number of people in each community district (the de‐
nominator). We’ll create the rate the same way we created the ratio in
the previous section, but now we need to create a calculated field that
includes fields from two different sources, as shown in Figure 4-14.
Figure 4-14. Creating a rate using fields from two data sources
Using the SUM aggregation type for both terms in the rate means that
we can get meaningful rates for boroughs as well as community dis‐
tricts. Also, notice we are converting from short tons (US) to pounds
(lbs.) by multiplying the numerator by 2,000—which is how many
pounds are in each ton. On a per person basis, it’s much easier for us
to think in terms of pounds, so this is a better unit to use for this
comparison.
Now that we have created the rate, we can visualize it. We’ll follow the
same steps that we used to create the ratio bar chart in Figure 4-12 to
create the rate comparison bar chart shown in Figure 4-15.
Rates 
| 
65
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 4-15. Comparing rates in a bar chart
It’s clear from this view that the three community districts in Staten
Island produced the most refuse per person in September 2011, at a
rate of more than 70 pounds per person.
A word of caution about these results: often, data visualiza‐
tion and data analysis are best used to propose new ques‐
tions to ask. Data is great at helping us make comparisons,
but it doesn’t always answer “why?” and “how?” It can be easy
for us to jump to conclusions based on what the data shows,
but some further qualitative investigation is frequently
required.
Why are the Staten Island community districts at the top of this chart?
The chart itself doesn’t tell us. It helps us formulate the next question.
Does this mean every person who lives on Staten Island produced 70
to 80 pounds of trash that month? No, that’s not what the data shows.
The data just shows how much trash was collected from their com‐
munities. DSNY provided overall refuse collected, not just for resi‐
dences, so perhaps there are industries or businesses on Staten Island
that produced a lot of trash.
The point is to be careful with what we communicate, and not to com‐
municate more than the data gives us license to say.
66 
| 
Chapter 4: Ratios and Rates
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to use Calculated Fields and blended
data sources to create ratios (quotients) and rates (quotients with
mixed units). We also learned the Index function as well as the Rank
table calculation, and created highlight tables and bar charts to com‐
pare different dimensions—at both the borough and community dis‐
trict levels. This enabled us to go beyond overall amounts (“how
much”) and to consider relative amounts (“how much per”).
In the next chapter, we’ll consider another type of normalized com‐
parison: proportions and percentages.
Summary 
| 
67
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“Baseball is ninety percent mental and
the other half is physical.”
—Yogi Berra
CHAPTER 5
Proportions and Percentages
Anyone who wants to master the discipline of communicating data
needs to learn how to convey proportions and percentages effectively.
We see these types of comparisons every day, from the quarterly sales
reports to the sports page box scores to the side panels of cereal boxes.
Getting them right is important (unless you’re Yogi Berra).
Recall from Chapter 4 that proportions are ratios expressed as values
from 0 to 1—where the numerator is a partial amount and the de‐
nominator is the total—and percentages are simply ratios expressed
as an amount in each hundred. They are most often used to commu‐
nicate three different types of comparisons:
• Part-to-whole
• Current-to-historical
• Actual-to-target
Let’s consider each one of these types of comparisons one at a time,
starting with part-to-whole.
Part-to-Whole
Just how much of baseball is physical, and how much is mental? If
these two aspects of the game are mutually exclusive and collectively
exhaustive, they should sum to 100%, right? Yogi’s bogus math in this
69
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
chapter’s epigraph is funny because it’s different than what we know
to expect.
In honor of Yogi, let’s stick with baseball as we consider proportions.
In this section, we’ll consider the team batting statistics for the 2012
New York Yankees.
Followers of the sport of baseball have long been fascinated with pro‐
portions of outcomes (called stats). As a boy, I would spend all of my
weekly allowance on packs of baseball cards, and each player card
would have a table of the player’s career stats on the back: games played,
hits, doubles, triples, runs, home runs, batting average. My friends and
I memorized these stats for our favorite players.
Batting average was of particular importance. It was the quintessential
metric for efficiency at the plate. Of all the times a batter came to bat,
how often did he get a hit, not including the times he was walked or
hit by a pitch?
Batting average is one of the three stats (along with home runs
and runs batted in, or RBI) that together make up the “triple
crown” of Major League Baseball batting statistics.
A stat that has recently earned more focus is the “On Base Percentage,”
or OBP, in which the number of times a player gets a hit, walks, or is
hit by a pitch is divided by the number of plate appearances (minus
sacrifice hits). It’s rarely expressed as a percentage, though. For exam‐
ple, Raul Ibanez’s OBP in 2012 was 0.308, which is a proportion, not
a percentage. A percentage would need to be expressed, well, in per‐
cent, like 30.8%.
Conveniently, these proportions are already included in the 2012 Yan‐
kee player stats table, so we don’t need to create them with calculated
fields like we did with the recycle ratios in Chapter 4. Let’s go ahead
and create a simple visualization of the players’ batting averages.
To start, we’ll drag Name onto the Rows shelf, resulting in a list of all of
the players on the Yankee roster in 2012. Next, we’ll drag BA (for batting
average) onto the Columns shelf, and sort in descending order. We’ll
have a simple bar chart, as shown in Figure 5-1.
70 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 5-1. Bar chart showing BA for every Yankee with at least one
at bat in 2012
Notice that almost half of the players have a batting average of 0.000,
and there’s a note in the lower-right corner of the view telling us there
are “16 nulls,” or 16 players that didn’t have any at bats. The players
with a batting average of 0.000 only came to the plate a few times.
Further, notice that Melky Mesa, at the top of the list, has a batting
average of exactly 0.500. He only had two at bats in the 2012 season,
earning a single hit and locking in his “team best” batting average for
the year. Surely, including these players isn’t a good way to commu‐
nicate this proportion. One approach would be to filter out every
player who didn’t have a certain number of at bats.
Introducing Filters and Quick Filters
One of the most powerful aspects of Tableau is that charts can be fil‐
tered using the same drag-and-drop user interface that you’ve been
learning over the past few chapters. If we want to filter out all the
players who have less than 100 at bats, for instance, we would only
Part-to-Whole 
| 
71
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
need to drag the AB (for at bats) field into the Filters shelf above the
Marks card, and then fill out the resulting dialog box, as shown in
Figure 5-2.
Figure 5-2. Filtering the BA bar chart to show only players with at
least 100 at bats
We can drag the slider to the left or right, or enter a number into the
text entry box to set the minimum number of at bats, or we can filter
a number of different ways using the tiles across the top. We’ll click
OK with the setting shown in Figure 5-2, and the bar chart changes to
the view shown in Figure 5-3.
Notice the green AB pill in the Filters section in the top left. We’ll con‐
sider other types of filters as we go along. One other important control
to learn is the Quick Filter control. If we hover over the green AB pill
and click the small down arrow that appears within the pill, we can
select Show Quick Filter, and Tableau will place a slider control on the
canvas for us. It can be moved around, and I’ve moved it below the
Marks card, as shown in Figure 5-4.
It becomes very easy to filter the view using Quick Filters. Drag the
slider to change the minimum number of at bats required to appear
in the bar chart, and see players’ names come and go from the list.
72 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 5-3. The filtered BA bar chart
Figure 5-4. The AB Quick Filter added to the Sheet
To tidy up the view, we can change the view to the dot chart discussed
in Chapter 3 and add the Rank field covered in Chapter 4. The resulting
batting average dot chart is shown in Figure 5-5.
This was a fairly straightforward example, as the proportions were
already computed for us and included as fields in the data set. After
we learned how to filter out the players who didn’t have sufficient at
bats, we were able to apply some of the same techniques to create the
final views.
Part-to-Whole 
| 
73
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 5-5. Batting average dot chart
What happens when the proportions aren’t neatly calculated for us,
and when it’s not a simple matter of creating a ratio from two existing
fields using a calculated field? For example, what if we wanted to know
what percentage of the team’s overall home runs were hit by each 
player?
Introducing Table Calculations
When I first started using Tableau, I didn’t know much about table
calculations. If I wanted to find out what percentage of the overall
team’s home run count was hit by Robinson Cano, for example, I’d
either do the calculations myself outside of Tableau, or I’d struggle to
make my own calculated field in Tableau.
There’s no need to jump through these hoops. Let’s look at the easy
way to compute percent of total.
We’ll start by placing the players’ names on the Rows shelf and drag‐
ging HR (for home runs) onto the Column shelf. Just as we filtered the
batting average chart, let’s get rid of all players who don’t have at least
one home run by dragging HR to the Filter shelf and selecting At
Least one home run. Adding the Rank field as before, we can now easily
see that 18 different Yankees hit at least one home run for the team
during the 2012 season, as shown in Figure 5-6.
We haven’t done anything new yet; we’ve just applied the same tech‐
niques previously covered to the home run field. How do we easily
compute percent of total?
74 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 5-6. Bar chart showing Yankees in 2012 with at least one home
run
First, let’s visualize the players’ home run tallies in comparison to the
overall team number. To do so, select the Analysis menu from the top,
and then choose Totals → Show Column Totals. Adding SUM(HR) to 
the Label shelf yields the view shown in Figure 5-7.
Figure 5-7. Home run bar chart with team total added
Part-to-Whole 
| 
75
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
To answer my earlier question, I can now see that Robinson Cano hit
33 home runs, and that the team hit 245 home runs overall. How do I
get Tableau to do the percent of total calculation for me?
To label each player bar as a percent of total rather than an absolute
amount of home runs, hover over the green SUM(HR) pill in the Marks
card (the one that’s being used to generate the labels) and click the
small down arrow that appears within the pill. Choose Quick Table
Calculation → Percent of Total, as shown in Figure 5-8.
Figure 5-8. Changing the label to a “Percent of Total” table
calculation
76 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
After doing so, notice that the chart changes to the view in
Figure 5-9, showing the players’ home run contributions as a percent
of the total team amount (shown with the Column totals removed).
Figure 5-9. Home run tallies with labels shown as Percent of Total
This is a very simple example of a table calculation, or “table calc,” as
they are commonly called. (We’ll revisit this topic a few more times in
greater depth as we go forward.)
Now that we can easily determine the contribution of each player to
the overall team home run amount, is there a better way to visualize
it than the view in Figure 5-9? Figure 5-10 shows three alternatives.
Part-to-Whole 
| 
77
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 5-10. Three alternative ways to show the proportion of home
runs hit by each player
Do you feel that any of the three views in Figure 5-10 is an improve‐
ment over the simple bar chart in Figure 5-9? What about the dot chart
shown in Figure 5-11?
Each has its own merits, though the pie chart doesn’t really have many.
In the pie chart, I can’t really tell any difference between the pie slices
in the middle. There are just too many slices to discern among them.
I’d elect to use the dot chart shown in Figure 5-11. It lets us make quick
comparisons and see the relative and absolute amounts, and it makes
the rank order immediately obvious.
78 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 5-11. Dot chart of percentage of home runs contributed by
each player
Proportions as Waterfall Charts Using Gantt
Let’s look at the home run data in a slightly different way. What if we
could stagger the columns of the stacked bar chart in Figure 5-10, so
that each player had his own column? The resulting view would look
like the chart shown in Figure 5-12, complete with pinstripes in honor
of “the Bronx Bombers.”
Admittedly, this chart type doesn’t make the most efficient use of space,
but it creates a nice stairstep effect that gives a unique sense of the part-
to-whole relationship. How is this made with Tableau? It makes use of
the Gantt chart type. Let’s see how.
Let’s start by creating a column for each player by dragging Name onto
the Columns shelf, and then change the Marks type to Gantt Bar using
the drop-down menu in the Marks card. Next, drag HR onto the Rows
shelf, filter out all the players with less than one home run in the 2012
season, and sort descending. The resulting view should look like the
view shown in Figure 5-13.
Part-to-Whole 
| 
79
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 5-12. Home run data as a waterfall chart
Figure 5-13. Waterfall chart in progress
The next step is to use another table calc: the running total. Hover the
cursor over the green SUM(HR) pill in the Rows shelf, and when the
small down arrow appears within the pill, click on it. In the menu that
pops up, go to Quick Table Calculation and select Running Total. The
view changes to show a cascading set of horizontal lines. Each player’s
home run number starts at a height that equals the sum of all of the
80 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
preceding players’ home runs, and grows accordingly. All we need to
do now is fill in the columns and add a Grand Total column at the far
right.
The trick with the waterfall chart is to create a calculated field that is
the negative of the Measure you are charting. This will allow you to
create columns that stretch from each horizontal line down to the pre‐
vious level.
Right-click on HR, click Create Calculated Field, name it HR(rev) and
enter HR*-1 in the Formula area. Drag this new field onto the Size
mark, and the columns fill in, creating the cascading view we’re looking
for.
To finish the view, click Analysis → Totals → Show Row Grand Totals.
The total column appears to the far right. To get the Yankee look and
feel, change the color of the bars to dark gray and add pinstripe column
dividers in the Format panel, creating the view shown in Figure 5-14,
with HR labels added.
Figure 5-14. Completed waterfall chart
We’ve considered part-to-whole relationships in a number of different
ways. Now let’s consider ways to communicate current values as per‐
centages of historical ones.
Part-to-Whole 
| 
81
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Current-to-Historical
New York hit 245 home runs in 2012; that much we know. But how
did that home run tally compare with other teams in their league, and
how did it compare with the amount of home runs they hit the year
before? Was it the most in the league, the least, or somewhere in be‐
tween? Did they improve their home run tally over 2011 or did they
fail to reach the previous year’s mark?
Recalling the data discovery horse race track of Figure 1-1, these are
new questions that have arisen from data we have already explored
and communicated. These questions send us in search of yet more
data, and we find the 2011 and 2012 league team home run totals on
the Web. Figure 5-15 shows the complete table.
Figure 5-15. Team home run totals, 2011 and 2012
The Bullet Graph
One very efficient way to show each of these comparisons in one view
is using a “bullet graph”. Let’s go ahead and connect to the data table
and create a bullet graph by Ctrl-selecting City, 2011 HR, and 2012
HR, and then choosing bullet graph from the Show Me panel. The re‐
sulting view is shown in Figure 5-16.
In this initial view created from the Show Me menu, the length of the
blue bars is determined by the 2011 HR totals, as evidenced by the
green pill in the Columns shelf. The vertical black lines are the 2012
82 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
HR totals for each team, and the bands are at 60% and 80% of the 2012
values.
Figure 5-16. The initial bullet graph created by Show Me
Ideally, we’d prefer it to be the other way around: we want to see how
the 2012 home run totals compared to the previous year. To make the
switch, right-click in the x-axis and click Swap Reference Line Fields.
The resulting bullet graph is shown in Figure 5-17 (sorted descending
and with a ratio calculated field column added).
Figure 5-17. Bullet graph of AL team home runs, 2012 to 2011
What has Tableau done here? It has created a simple blue bar chart, in
which the lengths of the bars are proportional to the amount of home
Current-to-Historical 
| 
83
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
runs hit by each team in 2012. It has also created a vertical line to each
row, and color bands to facilitate easy comparison.
How do we read the bullet graph? If the blue bar goes beyond the black
line, then the team hit more home runs collectively in 2012 than they
did in 2011. If the blue bar falls to the left of the black line, then the
team hit fewer home runs, and their 2012 tally falls into one of three
bands:
• The darkest gray band is for teams that hit less than 60% of their
previous year total (none fall into this leftmost band).
• The next lighter gray band is for teams that hit between 60% and
80% of their previous year total (again, none did).
• The final band is for teams that hit between 80% and 100% of their
previous year total. This time, we find four teams in this region:
the Rangers, the Red Sox, the Tigers, and the Indians.
Let’s look at how these helpful reference lines and bands are created.
Reference Lines
Tableau has the ability to add a variety of types of reference lines and
bands to charts that can be used to aid comparison. The bullet chart
has built-in reference lines, but they can be added manually to any
chart type.
To learn more about them, let’s take a closer look at what Tableau added
to the bar chart in Figure 5-14. Click in the x-axis area of the bullet
graph, click Edit Reference Line, and notice there are two options to
choose from. Tableau has created average 2011 HR lines (dark vertical
lines in each row) and 60% and 80% bands for the 2011 figures (re‐
sulting in the different shaded areas in each row).
Figure 5-18 shows the dialog boxes that could be used to create these
reference lines in any chart.
Notice that the dialog box on the left creates a line for every cell (row)
that is equal to the average of the SUM(2011 HR). Because there is only
one 2011 home run value for each team, the average is just that one
value. The dialog box on the right creates distributed banding for each
cell (row) that is equal to 60% and 80% of the 2011 HR average. Again,
the average is just the single 2011 value for each team. The formatting
84 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
controls the color of the fill, and how to fill in the regions between the
boundaries.
Figure 5-18. Two reference lines automatically created along with the
bullet graph
Using this bullet graph, we can easily communicate a number of com‐
parisons. It’s clear that New York hit the most home runs in the league
in both the 2011 and 2012 seasons, and that their 2012 tally was more
than their 2011 tally. Similar questions can be answered about each
team. The bullet graph is a very efficient and effective tool for
comparison.
Lastly, let’s briefly consider actual-to-target comparisons.
Actual-to-Target
The world is full of people and teams with goals in the form of quotas,
budgets, and performance targets. These figures are tracked and
monitored religiously to determine “performance to plan.” Just listen
to any monthly sales call. You’ll hear discussions about concepts such
as:
• How are we doing compared to where we want to be at the end of
the year?
Actual-to-Target 
| 
85
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• How are we doing compared to where we should be right now if
we want to hit our monthly goal?
These are fundamental questions in business, politics, world devel‐
opment, and even personal life. At their core, they are comparisons of
proportion or percent, and it’s fairly easy to see how charts like the
ones shown in this chapter can be used to answer these types of ques‐
tions. Actual-to-target is a special type of part-to-whole and current-
to-historical.
By definition, actual-to-target isn’t bound by 1 or 100%, be‐
cause we can always exceed our goals and targets. In the case
of quotas, exceeding the target would be welcomed, while in
the case of budgets, it would not.
Imagine a waterfall chart showing how spending in a fiscal year breaks
down into different departments or categories. Adding a budget ref‐
erence line would be an easy way to see if the expenditures were more
or less than what was allocated.
Or if a sales department wanted to show how its reps were performing
relative to plan, they could create a bullet graph where the blue bars
represented actuals for each rep and the lines and bands represented
quotas.
Summary
Proportions and percentages are ubiquitous, and in this chapter, we’ve
seen how to communicate them well, as well as the steps involved to
create effective chart types in Tableau. We’ve also considered table
calculations in greater detail, and started using reference lines and
quick filters. We introduced the bullet chart, and showed how to create
the waterfall chart.
In the next chapter, we’ll consider “measures of central tendency”:
mean and median.
86 
| 
Chapter 5: Proportions and Percentages
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“...like a statistician who drowned in a
lake of average depth six inches.”
—Anonymous
CHAPTER 6
Mean and Median
Try to think of a time when you listened to a presentation about data
that didn’t include either an average or a median value. They’re almost
as common as percentages. Whether we’re tracking home prices, the
stock market, student test scores, or the price of gasoline, we come face
to face with the notion of central tendency on a regular basis.
Why are they so commonly used? As humans, we have a hard time
processing a simple list of more than a half dozen values, let alone
reams and reams of raw data. The attractiveness of these measures of
central tendency is that they condense a lot of data into digestible
morsels that carry with them the notion of “typical.”
As useful as these statistics can be to communicate data, they need to
be handled with care. In this chapter, we’ll see how they can be put to
good use, but we’ll also see how they can mislead.
The three main measures of central tendency are mean, median, and
mode. Let’s start with their definitions:
• The mean (or average) is determined by summing all of the values
in a data set and dividing by the number of values. The mean is
considered a “representative value,” meaning if you replaced each
value in the data set with the mean, the overall sum wouldn’t
change.
87
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• The median is the middle value in a data set in which the values
have been placed in order of magnitude. Thus, half the values in
the data set are less than the median, and half are greater.
• The mode is the most commonly occurring value in a data set.
Before diving into the data, let’s clarify that the goal of our discussion
about mean and median isn’t to recap our freshman statistics courses.
This book is for practitioners, so we’ll focus on the use of these statistics
in communicating data.
No discussion of mean and median is complete without a healthy dose
of the Gaussian distribution. We’ll start there.
The Normal Distribution
The Gaussian, or normal, distribution, is something we’ve all been
exposed to at some point. The unmistakable bell-shaped curve of the
Gaussian represents a very mild style of variation, one in which the
probability of a value occurring falls off dramatically the farther we
move away from the mean on either side (determined by the number
of standard deviations the value lies away from the mean). It’s also
symmetrical, and the mean, median, and mode are exactly equal.
Figure 6-1 shows the characteristic shape and attributes of the normal
distribution.
Figure 6-1. The characteristics of the normal distribution
Distributions approximating the normal are found in nature and the
physical sciences. An example that will suffice to illustrate the point is
88 
| 
Chapter 6: Mean and Median
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the heights of adult humans (though the distribution departs from the
normal due to the medical condition known as dwarfism).
If the next flight overseas collected height measurements of 250 pas‐
sengers, the heights would be more or less normally distributed. Even
if the tallest person in the world happened to be on board, he would
account for no more than about half a percent of the summed heights
of the group (and that one person would be incredibly uncomfortable,
I would imagine).
To get an empirical view of the normal distribution, let’s look at an‐
other data set from baseball: runs batted in.
An Example of “Normal” Data
In baseball, a run batted in (RBI) is granted to a batter every time he
enables a runner to score during his at bat. A batter can earn more
than one RBI during a single at bat; a grand slam home run would
result in 4 RBI—one for each of the runners on base, and one for the
batter himself. A player’s RBI tally is an important batting statistic; as
mentioned in the previous chapter, it’s part of the “triple crown” along
with batting average and home runs.
Batting statistics, including RBI, for the 2012 season are available on‐
line, and we can download and connect to the data with Tableau. We
can create a histogram as before, in order to visualize the distribution
of qualifying players’ RBI during the 2012 season, as shown in
Figure 6-2.
At a quick glance, this distribution seems to approximate the normal
curve quite well. It has a mean of 73.69 and a median of 74—measures
nearly identical in magnitude. In this case, both of these measures are
effective at communicating the “typical” number of RBIs earned by
qualifying batters (those who have roughly 500 at bats in a season).
The histogram is a helpful way to see the overall distribution of all of
the players, but what if we were interested in comparing the RBI tallies
for players that play different positions on the field? Players play one
of nine positions on each baseball team. Which position had the most
RBI, on average? First basemen? Center fielders?
To make this comparison, we’ll create a box plot.
The Normal Distribution 
| 
89
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 6-2. A histogram of players’ RBI during the 2012 season
Box Plots
Every data set has a mean, a median, a maximum (max), and a mini‐
mum (min), among a variety of other statistics. A helpful way to vis‐
ualize these statistics and to get a sense of the distribution of multiple
groups in a data set is with a box plot. Figure 6-2 shows a diagram of
this type of statistical chart, invented by John Tukey in the 1970s.
We can create a box plot in Tableau 8.1 and above very quickly and
easily using the new box-and-whisker plot chart type in the Show Me
panel. If we Ctrl-click the Player and Pos (for “Position”) Dimensions,
and the RBI Measure, and then open the Show Me panel and select
box-and-whisker plot, we get the chart shown in Figure 6-4.
It’s possible to create a box-and-whisker plot from scratch, and doing
so will help reinforce the power of reference lines and bands like we
used in the previous chapter when we created bullet graphs.
90 
| 
Chapter 6: Mean and Median
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 6-3. The box plot
Figure 6-4. The box-and-whisker plot
The Normal Distribution 
| 
91
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Let’s start by dragging Pos onto Columns and RBI onto Rows, which
creates a bar chart showing the sum of all RBI for each position. Next,
drag Player onto Detail and change the Marks type to Circle. After
changing the circles to a transparent gray with a darker gray border
via the Color shelf, we now have a sense of the distribution by position,
as shown in Figure 6-5.
Figure 6-5. Dot plot of RBI by position
There is only one DH (“designated hitter”) that completed the 2012
season with enough at bats to qualify, so we’ll filter out this data point
by right-clicking and selecting Exclude. Now we’re down to eight po‐
sitions—and notice the blue pill that appears in the filter shelf as a
result of excluding the DH.
Next, we’ll convert the dots to eight vertical lines stretching from the
minimum value to the maximum value of each position by changing
the Marks type from Circle to Line and then dragging Player onto the
Path shelf, as shown in Figure 6-6.
92 
| 
Chapter 6: Mean and Median
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 6-6. Vertical lines from the min to the max values of each
position
We’ll now right-click in the y-axis and select Add Reference Line three
separate times, filling out the resulting dialog boxes one at a time, as
shown in Figure 6-7.
Figure 6-7. Add Reference Line dialog boxes
The Normal Distribution 
| 
93
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The dialog box on the left results in the shaded region known as the
“interquartile range” for each of the eight positions. The dialog box in
the middle creates the eight horizontal lines at the top of each box plot
(maximum), and the dialog box on the right creates the lines at the
bottom (minimum). The resulting box plot is shown in Figure 6-8.
To add the dots for the mean, click RBI in the Measures panel with the
right mouse button and drag it onto the Rows shelf to the right of the
existing SUM(RBI). Select AVG(RBI) in the menu that appears when you
release the right mouse button.
A second chart now appears below the box plot, and also notice that
the Marks area changes to have three sections: the top section for
All, or both; the middle section for SUM(RBI); and the bottom section
for AVG(RBI). Click in the AVG(RBI) section, change the Marks type
to Circle, and drag the Player field out of the Marks card. The view
on the bottom changes to a dot plot of means.
Figure 6-8. The box plot without the mean
Hover over the green AVG(RBI) pill in the Rows shelf, and when the
small down arrow appears within the pill, click it and then select Dual
Axis from the drop-down menu. The two charts in the view now
94 
| 
Chapter 6: Mean and Median
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
overlap, and a second y-axis appears to the right. The two y-axes aren’t
yet synchronized (they have different maximum values). Right-click
in the y-axis on the righthand side, and select Synchronize Axis, as
shown in Figure 6-9.
Figure 6-9. Using the synchronized dual axis to add average points to
the dot plot
We can now compare the mean, median, first and third quartiles, and
maximum and minimum RBI values for each of the eight positions,
all in one compact view.
Just like the bullet graph, the box plot is a very dense chart type, con‐
veying a lot of information in a visual encoding that isn’t very difficult
to learn. That’s why it’s such a popular chart type among statisticians
and engineers trying to understand the central tendency and variation
of multiple groups of data.
Next, let’s consider how we can communicate central tendency when
the distribution doesn’t fit neatly into a normal distribution.
The Normal Distribution 
| 
95
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
An Example of “Non-Normal” Data
The world we live in is full of non-normal data sets that are much more
challenging to deal with than those that approximate the Gaussian. If
the Gaussian displays a mild form of variation, then non-normal data
sets display a wild form of variation: skewed to either side, multimodal,
or having fat tails or distant outliers.
Distribution of wealth is notoriously non-normal. If the next flight
overseas collected net worth data from each of the passengers onboard,
instead of height measurements, a small number of passengers would
account for a lion’s share of the overall wealth. If the richest person in
the world were on board (as unlikely as that may seem), he would
account for virtually all of the wealth of the group. It may not be fair,
but that’s how it is. Very different than the distribution of height,
wouldn’t you say?
Let’s consider an example of the distribution of money from the world
of sports. Salary data for all of the 550 players in the US professional
soccer league during 2012 can be found online. Figure 6-10 shows a
histogram of guaranteed compensation.
Figure 6-10. Histogram of 2012 U.S. professional soccer player
salaries
Not exactly a bell-shaped curve, is it? The length of the x-axis scale
isn’t a mistake: those tiny bars along the baseline are the nine players
that earned over $1M in guaranteed compensation in 2012. The player
who earned the most in 2012 has a salary that is more than 12 standard
deviations away from the mean.
96 
| 
Chapter 6: Mean and Median
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Let’s consider the summary statistics for this data set as tabulated in
Figure 6-11.
Figure 6-11. Summary statistics for 2012 player compensation
Which is the best measure of central tendency? Which measure would
you consider “typical” of player salaries? More than three out of four
players earned less than the mean, and only 10% earned less than the
mode, so neither seems very typical.
The median, by definition, has as many players above it as it has below
it. This is why the median is often used as the measure of central ten‐
dency when dollars are involved: because the distribution is often quite
skewed. Think about the median home price in your zip code, or the
median annual salary of employees in your workplace.
Sensitivity to Outliers
To illustrate the point further, let’s consider the hypothetical impact to
the measures of central tendency of adding one of the world’s top-paid
soccer players to the league. The world’s top soccer players (e.g., Lionel
Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo) command about $20M in salary (not
including endorsements). How would the summary statistics change
if a new player like this were added to the mix? Consider the updated
tabulation of statistics shown in Figure 6-12.
The Normal Distribution 
| 
97
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 6-12. Hypothetical statistics resulting from the addition of a
$20M player
Notice that the mean is far more sensitive to the addition of this new
outlier. It jumped from $164K to almost $200K, while the median in‐
creased by less than $100. Relative insensitivity to outliers is another
reason to consider using the median when communicating “typical”
values of skewed distributions.
Visualizing Typical Values of Non-Normal Distributions
If we create box plots of player salary for each of the teams similar to
the way we created box plots in the RBI example, we would end up
with the view shown in Figure 6-13.
Figure 6-13. Box plot of player salary by team
Notice how the mean (the dots colored red) don’t even fall within the
interquartile range for the three teams at the top of the chart. It’s no
coincidence that these are the teams with the three highest paid players
98 
| 
Chapter 6: Mean and Median
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in the league. The presence of these outliers “pulled” the mean to the
right. I’m sure the players on the New York team wouldn’t agree if you
told them the “typical” player salary was $518K.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered measures of central tendency—mean, me‐
dian, and mode—and how to visualize these values for different types
of distributions. We also touched on how the notion of “average” can
be problematic in communicating data. To recap: blindly using the
mean can be dangerous. It conveys a notion of “typical” when it may
not be typical at all, depending on the distribution of the data. This is
important to remember when communicating measures of central
tendency.
Does knowing this make the task a little more difficult? Yes, but we
wouldn’t want to make it simpler than it is, would we?
In the next chapter, we’ll consider two very important topics that are
often overlooked in communicating data: variation and uncertainty.
Summary 
| 
99
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“There is nothing so uncertain as a sure thing.”
—Scotty Bowman
CHAPTER 7
Variation and Uncertainty
It’s easy to get cocky when armed with a little bit of data. We get a sense
of knowing something about the world, and it increases our confi‐
dence in what we have to say. That can be a good thing. But the world
is a noisy, chaotic, ever-changing place. If the data set we’re working
with is noisy, or if the inferences we’re making are dubious at best, we’ll
need to proceed with caution.
The core principle to employ when communicating data is to be honest
about what we know and what we don’t know, and to represent reality
to the best of our ability. If there is a high degree of variation in the
data, or if we’re only working with a limited sample, we should make
that clear to our audience. Doing otherwise would be misleading.
In this chapter, we’ll consider two humbling and unavoidable aspects
of communicating data: variation and uncertainty. By variation, we 
mean the degree to which individual observations differ from others
in a group. By uncertainty, we mean the lack of confidence in infer‐
ences about a population based on data collected from samples.
Respecting Variation
In Chapter 6, we considered measures of central tendency, like mean
and median. In so doing, we touched on some basic measures of var‐
iation, such as standard deviation and the interquartile range, concepts
visualized once again in Figure 7-1.
101
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-1. Visualizing variation
We also considered two very different types of variables from the world
of sports in Chapter 6: baseball batting statistics (RBI) and soccer
players’ salaries, as shown in Figure 7-2.
102 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-2. Two different distributions: normal/Gaussian/bell-shaped
(top) and non-normal (bottom)
These variables are fundamentally different in the type of distribution
their values form. The former demonstrates the Gaussian properties
of the bell-shaped curve, while the latter is characterized by extreme
outliers that make up the bulk of the total amount.
The importance of this distinction and what it means to the way we
deal with data has been articulated by Benoit Mandelbrot, and more
recently by Nicholas Nassim Taleb. In a nutshell, applying measures
of variance like standard deviation to describe and predict phenomena
that are decidedly non-normal—such as just about any parameter in
the world of economics and finance—is fraught with error and should
be avoided. It’s the wrong tool for the job.
Respecting Variation 
| 
103
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Visualizing Variation
One way to respect the variation inherent in our data is to show it.
Merely showing averages yields an overly simplistic picture of the
world. Not every person in a country possesses the most common
physical traits in that country. So, too, not every value in a data set is
equal to the mean, median, or mode. If we only show the most typical
value, then we rob our audience of an appreciation of the rich texture
to be found in the subject at hand.
If we consider once again the number of strikeouts per nine innings
in professional baseball over the past 100 years, we can show a simple
line plot of average strikeouts per nine innings, as shown in Figure 7-3.
Figure 7-3. Average number of strikeouts per nine innings
What we don’t know from this chart, however, is how the different
teams in the league each year differed in their strikeout rates. What’s
the difference between the team with the highest strikeout rate and the
team with the lowest rate each year? We just don’t know from this view.
We can give a sense of the variation inherent in the data in a number
of different ways, as shown in Figure 7-4.
104 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-4. Four different ways of showing variation in a time series
The top-left view is the most straightforward—each team has its own
circle in each year. The top-right view includes reference bands from
the minimum to the maximum for each year. The bottom-left view is
a series of circle histograms, wherein the area of each circle is propor‐
tional to the number of teams in each bin. The bottom-right view
shows a series of box plots for each year. Each view gives a sense of
how much the average number of strikeouts per nine innings varies
from team to team each year.
It may not be important to our message, but if we only showed the
average values for each year, then the assumption many would make
is that each team was very close to the points plotted. Showing varia‐
tion can be helpful, and there are ways to do so without “hitting the
audience over the head” with all that variation.
Respecting Variation 
| 
105
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Variation Over Time: Control Charts
Control charts illustrate whether data collected over time has any stat‐
istically significant signals, or whether the variation in the data is
merely noise. They were invented at the Western Electric Company by
Walter Shewhart in the 1920s, in the context of industrial quality con‐
trol. The recent Six Sigma movement has brought this type of chart
into prominent use, as legions of “black belts” use them to measure
process behavior in an attempt to reduce variation and thereby im‐
prove quality.
The theory is that less variation results in fewer defects. The theory
definitely holds water in manufacturing, and—more generally—any
time a process should be producing the same thing over and over
again. As drab as that sounds, it’s what we expect when we order a
burger from a fast food chain or go to start up a new car. Variation in
those contexts would most likely be unwelcome.
In order to reduce variation, process specialists first need to figure out
whether there are any sources of special-cause variation—or signals—
in the historical data.
Let’s first break down the elements of the control chart as shown in
Figure 7-5, and then we’ll consider how to make them step by step.
Figure 7-5. The elements of a Shewhart Control Chart
106 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Anatomy of a Control Chart
A control chart contains the following basic elements:
• The time series data itself
• The average line
• The control limits, computed in various ways from the data itself:
— UCL (the upper control limit)
— LCL (the lower control limit)
• Signals:
— Outliers (data points either above the UCL or below the LCL)
— Trends (six or more points either all ascending or all descend‐
ing)
— Shifts (nine or more points either all above or all below the
average line)
How to Create a Control Chart in Tableau
Now that we’ve got the basics covered, let’s see how it’s done using two
different methods—the quick method and the rigorous method. The 
difference between the two is how the control limits are calculated.
The quick method uses what’s called a global measure of dispersion, or
the standard deviation of all of the points. The rigorous method uses 
a local measure of dispersion, called Sigma(x), which is derived from
the differences between successive data points.
For the next few pages, we’ll take into consideration the total number
of earthquakes recorded worldwide that registered magnitude 6.0 or
higher on the Richter scale from 1983 through 2013. The source for
the data is the USGS Earthquake Archive Search website. There were
4,136 such events recorded, and Figure 7-6 gives a view of the most
recent records in the data set.
Variation Over Time: Control Charts 
| 
107
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-6. Sample of global earthquakes data set, registering magni‐
tude 6.0 or greater
The quick method
Create a simple timeline with a YEAR(Date & Time) on the Columns 
shelf, and SUM(Number of Records) on the Rows shelf, fit to width as
shown in Figure 7-7.
Figure 7-7. A simple timeline of the number of annual earthquakes
Right-click on the y-axis, select Add Reference Line, and add an aver‐
age line by filling out the resulting dialog box. Then right-click on the
y-axis, select Add Reference Line again, and this time add a distribu‐
tion of +3 and −3 times the standard deviation, with dotted red lines
and no fill. Both reference line dialog boxes are shown in Figure 7-8.
108 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-8. Adding reference lines to the line chart
We now have a simple control chart showing the annual number of
earthquakes worldwide, as shown in Figure 7-9.
Figure 7-9. Simple control chart of annual earthquakes of magnitude
6.0 or greater
This version doesn’t show any points “out of control,” or beyond three
standard deviations from the mean. If we change from YEAR to
MONTH, then the control chart changes to show a number of points
above the 3 sigma line, including a sharp outlier in March 2011
Variation Over Time: Control Charts 
| 
109
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
corresponding to the Great East Japan earthquake, as shown in
Figure 7-10.
Figure 7-10. The simple control chart showing monthly counts of
worldwide earthquakes
Also note that the lower limit is not real. It’s below 0, and it’s not pos‐
sible to have a negative number of earthquakes recorded.
Let’s see how a more rigorous approach can enlighten us further about
whether any statistical outliers are included in the data.
The rigorous method
We’ll add a few extra elements to this version, including a “Moving
Range” timeline that shows the absolute value of the change from
quake to quake, control limits calculated from this moving range, and
data points colored by their type—in range, outliers, trends, and shifts.
Start with a new Sheet, and repeat Step 1 of the quick method described
in the previous section to create a basic timeline, duplicating SUM(Num
ber of Records) and creating a dual-axis plot with axes synchron‐
ized. The first set of Marks should be a line, and the second set of Marks
should be circles, as shown in Figure 7-11.
110 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-11. Dual-axis timeline of annual earthquake count
Create the “Moving Range” timeline underneath the main “Individu‐
als” timeline by dragging another instance of SUM(Number of Re
cords) to the Rows shelf to the right of the first two, and change this
new pill to a Quick Table Calculation showing the difference, as shown
in Figure 7-12.
Figure 7-12. Adding a Moving Range chart
Edit the Table Calculation and click Customize to open the edit dialog,
adding ABS() around the entire equation, as shown in Figure 7-13.
Also, make the new Moving Range chart a dual-axis chart with a line
Variation Over Time: Control Charts 
| 
111
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and circle marks for the individual data points as we did with the top
chart.
Figure 7-13. Modifying the Moving Range table calculation to make it
an absolute value
Add the average lines for both the Individuals chart (top) and the
Moving Range chart (bottom) by right-clicking on each of the y-axes
and selecting Add Reference Line, similar to Step 2 in the quick method.
Do this for both charts.
Create the following three calculated fields, MR_UCL, UCL, and LCL,
which are Shewhart’s original equations to determine the control
limits:
MR_UCL = 3.267*WINDOW_AVG([Moving Range])
UCL = SUM([Number of Records]) + 3*WINDOW_AVG([Moving
Range]) / 1.128
LCL = SUM([Number of Records]) - 3*WINDOW_AVG([Moving
Range]) / 1.128
Figure 7-14 shows these equations in Calculated Field dialog boxes.
112 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-14. Creating Shewhart’s control limits via calculated fields
Add these three new calculated fields to the level of Detail for All
Marks, and use them to create three new reference lines: UCL and LCL
in the top Individuals chart, and MR_UCL in the bottom Moving
Range chart.
Create two new Calculated Fields for the signals, one called Signals
(to be used in the top Individuals chart) and the other called MR_Sig
nals (to be used in the bottom Moving Range chart) by copying and
pasting the equations available in Signals.doc and MR_Signals.doc. You
can also find these files to download at http://dataremixed.com/books/
cdwt.
Drag these new calculated fields to their respective Colors shelves—
Signals should be placed on the Individuals Circle Color shelf and
MR_Signals should be placed on the Moving Range Circle Color shelf.
The final rigorous control chart is shown in Figure 7-15.
Variation Over Time: Control Charts 
| 
113
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-15. The rigorous control chart showing worldwide earth‐
quake count by year
There are a few new insights we can glean from this more rigorous 
approach:
• Both 2009 and 2011 are statistical outliers: they are above the up‐
per control limit for this time period.
• 2012 and 2013 represent a shift in the data: they are the ninth and
tenth points all on one side of the average line (higher).
• The drop in earthquake count from 2011 to 2012 was a statistically
significant change in the number of annual earthquakes, further
highlighting the extraordinary amount in 2011, largely accounted
for by the crisis in Japan that year.
If we change from YEAR to MONTH, then we see a number of other stat‐
istically significant outliers and shifts, but no trends, as shown in
Figure 7-16.
Control charts have a broad application to anything that can be
thought of as a process. Creating control charts in Tableau is a great
way to track that process and be alerted to signals in the data, as well
as save time and effort by filtering out the noise. When creating control
charts, users can either opt to employ the quick method or the rigorous
method, depending on their level of skill and the degree of statistical
rigor warranted by the situation.
114 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-16. A monthly view of global earthquakes using the rigorous
method
Understanding Uncertainty
When we present data to an audience, it’s important to make clear
whether we are presenting data from the entire population, or from
just a sample of the population.
Often, the data set we’re working with is the whole enchilada—all sales
for the past quarter, total inventory levels, a team’s win percentage for
the entire season. But sometimes we’re only presenting data from a
sample of the population—quality inspection results for a sample of
the day’s production, or the results of a customer satisfaction survey
sent to 1% of the customer base.
In these cases, we should do our best to follow good statistical practices
and randomize the sample, and we should also present the results with
confidence intervals included so our audience isn’t misled into think‐
ing that they can conclude more than the data allows.
To illustrate the point, let’s consider a fictional case of chess club par‐
ticipation rates of students in ten different cities in the peaceful country
of Chesslandia. The President of Chesslandia, Garry Fischer, wanted
to know whether students in his country were involved in chess club
or not, and which cities were more successful in getting students to
participate. He sent out his amateurs to ask a handful of students in
Understanding Uncertainty 
| 
115
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
each city whether they were in chess club or not, and the spreadsheet
they brought back to him is shown in Figure 7-17.
Figure 7-17. Spreadsheet of results of chess club student survey
Being a big believer in data visualization, the president uploaded the
numbers into his computer, Deep Purple. The enlightening bar charts
that he saw are shown in Figure 7-18.
He was about to call up the mayors of Castleborough and Pawnford
to congratulate them on their results when he noticed that the sample
sizes were very small relative to the thousands of students in each city.
For some of the grades, as few as 18 students had been surveyed.
116 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
He demanded to know what level of confidence he could place on the
results, and so he summoned his chief statistician, who was busy cal‐
culating how many chess moves were possible.
Figure 7-18. Visualization of the survey results
The chief statistician explained to him the concept of sample statistics
and population parameters, the central limit theorem, and binomial
proportion confidence intervals. The survey was not unlike flipping
coins—the possibilities were two-fold: either a student was in chess
club, or not. Given a certain number of students surveyed, it was pos‐
sible to compute an interval for each city and grade at a certain degree
of confidence.
The statistician used the normal approximation interval formula to
put error bars around each proportion.
To do so, he first needed to create a parameter that allowed the pres‐
ident to select his desired degree of confidence, as shown in
Figure 7-19.
Understanding Uncertainty 
| 
117
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-19. A new parameter to select desired confidence level
Next, he needed to create a number of calculated fields to generate the
error bars:
• % in Chess Club, p = [In Chess Club]/([In Chess Club]+[Not in
Chess Club])
• Sample Size, n = [In Chess Club]+[Not in Chess Club]
• Standard Error = SQRT(([% in Chess Club]*(1–[% in Chess
Club]))/[n])
• z upper = CASE [Confidence level]
— WHEN 0.99 THEN 2.575829
— WHEN 0.95 THEN 1.959964
— WHEN 0.90 THEN 1.644854
• Margin of Error = [Standard Error]*[z upper]
• Lower limit = [% in Chess Club]–[Margin of Error]
• Upper limit = [% in Chess Club]+[Margin of Error]
• Error Bar Line = [Upper limit]–[Lower limit]
• np = [n]*[% in Chess Club]
118 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Finally, he created a dual-axis dot plot with error bars as follows:
• He created a Circle plot with Town on Rows and SUM(% in Chess
Club) on Columns, sorted descending, and added np to the Filter
shelf, including only values of np greater than or equal to 5 (to
satisfy the criteria for using the Normal approximation interval).
• Next, he created a Quick Filter for Grade and selected only one of
the grades to show (fifth and sixth grade).
• He dragged Lower limit and Upper limit to the Details card and
created reference lines for each cell, one for each of the two cal‐
culated fields.
• He then dragged SUM(Lower Limit) to Columns, made it a Gantt
Bar chart, and added SUM(Error Bar Line) to the Size shelf of
the Gantt Bar chart, reducing the Size of the bar so that they were
thin lines rather than thick bars.
• Finally, he changed the new Gantt Bar chart to a dual-axis with
synchronized axes.
The resulting dot plot with error bars is shown in Figure 7-20.
Figure 7-20. A binomial probability distribution for the chess club
survey results
The confidence intervals are shown for each city and each grade in
Figures 7-21, 7-22, and 7-23.
Understanding Uncertainty 
| 
119
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-21. 95% confidence intervals for first- and second-grade
chess club participation
120 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-22. 95% confidence intervals for third- and fourth-grade
chess club participation
Understanding Uncertainty 
| 
121
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 7-23. 95% confidence intervals for fifth- and sixth-grade chess
club participation
From these charts, it’s apparent that based on these survey results, the
president can be confident about far less than he originally thought.
In fact, nothing can be said about the relative difference of chess club
participation between the first and second graders of each city. The
intervals completely overlap one another.
Additionally:
• Bishop Village has been filtered out of the first and second grade
results because the sample size times the proportion (np) was less
than 5, meaning that the normal approximation isn’t legitimate.
• While Castleborough seems to have much higher participation
rates for third and fourth graders, we can only be confident at the
95% level that rates are higher at Castleborough than Gambitop‐
olis and Bishop Village.
122 
| 
Chapter 7: Variation and Uncertainty
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• We can be 95% sure that Pawnford fifth and sixth graders partic‐
ipate at higher rates than at Kingston and Bishop Village, and we
can be 95% sure that Castleborough fifth and sixth graders par‐
ticipate at higher rates than at Bishop Village.
Lastly, we can’t really combine these results to compare all students in
each city, because the sampling plan was somewhat haphazard. If
President Fischer wanted to compare the overall picture, he would
need his statistician to create a stratified sampling plan that took into
account the relative differences of students in each of the grade
groupings.
Summary
Variation and uncertainty really matter when communicating data. It’s
easy to take the simple route and just show averages or percentages,
glossing over the complexity of the situation at hand. But how much
the data points vary, and how confident we can be in the proportions
can have a huge impact on the conclusions and decisions that follow.
The methods we’ve used in this chapter—the control chart and the
binomial confidence interval plot—don’t come close to covering every
situation, and the wise communicator of data will research principles
and techniques that may apply to the specific circumstances.
In the next chapter, we’ll consider ways to communicate multiple
quantities in the same views.
Summary 
| 
123
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“Correlation does not imply causation.”
—Unknown
CHAPTER 8
Multiple Quantities
So far, we’ve been creating views that focus on one variable at a time.
While focus can be great, there is a whole world of relationships be‐
tween multiple variables to explore, understand, and communicate.
Finding these relationships can change the world (think carbon diox‐
ide and global temperature).
One thing to keep in mind when exploring two or more variables at a
time is that “correlation does not imply causation.” What does this oft-
quoted phrase mean? Just because two variables seem to change to‐
gether doesn’t necessarily mean that one causes the other to change,
or vice versa. A third factor could be causing them both to change, or
it may be coincidence and there may not be any causal relationship at
all.
You’ve probably heard the example of rising ice cream sales and shark
attacks. They both may rise together, but as the college textbook ex‐
ample goes, they’re both caused by increasing numbers of people at
the beach, which is in turn caused by increasing temperature. It’s a silly
example intended to illustrate the point, but there’s some truth to it.
We’re very quick to assume causal relationships exist when all we really
have is evidence of correlation. It’s something to watch out for, but we
shouldn’t let it derail our exploration altogether, either.
In this chapter, we’ll consider a number of ways to explore and com‐
municate multiple quantities in the same individual chart. Later, in
125
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Chapter 12, we’ll tackle dashboards, where many different charts can
be added to the same view.
Scatterplots
I’ll come right out and say it: I love scatterplots. I love them because
they create a two-dimensional plane in which a whole host of com‐
parisons can be made in an instant. It’s almost effortless to spot groups
of points and individual points that stand apart from the rest, or out‐
liers. The first visualization I created with Tableau Public was a scat‐
terplot of the top 100 career points leaders in professional hockey
history, shown in Figure 8-1.
Figure 8-1. My first Tableau Public visualization: a scatterplot dash‐
board of career stats (photo by B. Bennett/Getty Images)
In professional hockey, players earn a point toward their career sta‐
tistics in one of two ways: they either score a goal themselves or they
earn an assist by enabling a teammate to score a goal. A player’s point
126 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
total is simply the sum of their goals and assists. Goals and assists are
also recorded individually, and you can find an updated table of career
stats online that can be searched and filtered.
As we discussed in Chapter 3, tables are helpful for gleaning a small
number of precise values, but they’re not so helpful when it comes to
recognizing patterns or comparing many values at the same time.
That’s where visualization comes in handy. The scatterplot shown in
Figure 8-1 makes use of two axes to locate the circles on the plane
according to the players’ career goals (the x-axis) and their career as‐
sists (the y-axis).
Let’s explore how to create this scatterplot. First, we’ll connect to the
spreadsheet that contains the top 100 players, which you can find on‐
line here. Once we’ve connected to the spreadsheet, it’s a simple matter
of Ctrl-selecting Player, G (for goals), and A (for assists), and then
clicking on scatterplots in the Show Me panel, as shown in Figure 8-2.
Figure 8-2. Creating a scatterplot using Show Me
Notice that Tableau has placed SUM(G) on the Columns shelf, SUM(A)
on the Rows shelf, and Player in the Marks card (in the level of Detail).
We could also have dragged these fields out to their corresponding
places instead of using Show Me to create the scatterplot.
We’ll consider how to add trend lines later in this chapter, but for now
we can see that there is a large cloud of dots in the middle and a single
dot in the upper-right corner that stands apart from the rest of the
Scatterplots 
| 
127
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
pack. The outlier is Wayne Gretzky, the player who wore jersey number
99 for Edmonton, Los Angeles, St. Louis, and New York. This view
makes it clear that Gretzky’s career statistics were something remark‐
able, even when compared to the rest of the players that together with
Gretzky make up the top 100 of all-time. There are the 99, and then
there is number 99. To me, this chart shows why Gretzky is regarded
by many as the greatest athlete to play any team sport, ever.
So far we’ve compared two variables: goals and assists. With the scat‐
terplot, we can add two more variables to the view rather easily. If we
drag P (for points) to the Size shelf and GP (for games played) to the
Color shelf, we now have a scatterplot that allows us to compare these
100 players along four different dimensions, as shown in Figure 8-3.
Figure 8-3. Scatterplot with added encodings for size and color
The larger the ring, the more career points a player has. The darker
the ring, the more games a player played. These new comparisons are
based on area and color ramp encodings, respectively. Refer back to
Figure 1-6 and notice that area and color ramp are below position in
128 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the Quantitative list. The scatterplot still primarily facilites a compar‐
ison of the goals and assists, which are encoded based on position.
When deciding which variables to use where, consider which
are the most important comparisons to make, and then en‐
code them with the most effective encodings.
I made some changes purely based on aesthetics: first, I changed the
Marks type from Automatic to Circles, then I changed the color palette
from Green Sequential to a reversed Orange-White-Blue Diverging.
Finally, I gave the circles some transparency and added light gray bor‐
ders using the Color shelf, as shown in Figure 8-4.
Figure 8-4. Additional formatting to the scatterplot
Scatterplots 
| 
129
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Who Is Who?
One challenge with the view so far is that it’s a guessing game as to
which players the dots correspond to. Where is Mark Messier, Gretz‐
ky’s teammate on the Edmonton Oilers and the New York Rangers?
Where is Gordie Howe, the player that Gretzky surpassed when he
claimed the career points leadership? We can’t tell. If that’s part of our
message, then we have a problem.
There are three ways to communicate who is who: labels, tooltips, and
annotations. Let’s consider them one at a time.
Labels
If we take Player from the Dimensions panel and drag it onto the
Label shelf, Tableau attempts to add as many labels as it can without
creating a messy view. The result is shown in Figure 8-5.
Figure 8-5. Adding labels to scatterplots
130 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
From this view, you can see a handful of other players around the cloud
of points, including Messier and Howe. Conveniently, the algorithm
tends to label the outliers, or at least the players on the fringes.
Adding these labels is helpful and allows the audience to pick out a
few other stories from the view. For example, I can recall my father
telling me about Maurice “the Rocket” Richard when I was a boy. He
was known as a legendary goal scorer, and now I can see why: he is
one of the few players in the top 100 with more career goals than assists,
so he did little else than put the puck in the back of the net, relatively
speaking.
It’s possible to force Tableau to show all the labels, but I don’t recom‐
mend it. Go ahead and try it out if you feel the need to, by clicking
Label and checking the box at the bottom where it says Allow labels to
overlap other marks. Don’t say I didn’t warn you, though. Sometimes
more is less.
Tooltips
What about the other points without labels? How can we see who they
are? Tableau has a great feature called Tooltips, which appear when a
person interacting with the chart hovers the mouse cursor over an
individual mark (or circle, in this case).
What would be an interesting data point to investigate further? How
about the blue point just below Messier? We know blue means the
player played relatively few games. Who is this player, and how did he
rack up so many goals and assists in such a small number of games?
Let’s hover the mouse over the point or click on it to discover who it
is. The mystery is revealed in Figure 8-6.
Hovering over the blue circle in the upper right reveals that the player
is none other than former Pittsburgh center Mario Lemieux, another
remarkable player whose career was interrupted by a number of in‐
juries and health problems, including Hodgkin’s lymphoma. We can
only imagine how many points he would have tallied had he played as
many games as Gretzky.
It’s possible to modify the tooltip, and we’ll cover formatting of tooltips
later in Chapter 13. But if you want to play with them yourself now,
just click Worksheet → Tooltip and the dialog box shown in Figure 8-7
appears.
Scatterplots 
| 
131
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-6. Hovering and clicking reveals tooltips
Figure 8-7. Editing tooltips
What does the checkbox in the bottom left mean? It says “Include
command buttons,” and if the checkbox is checked, then the footer of
132 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the tooltip shown in Figure 8-6 will appear, allowing the user to per‐
form a variety of filtering and grouping actions with the selected
points. Only check this box if you want the user to be able to filter or
group points directly. I almost always uncheck this box, as I prefer to
use Quick Filters to allow the user to control what data is shown and
what is not shown in the view.
Annotations
Let’s say we don’t want to show a whole bunch of player names as labels,
we just want to show Gretzky and Lemieux. How can we do that? First,
let’s get rid of the labels by dragging the blue Player pill next to the
Abc symbol out of the Marks area. Next, right-click on the circle for
Gretzky and select Annotate → Mark. In the resulting dialog box, let’s
delete everything except <Player> and click OK. After we do the same
for the blue circle for Mario Lemieux, we get the scatterplot shown in
Figure 8-8, with the annotations moved to a convenient place on the
view.
Figure 8-8. Adding annotations to scatterplots
Scatterplots 
| 
133
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Labels, tooltips, and annotations are three different ways to call atten‐
tion to specific marks, or data points, in our views. Which we decide
to use depends on whether we want to label many points, no points,
or specific points. We can also use a combined approach as we did in
the previous examples, showing some labels and allowing a user to
discover other names through interaction.
Making it Exploratory
The last element we’ll add with this scatterplot are the Quick Filters
you see in Figure 8-1 on the righthand side. Why would we bother
adding these filters? If our goal is to explain how remarkable Wayne
Gretzky was, our job is done. However, if we’d like to give our audience
the ability to explore the data to find other insights about the top 100
players, we still have some work to do.
We’ve mentioned it already, but it’s worth repeating: adding Quick
Filters is an easy and powerful way to explore data in Tableau. In the
case of the hockey player career points data set, we’d like to add the
ability to filter by position, career penalty minutes, and career +/−
(pronounced “plus-minus”). To determine a player’s plus-minus, stats
keepers add up every goal the player’s team scored while the player
was on the ice, and subtract every goal the opposing team scored while
the player was on the ice.
To add the three Quick Filters to the view, right-click on the three fields
(Pos, +/−, and PIM) one at a time, and select Show Quick Filter for each
one. Tableau adds a Multiple Values (combo box) list for Pos and
Range of Values sliders for +/− and PIM, as shown in Figure 8-9.
134 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-9. Quick Filters turn a scatterplot into an exploratory
interactive
Now we can explore this data set in a number of different ways to ask
and answer a variety of questions. We can also configure the filters to
be different types. To change the position filter from a multiple select
to a single select “radio button” style, we can hover over the filter box,
click the small down arrow that appears in the upper-right corner, and
then select Single Value (list). We can also change the sliders to be one-
sided: “At Least” or “At Most.”
Our choice of filter type depends on what we want users to do with
the filters. In this case, allowing the users to select only one position
at a time makes it more likely that they will create the views shown in
Figure 8-10, wherein certain patterns emerge about the different
positions.
Scatterplots 
| 
135
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-10. Viewing the scatterplot one position at a time
Among offensive players, there are relatively few left wingers in the
group, and players who played the center position have some of the
highest point totals, including Gretzky. Defensemen cluster to the
lefthand side of the cloud, meaning they have a higher ratio of assists
to goals than the offensive players, and they are mostly dark orange,
meaning they played a relatively high number of games in their careers.
What other patterns do you notice?
Adding Background Images
The next step is motivated purely by aesthetics, and it involves adding
a background image that gives the effect of Wayne Gretzky sweeping
through the other 99 players with a slap shot. To do this, I selected
Map → Background Images → [File Name] and then Add Image, which
resulted in a dialog box, which I filled out as shown in Figure 8-11,
browsing to select the image file and specifying how to center the
image.
136 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-11. Adding a background image (photo by B. Bennett/Getty
Images)
In the Options tab, I made sure to select both Lock Aspect Ratio and
Always Show Entire Image, because I didn’t want to either distort the
image or chop off any of the sides.
I try to use background images sparingly, as they are kind of
like playing with fire: you either have a nice campfire going,
or you burn down the forest. If you’re going to use one, pro‐
ceed with caution.
What’s your opinion? Does the background image add to the overall
impact of the visualization or does it take away from it? The dialog
that emerges from these preferences and opinions is the part about
data visualization that I enjoy the most.
Stacked Bars
Scatterplots aren’t the only way to show multiple quantities in the same
view. Another visualization type we can use is the stacked bar chart.
Let’s create a stacked bar chart as we explore a different angle of the
data: per game rates. Recall from Chapter 4 that a rate is a ratio in which
Stacked Bars 
| 
137
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the numerator and the denominator have different units. Rates that
are per game have the number of games played as the denominator.
Let’s see whether Gretzky also stands alone in his career point pro‐
duction rate, or whether he has any company when it comes to scoring
efficiency. The data table doesn’t include the per game rates, so we’ll
have to create them using calculated fields, just like we did in Chap‐
ter 4. We’ll create Goals per Game, Assists per Game, and Points
per Game by right-clicking in the Dimensions or Measures area, se‐
lecting Create Calculated Field, and then filling out the dialog boxes
similar to the one shown in Figure 8-12 for all three fields—the only
difference being the calculated field names and the numerators.
Figure 8-12. Creating per game rates with Calculated Fields
Now that we have these three new calculated fields in our Measures
area, we can use them to visualize the rate of point production as a
stacked bar plot. The way we’ll need to create the stacked bar plot isn’t
straightforward in this case, because the values we want to stack are
different Measures. Here are the steps:
138 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1. Drag Player to the Rows shelf, creating an alphabetical list of
player names.
2. Drag Measure Values from the Measures area to the Columns
shelf, creating bars that are the sum of all Measures for each player.
3. Drag Measure Names from the Dimensions area to the Colors
shelf, breaking up the bars by color.
4. Drag everything except AGG(Assists per Game) and AGG(Goals
per Game) out of the Measure Values area below the Marks card,
which leaves only two corresponding bars for each player.
5. Change the colors by clicking on the down arrow to the right of
the Measure Names area header and clicking Edit Colors.
6. Click the down arrow in the blue Player pill on the Rows shelf
and select Sort, choosing a descending sort order by the Points
per Game field.
Figure 8-13 shows what the Sheet should look like after following these
steps.
We can see right away that Gretzky has company at the top of this list.
He and Mario Lemieux both stand apart from the rest, don’t they?
Their overall points per game are substantially higher than the rest of
the top 100. We can also see that Lemieux scored goals at a higher rate
than Gretzky, as indicated by the dark gray bars, and that Mike Bossy
scored more goals per game than either of them.
It’s a little more difficult to compare their Assists per Game rates,
though, wouldn’t you say? This is one drawback of the stacked bar
chart: it’s easy to compare the lengths of the first bars (dark gray in this
case) and the overall lengths of the stacked bars, while the bars without
a common baseline are much more difficult to compare. What if it was
more important to enable a comparison of assists?
If it’s more important to be able to communicate the compar‐
ison of the two variables themselves, and less important to
compare the overall sum, then a dual dot chart is preferred to
the stacked bar.
Stacked Bars 
| 
139
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-13. Creating a stacked bar from multiple Measures
To make the change from the stacked bar to the dual dot chart plot,
simply change the Marks type from Automatic, or bars, to Circles or
Shapes, whichever you prefer. Figure 8-14 shows the view with Shapes
selected and Row grid lines added from the Format panel, which can
be opened by right-clicking anywhere in the view and selecting
Format.
The sort is a little difficult to make sense of. Try sorting by either Goals
per Game or Assists per Game by editing the Sort dialog box (ac‐
cessed by clicking the down arrow of the blue Player pill in the Rows
shelf) and see which you prefer.
You can see how these different sort options allow you to communicate
slightly different messages to your audience. Knowing your precise
message helps you make the right choice.
140 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-14. Per game rates shown in a dual dot chart view
Regression and Trend Lines
When comparing two variables, it’s common to apply statistical re‐
gression analysis to estimate the strength of the correlation between
the two variables. Regression analysis can be visualized by adding a
trend line to a scatterplot, and the indication of how well the points fit
the trend line is known as the coefficient of determination, R2 (pro‐
nounced “R Squared”).
While making use of Tableau’s regression functionality, let’s consider
a new combination of rates: shots and goals. Shots can result in goals
(and not the other way around), so we want to place the Shots field
on the x-axis (the Columns shelf), because this is typically where the
independent variable is placed. Goals would then be placed on the
y-axis (the Rows shelf), the typical orientation of the dependent vari‐
Regression and Trend Lines 
| 
141
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
able. We’ll also need to add Player to the Detail shelf so we don’t just
have one single dot, but rather one dot for each player. After taking
these steps, and also adding Pos to the Color shelf and Player to the
Label shelf, we have the standard scatterplot as shown in Figure 8-15.
Figure 8-15. Scatterplot of shots versus goals
Notice the message at the bottom right that tells us there are 16 nulls.
What does this mean? It turns out that the league didn’t start collecting
the number of shots in their statistical monitoring of games until after
some of the players in the top 100 had already started playing, so this
information isn’t available for all players. In the spreadsheet, there is
a blank (as opposed to a value of 0) for these 16 old-timers. We’ll filter
them out by clicking on the message and selecting Filter Data.
Further notice that the axes do not have the same ranges. While both
start at 0, the y-axis extends upward to just under 1,000 goals, while
the x-axis extends to the right past 6,500 shots. This is typical of scat‐
terplots, as the primary goal is to understand the nature of the group‐
ing of the points. Having the axes be of equal length would result in
the data points lying very close together above the x-axis, making it
difficult to see any trend.
How do we add trend lines? Just right-click anywhere in the grid de‐
fined by the axes and select Trend Lines → Show Trend Lines. The
resulting view shows four trend lines, one for each position, as shown
in Figure 8-16.
142 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-16. Scatterplot with multiple trend lines
As we can clearly see, defensemen (the orange line) have a very dif‐
ferent shots-to-goals relationship than the offensive players, whose
trend lines are all very similar.
If we want to show only one trend line for all of the points together,
we can right-click anywhere in the grid area and select Trend Lines →
Show Trend Lines. Then, we can uncheck the box that says “Allow a
trend line per color”—and I’d also recommend checking “Force y-
intercept to zero,” because no shots means no goals. The resulting view
is shown in Figure 8-17.
As we would imagine, the line slopes upward, indicating a positive
correlation between shots and goals. The points are somewhat scat‐
tered about the line, but how can we describe the relationship in
mathematical terms? If we hover over any point along the trend line,
a pop up appears with a linear equation and a p-value, as shown in
Figure 8-18.
Regression and Trend Lines 
| 
143
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-17. Scatterplot with a single trend line
Figure 8-18. Equation and p-value of trend line
The equation tells us that the line has a slope of 0.134198, meaning
that for every increase of one shot (along the x-axis), the line rises
0.134198 units (along the y-axis). The p-value indicates that there is a
very small chance (< 0.0001, or < 0.01%) that two variables without
144 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
any correlation at all would produce such a relationship. They are def‐
initely correlated, and this comes as no surprise.
But how good is the fit? We can find that and much more by right-
clicking on the trend line and selecting Describe Trend Model. The
window shown in Figure 8-19 appears.
Figure 8-19. Describe Trend Model window
From this window, we can see a number of different aspects of the
model, including its coefficient of determination (R-Squared) and its 
Standard error. Since we forced the trend line to cross the y-axis at
y=0, we can’t use the R-Squared value in the typical way, namely, to
understand how well the model fits the data. Try editing the trend line
by unchecking the “Force y-intercept to zero” box and then choose
“Describe Trend Model” once again. You’ll notice that the R-Squared
value drops from 0.938774 to 0.302579.
The line divides the grid area into two sections. The data points that
lie above and to the left of the upward sloping line can be thought of
as having higher accuracy: it took these players fewer shots to achieve
a certain number of goals, as compared to the model. The data points
that lie below and to the right of the line can be though of in the op‐
posite way: it took a relatively high number of shots to achieve a certain
number of goals. The farther away from the line, the more the player
deviated from the typical ratio of shots to goals.
Regression and Trend Lines 
| 
145
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The Quadrant Chart
Another way to compare these same points is to divide the grid area
into four sections instead of two. I have a predilection for dividing
everything into quadrants, so let’s explore how to do that now.
First, let’s turn off the trend line by right-clicking in the grid area,
selecting Trend Lines, and deselecting Show Trend Lines. Next, let’s
create the four panels using reference lines as we’ve done before.
How should we divide the plane into quadrants? Let’s create horizontal
and vertical lines at the mean, or average values. This would allow us
to determine right away if a player was above or below the group aver‐
ages for both shots and goals. To do that, we’ll just right-click in each
of the axes and select Add Reference Line, completing the dialog boxes
as shown in Figure 8-20.
Figure 8-20. Adding vertical (left box) and horizontal (right box) ref‐
erence lines
The resulting cartesian plain is now divided into quadrants, as shown
in Figure 8-21, with the Row and Column grid lines removed.
146 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-21. The four quadrant scatterplot
Don’t you think this is an interesting way to compare the players?
They’re divided based on whether they scored an above or below aver‐
age number of goals, and whether they took an above or below average
number of shots in their careers. (Remember that when we say “aver‐
age,” we’re referring to the mean value of the top 100 players (minus
the 16 without shot statistics), so there’s nothing “average” about this
group from an overall point of view. Our comparison is relative to
players within this group.)
I would consider the relative few number of players in the top-left
quadrant to be the most accurate shooters of the group. Why? They
scored an above average number of goals while shooting a below aver‐
age number of times. In contrast, the group in the bottom-right quad‐
rant (populated mostly with defensemen) are the least accurate shoot‐
ers of the group. They scored a below average number of goals while
shooting an above average number of times. If you’ve watched hockey,
you know that the defensemen typically stay the farthest from the goal,
unleashing powerful slapshots from greater distances, so let’s not be
too harsh in our assessment of their accuracy. Nevertheless, in the
bottom-right quadrant they remain.
The top right and bottom left are the high and low relative producers,
respectively, We can label these areas by right-clicking in the grid area
and selecting Annotate → Area, and then typing in the quadrant names.
The finished quadrant scatterplot is shown in Figure 8-22.
The Quadrant Chart 
| 
147
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 8-22. The completed quadrant scatterplot
This is an interesting way of grouping the players. If you want, you can
add the trend line back to the quadrant view and use both comparison
aids together. I’d recommend going with soft, light lines if you do so,
as you don’t want to obstruct the data points themselves with thick,
dark lines.
Summary
In this chapter, we explored but a few of the ways to compare multiple
variables at the same time, and my admiration of the scatterplot has
been evident. We also touched on annotations and background im‐
ages, topics we’ll pick up again later. In addition, we exlored how to
create stacked bar charts using Measure Names and Measure Values,
a tricky technique that is a little mind-bending at first, I’ll admit. Lastly,
we covered how to add trend lines and reference lines to aid in
comparison.
In the next chapter, we’ll explore the all-important factor of time.
148 
| 
Chapter 8: Multiple Quantities
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“Perfection is attained by slow degrees;
it requires the hand of time.”
—Voltaire
CHAPTER 9
Changes Over Time
When it comes to communicating data, it’s all about time. Time is the
one factor that simply can’t be removed from the equation. Look at
any presentation of data on the Web, in print, or at the office. You won’t
have to look very hard to see the element of time. It’s usually right on
the surface: monthly unemployment rate, quarterly earnings per share,
top-grossing movies of the weekend. If the element of time isn’t ex‐
plicitly stated somewhere, it probably should be.
So far, we’ve compared quantities summed up over a period of time,
like total points in a player’s career or tons of trash collected in New
York City during the month of September. While time was a factor, we
didn’t consider how these quantities varied over the course of time,
other than control charts in Chapter 7. We simply defined the start
and stop points, and lumped everything between into one bucket.
But we can unlock a whole new dimension of insight if we consider
how the measurable universe has changed, is changing, or likely will
change with time:
• Is the situation getting better or worse, or continuing the same?
• Has time treated one variable differently than another?
149
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• Are there trends, outliers, or shifts in the data over a specific
period of time?
• Is the degree of variation over time significant or just mere noise?
These are all questions that are central to communicating data with
respect to time. There are many ways to communicate change over
time, and we’ll consider a number of them in this chapter, starting with
the simple and effective line plot.
The Origin of Time Charts
Scottish engineer and political economist William Playfair is credited
with inventing the line chart in 1786, when he visualized the balance
of trade between countries in his book, The Commercial and Political
Atlas (see Figure 9-1).
Figure 9-1. The first line chart, by William Playfair in 1786
Two lines are depicted, showing imports and exports over time, and
the caption at the bottom describes the two axes. We’re so accustomed
to seeing line charts today that it’s almost amusing to see the axes ex‐
plained in this way, and yet line charts aren’t even as old as the United
150 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
States. William Playfair had the pioneer’s task of introducing his read‐
ers to this new form of communication.
As we seek to communicate how quantities change over time, we’d do
well in most cases to follow Playfair’s lead and place time on the x-axis,
proceeding from left to right. This orientation will be well understood
by those we are communicating with, and they’ll need to invest rela‐
tively little time and effort to begin gleaning insights from what we
show them.
Let’s look at some examples.
The Line Chart
Let’s start with a pre-aggregated data set: average strikeouts per game
(SO), number of teams (Tms), and the total number of pitchers
(#Pitch) of each professional baseball season (Year) since 1871. In
this data set, Year is a simple quantitative measure. An image of the
data set is shown in Figure 9-2.
Figure 9-2. Average game stats data set
In order to visualize how these variables have changed over time, we
can first connect Tableau to the spreadsheet, and then take the fol‐
lowing steps to create a line chart:
The Line Chart 
| 
151
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1. Left-click the Measure SO, and drag and drop it onto the Rows
shelf.
2. Right-click on the Measure Year, and drag it to the Columns shelf.
When you release the right mouse button, select the top option,
Year.
The resulting line chart is shown in Figure 9-3.
Figure 9-3. A simple line chart showing the increase
How would we describe this pattern? There is no doubt that there is
an increasing trend in the number of strikeouts per game over the past
century and a half. The climb looks dramatic, but if we add a trend
line by right-clicking in the chart area and selecting Trend Lines, then
Show Trend Lines, we can see that the average number of strikeouts
per game has increased at a glacial rate of 0.033 strikeouts per game
each year, on average. So every decade, pitchers struck out one extra
batter every three games, on average. The time chart with added trend
line is shown in Figure 9-4.
There are a number of departures from the trend, though, aren’t there?
Before the turn of the twentieth century, the rules of baseball were in
a state of flux. For example, the definition of the strike zone underwent
a number of changes, and until 1887, batters could actually request a
high pitch or a low pitch. Correlated with these changes to the rules,
we see a relatively high degree of flux in the number of strikeouts per
game until about 1920, when the rules of the game stabilized.
152 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Strikeouts per game began steadily climbing, and then something
changed in the late 1960s.
Figure 9-4. Strikeout line chart with trend line added
Researching the rules of the game, we discover that the mound was
lowered and the strike zone was reduced in 1969. The league imple‐
mented these changes in response to the increasing dominance of
pitchers in the league. They wanted teams to score more runs during
games, in hopes of boosting attendance. We can see that this change
to the rules coincides with a decrease in the average number of strike‐
outs per game that lasted until 1981, when the trend once again began
climbing.
We can add a vertical reference line at 1969 by right-clicking in the
chart area and selecting Add Reference Line, and then filling out the
resulting dialog box as shown in Figure 9-5, resulting in the updated
line chart shown.
So far, we’ve only been able to show how one quantitative variable has
changed over time. While we’ve added a trend line and a reference
line, we haven’t yet matched the degree of sophistication of Playfair’s
original line charts.
Let’s see how we can gain further insight into the history of strikeouts
by adding a second line to the chart: pitchers per team.
The Line Chart 
| 
153
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-5. Updated line chart with added reference line
The Dual-Axis Line Chart
What else changed in 1981 that could give us a clue as to the reason
for the reversal in the strikeout trend? The data set also includes a field
called #Pitch, representing the total number of pitchers that played
in each season. It also includes the number of teams in the league each
year in a field called Tms. We can create a simple ratio by dividing the
154 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
total number of pitchers by the total number of teams each year, re‐
suling in Pitchers per Team.
Let’s see how the number of pitchers used by teams changed over the
course of the same period of time. If we drag the Pitchers per
Team Measure onto the Rows shelf next to strikeouts, we create a sec‐
ond line chart below the first, as shown in Figure 9-6, with the trend
line for the new time chart added.
Figure 9-6. Two line charts, shown one above the other
Notice that these two charts share the same x-axis, but they have dif‐
ferent y-axes. The new chart showing the increase in the number of
pitchers per team has been added to the view directly below our strike‐
out chart.
How can we superimpose them on top of each other? If we hover over
SUM(Pitchers per Team) in the Rows shelf and click on the small
down arrow that appears, we can select Dual Axis in the menu that
pops up, as shown in Figure 9-7, resulting in a dual-axis line chart.
The Dual-Axis Line Chart 
| 
155
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-7. The dual-axis line chart
Notice that a number of elements have changed:
• First, and most obviously, the lines have been placed together and
Tableau has automatically colored one chart (and its trend line)
red to differentiate it from the other.
• Second, notice that the second y-axis (Pitchers per Team) has
been placed on the righthand side of the chart, and that it has a
different scale than the lefthand y-axis (SO).
• Third, notice that the green pills in the Rows shelf have changed
shape: their adjacent edges are flat instead of round.
156 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• Finally, notice that the Marks card area to the left of the lines now
has three different sections: All, SUM(SO), and SUM(Pitchers per
Team). Click on these headers to see how the Marks card changes
to allow us to control each line separately, or both together.
One challenge to reading the dual-axis chart is that it’s difficult to know
which y-axis applies to which line. To find out, we need to look from
the lines to the color legend to the y-axes. To reduce the time and effort
required to match each line with its corresponding y-axis, we can
change the color of both y-axes by right-clicking the axis and selecting
Format, changing the properties as shown in Figure 9-8. We can also
double-click on the leftmost y-axis and change the title from “SO” to
something more meaningful, like “Average Strikeouts per Game.”
Figure 9-8. Dual-axis line chart with y-axes formatted
What can we glean from this dual-axis line chart? We can see right
away that teams added pitchers starting in 1871 until about 1940, and
then held their rosters steady at about 15 pitchers per team until the
early 1980s, when they began adding pitchers once again. Thus, the
turnaround in average strikeouts per game correlates with the point
in time when teams began adding more pitchers to their rosters. Cor‐
relation does not imply causation, but we could come up with a causal
theory to test: more pitchers per team means each batter is likely to
encounter a pitcher who has thrown fewer pitches, and therefore has
a “fresher arm”.
Let’s consider another way of showing how these two variables are
correlated: the connected scatterplot.
The Dual-Axis Line Chart 
| 
157
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The Connected Scatterplot
We haven’t yet strayed from the rule of thumb that time should be
encoded on the x-axis increasing from left to right. An innovative way
to encode time is to make a scatterplot of the two variables in question
and connect dots that represent successive years. Let’s create one to
see what it would look like.
To start with, we can create a standard scatterplot as we did in Chap‐
ter 8 with pitchers per team on the x-axis (or Column shelf) and SO,
or average strikeouts per game, on the y-axis (or Rows shelf). If we do
so and then add a trend line as before, we will find that the variation
in pitchers per team explains 71% of the variation in strikeouts (from
the R-Squared value). The basic scatterplot with trend line is shown
in Figure 9-9.
Figure 9-9. Basic scatterplot with trend line and model shown
158 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
It’s difficult to tell from this view in what order the points occurred.
Which circle corresponds to which year? The basic scatterplot doesn’t
tell us anything about time. We could add Year to the Color shelf and
the Label shelf, resulting in the view shown in Figure 9-10.
Figure 9-10. Basic scatterplot colored by year and year labels added
This helps somewhat: we can tell that the circles in the lower-left region
correspond to the earliest seasons and the circles in the upper right
are more recent. Yet another way to show the pattern is to connect the
dots of successive years with a straight line. To do so, we’ll need to
change the Marks type from Circle to Line, and move SUM(Year) from
the Color shelf to Path, resulting in the somewhat scrambled view
shown in Figure 9-11.
From this view, we can see that the points start in the lower left and
ricochet their way upward and to the right, indicating an increase in
both variables over the years. Depending on the data, connected scat‐
terplots are generally easier to read when we plot fewer points. Let’s
filter the view to just the years in question: 1981 to the present. To do
so, we can right-click on Years in the Measures panel and select Show
Quick Filter, entering 1981 into the left parameter of the quick filter,
as shown in Figure 9-12.
The Connected Scatterplot 
| 
159
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-11. The connected scatterplot
Figure 9-12. A filtered connected scatterplot
This view is much easier to read, and the pattern is now obvious. In
addition, another pattern has become clearer: between 2007 and 2012,
strikeouts per game increased, while pitchers per team did not.
I prefer to format connected scatterplots to look like the view shown
in Figure 9-13. To do this, the following steps are required:
1. Drag a second Pitchers per Team pill onto the Columns shelf to
the right of the first and make it a dual-axis plot.
160 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2. Right-click in the top x-axis and select Synchronize Axis, then un‐
check “Show Header.” The top x-axis should disappear.
3. Take Measure Names off of the Color shelf of “All” by dragging
and dropping it back into the Measures area.
4. Change Mark type for Pitchers per Team (2) from Line to
Circle, and take SUM(Year) off of the Labels shelf.
5. In the Marks panel for Pitchers per Team (2), change the Circle
color from blue to white and give each circle a gray border.
6. In the Marks panel for Pitchers per Team, change the color of
the line to gray and reduce the size.
Figure 9-13. The formatted connected scatterplot
Take a look back at the different ways of showing the change in average
strikeouts per game and pitchers per team over time. Which would be
most effective in communicating this data to an audience? The answer
depends on which insights we want to highlight, and how “captive” the
audience is:
• Can we be present to explain the chart to the audience or not?
• Are they highly motivated to understand the content or not?
The Connected Scatterplot 
| 
161
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
If the answer to either of these questions is “yes,” then a connected
scatterplot may work just fine. If the answer to both is “no,” then the
connected scatterplot is a risky choice.
In my experience, the connected scatterplot takes more ef‐
fort up front to decipher what is being shown, simply be‐
cause we’re less accustomed to seeing time shown in this way.
If we can’t be present when the audience sees it, and if they’re
not that motivated regarding the subject matter, then they’ll
be less likely to put in the effort and we should probably stick
with a chart type that will be easier to understand: one with
time on the x-axis.
The baseball strikeout data was an easy “learner” data set for us because
it was pre-aggregated and the only date type we needed to consider
was year. In the real world, we often get data in logs or long lists of
records with a time-date stamp field. Let’s consider how we can explore
changes over time with this type of data next.
The Date Field Type and Seasonality
Let’s return to the New York City rat sightings data we considered in
Chapter 3. Recall that this data is formatted as a list of reported oc‐
currences, and each row in the spreadsheet is a single occurrence. The
location, time, and date are reported, as well as a number of categorical
fields such as type of location. We considered the total number of rat
sightings for each borough, but we didn’t consider how those sightings
were spread out over time.
A number of questions could be asked of the list of records, such as:
• What time of the year do the most rat sightings occur?
• Is the number of rat sightings increasing, decreasing, or staying
steady?
• How many rat sightings can we expect to see in the coming year?
Let’s explore this data to find some answers. If you recall from
Figure 3-12, the rat sightings data set included a field called Created
Date, in the form of mm/dd/yyyy. Let’s see how Tableau treats a date
field like this.
162 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
If we drag Created Date onto the Column shelf and then drag Number
of Records from the Measures area to the Rows shelf, Tableau creates
a yearly line plot by default, as shown in Figure 9-14.
Figure 9-14. Default annual timeline
Notice that the color of the Year(Created Date) is blue, indicating
that Tableau is treating the field as a discrete, or categorical, data type,
and that there is a + sign to the left of the field. Clicking on the + sign
disaggregates (or breaks down) the line plot by quarter, as shown in
Figure 9-15.
Figure 9-15. Rat sightings by quarter
The Date Field Type and Seasonality 
| 
163
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Notice that Year(Created Date) now has a – sign next to it. Clicking
on the – sign returns the view to the one shown in Figure 9-14, and
clicking the + sign next to Quarter breaks down the data by month.
By using the + and – symbols, we can either increase or decrease the
level of aggregation of the data.
We can also change the Created Date field from discrete to continu‐
ous by clicking the down arrow in the Year(Created Date) pill and
selecting either Year, Month, Week Number, or Day from the options
below the line, resulting in the line charts shown in Figure 9-16 (shown
with the partial month of June 2013 excluded).
Figure 9-16. Rat sightings in New York shown yearly, monthly,
weekly, and daily
Notice the seasonality of the reported rat sightings. Summer months
have seen the highest number of rat sightings, and winter months the
lowest. Is this seasonality the same for all boroughs? All we need to do
is drag the Borough data field from Measures to the Color shelf to find
out, resulting in the view shown in Figure 9-17.
164 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-17. Rat sightings by month and borough
Now we can see the line plot for each borough, and it’s clear that this
seasonality holds true for all boroughs.
Do you notice the one lone brown dot in May of 2012 associated with
the borough “Unspecified”? It seems that a single reported sighting
did not include an address or borough. I clicked on this point and
chose to exclude it from the analysis.
Another feature that is new to Tableau is the ability to add a forecast
to a line plot such as this one. If we right-click in the graph area, and
then select Forecast and Show Forecast, the line plots update to show
lighter colors for months stretching into the future, as shown in
Figure 9-18.
Figure 9-18. Rat sightings by month and borough, forecast added
The Date Field Type and Seasonality 
| 
165
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
There are a number of options associated with the forecast, such as
the forecast length and whether to include seasonality. These options
can be accessed by right-clicking and selecting Forecast → Forecast
Options. To see the full details associated with the forecast, choose
Describe Forecast.
The line plot is the simplest and clearest way to show how quantities
vary over time. But what if we’re interested in showing event durations
in order over time, like the various presidential administrations? That’s
where a timeline comes in handy.
The Timeline
Two decades prior to William Playfair’s line plots, English theologian
and chemist Joseph Priestley created the first known timelines, in
which each bar represents the life span of an influential person of his‐
tory (see Figure 9-19).
Figure 9-19. Joseph Priestley’s first timeline: Chart of Biography, 1765
This may seem like a rather obvious way to depict this type of infor‐
mation to us now, but it was innovative to Priestley’s readers. In our
day, timelines such as these are used extensively in project manage‐
ment, and Tableau includes a chart type known as a Gantt Bar chart
to make it easy to create one. Let’s consider the history of presidents
of the United States of America as we examine how to create this type
of timeline.
166 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Wikipedia records the day of birth and death of each of the 44 U.S.
presidents, as well as their first and last days in office. These dates can
be combined into a single spreadsheet, as shown in Figure 9-20.
Figure 9-20. Spreadsheet of U.S. president milestones
If we connect a new Tableau workbook to this spreadsheet, we will first
need to create two calculated fields: Life Span and Time in Office.
These two calculated fields are simple enough, but need to take into
account that not all presidents have died yet, and that the current
president hasn’t yet left office. If these fields are null (blank), then the
formula uses today’s date to calculate these two spans of time, as shown
in Figure 9-21.
Figure 9-21. Calculating life span and time in office
The Timeline 
| 
167
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Now that we’ve created these two fields, we can begin creating time‐
lines using the Gantt Bar option by following these steps:
1. Drag Took Office to the Columns shelf and change the pill to
Day, continuous.
2. Change the Marks type from Automatic to Gantt Bar using the
drop-down selector.
3. Drag Time in Office from the Measures pane to the Size shelf.
4. Drag Party from Dimensions to the Color shelf.
The resulting simple timeline is shown in Figure 9-22.
Figure 9-22. A simple timeline of U.S. presidential administrations,
colored by political party
If we want to break this timeline out by president, we can simply drag
President from the Dimensions pane to the Rows shelf. Doing so lists
each president in alphabetical order, so we can change the sort to be
in chronological order by clicking in the President pill on the Rows 
shelf, selecting Sort, and applying the sort rule shown in Figure 9-23.
After doing so, the timeline changes to appear as shown in Figure 9-24.
168 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-23. Sorting presidents by “Took office” date
Figure 9-24. U.S. presidential administration timeline, in chronologi‐
cal order
The Timeline 
| 
169
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
It would be nice to also show the total life span of each president on
the same timeline. Because we have the birth date and death date fig‐
ures, and therefore total life span, in the workbook, we can add them
by using the Dual Axis feature we have already considered. Follow
these steps:
1. Drag Born from Dimensions to the left of DAY(Took office) in
the Columns shelf.
2. Click in the new pill and change the from YEAR(Born) to green
DAY(Born).
3. In the Marks area, open the DAY(Born) section, replace SUM(Time
in Office) with SUM(Life Span) and remove Party from the
color shelf.
4. Click the down arrow in the DAY(Took office) pill in the Col‐
umns shelf and select Dual Axis.
5. Right-click on the top x-axis (Day of Took office) and select
Synchronize Axis.
6. Right-click on the top x-axis again and uncheck “Show Header.”
The resulting view is shown in Figure 9-25 with a few reference lines
added for context.
This turns out to be a very interesting and useful way to show events
over time, as it’s easy to identify presidents who died while in office,
as well as to see the number of previous and future U.S. presidents who
were alive during the Civil War, for example.
The timeline is a visual history, and because it’s visual, patterns and
relationships emerge in ways that are difficult to explain using only 
words.
170 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1. Andy Kirk, “In praise of slopegraphs,” Visualising Data, December 2012 (http://bit.ly/
kirk-slopegraphs)
Figure 9-25. The completed U.S. presidential timeline
The Slopegraph
The following project was inspired by a blog post by Andy Kirk, who
compares the change in points earned by professional English soccer
teams in the first 15 games of successive seasons.1
If we only want to show changes in time of a number of different items
from one point in time to another, the slopegraph can be useful. Let’s
walk through how we can make this type of chart in Tableau.
Step 1: Get the Data
League tables for each season up to a chosen game number are avail‐
able online. The teams’ results up to game 15 for both the 2012/2013
and 2013/2014 seasons were copied and pasted into an Excel spread‐
sheet, with an added column for Year, as shown in Figure 9-26.
The Slopegraph 
| 
171
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-26. The first 15 game results in Excel
If you read Andy’s blog post, you’ll notice that this spreadsheet is
structured differently than Andy’s. He had one column for 2012/2013
results and another column for 2013/2014 results. I’ve structured the
spreadsheet in this way so that I can use Year as a Measure in Tableau.
Step 2: Connect Tableau
This is a very straightforward step: Open Tableau, click Connect to
Data, and find your results spreadsheet.
Step 3: Create a Parameter and Matching Calculated
Field
Before creating the slopegraph, let’s make a Parameter that will allow
users to choose which stat to chart. This is a technique we’ll explore
more in later chapters as well.
Right-click anywhere in the Dimensions or Measures panel to the left,
and select Create New Parameter. Fill out the dialog box as shown in
Figure 9-27.
172 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-27. Creating a Parameter in Tableau
Click OK, and then right-click the newly created Parameter in the area
to the bottom left and select Show Parameter Control. You’ll see a drop-
down select appear in the upper right. You can use this to change the
value of the parameter.
We now need to create a calculated field to link to the different team
stats based on the user’s choice. Right-click on the parameter, select
Create Calculated Field, and fill out the dialog box as shown in
Figure 9-28.
The Slopegraph 
| 
173
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-28. Mapping a Calculated Field to a Parameter
Step 4: Create the Basic Slopegraph
Now that we have this Selected data field mapped to the Parameter,
we can use it to create our basic slopegraph as follows:
1. Drag Year to the Columns shelf, and change it to discrete (blue
pill) by clicking the down arrow and selecting Discrete.
2. Drag the Selected calculated field to the Rows shelf.
3. Change the Marks type from Automatic to Line.
4. Drag the CLUB Dimension to the Detail card and resize the view
(making it wider).
5. Drag another instance of the CLUB Dimension to the Label card,
and then click on Label and select Line Ends in the “Marks to
Label” area.
Step 4, numbers 1–5 are shown in Figure 9-29.
174 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-29. Creating a basic slopegraph in Tableau
Step 5: Add Line Coloring and Thickness
In order to make the lines one color for increasing values and another
color for decreasing values, and to change their thickness based on the
magnitude of the change, we’ll need to create three more calculated
fields:
Delta
The first calculated field computes the change in value of the se‐
lected statistic from one year to the next, as shown in Figure 9-30.
Direction
The second calculated field gives one string for values that got
better and another for values that got worse. This will be useful
for coloring the lines. See Figure 9-31.
Magnitude
This final calculated field yields the absolute value of the change,
or the magnitude. This will be helpful for making lines thicker or
thinner based on the magnitude of the change. See Figure 9-32.
The Slopegraph 
| 
175
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-30. Creating a Calculated Field to compute the change in
values
Figure 9-31. Creating a Calculated Field to categorize the direction of
change
176 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-32. A Calculated Field that determines the absolute value, or
magnitude, of the change
Now that these fields are created, let’s do the following to complete the
slopegraph itself:
1. Drag Direction to Color.
2. Drag Magnitude to Size.
3. Drag Selected to Label and change the label so that the Club name
and the value are in line, with a comma separating them.
4. Filter out the Clubs that were either promoted or relegated after
the 2012/2013 season.
5. Clean up the fonts (change them all to Gill Sans MT).
Step 5, numbers 1–5 are shown in Figure 9-33.
The Slopegraph 
| 
177
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-33. An updated slopegraph
I’ve also formatted the tooltips to yield a nice result when mousing
over any of the line ends, and I’ve hidden Marks that were placed in
awkward positions on the slopegraph that I couldn’t adjust.
Step 6: Design the Dashboard
We’ll cover dashboards much more starting in Chapter 12, but let’s see
how a finished dashboard could look using this slopegraph example.
After creating the slopegraph, we can add it to a new dashboard, add
the parameter control and a drop-down filter for Clubs as floating
dashboard objects, and then add a title and data source/reference in‐
formation at the bottom.
With this view, we can do a whole lot more than find out what’s behind
Manchester’s performance; we can also notice other big changes, such
as Liverpool’s suddenly prolific offense (select “Goals For”), or South‐
ampton’s dramatic improvement in defense (“Goals Against” drops
from 32 in 2012/2013 to only 14 in 2013/2014). See Figure 9-34.
178 
| 
Chapter 9: Changes Over Time
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 9-34. A slopegraph comparing the points earned by clubs
through 15 games
This is the value of the slopegraph. It allows us to make a whole host
of point-to-point comparisons, and the largest magnitude changes
literally jump to the surface.
Summary
In this chapter, we took a close look at a number of different ways to
show quantities and events over time. We considered simple line plots,
dual-axis line plots, connected scatterplots, different levels of aggre‐
gation, forecasts, timelines, and finally slopegraphs.
In the next chapter, we’ll move from time to the other ubiquitous
element of our universe: space.
Summary 
| 
179
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“There’s just something hypnotic about maps.”
—Ken Jennings,
74-time Jeopardy winner
CHAPTER 10
Maps and Location
Not only are maps hypnotic, but they are also very practical. Simply,
maps are our way of communicating where things are in relation to
one another. When I say the word “map,” you probably think of a world
map, but the earliest known maps are of the heavens. Dots on the walls
of the Lascaux caves in southwest France date back to 16,500 B.C, and
are interpreted to depict constellations: the position of stars in relation
to one another.
There are many, many different types of maps. Architectural floor
plans are also maps, as are dental charts and heat maps that show the
location of pitches in a baseball game. What they all have in common
is that at least one of their encodings is location in physical space.
In this chapter, we’ll focus on maps with two positional encodings:
latitude and longitude, or more generally, x and y. Of course the earth
is not actually a flat plane, so we will need to make use of what’s
called a standard projection to avoid requiring a three-dimensional
medium. There are many different types of projections, and Tableau
uses the Web Mercator (sometimes referred to as EPSG 3857) projec‐
tion common in online mapping applications such as Google Maps
and Bing Maps.
181
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
One Special Map
One year before he died at the age of 89, French civil engineer Charles
Joseph Minard left the world with a truly remarkable map depicting
the ill-fated march of Napoleon’s army to Moscow and back in the
winter of 1812, shown in Figure 10-1.
Figure 10-1. Minard’s “carte figurative” of Napoleon’s March of 1812
The thickness of the band represents the size of Napoleon’s army, with
the pale colored band showing the French soldiers’ advance on Mos‐
cow and the black band their return. The gradual narrowing of the
band conveys the staggering loss of life that occurred during the cam‐
paign. The line plot at the bottom charts the temperature during the
return.
What’s most remarkable about this now-famous map is that it was
created by a man who wasn’t a professional cartographer at all. Minard
spent his career working on dams, canals, bridges, and railroads, and
his map was largely ignored by professional cartographers of his day.
Minard was an expert in the flow of masses across a terrain, and he
applied his professional expertise to his hobby: history.
With a little effort using today’s tools, anyone can become a hobbyist
cartographer like Minard. In this chapter, we’re going to consider how
to communicate positional data using circle maps, filled maps (or
choropleths), and maps that combine both of these approaches. In
later chapters, we’ll consider different types of maps, including maps
with shapes and maps using custom imported background images.
182 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Circle Maps
So far, we’ve created a number of charts and graphs of various places
(chiefly New York City), but we have yet to create a map. At its simplest,
a map shows a graphical depiction of some place, with markings for
objects in that place. The markings on the map, like roads, borders, or
bridges, are spaced in proportion to their spacing in the real world.
A map, then, becomes an ideal chart on which to visualize data. One
way to visualize data on a map is to place a circle at a particular location,
the size or color of which is proportional to some quantity associated
with that location. This type of map is sometimes called a “bubble
map.”
Why use a circle? Because we quickly identify a circle with its
center point; there are no corners that would suggest another
intended location.
There are plenty of ways to make these types of maps, including using
the D3.js library or the Processing environment. Tableau provides an
incredibly easy way to create a circle map using the same drag-and-
drop interface we’ve been exploring. Let’s try it out.
If we go back to the New York City boroughs population data we con‐
sidered in Chapter 2, we can see that creating a map with circles is easy.
There are three ways to do it:
1. Double-click on any geographic data field (one that has a globe
icon next to it).
2. Select the geographic field by clicking on it, open the Show Me
panel, and select symbol maps.
3. Drag Latitude (generated) to the Rows shelf, drag Longitude
(generated) to the Columns shelf, and then drag County to
Detail.
All three of these methods result in the view shown in Figure 10-2, in
which Tableau places a blue circle at the center point of the coordinates
of the geographic field.
Circle Maps 
| 
183
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 10-2. Creating a “symbol map” with circles
Recall from Chapter 2 that Tableau automatically generated these co‐
ordinates for us. We didn’t need to find, download, and import the
coordinates of New York City counties ourself: Tableau contains these
values natively. Tableau also comes with coordinates for every country
and state or province in the world; cities with population greater than
15,000; and other geographic fields such as zip code, area code, and
metropolitan district for certain parts of the world. A complete list of
the types of geographic fields is shown in Figure 10-3.
Figure 10-3. Different types of geographic fields in Tableau
Now, all the map in Figure 10-2 really tells us is that our data set con‐
tains at least one record for five different counties. That’s not very
interesting, is it? What we really want to show is how many people live
184 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in each of these places. To do that, all we need to do is drag Popula
tion from the Measures shelf to the Size shelf, as shown in Figure 10-4.
Figure 10-4. Circle map with circles sized by a Measure
We can do this with any numeric data field type, but it’s best to use
Continuous (green) fields, as they will result in maps with circles that
are sized proportionately to the quantity. You can change the sizing by
clicking on Size and moving the slider up or down. To create the map
in Figure 10-4, I dragged the Size slider to the second notch, which
increased the size of each of the circles proportionately. I also added
County to the Label shelf so that those less familiar with New York will
be able to know the place names.
Now we can see the circles and their size and position relative to each
other, but comparisons aren’t as precise as they are with bar lengths.
Is the circle for New York county larger or smaller than the circle for
Bronx county? How much larger is the population in Kings than in
Richmond? Why not just make a bar chart, then? The map adds some‐
thing to the equation: relative position.
Adding a Second Encoding
We’ve encoded population with circle size, but we haven’t used color
yet. We could use the Population Density calculated field to make cir‐
cles darker proportionate with the number of people per square mile.
Circle Maps 
| 
185
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This would be a very intuitive thing to do, as we naturally identify
darker colors with more and lighter colors with less. By now you get
it: it’s as easy as dragging the Population Density field to the Color
shelf. The resulting view is shown in Figure 10-5.
Figure 10-5. Circle maps with two encodings: size and color
Now we can make a number of different comparisons. It’s more com‐
plex, but also more useful if we invest the time to learn the map. While
there are fewer people in New York County as compared to Queens,
the inhabitants of New York County are much more tightly packed.
Richmond has both the fewest inhabitants as well as the lowest pop‐
ulation density.
This isn’t any different than the comparisons we were able to make
with the bar chart shown in Figure 2-12 (the borough names have been
replaced with county names), but the map provides the added benefit
of being able to know where on the planet these place names are loca‐
ted. That’s valuable.
When Marks Multiply
We’ve made a very simple map: there are only five circles on it. What
does it look like if we create a map with a lot of marks? Let’s try it out.
186 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Because the world is a bigger place than just New York City, let’s take
a look at some global numbers: the growth of the Internet, by country,
from 2000 to 2010. The data is available as part of the World Bank
Indicators sample set that comes along with Tableau Desktop. Open a
new workbook, click Connect to Data and find Sample – World Bank
Indicators (Excel) in the Saved data sources section.
Let’s build our circle map by taking the following steps:
1. Double-click on Country / Region in the Dimensions area.
2. Drag the Measure called B: Internet users (per 100) to the
Size card.
3. Drag the Dimension Region to the Color card.
4. Click on the down arrow in the Region color legend area and
change The Americas to blue and Other to pink. (This is a matter
of preference, but I prefer using primary colors as much as
possible.)
Let’s pause and take a look at what we have, shown in Figure 10-6.
Figure 10-6. Average global Internet usage rates, by country, 2000–
2010
First, notice that when we dragged B: Internet users (per 100) to
the Size card, Tableau created a green pill called AVG(B: Internet
users (per 100). There is more than one value for each country/
region for the field B: Internet users (per 100) in the data set, so
Tableau had to do something with the set of rates for each country to
Circle Maps 
| 
187
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
give us a single circle on the map for each country. It could have sum‐
med up each value, given us a count, shown only the maximum or the
minimum, and a handful of other options you can see by clicking the
down arrow in the green pill and looking at the Measure menu.
But why is there more than one value for each country? If we look in
the Dimensions panel, we see that there is also a field called Date
(year). Every country has a rate for each year. We know the Internet
grew rapidly over the first decade of the twenty-first century, so we
likely don’t want to show the average rate. Instead, let’s add a Quick
Filter for year so we can see Internet usage rates for one specific year.
To do that, right-click on Date (year) in the Dimensions pane, select
Show Quick Filter, then click the down arrow in the upper-right corner
of the resulting multiple values list and change the filter type to a single
value list or single value slider.
Why do this last part and change the filter type? Well, it’s not likely
that users will want to know the average of the rates for a handful of
years, like 2000, 2002, and 2009. So instead of giving them this ability
and risk confusing them, let’s keep it simple and let them see the world
map for a single year.
If we set the year to 2010, we see the updated map in Figure 10-7.
Figure 10-7. Internet usage per 100 people in 2010, by country
Notice how Europe has become a giant red blob. The same is true for
the the Caribbean, only the blob is blue. What do we do about that?
Two things: we can change the formatting to allow for transparency
188 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and circle borders, and we can add a filter for country/region to allow
users to zoom in on one particular part of the world.
1. Click on the Color card and change the Transparency to 60%.
2. Still in the Color card options, add a gray border in the Effects
area. Steps 1 and 2 are shown in Figure 10-8.
3. Right-click on the Country / Region field in the Dimensions area
and select Show Quick Filter.
4. Change the Country / Region quick filter to the type of filter
you’d like to use. I’ll select the Single Value (Dropdown) style.
Figure 10-8. Dealing with “circle blobs” by adding borders and
transparency
Our final circle map of global Internet adoption by country is shown
in Figure 10-9.
Was coloring by Region the best choice in this case? It makes for a
prettier picture, but is it helpful?
Well, we had a number of options, including double encoding color
based on the same field dictating size. The only function coloring
based on Region performs, because we can already tell which countries
Circle Maps 
| 
189
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
belong together based on their proximity, is to resolve a few groupings
of countries close to the boundaries between the regions, like Green‐
land and Iceland. What it will do, though, is set us up to create a dash‐
board with multiple sheets, where regional colors are cues to link the
map with other charts. We’ll set that aside for later.
Figure 10-9. Global Internet adoption in 2010, by country
Next, let’s consider another way to show data on a map of the world
using a choropleth, or a filled map.
Filled Maps
Filled maps are great ways to show concentration by location, where
location is a distinct area on the map with borders separating it from
other areas. We see these very often with election results data, where
certain regions are shaded a certain color according to how they voted.
The Internet usage statistics are a great example of a data set that is
perfect for a filled map, because the data is in the form of a rate: users
per 100 in the population. This metric is a type of density, not mass.
If I see a map with circles, and place A has a bigger circle than place
B, my first assumption is that place A has more of something. But a
place with a higher rate than another place may have a greater con‐
centration, while having a far fewer number overall.
To consider an example, compare Iceland with India in 2010, as shown
in Figure 10-10.
190 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 10-10. Comparing Internet usage in Iceland and India, 2010
The World Bank data set includes the first three columns, and the
fourth was made with a simple calculated field, as shown in
Figure 10-11.
Figure 10-11. Calculating the absolute number of Internet users
As we can see, while Iceland has a far higher rate of Internet adoption
than India, the sheer number of Internet users in India overwhelms
the number in Iceland by more than 300:1. Mass versus density. Quan‐
tity versus rate.
Before we create the filled map, let’s rename the Sheet for the circle
map we just created and duplicate it. That way we can retain both maps
Filled Maps 
| 
191
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in our workbook and we can use either one. Once we’ve done that,
changing the map in the duplicated sheet from a circle map to a filled
map is a simple as selecting the filled map tile in Show Me. The result
is shown in Figure 10-12.
Figure 10-12. A filled map of Internet usage rates by country, 2010
Tableau automatically gets rid of the circles and replaces them with
country shapes colored an increasingly darker green in proportion to
the Internet adoption rate in each country. In this type of coloring,
termed “Sequential” in Tableau, only one color (or hue) is used.
This allows us to communicate rate very effectively, and there is less
risk that we’ll mislead viewers about the absolute number of Internet
users. We can clearly see that the rate is higher in North America,
Europe, and Australia, somewhat lower in South America and most
of Asia, and dramatically lower in Africa.
But can we easily tell which countries are at the halfway point, with
around 50 Internet users out of 100? That would be a difficult list to
come up with using the map as we have designed it. Let’s try a different
style of coloring: a diverging scale, in which more than one color is
used.
We’ll start with a color palette that evokes the notion of hot versus
cold: Orange-White-Blue Diverging. To aid cognition, let’s change the
defaults so that the deepest blue (cold) corresponds to 0 Internet users
out of 100, and the deepest orange (hot) corresponds to exactly 100
Internet users out of 100. Tableau defaulted to 0 and 96, which are the
192 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
min and max values in the data set, but this places the white midpoint
at an awkward 48 users out of 100, a meaningless value. The dialog
box used to edit colors is shown in Figure 10-13.
Figure 10-13. Editing the color palette for the global Internet user fil‐
led map
Once we make this change, the all-green filled map changes to the
filled map shown in Figure 10-14.
Figure 10-14. Filled heat map of global Internet usage
Filled Maps 
| 
193
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Which gives a clearer picture of the state of Internet usage in 2010, the
all green version in Figure 10-12, or the hot/cold version in
Figure 10-14? Now is it easier to tell which countries are at about 50%
Internet usage—the halfway point? We can tell pretty easily that Italy,
Portugal, Morocco, and Uruguay are at around 50 Internet users out
of 100.
But what about North Korea? As Figure 10-15 shows, this version of
the map is not without its problems. It seems at a glance that North
Korea is at about 50 Internet users per 100, which we know to be false.
In fact, North Korea is missing from the data set, and Tableau does not
include a shape for missing countries at all, which makes them seem
close to the halfway usage point of the color scheme we’ve chosen.
Figure 10-15. North Korea is missing data, not at 50 users per 100
Another example is shown in Figure 10-16. Portugal (51 users per 100)
and Morocco (49 users per 100) are both very close to the halfway
point in 2010, but data for the territory of Western Sahara is missing.
We can see that we’ve solved one problem and created another, which
is often the case with color choices. We could go with an orange-blue
diverging color palette rather than an orange-white-blue to make the
situation a little better, but if you try it for yourself you’ll see that it
194 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
isn’t a perfect solution either, as the gray of the base map is close to the
blue of Morocco.
Figure 10-16. Western Sahara is missing data; Morocco and Portugal
are not
Another possible solution is to change the style of base map from
“Gray” to “Dark.” To do this, just click Map from the menu, select Map
Options, and change the Background Style from Gray to Dark. The
result for this and the orange-blue color choice are shown in
Figure 10-17.
Figure 10-17. Two solutions to the missing values problem: orange-
blue (left) and a dark map (right)
Filled Maps 
| 
195
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
One further consideration when choosing a color scheme is
whether the viewer of the visualization will be able to view it
in color, or will see it only in grayscale. If there’s any chance
the viewer will see a grayscale version, steer clear of diverg‐
ing color palettes and stick with sequential.
The two versions of the map are shown in grayscale in Figure 10-18.
Notice how it’s impossible to tell the difference between the dark of
very high values (like in Scandinavia) and the dark of very low values
(like in Africa) when viewing the diverging color palette in grayscale.
With sequential, higher values are always darker than lower values, so
it’s perfectly clear in grayscale. If there’s any chance your viewer won’t
have a color display, use sequential.
Figure 10-18. Sequential (left) and diverging (right) color palettes
shown in grayscale
Dual-Encoded Maps
Now we’ve created a version of the Internet usage map with circles,
and a couple others with filled country shapes using different color
schemes. Both types communicated one variable: Internet usage per
100 users. But what if we also wanted to communicate which countries
have the most overall Internet usage?
The first thing we’ll have to do is to create a new variable for the num‐
ber of Internet users, because that isn’t included. What is included is
the rate of Internet users per 100, and the overall population of the
country, so creating the measure for the absolute number of Internet
users is as simple as creating a new calculated field, as shown in
Figure 10-19.
196 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 10-19. Creating a Calculated Field for the number of Internet
users
We could create two different maps, one for each variable, or we could
create a single map that encodes both variables. Let’s take a look at two
ways to show both variables on a single map: the first makes use of the
dual-axis feature, and the second makes use of the two attributes of
circles: size and color.
A Dual-Axis Map
Let’s start with the filled map we created (shown in Figure 10-14). We’ll
take the following steps to create a dual-axis map:
1. Drag another Latitude (generated) pill to the Rows shelf to the
right of the first one.
2. Click the small down arrow in the second Latitude (gener
ated) pill and select Dual Axis (as shown in Figure 10-20).
3. In the Marks card, open the panel for Latitude (generated)
(2) and change the Mark type from Automatic (or Filled Map) to
Shape.
4. Still in the Marks card area for Latitude (generated) (2), re‐
move AVG(B: Internet users (per 100) from the color shelf
and add B: Internet users (calculated) to the Size shelf.
Dual-Encoded Maps 
| 
197
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5. Use the Color and Size cards to change the color of the rings to a
darker gray and increase the size of all of the rings to produce the
final dual-axis map shown in Figure 10-21.
Figure 10-20. Create a dual-axis map
Figure 10-21. A dual-axis map showing both rate (color) and number
(circle sizes) of Internet users
If we pause a moment to take a look at what we’ve created, we’ll notice
that this version of the map would probably be slightly more intimi‐
dating to the first-time viewer. We’re communicating two different
198 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
measures via totally separate encodings, so viewers will need to invest
a little more time to “learn the map,” especially if we don’t have the
luxury of explaining it to them in person. Once they understand the
cipher though, they’ll get more in-depth insights in return.
Viewers can easily see, for example, that while the rate of Internet users
in China is relatively low (light blue color), it represents the highest
absolute number of Internet users in any country in the world in 2010.
That might not be very surprising, but other interesting comparisons
can be made. Compare Japan with India, for example. Both had around
100 million Internet users in 2010, but Japan had a much higher rate
of adoption. The Scandinavian countries, while still the darkest on the
map, contribute a fairly low total number of users to the global pool.
These types of comparisons can be made relatively quickly with this
type of map.
A Dual-Encoded Circle Map
The second way to show both variables on a single map is to use the
fact that we can encode measures to two different shape properties in
Tableau: color and size.
Let’s return to the circle map we created earlier in the chapter (see
Figure 10-9). If we review this first version of the circle map, we’ll
notice that we encoded circle size by the rate of Internet users per 100,
and we encoded circle color with region. Instead, let’s duplicate this
sheet (right-click on the Sheet tab and select Duplicate Sheet), and
rearrange the pills to encode number of Internet users to size and rate
of usage to color, as follows:
1. Remove Region from the Marks card area so that it no longer
encodes circle color (click the blue Region pill and drag and drop
it back into the Dimensions area).
2. Change the Marks type from Automatic to Circle.
3. In the Marks card area, click the Size icon next to the green AVG(B:
Internet users (per 100)) pill (shown as two rings), and
change this encoding to Color, as indicated in Figure 10-22.
4. Change the color palette to Orange-White-Blue Diverging, starting
a 0 and ending at 100.
Dual-Encoded Maps 
| 
199
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5. Drag the calculated field B: Internet Users (calculated) to
the Size shelf.
6. Increase the size of the circles.
Figure 10-22. Using the Marks card to change encodings
The resulting dual-encoded circle map is shown in Figure 10-23.
Figure 10-23. A dual-encoded circle map of Internet usage
It’s hard to say which does a better job of communicating the two
variables, the dual-axis map or the dual-encoded circle map. They both
are probably adequate, and a choice of which to use likely comes down
to a matter of preference. To me, the dual-encoded circle map shown
200 
| 
Chapter 10: Maps and Location
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in Figure 10-23 is easier to read, because (by definition) the dual-axis
map in Figure 10-21 involves occlusion of marks, as the circles are
overlaid on the country shapes. For this reason, it feels more “jumbled”
to me, which increases the intimidation factor upon viewing it for the
first time.
Summary
In this chapter, we created a number of different map types in Tableau
without ever dealing directly with GIS shapefiles or having to find
latitude and longitude coordinates. We compared symbol maps and
filled maps, and found ways to show more than one quantitative
measure at a time.
In the next chapter, we’ll dive into some more advanced mapping 
topics.
Summary 
| 
201
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“The map is not the territory.”
—Alfred Korzybski, philosopher and
scientist, 1931
CHAPTER 11
Advanced Maps
I remember my first job interview after engineering school. The year
was 2000, and online maps and driving directions were relatively new.
Feeling confident and wearing my best suit, I headed out the door with
a printout of my driving directions in hand for what should have been
a ten-minute drive north on the Ventura Freeway. Forty-five minutes
later and in the middle of a strawberry field in Camarillo, I felt the
sting of this quote like never before.
Korzybski’s statement is helpful because it points out that often we
confuse an abstraction (like a map) derived from something with the
thing itself. Indeed, this idea is applicable to each of the data visuali‐
zations we’ve created so far in this book, and is a healthy reminder any
time we are communicating data. We’re showing abstract representa‐
tions of reality, not reality itself. Just because some map says a partic‐
ular road goes over a creek doesn’t mean the road has to obey, no matter
how much a tardy job seeker may want it to. Maps contain approxi‐
mations, uncertainties, and errors.
So far, we’ve looked at circle maps and choropleth (or filled) maps. In
this chapter, we’ll consider a number of other types of maps, including
maps with shapes, maps showing paths, and views that plot map shapes
on axes. While these additional types of maps may contain their fair
share of inaccuracies, they can also serve a purpose as we communicate
data to others.
203
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Maps with Shapes
We love to look at maps with shapes on them. Online maps have sym‐
bols for freeways, national parks, and hotels. Shopping mall maps have
store logos and the universally recognized bathroom icons to guide us
to the right places in the least amount of time (hopefully!). As children,
we learn to read maps with icons like the ones at zoos that show the
different animal exhibits.
Why are these so effective? If we refer back to our data encoding ef‐
fectiveness diagram (Figure 1-6), we’ll get a clue as to why shapes on
maps can be such a powerful communication tool: notice that the two
most effective encodings for nominal values are position and shape.
Think of the proverbial tiger in the savannah: we are very quick to spot
images and to associate them with the place in which we saw them. It’s
just how our brain works.
We can also see from Figure 1-6 that we wouldn’t want to use shapes
to encode quantitative or ordinal values. Think of the way shapes are
used in the world around us: we use traffic signs with different shapes
to indicate the type of action to be performed (like stop or yield), but
we don’t use the shapes themselves to tell us the speed limit, for ex‐
ample. This is an issue of nominal versus quantitative information.
Let’s consider a few examples of how we can make good use of shapes
on maps to communicate data.
If I wanted to communicate where the 32 different professional foot‐
ball teams are located in the United States, I could simply provide a
list of team names and locations in table form, as shown in Figure 11-1,
obtained from Wikipedia.
As accurate as this list may be, it’s not very useful or interesting. Our
brains just can’t process it very efficiently for a whole host of tasks,
such as determining whether there are any clusters of teams, or fig‐
uring out which areas of the country have relatively few teams.
Alternatively, I could show a map of the team names using Tableau, as
shown in Figure 11-2, by connecting to the table, double-clicking on
City, dragging Team(s) to the Text shelf, and changing the Marks type
from Automatic to Text.
204 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-1. List of NFL teams and stadiums sourced from Wikipedia
Figure 11-2. Mapping football team cities
Note that three places aren’t automatically given latitude and longitude
coordinates and therefore don’t appear on the map at first: Miami
Gardens, FL; Landover, MD; and East Rutherford, NJ. This is because
these are not cities: they’re unincorporated communities or they have
fewer than 15,000 residents, so Tableau doesn’t autogenerate their
coordinates.
Maps with Shapes 
| 
205
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
To make them appear, click on the 3 unknown pill in the bottom right
of the map, select Edit Locations, and then enter the coordinates shown
in Figure 11-3 for each of the three respective locations.
Figure 11-3. Entering coordinates for cities that are unknown to
Tableau
The map with team name labels is much easier to digest than the list,
even if a few of the team names are difficult to read due to proximity
to another team. We can immediately see the clustering of teams in
the Northeast, and I can see right away that the Seattle players probably
fly the farthest over the course of a season to play their games.
But there’s still some ambiguity in this map, as I don’t know the exact
location of each team’s city relative to the text displayed. Are the cities
located near the first letters, the last letters, in the middle, or some‐
where else?
To resolve this ambiguity, we can change the Marks type from Text
back to Circles, and we see very quickly that each city is located in the
center of the text and slightly above it, as shown in Figure 11-4.
206 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-4. Mapping football teams with name and circle
This seems like a missed opportunity, though, because all of the blue
circles are the same shape and color. These symbols have the potential
to communicate more information than just latitude and longitude.
Is there a way to make use of this opportunity to either enhance in‐
terest, cognition, or memory?
I could place Team on the color shelf, or I could change the Marks type
to Shape and add Team to the Shape shelf, as shown in Figure 11-5.
I’m not a big fan of either one of these. In the first case, Tableau auto‐
matically mapped 20 different colors to the 32 different teams, mean‐
ing that some teams got the same colors, like the Carolina and Pitts‐
burgh teams (both are green). There is no reason for these two teams
to be linked in this way; they simply got assigned the same color due
to their position in the alphabetically sorted list of names.
It’s even worse with the shapes: the 32 teams got assigned one of 10
default shapes, meaning there are groups of three teams that arbitrarily
share the same shape. While I could edit the colors or shapes to give
each team a unique assignment, I don’t see how this would commu‐
nicate anything more effectively than the circle map in Figure 11-4.
If we wanted to convey something about each team, such as what type
of stadium they play in, we could use different shapes to communicate
this information. There are stadiums with three different roof types:
open, domed, and retractable (as indicated in Column H of the table
shown in Figure 11-1).
Maps with Shapes 
| 
207
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-5. Mapping football teams with different colors and stan‐
dard shapes
We can create shapes for each of the roof types (as shown in
Figure 11-6) and save them as individual image files (ideally in .png
with transparent backgrounds) in a folder called, say, stadiums. Then
we can make them accessible inside Tableau by placing that folder into
My Documents/My Tableau Repository/Shapes.
Figure 11-6. Images (.png files) corresponding to different stadium
roof types
208 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Once the files are in this location, we can then add them to the map
by taking the following steps:
1. Change the Mark type from Circle to Shape (the Shape card should
appear to the right of Tooltip)—Tableau changes the marks to
rings.
2. Drag Roof Type from Dimensions to the Shape shelf—Tableau
automatically assigns default shapes.
3. Click the Shape card (or click the small down arrow in the upper-
right corner of the shape legend).
4. In the dialog box that appears (see Figure 11-7), select your folder
in the Select Shape Palette and assign the appropriate icon to the
roof type in the list to the left. If the folder does not appear, click
the Reload Shapes button.
Figure 11-7. Editing shapes
The map changes to look like the map shown in Figure 11-8. (This map
was also changed to a dark map by selecting Map → Map Options →
Style → Dark.)
Maps with Shapes 
| 
209
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-8. Mapping football team stadium types using custom
shapes
If you were asked to quickly tell the locations of the domed roof sta‐
diums (indicated by the white round shape a circle in the center), you
could spot them rather quickly — all are located in the central section
of the country. You could also quickly see that all but one of the re‐
tractable roofs are in the southern states. These patterns are very dif‐
ficult to spot when the information is given in a table, but they reveal
themselves with a minimum amount of interrogation when shown on
a map: the audience gets an immediate return on very little effort.
But there are some issues with this map. Some shapes are hidden or
partially covered, such as the stadium shape for San Francisco, which
is almost entirely underneath the stadium shape for Oakland. I can’t
imagine fans of either team approving of this configuration. Similar
occlusion of logos is happening in the Northeast, where the stadium
shapes for the two New York teams overlap heavily.
This can be partially remedied by adding Annotations to the shapes
that are clustered. If we right-click on each shape, select Annotate and
then Mark, we can edit the resulting dialog box to make sure the data
field <Tm> is displayed. The team acronym appears on the map with
an arrow pointing to the shape.
We can move the resulting annotations to the desired locations on the
map and then right-click each one and change its format. I prefer to
remove the arrows from the line ends and change the line colors to a
lighter gray. The updated stadium map is shown in Figure 11-9 (with
210 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the map changed to the Normal style and shapes changed to standard
ones from the Proportions palette).
Figure 11-9. Updated football team city map with annotations
By now, we’ve established the usefulness of using shapes on maps to
communicate data. So far, all of the maps we’ve created show shapes
stuck to one place on a map. Sometimes, though, the point of showing
a map is to show people the path taken along a particular route. Next,
let’s consider how to handle data when the location on a map isn’t static,
but dynamic, like a hurricane in motion.
Maps Showing Paths
Weather patterns are excellent examples of objects that move over
time. When a hurricane makes its way across the surface of the ocean
and toward land, the whole world watches. There are rich sources of
historical hurricane data on the Web, such as the IBTrACS dataset
maintained by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra‐
tion, NOAA.
The table shown in Figure 11-10 shows an Excel spreadsheet created
from a .csv of 2012 hurricane data. Notice that each row contains a set
of coordinates and information about a particular storm at a particular
hour. There are multiple rows for each storm, and the series of coor‐
dinates contained in these rows provides a route that the storm fol‐
lowed over time.
Maps Showing Paths 
| 
211
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-10. NOAA hurricane data for 2012
If we connect Tableau to this data, and we drag Latitude to the Rows
shelf, Longitude to the Columns shelf, Name to the Label shelf, and
Basin to the Color shelf, then we get the circle map shown in
Figure 11-11.
Figure 11-11. The average location of each hurricane recorded in
2012
There isn’t really too much significance to the “average” latitude and
longitude of a storm. In fact, the average position could be in a place
that the storm never visited. What we’d really like to see is the route
of each storm as it made its way across the face of the planet.
To create such a map, we can do the following:
212 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1. Change the Marks type from Automatic to Line. Notice that a new
landing pad called Path appears to the right of Tooltip in the Marks
card.
2. Drag ISO_time to this Path landing pad/shelf. Notice that a new
blue pill called YEAR(ISO_time) appears in the Marks card with a
path icon to the left of it.
3. Click in the down arrow of the blue YEAR(ISO_time) pill in the
Marks area and choose More → Hour, as shown in Figure 11-12.
Figure 11-12. Changing the time field to be associated with each hour
The resulting hurricane plot is shown in Figure 11-13.
Maps Showing Paths 
| 
213
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-13. Hurricane plot showing the route of each hurricane of
2012
Notice that each line has an identical weight, so while we can visualize
the path traveled by each storm, we can’t see the relative strength or
size of each storm. Notice that the table in Figure 11-10 contains a
column called Wind (WMO). This provides a measure of the wind speed
(in knots) of each hurricane at each point in time.
We can drag this field to the Size shelf, move Basin to the Filters shelf
and Place Name to the Colors shelf to get the updated hurricane map
shown in Figure 11-14.
This is a great way to show the entire 2012 hurricane season in one
snapshot. What isn’t shown, though, is when these hurricanes occurred
during the course of the year. To see the hurricanes move their way
across the map, drag ISO_time to the Pages shelf, change the pill to
DAY(ISO_time), check the “Show History” box, and then press the
Play button, as shown in Figure 11-15.
This type of animated data visualization can leave a lasting impression
on an audience, as the viewers get a sense of the 2012 hurricane season
“playing out” in front of their eyes.
214 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-14. Updated hurricane map showing the path and strength
of each hurricane
Figure 11-15. Animating the hurricanes with the Pages shelf
Here’s another example of using the Path shelf to show routes on a
map. My two sons and I like to track our hikes using a GPS app for my
smart phone. Afterward, we download the data from the app site and
connect Tableau to see our trek. A recent hike in the hills near Mount
Si in Washington is shown in Figure 11-16.
Maps Showing Paths 
| 
215
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-16. The Little Si hike, May 26, 2013
You can also see that we captured the spots where we took photos,
showing them as custom camera shapes and mapping them on top of
our route using a dual-axis map. We also linked these camera icons to
the actual photos online, so you can click on each one and be taken to
a website showing the photo. We’ll consider how to do this when we
cover Dashboard Actions later on.
All of the maps we’ve created so far in this book have made use of the
Urban Mapping tiles that are triggered whenever we use a field with a
“Geographic Role” (as indicated by the globe icon next to the field
name in the Dimensions or Measures pane). Often, however, we want
to show the relative position of different objects with reference to a
space other than the surface of the earth, such as a building floor plan
or some other object projected onto a plane.
Lastly, we’re going to make use of Tableau’s built-in geographical filled
maps to make a different kind of filled map: one in which the shapes
of the regions are placed on types of views we considered earlier in the
book: scatterplots and bar plots.
Plotting Map Shapes Using Axes
The 2012 U.S. presidential election pitted the Democratic candidate
and incumbent, Barack Obama, against the Republican candidate and
former governor of the state of Massachusetts, Mitt Romney. After the
216 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
votes were tallied, a whole host of comparisons could be made, such
as how the voting record compared with other demographic variables,
including unemployment levels, degree of urbanization, and educa‐
tion levels, among many others. We’ll consider a few of these variables
in tandem, and see if there is any correlation between them.
The trick with these types of comparisons is to remember that
correlation does not imply causation.
First, we’ll start with the data. At a state level, we can obtain the voting
percentages and demographic statistics from governmental sites
(http://bit.ly/fed-elec-2012, http://bit.ly/reg-state-employment, http://
bit.ly/2010-UR-census, and http://bit.ly/educ-attainment), and com‐
bine them into the table shown in Figure 11-17.
Figure 11-17. Spreadsheet of voting rates and demographics
By now you’re familiar with how to connect Tableau to this data source
and you’re probably already thinking of a number of ways to visualize
these variables from the earlier chapters. It’s helpful to remember that
as soon as we connect Tableau to the data, we have at our disposal three
other geographic elements for each U.S. state: its latitude, longitude,
and shape. In this section, we’ll see how to make use of the built-in
Plotting Map Shapes Using Axes 
| 
217
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
shape library to enhance our common chart types so as to aid cognition
and memory.
Before we begin visualizing the data, let’s do some extra setup to create
a Parameter that we can use to quickly toggle between views with dif‐
ferent variables. Right-click in the Dimensions area and click Create
Parameter, then fill out the resulting dialog box with the information
shown in Figure 11-18.
Figure 11-18. Create a Parameter to change the “compare with”
variable
Once you click OK, a Parameters area appears in the lower-left corner
of the sheet, and “Compare with” appears in that area. Now that we
have this Parameter created, we can right-click it and select Show Pa
rameter Control. The drop-down selector should now appear in the
upper-right corner of the sheet. While you can now change the value
of the Parameter by using the drop-down menu, it isn’t linked to
anything.
We need to link a new calculated field to it first. To do so, right-click
on Compare with in the Parameters area in the bottom left, select
Create Calculated Field, and fill out the resulting dialog box as shown
in Figure 11-19, making sure the text you enter is exactly as it appears
in the Parameter dialog box (it’s case-sensitive).
218 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-19. Creating a Calculated Field for the Parameter to
control
Now that we have this calculated field called “Chosen Demographic”
in the Measures area, let’s use it to create a scatterplot comparing the
various state demographics with the voting record using the following
nine steps:
1. Drag Chosen Demographic to the Columns shelf.
2. Drag Voted for Obama to the Rows shelf.
3. Drag State to the Level of Detail.
4. Change the Marks type from Automatic to Filled Map.
5. Click the Size card and increase the size to the second notch.
6. Drag State ID to Label.
7. Drag Voted for Obama to the Color shelf and edit the colors as
shown in Figure 11-20.
8. Right click in the scatterplot and select Trend Lines → Show Trend
Lines.
Plotting Map Shapes Using Axes 
| 
219
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9. Right click on the y-axis and select Add Reference Line, Band, or
Box... and complete the dialog box as shown in Figure 11-21.
Figure 11-20. Creating the U.S. political color scheme
Figure 11-21. Adding a reference line at 50% voting for Obama
220 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The resulting scatterplot (with grid lines removed) is shown in
Figure 11-22. Notice that we can use the Parameter control in the upper
right to quickly change the x-axis variable to any of the five fields we
included in the Parameter.
Figure 11-22. Scatterplot of demographics and voting results
We can figure out which of the five variables is most closely correlated
with the voting record by clicking on the trend line, right-clicking, and
selecting Describe Trend Model. The trend model when “Advanced
degree or more” is selected is shown in Figure 11-23.
Figure 11-23. Trend Model for “advanced degree or more” versus “%
voted for Obama”
Plotting Map Shapes Using Axes 
| 
221
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-24. Significance and strength of correlation for five
variables
Another way to show two variables at a time using these shapes is to
create a dual-axis bar chart with the state shapes at the end of the bars,
as shown in Figure 11-25. The key to building this chart is to change
the Marks type of the second axis to Filled Map, as we did in step 4
when we created the scatterplot.
Figure 11-25. Using state shapes on a dual-axis map
The same can be done with country shapes, as shown in
Figure 11-26, comparing trade and GDP for the G-20 nations.
222 
| 
Chapter 11: Advanced Maps
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 11-26. Trade versus GDP for the G20 nations
Summary
In this chapter, we’ve considered a number of advanced mapping
functions in Tableau. We’ve added shapes to maps, mapped moving
objects via the Path and Pages shelves, and used geographic region
shapes on common chart types.
We’ve now considered how to communicate data using many different
types of individual charts, graphs, and maps. The focus has been on
communicating effectively using the abilities of Tableau to use data
fields as encoding types, and to quickly filter the view using the power
of Tableau’s visual analytics engine.
In the subsequent chapters, we’ll consider how to bring multiple views,
filters, parameters, and various objects into richly interactive data
dashboards.
Summary 
| 
223
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“You don’t have to cook fancy or
complicated masterpieces—just good
food from fresh ingredients.”
—Julia Child
CHAPTER 12
The Joy of Dashboards
If we compare communicating data with cooking, then what we’ve
covered so far in this book amounts to a course on individual ingre‐
dients. Just as a master chef knows how to combine ingredients to serve
up a meal, so an expert communicator of data can mix different charts,
graphs, and tables to deliver a multifaceted message.
The analogy to a meal in this context is known as a dashboard. In this
chapter, we’ll consider different types and styles of dashboards, and
we’ll outline key factors to consider before creating them for
consumption.
But first, it’s important that we distinguish between two different, but
related meanings of the word:
A data dashboard
A single display that combines multiple data visualizations, tables,
text, and figures to give a multifaceted view of a subject.
Dashboards in Tableau
One of two tab types (the other type is a Sheet) that allows users
to combine one or more Sheets with other objects—such as text,
images, and web pages—into a single display.
The first definition is a general term describing how data is shared,
and the second relates specifically to Tableau. The main difference
between the two is that a data dashboard always involves multiple
225
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
views in the same display, while a Dashboard in Tableau doesn’t
necessarily include multiple views (though it often does).
In other words, it’s possible to create a Tableau Dashboard that only
contains a single Sheet. Why would anyone do this? As we’ll show,
Dashboards in Tableau can be used to add text and images and format
even a single visualization in helpful ways, as the Periodic Table dash‐
board in Figure 12-1 illustrates.
Figure 12-1. An example of a Tableau Dashboard with a single Sheet
Dashboards in Tableau
There are a number of advantages of using Dashboards in Tableau to
create a final version of your message to share with your audience. In
order to illustrate the advantages, we’ll consider an example of a tiled
dashboard, shown in Figure 12-2.
226 
| 
Chapter 12: The Joy of Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 12-2. An illustrative example of a tiled dashboard
The following are six distinct advantages to using Dashboards over
Sheets in Tableau, illustrated in Figure 12-3:
Descriptive text
Titles, lead-in paragraphs, references, and attributions that de‐
scribe the topic and give important background information can
be added and positioned.
KPIs and metrics
Important metrics, KPIs, or summary values can be added, often
toward the top of the dashboard, that communicate the “big
picture.”
Multiple annotations
In explanatory dashboards, multiple annotations can be added
that explain outliers and patterns.
Filters
In exploratory dashboards, filters can be added that change one,
some, or all of the visualizations on the dashboard, allowing users
to ask and answer a number of different questions about the data.
Dashboards in Tableau 
| 
227
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Sheet actions
Each visualization on a dashboard can be configured to filter or
highlight the other sheets, giving users the ability to interrogate
the data to find hidden insights.
Multimedia
Images, video, and even web pages can be added to the dashboard
to provide additional context, aid cognition, and increase
memory.
Figure 12-3. Six dashboard advantages illustrated
As these six advantages demonstrate, there is often a case to be made
for creating a Dashboard rather than showing individual Sheets in
sequence over the course of a presentation. Whether you’re making
one simple point with a single chart or illustrating a complex set of
relationships with multiple visualizations, Tableau Dashboards afford
you the design freedom and interactive capabilities to accomplish your
objective.
A Word of Caution
Before we dive into data dashboards, let’s pause for a moment and
consider whether they’re even necessary. When communicating data,
is it really useful to combine a number of different visualizations into
the same display? Won’t that just overwhelm the audience? Overload‐
ing the audience is a very real concern, and often the dashboard
228 
| 
Chapter 12: The Joy of Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
designer is tempted to add more and more data to the display in a show
of force.
As the epigraph to this chapter tells us, the best meals are often the
least complicated, with the fewest ingredients. So, too, the least com‐
plicated data displays often convey the message in the strongest pos‐
sible way. More is not always better, and care should be taken when
adding anything to a dashboard that the additional pixels serve a real
and useful purpose.
Showing multiple charts simultaneously on a dashboard is useful
when:
• Juxtaposing different views provides a perspective that each one
alone fails to provide; or
• Interactivity among different views, such as filtering or highlight‐
ing, allows viewers to answer a myriad of questions about the data
ad hoc; or
• There is some inherent constraint such as limited time or space
in which to present the data to the audience, and no single view
will communicate all that is required.
“Begin with the End in Mind”
Before designing a data dashboard in Tableau or any other tool, you
should be able to clearly state why a dashboard is needed. If it’s because
you want to impress your audience with data, or with your dashboard
design skills, or because a particular software package makes it easy to
do so, then you’d do well to revisit the Goal Triangle shown in
Figure 1-4:
• Who is the target audience?
• What is your intended meaning?
• Why? What is the desired effect?
Once you’ve defined these three core elements, it’s important to define
the key objectives of the display in greater detail. What’s the primary
objective? Are there any secondary objectives?
Here are four additional questions to consider:
A Word of Caution 
| 
229
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• Are you trying to make a specific point, are you trying to give the
target audience the ability to ask and answer their own questions,
or both?
• Is your target audience interested in the subject matter, and if so,
why? What interests them most about the data?
• What questions will your audience have about the data?
• Does the data relate to specific tasks or decisions that your audi‐
ence is responsible for? What are the tasks or decisions and how
can the data help?
Once you have answers to these questions, you should be able to de‐
termine what type of dashboard will be most effective. In the next
section, we’ll consider five different types of dashboards.
Types of Dashboards
There are five different types of dashboards that you can create: ex‐
planatory, exploratory, explanatory/exploratory, storytelling, and
infographics-style dashboards. Let’s take a look at each:
Explanatory dashboards
The primary objective is to point out a specific fact (or facts) about
a certain subject to educate readers. Key features include annota‐
tions and informative text. Explanatory dashboards are often
static, with very few, if any, interactive elements, such as the one
in Figure 12-4.
Exploratory dashboards
The primary objective is to allow users to delve into a subject ad
hoc and find answers about a whole host of potential questions.
Exploratory dashboards are often interactive, featuring various
types of controls that allow the user to drill-down to specific sub‐
sets of the data, like the example in Figure 12-5.
Explanatory/exploratory dashboards
Dashboards that explain central facts while also allowing for an‐
cillary analyses can be very powerful. As such, they often include
both annotations and interactive controls, such as the one about 
avalanches in the United States, shown in Figure 12-6.
230 
| 
Chapter 12: The Joy of Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 12-4. An example of an explanatory dashboard showing the
best and worst NYC recyclers
Figure 12-5. An example of an exploratory dashboard of basketball
player stats
Types of Dashboards 
| 
231
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 12-6. This explanatory/exploratory dashboard gives key facts
and allows for interrogation
Storytelling dashboards
Often, dashboards seek to convey a series of events or show how
a particular situation unfolded over time. Such dashboards are
thus used to facilitate storytelling, like the example in
Figure 12-7. The top three boxes, when clicked, step the viewer
through various stages in a contest.
232 
| 
Chapter 12: The Joy of Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 12-7. An example of a storytelling dashboard that conveys a
development over time
Infographics
This style of data display includes a series of facts about a specific
subject, often oriented in one tall column. Unfortunately, many
infographics are merely tall posters full of cheesy images and in‐
dividual percentages or figures. Often, the figures are accompa‐
nied by an ill-advised attempt at a visualization that skews the
proportions horribly. But just because many abuse this format
doesn’t mean it’s useless. Figure 12-8 shows one attempt to convey
a series of facts about a particularly amazing feat of bravery.
Types of Dashboards 
| 
233
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 12-8. An infographics-style data dashboard about Baumgart‐
ner’s 24-mile jump
234 
| 
Chapter 12: The Joy of Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Once you have a good handle on the type of data dashboard most
appropriate to your objectives, it’s also helpful to identify the context.
Context Is King
Data dashboards are used to communicate data in a variety of different
contexts, including analytics/decision support, reference/open data,
and data journalism. Let’s take a closer look at each of these:
Analytics/decision support
Organizations create data dashboards to show performance over
time and to inform managerial decisions necessary to achieve
growth objectives. Many Business Intelligence (BI) and web ana‐
lytics dashboards, as well as Key Process Indicator (KPI) Score‐
cards, fall into this category. Figure 12-9 shows traffic to my blog,
http://dataremixed.com, from the Google Analytics connector
available in Tableau Desktop. This dashboard helps me answer the
following questions:
• What type of content should I focus on creating in order to
drive traffic to my site?
• What sites refer readers to my blog, and where are the op‐
portunities to promote?
• Where are my readers located in the world and how should
that inform my strategy?
Data journalism
Online newspapers often publish data dashboards in order to in‐
form readers about topics in the news, and to allow them to “drill
down” to uncover stories relevant to them. More focus is placed
on visual appeal and aesthetics, as it’s possible that readers’ atten‐
tion must first be captured. Figure 12-10 shows the history of mass
shootings in the United States from 1982 through 2012.
Reference/open data
Data bloggers around the world typically convert repositories of
data into data dashboards, not to relay the news or inform a spe‐
cific decision, but rather to educate their readers about specific
topics of interest, such as the Type I Diabetes prevalence dash‐
board created and published by Ramon Martinez of Health In‐
telligence shown in Figure 12-11.
Types of Dashboards 
| 
235
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 12-9. A web analytics dashboard: pageviews to http://datare
mixed.com
Figure 12-10. A data journalism dashboard: U.S. mass shootings,
1982–2012
236 
| 
Chapter 12: The Joy of Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 12-11. An open data dashboard: Prevalence of diabetes melli‐
tus in adults, 2013
While these different contexts may call for slightly different ap‐
proaches, the fundamental way in which people interpret, or decode,
data visualizations remains the same. Showing more than one data
visualization in a particular view, such as in a data dashboard, means
that the viewer must perform multiple decoding operations, which
likely requires more effort on the viewer’s part.
How much effort is your audience willing to put forward, and how
much do they expect (or need) to get in return? The answer is different
for different contexts.
Types of Dashboards 
| 
237
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Summary
In this chapter, we compared the act of creating dashboards to cooking.
In both disciplines, it’s easy to assume that more is better and thereby
spoil the result. We also defined the various types of dashboards.
In the next chapter, we’ll create some basic Dashboards in Tableau,
and in the final chapter, we’ll consider some more advanced usages.
238 
| 
Chapter 12: The Joy of Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“‘Data! Data! Data!’ he cried impatiently.
‘I can’t make bricks without clay.’”
—Sir Arthur Conan Doyle,
“The Adventure of the Copper Beeches”
CHAPTER 13
Building Dashboards
In this chapter, let’s return to the analogy we used in the opening
paragraphs of Chapter 1 and compare the act of communicating data
with building a structure. As the famous fictional detective Sherlock
Holmes relates emphatically in this chapter’s epigraph, the raw mate‐
rial that we’re using is data.
Now, neither we nor our audience have Holmes’ superior powers of
deduction, so we need to take the raw material and build a suitable
structure in order to facilitate discovery. And if the data is the clay,
then the bricks are the individual charts and graphs, and the overall
structure is the dashboard.
Building a dashboard that communicates data well doesn’t happen all
at once. It requires some creative thought and diligent crafting. And
like all creative processes, the process of building a data dashboard is
rarely linear. There is typically a great deal of reworking and fine-
tuning throughout.
That being said, it is useful to identify the different activities involved
in creating dashboards in Tableau, and the general order in which they
occur:
Design
Make a few rough sketches of dashboard layouts that use your data
to help you accomplish your overall goal, taking into considera‐
239
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
tion the medium and channel that you will use to deliver the final
version to your audience.
Sheets
Build each visualization as an individual Sheet and then add them
to your dashboard, arranging them with their Quick Filters,
Parameters, and Legends according to your chosen layout and
dashboard size.
Annotations
Add titles, lead-in text, tooltips, labels, notes, instructions, sour‐
ces, and other pertinent textual information to explain to your
audience how to interact with the dashboard and/or how to in‐
terpret the data.
Objects
Add images, layout containers, blank spaces, and web page objects
as needed to provide additional context to the visualizations, as
long as they serve a real purpose.
Actions
Configure dashboard interactivity using actions to filter, high‐
light, and hyperlink the various Sheets and Objects in ways that
help your audience explore and answer real questions.
Formatting
Configure the fit and finish of the dashboard by adjusting fonts,
colors, borders, grid lines, and shading to remove distractions and
enhance the visual appeal of the dashboard.
Delivery
Share the dashboard with your audience via your chosen medium
and channel, whether guided or unguided.
Results
Find out whether your message was received, properly interpret‐
ed, and found effective in achieving your goals.
Let’s use a few different examples to walk through these steps and build
interactive dashboards in Tableau. We’ll consider an updated version
of the World Bank Internet usage data set we considered in Chap‐
ter 10. Let’s start by first taking a look at a sample of the data set, as
shown in Figure 13-1.
240 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-1. World Bank Internet usage statistics by country, 1994–
2012
At a glance, we can see that each country has an associated region, and
both population and Internet usage statistics for a variety of years,
including more recent data from 2011 and 2012. Of course, the format
that the data set is in doesn’t facilitate communication with an audi‐
ence. That’s where the skills we’ve learned in the first 12 chapters will
be useful to craft something more informative.
There are two different angles to the Internet usage topic:
Proportion
What is the number of Internet users per 100 people in a given
country and year? (For example, in China in 2012, there were
42.30 Internet users per 100 people.)
Quantity
How many total Internet users are there estimated to be in a given
country and year? (For example, China had an estimated 571M
Internet users in 2012.)
To compute this value, we’ll need to create a Calculated Field
that multiplies Internet users per 100 with the population and
divides by 100, as shown in Figure 13-2.
Building Dashboards 
| 
241
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-2. Adding a calculated field to estimate total Internet users
What we ultimately create for our audience strongly depends on what
we hope to accomplish. Returning to our goal model in Chapter 1, we
need to consider who we are presenting to, what meaning we hope to
relate, and why we are doing so in the first place:
• If we want to allow them to ask and answer their own questions,
we’ll want to give them an exploratory dashboard that makes it
easy to do so.
• If we want them to know the answer to a single specific or multiple
specific questions, then we’ll want to create an explanatory dash‐
board that makes those answers clear.
First, we’ll build an exploratory dashboard that allows users to answer
a whole host of questions, and then we’ll build two different explana‐
tory dashboards that clearly articulate specific (and completely differ‐
ent) insights from this data set.
242 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Building an Exploratory Dashboard
As we discussed in the previous chapter, the primary objective of an
exploratory dashboard is to allow the audience to delve into a subject
ad hoc and find answers about a whole host of potential questions.
Knowing that this is our objective, let’s walk through the eight steps
mentioned earlier.
Step 1: Design
To allow our audience to fully explore the subject, we’ll want to include
a few different types of views:
• A timeline that shows how usage has changed over time
• A world map to see where usage is the highest, geographically
• A chart to directly visualize usage by country from a common base
What could this look like? There are countless ways we could show
these three views on the same dashboard. Take a minute to sketch some
of your ideas.
We also want to allow the audience to explore both the proportion as
well as the estimated total, and make it clear which aspect they are
considering at any given moment.
Step 2: Sheets
It’s critical that the audience be able to explore the subject of Internet
usage by both proportion as well as quantity. In order to facilitate this
dual function, we’ll need to create a new Parameter (right-click in the
Dimensions and Measures area and select Create Parameter...) and an
associated Calculated Field (right-click on the Parameter once it’s cre‐
ated and select Create Calculated Field...) as shown in Figure 13-3.
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
243
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-3. “Select” Parameter and associated “Show” Calculated
Field
Now that we have these foundational types of “clay,” we can start
building the individual “bricks” for our dashboard, as shown in Fig‐
ures 13-4, 13-5, and 13-6. If you need to review how to build these
Sheets, go back to Chapter 3 (bar chart), Chapter 9 (timeline), and
Chapter 10 (global map).
244 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-4. The global symbols map sized by Internet usage (propor‐
tion or quantity)
Figure 13-5. The timeline showing the growth of Internet usage and
colored by region
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
245
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-6. The dual-axis bar chart colored by region with rank add‐
ed
Make sure to give each visualization an appropriate name; I
renamed them “Map,” “Trend Line,” and “Rank.” That will
make it much easier when we go to add them to the Dash‐
board not to have to deal with “Sheet 1,” “Sheet 2,” and so on.
One important detail is the Rank column we have added at the far left
of the bar chart. We used the Rank table calculation to add it as follows:
1. With the basic dual-axis bar chart already created, drag Show to
the Rows shelf to add the green SUM(Show) pill.
2. Click on the down arrow in the green SUM(Show) pill on the Rows
shelf and change it to Discrete. The pill changes from green to
blue.
3. Click on the down arrow again and select Quick Table Calculation
→ Rank.
4. Click on the down arrow again and select Edit Table Calculation;
then in Running along, select Advanced, updating the dialog box
as shown in Figure 13-7.
246 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-7. Updating the Rank field
We now have the three main Sheets built, and we can create a new
Dashboard to bring them together onto the same canvas. From the
top file menu, click Dashboard → New Dashboard, or click the 
 icon
in the bottom.
I know that I want to embed this Dashboard on my website, which has
a column width of 940 pixels, so in the bottom left corner of the newly
created empty Dashboard, I’ll set the Size to Exactly 940 by 700, as
shown in Figure 13-8. I can always adjust the height later if I need to.
Figure 13-8. Setting the Dashboard size
Next, with the Add new sheets and objects as: set to Tiled, we’ll simply
drag the three Sheets from the Dashboard area on the left onto the
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
247
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Dashboard in their approximate locations, according to our selected
design. The result is shown in Figure 13-9.
Figure 13-9. The rough Dashboard with Sheets dropped into place
shown in their default locations
Notice that the Rank Sheet has both horizontal and vertical scroll bars.
It’s best to eliminate scroll bars as much as possible, as they hide in‐
formation and require the user to interact to access that information.
In this case, it would be difficult to fit all 204 countries in the vertical
space allotted to our Dashboard, but we can certainly do something
about the horizontal scroll bars. Click the arrow in the upper-right
corner of the Rank Sheet and select Fit → Fit Width.
Moving Things Around
I’d argue that we can remove the map size legend altogether, because
the map only gives a general sense of relative Internet usage by country.
The main purpose is to show patterns by region (very high usage across
Europe, very sparse usage in the middle of Africa, highly varied usage
within Asia, etc.). More precise comparisons can be made using the
Rank bar chart. To remove the size legend, just click the X in its upper-
right corner.
248 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Next, there’s a large chunk of whitespace below the color legend and
Parameter drop-down. Let’s float these objects so they don’t take up
so much space. To do so, click the arrow in the upper-right corner of
each, and set them to Floating, moving them to the most convenient
and logical location as shown in Figure 13-10.
Figure 13-10. Floating the legend and Parameter drop-down selector
If you don’t see the Quick Filters for Region and Year, or if you’d like
to add more in the future, you can click on the Map and then from the
top toolbar, select Analysis → Quick Filters → Region. Change it from
a Multiple Values (List) type to a Single Value (Dropdown) type, and
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
249
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
then float it somewhere near the Select Parameter dropdown. Click
on the Timeline and select Analysis → Quick Filters → Year. Change it
from a list to a Slider, customize it by removing the Read-out and
Buttons, and place it below the x-axis of the timeline, sizing it so that
the tick marks of the Slider align with the tick marks of the x-axis, as
shown in Figure 13-10.
The basic frame of the structure we’re building is now in place. Next,
we’ll add “signage” to the structure in the form of annotations: text to
help orient our audience and provide useful information.
Step 3: Annotations
The annotation layer is critical, especially when we are creating a
dashboard that will “stand alone,” meaning that audience members
will take it in without anyone present to guide them. Important ele‐
ments to consider adding include:
• A title
• A lead-in paragraph or sentence
• A data source call-out
• A “created on” date
• A “created by” name
• Text that hyperlinks to reference websites
• Instructions on how to use the dashboard
• Call-outs or notes about the data
• Well formatted “tooltips” that pop up when the user hovers over
or selects marks
With the exception of the last bullet, these items can be added by sim‐
ply dragging Text objects from the middle of the left panel onto the
Dashboard. Depending on how you want the text to appear, it can be
either Tiled or Floating. Six different annotations have been added as
shown in Figure 13-11, highlighted in yellow for illustrative purposes.
All of the annotations we just created can be seen without any inter‐
action. They act as signage to give context and explain what the dash‐
board is all about and how to use it.
Sometimes we want to add context to the data themselves. By default,
Tableau adds tooltips to each mark. Hovering over any mark results
250 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in a pop-up window that gives additional information about the mark.
By default, the tooltips are functional but not very interesting
(Figure 13-12).
Figure 13-11. Exploratory dashboard with various text annotations
added
Figure 13-12. A default tooltip generated for the Map Sheet
Luckily, we can customize these tooltips using a rich text editor that
also gives us the ability to add data fields and even Parameter values.
For example, I edited the tooltips for each of the three Sheets, as shown
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
251
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in Figure 13-13. To add the data fields, which appear in <brackets>, I
used the Insert button in the top toolbar of the Tooltip edit dialog box.
Figure 13-13. Formatted tooltips for the Map (top), Trend Line (mid‐
dle) and Rank (bottom) Sheets
252 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Note that in order for a data field to appear in the Insert menu,
that data field needs to be used somewhere on the Sheet. If the
data field you want to use doesn’t appear in the menu, drag‐
ging it to the Tooltip card in the Marks area of a Sheet will do
the trick.
Now, hovering over a mark yields a much nicer experience for the
person interacting with your dashboard, as shown in Figure 13-14.
Figure 13-14. Hovering over a mark with a formatted tooltip
Next, we’ll consider whether adding any other objects to the Dash‐
board would be useful.
Step 4: Objects
Tableau also gives us the ability to add images and web page objects
to a dashboard to add additional context. For example, we might want
to add our logo and make it link to our website.
To add my logo, I’ll click on Image in the middle of the left panel,
making sure Floating is highlighted, and then drag an Image object to
the upper-right corner of the dashboard. When I drop it there, Tableau
automatically opens a dialog box that lets me navigate to my image
file. Once I find it, I’ll click Open, and then resize the image to fit in
the space I’ve made for it. I also dragged a “Blank” object to the right
of the lead-in paragraph to make additional room for the logo, as
shown in Figure 13-15.
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
253
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-15. The Dashboard’s top-right corner with Image object
added
To link the Image object to my website, I’ll click in the upper-right
corner of the image itself, select Set URL, and fill out the resulting
dialog box, as shown in Figure 13-16. Now, when a person interacting
with my Dashboard clicks on my logo, a new browser window will
open to take them to my site.
Figure 13-16. Adding a URL hyperlink to a Dashboard Image object
The logo is a good feature to add to a dashboard, provided that it serves
a useful purpose. Adding frivolous images or “clipart” is not recom‐
mended, as it will only serve to detract from the data. As we discussed
in Chapter 11, images and icons can be rich sources of emotional con‐
tent, so they’re a double-edged sword: they can do much good or much
harm, depending on how they’re used.
“Hover for More Info” icons
A small icon that provides detailed instructions and information when
the user hovers over it can be a useful feature to add to an exploratory
dashboard, especially when there’s high complexity. Tableau doesn’t
allow us to add a tooltip to an Image object, so we’ll need to jump
through a few hoops to make a feature like this. It involves creating a
new Sheet with a shape mark that has a tooltip. Here are the steps
involved:
254 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1. Create the icon image that you’d like to use and add it to a new
folder in Documents → My Tableau Repository → Shapes. I named
my folder Hover, and I’ll be using this: 
2. Create a new Sheet in your Tableau Workbook and rename it Info
or something like that.
3. Create a new Calculated Field, give it the name Info (or whatever
you want to call it) and enter some simple text in quotes, like
“Info.”
4. In the new Sheet, change the Marks type from Automatic to Shape
and drag the Info Calculated Field to the Shapes card.
5. Change the Shape from the default ring shape to your chosen
shape by clicking the down arrow in the Shape legend, selecting
Edit Shape, and navigating to your new Hover folder, as shown in
Figure 13-17.
Figure 13-17. Changing the shape of your icon
6. Edit the tooltip for the icon by selecting Worksheet → Tooltip and
entering the instructions and information that you’d like to in‐
clude, as shown in Figure 13-18.
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
255
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-18. Editing the tooltip for the instructional icon
7. Get rid of the box around the icon by right-clicking on the icon,
selecting Format, clicking the Format Borders icon on the left
panel that appears, and setting the Row and Column Dividers to
None, as shown in Figure 13-19.
8. Click on the Dashboard tab and drag the new Info Sheet onto the
Dashboard as a floating object. Place it where you want, get rid of
the sheet title and legend that are included by default, and size the
Sheet to Fit to the Entire View. The icon now shows up as pictured
in Figure 13-20.
256 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-19. Formatting the borders of the icon
Figure 13-20. Dashboard shown with hover icon
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
257
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This new hover icon we’ve added is more an annotation than an image,
illustrating my earlier claim that dashboard building is a highly itera‐
tive process and the steps are not strictly linear. We’ll consider how to
add web page objects in the next chapter.
Step 5: Actions
Now we come to the part of Tableau that is perhaps the most powerful:
the ability to make the visualizations we’ve created and added to our
dashboard richly interactive. This can give users the ability to rapidly
explore multiple elements of the data from multiple angles in a visual
way. We can give our users the ability to instantly change all of the
views based on a single Quick Filter, or allow them to click on one
chart and have it filter the others. The result, if done well, is a data
discovery gold mine.
There are three types of Dashboard Actions:
Filter
Take away all records that don’t belong in a selected subset and
only show those records that do apply. For example, clicking on a
single country circle on the map limits the timeline to show only
the line for that country.
Highlight
Make the corresponding measure show more prominently in oth‐
er Sheets by fading all other measures. For example, hovering over
a single country circle on the map makes it easy to spot the cor‐
responding country in the bar chart by fading out all other
countries.
URL
Open a web page either in the browser or in the Dashboard itself
when the user clicks a mark that is connected to a specific URL.
For example, clicking on a country circle opens a Wikipedia page
of that country.
We’ll consider the first two Action types in this chapter and the third
in the next chapter.
There are two types of Dashboard objects that can be used to trigger
actions: Sheets and Quick Filters.
258 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Note that Parameters don’t trigger Dashboard Actions, per se;
they change the data that is shown based on how they were
used in the Sheets that include them.
Quick Filters on Dashboards
There are currently two Quick Filters on the Dashboard: Region and
Year. By default, they only control their “source” Sheet—the Sheet with
which they were brought into the Dashboard. For example, the Region
Quick Filter was brought in with the Map Sheet, so selecting Africa
only changes what is shown in the map. As Figure 13-21 shows, the
other two Sheets still show all of the Regions.
Figure 13-21. The Quick Filter in its default state, only controlling its
source Sheet
If we’d like to to control all of the Sheets on the Dashboard, we can
make it do so by clicking the down arrow in the upper-right corner of
the Quick Filter and selecting Apply to Worksheets → All Using This
Data Source. Now the Dashboard shows the fully filtered version
shown in Figure 13-22.
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
259
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-22. A Quick Filter configured to apply to all Sheets
Similarly, we’d like the slider at the bottom to change both the map
and the bar chart, but we don’t want it to filter the timeline (otherwise,
the timeline would just show one year for each country in a tall column
of 204 dots). To configure the year slider to behave accordingly, we’ll
click the down arrow in the upper-right corner of the slider Quick
Filter, select Apply to Worksheets → Selected Worksheets, and then
check the boxes for Map (defaulted) and Rank, but not for Trend
Line (the timeline).
Now, when we change the slider to 2008, we can see from Figure 13-23
that the map and bar chart are both showing data for the year 2008.
One important thing to notice at this point is that, other than looking
at the slider at the bottom, it’s not very clear that the map and bar chart
are showing 2008 data. A user would have to actually hover over the
data point and read the tooltip to find out. This is a deficiency from
the annotation step, and we really should correct it. How can we add
additional signage or cues that indicate what year is shown?
260 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-23. The Year slider Quick Filter affecting the map and bar
chart, but not the timeline
Dynamic Labels on Dashboards
We can do two things to address this deficiency: we can add a Sheet
that shows the current year, and we can add titles to the Sheets that
include the current year.
To create a Sheet that will serve as a year label, do the following:
1. Add a new Sheet to the workbook.
2. Drag the Year Dimension onto the Text card.
3. Filter the text to just one year by dragging Year to the Filter shelf
and selecting one year from the list.
4. Click on the Text card and format the year label to give it added
prominence.
5. Right-click and remove the Row and Column dividers as we did
earlier with the Info icon Sheet. The Sheet now appears as shown
in Figure 13-24.
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
261
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-24. Creating a Sheet that acts as a dynamic label
Now, to add this dynamic year label Sheet (I renamed it Selected
Year) to the Dashboard, drag it in floating fashion to a suitable location
on the Dashboard, resize it and fit it to the entire width, and give it the
title you want (Figure 13-25). Finally, make sure to change the year
slider to check that the label updates.
We can also add a dynamic Year label to the Dashboard by adding the
Year data field to Sheet titles. For example, if we edit the Title of the
bar chart on the right, we can insert the Year field so that if a user moves
the slider, the year in the title will change accordingly. This step is
illustrated in Figure 13-26.
262 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-25. Updated Dashboard with Year label Sheet added
Figure 13-26. Editing Sheet titles to add references to selected
Measures
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
263
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
So far, we’ve seen how we can use Quick Filters and Parameters to
affect multiple Sheets on Dashboards, and we’ve seen how we can cre‐
ate Sheets that act as dynamic labels in response to changes in Quick
Filter selections. Next, we’ll look at how we can configure Sheets
themselves to filter and highlight other Sheets on a Dashboard.
Using Sheets as Filters on Dashboards
Once a Sheet has been brought into a Dashboard, it can be used as a
filter by simply clicking on the down arrow in the upper-right corner
of the Sheet and selecting Use as Filter. Tableau generates a filter Action
that we can review and edit by clicking Dashboard → Actions and ed‐
iting Filter 1 (generated), resulting in the dialog box shown in
Figure 13-27.
If we take a close look at the Edit Filter Action dialog box in
Figure 13-27, we’ll notice three distinct sections.
• The top section, “Source Sheets,” tells us what triggers the Action.
In this case, the default Filter Action is triggered when a user se‐
lects (clicks on) a Mark in the Sheet called Map on Dashboard 2.
• The middle section, “Target Sheets,” tells us what Sheets the Action
affects, and what happens when the selection is cleared. In this
case, all of the Sheets on the Dashboard are affected by this Action,
and clearing the filter will show all values.
• The bottom section, “Target Filters,” tells us what fields of the
selected Mark(s) on the Source Sheet are used to affect the other
Target Sheets. In this case, it has defaulted to all fields, meaning
that when a country Mark (circle) on the Map is selected, all of
the fields associated with that Mark (Country Name, Year, etc.)
are used as filters for the other Sheets.
The default settings for this Filter Action will give us some problems.
We don’t really want the bar chart on the left to only show one country,
and showing all years at the same time on the map and bar chart will
be very confusing. Let’s change the default settings to look like what’s
shown in Figure 13-28, which allows us to show the timeline for only
the selected country, whether we click on the country in the map or
the Rank bar chart.
264 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-27. Using a Sheet as a filter and editing the generated Filter
Action
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
265
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-28. Modified Filter Action and resulting Dashboard
behavior
266 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Note that you might need to move the Year slider at the bot‐
tom back to 2012 to get the map to show only one year.
We can use all Sheets in this way to filter other sheets. Instead of using
the Use as Filter shortcut, we can also just go to Dashboard →
Actions and create a new action.
If we want to highlight marks so that the other marks fade instead of
getting filtered out, we can do that with Highlight Actions, as we’ll
explore next.
Highlighting Sheets
At first glance, the bottom timeline is very difficult to read. There are
204 lines of seven different colors, so it’s not easy to see any one line.
We can filter out the lines to only show one color by using the Region
Quick Filter, but it would be nice to just highlight all of the lines from
one of the Regions so that the other lines could still be seen in the
background to provide additional context.
One way to do this is to use the color legend to highlight all of the
Sheets on the Dashboard. If we click on the down arrow in the upper-
right corner of the Legend and select Highlight Selected Items, then
we’ll get the behavior shown in Figure 13-29. All of the Marks in the
selected Region are now showing prominently, and the Marks associ‐
ated with the other Regions are faded.
Legends aren’t the only thing we can use to highlight Marks on a
Dashboard. Just as we can use Sheets as Filters, we can also use them
to highlight Marks on other Sheets.
Using Sheets to Highlight
To make the Dashboard feel more responsive and “alive,” we can create
a new Dashboard Action to highlight marks on hover (just by placing
the mouse cursor over a Mark). Let’s make it so that if we just hover
over a country Mark on the map or the bar chart, the corresponding
timeline is highlighted. To do so, we’ll select Dashboard → Actions →
Add Action → Highlight and fill out the resulting dialog box, as shown
in Figure 13-30.
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
267
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-29. Using a legend to highlight Marks on a Dashboard
268 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-30. Creating a new Highlight Action to trigger upon hover
and resulting Dashboard behavior
We’ve seen how Quick Filters, Parameters, Sheets, and even Legends
can be put to good use on a Dashboard to create an intuitive and richly
interactive data discovery experience. The next step often takes the
most time: the fit-and-finish.
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
269
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Step 6: Formatting
The Dashboard is very useful and functional as is, and often we will
need to stop there and skip to the delivery phase. This may be due to
time pressures, or because details like fonts and line weights simply
don’t matter to our audience.
However, many times the difference between a dashboard that accepts
all of the defaults and a fully formatted and “pixel perfect” one is the
difference between being ignored and achieving your objective. Data
journalists understand this. As humans, we appreciate good design.
A number of the default formats have already been changed. Sheet
borders have been removed, grid lines have been taken away, the font
has been changed to Segoe UI, and the font colors have been softened.
We can edit all of these parameters by either double-clicking and ed‐
iting the rich text editor, or clicking in the down arrow and selecting
Format.
Compare the fully formatted version in Figure 13-31 with a version of
the same Dashboard that results from accepting all of the defaults
shown in Figure 13-32.
Figure 13-31. The fully formatted Dashboard
270 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-32. A version of the same Dashboard with all of the defaults
accepted
Does it make a difference? It depends on the circumstances, and that’s
why it’s critical to know your audience and understand what will help
you achieve your object versus what will be a waste of your time. Focus
on the things that really matter.
Steps 7 and 8: Delivery and Results
What remains is the most critical part: actually communicating your
data to your audience. Before doing so, I highly recommend showing
what you’ve made to multiple people. You’ve just spent hours poring
over the data, and you’re likely head over heels in love with the result
of your beautiful creation.
But the simple fact is that your baby may be ugly—or worse, confusing
—and it’s better to know now than after the bright lights are on. Ask
an expert. Ask a nonexpert. Don’t tell them what to do with your
dashboard, just let them play with it, and see where they trip up. It’s
nothing to take personally; it’s for your learning.
Building an Exploratory Dashboard 
| 
271
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In this case, communicating the dashboard involved saving it to Ta‐
bleau Public (the data is publicly available), copying and pasting the
embed code into my WordPress.org blog, and socializing it. In your
case, you may instead want to switch to presentation mode, turn on
the projector, and begin your eloquent speech. These two modes of
delivery are extremely different, and both require up-front planning
and superb execution. In either case, best of luck, and be sure to seek
out feedback and make improvements for next time.
Finally, check your results. Did your presentation have the desired
impact? Did your audience understand the points you wanted them
to understand, and did they take the action you wanted them to take?
I can’t really tell you how to gather this information, because it’s highly
dependent on the context of your situation. Polling or surveying your
audience, tracking measurable activities afterward, or just plain asking
them what they thought are all potential methods. Use your imagina‐
tion, but absolutely be diligent about this step. How else are you going
to improve?
Next, let’s consider how Dashboards created from this exact same data
would be different if, rather than seeking to empower an audience to
ask and answer their own questions in an exploratory mode, we in‐
stead wanted to make two very specific points and explain something
key to our audience.
Building an Explanatory Dashboard
There are many, many insights that could be drawn from the Internet
usage data we’ve been exploring so far in this chapter. The emergence
of the Internet has been one of the most significant developments of
our time, and has forever changed the face of life on our planet.
Let’s consider two different stories we could relate in an interactive
Dashboard.
A Key Point to Explain: Nordic Countries in the Lead
One remarkable insight is that a relatively small cluster of countries in
Europe known as the Nordic countries have been at the forefront of
Internet usage rates since the earliest days of the Internet. Figure 13-33
is a dashboard that was created to illustrate this fact alone.
272 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 13-33. An explanatory dashboard showing the leadership of
the EU Nordic in terms of usage rate
What has changed between this version and the exploratory version
in Figure 13-31?
• There’s a new title and lead in paragraph.
• There are only two groups of countries now: EU Nordics and all
other countries.
• The color scheme has been simplified to show only these two
groups, and the legend is now in a more prominent position of
the dashboard: the upper-right corner.
• The Region Quick Filter has been removed.
• The Parameter has been removed so the dashboard only shows
Internet users per 100. That’s the story, so we’re sticking to it.
• The Info icon has been removed, because the dashboard is largely
self-explanatory.
• Two annotations have been added: one in the map showing Ice‐
land and the other in the timeline showing the only year since
1994 that a Nordic country didn’t lead in usage rates.
Building an Explanatory Dashboard 
| 
273
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
As you can see, there are fewer controls and fewer things to do in this
dashboard. Many aspects have been simplified, and many elements
removed in order to maintain a clear focus on the message. The goal
is to illustrate a single point.
There is another type of Dashboard called a storytelling dash‐
board (that we won’t explore in this chapter), in which users
must make a series of specific interactions in order to explain
a multifaceted and sequential message, or “story.”
Another Key Point to Explain: The Emergence of China
There’s yet another fascinating story that we may have missed in the
exploratory version: China has recently surged past the United States
as the country with the highest total number of Internet users. To il‐
lustrate this fact to an audience, we could create an explanatory dash‐
board like the one in Figure 13-34.
Figure 13-34. An explanatory dashboard showing the emergence of
China in terms of total users
274 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Let’s list the things that have changed in this version:
• There’s another new title and lead-in paragraph explaining the
most salient points.
• There are now three groups of countries (and therefore three col‐
ors in the legend): China, the United States, and all other coun‐
tries.
• Again, we’ve removed the Region Quick Filter, as it’s beside the
point.
• Again, there’s no Parameter to change from users per 100 to total
users; only this time, the total number of users is the only Measure
shown on the Dashboard.
• The timeline has been moved to the top of the Dashboard. It’s a
message about the surge, not a geography lession, so the timeline
is more important than the map and deserves a more prominent
seat at the table.
• New annotations appear that are color-coded (blue for the United
States and red for China).
Again, everything else has been stripped away or made to fade into the
background so that nothing gets in the way of the main message, which
is that China has vaulted to the top. Perhaps a similar Dashboard will
be created in a couple years’ time showing how India did the same.
There are probably dozens more explanatory dashboards that could
be created with this data set. I wouldn’t have found these insights unless
I had created the exploratory dashboard in the first place. In that sense,
Tableau is not only a great data presentation tool, it’s also a great data
discovery tool. You have to find the story before you can tell it, and I
just can’t imagine finding many stories with a spreadsheet.
Summary
We’ve seen in this chapter how to combine multiple Sheets onto Dash‐
boards in Tableau, and how to configure them to create a richly in‐
teractive experience for our audience. We’ve used functions like Dash‐
board Actions (filters and highlights) and we’ve seen how to annotate
and format to create the kind of experience that we want to create.
We’ve seen how to do this for both exploratory dashboards as well as
explanatory dashboards.
Summary 
| 
275
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In the next chapter, we’ll consider some more advanced use cases in
Dashboard building, like adding web pages and embedding video,
among others. Returning to this chapter’s analogy, if a Dashboard is a
building, then these features are the high-tech appliances we install
into them once they’ve been built.
276 
| 
Chapter 13: Building Dashboards
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“Communication works for those who work at it.”
—John Powell
CHAPTER 14
Advanced Dashboard Features
There are many ways to take a basic, functional dashboard to the next
level, and we’ll consider some of these features in this chapter.
A word of caution: basic, functional dashboards don’t neces‐
sarily need to be taken to any other level. You shouldn’t add
“bells and whistles” if the only reason for doing so is be‐
cause you know how to add them or you want to show that
you know how to add them.
Bells (churches) and whistles (soccer coaches) can really be useful, but
they just distract if they’re present but not useful (toasters). Of course
the trick is that one person’s “useful” is another person’s “distracting.”
You, as the communicator, get to choose. Have fun with it, but be your
own toughest critic and be crystal clear about what you’re trying to
accomplish, and let that be your guide.
That being said, let’s consider how to do the following to provide a
new and useful dimension to our dashboards, when appropriate:
• Using the Pages shelf to “animate” dashboards
• Showing multiple tabs
• Adding navigation between tabs via filters
277
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• Adding custom header images
• Embedding web pages like Google Maps and YouTube videos
Once we’ve decided that one of these features will serve our purposes,
we can decide how to best implement it, and make use of the tutorials
in this chapter to do so.
Animating Dashboards
If we return to our Internet usage study from Chapter 13, we can make
a pretty good case that the real story is how fast the Internet has taken
root in many countries over the past two decades. The story, then, has
to do with change over time. Our timeline conveys that change over
time at a glance, but perhaps there would be some value in allowing
our audience to watch the growth unfold.
What value could there be in animating data? Well, we’re certainly
wired to be very attentive to objects in motion, and we tend to have a
much more visceral or emotional reaction to events in motion as op‐
posed to static images. I don’t mean to say, by the way, that we should
always make pixels dance around on the screen. But if the emergence
of some relationship over time is at the core of our message, we might
want to consider actually showing the change take place, as Rosling
did in the quintessential example of communicating data from Chap‐
ter 1.
We can make use of the Pages shelf in Tableau to bring the Dashboard
to life.
First, we’ll need to drag the Year Dimension to the Pages shelf on all
four of the Sheets on the Dashboard (the map, the bar chart, the time‐
line, and the selected year label), and remove the blue Year pill from
the Filters shelves on each Sheet. Figure 14-1 shows what this change
looks like on the map.
278 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-1. Adding the Year Dimension to the Pages shelf
When we add Year to the Pages shelf in the Trend Line Sheet, the lines
change to columns of disconnected dots, so we need to change the
Marks from Line (or Automatic) to Circles, and then show historical
marks with trails as shown in Figure 14-2.
Figure 14-2. Updating the Trend Line Sheet to add Year to Pages and
add historical data with trails
Next, we can add the Pages Playback Controls to the Dashboard by
removing one of the Sheets (I removed the Map) and then bringing it
Animating Dashboards 
| 
279
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
back into the Dashboard by dragging it into place from the left panel.
Along with it comes the Pages Playback Controls, and we can make
sure the controls are set to “Synchronized” by clicking in the down
arrow in the upper-right corner of the Pages Playback Controls.
I re-added the Map with the Pages shelf and made a number of design
and layout changes, as shown in Figure 14-3.
Figure 14-3. The Internet Growth dashboard with Playback Controls
added via the Pages shelf
Here’s what changed about the Dashboard since we last saw it in
Figure 13-31:
• The map is now at the bottom of the Dashboard and the Pages
Playback Control is aligned to the Year axis at the top. This control
is now the primary means of interacting with the Dashboard, and
placing it at the top gives it more prominence and indicates that
it applies to all of the Sheets.
• The lead-in paragraph and Info hover icon have been removed,
as the purpose of the Dashboard is fairly straightforward now.
280 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• The size of the Selected Year font is much larger, and it resides in
the middle of the Dashboard so that it will act as a counter as we
play through the years.
• The Rank column in the table no longer appears, as using the
Pages shelf would display each country’s rank for each year.
Now that the Dashboard has been turned into a tool to show data in
motion, we need to decide how we will communicate to our audience.
We have a few options at our disposal:
• If we are going to present the data to our audience live, then we
can simply turn on Presentation Mode by pressing F7, clicking on
the Presentation Mode icon in the top toolbar, or clicking Window
→ Presentation Mode. We will need to determine our talking
points, and how much time we will need to say what we’d like to
say. We can set the Playback to Slow, Normal, or Fast: 
.
• If we would like to send the Dashboard via email, then recipients
can open the Workbook using Tableau Desktop or Tableau Reader
and make use of the Playback Controls on their own.
• If we want to broadcast this message over the Internet, then saving
to Tableau Public won’t give readers the ability to use the Playback
Controls. Instead, the control panel will turn into a simple Year
slider that takes up the entire space of the Playback Control, as
shown in Figure 14-4.
The alternative is to create a video of the animation using screen
capture software like Camtasia and then embed the video in a
website. I did so, and uploaded the videos to YouTube:
— 1:01 video of Internet users per 100
— 1:01 video of Total Est. Internet Users
Showing how the changes have played out over time in this way can
have a dramatic impact if designed, built, and delivered well. The po‐
tential is high, and the effort required to achieve that potential is also
fairly high.
Animating Dashboards 
| 
281
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-4. How the Playback Control bar functions when you save
to Tableau Public
Showing Multiple Tabs
The two explanatory dashboards of Internet usage from Chapter 13—
the one showing the leadership of the Nordics (Figure 13-33) and the
other showing the emergence of China (Figure 13-34)—exist as two
totally different Workbooks. If we want to give our audience the ability
to switch between these two Workbooks without leaving a single en‐
vironment, we can put them into one Workbook and use the Show
Sheets as Tabs function in Tableau when saving to Tableau Server or
Tableau Public.
To start, we need to add both Dashboards to a single Workbook. Luck‐
ily, versions of Tableau Desktop starting at 8.2 allow us to copy and
paste Sheets and Dashboards from one Workbook to another, along
with all of the associated Sheets and underlying data. I went ahead and
copied the version showing the expansion of China to the version
showing the leadership of the Nordics. The two Workbooks had iden‐
tically named Sheets, so Tableau appended a (2) to all of the Sheets
from the Workbook we brought over, as shown highlighted in yellow
in Figure 14-5.
282 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-5. Copying and pasting from one Workbook to another
We can now publish this combined Workbook and share it with our
audience such that anyone interacting with the Workbook can navi‐
gate from one Dashboard to another using tabs above the Dashboards.
1. First, though, we need to decide which Dashboards and Sheets
should be included as tabs for users to interact with. All other
Sheets and Dashboards will need to be hidden (or deleted). Right-
click on the tabs that you don’t want to let users access directly (in
this case all of the individual Sheets) and select Hide.
2. It would also be helpful to give the Dashboards descriptive tab
names that help users understand what they’ll get by clicking on
the tab. In this case, I changed the first Dashboard title from
InternetGrowth to 1. Nordics: most users per 100 and the
second from InternetChina to 2. China: most total users.
3. Now, we can publish the Workbook and share it with our audi‐
ence. To do this, click Server → Publish Workbook (or Server →
Tableau Public for data we want to share on the Web) and check
the Show Sheets as Tabs box, as shown in Figure 14-6.
Showing Multiple Tabs 
| 
283
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-6. Publishing Workbooks showing Sheets as Tabs
The final version of the Workbook with the Tabs at the top is shown
in Figure 14-7.
Figure 14-7. Two explanatory dashboards with top navigation Tabs
The fact of the matter is, though, that these tabs can be hard to notice.
Next, let’s look at a way to add additional navigational affordances to
the Dashboards so that we can be sure our audience will notice that
there’s more to the Dashboard than first meets the eye.
284 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Adding Navigation with Filters
We can effectively use Tableau as a presentation tool to provide a gui‐
ded experience through a specific data set by adding Sheets that act as
navigation aids. We’ll start by adding a new Sheet and creating two
“dummy” calculated fields, called Left and Right, as shown in
Figure 14-8.
These fields do nothing more than add two new Dimensions that we
can use to create functional arrows. To create the actual arrows, we’ll
do the following (starting with the Left arrow):
1. Add a new Sheet and change the Marks type from Automatic to
Shape.
2. Drag the Left Dimension to the Shape card.
3. Edit the shape by clicking into the legend and choosing a left arrow
icon (from the Arrows shape palette, or from another you add to
your My Tableau Repository Shapes folder).
4. Format the icon by increasing its size, eliminating Row and Col‐
umn borders, and adding a Tooltip that says Go to Previous
Slide. I also dragged the Left Dimension to Color and changed
it to gray.
5. Rename the Sheet tab Left and repeat steps 1–5 similarly with
another new Sheet to create a right arrow. The finished gray Left
arrow Sheet is shown in Figure 14-9.
Adding Navigation with Filters 
| 
285
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-8. Adding two “dummy” Calculated Fields for arrows
286 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-9. The completed Left arrow Sheet
It’s possible to create more types of navigation icons, such as a Home
icon, using this same method. It’s also possible to create a Table of
Contents Dashboard with shapes that take the user to various places
in the Workbook. It all depends on what we want the Dashboard user
to be able to do, and how that action can best be represented.
Now that we have these Left and Right icons created, we’ll need to add
them to each of the Dashboards in the Workbook. Note that I used the
same copy-and-paste method to bring the exploratory Dashboard we
created in the previous chapter into the Workbook, and I named that
tab 3. Explore the data yourself.
To add the icons and make them function the way we want them to,
we’ll do the following for each of the three Dashboards:
1. Drag the Left and/or Right arrow Sheets onto the Dashboard and
place them wherever we want them.
• The first Dashboard only needs a Right arrow (Go to Next
Slide Filter).
• The middle Dashboard needs both a Left (Previous) and a Right
(Next) arrow Sheet.
Adding Navigation with Filters 
| 
287
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
• The last Dashboard only needs a Left (Previous) arrow Sheet.
2. For each arrow Sheet on each Dashboard, create a new Filter
Dashboard Action by clicking Dashboard → Actions → Add Action
→ Filter that has the following properties:
• In the Source Sheets area at the top of the dialog box, check the
box for the Sheet (Left or Right) that you’re configuring. Set the
Action to run on Select.
• In the Target Sheets area in the middle, use the drop-down
menu to select the Dashboard you want the arrow Sheet to nav‐
igate to, and leave all the check boxes blank in the Target
Sheets area. Choose Show all values in the section to the right
about clearing the selection.
• In the Target Filters area at the bottom, choose All Fields. The
final dialog box for the left and right arrow on the middle
Dashboard (Slide #2) is shown in Figure 14-10.
Figure 14-10. Adding Dashboard Filters as navigation controls
288 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Go ahead and perform a similar set of steps for each of the three
Dashboards. Doing so results in a Workbook with additional naviga‐
tion controls, shown in Figure 14-11.
Figure 14-11. The middle Dashboard with navigation arrows added
We can now publish the Dashboard and show sheets as tabs, making
sure to hide all of the Sheets with which we don’t want the users to
directly interact.
This was a relatively simple case of adding a few arrows, but this tech‐
nique can be used to create more elaborate interconnected presenta‐
tions, such as the one shown in Figure 14-12, which I presented at the
first Tapestry Conference in Nashville in 2013.
Adding Navigation with Filters 
| 
289
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-12. The second slide of a presentation built in Tableau us‐
ing Sheets as navigation aids
Adding Custom Header Images
Adding custom graphics to a Tableau dashboard can help us achieve
our overall objective, especially when our audience is less “captive,”
such as in the blogging and journalism scenarios. When done well,
graphics can increase the visual appeal and aesthetic of the final prod‐
uct. We respond emotionally to pictures, and we appreciate thoughtful
and tasteful design. From a functional perspective, adding graphics
can serve to introduce the subject or even add to an emotional effect
we are attempting to create.
Custom graphics can help or hinder our cause, depending on how
they’re implemented. Before considering how to add custom graphics,
it’s important to lay down a few rules of thumb to help us avoid making
a mess of the endeavor:
1. Exercise restraint. Don’t overdo it, and never add cheesy clip art.
2. Never, ever occlude the data. Blocking marks on a Dashboard is
a big no-no.
3. Don’t steal the spotlight from the data. The data should still take
center stage and be the focal point of the dashboard.
With those rules of thumb in mind, let’s consider two similar dash‐
boards shown in Figure 14-13 that show CCTV (closed-circuit
290 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
television) camera locations as provided by the city of Glasgow’s Open
Data site.
Figure 14-13. A Dashboard with and without a custom header image
The basic text box header on the left does the job, but it certainly
doesn’t draw in any readers. In contrast, let’s consider the Dashboard
with the custom header image on the right:
• The custom header image on the right is created using a custom
“spy” font to convey the sense of surveillance, and it includes an
image of a security camera to add additional context.
• For readers who are unfamiliar with the acronym “CCTV,” the
camera image provides useful information about the topic of the
Dashboard at a glance.
• The camera doesn’t occlude (cover or block) any data points, and
it actually points directly at the data, such that the eye bounces
from the camera to the map itself.
Is the custom header image useless, wasteful, and distracting? Not at
all, and on the contrary it both increases the visual appeal and aug‐
ments the message of the Dashboard. It’s a communication aid.
This type of custom header image can be created with any vector
graphics editor. I like to use software programs like Inkscape and
GIMP 2, which are free and open source. Other programs include
Adobe Photoshop or Illustrator, and even PowerPoint can be used to
create simple graphics like this.
Adding Custom Header Images 
| 
291
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
It’s helpful to learn how to make image backgrounds transparent, as
Tableau now supports transparency for Dashboard image objects, and
a simple Google search on the topic will yield helpful tutorials.
The image itself is shown in Figure 14-14. Once it’s created using your
editor of choice, you can easily add it to your dashboard by dragging
an Image object onto your Dashboard and opening the file. You can
give it a URL as we did in Chapter 13.
Figure 14-14. The custom header image file
Next, we’ll consider how to embed a dynamic Google Maps window,
the part of the Dashboard in Figure 14-11 that is shown in the bottom
half.
Adding Google Maps to Dashboards
In general, it’s possible to embed a live website in a Dashboard by
dragging the Web Page Dashboard object onto the canvas. We can have
the web page itself be either static or dynamic. If we simply enter a
URL in the dialog box that appears when dropping the Web Page object
on the Dashboard, then that website will always appear, as shown in
Figures 14-15 and 14-16.
292 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-15. Adding a static Web Page object to a Dashboard
Figure 14-16. The resulting Dashboard, with the Web Page showing
in the view
Adding Google Maps to Dashboards 
| 
293
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
We can take it a step further and make the Web Page object pull up a
Google Maps satellite view of each of the 399 CCTV locations, based
on which circle is selected in the Map at the top. To do this, we’ll make
use of the fact that the data we are using includes Latitude and Lon‐
gitude fields, as shown in Figure 14-17.
Figure 14-17. The underlying data for the Glasgow CCTV Dashboard
The first group of three steps shows you how to create a URL for each
bridge, and the second group of five steps shows you how to add a box
to your dashboard to pull up the bridges.
Create the URLs
1. A particular latitude and longitude (say, 55.85608 and −4.25732)
can be added to a Tableau Dashboard using a URL like this:
https://maps.google.com/maps?
q=55.85608,-4.25732&z=17&t=h&output=svembed
2. Breaking down the elements of the URL, we can see that after the
latitude and longitude, there are four distinct parameters in the
URL:
q=55.85608,-4.25732
These are our coordinates for a single CCTV location. Note
that if we have an address field instead of Lat/Long, we can
use a street address after “q=” as well.
294 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
&z=17
This specifies the zoom level. Higher numbers zoom in, lower
numbers zoom out.
&t=h
This specifies the type of map (t=m is a map, t=h is a satellite
view).
&output=embed
This is a key parameter that makes sure the website we embed
in our Dashboard doesn’t include the entire site, just the map
itself.
3. We could then generalize the URL to:
https://maps.google.com/maps?q=<Latitude>,<Longi‐
tude>&z=17&t=h&output=svembed
Notice that the actual numbers for Latitude and Longitude have
been replaced with field names <Latitude> and <Longitude>.
Alternately, we could embed Google Static Maps using the Static Maps
API, which is documented here. In that case, the generic URL would
be similar to:
https://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/staticmap?center=<Latitude>,
+<Longitude>&zoom=17&size=460x340&maptype=satellite&mark‐
ers=color:blue%7C<Latitude>,<Longitude>
Adding Dynamic Google Maps Satellite Images to Our
Dashboard
The next group of steps shows how to edit the Web Page object such
that when a user clicks on a particular circle in the top map, the em‐
bedded satellite image changes to show the location selected:
1. First, in the Dashboard tab, drag a new Web Page object (or edit
the one we added in Figure 14-14) onto the Dashboard from the
left-center panel (just leave the Edit URL dialog box blank and
click OK for now).
2. From the Dashboard file menu, click Actions, then click the Add
Action button and choose URL....
3. In the Add URL Action dialog box, select the Sheet or Sheets that
you want to use as the source for the action, and choose which
event you’d like to trigger navigation to the new image (Hover,
Adding Google Maps to Dashboards 
| 
295
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Select, or Menu). In this case, I’ve selected CCTV and Locations
as my Source Sheets and Select as my trigger event, but you could
trigger the action from a table or other type of sheet.
4. Finally, copy and paste the generalized URL to the URL field of
the dialog box, making sure to include the <Latitude> and <Lon
gitude> fields, as shown in Figure 14-18.
5. That’s it! Test it out by clicking on the map circles and see the
satellite image change accordingly.
Figure 14-18. The Edit URL Action dialog box for adding Google
Maps
We now have a Dashboard that lets users get a satellite view of each of
the CCTV locations in Glasgow, and we didn’t have to upload 399
images, nor did we have to key in all 399 URLs. We allowed Tableau
to generate each individual website address by including field names
in the Web Page object URL.
For another example of this same technique, see Figure 14-19, which
shows 2,489 bridges in the state of Washington and allows users to
click on each one to see a satellite image of the bridge.
296 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-19. Another example of a Dashboard with embedded and
dynamic Google Maps
We can do something very similar with YouTube videos, although the
complete URL will need to be included in the data set itself.
Adding YouTube Videos to Dashboards
My son Aaron is a Lego pro. He also likes movies and his iPod. Put
those three things together and you get stop-motion Lego movies
made with an iPod! He started uploading his videos recently to his new
YouTube channel, so I thought I’d make a fun little Dashboard for him
to play with. The finished version is shown in Figure 14-20. Let’s con‐
sider how it was made.
Adding YouTube Videos to Dashboards 
| 
297
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-20. Aaron’s LegoTube: a Dashboard with embedded You‐
Tube videos
We’ll need to start by building a spreadsheet of all of the videos we
want to add to our Dashboard (in this case, Aaron has created seven
videos, so we’ll need a spreadsheet with a row for each of the seven):
1. In YouTube, click Share, then Embed, and then copy the embed
code. We need only the URL between quotes. It should be in the
form of http://www.youtube.com/embed/…. See Figure 14-21.
2. Next, let’s create a spreadsheet with the information we want to
include about each video across the columns (including the em‐
bed link URL), as shown in Figure 14-22.
298 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-21. How to grab the embed code for a YouTube video
Figure 14-22. A simple spreadsheet containing information about
each video
3. In Tableau, we can connect to this spreadsheet, make the chart we
want to use to change the video link (in this case, I made a simple
bar chart showing the views of each video), making sure we drag
the Embed dimension field into Detail, as shown in Figure 14-23.
Adding YouTube Videos to Dashboards 
| 
299
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-23. The bar chart that will be used to switch YouTube
videos
4. Next, we can make a new dashboard, add the bar chart, and drag
a Web Page object where we would like to place it (either Tiled or
Floating, whichever works best). When the Edit URL dialog box
pops up, just leave it blank and click OK for now, as shown in
Figure 14-24.
5. Lastly, we’ll add a Dashboard Action by selecting Dashboard →
Actions → Add Action → URL, and fill out the resulting dialog box,
as shown in Figure 14-25.
Click one of the bars, and you should see the video load in the Web
Page object box.
300 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Figure 14-24. Adding the Web Page object to the Dashboard
Figure 14-25. The Add URL Action dialog box
Adding YouTube Videos to Dashboards 
| 
301
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Summary
Any one of these advanced Dashboard elements can make a big dif‐
ference, and it’s up to you to know when to use them, and when to
leave them out. Stay focused on your objective, respect and honor the
data above all else, and show good design sense. Ask yourself what you
should do, not what you could do.
These features can make it fun to communicate data, and they can
engage and delight your audience. They can also mislead and distract,
so be sure to test them out on some willing guinea pigs and gauge the
impact.
302 
| 
Chapter 14: Advanced Dashboard Features
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
APPENDIX A
Resources
All of the examples in this book can be accessed as an interactive (Ta‐
bleau Public), a Tableau workbook (.twbx that requires Tableau 8.1 or
later to open), and the raw data file (.xlsx) at http://dataremixed.com/
books/cdwt.
Training
• Tableau Software training resources
• Tableau Public training resources
Examples
• Tableau Public Viz of the Day
• Tableau Software Visual Gallery
303
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Blogs
• DataRemixed, the author’s blog
• Tableau Software blog
• Tableau Public blog
• Tableau Data Blog Finder
• Andy Kriebel’s “Cool Data Viz Blogs” page
• Andy Kirk’s Visualising Data blog
Other Resources
• Tableau Knowledge Base
• Tableau Community Forums
• Ramon Martinez’s “Data and Visualization sites” page
• Jonathan Drummey’s Tableau wiki
304 
| 
Appendix A: Resources
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
We’d like to hear your suggestions for improving our indexes. Send email to
index@oreilly.com.
Index
A
ABS formula, 111
actions (dashboard)
about, 240, 258
dynamic labels, 261–264
highlighting sheets, 267–269
Quick Filters, 259–260, 267
sheets as filters, 264–267
actual-to-target comparison, 85
Add Highlight Action dialog box, 267
Add Reference Line dialog box
about, 93, 108
presidential election example, 220
quadrant charts, 146
Add URL Action dialog box, 295, 300
aesthetics, designing for
about, 9–11
in bar charts, 54
in scatterplots, 129
Analysis menu, 75
animating dashboards, 278–281
annotations
for dashboards, 227, 240, 250–253
for scatterplots, 133
for shapes, 210
avalanche statistics example, 230
AVG formula, 94
B
background images, 136–137
bar charts
adding labels to grids, 56
dual-axis, 246
filtering data, 72–72
fine-tuning the default, 36
part-to-whole comparison, 70, 77,
79–81
quantitative comparisons in, 35–
35, 39
rates example, 65
ratio example, 59, 61–63
sorting, 37–39, 54
suggesting as option, 34
baseball statistics
current-to-historical examples,
82–85
normal distribution and, 89–99,
102
part-to-whole examples, 69–81
tracking changes over time, 151–
162
visualizing variation, 104–105
305
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
basketball player statistics, 230
Baumgartner, Felix, 233
Bell Laboratories model, 3
bell-shaped curve (see normal distri‐
bution)
Berra, Yogi, 69
Bing Maps, 181
binomial probability distribution, 119
binomial proportion confidence in‐
tervals, 117
Bloomberg, Michael, 51
borders
adding to circle maps, 189
formatting for icon Sheet, 256
Bowman, Scotty, 101
box-and-whisker plots
dual-axis, 94–95
non-normal distribution and, 98
normal distribution and, 90–95,
102
visualizing variation with, 102, 105
Brinton, Willard Cope, 1, 9
bullet graphs
about, 82–84
adding reference lines, 84–85
C
Calculated Field dialog box
adding navigation with filters, 285
earthquakes example, 111
garbage collection example, 53, 60
hockey players example, 138
Internet usage example, 191, 196,
241, 243
population density example, 27
presidential election example, 218
soccer points scored example, 173,
175–178
calculated fields
about, 26
adding line coloring and thickness,
175–178
adding navigation with filters, 285
adding rank, 60–63
determining control limits, 112
generating error bars, 118
hockey players example, 138
Internet usage example, 191, 196,
241, 243
mapping to parameters, 172
population density example, 185
presidential election example, 218
ratios and, 52
causation, correlation and, 125, 157,
217
CCTV (closed-circuit television), 291
central limit theorem, 117
channel for communicating data, 11–
13
chess club example, 115–123
Child, Julia, 225
chloropleths (see filled maps)
circle maps
about, 183–185
adding second encoding, 185
dual-encoded, 199–201
filtering data, 188–189
Internet usage example, 186–190,
199–201
multiple markings, 186–190
population density example, 183–
186
circle views
quantitative comparisons in, 35
resolving overlapping circles, 39
closed-circuit television (CCTV), 291
coefficient of determination, 141, 145
color palette
filled maps, 192–196
football teams example, 207
Color shelf, 27, 39
column graphs, 11, 27
Columns shelf
about, 19
creating visualizations, 27
how many comparison, 45
how much comparison, 36, 39
recycling example, 56
The Commercial and Political Atlas
(Playfair), 150
communicating data, 31
(see also comparisons; dash‐
boards)
about, 31
Bell Laboratories model, 3
306 
| 
Index
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
maps and location, 181–201
maps showing paths, 211–216
maps with shapes, 204–211
multiple quantities, 125–148
plotting map shapes using axes,
216–223
principles of, 5–13
as process step, 2
Tableau software, 15–29
time factor in, 104, 106–114, 149–
179
types of problems, 4–5
uncertainty in, 101, 115–123
variation in, 101–114
comparisons
how many, 32, 42–50
how much, 31–42
proportions and percentages, 52,
69–86
ratios and rates, 51–67
Conan Doyle, Arthur, 239
confidence intervals, 117, 119
Connect to Data control, 21
connected scatterplots, 158–162
continuous data
about, 22
Measures panel display, 61
Tableau user interface and, 25
control charts
about, 106
basic elements, 107
creating with quick method, 107–
110
creating with rigorous method,
107, 110–114
dual-axis, 110
earthquake examples, 107–114
trend lines in, 107
control limits (control charts), 107,
112
correlation, causation and, 125, 157,
217
Create Parameter dialog box, 218
current-to-historical comparison
about, 82
baseball statistics examples, 82–85
bullet graphs, 82–84
reference lines, 84–85
D
D3.js library, 183
Dashboard view
about, 225
embedding on website, 247
major components, 20–21
Sheet view comparison, 226–228
dashboards, 239
(see also specific types of dash‐
boards)
about, 18–21, 225
adding Google Maps, 292–297
adding navigation with filters,
285–289
adding YouTube videos, 297–300
advantages of, 226–228
animating, 278–281
building, 239–242
context considerations, 235–237
custom header images, 290–292
designing, 178
dynamic labels on, 261–264
filtering data, 227, 258–260
Internet usage example, 240–276
moving things around, 248–250
showing multiple tabs, 282–284
types supported, 230–235
usage considerations, 228–230
data discovery process, 2, 45
data munging, 2
data sources, blending, 64
data types
changing, 25–26
choosing medium and channel,
11–13
selecting suitable visualizations, 8–
9
Tableau user interface and, 21–26
data visualizations (see visualizations)
data wrangling, 2
date fields, 162–166
decimal places, specifying, 56
Default Number Format dialog box,
56
dependent variables, 141
Describe Forecast option, 166
Index 
| 
307
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Describe Trend Model window, 145,
221
Dimensions (data type)
about, 19, 21
calculated fields and, 27
changing with Measures, 25–26
differences with Measures, 22–23
generated fields, 23, 47
discrete data
about, 22
Measures panel display, 61
Tableau user interface and, 26
dispersion, measures of, 107
dot charts
how many comparison, 45
how much comparison, 39–42
multiple quantities, 140
part-to-whole comparison, 73, 78
dot plots, 92, 119
dual-axis charts
bar charts, 246
box plots, 94–95
control charts, 110
dot plots, 119
filled maps, 197–199, 222
Gantt Bar charts, 170
line charts, 154–157
dual-encoded maps, 196–201
dynamic labels on dashboards, 261–
264
E
earthquake examples, 107–114
Edit Background Image dialog box,
136
Edit dialog box, 47
Edit Filter Action dialog box, 264–
267, 288
Edit Parameter dialog box, 117, 172,
243
Edit Reference Line dialog box, 84, 93,
153
Edit Shape dialog box, 209
Edit Tooltip dialog box, 131, 252, 255
Edit Trend Lines option, 143
Edit URL Action dialog box, 296, 300
effectiveness communication prob‐
lems
about, 5
choosing medium and channel,
11–13
encoding based on data types, 8–9,
34
maps with shapes, 204
EPSG 3857, 181
explanatory dashboards
about, 230
building, 272–275
showing multiple tabs, 282–284
explanatory/exploratory dashboards,
230
exploratory dashboards
about, 230
building, 243–272
moving things around, 248–250
step 1: designing, 243
step 2: building sheets, 243–248
step 3: adding annotations, 250–
253
step 4: adding objects, 253–258
step 5: adding actions, 258–269
step 6: formatting, 270–271
step 7: delivery, 271
step 8: results, 271
F
filled maps
creating, 28
dual-axis, 197–199, 222
Internet usage example, 190–196
filtering data
bar charts, 71–74
circle maps, 188–189
dashboards, 227, 258–260
navigation and, 285–289
scatterplots, 134–136, 142, 159–
161
sheets, 264–267
Filters shelf, 19, 72
Fit control, 21
football teams example, 204–211
forecasts, adding to line plots, 165
Format function, 40
308 
| 
Index
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Format panel, 40
G
Gantt chart type
baseball statistics example, 79–81
presidential milestones example,
166–170
GapMinder scatterplot, 11
garbage collection example
how much comparison, 33–42
ratios and, 52–63
Gaussian distribution (see normal dis‐
tribution)
generated fields, 23, 43–46, 47
global measure of dispersion, 107
goal of communicating data, 6–7
Google Maps, 181, 292–297
grid lines, adding, 40
Group control, 21
H
heat maps, 35
highlight actions, 258, 267–269
highlight tables
quantitative comparisons in, 35
ratios and, 57–58
hiking trail example, 215
histograms
how many comparison, 46–50
non-normal distribution and, 96,
103
normal distribution and, 89, 103
visualizing variation with, 103, 105
hockey players example
in scatterplots, 126–137, 142–148
in stacked bar charts, 137–140
horizontal bar charts
fine-tuning the default, 36
quantitative comparisons in, 35
rates example, 65
ratio example, 59, 61–63
sorting, 37–39, 54
suggesting as option, 34
Hover for More Info icons, 254–258
how many comparison
about, 32, 42
counting dimensions, 43–46
data at aggregate level, 43
data at incident level, 43
histograms for, 46–50
how much comparison
about, 32–33
comparing comparisons, 35–36
dot charts, 39–42
example of, 33
fine-tuning the default, 36
garbage collection example, 33–42
sorting, 37–39
hurricane data example, 211–214
hyperlinks, adding to dashboards, 254
I
IBTrACS dataset, 211
images
background, 136–137
custom header, 290–292
impact (RUI), 13
independent variables, 46, 141
INDEX formula, 60
infographics, 233
information source (in communica‐
tion systems), 3
Internet usage example
circle maps, 186–190, 199–201
dashboards, 240–276
dual-encoded maps, 196–201
filled maps, 190–196, 197–199
interquartile range, 94, 101
J
Jennings, Ken, 181
K
Key Process Indicators (KPIs), 227,
235
Kirk, Andy, 171
Korzybski, Alfred, 203
KPIs (Key Process Indicators), 227,
235
L
Label shelf, 56
Index 
| 
309
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
labeling
bar chart grids, 56
dashboards, 261–264
quadrant charts, 147
scatterplots, 130, 147, 159
Latitude field, 23, 183, 197
LCL (lower control limit), 107, 112
line charts
dual-axis, 154–157
origin of, 150
reference lines in, 108, 153–153
tracking changes over time, 151–
157, 164–166
trend lines in, 152–153
line plots
adding forecasts to, 165
designing for aesthetics, 10
variation over time, 108
visualizing variation, 104–105
local measure of dispersion, 107
logos, adding to dashboards, 253
Longitude field, 23, 183
lower control limit (LCL), 107, 112
M
Mackinlay, Jock, 8
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 103
maps
about, 181, 203
circle maps, 183–190, 199–201
dual-encoded maps, 196–201
filled maps, 28, 190–199, 222
heat maps, 35
march of Napoleon’s army, 182–
182
plotting map shapes using axes,
216–223
with shapes, 204–211
showing paths, 211–216
symbol maps, 183–184, 244
treemaps, 35, 77
Marks card
about, 19
Internet usage example, 199
rat sightings example, 44
The Mathematical Theory of Com‐
munication (Shannon and Wea‐
ver), 3
mean
about, 87
box plots and, 90–95
normal distribution and, 88–89
Measure Names field, 23, 139
Measure Values field, 23, 138–140
Measures (data type)
about, 19, 21
calculated fields and, 27
changing with Dimensions, 25–26
circle maps and, 185, 188
differences with Dimensions, 22–
23
generated fields, 23, 43–46
measures of central tendency (see
mean; median)
measures of dispersion, 107
median
about, 88
box plots and, 90–95
normal distribution and, 88–89
medium for communicating data, 11–
13
Minard, Charles Joseph, 182–182
missing values
filled maps and, 194–196
histograms and, 49
mode
about, 88
normal distribution and, 88
Moving Range charts, 110–114
multiple quantities
dual-encoded maps, 196–201
quadrant charts, 146–148
regression analysis, 141–145
scatterplots, 126–137
stacked bars, 137–140
trend lines, 141–145
N
Napoleon’s army’s march, 182
navigation, adding to dashboards,
285–289
310 
| 
Index
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmos‐
pheric Administration), 211
nominal data
about, 8–9
independent variables as, 46
non-normal distribution
about, 96
outliers and, 97
sports salaries examples, 96–99,
102
visualizing typical values, 98
normal approximation interval for‐
mula, 117
normal distribution
about, 88
baseball statistics examples, 89–99,
102
box plots and, 90–95, 102
normalized comparisons
about, 51
actual-to-target, 85
current-to-historical, 82–85
part-to-whole, 69–81
proportions and percentages, 52,
69–86
rates, 51, 63–66
ratios, 51–67, 52
Number of Records field
about, 23
rat sightings example, 43–46, 163
O
Obama, Barack, 216–223
objects in dashboards
about, 240
adding, 253–258
adding Google Maps, 292–297
adding YouTube videos, 300
ordinal data
about, 8–9
independent variables as, 46
outliers
in control charts, 107, 114
non-normal distribution and, 97
overlapping circles, 39
P
packed bubbles, 35
Pages shelf, 20, 214, 278
parameters
creating, 172, 218
population, 117
part-to-whole comparison
about, 69–71
baseball statistics examples, 69–81
filtering data, 71–74
table calculations, 74–78
waterfall charts, 79–81
Path shelf, 213, 215
paths on maps, 211–216
Pearson, Karl, 46
percent of total calculation, 74–78
percentages
about, 52, 69
actual-to-target comparison, 85
current-to-historical comparison,
82–85
part-to-whole comparison, 74–78
Periodic Table dashboard, 226
pie charts
part-to-whole comparison, 77
quantitative comparisons in, 35
Playfair, William, 150
population density example
calculated fields and, 27
circle maps, 183–186
creating visualizations, 27–28
data types and, 22–26
Powell, John, 277
precision in data, 36, 56
presidential election example, 216–
223
presidential milestones example, 166–
170
Priestley, Joseph, 166
principles of communicating data
about, 5
checking the results, 13
choosing effective medium and
channel, 11–13
designing for aesthetics, 9–11, 54
knowing your goal, 6–7
Index 
| 
311
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
selecting suitable visualizations, 8–
9, 34
using the right data, 7
proportions
about, 52, 69
actual-to-target comparison, 85
current-to-historical comparison,
82–85
Internet usage example, 241
part-to-whole comparison, 69–74,
79–81
Q
quadrant charts, 146–148
quantitative data
about, 8–9
dot charts and, 39–42
independent variables as, 46
Internet usage example, 241
multiple ways to show compari‐
sons, 35–36
Quick Filters
bar charts, 72–72
circle maps, 188–189
dashboards, 259–260, 267
scatterplots, 134–136, 159–161
quick method (control charts), 107–
110
Quick Table Calculation option, 76
R
rank, adding to ratios, 60–63
rat sightings example, 43–50, 162–166
rates
about, 51, 63
blending data sources, 64
Internet usage example, 190, 192
visualizing, 65
ratios
about, 51
adding rank, 60–63
garbage collection example, 52–63
reach (RUI), 13
receivers (in communication sys‐
tems), 3
recycling example, 53–63, 230
Redo control, 21
reference lines
box-and-whisker plots, 90
bullet graphs, 84–85
line charts, 108, 153–153
plotting map shapes using axes,
220
regression analysis, multiple quanti‐
ties, 141–145
rigorous method (control charts), 107,
110–114
Robbins, Naomi, 39
Romney, Mitt, 216–223
Rosling, Hans, 11
rotating views, 40
Rows shelf, 19, 27, 36, 47
RUI acronym, 13
running total calculation, 80
S
sample statistics, 117
Save control, 21
Save Workbook to the Public Web di‐
alog box, 283
scatterplots
about, 126–129
annotations in, 133
background images, 136–137
connected, 158–162
filtering data, 134–136, 142, 159–
161
hockey players example, 126–137,
142–148
labeling, 130, 147, 159
multiple quantities in, 126–137
presidential election example, 221
quadrant charts, 147
regression analysis and, 141–145
Tooltips for, 131–133
trend lines in, 141–145, 158–162
seasonality of data, 164
Select Shape Palette option, 209
semantic communication problems, 4
Set URL dialog box, 254
Shannon, Claude Elwood, 3, 7
Shape shelf, 207
shapes on maps
football teams example, 204–211
312 
| 
Index
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
presidential election example,
216–223
Sheet view
adding navigation with filters,
285–289
Dashboard view comparison, 226–
228
data fields and, 253
exploratory dashboards, 243–248
highlighting sheets, 267–269
major components, 19
Quick Filters and, 259–260, 267
Tooltips and, 254–258
sheets
about, 18–20
dashboards versus, 226–228
exploratory dashboards and, 243–
248
filtering data, 264–267
highlighting, 267–269
Show Sheets as Tabs function, 282
Shewhart control charts, 107, 112
Shewhart, Walter, 106, 112
shifts (control charts), 107, 114
Show Forecast option, 165
Show Labels control, 21
Show Me card, 19, 28–28
Show Me panel
box-and-whisker plots, 90
bullet graphs, 82
filled maps, 192
histograms, 46
scatterplots, 127
selecting chart types, 35, 45
symbol maps, 183–184
Show Missing Values option, 49
Show Parameter Control option, 218
Show Sheets as Tabs function, 282
Show Trend Lines option, 142, 152
Sigma(x), 107
signals (control charts), 107, 113
Six Sigma movement, 106
slopegraphs
about, 171
creating step 3: calculated fields,
172
soccer points scored example,
171–179
step 1: getting data, 171
step 2: connecting Tableau, 172
step 3: creating parameters, 172
step 4: creating, 174
step 5: adding line coloring and
thickness, 175–178
step 6: designing dashboards, 178
soccer points scored example, 171–
179
Sort control, 21, 37
Sort dialog box, 38, 168
sorting
in chronological order, 168
how much comparison, 37–39
ratio example, 54
special-cause variation, 106
sports salaries examples, 96–99, 102
stacked bar charts
hockey players example, 137–140
multiple quantities in, 137–140
part-to-whole comparison, 77, 79–
81
quantitative comparisons in, 35
standard deviation
cautions using, 103
global measure of dispersion, 107
normal distribution and, 88
visualizing variation, 101
Standard error, 145
standard projections, 181
storytelling dashboards, 232
SUM formula
baseball statistics examples, 75,
155
earthquakes example, 108, 111
hockey players example, 127, 134,
142–145
recycling example, 53, 65
Swap function, 40
Swap Reference Line Fields option, 83
symbol maps, 183–184, 244
Synchronize Axis option, 95
T
table calculations
percent of total, 74–78
rank, 246
Index 
| 
313
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
running total, 80
Tableau Desktop
about, 16
connecting to data, 18
World Bank Indicators, 187
Tableau Online, 17
Tableau Public
about, 17
connecting to data, 18
hockey players example, 126
Tableau Public Premium, 17
Tableau Reader
about, 17
connecting to data, 18
Tableau Server, 17
Tableau software
about, 15–16
connecting to data, 18–28
creating control charts, 107–114
products supported, 16–17
Tableau user interface
about, 18
calculated fields and, 26
dashboards and, 18–21
data types and, 21–26
sheets and, 19–20
toolbars and, 21
visualizations and, 25, 27–28
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas, 103
technical communication problems, 4
Text shelf, 44
text tables, 35
time factor in communicating data
about, 149
connected scatterplots, 158–162
date fields and seasonality, 162–
166
line charts, 151–157, 164–166
origin of time charts, 150
slopegraphs and, 171–179
timelines and, 166–170, 244
variation in time series, 104, 106–
114
Toggle to Presentation Mode control,
21
toolbars
about, 21
Sort icons, 37
Tooltips
for dashboards, 250–253, 254–258
for scatterplots, 131–133
transmitters (in communication sys‐
tems), 3
transparency, adding to circle maps,
189
treemaps
part-to-whole comparison, 77
quantitative comparisons in, 35
trend lines
in control charts, 107
in line charts, 152–153
multiple quantities, 141–145
in scatterplots, 141–145, 158–162
Tukey, John, 31, 90
U
UCL (upper control limit), 107, 112
uncertainty
about, 101, 115
chess club example, 115–123
understanding (RUI), 13
Undo control, 21
upper control limit (UCL), 107, 112
URL actions, 258, 294–297, 300
user interface (see Tableau user inter‐
face)
USGS Earthquake Archive Search
website, 107
V
variation
about, 101
measures of, 88, 94, 101, 103
showing over time, 104–114, 149–
179
visualizing, 101–105
vertical bar charts, 35, 39
visualizations
aesthetic elements of, 9–11, 54
comparing values in, 127
creating, 27–28
knowing your goal, 6–7
maps and, 183
multiple quantities, 137
naming, 246
314 
| 
Index
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
non-normal distributions, 98
rates, 65
recognizing patterns in, 127
selecting suitable, 8–9, 34
Tableau user interface and, 25, 27–
28
using the right data, 7
for variation, 101–105
VizQL (visual query language), 15, 17
Voltaire, 149
W
waterfall charts, 79–81
Weaver, Warren, 3, 7
Web Mercator projection, 181
Web Page objects, 292–297, 300
Western Electric Company, 106
word clouds, 35
workbooks
adding data sources to, 64
Show Sheets as Tabs function, 282
World Bank Indicators, 19, 187, 191
Y
YEAR formula, 108, 163
YouTube videos, 297–300
Index 
| 
315
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
About the Author
Ben Jones is an award-winning Tableau Public author, and is also the
Tableau Public product marketing manager at Tableau Software in
Seattle, WA. With over 12 years of experience as an engineer, Lean Six
Sigma Master Black Belt, and Business Analytics manager for a For‐
tune 500 company, Ben has worked on data-driven projects for every
department, from facilities to finance.
Colophon
The animal on the cover of Communicating Data with Tableau is the
turquoise parrot (Neophema pulchella), more specifically a male of the
species, which are more brightly colored than the females. While both
sexes have yellow bellies and green plumage on their back, males also
have a bright blue head and red patches on their wings.
These birds are native to Australia and belong to a class of parrots
called “grass parrots.” Their preferred habitat is grassland and open
woodland, where they nest in and forage near gum trees. The turquoise
parrot primarily looks for food on the ground—while seeds make up
most of its diet, it also eats leaves, flowers, nectar, insects, and fruit.
They are small parrots, averaging around 8 inches long and weighing
around 1.4 ounces.
Turquoise parrots flock and forage together in family groups of 30–50
in the winter, but only 6–8 in warmer months. As the breeding season
nears in spring/summer, the monogamous pairs separate from the rest
of the flock to mate and nest. Each clutch contains 2–5 eggs. Once they
hatch, the female feeds the young for a few days before her mate begins
helping.
The cover image is from the Braukhaus Lexicon. The cover fonts are
URW Typewriter and Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe Minion
Pro; the heading font is Adobe Myriad Condensed; and the code font
is Dalton Maag’s Ubuntu Mono.
www.it-ebooks.info
WWW.EBOOK777.COM

