Rey’s Speeder
Brian Carter Rides To Another PDXLAN Mod Contest Win
September  |  Vol. 17  Iss. 09
COMPUTERPOWERUSER.COM
Complimentary Copy
AMD Threadripper  |  Memory Buyer’s Guide  |  Keyboard Roundup
MODDER Q&A
BEN LZICAR


SEPTEMBER 2017  |  VOL 17 ISSUE 09
FRONTSIDE — P. 4
News, product release information, and 
stats from the tech industry.
HEAVY GEAR — P. 11
The latest PC hardware is here: reviews, 
product profiles, and category roundups.
HARD HAT AREA — P. 34
CPU’s Mad Reader Mod winner, LAN 
party coverage, and in-depth looks at the 
latest technology.
BUYER’S GUIDE — P. 54
A slew of new PC platforms means it’s 
time to check out the memory market. 
LOADING ZONE — P. 64
Software projects, betas, updates, and more.
DIGITAL LIVING — P. 73
Trends and leisure, news from around the 
web, tech company interviews, and more.
BACK DOOR — P. 87
Monthly last-page interview with people 
who help to shape the PC industry.
DID YOU FIND THE HIDDEN 
CPU LOGOS ON OUR COVER?
Gotcha. Here they are.
Copyright 2017 by Sandhills Publishing Company. Computer Power User is a registered trademark of Sandhills Publishing Company. All rights reserved. 
Reproduction of material appearing in Computer Power User is strictly prohibited without written permission.
Contact Us
P.O.Box 82545
Lincoln, NE 68501 
or
120 W. Harvest Drive
Lincoln, NE 68521
Advertising: (800) 247-4880
Fax: (402) 479-2104
Circulation: (800) 334-7458
Fax: (402) 479-2123
www.cpumag.com
email: feedback@cpumag.com
34
Mad Reader Mod: Rey’s Speeder
Print ISSN: 1536-7568 
Online ISSN: 2473-8468
11
Mech Warriors: Keyboard Roundup

Corsair Adds VOID PRO Headsets
Corsair has added three new models to its lineup of VOID PRO 
gaming headsets. All three feature the same basic cast-aluminum 
construction, with a metal reinforced headband and memory 
foam over-the-ear cups. The three models differ in color options, 
lighting capability, and connectivity features. The base model is 
the VOID PRO SURROUND, which is available in red and 
carbon colors and offers Dolby 7.1 surround sound. The VOID 
PRO RGB USB adds in some lighting bling in each earcup; it 
comes in carbon and white. The VOID PRO RGB WIRELESS 
also offers RGB, but in a model that can connect wirelessly at 
distances up to 40 feet. Corsair says the wireless model comes in 
carbon, white, and yellow, and it has a battery life of 16 hours. 
The VOID PRO SURROUND and VOID PRO RGB USB 
models carry an MSRP of $79.99. The VOID PRO RGB 
WIRELESS carbon and white models run $99.99, while the 
striking yellow SE (Special Edition) model includes a base station 
for your wireless USB adapter and will cost you $129.99. 
ENERMAX Debuts LIQTECH TR4 Series
ENERMAX has announced a new series of all-
in-one liquid coolers designed especially for AMD’s new 
high-end Threadripper CPUs. The LIQTECH TR4 cooler 
series includes two models, the LIQTECH TR4 240 and 
LIQTECH TR4 360. ENERMAX uses a patented design 
called Shunt-Channel-Technology (SCT) in the cooling blocks 
for the LIQTECH TR4 series that the company says improves 
overall heat transfer and prevents the build-up of hot spots. 
ENERMAX also designed a new pump for the coolers that 
increases liquid flow, and it made sure the base plate on the 
coolers covers all of Threadripper’s integrated heat spreader. 
Altogether, the technologies and design of the LIQTECH 
TR4 series help the coolers provide up to 500W+ of TDP. The 
coolers come with custom mounting kits, and ENERMAX has 
videos available to walk users through the installation process. 
The MSRP for the LIQTECH TR4 240 is $129.99; the 
triple-fan LIQTECH TR4 360 goes for $149.99. 
WATCHING THE CHIPS FALL
Here is the pricing 
information for 
various AMD and 
Intel CPUs.
* As of August 2017
** Manufacturer’s  
    estimated price 
    per 1,000
CPU
Released
Original Price
Last Month’s Price
Online Retail Price*
AMD Ryzen Threadripper 1950X (Zen)
8/10/2017
$999.99
n/a
$1,019.99
AMD Ryzen Threadripper 1920X (Zen)
8/10/2017
$799.99
n/a
$799.99
AMD Ryzen 7 1800X (Zen)
3/2/2017
$499
$449.99
$459.99
AMD Ryzen 7 1700X (Zen)
3/2/2017
$399
$389.99
$359.99
AMD Ryzen 7 1700 (Zen)
3/2/2017
$329
$314.99
$299.99
AMD Ryzen 5 1600X (Zen)
4/11/2017
$249
$239.99
$239.99
AMD Ryzen 5 1600 (Zen)
4/11/2017
$219.99
$214.99
$214.99
AMD Ryzen 5 1500X (Zen)
4/11/2017
$189
$189.99
$189.99
AMD Ryzen 5 1400 (Zen)
4/11/2017
$169
$164.99
$164.99
AMD A10-7890K (Godavari)
3/1/2016
$164.99
$134.99
$149.99
Intel Core i7-6950X (Broadwell-E)
5/31/2016
$1,723**
$1,695.00
$1,599.99
Intel Core i7-5960X (Haswell)
8/29/2014
$999**
$1,073.52
$1,073.52
Intel Core i7-6900K (Broadwell-E)
5/31/2016
$1,089**
$1,049.99
$1,034.99
Intel Core i9-7900X (Skylake-X)
6/26/2017
$999.99**
$1,061.99
$999.99
Intel Core i7-7820X (Skylake-X)
6/26/2017
$599.99**
$678.75
$599.99
Intel Core i7-6850K (Broadwell-E)
5/31/2016
$617**
$459.99
$359.99
Intel Core i7-7800X (Skylake-X)
6/26/2017
$389.99**
$415.99
$375.99
Intel Core i7-7740X (Kaby Lake-X)
6/26/2017
$349.99**
$349.99
$349.99
Intel Core i7-6700K (Skylake)
8/5/2015
$359**
$339.99
$339.99
Intel Core i5-7640X (Kaby Lake-X)
6/26/2017
$249.99**
$249.99
$239.99
4 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

CableMod Announces ModWrap
The ModWrap is a sleeving kit from CableMod that lets users 
dress up the cooling tubes used in AIO coolers. Custom loops 
often have transparent tubing, so enthusiasts can dye the 
color of the liquid to fit the color scheme of their systems. 
AIO liquid-cooling kits come pre-filled with liquid and 
generally have black tubing, which stylistically will work in 
most builds. With the ModWrap, users can give the tubing 
in AIO kits extra visual punch. The ModWrap sleeving is 
made of nylon and is custom fit for specific lines of coolers. 
The sleeving comes in your choice of five colors: White, Red, 
Light Blue, Light Green, and Carbon (the colors match the 
ones CableMod uses for its ModMesh cables). The kits come 
in two series: Series 1 kits work with Corsair’s second-gen 
Hydro coolers, while Series 2 kits work with EVGA CLC 
coolers and NZXT Kraken models. CableMod says it may 
add sleeving kits for other cooler models if there is enough 
demand. The ModWrap kits are priced at $19.90.
New X399 Memory From G.SKILL
G.SKILL has released specs for new kits of DDR4 in the Flare 
X line that it created for AMD’s Threadripper platform. The 
memory specs are optimized for motherboards sporting X399 
chipsets and high-end Threadripper CPUs. The specifications 
are for 1.35V kits that run at frequencies from 2933MHz to 
3600Mhz. There are two kit capacities: 32GB (8GB x 4) and 
128GB (16GB x 8). The latter kit takes advantage of the eight 
memory slots that can run in quad-channel mode on AMD’s 
X399 platform. G.SKILL says the 32GB 3600MHz kit of 
Flare X is the fastest memory kit that has been released for 
AMD’s platform. The specifications for that kit as well as the 
other new kits are as follows:
FREQUENCY   TIMING   KIT   CAPACITY   VOLTAGE
3600MHz       16-18-18-38       32GB       (8GB x 4)       1.35V 
3466MHz       16-18-18-38       32GB       (8GB x 4)       1.35V 
3200MHz       14-14-14-34       32GB       (8GB x 4)       1.35V 
2933MHz       14-14-14-34     128GB      (16GB x 8)      1.35V 
Lian Li Goes Small With PC-Q39 WX 
Lian Li’s PC-Q39 WX is a small-form-factor tower that features 
a tempered-glass side panel on the left. The Mini-ITX case 
supports full ATX-sized power supplies and has slots for three 
graphics cards. The interior layout divides the chassis into two 
compartments, one that runs along the bottom for the power 
supply and storage drives, the other for the motherboard and 
graphics cards. The lower compartment holds a drive rack that 
can handle up to two 3.5-inch drives and one 2.5-inch drive. 
Another 2.5-inch drive can be placed in the back of the case, 
plus there is room for one more on the motherboard tray. The 
main compartment has room for graphics cards up to 320mm 
long and a CPU cooler up to 120mm. The chassis itself is made 
of aluminum and measures 348 x 252 x 346 (HxWxD in mm). 
The case has spots for up to four fans (2 x 120mm on top, plus 
2 x 120mm or 1 x 140mm on the bottom). It also supports 
liquid-cooling radiators up to 240mm on top. The MSRP for 
the new PC-Q39 WX is $209.99.
CPU  /  September2017 5

HARDWARE MOLE
Thermaltake Reveals Two New Views
Thermaltake’s new View 71 TG and View 71 TG RGB are 
nearly identical towers, but they vary in the type and number 
of fans included with the cases. The View 71 TG has two 
preinstalled 140mm Riing Blue fans, while the View 71 TG 
RGB comes with three preinstalled 140mm Riing RGB fans. 
Other than that, the specs for the two cases look the same, with 
the same interior structure and 5mm tempered-glass panels on 
the front, top, and both sides. Both cases measure 592 x 274 
x 577 (HxWxD in mm) and they each weigh a hefty 41.66 
pounds. Inside, they have an HDD rack that holds four 2.5-
inch or 3.5-inch drives, plus there are mounts for an additional 
six 2.5-inch or three 3.25-inch storage units. The cases support 
motherboards up to EATX, and they have 8+2 expansion slots. 
Graphics cards can range up to 410mm without the HDD 
rack, or 310mm with the rack. The CPU cooler has 190mm of 
headroom. Pricing wasn’t available at press time, but by the time 
you read this, both cases should be available at retailers. 
ADATA Unveils XPG SX9000 SSD
ADATA’s fastest consumer SSD is on the way. The XPG 
SX9000 is an PCIe Gen 3x4 NVMe 1.2 SSD that uses 
the M.2 2280 form factor. ADATA is targeting the new 
drives at gamers and overclockers. The XPG SX9000 can 
read sequential data at up to 2800MBps and write at up 
to 1,450MBps. The drive uses MLC NAND and has a 
Marvell controller. ADATA says random 4K read/write 
speeds are 310K/240K IOPS. The new series ships with 
a black heat spreader that has the ADATA logo, but the 
company is leaving it up to buyers to decide whether they 
want to attach it to the drive. Thermal paste is pre-applied 
to the heat spreader to make the DIY installation as 
painless as possible. The exact availability date hasn’t been 
released, but ADATA says the new drives will be available 
in 256GB, 512GB, and 1TB capacities.
HyperX Releases Kit For Gamers 
Who Want Keyboard Feedback
HyperX, the extreme gaming division of Kingston 
Technology, has released a keycaps upgrade kit. The kit 
is aimed at gamers who play MOBA or FPS games. The 
kit contains keycaps in your choice of two colors: red 
(HXS-KBKC1) or titanium (HXS-KBKC2). The caps 
are textured to give users more tactile feedback from 
their keyboard while gaming, plus they have a coating 
that gives them extra durability. Along with caps for 
the keys commonly used in MOBA/FPS games, the kit 
contains a HyperX keycap removal tool. HyperX says the 
replacement gaming keycaps are compatible with Cherry 
mechanical switches. MSRP for the new keycaps upgrade 
kit from HyperX is $14.99. 
6 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Skydance Interactive Announces 
$12.99 Release For PWNED FPS
Entertainment software publisher Skydance Interactive 
announced it is releasing the new game PWNED for 
Windows PCs via Steam Early Access. The company first 
debuted the game at Comic-Con in San Diego in July. 
The fast-action FPS game will only cost $12.99. SkyDance 
describes PWNED as an arena-based shooter that takes 
place in a “dystopian future” and says it features “three-
dimensional rocket-jumping combat.” Along with the low 
price point for PWNED, Skydance says users who buy 
the software in the first few days of September will receive 
special skins they can use in the game. Early purchasers also 
can participate in a contest to win prizes on the PWNED 
leaderboard. Skydance says it will award the best player on 
the board each day a new gaming computer (the special 
computer givewaway contest will run until September 3). 
Paragon Releases Free Preview 
Version Of Hard Disk Manager 16
Paragon Software Group is getting ready to release the next 
commercial version of Hard Disk Manager, the company’s 
suite of tools that helps you maintain your storage devices 
and protect your data. Version 16 of the software includes 
new features and utilities for partitioning drives, making and 
scheduling backups, and restoring data. Paragon says the latest 
version of the suite has an improved user interface that makes 
using the software more intuitive, and it includes a new Create 
Backup Job Wizard that speeds up the process of creating 
individual backups or scenario-based backups for your PC. 
Recently the company released a “free preview” version of 
HDM 16 at www.paragon-software.com to let users download 
and try out the new features with their storage devices. The 
preview version is completely free to use and there is no time-
based cutoff, so it won’t shut down in 15 or 30 days (note that 
it won’t let you upgrade for free to later versions). 
SOFTWARE SHORTS
Google Releases Android 8.0, “Oreo”
Google’s Android operating system is now found on about 
two billion mobile devices worldwide. The latest version of 
the OS is called Oreo (or Android 8.0), and it is now available 
to the public. The update includes a number of new features. 
Google says Oreo boots twice as fast as previous iterations of 
Android (which also are named after various confections), 
and the redesigned interface gives users access to more apps 
with fewer taps. There’s also a picture-in-picture feature that 
lets you see two apps at once. A menagerie of more than 60 
new emojis is available to help people express themselves, and 
the autofill feature now works with passwords, so you can log 
into your favorite apps and websites faster. Google also has 
made a number of tweaks that it says improve the battery life 
of mobile devices and also increase user security. You can learn 
more about all the new features by visiting www.android.com.
CPU  /  September2017 7

Mozilla’s New Firefox 55 Browser 
Supports WebVR Standard
Mozilla, the non-profit organization that supports and 
promotes open-source technologies and products, has 
released an updated version of the Firefox web browser. 
Firefox 55 is the first Windows desktop browser that 
supports WebVR, the standard that was created to allow 
people to experience virtual reality programs with just a 
browser and a headset. In addition to being able to view 
virtual reality content, Firefox 55 has been tweaked in 
various ways to improve performance and usability. The 
address bar includes predictive search suggestions and 
a one-click search function. Version 55 also prioritizes 
authenticated addresses (sites using the HTTPS protocol 
instead of just HTTP) for more secure Internet browsing. 
Other new features include changes to make pages load 
faster and to improve battery life in portable devices. 
Google Adds Q&A To Maps & Search
Google is adding a new question-and-answer feature to Maps 
and mobile Search. The Q&A feature lets users post questions at 
the bottom of business listings that appear on Maps or in Search 
when someone looks for a type of company by location (say, 
restaurants in Seattle or museums in Cleveland) or a particular 
business by name. The listings show information about the 
company and give a street address and other contact information. 
At the bottom of the listing, the new Q&A feature will let users 
post a question about the business or institution (Do you serve 
gluten-free meals? What’s the best time to visit this exhibit?) and 
then someone from the business or other users can post answers. 
Users who post a question will receive a notification when somone 
posts an answer. Users will be able to scroll through questions 
other people have asked and “upvote” or “downvote” them, so 
the most useful information will appear toward the top of the 
questions list. Businesses also will be allowed to create a sort of 
FAQ list by asking and answering their own questions. 
SITE SEEING
So You Think You Know The Internet
The PIR, or Public Interest Registry, is the non-profit entity 
that handles registration for the .org domain and a few others. 
PIR recently conducted a nationwide survey of internet users 
to find out how much they really know about the network. It 
turns out, not so much. For starters, only 20% of respondents 
knew that the World Wide Web and the internet are two 
different things. A slightly higher percentage (29%) knew what 
the abbreviation HTTP stands for. Only 31% could define 
what the DNS does, and barely 32% even know what decade 
the web began. The results are a little confounding, especially 
when you consider the average respondent had been using the 
internet for 17 years (!). For information on the survey and a 
link to a graphic that illustrates some of the survery results, see 
http://pir.org/internet-101-survey-how-much-do-people-really-
know-about-the-internet/.
8 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Job Of The Month
Got the right stuff? OK, so we’re really not talking about applying for an astronaut position here, but it 
is a position with the same parent organization. NASA employs thousands of people in STEM positions 
(hey, they practically invented the pocket protector), and they are currently looking for an Information 
Technology Specialist (Data Management) for their offices at the Langely Research Center in Hampton, 
Va. This person will help capture data, classify data, integrate data, manage data, model with data, 
analyze data . . . well, you get the idea. You’ll be a doing lots of stuff with data. The ideal candidate will be 
experienced with data analytics techniques and know all about data modeling and data standardization 
procedures. The IT Specialist, Data Management works closely with other IT and engineering teams at 
NASA. You won’t be walking on the moon (they say it’s not a remote working position, anyway), but who 
knows, you may end up meeting some folks who do. Hey, it’s NASA! See the site below for more info. 
Source: www.usajobs.gov
Three Letters: M.I.T.
The Center For Data Innovation, a global think tank that 
examines public policy as it pertains to technology and 
data, recently released a report that ranked all 50 U.S. 
states on how well-prepared they are to participate in 
tomorrow’s data-driven economy. The report examined 
25 indicators in three key technology asset categories: 
1) availability of datasets (in areas such as energy, 
education, health care, and so on); 2) technology 
(how well the state is doing in developing broadband 
access and other digital infrastructure); and 3) people 
and companies (whether a sufficient pool of data 
professionals is available and how many technology-
based companies are already in the state). The results 
of the report show Massachussetts is well positioned for 
the future, while Mississippi has some catching up to do. 
Source: Center For Data Innovation
Facebook & Google: Yes, They Do Own The World
Modern consumers spend a great deal of time on digital media, and 57% of that time is spent on 
mobile apps. Even when you take tablets out of the equation, smartphone apps still account for more 
than half our digital media time. According to research by comScore, seven apps have now achieved 
50% or more market 
penetration (installed 
on more than half of the 
devices that use mobile 
apps). Facebook leads 
the pack with 81%, with 
Google’s YouTube in 
second place with 71%. 
In fact, Facebook and 
Google own eight of the 
10 most popular apps. 
Source: comScore
1,388+
The collective equivalent time in years that 
all of humanity spends entering passwords 
into digital devices each day. This estimate 
by Microsoft Principal Researcher Dr. 
Cormac Herley assumes two billion people 
enter an average of one password per 
day. And that number has no doubt grown 
significantly, as Herley’s original calculation 
was based on data from 2014.
Cormac Herley,  “Passwords: A Guide To The 
Ruins And Lessons For Improvement”
24 million
The number of households worldwide that 
will own at least one virtual reality device by 
the end of 2017. 
Parks Associates
256 million
The number of people worldwide who will 
be using virtual reality devices by the year 
2022. This forecast also projects annual 
VR revenues in the U.S. alone will top $60 
billion in five years. 
ABI Research
$237 billion
The total revenues of the robotics industry 
worldwide by the year 2022. This total 
includes such items as autonomous 
vehicles, consumer robots, enterprise 
robots, and unmanned aerial vehicles. 
Total revenues from these categories in 
2016 reached $31 billion.
Tractica
CPU  /  September2017 9


Mech Warriors 
We Put Thirteen Mechanical Keyboards To The Test
In a similar vein, when we review a 
mechanical keyboard, we keep our personal 
preferences (see above: cacophonous clicky 
switches) in check and evaluate each 
board on its individual merits. If we feel 
like a manufacturer has product a brilliant 
keyboard with Blue or Green switches, we’ll 
assess it as such.
Cherry MX BOARD 6.0
Leading off our roundup is the keyboard 
from the company that’s arguably responsible 
for the modern resurgence of mechanical 
keyboards among enthusiasts. After watching 
other companies succeed on the back of 
its incredibly popular MX keyswitches, 
German designer Cherry delivers its own 
keyboard, the MX BOARD 6.0. If you’ve 
always wondered what Cherry’s vision of the 
quintessential MX-based keyboard might be, 
wonder no longer.
As far as construction goes, the MX 
BOARD 6.0 is practically peerless. Sleek 
and stately, the chassis is a combination of 
aluminum and plastic, like the majority of 
or membrane switches. Further, with a little 
practice, you can use mechanical switches’ 
characteristics to make typing easy, fast, 
and effortless. To wit, clicky and tactile 
keyswitches give you both aural and haptic 
cues, respectively, to type without bottoming 
out the keys as you go. Eventually, you’ll 
be typing up a storm and wondering why 
you spent the best years of your life using a 
substandard keyboard.
Despite the general advantages of mech-
anical keyboards, we don’t recommend 
haphazardly buying one. Clicky keyboards, 
for example, are music to some users’ ears 
but a cacophonous nightmare to others. 
If you can’t stand the sound, you’ll want a 
mechanical keyboard with silent, or non-
clicky, switches. We recommend taking a 
mechanical keyboard or two for a test drive; 
take advantage of your next LAN party, or 
if your friend(s) have one, take advantage of 
them. After chronicling the adventures of 
the quick brown fox and its jumps over lazy 
dogs a few times, you’ll know the type of 
mechanical switch for you.
A
s a group, enthusiasts tend to upgrade 
their hardware at a faster pace than Joe 
and Jane PC User. If you want to play the 
latest and greatest games or power through 
a heavy workload in no time, you have to 
have a beefy graphics card, powerful CPU, 
smoking-fast SSD, and so forth. Plus, who 
doesn’t love the excitement of jamming 
brand-new components into their rig? It’s 
our way of life.
However, whether you’re upgrading 
an existing system or building a new one 
from the ground up, we tend to pass over 
certain parts despite the promises we make 
to the contrary. If the mouse keeps clicking 
and tracks true, we tell ourselves that we’ll 
replace it next time. Why worry about a 
handful of dead or stuck pixels when your 
monitor has millions more that work 
perfectly? And of course, unless you’ve 
created a Mountain Dew swamp within 
your keyboard, most of the time it will keep 
right on typing.
If you’re still forcing your fingers to toil 
away at a decade-old keyboard, maybe 
the time has come for you to think about 
swapping it for a newer model. This isn’t 
always true, as high-quality mechanical 
keyboard can stand up to years of punish-
ment. But it’s precisely for that reason we’ve 
assembled a small army of mechanical 
keyboards for this roundup. The mushy $15 
keyboard in front of you is doing you no 
favors. Make the move to mechanical and 
don’t look back. Instead, look at all these 
awesome options; one of them will be your 
next keyboard.
Hooked On A Feeling
We’ve been preaching the benefits of 
mechanical keyboards for years, but if you’re 
new to the game, here are the CliffsNotes. 
For starters, the keyswitches that mechanical 
keyboards use are far more durable and long-
lasting than keyboards with rubber dome 
MX Board 6.0
$175.99    |    Cherry    |    www.cherry.de
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Red); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: USB; 
Red LED lighting; Full anti-ghosting; Full n-key rollover; Macros: N/A; Warranty: 2 years
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
CPU  /  September2017 11

its keyboard’s switches, Cherry’s decision not 
to offer the MX BOARD 6.0 with alternate 
switches is somewhat puzzling
Also puzzling is the extent of the MX 
BOARD 6.0’s options, which are rather 
limited. As we said, the red LEDs’ brightness 
is outstanding, but brightness is all you get—
no custom colors or effects, no macros, no 
software. Another conundrum is that the 
MX BOARD 6.0’s Red switches are probably 
the best fit for gamers and yet the keyboard 
has none of the goodies they want.
As “just a keyboard,” the MX BOARD 
would be damn near perfect, but we know 
there’s no such thing as “just a keyboard” 
anymore. An ultra-premium price is fine, but 
the feature set has to match. If “the perfect 
MX Red experience” and nothing else is on 
your wish list, take a look.
Cooler Master MasterKeys Pro S
Lately, we’ve noticed a trend among 
keyboard manufacturers toward full-
flavored flash. We’re talking about RGB 
LED lighting—the more the better. Now 
that virtually every other system component 
has embraced LEDs, these keyboards fit 
right in. Cooler Master’s MasterKeys S 
course-corrects.
colors in Cherry’s palette. Curiously, Cherry 
makes no other variants of the MX BOARD 
6.0, so even if you’ve fallen in love with the 
look, you might have to persuade yourself 
into having a similar affection for the Red 
switches. As the company that actually makes 
our boards, but Cherry’s execution is a sight 
to behold. In addition to its clean lines, the 
MX BOARD 6.0 had absolutely no flex 
to it. Even the wrist rest, which attaches 
magnetically, is luxurious. Measuring a 
little over 3.5 inches deep and coated with 
soft-touch rubber, the wrist rest is a terrific 
complement rather than an afterthought. 
The MX BOARD 6.0’s LEDs shine through 
its keycaps more brightly than any of the 
other keyboards we tested. If you want proof 
that elegance doesn’t have to be elaborate, 
Cherry’s keyboard is exhibit A.
Similarly, it’s no great surprise that the 
MX Reds work flawlessly. These switches 
aren’t generally regarded as the best switches 
for general-purpose typing, and in truth 
we prefer our keys to at least offer a tactile 
response. That said, the MX BOARD 6.0 
arguably has the best feel of any mechanical 
keyboard that uses Red switches. As such, 
it has the speed that hardcore gamers are 
looking for in a mechanical keyboard 
without delivering substandard results while 
writing a term paper or the next Great 
American Novel.
But as good as the MX Reds are in the 
MX BOARD 6.0, it doesn’t change the fact 
that many people would rather use MX 
Browns, Blues, Blacks, or one of the other 
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
MasterKeys Pro S
$79.99    |    Cooler Master    |    www.coolermaster.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Green); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: USB; 
Macros: Yes; Full anti-ghosting; Full n-key rollover; Warranty: 2 years
K95 RGB PLATINUM
$199.99    |    Corsair    |    www.corsair.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Brown); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: USB; 
Macros: Yes (6 dedicated keys); Per-key RGB backlighting (16.8 million colors); Full anti-ghosting; 
Full n-key rollover; Warranty: 2 years
12 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

are undoubtedly attractive. Although the 
aluminum itself was sturdy, the plastic 
portion of the body did flex slightly.
Put “RGB” in your keyboard’s name, 
and you’d better be prepared to deliver, 
especially if that keyboard will separate 
potential buyers from a pair C-notes. 
Thankfully, this isn’t a concern with the 
K95, thanks to a combination of bright 
LEDs and truly great software, the Corsair 
Utility Engine. In addition to giving you 
a great deal of control over the LEDs’ 
color (per-key lighting, natch), speed, and 
Our K95 included 
Cherry MX Brown 
switches, which are 
among Cherry’s 
lightest and fastest 
switches, requiring 
a mere 45cN to 
actuate. This puts 
them on par with 
Cherry MX Reds 
(you might refer to 
them as the “gamer 
switches”), but the 
Browns also have 
a tactile bump 
that makes them 
more suitable as 
an everyday board. 
Alternatively, Corsair 
offers the K95 with 
Cherry MX Speed 
switches, a relative 
newcomer that’s even 
more similar to the 
Reds. (The biggest 
difference is travel 
distance—2mm for 
MX Red switches 
vs. 1.2mm for the 
Speeds.) Of course, 
the Browns as Corsair 
has implemented 
them on the K95 are 
excellent, solid all-
around performers 
but also fast enough 
to lead you to victory 
in your favorite 
game(s).
Corsair is obvi-
ously aware that the K95 will be the weapon 
of choice for many gamers and designed the 
keyboard as such. The column of six macro 
keys on the left edge of the keyboard are 
texturized (as is the Spacebar), and Corsair 
also includes extra sets of texturized 
keycaps that match popular game layouts 
(FPS and MOBA). A magnetized wrist 
wrest would have been nice, but the wide 
strip of soft-touch rubber that Corsair 
uses is quite comfortable. An aircraft-
grade aluminum backplate runs from top 
to bottom of the K95, and the contours 
Perfect for minimalists, the MasterKeys S 
is one of two keyboards in our roundup to 
feature a tenkeyless design. In other words, 
Cooler Master lopped off the numeric 
keypad, making this keyboard considerably 
smaller than its compatriots. (If you want 
the numpad back, the MasterKeys L is your 
ticket.) As such, the MasterKeys S follows 
in the tradition of Cooler Master’s other 
tenkeyless boards, such as the QuickFire 
Rapid. At 2.13 pounds, the MasterKeys S has 
a little heft, but it didn’t feel cumbersome. 
Cooler Master touts the MasterKeys S’ 
durability, and we buy it. The plastic frame is 
exceptionally rigid; we’d have no reservations 
about flinging this keyboard into a backpack 
for transport to a LAN party. Cooler 
Master uses PBT keycaps that are 1.5mm 
thick, or nearly twice as thick as most ABS 
keycaps. After pulling off one of the keycaps 
and comparing it to a couple of others, the 
MasterKeys S’ keycaps do feel slightly more 
rigid. Keycap breakage does happen from 
time to time, so the 1.5mm-thick keycaps (the 
included red replacement WASD—plus Q, E, 
and R—keycaps don’t appear to have the same 
thickness) are a non-negligible benefit. 
The MasterKeys S that Cooler Master sent 
us used Cherry MX Greens, clicky and tactile 
switches that are even stiffer than MX Blues. 
The Greens will give your fingers a workout, 
but their implementation on the MasterKeys 
S will be immensely satisfying for anyone 
who prefers a firmer feel. Don’t fret if you 
favor a lighter touch, as Cooler Master also 
makes the MasterKeys S with MX Blue, Red, 
Brown, or Silver switches.
There’s no software for the MasterKeys S, 
which is a benefit or a drawback depending 
on how you use your keyboard. Macro 
maniacs may need a little more than the 
MasterKeys S’ onboard capabilities. That 
said, this is a no-nonsense tenkeyless board 
that can take a punch.
Corsair K95 RGB PLATINUM
Corsair has never been a company that 
cuts corners. Even its wares made for thrifty 
enthusiasts have terrific fit and finish and 
attention to detail. So naturally, Corsair’s 
flagship mechanical keyboard, the K95 RGB 
PLATINUM, arrived on our doorstep dressed 
to impress. Spoiler: We were impressed. 
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
Attack X3
$109.99    |    COUGAR    |    www.cougargaming.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Speed); 50 million keystroke 
life span; Interface: USB; Macros: Yes; Per-key RGB backlighting (16.8 
million colors); Full anti-ghosting; Full n-key rollover; Warranty: 1 year
Francium Pro
$164.99    |    Deck    |    www.deckkeyboards.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Brown); 50 million keystroke 
life span; Interface: USB; Macros: Yes; White LED backlighting; Full anti-
ghosting; Full n-key rollover; Warranty: 1 year
CPU  /  September2017 13

X3 RGB is still a sleek board. COUGAR 
reports a weight of 2.2 pounds; despite this, 
we thought the keyboard was reasonably 
sturdy. With a gentle twist, the plastic part of 
the Attack X3 RGB’s chassis wanted to pull 
away where it met the aluminum, but the 
aluminum itself was rock-solid.
The UIX System that COUGAR has 
developed to fully harness the Attack X3 
RGB’s capabilities is arguably as good as the 
keyboard itself. COUGAR gives you plenty 
of dials and knobs to turn. In addition to 
flipping the On switch to activate the typical 
set of lighting effects (ripple, wave, reactive—
you know the drill), you can drill down and 
customize the effects. The UIX System also 
handles macro recording and profile creation. 
To make matters better, we liked the UI’s 
aesthetic, as well.
Available for $109.99, COUGAR’s new 
Attack X3 RGB is an awesome, approachable 
keyboard for gamers seeking their first 
mechanical keyboard, but it’s also an 
intriguing option for MX Red veterans who 
want to give the Speeds a shot. If you bag this 
big cat, you won’t be disappointed.
Deck Francium Pro
Most of the companies featured in this 
roundup dabble in all sorts of product 
categories. Deck makes keyboards and only 
keyboards. (And Deck comes by it honestly, 
as parent company TG3 Electronics produces 
specialized keyboards for a wide range of 
industries—think hospitals, emergency 
vehicles, POS devices, and more.) For this 
tenkeyless mechanical keyboard, Deck 
turned to the periodic table to give us the 
Francium Pro. See, everyone’s fourth-favorite 
alkali metal (apologies to rubidium and 
cesium) has an atomic number of 87. Want 
guess how many keys the Francium Pro has?
Beneath the Deck’s keycaps are Cherry MX 
switches. Our Francium Pro had MX Browns, 
which have the same fast and light action as 
the MX Red switches, requiring 45cN to 
actuate, but they also have an accompanying 
tactile bump. As a result, the Francium Pro is 
an outstanding all-around keyboard, provided 
you don’t have any qualms about ditching the 
numpad. We thought the keyboard was fast 
and responsive, a great example of the MX 
Brown switches in action.
premier apex predators, and its product name 
is “Attack” . . . times three!
Let’s get serious, though, because 
COUGAR’s redesigned Attack X3 RGB 
is one cool cat. It’s one of two keyboards 
in this roundup to use Cherry’s MX Speed 
(aka Silver) keyswitches. Notice again that 
show of force, this time from Cherry: MX 
Speed switches are fast, and gamers love 
fast. Specifically, these linear switches have 
an actuation force of 45cN, putting them 
on equal footing with Cherry’s other “fast” 
switch, the MX Red. The key difference 
between the two is the Speeds’ slightly lower 
travel distance of 1.2mm. (A Red switch has 
2mm actuation point.) 
Despite their profile, the MX Speed 
switches on the Attack X3 RGB feel closer to 
Cherry’s other linear switch, the MX Black. 
This keyboard has a light touch, to be sure; 
it’s most definitely a gamer, and we liked 
its overall performance. We even prefer the 
Attack X3 RGB’s switches over MX Reds 
for general-purpose typing. COUGAR also 
offers the Attack X3 RGB with MX Red, 
Black, Brown, or Blue keyswitches, but you 
won’t get the detachable wrist rest that this 
new model includes.
COUGAR sticks with a tried-and-true 
combination of brushed aluminum and plastic 
for the Attack X3 RGB’s chassis. The finish is 
subdued, without much luster, but the Attack 
so forth, CUE connects to certain other 
Corsair components and unites them, as 
the company has slowly made good on 
the promises it made with Corsair Link so 
long ago. You can also download additional 
community-generated effects. As good as 
the lighting aspect of CUE is, its macro 
controls are arguably better, and the clean 
UI makes Corsair’s software accessible and 
powerful in equal measure.
The K95 RGB PLATINUM is an out-
standing example—maybe the best 
example—of what a Cherry MX mech-
anical keyboard with customizable RGB 
LED lighting can be. That much is 
undeniable. On the other hand, Corsair 
doesn’t hold a monopoly over LEDs or 
Cherry switches. Corsair’s K95 RGB 
PLATINUM gives you a lot, but for 200 
bucks, it’s asking a lot in return.
COUGAR Attack X3 RGB
In this business, a proper show of force 
can be the difference between a product 
going gangbusters and gathering dust in an 
online retailer’s warehouse. You don’t think 
brags like “aggressive design” and “Starfleet-
grade components” happen by accident, 
do you? Well, if you need your stuff to be 
threatening, you can shut things down right 
now. We have a keyboard from a company 
whose namesake is one of North America’s 
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
AORUS K7
$129.99    |    GIGABYTE    |    www.aorus.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Red); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: 
USB; Macros: Yes; Per-key RGB backlighting (16.8 million colors); Full anti-ghosting; Full 
n-key rollover; Warranty: 2 years
14 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

volume controls) 
are a nice touch.
A s  
f a r  
a s 
other touching 
is concerned, 
Cherr y’s MX 
Red is the switch 
of choice on the 
AORUS K7; at 
the time of this 
writing, Blues or 
Browns weren’t an 
option. We can’t 
fault GIGABYTE 
for tapping the 
switch that’s 
e x c e e d i n g l y 
popular among 
gamers to use 
in a keyboard it 
intends to market 
to gamers, but 
anyone who favors 
tactile and/or 
clicky switches must look else-where. There 
were no surprises from the AORUS K7’s 
Reds. The switches are fast and smooth—this 
is can’t-miss performance if you need a rapid-
fire response in your game of choice.
Rather than use a standalone program 
to command the AORUS K7’s LEDs, the 
AORUS GRAPHICS ENGINE gives you 
the tools. Naming aside, the move makes 
a lot of sense. As much as we grouse 
about ecosystem lock-in, we’d much 
rather have a single tweaking and tuning 
utility running the show if we’re using 
hardware from a single manufacturer. 
(And to be clear, the software absolutely 
works with the AORUS K7 even if it’s the 
only GIGABYTE component you own.) 
The UI won’t win any beauty pageants, 
but it makes setting up the AORUS K7’s 
per-key lighting far easier than relying 
on the onboard controls (which are 
decent in their own right). THE AORUS 
GRAPHICS ENGINE lets you create 
macros, too.
In short, the AORUS K7 is another 
fine offering from GIGABYTE’s gaming 
lineup, this time in keyboard form. “By the 
numbers” often gets a bad rap; in this case, 
GIGABYTE has given us a solid Cherry MX 
if you want easy access to lots of LED 
patterns and colors, there are other choices 
that might serve you better.
GIGABYTE AORUS K7
As more companies establish and 
develop gaming brands, GIGABYTE 
has answered with its AORUS family. In 
addition to the usual suspects, the AORUS 
line has a wide range of components, such 
as mice, a CPU cooler, and even a gaming 
chair. Joining the gang is the AORUS K7, 
a mechanical keyboard with virtually wall-
to-wall LED lighting.
In terms of physical design, the AORUS 
K7 is sleek and sensible. GIGABYTE uses 
a thin sheet of brushed aluminum for the 
top of the keyboard’s frame. Just a shade or 
two lighter than gunmetal, the gray color 
has a slightly lustrous finish that nonetheless 
remained relatively free of fingerprints. The 
rest of the housing is plastic, and because 
GIGABYTE keeps the dimensions of this 
board to absolute minimum it doesn’t quite 
have the same firmness as some of the other 
keyboards we tested. We’ll also give credit 
where it’s due: The AORUS K7’s adjustable 
feet (we first thought the adjustment wheels 
at the top of the keyboard were dueling 
Design-wise, the 
Francium Pro is a string 
of hits and one glaring 
swing-and-a-miss. 
Beneath the plastic 
exterior is a metal frame 
that must be made out 
of vibranium, because 
this keyboard didn’t 
give an inch when we 
tried to twist the body. 
Deck then doubles 
down on durability, 
topping the switches 
with thick PBT 
keycaps. In addition 
to their resilience, 
the PBT keycaps are 
highly resistant to 
fingerprints. Because of 
the keycaps’ thickness, 
though, we didn’t 
think the Francium 
Pro’s LEDs had quite 
the shine as many of the other keyboard 
in the roundup, but that’s not its greatest 
offense. Rather than stick with a plain, but 
inoffensive font for the keycaps, Deck chose 
something that resembles the cover of a 
children’s fantasy novel. Perhaps Deck was 
hoping to distinguish the Francium Pro 
from other tenkeyless mechanical keyboard. 
Mission accomplished, but not in the way 
the company likely intended.
Instead of the 16.8 million colors some 
companies’ keyboards boast, Deck gives you 
two. You can get a Francium Pro with either 
blue or white LEDs. And even though you 
can customize those monochromatic LEDs in 
any pattern you please, be prepared to do a lot 
of the legwork. Rather than give you a utility 
with a GUI, you’ll have to roll up your sleeves 
and script the lighting effects yourself (or cheat 
and download some from sites dedicated 
to mechanical keyboards). If that sounds 
daunting, Deck doesn’t leave you completely 
high and dry, as a handful of lighting effects 
are built into the Francium Pro.
All of this makes Deck’s tenkeyless 
dynamo a bit of a mixed bag. It’s tough 
as nails, make no mistake, and the Cherry 
MX Brown switches are terrific. Despite 
selling online at a deep discount ($94), 
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
RIPJAWS KM780 RGB
$169.99    |    G.Skill    |    www.gskill.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Brown); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: 
USB; Macros: Yes (6 dedicated keys); Per-key RGB backlighting (16.8 million colors); Full 
anti-ghosting; Full n-key rollover; Warranty: 2 years
CPU  /  September2017 15

Fire up the RIPJAWS KM780 RGB’s 
software, and you’ll find that it’s of the same 
caliber as the keyboard itself. It lets you drill 
down and configure nearly every little thing 
on the KM780 RGB. In addition to standard 
roster of macros, profiles, and lighting effects, 
you can tweak individual key lighting and the 
effects themselves. Creating a custom lighting 
profile does take a lot of work, but G.Skill’s 
software makes it possible, even if newcomers 
might find it a bit daunting. 
Don’t let the RIPJAWS KM780 RGB’s 
$169.99 MSRP scare you. You should be 
able to find it online priced well south of 
that mark. It possible that the keyboard’s 
distinct look might limit its broad appeal, 
which is a shame, because G.Skill has 
demonstrated it can trade punches with the 
industry’s heavyweights.
HyperX ALLOY Elite
HyperX’s bread and butter has always 
been its high-end DRAM, but the 
company’s pantry is stocked with plenty 
of other ingredients to help give gamers 
a competitive edge. In addition to the 
stacks and stacks of blazing-fast system 
memory, HyperX (quick reminder: the 
company is still under Kingston’s tent, 
even though Kingston has made an 
effort to establish HyperX as a distinct 
brand) also makes solid-state drives, 
mice, headsets, and a few additional 
for gaming as the Reds, but the haptic 
response makes them a little more suitable 
for everyday use. The switches performed 
admirably on the KM780 RGB, offering 
exactly the feel we expect from an MX 
Brown. The column of six dedicated 
macro keys on the keyboard’s left edge 
is relatively easy to reach. The volume 
barrel located in the top right corner has 
a smooth, but not loose feel. G.Skill jacks 
the KM780 RGB’s “gamer look” to the 
max, but make no mistake—the function 
matches the form.
Red keyboard that won’t take too big of a bite 
out of your wallet.
G.Skill RIPJAWS KM780 RGB
G.Skill wasn’t the first company to realize 
the potential of mechanical keyboards 
among gamers and other enthusiasts, but the 
company’s understanding of this audience is 
the reason why a keyboard like the RIPJAWS 
KM780 RGB is a powerful competitor.
Like the company’s memory modules 
of the same name, there’s no mistaking the 
RIPJAWS KM780 RGB. G.Skill clearly 
wanted to make a keyboard that would appeal 
to the FPS/MOBA/RTS crowd, and it went 
all in aesthetically. The KM780 RGB is not 
a keyboard you can sneak into the office, 
and that’s a badge of honor as far as we’re 
concerned. In addition to the anodized, 
brushed-aluminum backplate, G.Skill rings 
the periphery of the KM780 RGB with what 
amounts to a roll cage. The end result is a 
keyboard that doesn’t give an inch in terms 
of durability, but it does result in one of the 
largest footprints of the keyboards we tested. 
For our tastes, it’s a great-looking keyboard.
The Cherry MX Brown switches our 
KM780 RGB uses (G.Skill alternatively 
lines the RIPJAWS KM780 RGB’s maw 
with Red and Blue choppers, as well) 
are a delight. Requiring 45cN of force 
to actuate and offering a tactile bump, 
the Browns have the same light touch 
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
ALLOY Elite
$109.99    |    HyperX    |
www.hyperxgaming.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Red); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: USB; 
Macros: Yes; Red LED backlighting; Full anti-ghosting; Full n-key rollover; Warranty: 2 years
G413 Silver
$89.99    |    Logitech    |    gaming.logitech.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Romer-G); 70 million keystroke life span; Interface: USB; Macros: 
Yes; White LED backlighting; Full anti-ghosting; 26-key rollover; Warranty: 2 years
16 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

etc.—for ages. Despite its long history 
in the market, Logitech has watched 
as a horde of others recognized the 
runaway popularity of mechanical 
keyboards and flooded the market 
with contenders, and most of them 
use battle-tested and enthusiast-
respected Cherry MX switches.
To beat back the horde of other 
mechanical gaming keyboards, 
Logitech equips the G413 
Silver with exclusive Romer-G 
mechanical switches. Produced 
with an assist from Omron, 
the Romer-Gs are quiet, tactile 
switches that closely resemble 
Cherry MX Browns. According 
to Logitech, its switches have a 
shorter actuation point—1.5mm—
than Cherry’s Brown switches. 
We’ve typed our way through several 
Cherry-based boards with switches 
of every color; the Romer-G switches 
have an undeniably different feel. Is it 
better than, say, the MX Browns? We 
felt like the Romer-G switches were 
a touch firmer than comparable 
Cherries, but again, it’s largely a 
matter of preference. Less a matter of 
preference was the fact that the G413 
Silver’s Spacebar was noticeably noisier 
than its counterparts with Cherry 
switches. On the whole, though, we 
enjoying using the keyboard.
Credit Logitech with points for the 
G413 Silver’s construction, too. The 
base of the keyboard is plastic, but the 
backplate is sleek brushed aluminum 
(5052 aluminum-magnesium alloy, to be 
precise). The aluminum lends a welcome 
degree of rigidity to the overall frame, 
and yet the G413 Silver didn’t seem 
overweight when we held it. The keycaps 
do collect fingerprints like an episode of 
CSI, if that’s a concern. Logitech also 
includes a set of WASD (plus QER and 
1-5) replacement keycaps, and they’re 
contoured differently rather a different 
color. We can see the benefit of being 
able to distinguish and locate the most 
important keys in the heat of battle, 
but the keycaps didn’t revolutionize our 
experience, either.
of replacement keycaps; the set consists 
of WASD and 1-4 keycaps. All of the 
alternate keycaps are titanium-colored, 
and the WASD keycaps are texturized.
The LED lighting on the ALLOY Elite 
is a bit on the basic side. We’ll admit 
that sometimes choosing from 16.8 
million possible colors and dozens of 
wacky effects can be, at times, exhausting, 
but there’s a very real danger of going 
underboard and not giving enthusiasts 
as much as they’ve come to anticipate. 
The ALLOY Elite’s red LED lighting is 
decent, but it’s also the only available 
color. Similarly, the limited number of 
lighting effects all deliver as expected 
while simultaneously leaving any and all 
games unchanged.
Over the years, Kingston has made 
consistently good hardware under its 
HyperX label, and the ALLOY Elite is no 
exception. There are no huge surprises, 
good or bad, and we need keyboards like 
that. You can bring the ALLOY Elite home 
to mom and dad, and we guarantee you 
they’ll approve.
Logitech G413 Silver
Of all the manufacturers with a hat 
in this ring, Logitech is the only one 
we’d consider a household name. The 
company has been making keyboards—
high-end, budget-friendly, gaming, 
odds and ends. Its flagship keyboard is 
the ALLOY Elite.
As far as switch selection goes, where a 
lot of manufacturers zig, HyperX . . . also 
zigs. Of course, when zigging involves 
using Cherry MX mechanical switches, 
that’s not a knock. Our ALLOY Elite had 
MX Red switches (no bumps, no clicks), 
but HyperX also produces the keyboard 
with the other two “Big Three” Cherry 
switches—MX Blues and MX Browns. 
Red switches are often pigeonholed as the 
“gamer switches,” people who like easy, 
breezy typing should find the switches 
on the ALLOY Elite to their liking. 
Sure, it’s not groundbreaking, but using 
the ALLOY Elite was exactly what we’d 
expect from an MX Red keyboard.
A mix of plastic and steel make up 
the ALLOY Elite’s body, and the end 
result is, for the most part, a relatively 
sturdy keyboard. If that sounds like we’re 
hedging, we are. The top “bar” of the 
ALLOY Elite, where the LED and media 
keys are located, appears to be entirely 
plastic. To be fair, we suspect this would 
only become a problem if you used the 
ALLOY Elite in a cage fight, but it also 
gives the keyboard a slightly less than 
premium air. That said, HyperX included 
a detachable wrist wrest that’s treated 
with a sweet, soft-touch coating that we’re 
suckers for. You also get a small bundle 
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
MSI GK-701 RGB
$129.99    |    MSI    |    us.msi.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Cherry MX Speed); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: USB; Macros: 
Yes; RGB LED backlighting (16.8 million colors); Full anti-ghosting; Full n-key rollover; Warranty: 1 year
CPU  /  September2017 17

Patriot Viper V770
As soon as a particular type of 
component picks up steam among 
enthusiasts, you can expect Patriot 
to arrive on the scene in short order, 
offering its own unique take. Most of us 
know that Patriot was among the first 
to introduce high-performance memory 
modules, and over the course of the 
company’s three-decade history it’s done 
the same thing for lots of other hardware. 
Patriot’s Viper line of gaming peripherals 
is yet another example.
You’ll regularly hear manufacturers say 
that they take their customers’ feedback 
and input seriously, but Patriot puts 
action to those words. The Viper V760, 
debuted last year with Kailh Brown 
mechanical keyswitches, but thanks 
solely to customer feedback, this year’s 
Viper, the V770, has a different switch 
beneath its keycaps.
On the V770, Patriot dispenses 
with the Kailh Brown’s tactile bump in 
favor linear Kailh Red switches. This 
is our first encounter with Chinese 
manufacturer Kaihula’s switches in 
subdued. Speaking of that frame, the 
GK-701 RGB has a plastic body. 
Overall, the frame has some flex, but at 
the same time it doesn’t feel flimsy. The 
matte finish did pick up a fair number of 
fingerprints as we used it. 
MSI presents you with a single choice 
of Cherry MX switch if you want the 
GK-701 RGB, but we suspect gamers 
with itchy trigger fingers will appreciate 
it. The Cherry MX Speed switches are 
the lightest of Cherry’s offerings and 
comparable to the MX Reds. Both silent, 
linear switches have an actuation force of 
45cN, but as you’ll recall, the Speeds have 
a slightly shorter actuation point, just 
1.2mm. Typing on the GK-701 RGB is 
indeed effortless, and we suspect gamers 
will like this APM monster.
Overall, the GK-701 RGB is a great 
way for gamers and other enthusiasts 
to get a fast mechanical keyboard 
with solid LED lighting. Mystic Light 
compatibility would’ve been a terrific 
treat for MSI loyalists, and which makes 
this keyboard just a little less delectable 
than it could’ve been.
To fully harness the G413 Silver’s 
capabilities, you’ll need to download 
Logitech Gaming Software. On this 
keyboard, LGS’ principal role is 
configuring macros (and Logitech 
supplements this by giving you 
access to literally hundreds of game-
specific profiles), mostly because the 
monochromatic LEDs have a single 
effect: breathing. One neat surprise 
was LGS’ ability to record and display 
heatmaps of your most frequently 
pressed keys, something competitive 
gamers will likely appreciate. Otherwise, 
LGS as it works with the G413 is simple 
and straightforward.
Logitech arguably took a big risk by 
developing its own switches instead of 
jumping on the Cherry train. We think 
the gamble has paid off, especially when 
you consider the G413 Silver can be 
yours for 90 bucks. That’s a steal. If you’re 
not married to Cherry, let the Romer-G 
switches win your heart.
MSI GK-701 RGB
Over the last few years, MSI has a 
made a concerted effort to establish itself 
as the first name in gaming. Graphics 
cards, motherboards, laptops, you name 
it—if videogames are at the top of your 
to-do list, MSI makes it painfully easy 
to find hardware that’s up to the task. 
The company has extended its reach 
to peripherals, too, with gaming mice, 
monitors, and keyboards (obviously).
Like most of the keyboards in the 
roundup, the GK-701 RGB makes 
ample use of LED lighting. No, all that 
flash won’t make you a better gamer, but 
you’ll look good doing it. You’ll have 
20 animations at your disposal, plus the 
ability to adjust LED color and intensity. 
However, without a utility to manage 
the GK-701 RGB’s customizations, the 
process can be somewhat of a chore. 
Further perplexing is the fact that MSI’s 
Mystic Light software works with other 
manufacturers’ keyboards but not the 
GK-701 RGB. On balance, though, the 
GK-701 RGB’s LEDs have a nice glow; 
because the keys are nestled within a 
fairly deep frame, the shine is a little 
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
Viper V770
$139.99    |    Patriot    |    patriotmemory.com
Specs: Specs:  Switch type: Mechanical (Kailh Red); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: 
USB; Per-key RGB backlighting (16.8 million colors); 109-key rollover; Macros: Yes (5 profiles); 
USB pass-through port; Game mode; Warranty: 2 years
18 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

result, the company has produced some 
truly iconic hardware. A good example is 
its BlackWidow keyboards, which have 
gone through a number of revisions over 
the years. The latest is the Chroma V2.
BlackWidow keyboards used to use 
Cherry MX switches, but now they 
have Razer’s own—sort of—mechanical 
switches. Manufacturing partnerships 
with Kaihua (which makes Kailh 
switches) and Greetech have given us 
Razer Green (tactile and clicky), Orange 
(tactile and silent), and Yellow (linear 
and silent) switches. Requiring 50cN, 
45cN, and 45cN, respectively, to actuate, 
Razer lines up its switches against Cherry 
MX Blue, Brown, and Red switches. Our 
BlackWidow Chroma V2 had Yellow 
switches, which do indeed feel very 
similar to Cherry’s Reds. They’re smooth, 
fast, and responsive, all traits you want 
in a gaming keyboard. After using and 
enjoying them, we have no reservations 
about the Razer Yellows. We’ll have to 
take Razer at its word that the switches 
are good for 80 million keystrokes, but 
the bottom line is that they’re capable 
of going toe-to-toe with other high-end 
mechanical switches. There is a column 
of five dedicated macro keys on the left 
side of the board.
Razer has always prized design, and the 
BlackWidow Chroma V2 is no exception. 
We’d even call the keyboard’s aesthetic 
understated. It’s only visual flourish (aside 
from the RGB LEDs, obviously) is an 
LED-lit Razer logo on the front of the 
board. The LEDs themselves do have a 
nice glow that the matte black finish on 
the frame accentuates. The plastic frame 
does flex slightly under pressure, but the 
BlackWidow Chroma V2 nonetheless 
feels solid. The unheralded star, though is 
the included wrist rest. The plush padding 
makes it easily the most comfortable 
of the bunch, and perfect for nonstop 
gaming sessions (though it remains to be 
seen how the padding would wear over 
time). It also magnetically attaches to the 
keyboard. Razer has done beautiful, if 
simple, work here.
Although the build quality and per-
formance of the keyboard itself is 
the keyboard, it illuminates a brilliant strip 
of LEDs. An aluminum backplate gives the 
keyboard a sharp look and a stiff backbone.
Patriot’s software completes the package. 
It lets you control and customize the 
Viper V770’s RGB LEDs, as well as 
program macros. You can set up per-key 
lighting, choosing from 16.8 million 
colors, or punch in one of 10 effects, with 
some customization to boot. The Viper 
V770 has five dedicated macro keys, but 
you can record to every key on the board 
if you like (with the exception of the 
Windows key).
We liked Patriot’s Viper V760 last year, 
and we like the Viper V770 this year. 
Anyone who wants quick keys, great LED 
lights, and a solid configuration utility, 
all wrapped in a stylish chassis, needs this 
keyboard on their short list.
Razer BlackWidow Chroma V2
It’s hard to believe that Razer is almost 
a teenager. Where other PC companies 
eventually recognized the tremendous 
purchasing power gamers possessed (not 
to mention their influence over friends 
and family), Razer has had an unswerving 
focus on gamers since its inception. As a 
this roundup, so if you’re unfamiliar 
with them they have similar profile 
to Cherry’s MX switches of the same 
color. Kailh and Cherry MX Red 
switches are both silent, provided you 
don’t bottom them out. Kailh Reds 
are slightly stiffer, requiring 50cN to 
actuate. We won’t go so far as to say 
the difference is imperceptible for 
everyone, but we thought the Viper 
V770 gave us performance consistent 
with other keyboards in the roundup 
that used Cherry’s Reds. Instead of 
declaring one Red superior to the 
other, because you could easily 
disagree, we’ll say this: The action on 
Patriot’s keyboard was fast, responsive, 
and accurate. Gamers, get in line.
Patriot competes with Razer for the 
best wrist rest of the bunch (an overlooked 
aspect that we wish more companies would 
devote more attention to), but for different 
reasons. The BlackWidow Chroma V2’s 
wrist rest is a Tempur-Pedic California 
King bed you buy for your wrists, the 
Viper V770’s is a Vegas vacation (not 
that the latter is uncomfortable, per se, 
thanks to a soft-touch coating). When you 
magnetically attach the V770’s wrist rest to 
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
BlackWidow Chroma V2
$169.99    |    Razer    |    www.razerzone.com
Specs: Switch type: Mechanical (Razer Yellow); 80 million keystroke life span; Interface: 
USB; Macros: Yes (5 dedicated keys); Per-key RGB backlighting (16.8 million colors); 10-key 
rollover anti-ghosting; Warranty: 2 years
CPU  /  September2017 19

great, the market is brimming with 
cheaper options that have equally good 
mechanical switches and solid designs. 
So, what exactly does $170 buy you? 
The BlackWidow Chroma V2 is a 
great keyboard, but what puts it in the 
upper echelon of gaming keyboards is 
Razer’s software package, which has been 
polished and refined over the years. Razer 
Synapse gave us extensive and intuitive 
control over the keyboard’s macros and 
lighting effects. With Chroma, you can 
design your own effects or download 
community creations, including game-
specific packages. These tools aren’t simply 
well-developed extras; they’re an integral 
part of Razer’s flagship keyboard.
Usually, when hardware doesn’t 
surprise us, it’s a disappointment. With 
the BlackWidow Chroma V2, it would’ve 
been a bigger surprise if Razer hadn’t 
reasserted its power. Sometimes, you have 
to pay for greatness.
Topre RealForce RGB
Despite their protestations to the con-
trary, power users are as susceptible to 
herd mentality as any other group. Ask a 
group of enthusiasts whether they prefer 
AMD or NVIDIA graphics cards, for 
example, and expect a rancorous partisan 
debate, with both sides passionately 
stating their case.
When it comes to keyboards, there 
is a very big herd that wants you to 
believe that Cherry MX switches are 
the mechanical keyswitches you want. 
The idea that you’d want a different 
mechanical keyswitch is nonsensical. 
The contention that a terrific keyswitch 
can have the properties of a rubber 
dome—heresy. Do you think Japanese 
company Topre concerns itself with the 
opinions of the herd?
If the RealForce RGB is any indica-
tion, it does not. Regularly billed as a 
hybrid, the switch Topre uses in this 
keyboard is what the company calls 
“electrocapacitive,” which is short for 
“electrostatic capacitive.” We detailed 
the RealForce RGB’s unique switch 
last month (see page page 20 in the 
August 2017 issue), but here’s a quick 
recap: Rubber domes under each keycap 
compress, and the top of the dome 
makes contact with the PCB’s circuit. 
A conical spring above each dome is 
largely responsible for the switches’ 
unique feel, and Topre has other tricks, 
such as using O-rings to dampen the 
switches’ acoustics. 
Requiring 45cN to actuate, Topre’s 
switches are comparable to Cherry MX 
Reds and Browns, and they do have a 
light touch. The RealForce RGB’s keys 
felt a little crisper than the Cherries, and 
they’re whisper-quiet if you can train your 
fingers to not bottom out the keys. That’s 
easier said than done, though, and the 
RealForce RGB’s Spacebar in particular 
has a distinct clack if you bottom it 
out, which happened frequently. That 
said, typing on the RealForce RGB felt 
outstanding. The action was smooth, and 
the tactile feedback from the switches felt 
outstanding to us. Topre’s switches are 
more than capable of competing with the 
best in the business.
Elsewhere, the RealForce RGB dis-
tinguishes itself in a couple of ways. 
The keyboard’s stems are compatible 
with Cherry MX keycaps, which gives 
you access to a substantial buffet of 
aftermarket keycaps. (Real mechanical 
keyboard aficionados go whole-hog on 
this type of customization, so MX keycap 
compatibility is a bigger feather in the 
RealForce RGB’s cap than you might 
think.) From a functional standpoint, 
this keyboard’s real knockout feature 
is its Actuation Point Changer. Letting 
you adjust the switches’ actuation point 
(1.5mm, 2.2mm, or 3mm), either 
globally or on a per-key basis, APC 
means the RealForce RGB can be a fast 
gaming keyboard or a typing tank for 
anyone with heavy fingers. The difference 
is subtle at first, but as you experience 
typing at different actuation points you’ll 
understand how awesome this feature is.
Although the RGB lights on 
the keyboard have a nice shine, the 
customization options are a somewhat 
limited. First and foremost, the RealForce 
RGB is a board for people who are fanatics 
about the overall typing experience. The 
$232 price tag is a chunk of change 
(however, Topre has discounted it to 
$199.99 until the end of September), but 
if you fall in love with the switches this will 
be the last keyboard you’ll ever need.
Get On Board
If there’s one thing that unifies 
these keyboards, it’s that they’re all 
unequivocally superior to that bottom-
of-the-barrel keyboard you’ve been 
suffering with for years. Although we’re 
trending toward a mandatory LED 
tax on gaming keyboards, with a little 
diligence you can still find exactly the 
mechanical keyboard you want for 
exactly the price you want to pay. We’re 
confident that one of these boards will 
become your fingers’ new best friend. ■
BY VINCE COGLEY
RealForce RGB
$232    |    Topre    |    www.topre.co.jp/en
Specs: Switch type: Hybrid (Topre electrocapacitive); 50 million keystroke life span; Interface: USB; Macros: 
Yes; Per-key RGB backlighting (16.8 million colors); full anti-ghosting; Full n-key rollover; Warranty: 1 year
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
20 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

above and beyond. With almost a 1TB 
(952GB effective) of storage from the 
Samsung PM961 drives, you won’t be 
lacking for storage space on the OS drive. 
CrystalDiskMark tests on the RAID 0 
configuration showcased a Sequential 
Read Speed of 3295MBps and Sequential 
Write of 2961MBps. Another 1TB 
(908GB effective) of capacity is available 
via the Hitachi Travelstar HDD.
MSI complements the top-of-the-line 
hardware with extras that gamers and 
enthusiasts will appreciate. Let’s start with 
the SteelSeries Rapid Mechanical RGB 
keys, which have action that feels and 
sounds like Cherry MX Blue switches. 
The onboard SteelSeries Engine 3 also 
allows for per-key RGB lighting control.
Continuing with game enhancing 
features, the GT75VR boasts an ESS 
SABRE DAC that supports up to 
32-bit/384KHz audio and what MSI 
calls “high-res” audio. Essentially, the 
enhanced audio allows for more accurate 
playback of lossless audio and other 
digital music recorded at a high sample 
frequency. MSI partners with Nahimic 
for sound processing, and the preinstalled 
With these disclaimers out of the way, 
power users can’t ask for much more from 
a notebook. The Intel Core i7-7820HK, 
for example, is a quad-core mobile CPU 
with Hyper-Threading to process up to 
eight concurrent threads. With a base 
speed of 2.9GHz and a healthy Turbo 
Boost of 3.9GHz, the Core i7-7920HK 
is one of the fastest mobile processors 
available. Multitasking and video 
rendering duties are further enhanced by 
this notebook’s 64GB of DDR4-2400 
memory. 
MSI offers a version of the GT75VR 
Titan with two GeForce GTX 1070 
GPUs in SLI, but this configuration’s 
GeForce GTX 1080 is capable of gaming 
at the notebook’s native 3,820 x 2,160 
resolution without the need for a second 
card. In our game testing, the notebook 
delivered 53fps in Metro: Last Light and 
45fps in Witcher 3 at the 4K resolution 
and highest settings. Games looked 
great on the IPS panel. The autumn 
scenes in Witcher 3, in our testing, were 
particularly vibrant.
The GT75VR Titan’s standard storage 
subsystem is another area where MSI goes 
E
nthusiasts who follow product 
announcements at big shows, such 
as CES and Computex, know some of 
the biggest headliners never make it 
to consumers. Some components are 
prototypes, while other items turn out 
to be infeasible for mass production. 
MSI’s GT75VR Titan was one of the 
“hot” products of this year’s Computex, 
and fortunately for enthusiasts, MSI has 
followed through with the hyped DTR 
(desktop replacement notebook). Our 
$4,299 sample boasts Intel’s Core i7-
7820HK, 64GB of DDR4-2400, and 
NVIDIA’s GeForce GTX 1080. There 
are also two Samsung PM961 drives to 
form a RAID 0 configuration using PCIe, 
NVMe SSDs.
As with any DTR, the GT75VR Titan 
is only somewhat portable—it weighs in 
at 9.92 pounds. And when it comes to 
bulk, the 17.3-inch screen and powerful 
cooling system doesn’t do the notebook 
format any favors. Enthusiasts familiar 
with DTR understand that you won’t 
be hauling this notebook around all day 
long, but it’s possible to use on the go, 
should you need it.
MSI GT75VR Titan
GT75VR Titan-082
$4,299 (as tested)
MSI
us.msi.com
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
CPU  /  September2017 21

In Cinebench 15, for example, the 
notebook generated 760 points in the 
CPU test—a good mark for a mobile 
processor. The dual-channel DDR4-
2400 memory was also speedy, delivering 
29.14GBps in SiSoftware Sandra’s 
Memory Bandwidth test. In the new 
PCMark 10 benchmark, the GT75VR 
Titan produced an overall score of 5331, 
highlighted by a Digital Content Creation 
mark of 6971. 
MSI continues to improve upon its 
Titan notebooks, and the changes 
are much more than keeping up with 
modern CPU and GPU architecture. 
Cutting-edge additions, such as 
mechanical RGB keys, support for high 
fidelity audio, and Killer networking, 
improve the all-around experience. The 
GT75VR Titan’s all-around luxury is in 
line with the $4,299 cost. ■
BY NATHAN LAKE
Nahimic 2 utility features a 3D sound 
feature for virtual 7.1 surround sound. 
You can combine the virtual surround 
sound with Nahimic’s Sound Tracker tool 
for onscreen indicator of where in-game 
sounds originate.
Network connectivity, both wired 
and wireless, is on the bleeding-edge. 
The Ethernet connection is powered by 
Killer MULTI GIG and supports wired 
speeds up to 10Gbps. Although most ISPs 
don’t yet provide enough bandwidth for 
this speed, the MULTI GIG port does 
mean the notebook will be ready for 
when next-gen broadband arrives in your 
neighborhood. The Wi-Fi connection is 
also a Killer product, the Wireless AC-
1535 that supports MU-MIMO and 
beamforming.
We’ve already covered a bit of the 
GT75VR Titan’s performance in our 
game and storage tests, but there are 
other results worthwhile to explore. 
Specs: CPU: Intel Core i7-7820HK; Memory: 64GB DDR4-2400; Chipset: Intel CM238; GPU: NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080; Storage: 2 x Samsung 512GB 
PM961 (RAID 0), 1TB Hitachi Travelstar; Networking: Killer MULTI GIG 10Gb, Killer N1535; OS: Windows 10 Professional; Ports: 5 x USB 3.0, 1 x USB 
Thunderbolt 3 (Type-C), 1 x HDMI 1.4, 1 x mini DP 1.2, 1 x S/PDIF, audio I/O; 3-in-1 card reader (SD/SDHC/SDXC); Warranty: 1 year
Benchmark Results
MSI GT75VR Titan
3DMark Fire Strike
14816
Graphics Score
18929
Physics Score
11173
PCMark 10
5531
Essentials
7770
Productivity
7592
Digital Content Creation
6971
SiSoftware Sandra 2017
Dhrystone AVX2 (GIPS)
161.71
Whetstone AVX 
(GFLOPS)
95
Multi-Media Integer 
AVX2 x32 (Mpixels/s)
458.21
Multi-Media Long-int 
AVX2 x16 (Mpixels/s)
166.3
Multi-Media Quad ALU 
x1 (Mpixels/s)
1.83
Floating B/F AVX/128 
(GBps, mem bandwidth)
29.14
CrystalDiskMark 5.1.2 
(MBps)
Sequential Read 
(Q32T1)
3295
Sequential Write 
(Q32T1)
2961
Random 4K Read 
(Q32T1)
640.6
Random 4K Write 
(Q32T1)
567.3
POV-Ray 3.7 (Pixels/s)
1634.13
Cinebench 15 (Points)
760
Games
(3,820 x 2,160)
Metro: Last Light (Very 
High, 16xAF; SSAA off)
53fps
Sniper Elite 4 (VSync 
off, Ultra, DX12)
62fps
Witcher 3: Wild Hunt 
(Vsync Off, Unl. FPS, 
Ultra)
45fps
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
22 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com


Intel Core i7-7820X
DDR4-2666, which is a bit faster 
than the DDR4-2400 speed limit 
that the 6-core 12-thread Core i7-
7800X is saddled with. The 7820X 
features a few tweaks compared to 
original Skylake procs, including a 
rebalanced cache hierarchy that 
dedicates more private MLC 
(Mid-Level Cache) to each of the 
chip’s 8 cores, resulting in modest 
improvements in IPC (instructions 
per clock), but at the cost of some 
increased latency. Other extras 
include AVX-512 instructions, 
support for Intel SpeedShift 
technology that enables the processor 
to change P states in as little as 1ms, 
an improved the front-end, deeper 
out-of-order buffers, an increased 
the execution unit count, and higher 
load/store bandwidth. 
This processor is manufactured 
on Intel’s 14nm process-based 
die and it comes with a rather 
high 140-watt TDP. When we 
overclocked the CPU, we got stable 
scores at 4.3GHz, with a minimal 
bump in voltage. These chips get 
hot fast, so we didn’t get pushy. 
The Intel Core i7-7820X is a 
solid, if slightly expensive, starting 
point for enthusiasts looking to 
build an X299-based system that 
needs tons of memory bandwidth 
and could do with a decent amount 
of PCIe lanes. ■
BY ANDREW LEIBMAN
W
e still don’t know how Intel’s highest 
core-count Skylake-X processors will 
perform, but here’s an eight-core appetizer to 
nibble on in the meantime. 
The Intel Core i7-7820X is, at least 
architecturally, closer to the Core i9-7900X 
than to the Kaby Lake-X Core i7-7740X, 
and that’s a good thing. This processor 
features eight cores with Hyper-Threading 
enabled, letting it handle up to sixteen 
concurrent threads at once. The base clock is 
set to a modest 3.6GHz, but it has a Turbo 
Boost 2.0 frequency of up to 4.3GHz. 
Those clocks put it at a rather significant 
single-core disadvantage compared to the 
fastest Kaby Lake-X processor, however, this 
processor is the least expensive of the X 
Series processors to have Intel Turbo Boost 
Max Technology 3.0 switched on, which 
gives the fastest core a little more room to 
run, to the tune of 4.5GHz, which is the 
Core i7-7740X’s Max Turbo frequency. 
But there are other things about the 
Core i7-7820X that make it a significantly 
better choice for enthusiasts, such as its 
beefier 11MB L3 cache and an onboard 
quad-channel memory controller, which 
does wonders for memory-limited 
applications and actually lets you use 
all of the memory slots on your X299 
motherboard. Another thing that gamers 
and storage savants will be happy to hear is 
that this processor supports up to 28 PCIe 
3.0 lanes, which is 12 more than the Core 
i7-7740X and anything currently available 
on Intel’s mainstream Z270 platform. 
Other features include an 8GTps DMI 
3.0 bus and support for up to 128GB of 
Specs: Clock speed: 3.6GHz base, 4.5GHz Turbo Boost Max Technology 3.0; 8-cores; unlocked multiplier; quad-channel DDR4-2666 memory; 28 PCIe 
lanes; 11MB L3 Cache; Hyper-Threading; Turbo Boost; 14nm; 140W TDP
Test System Specs: Motherboard: ASRock X299 Taichi; GPU: EVGA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti FTW3; Memory: 32GB Kingston HyperX DDR4-3200; Storage: 
480GB Patriot Hellfire PCIe SSD; OS: Windows 10 Enterprise
Core i7-7820X
$589
Intel
www.intel.com
Intel Core 
i7-7820X
i7-7820X OCed 
@ 4.3GHz
3DMark Fire Strike Ext.
13,601
13,615
Graphics Score
14,400
14,314
Physics Score
20,963
22,230
Graphics Test 1
76.8fps
76.40fps
Graphics Test 2
52.84fps
52.51fps
Physics Test 
66.55fps
70.57fps
Combined Test
32.57fps
32.53fps
PCMark 10 Score
6,400
6,782
Sandra 2017 Platinum
Dhrystone Integer Native 
AVX2 (GIPS)
363.68
393
Whetstone Single-float Native 
AVX (GFLOPS)
216.7
233.16
x128 Multi-Media Integer 
AVX512/BW (Gpixels/sec.)
1.27
1.51
x64 Multi-Media Long-int 
AVX512/DQW (Mpixels/sec.)
426.69
499.29
x1 Multi-Media Quad ALU 
(Gpixels/sec.)
4.07
4.59
x64 Multi-Media Single-float 
AVX512F (Gpixels/sec.)
1.49
1.83
Integer Memory Bandwidth 
B/F AVX512/512 (GBps)
49.47
47.4
Floating Memory Bandwidth 
B/F AVX512/512 (GBps) 
50.85
48.89
Cinebench 15 (Points)
1,739
1,850
POV-Ray 3.7 (Pixels/sec.)
3,696.44
3,983.04
Sniper Elite 4 (Vsync Off, 
Ultra, DX12)
120.29fps
120.97fps
The Witcher 3 (Vsync off, 
Unl.fps, Ultra)
104.75fps
110.03fps
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
24 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

HP SSD S700 500GB
initial foray. HP sent us its biggest S700, 
a 500GB 6Gbps SATA drive that slips 
in just under the $200 mark. The math 
practically does itself. Based on this drive’s 
MSRP, you’re paying $0.40/GB.
Let’s get this out of the way now: These 
SSDs aren’t going to burn up the test track, 
which is largely a result of 6Gbps SATA 
bus bottlenecking throughput. Instead, 
HP is positioning the S700 and S700 
Pro as sources of affordable, long-lasting 
solid-state storage. Equipped with a Silicon 
Motion controller and a stack of 3D TLC 
NAND, the SSD has the hallmarks of an 
approachable, cost-effective drive.
HP has imbued the S700 with a handful 
of other benefits intended to help it stand 
up to regular punishment. There’s advanced 
wear-leveling, which we’ve come to expect 
at this point, so this SSD should be good for 
295 TBW. Higher Order LDPC (low-density 
parity check) Error Correction keeps data on 
the drive safer.  An all-metal enclosure acts as 
a natural heatsink; combined with the S700’s 
A
sk anyone in the enthusiast old guard 
about Hewlett-Packard, and you’ll 
probably get a condensed dissertation 
about the company’s pivotal role in not 
only establishing personal computers 
but also Silicon Valley itself. Ask a LAN 
party youngling playing Rocket League 
on his dad’s gaming rig, and the answer 
will probably be, “I think they made my 
grandparents’ printer.” 
Indeed, although HP is a dominant 
force in a lot of tech industries and still 
maintains a very healthy share of the 
overall PC market, the company has been 
searching for an identity that resonates 
among gamers and other power users. This 
summer, HP seems to be finding its way, 
announcing the OMEN line of gaming 
systems and becoming an official partner 
of the 2017 Overwatch World Cup. 
Almost simultaneously, HP is attempting 
to make inroads in another enthusiast 
arena: solid-state drives. The SSD S700 
and SSD S700 Pro series make up the 
7mm thickness, it’s a good fit for laptops 
in need of a better boot drive. Laptop users 
should also like that the S700 uses a scant 
5mW in sleep mode.
We pitted the 500GB S700 against 
CrystalDiskMark and AS-SSD, and it 
delivered precisely the throughput that’s 
consistent with modern 6Gbps SATA SSDs. 
The S700 might not be your next boot 
drive, but it’s a perfectly acceptable source 
of fast, dependable supplemental storage or 
a can’t-miss upgrade for a sluggish laptop. ■
BY VINCE COGLEY
Specs: Interface: 6Gbps SATA; Controller: Silicon Motion SM2258; Maximum sequential read/write: 560MBps/515MBps; Random 4KB read/write: 75,000 
IOPS/95,000 IOPS; Form factor: 2.5-inch; Warranty: 3 years
Test system specs: Processor: Intel Core i9-7900X; Motherboard: ASROCK X299 Taichi; GPU: EVGA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti FTW3; Memory: 32GB Corsair 
Vengeance LED DDR4-3200; Storage: 480GB Patriot Hellfire; OS: Windows 10 Enterprise
SSD S700 500GB
$199.99 | HP | www.hp.com
Benchmark Results
HP SSD S700 
500GB
CrystalDiskMark 5.2.1*
Sequential read
521.7
Sequential write
464.5
4K read
25.50
4K write
115.2
Sequential read (QD32)
557.5
Sequential write (QD32)
512.5
4K read (QD32)
222.3
4K write (QD32)
322
PCMark 8 Storage
4904
AS-SSD 1.9*
Sequential read
524.16
Sequential write
461.46
4K read
19.40
4K write
100.96
4K read (64Thrd)
204.29
4K write (64Thrd)
293.58
*all results in MBps
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
CPU  /  September2017 25

Alphacool Eisbaer 420 CPU
and the same fittings are present on the 
Eisbaer 420 CPU. Notably, Alphacool 
also sells Eiswolf GPX-Pro AIO kits 
(GPU coolers) with the same quick 
disconnect system. Should you have a 
different GPU block in mind, Alphacool 
also sells adapters to make the quick 
disconnect system work with standard 
G1/4 fittings. We also like that Alphacool 
includes a fill port on the pump/water 
block unit, so you can quickly add 
coolant if you do opt to expand the loop.
Alphacool tells us that the Eisbaer 
420 CPU is the largest AIO available, 
and after a bit of research, we found no 
other closed-loop kits with a 420mm 
radiator. The extra-long and wide copper 
fin structure, of course, is great for heat 
dissipation, but support for this big bear 
of a radiator requires a huge case. Even 
some full towers might not have room 
for it. We installed the AIO into the top 
panel of a Thermaltake Urban T81, where 
it fit quite nicely. 
The three Eiswind 14 fans included 
with the Eisbaer 420 CPU are different 
than the PWM-controlled Eiswind 12 
fans that come with the Eisbaer 360 
CPU. Despite sharing the same series 
name, the 140mm Eiswind 14 fans 
A
t the beginning of the year, we 
reviewed Alphacool’s Eisbaer 360, 
an all-in-one CPU cooler with quick 
release fittings to let you expand the loop 
without needing to drain the system or 
take the AIO apart. Alphacool recently 
added a new flagship CPU cooler, the 
Eisbaer 420, that brings a similar feature 
set with a 420mm copper radiator and 
three 140mm Eiswind 14 fans. If you 
have the space for such a voluminous 
radiator inside your case, this expandable 
AIO might just be for you.
The Eisbaer 420 CPU, similar to the 
Eisbaer 360 CPU, comes completely 
preassembled and factory-filled with 
coolant, so you can install it right away. 
Alphacool includes mounting kits for all 
modern Intel processors, including LGA 
2066 sockets. On the AMD side, there 
are mounting kits for AM4 and previous 
generation AMD processors. Alphacool 
tells us a TM4 bracket for Threadripper 
chips is now available for preorder and 
should be available by the time you read 
this. Maybe more importantly, the Eisbaer 
AIO’s cold plate is large enough to cover 
the Threadripper die.
We’ve been big fans of Alphacool’s 
integrated quick disconnect system, 
feature a static 1,100rpm fan speed. The 
tremendous length of the radiator, in part, 
alleviates the need for super-speedy fans, 
but we still like having PWM control as 
an option for keeping noise to an absolute 
minimum when the PC is idle.
Much like the Eisbaer 360 CPU, the 
420 model offers quite a bit of headroom 
for overclocking. We tested the unit with 
Intel’s Core i7-7820X and ASRock’s X299 
Taichi. Prime95’s SmallFFT torture test 
pushed average CPU temperatures to only 
55.63 degrees Celsius with a maximum 
of 60 C. We also ran POV-Ray 3.7 for 
ten minutes, where CPU temperatures 
averaged 52.7 C with a max of 58 C. In 
idle, the Core i7-7820X averaged a cool 
25 C. 
Alphacool’s expandable AIO design 
is especially powerful when paired with 
large radiators, such as what you’ll find 
on the Eisbaer 420 CPU, as the unit 
has greater cooling potential for loop 
upgrades down the road. Compatibility 
will likely be a roadblock for some users, 
but otherwise, there’s little to complain 
about in terms of design, performance, 
and pricing. ■
BY NATHAN LAKE
Specs: Materials: copper (waterblock and radiator); Socket compatibility: Intel LGA 2066/2011(3)/2011/1366/115X/771/604, AMD FM2(+)/FM1/AM3(+)/
AM2(+)/939/940/G34; Pump: 2,600rpm, 7-13.5V; Fans: 3 140mm Alphacool Eiswind 14 fans (1,100 rpm); Radiator dimensions: 1.18 x 5.66 x 19.26 
inches (HxWxL); Warranty: 2 years
Test System Specs: Processor: Intel Core i7-7820X; Motherboard: ASRock X299 Taichi; GPU: EVGA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti FTW3; Memory: HyperX 32GB 
Predator DDR4-3000; Storage: 480GB Patriot Hellfire; OS: Windows 10 Enterprise
Eisbaer 420 CPU
$152.30
Alphacool
www.alphacool.com
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
26 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Corsair VOID PRO Surround
LED-backlit logo the other VOID PRO 
models feature. 
No matter which unit you choose, 
however, they all come equipped with 
custom tuned 50mm Neodymium 
drivers, which deliver a rich and full 
sound experience whether you’re 
enjoying surround or stereo content. 
The unidirectional noise-cancelling 
microphone on this unit delivers a similar 
high-quality experience, with its 50Hz to 
18kHz frequency response and-38dB (+/-
3dB) sensitivity. 
In addition to improving the experience 
for your teammates, the VOID PRO 
Surround also supports Sidetone 
Control, which lets you hear your voice 
through the headphones to keep you 
from shouting unnecessarily or becoming 
the “heavy breather” of the group. Better 
yet, the VOID PRO Surround has been 
DISCORD Certified, which means it’ll play 
nice and sound great when you’re running 
one of the most popular gaming chat apps. 
The mic and sound performance of 
a headset is important, sure, but it’s 
really only half of the story. We’re happy 
to report that Corsair have nailed the 
comfort aspect as well; the VOID PRO 
Surround is one of the most comfortable 
headsets we’ve used. It weighs a hefty 
13.4-ounces, but Corsair’s engineers have 
figured out a way to evenly distribute 
C
orsair recently launched its new VOID 
PRO family of gaming headsets, 
and we opted to take the VOID PRO 
Surround for a test drive. Compared to 
other headsets in the new product line, 
the VOID PRO Surround resides in a 
more affordable neighborhood, but you 
aren’t missing out on audio quality when 
you opt to pick up this model over one of 
the others. 
The difference between the unit we 
tested and the VOID PRO RGB Wireless 
is all in its name; the $99 cordless unit 
features a built-in battery (over 16 hours 
of battery life, 2.4GHz wireless audio 
with up to 40ft of range) and an RGB 
LED under the Corsair logo on the cans. 
There’s a $129 yellow VOID PRO RGB 
Wireless SE (Special Edition) that comes 
with everything mentioned above and a 
bundled receiver dock and wireless USB 
adapter holder. There’s also a basic VOID 
PRO RGB that carries the same $79 
price as the VOID PRO Surround, but it 
comes with a corded USB-only interface. 
With the VOID PRO Surround, 
we like having the option of plugging 
in the USB dongle to take advantage 
of the headset’s Dolby Headphone 7.1 
surround sound capabilities, or putting 
it away when we want to switch to a 
non-PC source, such as a game console or 
smartphone. We do miss out on the RGB 
that weight across the microfiber mesh 
headband and memory foam ear cup 
cushions. Those cushions are also large 
enough that they’re not resting on any 
sensitive portions of your ears. As a result, 
the headset stays put and feels great, even 
after hours of nonstop gaming. 
We downloaded Corsair’s CUE 
Control utility to enable/disable the 
Dolby Headphone 7.1 surround sound, 
but there’s no RGB LED and currently 
no other Corsair components installed 
on our test system, making the software 
seem largely unnecessary beyond offering 
a handful of EQ settings, which we rarely 
adjust anyway.
The VOID PRO Surround comes 
with your choice of Cherry Red or 
Carbon (black) can highlights. The 
unit is composed of a plastic adjustable 
headband, with anodized black aluminum 
brackets between the headband and the 
cans, letting them swivel and rotate for a 
perfect fit or easy travel. 
After several days spent with the VOID 
PRO Surround effectively glued to our 
scalp, we’re pleased to report that this 
unit is comfortable and great-sounding 
enough that we’d be content to use it for 
gaming, music, streaming video, movies 
and more, all day, every day. ■
BY ANDREW LEIBMAN
Specs: Drivers: 50mm neodymium driver, 20Hz to 20kHz; Impedance: 32 ohm @ 1kHz; Mic: 50Hz to 18kHz; Sensitivity: -38dB (+/-3dB); Controller: On-can 
volume; LEDs: None; Connector: 3.5mm plug, USB dongle for Dolby Headphone 7.1
VOID PRO Surround
$79.99
Corsair
www.corsair.com
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
CPU  /  September2017 27

ARCTIC BioniX F120 & F140
frame, rather than the rotating blades that 
blur during operation, the color is more 
distinct inside the case. 
In addition to changing up the look, 
the BioniX fans bring some serious 
airflow to ARCTIC’s fan lineup. The 
BioniX F120 is rated for 69cfm at the full 
1,800rpm, while the F140 hits 104cfm 
at full throttle. Impressively, the rated 
airflow matches some fans that we’ve 
recently tested that operate at 2,000rpm. 
ARCTIC’s engineers tweaked the fan 
blade design to generate higher airflow 
without increasing noise.  
At full speed, we’d rate the fan noise as 
average for both the 120mm and 140mm 
models. The fans aren’t silent when the 
PC is under full load, nor are they so 
loud as to be distracting. The BioniX’s 
200rpm minimum fan speed, on the flip 
side, ensures the F120 and F140 fans are 
quiet during idle. In our testing, noise 
levels aren’t really noticeably until the fan 
reaches 1,200rpm, so the BioniX fans are 
unobtrusive in everyday application.
ARCTIC makes a small, but 
important, addition to the PWM plug 
by including both a male and female 
T
he majority of case fans come with 
a two-year warranty, and some 
higher-end models are backed by a five-
year warranty. ARCTIC’s new BioniX 
F120 (a 120mm fan) and F140 (a 
140mm fan) series boast a nearly unheard 
of 10-year warranty. Why is ARCTIC so 
confident in the BioniX fans, you might 
ask? The company indicates that most 
fans are designed with a 1- or 2-phase 
motor, while the BioniX fans feature 
a 3-phase motor that, by comparison, 
drastically reduces motor temperature. 
Turning down coil heat, according to 
ARCTIC, quadruples the life span of the 
fan motor and also reduces noise. Power 
users should also like that the BioniX fans 
produce high airflow and feature a wide 
PWM range (200-1,800rpm).
On the BioniX line, ARCTIC eschews 
the bright white blades so commonly 
found on its low-noise “F” series for black 
blades and a colored inner frame. Our 
BioniX F120 sample features a white 
inner frame, while the BioniX F140 
boasts a red inner frame. ARCTIC also 
offers the BioniX line in green and yellow 
colors. By moving the accent color to the 
connector. The design makes it easy to set 
up multiple BioniX fans in a series. The 
BioniX series also supports ARCTIC’s 
PWM Sharing Technology, where up to 
10 fans (assuming the motherboard has 
a high power fan header) can run in a 
daisy-chain for a single point of PWM 
control. The fan’s female 4-pin header, of 
course, could also support any other 3- or 
4-pin fan—not just ARCTIC’s BioniX 
line.
The BioniX F120 and F140 are well-
designed fans, and in particular, we like 
the wide PWM range and impressive 
airflow at 1,800rpm. The 10-year 
warranty and dual PWM plug set add 
to the premium features. With fans on 
the leading edge of the RGB LED craze, 
it’s notable that ARCTIC foregoes LEDs 
entirely on these “gaming” fans, but the 
fan’s look is still bold enough to attract 
attention inside a case. ARCTIC tell 
us that the fans should be available by 
September 13th. ■
BY NATHAN LAKE
Specs: Dimensions: 120 x 120 x 27mm (F120), 140 x 140 x 28 (F140); Speed: 200-1,800rpm; Maximum airflow: 69cfm (F120), 104cfm (F140); Maximum 
noise: 0.5 Sone (F120, 0.6 Sone (F140); Connectors: 4-pin PWM (male and female); LED: none; Current: 0.2A (F120), 0.25 (F140); Warranty: 10 years
BioniX F120 & F140
$14.99/F120, $15.99/F140 |  ARCTIC | www.arctic.ac
CPU RANKING    0 = ABSOLUTELY WORTHLESS    2.5 = ABSOLUTELY AVERAGE    5 = ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
28 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

State-Of-The-Art
Standards
AMD XFR
L
ast month we looked at Intel’s Turbo 
Boost Technology as it has evolved over 
the past eight years, and now it’s time to 
shine the spotlight on AMD’s automated 
clock speed-tweaking technologies. Unlike 
Intel’s technology, AMD has gone through 
a couple revisions, initially Turbo Core, 
followed by Turbo Core 2, which was 
ultimately scrapped in favor of Precision 
Boost and XFR (Extended Frequency 
Range) in the firm’s latest Zen-based 
processors. But before we get ahead of 
ourselves, let’s take a closer look at how 
AMD found itself with a series of processors 
that could do better than their base clocks 
on a consistent basis. 
The Original Turbo
The idea of dynamic frequency scaling has 
its origins in technologies that significantly 
predate both Intel’s Turbo Boost and 
AMD’s similar efforts. The Turbo Button 
was a physical button that existed on the 
front panel of a handful of beige-box 
IBM compatibles that were shipped with 
processors that ran at faster core clocks than 
the original 4.77MHz of the Intel 8088. 
Today, we take it for granted that 
upgrading our processor to a model that 
runs at a higher frequency always results 
in universal software compatibility and 
generally better performance across the 
board. But in the mid-to-late ’80s, this 
was not the case. The developers of some 
early PC games used the CPU clock for 
timing animations (we’re using the term 
“animations” loosely here) and in-game 
events, which meant that they only ran 
correctly if the processor was running at 
the CPU speed that the game was designed 
to use. PCs equipped with a Turbo Button 
In the bad old days, some IBM compatibles needed to underclock the CPU via a Turbo Button 
just to play a handful of legacy games.
CPU  /  September2017 29

It was as true then as it is now; 
High-end processors that consume 
significantly more than 140 watts 
have a hard time dissipating heat 
quickly enough using conventional 
(read: affordable) cooling devices 
to be commercially viable. Even 
stricter power and thermal limits, 
in the neighborhood of 65 watts, 
needed to be instituted on desktop 
processors that commonly shipped 
with low-profile, air-cooled CPU 
heatsinks. Mobile processors, which 
are heat- and power-limited to 
the tune of around 35 watts, can’t 
simply run at higher generation-
on-generation clocks to outperform 
their predecessors. 
This has resulted in processors 
that, for the better part of the 
last decade, have had to make 
tradeoffs between core count and 
clock speed to stay within roughly 
the same thermal envelope. To 
simplify what we’re talking about, 
consider that a single-core processor can 
stay within its power and heat output 
limits with a 4.2GHz core clock, but 
a dual-core processor will need to be 
clocked at 3.6GHz to do the same, 
there was another problem that both 
Intel and AMD’s chip designers were 
beginning to encounter, and that was 
their processors’ physical limitations with 
regard to heat and power. 
could effectively reduce the clock speed to 
support these software titles, and then run 
with Turbo enabled, or effectively full speed, 
for any software that didn’t suffer this fault. 
Modern versions of turbo have flipped the 
script significantly, and we’re 
grateful that these sorts of 
workarounds are no longer 
necessary. 
The Heat & Power 
Problem
In last month’s look 
at Intel’s Turbo Boost 
technology, we implied that 
there was a link between 
multicore processors 
struggling with single-
threaded software and 
Intel’s desire to convert 
the power those idle cores 
weren’t using into a real 
performance advantage. 
But even before anyone 
was making multicore 
processors, back in the 
days of NetBurst Pentium 
4s and K7-based Athlons, 
AMD’s Bulldozer architecture may have a bad reputation among enthusiasts, but Turbo Core Technology 
gave you more bang for your buck.
Turbo Core relied on P-state transitions to signal the system when to raise the base clock. 
30 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

limit, considering the flagship AMD 
Ryzen Threadripper 1950X processor 
has a TDP of 180 watts. The AMD 
Wraith Stealth cooler, which ships with a 
number of the most affordable Ryzen 5 
and 3 processors, conforms to the 0.451 
minimum degrees-Celsius-per-watt rating 
mentioned above. 
The Bulldozer Phenomenon
AMD’s first implementation of 
dynamic frequency scaling for the 
purposes of improving performance 
occurred with the relatively recent 
Bulldozer architecture, which initially 
launched in early 2010 on the company’s 
Phenom II processors, starting with 
the six-core Phenom II X6 1090T and 
1055T, and later in 2011 in select AMD 
Opteron processors. 
The technology, called AMD Turbo 
Core, was designed to bridge the gap 
between TDP and average power con-
sumption, which is the amount of 
power that a processor is most likely to 
draw under load when running typical 
workloads. As it turns out, this gap can 
be rather massive. 
According to a blog post from John 
Fruehe, former 
director of prod-
uct marketing at 
AMD, the base 
clock speed on 
these processors 
was effectively 
a “worst-case 
scenario,” assum-
i n g  b a s e l i n e 
c o o l i n g  
a n d 
workloads that 
draw atypical 
amounts of power. 
AMD determined 
the clock speed of 
these Bulldozer 
processors “using 
a methodology 
that includes 
using programs 
designed to stress 
every transistor 
at the same 
can calculate its TDP by subtracting 
71.3 (max temp at the processor’s 
heat spreader) from 42 (max temp at 
heatsink), and then dividing the result 
by 0.451, which is effectively a minimum 
degrees-Celsius-per-watt capacity for the 
thermal performance of AMD-compatible 
coolers. This gives us a TDP of 64.96, or 
65 watts. 
Keep in mind that when we use a 
phrase like “maximum temperature,” 
we’re really referring to the highest 
operating temperature before the CPU 
begins to throttle its speed to prevent 
damage to the hardware. This is the upper 
limit of desirable performance, even when 
overclocking is factored in. The reference 
power draw limit (current times voltage) 
for AMD’s Socket AM4 is 128 watts, and 
the processor’s tendency to approach this 
number isn’t influenced by aftermarket 
CPU coolers or other hardware choices. 
When talking about Ryzen processors 
and A-Series APUs that plug into the 
AM4 socket, that 128 watts can be 
considered a constant. Note that the 
AMD Ryzen Threadripper’s TM4 socket 
on X399 motherboards will have a 
significantly higher reference power draw 
and a quad-core processor will take 
another 400MHz to 600MHz hit to 
its clock speed to operate within the 
same boundaries. 
TDP VS. Power Draw
The terms TDP (Thermal Design 
Power, or thermal watts) and power 
draw (electrical watts) are often 
mistakenly used interchangeably. 
TDP refers to the measurement of 
the processor’s thermal output and is 
designed to be used as a reference point 
for choosing a suitable CPU cooler. The 
TDP is a number that the processor 
should not consistently be approaching 
under typical loads, and if the TDP 
is met, thermal throttling will occur, 
resulting in significant drops in clock 
speed and performance. The TDP 
for any ASIC can be determined by 
subtracting the maximum temperature 
for the heat spreader junction (tCaseC) 
from the maximum temperature at the 
HSF fan inlet (tAmbientC), divided by 
the minimum degrees Celsius per watt 
rating of a heatsink. 
If we take a look at the AMD Ryzen 
3 1300X we reviewed recently, we 
This chart from AMD shows how Precision Boost, XFR, and Pure Power work together to affect the clock speed of the 
flagship Ryzen 7 1800X.
CPU  /  September2017 31

from AMD and Intel. As a result, the 
processor base clock speeds could start 
out higher to improve the performance 
of those typical workloads. But this 
only gave AMD’s early efforts a modest 
5% clock improvement. There was still 
a big performance gap that was just 
lying there, untapped. 
Put simply, AMD Turbo Core lets 
the processor raise its clock speed 
dynamically, based on software 
demand, to as close to the processor’s 
TDP as possible without incurring 
provisioning for a data center, this disparity 
can result in a lot of wasted rack space. 
To address the issue, AMD came up 
with the ACP (Average CPU Power) 
rating for its server and workstation 
processors, which still assumes a 
100% loading, but more accurately 
reflects the processor’s real-world 
behavior. A major enabling technology 
here was AMD’s CoolSpeed, which 
effectively let the processor throttle 
when nearing the TDP, a capability we 
take for granted on modern processors 
time, maximizing the power con-
sumption to try to reach TDP.” In real-world 
scenarios, a processor will rarely be working 
very hard when running at its base clock, 
making this number a rather conservative 
estimate of the processor’s real horsepower. 
Another factor that can impact the 
clock speed of a given processor is the 
expected workload. AMD’s Opterons 
can reasonably be expected to run 
server workloads, scientific simulations, 
and other highly threaded workloads, 
which means these processors will be 
running against their limits 
significantly more often than 
the typical consumer processor, 
which may spend 70% of its 
uptime running a web browser 
and media playback software, 
and the rest of the time running 
games, content-creation apps, 
encoding utilities, and other 
demanding CPU-limited 
applications. This is a big part 
of why Opteron and EPYC 
processors tend to operate at 
lower base clocks compared to 
Phenom, FX-Series, Ryzen, and 
Threadripper processors.
Prior to the arrival of 
Turbo Core Technology, AMD 
customers often lamented that 
processors with 95W TDPs 
seldom consumed more than 
50W. For a customer tasked with 
XFR is a tangible benefit for those who have opted to run a CPU cooler that can dissipate a significant amount of heat in a short amount of time.
This chart shows just how the top Three Ryzen 7 processors compare with regard to base clocks, Boost 
clocks, and XFR clocks.
32 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

50MHz maximum XFR boost under 
the right circumstances. In these 
scenarios, whether a user is cooling 
the chip with air, liquid, or LN2, the 
Precision Boost, XFR, and Pure Power 
technologies will work together to level 
off at whichever limit is reached first, 60 
tCaseC or 128W of electrical power.
Better Smarts, More Speed
To sum up, with its Ryzen pro-
cessors, AMD has effectively built 
the processor to run smarter to take 
advantage of the environmental 
variables that we have some control 
over, such as the cooling solution 
with regard to the TDP. As a result, 
the processor can manage to run 
faster even under conditions that 
you have little control over, such 
as demanding workloads, heavily 
threaded tasks, or even lightly threaded 
tasks. In the future, we look forward 
to seeing how AMD iterates on its 
SenseMI technology to leverage its 
current strengths and shore up any 
shortcomings that may crop up with 
the new architecture. ■
lowering the processor’s clock speed 
in response to demand and thermal 
headroom. AMD’s scheme lets the 
processor adjust clock speeds in 25MHz 
increments to grant an extra bit of speed. 
In comparison to past dynamic clock 
speed adjustments, 25MHz is rather 
fine-grained; this lets a processor inch 
its way faster without dropping back 
so dramatically once the thermal or 
electrical limits are encroached upon. 
Ryzen processors rely on Pure Power 
to look at the distance to thermal 
junction maximums to determine the 
cooling capacity of the cooling solution, 
then adjust the speed accordingly 
when possible to deliver up to between 
50MHz and 200MHz of extra clock 
speed. XFR is available on all Ryzen 
processors, but you get a bigger boost 
on models with an X suffix. The trio 
of Ryzen Threadripper processors 
(1950X, 1920X, and 1900X) as well 
as the Ryzen 3 1300X, each get up 
to a 200MHz XFR boost, while the 
remaining Ryzen processors with the 
X suffix get up to a 100MHz boost. 
All non-X Ryzen processors get just a 
the wrath of CPU throttling. As 
a result, the published base clock 
started looking more like a minimum, 
with the Turbo Core speed being the 
maximum, which let customers more 
accurately determine the performance 
they could expect from the processors 
they bought. 
Better Clocks Through 
Machine Intelligence
Although AMD’s Turbo Core 
Technology can still be found on select 
AMD A-Series processors, the Zen 
architecture’s SenseMI (Sense Machine 
Intelligence) feature set has scrapped 
the Turbo Core marketing terminology 
in favor of a handful of new tech-
nologies. AMD recently described 
SenseMI as an umbrella of technologies 
that covers Pure Power, Precision Boost, 
Extended Frequency Range, Neural Net 
Prediction, and Smart Prefetch. 
The latter two technologies don’t 
have much bearing on the processor’s 
dynamically shifting frequency ranges, 
so we won’t discuss them here. Pure 
Power, Precision Boost, and XFR, on 
the other hand, let the processor adjust 
its performance and power attributes 
to meet the application demand at 
hand. In order to accomplish this 
feat, a smart grid of interconnected 
sensors within each Ryzen processor 
is constantly reporting power and 
temperature data within 1mA, 1mV, 
1mW, and 1 degree Celsius, up to a 
thousand times per second. 
Although that’s an incredibly useful 
trick, AMD doesn’t merely run an 
identical power profile for every Ryzen 
processor. Pure Power is capable of 
tailoring the power consumption behavior 
of each processor to the silicon’s specific 
capabilities. If the so-called “silicon lottery” 
was previously a hit-or-miss phenomenon 
of little interest to non-overclockers, on 
Ryzen processors a winning chip will 
perform better even when not specifically 
overclocked, improving the computing 
experience of anyone who buys it. 
Precision Boost functions similarly 
to Intel’s Turbo Boost, by raising or 
Processor Model
Cores/Threads
Base Freq.
Boost Freq.
XFR / Peak Freq.
Ryzen Threadripper 1950X
16/32
3.6GHz
4.0GHz
+200MHz / 4.2GHz
Ryzen Threadripper 1920X
12/24
3.5GHz
4.0GHz
+200MHz / 4.2GHz
Ryzen Threadripper 1900X
8/16
3.8GHz
4.0GHz
+200MHz / 4.2GHz
Ryzen 7 1800X
8/16
3.6GHz
4.0GHz
+100MHz / 4.1GHz
Ryzen 7 1700X
8/16
3.4GHz
3.8GHz
+100MHz / 3.9GHz
Ryzen 7 1700
8/16
3.0GHz
3.7GHz
+50MHz / 3.75GHz
Ryzen 5 1600X
6/12
3.6GHz
4.0GHz
+100MHz / 4.1GHz
Ryzen 5 1600
6/12
3.2GHz
3.6GHz
+50MHz / 3.65MHz
Ryzen 5 1500X
4/8
3.5GHz
3.7GHz
+200MHz / 3.9GHz
Ryzen 5 1400
4/8
3.2GHz
3.4GHz
+50MHz / 3.45GHz
Ryzen 3 1300X
4/4
3.5GHz
3.7GHz
+200MHz / 3.9GHz
Ryzen 3 1200
4/4
3.1GHz
3.4GHz
+50MHz / 3.45GHz
XFR is available on all Ryzen processors, but some models benefit more than others. This chart 
illustrates the available options. 
CPU  /  September2017 33

34 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Rey’s Speeder
parts, I wanted to take that same attitude towards this build. So 
whenever possible, I incorporated things from my own bone pile 
of old PC cases, such as the cut-down motherboard tray from an 
old Cooler Master case. Other brackets, chassis panels, and mesh 
were utilized, as well. One of the most popular features of the 
case was the salvage bag on the side of the speeder, where I added 
old PC components like a TNT2 video card, used liquid-cooling 
lines, an IDE cable, and an old Celeron processor slot 1 card. 
When I was at PDXLAN, people checking out the case had fun 
discovering all the old treasures!”
“This was my entry into Cooler Master’s Case Mod World 
Series 2017, and it’s my main gaming rig at home,” he says. 
“Before starting this project, I knew I wanted to 3D-print as 
much of the case as possible. So I spent a lot of time building 
a virtual speeder and scaling it to house all the PC components 
inside. I found the 3D printer most helpful when I had to revise 
my reservoir mounts to accommodate the graphics card. It was 
so easy to go back into SketchUp, make an adjustment to the 
mounts, and simply print them out again. My fitment issue was 
resolved in just a few hours.”
“Almost all the outer pieces were 3D-printed, save for a few 
found items and the saddle, which was modeled in foam and 
sculpting clay,” Carter says. “As much as I wanted to 3D-print 
everything on this build, I had to go with what took the least 
amount of time due to the looming deadline. It was just quicker 
to form the saddle from a piece of foam insulation and cover that 
with sculpting clay.”
T
his issue’s “Mad Reader Mod” marks Brian “Boddaker” 
Carter’s fifth appearance in CPU’s monthly best-mod 
feature, which eclipses the number of wins by every other 
modder except one (Bill “Mnpctech” Owen). Carter won the 
mod contest at the most recent PDXLAN event, PDXLAN 30, 
beating out the four other excellent mods that were chosen as the 
contest’s top five finalists. (You can see the other finalists in our 
PDXLAN coverage in this issue!)
We should point out that Rey’s Speeder is Carter’s third MRM-
winning mod with a science-fiction vehicle theme; his first win 
came with his Battlestar Galactica mod, and our December 2011 
issue’s Mad Reader Mod was Carter’s TRON Lightcycle PC. This 
one, of course, is a replica of the speeder Rey uses to haul her 
salvaged tech to market on Jakku in the first act of “Star Wars: The 
Force Awakens.” It’s also largely built from 3D-printed parts.
“I’ve always been a Star Wars fan and love doing Star Wars-
themed builds (I built a Minecraft-style R2-D2 mod for my son 
a couple years ago),” Carter says. “And when I saw a life-size 
replica of the speeder at Disneyland, I just knew it would make 
a great case mod.”
Back To Jakku
Carter says he spent about two and a half months working on 
Rey’s Speeder, and that he was on a pretty tight deadline. “I try to 
do as much research on my subject matter as possible, and apply 
that knowledge to the build,” Carter says. “In reading about the 
backstory on how Rey built her speeder from salvaged starship 
CPU  /  September2017 35

Other than foam, clay, and 3D-printed parts, Carter says 
he used a piece of 4-inch-diameter dryer vent, which he 
cut down for the jet engine’s heat shield. He also had to get 
creative to make the speeder “hover.” “Rey’s speeder uses 
devices called ‘repulsorlifts’ that enable it to hover above 
the ground,” Carter says. “Making something hover in real 
life is quite the challenge, since I can’t just skip down to 
the local hardware store and purchase a repulsorlift off the 
shelf. I had considered using strong magnets, but there aren’t 
any currently available that can support anything over 20 
pounds, so I had to settle for the next-best thing—tried 
and true engineering!” Carter devised a special cantilevered 
and weighted stand (he calls it “The Rebel Base”) that can 
support the entire mod from just one end. “That way, there’s 
nothing directly under the speeder holding it up, giving the 
illusion that it’s hovering,” Carter says. 
Carter then covered the stand with a natural rock texture 
to minimize detraction from the overall look. He also did his 
own custom paint work, which was made somewhat more 
difficult given its 3D-printed parts. “Prepping 3D-printed 
parts for paint can be an arduous process, due to the layer-
by-layer method in which they are produced,” he says. “So 
first I had to smooth the surface of the parts by filling in 
all the layer lines with an epoxy putty. After priming and 
painting, I applied extensive weathering and aging effects to 
make the speeder bike look worn and faded from the baking 
sun. I was excited to finally get the opportunity to break out 
my airbrush and dirty up a perfectly good paint job—I have 
to admit, this gave me way too much satisfaction! Anyway, 
to round out the theme, I always like to paint the peripherals 
to match, so the Corsair keyboard and mouse got the same 
weathering treatment.”
The Fuel Cells Have Ruptured
Aside from an old TNT2, the parts Carter used in 
building Rey’s Speeder include an Intel Core i7-7700K, an 
EVGA Z270 Stinger Mini-ITX mobo, an EVGA GeForce 
GTX 1080 FTW2 GAMING graphics card, 16GB of 
Crucial Ballistix DDR4, a Corsair SFX 600-watt PSU, 
and a pair of Crucial MX300 525GB SSDs. The cooling 
loop includes a PrimoChill CPU block, PrimoChill pump, 
PrimoChill reservoir, and PrimoChill rigid tubing and 
fittings. It also has an EKWB 240mm radiator and Corsair 
RGB case fans.
The peripherals Brian mentioned having painted to match 
(nobody does Attention To Detail like Carter) are a Corsair 
Gaming STRAFE RGB keyboard and an M65 Pro RGB 
mouse. He also included Corsair RGB lighting in the build.
Carter would like to think his sponsors: “Thanks to Crucial, 
Corsair, Intel, and especially EVGA and PrimoChill for giving 
me the honor of showcasing their awesome new products.”
Carter says he has moved on to his next project already, 
which is hardly surprising for a guy who has close to 30 
mods under his belt. “I’m working on an Overwatch-themed 
mod for Corsair,” he says. “I plan on implementing more 
3D-printed elements in it, as well.”
Junkrat’s peg-leg or Roadhog’s enormous, protruding 
bellybutton: Who ya got? ■
36 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

We Want Your Mod
Have a PC mod that will bring tears to our eyes? Email photos and a 
description to madreadermod@cpumag.com. If we choose your system 
as our “Mad Reader Mod,” you’ll win $1,500! (U.S. residents only, please.)
Drop Us A Line Today!
CPU  /  September2017 37

PDXLAN 30
North(west)ern Exposure
PDXLAN 30 kicked off on Friday, July 21 at 6 p.m. and ran through Monday, July 24 at 6 p.m. In between were 72 
amazing hours of gaming, contests, prize giveaways, catching up with friends, and much more. CPU was there, as we 
have been for a decade or more, and as usual we enjoyed being there for work nearly as much as attendees enjoyed 
attending. PDXLAN’s unique blend of gaming and AFK activities means that something is pretty much always going on; 
this time around, AMD was on hand to talk about and demo its new Vega graphics cards, we judged another amazing 
mod contest, there was a massive prize raffle, and much more.
PDXLAN packed ’em in again for the 30th “main” event; attendance 
for the July LAN hit 550, and tickets (of course) sold out very quickly.
Attendees got a chance to kick the tires on AMD’s new Vega graphics 
cards—and even got a chance to win one.
Picking a Top Five from all of 
the entries at a PDXLAN mod 
contest is never easy, but we 
managed to get it done once 
again. Read on to find out 
more about the mods that 
placed second through fifth; 
to find out more about Brian 
Carter’s first-place “Rey’s 
Speeder” mod (second from 
right, in case you missed it 
on the cover), check out our 
monthly “Mad Reader Mod” 
feature nearby in this issue.
38 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Second
Some say that second place is the first loser, but looking at Jason “Spartan Mods”Pierce’s Mrs. Spartan mod (so-named 
because he built it for his better half), we would have to disagree. This is a great-looking mod by any metric, and we 
loved it at first sight.
Based on Corsair’s Graphite Series 600T mid-tower case, Mrs. 
Spartan is a love letter in PC form.
This mod is festooned 
with elaborate custom-
built enhancements, 
starting with the lovebirds 
bolted on outside the left 
side and including the 
tree trunk displayed on 
the front panel, and much 
more inside.
CPU  /  September2017 39

Third
You’ll see a pic of the third-place mod, Kegputer 2.0, in our “Modder Q&A” interview with Ben Lzicar elsewhere in this issue, but 
we thought we needed to show more here, as well. After all, it’s not every day you see a computer that games like a champ AND 
dispenses ice-cold beer.
Lzicar has built some other very cool mods, but Kegputer and 
Kegputer 2.0 are the ones he’s best known for.
It looks like Kegputer’s components are being 
cooled by frosty-cold beer with a nice head of 
foam, doesn’t it? Sadly, this is an illusion, as 
apparently beer isn’t good for complex, high-end 
PC components. The liquid you see in the bottom 
two-thirds of the case is acutally beer-colored 
coolant, and it’s in a custom-made reservoir 
that looks like it encompasses the whole keg. It 
doesn’t. Fear not, however: Kegputer does hold 
cold beer, in the form of cans that sit in a special 
refrigerated compartment at the top of the unit. 
They didn’t show up at PDXLAN, because it’s a 
dry event, but we have photographic proof, below 
and to the left.
40 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Fourth & Fifth
Our fourth-place selection was lovingly crafted by none other than Dennis Leach, whose work is familiar to many who read CPU,
most in the modding community, and everyone who frequents PDXLAN events.
Old Dream, by Dennis Leach (above and above right).
Fifth place went to Robert Sorensen and his 
Dragons mod (right and above right). “This mod 
was a great experience,” Sorensen says. “I 
was born in the year of the dragon, as was my 
wife, so the theme of Dragons was easy and 
led to the choice of MSI for the motherboard 
and video cards. (It also helps that they make 
great products!)” Sorensen tells us that the 
Thermaltake Core P5’s open concept made 
bending the hard tubing for his cooling loop 
simpler, and its wall-mount ability made it 
possible to craft the perfect stand to leave him 
with plenty of elbow room in the limited space 
at the LAN.
“This was the case I 
wanted to build and sell 
when Danger Den was 
still running,” Leach says. 
It didn’t work out back 
then, but Leach went 
ahead and built it now, 
and we’re glad he did.
CPU  /  September2017 41

SAN LAN Summer Splash
eSports Spectacular In San Antonio
Back in our April issue, we introduced some readers to the resurgence of a cool eSports event in San Antonio called 
SAN LAN (those of you in the area likely already knew). We also pointed out that a summer event was upcoming, and 
on July 28, that event (SAN LAN Summer Splash) kicked off. Check-in started at 7 p.m., and people just hung out 
and gamed the first evening, plus there was a drawing for some cool prizes. The next morning at 8:30, team captains 
for the LAN’s CS:GO and League of Legends teams met to go over scheduling, rules, and the like, and round robin 
tourneys began at 9. There was a CPU Case Mod Contest at 4 p.m., and gaming resumed until 9 p.m. The next day, 
tournaments continued to rage all the way through to 6 p.m., when awards were handed out and folks finally packed 
up their systems and headed out.
Local artist Ray Roberts (@BoomFantasyArts) was at the LAN showing off 
some smokin’ art based on Playerunknown’s Battlegrounds. Case Mod 
Contest winners got prints of some of his work.
What’s better than 47 hours of Counter-Strike: Global Offensive? 
Probably 48 hours of it, but SAN LAN had to end sometime.
Spectators got in free on a first-come, first-
served basis, and got to hang out in the Red 
Bull eSports Lounge, which was serving up free 
snacks and drinks. For $45, attendees could 
get a seat in the BYOC, and for another $5, 
they got an entry in either the CS:GO or LoL 
tournament. Attendees also had the option to 
donate to SAN LAN’s campaign to help Gamers 
Outreach fund a GO Kart (a wheeled gaming 
cart) for The Children’s Hospital of San Antonio.
42 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Summer Splash Mods
Every good LAN party deserves a great mod contest, and SAN LAN is no exception. There were several cool mods on 
hand, including a couple we’ve seen at other events, so even though there can be only one winner, we decided we’d 
share pics of the top three for your perusal.
First place went to Cameron Watkins and his excellent Fish Tank Mod, 
which we first saw at Dreamhack Austin back in April. And yes, those 
are real fish swimming around in there.
Within moments 
of winning, the 
guys quickly dug 
into the latest 
issue of CPU for 
help planning 
their next 
projects.
The second-place mod was Golden Age by Hassan Alaw of V1 Tech, 
whose work you may have seen on Intel’s #ExpertMode Rig Wars.
Matthew 
Hopkins’
open-air mod 
featuring an 
AMD Radeon 
Vega card took 
third place.
The SAN LAN team put on a great LAN party.
CPU  /  September2017 43



AMD Ryzen Threadripper 
Multicore, Megatasking Monsters Unleashed
My Processor Can 
Beat Up Your Processor
Earlier this year, AMD finally unleashed 
CPUs based on its highly anticipated Zen 
microarchitecture. Officially “Zen” became 
“Ryzen,” and the new Ryzen 7 1800X 
and 1700X led the way. Both of these 
95W processors boasted eight physical 
cores along with the ability to chew 
on twice as many instruction threads 
simultaneously. The Ryzen 7 1800X 
had a base clock of 3.6GHz, while the 
1700X hummed along at a slightly 
more modest 3.4GHz. The 1800X and 
1700X, along with Ryzen 5 and Ryzen 
3 CPUs, proved they were capable 
of trading punches with comparably 
priced Intel processors across a wide 
range of workloads.
Despite Ryzen’s success, AMD still 
needed to find a way to truly contend with 
Intel’s HEDT (high-end desktop) CPUs, 
such as the 10-core Core i9-7900X. The 
I
f there’s one arena where AMD has 
always excelled, it’s naming its 
products. Over the years, we’ve been 
given AMD CPUs with code names 
and retail names that are equal parts 
menacing and awe-inspiring. We’ve 
had Sharptooth and Thunderbird, 
Sledgehammer and Clawhammer. 
Phenom, Bulldozer, Piledriver, and Black 
Editions for generations. Compared to a 
Wikipedia entry on towns and lakes in 
the Pacific Northwest, AMD’s children 
sound like the types who posterize all the 
other kids on the playground basketball 
court and then stop to menacingly stroke 
their moustaches.
However, names themselves obviously 
don’t do any of the computing. To 
bulldoze with Bulldozer or hammer 
with Sledgehammer, the underlying 
silicon does all the work. A CPU 
named “Laser-Shooting Velociraptor 
Riding A Megalodon” certainly sounds 
like it would ride roughshod over any 
benchmark in its path, but we all know 
the processor’s underlying architecture, 
engineering, and overall execution 
determines its true power level.
With this in mind, AMD has asked 
enthusiasts to consider a trio of high-end 
chips with a name that makes a strong 
case for being the scariest ever: 
Threadripper. Better still, AMD 
has designed the two initial Ryzen 
Threadripper processors to do more 
than intimidate you into purchasing 
one. This latest effort marks AMD’s 
first attempt in ages to challenge Intel 
for the overall performance crown.
“Ryzen Threadripper is the jolt of 
innovation that the high-end desktop 
customer was waiting for,” says Jim 
Anderson, AMD Computing and 
Graphics group senior vice president and 
general manager.
difference wasn’t merely a matter of cores, 
either, as processors like the 7900X possess 
a quad-channel memory controller to 
greatly increase memory bandwidth, plus 
a whopping 44 PCIe 3.0 lanes for feeding 
high-end graphics cards, solid-state drives, 
and so forth. Ryzen 7 CPUs couldn’t quite 
match these lofty specs. By comparison, 
the 1800X and 1700X are limited to a 
dual-channel memory controller and only 
24 PCIe 3.0 lanes. Of course, this isn’t 
an entirely fair comparison, given the 
fact that Intel’s 7900X costs twice as 
much as AMD’s 1800X, but it’s meant 
to highlight AMD’s lack of a comparable 
chip . . . until now.
With Threadripper, AMD is back 
in the driver’s seat. The company’s new 
flagship desktop processor is the Ryzen 
Threadripper 1950X, and it’s a beast 
in every way. The 1950X is nearly 
overflowing with physical cores, a total 
of 16 to be exact, and by using SMT 
Debuting in August, AMD’s Ryzen Threadripper CPUs (you can call them “Threadripper” for short) are 
desktop CPUs unlike anything AMD has made. These processors are massive, with the top-of-line 
Threadripper 1950X having an astonishing 16 cores that can power through 32 threads simultaneously.
46 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

detects an acceptable thermal load; for 
more information on AMD XFR, see this 
month’s “State-Of-The-Art Standards” 
on page 29) clock of 4.2GHz, and 
180W TDP. The “X” naturally denotes 
an unlocked multiplier, for overclockers 
who truly want to push Threadripper’s 
boundaries. Like the rest of the Ryzen 
family, Threadripper CPUs are built on a 
14nm FinFET process. 
The third Threadripper to emerge, the 
1900X has a higher base clock, 3.8GHz, 
but fewer cores, “only” eight. In some 
regards, the 1900X is the bridge between 
Ryzen 7 and Threadripper, since it 
shares the same number of cores as the 
1800X and 1700X but has access to the 
Threadripper platform’s quad-channel 
memory support and 64 PCIe lanes. The 
1900X’s 16MB L3 cache is consistent 
with Ryzen 7 and even most Ryzen 5 
CPUs, yet it has a rated TDP of 180W. 
All Threadripper chips require AMD’s 
new TR4 socket, as well, which illustrates 
how physically massive Threadripper 
CPUs are.
Super-Size Me
In order to cram so many cores into 
Threadripper, AMD needed to expand 
(simultaneous multithreading) the 1950X 
is able to tackle up to 32 threads at a 
time. It has a 3.4GHz base clock and a 
Boost clock of 4GHz. The 1950X’s little 
brother, the 1920X, is an impressive piece 
of silicon, too, with 12 cores (24 threads) 
running at a 3.5GHz base clock and 
4GHz Boost clock.
Cores and clocks aside, AMD’s biggest 
and baddest Threadrippers share some 
similarities. Both have a quad-channel 
memory controller, a first for AMD’s 
desktop CPUs. Officially, the 1950X 
and 1920X have the same memory 
speed support as other Ryzen processors, 
DDR4-2667. The other key highlight 
for Threadripper is its 64 available PCIe 
3.0 lanes, a simply staggering number 
and almost triple what the Ryzen 7 
1800X and 1700X offer. Of that total, 
60 are usable with up to seven PCIe 3.0 
devices, so power users should have plenty 
of bandwidth for components that use 
the PCIe 3.0 bus. Other shared specs 
include a 32MB L3 cache, 512KB of 
L2 cache per core, an XFR (eXtended 
Frequency Range, another automated 
overclocking capability that can extend 
a limited number of cores beyond the 
processor’s Boost clock provided it 
the CPU’s physical footprint far beyond 
its Ryzen 7 CPUs. To make such a feat 
possible, AMD turned to its EPYC 
CPUs, the server side of the company’s 
Zen architecture.
From time to time, hardware from 
the enterprise world crosses over into the 
realm of desktops. For example, Intel’s 
2008 Skulltrail platform was based on 
its Seaburg workstation chipset, and 2P 
(dual processor socket) motherboards 
occasionally make an appearance in the 
enthusiast market.
Threadripper has many similarities 
to AMD’s EPYC server CPUs, although 
there are differences. For example, the 
TR4 socket is physically the same as 
EPYC’s SP3 socket and has the same 
number of contacts, 4,094, yet the two 
are not cross-compatible. Further, EPYC 
CPUs can contain up to 32 physical 
cores, which helps explain what you’ll 
find if you’re courageous enough to de-lid 
your Threadripper.
Pop the Threadripper 1950X’s hood, 
and it will look like four dies are hiding 
underneath. In reality, only two are active, 
each containing eight physical cores. On 
Threadripper, the other two are silicon 
blanks, while high-end EPYC processors 
contain four 8-core dies. Regardless of the 
AMD Ryzen 
Threadripper Specs
AMD Ryzen 
Threadripper 1950X
AMD Ryzen 
Threadripper 1920X
AMD Ryzen 
Threadripper 1900X
Cores/Threads
16/32
12/24
8/16
Base/Boost/XFR clock
3.4GHz/4GHz/4.2GHz
3.5GHz/4GHz/4.2GHz
3.8GHz/4GHz/4.2GHz
L3 Cache
32MB
32MB
16MB
Process
14nm
14nm
14nm
PCIe 3.0 lanes
64
64
64
Max memory speed
DDR4-2667
(quad-channel)
DDR4-2667
(quad-channel)
DDR4-2667
(quad-channel)
Socket
AMD TR4
AMD TR4
AMD TR4
TDP
180W
180W
180W
Price
$999
$799
$549
THREADRIPPER, THREE WAYS
To truly appreciate the sheer size of Threadripper, 
look no further than AMD’s new TR4 processor 
socket. To accommodate Threadripper’s 4,094 
pins, AMD needs a socket that’s nearly as long as 
a motherboard’s DIMM slots.
CPU  /  September2017 47

with each other with as much bandwidth 
and as little latency as possible. That’s 
where Infinity Fabric comes in.
Infinity Fabric is a single, unified 
protocol that connects together cores on 
the same die, multiple separate dies, and 
multiple sockets. And don’t think of 
sockets in the traditional sense; these 
could also be a system’s graphics cards 
(provided they’re AMD GPUs, of course), 
which reveals AMD’s master plan. Its 
Vega GPUs use Infinity Fabric, too, 
theoretically boosting performance when 
all are working in concert. AMD cites a 
die-to-die bi-directional bandwidth of 
102.22GBps between the 1950X’s two dies. 
Threadripper’s processor dies can access 
DRAM with 78ns latency for near memory, 
which is the memory connected to the die, 
and 133ns for far memory, the DRAM 
that’s connected to the opposite die.
Game Time
We live in an age where cores count 
more than clocks, but having a CPU with 
an outrageous number of cores doesn’t 
mean it will destroy every workload you 
put in its path. These processors rely on 
number of active dies, AMD ties them 
together using its Infinity Fabric, the 
successor to HyperTransport.
A Unifying Thread
Over the years, we’ve relied on different 
advancements and technologies to 
continue taking CPU and system 
performance to new heights. That could 
involve simply increasing frequencies, 
adding more cores, or shrinking the 
manufacturing process to add more 
transistors. After splitting Threadripper’s 
(and EPYC’s) cores across multiple dies, 
AMD developed a new interconnect 
called Infinity Fabric to ensure high-speed 
transmission between separate processor 
dies, as well as other components.
For a basic understanding of Infinity 
Fabric, think of the Threadripper 1950X 
not as a single 16-core CPU but rather two 
8-core processors sharing a single package. 
These are Ryzen’s 8-core Zeppelin dies, 
which further break down into two core 
complexes (CCXs) of four cores. With its 
pair of Zeppelin dies, Threadripper has 
a MCM (multicore module), where the 
separate Zeppelin dies must communicate 
software that’s written to take advantage 
of multiple cores. You can see this in 
POV-Ray and Cinebench whenever 
we benchmark a processor, as both of 
these tests scale remarkably well with the 
number of cores a processor has.
Games, on the other hand, are regularly 
made for quad- or octo-core CPUs, not a 
12- or 16-core Threadripper. On occasion, 
an excessive number of cores can result 
in bad thread scheduling, which drops 
performance. It’s possible a game might 
not run at all.
AMD fixes this problem with Game 
Mode. Effectively disabling one of 
Threadripper’s working dies, Game Mode 
presents the 1950X as an eight-core, 
16-thread processor, which plays nicer 
with games. Game mode also uses the 
active CPU die’s local DRAM.
Start Ripping
AMD Ryzen Threadripper 1950X and 
1920X are available now, and at the time 
of this writing the 1900X was scheduled 
to be released August 31. Team it with 
an X399 motherboard and get ready to 
bludgeon some benchmarks. ■
As you can see from this block diagram, Threadripper has a lot on its plate. Of course, we would expect nothing less from a platform that gives power 
users access to 60 usable PCIe 3.0 lanes. In addition to 4-way CrossFire/SLI (x16/x16/x8/x8), Threadripper supports up to three PCIe 3.0 x4 NVMe SSDs. 
Threadripper’s remaining four PCIe 3.0 lanes link it to the X399 chipset, which handles things like USB connectivity, Gigabit Ethernet, etc.
48 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Ben “Bennyboy1337” Lzicar’s “Caged Heart” mod appeared in our December 2015 issue’s “Mad Reader Mod” 
feature, and it’s an excellent example of the form. But he’s probably better known for his Kegputer, which is just 
what it sounds like: a beer keg with a computer in it. (And yes, it still dispenses beer.) Lzicar also does some work 
producing videos and other creative for Micron’s Crucial and Ballistix product lines, and is a long-time regular at 
PDXLAN in Portland.
Modder Q&A: Ben Lzicar
If You Build It, They Will Drink
six-pack of a local IPA has me set for a 
night of gaming.
Q
: How is Kegputer 2.0 different from 
the original Kegputer?
BL
: Well, 2.0 makes it look like the 
parts are submersed in beer, thanks 
to a custom circle-shaped reservoir I made 
and some custom PrimoChill beer-colored 
coolant. I also have a mini-fridge up top that 
holds beer cans, which is more practical than 
refilling a beer keg every weekend.
bought from RadioShack. My friends 
called it “the Pokémon case” because 
of the colors and teased me about it all 
the time. I’ve obviously upped my game 
since then; they don’t make fun of my 
builds anymore!
Q
: How many Kegputers of beer do 
you go through at PDXLAN?
BL
: Uh . . . well, PDXLAN is a 
dry LAN, so no beer allowed. 
But when at home on the weekend, a 
Q
: How long have you been 
modding, and how many 
mods have you built at this 
point?
BL
: I have been modding 
as long as I’ve been 
building computers, back since 
2003. I would say I have built 
around a total of 20 modded 
machines since I started 15 
years ago.
Q
: Is it fair to say the Keg-
puter is the most well-
known and widely recognized 
mod you’ve built?
BL
: For sure, I built that 
thing back in 2010 and 
I still get questions about it to 
this day. To date, I still think 
I’m the only person to build a 
computer that dispenses beer.
Q
: What was your first mod project, 
and how did it turn out?
BL
: The first PC I ever built com-
pletely on my own was back in 
2003. I used an old, hideous Compaq 
case from my parent’s old machine, I cut 
a hole in the side and mounted an acrylic 
window, painted the case blue and yellow, 
then mounted some blue LED lights I 
CPU  /  September2017 49

Q
: If you could pick a beer 
sponsor for Kegputer 2.0, 
which one would it be?
BL
: I had Payette Brewing 
sponsor my last build and 
I love their beer, so if I didn’t have 
them for the next one I would 
probably go with another local 
favorite, like Woodland Empire 
or Sockeye Brewing. These are 
Idaho microbrews by the way. 
The Boise area has a ton of 
great brewers.
Q
: Which was more difficult 
to build, the Kegputer or 
Caged Heart?
BL
: The heart actually took 
longer to build but the 
Kegputer was more difficult just 
because of the scope of the project. 
With most builds, I am typically 
teaching myself to do something 
I’ve never done before, be it: 
casting silicone, powder coating, 
making a reservoir, or using a 
laser machine.
Q
: How long have you been 
going to PDXLAN, and 
what’s your favorite PDXLAN 
story?
BL
: I’ve been going for 
eight years. Favorite 
story was the time my friend’s 
backpack with a brand-new Core 
i7 he won at the raffle blew off 
the roof rack on my car while 
driving home. We thought the 
CPU and his keyboard and 
mouse that were in the bag 
were goners, but thanks to 
a CPU magazine that had my 
name and address on it, an 
awesome National Guardsman 
found the bag eight months 
later! Surprisingly, the CPU and 
keyboard still worked, even after 
sitting on the side of an Oregon 
road through the whole winter.
Caged Heart, Lzicar’s December 2015 Mad Reader Mod-winning project.
Lzicar’s best-known mod, Kegputer.
The latest beer keg computer, Kegputer 2.0.
50 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Powder coat all the way. Once you go 
powder you never go back.
5) PDXLAN July or PDXLAN 
November?
November. It’s more laid back, and seeing 
a bunch of gamers raise money for a local 
homeless shelter is always great. ■
3) Counter-Strike: GO or Overwatch?
Factorio? I honestly don’t play either 
game that much. Counter-Strike: Source 
was my jam back in my college days 
though, so I guess I would have to go 
with CS:GO. 
4) Powder coat or paint booth?
Q
: What’s your favorite mod out of 
all the mods you’ve built, and why?
BL
: Probably the Midnight Tower 
build I did for a friend of mine. 
It is just a really clean and aesthetically 
pleasing build; beautiful oak panels, 
great powder-coated frame, killer 
loop. You can check out the build on 
the Ballistix YouTube channel (www.
youtube.com/watch?v=RnAEGJDg8fc).
Q
: What would you say is the strongest 
part of your modding game?
BL
: My ability to think outside the 
box. Don’t get me wrong, I like 
clean case builds, but to me a scratch build 
that’s never been done before is really where 
it’s at. If I can redefine what it means to be a 
computer, then I have done my job.
Q
: What’s the weakest part, and why?
BL
: Making my builds at the last 
minute. I don’t know why 
I always do this, but for some reason I 
decide to build an epic computer a few 
months before PDXLAN; this means 
I’m pressuring myself to get the project 
completed instead of taking my time to 
ensure it is as good as it can be.
Q
: What’s up next now that Kegputer 
2.0 is done?
BL
: I might actually do a traditional 
case build. There is a CaseLabs 
Bullet sitting in my office right now that’s 
begging to have a system built in it.
Q
: It’s time for Five Quick Questions!
1) Intel or AMD?
Intel. I still love AMD though!
2) Best Spider-Man: Tom Holland or 
Tobey Maguire?
I had a horrible date experience 
watching Spider-Man when I was in 
middle school, so Holland all the way.
Midnight Tower, Lzicar’s favorite build.
CPU  /  September2017 51

In The Loop 
Expand Your AIO 
Advertisement
of both the waterblock and processor heat 
spreader. The Eisbaer comes with tubing, 
quick-disconnect adapters, and a series of 
G1/4-inch fittings, all of which we’ll discard 
for this expansion project. With a bucket 
handy to catch the coolant, we used a pair 
of pliers to gently unscrew the fittings on the 
Eisbaer’s waterblock/pump unit until it was 
free of the AIO’s radiator, and set them both 
aside to drain. In addition to the waterblock/
pump’s intake and output ports, the Eisbaer 
also features a fill port that that makes it easy 
to keep your loop topped off and avoid the 
damage that can occur if the pump runs dry. 
We removed the fill port cover to help drain 
the existing coolant from inside the unit’s 
built-in reservoir. 
With the waterblock/pump dry and a pair 
of 90-degree compression fittings installed 
finger-tight, we used the Eisbaer’s AM4 
mounting bracket to affix it to the socket on 
280, 360, and 420. That means it should be 
more than powerful enough for our loop. 
The other big benefit of going with the 
Eisbaer is the fact that it is compatible with 
G1/4-threaded fittings. The rest of our 
parts list consists of eight G1/4-threaded 
Alphacool Eiszapfen 16/10mm flexible 
tubing compression fittings, a half-dozen 
G1/4-threaded 90-degree angled adapters, 
the Alphacool NexXxoS GPX graphics card 
waterblock with backplate (we got a model 
that was designed to work with our NVIDIA 
GeForce GTX 1080 Ti Founders Edition), 
the Alphacool Eisbecher 250mm Acetal 
Reservoir, and two meters of appropriate-
sized flexible tubing. 
Crank & Drain
The first step is to disassemble your 
AIO. If it’s currently installed in your PC, 
take it out and clean the thermal paste off 
L
ast month, we covered an expert’s take 
on how to convert an off-the-shelf All-
In-One liquid cooler into a custom loop by 
pulling out the pipes and adding a bigger 
radiator, graphics card block, standalone 
reservoir, and flexible or hardline tubing. 
But this month, we’re getting our feet wet 
(hopefully not literally) by trying it for 
ourselves with the help of a bunch of gear 
from Alphacool. 
Part Picking
Not all AIOs are good candidates 
for conversion to a custom loop. Many 
combine aluminum radiators with copper 
waterblocks and brass fittings, but avoid the 
galvanic corrosion that plagues mixed-metal 
environments by adding corrosion inhibitors 
such as ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, or 
glycerin to the coolant. We’re planning on 
using plain old distilled water, so sticking 
with copper (the waterblock and our 
upgraded radiator are copper) and brass (the 
Alphacool fittings we got are brass) is ideal. 
As we relayed in last month’s interview with 
Elliot Shiver, PrimoChill’s Senior Technical 
H20 Specialist, the CPU waterblock/
integrated pump is the most useful and 
valuable item in your AIO. For the subject of 
this experiment, we chose Alphacool’s Eisbaer 
120 CPU, which is an AIO that features the 
company’s innovative quick-release connector 
for easily adding a GPU waterblock, such as 
the Alphacool Eiswolf. 
You might think that an AIO bundled 
with a 120mm radiator wouldn’t ship with 
a pump that’s powerful enough to handle 
the upgrade to a 360mm radiator, like the 
NexXxoS ST30 Full Copper Radiator 360 
we selected for our upgrade. According to the 
Eisbaer specifications, however, the DC-LT 
Ultra Low Noise Ceramic 12V waterblock/
pump (capable of pushing 70 liters per hour) 
is the same unit used in the Eisbaer 140, 240, 
Only use tools to loosen fittings, never to tighten them. 
52 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Order From Chaos
With the waterblock-equipped graphics 
card and processor installed in our system, 
the next step was to mount the new radiator 
and reservoir. The CaseLabs case we used 
for this project doesn’t have a mesh front 
or top panels, so we were forced to use the 
bottom of the case for air intake instead 
of the front or top, as is traditional. We 
installed the 360mm radiator, with the fans 
oriented as intake fans, in the bottom of the 
case. Because we’re installing a liquid-cooled 
graphics card, we kept the radiator’s in and 
out ports on the right side of the system, 
which ensured we didn’t have excessively 
long runs of tubing crossing in front of the 
graphics card. 
There are no built-in reservoir-mounting 
holes on the interior of this case, so we 
measured, marked, and drilled a quartet of 
holes to mount the reservoir to the right of 
the motherboard tray. With the reservoir 
mounted and oriented, our next job was to 
determine to loop order. 
When it comes time to determine the 
path of the coolant, our primary concern 
is to ensure that the Eisbaer waterblock/
pump is pulling liquid in directly from the 
reservoir. As a result, the pump will always 
have ready access to plenty of liquid with 
little resistance, even when operating at 
its highest speed. Due to the layout of the 
rest of our liquid-cooling components, our 
coolant path choices were fairly limited. 
Determining which of our waterblock/
pump unit’s ports are in and out was a 
vital step. The Eisbaer has its intake on 
the right and the output on the left. As a 
result, the coolant in our system flows from 
the reservoir to the Eisbaer waterblock/
pump unit, to the Alphacool NexXxoS 
GPX waterblock on our GTX 1080 Ti, to 
the NexXxoS ST30 Full Copper Radiator 
360, and then back to the Alphacool 
Eisbecher 250mm Acetal Reservoir via its 
top cap. Once we had the flexible tubing 
cut and spanning between each of these 
components in order, it was time to fill the 
system, check for leaks, painstakingly bleed 
out the air, and monitor our temperatures. 
When all that checked out, the system was 
ready to go, and it looks great. ■
our graphics card. This entails 
removing the air cooler from 
the NVIDIA GeForce GTX 
1080 Ti Founder Edition 
we’re using, which is a lengthy 
and involved process of its 
own. Although the graphics 
card waterblock comes with 
straightforward illustrated 
instructions, there are no 
instructions for removing 
the existing air cooler. If 
you’ve never disassembled an 
air-cooled graphics card, we 
recommend starting with the 
backplate facing up (or the 
backside of the card if there 
is no backplate) and simply 
removing any screw you can 
see. Next, flip the card over 
and unscrew any screws in the 
top side of the card’s cooler 
that appear to attach it to the 
PCB. Don’t forget to remove 
the screws on the back I/O 
bracket. You shouldn’t need 
to remove the fans from the 
cooler to proceed. 
When separating your 
graphics card’s PCB from the 
cooler, make sure to carefully 
unplug any fan or LED 
headers before wrenching 
the two apart. Usually these 
cables are only a couple 
of inches long and don’t 
provide you much room in 
which to work. If you have 
any hopes of reinstalling 
the air cooler, treat these 
connectors and cables 
with care. Graphics card 
waterblocks rarely require 
connection to these headers.
When installing any 
third-party waterblock on your graphics 
card, just remember that in most cases 
you’ll be voiding the unit’s warranty. Take 
your time, follow the install instructions, 
and be patient. One slip of a screw driver 
and your expensive graphics card could be 
damaged beyond repair.
the GIGABYTE motherboard in our system. 
If you’re worried about excess coolant leaking 
out, we recommend rolling up paper towels 
and sticking them into the open ports. 
Get A Cooler GPU
The next thing we did was install the 
Alphacool NexXxoS GPX waterblock onto 
Once we had finished bleeding the air out of the loop, we were 
ready to rock.
Given the right components, converting your AIO into a custom 
loop is not only possible, it’s easy.
CPU  /  September2017 53

Dominant DDR4
Memory Kits That Fuel Performance
Prices for DRAM are highly unpredictable. Unfortunately for system builders, memory costs have risen 
dramatically over the course of 2017. A recent report from DRAMeXchange indicates that the average PC DRAM 
contract price (the cost for shipments over a specific time frame, often ranging from two weeks to a month) 
increased nearly 40% sequentially in first quarter of 2017, 10% sequentially in the second quarter, and another 
4.6% between June and July. In short, system memory cost has more than doubled since the end of 2016. 
16GB kits that might have cost you $75 last year are often more than $170 today, while 32GB kits generally 
cost more than $300. Now that we’ve prepped you for sticker shock, here are a few important factors you’ll 
want to consider before purchasing system memory and comparing the modules in our buyers guide.
AMD Ryzen Ready
Ryzen processors introduced DDR4 support to AMD platforms, and when Ryzen was first released in March, 
motherboard and memory makers were still ironing out the kinks with overclocked DDR4 speeds. Some 
hardware combinations, for example, wouldn’t POST with the memory operating at the module’s fastest rated 
speed and latency. DDR4 compatibility is better now that companies have had time to perform more extensive 
testing. Still, we recommend that anyone building on the AMD platform select a DDR4 kit that’s been qualified 
by the motherboard manufacturer. Many of the modules in our guide are designed to work on AMD platforms at 
the maximum factory speed.
Quad-Channel Upgrade
Before the recent annoucements of AMD’s X399 and Intel’s X299 platform, the aging Intel X99 chipset was 
the only way for consumers to utilize quad-channel DDR4 memory. Quad-channel kits provide a sizeable 
bandwidth increase over memory in a dual-channel setup, because the CPU has simultaneous access to four 
memory modules. And the new AMD and Intel platforms allow for speedy DDR4 modules that further push the 
performance of enthusiast rigs.
16GB Single Module
The DDR4 standard expands single module capacity up to 16GB, and although it took a few years, most 
memory manufacturers now offer a few kits with 16GB sticks. If you have a need for extreme memory, such 
as loading up 128GB of memory on an Intel X299 or AMD X399 motherboard, or simply want to reach 32GB 
without filling up all your DIMM slots, a kit with 16GB modules might be for you.
BUYER’S GUIDE
54 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: The EVO SPEAR series is compatible with almost 
all builds, including small form factor systems, thanks to a low-profile 
heat spreader. And as a member of GeIL’s AMD EDITION, the memory 
modules have been tested specifically for the Ryzen processor platform. 
GeIL designs the EVO SPEAR series for gamers in the market for speedy, 
yet cost-efficient, kits of DDR4 memory. This 16GB kit, for example, 
operates at 2,400MHz and costs only $130.99. The timings of 16-16-
16-36 are also respectable, considering the EVO SPEAR’s price tag. GeIL 
also offers the EVO SPEAR series at speeds up to 3,466MHz for Intel’s 
Z270 and X299 series chipsets.
Who Should Apply: AMD builders who want to ensure compatibility 
with their new Ryzen or Ryzen Threadripper system.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 2400MHz
Timings: 16-16-16-36
BUYER’S GUIDE
GeIL 16GB AMD EDITION EVO SPEAR DDR4-2400
$130.99
www.geil.com
MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: The Predator lineup is currently available at 
speeds up to DDR4-3600MHz, thanks in part to a well-designed heat 
spreader that keeps the module cool under extreme loads. This DDR4-
3000 kit boasts two XMP configurations (DDR4-3000 and DDR4-2666), 
as well as a JEDEC DDR4-2400 profile. You’ll just need to select the 
fastest profile supported by your motherboard and you’re ready to 
go. We also like the fierce look of the black heat spreader, with its 
teeth-like fins. This quad-channel kit includes four 8GB modules with 
relatively aggressive timings of 15-17-17-36—at both the DDR4-3000 
and DDR4-2666 XMP settings. In our system testing with SiSoftware 
Sandra’s Memory Bandwidth benchmark, the quad-channel kit delivered 
excellent speeds of nearly 48GBps.
Who Should Apply: Builders interested in high-speed kit with 
low latency timings. We also like HyperX’s variety of kit capacities and 
speeds with the Predator series. 
Capacity: 32GB (four 8GB modules)
Speed: 3,000MHz
Timings: 15-17-17-36
BUYER’S GUIDE
HyperX 32GB Predator DDR4-3000
$370
www.hyperxgaming.com
CPU  /  September2017 55

MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: The SPECTRIX D40 series features RGB lighting and 
has been fully tested with ASUS AURA Sync software. The bright LED strip 
sits atop the heat spreader, and the angular curves of the LED strip give it 
an aggressive look. This quad-channel kit operates at DDR4-3200 speeds, 
and ADATA indicates that the XPG SPECTRIX D40 lineup will eventually 
operate at up to 4,000MHz. ADATA includes an Intel XMP 2.0 configuration, 
and the company says the kit is also compatible with AMD AM4 
motherboards. When installed on Intel’s X299 platform, the kit defaults to 
a DDR4-2666Mhz speed, rather than the DDR4-2400MHz or DDR4-2133 
baseline typical of DDR4 kits. Similar to other ADATA memory modules, the 
SPECTRIX D40 modules are backed by a lifetime warranty. For long-term 
reliability, ADATA designs the SPECTRIX D40 series with a 10-layer PCB. 
Who Should Apply: DIY enthusiasts who want to enhance the look 
of their build with bright RGB LEDs that draw attention to their system 
memory.
Capacity: 32GB (four 8GB modules)
Speed: 3,200MHz
Timings: 16-18-18-36
BUYER’S GUIDE
ADATA 32GB SPECTRIX D40 DDR4-3200
$359.99
www.xpg.com
MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: Available with red, gray, or white heat spreaders, 
the Ballistix Sport LT DDR4-2400 modules feature a “digital camo” 
design and black PCB that will fit into most power user builds. Crucial 
offers both two- and four-module kits to support both dual- and quad-
channel configurations. The 16GB Ballistix Sport LT DDR4-2400 boasts 
four 4GB modules. The XMP 2.0 profile on the 16GB Ballistix Sport LT 
DDR4-2400 runs at the low latency of 16-16-16-39. All of the modules 
in the Ballistix Sport LT series operate at 1.2V, so they’ll be compatible 
with current voltage requirements of Intel and AMD motherboards. Like 
all Crucial memory, this kit is rigorously tested and backed by a lifetime 
warranty.
Who Should Apply: Builders looking for an affordable quad-channel 
DDR4 kit that combines great looks with solid performance and long-
term reliability.
Capacity: 16GB (four 4GB modules)
Speed: 2,4000MHz
Timings: 16-16-16-39
BUYER’S GUIDE
Crucial 16GB Ballistix Sport LT DDR4-2400
$171.99
www.ballistixgaming.com 
56 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: G.SKILL has long been at the forefront of DRAM 
speed, and the Trident Z series is often where you’ll see G.SKILL’s 
groundbreaking DDR4 modules. This 32GB kit can operate at up to 
4,000MHz and has been designed for use on Intel’s Skylake-X and Kaby 
Lake-X series processors. And with four 8GB modules, the kit can take 
full advantage of the quad-channel memory controller built into the 
Skylake-X processor. Most all X299 motherboards support DDR4 at this 
kit’s incredible 4,000MHz speed. The 32GB kit operates with timings 
of 18-19-19-39 and a voltage of 1.35V when using the Intel XMP 
4,000MHz settings. 
Who Should Apply: Enthusiasts with the latest-and-greatest 
components who want to bring out the most memory bandwidth and 
speed from their system memory. 
Capacity: 32GB (four 8GB modules)
Speed: 4,000MHz
Timings: 18-19-19-39
BUYER’S GUIDE
G.SKILL 32GB Trident Z DDR4-4000
$512.99
gskill.com
MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: Patriot’s Signature Line is designed for value-
minded builders who want stable memory performance. This 16GB 
DDR4-2400 kit, for instance, is compatible with Intel 100 and 200 
series chipsets, as well as AMD 300 series platforms. The two 8GB 
modules, of course, will also support modern dual-channel chipsets. 
For compatibility, the 16GB Signature Line 2400MHz operate at DDR4’s 
preferred 1.2V power. Like other Patriot memory modules, the Signature 
Line comes with Patriot’s free customer service and features a lifetime 
warranty. The DDR4-2400 modules are certainly not the fastest 
available, but few 16GB kits will cost less than $141.
Who Should Apply: Users building mainstream systems who desire 
a hassle-free, plug-and-play kit.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 2,400MHz
Timings: 17-17-17-39
BUYER’S GUIDE
Patriot 16GB Signature Line DDR-2400
$140.98
www.patriotmemory.com 
CPU  /  September2017 57

MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: HyperX designs the FURY lineup as a cost-
effective way to complement the DDR4 capabilities of AMD and Intel’s 
latest chipsets. The $164 16GB FURY DDR4-2666 kit is a good example, 
as the two 8GB modules offer decent performance, and you won’t 
have to pay the premium associated with higher speed DDR4 modules. 
For optimal compatibility, HyperX engineers both the XMP and JEDEC 
profiles to operate at only 1.2V. The HyperX memory team has also 
performed extensive compatibility testing with AMD’s X370 and B350 
chipsets, and the company expects the FURY DDR4-2666 modules to 
operate at programmed speeds and timings without issue. In our testing, 
the kit worked great on MSI’s X370 GAMING TITANIUM and AORUS GA-
X370-Gaming K7, posting speeds around 27GBps in Sisoftware Sandra’s 
Memory Bandwidth test.
Who Should Apply: Gamers on a budget who need to upgrade 
system memory and DRAM performance.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 2,666MHz
Timings: 16-18-18-36
BUYER’S GUIDE
HyperX 16GB FURY DDR4-2666
$164
www.hyperxgaming.com
MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: DDR4-2400 kits are supported by almost all 
motherboards on the market and represent a decent speed upgrade 
over base DDR4-2133 modules. Corsair’s 16GB Vengeance LPX DDR4-
2400 kit boasts a pair of 8GB modules with timings of 16-16-16-39. 
Corsair compatibility tests the Vengeance LPX kits with AMD Ryzen 
series motherboards to ensure it’ll work on the latest platforms. 
Looking for something a bit faster? Corsair also offers the Vengeance 
LPX lineup in speeds up to 4,333MHz. Quad-channel kits are also 
available, if you’re looking to take full advantage of AMD’s X399 or 
Intel’s X299 platform.
Who Should Apply: Enthusiasts on a budget who want a kit that 
will work in most any build.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 2400MHz
Timings: 16-16-16-39
BUYER’S GUIDE
Corsair 16GB Vengeance LPX DDR4-2400 
$174.99
www.corsair.com
58 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: Patriot’s Viper 4 series meets all the requirements 
we demand from DRAM. This dual-channel kit boasts an aggressive 
latency of 17-19-19-39, while operating at DDR4-3600 speed. The 
Viper 4 series is able to reach such latencies and speeds with a custom-
designed, high performance heat spreader that keeps the modules cool 
under load.  The red heat spreader’s tall fins also stand out inside a 
build. Patriot has a wide selection of dual-channel kits with the Viper 4 
lineup, as well as quad-channel kits, if you’re building around an HEDT 
platform. Patriot hand-tests and validates all of these memory modules 
before packaging them up and shipping them out the door, greatly 
reducing the likelihood that you wind up holding a bum stick. Beyond 
that, Patriot backs its Viper 4 series memory with a limited lifetime 
warranty.
Who Should Apply: Multimedia enthusiasts who want to lower 
video render times and gamers who wish to improve frame rates. 
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 3,600MHz
Timings: 17-19-19-39
BUYER’S GUIDE
Patriot 16GB VIPER 4 DDR4-3600
$189.99
www.patriotmemory.com 
MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: Trident Z RGB models feature a vivid RGB light bar 
on top of the heat spreader, and the light bar is capable of generating a 
fluid rainbow wave, among other effects and single color options. This 
dual-channel kit isn’t the fastest Trident Z RGB option, but it does sit in 
a sweet spot for pricing and speed at $168.99. One thing we like about 
the Trident Z RGB series is that, compared to some other RGB memory, 
there’s no need for RGB cables running to and from the modules. If your 
motherboard doesn’t provide a software utility to configure the Trident Z 
RGB colors, G.SKILL also offers a beta software you can install to control 
effects and color. To improve reliability and stability, the Trident Z RGB 
modules are built with a 10-layer PCB, and each kit is tested on a wide 
range of motherboards.
Who Should Apply: Power users who want LED memory that syncs 
up system lighting and effects with the other RGB components on their 
system.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 3,200MHz 
Timings: 16-18-18-38
BUYER’S GUIDE
G.SKILL 16GB Trident Z RGB DDR4-3200
$168.99
www.gskill.com
CPU  /  September2017 59

MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: This 32GB quad-channel, 3,200MHz kit is 
ideally-suited to gamers and enthusiasts. The modules feature built-in 
thermal sensors that report to Crucial’s Ballistix M.O.D. (Memory 
Overview Display) utility and let you keep an eye on temperatures in 
real-time. The memory chips are attached to a black PCB, and the 
anodized matte black aluminum heat spreaders feature a distinctive 
profile that looks like a Picatinny rail, for a military look and feel that’s 
as functional as it is attractive. We also like that the all-black modules 
match most motherboards’ PCB and heatsinks. This memory’s 
optimized XMP latencies (15-16-16) should provide a noticeable 
improvement in your system’s overall responsiveness and deliver 
faster frame rates.
Who Should Apply: System builders who want to monitor 
temperatures for their system memory.
Capacity: 32GB (four 8GB modules)
Speed: 3,200MHz
Timings: 15-16-16
BUYER’S GUIDE
Crucial 32GB Ballistix Elite DDR4-3200
$379.99
www.ballistixgaming.com
MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: GeIL’s EXO X DDR4-3000 kit features RGB 
illumination along the top of the heat spreader, and GeIL includes an 
RGB extension cable to more easily sync lighting effects with other 
components, such as the motherboard. GeIL EXO X series memory 
supports RGB lighting control via ASUS AURA Sync, ASRock AURA 
RGB LED, GIGABYTE/AORUS RGB Fusion, and MSI Mystic Light. The 
80cm extension cable is long enough that you’ll be able to reach 
4-pin RGB headers near the bottom of the board, or LED lights at 
the top of a case. GeIL designs the two 8GB modules to operate at 
timings of 15-17-17-35 at the 3,000MHz speed.
Who Should Apply: Modders in the market for memory with 
RGB LEDs that will help to visually enhance a system’s interior.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 3000MHz
Timings: 15-17-17-35
BUYER’S GUIDE
GeIL 16GB EVO X DDR4-3000
$145.99
www.geil.com
60 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: The XPG Zl modules feature a heat spreader that 
resembles a jet wing. It’s more than just an attractive look, because the 
heat spreader also boasts excellent cooling by utilizing ADATA’s Thermal 
Conductive Technology. Each module is designed with a 10-layer PCB 
and two ounces of copper to effectively reduce electric resistance 
and consume less power, which greatly enhances the quality of signal 
transfer. ADATA offers the XPG Z1 lineup in red, gold, white, and black 
colors. We particularly like the gold modules, as they are a striking color 
you don’t typically see inside a case. This DDR4-3000 dual-channel kit, 
as with other modules in the XPG Z1 lineup, has been officially validated 
by AMD as AM4/Ryzen compatible, so you won’t have to worry about 
POST issues at the rated speed.
Who Should Apply: Power users in need of a dual-channel kit that 
will work on almost any platform.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 3,000MHz
Timings: 16-16-16-36
BUYER’S GUIDE
ADATA 16GB XPG Z1 DDR4-3000
$179.99
www.xpg.com
MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: This high performance kit has been designed for motherboards running AMD Ryzen series processors. Corsair follows an 
extensive compatibility testing process that includes most every AMD Ryzen series motherboard available. To quickly dissipate heat, the Vengeance 
LPX modules feature a pure aluminum heat spreader. Corsair also offers the Vengeance LPX in a few different colors, including white, black, blue, and 
red. Vengeance LPX modules feature an eight layer PCB, which helps to manage heat at faster speeds. The 16GB kit consists of two 8GB modules 
with XMP settings of 16-18-18-36 at the 3,200MHz speed. We also like that the Vengeance LPX modules feature a low-profile design to improve 
compatibility with air coolers and small form factor builds.
BUYER’S GUIDE
Corsair 16GB Vengeance LPX DDR4-3200
$179.99
www.corsair.com
Who Should Apply: Power users looking 
for a versatile DDR4 kit that’s built with 
performance and reliability in mind.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 3,200MHz
Timings: 16-18-18-36
CPU  /  September2017 61

MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: Do you have a serious need for system memory and want the flexibility to further upgrade in the future? This 32GB Vengeance 
kit consists of two 16GB modules, ideal for maximizing memory capacity without using up all of the DIMM slots on a motherboard. The high-capacity 
modules are also a good option for small form factor builds where the motherboard might only offer two DIMM slots. Corsair designs the 32GB 
Vengeance LPX kit to operate at 2,400MHz with a tested latency of 16-16-16-39 and voltage of 1.2V. Similar to other Corsair memory lineups, the 
Vengeance LPX modules are backed by a limited lifetime warranty, and each IC has been screened to optimize performance potential. 
BUYER’S GUIDE
Corsair 32GB Vengeance LPX DDR4-2400 
$329.99
www.corsair.com
Who Should Apply: Enthusiasts and 
creative professionals who need to pack a lot 
of memory capacity into their system’s DIMM 
slots.
Capacity: 32GB (two 16GB modules)
Speed: 2,400MHz
Timings: 16-16-16-39
MEMORY
Why You’ll Dig It: Patriot’s Viper Elite kits deliver excellent 
performance. This set of two 8GB modules, for example, operates 
at up to 2666MHz with timings of 16-17-17-36. Patriot offers the 
16GB Viper Elite DDR4-2666 modules in striking red, understated 
gray, or bright blue (pictured here). The color options make it easy 
to complement or brighten up the interior of your build. Patriot has 
also done extensive compatibility testing on AMD’s X370 and B370 
chipsets and has developed a full list of compatible DDR4 parts, and 
this kit is among the modules ideal for use with Ryzen processors.
Who Should Apply: Power users who want their system and 
memory to perform at the top of its game.
Capacity: 16GB (two 8GB modules)
Speed: 2,666MHz
Timings: 16-17-17-36
BUYER’S GUIDE
Patriot 16GB Viper Elite DDR4-2666
$157.99
www.patriotmemory.com 
62 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

MEMORY COMPARISON CHART
BUYER’S GUIDE
MEMORY COMPARISON CHART
BUYER’S GUIDE
Kit
MSRP
Speed
XMP Timings
Voltage
Capacity
LED
Warranty
G.SKILL 32GB 
Trident Z DDR4-4000
$512.99 
4,000MHz
18-19-19-39
1.35V
32GB (4x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
Crucial 32GB 
Ballistix Elite DDR4-3200
$379.99
3,200MHz
16-18-18-36
1.35V
32GB (4x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
HyperX 32GB 
Predator DDR4-3000
$370
3,000MHz
15-17-17-36
1.35V
32GB (4x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
ADATA 32GB 
XPG SPECTRIX D40 
DDR4-3200
$359.99
3,200MHz
16-18-18-36 
1.35V
32GB (4x8GB)
RGB
Limited 
Lifetime
Corsair 32GB Vengeance 
LPX DDR4-2400 
$334.99
2,400MHz
16-16-16-39
1.2V
32GB (2x16GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
Patriot 16GB 
VIPER 4 DDR4-3600
$189.99 
3,600MHz
17-19-19-39
1.35V
16GB (2x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
ADATA 16GB 
XPG Z1 DDR4-3000
$179.99 
3,000MHz
16-16-16-36 
1.35V
16GB (2x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
Corsair 16GB Vengeance 
LPX DDR4-3200 
$179.99 
3,200MHz
16-18-18-36
1.35V
16GB (2x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
Corsair 16GB Vengeance 
LPX DDR4-2400
$174.99 
2,400MHz
16-16-16-39
1.2V
16GB (2x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
Crucial 16GB Ballistix 
Sport LT DDR4-2400
$171.99 
2,400MHz
16-16-16-39
1.2V
16GB (4x4GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
G.SKILL 16GB Trident Z 
RGB DDR4-3200
$168.99 
3,200MHz
16-18-18-38
1.35V
16GB (2x8GB)
RGB
Limited 
Lifetime
HyperX 16GB 
FURY DDR4-2666
$164 
2,666MHz
16-18-18-36
1.2V
16GB (2x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
Patriot 16GB 
Viper Elite DDR4-2666
$157.99 
2,666MHz
16-17-17-36
1.2V
16GB (2x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
GeIL 16GB 
EVO X DDR4-3000
$145.99 
3,000MHz
15-17-17-35
1.35V
16GB (2x8GB)
RGB
Limited 
Lifetime
Patriot 16GB 
Signature Line 2400MHz
$140.98 
2,400MHz
17-17-17-39
1.2V
16GB (2x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
GeIL 16GB AMD 
EDITION EVO SPEAR 
DDR4-2400
$130.99 
2,400MHz
16-16-16-36
1.2V
16GB (2x8GB)
None
Limited 
Lifetime
CPU  /  September2017 63

limited to using Intel NVMe drives 
only. Again, we don’t know the full 
story as we went to press because 
keys were not yet available, and Intel 
has yet to fully flesh-out VROC’s 
requirements. 
Given the half-baked state of 
hardware-based NVMe RAID, you 
could be forgiven for assuming your 
current options are to go SATA or 
go home. Again, not so fast. There’s 
another option you may not have 
considered, and that is to create and 
run a software-based RAID array. 
Soft RAID
When you take the hardware 
limitations out of the RAID equation, 
your options open up considerably. 
For those running one or more servers, 
particularly where data redundancy 
is mission critical, RAID isn’t just a 
On older platforms, PCIe lanes 
are at a premium, but things aren’t 
much better with the latest hardware. 
On AMD’s new X399 platform with 
a Ryzen Threadripper chip installed, 
there’s currently no way to run RAID 
on NVMe drives, though of course 
SATA-based RAID is supported. As 
we went to press, however, AMD was 
reportedly working on something to 
address the issue. 
On Intel’s X299 platform, NVMe-
based RAID is possible, but fraught 
with caveats. To get it to work on our 
ASRock X299 Taichi motherboard, 
for instance, you’ll need to purchase a 
standard or premium VROC (Virtual 
RAID On CPU) key if you plan to 
use anything more complicated than 
RAID 0, and the keys are rumored to 
cost between $99 and possibly up to 
a whopping $299. You may also be 
I
t’s 2017, and the ability to combine 
two or more storage devices into a 
single large pool for the purposes 
of increasing the performance, 
automating data redundancy, or both, 
is a technology that many of us take for 
granted. It’s true, SATA-based RAID 
(Redundant Array of Independent 
Disks, or if you prefer, Inexpensive 
Disks) has been around seemingly since 
the dawn of the specification, but M.2-
based RAID is still rather wet behind 
the ears. 
You might think that as long as you 
have multiple available M.2 slots on 
your motherboard, or if you invest in 
something like the ASUS Hyper M.2 
PCIe card with four M.2 slots on a PCIe 
x16 expansion card, you can populate 
them all with NVMe drives and enjoy a 
mind-numbingly fast RAID array, in a 
variety of configurations. Not so fast. 
Build A Software RAID With Windows 10 Storage Spaces
Looking for hardware-based NVMe RAID support? Intel VROC (Virtual RAID On CPU) is your only real option.
64 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

ZFS-based RAID array delivers a high 
degree of data integrity and prevents 
silent data corruption that users can 
frequently encounter when running 
very large and very fast databases. It’s 
possible to use ZFS with a hardware 
RAID controller, however you need 
to choose the JBOD option on the 
controller to enable the ZFS file 
system to not only detect errors and 
corruption, but recover the corrupt 
sectors as well. 
If you’re curious about imple-
menting a software-based RAID on 
your general-purpose PC, you may be 
surprised to learn that Windows 10 has 
a built-in utility that makes creating 
a virtual RAID array fast and simple, 
using any combination of two or more 
SATA, NVMe, SAS, USB 2.0, or USB 
3.0 storage devices. The utility is called 
Storage Spaces, and it is capable of 
replicating traditional hardware-based 
RAID’s speed-multiplying capabilities 
and hardened data redundancy in a 
variety of configurations. This utility 
easily implement RAID 0, RAID 1, 
and the equivalent of RAID 5 single-
parity, RAID 6 double-parity, and 
even RAID 7 for triple-parity. Despite 
being a proprietary Oracle format, 
the OpenZFS umbrella project is 
continuing to develop and support the 
open-source branch. 
Back when we wrote about building 
your own NAS box, we used FreeNAS 
for the system’s OS, which also 
supports the ZFS file system. Here, a 
handy feature, it’s a necessity. That’s 
why many common server OSes 
support file systems that have built-in 
logical volume manager capabilities. 
One such example is a file system 
called ZFS, which is the native file 
system used in Solaris and Illumos, 
the open source version of Sun’s 
OpenSolaris. ZFS is also supported 
on FreeBSD and Linux. If you’re 
running a server and using ZFS 
as your default file system, you can 
VROC hasn’t been fully fleshed out as we went to press, but you’ll need to purchase a key from Intel to unlock anything better than RAID 0.
You may be surprised to 
learn that Windows 10 has 
a built-in utility that makes 
creating a virutal RAID array 
fast and simple.
CPU  /  September2017 65

ports in an attempt to determine how 
versatile Storage Spaces can be. 
Before we got started, we formatted 
both of the SSDs and the thumb drive. 
If you’re planning to reappropriate 
drives, make sure to take anything 
correspond to a 3rd-party SATA 
controller on the motherboard, but 
more on that later. We also connected 
a 64GB USB 3.0 Kingston HyperX 
Savage thumb drive to one of the 
motherboard’s external USB 3.0 
lets you manage 
multiple internal or 
external hard drives 
and SSDs as a single 
“s t o r a g e  s p a c e” 
with a capacity that 
you can shrink or 
grow dynamically, 
replacing or adding 
drives as needed, 
without losing any 
data in the process. 
In this month’s 
article, we’ll walk 
you through the 
process of setting 
up and using a 
s i m p l e  s t o r a g e 
space. 
Hardware
Prerequisites
For our test system, we’re using 
an Intel Core i7-7820X installed in 
the ASRock X299 Taichi with 32GB 
Corsair Vengeance LED DDR4-3200. 
The OS drive is a 480GB Patriot 
Hellfire NVMe SSD. We’re running 
W i n d o w s  
1 0 
Enterprise Edition, 
but the Storage 
S p a c e s  
u t i l i t y 
is also available 
on all consumer 
versions of Win10. 
We’ve connected a 
new 500GB HP 
S700 SSD and a 
positively ancient 
2 4 0 G B  
O C Z 
Vertex 3 to a pair 
o f  t h e  A S Ro c k 
X299 Taichi’s SATA 
ports. You may 
want to ensure 
the SATA devices 
you plan to use 
are driven by the 
chipset’s primary 
SATA controller 
as we encountered 
p r o b l e m s  w h e n 
using ports that 
The Control Panel, under the System and Security heading, is where you’ll find Storage Spaces.
Windows 10 users have access to a built-in software RAID utility called Storage Spaces.
66 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

attached via USB 
would appear 
as an available 
option, but we 
didn’t have one 
on hand to test 
this theory. 
On the Select 
Drives To Create 
A Storage Pool 
screen, the HP 
S700 and the 
O C Z  Ve r t e x 
3  S S D s  d i d 
s h o w  u p ,  a s 
well as our 1TB 
b a c k u p  d r i ve 
that we have 
no plans to add 
to the storage 
pool. Because 
we formatted 
the pair of SSDs in advance, we 
didn’t need to worry about moving 
data. If you have a new unformatted 
drive, or if you used Windows’ Disk 
Management utility to delete partitions 
and leave the drive as unallocated 
space, then those drives will appear in 
the Unformatted Drives box. 
Keep in mind, any drive that 
appears in the Formatted Drives box 
will be eligible for use in a storage 
pool, but may not be empty of useful 
data. Hyperlinks to the left of each 
detected drive let you view files or 
take the device offline. To proceed, 
we clicked the checkboxes in front 
of the HP and OCZ drives and then 
clicked the Create Pool 
button at the bottom of 
the page. 
At this point, the Storage 
Spaces utility proceeds 
to format the drives. As 
we mentioned above, we 
initially had our two SSDs 
attached to SATA ports 
driven by a 3rd-party 
SATA controller, which 
resulted in a “Can’t create 
the pool, check the drive 
connections and try again 
System And Security, and then 
clicking Storage Spaces. Next, click 
Create A New Pool And Storage Space 
and then click Yes when the UAC 
prompt appears. 
If no drives connected to the system 
are compatible with Storage Spaces, 
you’ll be informed on the Select 
Drives page. It was at this point that 
we determined that the USB thumb 
drive we had formatted did not show 
up as an option for inclusion in our 
new storage pool. None of the half-
dozen USB 2.0 or 3.0 thumb drives 
we plugged in were detected, whether 
formatted as exFAT or NTFS. It’s 
possible that an external hard drive 
important off of them before you 
proceed with setting up the Storage 
Space. If you don’t format the drives 
ahead of time, the utility will do it 
for you during the process, but there 
are advantages to manually formatting 
in advance.
Storage Spaces
The easiest way to access this 
utility is to click into the search box 
on the taskbar, type storage spaces, 
then press ENTER. Depending on 
your version of Win10, you may be 
able to access the utility from the 
Control Panel by right-clicking the 
Start button, clicking Control Panel, 
If you have two or more drives that can be used with the utility, they will appear in the Formatted or Unformatted Drive boxes.
Keep in mind, any drive that 
appears in the Formatted Drives 
box will be eligible for use in a 
storage pool, but may not be 
empty of useful data.
CPU  /  September2017 67

drawback is that the chances you’ll 
encounter a drive failure are multiplied 
by the number of drives in the pool. 
A Simple space composed of three 
drives, for instance, is three times as 
likely to fail as running a single drive. 
According to Microsoft, this sort of 
The Simple space option is good 
for those who are most concerned 
with improving the performance of 
their storage pool. This is effectively a 
RAID 0 setup. Although performance 
will increase and the capacity of your 
devices will be combined, the primary 
( 0 x 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 2 ) ” 
error. After con-
necting the drives 
to a pair of ports 
managed by the 
Intel chipset, the 
pool was created 
without incident. 
On  t h e  f o l -
l ow i n g  s c re e n , 
y o u  h a v e  t h e 
opportunity to 
choose a resiliency 
type, size, and 
name for the new 
storage pool. By 
default, the utility 
names the pool 
“Storage Space,” 
b u t  
y o u  
c a n 
input a different 
name by clicking 
into the text box 
and typing. We 
named our pool, 
“ Ba c k u p,”  l e f t 
the drive letter 
a s s i g n m e n t  a t 
the default, and 
also left the File 
Sy s t e m  o p t i o n 
at the default 
N T F S  s e t t i n g . 
The alternative file 
system option is 
REFS, which refers 
to the Resilient File 
System capable of 
enabling Windows 
to automatically 
m a i n t a i n  d a t a 
integrity and help 
prevent data loss 
in the event of a 
drive failure. 
Resiliency Options
Choosing a resiliency type for your 
pool is perhaps the most important step 
you’ll take in this tutorial. Click the drop-
down menu to select from Simple (no 
resiliency), Two-way Mirror, Three-way 
Mirror, and Parity. 
When you create a pool, the drives will be wiped and formatted, so make sure anything on them that you value is backed up elsewhere first.
A two-way mirror offers a good balance of performance and redundancy, so it’s the option we chose.
68 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

data resiliency above all else. Again multiple 
copies of your files will be created across 
multiple drives, letting your data remain 
in-tact even if one drive fails in a three-drive 
parity pool or two drives fail in a seven-
drive parity pool. Microsoft recommends 
selecting this option for archival data and 
music and videos libraries. 
two drives to work with, but want to 
maintain data integrity. Of course, 
any storage pool that relies on stashing 
copies of files across multiple drives 
will slash the combined capacity of 
your drives by at least half. 
Choosing the Parity option does 
nothing for performance, but focuses on 
storage pool is best for temporary files, 
such as video rendering files, image 
editor scratch files, and intermediary 
compiler object files. You’ll need 
a minimum of two drives to create 
a Simple space with any appreciable 
performance improvement. 
Mirror spaces, either two-way 
(requires at least two-drives, makes 
two copies of every file, and can 
tolerate one drive failure) or three-way 
(requires at least five drives, makes 
three copies of files, and can tolerate 
two drive failures), are designed to 
balance increases in speed against 
added data resiliency. Microsoft recom-
mends this type of storage pool to 
anyone looking to use a storage space 
for virtually any type of data that you 
value highly, such as general purpose 
files, backups, and more. Mirror spaces 
are also good for those who only have 
Depending on the type you selected, your Storage Space can be self-repairing, allowing for drive replacement and capacity upgrades on the fly.
Choosing the Parity 
option does nothing for 
performance, but focuses 
on data resiliency above 
all else.
CPU  /  September2017 69

storage pool before we get a low 
capacity warning. 
As we continue to use our new soft 
RAID, we’ll report back on anything we 
encounter going forward. Due to time 
and space constraints, we didn’t get a 
chance to cover the performance of our 
software RAID, let alone compare it to 
the performance of a similar hardware-
based RAID configuration, but we’ll 
definitely be looking into this at a later 
date. For now at least, we can say that 
Windows Storage Spaces is easy to use, 
and there’s lot of potential for enthusiast 
and novice users alike. ■
Making The Most Of Storage Spaces
To create the most effective and 
useful Storage Space, it’s best to use 
drives that are all of the same type, 
capacity, and speed. To put it simply, 
creating a pool from mixed drives will 
deliver mixed results. For instance, 
an external USB 2.0 hard drive will 
considerably slow down your array of 
6GBps SATA SSDs when combined 
into a single storage pool. Our 
array comprised of a 500GB SSD 
and a 240GB SSD is less-than-ideal 
because it’ll only take about 84GB of 
unique files in our two-way mirrored 
Juggling Capacity
To get the best of both worlds 
with our pair of SSDs, we selected 
the Two-way Mirror option from the 
dropdown menu. The various pool sizes 
appear below. For our configuration, the 
Total Pool Capacity was listed as 687GB, 
which was identical to the Available 
Pool Capacity. Even though we chose 
an option that includes file redundancy, 
the Storage Spaces gives us close to, but 
not exactly, the combined capacity of 
our 500 and 240GB drives. That’s all 
thanks to Storage Spaces’ support for 
thin provisioning, or a logical drive 
whose capacity is totally independent of 
the physical drives. 
You’ll want to avoid filling up your 
storage pool, however, because once 
a physical drive becomes full, it’ll 
automatically unmount itself. When 
approximately 70% of the physical drive 
space is consumed, the utility will begin 
prompting you to add drives to keep 
pace. If you get one of these warning 
prompts, click the Change Settings 
button on the Manage Storage Spaces 
panel and click Add Drives. After you 
add a drive (remember, keep all SATA 
drives on the same controller) the utility 
will begin “repairing,” or distributing 
files depending on the options you 
selected when you created the pool. 
You can input a number into 
the Size text box to dictate the upper 
limits of your thin provisioning, and 
the capacity including resiliency 
(doubled files) appears below, auto-
matically. For instance, if we set 
our maximum size to 400GB, 
then the including resiliency num-
ber appears as 800GB. To actually 
achieve this level of capacity, we’d need 
to ultimately upgrade the storage pool to 
at least two 500GB drives (there is some 
capacity-slashing overhead involved). 
Once the capacities look good, click 
the Create Storage Space button to 
complete the operation. The utility 
will then format the array and open 
the empty File Explorer window that 
corresponds to the new storage space. 
Now just add files.
   Your Raid Refresher
There’s a lot of RAID talk in this article, so let’s go over some of the most popular types of RAID 
arrays that hardware-based RAID controllers tend to support. Again, RAID combines two or more 
storage devices to form a larger storage volume that offers faster data read/write operations, 
built-in redundancy and the ability to self-repair, or all of the above. 
A RAID 0 array, for instance, is one of the most simple forms of RAID that combines the capacities 
of all drives. The files written on such an array are split into small chunks and distributed across 
the drives, which lets them all perform read and write commands simultaneously, for dramatically 
better performance than a single drive can deliver. The drawback of a RAID 0 array is that if any 
individual drive fails, so does the whole array. 
RAID 1, 5, and 10 arrays, on the other hand, offer excellent redundancy designed to be 
recoverable in the event of a drive failure. RAID 1 requires at least two drives, RAID 5 (striped 
with distributed parity) requires three, and RAID 10 requires a minimum of four drives to operate, 
but it offers the best performance and data security of the RAID options mentioned here. Any 
configuration with built-in redundancy and self-recovery will sacrifice capacity to some degree, 
which you’ll need to factored-in during the budgeting process.
•
RAID 0 – High performance, no redundancy (at least two drives)
•
RAID 1 – Good performance, high redundancy (at least two drives)
•
RAID 5 – Better performance, better redundancy (at least three drives)
•
RAID 10 – High performance, high redundancy (at least four drives)
70 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com


Upgrades That’ll Keep You Humming Along
For those of you who prefer to do your PC spring cleaning in the fall, you’re in luck. This month’s page of 
updates is positively jam-packed with apps to tweak, change, reconfigure, or otherwise modify your system 
settings. Fontface Ninja and ShareX are both fun and functional.
the end of July, and it’s loaded with new 
features. In addition to a sparkling new 
UI, Windows Repair’s Systray icon menu 
gives users the option to restart in Safe 
Mode, and a Repairs Preset feature lets you 
customize how you want Windows Repair 
to clean your OS.
www.tweaking.com
Winaero Tweaker 0.8
Repairing, tweaking, whatever you 
want to call it—we’re suckers for apps 
that help power users get the most out 
of their OS. Headlining version 0.8 is 
a brand-new Import/Export wizard. 
According to Winaero, Tweaker users 
(Tweakers?) have been clamoring for this 
feature for a while. Fairly self-explanatory, 
the wizard lets you export your tweaks to 
a file and then import them on another 
system. It also lets you pick and choose 
which tweaks you want to import from 
an export file, in case you have multiple 
systems that require different tweaks. 
Other slick new tweaks include setting 
the Lock Screen slideshow duration and 
disabling error reporting.
winaero.com
DRIVER BAY
NVIDIA GeForce 
Game Ready Driver 385.28
A pair of games receive optimizations 
in the latest driver for NVIDIA’s GeForce 
graphics cards. Agents of Mayhem 
has received NVIDIA’s Game Ready 
treatment, while Killing Floor: Incursion 
now has Game Ready VR optimizations.
https://www.geforce.com
your computer,” Patch My PC is yet 
another utility that makes PC maintenance 
less menial. With the latest version, you’ll 
need Microsoft .NET 4.5 to continue 
using Patch My PC, so make sure you’ve 
updated that, as well. Also note that the 
program’s log has now moved to %temp%\
PatchMyPC.log. Version 3.2.0.0 makes 
some improvements to Patch My PC’s 
application closing and scheduler.
https://patchmypc.net
ShareX 11.9.1
This FOSS screen capture tool boasts 
“over nine years of active development,” 
and it shows. In addition to having 
an arsenal of different screen capture 
methods, ShareX can also upload to a 
variety of image and text upload sites. 
The 11.9.1 update in mid-August merely 
fixes a few bugs, but version 11.9.0, 
released eight days earlier, delivers a 
bunch of goodies. There’s a new batch 
image thumbnailer tool, custom domain 
support for Microsoft Azure storage, 
a cursor tool for the program’s Region 
Capture ability, and Italian language 
support. Also, this update officially brings 
ShareX to the Windows Store.
https://getsharex.com
Tweaking.com 
Windows Repair 4.0.3
There’s little doubt you already have a 
gang of utilities that keeps Windows clean; 
why not add another? Not much changes 
in the latest version of Windows Repair—a 
pair of bugfixes remedies problems with 
the app’s Repair WMI function. However, 
Tweaking.com unleashed version 4.0.0 at 
SOFTWARE UPDATES
Fontface Ninja For Chrome 3.0
Sure, Fontface Ninja is a fairly specialized 
browser extension, but it’s nonetheless 
deadly effective at what it does. When it’s 
installed, Fontface Ninja snatches font 
information (including name, size, spacing, 
color, and so forth) from websites faster 
than you can knifehand strike a practice 
dummy. The extension even gives you the 
option to buy fonts that catch your eye. 
In version 3.0, our tiny typeface martial 
artist gets a new UI, improved speed, font 
detection based on metadata, and more. 
The latest update also fixes display problems 
with some websites.
https://fontface.ninja
NetSetMan 4.5.0
Short for Network Settings Manager, 
this is a solid option for anyone who 
wants to take a little more control over 
their network. Halfway to version 5.0 
(numerically, at least), version 4.5.0 
delivers a Network Scanner tool, which 
can scan networks according to IP range 
(both IPv4 and IPv6), subnet, and ARP 
and NDP cache. The Network Scanner is 
multithreaded, too, which is very helpful 
for rifling through an extremely wide range 
of IPs. It also has a real-time search feature. 
Aside from this new feature, the update 
squashes a swarm of bugs and introduces 
“lots of minor fixes and adjustments.”
www.netsetman.com
Patch My PC 3.2.0.0
Billed as a “free, easy-to-use program 
that keeps over 165 apps up-to-date on 
72 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Ransomware Resurgent
High-Profile Attacks Plague Systems Around The World
first known instance of ransomware, 
you have to set your wayback machine 
to 1989, when Dr. Joseph Popp 
distributed what is known as the AIDS 
Trojan. Popp distributed the Trojan on 
a floppy disk to members of a mailing 
list that he belonged to. The disks were 
labeled harmlessly “AIDS Information 
Introductory Diskette,” but when a 
victim opened the disk, the Trojan 
replaced the system’s AUTOEXE.BAT 
file. Eventually it would encrypt files 
and hide directories on the system. 
Then, it instructed its victim to send 
$189 to a Panamanian post office box 
in exchange for a separate program that 
would properly restore the files. Because 
of its demand for payment, the AIDS 
Trojan earned the ignominious honor of 
of thousands of systems in virtually all of 
the industrialized world. Damage estimates 
vary, but one cyber risk modeling firm, 
Cyence (https://www.cyence.net), initially 
pegged losses at $4 billion. Regardless of 
the final tally, WannaCry’s devastation puts 
it on the scale of a natural disaster. Some of 
the companities, government agencies, and 
other entities hit by WannaCry include the 
United Kingdom’s National Health Service, 
Fed Ex, Honda, and the University of 
Montreal. WannaCry isn’t alone, though, 
as ransomware continues to plague both 
big organizations and individual users.
All Your Data Are Belong To Us
Ransomware has been making 
its targets cry long before WannaCry 
infected systems globally. To find the 
L
ike it or not, malware in one form 
another has been around almost as 
long as computers themselves. You’d think 
that after years of malicious attacks our 
collective intelligence and experience would 
have created a natural defense against all 
but the most sinister threats. After the 
fourth time telling Grandpa he needs to 
stop clicking emailed links from the bank 
where he doesn’t even have an account, you 
expect him to treat the next email from 
“Wells Fargo” with a little suspicion. You 
tell him that Microsoft’s regular Windows 
updates aren’t just Redmond’s attempt to 
personally annoy him and can only hope he 
regularly grabs the patches and hotfixes that 
plug security holes.
Granted, sometimes it’s not Grandpa’s 
fault. Otherwise legitimate websites are 
hijacked all the time, and files you have 
no reason to suspect as dangerous become 
attack vectors. Of course, it’s possible 
for the most vigilant users, especially 
power users, to protect their systems, 
but everyday folks are arguably just as 
susceptible to malicious attacks now as 
they were during the heyday of macro 
viruses. As long as there’s money to be 
made, hackers gonna hack, and they will 
of course develop more sophisticated 
means of doing so.
Over the years, when a particular type 
of malware is particularly virulent, it 
enters the public conscious, and everyone, 
even Grandpa, learns about it. The ’80s 
gave us Elk Cloner and Christmas Tree, 
while the ’90s introduced the world to 
Michaelangelo and Melissa. Take your 
pick of notorious malware that has swept 
across the internet since the turn of 
the century.
Even with a few months to go, our 
money’s on 2017 going down as the year of 
ransomware. The most notorious of them 
all, WannaCry, wreaked havoc on hundreds 
Dating back to 1989, ransomware isn’t a new, or even recent, invention, among cybervillains, but it’s 
been in the spotlight this year, especially after the WannaCry cryptoworm brought businesses and 
organizations to their knees in early May 2017.
CPU  /  September2017 73

ransomware rampages through storage 
devices, encrypting data as it goes. Once 
the data is encrypted, crypto ransomware 
then “identifies itself ” to the victim 
and instructs them to submit payment, 
almost always in Bitcoin, to decrypt 
the files. If you’ve ever voluntarily 
encrypted your files, then you know that 
it’s difficult bordering on impossible to 
break strong encryption. In addition to 
WannaCry, two notorious examples are 
CryptoLocker and CryptoWall.
Instead of wrapping files in an 
impenetrable layer of encryption, locker 
ransomware attacks users in a different 
way. Whereas crypto ransomware makes 
data inaccessible but generally leaves 
the rest of the system usable, locker 
ransomware locks down access to the 
system as a whole, requiring a ransom 
before it can be used again. Locker 
ransomware typically doesn’t target files 
themselves, and users often can defeat the 
malware using security software.
When locker ransomware does succeed, 
it does so with social engineering. The lock 
screen that notifies the victim of the attack 
contains troves of irreplaceable data, 
such as family photos, work projects, 
and important personal/financial 
documents, which people value enough 
to be willing to pay a ransom to recover. 
Once it infects a system, this type of 
being the first publicly distributed piece 
of ransomware.
Broadly speaking, there are two types 
of ransomware. Crypto ransomware, 
or encrypting ransomware, preys on 
the assumption that a victim’s system 
WannaCry: A Timeline Of Events
Although WannaCry was snuffed out almost as quickly as it spread, it nonetheless caused tremendous damage to computers in every continent. 
(Technically, Antarctica was spared.) The attack occurred May 12, 2017, but it had been brewing well before that.
March 14, 2017.  Microsoft issues Microsoft Security Bulletin MS17-010. The security update fixes a vulnerability that lets an attacker execute code 
remotely by sending “specially crafted messages” to a Microsoft SMB server. Natrually, systems without the update remain vulnerable.
April 14, 2017.  A hacker collective known as the Shadow Brokers releases EternalBlue, a network exploit, and DoublePulsar, a backdoor. Both of these 
tools are widely believed to have been developed by the U.S. National Security Agency. A combination of EternalBlue and DoublePulsar will become 
the means by which WannaCry spreads.
April 21, 2017.  Swiss security firm BinaryEdge estimates that over 100,000 systems have been infected with DoublePulsar. By April 27, the number 
jumps to over 425,000.
May 12, 2017.  WannaCry strikes Europe early in the morning. Spanish mobile telecom provider Telefónica is among the first of many large entities to 
report that some of its systems have been compromised in the attack. Later the same morning several UK hospitals are crippled when WannaCry 
infects the country’s National Health Service. Other victims include French automaker Renault, Germany’s Deutsche Bahn, Russian telecom MegaFon, 
and FedEx. WannaCry demands payment in Bitcoin, a common practice among ransomware. 
May 12, 2017.  In the early afternoon, web security professional Marcus Hutchins discovers a kill switch within WannaCry that greatly impedes its propagation. 
(Coincidentally, on August 2, 2017, the FBI arrested Hutchins in Las Vegas for allegedly creating the Kronos banking malware.) 
May 12, 2017.  Microsoft issues a patch for Windows XP and Windows Server 2003, a move that Phillip Misner, Principal Security Group Manager, 
Microsoft Security Response Center, calls “highly unusual,” considering Microsoft has ceased official support for these OSes. Weeks later, security 
firm Kryptos Logic reports that WinXP systems are not nearly as vulnerable to WannaCry as initially believed.
May 15, 2017.  Thanks to Hutchins’ kill switch discovery and affected groups updating their systems, WannaCry is eventually stopped. However, experts 
warn that updated versions of the ransomware could reappear.
The WannaCry ransomware attack struck around the world, hitting government entities such as 
England’s National Health Service and businesses like FedEx, Honda, Renault, and Russian telecom 
provider Megafon.
74 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

typically tricks them into believing they’ve 
run afoul of the FBI, IRS, or some other 
equally intimidating government agency. 
The lock screen then accuses the user of 
illegal online activity or other crimes and 
instructs them to pay a “fine” to lift the 
lock. Locker ransomware aims to present 
serious enough threats to its victims that 
they won’t seek help, either from friends 
or legitimate law enforcement, out of fear 
they’ve committed a crime.
Although ransomware has generated 
millions in ransom payments over the 
years, its true damage comes from the 
attacks themselves. It’s difficult to put 
a price on family photos, but when 
ransomware strikes a business, metrics 
such as company downtime, hiring a 
security firm, and monetary damages in 
the form of fines and lawsuits are costly. 
For example, Cybersecurity Ventures 
estimated that global ransomware losses 
in 2017 will exceed $5 billion. Another 
attack on the scale of WannaCry could 
push that figure even higher.
Petya: A Coyote In Wolf’s Clothing
Just as organizations began to emerge 
from the wake of WannaCry, it appeared 
that another ransomware attack was 
ready to besiege systems worldwide. 
This new outbreak initially had all the 
markings of textbook ransomware. The 
cyberattackers used a modified version 
of existing ransomware called Petya and, 
like WannaCry, relied on the EternalBlue 
exploit to propagate it. On June 27, 
this new strain of ransomware began 
its attack. In the aftermath, security 
experts traced the origin to an update to 
Ukranian tax software MeDoc.
This version of Petya looked like 
ransomware, and initially acted like it, 
but further inspection of its behavior 
ultimately revealed a different, and 
arguably more nefarious, purpose behind 
the attack. Rather than encrypt a system’s 
files and genuinely demand a ransom 
payment, the new Petya variant often 
wiped drives completely, rendering data 
irretrievable even if there was an attempt 
to break the encryption and/or pay a 
ransom. Older versions of Petya targets 
Hackers Hold Hollywood Hostage
Some hackers just want to watch the world burn, but others are motivated by cold, hard cash. The movie 
and television industries generate billions of dollars every year, which naturally makes them attractive 
marks for digital bandits. Over the last few years, several major studios have found themselves in hackers’ 
crosshairs. The attacks aren’t ransomware in the same sense as WannaCry, but rather examples of 
leakware, where hackers threaten to expose/leak content they’ve stolen unless the victim pays a ransom.
Sony Pictures. On November 24, 2014, a group calling itself “Guardians of Peace” declared that it had 
compromised Sony Pictures’ computer systems. Shortly thereafter, the hacked data explodes across 
the internet; Sony employees’ personal information, embarrassing internal email exchanges, film 
scripts, and unreleased films all leak. Ultimately, U.S. intelligence agencies determine that North Korea 
is behind the attack, either directly or as the sponsor. Most believe that Sony’s release of the comedy 
“The Interview,” which involves a plot to assassinate North Korean dictator Kim Jong Un, was the 
primary motivation for the attack.
Netflix. A hacker or hackers operating under the moniker “TheDarkOverlord” breaches Larson Studios, 
a post-production company located in Hollywood. Larson’s owners are contacted by text message 
December 23, 2016, and then via email on Christmas. The owners wire $50,000 in Bitcoin to the hacker(s) 
to prevent the leak of most current season of “Orange is the New Black.” TheDarkOverlord makes similar 
demands to Netflix itself in April 2017, and when Netflix refuses, the hacker(s) release the full season 
online, several weeks ahead of its official premiere.
Disney. Coming right on heels of the WannaCry attack (though unrelated) Disney CEO Bob Iger reveals 
during a May 15 company town hall that hackers have contacted Disney with claims they’ve stolen a 
film that has yet to be released. Although unconfirmed, people overwhelmingly suspect the movie is 
the fifth installment of Disney’s “Pirates of the Caribbean” franchise. Eventually, Iger says that Disney 
determined the threat was a hoax. “Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales” premieres May 
26 without leaking online.
HBO. Thanks to massive success of “Game of Thrones,” as well as other shows, HBO has been no 
stranger to piracy and leaked content, though on July 31, 2017, HBO confirmed that it was the victim of a 
cyberattack. A hacker or hackers calling himself “Mr. Smith” initially claims to have stolen 1.5TB of data 
and dumps unreleased episodes of “Ballers” and “Room 104,” as well as a script for an upcoming episode 
of “Game of Thrones.” Mr. Smith demands a $6.5 million ransom and also leaks an email exchange with 
an HBO exec offering to pay $250,000 as a “bug bounty,” suggesting the studio might be willing to comply 
with the demand. HBO declines to pay the ransom as content continues to trickle out.
Game of Thrones / Courtesy of HBO
CPU  /  September2017 75

Scotland’s North and South Lanarkshire 
regions, recently admitted that it suffered 
another ransomware attack after already 
falling victim to WannaCry. NHS 
Lanarkshire said that it uncovered the 
ransomware, an updated strain of 
Bitpaymer, on August 25, and its IT team 
worked over the weekend to reverse the 
damage. Although the hospital group 
indicated the new attack wasn’t as severe 
as May’s WannaCry breach, it underscores 
how prime ransomware targets such as 
hospitals are under an ever-present threat 
of future assaults.
Despite the general advice that groups 
and individuals should not capitulate to 
hackers’ ransom demands (because doing 
so further encourages these criminals to 
launch additional ransomware attacks, 
and because they often don’t honor their 
promise to restore user data even after a 
ransom has been paid), people regularly pay 
up. In an August 30, 2017 letter, Dorchester 
School District Two superintendent Joseph 
Pye revealed that 25 of the district’s 65 
technology servers were hit with unspecified 
ransomware. After hiring two cybersecurity 
companies and huddling with the state’s 
Department of Education Chief Security 
Officer, South Carolina Law Enforcement 
Division, and “other law enforcement 
agencies,” Dorchester agreed to pay a 
$2,900 ransom to decrypt the compromised 
files. The school district was able to recover 
the data on 24 servers, while the final server 
was “corrupted, rendering it inaccessible by 
us or anyone else.”
As we went to press, cybersecurity 
provider AppRiver announced in its blog 
that it detected an explosion of over 23 
million spam emails containing the Locky 
ransomware. Particularly striking is this 
variant of Locky’s ransom demand of 
0.5 Bitcoin, which equaled over $2,350 
at the time of this writing. Historically, 
ransomware has asked for a much 
smaller payment, usually $300 to $600, 
a possible hint that hackers want to make 
ransomware more costly.
Either way, the recent and continuing 
spate of ransomware makes it a good idea 
to give Grandpa a call and remind him of 
the danger. ■
security department declared that Russia 
was behind the attack as part of ongoing 
hostilities between the two nations (a 
charge that the Kremlin obviously denied).
Future Petya or NotPetya attacks are a 
possibility, as well. Unlike WannaCry, the 
malware doesn’t contain a kill switch that 
could be activated to stop its spread.
Ransomware In The News
Although WannaCry and NotPetya 
dominated news cycles, ransomware 
continues to be a threat that security 
firms and government agencies treat with 
constant vigilance. On August 28, the 
IRS identified and issued a warning about 
a new phishing attack that attempts to 
trick people into installing ransomware.
“This is a new twist on an old scheme,” 
IRS Commissioner John Koskinen said 
in an official press release. “People should 
stay vigilant against email scams that 
try to impersonate the IRS and other 
agencies that try to lure you into clicking 
a link or opening an attachment.”
Adding injury to injury, NHS Lan-
arkshire, which operates hospitals in 
and encrypts the Master File Table, while 
the malware used in the June 27 attack 
encrypted files en masse. Eventually, the 
ransomware earned the name “NotPetya” 
or, more cutely, “Nyetya.” However, even 
though NotPetya didn’t target wallets like 
ransomware, the reason behind the attack 
was no laughing matter.
Security professionals now believe 
that the release of NotPetya was a 
misdirection, meant to divert news 
outlets and the general public away from 
a large-scale cyberattack against Ukraine 
itself. Although several other countries 
reported NotPetya attacks, Ukraine 
suffered the majority of the damage. 
The attack knocked out the Chernobyl 
nuclear plant’s automated radiation 
monitoring system and also affected several 
government departments, transportation 
and communication (including Boryspil 
International Airport, Ukranian Railways, 
and Ukrtelecom), and banks. Infected 
computers appeared to request ransom 
payments to restore full access, but instead 
NotPetya simply wiped out important files. 
In the aftermath, Ukraine’s official state 
Petya, another recent strain of ransomware, initially appeared to be another epidemic of ransomware 
to hit systems worldwide. However, after further analysis of the variant of Petya that was unleashed in 
June, security experts believe the attack was not a traditional ransomware attack. Rather, the attackers 
used their Petya variant as a smokescreen to draw attention away from a massive cyberattack against 
Ukraine, taking advantage of WannaCry’s widespread media coverage and deploying their malware, 
later dubbed “NotPetya” or “Nyetya,” to masquerade as more ransomware.
76 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Profound
BY CHRIS TRUMBLE
$29.99 (PC, PS4)   •   ESRB: (M)ature   •   Ninja Theory
www.hellblade.com
On the surface, Hellblade: Senua’s Sacrifice is an action game where you play 
the role of a grieving Celtic warrior on a quest to free her lover Dillion’s soul 
from hell after he was brutally murdered by Viking raiders. In truth, though, it’s 
a great deal more than that. For one thing, it’s irrefutable proof that Ebert was 
wrong: Games can, in fact, be art. I’ve been playing videogames for the better 
part of 40 years, and I’ve never been surer of that than while playing this one. 
Hellblade looks and sounds amazing in the technical sense, but more 
importantly, every image and sound in the game has been painstakingly 
created to immerse you in Senua’s world and let you see it through her eyes. 
That’s true in some sense for many games, but in the case of Hellblade, the 
developers at Ninja Theory took immersion a step further.
Not many games feature protagonists with psychosis, but Senua suffers 
from mild to severe hallucinations and hears voices throughout the game; 
her illness has a profound impact on the gameplay experience and the story. 
Perception can be a tricky thing for all of us, but for Senua (and, by extension, 
for you), it is sometimes very difficult to know what around her is real. Ninja 
Theory spent two years working with Dr. Paul Fletcher, a professor of Health 
Neuroscience and psychiatrist at the University of Cambridge, and also spent 
time working with people who experience these things in their daily lives in 
an effort to provide experiences that ring true.
The result is that Senua’s journey to hell is a physical representation of her 
inner journey through another kind of hell, and her fights against hulking 
Northmen and their gods are mirrored by her struggles with voices telling 
her that she is worthless, she is to blame for Dillion’s death, and so on. The 
interesting thing, though, is that some of the voices Senua hears encourage 
her. Some seek to guide her and can offer helpful advice, while others 
taunt and try to deceive. The trick, then, is to discern which voices to heed 
and which ones to ignore. Her visual struggles create another interesting 
gameplay mechanic; at times you will catch fleeting glimpses of a path you 
need to follow to solve a puzzle, only to have it disappear. In some cases, 
there are specific actions you can take to rediscover such things, other times 
they seem to appear and disappear more randomly.
Combat in the game takes place infrequently compared to most action 
games, but it is very well done and can be quite visceral. Early in the game, 
Senua becomes infected by the Darkness that plagues her journey, and the 
game warns that each time she falls in combat, that infection will spread. 
If she becomes fully infected, the game tells you, “All progress will be lost.” 
Although I’m generally not a big fan of permadeath systems in games, 
Hellblade’s implementation is, like the rest of this game, very well done.
We usually primarily judge games on whether or not they are “fun,” but 
that seems too trivial a way to evaluate Hellblade: Senua’s Sacrifice. I don’t 
know that I would call it fun overall, although the combat can be fun, and 
some of the puzzles are quite fun to solve. One thing’s for sure; this game is 
a profound experience that plumbs the depths of human emotion. If you’re 
ready for that, there’s currently no better way you can spend $30.
Yeah, we know you have blogs to post, video to encode, reports to write, and code to compile. We do, 
too, but you have to take a break once in a while (and maybe blow some stuff up). That’s why each 
month we give you the lowdown on what to expect from the latest interesting games.
Game Of The Month
CPU  /  September2017 77

They Don’t Crash ‘Em 
Like They Used To
BY ANDREW LEIBMAN
$11.99 (PC)   •   ESRB: n/a  •   Moonbyte
www.crashday.2tainment.com
On principle, I have no qualms with retro remakes and rereleases of 
classic games. Whether a game qualifies as a “classic,” and is therefore 
worthy of a revival, is also entirely subjective. I’ve been gaming on PCs 
since the since the early ‘90s, and as such, there are only a handful of 
games from 2006 that would budge the needle on my nostalgia meter, 
including The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion, Dead Rising, Gears Of War, and 
Tom Clancy’s Ghost Recon: Advanced Warfighter. The original Crashday 
never even showed up on my radar, at least not to the same extent that 
Burnout Revenge, FlatOut 2, and Auto Assault did. Incidentally, all three 
of those genre gems were rated better than Crashday. 
But we’re not here to talk about yesterday. Crashday Redline Edition is a 
faithful remastering that takes the arcade racer to new places. The game’s 
developer, Moonbyte, the same one that created the original, crammed 
seven game modes into this remake, including Wrecking Match, Stunt 
Show, Race, Hold The Flag, Pass The Bomb, and Bomb Run. The game 
modes generally boil down to straight non-combat races, or destruction 
derby-style arena-events or races where your car is equipped with missiles 
and a machinegun. There are a handful of mini games, though most modes 
are pretty dry when playing alone, getting considerably more exciting when 
you swap AI cars with up to eight of your friends in the online modes. With 
its release on Steam, matchmaking streamlines this process considerably. 
The Career Game mode is typically the highlight of an arcade racer, 
letting you methodically unlock tracks, earn cash for better cars, and 
upgrade your favorite rides. In Crashday Redline Edition, this mode is 
dragged down by some pretty awful voice acting, and a script that was 
probably cringe-worthy even a decade ago. 
Other features worth mentioning are a built-in track editor, a 
new lighting engine and improved textures, enhanced controls, 
better gamepad support (we played with an Xbox One controller), 
a total of 36 tracks (10 of them are new), 12 vehicles (these are 
unlicensed knockoffs), and a variety of tarmac, dirt, and urban racing 
environments. 
The game also supports avatars, voice chat, and mods, via the Steam 
Workshop. We loaded up a few spiffy new car models, a couple of 
custom tracks, and even an alternate soundtrack, enabled them from 
the game launcher, and got to take each for a spin once in the game. 
Although we were rather lukewarm on Crashday Redline Edition, the 
Steam Workshop integration has the potential to breathe new life into 
this game for years to come. The only real question here is whether 
there’s a large enough and talented enough audience to churn out 
quality mods for the foreseeable future. 
Despite all of the improvements, however, at the end of a several-hour 
session I came away feeling like I had just played a decade-old game. 
The controls are unrealistic even for arcade-style racer standards, and 
the difficulty curve is pretty steep, which is sure to turn off the casual 
race fans that tend to gravitate toward arcade-style racers like this. 
Visually, the game looks its age, but framerates were solid and we 
didn’t encounter any glitches or annoying bugs. 
For fans of the original, Crashday Redline Edition is a decidedly retro – 
and blessedly inexpensive – way to scratch the combat racer itch with 
their friends. For most everyone else, it just feels outdated. ■
78 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

CSI: OMG
BY VINCE COGLEY
Price $29.99 (PC, XOne, PS4)   •   ESRB: (M)ature   •   Aspyr
observer-game.com
Last year, I reviewed Layers of Fear, a psychedelic horror game from Polish 
developer Bloober Team. LoF puts you inside the mind of a master painter 
who had slowly lost his grip on his sanity. Set inside the requisite Victorian 
manor, LoF mostly followed the horror game playbook, but its seamless 
room reconfiguration mechanic and a trio of genuinely solid endings left us 
encouraged for future Bloober projects. 
Bloober is back with Observer (stylized as “>observer_”), which couldn’t be 
any more different from Layers of Fear, at least as far as setting is concerned. 
The stately mid-19th century mansion is long gone, as Observer rockets 
you to the future (2084, to be precise), where life is . . . not that great. In this 
cyber-punk hellscape, humanity can’t seem to catch a break. First, a deadly 
infection known as the Nanophage (basically, the 
nifty nanobots we’ve implanted in ourselves go 
haywire and start attacking their hosts) strikes, 
then the Great Decimation (think World War III and 
IV put together) takes care of most of the major 
world powers and a nice chunk of the global 
population. That’s the bad news.
The good news is that the game’s protagonist, 
Dan Lazarski (wait, that’s Rutger Hauer of “Blade 
Runner” fame!) has managed to make a name 
for himself as a skilled Observer, essentially the 
thought police—literally—of Chiron, Inc., the 
megacorporation that doubles as the game’s 
government. By using devices called Dream 
Eaters, Observers hack into their subjects’ 
brains, extracting vital information but also all 
the personal demons each subject is battling. 
As the game begins, Lazarski is working his beat when he receives 
a cryptic call from his estranged son, Adam, who sounds like his life 
choices may have caught up with him. Dan tracks the call to a Krakow 
slum. In short order he discovers a gruesome crime scene, and his 
investigation begins. Right away, you get to use Dan’s cybernetic 
enhancements to help pick apart the crime scene.
It’s clear that Bloober has come a long way since Layers of Fear, as 
Observer is a major leap forward in almost every regard. The neat little 
room reconfiguration trick they used in LoF is back, and it’s better than 
ever. When you break into someone’s mind, the game gives you visions 
of these broken souls’ lives in a mesmerizing, compelling, and terrifying 
way. As far as sci-fi goes, the technology isn’t really anything new, but the 
game’s execution of navigating a person’s psyche is as good as or better 
than anything I’ve seen in film or television.
I also enjoyed Observer’s side quests, which might be even better 
than the main narrative (also solid). Sure, you can choose not to 
follow these rabbit trails, but why would you? Bloober has built an 
astonishingly rich dystopian world, and experiencing it is more than 
half the fun. Using elements of police procedural/cyberpunk horror as 
its delivery mechanism, Observer earnestly explores topics like poverty, 
totalitarianism, and cybernetics with a touch that most games like 
this sorely lack. By the time I finished the game, I felt that I was only 
scratching the surface of a fully realized and compelling universe. My 
biggest regret about Observer is that there wasn’t more of it.
The 3D character modeling could use some work, and I thought some 
of the cues that guide you through Observer’s “levels” (each person’s 
mind) were a bit too vague, but everything else, including the voice 
acting, dialogue, sound design, writing, etc. are outstanding. I can’t wait 
to jack into the next nightmare Bloober Team creates. ■
CPU  /  September2017 79

Augmented Reality 
To The Rescue
BY ANDREW LEIBMAN
$19.99 (PC)   •   ESRB: (M)ature   •   The Fullbright Company
www.tacoma.game
In The Fullbright Company’s breakout debut, Gone Home, you explore an 
empty house reading notes and listening to audio cassettes to discover 
why your parents and sister are gone and nothing in the sprawling 
estate is as it seems. Even if I didn’t know that TACOMA was Fullbright’s 
sophomore outing, I might have guessed it after playing for 20 minutes. 
Although the storytelling devices and narrative tempo are similar between 
both games, the settings couldn’t be more at odds. The first game takes 
place in the ‘80s in a large house in Portland Oregon, and TACOMA takes 
place in the year 2088 on the Lunar Transfer Station Tacoma, orbiting 
200,000 miles above the Earth. Artificial Intelligence is a highly regulated 
but vital part of life in space, and massive corporations, including 
Amazon, Carnival, and the Tacoma’s own Venturis Corporation effectively 
keep people in a kind of indentured servitude to pay for the mandatory 
education and training required to remain a productive member of society. 
In TACOMA’s universe, when Capitalism wins, we all lose. 
The game opens with the player character, Amy Ferrier, as she docks her 
shuttle to the abandoned Tacoma. Your job, as a loyal employee of the 
Venturis Corporation, is to figure out what happened to the missing crew, 
retrieve the station’s AI ODIN (Operational Data Interface Network), wipe 
all evidence, and report back to your bosses. 
On the state-of-the-art Tacoma, your clues aren’t just scattered across 
dozens of sticky notes, journal entries, and cassette tapes; you’ve got 
AR. As you move from pod to pod, you can detect and unencrypt a series 
of key conversations and events, and replay, pause, and rewind them 
as you see fit. These augmented reality sequences are what really sets 
Tacoma apart from Gone Home. You can actually see the physical shapes 
and hear the voices of the various crew members as they interact with 
one another, communicate remotely with friends and family, and watch 
them in their intimate private moments. 
Everything starts off so quietly. You’re waltzing around in your mag 
boots, getting to know the crew by reading their emails, sifting through 
their belongings, breaking into lockers, and breathing down their virtual 
necks to see the pass codes they’re using to open otherwise inaccessible 
portions of Tacoma. Just as you’re beginning to feel as if you’re one 
of the team, the creepy one with complete access to their innermost 
secrets, disaster strikes. Communications are cut off and the station’s 
oxygen supply is almost completely vented into space. 
For Amy Ferrier, there’s no immediate danger, but as the AR recordings 
playback in chronological order, showing things going from bad to worse, 
you can’t help but begin to feel for them, to experience their anxieties 
and develop a real sense of urgency to uncover the truth. 
Although it only took me about four hours to complete, I found Tacoma’s 
narrative engaging, the characters interesting, and the dystopian future 
setting compelling. The Tacoma station has a fairly generic space 
aesthetic, but the game looks good and ran well on a system with 
modest hardware. 
My one big gripe with the game is that it didn’t really surprise me. There’s 
no real reversal, or Aha moment that reverberates well beyond the 
moment when the credits roll. Those who like this type of narrative-driven 
game won’t be disappointed for the modest asking price, but I can’t shake 
the feeling that Tacoma needed, and deserved, a stronger ending. ■
80 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com


Technically Speaking
Q&A With GIGABYTE’s Brian Ngo
BN
: You just need any Thunderbolt 
3-certified and -compatible device, 
such as a laptop or Ultrabook.
Q
: What other connectivity options 
does the Gaming Box offer?
BN
: Gaming Box is equipped 
with three USB 3.0 ports for 
adding additional devices, such as a 
keyboard, mouse, and webcam, and a 
variety of other USB-hosted devices. In 
addition to the three USB 3.0 ports, we 
have included another Quick Charge 
3.0 port, allowing you to charge your 
phone or other mobile devices up 
to four times faster than conven-
tional chargers.
Q
: What else can the Gaming Box do 
besides provide cutting-edge graphics 
capability to a laptop or Ultrabook?
BN
: To get enough bandwidth from 
an external device to be close to a 
PCIe 3.0 x16 slot, we had to use a protocol 
that offered the highest bandwidth available, 
so we turned to that fastest available port, 
Thunderbolt 3. Thunderbolt 3 offers a 
bandwidth of up to 40Gbps, up to eight 
times faster than USB 3.0 and four times 
more video bandwidth than HDMI. 
Q
: What other advantages are there to 
using Thunderbolt 3.0 to connect 
the Gaming Box to a laptop?
BN
: As Thunderbolt 3.0 becomes 
adopted more widely, we’d hope 
that the gaming box would be universally 
compatible with a growing portfolio of 
Thunderbolt 3-certified devices. 
Q
: What are the system requirements 
for using the Gaming Box?
Q
: What were GIGABYTE’s goals in 
designing the AORUS GTX 1070 
Gaming Box?
BN
: Staying true to our gaming ethos, 
we wanted to provide a compelling 
option in the eGPU market and offer a true 
plug-and-play device and experience that 
can transform any Thunderbolt 3 laptop 
into a gaming powerhouse. 
Q
: Which AORUS GTX 1070 does the 
Gaming Box contain?
BN
: Although the GTX 1070 
included in the Gaming Box is not 
of the AORUS family, it is an overclocked 
Mini-ITX model. 
Q
: How do you get enough bandwidth 
from an external device to equal a 
PCIe 3.0 x16 slot?
GIGABYTE recently unveiled its brand-new AORUS GTX 1070 Gaming Box, a compact external appliance that contains a 
GeForce GTX 1070 graphics card and a 450-watt power supply. You can connect the Gaming Box to a laptop and instantly turn 
it into a 4K, VR gaming-ready powerhouse. We talked to GIGABYTE Technical Marketing Specialist Brian Ngo to find out more.
82 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Newegg.com and Amazon.com in the 
United States and will be available August 
12th in Canada.
Q
: Does GIGABYTE have any plans 
to offer a Gaming Box with a GTX 
1080 or even a GTX 1080 Ti inside?
BN
: At the moment, we do not 
have plans for one in the 
pipeline, but this may change as 
demand rises. ■
running will be included in the 
package other than the Thunderbolt 
3-compatible device.
Q
: What is the AORUS GeForce 
GT X 1070 Gaming B ox’s 
MSRP, and when will it be available 
at retail?
BN
: Our AORUS GeForce GTX 
1070 Gaming Box’s MSRP 
will be $599. It is currently available at 
BN
: It can also be used to 
accelerate rendering times for 
professional-use applications such as 
Adobe Photoshop, Blender, and many 
more, adding even more functionality and 
expandability to your compatible laptop 
or Ultrabook.
Q
: From what we’ve seen, the AORUS 
Gaming Box also offers some RGB 
lighting options, correct?
BN
: Yes, we offer RGB Fusion, our 
fully customizable RGB lighting 
option that users can control and turn 
off through our Overclocking and RGB 
software, the AORUS Graphics Engine. 
Q
: OK, so what if someone who uses 
the Gaming Box wants to take his 
laptop and Gaming Box to a LAN party?
BN
: Great, that’s exactly what we’d 
hope for, so we have also included 
an AORUS carrying case (also known in 
our office as “the lunchbox”) alongside the 
AORUS GTX 1070 Gaming box. 
Q
: How does the design of the 
Gaming Box meet the thermal 
needs of the GeForce GTX 1070 inside? 
BN
: We used an open-air design on 
the side panels to allow proper 
ventilation along with an array of 40mm 
fans to direct airflow.
Q
: You know CPU readers are going 
to want to know this next one: Can 
users overclock the GTX 1070, and if so, 
how would they go about doing that?
BN
: Yes, of course you can overclock 
the GTX 1070, and you would 
be able to do so through the AORUS 
Graphics Engine.
Q
: Do users need anything to use the 
Gaming Box that isn’t included in 
the package?
BN
: Everything you need to 
get the Gaming Box up and 
CPU  /  September2017 83

Look For CPU At These LAN Parties
09.01-04.17
PAX West
Seattle, WA
west.paxsite.com
09.02-03.17
NAG LAN Party
Hutchinson, KS
www.nagitechs.net/nag-lan-party
09.09.17
Glowhouse Gaming Launch Party
Santa Clarita, CA
www.glowhousegaming.com
09.15.17
Oklahoma Gamers Group
Oklahoma City, OK
www.okgg.org
09.15.17
Source Gaming Lounge
Denton, TX
sourcegaming.org
09.16-17.17
LanOC v21.0
Van Wert, OH
lanoc.org/lan-parties
09.22-24.17
PONG EXPO LAN
Menomonie, WI
pong.uwstout.edu
09.29.17
Bluebonnet LAN
Arlington, TX
utaesports.com
09.29-10.1.17
BoiseLAN 5.0
Boise, ID
https://www.boiselan.net/forum/lan/
10.07.17
KCGames On 77
Kansas City, MO
kcgameon.com
10.07-08.17
River Valley LAN
Russellville, AR
www.outofeleven.com/rivervalleylan
10.21.17
Oklahoma Gamers Group
Oklahoma City, OK
www.OKGG.org
10.21.17
Source Gaming Lounge
Denton, TX
sourcegaming.org
10.21-22.17
Laclede’s LAN 17
St. Louis, MO
www.lacledeslan.com
84 September2017  /  www.computerpoweruser.com

Would you like us to help promote your next LAN?
Give us a call at 1.800.733.3809
We’ll be glad to consider your event
Across The Nation—& Beyond!
11.18.17
Oklahoma Gamers Group
Oklahoma City, OK
www.OKGG.org
11.18.17
Source Gaming Lounge
Denton, TX
sourcegaming.org
11.25-26.17
Wichita LAN 34
Lyons, KS
www.facebook.com/events/327652644327719/
12.01-03.17
KCGames On 78
Kansas City, MO
kcgameon.com
12.16.17
Dirty Santa Comes To The LAN
Oklahoma City, OK
www.OKGG.org
12.16.17
Source Gaming Lounge
Denton, TX
sourcegaming.org
10.27-29.17
FortCON 2017
Fort Wayne, IN
www.fortlan.org
10.27-29.17
BaseLAN 32
Winnipeg, MB
www.aybonline.com/baselan-32
11.03-06.17
PDXLAN 2017
Portland, OR
www.lanreg.org/pdxlan/pdxnov2017
11.17-19.17
Windy City LAN 3.0
Chicago, IL
www.windycitylan.com
11.10-11.17
True Gamerz Expo
Jacksonville, FL
www.beaucoreenterprises.com
11.17-19.17
November LAN
Menomonie, WI
pong.uwstout.edu
11.17-19.17
San Diego Winer LAN-A-THON
San Diego, CA
www.SanDiegoLAN.net/LANaThon.html
CPU  /  September2017 85


Q&A With Brian Farrell
PrimoChill Founder Talks 
EximoSX Radiators
Q
: We’ve talked a lot lately about radi-
ator construction and the use of 
copper vs. aluminum. Where does Primo-
Chill fall on the subject, and why? 
BF
: PrimoChill stands by Copper 
100%. Aluminum radiators pop 
up time to time as more manufacturers 
are looking for cheaper alternatives to 
copper. And each time they fade away 
because users reject them, as they are 
not compatible with 98% of the water 
cooling parts in the industry. Having 
aluminum parts in this mix just causes 
more headaches for companies as most 
users are not aware that the component 
or fluid they just bought will cause 
issues down the line because they have 
an aluminum radiator. Aluminum is 
not necessary. Later this year we will 
have an ALL copper cooling kit that 
will be in the same price range as the 
aluminum kits without the headache 
of mixing metals and the problems 
it creates. 
Q
: Do you have plans to bundle fans 
with EximoSX radiators, and if so, 
which ones? 
BF
: We do have plans to bundle the 
radiators. We plan to have three 
to four new kits coming out at the end 
of the year, and in true PrimoChill style, 
they will come with all the parts matching 
in SX colors.
Q
: What else would you like CPU
readers to know about PrimoChill’s 
EximoSX radiators?
BF
: The EximoSX radiators are the 
next piece of the puzzle to meet the 
highly desired complete PrimoChill-branded 
watercooling loop. ■
are a high- or low-CFM fan or high pressure. 
We did our best to make a high enough ratio 
of fins but low enough to give the user a 
radiator that they can use with their favorite 
fan. We didn’t want to dictate which fans can 
and cannot be used. The Eximo works great 
with any fan of your choosing.
Q
: Which of the 18 available color 
options EximoSX radiators come in 
have been the most popular so far?
BF
: TX Matte Black, Silver, Satin Black 
True Blue, and Candy Purple.
Q
: Your new EximoSX radiators are 
“designed for great performance in a 
variety of system conditions.” Can you talk 
about what that means and how they are 
engineered to do that? 
BF
: “System conditions” is how we 
tackled the design. The concept was 
executed by determining where the placement, 
functionality, and ventilation was in most 
modern cases, and how we could make sure 
our radiator would fit and perform.
Q
: We certainly appreciate a thin 
radiator; some cases don’t leave 
much room for radiators of traditional 
thicknesses. But is there a tradeoff in 
performance for that compactness?
BF
: The tradeoff is very minimal, if 
any, as we have found having one or 
more radiators in a system is not uncommon 
as well as more efficient. Running multiple 
thinner radiators supports the most demand-
ing of systems.
Q
: Why did you design the EximoSX 
with seven dual-pass coolant lanes? 
BF
: We packed in seven dual-pass lanes 
to give the highest possible flow rates 
for the cooling loop, which in turn increases 
efficiency.
Q
: Your site mentions that EximoSX 
radiators have a high-density tube-
to-fin ratio to aid in heat dissipation; 
how does the EximoSX’s tube-to-fin 
ratio compare to that of the average 
radiator, and how does that affect heat 
dissipation?
BF
: Well, there are not a lot of average 
radiators anymore; most radiators are 
fine tuned to a specific fan type, whether they 
CPU  /  September2017 87


