130 PAGES OF 
TUTORIALS
> LEARN CHORDS AND SCALES
> WRITE CATCHY HOOKS
> PLAY KEYBOARD LIKE A PRO
> TEAR GENRES APART
> ARRANGE PERFECT TUNES
> BUILD A TRACK WITH THEORY
Presents
Power up your chord progressions, hooks, basslines and arrangements
MUSIC 
THEORY
The Producer’s
Handbook
PLUS
OVER 5GB OF 
TUTORIAL FILES 
AND VIDEOS TO 
DOWNLOAD!
Digital 
Edition
FIRST 
EDITION


welcome
The term ‘music theory’ is known to strike fear in the 
hearts of computer musicians, conjuring up images of 
stuffy classrooms, clusters of confusing musical notes 
and incomprehensible languages.
However, with all this music-making power sitting on 
your hard drive, there’s no excuse not to fully grasp the 
fundamental building blocks of music. Yes, you can get 
by without any theory skills… but how much better would 
your tracks be if you could program those MIDI notes 
with gusto and tickle those ivories with purpose? 
So if words like 
‘chords’, ‘scales’, ‘modes’ 
and ‘inversions’ fill you 
with dread, fear not. 
We’ve cherry-picked the 
finest tutorial features 
from the pages of 
Computer Music and 
Future Music – each 
guide created specifically for the computer-based 
producer – to bring you this mega-compendium of 
music theory knowledge.
And if our step-by-step guides aren’t enough, you also 
gain access to a treasure trove of digital 
content, available from FileSilo – simply log 
in, register issue 81 and get downloading. 
Not only can you follow along with 
tutorial files in audio, MIDI and video 
formats, but you can even download 
Computer Music’s exclusive 
 Plugins 
collection – over 80 virtual instruments 
and effects created by the industry’s best 
software developers. 
Joe Rossitter Editor
ENJOY THE ISSUE
DOWNLOAD
See page 7 to find out  
how to download this 
issue’s exclusive content
“A mega-
compendium of 
music theory 
knowledge”
intro / computer music <
computermusic@futurenet.com
facebook.com/computer.music.mag
youtube.com/computermusicmag
twitter.com/computermusicuk
WWW
www.computermusic.co.uk
Where to get 
  PRINT 
in stores and online
myfavouritemagazines.com
  ZINIO 
for PC, Mac, Android, iPad & more
zinio.com
  GOOGLE PLAY 
for Android & Chrome for PC/Mac
play.google.com
 iOS APP STORE 
for iPad, iPhone & iPod touch
computermusic.co.uk/cmdigital
HOW TO USE
There’s extra video content  
wherever you see this icon.
This icon means there are extra files  
to help you follow a tutorial feature: 
project files, audio examples, etc.
We’ve got a new system for downloading 
files. Whenever you see this icon, you can 
grab the files on your PC or Mac by going 
to filesilo.co.uk/computermusic
DOWNLOAD
Tutorials featuring this icon make  
use of our own 
 Plugins – find  
out all about them at bit.ly/cmplugins
TUTORIAL 
FILES
MUSIC 
THEORY
The Producer’s
Handbook
Presents
Subscribe to 
Computer Music!
See p128


MUSIC 
THEORY
The Producer’s
Handbook
Presents
FIRST EDITION
Future Publishing Ltd.
Quay House, The Ambury, Bath, BA1 1UA 
Tel: 01225 442244 
Fax: 01225 732275
Email: computermusic@futurenet.com
Web: www.computermusic.co.uk
EDITORIAL
Editor: Joe Rossitter, joe.rossitter@futurenet.com
Art Editor: Paul Blachford, paul.blachford@futurenet.com
Managing Editor: Kate Puttick, kate.puttick@futurenet.com
CONTRIBUTORS
Dave Clews, James Russell, Lee du-Caine, Leon Bailey
Photography: Getty Images, REX/Shutterstock 
ADVERTISING
Commercial Sales Director: Clare Dove, clare.dove@futurenet.com
Advertising Sales Director: Lara Jaggon, lara.jaggon@futurenet.com
Account Sales Director: Steven Pyatt, steven.pyatt@futurenet.com
Account Sales Manager: Steve Hymas, steve.hymas@futurenet.com
MARKETING
Direct Marketing Campaign Manager: Will Hardy
PRODUCTION & DISTRIBUTION
Production Controller: Fran Twentyman
Production Manager: Mark Constance
Printed in the UK by: William Gibbons & Sons on behalf of Future
Distributed by: Marketforce (UK), 5 Churchill Place, Canary Wharf, London, E14 5HU
CIRCULATION
Trade Marketing Manager: Michelle Brock, 0207 429 3683
SUBSCRIPTIONS
UK reader order line & enquiries: 0844 848 2852
Overseas reader order line & enquiries: +44 (0) 1604 251 045 
Online enquiries: www.myfavouritemagazines.co.uk
Email: computermusic@myfavouritemagazines.co.uk
LICENSING
Computer Music is available for licensing. Contact the Licensing team to discuss partnership opportunities. 
Head of Print Licensing : Rachel Shaw, licensing@futurenet.com
MANAGEMENT
Chief Content Officer: Aaron Asadi
Brand Director: Stuart Williams
Group Editor-in-Chief: Daniel Griffiths
Head of Art and Design: Rodney Dive
Group Art Director: Graham Dalzell

6
contents
44  WRITE PERFECT HOOKS 
26  PLAY KEYBOARD LIKE A PRO
96  ARRANGEMENT WORKSHOP
64 GENRE-BUSTING  
MUSIC THEORY
08     THE PRODUCER’S GUIDE TO 
CHORDS AND SCALES
26   PLAY KEYBOARD LIKE A PRO
44   HOW TO WRITE PERFECT 
HOOKS 
64– GENRE-BUSTING MUSIC 
THEORY
82   MUSIC THEORY MADE EASY
96    ARRANGEMENT 
WORKSHOP
120    BITESIZED THEORY  
TIPS AND TRICKS
122    GET INSPIRED WITH  
THEORY
127    REMIXING IN KEY
128    SUBSCRIBE
Presents
MUSIC THEORY
The Producer’s
Handbook

Your FileSilo 
downloads
Plugins
Download our exclusive cm Plugins collection for PC and Mac
Tutorial Videos
See and hear exactly how it’s done 
with our expert video guides
Tutorial Files
Follow along in your DAW with WAVs, 
project files, MIDI clips and more
Register issue 81 to access your content
Get started
01 
Register your FileSilo 
account and log  in. Even 
if you have a subscriber ID, you’ll 
still have to unlock each mag 
separately or migrate your old 
Vault account (see step 3)
02 
Head back to the 
Computer Music page 
(filesilo.co.uk/computermusic) 
and choose an issue to unlock. 
You’ll need to answer one 
question to prove you’ve 
purchased the issue 
03 
You can migrate your 
old Vault account over 
to FileSilo to retain the issues 
you’ve added – head to 
filesilo.co.uk/vault and enter 
your Vault email address. 
Reset your password via the 
email you receive, and log in
The home of great 
downloads, exclusive to 
your favourite magazines
Secure and safe online 
access, from anywhere
Free access for every 
reader – print and digital
Download only the files 
you want, when you want
All the downloads from all 
your issues, in one place
Register this issue (81)  
for instant access to  
our plugins, samples,  
videos and files on your 
desktop computer 
Free  
for digital 
readers, too!
Read on your tablet, 
download on your 
computer
Log in at filesilo.co.uk/computermusic
7

> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales
8

the producer’s guide to chords and scales / make music now <
9
An unforgettable vocal melody. A moving 
chord sequence. An infectious bassline. 
Nailing just one of these could leave your 
listeners humming your tunes and whistling 
your melodies, eager for their next hit of your 
audio crack. Back it up with a killer production, 
and you could have another kind of hit on  
your hands!
But the truth is that many computer musicians 
put the technical side of production first. With 
sonic standards always evolving, and endless 
plugins and techniques to master, why wouldn’t 
you? Well, see it from the listener’s point of view: 
they can’t sing along to sidechain compression or 
dance to multiband distortion!
To keep your listeners coming back for ‘just 
one more listen’, you’ll need to hook ’em with a 
catchy combination of notes. So how’s it done? 
Do we just hit keys at random until a great tune 
pops out? Well, you could, but there’s an easier, 
faster way, and that’s by using tried-and-tested 
note combos as a guide. Yep, chords and scales!
Now, if there’s a two-word phrase guaranteed 
to paralyse producers with fear, ‘music theory’  
is it… and no wonder: most learning material is 
textbook-dull, full of jargon, and simply not 
designed for computer musicians. We’ve long 
recognised such problems here at 
, with our 
ever-popular Easy Guide series packing in over 
150 tutorials to date. But what if you need a one-
stop primer to get you up to speed? You need it 
easy, you need it fast, and you need it right now! 
Well, here it is!
With this tutorial, you’ll be making amazing 
evocative melodies and jazzing up your chord 
progressions in no time. You’ll learn everything 
from basic major and minor scales to inversions, 
suspensions, seventh chords, key changes, 
modes, exotic scales, and loads more. We’ll show 
you which notes go where, with audio examples, 
MIDI files, and videos packed with clear 
annotations and extra explanation. All with zero 
music notation in sight, and a minimum of jargon.
As if that’s not enough, we bring you the CM 
MIDI Construction Kit, comprising almost 2000 
ready-made scales and chords in every key. These 
include our scale ‘templates’ that show you which 
notes to use, making composition a breeze!
Take the mystery out of 
music theory and give 
your tracks the ultimate 
musical power-up with  
the computer musician’s 
definitive crash course

Before fumbling around with chords and 
scales, let’s get a grip on the stuff they’re 
made up of: notes and intervals. There are 
only 12 different notes, and they repeat all the 
way up the piano keyboard (or piano roll). 
The piano is easy to visualise, with one key 
per note, but music theory principles work 
the same for every instrument.
Whichever note you start on, if you go up  
12 notes from there, you’re back where you 
started, playing the same note, but one ‘octave’ 
higher – it sounds the same but higher pitched. 
In addition, the pitch difference between 
adjacent notes is always the same, called a 
‘semitone’ (also known as a half-tone or minor 
second). A difference in pitch between two 
notes is called an ‘interval’ – so far we’ve 
covered only two intervals: the octave and  
the semitone.
It all begins with a C
The 12 notes are named C, C
♯, D, D
♯, E, F, F
♯, G, G
♯, 
A, A
♯ and B. After that, the sequence starts over 
at C, as we’ve reached the octave point. ‘#’ 
means ‘sharp’ and is essentially shorthand for 
‘plus 1 semitone’, telling us that A
♯ is the note 
immediately above A, for example. Notes with 
no sharp symbol – C, D, E, F, G, A, B – are called 
‘natural’ notes and are the white keys on a 
piano. The black keys are C
♯, D
♯, F
♯, G
♯ and A
♯. 
Notice that B/C and E/F have no sharp note 
between them. Also, C (rather than A) is 
considered the ‘default’ or ‘first’ note in music 
theory, not A.
Some notes lead a shady double life, as the 
five sharp notes can also be described as ‘flat’, 
the symbol for which is ‘b’, meaning ‘minus 1 
semitone’. So A
♯ can be called B♭, for example – 
same note, different name! The full run using 
flats would be: C, D♭, D, E♭, E, F, F♭, G, A♭, A, B♭, B.
If you’re finding it hard to take in, just get 
comfortable with the sharp naming scheme first. 
Most music software uses only sharps anyway, 
so to make sure our tutorials translate to your 
software, we’re going to use sharps pretty much 
throughout (even where they might be 
considered ‘wrong’ in traditional music theory).
Let’s go after the interval
It’s time to look at the other intervals – we’ve put 
a table of the intervals (from 0 to 12) over on the 
right-hand side of the page. 
Notes played one after the other make a 
‘melodic interval’, and no matter which of the 
notes you play first, it’s the same interval – we’d 
just call it ascending or descending. When the 
notes are played at the same time, that’s a 
‘harmonic interval’.
Each interval has its own sound. The ‘unison’ 
and ‘octave’ intervals sound very clear, since 
they’re playing the exact same note – no 
surprise. However, the next clearest are the  7- 
and 5- semitone intervals, known as a  
‘perfect fifth’ and a ‘perfect fourth’ – the 
reason for this naming will become clear soon, 
we promise!
Next, the 4- and 3-semitone intervals  
– named ‘major third’ and ‘minor third’ – also 
sound musically satisfying, with a ‘happy’ and 
‘sad’ feel respectively. Memorising each interval 
and being able to identify them by ear will help 
massively in making music, and a common trick 
to help with this is to associate each interval 
with the opening notes of a well-known tune. 
For more, see bit.ly/IntervalIdeas.
Notes, octaves and intervals
 > Step by step  1. Listening to and understanding musical intervals 
Let’s hear intervals in action. Load 
Dune CM in a new project, select 
preset 32: Fat Saw Bass RH, set Volume 
to 25% to prevent clipping, then load 
Interval Demo.mid on its track. Play it  
to hear a 1-semitone interval (a minor 
second) between C and C
♯, first as melodic 
intervals (ascending and descending), 
then as a harmonic interval (both notes 
played together), then a short riff.
1
This pairing sounds quite “dark”, and 
the harmonic interval is kind of jarring 
on its own. Select all C
♯ notes and move 
them up one step to D for a 2-semitone 
interval (a major second), which sounds 
less harsh, but still not that musically 
pleasing. Now move the Ds up to D
♯ – this 
3-semitone interval, a minor third, is a lot 
more satisfying, with a sad, serious quality. 
Our riff sounds more like actual music now!
2
The 4-semitone major third also 
sounds very listenable, with a happy, 
upbeat quality. There are two more stand-
out intervals: 5- and 7-semitones, called a 
perfect fourth and perfect fifth. Aside 
from the octave, these two intervals have 
the purest, most solid sound, if a little less 
evocative than the minor and major third. 
See our bonus video (1b) to find out why 
some intervals sound more ‘natural’.
3
TUTORIAL 
FILES
Unison
Minor Second
Major Second
Minor Third
Major Third
Perfect Fourth
Augmented Fourth/ 
Diminished Fifth
Perfect Fifth
Minor Sixth
Major Sixth
Minor Seventh
Major Seventh
Octave
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Interval 
name
Number of 
semitones
“Memorising each 
interval and being 
able to identify them 
will help massively” 
> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales
10

A scale is a set of notes picked from the full 12, 
and the most basic, the chromatic scale, 
contains all 12 notes. The note you start the 
scale on – called the ‘root’ – gives the scale its 
name. Fig 1 shows all the notes of the C 
chromatic scale stacked together on a piano 
roll, so you can visualise the set of notes  
(you’d never normally play all the notes 
like this). The final octave note is 
included for completeness – there aren’t 
actually two Cs in the scale.
Making music with the chromatic 
scale can sound rather, er… 
experimental. What we really want is a 
smaller set of notes that ‘play nice’ 
together, and the most fundamental 
scale for this is the major scale – like 
most ‘normal’ scales, it contains seven 
different notes. We build it by starting 
on any note and selecting notes using a pattern 
of semitone (1 note) and tone (2 note) intervals: 
2-2-1-2-2-2-1. Check out Fig 2 to see what we 
mean – the notes we’ve ‘selected’ for the scale 
are in red, and the ones we haven’t are in white.
Fig 3 shows our complete C major scale,  
C D E F G A B C. The C major scale has no sharp 
(or flat) notes, and it coincides exactly with the 
white keys on the keyboard. This is because 
music theory and keyboards have been 
designed around the C major scale. 
The important thing to remember is that  
it’s the 2-2-1-2-2-2-1 pattern that creates a major 
scale, so concentrate on that first – you can 
learn the notes as you go.
Every scale has its own sound and 
feeling, and the major scale is upbeat 
and “happy” in character. There are lots 
more scales to use, of course, and that’s 
when things can start to get confusing. 
To make your life easier, we’ve prepared 
the CM MIDI Construction Kit within this 
issue’s Tutorial Files. It’s packed with 
MIDI scales and chords to guide you  
– let’s try it now and see what the major 
scale can do!
Major scales
 > Step by step  2. Instant music-making with the CM MIDI Construction Kit 
Let’s write an upbeat 80s pop loop 
with the C major scale. Load Beat.wav 
in a 126bpm project, loop it, then create 
MIDI tracks named Bass and Melody. Load 
them with Bazille CM and Dune CM, with 
presets 02 Basses - Ark Sawker Punch 
and 110: Synth Stabs RH. Put Reverberate 
CM on the Melody track, set the Bass and 
Melody track levels to -14dB and -18dB, 
and put D16 Frontier on the master bus.
1
Now create four-bar MIDI clips on the 
Bass and Melody tracks, and import 
MIDI Construction Kit » C » Major 
Template.mid alongside those clips.  
Don’t play it, though – it’s for use as a 
visual guideline only. It features sustained 
notes on only the notes of the C major 
scale. We’ve included tons of scales in  
this format, and we’ll use them throughout 
our tutorials.
2
How you use these clips as a guideline 
depends on your DAW software, but 
here’s a method for Ableton Live: Select all 
the notes, copy them, then paste them 
into the Bass MIDI clip starting at bar 5 – 
this is outside of the clip’s loop points, so 
we’ll never hear the notes. With the small 
blue headphones icon (just upper-left of 
the piano roll) enabled, click each note 
from C3-C4 to hear the C major scale.
3
In Ableton Live, you can click the Fold 
button to hide all notes that don’t 
have a MIDI note already, so now we’ll see 
only the notes in C major – perfect! To 
provide a foolproof backing for our 
melody, program a bassline using only the 
root note, C2 – a repeating pattern of one 
eighth-note then two 16th-notes will work.
4
Repeat steps 3-4 to set up the C major 
template on the Melody track and 
draw in your own melody. When you’re 
done trying it out, program our pattern 
above – we’ve turned off the Fold function 
here in case you’re using a different DAW. 
This melody uses all seven notes of the C 
major scale, so you can hear the scale’s 
full range of tonality, and how it sounds 
against the root note, C, in the bass.
5
POWER TIP
>Major insights
Switch off the Fold function in Live – if 
you’re using it – and check out the 
intervals between the notes C-E, C-F and 
C-G – these form three of the four ‘core’ 
intervals we showed you in the previous 
tutorials: 4 semitones (major third), 5 
semitones (perfect fourth) and 7 
semitones (perfect fifth). You can see 
how they got the numerical part of their 
names now too, as they are the third, 
fourth and fifth notes of the major scale! 
Now move the notes on the Bass track 
so bars 1-4 are based on C, E, F then G, 
for a common yet satisfying sequence. 
We even based the sustained ‘main’ 
notes of our melody on these!
Every major scale uses the same pattern of interval jumps: 2-2-1-2-2-2-1
Fig 1
Fig 2
Fig 3
the producer’s guide to chords and scales / make music now <
11

Load a basic synth patch such as Dune 
CM’s 103: String Section, then import 
C Major & C Minor.mid. This contains 
both scales played in order, so you can get 
familiar with their sound, then two-octave 
‘stacks’ of both scales’ notes, so we can 
compare them. Major uses the semitone 
pattern 2-2-1-2-2-2-1, while minor is 2-1-2-
2-1-2-2. So C minor is C, D, D
♯, F, G, G
♯ and A
♯.
1
In the minor scale, the 3rd, 6th and 7th 
notes are one semitone lower (ie, they 
are flattened). These notes are therefore 
key to the sound of both scales – if you 
don’t use them at all, your music will sound 
neither major nor minor! The 3rd note 
most strongly defines the major/minor 
sound, being a major third (4 semitones 
from root) or minor third (3 semitones).
2
C minor is trickier than C major as it 
uses a number of black keys. We’ve 
also got D/D
♯ and G/G
♯ in the same scale – a 
real no-no in proper music theory! If we 
use flats instead, we get C, D, E♭, F, G, A♭, B♭, 
giving a neat alphabetical run. Most music 
software uses only sharps, so don’t get too 
hung up on this!
3
Finally, here’s another way to look at 
minor scales. Select the C minor scale 
stack, and move it down 3 semitones – the 
root note becomes A, making A minor.  
C major and A minor use the exact same 
notes (all the white keys), so if you know  
C major you know A minor – just start on A 
instead of C.
4
 > Step by step  3. The minor scale, and how it relates to major 
 > Step by step  4. Rapidly reworking a tune from major to minor 
We’re going to take the tune from our 
earlier major scale demo and alter it to 
use the minor scale, giving it a whole new 
feel. Follow step 1 of the earlier tutorial 2 to 
set up the plugins, then import Bass.mid 
and Melody.mid onto their respective 
tracks. This song is in C major, so let’s use 
our MIDI Construction Kit to show us the 
notes for C minor.
1
Create a new MIDI channel called 
Scale Guide, then import C » Scales » 
C Major Stack.mid onto it, extending the 
notes to fill four bars. We’re going to use 
this to find which notes from our existing 
C major scale aren’t in the C minor scale. In 
our DAW, Studio One 3, we can set things 
up so we can see – but not edit – the minor 
MIDI stack.
2
The minor scale differs from the major 
scale in that the 3rd, 6th and 7th notes 
of the scale are flattened by one semitone. 
We need to find the notes that aren’t on 
the C minor ‘grid’ of the Scale Guide track 
and drop them a semitone. Select all 
occurrences of notes E, A and B, and slide 
them down one semitone to hear our tune 
take on a less jolly and more serious feel.
3
Major vs minor
In this page’s tutorials, we show 
you how using a minor scale 
instead of a major one can totally 
transform the ‘feel’ of a piece of 
music. Finding the scale that 
conveys your musical intentions 
is important, then.
The major scale is generally the 
choice for an upbeat, happy, 
sound, while minor scales offer a 
more serious, downbeat, sad vibe. 
There are many exceptions, of 
course, but if you’re wondering 
why your dark DnB bangers 
sound way light, or your happy 
hardcore tunes are flat-out 
depressing, it may simply come 
down to knowing your major from 
your minor. To get an idea of the 
difference it makes, check out 
these famous songs transformed 
between major and minor via the 
magic of software:  
bit.ly/MAJtrnMIN
By the way, there are a couple 
of variations on the standard – or 
‘natural’ – minor scale covered on 
this page. We’ll get to them later 
on in the article.
TUTORIAL 
FILES
Hear No Doubt’s break-up anthem Don’t 
Speak in a major key at bit.ly/DSmajor
> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales
12

 > Step by step  5. Instant chord construction: major, minor and diminished triads 
 
 
Let’s build the most basic chords, 
triads, and use them in a chord 
progression. Load Dune CM on a MIDI 
instrument track in your DAW, and select 
the 022: Earth Views RL preset. Load 
Beat.wav on an audio track and set tempo 
to 100bpm. We’ll use our MIDI 
Construction Kit once again to guide us, 
this time showing you how it’s done in 
Logic Pro X.
1
On the Dune CM track, create a four-
bar MIDI clip starting bar 10, loop it, 
then import C > Scales > C Major - All 
notes.mid, starting bar 14. Select both 
clips and double-click them to open the 
Piano Roll editor. You can now use the 
stack of notes as a visual guide, or click 
the collapse mode icon (just right of the 
View dropdown) to restrict programming 
to only the notes in the scale.
To create triads, we use a simple 1-3-5 
pattern. Draw in the first note of the 
scale on C3, then miss out the D, draw in 
the E, skip over the F, and draw in G. This 
gives us C major: C-E-G. Carry on up the 
scale and create the rest of the triads using 
this 1-3-5 pattern, and we get the other six 
C major triads: D major (D-F-A), E minor 
(E-G-B), F major (F-A-C), G major (G-B-D), 
A minor (A-C-E) and B diminished (B-D-G).
2
3
Let’s make an eight-bar chord sequence 
– create a new MIDI clip from bars 1-9, 
and loop it. For bars 1-3, program chords C, 
Em then F. We want a ‘turnaround’ in bar 4 
to bring us back to chord 1, C, and a classic 
method is to use the 5th chord of the scale 
right before it – going from chord 5 to 1 is a 
very strong progression, and it’s 
technically called a perfect cadence. So 
program chords Am and G during this bar.
4
We’ve used all the triads except chord 
2, Dm, and that pesky B diminished 
triad, chord 7, so let’s try and work those in 
during bars 5-8. Program bars of C, Em, 
then Dm, then half-bars of G and Bdim to 
fill the final bar. The B in Bdim is called  
the leading note, and it has a strong ‘pull’ 
to resolve to the next semitone up, C, 
which is why it makes a good transition 
back to chord 1.
Let’s make our sequence less 
predictable. Going from chord 5 to 
chord 1 sounds super-strong – so strong, in 
fact, that if we don’t go to chord 1, it will 
sound unexpected. Change bar 5’s C chord 
to Dm, and bar 6’s Em to G, so we get a 
‘back and forth’ between chords 2 and 5, 
leading up to our 5-7-1 turnaround. Finally, 
load CM Arp.fxp patch in Dune CM for an 
arpeggiated take on our tune.
5
6
So far we’ve looked at playing single-note 
melodies with a bassline underneath. Play a 
bunch of notes together, though, and you 
create rich musical textures: chords. The most 
basic chords are three-note triads, and they’re 
dead easy to build.
First we need a scale – we’re going to use  
C major, but it works in the same way for any 
other scale, including minor ones. Now we pick 
a root note for the chord, then alternately skip 
and pick notes until we have three of them. 
Numerically, the formula is 1-3-5. So for the first 
chord in C, we’d pick these notes in bold:  
C D E F G A B. That gives C-E-G. The other triads 
in C major are: D-F-A, E-G-B, F-A-C, G-B-D, A-C-E, 
B-D-F. In total, that’s seven chords, which we can 
number 1-7 for reference. The three notes of a 
triad are called root, third and fifth.
Now take a good look at the chords’ intervals 
– see step 3 below. Chords 1 (C-E-G), 4 (F-A-C) 
and 5 (G-B-D) all have a major third as their first 
interval, which makes them ‘major chords’. We 
name them C major, F major and G major – or 
simply C, F and G. 
Chords 2 (D-F-A), 3 (E-G-B), and 6 (A-C-E) are 
minor chords – that’s right, chords based on the 
major scale aren’t necessarily major chords. We 
call these D minor, E minor and A minor, also 
known as Dm, Em and Am.
We can also use a formula based on semitones 
to create any major or minor chord. Major is root 
– major third – fifth, so root-4-7. Minor, on the 
other hand, is root – minor third – fifth: root-3-7.
Chord 7 (B-D-F) is a bit different. It’s made of 
two minor thirds stacked up, and it’s called  
B diminished, or Bdim. Diminished chords are 
often used to create moments of tension that 
are ‘resolved’ to a more harmonious or ‘stable’ 
chord, such as chord 1. For the walkthrough 
below, we’ll take you through it in video form.
Chord basics
These triads are the most common chords. Based on the 
major/minor scale, they can be built with an easy formula
the producer’s guide to chords and scales / make music now <
13

Six more chord tricks
Mastered major, minor and diminished chords? Tackle this lot next!
A normal C major chord is C-E-G, but you can 
easily change it to E-G-C, called the ‘first inversion’, 
or G-C-E, the ‘second inversion’ – the bass note 
has changed, but it’s still the same chord, with the 
same root note, C. This can be used to create 
much smoother chord sequences. To try an 
example, create a 100BPM project and load  
Beat.wav; then use Chords.mid to trigger Bazille 
CM’s Computer Music » Joe Rossitter » 
Richmond Keys preset.
This C minor progression uses basic non-
inverted triads. Select the lower two notes of all 
chords in bar 1 and 3, then transpose them up one 
octave – most DAWs have a shortcut key for this, 
such as Shift-Up. Now hear how much smoother 
the progression is, since there’s less movement 
from chord to chord. In the final bar, select all 
notes above (and including) D4, and drop those 
one octave for a cool descending chord 
progression. You may start to hear melodies in 
the chords’ movement – there’s one going on in 
ours, so duplicate the top note of each chord and 
place them one octave up, for an instant melody.
Take a normal major or minor triad – it doesn’t matter 
which – then move its third up to play a perfect fourth, 
and you have a suspended 4 chord, or sus4 – the 
formula in semitones is root-5-7. Because it lacks a 
third, the chord sounds neither major nor minor,  
with a spacey, ambiguous feel. It’s often followed  
by the regular major or minor chord, creating a 
satisfying resolution.
To go full classical, ‘prepare’ the suspension by 
preceding it with a chord that contains the suspended 
note. In our A minor example, we play Am (A-C-E), 
Esus4 (E-A-B), Em (E-G-B). A is the prepared note, 
shared by Am and Esus4, resolving to the G in Em.
Now, until you actually resolve the chord, nobody 
knows whether it’s going to be major or minor, and 
you can add a surprise twist by resolving to a minor 
chord instead of a major, making it a borrowed chord. 
You can do it the other way around, of course, 
resolving to major where a minor is expected.
8. Transitions with 
suspended chords
6. Smoother 
sequences with 
inverted chords
The occasional chord from a different scale – or key 
– can give your progressions an element of surprise. 
Borrowed chords are an easy way to achieve this, 
and they are simply chords taken from the parallel 
minor or major key. So if your sequence is in  
A minor, you would borrow chords from A major; if 
you’re in D major, you’ll take them from D minor, and 
so on. See our video for a practical example!
7. Borrowed chords
> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales
14

C major demo - Normal triad 
chords (chords).mid is a triad 
sequence. To make sevenths, we 
extend the pattern of alternating notes, 
adding an extra note on top of each 
chord. For the final half-bar chord, add 
the note to the bottom instead, so we 
have two different chords in that bar. 
Our added notes are in yellow.
2
Seventh chords can sound dense, 
but you can remove the fifth to slim 
them down. They can be inverted, too, 
for a smoother flow. Combine these 
tricks for sweet progressions, as in our 
finished sequence above. Our video 
goes into more detail on seventh 
chords and their type.
3
You may have seen chord sequences written 
using Roman numerals, rather than naming 
them (C, Em, etc) or numbering them the 
usual way. Chords 1-7 of the major scale 
would be written I ii iii IV V vi vii°, while for 
minor, we’d have i ii° III iv v VI VII. Upper case 
tells us it’s a major chord; lower case is minor; 
the small circle means it’s a diminished 
chord. The beauty of this method is that 
chord sequences aren’t tied to a specific key, 
so progressions can be discussed and 
compared independently of the key the song 
was originally in. Musicians can also use this 
notation to play a given progression in any 
key. To avoid overloading you with jargon, 
we’ve stuck to plain old 1-7 in our tutorials, 
but it’s good to know about this alternate 
method, and to give you a leg-up with the 
concept, we’ve added the numerals to the 
filenames of our Triads Chord Sets.
 
Triads use the 1-3-5 formula, but if 
you continue stacking alternate 
notes, your next stop would be 1-3-5-7, 
comprising a root, third, fifth and 
seventh. This makes a seventh chord, 
and shown are those built on the C 
major scale – we’re using our scale 
template, so only notes in C are shown.
1
You can create custom chords that 
aren’t sevenths or extended chords 
by simply adding in extra notes, 
usually the 2nd, 4th or 6th. These chords are 
called add2, add4 and add6. There’s also the 
add9 chord, which is the same as the add2 
chord except the added note is an octave 
higher, rather than sitting right next to the 
root note. In our video and audio example, 
we first turn a C major chord into an add2 by 
adding its 2nd note, D… Then we transpose 
the added note to make add9. This works 
well to transition into the E minor 7 that 
follows, since that chord also contains a D.
Just as you can stack an extra third on 
top of a triad to add the seventh, you 
can keep piling thirds on top to 
introduce ninths, elevenths and 
thirteenths. We haven’t discussed intervals this 
large yet, but they give us the same notes as a 
second, fourth and sixth, just one octave higher. 
On the right is C major 13: C-E-G-B-D-F-A.
If you just add on the ninth interval, without 
the seventh, you have an ‘add 9’ chord (which 
you’ll read more about in the technique below.) 
See the video for more detail.
 > Technique 
If it’s jazzy sophistication  
and smouldering sensuality 
you’re after, it’s time you  
tried seventh chords
 9. Seventh chords 
 > Technique  10. Other extended chords 
 
 > Technique  11. Making ‘add’ chords in a snap  
 
MAJOR
I 
ii 
iii 
IV 
V 
vi 
vii°
MINOR
i 
ii° 
III 
iv 
v 
VI VII
Numeralogy
the producer’s guide to chords and scales / make music now <
15

Music theory knowledge is awesome when  
you have it, but for many of us, recalling  
scale patterns and chord shapes can be a 
creative drag.
To keep your sessions flowing, we’ve  
created the CM MIDI Construction Kit, a  
massive pack of MIDI chords, scales and 
templates. Let’s take a look at what’s inside this 
amazing musical toolkit, and how you can use it 
to make better music now. You’ll find it inside 
the Tutorial Files folder.
First, folders are arranged into the 12 musical 
keys (ie, root notes – we’ll talk more about keys 
on the next page), and inside each is three 
folders. The Chords folder contains useful 
chords based on the root note, each sustained 
for a bar – just drag them into your DAW. Our 
‘cheat sheet’ below also gives you a handy 
overview of common chords.
The Chord Sets folder contains the triads, 
sevenths, ninths, elevenths and thirteenths 
derived from the standard major and minor  
(ie, natural minor) scales. Where relevant, we’ve 
included an alternative scale set using a flat key 
signature. These use the same MIDI notes, just 
with different filenames.
The Scales folder offers up four common 
scales: major, (natural) minor, melodic minor 
and harmonic minor. You also get all seven 
commonly used modes, and a range of other 
scales, from everyday to exotic. Every scale 
comes in two formats: a straightforward run up 
the scale so you can hear how it sounds, and 
our special ‘template’ format. These templates 
contain every note of the scale in every octave, 
sustained for one bar. They are for use as a 
guide only – avoid playing them as it won’t 
sound pleasant! How you use these will depend 
on your DAW, but you’ll find suggestions spread 
throughout our tutorials. There’s also a handy 
text file in the MIDI Construction Kit folder with 
more specifics, as well as a video overview.
Chords cheat sheet
Stuck for a chord?
Try these! Here’s a recap of some of the most commonly used chords. Intervals are  
given in a numerical format – you can assume they are the ‘major’ or ‘perfect’ varieties 
unless modified with a preceding flat, making them minor or diminished intervals
Use the CM MIDI Construction Kit as your guide to the world of theory – there’s a template for everything
Suspended fourth
Intervals Root-4-5
Semitones Root-5-7
Example naming Csus4
Example chord 
C-F-G
Has no third, so is neither major nor minor, giving a spacey, unresolved 
quality. Can be resolved using the expected major or minor chord (above)
Intervals Root-♭3-5-♭7
Semitones Root-4-7-11
Example naming Cm7
Example chord
C-E♭-G-B♭   C-D#-G-A# 
Minor seventh
Intervals Root-3-5
Semitones Root-4-7
Example naming C
Example chord  
C-E-G 
Major
Intervals Root-3-5-7
Semitones Root-4-7-11
Example naming Cmaj7
Example chord 
C-E-G-B
Major seventh
Add 6
Intervals Root-3-5-6
Semitones Root-4-7-9
Example naming Cadd6
Example chord 
C-E-G-A 
A major chord with an added 6th, sometimes written as C6. You can also 
add the 6th to a minor chord, eg, Cm6 would be C-D
♯-G-A (C-E♭-G-A)
6/9
Intervals Root-4-5-6-9
Semitones Root-4-7-9-14
Example naming C6/9
Example chord
C-E-G-A-D
A major triad with an added 6th and 9th interval.  
It’s possible to leave the ﬁfth out if things are getting too crowded
Dominant ninth
Intervals Root-5- ♭7 - 9
Semitones Root-4-7-10-14
Example naming C9
Example chord
C-E-G-B♭-D  C-E-G-A#-D 
The ﬁfth can be left out if the chord is too dense.  
Like the seventh chord, this has major and minor varieties too
Intervals Root- ♭3- ♭5- ♭♭7
Semitones Root-3-6-9
Example naming C°7
Example chord
C-E♭-G♭-B♭♭  C-D#-F#-A 
Diminished seventh
Three minor thirds and two tritones make this disturbing chord the stuff 
of horror soundtracks – see tutorials 9 and 14 for examples of its use
Add 9
Intervals Root-3-5-9
Semitones Root-4-7-14
Example naming Cadd9
Example chord
C-E-G-D
The major ninth (D in our example chord) is a major second an octave 
higher. Without this transposition, you have an ‘add 2’ chord instead
Intervals Root-3-5-♭7
Semitones Root-4-7-10
Example naming C7
Example chord
C-E-G-B♭   C-E-G-A# 
Dominant seventh
This chord occurs in the major scale by building a seventh on note 5  
(eg, G7 in C major), and is a strong chord for transitioning back to chord 1
Intervals Root-♭3-5
Semitones Root-4-7
Example naming Cm
Example chord  
C-E♭-G  C-D#-G 
Minor
Power chord
Intervals Root-5
Semitones Root-7
Example naming C5
Example chord
C-G
Just two notes, often repeated in higher octaves, this is the chord  
of rock and heavy metal. It has no third, so is neither major nor minor
> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales
16

 > Step by step  12. Key changes 
Let’s see how easy it can be to kick up 
the energy levels in a song with a key 
change. Import Beat.wav on an audio 
track in a 124bpm project, then import 
Chords.mid onto a track with Bazille CM’s 
04 Poly » HS DXzille Piano patch, and 
import Bassline.mid on a track with Dune 
CM’s 010 Chorus Bass RL preset. Pop a 
D16 Frontier limiter on the master bus, too.
1
This tune is in the key of G minor, and 
the chords are Gm, A
♯maj7 (B♭maj7), 
Csus4, Gm, A
♯maj7, Cadd6. We’d like a key 
change at bar 9, when the solo comes in. 
Basic key changes can be achieved just by 
transposing entire sections, so let’s try 
that first – cut the MIDI clips at bar 9, and 
transpose the entire section from bars 9-17 
up and down for an unexpected shift, like 
our song is changing gear.
2
Good settings to try are 1, 2, 5 and 7 
semitones, either up or down. When 
you’ve tried it out, settle on -5 semitones, 
which puts the second half of our track 
into D minor. That’s it – our key change is 
done! The transition between the two parts 
could be improved, though. Let’s focus on 
the final chord of the first section, Cadd6. 
Solo the chords track so the bassline 
doesn’t throw us off.
3
Take a look at the triad Chord Sets for 
D minor and G minor in our MIDI 
Construction Kit – the triads shared by 
both keys are Dm, F, Gm and A♯, so these 
will make good transitional chords. Let’s 
try them all. Dm is the first chord of the 
incoming riff anyway, so it has no real 
impact. F isn’t bad, but let’s keep going.
4
A♯ is a continuation of the preceding 
A♯maj7, so it sounds like not much is 
happening. Finally, Gm works really well. 
In the key of D minor, Gm is chord 4, so it 
creates a transition from chord 4 to chord 
1 (called a plagal cadence). Now unsolo the 
chords and transpose the bassline -5 
semitones, which not only fits the chord 
but also echoes the actual bassline of the 
second part of the track.
5
Another way to bridge keys is to use 
chord 5 of the incoming key – for Dm, 
that’d be Am (A-C-E). Now add the seventh, 
G, making Am7… then move the C up to C♯, 
giving A7, a dominant seventh, a classic 
choice for transitions. Next, move the A up 
to A♯ for a diminished seventh… and 
transpose the whole chord -1 semitone to 
make Adim7. Don’t be afraid to fool around 
with chords like this until you hit the spot!
6
A key is just another way of saying what scale 
you’re using. If your song is based on the  
C major scale, it’s in the key of C major. But for 
every major scale, there’s a relative minor with 
the same notes, so what’s stopping the song 
being in the key of A minor? The difference is 
that in C major, C feels like the ‘home’ note or 
chord – called the ‘tonal centre’. The song will 
likely begin and end on this note/chord, and will 
return to it at the start of sections. A song in  
A minor will likewise build outwards and return 
to Am. These ‘rules’ are often broken, mind you.
Changing key mid-song can re-energise 
things or flip into an unexpected new part. This 
can be accomplished by taking a section, 
duplicating it, and transposing the copy. A one 
semitone shift in either direction, for example.
For a more considered approach, we can 
move to a destination key that shares notes 
with the current one. For C major, the most 
similar keys/scales would be G major (uses  
F
♯ instead of F), and F major (B
♭/A
♯ instead of B). 
From C up to G is an ascending perfect fifth, and 
from C down to F a descending perfect fifth. 
Interesting! In fact, to find the ‘closest’ two 
scales to any major or minor scale, just go up or 
down a perfect fifth.
This results in the Circle of Fifths, a superb 
songwriting tool, which is shown in our 
diagram. Adjacent keys are most similar, and 
the further around the circle you go, the more 
disparate and unrelated they become. So, for  
C major, good choices for a key change would 
be F and G (+/- 7 semitones, a perfect fifth away),  
and going one more step in each direction, D 
and B
♭/A
♯ (+/- 2 semitones, a major second). 
To transition from a major to minor key, or 
vice versa, we just use the relative minor/major 
relationship – minor keys are shown on the 
inside of the wheel. For more, see 
221’s  
Easy Guide on the Circle of Fifths.
What are keys? What key am I in? Try the circle of ﬁfths!
F♯/G♭
A
C
G
D
E
B
D♭/C♯
A♭/G♯
E♭/D♯
B♭ /A♯
F
Circle 
of 5ths
Em
Bm
F♯m
Cm
C♯m
G♯m
B♭m/A♯m
Fm
Gm
Dm
D♯m
Am
the producer’s guide to chords and scales / make music now <
17

 > Step by step  13. Taking the mystery out of modes in a flash 
We’ve focused on the basic major and 
minor scales so far, as they’re the most 
commonly used. We also showed you how 
they’re really the same scale, starting from 
a different note. Did you know that there 
are five more scales hiding inside the 
major shape, though? Let’s uncover them! 
To get started, load Bazille CM and select 
the patch 03 Leads - AF AnaLead.
1
From the MIDI Construction Kit, import 
C » Scales » C Major Template.midi, 
placing it on bar 1. Delete all the notes 
below C3. Enable your DAW’s note audition 
feature and click notes C3 to C4 to hear 
the C major scale. Now select all notes 
from A3 and upwards, and copy them to 
bar 6. Click notes A3 to A4 to hear the A 
minor scale – all we’ve done is change the 
starting note, but it has a different feel.
2
So what if we create scales starting on 
the other five notes of C major? Well, 
that’s what modes are! From the stack of C 
major notes, copy notes D3-D4 to bar 2, 
E3-E4 to bar 3, F3-F4 to bar 4, G3-G4 to bar 
5, and B3-B4 to bar 6. We’ve now created 
the scales C Ionian, D Dorian, E Phrygian, 
F Lydian, G Mixolydian, A Aeolian, and B 
Locrian. Ionian and Aeolian are simply the 
major and (natural) minor scales.
3
Click through the notes of each mode 
in order to hear these new scales. Let’s 
put them all into the same key, C. Select 
and slide each stack of notes down so it 
starts on C. We can now see their interval 
patterns side by side. Everything we’ve 
showed you about scales and chords so 
far can be applied to these five new scales. 
And our MIDI Construction Kit contains 
scale templates for all modes in every key.
4
Now let’s hear how they sound – 
import Drone.wav onto an audio 
track, set tempo to 100bpm, and loop it. 
This loop features only one note, C, so we 
can hear how the modes sound against it. 
Either program your own patterns using 
the scale templates, or load our demo 
MIDI files from the Tutorial Files folder.  
C Ionian is the upbeat major sound we’ve 
already covered.
5
Dorian is similar to the minor scale but 
has a bit of a jazz/blues feel going on 
with the major instead of minor 6th. 
Phrygian is often associated with Spanish 
music. Lydian has an unresolved, dreamy 
character. Mixolydian appears in rock and 
blues a lot. Aeolian is the good-old natural 
minor scale. Locrian has a dark, 
unresolved quality and is probably the 
least used mode.
6
Among many musicians, modes have a 
reputation as mysterious and hard to 
understand, but if you understand the major/
minor relationship, then you’re already halfway 
to understanding modes. You may even have 
used modes in your music without realising it. 
Our tutorial below lays it all out for you, but let’s 
look at some examples you may have heard.
The first mode is Ionian, beginning on the 
first note of the major scale – yep, it is the major 
scale! Typically upbeat and positive in vibe, but 
it doesn’t have to be – Adele’s Someone Like You 
could hardly be described as a joy-fest, for 
example, but it’s very much in A major.
The Dorian mode is similar to the good-old 
natural minor, except the sixth is major instead 
of minor, giving a melancholy sound. Probably 
the most famous example of a Dorian-based 
song is Scarborough Fair, and you can also hear 
it in Tears for Fears’ Mad World, Chris Isaak’s 
Wicked Game, and Daft Punk’s Get Lucky.
The Phrygian mode’s first two notes are just 
a semitone apart. It has a distinctive flavour 
associated with Spanish music such as 
flamenco…but did you know that the Knight 
Rider theme tune is also in Phrygian?
Next, the ethereal and spacey Lydian mode. 
80s guitar rock shred-heads loved to explore 
modes, and Joe Satriani noodled the heck out of 
this one on Flying In A Blue Dream.
The Mixolydian mode is like a major scale 
with a minor seventh – Guns ’n’ Roses Sweet 
Child o’ Mine uses it during the verses.
Aeolian is the natural minor scale by another 
name – you’ve heard this one plenty of times!
Locrian is the least-used mode of all, as it 
sounds kind of disconnected, tense and 
unresolved. This scale can be heard in  
the verses of Bjork’s Army of Me, Judas  
Priest’s Painkiller, and The Strokes’ Juicebox, 
though most of these do not use all the notes  
in the scale.
Taking the mystery out of modes
Taking the mystery out of modes
Modes are used in many tracks you may know, so it’s  
not hard to get a handle on their distinctive sounds
> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales
18

There are actually three types of minor 
scale: natural, harmonic and melodic. 
The natural minor is the standard, widely 
used minor scale we’ve stuck to so far. By 
sharpening the seventh, we create the 
harmonic minor scale – as shown. This 
scale has the pattern Root-2-1-2-2-1-3. That 
3-semitone leap gives it a recognisable 
sound with a serious neoclassical vibe.
1
The harmonic minor scale has some 
highly useful properties when we 
build chords on it. Chord 5 becomes major 
instead of minor, and can be extended to a 
dominant seventh chord. By building 
further on note 7 of the scale, we get a 
diminished seventh, an excellent chord for 
transitions, rooted on the leading tone so 
that it leads back, or ‘resolves’ to chord 1.
2
In A harmonic minor, chord 7 of the 
scale would be G♯dim7. But if you 
invert it, it becomes identical to Bdim7, 
Ddim7 and Fdim7. These four share the 
same notes and are basically the same 
chord. So you can consider any note of the 
chord as a leading tone to take you not 
just to Am, but to Cm, D
♯m or F
♯m.
3
Melodic minor is like harmonic minor 
but with the sixth note sharpened too, 
getting rid of the 3-semitone step which is 
sometimes undesirable. Classically, the 
melodic minor scale was used when 
ascending, and the regular natural minor 
for descending, but in modern music the 
scale may be used for both directions.
4
 > Step by step  14. Natural, melodic and harmonic minor scales 
 > Step by step  15. Pentatonic scales and beyond 
Pentatonic scales, as the name 
suggests, use only five notes per 
octave. The major pentatonic is the 
major scale with the fourth and seventh 
notes missed out. So in C, we leave out F 
and B, giving us the scale C D E G A, shown 
here. The minor pentatonic is the natural 
minor scale without the second and sixth 
notes – A C D E G.
1
Add a note to the minor pentatonic, 
between the fourth and fifth, to create 
the six-note blues scale, shown above. 
Add a note between the second and third 
of the major pentatonic for the less-used 
major equivalent. Theses scales are great 
for riffs, melodies and solos, and with 
fewer notes to clash, they’re easy to work 
over progressions.
2
There are lots more scales to explore. 
Phrygian Dominant is a mode of 
Harmonic minor, and so has a similar feel. 
The Whole Tone scale, shown, is made up 
entirely of 2-semitone steps, and has a real 
spaced out vibe. Hirajoshi is adapted from 
Japanese koto music – it’s got five notes, 
making it a pentatonic scale. These scales 
and more are in our MIDI Construction Kit.
3
Chord considerations
Figuring out which chords to use 
with exotic scales can be tricky, but 
there are plenty of approaches to 
ease the pain.
First, when using a minor key, you 
don’t have to choose between 
natural, harmonic and melodic then 
stick with it. For example, when 
writing in natural minor, harmonic 
minor’s dominant 7 on chord 5 and 
diminished 7 on chord 7 can be 
borrowed as needed. Check out our 
earlier tutorial video number 9 at 
0:40 – we did exactly this to smooth 
our progression.
For more obscure scales where 
the chords are giving you headaches, 
there’s a simple solution: forget 
chords! You can create plenty of 
movement with a monophonic 
bassline, for example. A slight step 
up from there would be power 
chords, which use just a root and 
fifth. Rock and metal guitarists have 
got tons of mileage out of weird 
scales by shredding them over 
power chords or repetitive riffs that 
don’t have a particularly strong 
tonality to begin with. Check out 
Meshuggah for one of the most 
extreme examples of this approach – 
guitarist Fredrik Thordendal often 
lays down melodically complex 
solos over riffs comprising one or 
two notes. The solo (3:15) in 
Vanished, from 1995’s Destroy Erase 
Improve, is a great example.
Finally, a little dissonance never 
hurt anyone, and sometimes a scale 
and chord combination that 
theoretically shouldn’t work actually 
sounds great in context.  
Try it and see!
the producer’s guide to chords and scales / make music now <
19

By this point, you may be struggling to keep up 
with the multitude of scale patterns – they 
certainly look similar, even if they don’t sound it. 
To help you keep a lid on it, we’ve put together a 
cheat sheet of scales. And remember, our MIDI 
Construction Kit is rammed with scale templates 
in every possible key. If you’re still unsure how 
to use them, here’s some concrete advice.
In Ableton Live, copy the template’s stack of 
notes so it lies just outside your MIDI clip’s play/
loop markers. Use it as a visual guide or enable 
Fold to restrict the piano roll to notes in the scale.
Logic Pro X works similarly: place the 
template MIDI clip alongside the one you’re 
working on, and select both clips to view them 
in the Piano Roll. Click Collapse Mode to restrict 
programming to the scale’s notes.
In Bitwig Studio, you have a few options. If 
using single-clip edit mode, paste the template 
outside of the clip’s playable range. For multi-
clip edit, paste the template into a separate clip 
outside your loop points. Drum Editing mode 
restricts programming to notes of the scale. 
Another method is to place the clip on a track 
with no instrument loaded, then enable Multi-
Layer editing and lock that track. The notes will 
show as a visual underlay.
For Studio One 3, load the template on a MIDI 
track with no instrument, then click Track List 
(four horizontal lines). Enable the leftmost Show 
(circle) icon for the template track and those 
you want to edit. Disable the Edit (pencil) option 
for the template, and it’ll show only as a guide.
Cubase users can load the template 
alongside the MIDI they want to edit as a guide, 
again, ensuring it’s outside of loop points; but 
Cubase has its own scale guide feature – to use 
it, add a Chord Track, disable Automatic Scales 
(in the Inspector), click Show Scales (on the 
track), add a scale event and choose a scale. 
Now set the colouring mode in the Piano Roll to 
Chord Track, and notes within the scale will be 
blue, while those outside it are red.
Scales cheat sheet
Find a scale in a ﬂash
All the scales from our tutorials in one handy place! We also give you the scale  
example in sharps too, for easy transferrance to your piano roll. Alternatively,  
find all these scales in MIDI format in every key in our MIDI Construction Kit!
Cubase’s scale guide, here highlighting the notes of G harmonic minor in blue – the red notes are out of key!
Natural minor
(aka Aeolian mode)
Pattern 2-1-2-2-1-2-2
Intervals Root-2-♭3-4-5-♭6-♭7
Example C D E♭ F G A♭ B♭
Of the three types of minor scale, this is the most common. The sounds 
is sad/downbeat with the minor third, three semitones from the root
Blues scale
Pattern 3-2-1-1-3-2
Intervals Root-♭3-4-♭5-5-♭7
Example C E♭ F G♭ G B♭
The pentatonic minor with an extra note added in. It’s used in  
blues music, but it’s great for rockin’ solos and melodies of all kinds
Mixolydian
Pattern 2-2-1-2-2-1-2 
Intervals Root-2-3-4-5-6-♭7
Example C D E F G A B♭
The ﬁfth mode of the major scale isn’t far removed – the Mixolydian 
mode is just like the major scale but with a minor seventh. Very useful
Harmonic minor
Pattern 2-1-2-2-1-3-1 
Intervals Root-2-♭3-4-5- ♭6-7
Example C D E♭ F G A♭ B
The same as the natural minor, but with the seventh note moved up one 
semitone. Sounds neoclassical, Baroque or faux Egyptian/Middle Eastern
Dorian mode
Pattern 2-1-2-2-2-1-2 
Intervals Root-2-♭3-4-5-6-♭7
Example C D E♭ F G A B♭
The second mode of the major scale. Similar to natural minor,  
but with a major sixth. Note its symmetrical pattern of intervals
Locrian mode
Pattern 1-2-2-1-2-2 
Intervals Root-♭2-♭3-4-♭5-♭6-♭7
Example C D♭ E♭ F G♭ A♭ B♭
You can play C major starting on B to create B Locrian. It’s the least  
used mode, with the diminished ﬁfth giving it an unresolved feel
Melodic minor
Pattern 2-1-2-2-2-2-1
Intervals Root-2-♭3-4-5-6-7
Example C D E♭ F G A B
Also known as jazz minor, it’s like the bottom half  
of natural minor with the top half of the major scale
Phrygian mode
Pattern 1-2-2-2-1-2-2 
Intervals Root-♭2-♭3-4-5-♭6-♭7
Example C D♭ E♭ F G A♭ B♭
The third mode of the major scale. The one-semitone interval  
between the ﬁrst and second notes gives it a dark vibe
Phrygian Dominant
Pattern 1-3-1-2-1-2-2
Intervals Root-♭2-3-4-5-♭6-♭7
Example C D♭ E F G A♭ B♭
Similar to Phrygian but with a sharpened third note. Playing harmonic 
minor from its ﬁfth note will give you this shape – dark and exotic
Pattern 2-2-1-2-2-2-1
Intervals Root-2-3-4-5-6-7
Example C D E F G A B
Major 
(aka Ionian mode)
The most fundamental scale; music theory is centred around it.  
Sounds upbeat/happy, with its major third, four semitones from the root
Pattern 3-2-2-3-2
Intervals Root-♭3-4-5-♭7
Example C E♭ F G B♭
Pentatonic minor 
Like natural minor minus the 2nd and 6th notes. A major equivalent  
can be created by leaving the 4th and 7th out of the major scale
Pattern 2-2-2-1-2-2-1 
Intervals Root-2-3-♯4-5-6-7
Example C D E F♯ G A B
Lydian mode
The major scale’s fourth mode – start C major on F to get it easily.  
The raised fourth gives the Lydian mode a really dreamy, ethereal feel
> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales
20


 02  
CHORD  
PROCESSING UNITS
Building chords and using scales 
can seem more like a brutal maths 
exercise at times – so why not get your 
computer to do the hard work? This month’s 
B-Step CM plugin, for example, makes it easy to 
try riffs based on chord sequences. Xfer 
Records’ Cthulhu is another fine option for 
exploring progressions. Cubase’s Chord Track 
and Chord Assistant can even tell you what 
chords ought to come next! Ableton Live isn’t 
quite that smart, but its MIDI Effects make it 
easy to stay in key and generate instant chords. 
Many other DAWs feature similar MIDI plugins. 
Other software, like Autotheory and AutoTonic, 
sits between your MIDI keyboard and DAW to 
keep your noodlings strickly diatonic. 
RapidComposer, Cognitone Synfire and 
WaveDNA Liquid Music can even help with the 
composition process.
 03
JUST THE TONIC
To keep things nice ’n’ easy, we’ve 
referred to the notes and chords 
of a scale as numbers 1-7. We 
mentioned the Roman numeral naming system 
a while back, too. but guess what? There’s yet 
another bunch of terminology for referring to 
notes – aka degrees – of a scale, and the chords 
built on them. For a major scale, they are Tonic, 
Supertonic, Mediant, Subdominant, Dominant, 
Submediant and Leading Tone. The minor scale 
uses Subtonic instead of Leading Tone. Cryptic 
or what?! A discussion of these names is beyond 
the scope of this feature, but in short, they tell 
you how the degree functions in a progression. 
The Dominant (5th), is so named because it’s  
the second most important besides the Tonic 
(1st), while the Leading Tone (7th) leads nicely 
back to the Tonic (1st). If you recall, we touched 
upon these 5-to-1 and 7-to-1 transitions in  
earlier tutorials.
 04
WORLD’S 
STRONGEST EARS
Knowing how to lift weights and 
what to eat for optimal strength 
won’t make you strong, and it’s the same deal 
with music theory: you need to put it into 
practice and train your ear for the best results. 
As an exercise, try recreating a favourite song in 
your DAW – see how close you can get the notes 
and chords. Or render out notes, intervals, 
scales and chords as MP3s, then put them in 
playlists on shuffle. Try to identify or match 
them on your MIDI keyboard. Don’t expect to 
identify specific notes by ear, though – that’s 
perfect pitch, and it’s very rare, so don’t sweat it!
 01
HARDCORE MEMORIES
If scale modes are scary, then chord modes 
must be truly trouser-soiling stuff, right? 
Thankfully not – chord mode or memory is 
the name of a classic synth feature where a chord is 
triggered with one key. In traditional implementations, 
the chord is simply transposed up and down, so it 
doesn’t stay diatonic (in key). However, it’s a sound 
that’s featured in countless dance and rave tracks, 
proving that music theory rules are there for the 
breaking! To achieve it, use a synth with a chord 
memory (eg, AudioRealism’s Redominator), duplicate 
or transpose a MIDI chord (there’s tons in our MIDI 
Construction Kit!), or use a chord sample in a sampler.
Instant compositional results from artificial intelligence
9 pieces of fast 
theory advice
A bunch more theory tips to 
put into practice the next  
time you’re looking for a  
boost of musical inspiration
Try out your synth’s chord memory function – if it’s got one – to give yourself some quick one-finger action
> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales
22

 
INSTANT HARMONIES 
Want to create a harmony for your lead 
line? A simple approach is to duplicate 
the line and move it up or down a perfect 
fifth or perfect fourth. This basically ensures a diatonic 
(that means ‘in key’) result. The only exceptions would 
be things like adding a perfect fifth on top of the 7th 
note in a major key, which should be a diminished fifth. 
In practice, though, it’s often either left as-is, moved to a 
different in-key note, or avoided altogether. For even 
sweeter harmonies, stack in thirds instead. It’s just like 
building notes into triads, but using a Root-3 formula 
rather than Root-3-5. Make sure the harmony notes are 
in key – you’ll end up with a mixture of minor and major 
third intervals. Our scale templates can help here!
 05
RIP UP THE 
RULEBOOK
One of the absolute best things 
you can do with music theory 
knowledge is… to forget all about it! Yep, ditch all 
the rules and regulations and just get on with 
making music. With even a basic understanding 
of theory, you’ll find that things come together 
more naturally, even if you’re not thinking about 
specific chords and scales while writing. And 
when you do get stuck? Or can’t quite get that 
melody to gel with the chords? That’s when  
you apply music theory, to get the creative 
process rolling again. Finally, don’t be afraid  
to do something that – perhaps very deliberately 
– goes totally against everything you’ve learnt in 
this guide. After all, music would never have 
evolved if composers had stuck to pre-
established rules.
 06
MIXED MODES
When you first get familiar with 
modes and scales, you may feel 
the urge to stay locked into the 
“right” notes for the whole song, to maximise 
the effect. After all, any deviation could leave 
you in a sort of musical no-man’s land that’s 
neither one scale nor the other! Couldn’t it…? 
Nah, not really – songwriters move between 
modes and scales all the time. This can either be 
done in a ‘passing’ sense, such as brief 
connecting chords or notes (semitone steps 
work well). Or it could be as extreme as writing a 
melody that outlines a new key with each chord. 
Don’t be afraid to take off the harmonic 
stabilisers and wander into a different scale if it 
feels right.
 07
KEY DECISIONS
No one key is musically superior, 
but there are reasons for choosing 
one over another. First, some 
musical instruments are easier to play in certain 
keys. And some can only play specific keys, such 
as a harmonica or harp. Vocalists may find a 
given song easier to sing if it’s transposed to a 
higher or lower key, to move it into their 
comfortable range.
Electronic musicians don’t have playability 
worries, but the key used will determine the 
frequencies of the main notes in a song. Many 
dance tracks are in keys F to A (major or minor), 
so that when the bass plays the first note of the 
scale, it’s in the optimal sub bass range, 45-55Hz.
 09
EASY DOES IT
Our fast guide only scratches the 
surface of music theory, but we 
hope it’s given you a taste for juicy 
chords, progression tricks and wild scales.  
When you’re ready to broaden your knowledge, 
our famous Easy Guide series is your next stop. 
Every edition is packed with wise words, expert 
video and groan-worthy puns from 
’s resident 
keyboard wizard Dave Clews. And with over 40 
episodes stretching right back to 
192, and a 
new edition every month, you’d be mad not  
to fill in your back issues collection and 
subscribe right away to avoid missing out on 
this essential material!
Here’s the C major melody from way back in tutorial 2, harmonised in thirds – the harmony notes are in yellow
08
Singer straining to hit the highest or lowest notes?  
Try transposing the music to another key until they can
Top up your theory knowledge every four weeks  
with our regular Easy Guide articles and videos
the producer’s guide to chords and scales / make music now <
23

Jargon guide
Music theory’s tricky enough without the lexicon – get 
your head around the lingo with our quick dictionary
ASCENDING
Rising in pitch, or going up the 
piano keyboard from left to right
CADENCE
A short sequence of notes  
or chords at the end of a  
musical phrase
CHORD
More than one note is played at the 
same time
CIRCLE OF FIFTHS
A diagram charting the 
relationship between the twelve 
notes/keys in the chromatic scale
DESCENDING
Falling in pitch, or going down the 
piano keyboard from right to left
DIMINISHED FIFTH
An interval of a perfect fifth 
flattened by one semitone,  
eg C-G♭ or A-E♭
DOMINANT
The fifth note of a scale, an interval 
of a perfect fifth above the tonic. 
Also, a chord built on this fifth note
EXTENDED
Extended chords contain extra 
notes added from further up the 
keyboard. A major ninth chord, for 
instance, contains root, third, fifth, 
seventh and ninth
FLAT
Determines that a note  should  
be one semitone lower in pitch
HARMONIC INTERVAL
Notes of different pitches played 
together at the same time, as 
opposed to one after the other
HARMONY
A tune that complements a melody 
when played at the same time. Also 
refers to the relationship between 
a series of chords
INTERVAL
The difference between two note 
pitches. Intervals are named 
according to the number of letter 
names they span, eg from C to D is 
a second, C to F is a fourth, etc
INVERSION
The order of notes in a chord is 
changed. A first inversion would 
see the root shifted up an octave  
to the top of a chord
KEY
The scale on which a piece of 
music is based. The key takes  
its name from the tonic, or first 
note of this scale
MAJOR SCALE
The most common scale in 
Western music. A series of  
eight notes with a set pattern  
of intervals: 2-2-1-2-2-2-1
MAJOR SECOND
An interval of two semitones 
between two different notes.  
For example, C to D is a major 
second interval
MAJOR SEVENTH
The interval between the root  
note and the seventh note  
(or ‘degree’) of a major scale. 
Equivalent to eleven semitones
MAJOR SIXTH
An interval of nine semitones 
between two different notes.  
C to A, for example
MAJOR THIRD
An interval of four semitones 
between two different notes. 
Examples include C to E, G to B,  
D
♯ to F
MELODIC INTERVAL
When two notes of different 
pitches are played one after  
the other – in other words, a  
two-note melody
MELODY
A sequence of notes played one 
after the other to produce a tune
MINOR SCALE
The sad-sounding sequence  
of notes you get when you  
play a major scale from the  
sixth note upwards.
MINOR SECOND
An interval of one semitone 
between two notes. For example, C 
to D♭ is a minor second interval
MINOR THIRD
An interval of three semitones 
between two different notes. For 
example, C to E♭ is a minor third 
interval, as is G to B♭
MINOR SEVENTH
The interval between the root note 
and the flattened seventh note (or 
‘degree’) of a major scale. 
Equivalent to ten semitones
MINOR SIXTH
An interval of eight semitones 
between two different notes.  
For example, C to A♭ is a minor  
sixth interval
MODE
A type of scale built by starting 
another scale from a note other 
than its root
OCTAVE
An interval of twelve semitones,  
at which the two notes have the 
same ‘quality’, just one higher and 
one lower
ROOT
The lowest note of a chord or scale. 
C is the root note of a C major chord 
and of the C major scale.
ROOTLESS VOICING
When an extended chord is played 
with the root note missing. Used a 
lot in jazz and gospel music
SCALE
A sequence of notes going up  
or down the keyboard with a 
particular pattern of intervals 
between them
SECONDARY DOMINANT
The name given to a chord based 
on the fifth, or dominant, note of 
any key or scale other than the 
tonic key
SEMITONE
The smallest interval in a 
chromatic scale, or the  
distance between any two  
notes on the piano keyboard
SEVENTH
A four-note chord formed by 
adding the seventh note of the 
scale to a triad that already 
contains a root, third and fifth
SHARP
Raised in pitch by one semitone. 
We’ve tried to stick to sharps 
instead of flats in our tutorials,  
in keeping with MIDI standards
TONE
Short for ‘whole tone’, an interval 
of two semitones
TONIC
The first note, or ‘root’ note,  
of a scale
TRANSPOSE
To shift a piece of music, note or 
chord up or down in pitch by a 
certain number of semitones
TRIAD
A chord made up of three notes.  
A major triad contains a root, a 
major third and a perfect fifth
UNISON
An interval that’s not an interval  
– in other words, the interval of 
zero semitones, the same note 
played twice. 
24
> make music now / the producer’s guide to chords and scales

BONUS DIGITAL CONTENT WITH EVERY ISSUE 
INCLUDES OVER 3 HOURS OF VIDEO AND EXCLUSIVE ROYALTY-FREE SAMPLES
Future Music is the mag for the latest gear and how today’s cutting-edge music makers use it. 
We’ve been making the future since 1992. Make sure that you’re part of it.

 PLAY  
 KEYBOARD  
 LIKE A PRO
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro
26

See it in action in video  
on your PC or Mac via 
filesilo.co.uk/computermusic
DOWNLOAD
When it comes to making music with your 
computer, the keyboard is surely the 
number one choice for capturing MIDI data. 
Sure, you can program notes in one at a time 
in step input mode, or paint them into your 
DAW’s piano roll editor using a brush tool, but 
for getting your musical ideas out of your 
head and into the computer quickly and 
efficiently, there’s no question that the 
keyboard (in the ubiquitous form of the MIDI 
keyboard controller) is the ultimate weapon 
of choice. 
Besides which, playing keyboards is just an 
incredibly fun thing to do. So, if you really want 
to take proper control of your DAW, we reckon it 
makes sense to get acquainted with it at least to 
the point of being able to play in simple riffs, 
chords and melodies. Over the next few pages, 
then, we’ve put together a complete beginner’s 
guide to the keyboard. You’ll find advice on what 
to look for when buying your first keyboard, 
some pointers on basic technique, a few 
exercises to get you started and increase your 
overall dexterity, lots of useful information 
about chords and scales, how to optimise your 
synth presets for control over particular 
performance parameters, and how to get to 
grips with all those mysterious knobs and 
buttons that you’ll find on the average MIDI 
controller keyboard. 
Just like with the guitar, there are many 
different techniques that can be adopted 
depending on the kind of keyboard instrument or 
part you’re dealing with. Playing a synth solo uses 
a very different skillset to performing a classical 
piano piece, for example, and effective clavinet 
and organ parts all require their own specific 
version of the basic piano technique. 
Add in extra controls and considerations like 
sustain pedals, pitchbend and modulation 
wheels, and you have a fair variety of different 
skills to get to grips with. So if you’ve ever wanted 
to conquer the keyboard and become the next 
Jools Holland or Alicia Keys, but not really known 
where to start, you’ve come to the right place!
Get better with your black ’n’ whites, 
and master your MIDI controller for 
performing, composing, and making 
your most expressive patches ever
play keyboard like a pro / make music now <
27

The earliest known piece of music written for 
keyboard dates from around 1360, about the time 
that the first keyboard instruments – the 
clavichord and the harpsichord – began to 
appear. It’s sobering to think that the classical 
composers of the Baroque era – notable 
examples of which include JS Bach, who 
composed some of the greatest keyboard music 
ever written – did not have access to the modern 
piano as we know it, or indeed any form of piano, 
as the earliest examples date from the late 18th 
century. Pipe organs became standard in 
churches, while string-based keyboard 
instruments like clavichords, harpsichords, 
spinets and virginals were fashionable for well-to-
do drawing rooms of the day.
The clavichord was a small, rectangular 
wooden instrument that contained a set of 
strings that were plucked with a small blade or 
‘tangent’ whenever a key was pressed. The 
design of the keyboard itself evolved from having 
seven keys per octave to the current design that 
features 12, including the black notes, or 
‘accidentals’ as they’re known.
The more sizeable harpsichord was largely an 
attempt to produce a greater volume of sound. 
Many harpsichords featured double keyboards, 
but still lacked the ability to vary the dynamics 
of the performance, due to the fact that the 
strings were plucked.
The forerunner of the modern piano was 
invented around 1780, mainly in response to this 
lack of expressiveness. It featured what we know 
today as a velocity-sensitive keyboard: the 
player could vary the volume depending on how 
hard the keys were struck, and the strings were 
whacked with hammers rather than being 
plucked. However, these early pianos had light 
wooden frames, lightly-sprung key action, 
leather hammers and short sustain; compared 
to the iron-framed, weighted-action, felt-
hammered, long-sustaining version of the 
instrument we know today.
Piano power
The piano was a big hit with performers and 
composers of the time, pushing clavichords and 
harpsichords to the sidelines. It wasn’t until the 
20th century and the advent of electricity that we 
started to see new instruments and innovations 
such as the Hammond tonewheel organ, the 
Ondes Martenot (a sort of early keyboard 
synthesiser/theremin hybrid), the Fender Rhodes 
and Wurlitzer electric pianos, the Mellotron (a 
tape-based precursor of the modern sampling 
keyboard) and early synthesisers such as the EMS 
VCS3, Roland Modular and Moog Minimoog. 
These early synths were monophonic – ie, only 
able to play one note at a time, which was great 
for basslines and solos – but it wasn’t until the 
Yamaha CS80 and Moog Polymoog appeared in 
1976 that synths became the mainstay of two-
handed keyboardists the world over, culminating 
in iconic milestones of the digital era such as 
Yamaha’s DX7 and the Roland D-50.
Today’s keyboardists have a huge list of 
influential players to take inspiration from, going 
back almost 100 years to the jazz greats of the 
1920s, through the rock ’n’ roll era of the 1950s, 
70s prog rock and beyond. Here’s a timeline of 
some of the great players from the last century – 
check out some of these guys’ work and you’ll 
definitely pick up plenty of pointers.
Key moments in keyboard history
Skidmore/REX/Shutterstock
“Early synths played a 
note at a time” 
© Getty
 © Getty
Norah Jones is a noted  
piano and organ player 
1950s
Jerry Lee Lewis (Rock ‘n’ roll pioneer)
Little Richard (Rock ‘n’ roll legend)
Fats Domino (Blueberry hill icon)
Ray Charles (Rhodes innovator)
1960s
Thelonious Monk (Bebop legend)
Oscar Peterson (Blues maestro)
Ray Manzarek (Doors keysmith)
Stevie Wonder (Pop/soul hero)
1970s
Herbie Hancock (Jazz supremo)
Rick Wakeman (Prog rock wizard)
Elton John (Glam rock royalty)
Jon Lord (Deep Purple)
Keith Emerson (Emerson, Lake  
& Palmer)
Chick Corea (US fusion giant)
Joe Zawinul (Weather Report)
Billy Joel (Pianist / Songwriter)
George Duke (Genre-hopping jazzer)
Bernie Worrell (Funk magician)
Jean Michel Jarre (French synth icon)
Geoff Downes (Asia / The Buggles)
Tony Banks (Genesis)
Richard Tandy (ELO)
Jools Holland (Squeeze, Jools Holland 
Big Band)
1980s
Greg Phillinganes (Session supremo)
Billy Currie (Ultravox synthman)
Jan Hammer (Miami Vice icon)
Thomas Dolby (Mad professor)
Mike Lindup (Level 42)
Nick Rhodes (Duran Duran)
Richard Barbieri (Japan/Porcupine 
Tree)
1990s
Bruce Hornsby (Pianist/songwriter)
Harry Connick Jr. (Modern jazz pianist)
Alicia Keys (Singer/pianist)
Jordan Rudess (Dream Theater 
virtuoso)
2000s
Norah Jones (Jazz singer/pianist)
Jamie Cullum (Jazz singer/pianist)
Matt Bellamy (Muse genius)
Greatest 
players of the 
20th century
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro
28

Korg SV-1 £1399
The fabulous Korg SV-1 stage keyboard is available in both 73 and 
88-key versions
ROLI Seaboard RISE 49 £1000
Like a row of hotdogs in a wetsuit, the innovative RISE 49 offers 
boundless realms of expression
NI Komplete Kontrol S49 / S61 MkII £499
Native Instruments’ newly-updated, S-series controllers feature 
twin hi-def LCD screens and illuminated keys
Akai LPK25 Wireless £59
This dinky controller fits in a laptop bag and connects via Bluetooth 
for ultimate portability
Nektar Impact 88+ £249
Remarkable value for money for a full-size, semi-weighted action 
88-note board
Nord Stage 3 88 £3459
The ultimate all-rounder for live/studio use, with a hammer-action, 
fully-weighted 88-note keyboard
There are many different types of keyboard 
out there. So when buying, you’ll need to 
consider exactly what it is you’ll be using it for. 
There are hardware synthesisers designed for 
live performance or for the studio. These 
generate their own sounds internally, and thus 
need to be connected either to a PA system for 
use on stage, or plugged into an audio 
interface so the sounds they make can be 
recorded into a computer. 
Then there are the personal home 
keyboards, generally targeted more towards 
the home entertainment market, such as 
Yamaha’s Tyros range, with hundreds of built-
in sounds, auto-accompaniment features and 
built-in speakers for monitoring in a domestic 
environment without the need for any 
additional hardware or computer. 
It’s a fair bet that most readers of this 
magazine will probably be more interested in a 
MIDI controller keyboard. This is the type of 
keyboard that makes no sounds on its own, but 
is designed to be hooked up to a computer via 
USB or Bluetooth in order to control the 
softsynths that run within the confines of your 
DAW, and generate the MIDI data that your 
host records and plays back whenever you 
enter a keyboard part.
How many keys?
A standard piano has 88 keys, spanning over 
seven octaves, and while there are plenty of 
controller keyboards out there of this size, in 
many cases the average home or project 
studio keyboardist will be able to get away 
with something with a much smaller footprint. 
Controllers start from 25 keys (two octaves), 
through 49 (four octaves), 61 (five octaves) and 
76 (six octaves). A 25-key unit will be fine if all 
you need to do is bash out the odd drum, bass 
or solo part with one or two fingers, but if 
you’re a two-handed player, the minimum 
you’ll be comfortable with is a 49-key option, 
as even with octave-shift buttons, you’ll find 
the range of a 25-key model fairly limiting. 
Above that, the more keys the better – it’s 
always good to go for as many keys as you 
have the room for, we say.
The other question is whether or not to go 
for full-size keys or micro keys. Micro 
keyboards are conveniently small enough to 
squeeze into a laptop bag, but although that’s 
handy for inputting keyboard ideas on the 
move, small keys are more fiddly and harder to 
play than full-size equivalents. If you have the 
space, we’d always recommend a unit with full-
size keys for studio use, simply because they 
have a more conventional feel – important if 
you want to take your playing to the next level. 
All in all, we reckon you should look to spend at 
least £100 or so for a decent spec, full-size 
49-key controller; or more if you want one with 
other modern features.
KEYBOARD BUYER’S GUIDE
29
play keyboard like a pro / make music now <

Anatomy of a keyboard
We’re all familiar with black and white notes – but what do all 
those knobs, sliders and flashing buttons do? Let’s find out… 
PITCHBEND 
WHEEL
Allows you to bend 
notes while playing
MODULATION WHEEL 
Apply vibrato or other 
parameters to the 
current sound
MIDI IN/OUT 
Traditional 
ﬁve-pin sockets 
for transmitting 
and receiving 
MIDI data
KEYS
Standard-size, 
piano-type keyboard 
for inputting notes
PSU SOCKET
For plugging 
in an external 
power supply
DRUM PADS
Smackable pads for 
programming drum parts
USB SOCKET
Connects to your computer for 
both MIDI data and power
ROTARY ENCODERS 
Assign these knobs to 
control parameters in 
your DAW
LCD DISPLAY 
Shows info about the 
currently selected control
OCTAVE SWITCHES
Shift the notes you’re 
playing up or down one 
octave at a time
FADERS
Assign these 
to variable 
parameters, 
such as 
channel volume
SWITCHES
Programmable 
switches for 
DAW functions 
like mute/solo etc
SUSTAIN PEDAL INPUT
Connect a sustain pedal for 
realistic piano-style playing
TRANSPORT 
CONTROLS 
Navigate your 
DAW project 
directly from your 
controller
EXPRESSION  
PEDAL INPUT 
Plug a pedal in here 
to control volume and 
other parameters 
30
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro

“Get basic hand 
positions nailed 
early on”
 > Step by step  1. Basic hand positioning 
To begin with, start with your right 
hand. Keeping your hand and fingers 
relaxed, place your right hand lightly on 
the keys, with the left side of your thumb 
on middle C and the tips of your fingers 
resting on the next four white keys 
(that’s D, E, F and G) to the right.
1
Draw your fingers back a little so that 
they’re slightly bent, keeping each 
fingertip resting lightly on its own key, 
positioned equally between the left and 
right edges of each key. Make sure your 
wrist is relaxed, but not so much that it’s 
completely drooping down below the 
level of the keys. Keep it raised slightly.
2
Maintaining this position, press down 
with just your thumb to play middle C. 
Keep the other fingers as still as you can, 
and avoid sticking your fingers out 
straight in weird directions as you play. Lift 
up and press down again to play the note 
a few more times, getting used to not 
moving the rest of your hand as you do so.
3
Next, as you release your thumb up 
from middle C and let the key rise up 
again, press down with your index finger 
to play D. To avoid the notes overlapping, 
think of it like how you’d use the pedals 
when changing gear in a car – C is the 
clutch, and D is the accelerator. As the 
clutch comes up, the accelerator goes 
down, and vice versa.
4
Now try the same thing going from D 
to E, lifting the D up as you press 
down on the E with your middle finger, 
again keeping the rest of your hand as 
still as possible. Then go from E back to 
D again, then down to C, in reverse 
order. Keep playing slowly up and down 
through C-D-E-D-C a few times to try and 
get the feel of it.
5
As you get more confident, add the 
notes F and G into the equation, 
playing them with your ring and little 
finger. As you play up and down the five 
notes C-D-E-F-G-F-E-D-C, try to make your 
fingers ‘walk’ from one key to the next, so 
that the notes transition together 
smoothly. Keep things really nice and slow 
and even to start with.
6
When starting to learn the keyboard, 
it’s a good idea to get basic hand 
positions nailed early on, as it’ll make 
playing easier in general, and 
prevent you from falling into bad 
habits in the long run. In terms of 
simple ergonomics, it 
might seem obvious, 
but you need to be 
sat (or standing) 
facing your keyboard, 
positioned roughly in 
line with the centre – 
around middle C. If 
you’re sitting, make 
sure that the seat is high enough that 
your wrist and elbow are slightly 
higher than the level of the keyboard 
when your fingertips are on the keys. 
Similarly, if you’re standing, adjust 
the height of your keyboard to 
achieve the same result.
Generally speaking, if you’re 
playing two-handed, you’ll be 
focusing your right hand on the 
area of the 
keyboard around 
middle C and 
above, and your 
left hand will be 
positioned mainly 
in the lower area of 
the keyboard to 
the left of middle 
C, taking care of the bass notes. This 
will often be played in octaves, 
using your thumb and pinky an 
octave apart.
Beginners, start here!
 5
 5
4
4
 3
 3
 2
 2
 1
 1
Throughout this feature, we’ll be referring to 
finger positioning using this numbering system
31
play keyboard like a pro / make music now <

You can now play G-A-B-C with fingers 
2-3-4 and 5, ending with your pinky on 
top C to complete the scale. To descend, 
simply play C-B-A-G-F with fingers 5-4-3-2 
and 1, ending with the thumb back on F. 
Then bring your fingers over your thumb 
and hit E with your middle finger, followed 
by the index finger on D and thumb back 
on middle C.
3
If you’re feeling brave, you can go for 
the two-octave version – 1-2-3 (thumb 
under), 1-2-3-4 (thumb under), 1-2-3 (thumb 
under), 1-2-3-4-5, ending up with your 
pinky on C5. The critical thing with all 
scales is to start out slowly, and master 
playing the scale evenly at a slow tempo 
before speeding up. Don’t be tempted to 
go too fast too soon!
4
Moving on, it’s time to adopt the 
proper fingering for a C major scale. 
This lets you play all of the white notes up 
to the octave above middle C (C-D-E-F-G-
A-B-C) smoothly and evenly. Start with 
your hand in the starting position 
described previously and play C, D and E 
with your thumb and first two fingers.
1
Now, move the thumb up from C to F, 
keeping the middle finger on the E, 
passing your thumb under your first two 
fingers. As you release the E, press the F 
key with your thumb and move the rest of 
your hand back over to the right to adopt 
the starting position once again, this time 
with the thumb on the F key.
2
Interval patterns  
for major and  
minor scales
Love ’em or hate ’em, there’s no 
better method of keyboard 
practice than scales for improving 
overall dexterity. Major and minor 
scales are specific sequences of 
eight notes, defined by the 
patterns of intervals between 
those notes. By applying this 
pattern as a kind of formula, we 
can work out the major or minor 
scale for any key. The formula for 
a major scale is T-T-S-T-T-T-S, where 
S stands for an interval of one 
semitone (the smallest possible 
interval on the keyboard, between 
any two adjacent keys) and T 
stands for tone (an interval of two 
semitones). So, using C major as 
an example, we’d start on C, move 
up a tone (two semitones) to D, 
another tone to E, then a semitone 
to F, another tone to G, and so on 
until we get the whole scale; C-D-
E-F-G-A-B-C. Apply the same 
formula to the key of D major, and 
we get D-E-F#-G-A-B-C#-D. For a 
natural minor scale, the formula is 
T-S-T-T-S-T-T, so C minor would give 
us C-D-Eb-F-G-Ab-Bb-C, and D 
minor D-E-F-G-A-Bb-C-D.
 > Step by step  3. Playing a C major scale 
As you look down at the keyboard, 
check out the black keys. Notice how 
they’re arranged in a regular pattern – a 
group of two, followed by a group of three, 
followed by a group of two, another group 
of three and so on. In fact, they’re 
arranged in alternating groups of two  
and three like this all the way along  
the keyboard.
1
The white note immediately to the 
left of each group of two black notes 
is a C – the one situated in the centre of 
the keyboard is middle C. C is important 
because it’s the starting point for anyone 
learning the keyboard. The key of C 
major contains no sharps or flats in it,  
so it has no black notes for you to  
worry about.
2
There are seven main note names 
for the white notes, starting with A 
and continuing through B, C, D, E, F and 
G. Travelling along towards the right end 
of the keyboard, the next white note up 
from C is D, then E, F, and G. After G, it 
just wraps back around to A, followed  
by B, and finally a repeat of C one  
octave higher.
3
 > Step by step  2. How to recognise the keys 
32
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro

GET 
IN PRINT AND DIGITALLY!
Print, digital and print/digital bundle offers at
www.myfavouritemagazines.co.uk
TRY A FREE  
DIGITAL ISSUE  
TODAY FROM THE 
APP STORE

 > Step by step  4. Tackling major and minor triads 
So far, we’ve only been playing single 
notes, so let’s try some chords. We’ll 
start with a C major triad – a chord made 
up of three notes from the C major scale, 
namely the root (C), major third (E) and 
fifth (G). This can be played from our basic 
starting position shown in the previous 
tutorial – thumb on middle C, middle 
finger on E and pinky on G.
1
Once you’ve got the hang of pressing 
down these three keys without your 
other two fingers getting involved, move 
the whole thing up so your thumb is on D 
and play D, F, and A. That’s D major, right? 
Wrong! Hear how it sounds sadder 
somehow? That’s because you’re actually 
playing a D minor triad, made up of D 
(root), F (minor third) and A (fifth).
2
It sounds different due to the minor 
third interval between the D and the F. 
The quality of the third – major or minor – 
determines whether the triad is a major or 
minor chord. Here, the minor third 
between D and F produces that sad, minor 
sound. To make it a major third, move the 
third finger a semitone up to F#. Try it now 
to play D, F#, A – that’s D major!
3
So, major triads consist of root, major 
third and fifth, while minor triads are 
made up of root, minor third and fifth. Try 
it with an F chord – F major is built from F, 
A and C, while F minor is made up of F, Ab 
and C. The only change is that third going 
from major (A) to minor (Ab).
4
There are three ways to play each triad, 
depending on which note you put your 
thumb on. Go back to our C major triad for 
a second. As played in step 1, with our 
thumb on C, middle finger on E and pinky 
on G, we’re in root position – so-called 
because our thumb is on the root.
5
To get the first inversion of C major, we  
move the thumb to the next chord tone 
up: E. The G is now covered by the index 
finger, and the pinky moves to the next C 
note up – E, G, C. Move up again, with the 
thumb on G, middle finger on C and pinky 
on E, to get the second inversion – G, C, E.
6
Now we know how to construct major 
and minor scales, we can take the notes 
within them and start stacking them up 
together to play chords. While it’s 
possible to form simple two-note chords, 
the most basic form of chord in common 
usage contains three notes, and is known 
as a triad. Like scales, triads come in 
major and minor flavours, depending on 
the scales their notes (also known as 
chord tones) are taken from. 
Take the C major scale as an example. 
It contains the notes C-D-E-F-G-A-B-C, as 
we’ve seen. If we use numbers to label 
the notes (or degrees) in the scale from 1 
to 8, we can use these numbers to create 
formulas to build chords from. For 
instance, in a C major scale, C=1, D=2, E=3 
and so on, until B=7. So, to build a C major 
triad, we need the notes numbered 1, 3 
and 5 from the major scale; in other 
words, C, E, and G = C major. The same 
idea works when building minor triads 
from minor scales, too. Take the scale of A 
natural minor (which uses all the white 
notes too, from A to A): A-B-C-D-E-F-G-A. 
Taking the notes numbered 1, 3 and 5 
from this scale – A, C and E – gives us an A 
minor triad.
Looking at it from the point of view of 
the intervals between the chord tones, 
the formulas are root + 4 semitones + 3 
semitones for a major triad, and root + 3 
semitones + 4 semitones for a minor 
triad. Using a combination of major and 
minor triads, it’s possible to play 
thousands of popular songs, so they’re 
pretty useful things to know!
Chord formulas for major and minor triads
Get to know major and minor triads – the building blocks of popular music
34
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro

Play through this sequence four times 
or so, then play the C and D together 
once again, only this time lift your thumb 
off C while keeping D held down with your 
index finger. Play the notes either side of D 
in a smooth up/down sequence once 
more, this time skipping the held-down D 
note and playing C-E-F-G-F-E-C, keeping 
that index finger held down.
4
Continue moving on through the 
other fingers, holding down E and 
playing around that, then F and playing 
around that, and so on. It’s much harder 
than it looks, and it doesn’t sound very 
nice while you’re playing it, but stick at it. 
Keep it slow at first, and eventually you’ll 
train your finger muscles and motor 
response accordingly.
5
Keep holding your thumb down on the 
C key, but lift off the D and play the E 
with your middle finger, followed by the F 
with your ring finger and G with your 
pinky – holding C down with your thumb 
the whole time. Then walk back down 
again from G through F, E and D without 
lifting your thumb, so that the C note 
sustains throughout.
Having completed the A minor scale, 
keep descending through G to F 
(crossing over the thumb) and play an F 
major scale (F, G, A, Bb, C, D, E, F). Continue 
dropping down a couple of notes each time, 
until you’re at the bottom. You can alternate 
between major and minor scales like this, or 
play all major or all minor scales in one pass 
to vary things up a little.
3
3
To grow as a keyboard player, you 
need to get used to your hands doing 
different things at the same time, and 
fingers as well. Remember the beginner’s 
exercise where we walked through the 
notes C-D-E-F-G-F-E-D-C? To help develop 
finger independence, we’re going to 
revisit this, but with a twist. First, assume 
the position shown above.
One way to practise scales is to 
alternate major and minor scales 
while simultaneously moving down the 
keyboard from right to left. Here’s an 
exercise that does just that. Starting from 
the C above middle C, play a one-octave C 
major scale up and down the keyboard, 
using the fingering 1-2-3, 1-2-3-4-5-4-3-2-1, 
3-2-1.
1
1
The idea is to hold down a different 
note each time and play through the 
notes that surround it, without lifting off 
the held-down note. Sounds easy, but it’s 
actually pretty tricky, and is a great 
exercise for developing finger 
independence. Start by playing the C and 
D together with your thumb and index 
finger. Easy enough so far…
When you’re back on the C you started 
on, don’t stop there – continue down 
another two notes, through B, to land on 
A. Do this by crossing over your thumb 
while on C and landing on the B with your 
index or middle finger, before shifting 
your thumb onto the A. From there, you’re 
poised for a one-octave A minor scale, so 
go ahead (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, A)!
2
2
 > Step by step  5. A tricky finger-independence exercise 
 > Step by step  6. Major-to-minor scale arpeggio exercise 
POWER TIP
>Two-ﬁnger 
challenge
A fun variation to help with this 
exercise is to place your hand on a 
tabletop and get a friend to call out 
random pairs of numbers – say, ‘2 & 
5’, or ‘1 & 4’ – then lift up only the 
corresponding pair of fingers, 
keeping the others flat on the table. 
This can be quite a challenge, even 
for experienced players! After a bit 
of practice, you can do one hand at 
a time, or both at once if you want 
to make things more interesting.
35
play keyboard like a pro / make music now <

 > Step by step  7. Using a sustain pedal 
Most keyboard controllers have a 
sustain input jack that will take a 
sustain pedal. As long as your pedal is 
switched to the correct polarity for your 
keyboard, once connected it should 
behave so that notes ring out with the 
pedal down, and are cut off when you 
release the pedal back up. Some 
controllers can be switched to suit.
1
The main purpose of the pedal isn’t to 
make your playing louder, but to 
prolong notes while your hands are 
moved away from the keyboard in 
readiness to play the next note. This 
makes for a smoother transition between 
notes and chords, but you need to be 
careful not to overdo things. Here’s a full-
on, two-handed piano part with no pedal.
2
As a further illustration, the above 
diagram shows the same piece with 
the pedal down all the time this time. The 
status of the pedal – which is basically an 
on-off switch – is shown in this editor 
window at the bottom of our DAW’s piano 
roll editor. As you can hopefully hear, it all 
starts to get a bit much, especially in the 
low end.
3
The answer is to find a compromise 
between the two approaches. Use the 
pedal sparingly, but effectively enough to 
enable a smooth transition between 
chords. Usually, lifting it up in the fraction 
of a second before you play the next chord 
in a sequence is the way to go. As it’s a 
continuous controller message in your 
DAW, you can touch up any mistakes or 
overhangs in the MIDI editor later.
4
As well as closing up gaps between 
chords, sustain is also useful for things 
like flourishes, big finishes and swanky 
cocktail-bar arpeggios up and down the 
keyboard. Check out this example of a 
Rick Wakeman-esque arpeggio played 
with and without the sustain pedal. It 
works here because all the notes are 
versions of the same chord played in 
different octaves.
5
The sustain pedal isn’t just reserved 
for piano parts, though – it’ll have the 
same effect on 99% of other keyboard 
sounds too (Hammond organs being the 
exception, in which case it usually 
controls rotary speaker speed). Use it to 
create eerie, sustained plonky textures, 
or to smooth the transition between 
chords in a pad part, like in our  
example here.
6
A real acoustic piano actually has three pedals 
– from left to right, the soft pedal, sostenuto 
pedal and sustain pedal – but when you’re 
tackling piano parts on a computer 
music setup with a controller keyboard, 
the only pedal that’s essential to 
getting an authentic result is the 
sustain pedal, which is used to make the 
notes ring out longer. 
On a real piano, there’s a row of felt 
dampers that prevent each string from ringing 
out when it’s not being played. If you hit a key 
briefly with the sustain pedal up, the note 
won’t sustain after the key is released, 
because when you release the key, the 
damper for that note falls back into place, 
cutting off the note. With the pedal down, 
however, the row of dampers is moved away 
from the strings, so any note you hit will ring 
out for as long as the string continues to 
vibrate, or until the pedal is released and the 
dampers return to their normal position.
In synth terms, it’s the equivalent of 
increasing the release time of your amplitude 
envelope, but the effect is turned on and off at 
will by operating the pedal. There’s a knack to 
combining the timing of the pedal moves with 
the way your hands are playing the keys – it 
has to be timed so the notes don’t all merge 
together in a clangy, stodgy mess.
Most keyboard controllers don’t 
come with sustain pedals as standard, 
so you’ll have to invest in one 
separately. A decent one should only set 
you back around £20 or so, but you’ll need 
to check that the polarity is compatible with 
your controller. A pedal wired with the wrong 
polarity will work the opposite of how it’s 
supposed to (notes will sustain with the pedal 
in the ‘up’ position and be dampened with it 
held down), so make sure you buy the correct 
pedal, or one that can be switched to suit your 
keyboard.
Sustaining interest
A sustain pedal, such as the Casio SP-20, can be 
bought for a minimal outlay
36
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro

If you play the part legato, by running 
the note lengths together so that the 
end of each note overlaps the start of the 
note that follows, the synth’s amplitude 
envelope is only triggered at the start of 
the first note. This results in a smoother 
sequence – great when you dial in 
portamento (or glide) for extra ‘slidiness’.
3
This means that, rather than playing 
short notes on the C each time, you 
can make things easier by simply holding 
down the C key and playing all the other 
notes in the part. When you release each 
note, the C resumes. This is great for 
playing fast trills more easily, as you only 
need to move one finger instead of two.
4
Here are a few special techniques you 
can bring to bear while playing 
monophonic synth sounds, to achieve 
specific effects. In this example piece, 
we’re using SynthMaster CM’s LED 80s 
Rock Saw preset to solo over a backing 
track, using notes from the C minor blues 
scale (C, Eb, F, F#, G, Bb, C).
1
Here, our notes are played distinctly, 
separated out so that each has its own 
attack portion – each note retriggers the 
synth’s amplitude envelope. There are 
gaps between each note, and none 
overlap. This means that portamento 
won’t have any effect, as the notes must 
overlap to work.
2
Basic synth solo 
techniques
Although basic competency on 
the piano is key, playing synths 
demands the adoption of one or 
two extra techniques you won’t be 
able to practise on the piano. Like, 
what are these weird-looking 
wheels to the left of the keyboard? 
What’s aftertouch and how do I 
use it? For now, we’ll address one 
of the main differences between 
synths and the piano – the fact 
that some synth sounds are 
monophonic. This means they’re 
only able to play one note at once, 
and this in turn means there’s a 
range of techniques you can 
adopt when putting together a 
rip-roaring synth solo or a funky 
synth bassline. How they work 
depends on how the synth sound 
you’re currently playing has been 
set up – whether or not the 
amplitude envelope retriggers 
whenever you play a new note, for 
instance, or whether or not 
portamento (glide) has been 
enabled. You can make 
monophonic sounds respond 
differently in subtle ways.
 > Step by step  9. Playing a monophonic synth 
The easiest jump-off point for learning 
how to play keyboard solos is the 
minor blues scale. To build it, we just take 
a regular natural minor scale. Here’s E 
minor as an example – E, F#, G, A, B, C, D 
and E. The intervallic pattern for this scale, 
as described earlier, is T-S-T-T-S-T-T.
1
That’s far too many notes, so let’s 
convert it into a minor pentatonic 
scale. Pentatonic means ‘five notes’, and 
our scale currently has seven, so we need 
to lose two. To make a minor pentatonic, 
we just remove the second (F#) and sixth 
(C) degrees, leaving E, G, A, B and D.
2
Finally, to get our E minor blues scale, 
a sharpened fourth degree. The fourth 
degree of the E minor scale is A, so we 
need an A# in there. This gives us E, G, A, 
A#, B and D – the E minor blues scale. To 
apply it to any key, the formula is 1-3-4-4#-
5-7. Practise this a lot – it’ll serve you well!
3
 > Step by step  8. The minor blues scale – the one extra scale you need to learn 
37
play keyboard like a pro / make music now <

Now you can incorporate bends and 
manual vibrato into your leads and 
basslines. So, for a Stevie Wonder-style 
Moog synth bassline in the key of E minor, 
you can apply upward bends to the third, 
fourth and seventh degrees (G, A and D). 
You can also do a full 12-semitone 
downward bend to achieve octave slides, 
like we’ve done here on the A note.
3
A manual vibrato effect can be 
achieved by holding a note and 
rapidly flicking or tapping the pitchbend 
wheel just enough to change the pitch 
slightly, like how a guitarist applies 
vibrato to a note by wiggling the string 
back and forth. We’ve applied this to the 
long G note at the start of bar 2 of our 
bassline riff.
4
Most synth presets are programmed 
so that your pitchbend control bends 
the pitch of the notes, but often the 
amount of bend applied at full stretch 
needs to be adjusted. To do this, set the 
synth’s pitchbend range. Here’s Bazille 
CM’s HS Bass Punch Bag preset, set to  
+2 / -12 semitones.
1
Now, if you play a note and move the 
pitchbend wheel to its fullest extent 
either way, the pitch of the note will shift 
up two semitones or down 12. Hold down 
a C and bend the pitch up by moving the 
wheel fully upwards. We’re now playing a 
D – 2 semitones higher. Bending it all the 
way down, however, produces a low C.
2
Bending the rules
In the early 70s, there was a fair 
amount of ‘expression envy’ from 
keyboard players towards 
guitarists. After all, guitarists 
could coax maximum 
expressiveness from their 
instruments, bending strings to 
produce a cool, smooth shift in 
pitch – awesome for soloing, in 
particular. So, to even things up a 
little, the Minimoog introduced a 
pitchbend wheel so that 
keyboardists everywhere could 
emulate that. The knurled plastic 
wheel to the left of the keyboard 
was used to shift the overall pitch 
of the whole instrument, but 
early adopters needed to be a bit 
careful, as although there was a 
central detent position for 
returning things to the normal 
pitch, initially these wheels 
weren’t spring-loaded, so had to 
be returned to the centre position 
manually – tricky! Other designs 
sprung up  – ribbon controllers 
and joysticks, for example – but it 
wasn’t until the 80s that Jan 
Hammer finally nailed the 
combination of keytar, distortion, 
pitchbend and modulation to 
really make a synth sound like a 
guitar solo.
 > Step by step  10. Setting up and using the pitchbend wheel 
The modulation wheel’s traditional 
use is for adding vibrato to a sound by 
increasing an LFO’s depth of control over 
oscillator pitch – but it can be used for 
other things, such as adjusting filter cutoff. 
In our example, Bazille CM’s Init default 
sound has no parameters assigned to the 
mod wheel, so moving the wheel has no 
effect on the sound.
1
Let’s set it up to control vibrato. 
Vibrato is achieved by using one of the 
synth’s LFOs (low frequency oscillators) to 
modulate the pitch of the main oscillators. 
The Mod wheel is already linked to LFO 
Depth, indicated by the orange text field 
below the Amp Mod control in the LFO 1 
section – we just need to turn the control 
up to the max.
2
The target for the modulation will be 
the pitch of oscillator 1, so we draw a 
virtual cable between the LFO’s output and 
the Freq Mod Depth control (PM Coarse) 
in the Osc 1 panel. Turn this control fully 
right, then select Cents from the 50 Semi 
menu. Moving the wheel introduces vibrato, 
the speed of which is controlled by LFO1’s 
Rate control.
3
 > Step by step  11. Setting up the mod wheel to control vibrato 
38
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro

Everything you need 
to live the Apple life
N E W  I S S U E  O N  SA L E  N OW !
Available from www.myfavouritemagazines.co.uk/MACsubs
SUBSCRIBE 
TODAY! 
SAVE
54%

This approach blends well with 
staccato, funky, rhythmic chops, 
particularly when using the sharpened 
fourth degree of the minor blues scale (as 
described on p33) as the grace note, 
sliding from there onto the fifth. Combine 
this with a held-down flattened seventh, 
and you have the beginnings of a classic 
organ riff, as shown here.
3
Another classic organ technique is the 
glissando, achieved by running your 
hand up and down the keys. You can use 
the side of your fingers or the back of your 
hand for this, but the trick is to merge it 
smoothly into whatever follows. Here 
we’re sliding up the keyboard with the left 
hand, hitting a pre-shaped C minor chord 
(C, Eb, G) with the right.
4
Organ keys are like on/off switches –
the only way to make them sustain is 
to hold them down. The sustain pedal is 
instead often used to switch the speed of 
the Leslie speaker effect. Here’s an NI 
Vintage Organs B3 Kontakt Player preset, 
playing sustained chords while switching 
speaker speeds with the pedal.
1
Organs have no pitchbend feature, so 
to emulate guitar strings being bent, 
organ players started including grace 
notes, rolls and slurs into their playing. To 
play a grace note, quickly flick the note 
one semitone to the left of your target 
note, using the finger to the left of the one 
you’re about to use to play the main note.
2
Vintage vibes
Thanks to the genius of software 
developers, who’ve managed the 
mind-boggling task of replicating 
almost every vintage keyboard 
made in plugin form that can be 
loaded into a DAW and conjured 
up with the click of a mouse, 
today’s computer muso has 
never had it so good when it 
comes to getting their hands – 
literally – on pretty much any 
exotic or esoteric keyboard from 
days of yore. Manufacturers such 
as Native Instruments, Arturia 
and Modartt have come up with 
brilliant products like Komplete, 
Analog Lab and Pianoteq to name 
but a few, meaning that the entire 
gamut of sought-after keyboard 
sounds from Wurlitzers and 
Rhodes to Mellotrons and 
Minimoogs are accessible at a 
fraction of the cost of the real 
thing. If you want the real 
shimmering tones of a Hammond 
B3 organ through a Leslie rotary 
speaker, or a Stevie Wonder clav 
sound, you got it! However, for a 
really authentic sound, it pays to 
know a little bit about how each 
would actually be played, as they 
each demand their own different 
piano/keyboard technique.
 > Step by step  12. Organ technique 
Perhap the funkiest of all keyboard 
instruments, the clavinet responds 
well to short staccato playing. We’ll add a 
clav part to the example from a previous 
tutorial, using Pianoteq 4’s Clav CL1 Basic 
preset, with some compression added to 
harden up the attack of the sound. Start by 
forming a G major triad (B, D and G) with 
the right hand, as shown.
1
With your left hand, form an octave on 
two low E notes, effectively making an 
Em7 chord when both hands are played 
together. Imagine playing bongos with a 
16th note pattern, but only connect with 
the keyboard on some beats. Alternate 
between the two notes in your left hand, 
working them into the rhythm individually 
along with the right hand.
2
Split the chord in your right hand 
between your thumb on B and your 
index and pinky fingers on D and G, then 
rock between the two halves of the chord. 
The key to a good clav part is the ‘bounce’, 
hitting the keys with short, clipped strikes. 
Once the basic rhythm part is established, 
we can fill the gaps with right hand riffs 
and runs from the E minor blues scale.
3
 > Step by step  13. Clavinet technique 
40
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro

 > Step by step  14. How to make a synth patch respond to aftertouch 
 
Most modern keyboard controllers 
are capable of generating aftertouch, 
but to check whether or not yours does, 
launch your DAW and press down firmly 
on some keys on your controller, while 
watching your computer screen. If your 
DAW’s MIDI activity indicator flashes as 
you press down and release, you’re 
generating aftertouch data.
1
If the test works, you know you can 
program aftertouch response into a 
patch in any synth that supports it. For 
example, if we load up Dune CM’s 022 
Earth Views RL preset and play a few 
notes, we can hear that there’s no change 
to the sound when we press down on the 
keys after the initial impact, so no 
response to aftertouch has been set up.
2
We can use aftertouch to open the 
filter, so the sound gets brighter as we 
press down on the keys. In Dune CM, 
aftertouch is labelled as ATouch, and is 
assigned to your desired parameter in the 
main modulation matrix window in the 
LCD panel in the centre of the synth’s 
control panel. Click the button labelled 
Mod Matrix 1>12 to access this.
3
Clicking on the Source column in  
the first empty row of the matrix  
(row 4 in this case) reveals a list of all  
the applicable sources for us to choose 
from. To select aftertouch, choose the 
ATouch item from the menu. It can be 
found by looking for the fifth one down 
from the top.
4
We want the aftertouch data to control 
the filter’s cutoff frequency, so select 
Filters > Filter Cutoff in the Destination 
column. The routing is now all set up, so 
set the amount of effect generated when 
we press down on the keys. A setting of 
about +50 is a good starting point. Enter 
this in the centre column.
5
Now, when we hold a note down, we 
can control the opening and closing of 
the filter by how hard we press on the key. 
In the case of channel aftertouch, since 
the effect is generated by one long sensor 
beneath the keys, you only need to press 
with one finger, not all of them, when 
holding down a chord.
6
Aftertouch – also known as pressure – is another 
type of MIDI controller message that keyboard 
controllers can generate. Like pitchbend, 
aftertouch isn’t grouped in with the continuous 
controllers that constitute CC numbers 1-127 (like 
pan or MIDI volume), but instead has its own 
classification as an independent type of MIDI 
signal. It produces information based on how 
hard you press the keys down after you’ve 
initially played them, and it’s this data that can 
be assigned to various parameters in your synth 
to control things – eg, changing the LPF cutoff 
frequency for making more realistic brass 
swells, altering the pitch of a guitar sample for 
string bend effects, or increasing the depth of an 
LFO for adding vibrato.
There are two types of aftertouch, the most 
common of which is channel aftertouch. This is 
when a series of force-sensing resistors beneath 
the keys of your 
controller measures 
the average pressure 
being applied to the 
keybed and produces a 
MIDI control signal based 
on this changing value. 
Effectively, this means that 
the harder you press, the 
higher the value of the 
generated signal. The second type, known as 
key or polyphonic aftertouch, relies on the same 
principle, but this time each key on the 
controller generates its own signal, outputting a 
value that corresponds to that key, rather than 
the average of the keyboard as a whole. This 
increases the expressive potential considerably, 
as every key can send different values as you 
play. This type of aftertouch used to be quite 
rare, owing to the amount of data it can 
generate, but is now supported by an increasing 
number of  devices like Keith McMillen 
Instruments’ QuNexus and CME’s Xkey USB 
Mobile MIDI Keyboard.
Many synth presets will already have some 
kind of aftertouch response built in, but 
knowing how to add this facility to tailor the 
behaviour of a particular sound that doesn’t 
already feature it is definitely worth knowing.
Aftertouch explained
Keith McMillen’s QuNexus supports polyphonic aftertouch
41
play keyboard like a pro / make music now <

When synthesisers first appeared, 
the thing that players loved most – 
apart from their sound, obviously – 
was their tweakability. Those rows 
of knobs and buttons on the front 
panel just itched to be messed with 
during a performance. The modern 
computer-based equivalents of 
analogue synths are much less 
tactile by comparison. Moving 
virtual knobs on screen with a 
mouse just isn’t the same – not to 
mention tricky to accomplish in the 
middle of a solo. 
Luckily, controller keyboard 
manufacturers have caught onto 
this, and many current models 
sport a generous array of user-
assignable hardware controls that 
can transform your favourite 
software synth’s flat, virtual control 
panel into a properly tweakable, 
hands-on experience.
The controls on your keyboard 
will most likely fall into three main 
types: rotary encoders, faders and 
switches. If you need to adjust 
within a set range of values, a fader, 
with its easily visible start and end 
points, is a good bet. However, if the 
current parameter setting differs 
from the fader’s physical position, 
there may be a big jump in values 
when you move it. Conversely, 
rotary encoders rotate 
continuously through 360 degrees, 
incrementing or decrementing 
values by one from wherever the 
current parameter value is set, so if 
you need to adjust settings without 
a big jump, a rotary encoder will do 
the trick. Meanwhile, switches are 
more suited to on/off controls like 
mute or solo buttons.
All you have to do is tell the 
synth what it needs to do when it 
receives a continuous controller 
MIDI message from a particular 
control. Here’s how to set up the 
knobs and faders on your controller 
so that you can use them, not just to 
perform and change sounds in real 
time, but to record those changes 
into your DAW for posterity.
Setting up 
those knobs  
on your 
controller
Again, wiggle the control you want to 
use on your device for that parameter. 
Here, we’re assigning one of the macros in 
the 1991 preset to a rotary encoder on the 
Akai MPK249. If your controller has 
enough encoders, try assigning all eight 
macros to a separate control and see what 
kind of fun you can have, tweaking them 
as you play.
5
Once assigned, you can record the 
changes into your DAW as 
automation, meaning that they’ll be 
played back in all their glory. This is such 
an easy way to get movement into your 
tracks that once you’ve worked out how to 
assign your favourite controls in your 
favourite synths, you’ll never want to go 
back to static sounds again!
6
Next, simply move the desired control 
on your device to set up the link – 
doing this lets the synth know to map the 
controller message transmitted by the 
knob you just moved to the parameter 
you just selected. If you play the sound 
and wiggle the control, you’ll see and hear 
the filter opening and closing accordingly.
3
As another example, here’s how to do 
the same thing in NI Massive. It’s a 
similar approach, but this time each 
control has its own separate ‘learn’ mode, 
as opposed to a global mode for the entire 
synth. In this case, simply right-click on 
the control you want to assign and select 
MIDI Learn from its popup menu.
4
Let’s look at how to assign a hardware 
control on your controller keyboard to 
a particular software synth parameter. In 
our first example, we’re going to assign 
filter cutoff in Bazille CM to a rotary 
encoder on our Akai MPK249. To begin, 
load an instance of Bazille CM into your 
DAW and select the Antivirus preset.
1
Click the cog icon in the upper right 
corner to enter the MIDI CC Learn 
mode, in which we can match the MIDI 
controller messages transmitted by 
hardware controls to any parameter that’s 
illuminated green. We want to assign filter 
cutoff, so click the filter cutoff knob in 
Bazille CM’s central filter panel.
2
 > Step by step  15. Assigning MIDI knobs to software parameters 
42
> make music now / play keyboard like a pro

 Getty Images
 HARPEJJING ON 
The harpejji is an innovative electronic 
stringed instrument that’s kind of a 
keyboard-guitar hybrid, played by tapping 
or ‘hammering’ on the strings at particular 
locations. Why is this of interest to 
keyboard players? Because the fretboard is 
marked with white and black notes in a 
keyboard layout, giving keyboard players 
access to a whole new way of achieving a 
guitar-like sound – plus techniques like 
vibrato, string-bending and slides – but with 
notes arranged in a familiar format.
 STAY IN TIME 
To ensure that you end up being able to play 
in time as well as hitting all the right keys, 
practising with a metronome when doing 
exercises will go a long way to helping you 
lock down your timing. Or, if you find this too 
boring, try programming little sketch tracks 
in your DAW to groove along to, made up of a 
tasty drum beat, a bassline and maybe even 
some accompanying chords.
 HAMM IT UP 
Assigning the faders on your controller to 
the drawbars on your virtual Hammond 
organ plugin will allow you to vary the tone 
of the sound as you’re playing – a classic 
technique employed by veteran players of 
the real thing. Many software emulations of 
Hammond organs are also programmed to 
use input from a sustain pedal to switch 
between fast and slow Leslie rotary speaker 
speeds.
  EXPRESS YOURSELF 
Adding an expression pedal to your lineup 
will allow you to use it to control volume. 
Essentially a foot pedal devoted to the 
transmission of MIDI volume (CC#7) data,  
an expression pedal will let you create 
authentic swells, both in and out, when 
playing organ parts. You can also use one to 
add ultra-realistic crescendos to brass  
and strings patches. 
 SLOW IT DOWN 
If you’re trying but struggling to capture a 
really tricky keyboard part, remember that 
technology is on hand to help. Using a DAW has 
the huge advantage of being able to slow 
down the tempo of your tune. Capturing more 
difficult parts at a slower tempo, then speeding 
things back up again, will make you look like 
one of Jordan Rudess’ lesser-known cousins.
 PADDY POWER 
Generating notes from a set of drum pads, 
(such as Maschine’s note mode or the MPC-
style 4x4 grid of pads found on Akai’s MPK 
series of controllers) can yield interesting 
results, as it divorces the normal relationship 
you hold in your head between note pitches 
and the piano keyboard and frees you up to 
create truly random phrases.
 LEARN YOUR SKALES 
Native Instruments’ Komplete Kontrol series of 
controller keyboards feature coloured LEDs 
above the keys, that can be used to indicate the 
notes that make up different scales – useful 
when practising. You can set them to a visual 
guide, showing you the notes you need to hit 
to play the scale, or you can set the keyboard 
to map any note to the next nearest note in the 
selected scale, making it impossible to hit a 
wrong note. There are MIDI software 
remappers that can do this for you too, such as 
AutoTonic or Mosaic’s AutoTheory.
 SEABOARD SHUFFLE 
One of the more radical innovations in the MIDI 
controller world recently is the ROLI Seaboard, 
a collection of versatile sensors swathed in a 
neoprene outer skin, transforming the 
conventional keyboard that we know and love 
into a single slab of rippled, squishy silicone. 
Each ‘keywave’ responds to five different 
gestures that can control vibrato, pitch bend or 
key pressure, opening up a whole new world of 
expressiveness. It takes a little bit of work to 
get the best out of it at first, as the lack of a 
distinct physical boundary between notes 
means that you’ll need to step up the accuracy 
stakes when playing, but the enhanced 
expressive potential is more than worth it.
Eight more keyboard tips
Looking for a keyboard to help you learn scales? Komplete Kontrol’s coloured LEDs will guide your practising
Unlock creativity by programming melodies with pads 
The legendary Stevie Wonder is a fan of the harpejji
43
play keyboard like a pro / make music now <

Turn a good song into a surefire  
hit with our huge guide to crafting 
attention-grabbing lead lines, 
standout riffs and catchy melodies
44
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks
HOW TO WRITE

 45
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <
Music’s a funny old thing. You work, you learn, 
you obey all the rules, and sometimes… 
nothing. That track you’re working on might be 
perfection – a textbook example of your genre. 
Kick, hard and punchy; snare, thumpin’; vocal, 
lush and well recorded. You’ve done everything 
your favourite production mag has taught you, 
but still… it just doesn’t quite cut it. It’s good, but 
it’s not great.
You see, making a hit song – the kind that blows it 
into the stratosphere – has always been a balancing 
act. Audiences are looking for two opposing things 
at the same time: your track has to be just like 
everything they’ve heard before, but just a little 
different enough to give them something new. Too 
samey and you’ve not challenged them enough; too 
bold and experimental, and congratulations, you’ve 
just alienated everybody on the dancefloor.
So what’s the missing piece of the puzzle? Well if 
you’ve not guessed it by now, dear reader, you are 
in need of a hook. This magical element is going to 
give your song the ‘X factor’ – something to grab the 
listener’s attention and act as the focal point of your 
masterpiece. It’s the recognisable vocal that 
everyone can sing along to; it’s the synth line that 
nobody else could have come up with; it’s the 
inescapable groove that burrows into people’s 
minds and will simply not let go. It’s different, it’s 
unique, and it’s what makes your track your track. 
It’s Bon Jovi shouting Living on a Prayer, it’s the 
bassline in Billie Jean, and it’s the infectious guitar 
and drum groove of Get Lucky.
OK, simple, so just craft the catchiest riff anyone’s 
ever heard, get your audience hooked on your 
grade-A musical crack, and wait for the dollaz to 
start falling from the studio ceiling, yeah? Well sorry 
to burst your bubble, but it’s not as straightforward 
as that. Hooks are the holy grail of music, and you 
never know what’s going to work out and what’s 
going to fall flat on its face. With this massive guide, 
though, we’re going to turn the odds in your favour 
by showing you everything you need to know.

 > Step by step  1. Building a monophonic lead synth with Bazille CM 
Load up an instance of Bazille CM in 
your DAW and keep the Default patch 
loaded. We’re going to make a monophonic 
lead sound, so in the Voice section, switch 
from Poly to Mono mode. Our sound only 
uses one oscillator, so in the Osc 1 section 
over on the left-hand side, change the 
waveform from Saw to Square. 
1
Move the cable from the input of Out 1 
to the input of the filter section. Then 
drag a cable from the LP12 output of the 
filter section to the input of Out 1, 
replacing the one you moved. This places 
a 12dB/octave low-pass filter between the 
oscillator and the output. Set the filter 
Cutoff to 120 to trim off some of the upper 
harmonics, making the sound smoother 
and less bright.
2
In the Glide section, set the Mode 
parameter to Rate and the Amount to 
31. This will add a nifty pitch swoop to the 
front of each note. In terms of effects, the 
default delay effect works fine just as it is. 
Click the Save button at the top right to 
save the preset – we can use it in another 
tutorial later on.
3
Ask a hundred big-shot songwriters how they 
come up with their hooks, and you’ll get a 
hundred different answers. But when it comes 
to writing a solid, catchy earworm, two things 
remain consistent: first, often you just have to 
get lucky, and second, you’ll know it when 
you hear it – just like your audience.
Generating memorable hooks can be a 
challenge for even the most experienced 
tunesmith, and vast amounts of time have often 
been spent in pursuit of the ultimate hook. 
The challenge is to find something that’s 
completely unique, while at the same time 
fitting into the familiar musical landscape; 
memorable enough to be recalled, but not so 
infectious that it becomes annoying. So let’s run 
through a few initial considerations that will help 
get your priorities straight.
Keep it simple
When trying to come up with a dynamite hook, 
simpler is often better. Memorable motifs tend 
to be the ones that most people find easiest to 
remember – the sort of thing you only have to 
hear once to be able to sing it back. That’s the 
reason we use the word ‘hook’: it’s meant to lock 
instantly into your brain and lodge there.
From Beethoven to Beyoncé, the rule of 
simplicity holds true. Overstep your audience’s 
comprehension and you’ve blown it. So what 
about the musical content of your ear candy?
Notes and chords
There are two main schools of thought when it 
comes to ‘composing’ a hook. Some writers 
prefer to come up with a melodic hook first, then 
fit an appropriate set of chords underneath, 
while others prefer to start out with a chord 
progression and come up with something that 
fits over the top. None of these are better – as 
with most aspects of composition and 
production, it’s mostly a matter of personal taste 
and experimenting to find 
the method that works best 
for you.
If music theory isn’t  
your strong suit, it’s  
probably easier to start  
with an existing set of  
chords and sketch out your line instinctively. 
This approach also has the benefit of allowing 
you to use MIDI transformers such as AutoTonic 
CM (free with the mag this month) to lock 
incoming MIDI data to a scale or key that you 
know will work with the chords, giving you the 
freedom to just plonk away randomly and come 
up with something that sounds great. If you 
need a few pointers, look no further than our 
exhaustive guide to Chords & Scales in 
234.
So now that we have a workflow in mind, we 
want to reconsider the hookmeister’s mantra: 
‘simplicity is key’. But what does that actually 
mean in practical terms? Well, at its simplest, 
even though it might seem like a bit of an uncool 
approach at first, sometimes the more childish 
and nursery-rhymesque your motif is, the better.
So following that logic, the simplest type of 
hook is the monotone chant, that just sticks on 
one note and hammers it home with a catchy 
rhythm. Let’s take a look at how you might go 
about it.
Ground up: a one-note hook
Rhythm and syncopation are as important as the 
notes that form this type of hook, but we’ll get 
deeper into rhythm later on. For our first 
consideration, which note do you actually pick? 
The most obvious choice would be the  
root note or tonic of the key you’re in, but the 
most obvious isn’t always what works best.  
For instance, check out the chorus hook in the 
recent Little Mix single Shout Out To My Ex  
(bit.ly/LMshoutout) as an example. It’s in the key 
of F major, but the hook is centred around the 
fifth (the note C). By going for the fifth rather than 
the root, it’s given the whole chorus a particular 
feeling – there’s tension, caused by the need to 
resolve back to the root, which would be absent 
if the hook were based on F in the first place.
You can also get great results by picking a 
note that’s somehow at odds with the track – a 
flattened seventh for example. If the tune is in 
the key of C major, you could try a repeated B♭ 
note as your hook. 
As you add more notes to your hook, it makes 
sense to stay within the boundaries of the parent 
scale of the key you’re in – in other words, the 
set of notes that define the key of the song. The 
more notes you add, the more complex your 
hook will become, together with the added risk 
of it becoming less memorable, so finding the 
happy medium is your overall goal.
“From Beethoven to Beyoncé, 
the rule of simplicity holds true”
Even a one-note hook needs its note choosing wisely
46
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks
Hook theory basics

 > Step by step  2. Using basic music theory knowledge to build a simple hook 
The first step is to determine the key of 
the track and find the root note. There 
are various ways to do this, but the easiest 
is to plonk about on a keyboard until you 
hit a note that sounds like it’s the tonal 
centre of the piece. Our track shown here is 
grooving along in C minor, so the root note, 
or ‘tonic’, is probably C.
1
Our next step is to find the dominant, 
or fifth degree of the parent scale.  
You can find this by taking your root note 
(C in this case) and counting up seven 
semitones (black or white keys on your 
keyboard) from it. The note you land on  
– G in this case – will be the dominant.
2
Play in a rhythmic part that alternates 
between these two notes, such as the 
one shown here. The great thing about 
alternating between the tonic and the 
dominant like this is that it will work 
equally well over a major or minor key. 
This is because a key’s major or minor 
quality is determined not by the tonic  
or dominant, but by the third degree of 
the scale.
3
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <
47
Riffs & melodies
Whether it’s a synth, guitar or 
vocal line, a kickass melody or 
repeated riff that no one’s ever 
heard before can make a hugely 
effective hook, and also give 
you plenty of fodder to spin out 
the rest of a track. Classic 
examples include Sweet Child 
O’ Mine (bit.ly/GnRsweet) and 
Stayin’ Alive (bit.ly/BGstayin), 
both hugely recognisable and 
repeatable. A good modern 
example of this is Jonas Blue’s 
recent hit By Your Side  
(bit.ly/JBbyYS), which builds 
itself up to a highly infectious 
chorus melody.
Rhythm
A rhythmic hook could be a 
drum or percussion pattern, 
such as the contentious one in 
Thicke and Pharrel’s Blurred 
Lines, or Justin Timberlake’s 
Like I Love You. In the case of 
the JT example (bit.ly/JTlily), 
the sparse backing track lets a 
loose drum groove shine 
through. The combination of 
the drum track and that 
chopped-up acoustic guitar 
makes for a smash hit.
Repetition
Hooks generally benefit from a 
healthy dose of repetition, to 
reinforce the musical idea in 
the listener’s brain. Venerable 
songsmith Sting is a big fan of 
tenaciously going on and on 
and on and on until it feels like 
he can’t go on any longer, and 
the early catalogue of The 
Police is fittingly rife with 
repetition – from the relentless 
chorus of I Can’t Stand Losing 
You to the raucous So Lonely 
(bit.ly/PoliceSL) and of course 
Roxanne, whose repetition was 
parodied in (bit.ly/RoxFaster).
Lyrics
Sometimes, all it takes to form a 
hook is a catchy lyric. In Work It 
by Missy Elliot (bit.ly/MEworkit) 
for example, the line “I put my 
thing down, flip it, and reverse 
it”, is… flipped and reversed, to 
make “it’s your frimly dippy frem 
anyet”. Absolute nonsense, but 
you just can’t help wanting to 
sing it back. And you don’t even 
have to use actual words, as 
proved by Blur’s Song 2,  
(bit.ly/Blurr2) which simply 
relies on the “Woo-hoo!” to drive 
its point (if it has one) home.
Sound
Characterful sounds can often 
be hooks in themselves – case 
in point, Duck Sauce’s It’s You 
(bit.ly/DSitsyou). Love it or 
hate it, there’s no sound quite 
like that squeaky synth, and for 
better or for worse it’ll stick in 
your head. Gary Numan’s Cars 
is a fine example of a hook 
arising from a unique sound, 
although over the years it’s 
become less unusual. More 
recently, the many synth hooks 
currently on display in the 
charts that are fashioned from 
vocal audio is evidence that 
voice manipulation has been a 
big influence on music. You 
can still do great things with 
the simplest of sounds, 
however, such as the little 
monosynth hook in Clean 
Bandit’s Heart On Fire.
We reckon that these five factors are the crucial 
ingredients for a unique and memorable tune
Baiting the hook

Ever one to go 
along with the 
crowd, Katy has 
been known  
to whoop
Photo: ddp USA/REX/Shutterstock
 > Step by step  4. Using the same hook in different genres 
The synth hook in this tropical house-
style track uses a combination of an 
analogue synth lead sound and a vocal 
sample that’s been treated in Logic Pro X’s 
Alchemy to produce the kind of radio-
friendly sound that can be heard on  
many current hits. You can find the MIDI 
file for the part in the Tutorial Files folder 
on FileSilo..
1
Here, the same hook can be found 
fronting this disco house tune, played 
by a different analogue synth lead that’s 
more suited to this style. We’ve simply 
imported the MIDI file and changed the 
sound to suit the track. Both tracks are in 
the key of C minor, so the part works well 
in both settings without any transposition.
2
For this rock tune, we’ve transposed 
the same MIDI file up four semitones 
to the key of E minor. We’re using the LED 
80s Rock Saw MK lead synth preset from 
Synthmaster CM for this one. We’ve also 
removed some of the shorter notes and 
lengthened some others to fill the gaps. 
This simplified rhythm works better with 
the faster tempo of this track compared to 
the previous two.
3
 > Step by step  3. Building a complex hook from layers 
Here’s a chorus section of a track that 
features just drums, bass and piano, in 
the key of C minor. We’ll start building our 
hook by simply replacing the chords that 
the piano is playing with short, staccato 
versions of the same chords played by a 
marimba sample. This marimba part could 
also be used on its own as the intro to the 
song, for instance.
1
Next, we program in a single note riff 
on a different track, also loaded with 
the same marimba sound - the factory 
African Marimba preset from Logic Pro X’s 
EXS24 sampler. To match the rest of the 
notes in our track, this riff is constructed 
using notes from the C minor scale.
2
In the gaps, we program a little 
answering phrase to fill in the gaps 
between the main hook. We can either use 
the same marimba sound for this – as it 
suits the part and could work to make a 
complex, all-marimba hook – or we could 
use a different sound for this part, for a 
kind of ‘duelling hooks’ effect. Something 
like a mono synth sound, for instance, or 
even a sung vocal hook.
3
Let’s get down to the nitty gritty by taking a look 
at a few real examples of hooks from  
recent years. The Millennial Whoop, as it’s  
come to be known, was identified as ‘a thing’ 
recently, after cropping up over and over again 
in the last few years (bit.ly/millWhoop).
Basically, the ‘whoop’ is an element of a  
vocal hook that involves a shift in the melody 
from the fifth note in the scale to the third note 
and back to the fifth once more. For instance, if 
your song is in the key of C major and your 
melody swings from a G note (the fifth note of 
the C major scale) down to an E (the third note 
of the C major scale) and back up again, there 
you have it. Examples can be found in a huge 
number of recent hit songs, across many 
different genres, from artists like Katy Perry 
(California Gurlz), Little Mix (Hair), Chris Brown 
(Turn Up The Music), One Direction (Live While 
We’re Young), Kings of Leon (Use Somebody), 
Owl City (Good Time), Fifth Harmony (Anything 
Is Possible) and the Lumineers (Ho Hey) to name 
but a few. It’s popular not just because it sounds 
upbeat, celebratory or euphoric, but because it 
feels familiar, easy to sing along to and 
remember. Which is, after all, what a good hook 
is all about!
That said, the enormity of its use over the  
last five years in particular has saturated the 
market somewhat, so it might be time to give  
it a bit of a wide berth for now. Use the Millennial 
Whoop at your peril!
48
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks
The Millennial Whoop

;OLZV\YJLMVY[LJOI\`PUNHK]PJL
techradar.com

Four famous hooks dissected
Find out what makes this quartet of classic tracks so damn catchy
 ARTIST 
Lipps Inc
 TRACK 
Funky Town
 ARTIST 
Calvin Harris
 TRACK 
Outside
 0:00  This tune’s rhythm track, from 
the word go, is a hook in itself, with 
rapid-fire, dual-tone cowbells clattering 
over a solid disco beat played on a live 
kit. At the same time, a beautiful round 
Moog synth bass kicks things off with 
an insistent eighth-note sequence of 
alternate octaves on C.
 0:05  We’re straight in with the main 
synth hook: a bright, bleepy 
monophonic synth sound played in the 
mixolydian mode over the key of C 
major. This means that, although the 
song is in the key of C major at this 
point, the synth part has a B♭ rather 
than the B normally found in C major.
 0:12  After just four bars, the riff is 
joined by another great hook - the 
vocoded lead verse vocal, playing 
another single-line melody, also in  
C major. The synth lead fills in the  
gaps after the first two lines.
 0:27  “Well, I talk about it…” in comes a 
regular, three-part harmony vocal, 
repeating “talk about it” four times, 
stepping down a note each time.
 0:43  “Gotta move on…”, the three-part 
harmony continues, repeating this  
C B♭ C phrase over the first three notes 
of the main synth riff as it continues for 
another six bars.
 0:59  Here we get a rhythmical hook – 
four bars of white noise stabs, probably 
from a Minimoog. The chorus bassline 
also makes an early appearance in the 
last two bars, as does a seemingly 
random ‘peep-peep’ on a whistle!
 1:07  It’s chorus time! Heralded by a 
glorious, full-stereo guitar lick that pulls 
us into the key of C minor with a funky 
Cm7 chord – yet another hook.
 1:07  Meanwhile, the lead vocal, without 
harmonies this time, takes us in a 
whole new direction, entreating “won’t 
you take me to Funkytown?” using 
notes from the C minor blues scale.
 1:23  Essentially an instrumental repeat 
of the chorus, this section features a 
unison string section playing the chorus 
melody in place of the lead vocalist.
 1:35  Bada-ba-ba-bakow! go the guitar 
and snare drum in unison, playing an  
F major chord stab to announce the 
middle 8. This happens four times, with 
a bluesy sax riff filling the gaps.
 3:17  The final hook is a male vocoded 
version of the chorus lead vocal that 
takes over from the female lead for the 
“won’t you take me to” line of the final 
sung chorus. We could analyse this 
track all day, thanks to its catchiness…
but we gotta move on.
 0:00  The main instrumental hook 
comes in two different incarnations, 
the first of which we’re treated to from 
the outset. Twin picky guitars kick 
things off, one playing arpeggiated B♭, 
Gm, Dm and C chords while the second 
picks out what will eventually become 
the main hook. The two heavily 
processed guitar parts intertwine 
beautifully, continuing on throughout 
the entire first verse, providing the 
backdrop to Ellie Goulding’s vocals.
 0:10  “Look at what you’ve done…” 
Enter the lead vocal, singing a melody 
in the key of D minor. The phrases in 
the melody are largely made up of 
simple runs up and down the notes in 
the scale. A powerful hook bounces 
between alternating F and D notes – 
“there’s a power in what you do…” 
before ending on a “wo-ah”.
 0:40  Now we get the second version of 
the main hook, with the same melody 
previously taken by the picky guitar 
now played by a combo of synth and 
live, unison strings with a healthy dose 
of portamento (glide). The rest of the 
track begins to build in intensity up to 
the next section, while Ellie Goulding 
sings the main chorus hook (“I’ll show 
you what it feels like, now I’m on the 
outside”) over the top. The main lyric is 
punctuated by the “oh-ah” vocal hook 
after every line. Chorus? Pre-chorus? It 
builds like a bridge musically,  
quarter-note handclaps and snare rolls 
building the tension, ready for…
 1:09  …the drop! The vocal drops out 
and the main hook repeats in full force 
over a stepped-up groove, with four-to-
the-floor kicks and that bendy string 
hook more prominent and pronounced.
 1:24  The track drops down to the 
second verse, with a reprise of the 
picky guitar hook and the same vocal 
melody repeated from the first verse.
 1:42  “I’m holdin’ on … never enough for 
me”. This answering backing vocal in 
three-part harmony halfway through 
the verse is a choice little piece of ear 
candy that gives us something new.
 2:39  After a repeat of the verse, pre-
chorus and chorus, we drop back to a 
middle-eight section made mainly from 
the arpeggiated guitar from the intro, 
with a new vocal hook laid over the top. 
This has the same lyric as the chorus 
vocal, but uses a different melody.
 2:54  In a final repeat of the pre-chorus 
section, we get a new backing vocal 
hook with a harmonised “aah-aah-aah” 
part that complements the main lead.
bit.ly/CHoutside
bit.ly/FnkyTn
0:05 
0:10
0:00 
0:00
0:12
0:40
0:59
1:07
0:43
1:24
1:42 
2:54
3:17
1:35
1:23
0:27
1:09
2:39
An oldie-but-goodie, this  
1979 slice of disco/funk  
fusion is a masterclass in  
how to assemble multiple 
hooks into one smash hit
Curious one this, as it features 
an instrumental chorus  
that drops the lead vocal 
melody while a killer string 
hook takes centre stage…
50
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks

 ARTIST 
Beyoncé
 TRACK 
Crazy In Love
 ARTIST 
The 
Chainsmokers
 TRACK 
Don’t Let  
Me Down
 0:00  The main sampled hook of the 
tune hits the ground running, with  
full-on blaring horns and ride cymbal-
led samba-style percussion. In the key 
of D minor but alternating between B♭ 
and G major chords, this is lifted 
entirely from the Chi-Lites’ 1970 song 
Are You My Woman? (Tell Me So). 
 0:02  The main hook is joined a 
moment later by some freestyling  
Jay-Z, who introduces the tune with a 
few throwaway lines.
 0:14  “Uh-oh uh-oh uh-oh oh no-no!” 
This famous vocal hook takes over 
from the horns, with the percussion 
loop continuing beneath. The rhythm 
of the “uh-oh” hook is based on the  
part that would normally be played  
by go-go bells in the Samba genre  
on which the percussion groove is 
based, explaining why it fits so well  
in the track.
 0:24  In comes the main hook again, just 
for two bars, to set up the first verse.
 0:29  Out drops the brass hook to be 
replaced by the verse vocal, the 
percussion loop and the odd horn stab 
taken from the sample. The vocal 
melody in the verse is centred mainly 
around only three notes – D, C and E – 
from the D minor scale.
 0:43  There are a couple of ‘one-shot’ 
hooks in this record – little ear treats 
that only happen once – and this is one 
of them: a sampled voice saying “yeah”, 
with a quarter-note delay added.
 0:48  Our first proper chorus, with the 
main brass riff pounding back in, and 
Beyoncé gives it “Got me lookin’ so 
crazy right now…”, again using only 
three notes (F, G and D) for the entire 
chorus vocal hook.
 1:20  Another one-off hook: the spoken 
verse lyric: “Who he think he is?”
 2:01  Jay-Z does his thing over brass 
stabs and percussion.
 2:35  The “uh-oh” hook returns beneath 
this part of the rap section, this time 
with added phaser effects!
 2:44  For the middle-eight, we get a 
new vocal hook over the intro chords; 
“You got me lookin…”. This lyric is sung 
half-time, and this time we’ve added in 
an A note to the melody. Three-part 
harmony backing vocals chime in with 
a G7 chord on the words “crazy”, 
“baby”, “foolish”, and “do this”.
 2:58  Another new vocal hook adds  
the lines “but your love’s got the  
best of me, baby you’re makin’ a fool of 
me”, with lots of soulful harmonies 
added in.
 0:00  One of the tune’s main hooks is 
the first thing we hear – a sultry-toned 
picky jazz guitar riff, underpinned after 
four bars by long bass notes sustaining 
the root note of the underlying  
chords (E B F
♯ G
♯m). The riff picks out 
the third in each chord as each change 
happens – a good tip for generating 
hooks of your own.
 0:13  Entering smoothly over the guitar 
hook, Daya’s verse melody is a very 
simple one, and thus very memorable, 
involving the notes B, G
♯ and B♭. This 
suggests that we might be in the key of 
G
♯m here, as these are the first three 
notes in the G
♯ minor scale.
 0:36  “I need ya” sings Daya, three 
times before adding “right now”. This 
repeated, three-note hook (E D
♯ C
♯) 
takes up the first half of this section, 
ending with the “now” on a B note. 
Stepping through scale tones in 
sequence like this is another useful 
hook-generation method.
 0:48  The second half of this section, 
the “It’s in my head” lyric, breaks out 
the melody a little over a kick and clap 
loop. The “here when I need” line shares 
two notes (B and G
♯) that are a major 
sixth apart – always a nice, dramatic 
interval to place into a melody.
 0:54  “Don’t let me, don’t let me” 
mirrors the three note “I need ya” trick 
from the previous section, but higher 
up in pitch, using B, B♭ and G
♯, before 
settling on the F
♯ for “down”.
 1:00 Preceded by a final “Don’t let me 
down” (G
♯ E, D
♯), the drop is where all 
hell breaks loose. The weird bendy 
synth line is another really ear-catching 
hook, the unique sound making it 
memorable despite – or is that because 
of – the heavy portamento smearing 
the pitches of the notes. The chorus 
vocal melody is based around the  
same three notes that bring in the drop 
(G
♯ E D
♯), and repeats throughout with a 
few minor variations. Somewhere in 
the background is a group of guys 
singing “Hey!” on the offbeats.
 2:12  The middle-eight section brings  
us a new keyboard hook played by  
a brassy synth sound like a miniature 
fanfare, hopping from three C
♯ notes  
up to D
♯ over double-speed kicks.  
We also get another new vocal hook  
– “ooh I think I’m losing my mind  
now, yeah”.
 3:01  With the middle section chords 
forming the song’s outro, a higher 
version of the brassy synth riff helps 
round things off nicely.
bit.ly/CSdlmd
bit.ly/BeyCrayJay
0:14
0:13  
0:00
0:00  
0:24 
0:29 
0:02
0:36
0:43
0:48
0:48 
1:00  
2:44
2:58
2:12  
3:01
2:01
2:35
1:20
0:54
This corker, released in 2003, 
is a great example of how 
one great sampled hook  
can provide the foundation 
for a worldwide smash
This gem from the unhealthy-
sounding New York duo is 
packed with more hooks 
than a fisherman’s tackle  
box, as we discover below
51
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <

 > Technique  5. Rhythm and repetition 
 > Technique  6. Melismatic vocals 
 
Stretching a word or single syllable out  
over multiple notes is known as a melisma, 
and it’s a technique commonly found in  
pop music. The most widely-known classical 
or folk example is probably the singalong 
“Glo-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-ria” chorus from 
Ding Dong Merrily On High, but there are 
many more recent examples from the field of 
popular music. Annie Lennox, for example, 
wondered “Why-y-y-yy-yy-y-y-y”, and Bruno 
Mars is another guy who likes a good 
melisma (“24 carat magic in the ai-i—i-i-ir”). 
While you’ve still got to fill in the notes, you 
won’t need to come up with lyrics.
So that they stick in the listener’s brain to 
keep them coming back for more, hooks 
generally need to be short and easily 
repeatable. Throughout the history of pop 
music, its repetitive nature has often been a 
target for criticism, yet it’s what helps to 
hammer a hook home so that the song 
endures. The key is to use the right amount of 
repetition, so that it does the job without 
crossing over into being annoying. If you can 
tap into a rhythmic feel that’s the kind of 
thing you might hum while walking to the 
shops for a loaf, then so much the better. The 
“Bam bam be dam bam bam be dam dam” 
hook in Rihanna’s Disturbia is a good 
example of this idea.
Now let’s hook it up with a funky, 
rhythmic vocoder chant, singing 
“Yeah, we just wanna rock with you”. 
The rhythm dovetails nicely with the 
piano part, and the vocoder is a blend 
of two sounds, each triggered by a 
version of the pad part.
2
Now we add a long, flowing 
melody, played here by a synth, but 
which would ordinarily be the kind of 
part that would be sung by a vocalist. 
The long notes float over the top of the 
vocoder chant, ascending gradually 
without getting in the way of things. 
Double hooks!
3
Sometimes you can combine short, 
rhythmic hooks and long, flowing 
ones to great effect. Here’s an example 
piece not too dissimilar to a recent 
chart hit. It’s just drums, bass and keys 
at this stage.
1
Why stop at one hook?  
Here’s a way to combine 
multiple ideas into one 
overarching theme
 > Technique 
 7. Overlaying hooks 
52
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks
Quick-fire hook ideas 1
Every hook is different – will one of these effects 
be the silver bullet for your next catchy motif?

53
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <
Percussive and rhythmic hooks
Beat out a new furrow with these drum and perc ideas
Club-destined underground genres such as 
tech-house and techno usually forfeit obvious 
lead melodies, full-blown vocals and 
instrumentation; instead, simple percussion riffs 
and atonal ‘call-and-answer’ sounds are 
sequenced to create raw, rugged, driving drops.
For a popular minimal house trick, start with 
a tuned electronic percussion hit such as a clave 
or 808 cowbell – this can either be a drum 
sample loaded into a sampler, or synthesised 
using any synth – then lay down a hyper-basic, 
hypnotic riff that works nicely over a simple 
beat-and-bass groove, forming the core melodic 
focus of the drop in the absence of a traditional 
hook. To make the perc lead’s pitch rise or fall 
during key sections of an arrangement, assign 
the sample’s pitch to a MIDI knob, then record in 
unusual variations on the fly. Also assign other 
insert effects’ parameters such as reverb time 
and ping-pong delay feedback to MIDI dials for 
further intensity-swelling potential.
Nothing is as primal, driving or 
relentless as a melodically-sparse 
drop crammed with drum rhythms. 
Many styles of house, techno and 
electronica take inspiration from 
tribal, African and Brazilian grooves, 
so for a feel similar to tracks such as 
GotSome’s Zulu or Mele’s Ambience, 
have a go at making a hook from a 
montage of bongos, congas or toms. 
Program one-shot samples, chop up 
and rearrange loops from sample 
packs, or even grab a mic and record 
your own percussion! If there’s a 
drum hit you use repeatedly in the riff, 
copy it to a new channel and make 
subtle variations – reverse, filter, 
modulate, you name it!
10. Tribal  
workouts
8. Tonal perc
Want to inject an epic Hollywood feel into your 
tracks? Then try out cinematic percussion as your 
main hook! Fire up an epic movie drum sample 
library, reach for your MIDI drum pads, then bash out 
a raucous rhythm of timpani drum hits, booming 
bass drums, crashing gongs and tension-building 
toms. Limit and sidechain the hits to fit them with 
your kick and snare, and layer a simple sine wave or 
808 sub underneath to fill out the bottom end.
9. Action drums

 > Technique 
 11. Note lengths 
 > Technique  13. St-st-stuttering vocal hooks!  
Stuttering sampled vocals are a dance 
music staple. To begin, load Vocal.wav 
into a sampler , then add a little 
performance reverb and delay via sends  
– we’ll use Ableton Live 9’s built-in effects, 
but feel free to experiment.
1
Set the sampler’s amplitude envelope 
Release time to 8ms, This keeps the 
release tight when a note stops. Play a riff 
in via a MIDI keyboard: by jamming in 
short 16th-notes, we can repeat just the 
start portion of the vocal for a st-st-
stuttering effect!
2
Finally, we add some variations at the 
end of the phrase by programming a 
longer MIDI note, triggering the entire 
length of the vocal phrase for variation. 
We also push the delay send amount up 
during this longer segment for spatial 
‘bloom’ and impact.
3
Sometimes, the space around a note is just as 
important as the note itself – and this is 
especially important when programming  
riffs. By making the notes of a riff very short, 
you’ll draw more attention to its rhythmic 
interplay, and how the melody interacts with 
the track’s drums, adding more emphasis to 
the overall groove and creating more space  
in your mix. 
Extending a few notes in the riff by just a 
small amount will have a massive impact  
and add much-needed contrast. Use effects 
such as delay or reverb with a short  
feedback/decay time to add subtle ambience 
between the notes without messing up the 
carefully-constructed groove; and add a 
crescendo by automating up the synth’s  
amp envelope release time, swelling the synth 
open before a breakdown or at the end of a 
16-bar section.
Need to give a synth hook more punch and impact? 
Try layering a sharp transient over the start of each 
note. To prevent transient collision in the mix, use the 
punchy elements that occur at the same time (kick, 
snare, hats, etc) to trigger sidechain compression on 
the transient layer – dial in a fast attack and a slightly 
slower release for around 6dB of invisible gain 
reduction. Create your own attack layers with short 
bursts of synthesised white noise – or check out 
217’s Layering Toolkit pack for tons of transient samples.
54
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks
 > Technique  
12. Transient impact

55
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <
When it comes to writing 
crowd-rockin’ riffs and 
melodies, DnB outfit  
Simon James and Ben Hall 
are two of the best in  
the biz. We grilled them for  
their top hook-writing tips… 
: Do you guys have any background in 
music theory? Or do you create your 
melodies using trial and error? 
DH: “We mostly create melodies through stages 
of development and tweaking after an initial 
idea. Sometimes you nail it first time and then 
spend days slowly working in a circle as you try 
to improve it… but other times you just make it 
worse and have to revert back to the original! 
“It also depends on whether you create the 
melody with the finished sound you want to 
use, or develop the sound afterwards. With 
electronic music the sound is just as important, 
if not more important than note selection, so it 
can be a process of refining the sound and/or 
melody rather than just working on the notes.”
: Do you have a particular way of working 
when trying to nail a solid, memorable lead? 
Perhaps writing the lead synth first helps the 
other parts fit into place? Or do you lay down 
beats and bass before jamming out leads?
DH: “You want it to be memorable and simple. It 
totally varies at what point in the song’s 
development the melody is written. Sometimes 
we’ll have a sound we like and write a melody; 
other times we won’t realise the tune is lacking 
a melody until later in the process. If you were 
being efficient and clever, then getting the main 
focus of the track nailed first and then writing 
around it is ideal, but a lot of tunes are often a 
process of trial and error. You may end up 
finding that your idea doesn’t even vaguely 
resemble what you started with.”
: It’s often said that “less is more” when 
writing catchy, dancefloor-focused tracks. 
How do you nail that perfect balance of 
catchiness and minimalism? 
DH: “Constant refinement and a fresh pair of 
ears. The first listen after a break can tell you 
instantly whether the melody or whatever kind 
of hook you’re creating is right, especially if 
you’ve gone way over the top and made it too 
complicated. To nail the balance, getting the 
basic idea down is key and then you come back 
to it again and again, tweaking different 
elements until it all feels like it’s sitting 
comfortably together.”
: A DnB track’s melodic focus is often a 
combination of many elements – for 
example, a bass riff, lead synth and vocal 
chops that all work together to create an 
overall ‘hook’. How do you go about creating 
this interplay of melodies?
DH: “Firstly, it’s a good idea to sit down and have 
studio day when you just make or find some 
cool synth patches – when you want to write a 
tune you’ll have an arsenal of sounds to draw 
from and quickly put things together. 
“Secondly, it’s good to have an initial idea in 
your head of how they can interplay together. 
From that it’s a process of trial and error again. 
In DnB, people often use complex synths that 
have a lot of movement. I’ve found that after 
getting an initial idea, bouncing down the parts 
to audio and then trying different bits can help 
you achieve that perfect interplay of sounds. It 
feels like a game of Tetris.” 
: What’s your approach when creating 
catchy, memorable vocal hooks? 
DH: “If you are going to mess around with the 
vocal like it’s an instrument, then taking an 
acapella and creating the idea is the best way to 
do it, so it can be the focus of your track. Doing 
it the other way around means you can often be 
playing catchup and bending it to fit the rest of 
your track, which hard when it’s the focus. If it’s 
a natural, song-based vocal hook, it’s always 
good to have a vibe to work with, even if it’s quite 
basic. We’ll often lift the finalised acapella and 
write a new backing to it – almost like a remix.” 
: Do you have any tips or tricks for writing 
memorable hooks and drop leads?
DH: “Don’t labour too long over melodies if they 
aren’t working. Songwriting is a numbers game, 
so the more songs you write, the more chances 
of coming up with great material you have. It’s 
partly a question of vibe and perspective, both 
of which you will lose if you keep slogging away 
at the same tune.
“Looking back at the toplines and melodies 
in our tunes that have been finished, they’ve 
mostly come very quickly. This doesn’t change 
the advice about tweaking and slowly working 
on them, but you have to have a good basis.”
www.facebook.com/deltaheavyuk
www.ramrecords.com
TIPS FROM THE PROS
 Delta Heavy

 > Step by step  14. Crafting a DJ Snake-style sampled vocal patch 
Chopping up a song’s main vocal line 
to use as sample fodder is nothing 
new, but modern pop tracks are taking 
this approach to extremes. Let’s create our 
own DJ Snake-style sampled vocal melody. 
Load the WAVs beginning “Pop…” onto 
audio tracks in a 95bpm project, then stick 
a D16 Frontier limiter on the master bus. 
The vocal comes from Loopmasters’ Kate 
Wild Vocal Hooks & Acapellas Volume 2.
1
First, we need to pick a single vocal 
sound out of the acapella to use as the 
basis of our sampled hook. The best way 
to do this is to load the entire file into a 
sampler, then adjust the start point until 
we get a position that responds well to 
jamming via MIDI. We’re using Ableton 
Live, so we load the audio clip into a 
Simpler. Make sure Warp is off, Classic 
mode enabled and Volume set to -6dB.
2
The start of the second line works well 
(“I hide away a…”), so adjust the 
sample start/end markers to encompass 
this section. Enable the sampler’s 
monophonic mode – in Simpler, set Voices 
to 1 – then activate Glide in the Controls 
section. This allows us to create cool pitch 
glides by playing overlapping notes. While 
we’re at it, we set Transpose to +4 to bring 
it to concert pitch.
3
Now let’s create a variation by 
changing the sample start point. Put 
the Simpler in a Rack (click its header, then 
press Cmd/Ctrl-G), then duplicate its 
Chain and solo the new Chain as above (if 
you’re using a different DAW, you can 
accomplish a similar thing by duplicating 
the whole track). We adjust the sample 
Start point again to locate a vibratoed note, 
“of”, then set Transpose to -1 to tune it.
4
For a third variation, we make a 
duplicate of the first Chain once again. 
Looping the body of the initial “I” syllable 
should give a sustained sound that’s great 
for melodic play, so turn on Loop and 
adjust the Loop and Length parameters 
to its left so the later part of the sound is 
looped, turning up Fade to smooth the 
start/end overlap. The loop is too short 
though, giving a noticeable buzzy quality…
5
To get around this, we use a high-quality 
timestretch algorithm to lengthen the  
clip (PopVoxHideStretched.wav), then 
reimport it into the sampler as before. To 
finish, we open the Rack’s Chain view, set 
the first Chain to cover the full range, 
right-click and select Distribute Ranges 
Equally, then map the Chain Selector to 
Macro 1. We can now use Macro 1 to flip 
between our three variations on the fly.
6
56
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks
Mix the human voice with production techniques  
for thoroughly modern, Major Lazer-style results
Tons of current pop songs feature vocal samples 
played in a melodic fashion, often alongside 
traditional sung vocals. Even a cursory browse 
of today’s hottest hits will turn up countless 
examples, but try Major Lazer & DJ Snake feat. 
MØ’s Lean On (bit.ly/MLDSlean) for a textbook 
one. The squeaky, high-pitched vocal solo 
beginning at 2:12 is constructed from vocal 
notes played back in a sampler. Right at the end 
of the song, you can hear a brief acapella from 
MØ that is likely part of the source material. 
(And by the way, sample-spotters: the “eh-eh-
ohh” hook at 0:49 is actually a one-shot from the 
Vengeance Essential House 3 sample pack!)
Hooks created in this way have a hummable, 
singalong catchiness. To make your own, source 
a sustained vocal note, load it in a sampler, loop 
it if necessary, then use it to play riffs and leads. 
It can take some experimentation to locate 
suitable vocal sounds, and while your song’s 
main vocal track is the most logical sound 
source, don’t be afraid to use acapellas from 
completely different singers if it sounds good.
If you’re working with a vocalist rather than 
using prerecorded material, ask them to 
perform a bunch of one-note vocal sounds for 
use in this way. It may not seem like it – to your 
singer especially – at the time of recording, but 
having off-the-cuff cut-ups like these can prove 
a real goldmine when it comes to writing a track.
For variety, set up multiple patches and switch 
between them during the hook. For instance, you 
might have a sustained loop for your main, a 
vibratoed note for expression, and a nonsense 
vocal phrase to add flavour. Some vocal sounds 
will work better in certain octave ranges, too – 
especially relevant since you’ll often transpose 
vocals far away from their natural pitch!
Now let’s show you how it’s done, first 
building a patch before writing a melody with it.
Singing samplers

 > Step by step  15. Programming a DJ Snake-style sampled vocal hook 
 > Step by step  16. Three more processed vocal hooks 
In the previous tutorial, we built a DJ 
Snake-style sampled vocal patch with 
three variations. To follow along, load the 
WAVs beginning “Pop…” as before in a 
95bpm project, plus PopVoxPatch.adg  
in a Simpler instrument. Create a new  
eight-bar MIDI clip starting at bar 9, and 
set the Chain selector to 64 to select the 
sustained vocal sound.
1
The distorted vocal hook in tracks like 
Neiked ft. Dyo’s Sexual almost sounds 
like a different instrument altogether. To 
make your own, load a vocal snippet in a 
sampler, then add a short reverb with 
plenty of wet signal mixed in, followed by 
distortion. We used FabFilter’s Saturn to 
distort the lows and highs separately. Play 
the sample an octave or two higher than 
its natural pitch.
1
The backing is in A♯ minor (aka B♭ 
minor), using the chord sequence  
A♯m, C♯, F♯, G♯. So our melody will be based 
on the notes of the basic A♯ minor scale:  
A♯, B♯, C♯, D♯, E♯, F♯, G♯. In the DAW, this will  
be notes A♯, C, C♯, D♯, F, F♯ and G♯,  
shown above. See 
234’s guide to 
Chords & Scales for an in-depth look at 
these concepts and more.
2
Desiigner’s heavyweight hit Tiimmy 
Turner uses auto-tuning for a robotic 
vocal. Get the effect for free with 
MeldaProduction MAutoPitch, with Depth 
and Speed on full to brutally snap every 
note’s pitch to the nearest full note. Select 
a scale for more musical results. We’ve 
applied it to a vocal from Loopmasters’ 
ace Iconical Vocals Volume 2 pack.
2
We can create a strong melody by 
incorporating the strongest notes of 
the scale: the first, fourth and fifth. That 
gives A♯, D♯ and F, which we lead into from 
the sixth, F♯, to give a bit of flavour. We 
then go to C♯, which coincides with the 
move to the C♯ chord halfway through the 
bar. Our lick starts on the offbeat, adding 
interest to an otherwise very basic idea.
3
Downwards formant-shifting gives a 
deep, authoritative vocal, as in Crnkn’s 
Heart. Carrying on from the last step, we 
decrease MAutoPitch’s Formant Shift to 
-6. Light bitcrushing adds dirty digital 
roughness. Note that our backing track 
comes from the Hybrid Trap teaser pack in 
238’s free 1GB Loopmasters samples.
3
Next we repeat the whole lick at beat 
3, this time starting on the downbeat – 
this gives a different rhythmic emphasis 
while retaining familiarity, which aids 
catchiness. We’ve also thrown in G♯ and D♯ 
notes. You can overlap certain notes or 
throw brief extra notes in during sustained 
notes, to create effects with glides.
4
The complete eight-bar hook combines 
one-off licks and runs with repetitive 
figures – we’ve included it as a MIDI file 
and Ableton Live clip. For variety, automate 
the Chain Selector to switch between the 
three sampled variations and automate 
the Glide parameter to change bend 
speed. See these in action in the video.
5
Let’s finish it off with some effects. In 
the video, we add Reverberate CM 
twice, for reflections and room spaces, 
then we whack on a D16 Group Frontier 
Limiter with its Threshold at -30dB and 
Output at -24dB – this extreme squashing 
gives an obvious pumping effect between 
the notes.
6
57
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <

Let’s make a bendy, high-pitched lead 
sound for trap, dubstep or grime using 
any DAW and Xfer Records’ Serum (there’s 
a demo available from xferrecords.com). 
Set the BPM to 80, then import  
Backing.wav from Tutorial Files. Add 
Serum onto a fresh MIDI channel and 
import Lead.mid to trigger the synth.
1
Turn Serum’s channel fader down to 
-7dB to keep levels in check, then 
open the synth and set Oscillator A’s 
wavetable type to Analog_BD_Sin – a 
clean, solid sine tone. Next, push the 
Unison amount to 3 and Blend to 50: this 
stacks and detunes three unison voices 
for an instantly bigger, wider sound.
2
We’ll add a spectral oscillator into the 
mix to give the lead some extra 
harmonics and movement – turn on Osc B 
and choose the Spectral » Bowed Metal 
wavetable. We’ll use Oscillator A to 
frequency-modulate Oscillator B’s Warp 
dial – select FM (From A) from Osc B’s 
Warp menu, then use LFO 1 to modulate 
the Warp dial by an amount of 45. Gritty!
3
A touch of portamento will make the 
riff notes lazily glide into each other: 
turn the Portamento Time (bottom right) 
to around 100ms and set the Mode to 
Always. To finish, add a splash of space by 
opening Serum’s FX page and turning on 
the Reverb effect.
4
 > Step by step  17. Designing a bendy trap lead from scratch  
The need for leads
Aside from the key and scale of 
the notes played, the timbre of a 
lead or hook tends to define the 
genre it’s used in. For example, an 
EDM/big room banger will 
typically call for a glossy, reverb-
soaked synth that’s pushed right 
to the front of the speakers while 
also containing plenty of 
impressive stereo width. When 
creating lead sounds of this style, 
use harmonically rich oscillators 
such as sawtooth or square 
waves, alongside plenty of 
unison, detuning, layering and 
effects to give a dense end result 
that dominates the mix. 
In contrast, urban styles such 
as grime typically use subtle, 
thin, ‘cheap’ synth timbres. For 
8-bit vibes, there are oodles of 
Commodore 64 SID chip-inspired 
sample packs out there, while 
our own miniBit CM is a great 
starting point for those 8-bit 
source sounds, which can then be 
roughed up further with 
distortion and bitcrushing.
When balancing your lead 
sound’s frequencies and 
perceived mix density, always 
consider the other sounds 
present in the track. If your lead 
vocal dominates the centre of the 
mix, design a thinner lead synth 
that sits further out to the sides. 
In contrast, an instrumental 
dance record will need the lead 
hook and chords to take centre-
stage, so dial in the appropriate 
weight and thickness in the 
absence of competing parts.
 > Step by step  18. GrimeBoy hooks with AudioThing miniBit CM 
Retro, lo-fi leads are great for grime or 
dubstep hooks, so let’s use 
AudioThing’s miniBitCM to design one. Set 
the BPM to 70 then import Backing.wav 
from the Tutorial Files folder. Add  
miniBit CM to a new MIDI/instrument 
track, then drop Lead.mid on the channel 
to trigger the synth. We like the Flute Ish 
preset’s classic video game sound.
1
To crunch the lead up, load D16 
Decimort 2 (there’s a demo available 
from d16.pl) to the MIDI track, then dial in 
a Resampler Frequency amount of 
around 2.7kHz for a grittier, more lo-fi 
timbre. Set the Quantizer resolution down 
to 12 to add bite, then push the Jitter 
amount to around 6% to add extra digital 
errors and noise.
2
A pitched delay will give our hook a 
unique sound. Add Soundtoys 
Crystallizer (demo at soundtoys.com) to 
the MIDI track and change the Delay time 
to 1/16th notes and the Splice time to 
1/32nd notes. Crystallizer now grabs a 
shorter slice of the incoming audio. Finally, 
push the Pitch up to 1200 Cents and rein 
the Mix back to around 10% to add a cool 
delay pitched an octave up.
3
58
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks

59
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <
Quick-fire hook ideas 2
Get some lightning-fast inspiration for your next hook
There’s one kind of hook that’s guaranteed to 
screw up faces and unite a dancefloor: a fat, 
filthy synth bassline! In fact, genres like drum  
’n’ bass, UK garage and bassline house almost 
entirely rely upon a simple-yet-catchy bassline 
doing its thing over a supporting beat. A prime 
example is DJ Hazard’s Bricks Don’t Roll  
(bit.ly/DJHbricks), a modern DnB anthem 
guaranteed to get a whole rave singing along. 
When bassline is the only main melodic 
element of a track, it has to work musically  
and rhythmically – spend plenty of time  
refining the timing and pitch of your notes to 
create a catchy bass hook that fits like a glove 
with the drums. One-sound riffs can get 
repetitive over time, so automate your basses’ 
synth/sampler parameters or fade supporting 
layers in and out as the track progresses to keep 
its timbre evolving.
By interplaying a few different hook sounds 
together, you can create a catchy and 
original ‘call and answer’ lead montage  
for any track, similar to the lead sounds of 
artists such as Pendulum and Feed Me. 
Typically, the best approach is to pick 
one sound for the ‘call’, with two alternating 
sounds for the ‘answer’ – for example, a 
cinematic timpani followed by a trap  
synth hook that alternates with a 8-bit-
sounding grime lick. When creating a  
cut-and-paste lead of this sort, tie the 
disparate leads together into one single unit 
by layering a single solid low-frequency 
layer underneath – we recommend a simple 
sine wave sub bass or 808 bass drum, but 
feel free to experiment with other sub 
tones. See 
234’s Three-sound sweet-spot 
technique for more inspiration!
21. Call and 
answer
19. That bass
Manipulating and replaying samples from other 
records can be controversial, but electronic 
producers have been doing it since the birth of 
dance music for one reason: it works! If you take  
a piece of an entire instrumental section from 
another track, your riff will have other elements 
layered in as part of the sample, all adding up to a 
complex, interesting sound.
20. Making a riff from a sample

 > Step by step  22. Creating your own classic chord stabs 
Using a single chord shape 
throughout an entire riff or hook is a 
classic technique found in many rave and 
house tunes. Results can range from 
simple and satisfying to complex and 
intense. To give it a go yourself, start a 
125bpm project, load HouseBeat.wav on 
an audio track, Dune CM on a MIDI 
instrument track, and then stick D16 
Group Frontier on the mater bus.
1
In Dune CM, load the supplied  
preset AmnesiaOrgan, then add  
a Reverberate CM with the preset  
6: Metallic Whispers and Predelay at 
0.040s. We want single notes to trigger 
full chords, just like the ‘chord mode’ on 
old synths, and most DAWs have a chord 
MIDI plugin that’ll do this – in Ableton Live, 
it’s the Chord MIDI Effect, so add it to the 
Dune CM channel.
2
Set Chord’s Shift 1 to +3 and Shift 2 to 
+7 to stack a minor third and perfect 
fifth on top of the root note, giving a 
standard minor triad, which works well in 
many genres. Now play or program single 
MIDI notes to trigger the chord. A basic riff 
approach is to choose a handful of main 
notes that work together, then focus on 
tapping out a catchy syncopated rhythm 
with them – here’s what we came up with.
3
Try transposing notes up or down an 
octave and adjusting note lengths to 
add interest. For an instant bassline, 
create a MIDI instrument track with Bazille 
CM loaded with the Computer Music » 
Joe Rossitter » House FM Bass preset, 
turn the channel down to -11dB, copy the 
riff to it, and transpose it down 2 octaves. 
You might need to nudge certain notes up 
or down an octave to make it work.
4
Changing the chord transforms the 
feel. Minor sevenths (0-3-7-10) and 
9ths (0-3-7-10-14) work great for smooth, 
jazzy house tracks. Remove some of the 
lower notes if it’s too thick and dense. A 
major triad (0-4-7) gives an upbeat, happy 
vibe – ideal for old-school rave and 
hardcore. Diminished triads (0-3-6) can 
work for a touch of evil.
5
Once you’re happy with the chord, you 
can resample it, then play your single-
chord stab from a sampler instead. This 
also gives you the opportunity to layer up 
other sounds such as vinyl crackle to 
create a more characterful stab. Effects 
like reverb/delay will become a permanent 
part of the stab (you can add another 
reverb/delay if needed), and the end result 
will be super-solid and consistent.
6
Music technology has brought about many 
possibilities, and just one of them is the ability to 
trigger entire chords by pressing just one key on 
the keyboard. Later, many polyphonic synths 
included a ‘chord memory’, which could trigger 
juicy seventh chords and multi-octave voicings 
from one key press. Play a D and you’d get, say, a 
D minor 7 chord… hit E and get Em7, and so on.
A yet more common approach is to sample a 
chord, and this has given us everything from 
cheesy 80s orchestra hits and deep house 
organ chords to horn-like rave blasts and 
reverberant techno stabs. Absolutely loads of 
iconic 90s dance hooks were made in this 
way: think 2 Unlimited’s Get Ready For This, 
T99’s Anasthasia, Landlord’s I Like It (actually 
pre-90s – but only just!), Spectrum’s Brazil, 
and… well, the list never ends. Many of these 
stabs are as legendary as the tracks they first 
appeared in, and sampled chords remain 
commonplace today.
The ‘locked’ chord voicing means that, if you 
want to stay in key, you’re restricted to certain 
notes/chords. In natural minor keys, for 
example, only the first, fourth and fifth chords 
are minor, so in A minor, you could use 
only A, D and E (producing 
chords Am, Dm and Em). 
Likewise with 
major keys, only the first, fourth and fifth chords 
are major.
So how do you write a decent hook with such 
crippling restrictions? First off, you can use 
borrowed chords from the parallel key – for 
instance, C major is the parallel of C minor. You 
could also change key during the hook – the first 
half in C major, and the second half in D♯ major, 
for example. At a push, you could use a major 
triad to voice the top part of a minor 
seventh chord (or a minor triad to form 
the top of a major seventh).
Having said that, if you’re fretting over 
the diatonic details while writing a hook for your 
hardcore throwback banger, then your priorities 
are all wrong! Get that index finger pumping on 
the keys and let the music take you. If you get 
stuck or it’s not quite sounding right, then try 
using music theory to get back on track.
One-ﬁnger wonder: the chord stab
The Roland  
Alpha Juno did 
much to facilitate 
one-finger chords
60
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks

61
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <
Now go through the riff and move 
each note up or down to create a 
melody. You may need to quantise and 
adjust note lengths to get the feel you’re 
after. Parts played in on a single note 
will have a staccato feel, so you may 
want to lengthen the notes. In our riff, 
though, the staccato sound works well.
2
Finally, don’t be afraid to rely heavily 
on the rhythm. There are plenty of 
famous hooks that rely on just a few 
notes, with variety instead coming from 
the rhythm, lyrics or tonal variations, 
or the underlying chords and bassline. 
Here’s a simplified version of our hook, 
which we think is more compelling.
3
Forget about scales, keys and 
arpeggios for now, and locate the 
song’s main root note. Play your 
backing track on a loop and tap out a 
complementary rhythm on the key, 
making it as catchy as possible on its 
own. When you’ve got something, 
record it to MIDI.
1
Got the chords down but struggling to find the notes? Try an 
arpeggio-based approach to melody writing, using the notes of 
the chords to form a tune. That doesn’t mean blasting through 
every chord note in a three-octave 16th-note blur, but rather 
using one or two notes per chord, or bridging main melody 
notes with arpeggios, as shown. This approach worked out so 
well on the keyboard hook for Abba’s huge Gimme! Gimme! 
Gimme! that Madonna just had to nab it for Hung Up.
Got a great basic melody going around in 
your head? Or a simple two-note line you 
can’t help humming over the chords? 
Grab your microphone – even an in-built 
one is good enough for this – and record it 
straight in before your inspirational 
moment is gone forever! Then use audio-
to-MIDI to turn it into MIDI data. Great 
hooks are often both simple and singable, 
so coming up with ideas in this way gets 
you off to a flying start on both counts.
Are you spending hours laying down 
beats, chords and basslines, then hitting a 
wall when it comes to laying a great hook 
on top of them? Try taking a totally 
different approach: delete the lot, start 
over, and begin with the hook! Hooks 
need to stand up on their own, and this 
method ensures that yours will at least do 
that. Devote an entire session to making 
cool hooks in isolation – don’t let anything 
sidetrack you. When you’re done, pick the 
strongest idea to start a new track with.
 > Technique 
It’s easy to overlook the 
importance of rhythm in 
creating catchy melodies,  
but here’s an easy method 
that puts the beat first…
 26. Rhythm-first melodies 
 > Technique 
 25. Get your hooks in! 
 
 > Technique 
 24. Sing it! 
 
 > Technique  
Quick-fire hook ideas 3
Four more instant tips for your catchiness quest
23. Arp and away

If it’s just not 
flowing on one 
instrument, 
grab something 
completely new
62
> make music now / how to write perfect hooks
As we keep saying, keep it simple – and what better way than limiting the choice of notes you can use?
Easy tips for instant hooks
Our resident theory pro Dave Clews has a few tips to  
help make your tunes hookier than a pointy hatstand
INVITE AUDIENCE PARTICIPATION
Anything that gets your listeners singing 
along qualifies as a hook, so don’t rule out 
catchiness for the sake of credibility. Love it 
or hate it, the “I get knocked down” chant 
from Chumbawamba’s  Tubthumping ticks  
all the boxes when it comes to outright 
hookiness, cementing its status as a  
karaoke and wedding disco favourite pretty 
much for eternity. So if all-out world 
domination is your aim, don’t be afraid to set 
your sights a few notches down the coolness 
ladder if you need to!
SUMMARISE THE SONG
Get the idea behind your song across in  
just a few words, in combination with a 
melodic hook, and you’ll be well on the way  
to something memorable that will resonate 
with listeners. Try to keep the lyrics  
as relevant as possible to the  
subject material when coming up with 
your hook.
SIMPLIFY 
Short, simple hooks tend to be 
more memorable than longer, 
more complex ones. Take an ear 
break from your track and, if you 
can’t remember the hook after 
ten minutes away, it might be 
time to simplify. Can you say 
the same thing with fewer 
words or notes? Or maybe 
break the rhythm up into 
staccato phrases?
PLAY AN UNFAMILIAR 
INSTRUMENT
It might sound daft, but if 
you write your hook on 
an instrument that you 
can’t actually play very 
well, the chances are 
you’ll come up with 
something that’s just 
the right dose of simple. 
The majority of your 
target audience won’t be 
musicians themselves, so 
lack of musical prowess 
can sometimes be a 
strangely relatable quality.
This effect comes from 
your naivety with the 
instrument in question 
being at odds with what a 
trained professional would 
play – you won’t be doing 
anything by the book, or even 
have a clue what ‘the book’ 
says, and very often, the result 
is a hugely creative flurry of  
novel music!
LIMIT NOTE CHOICES
Stick to a limited palette of only two or three 
notes and see what you can come up with. It 
doesn’t matter if you don’t know the key of 
the song – just find two notes that you think 
work with the track and swap between them, 
using them to make a little phrase. Take the 
guitar hook in the tags of My Favourite Game 
by The Cardigans, for example – it’s only got 
two notes, but the unique guitar tone and the 
way in which it’s played make it memorable.
GO BACK IN TIME
Look at some of the classic hooks in vintage 
pop songs and use these, in combination  
with updated sounds and/or rhythms, as 
inspiration. You might find you like the 
rhythm of one hook from a 60s hit, but that it 
really comes alive when played using 
different notes with a Sylenth1 preset, for 
instance. The important thing is to stay on  
the right side of outright plagiarism, so you 
don’t end up in trouble with the estate of the 
artist in question!
GET MEDIEVAL
Many current pop hooks can trace their roots 
from ancient Celtic folk tunes from the 
Middle Ages. This makes a good source of 
inspiration, as not only are these tunes well 
out of copyright, they tend to be easy to 
remember due to them having to be passed 
down verbally through generations. 
Amongst today’s crop of current hit tunes, 
you’ll find a number of hooks that sound like 
they’ve been derived from 15th century 
Scottish folk songs. And In The Name Of Love 
by Martin Garrix and Bebe Rexha, rather 
brilliantly, even features an updated version 
of the nose-thumbing “ner-ner-ne-ner-ner” 
playground catcall from yesteryear!
PRESET TO STUN
And finally, while it may be a dirty secret for 
some, where better to look for sounds than in 
factory and third-party preset packs? If you 
start with an instant hook from an expert 
sound designer, you can always make it your 
own with some further tweaking.
Garrix’ interpretation of a schoolyard classic shows  
just how viral the oral tradition can still be today

Straight from the hooksmith’s mouth
To deliver some 
insights into the 
world of the 
professional 
hitmaker, we 
grabbed some 
downtime with 
one of the UK’s 
most versatile 
and prolific 
songwriters, Karen Poole. Beginning as one 
half of Brit and Ivor Novello-nominated, 
platinum-selling pop duo Alisha’s Attic, 
Karen has had over 25 Top 10 hits and has 
worked with artists including Kylie Minogue, 
Will Young, Sugababes, Annie Lennox, David 
Guetta,  
Lily Allen and many others. Her latest 
collaboration is the new Galantis single  
Rich Boy, out on January 27th.
: Has your method / approach to 
songwriting changed over the last 15 years? 
KP: “Yes. I do more dance stuff than I’ve ever 
done, and we write just hooks a lot these days.  
I very rarely sit down with somebody on an 
instrument and jam a song. It’s very rare, sadly  
–  I miss it! I generally also do less stuff with 
artists now, as albums are actually much less 
common these days. It’s a singles-based market 
taking over, which means there’s more pitching 
songs, and more focus on having ‘the single’, 
but I guess the pressure of writing a single is a 
good one.”
: What’s your favourite method of working 
when you write?
KP: “I’m quite an overthinker with toplines, and I 
always have been – I can be infuriating to work 
with! I think the dance stuff I do (with people 
like Becky Hill, etc), seems to come quicker, and  
I feel a little more free to just be a little more ‘off 
the cuff’. It’s a new way of writing but I enjoy it. 
“I normally always come with a melody first 
and work backwards from there, but sometimes 
– especially for the dance tracks – I have a 
concept or title idea first. I love working with 
great co-writers too, and often work with other 
young topliners. I have a small circle of people 
who I love, who bring something fresh to my 
writing and complement what I do, which 
makes the whole process a lot easier.”
: Can you describe the workflow on a 
typical writing session?
KP: “I generally write the hook melody first.  
It’s essential for the melody to be amazing, and I 
work hard at getting that first. Then quite often 
I’ll take the verse melody and lyric at the same 
time so it feels more free. But again, it depends 
on who I’m with and the style of music. 
Sometimes there’s a whole track to write to, and 
other times the producer just has a basic beat 
and chord structure. It really is different every 
time.
“With an artist, it’s very often a more 
thought-out, less sporadic approach, as it 
involves what they want from the song and the 
message they want to bring. In that scenario, I 
encourage the artist be in the driving seat.”
: Who inspires you as a writer?
KP: “Prince! Every time. But there are many 
current writers I love, like Greg Kurstin, Sia, 
Pharrell, Max Martin etc, who are genius.  
I’ve also had a love of R&B since my childhood, 
so I can listen to old 90s stuff all day long!”
: You’ve had an enviable career as a singer 
and a songwriter. Do you play an instrument?
KP: “Well, I noodle, but no. I have a weird theory 
that if I become too musical I’ll lose my instinct. 
Quite often I sit with a musician and say ‘No, the 
happy chord there should be sadder.’ Terrible 
metaphor, but what I mean is, I’m really musical 
instinctually, rather than theoretically. I know 
exactly when it’s not right and always have 
opinions on track dynamics and sounds, etc, as 
well as backing vocals and all things vocal and 
harmonic. But I don’t really ever feel the need to 
be a player.”
: So would you agree that a great hook 
comes more from instinct and feel  
rather than a deep-seated knowledge of 
music theory?
KP: “100%!  Having said that, people like Max 
Martin have a very formulaic and mathematic 
approach with their writing and it’s amazing. I 
guess I’m somewhere in between.”
: Where do the hooks come from? Do you 
hear inspiration in the music you’re writing 
to, or do they just pop into your head?
KP: “Oh god – I don’t really know. I would like to 
say I’m not really in control of what comes out 
of my mouth. If I hear an amazing track it’s very 
inspiring, but equally I like writing over a simple 
drum beat. It’s a ‘feel’ thing, I guess.  
 
“Stuff has to feel right and click somewhere. I 
know immediately if the chords aren’t 
conducive to me getting a good melody. 
“I like minor chords. I remember the 
producer Bloodshy once saying, “Just give her a 
few minor chords on a beat and leave her alone if 
you want a good song outta her!” He was right! 
My melodies are too twee on major chords.”
: Do hooks come to you while you’re doing 
other stuff? Making tea? Driving? How do 
you capture them? Is your dictaphone your 
best friend?
KP: “Driving, yes. I’m constantly writing when 
driving, and recording on my dictaphone. Not at 
home though, weirdly. Hardly ever. It probably 
has something to do with having a seven-year-
old running around the house!”
: Do you have any favourite ‘go-to’ 
methods for coming up with hooks quickly?
KP: “Yes – old faves. Soulful old-school  
melodies are my natural place on dance tracks, 
so I fight to stay away from them and work 
harder, but I don’t really have a definite method. 
Melodies normally come quickly – it’s the lyrics  
I find harder.” 
Photo: Hayley Madden/REX/Shutterstock
how to write perfect hooks / make music now <
63
Hear first-hand how a pro songwriter gets her results

64
> make music now / genre-busting music theory
GENRE-BUSTING 
MUSIC 
THEORY!
Scared of scales? Puzzled by 
progressions? Fear no more 
– get to grips with the musical 
framework behind 13 essential 
genres with our definitive guide

Get the videos and tutorial  
files on your PC/Mac at 
filesilo.co.uk/computermusic
DOWNLOAD
65
genre-busting music theory / make music now <
Over the past few pages, we’ve 
featured a beginner’s guide to chords 
and scales (The Producer’s Guide to 
Chords & Scales, 
234) and a huge 
tutorial on creating catchy hooks (How to 
Write Perfect Hooks, 
240). Now it’s 
time to build upon those solid 
foundations and break apart the 
underlying language of music.
It may conjure up  images of dusty 
lecture halls presided over by ancient 
professors shedding equal parts dandruff 
and chalk dust, but music theory is a vital 
component of everything we, as computer 
musicians, deal with on a daily basis. 
Whether it’s a floorfiller from the latest 
superstar DJ, or the baroque equivalent 
from centuries ago, the one common link 
between all pieces of music is the 
framework of scientific principles and well-
worn tradition that make up their collective 
DNA. These were discovered thousands of 
years ago by early brainiacs like Aristotle 
and Pythagoras, and have constantly 
evolved and developed ever since.
People often hold the idea of learning 
theory at arms’ length because they fear it 
will make them over-think the music-
making process, affecting their instinctive 
feel and performance. But just because you 
know a bit of theory, it doesn’t mean you’re 
suddenly going to have limited inspiration – 
if anything, it’s often better to have the 
knowledge and be able to judge when and 
when not to apply it. So, over the next few 
pages, we’ll use basic music theory 
knowledge to deconstruct the scales, 
chords, notes and rhythms used in some of 
the most popular musical genres of 
yesteryear. After that, we’ll dive into the 
piano roll and show you how to put some of 
that knowledge into practice when 
composing modern electronic music, using 
‘traditional’ genres as inspiration for crafting 
new compositions from scratch!
So, fire up your DAW and grab your 
plugins as we compose several track 
sketches for some popular contemporary 
genres. You also get tutorial files (audio 
examples, MIDI files and video), so you can 
follow along with every step.

Over the last century, we’ve seen an 
incredible evolution of the production and 
consumption of popular music, the 
beginning of which can trace its roots back 
to the earliest experimental wireless 
musical broadcasts, which were made in the 
1900s. These brought music in general to a 
whole new audience – its new, readily 
available, free-to-air nature was embraced 
by millions globally as the 20th century 
progressed and the technology used in the 
capturing and broadcasting of new music 
improved along with it. 
From around 1910, recordings of blues 
music derived from the American deep 
south began to gain global appeal, while the 
1920s heralded the beginning of the jazz 
era, with superstars like Fats Waller and 
Louis Armstrong emerging. Milestones in 
musical development came in rapid 
succession, such as George Gershwin’s 
Rhapsody in Blue, which, in 1924, 
represented an unprecedented fusion of 
the classical world and the radical new 
sound of jazz, with its ragtime rhythms and 
prominent use of the blues scale. Further 
landmarks include 1940s swing, with Glenn 
Miller’s big band sound; Leonard Bernstein’s 
West Side Story, setting the template for 
Broadway musicals to come; and the 
chaotic rhythms and virtuosity of bebop 
jazz musicians such as Charlie Parker and 
Dizzy Gillespie.
Yet it was the 1950s that provided the 
biggest evolutionary leap, as the contrasting 
rigidity and regularity of the rock and roll 
beat became popular. The new, post-war 
market of affluent teenagers with cash to 
spend on records, record players and 
transistor radios provided the perfect 
environment for the new genre’s speedy 
gestation. The first acknowledged rock and 
roll record, Jackie Branston’s Rocket 88, was 
released in 1951, and other artists including 
Chuck Berry, Jerry Lee Lewis and Bill Haley 
were quick to feed the appetite of the 
growing market of teenagers. By 1959, 
rhythm and blues as a genre had matured, 
spearheaded by Ray Charles’ distinctive 
blend of jazz, country, rock and roll and 
gospel-tinged soul vocals.
Musical evolution
The explosion of new pop songs written 
and recorded during the 1960s is at odds 
with their relative simplicity. The majority 
were based on a set formula drawing from a 
blues template, with a limited palette of 
chords, a straightforward, 4/4-based rhythm 
and a standard instrument selection of bass, 
drums, guitar and keyboards. Few people 
did more to progress pop music as a whole 
throughout the 60s than The Beatles, who 
began the decade as a mop-haired skiffle 
outfit and ended it as pioneers of innovative 
recording techniques (as covered last issue 
in our Studio Pioneers feature).
After this, pop music began to evolve and 
splinter into multiple sub-genres, such as 
progressive rock, glam rock and disco. Punk 
exploded into life in the mid-to-late 70s. The 
advent of digital sampling technology in the 
early 1980s provided the tools for a new 
generation of artists to lay the foundation 
for hip-hop, synth pop and new wave.
The emergence of properly effective 
DAWs in the mid 90s paved the way for the 
musical landscape we know today, in which 
most recordings now have a computer 
involved somewhere in the chain, and a 
bewildering array of dance music sub-genres 
have since taken root, from nu-disco to 
breakcore. Yet, incredible though this period 
of constant evolution has been, one thing 
has remained consistent throughout; the 
basic principles of music theory!
The evolution of modern popular music
“Milestones in musical 
development came in 
rapid succession”
If your music theory knowledge could do with  
a bit of brushing up, we advise you check  
out the following resources, to help get you  
up to speed…
234’s cover feature, The Producer’s Guide 
to Chords & Scales, packs in a whopping 15 
pages, 17 expert videos, a MIDI Construction  
Kit with almost 2000 ready-made chord and 
scale templates in every key, a handy cheat 
sheet of  intervals, chords and scales, and a 
jargon-free glossary of common music  
theory terms.
Also, in every issue of 
 you’ll find  
Dave Clews’ Easy Guide tutorial (plus video  
and files), which features a different music 
theory topic broken down and demystified 
every month.
And of course, there are numerous resources 
available online for you to dive into – here are 
some of our recommendations.
 HookTheory.com 
This site delivers interactive online analysis  
of hundreds of commercial releases, from  
Abba to Zedd. Just search for a tune, and if it’s 
there, you can hear extracts and follow along 
with a “theorytab” chord chart that picks out  
the chords and melody in real time as the  
track plays – a brilliant way to see how hit songs 
are pieced together.
www.hooktheory.com/theorytab
 MusicTheory.net 
Home to a great range of free online content, 
which, combined with a couple of premium  
apps for learning music theory, can be a great 
way to supercharge your knowledge and train 
your ears.
www.musictheory.net
 YouTube 
A huge resource of educational videos on  
every music theory topic imaginable can be 
found on the ‘Tube, as you probably know 
already! Search the whole site for videos 
covering your preferred topic, or check out 
some of the channels listed below…
www.youtube.com
 Music Tech Help Guy 
www.youtube.com/user/musictechhelpguy
 Music Theory Guy 
www.youtube.com/user/musictheoryguy
 Music Online UK 
bit.ly/MusOnUK
 Furmanczyk Academy of Music  
www.youtube.com/user/Lypur
Music theory resources for electronic musicians
The Shirelles’ Will You Still Love Me Tomorrow?  
is a classic example of diatonic 60s pop
Our massive Producer’s Guide to Chords & Scales makes 
for a great introduction to music theory
> make music now / genre-busting music theory
66

Music theory primer
Theory basics explained from a piano roll perspective
1. NOTES
2. INTERVALS
3. SCALES
4. CHORDS
A scale is a sequence of notes (known as ‘degrees’) that 
provides the raw material for a piece of music. The intervals 
between the notes follow a set pattern that depends on the 
type of scale. The first scale everyone encounters when 
learning music is the major scale (pictured above), which 
follows the interval pattern T-T-S-T-T-T-S, where S is a Semitone, 
and T is a Tone (two semitones). The C major scale is made up 
of all the white notes on a piano keyboard, but other major 
scales (starting on different notes) include black notes – G 
major, for example, contains one sharp note, F
♯, while F major 
contains one flat note, B
♭. The other most common scale is 
the minor scale, which has the interval pattern T-S-T-T-S-T-T.
A chord is defined as two or more notes sounding at the same 
time, but in basic theory terms, we generally take it to mean 
three-note chords, or ‘triads’. In Western music, chords are 
generally made by stacking up alternate notes from the scale 
– taking the first, missing the next, taking another, missing one 
and taking one more. The image above shows the C major 
scale from the left-hand pic now ‘harmonised’ – every chord 
contains alternate notes of the C major scale. Some of the 
chords are major (a gap of four semitones followed by a gap 
of three) while some are minor (a gap of three semitones 
followed by a gap of four). One of them (vii) is ‘diminished’ 
(gaps of three and three).
The raw material of music, notes are the building blocks from 
which all chords and melodies are created. Each note has a 
duration and a pitch. In the piano roll, the length of each note 
event in the display directly relates to its duration, while the 
pitch is represented by its vertical position. In Western music, 
there are a total of twelve notes per octave, named A, A
♯, B, C, 
C
♯, D, D
♯, E, F, F
♯, G and G
♯. The sharp notes, or ‘accidentals’, fall 
on the black keys, while the regular or ‘natural’ notes fall on 
the white keys. As well as sharps, the black keys can also be 
flats – i.e. B
♭, D
♭, E
♭, G
♭, and A
♭. Whether a given note is deemed 
sharp or flat largely depends on the current scale or key.
On the piano keyboard, two notes immediately next to  
each other are a semitone apart in pitch. The distance in  
pitch between any two notes is known as an interval, and 
each interval has a particular name, according to its size.  
For example, an interval of just one semitone is known as  
a minor second, while an interval of seven semitones is 
known as a perfect fifth. The diagram above shows the 
names of all possible intervals within an octave – they can 
either be melodic (between a sequence of consecutive notes 
in a melody) or harmonic (between notes in a chord). If two 
notes have the same pitch, they’re said to be in unison.
genre-busting music theory / make music now <
67

PRINCE
His canon of songs forms a remarkable legacy that 
will undoubtedly stand the test of time, and is filled 
with all manner of classic songwriting techniques. 
Although much of his work was in the pop, R&B 
and funk genres, most Prince songs could easily 
pass the acoustic test – ie, you can strip away all 
the production and still recognise the song when 
played on an acoustic instrument such as guitar or 
piano. They’re also pretty timeless, a quality that 
owes a fair amount to the simplicity of the basic 
underlying chord structures. Taking the famous 
power ballad Purple Rain as a typical example: the 
chord structure is relatively simple, giving us four 
chords in the verse (B♭, Gm, F, E♭) and the same four 
in a different order in the chorus (E♭, B♭, Gm, F). 
Melody-wise, the song relies on a Gm blues scale, 
with the first notes in the verse striking a D/D♭ blue 
note, and the last notes before the chorus repeating 
an E♭ over the F major, effectively making an F7.
DEADMAU5
The progressive house icon (aka Joel 
Zimmerman) has a distinctive style 
that hinges on his production workflow 
and the way he builds his chord voicings 
– the order in which the notes are 
arranged across the keyboard. He tends 
to rely on progressions that feature 
mostly major chords, but arranged 
and voiced in a way that makes them 
sound minor (such as the beautiful  
I Remember: B - Dmaj7 - Gmaj7 - F
♯ - 
Dmaj9 - Gmaj7). Joel often finishes off 
with a prominent, majestic-sounding 
shift from a minor chord to a major 
chord (Some Chords – A
♭m, E, E, F
♯, A
♭ – 
or Ghosts N’ Stuff – B
♭m, A
♭, F
♯, E
♭. That 
minor-major shift crops up often, and 
because of his programming style, a 
four-note chord will be spread over 
three or four octaves rather than 
bundled in the centre of the keyboard.
The artists’ choice
We’ve scoured the airwaves to expose the musical  
preferences of four successful commercial artists
Images/REX/Shutterstock
Joe Skipper/epa/REX/Shutterstock
68
> make music now / genre-busting music theory

HANS ZIMMER 
Of all the Hollywood film composers active 
today, Zimmer is one of the most well 
known, and for good reason: his scores 
have accompanied over 150 blockbusters, 
including Gladiator, Inception and Man of 
Steel – a remarkable achievement for 
someone who claims not to be able to read 
music. Although incredibly imaginative 
and prolific musically, Zimmer’s real 
strength is in using sound in innovative  
and unusual ways. To accompany the 
Joker’s scenes in The Dark Knight, for 
instance, he used a single long cello note, 
together with guitars played with pieces of 
metal, gradually rising in pitch to convey a 
sense of mounting tension and fear. 
Although he strives to avoid repetition in 
his work, Zimmer seems to favour minor 
keys, often bucking the trend by 
juxtaposing them against comedic scenes 
that would normally suit a major key. 
Somehow, it works!
CHAINSMOKERS
The Canadian duo have 
dominated the mainstream of 
late with a string of classy 
productions. From a theory 
point of view, they tend to 
favour progressions that 
feature a mix of three basic 
major and minor triads, but 
often with a sustained note 
tacked on at the top to give 
the chords a more extended 
sound. For example, the 
chords to Closer alternate 
between D♭, E♭ and Fm, but 
with a high E♭ added to each 
one, effectively making it D♭9, 
E♭ and Fm7. This is coupled 
with a simple yet insistent 
vocal or synth hook built from 
only two or three notes, 
proving the old adage that 
simple is effective.
Allocca/StarPix/REX/Shutterstock
ddp USA/REX/Shutterstock
69
genre-busting music theory / make music now <

Progressions: common recipes
Pop music’s broad appeal lies in the fact that the songs are memorable, 
and therefore easy to sing along to. The easiest way to make a song 
memorable is to base its chord progression on a template that has 
been proven to be repeatedly successful over the years. 
The most basic progressions are known as diatonic progressions, 
meaning that the chords they contain only use notes found in the 
scale on which the key of the song is based. For more information 
about diatonic harmony, see Dave Clews’ Easy Guide in issue 211 of 
Computer Music. Here we have three of the most popular and 
enduring diatonic progressions, which are behind literally thousands  
of songs common to all genres.
I-V-IV-V
In key of C major: 
C-G-F-G
This timeless progression can be found in  
classic pop songs including the Four Seasons’  
Big Girls Don’t Cry, The Beatles’ Baby’s in Black 
and Eric Clapton’s Wonderful Tonight.  
The main reason it’s such an effective 
combination is because it features all three of 
what are known as the ‘primary’ chords – a bit 
like primary colours. The I chord is known as the 
Tonic, the IV is called the Subdominant and the V 
chord is the Dominant. Notice that these three 
chords are three three major chords from the 
harmonised major scale, but they can be 
translated into any key. They form the basis of 
thousands of tunes, and are especially popular 
with blues, folk and country rock artists.
I-V-vi-IV
In key of C major: 
C-G-Am-F
Why have one example when you can settle for 
about a hundred? In a YouTube video that went 
viral in 2011, Australian comedy outfit Axis of 
Awesome ably point out the usefulness of this 
particular progression when it comes to writing 
pop hits. Mashing together a medley of 47 songs 
that are all based on this sequence of chords, 
what’s interesting about the exercise is that the 
original key of the source songs turns out to be 
irrelevant. Due to the fact that the melodies all 
work over the same chord sequence regardless 
of key, the band are able to stay in one key (D 
major) and play the same chords throughout, 
while simply jamming the melodies over the top, 
having transposed the songs.
I-vi-IV-V
In key of C major: 
C-Am-F-G
The recent UK chart success of I’m the One (by 
DJ Khaled featuring Justin Bieber & Chance the 
Rapper) just goes to show that you can’t beat 
the classic simplicity of the I-vi-IV-V progression. 
Instantly relatable and exceptionally versatile, 
you can have a Number One single on a backing 
track made up of a fingersnap sample and a  
rubber band playing the root notes of these 
chords. As well as also being found in Train’s  
Play That Song, Justin Bieber’s Baby and Sean 
Kingston’s Beautiful Girls, this progression is also 
the basis of Heart and Soul, a simple piano duet 
that’s one of the first things anybody learns to 
play on the piano, which is probably why it liter-
ally strikes a chord with so many people.
> make music now / genre-busting music theory
70

Love to play guitar?
Then get properly serious with the world’s 
finest tuition-only magazine. Every issue’s 
packed with blues, rock, jazz, classical and 
folk lessons from the very best tutors, all 
with audio and backing tracks.
Print, digital and print/digital bundle oﬀers at
www.myfavouritemagazines.co.uk
Guitar Techniques with moving tab 
synched to quality audio for every lesson, 
is also available for iPad & iPhone
ON  
SALE  
NOW

 > Step by step  5. Making a Pop/R&B progression with triads  
You can make a major chord in any 
key by using a specific formula based 
on the intervals between the notes in the 
chord. First, we need to pick a root note  
– let’s start with C, as shown here. For the 
next note, we need a major third interval, 
so we count four semitones up to end up 
on E. Then we count another three 
semitones up, finishing on G. In the end we 
have C, E and G, which is a C major chord.
1
It’s the interval between the middle 
note and the root that determines 
whether a triad is major or minor. In the 
chord we just made, the interval was a 
major third (four semitones), making it a 
major chord. If we decrease the interval by 
one semitone, making a minor third 
(three semitones) between this and the 
root, then the triad becomes a minor chord 
comprising C, E♭ and G, which is C minor.
2
To show how these formulae work in 
any key, let’s program a typical pop 
progression of minor and major chords, 
beginning with A major. Our root note is A, 
and we want to make a major chord, so we 
count up four semitones – an interval of a 
major third – to C
♯, and add this note to our 
chord. Another three semitones brings 
us to E, completing our first chord: A-C
♯-E, 
which is A major.
3
Our second chord is a passing B major 
at the end of the bar, so we copy the A 
major chord we just made and paste it into 
position at 1.3.4.1, then shift the whole 
thing up two semitones. Because the 
intervals between the notes in the chord 
remain the same, raising it in pitch by this 
amount from A to B creates a B major 
chord – B-D
♯-F
♯.
4
We’ll make the next chord a minor one 
– C
♯ minor. Taking C
♯ as our root note, 
we count up an interval of three 
semitones (a minor third), landing on E. 
From there, we go up a further four 
semitones to land on G♯, completing the 
C♯ minor chord – C♯-E-G♯. Our next chord  
is also minor, so we copy and paste the  
C♯ minor into position at 2.4.3.1.
5
This new chord needs to be a low G♯ 
minor, so we simply transpose all three 
notes in the chord down by five semitones. 
Since this preserves the chord’s internal 
structure of intervals between notes, the 
result of the transposition is a G♯ minor 
chord – G♯, B, D♯. All we need to do to 
complete the progression is copy an A 
major chord from the first bar to the end.
6
Popular music can be categorised 
into a multitude of genres, but 
since we don’t have space to 
include all of them in this feature, 
we’ll be using fairly broad strokes 
in our distinctions between 
particular styles. Probably the 
broadest is mainstream pop and 
R&B, the kind of thing you hear  
on the radio every day, and 
possibly the genres that rely the 
most on regular major and minor 
diatonic triads. This palette of 
chords can produce  millions of 
combinations, which is why so 
many classic pop songs can be 
boiled down to relatively simple 
progressions of basic chords like 
these ones.
Rhythmically speaking, the 
broad genre of pop and R&B can 
assume many guises, from slow 
power ballads through mid-tempo 
jams to full-on dance-style tracks. 
Plenty of recent releases have 
featured minimal drum tracks 
consisting of sparse handclaps 
and percussion, while others have 
adopted a kind of Caribbean 
dancehall feel, with an irresistible 
beat made up of pushed snare 
drums laid over a 4/4 kick. 
Melodies, meanwhile, tend to be 
simple affairs using mainly a 
handful of notes from the parent 
scale, dependent on whether the 
song is in a major or minor key.
Major &  
minor triads
Pop and R&B’s simple progression-based 
style makes it great for exploring triads
72
> make music now / genre-busting music theory

From a music theory perspective, jazz, 
gospel and funk are probably the most 
technically advanced genres, with 
exotic chord names like ‘minor seven 
flat five’ and ‘augmented seven sharp 
nine’ thrown about with abandon. 
We’re not going to go too deep 
down the rabbit hole in this feature – 
and indeed there are entire books 
dedicated to the subject on its own – 
but essentially, jazz is all about 
altering the chord in some way to 
make it sound different, while at the 
same time maintaining the basic 
harmonic progression of the tune.
Occasionally, just one note – usually 
a fifth or ninth – will be altered, or 
maybe a chord will be swapped out 
for a totally different one that has the 
same function in the progression – a 
tactic known as substitution.
On this page, you’ll find formulae 
to some of the more common altered 
chord types you’ll need to be aware 
of if you intend to start exploring this 
type of sound.
We’ve composed a short progression using 
some of the more common chord types in 
jazz, funk and gospel styles. The first four 
bars are alternating Cm9 (C-E
♭-G-B
♭-D) and 
Fm9 (F-A
♭-C-E
♭-G) chords. However, just 
before the second Fm9, we’ve inserted a 
passing chord – F
♯6 (F
♯-C
♯-D
♯-F
♯-A
♯. Passing 
chords are chords that you ‘pass’ through to 
get from one chord to another – the F
♯6 
works because its notes are nearly all one 
semitone away from those of the target 
chord (Fm9).
Following this, we have Dm7
♭5 (as 
detailed above), then a Gaug7 in bar 6 – this 
is a G7 chord with a raised fifth (G-B-D
♯-F), 
but with the G removed from the right hand 
and played only in the bass. Bar 7 contains 
another Cm9, then we ramp up the tension 
in bar 8 with a Gaug7
♯9 (G-B-D
♯-F-A
♯). To 
make this stonker of a chord, simply form a 
regular ninth chord (1-3-5-
♭7-9), then raise 
both the fifth and ninth by one semitone.
7. Jazz chords
The minor seven flat five (m7♭5) chord is the jazz 
muso’s secret weapon. It’s derived from a regular 
minor seventh chord but with the fifth moved  
down in pitch (flattened) by one semitone.  
The formula for a regular minor seventh chord is 
1-♭3-5-♭7, which in the key of C would give us C-E♭-G-B♭, 
as we’ve seen. However, if we also flatten the fifth, we 
get 1-♭3-♭5-♭7, or C-E♭-G♭-B♭ – Cm7♭5.
6. The m7♭5 chord formula
genre-busting music theory / make music now <
73

The minor seventh chord is disco’s best 
friend, as we’ll demonstrate in this 
mini-sketch, which contains a suitably 
disco-licious rhythm track of drums and 
bass. We’re going to add some Rhodes 
electric piano chords, starting with Cm7. To 
make this chord, start by creating a regular 
C minor chord, inserting the notes C, E♭ and 
G as seen previously.
1
A minor seventh consists of a minor 
triad with an added flattened seventh 
degree. This means that we take the 
seventh note in the major scale, lower it by 
one semitone and add it to the chord. The 
seventh degree of the C major scale is B, 
so we flatten this to B♭ – three semitones 
up from G – and tag it onto our existing  
C minor chord to get C, E♭, G and B♭ – Cm7!
2
A major seventh consists of a major 
triad with an added seventh degree of 
the major scale. So let’s insert an A♭maj7 
over the A♭ bass note in bar 3. Following 
our major chord formula, we pick A♭ as  
the root note, add C, and then E♭. Next we 
add the seventh degree of the A♭ major 
scale – G, to make A♭-C-E-G – Amaj7.  
3
Let’s conclude with a Gm7 in bar 4. 
The minor seventh formula is 1, ♭3, 5, 
♭7, so with G as our root note this time, we 
get G, B♭, D, F – Gm7. So far, we’ve merely 
been blocking out the chords, placing 
them on the downbeat, but to make things 
a little more disco, we could use a pattern 
like the one shown here to fit with the 
rhythm of the drums and bass parts.
4
 > Step by step  8. Introducing major and minor 7ths 
 > Step by step  9. The disco string run with repeated high note 
A repeated high string note is a good 
way to maintain tension through a 
series of changing chords, in the same 
way that house tracks often contain a long, 
sustained single string note. In the project 
from the previous walkthrough, we load 
up a suitable realistic string patch – we’re 
using Spitfire Audio’s Albion One – and 
program a stab on C4 every quarter-note.
1
Half way through the fourth bar, we’ve 
inserted a run – a short 16th-note 
arpeggio based on the notes of the minor 
pentatonic scale (see the next page for 
more on this). In the case of C minor, the 
key we’re in here, these notes are C, E♭, F, G 
and B♭. So our run of eight 16th-notes is 
made up of two similar four-note riffs, 
namely C B♭ C E♭ followed by G F G B♭.
2
We’ve used a ‘spiccato’ sound with lots 
of attack, great for stabs and fast runs, 
with the notes programmed at high velocity 
to give maximum bite. To add breadth and 
realism, we copy and paste all the notes in 
the part up an octave. We also add interest 
by inserting short three-note (G B♭ C) 
pickups at the end of every two bars to 
break up the monotony of the repeated C.
3
With its metronomic 4/4 beats, synth 
basslines and electronic percussion, 
disco evolved throughout the 1970s, 
eventually becoming the forerunner 
of house. It was disco that most 
successfully married the new sonic 
possibilities of the synthesiser to the 
traditional sounds of strings and brass, 
sustaining the use of orchestral 
instruments in pop until synths  
finally took over completely in the 
new wave explosion of the early 80s. 
Disco embraced orchestral 
instruments, with bands such as 
Earth, Wind & Fire using strings in 
particular to great effect. 
Two of the greatest exponents of 
this technique were Nile Rodgers and 
Bernard Edwards, the production 
masterminds behind Chic, Sister 
Sledge and many other disco classics. 
Making prominent use of soulful 
major and minor seventh chords, they 
hit on the perfect blend of slick 4/4 
grooves, funky, extended minor 
guitar chords (such as B♭m11 or A♭m9), 
clever basslines and great pop string 
arrangements that ultimately 
epitomise the sound of the disco era.
> make music now / genre-busting music theory
74

Two-handed piano jams are the staple 
diet of classic house, so let’s look at 
how to program one from scratch. Start 
with an empty project or DAW session at 
about 124bpm and create a software 
instrument track loaded with a piano 
sound. Open the piano roll and draw in the 
notes G2, C3 and E3. Make this C major 
chord last for a duration of one 16th-note.
1
Copy and paste the chord seven times, 
for eight chords in total, one on every 
quarter-note beat over two bars. Select 
the fourth chord in each bar and move 
them one 16th-note earlier. Then move the 
first two chords in the second bar two 
16ths earlier, and the third chord three 
16ths earlier. Lastly, copy and paste the 
final two chords three 16ths later.
2
Next, double the duration of the third 
chord in each bar to two 16th-notes. 
Copy and paste these two bars to make a 
four-bar section, then transpose the 
chords in bar 2 down by two semitones to 
make B♭ major (F-B♭-D). Rearrange the 
notes in the third chord to make a 1st 
inversion C minor (E♭-G-C), then make the 
fourth chord an F major (F-A-C).
3
Now for the magic. Copy and paste the 
lowest note of each chord to form a 
left-hand bassline. Place the new notes on 
C1 in bar 1, E♭1 in bar 2, A♭1 in bar 3 and F1 in 
bar 4. By adding new bass notes to the 
original right-hand triads to form new 
chords, this effectively transforms our 
vanilla C-B♭-Cm-F progression into a 
house-tastic C-B♭11-A♭maj7-F.
4
 > Step by step  10. Classic Chicago house - spread piano chords 
 > Step by step  11. Detroit techno-style fixed interval chords 
Detroit techno, a more electronic-
sounding offshoot of house, often 
made use of the chord memory feature of 
certain synths, which enabled you to play 
a particular chord shape with a single key. 
This kind of fixed-interval chord 
progression can be emulated in Dune CM. 
Start by loading up an instance of the 
synth in our techno example project.
1
What makes Dune CM particularly 
appropriate for this is that it includes 
oscillator waveforms pre-programmed at 
specific intervals to replicate certain chord 
shapes. For example, preset 057: Mellow 
House RL uses waveform number 60, 
which is programmed in the shape of a 
minor chord – so when you hit a C note, 
you get a C minor chord! 
2
This means that when we copy the 
bass track in our project and paste it 
onto our Dune CM track, the bass notes 
play an auto-generated progression of 
minor chords that gives us that signature 
techno sound, namely Cm-Gm-Fm-Gm-
A♭m-B♭m. This kind of progression 
probably isn’t one you’d be likely to come 
up with using a conventional sound!
3
Pentatonic 
scales
These incredibly useful five-note 
scales are heavily relied upon in all 
genres of music, but particularly 
pop. Because of their simplicity 
compared to a normal seven-note 
major or minor scale, they’re often 
used to introduce beginners to the 
world of improvisation.
To create major and minor 
pentatonic scales, imagine removing 
the notes B and F from the keyboard. 
If you then play a C major scale, you’d 
get C D E G A – the C major pentatonic 
scale. And if you played A C D E G, the 
result would be the A minor 
pentatonic scale. So a major 
pentatonic can be thought of as a 
major scale with the fourth and 
seventh degrees missing, while a 
minor pentatonic can be thought of 
as a natural minor scale with the 
second and sixth degrees missing. 
The reason these scales work so 
well over many chord progressions 
is that they contain either chord 
tones found in major or minor  
triads, or common extensions. As a 
bluesy bonus, if you add a sharpened 
fourth to the minor pentatonic,  
you get the famous blues scale, 
which is perfect for riffing and 
soloing over almost anything.
75

EDM as a genre is something of an 
umbrella term. Standing for 
electronic dance music, EDM 
encompasses house, trance, electro, 
dubstep, drum ’n’ bass, complextro 
and pretty much everything in 
between. That makes it a huge genre 
to analyse as a whole, but from a 
theory standpoint, the most obvious 
common traits tend to be a general 
leaning towards minor chords and 
the heavy use of chromatic harmony 
– in other words, chords that use 
notes that don’t belong to the scale 
of the key the song is in. The biggest 
breakaway from the norm that’s 
accompanied the rise in EDM’s 
popularity is in the realms of song 
form. Intros and outros have been 
stripped down and extended to 
make tunes easier for DJs to mix in 
and out of, while traditional  
verse-chorus-bridge forms have 
been elbowed aside in favour of 
more dancefloor-friendly structures, 
with more abstract arrangements, 
builds and drops.
The drop is the equivalent of the chorus in 
EDM parlance (see 
242’s cover feature 
for more on this), and it’s the part of the 
track that delivers a maximum-impact 
resolution to the tension of the build that 
comes before it. For that reason, the drop 
tends to be musically minimal, based 
mainly on a single note or chord that digs in 
hard from the outset, allowing the listener 
to focus primarily on the energy of the beat 
and the bassline. For maximum impact, 
there should be a degree of tonal contrast 
between the build and the drop, and this is 
often achieved by including fewer bass 
elements in the build. When it comes to 
chord changes, the fewer the better, to 
allow focus on ‘character’ sounds. We’ve 
added interest to this section by using 
fragments from a bunch of cut-up musical 
loops, all in the key of C minor.
13. The one-
note drop
Most DAWs feature an arpeggiator of some 
description, generating rapid runs of notes from 
held-down chords. If you know what the chords are 
in your track, they’re a very useful way of adding a 
bit of sparkle to proceedings. Here, we’ve got Logic’s 
Arpeggiator MIDI plugin playing an ascending/
descending 32nd-note arpeggio over four octaves  
to announce the build-up to a drop. The chord  
we’re playing is a 2nd inversion of A♭9 (C-E♭-A♭-B♭).
12. Arpeggios
76
> make music now / genre-busting music theory

Minor ninth chords have a brooding 
intensity to them – perfect for deep 
house. This example project consists of a 
128bpm drum track with a bassline built on 
the notes C, A and A♭ – the root notes of the 
chords we’re about to create. Using Bazille 
CM’s 3ee Bassy Keys preset, we’ll start with 
a regular C minor triad (C E♭ G) playing a 
pattern of three 16th-notes.
1
The minor ninth is known as an 
extended chord, as it uses notes that 
fall outside the octave range we usually 
pick notes from. If the G in our C minor 
chord is the fifth, we need to add two extra 
notes – the seventh and ninth – to extend 
the chord. In this case, the seventh will be 
B♭ (ten semitones up from C) and the ninth 
will be D (14 semitones up from C). 
2
Now we have a bar full of Cm9, let’s 
alter the voicing slightly to give it a 
brighter, more open sound. The voicing is 
simply the order in which the notes in the 
chord are played on the keyboard, so grab 
the second and third notes up from the 
bottom of the chord – E♭ and G – and 
transpose them up an octave.
3
After this, we can copy and paste this 
bar to occupy a four-bar section, 
matching the length of our bass part. To 
match what the bass plays, we transpose 
the Cm9 chord in bar 2 down three 
semitones to make Am9, then drop the 
chords in bars 3 and 4 down four 
semitones to get A♭m9.
4
 > Step by step  14. Deep house m9 chords 
 > Step by step  15. Progressive house eighth-note chords 
Rigid, pumping eighth-note chords 
can be found in most genres, but are 
particularly effective in progressive house. 
To illustrate, we’re going to add some 
chords to a typical 4/4 prog house beat 
using a tweaked version of Dune CM’s 
090 Silk Lead preset. Start by 
programming a Cm (C-E♭-G) on 16th-notes.
1
Make sure all the notes are the same 
velocity, then copy and paste to end 
up with a chord on every eighth-note beat, 
as shown. Adjust the Release of the 
synth’s amplitude envelope and the filter 
Cutoff, so that you hear a pulse rather 
than a constant chord against the beat. 
Then copy the lowest notes and paste 
them an octave lower for a bassline.
2
Now, experiment by changing the 
chord slightly, moving the middle note 
(the third – E♭) down one semitone to D to 
create a Csus2 chord, or up two semitones 
to F to create a Csus4 chord. You can also 
move the bass note around the C minor 
scale while doing this, to make a more 
interesting progression overall, like the 
one shown above.
3
Mad about  
the house
If you were to run a competition to 
find the genre with the most  
sub-genres, house would probably 
emerge as the clear winner. 
Enormously popular right from its 
genesis in the Chicago nightclubs of 
the late 1970s up to the present day, 
house has splintered off into 
multiple versions of itself over the 
intervening decades. Here’s a brief 
rundown of just a few of them…
 
Classic (Chicago) house
Original 4/4 beats, 808/909 drums,  
funky synth basslines, pea-soup 
hi-hats and percussion.
 
Deep house 
A blend of funk, jazz, soul and 
traditional house elements; tends to 
be slightly more complex musically.
 
Progressive house
Blending trance elements with 
traditional house style, prog is now 
one of the most mainstream styles.
 
Tech house
A fusion of techno’s sparse rigidity 
and the soul and funkiness of house.
 
Electro house
Radio-friendly mix of house, techno 
and electro-pop at about 128bpm.
 
Tropical house
Mid-tempo grooves and sunny,  
feel-good vibes – very commercial.
 
Bassline house
A combo of traditional house and UK 
garage rhythms shot through with 
heavy, wacky bass noises.
77

Neurofunk is as much about sound 
design as actual music theory. A typical 
intro centres on building tension and 
menace, so we create a mysterious-
sounding eight-bar part using Massive’s 
Stinga preset, as shown, using the notes F, 
A♭, F and F
♯. At 175bpm, the bars tick by 
pretty rapidly, so we repeat the region out 
to a length of 32 bars.
1
Next, we layer in Curve 2 CM’s Echo 
Organ preset, playing the same part 
but this time using power fifths – three-
note combinations of root, fifth and 
octave that can be played over both major 
and minor keys, due to their lack of a third. 
We then turn to Bazille CM’s Purr Bass 
preset for some tense, rhythmic stabs – 
two every two bars – on a low F.
2
After eight bars, we bring in another 
Bazille CM preset – Bass Growler – 
playing a portamento octave version of 
the drone from step 1. After eight bars of 
this, we add some drum hits from a sliced-
up loop, playing a reverb-laden, half-speed 
kick and snare pattern, together with 
some bleepy synth atmospherics.
3
Finally, we tag on an eight-bar build 
consisting of a new drum loop, a riser 
FX sample and a double-frequency Purr 
Bass part. We also send all the synth and 
bass tracks to a bus hosting an automated 
high-pass filter. This will give the kick and 
bass elements in the drop more impact 
when it comes in. Cue the drop!
4
 > Step by step  17. Composing a dark neurofunk DnB intro 
In the drum and bass genre, as the 
name would suggest, the main focus 
is on how the drums and bass 
interact. Typically motoring along at 
signature white-knuckle speeds of 
around 170-176 bpm and featuring 
ribcage-rattling bass tones, amongst 
the many offshoots of the genre that 
have evolved, such as jump up, 
drumstep and techstep, there are 
two distinct sides to the drum and 
bass coin.
The smoother side of DnB consists 
of the uplifting ‘liquid funk’ style, 
often relying on jazz-funk-influenced 
chords and tending to feature the 
kind of euphoric progressions you 
might find in a trance tune. On the 
other side of the coin, the darker 
style of DnB that has come to be 
known as ‘neurofunk’ relies on a 
heavier production style, with  
more emphasis on sound design  
and crazy distorted, swooping  
bass sounds rather than complex 
chord progressions.
 > Step by step  16. Uplifting liquid DnB chords 
Extended chords – such as major 
sevenths and minor ninths – work well 
for a bit of uplifting (‘liquid’) DnB. Using 
the 175bpm DnB Drums.wav as a drum 
track, we’ve programmed an eight-bar 
bassline, using Enzyme CM’s BASS 
Incendiary preset. We’re using notes from 
the key of A minor – A, C, E, A, F, E – with 
one new note every three eighth-notes.
1
Over this, we’re going to use the piano 
chords Am9, Cmaj7, Em7, Am9, 
Cmaj7sus4/F, E. To begin with, we just 
insert a new chord on the downbeat of 
each bar. Notice how Am9 and Cmaj7 are 
basically the same chord (C-E-G-B), but 
playing these four notes over a C bass 
rather than A effectively transforms Am9 
into Cmaj7.
2
With the changes blocked out, we can 
start to introduce some melodic 
movement by adding extra, incidental 
chords that just slightly alter the top notes 
of the existing chords. By rounding off 
with an E major instead of the expected 
Em7 (stealing a trick from Deadmau5), 
we’ve added an optimistic, upbeat ending 
to our minor progression.
3
78
> make music now / genre-busting music theory

 > Step by step  18. Using articulations and theory to craft an orchestral soundtrack 
Like most tracks, it’s often easiest to 
start with a rhythm part, so here we’ve 
loaded up the Pizzicato articulation of 
Albion One’s Strings patch. Pizzicato is a 
plucked articulation, and we kick things 
off with a rhythmic eighth-note pulse, 
playing power chords – C3, G3, C4. This is 
the equivalent of a major triad with no 
third, just the root and fifth.
1
Next, we duplicate the part with a  
Col Legno sound – violins played by 
hitting the back of the bow against the 
strings, a great semi-percussive sound for 
rhythmic parts. Rather than simply 
duplicating the previous part, though, we 
re-play the notes, leaving the quantise off 
to retain the feel of a group of live 
musicians playing together.
2
For some bottom end, we underpin 
the existing parts with cellos and 
double bass. Using Albion One’s Strings – 
Low Octaves patch, a single note on the 
MIDI keyboard triggers a sample of the 
same note played by a cello and a double 
bass an octave lower.
3
Now for a rhythmic spiccato string 
part, meaning to bounce the bow off 
the strings. The part we’ve programmed 
here is derived from alternating C major 
and D major chords. This pattern of 
alternating major chords, with roots two 
semitones apart, is a popular device for 
introducing a movie’s main character.
4
The Lydian mode is a version of a 
major scale played from its fourth 
note instead of its first. For example,  
a G major scale (G A B C D E F
♯ G)  
played from its fourth note – C – is spelled 
C D E F
♯ G A B C and known as C Lydian. So 
what we’ve ended up with is a version of 
the C major scale with a sharpened fourth 
degree – F
♯.
5
C Lydian has an inbuilt wistful, optimistic 
and humorous quality. It works with 
the track so far because that sharpened F 
fits with the F
♯ in the D major chord hinted 
at by the spiccato part. We use a high 
woodwind sound to play in a quirky melody 
using notes from C Lydian (emphasising 
that F
♯) – perfect for the first glimpse of our 
romantic heroine, for instance.
6
In the early 20th century, as new recording and 
broadcast technology prompted a shift in 
mainstream popularity from classical to folk, 
blues, ragtime and jazz, one final refuge for 
classical composers was the blossoming movie 
industry. Just as its previously widespread 
audience started to wane, the niche market of 
classical soundtracks for movies was born, 
establishing a style and sound that’s still 
relevant today. Modern film composers like 
James Horner, Hans Zimmer and Danny Elfman 
all take cues from classic soundtracks of the  
30s and 40s, with orchestral instruments front 
and centre in the mix. Current movie 
soundtracks still rely heavily on the orchestral 
sound, taking inspiration from Romantic-era 
composers such as Tchaikovsky and Prokofiev, 
as well as modern classical composers like 
Copland and Schoenberg.
The proliferation of superb orchestral sample 
libraries, such as Spitfire Audio’s offerings, make 
the modern-day film composer’s life much 
easier, allowing them to get a solid idea of how 
an arrangement will sound before a single 
musician gets to see the score. This technology 
also puts the epic orchestral movie-score sound 
within reach of those of us who lack the space 
or budget to mic up and record a 100-piece 
orchestra in the living room!
Film composers are skilled in conveying and 
reinforcing the right emotional response to 
match the visuals they’re accompanying. This 
can be achieved by adopting particular styles 
and scales to suit – fast-paced, dynamic stuff for 
action sequences, for example; or swelling, 
string-laden cues for romantic scenes.
In the walkthrough below, we’re going to 
build a simple orchestral cue from scratch with 
Spitfire’s Albion One, using a special scale called 
the Lydian mode. Essentially a major scale 
played from its fourth note rather than its first, 
the Lydian mode is very useful for light-hearted, 
quirky-sounding cues and thus ideal for 
romantic comedies or even cartoons – Danny 
Elfman’s famous Simpsons theme is a great 
example of the Lydian mode in action.
genre-busting music theory / make music now <
79

 02  
TRANCE AND 
TECHNO: 16TH-NOTE 
SEQUENCES
Like most dance music, trance and 
techno are most comfortable in a 4/4 rhythm, 
which is usually pinned down by a solid kick 
drum on all four beats in the bar. This provides 
the perfect backdrop for 16th-note bass and 
synth sequences to drive the rhythm along. 
Rather than just filling the whole bar with a note 
or chord on every beat, however, create 
different rhythmic effects by removing notes 
here and there, then shifting or lengthening the 
remaining notes to create space around the kick 
drum beats.
 03
POP: MODULATION 
WITH PIVOT CHORDS
In a music theory context, 
modulation means moving to a 
different key, and it can be achieved in several 
ways. One method is to use a chord common  
to both keys as a ‘pivot’ chord. This enables  
you to have a verse in a minor key (Am, for 
example) and switch to the relative major key 
(C) for the chorus. Luckily, relative keys share all 
the same diatonic chords, making this kind of 
modulation fairly straightforward. So a 
prechorus in the key of Am that ends with a  
G major chord (the VII chord of Am and the  
V chord of the key of C) will resolve to a C major 
chord, allowing you to kick off the chorus with 
the tonic of the new key of C major.
 04
REGGAE:  
THE ‘SKANK’
Reggae has a very distinctive 
sound that’s defined by a few 
signature elements, including the ‘one-drop’  
kick drum plus sidestick rhythm pattern, deep 
bass guitar tones and tape echo dub delays. 
Probably the most recognisable reggae 
trademark though, is the off-beat ‘skank’ – a 
rhythm part made up of a chord, usually a major 
or minor triad, played on every even-numbered 
eighth-note. Extended chords such as major and 
minor sevenths are also often used, but 
suspended or diminished chords crop up less 
often. In terms of instrumentation, the skank is 
normally handled by the guitar, piano or organ. 
When an organ is used, there’s also the option to 
go for a two-handed shuffle. This involves 
playing staccato chords in a choppy eighth-note 
pattern but leaving the downbeats empty – ie, 
Rest-Left-Right-Left-Rest-Left-Right-Left. With 
the right organ sound (usually a Hammond 
B3-style tone), the result is a very percussive 
groove that complements the rhythm section’s 
overall emphasis on the third beat of the bar.
 01
R&B SUBSIDIARY CHORDS
Subsidiary chords share two or more  
chord tones, and thus can be switched out 
for each other because they share the same 
harmonic function. In this example, we have a I-I-IV-V 
progression in C major (C-C-F-G). To find the subsidiary 
chord of a major triad, we simply raise the fifth by a 
whole tone. So the subsidiary of C major (C-E-G) is A 
minor (C-E-A). This can now be substituted for the 
second C major chord in our progression, giving us 
I-vi-IV-V (C-Am-F-G).
Break up 16th-note sequences for rhythmic variation
Nine top  
theory tips
Incorporate stylistic tricks into 
your tunes with these genre-
busting tactics that can be 
applied to any musical style
Swapping out one chord for a very similar alternative can be a great way to subtly spice up a progression
> make music now / genre-busting music theory
80

 
JAZZ: TRITONE 
SUBSTITUTIONS  
Substitution means replacing one chord 
with another one that performs the same 
harmonic function, and tritone substitution is a popular 
example of this in jazz. A tritone is an interval  
of three whole tones (six semitones), so in a tritone 
substitution, a chord is replaced by one whose root 
note is a tritone away from the root of the original 
chord. In our example, we’ve got a ii-V-I progression in 
the key of C major: Dm, G, C. We can replace the V (G) 
with D♭ – three whole tones down from G – for a jazzier, 
ii-♭II-I sound that still resolves nicely back to the C.
 05
BLUES:  
SOLOING TIPS
When soloing over minor 
progressions, using either the 
minor pentatonic (1, ♭3, 4, 5, ♭7) or minor blues  
(1, ♭3, 4, 
♯4, 5, ♭7) scales, all five notes in the  
minor pentatonic fit over any chord in the 
standard blues progression, so you can stick  
to one scale and it should work. The major 
pentatonic scale (1, 2, 3, 5, 6) can be used to  
solo over progressions containing major  
triads, 7th and major 7th chords, because it lacks 
a 7th degree. However, the major pentatonic 
scale only works with one chord at a time, 
meaning that you should use the A major 
pentatonic scale when soloing over A7, for 
example, but when you switch to D7, you should 
use the D major pentatonic.
 06
FUNK: MINOR 11TH 
POLYCHORD
Minor eleventh (m11) chords  
are great for spicing up jazz or 
funk progressions, and they can be formed  
in two ways: by spelling out the  
six-note formula 1-♭3-5-♭7-9-11 (which for a  
Cm11 is C-E♭-G-B♭-D-F), or by playing two triads 
together to make a polychord. For an m11, play  
a minor triad with the desired root with your  
left hand (Cm in this case), then work out the 
note a whole tone below the root (B♭) and use 
your right hand to play a major triad based on it 
(B♭). The result? Cm11!
 07
MIDI 
TRANSFORMATION 
FOR ANY GENRE
Use a MIDI transformer app  
(such as AutoTonic or AutoTheory), a  
dedicated MIDI plugin or scale lock mode  
in your DAW to fix MIDI input data to the key of 
your song. Used properly, these devices  
make it impossible to play a note out of your 
selected key and scale, so you can plonk around 
randomly on the keys and still end up with 
something useable. You do have to work out the 
key your song is in, mind, and which scale you 
want to use; but even if you know a lot about 
theory, you can get some unexpectedly cool 
results using this technique.
 09
DANCEHALL-POP: 
DEM BOW
Unlike traditional Caribbean 
dancehall songs, dancehall-pop 
music fuses authentic dancehall rhythms with 
material found in mainstream pop music, such 
as repeated choruses, melodic tunes and vocals 
with lashings of hard pitch correction. The 
rhythm this genre uses is known as ‘dem bow 
riddim’ – it features a 4/4 kick drum at a  
medium tempo, with the 16th-notes of each bar 
divided into accents on 3+3+2+3+3+2, usually 
played on the snare to give a pushed, rolling  
feel to the track. 
The selected chord was G major, but replacing it for a D♭7 lends a jazzier way to get back to the tonic C major
08
An authentic dancehall-pop rhythm takes  
this shuffled pattern as the basis of its drum track
Use MIDI transposition in your DAW and you’ll never 
play a wrong note again!
genre-busting music theory / make music now <
81

82

If there’s one thing guaranteed to polarise a room 
full of computer musicians, it’s music theory. With 
just one mention of a dominant seventh or a double 
flat, the MIDI keyboards come out, and the two sides 
line up against each other and proceed to fight to the 
death until just one remains, gasping for breath in a 
heap of piano wire.
OK, so it’s not quite that bad, but there’s definitely a 
divide nonetheless. Some musicians preach the 
importance of theory but never get any tracks finished, 
while the other side shun the lexicon and knuckle down – 
but their tracks don’t always sound quite… ‘right’. 
Here at 
, we’re firmly in the middle. It’s the emotion 
that counts, but we know that a dose of useful knowledge 
can inspire a truly unique track. Music theory is just that: 
theory. It explains why certain notes work together, but 
they still work together if you don’t know why they do. 
That’s why we believe that you should develop your 
theory skills while actually making music – after all, it’s too 
easy to use your lack of knowledge as an excuse for lack 
of output. It’s important that you don’t get lost down the 
theory rabbit hole, and instead actually get around to 
making some kick-ass music, equipped with good old-
fashioned learning to back it all up.
So what are we going to do about it? Well, over the 
next 14 pages, we’re going to distil music theory down to 
the elements we think are most important in the track-
building process. And we’re going to put our money 
where our mouths are by showing you how these crucial 
elements come into play while building an actual track. 
We’ll start with a skeleton ‘sketch’, with no harmonic 
content, that you can go grab from the Tutorial Files 
folder and use in any DAW. Using this basic starting point, 
we’ll then demonstrate real-world uses of the most crucial 
theory techniques as we build and develop the track.
This feature and its accompanying videos will focus on 
the practical basics of theory, but if you want to get up to 
speed with the topic in more detail, be sure to check out a 
few choice Computer Music back issues, or treat yourself 
to a monthly subscription (see p128). Aside from semi-
regular cover features on music theory, you’ll find our 
in-house expert and pun extraordinaire Dave Clews 
breaking down a specific topic each and every month in 
his long-standing Easy Guide column. 
It’s not as scary as you think – 
follow our guide and you’ll be 
writing better tunes in no time
MADE EASY!
 MUSIC 
THEORY
83

Our starting point
01
02
03
05
04
07
09
06
08
10
11
01
ARRANGEMENT 
This track’s a fairly basic dance arrangement of 
nearly seven minutes. It’s nothing special, but it’s what 
you do with the notes that counts, isn’t it? Since we’re 
working in MIDI, the tempo doesn’t particularly matter, 
but keep it around 114–125bpm to get results like ours. 
Throughout our videos, we’re running at 120bpm.
02
NOTHING BUT C 
Every single note in this project starts out as a C 
note – there are no other notes in the entire project (other 
than drums, of course). It might sound weird as you play 
through it for the first time, but this actually gives us a 
perfect blank canvas to show you how to use theory to 
build something from nothing – and something musical  
at that!
03
DRUM ELEMENTS: AUDIO FILES 
We’ve used our own drums for this track, and 
we’ve included them in the Tutorial Files for you to get a 
rhythm going straight away. However, if you want to get 
your own beats in there instead, we’ve also included a 
MIDI file of our drum pattern for that purpose. We 
recommend using XILS-lab StiX CM – the excellent drum 
machine from 
 Plugins – to get something started.
04
KEYS AND CHORDS:  
PHONEC CM 
With its drifting, retro, VHS-styled sound, Phonec CM has 
us covered for these sultry chords. Just grab the 
Organics preset from the menu in the lower right. We’ll 
get going straight away on the next page, and start 
learning about how chords work with this lush patch.
05
LOW AND HIGH LEAD SYNTHS: 
THORN CM AND CURVE CM 
There are two lead synths in our project that play similar 
parts. The ‘Low Synth’ is a patch from Thorn CM (Lead >> 
Pluck >> Warmer), while the higher synth is a preset from 
Cableguys’ Curve 2 CM: Bloopy (CG Edit) LE, found on 
page 2 of the synth’s preset library.
06
PAD SYNTH: ENZYME CM 
Using the preset PAD Eerie, Enzyme adds an 
atmospheric synth layer that gives some texture at the 
start of the track, and  comes back in towards the end to 
fill out the mix when some extra complexity is needed.
07
RISING SYNTH PART:  
PHONEC CM 
This slow sound (Phonec CM’s Making Contact patch) 
rises up in pitch to the C note we’ve programmed. When 
timed right, it acts as both a riser effect and also a melodic 
note as other instruments come in to do their thing. 
Phonec CM’s not just used in the first drop and the 
following build – it’s also used to make some more 
interesting effects during the long second verse, too.
08
SYNTHESISED BASSLINE: 
BAZILLE CM 
With the HS Max Bassroom patch loaded, Bazille CM 
provides low-end weight, plus attack and ‘definition’ 
when played with quick note combinations like the ones 
we’ve programmed here. When this bass part first comes 
in, it’s playing longer, sustained notes, but this quickly 
gives way to a rhythmic pattern that follows the main 
song whenever it does play. 
09
NEW MIDI FILES FOR  
EVERY WALKTHROUGH
Anywhere that we amend an instrument part in one of our 
tutorials, we’ll include the new version in the Tutorial 
Files folder. With this, you can either replace the original 
outright, or add it as an extra track then compare it 
against the initial version.
10
HIGH-PASSED MASTER 
We’ve included several project files for a few 
leading DAWs. We’ve automated a couple of high-pass 
sweeps on the master channel. If you’re building the track 
in a different DAW using our MIDI files, you’ll have to 
program these sweeps yourself: the first creeps up slowly 
from the track’s start until bar 41, and the second goes 
from halfway through bar 175 and drops back in just 
before bar 179.
11
SIDECHAINED ELEMENTS 
We haven’t given every element the full mixdown 
treatment, but we’ve added sidechain pumping (with the 
key input from a silent kick drum track) to help parts 
rhythmically fit together a bit better, and to help you 
make your chord choices with some context. If you want 
to recreate this yourself, route a (silent) kick channel 
playing on every beat to a compressor on the Chords 
(Phonec CM) channel and the Pad (Enzyme CM) channel.
12
THE REST IS UP TO YOU
Fancy restyling the drums, adding elements or 
swapping them around? Please do! Want to polish up the 
track and give it a proper mixdown? Go ahead! 
We’re focusing purely on music theory knowledge 
throughout this feature, but feel free to give the tune your 
own stamp.
We’ve created this entire project using only C notes. Go get the MIDI files, plugins 
and projects from FileSilo to follow along, and we’ll build the track up using theory…
 
TUTORIAL 
FILES
GET THE FILES
Download the files for this track from FileSilo 
(filesilo.co.uk/computermusic) – they’re in the Tutorial 
Files folder. You’ll find the initial MIDI files for each track, 
plus the amended MIDI files for any changes we make in 
any given walkthrough – just replace the originals in 
your project when required.
 
GET THE PLUGINS
 You might already have the requisite 
 Plugins 
installed on your system. If not, head to FileSilo or grab 
the installers from this issue’s covermount DVD, then 
install them on your PC or Mac.
> make music now / music theory made easy
84

More three-note chord ﬂavours
Let’s look at chords. For now, we’ll just 
use simple three-note major and 
minor chords. We won’t go too deep yet – 
we’ll just show you what these chords are 
and how to make them – but our later 
walkthroughs will help clarify how to 
choose chords in the right context. Load 
up our sample project, shown on the 
previous page.
1
Next we’ll duplicate this chord, 
moving all three notes to make the 
chord F-A-C. This chord is F major. 
Although we have different notes, the 
pattern between them remains the same  
– from the first note, F, we go four steps up 
to find our second note, A, and then three 
steps up to find our third note, in this case C.
4
The Chords Keys.mid track is 
triggering Phonec CM. Right now, 
every chord is two C notes, spaced an 
octave apart – pretty boring!  A chord is 
played by playing two or more notes at 
the same time. For the first eight C chords 
in the MIDI part, delete the top note so we 
can build something new.
2
If we continue to move this chord to 
other notes, we’ll still get a major chord, 
because of the pattern between the notes. 
Move the chord notes to make it a G 
major (G-B-D). Now we’ll make a minor 
chord as the third chord, namely C minor: 
C-D♯-G. Compare it to the C major at the 
start – the only real difference is the 
middle note.
5
There’s a world of possible note 
combinations, but here we’ll focus on 
the most common by creating specific 
three-note chords – aka ‘triads’. We’ll start 
with a C major chord. Take the C note and 
duplicate it four steps up to the note E. For 
the third note, duplicate that E, and move 
it up by three steps to G. Our C major 
chord contains the notes C-E-G.
3
Again, what makes this chord minor is 
the pattern between the notes (up three, 
up four). We move it down to make it an A 
minor (A-C-E), then program our last 
chord as an F major (F-A-C). We then 
duplicate this chord progression for the 
entire track on this instrument. Check out 
the video to see and hear it all in action, 
and grab our new MIDI chords track in the 
Tutorial Files folder.
6
 > Step by step   1. Exploring basic three-note chords and building a progression with them 
With so many notes available, major and minor 
chords are just the tip of the iceberg. We’ll take 
you through four-note  chords later in this 
feature, but here are a few more three-note 
chords you can use to spice things up.
A diminished chord is made by taking the 
root note, moving three semitones up, then 
another three semitones up. The diminished 
chord sounds ‘unsettling’, and can be good for 
transitions between sections.
An augmented chord, on the other hand, 
takes the root note, adds one four semitones 
up, then another four semitones up. The sound 
of the augmented chord is mysterious – it’s 
great to play after a major chord by moving the 
first note one down, Beatles-style.
How about going for a suspended fourth 
chord? With this one, the gap between the first 
two notes is bigger than that between the 
second two. Start off by moving five semitones 
up, then another two semitones up. It’s a major 
chord with the second note raised, basically. It’s 
somewhat reminiscent of church hymns, and it 
sounds like it wants to resolve back to that 
major chord.
Similar to the suspended fourth, a 
suspended second takes the second note of 
the major chord and moves it down two 
semitones – jumping up two semitones from 
the root, then up another five semitones.
A diminished chord starts at the root note, moves three 
semitones up, then another three up
An augmented chord travels four semitones  
from the first note, then another four semitones 
Try a suspended fourth chord out before the major chord, 
formed by moving the middle note one step higher
TUTORIAL 
FILES
85
music theory made easy / make music now <

The major scale can be found by playing 
the white notes from C to C, but it’s the 
pattern between notes that matters
The minor scale has a different pattern, 
making jumps ordered 2-1-2-2-1-2-2
Keys and scales
Pay attention now – if you learn 
one thing about music theory, it 
should be this.
There are 12 notes on a piano 
keyboard: C to C and repeat. But in 
almost all music, the point is to not 
use all of them. Most often in 
Western music, seven from those 
12 are used. 
Put basically, if you restrict all 
the notes you play to that specific 
selection of seven – that ‘scale’ – 
everything you play will be in key. 
It won’t automatically sound 
awesome, but it’s half the battle.
But here’s the thing: the 
question of which seven notes you 
use is very important. You can’t 
just use any seven, and the seven 
notes are what define the musical 
scale you’re using.
If you play all the white notes 
on the keyboard (C D E F G A B C) 
in order, then you’ve just played a 
C major scale. If you play the 
white notes from A to A, you’ve 
just played an A minor scale.
The pattern of the gaps 
between the notes determines 
what the scale is. Scrutinise that C 
major scale and you’ll see the 
pattern of jumps between notes is 
2-2-1-2-2-2-1 – ie, the first jump 
goes from C to D, missing out C♯, 
while the third jump goes from E 
to F, not missing any notes out.
Starting from D, you’ll play D 
major if you keep that same 
pattern (2-2-1-2-2-2-1). So from D, 
jump to E (missing D♯), and next to 
F♯ (missing F), then to G (missing 
nothing). The whole D major scale 
is D E F♯ G A B C♯ D.
Let’s look back at that A minor 
scale (all the white notes from A to 
A). The pattern for a minor scale is 
2-1-2-2-1-2-2. 
In the walkthrough on the right, 
we’ll start to take you through this 
concept in context, giving you an 
extra handle on chords and scales 
using a DAW’s piano roll.
Getting all the notes in your project to 
conform to the same musical key is 
one of the most useful skills you can learn 
when creating music, We start by defining 
the C major scale – that’s all  
the white notes played from C to C, ie,  
C D E F G A B C. This run of notes will 
probably sound very familiar to almost 
anybody with even a smattering of 
musical knowledge.
1
If we move the same pattern up the 
keyboard and play it from F instead  
of C, we land on the F major scale – so 
that’s F G A B♭ C D E F. We’re no longer 
sticking to the white notes, as this rule 
applies only to C major, and no other 
major scale. What matters here is the 
pattern created between each step of the 
scale. For these major scales, the pattern 
between the notes is 2-2-1-2-2-2-1.
2
Now we’ll construct a minor scale. 
Similarly, if we use all the white notes 
from A to A, we end up with the A minor 
scale – A B C D E F G A. Again, it’s the 
pattern of jumps between the notes that 
makes the scale minor, and in this case 
that pattern is 2-1-2-2-1-2-2 – the ‘all white 
notes for A minor’ rule is just a handy way 
of remembering how to formulate it. 
So we can program any pattern of 
those white notes into the Low Synth, 
and it’ll be playing in C major. Above, 
we’ve set up some chords to play. As long 
as every note played is in the same scale, 
things will tend to sound pretty good 
together. Notice how our chords are 
spaced out between scale notes and don’t 
use adjacent notes at the same time.
3
5
Let’s get our heads back into C major 
again, drawing the scale in for the Low 
Synth part. So the point of the music 
‘being in C major’ is that every instrument 
only uses notes from this scale. In Ableton 
Live, we can use the Fold function to make  
all unused notes disappear, which can 
make working with scales easier.
We move to the High Synth part and 
Fold the piano roll to the C major 
scale again. Once more, we can draw in 
practically any notes from those available, 
and when played together with the Low 
Synth chords, the instruments will be in 
key. Anything you program will sound 
reasonable… maybe not perfect, but it’ll at 
least be in key.
4
6
 > Step by step  2. Defining a musical scale with a set of notes 
86
> make music now / music theory made easy

Modern software instruments aren’t  
limited by note ranges, which begs the 
question: how low can you go? In our video, 
we position the intro bassline in a higher 
octave than the main bassline, which gives 
the main ‘drop’ a powerful sense of weight 
and impact.
While we could’ve gone even lower than 
that (with the F note straight after it), having 
the final note of the phrase a little higher 
helps the next note – the C at the start of the 
repeated phrase – to hit a little harder when 
it drops in.
Our lowest notes extend down to about 
49Hz – the low G. In the real world, the 
lowest note a loudspeaker system can 
reproduce effectively is a low E (41.2Hz). 
We’re staying above that here, but if you’re 
going lower, remember that not everybody 
will be playing your music back on super-
powerful club sound systems. 
 Bass theory
Resting on  
the root note
If you’ve loaded our new MIDI parts for the first 
walkthrough, the chords sound nice, but they’re 
not backed up by the bassline, which continues 
to just play C notes. So what do we do? Since we 
were sticking to simple three-note major and 
minor triads when we created those chords, all 
we have to do is copy the lowest note of each 
chord (aka the ‘root note’) for our bassline. So 
where our chords are Cmaj – Gmaj – Amin – 
Fmaj, our bassline playing underneath them will 
simply go C–G–A–F. Since, at this point, the 
chords don’t really change much throughout 
the track, we can copy the same group of four 
bass notes throughout the entire project.
Once you’ve done the Extensions and 
Inversions walkthroughs, come back here and 
experiment with the bassline – there may be 
new lowest notes for each chord later on, but it’s 
still the root (A in an A major chord, C♯ in a C♯ 
minor chord, F in an F minor chord) that will be 
the most solid choice for a bassline.
Considerations when 
crafting a bassline
The way you program bass notes will change 
depending on the sound you use. If the character of 
your bass patch lies in its complex modulation, your 
notes should often be long and low. If it’s a solid, 
weighty, subby bassline, the length of the notes you 
use may change. If a ‘punchier’ bass has higher-
frequency transients at the starts of notes, use it to 
pick out a rhythm, as in the screenshot above.
Is it just a melody, but lower? Sort of, but there’s more to it than that…
The lowest  
of the low
87
music theory made easy / make music now <

If melodies are a fight between something a 
listener’s heard before and something they 
haven’t, then one great weapon for the 
‘unusual’ side of the equation is contrast. 
Moving in smaller steps rather than big 
leaps is usually standard, but making large 
jumps between notes will help your melody 
stand out against the crowd.
On a similar tip, treat your melodic 
phrases in the same way: if you’ve just gone 
up to higher notes, go down to lower ones 
next time round. If you’ve just played a 
phrase full of short, staccato notes, go for a 
lingering section of longer, held notes to 
slow things right back down. In the search 
for something interesting, contrast is king.
It’s not all about textbook theory. Set your 
music to loop, work out the scale you’re in 
(and therefore the notes you need), and get 
down and dirty with your MIDI controller. 
Even if you’re not Mozart, there are very 
likely to be salvageable snatches of 
inspiration in there. And with the magic of 
the modern DAW, you can experiment with 
what you’ve recorded, then tweak to 
improve your result. Hint: duplicate melody 
clips before changing them to give yourself 
a variation to use later on!
Sometimes, laying out the rhythm with one 
note helps you get started, and from here, all 
that remains is the final 50% of the task. 
Experiment with different notes in the 
already-interesting rhythm you’ve laid 
down, and it’s hard to go wrong.
Our project is a great example of building 
a melody with this method. As we’ve laid 
down the whole thing using just C notes, 
with the rhythms already programmed, all 
we need to do (as seen in the video) is move 
the notes up or down. There’s still plenty of 
refining to do though, of course…
 > Technique  3. The rhythm-first method 
 
 
 > Technique  4. Recording then editing  
 
 > Technique  5. Ramp up the contrast   
Melody generators
Three ways to come up with a melody from scratch
Crafting hooks 
and melodies
A mainstream track won’t get very 
far if it doesn’t have that special 
something – that unique element 
that a listener can grab onto and 
identify time and time again. 
Something that’s familiar, yet new. A 
hook, essentially.
Your tune’s hook could be a vocal 
phrase, a repeated melody, or even a 
funky beat, but for the purposes of 
this section, we’re going to be 
concentrating on melodic material.
So what makes a melody? We’ll 
start off with the basics. Simple 
melodies (and even plenty of 
complex ones) tend to start and end 
with the ‘tonic note’ – that’s the note 
that starts the scale you’re in, such 
as C in C major, or G♯ in G♯ minor.
But you can’t just use one single 
note throughout… as our initial 
project testifies! A melody is also 
about moving away from that note. 
Without wanting to sound too airy 
fairy, it ‘tells a story’ by starting at 
the tonic note, moving away from it, 
then finding its way back at the end. 
Of course, it’s the journey that 
counts, rather than the destination.
Melodies also tend to make use of 
phrases. Over four bars, you might 
encounter four separate phrases, 
with gaps (or at least less action) in 
between them. These phrases are 
often linked in some way musically, 
acting as ‘call and response’ pairs, or 
‘question and answers’ pairs, if you 
prefer to think of it that way.
Another handy rule of thumb is to 
end your middle phrase (halfway 
through the melody line) with the 
‘fifth’ note. This is the fifth degree of 
the scale, ie, seven semitones up 
from your scale’s tonic note – that’s 
the G note in the C major scale or the 
A♯ note in the D♯ minor scale. We 
won’t get bogged down in the 
details, but this reinforces the 
listener’s urge to get back ‘home’ to 
the tonic note by the end of the 
melody, and helps it all make a lot 
more musical sense in general.
But these basic melodic rules 
leave a little something to be 
desired. They apply to easy ideas 
such as nursery rhymes, but the real 
art in modern music is to mix things 
up a bit – to subvert the listener’s 
expectations. Once you’ve learnt the 
building blocks of melody, it’s time 
to break the rules and hit the listener 
where they least anticipate it: use 
unusual rhythms, unexpected turns 
from note to note, and never-before-
heard sounds to get deep into your 
audience’s skulls.
Even then, though, go too far with 
your musical experimentations and 
you’ll risk alienating everyone. It’s a 
fine balance to strike, but it’s what 
being a musician is all about.
> make music now / music theory made easy
88

Aside from our main melody line, 
there are also spaces in the track for 
smattering a few notes in the intro and 
breakdown sections. These are currently 
still just playing C notes. The intention for 
these is to provide a few hints of what the 
melody will be in the intro section, and 
some reminders and echoes of it during 
the breakdown.
1
We continue in the same vein for all 
four phrases of the melody, lining up 
their first halves with the chords, as above. 
The whole effect is a gradual exposition 
unravelling what’s to come, but it still 
fulfils its musical function in the track as 
an interesting element in its own right, 
keeping the intro animated with a sense of 
‘building up’.
4
We cut out one of the four-bar melody 
duplicates from the High Synth line 
and bring it over to replace the original C 
notes here. Once we’ve got it lined up, we 
delete the last three notes from the first 
phrase of the melody, leaving just the first 
four notes, then a gap after them.
2
In the breakdown section, we do 
basically the same thing, but this time 
we distribute the same phrases between 
the high and low synths, bouncing the 
phrases between higher and lower 
octaves. Doing so keeps this part as a low-
key, stripped-back breakdown, but also 
offers something new in comparison to 
the first time we heard it in the intro.
5
During the intro, the chords move at a 
different rate, slowed down to half 
speed. We move the second phrase up to 
join the second chord, and again remove 
the second half of the phrase, turning it 
into a little hint for the melody to come. 
Keeping it quick, simple and snatchy is the 
aim here in the intro section.
3
We’ve got a melody worked out for 
our two synth parts – one plays it 
lower while the other one plays it a little 
higher. That’s all well and good, but the 
track is long and the melody starts to 
grind after a while. It’s time to change it  
up and create an alternate version to  
keep the track spinning without  
becoming samey…
6
 > Step by step  6. Consolidating the melody and creating variations 
We chop out the melody line halfway 
through verse two, and get to work 
making a copy to provide variation – an 
alternate take on the melody so far. We 
start by adding some extra notes between 
the first and second phrase for the melody 
to ‘fall down into’.
7
In the second phrase we create some 
more doubled notes, where there 
were previously single notes, or nothing at 
all. Judging by the feel of this track, 
turning up the velocity for the second 
note helps the quick-fire double make 
itself heard best.
8
Try a bigger embellishment in this 
second line, creating an arpeggio-
style run of notes at the end of the fourth 
phrase to cap things off. Duplicate this 
new melody clip through the end of the 
second verse and outro, trying different 
octaves for the high and low synth parts.
9
89
music theory made easy / make music now <

We’ve given you a very practical demonstration 
of chord extensions in the walkthrough above, 
and while we’re generally avoiding too much 
jargon this issue, this is a topic that would 
benefit from a few concrete definitions.
The first two types of extended chords are 
seventh chords. A major seventh uses the 
standard triad pattern for a major chord and 
then adds a note four semitones on top. So 
that’s C-E-G-B, for example. A minor seventh is 
similar, but adds three semitones on top of a 
minor chord – say, C-E
♭-G-B
♭. One more variant is 
the dominant seventh. This is a mixture of the 
two, in many ways, taking a major chord but 
only adding three semitones on top. C-E-G-B
♭ 
would be an example of that.
If you look through a standard major scale, 
the notes available to you mean that the major 
seventh is a natural candidate for the C chord, 
while the D minor and E minor chords will easily 
turn into minor sevenths. You can easily build a 
major seventh on the F, but the G encourages 
that lovely dominant seventh chord.
Moving things further up, you can build on 
the seventh chords by adding three or four 
semitones (whatever’s allowed by the key 
you’re in) to build a ninth chord. C major 9th 
would be a five-note C-E-G-B-D, with the ‘ninth’ 
reaching into the next octave. D minor 9th 
would be D-F-A-C-E.
And if you decided to miss out the seventh 
note and just add the ninth to the original chord 
(as in C-E-G-D), that’d be called an add 9 chord. 
These chords continue building in just the way 
you’d expect, with 11ths (or ‘add 11’s) or 13ths, 
right until you come back to the tonic note – 
and things start repeating as you get higher 
and higher.
Of course, these chords can be inverted like 
any other (as we’ll show you on the next page), 
but when doing so, watch for clashes between 
adjacent notes – extensions can get a bit messy 
with so many notes hanging around.
Extended chords
We can make our chords more 
interesting by adding extra notes… but 
not just any. We’ve been dealing with basic 
three-note triads so far, but we’re going to 
spice things up before the second verse 
hits by using four-note chords. Start by 
duplicating the top note of the C major 
chord four semitones up to B.
1
Chord extensions don’t have to stop 
there. For the second G major and A 
minor chords, we move the top note up 
even further, hitting A for G major and B 
for A minor. Finally, we also extend the 
second C major chord in the group of 
eight with a higher-up D note.
4
This new C-E-G-B chord adds a new 
feeling to the first chord of the 
progression. If we try doing exactly the 
same with the G major and A minor 
chords, though, the note wouldn’t be in 
key. This time, we move the top note up 
three steps instead of four. 
2
The chords have become a bit too 
‘jazzy’ for the track. We take the G and 
A chords’ highest notes elsewhere, 
making G major (G-B-D-B) and A minor 
(A-C-E-C). These chords aren’t technically 
extensions, as the higher notes already 
belong to the original chord, but it still gives 
extra complexity.
5
We can extend the F major chord by 
adding an extra note four semitones 
up. This is a great chord to ‘lead on from’. 
For this reason, we decide to use this 
chord as the last in a group of eight, rather 
than in a group of four. We duplicate the 
first four, then remove the extension from 
the F the first time around.
3
Finally, we start duplicating these 
alternate, more complex chords out to 
the rest of the sections in the track. They’ll 
feature from the first breakdown, into the 
second verse, and beyond into the track’s 
outro as well. 
6
 > Step by step   7. Using chord extensions to add flavour 
A range of extended (and inverted) chords  
that are possible when using the C major scale
90
> make music now / music theory made easy

Here’s a more technical reason: when 
chord notes fall within a similar octave 
range, more space is created for other 
instruments in terms of frequency 
content, meaning you may be able to push 
the level of your inverted chords up a bit 
higher in the mix.
Also, when chord notes lie in the same 
octave range, the job of EQing 
becomes easier. You’ll have more mix 
space to work with, as the chords’ 
harmonics will lie in a similar frequency 
range. This helps you pocket your musical 
parts more effectively within a busy track.
However, not all chords need to be 
inverted. We’ve left our extended 
chords in their original orders for our 
breakdown and build-ups, where fewer 
instruments compete for space. At these 
points, we can let the original chords shine 
through for a change of feeling.
Have a look at the chords in the last 
walkthrough (load ours from the 
Tutorial Files if necessary). Notice a 
couple of things: for one, they cover a 
broad range from note to note on the 
piano keyboard (about two octaves), and 
they lurch from high to low and back. Let’s 
tidy this up for a smoother effect…
1
We continue by moving the low A in 
the A minor chord up higher, and then 
the extended D in the next C major chord 
down lower. Already, we can see that our 
chords are more closely grouped than the 
originals playing after them. Now we’ve 
brought the notes closer together, the 
chords sound a lot smoother.
4
We’re going to aim to bring them into 
just one octave range, from C to C, 
matching the C chord at the start. For our 
second chord (G major), we’d like to move 
the lowest G note up an octave to the 
higher G… but there’s already a G note 
playing up there. Instead, then, what we’ll 
do is delete this lowest G note.
2
Moving on, we move a G up an octave, 
an A up an octave, and an E down by 
an octave. This E (the extension from the F 
major chord) has landed right next to the 
F above it, though – that sounds a little 
worse than before. Move that new E down 
to the D below it, then duplicate these 
inverted versions of the chords 
throughout the rest of the track.
5
Now the lowest note of the chord is a 
B. We move this note to the B an 
octave up, bringing it into the same C-to-C 
range we’re shooting for. Moving one note 
up or down doesn’t actually change the 
nature or character of the chord – what 
defines this is which notes are present, not 
where they fall.
3
So why does this work, exactly? Well, it 
stops ‘lurching’ between higher and 
lower notes (imagine playing such far-
apart notes on a real keyboard!), as the 
jump from note to note is smaller. If this 
was a four-voice sung chord progression, 
and you were singing the second highest 
note, you wouldn’t need to move your 
voice very far between each note.
6
 > Step by step  8. Chord inversions – how (and why) to shuffle chord notes 
7
8
9
91
music theory made easy / make music now <

At the end of the track, we want to 
change things up a bit and switch to a 
different key. But how do we do that? 
In the original track, we have this 
breakdown, after which the music restarts, 
and builds back up again…
1
Because the music fades out, takes a 
little break and then starts building 
again, this works quite well. After 
everything drops out, the bass starts at D, 
not C where it’s been all along, and 
emphasises that we’re in a whole new key.
4
With this drop in the music, it’s quite 
an easy setup to build things back up, 
only this time in a different key. First of all, 
we cut out the outro parts for the Chords, 
High Synth, Low Synth and Bassline parts…
2
As we’re using Studio One here, we 
can right-click the separate MIDI clips, 
hit Transpose and move them up by, say, 
two semitones, which shifts all these 
elements into the key of D major.
3
Since the patterns between all the 
notes remain the same, we can move 
to practically any key in this abrupt way. 
Another two semitones up and we hit E 
major, which provides an even bigger 
change after spending a long time in C.
5
Here’s another way to make a 
smooth, logical and musical 
transition. Let’s use the example 
of changing from C major to D 
major once again.
If you program out the notes 
of both these scales and inspect 
them, you should see that the 
two have similarities and 
differences. C major has a C and F 
while D major has C♯ and F♯. On 
the other hand, the two scales do 
share a few notes: D, E, G, A and B. 
The idea behind a shared 
chord (sometimes called a ‘pivot 
chord’) is to use notes belonging 
to both the scales – the original 
and the destination – to form a 
chord to transition between the 
two. This chord will act as the last 
chord in C major, but it’s also an 
acceptable one in D major, so it 
works for a smooth transition.
So, for our remaining notes 
– D, E, G, A and B – what chords 
would qualify as the pivot chord? 
Two obvious triads are G major 
(G-B-D) and E minor (E-G-B) – 
these provide a better transition 
between the two keys.
Once you’ve got a chord 
worked out for the transition, 
there’s nothing stopping you 
extending it and inverting it, as 
demonstrated on the previous 
two pages. Using the same 
available notes, E minor could be 
extended to E-G-B-D, while G 
major could be extended to 
G-D-B-A, for example – and any of 
these can be inverted as you see 
fit, depending on the exact 
transition between the previous 
and next chords.
In the video, we demonstrate 
this with G major, eventually 
resting on a combo that falls 
between the A minor chord 
before and the C major after.
In our video, we show you how to make 
smooth transitions between two scales
Shared chords
 Four strategies for changing key
 > Step by step  9. Break it down, build it up again… 
POWER TIP
> Why change key?
Our track is about seven minutes 
long, and that’s a long time to listen 
to a C major scale going around and 
around. The key to keeping the 
audience hooked is to make things 
interesting. When we go into the 
outro, we’re essentially repeating 
ourselves, and changing key at this 
point is one way to surprise the 
listener. There are other ways to do 
the same thing, but changing things 
up like this is a distinctly musical 
way to inject extra life, pace and 
energy into a tune.
> make music now / music theory made easy
92

There are a few more ‘traditional’ music 
theory techniques you can use to make a 
key change more interesting and less 
clunky. The first is to use a transitional 
chord that’s the ‘dominant’ of the 
destination key. Put simply, that means the 
chord with its root note on the fifth degree 
of the destination scale. In our C major to  
D major transition, the fifth note of the  
D major scale is A, making our transition 
chord A major – A-C♯-E. This chord doesn’t 
fit into the C major scale, but theory-wise, 
it’s still a valid one to use for the switch.
There’s also a note choice that can help 
when programming a melody for the 
key-change transition. The ‘leading note’ is 
the top note of the destination scale, just 
before it returns to the tonic. So in C major 
(C D E F G A B C) it’s the B note. In D major, as 
with our example, you’d be looking at C♯. 
The idea is to get the leading note to, er, 
lead into the destination scale by involving 
it in the final phrase of melody before the 
key change, and playing as the last note, 
right before the keychange happens.
One more way of changing key, often known as the 
‘trucker’s gear change’, is the abrupt, foolhardy and 
jarring way of getting things done. Put simply, you 
just do it: change the key suddenly, without warning, 
jolting the listener into a new mode.
This is a tactic to use with caution, as it’s very 
reminiscent of the effect you’d hear from the 
members of a certain boy band, wearing all white, 
getting off their stools when the song they’re singing 
changes key. That’s not to say you can’t make it work, 
of course… but do be careful!
The knowledge you need
We’ve gone through our entire track, 
transforming what were once just C notes into 
a whole musical arrangement, all the while 
throwing you the theory knowledge you need 
to do the same.
So what now? Don’t forget to  try 
transposing the entire track. We’ve kept to  
C major for demonstrative purposes, as it’s 
easier to see how the scale functions using all 
the white notes – but try transposing every 
note in the entire tune by the same amount, 
and experimenting with anchoring it in 
different scales. Remember to check the 
lowest notes when you do this, though: make 
sure you’re hitting the right bass notes.
We’ve gone further ourselves, too. We’ve 
made small refinements and messed with fine 
details, and over the page we’ll describe every 
small change and how it works to make the 
whole track better. We’ve also included a 
playthrough video of our finished version 
to check out yourself. 
Need more theory knowledge, then? 
There’s plenty every month in 
 thanks 
to Dave Clews’ Easy Guide, and we’ve also 
put out a few music theory features over 
the past couple of years. For more on 
Chords and Scales, check out 
234, or to 
learn how to Play Keyboard Like a Pro, 
why not check out our huge hands-on 
video course in 
255?
We’ve also got you covered for 
arrangement  tips and inspiration topics. 
Arrange the Perfect Track (
229) will 
guide you through the process of turning loops 
into tunes, and Finish Tracks Faster (
235) will 
help you get it all done in less time. You can 
grab these issues, complete with their videos, 
in digital form via Apple or Google Play 
Newsstand, or on Zinio.
You can learn more about music theory every month 
with 
 – pick up a print or digital subscription on p128
The sudden  
gear change…
Getting technical
music theory made easy / make music now <
93

 02 
THE FIFTH  
OF FOURTH
We also haven’t really touched our 
Enzyme CM pad sound, which has 
been playing two C notes throughout. This can 
help with a pad sound, because it allows a bit of 
musical ‘information’ to slip out in the intro 
without firmly committing to one scale.
Another way to keep things tonally 
ambiguous is to use fifths and fourths. If you 
study the C major and C minor scales, you’ll 
notice that they share certain notes: C, F and G 
(they also share D, but we’ll ignore that for now). 
F and G are the fourth and fifth notes of both 
scales, and so playing these doesn’t really 
commit us to either a major or minor key. This 
means we can bolster the pad part in the intro 
by adding a G (to create a chord with the notes 
C-G-C).
This helps establish the track as being ‘in C’ 
from the start, but we only want it to be obvious 
that we’re specifically in C major once the 
chords start. This way, we’re slowly unravelling 
the nature of our track.
 03
MORE LITTLE 
EMBELLISHMENTS
Our melody still needs a bit more 
touching up to ensure it doesn’t 
get too repetitive. During the first verse, it’s fine 
to repeat the same melody, as we’re introducing 
listeners to what our track is like. The second 
verse changes things up a bit already, playing 
the melody with the higher synth instead of the 
lower one – but to our ears, it feel like there’s 
room for more flair and virtuosity.
To solve this, we’ve gone through the second 
verse, making slight variations on the core 
melody in order to keep things as interesting as 
they possibly can be, providing a bit of extra 
spice to ears that have heard this melody line 
before. Changing things up with a completely 
new (or similar) melody would also work here.
 04 
INVERTING FOR  
NEW DIRECTIONS
When things are building up or 
down to a new section, we might 
want chords to rise or fall. For example, at the 
end of the second verse before the breakdown, 
our risers take things up, but maybe we can 
bring the chords lower to cool things down a bit.
Instead of lowering the notes into the octave 
below, we take some of the notes and invert 
them, as pictured below. This means we get to 
change the range of the chords without altering 
the character of the chords themselves, 
providing a sense of movement when 
everything else stays the same.
  Polishing up  
our track
By inverting chords into another octave range, we can 
make the exact same chords travel in a new direction
 01
GETTING RISERS AND FX IN KEY 
Throughout this whole process, there’s one 
element of the track that we haven’t actually 
touched: our Phonec CM rising synth part. 
This creates a rising tone that ends at the note being 
held down. We can work with note pitches, lengths and 
velocities to use this build for different effects at 
different times: as the intro leads into the main loop, 
Phonec CM rises to a C major chord, and does the 
same thing just before the mini-build. As verse 2 rolls 
on, Phonec CM throws out a few ascending notes (as 
pictured above) to keep things interesting.
We take fine control over velocities and timings of notes to get the Phonec CM riser in key with the rest of the track
We’ve nearly reached the finish line! Let’s 
put the final touches on this track, dish out 
a few theory-led arrangement tricks along 
the way, and walk you through a final 
playthrough at the end…
94
> make music now / music theory made easy

Getting things to gel together in the mix is now just that much easier, since we brought things into line with theory
Download this issue’s Tutorial Videos to hear our 
completed track in all its glory – changes ’n’ all!
 08
MIXING MUSICALLY
A bit of panning will separate those Low 
and High synths, which often play in the 
same octave. Lindell’s 6X-500 CM is 
great for providing some saturation and getting the 
low-down bass notes to pop through on small speakers. 
Sidechaining the chords and pad parts against the kick 
adds ‘pump’, and you can also automate the send level 
from the kick to increase or decrease this effect in 
busier or lighter sections. Automating the volume for 
elements that play in the intro and breakdown also 
helps keep the focus on them.
 05
PLAYING CHORDS 
WITH OUR PAD
Throughout the track, the pad  
has been playing a tonally 
ambiguous C-G-C chord. This fills out some 
space behind the mix, and allows the other 
instruments to carry the harmonies and 
melodies… but by the time we get to the 
breakdown, we need to ramp up interest and 
change somehow. 
For this reason, we’ve experimented by 
having the pad play chords at this point. We use 
chords very similar to those played by the main 
Chords track, allowing us to get a new element 
moving where it otherwise wasn’t. Since the 
breakdown is designed to be more atmospheric, 
a complex pad sound playing chords will add 
the lush interest we need.
 06 
REWORKING  
THE BASS PART
Another repetitive element in the 
track is the bassline. It uses held 
notes for the intro, but then repeats the exact 
same pattern throughout the rest of the tune. 
For the second half of the second verse, we’ve 
switched up the pattern while keeping the notes 
the same. This new pattern still plays every beat, 
only it plays on the offbeat, hitting between the 
kicks instead of on top of them. This adds extra 
pace to the tune at this point, as the bass part 
feels far springier and more reactive to the kick.
Later on, when the outro comes along, we’ve 
kept the original bassline but reinforced it by 
picking out an extra note. Again, this picks up 
the pace, so to speak, and provides a little extra 
‘push’ for the final section of the track.
 07
FILLING IN  
THE GAPS
We haven’t spent much time 
talking about drums and rhythms 
so far, as they’re slightly outside the scope of the 
theory in this feature – but, of course, drum 
variations are crucial for creating an interesting 
arrangement that keeps on rolling. 
Our drum files in Tutorial Files already 
change with the track, but we’ve created some 
slight variations, too. In the second half of the 
first verse, after the melody drops out, we’ve 
dropped extra snare hits to keep things pacy, 
and we’ve also added some extra hits just before 
the breakdown. We haven’t gone for full fills, per 
se – just extra hits to highlight other beats.
09
WATCH THE 
FINISHED TRACK 
PLAY OUT
Woo-hoo! We did it! We’ve built 
an entire track using music theory knowledge, 
and we’ve made a few small remaining tweaks 
using some specific techniques.
We’ve included a video of our final track 
playing through so that you can see and hear 
the finished result, and reference the points 
we’re making on these last two pages. You can 
grab it in the Tutorial Videos folder, and don’t 
forget to check out the Tutorial Files for every 
stage of the project as well – these will shed 
extra light on the decisions we’ve made 
throughout this feature, and give you a sound 
basis to compare the notes we’ve chosen to the 
notes you’ve chosen. 
Drum fills at the ends of sections are a tried and tested 
way to keep things moving as you transition
95
music theory made easy / make music now <

ARRANGE
TRACKS
LIKE A PRO!
96
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro

It’s often been said that the best way to get something 
done is simply to begin. However, while that may be 
true for many things, when making songs on a 
computer, getting started is all too often the easiest 
part – it’s being able to properly finish a track, taking it 
past the ‘loop of doom’ stage, that’s the most difficult 
part of the process. For example, how many times 
have you started a project and made it as far as 
creating a spectacular four or eight-bar region, only to 
get stuck at the point where you have to start thinking 
about actually moulding it into a finished song? If 
you’re anything like us, you’ll most likely have a hard 
drive (or seven!) packed with unfinished ideas that 
started from flashes of inspiration but never got 
beyond that initial ‘cycle mode’ stage.
A lot of the time this comes down not to an overall lack 
of ideas, but to difficulty with the arrangement process – 
the sequence in which the different sections of your song 
are laid out. When it comes to engaging with your 
audience and provoking that essential ‘reach for the 
repeat’ response in your listeners, coming up with an 
effective arrangement is undoubtedly as important as the 
construction of the individual sections themselves. 
Although today’s DAWs put endless instruments, 
effects and track counts at our fingertips, it’s all too easy 
to fall into a solely loop-based workflow that can actually 
stifle, rather than inspire, the ability to extend single 
regions out into a fully-arranged song. And that’s where 
we come in! Within this mammoth, 15-page ‘arrangement 
workout’ feature, you’ll find plenty of ideas for developing 
half-formed sketches into fully-fledged tracks. We’ll give 
you loads of inspiring suggestions for getting out of that 
rut and finishing your songs, revealing a boatload of 
supplementary tips and techniques along the way. So fire 
up your DAW, and let’s see if we can’t come to a suitable 
arrangement, shall we?
Want to avoid your music 
sounding formulaic? Get to 
know the nuts and bolts of 
arrangement with our guide
arrange tracks like a pro / make music now <
97

 > Step by step  1. Basic pop structure  
 > Step by step  2. Standard pop structure  
 > Step by step  3. EDM-style structure  
Arrangement from the point of view 
of the average computer musician 
mainly refers to the order in which the 
sections of a song are sequenced. Using 
the alphabet to represent these, one of the 
most well-used structures in pop is the 
ABABCB format, made of three sections: 
verse, chorus and bridge.
1
The A section represents the verse, 
while the B section represents the 
chorus. At the simplest level, a song might 
begin with a verse of eight or 16 bars, 
followed by a chorus of a similar length, to 
give a basic AB structure. This whole 
segment would then be repeated with a 
second verse and chorus, giving us ABAB.
2
The C section is a kind of breathing 
space in the middle, known as the 
‘middle eight’ or ‘bridge’. This gives the 
listener something different before the 
chorus repeats again at the end of the 
song. This segment is known as the outro 
chorus – so ultimately we end up with 
ABABCB.
3
A more sophisticated arrangement 
would expand on the basic form 
shown above, including extra sections for 
a bit more variety. It’s common to have a 
dedicated intro section, for example. 
Represented here by the letter D, this is 
commonly eight bars long and serves to 
introduce the song. 
1
Another extra element used a lot is the 
prechorus (also sometimes known as 
the bridge – we know, we know!). This is a 
section that links the verse and chorus, 
usually with a buildup, either musically or 
lyrically. Using a prechorus (shown here as 
the section E) is a very effective way to 
expand a basic arrangement.
2
For a twist, why not stick a short ‘reset’ 
section between the chorus and the 
second verse? This section, known as a 
‘tag’ and shown as the F section, can be a 
repeat of the chorus chords with a 
different hook over it, or simply a two-bar 
fill section. The resulting  arrangement 
would be D, A, E, B, F, A, E, B, C, B, B.
3
Your typical EDM song is structured 
so that the energy ebbs and flows 
dynamically. To keep the dancefloor full, 
you get high peaks and deep troughs in 
the form of builds and breakdowns, with 
high-energy, full-on drops sandwiched 
between. This equates to a format that can 
be shown by the letters ABCD.
1
The A section is an intro of suitable 
length for a DJ to mix into – usually 16 
bars or so – after which would come a 
breakdown or B section, which could be a 
stripped-down container for a verse vocal, 
say. Following this, you might have a long-
ish build, represented here by the letter C, 
ramping up the tension before…
2
…the drop, shown by the letter D. The 
EDM equivalent of the chorus, the 
drop, is where the beat ‘drops’ and the 
infectious hook kicks in. This completes 
the ABCD segment, the last three sections 
of which may be repeated again, before 
the song rounds off with a DJ-friendly 
repeat of the intro serving as the outro.
3
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro
98

Zedd’s recent hit, Stay, is a 
good example of a traditional 
song structure with an EDM-
inspired twist, adding an 
additional instrumental drop 
chorus after what would 
ordinarily be a standard 
chorus, but which in this case is almost 
completely made up of acappella vocals. This 
would have been an unusual step even five 
years ago, but producers are continually 
experimenting and pushing the boundaries of 
the traditional song form. The three-minute pop 
song format currently offers a wider canvas for 
dynamic exploration than ever. Pounding drums 
now yield to atmospheric breakdowns more 
frequently than just once in the middle of the 
song, and innovative use of technology such as 
pitch warping, Auto-Tune and Melodyne, 
together with new instruments like iZotope’s 
VocalSynth 2, are making it possible to craft new 
song sections that don’t rely on conventional 
vocals – of which this tune is a perfect example. 
Here’s a breakdown of the arrangement.
 0:00 INTRO
A looped and pitched-up sample of a male voice 
humming an intricate lick serves as the 
introduction to the song, cycled over four bars 
and backed with the two main chords that go on 
to provide the backdrop to the verse, prechorus 
and bridge sections.
 0:09 VERSE 1
The delicate verse vocal melody enters over a 
synth pad and that continually looping hum. All 
the main sections from this point in the song 
onwards are eight bars long.
 0:28 PRECHORUS 1
After a percussion fill, things start to build over a 
backdrop of minimal percussion: mainly 
reverbed finger snaps and clattering, low-pass 
filtered, high-pitched snares. 
 0:47 CHORUS 1 
Here’s where it gets interesting. We’re expecting 
a full-on chorus, but the track falls away 
completely, leaving us with just the acapella 
vocal chorus hook, backed by computer-
generated BVs. The only other musical element 
is the bass that punctuates a single root note 
with every chord change. Machine-gun snare 
fills prolong the second four bars to lead us to…
 1:05 DROP 1
In come the drums and the rest of the track, 
expertly arranged swooping synths taking over 
from the vocals. Intricate fills keep us interested 
from the rhythmic point of view. A sampled ‘uh’ 
and one line of lead vocal half way through 
seem to be all that’s needed vocally at this point.
 1:24 TAG
A one-bar rest, over which the reverb and delay 
overhanging from the drop die away, helps us 
reset in readiness for the reintroduction of that 
looped sample and verse two.
 1:27 VERSE 2
Gradually opening filtered percussion and a 
subtle vocal countermelody are all that really 
set the second verse apart from the first, but the 
development in terms of the progression of the 
song is still noticeable.
 1:45 PRECHORUS 2
The development continues. This prechorus is 
discernible from its predecessor by the addition 
of a fuller drum track with kicks and offbeat 
tambourine, together with big piano chords 
filling out the musical side of things.
 2:04 CHORUS 2
This chorus, too, comes across as a breakdown, 
sounding almost the same as the first but with 
the addition of the ticking clock sample 
throughout, and a fuller synth pad part that 
appears earlier in the section.
 2:23 DROP 2
Other than some additional high-end percussion 
in this second version, the two drop sections are 
pretty much identical.
 2:42 BRIDGE
Musically the same as the intro, verse and 
prechorus sections, the bridge is mainly synth 
pad, vocal and picky guitar line, until the kick 
drum reappears again four bars in, ushering in a 
short build-up to the final drop chorus.
 3:01 DROP CHORUS
The full-instrumentation, sing-along chorus 
section that the whole song has been building 
to. To keep it to a radio-friendly length, there’s no 
double-length outro chorus, merely a single 
eight-bar section that fuses the vocal hook from 
the chorus with the music of the drop.
 3:19 OUTRO
Practically a musical mirror image of the intro, 
the identical four-bar outro brings us back to 
earth with a downward-facing vocal adlib, ready 
for the anticipated hit of the repeat button.
 ANALYSIS 
Stay – Zedd feat. 
Alessia Cara
Fading away
For a number of reasons, the fadeout – a 
gradually diminishing, repeated hook – used 
to be the go-to way to end a pop song. The 
legendary SSL mixing consoles found in large 
studios in the 80s had a magic ‘Auto Fade’ 
button in the centre section, and there was 
even an urban myth amongst studio folk in the 
90s about the existence of a world-class 
session fadeout artist, known as Johnny 
Bag’o’Doughnuts, who would put a top-notch 
fadeout on your song for the session fee of… 
yep, a bag of doughnuts. Yet although reports 
indicate that the peak year for the fadeout was 
1985, since then it seems gradually to have 
fallen out of favour with producers across all 
genres, with only a handful of recent chart hits 
ending with a fade. So why is this?
Well, in terms of current trends, the fadeout 
has obviously had its day, but there may be 
deeper reasons for its decline than mere 
fashion. According to veteran 70s recording 
engineer Ron Albert: “The fade happened 
because we had to give the DJ a cue that the 
record was ending, so they could talk over that 
and segue into the next record. If the record 
company decided an album track would 
become a single, we’d usually have to edit and 
fade it to keep it under the three-minute mark. 
It was all about radio.” 
In this digital age of streaming, however, 
music consumption has changed 
immeasurably, to the point that songs are now 
a completely different product, so it looks like 
the fadeout may have faded out for good.
Zedd’s Stay combines EDM-style and traditional arrangement approaches to great effect
Thanks very much, fadeout, but your services are no 
longer required...
99
arrange tracks like a pro / make music now <

Live’s Session View is a mighty 
sketchpad for assembling clips into 
multitrack sequences, but if you’ve 
transitioned to the DAW from a 
traditional, linear-based arranging 
background, its loop-based nature can 
at first seem restrictive when it comes 
to developing ideas into fully arranged 
tracks. This is where the Arrangement 
View comes in, enabling you to chip 
away, move things around and 
generally finesse and finagle your 
project into something that sounds like 
a finished record with a proper 
beginning, middle and end, rather than 
a set of repeating loops. But how do 
you get clips into the Arrangement 
View to start with? Here are the two 
main methods to consider…
Arrangement View
The default hotkey for switching 
between Live’s two modes is your 
QWERTY keyboard’s Tab key, and you 
can use it to transfer clips from one 
view to the other and back again. In 
Session View, click to select the clips 
you want to transfer – individual ones 
or a multiple selection – and click-hold 
on one of the selected clips. While 
holding, hit the Tab key to switch to 
Arrangement view, then drag the clip 
to the desired position in the timeline 
and release – simple! The ability to 
select multiple clips at once lets you 
build up a solid arrangement fairly 
quickly using this method, and the 
bonus is that it also works in reverse. If 
you record a new idea directly into the 
Arrangement View that you want to 
experiment with further, you can drag 
it into Session View using the Tab key 
in exactly the same way.
Method 1 – Drag and drop via Tab key
Arranging in Ableton Live
100
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro

Live’s Consolidate command (Cmd/Ctrl-J) is really useful for 
tidying things up in the Arrangement View, especially if you’ve 
ended up with loads of tiny little clips scattered everywhere – it 
replaces a selected range of material on a track with one new 
clip. Not only does this look tidier, but it’s also useful when, for 
example, you have a linear sequence of clips that work well 
together as a part. Consolidating these into one long clip allows 
you to drag its edges to create further repeats. On audio tracks, 
Consolidate renders the selected clips into one single piece of 
audio, replacing the existing clips in the Arrangement View.
Consolidation service
If using the Arrangement View doesn’t appeal, 
you can still use the Session View to generate 
arrangement ideas in the form of Scenes. If you 
have multiple clips laid out in the Session View, 
experiment with different combinations by 
playing one clip at a time, then mixing it with 
others one by one. When you hit a combination 
that works, turn it into a Scene by selecting 
Capture and Insert Scene from the Create 
menu. Give it a suitable label (verse, 
breakdown, etc), then try a few more 
combinations of different clips. Once you’ve 
built a few Scenes, try playing them in different 
sequences to sketch out rough arrangements.
You can also trigger Session View clips on 
the fly and record the result directly into 
the Arrangement View. Ensure  all tracks 
in the Session View are disarmed for 
recording, and that the Arrangement 
View’s Cycle mode is disabled. Hold down 
Shift and click the Record button in the 
transport bar – Live will wait until you 
trigger your first clip, then start recording 
your moves. As you jam out a 
performance, a corresponding set of 
regions will be recorded onto the tracks in 
the Arrangement View. This works 
especially well with a hardware controller. 
Once finished, press the Stop All Clips 
button in the master channel to end the 
recording and switch to the Arrangement 
View, where you can tweak the 
performance and complete your track by 
recording new parts, transition effects 
and percussive punctuation directly in at 
the correct points in the song.
The scenic route
Method 2 –  
Arrangement record
KEEP ’EM SEPARATED 
If your project contains a lot of tracks, create 
a blank track and place it between two 
distinct groups of tracks as a visual 
separator. This keeps things tidy and lets 
you home in on specific areas of your 
arrangement more quickly.
COPY THAT 
Live’s Duplicate command (Cmd-D on Mac, 
Ctrl-D on PC) is a handy tool for knocking out 
arrangements quickly. It essentially 
duplicates the selected area directly after 
the selection – in other words, it’s brilliant for 
repeating sections.
FOLD IT UP 
For a quick tidy-up of the Arrangement View, 
Alt/Option-click one track’s fold button to 
fold all the tracks in your set. Find it next to 
the track name in the track header column 
on the right of the screen.
MARKER RESPECT
Use markers to mark where specific song 
sections occur. Create them by clicking a 
track, hitting Set above the track headers, 
moving the marker flag to the desired 
position, and renaming it.
TIME TRAVEL
The Duplicate and Delete Time 
commands not only work on the region 
highlighted by the loop bracket, but 
move subsequent regions earlier or later, 
extending the track or closing up gaps, 
depending on which command is used.
Ableton Live 
arrangement tips
arrange tracks like a pro / make music now <
101

 > Step by step  4. Using Logic’s Arrangement track 
Open Global Tracks to reveal the 
Arrangement track. Hit the + button in 
order to create a new arrange marker, and 
drag the right edge out to the required 
length of your first song section. The 
default length for a new arrange marker 
would be eight bars.
1
New markers are titled automatically 
from a menu of existing names. 
Choose one that suits, or rename it by 
choosing Rename from the menu. You 
can also colour code regions by pressing 
Option-C and assigning a colour to each 
highlighted marker.
2
Construct the rest of your 
Arrangement track by hitting the + 
button, dragging new markers out to the 
required lengths and renaming them as 
you go. Each new marker will always 
appear ‘glued’ to the right-hand edge of 
the previous marker.
3
Now for the cool bit. To move a whole 
section from one place in the song to 
another, simply drag it along the 
Arrangement track to its new location. 
The other markers will snap together to fill 
the gap so that the new arrangement 
flows seamlessly.
4
To copy a marker – in order to create 
another chorus, say – hold down the 
Option key while dragging. The new copy 
will be placed before the start of the 
marker over which you release it.
5
Delete an arrange marker by hitting 
Backspace twice – first to delete the 
regions below it, then the marker itself. To 
delete markers without deleting the 
regions of the song that are associated 
with them, select Suspend Content 
Connection before hitting the button.
6
Apple’s Logic Pro X has evolved into a true 
production powerhouse since the company 
acquired it from Emagic, back when dinosaurs 
roamed the Earth. One of the many 
developments that have been added to the app 
over the years is the addition of a dedicated 
Arrangement track, intended to make it easier  
to come up with new arrangement ideas with 
the minimum of fuss and bother, by literally 
picking up chunks of your song up and moving 
them around on the timeline into whatever 
order you like.
The Arrangement track works by treating 
song sections as single entities to be relocated 
at will – picking up a section collects all of the 
regions on all of the tracks contained vertically 
within it. Not only is this great for playing around 
with arrangements of your own tracks, it’s also a 
brilliantly simple way of creating extended 
versions of songs you like – drag the MP3 into 
Logic, sync it to the grid using the Adapt Project 
Tempo to Region Tempo command, then get rid 
of that annoying trumpet solo and extend that 
catchy outro chorus to your heart’s content!
To see the Arrangement track, you first have 
to make sure it’s set to be visible in the Global 
Tracks area that appears above the regular track 
headers in Logic’s main window. To do this, 
simply hit the Alt-G key command to reveal the 
Global Tracks Configuration popup, and tick the 
Arrangement checkbox. Once the track is 
visible, you can reposition it vertically in the 
global track list (so you can situate it directly 
above the main window if you like), and make it 
taller by dragging the divider above the track 
headers downwards.
Trying out new arrangement ideas
Logic Pro’s Arrangement track is a real timesaver when it comes to song construction
102
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro

GET THE NEW ISSUE FROM MYFAVOURITEMAGAZINES.CO.UK
ON 
SALE 
NOW

 > Step by step  5. Using Cubase’s Arranger Track 
Here we have a simple track made up 
of beats, a bassline, a vocal sample 
and a couple of synths. It’s essentially an 
eight-bar loop at the moment, so to thrash 
out an arrangement, we need to define 
some sections. We start by selecting all 
regions in the loop and repeating the 
whole thing a few times.
1
Now we go through each new section 
and remove a few regions to create 
multiple versions of the loop made up of 
different combinations of parts. For 
example, here we’ve made one that just 
includes vocal and synths, another with 
just the beat, a third with only the vocal 
and pad, and so on.
2
Next, select Project » Add Track » 
Arranger to create an Arranger track 
(you can only have one per project). With 
the pen tool, click and drag along the 
Arranger track for the length of the first 
section. This creates our first Arranger 
region. Click the Name field in the upper 
left corner and type in a suitable name.
3
Continue to define and name regions 
for the remaining sections in the 
project, then click the Arranger track’s e 
button to bring up its editor. You should 
now see a list of the defined sections or 
‘Arranger Events’ in the right hand column. 
Click the Activate Arranger Mode button 
to enable the Arranger Track.
4
Double-clicking or dragging any of 
these events into the left hand column 
places them into the current Arranger 
chain. If you hit Play with the Arranger 
active, the sections will play in the 
specified order. Type numbers into the 
Repeats column to set how many times 
that section will play back before moving 
on to the next event in the list.
5
When you’ve arrived at an 
arrangement you like, you can make it 
permanent by clicking the Flatten button. 
This translates the order of events into a 
regular layout of regions in the existing 
project, or exports it out to a new project. 
There are also options to keep the 
Arranger Track active in the rendered 
project, or remove it after flattening.
6
Steinberg’s Cubase can rightly be thought of as 
the founding father of the linear timeline DAW. 
The first version appeared on the Atari ST way 
back in 1989, ushering in the standard blocks-
on-a-timeline song arrangement approach so 
familiar to us all today. So, you’d expect all the 
necessary tools for flinging songs together in 
the traditional way of cutting, pasting and 
moving blocks of audio and MIDI data around 
the screen. However, there’s an additional trick 
up Cubase’s sleeve when it comes to trying out 
new arrangement ideas, and it harks back to the 
numerical, pattern-based methods employed by 
its erstwhile rival, Emagic Creator (the ancestor 
of Logic Pro X). Combining the best of both 
approaches, Cubase’s Arranger Track enables 
you to define regions of your song as named 
Arranger sections that can then be strung 
together into a list of events. You can swap 
regions around any way you like, and once the 
Arranger Track is activated, the program will 
play them back in the assigned order. Ideas can 
be saved and compared quickly and easily to 
determine whether or not that extra four-bar tag 
works coming out of the second chorus into the 
bridge, for example.
Song-building tricks in Cubase
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro
104

 > Step by step  6. Using Studio One’s Arranger Track 
The Arranger Track in PreSonus 
Studio One is a bit like a hybrid of the 
versions found in Logic Pro and Cubase. 
The first step to using it is to call it up by 
clicking its activation button in the toolbar. 
This makes it visible above the timeline.
1
To create an Arranger region, select 
the Paint tool and drag from the start 
point to the end point of the section of 
your song. A new region will be created 
with a default name that you can change 
to whatever you like.
2
To change the name of the region, 
click the Arranger Track’s header to 
reveal the inspector panel on the left of 
the screen. You’ll see your new region at 
the top of the event list. Double-click its 
name and type a new one.
3
Continue creating regions to fit the 
structure of your project in its current 
state. You can drag the edges of an 
existing region to resize it without 
affecting the content in the tracks area, 
but don’t try to drag them around at this 
point, as any content below will also move. 
The second method of rearrangement 
involves the Event List in the 
Inspector. You can rearrange the order in 
which the regions that appear here are 
played back by moving and copying them 
in a similar way to how you would usually 
do it in the Arranger Track.
4
7
Once you’ve built up a trackful of 
Arranger regions, there are two ways 
to move them around. The first is to drag 
them to new positions within the Arranger 
track. A helpful tag appears to let you 
know whether you’re about to replace an 
existing section or insert the one you’re 
moving before or after it.
Studio One has a final trick up its 
sleeve in the form of Scratch Pads, 
which allow you to try out new ideas in a 
separate area without affecting the main 
project. Create a new one by hitting this 
button in the upper right corner.
5
8
When a region is moved, all the 
content below it moves to the 
corresponding location. In order to  
copy a region instead of moving it,  
simply hold down the Option key while 
dragging. Hitting the Backspace key 
deletes the selected region but not its 
associated content.
Drag sections from the main area’s 
Arranger track into the Scratch Pad’s 
Arranger Track to copy them into it. These 
can be messed around with however you 
like without affecting anything in the main 
area, giving you free rein to experiment.
6
9
105
arrange tracks like a pro / make music now <

 > Step by step  7. Building a dance music intro 
A typical club track’s intro can last 
around a minute, so to keep things 
evolving, we can build things up by adding 
new elements every eight bars. Here 
we’ve got a 128bpm eight-bar section 
made up of a compressed kick drum, an 
ambient pad effect, and a crash/swoosh 
effect placed at the start of the section 
(also reversed at the end).
1
We add some musical elements right 
from the off – a band-pass filtered 
version of the first bar of what will be our 
main bass riff, and an offbeat plucked 
synth note. Let’s copy this whole chunk to 
give us 16 bars in total, and add reverbed 
808 claps doubling the kick drum part to 
the second eight bars.
2
We now have one 16-bar section, so 
let’s create another, more instrument-
heavy 16 bars to complete our one-minute 
intro (32 bars lasts for one minute at 
128bpm). We start by copying the looped 
pad and swoosh effects, together with the 
pluck synth, across twice to total 32 bars, 
leaving the filtered bass, claps and 
compressed kick in place.
3
The new drum parts for this section 
include a bigger kick drum, a kick-
snare loop, a big snare doubled with an 
extra track of claps, and an offbeat, eighth-
note hi-hat. These last only seven bars in 
each of the last two sections, leaving gaps 
at the ends for fills to be put in place. The 
last section adds in an additional hi-hat/
clap loop.
4
In this section, we introduce the full, 
unfiltered bass part and add the drop 
synth hook. This is reinforced in the last 
eight bars by an extra synth and a 
sidechained pad underpinning the chords. 
We link the two eight-bar sections by 
inserting a bass riff – with automated  
filter cutoff – in the gap at the end of the 
first section.
5
The transition between the two halves 
of the intro is enhanced by opening 
the filter on the bass part and adding a 
swelled pad chord. We mute the looped 
pad in the last bar of each of the last two 
sections, while in the last bar a four-beat 
snare fill with a heavily-reverbed last beat 
precedes a boomer effect that introduces 
the verse breakdown.
6
Putting an arrangement together by assembling 
sections like building blocks is the accepted way 
of creating songs on a computer, and for good 
reason – it works! Like most skills, though, 
there’s a certain knack to doing it well, and 
simply sticking a bunch of regions together so 
that they play back in order is inevitably going 
to sound a little mechanical – unless you apply a 
little extra attention around the edges to finish 
things off and smooth over those all-important 
transitional areas. 
 
Putting a bit of thought into the points where 
the sections actually join together can make a 
huge difference to the overall flow of the 
finished song, accentuating the dynamics of an 
arrangement and helping it sound like it isn’t just 
a bunch of sections arbitrarily jammed together. 
 
There are plenty of transitions and effects to 
be found in sample libraries, or amongst the 
treasure trove of sounds that come with your 
DAW. Alternatively, you can create your own 
from scratch in the form of synth ‘whooshes’, 
drum fill effects or spot delays. 
 
Whatever tricks or techniques you choose to 
use, effective transitions always glue everything 
together, so that your arrangement not only 
sounds more like a finished piece of music but 
also keeps the listener engaged along the way.
Using transition effects
As ever, if you’re struggling to find what you need, 
this very mag offers many free options
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro
106

iZotope
VocalSynth 2
 iZotope’s VocalSynth has all but revolutionised 
the way chart hits are made. Blurring the 
boundaries between vocals and, er, synths, it 
affords you endless scope for creating variations 
on existing song sections.
timespace.com
Delay
Delay is, of course, an essential item in any 
producer’s toolkit – a ping-pong, quarter-note 
delay works brilliantly on risers and downlifters, 
and a synced repeat can add life to the dullest of 
synth parts. For a great result, try u-he’s new 
Colour Copy or Eventide’s QuadraVox.
AIR
The Riser
A synth-based transition designer instrument 
specifically built to produce risers, falls, swells, 
fades and more. Based on a three-oscillator 
synth engine with multieffects, and with over 
300 presets to get you started, it’s a great go-to 
resource for the time-restricted transitionist.
airmusictech.com
Flanger
Flanging has been with us since the dawn of 
time, but that doesn’t make it any less effective 
for producing a startling dynamic effect that can 
really switch up a section of your track. Every 
DAW comes with a flanger, so try it on percussion 
or vocals for instant satisflangtion!
Sugar Bytes
Turnado
This brilliantly mental plugin is a bit like an audio 
blender – fill eight slots with a selection of 24 
separate plugins, then modulate their depths 
using a mini built-in sequencer known as the 
Dictator. Fantastic for random, glitchy transition 
effects when you need a quick idea for a fill.
sugar-bytes.de
Filter
Most filters or single-band EQs will be able to 
handle the task of filtering down drums during 
breakdowns and builds, but as stock plugins go, 
Ableton Live’s Auto Filter is a particularly good 
one for this job. It’s an absolute doddle to set up 
and use, and sounds great.
kiloHearts
Trance Gate
Available free with 
261, Trance Gate is a gem 
of a plugin for quickly dialling in gated effects 
that work on just about anything. Used as a spot 
effect in odd places, it’s a handy tool for 
generating quirky chunks of ear candy between 
different sections.
kilohearts.com
Apple
Step FX
A remnant of Apple’s acquisition of Camel Audio 
(and thus only available as part of Logic Pro X), 
Step FX provides Chorus, Delay, Distortion, 
Filtering and programmable gating all in one 
tasty bundle, and can transform the dullest of 
synth parts into inspiring rhythmical grooves.
apple.com
Steinberg
LoopMash
Only available with Cubase, there’s nothing 
quite like LoopMash for general beat mangling. 
It’s its talent for creating stutter and repeat 
effects on the fly with just a tap on your MIDI 
keyboard that makes it a great arrangement 
tool, however.
steinberg.com
Reverb
Throwing a snare into a long reverb on the last 
beat of the bar before a breakdown makes for a 
smooth transition as the long tail dies away into 
the next section. Pretty much any reverb plugin 
will work for this – we particularly like D16 
Group’s Toraverb 2.
GlitchMachines
Fracture
This free, cross-platform glitch plugin comes with a 
ton of presets, so if glitch is your thing, it’s a great 
source of inspiration for general weirdness. Take a 
two-bar section of audio and mangle it to the edges 
of recognisability in just a couple of clicks.
glitchmachines.com
Inear Display
Eurydice CM
A freebie available with every issue of this 
magazine, Eurydice CM combines Buffer, Filter, 
Delay and Crusher processors to create wacky 
transition effects you probably won’t hear anywhere 
else. Our advice is to strap a brickwall limiter across 
its output before you start experimenting!
filesilo.co.uk/computermusic
Use these tools to design great transitions 
and variations for new song sections
12 
arrangement effects
107
arrange tracks like a pro / make music now <

Turntable stops in 
Logic and Live
The ‘deck stop’ – an effect simulating hitting the 
‘off’ button on a turntable mid-track – is a 
popular trick, and easy to create in Logic Pro X 
using the Fade tool. All you have to do is draw a 
crossfade across the portion of audio you want 
to place the effect over, then change the fade 
type in the region parameter box to Slow Down. 
That’s it – although it’s often a good idea to 
render the effect to a new audio file once you’re 
happy with it, to solidify the effect.
The same effect is achievable in Live, too, 
though it takes a bit more work to pull off. Start 
by selecting the area you want to process, then 
use the Split command to separate it into a new 
region. In the region’s parameter box, make sure 
Warp mode is enabled and set to the Complex 
Pro algorithm, with the Formants control set to 
zero. Enable the Envelope controls and choose 
Transposition Envelope from the type menu. On 
the red line that appears in the waveform 
window to the right, click to create two 
automation nodes – one at either end of the 
region. Leave the first one where it is and drop 
the second one down to -24. This will pitch the 
segment smoothly down two octaves over the 
course of the edit. Change the shape of the 
curve by holding down the Alt key and dragging 
the automation line.
Caution – 
reversing!
Reversed reverb is a tried-and-tested 
technique for enhancing transitions 
between song sections. Some reverb 
plugins – Rob Papen’s RP-Verb 2, for 
example – actually have a reverse 
mode built in, which makes dialling in 
this kind of effect a very quick and 
painless process. Don’t worry if you 
don’t have access to anything like 
that, though, as your DAW will be 
able to reverse any piece of audio 
with a mouse click or three, so it’s 
never been easier to create your own 
reverse reverb effects from scratch, 
using any reverb plugin. 
Start by isolating the downbeat of 
the section you want to lead into – 
the first beat of the drop, say. Select 
just that snippet, then either bounce, 
consolidate or copy/paste it onto a 
new audio track as a new audio 
region. Next, apply a reverb plugin to 
the new track – any reverb will do for 
this, so a standard proprietary effect 
like Logic’s Chromaverb or Live’s 
Reverb should suffice. Dial the 
reverb’s decay time up to a healthy 
amount – this can be as much as ten 
seconds – and set the mix balance to 
100% wet, so that you’re hearing no 
dry signal at all. 
Next, render the effect to a new 
audio file. This is done in Logic by 
using the Bounce in Place command, 
or in Live by using the Freeze Track 
and Flatten features, for example. 
What you’re looking to end up with is 
a new audio file that contains the 
whole ten seconds’ worth of reverb 
tail. Once you have this, use your 
DAW’s reverse feature to reverse the 
region so that it starts off with no 
sound at all and slowly builds up to 
the initial hit. 
Now you just need to position it 
correctly on the grid. Slide the region 
along so that it ends in the right place 
– usually right before the downbeat 
you selected for processing – and 
trim the region’s left boundary so 
that it begins at the correct point 
relative to the rest of the song.
Because this technique is so easy 
to pull off, you needn’t limit it merely 
to transition effects – it makes a great 
lead-in effect for lead vocals too, and 
you could, in theory, with a little 
imagination, use it on just about 
anything you like.
A frequency shifter plugin is great for creating riser effects. 
Most DAWs offer a pitch- or frequency-shifting plugin that will 
do the job, or check out p18 for a roundup of third-party 
pitchshifters. Begin by taking a snippet of a musical element 
of your track, repeating it over eight bars and rendering the 
resulting eight-bar section as a new piece of audio. In Ableton 
Live, do this by right-clicking the track name and using the 
Freeze Track and Flatten commands; insert the Frequency 
Shifter on the track; then set its Mix control to 100% Wet and 
the Mode parameter to Ring. Click the Frequency control to 
reveal its automation lane in the Arrange area, and create 
two automation nodes – one at each end of the eight-bar 
audio region. Set the first node quite low down, and the 
second up towards the top of the lane to create the riser 
effect. Garnish with a sprinkling of creative effects!
Create risers with frequency shifters
Logic Pro X and Live both offer their own ways to stop 
the listener in their tracks with this turntable-style trick
Logic’s ChromaVerb – or any other reverb 
plugin –is all you need for reverse ’verb
Ableton Live’s Frequency Shifter is  just the thing for getting a rise-r out of a dull section of any track
108
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro

 > Step by step  8. Creating a repeated build-up by hand in Logic Pro 
 > Step by step  9. Extreme tempo modulation in Live 
 > Step by step  10. Creating fills with Cubase’s LoopMash FX 
Here’s a simple eight-bar drop section 
of a track that we’ll use for a basic 
repeated build. First, copy all the regions 
and paste a second copy of the entire 
section after the first. Then drag the right 
edges or split the regions to delete 
everything after the first half-bar.
Repeated builds are even more 
dramatic with extreme tempo 
automation. In Live, go to Master and 
choose the Mixer and Song Tempo 
options. Then set the values in the Tempo 
Range boxes to the song tempo – 128bpm 
here – and 999bpm in the right box.
Available in Cubase, LoopMash FX is a 
version of LoopMash that can be used 
as a standard plugin effect. Here’s a 
project in which the drums are just a 
single loop. Insert LoopMash FX across 
the drum track by clicking the track’s 
insert slot and selecting LoopMash FX.
1
1
1
Duplicate this first half-bar four more 
times to get five in total, filling the first 
two bars of the build, with another repeat 
on the downbeat of bar 3. Shrink this to a 
single beat, and add another three copies 
of this shorter section to fill the third bar 
with four repeated beats in total.
This sets the range of values displayed 
in the automation display. The red line 
at the bottom of the graph now shows our 
song tempo. Click the line to create two 
automation nodes: one where the effect 
should begin, and one where the original 
tempo returns.
Create a new MIDI track. Then, in the 
Inspector, set MIDI output routing to 
Drums: Ins 1. LoopMash FX – MIDI In. 
Play your MIDI keyboard and you’ll see the 
performance key indicators light up. Each 
key triggers an effect, from repeats and 
stutters to reverse, vinyl and staccato.
2
2
2
Last bar: shrink the regions further, to 
half size again, and create four 
16th-note repeats, then again for a further 
eight 32nd-note repeats. This fills the rest 
of the bar, but an alternative might be a 
heavily-reverbed snare on beat 4 of the 
last bar to bring in the subsequent drop.
Lift the second node up to the top of 
the graph, then hold the Alt key and 
push against the line to bend it into a 
curve. Lastly, set the global quantise to 1 
bar, then, using the Pen tool, draw a flat 
line at the bottom of the graph where you 
want the song’s original tempo to return. 
Set the track playing and record your 
input triggers to create fills at the 
appropriate points. You can also use MIDI 
keystrokes to change the timebase of 
effects. It’s easy to adjust placement and 
length of your triggers after you’ve 
recorded them in the piano roll.
3
3
3
109
arrange tracks like a pro / make music now <

Strip it back
An alternative approach to coming 
up with new sections for a tune is to 
take a loop or a section that already 
contains plenty of tracks – this could 
be achieved by creating a full drop 
section first, for example – then work 
backwards, progressively removing 
elements to find combinations of 
parts that you already know will 
work together, but with a more 
minimalistic approach. For builds, try 
just repeating the first bar or two of 
your musical elements over existing 
percussion parts. Or dive into a copy 
of an existing MIDI part and gradually 
remove notes a few at a time – this 
will have the effect of the part 
gradually growing from just one or 
two seemingly random notes or 
chords into a properly arranged part.
Listening to stripped-down 
versions of the drop is a good way to 
inspire new ideas for other sections 
of a track, particularly prechorus 
builds, intros and bridges. The 
combination of just drums, vocal 
hook and nothing else, for example, 
is often a winner, so if you’re stuck for 
variation ideas, just drop all the 
music out for eight bars or so and see 
what happens!
Filter ﬂow
Automatable low-pass filters are probably one of the most 
important tools ever to have appeared in the computer 
musician’s toolbox. Rather than simply fading the volume up, 
gradually opening out filters on synth, percussion or vocal 
parts over the course of an eight- or 16-bar phrase has 
become a standard for introducing new sections, and for 
good reason – it’s a technique that always works brilliantly. 
Now that most DAWs feature sophisticated parameter 
automation, getting a filter to open over the desired section 
is usually just a matter of assigning the plugin’s cutoff 
parameter to an automation curve and drawing in the 
appropriate breakpoints. When doing this, choose a plugin 
with additional distortion control, and dial in a little analogue 
warmth to fatten the sound as the filter opens.
Flip the pitch
Short of ideas for new sections? What if we told 
you you could make a complete new section 
with an entirely different mood by inverting 
your existing melody? Pitchflipping, or pitch 
reversal, is a technique by which you find a 
central axis or mirror point – often the midpoint 
between the root note of the key you’re working 
in and the note a perfect fifth above it – and use 
it like a fulcrum to literally flip the notes around, 
so that they retain their grid positions and 
durations, but change their pitch. What you end 
up with is a completely new melody with a 
different vibe, yet still derived from the same 
song. If you start out with a melody in a major 
key, it becomes minor, while minor key melodies 
become major, and so on. So, if you have a verse 
melody in a minor key, you could flip it to a 
major key for the chorus – a common 
songwriting technique. Whether this is done 
with a vocal or an instrumental part, it can have 
a big effect and be a great way of generating 
alternative bridge or prechorus parts. You could 
play the vocal melody in as a synth line, then 
invert it to produce a keyboard hook for a tag or 
a solo section, for example.
Logic Pro X, shown above, has a nifty ‘reverse 
pitch’ feature that asks for an axis pitch, then 
works everything else out for you. In the 
example shown above, we’ve got a simple 
melody in the key of A minor. To generate our 
flipped version, we’ve simply duplicated the 
region, selected the notes in the piano roll editor 
and chosen the MIDI Transform » Reverse Pitch 
option from the edit window’s Functions menu. 
This brings up a selection dialogue that asks us 
to input the note pitch around which we want to 
flip our notes. To get this result, we typed in the 
note D3 and hit Operate. Hey presto: a whole 
new melody! 
If that doesn’t work out, for even wackier 
results, why not try your DAW’s pitch 
randomising function, if it has one? For more 
information about a similar technique to this 
one, known as negative harmony, check out our 
resident music theory expert Dave Clews’ Easy 
Guide on the topic in 
257.
Pitch reversal is a staple of songwriting, and these days your DAW can do the leg work for you
When in doubt, sometimes the answer is just 
to take things back a notch…
110
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro

Exclusive hands-on sessions 
with the latest software
Classic Producer Masterclass 
videos from the 
 archives
650+ videos, with more 
added every month
SUBSCRIBE FOR:
youtube.com/ComputerMusicMag
Max For Live Beginner’s Masterclass 
bit.ly/cmmaxpk 
Building a Breakbeat Track with CM Samples 
bit.ly/breakscm    
Producer Masterclass | Fouk | Part 1 of 2  
bit.ly/foukcmpt1    
HOT VIDEOS 
ON THE
  
 CHANNEL

More tips for breaking out  
of the loop of doom…
01 
REMIX YOURSELF
Get some self-induced inspiration 
by taking one of your own songs, 
stripping away the music, then 
coming back after a day or two and remixing it. 
Listening to the vocal acapella after a while may 
help distance you from the original version 
enough to come up with something new. As it’s 
your own song, you can then choose to either 
keep the original vocal or replace it, then write a 
completely new song over the top of the new 
backing track.
02
JAM SESSION
Your computer is a powerful 
recording device with acres of 
hard-disk space, so why not 
make the most of it and record long synth ‘jams’ 
to audio? If you’re lucky, this can capture some 
great moments, creating a wealth of inspiring 
material that can organically influence 
arrangement decisions. Chop these nuggets out 
and use them as one-off ear-candy moments to 
keep your arrangement fresh.
 04
BUILDING BRIDGES
Make a whole new section for 
your song by copying an existing 
section, dropping out the drums 
and just changing one chord. This worked well 
for the Chainsmokers in their recent hit, Side 
Effects: they took the prechorus chords, 
swapped a Cm7 for an Fm7, and hey presto! – a 
bridge section was made! When the chorus 
re-enters, a new vocal melody over the existing 
chorus track keeps things fresh.
 05
SOUND ADVICE
As well as the structural side of 
things, there’s a lot that can be 
done with the instrumental parts 
you use (or don’t use) in your track to keep 
things interesting, and new sounds are always 
inspiring. Copy and paste the drums from your 
solitary eight-bar loop, dial up a new synth or a 
set of presets that you rarely use on one of your 
existing synths, or strap a seldom-used plugin 
over the channel and use the new sound to 
inspire a fresh part. 
 06
RISER ABOVE IT
When it comes to getting hold of 
risers and transition effects to 
keep your arrangement moving, 
there’s absolutely nothing wrong with 
plundering sample libraries and other resources. 
What’s more, you don’t have to use straight-up 
risers as-is – instead, try using a sample of a long 
cymbal crash or noise ‘downlifter’, flip the audio 
back to front with your DAW’s reverse function, 
then nudge the reversed audio into place on the 
timeline. Fade and shape the swell’s volume for 
instant ‘whipping’ effects. 
 07
TAKE IT AWAY 
Kick it old-school with subtractive 
arrangement! This tried-and-tested 
method dates from linear DAWs, 
and it still works just as well today. Start with a 
looping section of four or eight bars that 
represents the busiest section of your song – 
usually the chorus. Duplicate along the timeline 
to form a grid of regions lasting the length of the 
song, then work through from the intro, 
removing or muting unwanted parts. Keep 
going until an arrangement starts to appear, 
then refine the transitions.
 03
INVERSION THERAPY 
Chord inversions are your friends – you 
can fashion a decent prechorus by 
inverting the verse chords so that they 
play higher up the keyboard as the section progresses. 
Simply playing the same chords in different positions 
on the keyboard provides variety without actually 
changing the chords themselves.
Believe it or not, all of these are C minor chords – they’re just inversions going up the keyboard
Using samples – like the ones given away each month with 
Computer Music – can prove inspirational 
Subtractive arrangement might make your track look like 
Breakout, but it’s a reliable, easy technique
112
> make music now / arrange tracks like a pro

 08 
MAKE A PASS
If you’re using eight- or four-bar 
sections as building blocks to 
sketch out the foundations of 
your arrangement, run a few single-pass 
overdubs all the way down to ‘cement’ them 
together. These could be things like drum fills 
and cymbal crashes, vocal adlibs, keyboard riffs, 
live knob twiddling on an analogue synth or 
MIDI controller, etc – basically, any track 
recorded as a continuous performance that 
infuses your song with unique, one-off 
moments, contributes to the development of 
the track and makes it evolve as it plays. This will 
keep the listener interested and reduce the 
repetitiveness that block-based arrangements 
can sometimes suffer from.
09
GET HANDS-ON
If all you’ve got is a repeating 
eight-bar loop that you can’t 
break out of, try using 
automation as a performance tool. Copy and 
paste your loop into a three- or four-minute long 
block of repeats, then assign the volume levels 
of eight of the most prominent tracks to eight 
sliders on a hardware MIDI controller. You could 
also assign the channel mute switches to 
appropriate buttons if your controller has them. 
Then set your DAW’s automation system into 
Write or Touch mode, start the track playing and 
hit those faders. Often the live performance 
element of having physical controls beneath 
your fingers as the track plays will spark some 
latent creativity, and give you organic motion.
10
PARE IT DOWN
Writing a seven-minute song isn’t 
necessarily a bad move, but there’s 
often no need to go to great lengths 
– literally – to pepper your track with loads of 
different sections if it doesn’t need them. Many 
current chart hits are edited down to the bare 
minimum, coming in at under three minutes 
long. Don’t need that intro? Bin it and just start 
the track with a synth noise leading straight into 
the first verse. And having only one singalong 
 11
DYNAMIC IMPACT
If your drop is lacking in impact, try varying the 
dynamics of the track subtly between the drop 
and preceding build. Use automation to drop 
the overall level of the track by 1-3dB at the start of the 
build, maybe increasing the volume of the impact 
effect on the first beat to compensate for the sudden 
change in level. Then ramp the level back up by a dB or 
so during the build, before snapping back to the 
original level on the downbeat of the drop. Boom!
Subtle variations in dynamics can help balance the relative levels of builds and drops
prechorus, for instance. Most DAWs have a 
version of this – for example, in Logic Pro, just 
hold down the Cmd key while dragging to set 
the range; or in Cubase, just swap the left and 
right loop locators around.
14
LISTEN AND LEARN
Analyse the arrangements  
of some of your favourite tracks. 
Listen to what other producers have 
done and try to figure out the mechanics of the 
track and why it works the way it does. The  
more you do this, the better you’ll get at 
pinpointing the minor details that all make a big 
difference. To get analytical, import an audio file 
of the track into your DAW, and use markers to 
mark out the sections. Then you can see how 
the song develops, and which elements appear 
in which section. 
Overdubbing passes of fills, synth edits or other sonic 
effects can liven up grid-based arrangements
Separating multiple drum kit elements out to individual 
tracks will give you added arrangement flexibility
Skip cycle does what it says on the tin: it misses out the 
cycled section and skips to the next bit
chorus at the end has the effect of making your 
listeners want to play the whole thing again just 
to get to that bit – and that can’t be bad, can it?
12
KITTED OUT
If you’re constructing song sections 
by copying and deleting MIDI regions, 
it makes sense to have a separate 
track for each individual drum kit sound if 
possible, as that not only gives you flexibility for 
processing during mixing, but also lets you 
mute and bring back in individual elements of 
your track more easily when arranging. If you 
have regions containing multiple drum events – 
kicks, snares and so on – on single tracks, most 
DAWs have the ability to separate them out onto 
individual tracks – such as Logic’s Separate by 
Note Pitch command.
13
SKIP CYCLE
A quick way to check out an 
arrangement idea without actually 
changing anything is to use your 
DAW’s ‘skip cycle’ mode. This is where, instead of 
looping the cycle range, the playhead jumps 
over it, missing it out entirely – a good move if 
you want to see how the chorus sounds coming 
in straight after the verse, skipping the 
arrange tracks like a pro / make music now <
113

Classic arrangements deconstructed
Learn what makes four landmark tunes tick, second by second
 ARTIST 
The Beatles
 TRACK 
Back In 
The USSR
 ARTIST 
Chemical 
Brothers
 TRACK 
Go
114
> make music now / how to arrange the perfect track
This side-one opener from 
The Beatles’ 1968 ‘White 
Album’ possesses a fairly 
straightforward classic rock/
pop structure, albeit with one 
or two tweaks.
0:00 INTRO  The song begins with the 
sound effect of a jet plane coming in to 
land, followed by a four-bar intro on an 
E7 chord that neatly anticipates the A 
chord on the downbeat of the verse.
0:15 VERSE 1  The song gets into its 
stride as Paul begins to narrate the 
back story, about how he flew in from 
Miami Beach and didn’t get to bed last 
night. The verse section lasts eight 
bars, made up of two repeats of the  
A - D - C - D chord progression.
0:28 CHORUS 1  The chorus is slightly 
unusual here, as it only lasts a total of 
six bars – the first three made up of a 
rearrangement of the existing chords 
from the verse section – A - C - D – 
followed by a repeat of the chorus 
vocal hook “Back in the USSR”, and a 
final two-bar link into the second verse.
0:52 CHORUS 2  After a second verse 
that is, musically, a carbon copy of the 
first, we get the second chorus, 
complete, like the first, with vocal hook 
and lead guitar riff to distinguish it as 
such. However, this time round, the 
“Back in the USSR” vocal hook gets not 
one repeat, but three, extending the 
length of this chorus to an even more 
unorthodox seven and a half bars.
1:04 TAG  At this point we get a 
completely new section, made up of 
Beach Boys-style backing vocals and 
Paul extolling the virtues of Ukrainian 
girls and how they leave the west 
behind. The new D - A - D - Bm7 - E7 -  
D7 - A chord progression covers eight 
bars, followed by an extra, two-bar A - E 
turnaround that sets up the 
subsequent guitar solo.
1:21 SOLO  The lead guitar takes over 
from the vocal, playing a raucous, 
bendy solo over a straight set of verse 
chords. This section is the same length 
as all the other verse sections, coming 
in at eight bars, followed swiftly by a 
repeat of the first, six-bar chorus and 
another ten-bar tag section.
2:01 VERSE 3  A final eight-bar verse 
section has the vocal describing  
snow-peaked mountains way down 
south, joined by a screaming lead 
guitar part playing rapid notes on  
a high A. This is followed by a final,  
six-bar chorus section.
2:25 OUTRO  The outro section simply 
pedals on an A blues riff with lots of 
“Woo-oo-oo” backing vocals for six 
bars, before ceding to more jet plane 
sound effects to round off the perfect 
2:40 pop arrangement.
This recent cut from  
the Chems strikes the  
perfect blend of EDM  
stylings and mainstream 
song arrangement.
0:00 INTRO  A solid beat, heavily 
reverbed percussion and analogue 
filter sweeps make up the first eight 
bars of this tune, after which we’re 
more than set up for eight bars of 
monotonic bassline playing a string of 
16th-notes on D, with an ear-bending B♭ 
- G - A♭ motif every fourth bar. 
Meanwhile, Q-tip cues up the verse rap 
vocal with “Can’t think/sleep/breathe” 
over the last four bars.
0:32 VERSE 1  The drums and bassline 
continue unchanged as Q-Tip gets into 
his flow, his rap doubling the rhythm of 
the bassline and accompanied by a 
high-pitched synth sound that bends 
upwards in pitch as each line is 
delivered. The vocal creeps up in 
intensity over the 16 bars, building up 
tension before the chorus hits.
1:04 CHORUS 1  Heralded by a sung 
“O-oh” vocal on the downbeat, a flurry 
of stabby synth parts and an 
unforgettable lead synth hook, Q-Tip’s 
laconic delivery continues over the 
chorus, which is technically eight bars 
long. After the eight bars, however, we 
find the same delayed resolution 
technique found in the second chorus 
of Back In The USSR, repeating the 
“We’re only here to make you…” line 
four times before the payoff of “Go!” on 
the downbeat of the next section. This 
makes for an extra three-bar ‘tag’ at the 
end of the chorus, totalling 11 bars.
1:26 VERSE 2  The 27 bars from this 
point on are musically the same as the 
last 27, save a tambourine loop and a 
few extra synth noises for variety. We 
get another 16-bar rap verse followed 
by an identical eight-bar chorus and 
three-bar tag, except this time round…
2:20 MIDDLE 8  …the “Go!” leads into a 
new section that feels like a middle 8, 
but is actually four bars of repeated 
“Go!”s, the intro percussion and some 
synth noise. This leads to the middle 8 
proper, at which point the drums drop 
out, replaced by Q-Tip’s “Can’t think/
sleep/breathe” refrain from the intro, 
and the bassline now played higher up.
2:44 BUILD-UP  In this eight-bar section, 
the high bass synth continues 
pedalling on D, and Q-Tip quotes some 
lines from the first verse, while a 
sonorous synth note rises in pitch and 
frequency, ramping up the tension
3:00 DROP  An eight-bar instrumental 
verse with the drums back in full effect 
and the bassline played by a new, more 
analogue, reverberent synth sound.
3:16 OUTRO  The song finishes with just 
a regular chorus plus three-bar tag, 
with all instrumentation switched back 
to that of the first two choruses.
bit.ly/ChemBroGo
0:15 
Verse 1
0:32 
Verse 1
0:00 
Intro
0:00 
Intro
0:28 
Chorus 1
1:04 
Chorus 1
0:52 
Chorus 2
0:39 
Verse 2
2:01 
Verse 3
1:26 
Verse 2
1:34 
Chorus 3
2:14 
Chorus 4
1:58 
Chorus 2
1:45 
Doo Wop
2:20 
Middle 8
1:42 
Tag 2
2:44 Build-up
3:00 
Drop
2:25 
Outro
1:21 
Solo
3:32 
Tag 3
3:16 
Chorus 3
1:04 
Tag
0:36 
Tag
1:20 
Tag
2:14 
Tag

 ARTIST 
2Pac 
featuring 
Dr Dre
 TRACK 
California 
Love
(ORIGINAL VERSION)
 ARTIST 
Martin 
Garrix
 TRACK 
Animals
115
how to arrange the perfect track / make music now <
Featuring a typical structure 
for the genre, with relentlessly 
ticking head-nod groove and 
pounding piano hook, mated 
to some amazing talkbox 
jamming from Zapp!’s Roger 
Troutman, it’s easy to see why 
this classic West Coast hip-
hop anthem was a massive 
crossover hit in 1995.
 0:00 INTRO  The song kicks off with 
Troutman’s solo talkbox “California 
Lo-ove” vocal bringing in the beat at 
0:03. We then get four bars of drums, 
bass, piano and horns, establishing the 
main musical backbone of the track. 
From here on out, over the course of 
the rest of the track, additional 
supporting parts may come and go, but 
that piano riff never lets up.
0:13 CHORUS 1  The horns drop out and 
the talkbox chorus vocal hammers the 
hook for a further 12 bars, adding some 
two-part harmony here and there. One 
of Dre’s signature shimmering synth 
sounds props up the tonality, while 
over the repeated “We keep it rockin’” 
line, at the end of this section, an 
ascending brass line serves to 
announce the forthcoming rap verse.
0:45 VERSE 1  The first 16-bar rap verse 
is taken by Dre. Bar the odd whistle, the 
first eight bars is musically unchanged 
from the initial intro loop, but the 
second half features a couple of extra 
synth parts and the odd talkbox ad lib.
1:27 CHORUS 2  This chorus adds more 
to the first chorus’ musical landscape, 
with some ad libs answering the hook, 
and female backing vocals adding an 
extended “oo-oo-oo-ooh” line.
1:58 TAG  “Shake, shake it, baby” says 
Roger, adding a further talkbox hook. 
The unstoppable piano riff and drum 
loop thunder on unchanged for 
another eight bars, complete with the 
horn stabs from the intro.
2:19 VERSE 2  It’s 2Pac’s turn to take  
the mic, which he does with aplomb 
over the same 16-bar section of 
backing track that Dre has at his 
disposal in verse 1.
3:01 CHORUS 3  This section, and the 
repeated eight-bar “Shake it, baby” tag 
that follows it, are musically and 
structurally identical to the preceding 
chorus and tag, bar the odd ad lib.
3:54 OUTRO  Everything seems to calm 
down a bit at this point – the two rap 
verses have been dispatched and the 
chorus hook hammered home, so all 
that remains is to fill the remaining 20 
bars of loop with plenty of talkbox and 
rap ad libs as the track gradually 
swaggers off into the Californian 
sunset – job done!
This Number One EDM hit 
combines hands-in-the-air 
euphoria with a snarling 
4/4 kick and distinctive 
percussive riff for unashamed 
dancefloor destruction.
0:00 BEAT INTRO  The track keeps it 
minimal for the first 16 bars, with just a 
high-passed kick and onbeat ride to 
provide the DJ with a metronome with 
which to mix. A bubbling, reverbed 
synth line is filtered and opened out.
0:30 BASS INTRO  The full bass weight 
of the kick and synth arps are dropped 
into the mix. Garrix builds the tension 
with a strange rising synth and long 
reversed cymbal swell.
1:00 MINI BREAK  This four-bar mini 
break provides ‘ear refreshment’, 
preparing the listener for the imminent 
introduction of the breakdown melody. 
This is stamped by a huge bass fall, 
swelling reverse reverb and a ticking 
clock slowly winding up.
1:08 BREAKDOWN 1  The track’s main 
breakdown, initially filtered to lower the 
energy level. The ticking clock acts as a 
metronome, while swelling, reverbed 
synths from the intro shoot out from 
behind the main riff. After eight bars, 
the lead synth’s filter is opened, 
allowing the huge chords to take  
centre stage, with massive Pryda 
snares punctuating.
1:37 BUILD-UP  These eight bars are all 
about building the tension to the max. 
A snaking hoover-style riff and laser 
zaps rise and accompany the snare 
build, leading into a final one-bar gap 
with a practically naked spoken vocal 
sample and sucking reverse effect.
1:53 DROP 1 First-time listeners would 
expect the drop to continue the 
breakdown’s melody – but they’d be 
wrong. Instead, Garrix strips away the 
high-frequency intensity and throws in 
a monstrous 4/4 kick and an entirely 
new riff. Each section of the track 
gradually ramps up the intensity before 
the next part drops it back down to 
quickly start the process all over again.
2:30 BREAKDOWN 2  After another 
calming four-bar mini break, the epic 
synth chords drop back in, along with a 
repeat of the build-up from earlier.
3:15 DROP 2  Again, this section mirrors 
the first half of the track, with the same 
distorted kick and woody riff, but it’s 16 
bars longer. There’s a scream sample 
after eight bars, and rising zaps that 
mirror the lead riff to build tension.
3:58 OUTRO  After a one-bar edit, where 
the ticking clock briefly re-emerges, 
we’re back into the bubbling synth 
theme from the intro. As the track 
nears an end, Garrix again filters the 
bass from the mix to strip away  
weight and provide contrast. 
Unexpectedly, a cartoonish ‘boing’ 
sample finishes the track off.
bit.ly/GarrixAnim
bit.ly/2PacCalLove
0:13 
Chorus 1
0:30  
Bass Intro
0:00 
Intro
0:00  
Beat Intro
0:45 
Verse 1
1:00
Mini Break
1:27 
Chorus 2
1:08 
Breakdown
2:19 
Verse 2
1:53  
Drop
3:01 
Chorus 3
2:30  
Breakdown 2
3:32 
Tag 2
3:15  
Drop 2
3:54 
Outro
3:58 
Outro
1:58 
Tag
1:37 
Build-Up
2:22
Mini Break
3:00 
Build-Up

116
> make music now / how to arrange the perfect track
 > Step by step  1. Changing/extending a basic chord progression into an arrangement 
Let’s take a simple musical idea and 
mould it into a basic arrangement for 
solo piano – this will allow us to focus on 
musical arrangement techniques, rather 
than production-based ones. Here’s an 
eight-bar section containing the 
progression C - Am - F - G, each chord 
lasting for two bars. To start our song, we’ll 
call this the verse section. 
1
Note that the chords we’re using are 
all diatonic to the key of C major. This 
means that, if we take all the notes in the C 
major scale and build chords by stacking 
alternate notes as shown, we end up with 
seven diatonic chords: C, Dm, Em, F, G, Am 
and Bdim. ‘Diatonic’ just means that the 
chords contain only notes from the parent 
scale of the key we’re in, which is C major.
2
Here’s a cool little verse melody that 
fits over the top (we can sort out the 
lyrics later!). The melody also uses notes 
from the C major scale, so we know that 
it’ll work with our chords. We now have a 
complete verse section, so let’s construct 
a bridge that’ll form the link between it 
and the chorus.
3
The bridge will be the same length as 
the verse (eight bars), and we’ll use 
the same number of chords of the same 
length (two bars each); but we need 
different chords to take us up to the 
chorus. To create a variation, we duplicate 
the verse section and change two of the 
chords, using more from our diatonic 
palette. C becomes Em and F becomes 
Dm, giving us Em - Am - Dm - G.
4
Melody-wise, the bridge could do with 
being quite different to the verse, to 
distinguish it further as a separate section 
and lead up to the chorus. So we could do 
with something that ascends up the 
keyboard pitch-wise – which will build 
tension and excitement – and also has a 
different rhythm to the verse melody. 
Something like this will do the trick. Get a 
better look at it in the video!
5
For the chorus, we want the chords 
happening twice as often – in other 
words, driving the song along and making 
the chorus more impactful and exciting 
than the verse. We use the same 
progressions from the verse and bridge, 
but just shorten the chords from two to 
one bar each, squeezing them into an 
eight-bar section to form the progression 
C - Am - F - G - Em - Am - Dm - G.
6
Since we’ve simply resequenced the 
same chords from the verse and 
bridge sections, the melody we  
used for the verse will also work for the 
chorus. So we duplicate the part and, just 
for variety’s sake, adjust a note here or 
there in the second half so that it works 
better with the chords we took from the 
bridge section.
7
Now we have the main chunk of the 
song in place, we can work more on 
the actual arrangement. We start by 
adding a two-bar tag after the chorus  
– just two bars of the tonic chord C will do 
the trick – after which, we can repeat the 
entire verse-bridge-chorus section again. 
For luck, we also double the second 
chorus to 16 bars.
8
In the middle 8, we go to an Am for the 
first chord for a change of mood, 
followed by Em, then Dm, then G to bring 
us back into the C on the downbeat of the 
chorus. The outro is just two repeated 
choruses, and our final task is to fashion a 
four-bar intro section from the first half of 
the first verse.
9
TUTORIAL 
FILES

117
how to arrange the perfect track / make music now <
 > Step by step  2. Changing bass notes under static chords 
It’s possible to fashion new song 
sections from existing ones simply by 
changing the bass note under each chord, 
effectively creating new chords. To 
illustrate, here’s an eight-bar section 
containing a basic progression made up of 
alternating Cm and Fm chords. The left-
hand part is currently just playing the root 
note of each chord: C for Cm and F for Fm.
1
We copy and paste the section into the 
next eight bars to make what will 
eventually become a chorus part. Then, 
leaving the top three notes of each chord 
exactly as they are, we can start moving 
the bass notes around to make new 
chords. The first C note can stay as it is, 
but our first victim is the F beneath the 
first Fm chord in bar 2.
2
We change it to a B♭, which sounds 
good and fits well. Our original F 
minor contained the notes F-A♭-C, the first, 
third and fifth notes of the F minor scale 
(F-G-A♭-B♭-C-D♭-E♭). Adding the B♭ means our 
chord is called an Fm11, because if you 
keep counting past the octave to the B♭,  
its the eleventh note. Our Fm11 chord 
reads B♭-A♭-C-F.
3
 > Step by step  3. Using inverted chords and dynamics 
Occasionally, all you need for a song is 
a couple of chords. By inverting the 
chords and playing harder or softer to 
shape the song’s dynamics, you can do a 
lot with a little. This verse section contains 
eight bars of just Cm - F, played very softly 
and simply in two positions low on the 
keyboard. We can develop this without 
complicating things with more chords…
1
We can use the same chords for the 
bridge, but increase the dynamic and 
rhythmic intensity of the playing and 
move slowly up the keyboard, shifting (or 
inverting) each chord’s lowest note up one 
octave with each change to impart a 
three-dimensional build – increased 
loudness, rhythmic complexity and pitch  
– all without changing the actual chords.
2
For the chorus, we can remain on the 
same chords, but now we’re playing 
loudly in a higher register, using lots of 
dynamic articulations and incidental 
notes. Towards the end of the section, we 
can bring it back down the keyboard again 
to the level that the second verse will be 
at. In this way, it’s possible to construct an 
entire song from just two chords.
3
The bass note in the third bar moves 
from C to A♭, making an A♭maj7 chord 
(G-C-E♭ from the C minor chord, coupled 
with the new A♭ in the bass). As with the 
previous Fm11, our chord appears in 
spread or ‘open’ voicing – A♭-G-C-E♭ – rather 
than the ‘closed’ voiced A♭-C-E♭-G. Similarly, 
we then shift the F in the next bar down to 
D♭ to make D♭maj7.
4
The C bass note in the fifth bar 
becomes an E♭, making what’s known 
as merely Cm with an E♭ bass, or Cm/E♭. As 
it happens, the F in bar 6 can remain 
where it is, since Fm works well as the next 
chord in the progression. The pattern 
that’s emerging now in the left-hand piano 
part – that is, the bassline – is an ascending 
part from the low D♭ back up towards 
where it started on C2.
5
Finally, we change the C bass note in 
the seventh bar to an A♭, making 
another A♭maj7 chord with the same open 
voicing as the one in the third bar, and we 
shift the final F in the eighth bar to a high 
D♭ to create another D♭maj7 chord. The 
result is a more musically interesting 
section with a more defined, ‘fall and rise’ 
shape that takes the listener on more of a 
musical journey.
6

118
> make music now / how to arrange the perfect track
 > Step by step  4. Raising the chorus a whole tone  
Having different sections of a song in 
different keys can be an effective way 
to craft a more interesting arrangement. 
One example is to have the verse and 
chorus sections in different keys. Here’s a 
typical C - G - B♭ - Fm verse progression 
over eight bars. It’s in C major, but it uses 
two borrowed chords from the key of C 
minor, namely B♭ and Fm.
1
Duplicating the section and 
transposing it into a new key is a quick 
and easy way of creating a new section 
that gives the illusion of arriving at an 
uplifting new set of chords – even though 
all we’ve done is used the same chords 
and merely shifted the whole thing up two 
semitones, from C to D in this case.
2
The new progression (D - A - C - Gm) 
comes in with an abrupt transition. A 
keychange with no preamble like this is 
often known as the ‘trucker’s gearchange’. 
It actually works well in this scenario, as it 
gives the chorus an extra bit of impact. A 
bonus is that the final Gm chord resolves 
nicely back to the C on the downbeat of 
the second verse, after the chorus.
3
 > Step by step  5. Modulating to a new key from M8 to outro  
A key change can be very effective for 
raising the excitement level towards 
the end of a song, and the middle 8 can be 
a great place to do it. Here’s a C major 
chorus played with simple block piano 
chords of C - F - G - C. We duplicate this to 
make an outro section, then create an 
eight-bar gap in which to create our 
middle 8…
1
Let’s end up with the outro chorus 
playing in the key of D major – a whole 
tone above the previous chorus. We 
transpose this outro chorus’ chords up  
a tone, from C - F - G - C to D - G - A - D.  
We’ll set up our key change during the 
middle 8, as opposed to the abrupt 
‘trucker’s gearchange’ demonstrated in 
the previous walkthrough. 
2
So, now to fill the gap. Since the track 
up to this point has been in a major 
key, it would be good for the middle 8 to 
introduce a complete change of mood, so 
we’ll choose some minor chords to go 
here. We can do this without actually 
changing key just yet, by selecting two of 
the minor chords that are diatonic to C 
major: Dm, Em or Am.
3
We create a pattern comprising one 
bar of Em followed by one bar of Am, 
and fill the first six bars of the middle 8 
section with it, leaving the last two bars 
blank. This is where the transition to the 
key of D major is going to happen, but first 
let’s imagine we’re staying in C major for 
the outro. If that were the case, how might 
we end the middle 8?
4
We could use a bar of F and a bar of G, 
since ending on the G provides a 
strong resolution back to the C chord 
(since G is the dominant and C is the 
tonic). This would work well if the 
downbeat of the next section was a C 
major chord, but it’s now going to be a  
D major chord.
5
So instead of finishing on G, we need a 
chord that will resolve strongly to D 
major. The dominant of D major is A major, 
so let’s substitute that last G major in the 
middle 8 for an A major. This works 
because – like our new key – it’s a whole 
tone above the original chord and flows 
nicely into our new D major outro. 
6

THE UK'S NUMBER 1 
BASS GUITAR MAGAZINE
ON SALE  
NOW
Also available to order online at www.myfavouritemagazines.co.uk
All about the bass, every four weeks

Scale up and forget
>
Scales and keys are simple 
– instead of creating a track 
using all of the 12 available 
notes, you create it using 
seven. The patterns between the 
notes are what deﬁne a scale. If every 
instrument in a track is playing only 
from that same set of notes, then you 
should be in key. The root note is the 
focal note of the track – D in D major, 
for example – the one that comes 
right at the start and end of almost 
every musical phrase. Start at your 
be made from the notes of the scale 
you’ve chosen. A basic ‘triad’ is made 
of three notes, moving up the scale 
but skipping a note every time. If 
you’re using C major (all the white 
notes on the keyboard from C to C), 
your ﬁrst triad will be C-E-G. Start at 
a note: C, miss one (D), play one: E, 
miss one (F), play one: G.
What about ﬂats  
and sharps?
>
Anyone who’s ever sat down 
at a keyboard will be able to 
tell you that Db and C# are 
the same note, but music 
root, and move the keyboard in the 
pattern 2-2-1-2-2-2-1 to play a major 
scale. For a minor scale, the pattern 
is 2-1-2-2-1-2-2. As examples, move 
up all white keys of the keyboard 
from C to C and you’ll play the C 
major scale; go from A to A and you’ll 
have played the minor scale.
What chords can I use?
>
If you’ve got yourself a scale, 
it’s not hard to ﬁgure out 
which chords will go with it. 
Again, your chords will only 
theory has different ideas. Music 
theory’s job is to name things, and 
the difference is only in the name. 
These notes are exactly the same, 
and it’s only for advanced purposes 
that they’re given different names 
– even then, they’re the same note, 
just referred to differently. Don’t let 
the theorists’ will to name things 
discourage you from experimentation.
More chords to try
>
Basic triads are ﬁne, but  
for a bit more musical 
sophistication, try adding 
more notes to them (again, 
BRUSH UP ON 
MUSIC THEORY
Let’s face it, most music theory is stuffy and off-
putting. Here are a bunch of principles you can put 
to good use – no jargon, just simple techniques
Smooth moves
>
A sequence of chords will sound best when 
the notes make fewer huge leaps between 
chords. If there’s a huge difference in height 
between chords on your piano roll, there’s usually 
an inversion (see right) you can make to bring all 
the notes closer together. In the picture, the ﬁrst 
two chords are in normal position, and the 
second two are inverted. The second pairing  
puts the notes of each chord closer together,  
and this makes for a far smoother transition  
and sound.
Simple stuff with  
pentatonic scales
>
Musical scales don’t have to 
even contain seven notes – 
perhaps the simplest scale for 
listening to and creating music 
with is the pentatonic scale. Start 
at F# and play all the black notes, 
and you have the F# pentatonic 
scale. Therefore, to start at any 
note, you just need to know that 
the gaps between notes go in the 
pattern 2-2-3-2-3. Pentatonic 
scales are simple but can be 
extremely compelling.
INCLUDES VIDEO VAULT.FUTUREMUSIC.CO.UK
120
> make music now / bitesized theory tips and tricks

skipping every other scale note) to 
make sevenths, ninths and elevenths. 
Next give suspended chords a go 
– these involve taking the middle 
note of the triad and moving it up or 
down by one scale note.
A sense of tension
>
A diminished chord has three 
notes separated by a gap of 
three – eg, F-G#-B. When it 
comes to ‘standard triads’, 
they bear more resemblance to minor 
than major but, with the notes 
separated by the same gap of three, 
and the top and bottom separated by 
a gap of six, diminished chords are 
especially disturbing and aggravating. 
For this reason, they’re great to place 
at the height of tension, potentially 
best used during a build-up, though 
sometimes just as good as a 
connecting-chord between two 
normal triads. For an even more 
suspensive note combination, try 
adding another note on the top, again 
separated by three steps – the 
diminished seventh.
Chord Inversions
>
Inversions are, put simply, 
the idea of playing a chord 
with the notes in the ‘wrong 
order’, so instead of playing a 
D major D-F#-A, you could play it 
A-D-F#, and still maintain the exact 
same feeling. One way to use 
inversions to good effect is so that 
the lowest notes match a bassline 
below it; another good use is in the 
tip below…
Two ways to change key
>
Changing the key of your 
track in the middle is a way 
to make things interesting. So 
how is a key change 
performed? The ﬁrst and simplest 
way is to just abruptly change it from 
one bar to the next, with no warning. 
The second way is to introduce the 
next key just after playing a chord 
that this key and the current key 
share. Transitioning from G major to 
A major, to give an example, can be 
done using the chords Bm (B-D-F#) 
or D (D-F#-A), as both keys share 
these notes and chords.
ﬁnd music played in a mode rather 
than in a major/minor scale, but this 
is one way to keep things interesting.
Keep it in key
>
If you’re having trouble 
keeping to a key, your piano 
roll might be able to help. In 
Ableton Live, for example, 
A la modes
>
When you’ve had your ﬁll of 
standard major/minor scales, 
try some modes. Remember 
how C major and A minor 
were both played using the same 
notes, just starting at different 
places? Well, there are ﬁve more 
starting points you can use, and each 
is known as a mode. It’s unusual to 
you can wrap the piano roll to show 
only the notes that have been 
programmed into it so far, hiding the 
others. Add to this the fact that you 
can also drag notes back to before 
the ﬁrst beat, and you can program in 
the notes of your scale before you 
start, drag them back behind the ﬁrst 
bar, and ‘Fold’ the notes so you can 
only program acceptable notes. Many 
hardware controllers and sequencers 
allow you to do a similar thing. NI 
Maschine, Ableton Push and 
Novation Circuit all feature scale 
modes that ‘fold’ all the notes in a 
key across a grid of pads.
Ear training
>
One of the best ways to know and understand the 
useful parts of music theory is to get yourself on a 
course of ear training. Using websites or apps 
specially designed for the task, you can quiz yourself 
on different note combinations and chords in quick 
quizzes based on sounds. Pretty soon, when having to 
think about the combinations of notes presented, 
you’ll start to absorb the different relative sounds, and 
back at your DAW, you’ll be able to reach for ‘that note 
in your head’ a lot faster.
121
bitesized theory tips and tricks / make music now <

122
> make music now / get inspired with theory
Have you ever heard the inspiration/
perspiration saying? It suggests that 
for a successful result you need a 
great idea but that, in order to do it 
justice, you need a whole lot more 
hard graft. The way this concept 
translates to music making is open to 
interpretation but, as this feature 
the biggest one is music itself. Notes, 
chords, melodies, harmonies, 
instruments, arrangements, meter, 
time signature, key signature and lots 
more besides. Music history is 
littered with highly successful music 
makers who would have described 
themselves as precisely the opposite; 
artists who happen to have been able 
to express themselves through music, 
despite not knowing how to read it or 
play an instrument. So you can 
succeed and write interesting ideas 
without formal musical training. But, 
for many, that’s an excuse for a lack 
of hard work, rather than a creative or 
fertile idea in its own right. 
If you don’t agree, let’s ask a 
different question instead: ‘Why don’t 
you want to learn the rudiments of 
music?’ Or: ‘In what way will your 
musical ideas be damaged or diluted 
suggests a whole range of ways in 
which you can develop your ideas to 
produce something new and 
innovate, let’s focus here on the 
concept of perspiration… 
What might need hard graft in 
order to turn good ideas into better 
sounding ones? Well, by far and away 
by learning more music?’. Imagine 
you’re a novelist, trying to describe a 
particular scene. Let’s suppose your 
vocabulary is limited to half the 
number of words of another author. 
Whose idea is likely to be richer, 
more articulately described and more 
able to form a compelling image? 
If you have any fear that learning 
more ‘music’ will 
in any way lessen 
the potency of 
your musical 
ideas, worry not; 
it simply won’t. 
Musicians who 
have learned an 
instrument and 
studied music 
theory are 
developing key skills as they do so; 
they’re learning ear training, honing 
their sense of chord recognition and 
rhythm, while being able to assess 
and critique music they hear more 
intuitively and rapidly. They can often 
sort the good ideas from the weaker 
ones in a piece too, feeding their own 
imaginations with increasingly strong 
and inspired ideas in the process. 
But this doesn’t only apply to 
‘music’ itself; indeed, the technology 
we use for capturing our ideas is just 
as central. Do you know how to bring 
musical ideas to life with MIDI 
Expression data or lines of 
automation? Do you know how to 
capture a great-sounding vocal with a 
microphone matched to the tone of 
your singer’s voice, or how much the 
acoustic of your control room is 
impacting into your recordings? Are 
you sure you need to buy that new 
synth plug-in when you’ve not yet 
delved beyond the presets of the one 
you bought last month? 
This might all read as harsh and 
very much the voice of ‘tough love’ 
but in reality it’s not a chore to get 
better and to learn more about a 
subject you love. Writing an inspired 
musical phrase is a wonderful thing, 
but so is shaping it carefully in 
post-production to make it shine and 
sing and create an even greater level 
of emotional depth. The good news is 
that for those keen to further their 
musical knowledge, we’ve never had 
it so good. Aside from ‘traditional’ 
music lessons, the resources 
available for free online are limitless. 
Musical and technical knowledge will 
never hold you back; rather, both will 
unlock and expand your creativity.
10% Inspiration, 
90% Perspiration
> 
We’re starting with a basic synth-string 
chord progression where each chord moves 
up or down with roughly the same shape. 
The result is pleasing enough but there’s no sense 
of melody here, or of the harmony being in any 
way unusual or rich. It sounds pretty standard. 
> 
Using the Scissors tool in any DAW, you can 
cut holes into the top line of your chord 
progression and ﬁll in the gaps between 
note steps, leave a note hanging over from one 
chord to the next, or add extra notes to enrich 
your harmony. We’re trying both ideas here. 
> 
Next, in the bass, we add some passing 
notes between chords. Using the Scissors 
tool we chop a couple of low notes a beat 
early, ﬁlling in the hole with a step between the 
two original notes. We add a sub bass to help hear 
these moves, as the string sound lacks deﬁnition. 
Passing Notes And Enriched Chords
It’s easier than you think to extend and enrich the harmonic language of a 
track. Sometimes you just need notes ‘outside’ a chord
Recording a chord progression is often a great way to start a track but we’re not all the most nimble keyboard players and, in our desire to 
make sure we hit the right notes in the right places, we often end up recording ‘block chords’ where the ﬂow from one note to the next 
isn’t our ﬁrst priority. That’s no problem, particularly if we go back to our recording and take a pair of scissors to it, chopping notes to 
create melodies and looking for ‘passing notes’, which help our chords blend more sinuously from one to the next. In the following 
walkthrough, we’re going to look at how to build a melody and extend the interest in the bass end of a chord progression we’ve recorded in 
real time. You can also see an extended version of this idea in video form this month…
To learn music, the 
resources available 
for free online  
are limitless

123
get inspired with theory / make music now <
Moving Beyond Pastiche
Most of us gain our ﬁrst musical inspiration by learning to play a track we 
like. There’s nothing wrong with familiarising yourself with the creative 
process by copying something else, as it helps us understand many of the 
rudiments of music: chord progressions, melody, meter, tempo, groove and 
much more. However, copying or even pastiche-ing music (writing 
something which sounds like something else) doesn’t bring much that’s 
new to the creative process or to the world of music in general. 
Avoiding copying something relies on the fact that your musical 
understanding goes beyond the framework set by the track which inspired 
you. So, once you’ve got the chords for a speciﬁc track under your ﬁngers, 
go and learn another song. And another, and another. And then try mixing 
up the chords from the ﬁrst song with those of the second and the third 
and the fourth. Similarly, don’t feel you need to copy the groove of that ﬁrst 
track into your piece. How might your track sound with a groove subtly 
similar – but fundamentally different – to the ﬁfth song you’ve learned? 
Once you’ve begun to ﬁll your brain with a number of different chord 
shapes and progressions, you’ll start to feel that the language of music is 
one you can play with. 
Another, more fertile, 
way to explore this idea is 
to ask yourself: ‘How does 
this piece of music I ﬁnd 
inspiring, make me feel?’. 
The mood of a track is 
crucial and requires a step 
back from speciﬁc chords, 
melody and tempo, 
tapping into something 
more innate – emotion. Do 
you want to write 
something sad, uplifting, 
celebratory, driving…? If 
you can identify the way a 
track feels, then writing 
something in the same 
mood has little to do with 
copying chords, melodies 
or even sounds and 
instrument choices. 
Instead, you’re framing a 
concept genuinely worth 
copying. It’s a subtle 
distinction but, taking this 
route, you’re far more 
likely to write something 
genuinely new.
Listen and absorb  
as much as you can 
– your ideas will be 
richer for a deep  
gene pool of ideas

124
> make music now / get inspired with theory
Learning a musical instrument and 
how to write and produce music is a 
time-consuming process and, of 
course, we all start from a position of 
no experience or knowledge, which 
we gain slowly and steadily until our 
tracks and productions become more 
sophisticated. However, with each 
step in the direction of this 
‘academic’ approach to musical 
improvement, it’s easy to forget that 
when we’re inexperienced we tend to 
make some interesting musical 
discoveries. If you can’t play the 
guitar, for instance, but you’re asked 
to strum a chord, it’s unlikely to be E 
Slow down  
and hurry up
major or G minor, but instead a 
mismatch of notes which might just 
sound interesting. Similarly, not 
knowing the ‘tried and tested’ order 
of insert plug-ins required for a vocal 
chain means that, by experimenting, 
you might end up with an even more 
interesting musical result. 
The only ‘problem’ with 
becoming masters of our DAWs and 
the musical instruments we practise 
regularly is that we load our brains 
with what we might call ‘muscle 
memory’, with our ﬁngers reaching 
for known, familiar patterns which 
have worked before. It can be hard to 
rally against this sometimes, which 
is why we’ve all had moments of 
sighing deeply, bored by our own 
lack of inspiration. Watch how a 
child delights at picking up an object 
they can pluck, bash or otherwise 
extract a noise from and you’ll realise 
that sometimes all we need is to tap 
into our inner child. It’s easier to 
make interesting, inspiring 
discoveries when you’re in uncharted 
territory. Slow yourself down by 
grabbing any instrument – one you 
can’t play – or by downloading a free 
DAW which you don’t know how to 
use. Slowing yourself down might 
well hurry up the part of your brain 
craving inspiration.
> 
Here, we’ve got a little track formed of three 
instruments – synth chords, bass and a 
shufﬂing drum pattern. As the chords all 
fall on the down-beat of their respective bars, the 
overall effect is quite ‘block-like’ and rigid. It  
also becomes easy to predict where each chord 
will fall.
> 
Let’s make things less predictable by 
pushing the position of some chords. Even 
a push of 1/8th note either early or late can 
make a big difference and we’re trying both 
approaches here, moving some chords before the 
down-beat and some after it. We’re making the 
‘pushes’ a little different second time around.
> 
This works well but the bass now sounds 
strange, as it continues to fall on the 
down-beat each time. By shifting the 
position of each note to match the pushed chords, 
things feel more complete. Pushing chords 
doesn’t only work with downtempo music; try it 
with tracks operating at faster bpms too.
Using ‘Pushed’ Chords
Rhythm isn’t only deﬁned by your beat patterns. It’s also deﬁned by where 
chords, stabs and harmonic elements fall
There’s no doubt that any drums or percussion in your projects will do most to deﬁne the ‘rhythm’ of your tracks but the position of chords 
and even melodic notes will play a crucial role too. As such, if your chord parts only fall on the down-beats of each bar, you may well ﬁnd 
that the overall sense of rhythm your track has is diluted or made predictable. ‘Pushing’ chords so that they fall a little early or late can 
make a big difference, by keeping your listeners on their toes. Better still, as soon as you’re freed from the ‘curse of the bar line’, you have 
an opportunity to add something much more unique to your tracks.
DOs & 
DON’Ts
of Inspiration
DO: 
> 
Take regular breaks. 
We all suffer from 
mental blocks when 
producing music and 
towards the end of a 
long day whether or not 
to include that new 
synth line can feel like a 
huge decision. Go for a 
walk, give it 30 mins, 
and go back. Suddenly, 
that decision will be 
easy. A fresh perspective 
is always helpful. 
DON’T: 
> 
Only write the starts 
of tracks. We’ve all 
been there, with 
100 great track starts in 
our computers with no 
idea how to get a track 
ﬁnished. Developing an 
idea is harder than 
starting one and is a skill 
in itself. Don’t give up. 
DO: 
> 
Collaborate. Tired of 
your own ideas? 
Spend time with 
someone with alternative 
ones. It’s amazing how 
someone with a different 
approach and different 
skills can bring out the 
best in your own ideas.
DON’T: 
> 
Let anyone telling 
you your tracks are 
weird or unusual  
get you down. That’s  
the aim! Be proud of 
your originality.

125
get inspired with theory / make music now <
© LEON NEAL/AFP/Getty Images
The job of a soundtrack composer is, 
of course, to write music which 
responds to the action onscreen. So, 
while there’s plenty of room for 
musical creativity in this role, it’s 
equally true that there is a structure, 
a framework and a foundation for the 
music itself. Not only that but a 
be quite alike and there’s something 
for us all to learn from this when 
we’re making music of our own. 
It’s a great idea, if you’re 
struggling for new ideas, to bring a 
movie ﬁle into your project. Any 
screen capture software will allow you 
to grab a video from YouTube or 
Vimeo. Following the dynamic 
undulations of a ﬁlm, making 
intuitive decisions about sounds you 
want to use and how you’re going to 
build up and then decrease the sense 
of drama in your music will provide a 
framework for your work which will 
help get you up and running. When 
you have a track which is operating 
under its own steam, there’s nothing 
to stop you abandoning the ﬁlm itself 
and just concentrating on your 
production in its own right. But try to 
avoid doing this too soon, as the 
soundtrack composer has to take key 
musical elements from the picture. If 
there’s a scene set in the Middle 
East, or Paris, or Mexico, it’s not 
unlikely that sounds from these 
regions will be incorporated into the 
mix. As a result, for soundtrack 
composers, no two projects will ever 
longer you work to picture, the more 
your ideas are likely to come from 
‘outside’ your existing musical 
experience and you therefore produce 
something innovative and new. 
Film isn’t the only ‘external’ 
media you might ﬁnd inspiring. Have 
you ever tried writing a track in 
response to a photograph or a 
compelling 
novel? While this 
might seem 
unusual, it’s 
actually no 
different to 
writing a track 
because you’ve 
been inspired by 
another piece of 
music. And it’s 
far less likely that you’ll be too 
directly inspired (and therefore 
wander into the murky world of 
pastiche and copying) if your source 
material is non-musical. 
Another advantage of letting 
another media type inﬂuence your 
project is that you’re likely to write 
‘less’. If you’re working on a music 
project, the feeling that every single 
moment needs micro-managing and 
ﬁlling with content can often be 
overwhelming. Yet music’s history is 
full of gaps, musical rests and pauses 
and moments where everything gets 
stripped right back to make the 
bigger moments seem even more 
dramatic. There’s no light without 
shade, no loud without soft…
And there’s another advantage… 
Some of the most interesting 
conversations you’ll have about 
music will be with creative people 
who work in other media. Film 
makers, photographers, animators, 
even writers are all dabbling with the 
same concepts – how to tell a story, 
how to structure it, frame it, highlight 
it, soften it, darken it… all the things 
we musicians do with the music we 
write. Whereas the conversations you 
have with like-minded musicians will 
always be underpinned by a speciﬁc 
sense of technical and musical 
knowledge, working with creative 
types outside of music will force you 
to ﬁnd other ways of expressing your 
interests and musical exploits. And in 
reaching for the right words, you’ll 
think about what you do in a different 
way and that, in turn, will feed back 
into your music making. Plus, those 
conversations might lead to 
collaboration, another regular source 
Work with ﬁlm 
and other media
> 
Download Sineqube’s Sapling. Prepare a 
folder of AIFF ﬁles of any audio you like. We 
suggest a minimum of four separate sounds 
as you can work with up to four sound sources at 
once. Drag and drop your folder of sounds onto 
the space in the top right-hand corner.
> 
Use the drop-down menus for each sound 
slot (1-4) to assign one of these sounds to 
each number. Press the space bar to hear 
sound playback begin, looping around the entire 
duration of each ﬁle. Each sound slot provides an 
Aux send to the in-built reverb and a pan dial. 
> 
Check all boxes to Randomize Loop Size, 
Speed and Volume. Set a millisecond length 
for how often these parameters will change. 
Set an Audio record path in the bottom right, then 
click Start Recording. You’ll have a ready-made 
soundscape to bounce other ideas off.
Embracing The Concept Of Random
There are lots of musical beneﬁts to unexpected things happening during 
the production process. Here’s just one approach to working with random
Sometimes, we just want something unexpected to happen. And it’s not easy to manufacture such moments when we’re sitting in a studio 
all by ourselves; how can we create the unknown when we’re solely responsible for what happens in our tracks? One way is to engage with 
technology whose remit is to throw unpredictable ideas into the mix. NI’s Reaktor is a good example, as is Cycling 74’s Max/MSP. But if 
you’re looking for a freeware alternative, we’d advocate Sapling. It’s easy to use but its sounds are as unexpected as you could wish them 
to be and, in creating a texture, you might hit upon a sound or a loop or an idea which provokes another and another and another. You can 
do anything with the layers you create in programs like this – see them as ‘whole tracks’, or import their audio ﬁles into a bigger project.
If you’re struggling 
for new ideas, try 
bringing a movie ﬁle 
into your project

126
> make music now / get inspired with theory
126
> make music now / get inspired with theory
> 
This chord progression couldn’t be more 
‘standard’. It starts with a major chord (C), 
drops to A minor, drops again to F major 
and then resolves back to C. We’ve heard it a 
million times and it’s sounding a little tired. 
However, contained within each chord of this 
progression is the note ‘C’, as the root of the ﬁrst 
chord, the third of the A minor and the ﬁfth of the 
F chord. Let’s use this note as the key to 
unlocking a more interesting chord progression.
> 
The fourth chord feels like it’s in a hurry to 
get us back to C major and it might be more 
interesting to give our chord progression 
more of a twist before heading back to the ﬁrst 
chord. Let’s swap it for a C minor but one with an 
E ﬂat in the bass, so that it doesn’t feel quite as 
‘grounded’ as the previous chords. As it’ll still be 
a ‘version’ of a C chord, we can still use the note 
C as a pivot.
> 
Let’s start by swapping the second chord for 
an A ﬂat major. The notes contained within 
this chord are A ﬂat, C and E ﬂat, so we can 
use that C in the middle as a pivot – the 
continuation of that note should ensure that, 
while the chord move is a little more unusual, it 
doesn’t sound completely alien. So, compared to 
the original A minor, both the A and the E drop by 
a semitone to provide the A ﬂat major chord.
> 
This creates a very different mood, partly 
because the chord is minor and partly 
because it’s not rooted in the same way now 
that it’s got the third of the chord at the bottom, 
rather than the root note. This is called a ﬁrst 
inversion chord, as is any chord with the third at 
the bottom (major or minor). A chord with the ﬁfth 
at the bottom is called a second inversion. You 
can hear the second inversion chord of C minor  
in the tutorial audio clip. 
> 
The third chord is currently F major but we 
can add a slightly darker feel to the 
harmony by switching this to F minor. This 
gives us two notes to ‘pivot’ from; both the C and 
the A ﬂat from the A ﬂat major chord can stay this 
time, with only the top note needing to move up 
to F. This adds a greater sense of richness to the 
progression overall.
> 
It often works well to underpin the central 
note of a pivot chord in your arrangement. 
Here we’ve added drums and bass to ﬂesh 
things out a bit, but we’ve also added an electric 
guitar part which only plays the note C in octaves, 
while also adding another, more sustained electric 
guitar which swells up to each chord change. This 
also only plays C. Reinforcement of the pivot note 
helps to smooth out any ‘unusual’ chord moves 
and glues the harmony together.
The Magic Of Pivot Chords
Stuck in a rut of reaching for the same chord progressions? With a little 
lateral thinking and some ‘pivot chords’, you can bust out of the norm

REMIXING IN KEY
Musical key is a consideration for every remix. At the most basic level, it’ll 
be needed to make sure that all the elements you add are in key with the 
elements you’ve brought over and the original track itself.
But music theory can come in very handy if you’re going above and 
beyond the usual remit. Playing with the key signature of the original song 
and stamping a new one on your own version is an audacious thing to do, 
and if you don’t do it right you can fail miserably. 
If you’re going to mess with the key of the track, you’ve got two options: 
the ﬁrst is to manipulate pitches, transpose samples and force it into a 
completely new scale. Using modern tools like Melodyne, Auto-Tune or 
even quite basic DAW or sampler timestretching features, it’s not exactly 
hard to make a remix conform to your designs by brute force. Transposing 
elements by several semitones or even whole octaves is certainly one way 
to make a statement.
The second option is to use a relative key. This is a more clever but quite 
technical way to do things, and it makes use of the original elements as 
they are, without the need to tweak any pitches. The relative minor key of C 
major, for example, is A minor. These two scales share the same notes, but 
the scales just start at 
different points. C major is 
C D E F G A B C, and A 
minor is A B C D E F G A. 
Thus, anything from C 
major will also sound good 
in A minor.
You can take this 
concept even further. 
Analyse what notes the 
elements you’re bringing 
over from the original song 
are made up of. Your 
selections may contain all 
seven from the original 
key, or may contain less. If 
they contain, say, ﬁve 
notes in total, your key can 
be any one that contains 
those ﬁve notes. Use a tool 
like a Scale Finder (bit.ly/
ScaleFinder) to enter the 
notes you have at your 
disposal and identify the 
keys they can ﬁt into. 
Search only ‘normal’ 
scales for the best and 
most logical results.
Every note played by all 
the elements of your 
track should ﬁt into 
your destination key – 
take some time to  
work it out
127
remixing in key / make music now <

128
CHOOSE YOUR PACKAGE
Subscribe and save

subscriptions <
129
Offer ends  31 October 2019. Prices and savings quoted are compared to buying full priced UK print and digital issues. You will receive 13 issues in a year. You can write to us or call us to cancel your subscription within 14 
days of purchase. Your subscription is for the minimum term speciﬁed and will expire at the end of the current term. Payment is non-refundable after the 14 day cancellation period unless exceptional circumstances 
apply. Your statutory rights are not affected. Prices correct at point of print and subject to change. For full terms and conditions please visit myfavm.ag/magterms. UK calls will cost the same as other standard ﬁxed 
line numbers (starting 01 or 02) and are included as part of any inclusive or free minutes allowances (if offered by your phone tariff). 
All packages 
include exclusive 
access to FileSilo 
for downloading 
our bonus 
content, including:
 80+ VST/AU  
plugin instruments 
and effects
 Hundreds of 
amazing, inspiration-
filled samples
 Make better music 
with our step-by-
step tutorials
 Expert video 
sessions, plus artists 
at work in the studio
 Tutorial files to 
help you follow 
our guides
IT’S EASY TO SUBSCRIBE
Click   
Call   0844 848 2852 
myfavouritemagazines.co.uk/CMUsubs

The No.1 website for musicians
Love this magazine?
You’ll love musicradar.com
Thousands of gear 
reviews and killer 
video demos
Tips and techniques 
to help you create 
your own sound


Power up your chord progressions, hooks, basslines and arrangements
130
PAGES OF
IN-DEPTH
PRO ADVICE
Presents
MUSIC THEORY
The Producer’s
Handbook
> LEARN CHORDS AND SCALES
> WRITE CATCHY HOOKS
> TEAR GENRES APART
> PLAY KEYBOARD LIKE A PRO
9000
9001

