
THIRD EDITION
COMPANY OFFICER

This page intentionally left blank 

THIRD EDITION
COMPANY OFFICER
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
THIRD ED

Edition: Company Oﬃ  cer, 3e
Clinton H. Smoke
Vice President, Career and Professional 
 Editorial: Dave Garza
Director of Learning Solutions: Sandy Clark
Product Development Manager: Janet Maker
Managing Editor: Larry Main
Senior Product Manager: Jennifer Starr
Associate Product Manager: 
 Meaghan O’Brien
Editorial Assistant: Amy Wetsel
Vice President, Career and Professional 
 Marketing: Jennifer Baker
Marketing Director: Deborah S. Yarnell
Senior Marketing Manager: Erin Coﬃ  n
Marketing Coordinator: Shanna Gibbs
Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Production Manager: Mark Bernard
Senior Content Project Manager: 
 Jennifer Hanley
Art Director: Benj Gleeksman
Cover photo courtesy of Andy Thomas
© 2010 Delmar, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein 
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, 
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
 Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 XX 11 10 09
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009929187
ISBN-13: 978-1-4354-2725-9
ISBN-10: 1-4354-2725-4
Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions 
with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United 
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: 
international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson 
Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com/delmar
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred 
online store www.ichapters.com.
NOTICE TO THE READER
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein 
or perform any independent analysis in connection with any of the product 
 information contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly  disclaims, 
any obligation to obtain and include information other than that  provided to it by 
the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety 
precautions that might be indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid 
all potential hazards. By following the instructions contained herein, the reader 
willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The publisher 
makes no representations or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, 
the warranties of ﬁ tness for particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any 
such representations implied with respect to the material set forth herein, and the 
publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such material. The publisher shall 
not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in 
whole or part, from the readers’ use of, or  reliance upon, this material.

T
his book is dedicated to firefighters everywhere.
The sculpture “To Lift A Nation” is based on the now-famous photograph 
taken by Thomas E. Franklin of The Record of Bergen County, New Jersey, in 2001, 
and it was produced by Atlas Bronze Casting in Cooperation with the North Jersey 
Media Group Disaster Relief Fund and The Bravest Fund (Sculptor: Stan Watts).
The inscription on the base reads:
Three firemen raised a flag at ground zero in silent tribute to those brave 
firefighters who answered the call. This noble flag is raised permanently in honor 
of those heroes and all who serve this great nation. May God continue to bless 
America.
DEDICATION
This photograph was taken at the National Emergency Training Center, home of 
the National Fire Academy, in Emmitsburg, Maryland, by Mark Whitney. 
Mr. Whitney is a Fire Programs Specialist at the National Fire Data Center, United 
States Fire Administration.
Photo courtesy of Mark A. Whitney

This page intentionally left blank 

vii
1
The Company Officer’s 
Role—Challenges 
and Opportunities  
Learning Objectives 
4
Introduction 
4
The Role of the Company Officer 
4
The Company Officer’s Role as a Supervisor in the 
Department 
7
Promotion to Company Officer 
8
The National Competency Standard for fire Officers 
9
Comparing NFPA 1021 and College Programs  10
Professional Development: An Opportunity 
for Company Officers 
12
Lieutenants  14
Captains  14
Strategies for Success as a Company Officer 
14
Lessons Learned 
17
Key Terms 
17
Review Questions 
17
Discussion Questions 
17
Endnotes 
18
Additional Resources 
18
Dedication  v
Foreword  xiii
Preface  xvi
NFPA 1021, 2009 Edition Correlation Guide  xxvi
Contents
2
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Effective 
Communications
Learning Objectives 
22
Introduction 
22
The Importance of Communications 
in Our Work and Life 
23
Formal versus Informal Communications  23
Forms of Personal Communications  24
Oral Communications 
24
Barriers to Effective Communications  25
Part of the Communications Process Is Listening  26
Good Communications Is a Part of Leadership  27
Making Practical Use of Effective Communications  28
Other Ways to Improve Your Speech Communications  29
Improving Writing Skills 
30
Principles of Effective Writing  30
Putting It All Together  32
Review Your Work  33
Other Ways to Improve Your Writing Skills  34
Using E-Mail 
35
Public Relations 
36
Dealing with Individuals  36
Dealing with the Media  36
The News Release  37
Emergency Communications 
39
Lessons Learned 
43
Key Terms 
43
Review Questions 
43
Discussion Questions 
43
Endnotes 
44
Additional Resources 
44
4
22

viii  Contents 
3
The Company Officer’s 
Role in the Organization  
Learning Objectives 
48
Introduction 
48
Groups and Organizations 
50
Formal Organizations  50
Informal Organizations  50
Authority For The Local Fire Department 
51
Our System of Government  53
Types of Local Government  53
The Role of the Courts  58
The Fire Service in America Today 
58
Public Fire Departments  58
County Fire Departments and Fire Districts  58
The Volunteer Fire Service  59
Federal Fire Departments  60
The Evolving Role of Fire Departments 
62
Organizational Structure 
63
The Fire Chief  65
Assistant Chiefs and Deputy Chiefs  66
Battalion Chiefs  66
Company Offi cers  66
Firefi ghters  67
The Organizational Chart 
67
Staff versus Line Organization  68
The Company Officer 
69
The Fire Chief’s Perspective of the Company Offi cer  69
The Firefi ghter’s Perspective of the Company Offi cer  69
Principles Of Good Organizations 
70
Scalar Organization Structure  70
Unity of Command  70
Division of Labor  70
Assignment of Specifi c Responsibilities  71
Control at the Proper Level  71
Span of Control  71
Delegation  71
Organizations Are Ever Changing  72
Flat and Tall Organizations  73
Autonomy and Entrepreneurship  73
Discipline  73
Organizing Your Own Company 
74
Lessons Learned 
76
Key Terms 
76
Review Questions 
76
Discussion Questions 
77
Endnotes 
77
Additional Resources 
77
4
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Management  
Learning Objectives 
80
Introduction 
80
What Is Management? 
80
The Beginnings of Modern Management 
80
Functions Of Management 
81
Planning  81
Organizing  82
Commanding  82
Coordinating  83
Controlling  83
The Principle of Exception  84
Contributors To Modern Management 
85
Frederick Taylor  85
Abraham Maslow  85
Peter Drucker  85
Douglas McGregor  86
William Ouchi  86
W. Edwards Deming  86
Kenneth Blanchard  87
Alan Brunacini  88
Management In Modern Organizations 
88
How Well is Your Fire Department Managed? 
89
Insurance Service Offi ce  92
NFPA Standards for Fire Department Response  93
Accreditation  93
Evaluating Service Demands  94
The Role Of Ethics in Management 
95
Lessons Learned 
98
Key Terms 
99
Review Questions 
99
Discussion Questions 
100
Endnotes 
100
Additional Resources 
100
5
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Managing 
Resources 
Learning Objectives 
104
Introduction 
104
Vision and Mission Statements 
105

Contents  ix
Goals and Objectives 
106
Using The Functions of Management 
107
Planning  107
Organizing  108
Solving Problems 
121
Managing Change 
122
Managing Customer Service 
123
Three Major Components of Customer Service  123
Building a Management Team 
125
Ongoing and Emerging Management Issues 
for the Fire Service 
126
Ongoing Issues of National Importance  126
Emerging Issues of National Importance  126
Lessons Learned 
129
Key Terms 
129
Review Questions 
130
Discussion Questions 
130
Endnotes 
131
Additional Resources 
131
6
The Company Officer’s 
Role: Principles 
of Leadership 
Learning Objectives 
134
Introduction 
134
What is the Difference Between Management 
and Leadership? 
134
Organizations and Groups 
134
What Is Leadership? 
135
Increasing Responsibilities for the Company Offi cer  137
Where Do We Get Good Leaders?  138
Modeling Human Behavior 
138
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs  138
Herzberg’s Perspective on Motivation  139
Needs Theory  140
The Managerial Grid  141
Understanding Power 
141
How to Determine the Leadership Style 
that is Right for You 
143
Elements that Determine Leadership Style  143
Good Leadership in Today’s Workplace 
144
Diversity  148
Harassment  149
Lessons Learned 
155
Key Terms 
155
Review Questions 
156
Discussion Questions 
156
Endnotes 
156
Additional Resources 
157
7
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Leading Others
Learning Objectives 
160
Introduction 
160
Being a Supervisor is Different 
160
Building a Relationship With Your Team Members 
161
The First Meeting  161
Determining the Team Members’ Competency 
and Commitment  163
Four Effective Tools for Team Member Development 
163
Mentoring  164
Coaching  165
Counseling  167
Performance Evaluations  168
The 360-Degree Assessment 
169
Superiors  170
Self-Assessment  170
Peers  170
Subordinates  171
Customers  171
Performance Evaluation Systems 
171
Graphic Rating System  173
Rank Ordering  174
Behaviorally Anchored System  174
Giving Recognition 
177
Taking Disciplinary Action 
179
Discipline Procedures  179
Taking Care of Your Teammates 
181
Fairness for One and All  181
Dealing with the Disenchanted Firefi ghter  183
Employee Assistance—When Is It Warranted?  183
Human Resource Management at a Glance 
184
Introducing Change 
184
Still Not Convinced? 
188
Lessons Learned 
190
Key Terms 
191
Review Questions 
191
Discussion Questions 
192
Endnotes 
192
Additional Resources 
192
8
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Personnel Safety
Learning Objectives 
196
Introduction 
196
160
196

The Value of Safety 
197
Background of Safety Activity in the Workplace  197
Safety Activities in the Fire Service  198
Annual NFPA Reports on Firefighter Safety 
200
Understanding the Nature of the Injuries  201
Reducing These Injuries  202
Theory of Accident Causes 
202
Domino Theory  202
Human Factors Theory  202
Multiple Causation Theory  202
Pure Chance Theory  204
“Symptoms versus Causes” Theory  204
Structure of Accidents  205
Summary of Accident Causation Theory  205
Regulatory and Standards Setting Bodies 
205
Fire Department Occupational Safety 
and Health Program 
206
Chapter 1. Administration  206
Chapter 2. Referenced Publications  206
Chapter 3. Defi nitions  206
Chapter 4. Fire Department Administration  206
So Who Is Really Responsible for Safety?  210
Infectious Disease Control Program  212
Chapter 5. Training and Education  213
Chapter 6. Fire Apparatus, Equipment, 
and Drivers/Operators  214
Vehicle Safety Is Important, Too 
214
NFPA 1500 Requirements for Safe Operations 
of Fire Apparatus  215
Using Seat Belts and Maintaining Safe Speed  216
Proper Use of Warning Lights Can Enhance 
Firefi ghter Safety  216
Firefi ghter Deaths from Tank Truck Rollovers  216
Manual on Safe Operations of Fire Tankers 
Now Available from USFA  217
Chapter 7. Protective Clothing 
and Protective Equipment  218
Outdated Equipment and Firefi ghter Safety  219
SCBA  219
Chapter 8. Emergency Operations  220
Rapid Intervention Teams  221
Rapid Intervention Is NOT Rapid  222
Who Is Leading When the Leader Is Working?  222
Chapter 9. Facility Safety  222
Chapter 10. Medical and Physical Requirements  226
Chapter 11. Member Assistance 
and Wellness Programs  228
Chapter 12. Critical Incident Stress Program  228
Safety Will Always Be a Top Priority  232
Lessons Learned 
233
Key Terms 
234
Review Questions 
234
Discussion Questions 
234
Endnotes 
235
Additional Resources 
235
9
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Fire Prevention
Learning Objectives 
238
Introduction 
238
The U.S. Fire Problem 
239
Fire Causes  239
Fire Research and Fire Data 
239
Using Data to Attack a Problem  240
So—What’s in It for Me?  242
Preventing Fires Through Regulation 
242
Demand for Inspections  243
Model Codes 
244
The Development of Model Codes  245
The Evolution of Regional Model Codes 
245
The International Codes  245
International Fire Code Council (IFCC)  246
Code Adoption 
246
State and Local Adoption  246
What Codes Cannot Do 
247
The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 
247
Establishing Inspection Priorities 
247
The Permit Model  248
The Inspection Model  249
Inspections of Existing Occupancies 
249
Company Inspections 
250
The Model Code System of Safety 
251
Use and Occupancy Classes  251
Changes in Use and Occupancy  252
Conducting Inspections 
253
NFPA 550, Fire Safety Concepts Tree 
254
Prevent the Ignition of Fires by Effectively 
Segregating the Three Elements of the 
Fire Triangle  254
Manage the Fire Impact by Effectively 
Regulating Construction, Use and 
Occupancy, and Occupant Training  255
Preincident Plans 
255
Preincident Plans and the Codes  255
Lessons Learned 
257
Key Terms 
257
Review Questions 
257
Discussion Questions 
258
Endnotes 
258
Additional Resources 
259
x  Contents 

10
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Understanding 
Building Construction 
and Fire Behavior 
Learning Objectives 
262
Introduction 
262
Today’s Firefighting Requires Experience, 
Knowledge, and Skill 
263
Even the Best Will Be Challenged  263
Fighting Fires Is Still Our Business  263
Understanding The Community’s Needs 
264
Building Construction 
265
How Construction Type Affects You  265
Types Of Construction 
265
Determining Construction Type  265
Five Construction Types 
266
Type I: Fire Resistive  266
Type II: Noncombustible  266
Type III: Ordinary  267
Type IV: Heavy Timber  267
Type V: Frame  268
Performance Codes 
268
Performance-Based Design  268
Fuel Load 
269
Cook County Administration Building Fire  269
Fuel Load and Fire Behavior  269
Fire Protection Systems 
269
Fire Extinguishing Systems 
270
NFPA 13 Sprinkler Systems  271
Residential Sprinklers  273
Types of Sprinkler Systems  273
Fire Alarm Systems  275
Smoke Control Systems and Smoke and Heat Vents  276
Duplication of or Gaps in Protection 
278
Fire Behavior 
278
Fire Science  278
Fire Phenomena  279
Putting It All Together 
282
What Makes the Fire Go Out?  283
Lessons Learned 
286
Key Terms 
286
Review Questions 
287
Discussion Questions 
287
Endnotes 
288
Additional Resources 
288
Contents  xi
11
The Company 
Officer’s Role in 
Fire Investigation
Learning Objectives 
292
Introduction 
292
All Fires Should Be Investigated  292
What Is Fire?  293
Common Causes Of Fire 
294
Accidental Causes  294
Natural Causes  295
Arson  296
The Value of Fire Investigation 
297
Observations of First Responders  299
Legal Issues for Fire Investigations  302
Recording the Information  304
Courtroom Demeanor  306
Lessons Learned 
308
Key Terms 
308
Review Questions 
309
Discussion Questions 
309
Endnotes 
309
Additional Resources 
309
12
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Planning 
and Readiness
Learning Objectives 
312
Introduction 
312
Managing Emergencies 
312
Everyday Implications  314
Pre-Incident Planning 
314
What Is Pre-Incident Planning? 
314
Pre-Incident Planning Activities 
315
Where to Start  316
Gathering Information  317
What to Look for During the Survey  320
Recording the Information  324
Converting Your Information into a Plan  324
Pre-Incident Planning for Other Events and Locations 327
Storing and Retrieving the Information  327
Training and Practice  329
Developing SOPs from Pre-Incident Plans  330

Company Training 
331
New Personnel  331
Individual and Company Skills  332
Multiple-Company Evolutions  332
Live-Fire Training  333
Training for Offi cers  334
Other Training  334
Physical Training Is Important, Too  335
The Company Officer’s Responsibility 
for Company Readiness 
335
One Final Comment 
336
Lessons Learned 
339
Key Terms 
339
Review Questions 
339
Discussion Questions 
340
Endnotes 
340
Additional Resources 
340
13
The Company Officer’s 
Role in Incident 
Management
Learning Objectives 
344
Introduction 
344
Incident Priorities 
345
The Command Sequence 
347
Understanding Size-Up  347
Risk Analysis 
352
Selecting the Correct Mode  354
Command Decisions  354
Brief Initial Report  356
Ongoing Size-Up  357
Developing an Action Plan  358
Putting Your Action Plan to Work  360
The Incident Management System 
366
Background  366
National Incident Management System  368
Organizational and Management Theory 
in the Incident Management System  370
Transfer of Command  370
Post-Incident Analysis  371
Emergency Management  372
NFPA 1561, Standard on Emergency Services 
Incident Management System12  374
What Makes IMS Work  375
Legal Issues for Fire Officers 
381
Lessons Learned 
383
Key Terms 
383
Review Questions 
385
Discussion Questions 
385
Endnotes 
386
Additional Resources 
386
Appendix A  388
Appendix B  392
Appendix C  400
Glossary  409
Index  415
xii  Contents 

xiii
THIRD 
EDITION
W
hat a 
 tremendous 
honor it is for 
me to be asked 
to  prepare the 
foreword for the 
third edition of 
Delmar’s textbook 
Company Officer. 
Following in the 
footsteps of both 
Chief Brunacini and 
Chief Coleman (the writers of the previous forewords) is 
one of the highest honors that I would ever hope to attain. 
Both Chiefs are truly among the most accomplished in 
the fire and rescue industry, and I am humbled by the 
opportunity to be the next person to prepare the foreword 
for such an important textbook. So, let me publically thank 
Mr. Clinton H. Smoke and Delmar Cengage Learning 
for this great opportunity. The notion of preparing a 
foreword is to stimulate the reader’s interest and urge 
the person to use the text in question to improve their 
performance or life. Because of the quality of work and the 
detailed content that went into this book, this is an easy 
assignment. Let me open by saying that this textbook is a 
must read and reference source for the modern fire-rescue 
officer. It is my opinion that the transition from firefighter 
to fire officer is the most difficult and important step that 
one can take in the American Fire–Rescue Service. I will 
expand this idea a little more, later in the Foreword.
Perhaps the best way to start the introduction of 
this outstanding textbook is to provide some insight 
about the author. Several decades ago, I had the 
chance to meet Clinton Smoke and work with him on 
several major training projects and national fire service 
committees. Clint’s professionalism and leadership 
ability were instantly apparent. As I would learn, he was 
a retired senior U.S. Coast Guard officer who was now 
working as the program head at the Northern Virginia 
Community College Fire Science Program in Fairfax, 
Virginia. Having graduated from this college program in 
the early 1980s, I felt an instant connection with Clint 
and found him to be a great instructor and mentor. 
Smoke’s military bearing and educational background 
provided the framework that has allowed him to write 
a textbook that is valuable and worthy of the time 
investment. I suggest that every fire officer or those who 
are aspiring to become fire officers obtain and use the 
information that Clint has published.
Now, a few thoughts about the value and importance 
of the fire–rescue officers have to our organizations. 
Arguably, the company officer is the most important 
level of supervision within our agencies. Typically, the 
first departmental representative who the customer 
meets is the company officer. The company officer 
is the connection between our labor force and 
management, making sure that the organizational goals 
and objectives are met, even when no one is watching. 
The impact that the company officer has on his or her 
crew and the overall health of the department cannot 
be overstated. If the company officer is well prepared 
and brings positive, effective leadership to the job, the 
impact that he or she will have becomes a tremendous 
force multiplier. The company officer must serve as the 
in-service trainer, personnel officer, safety advocate, 
coach, career advisor, and a host of other important 
titles that keep the company focused on what is 
Foreword

important—“preventing harm in the community.” Often, 
success or failure of a specific company is based on the 
quality of the supervision that is provided to that unit, 
by, you guessed it, the company officer.
The sad truth is that most departments do not have 
a structured way to prepare and develop their company 
officers. The third edition textbook Company Officer will 
go a long way to close the training and education gap as 
well as provide the needed information to help a member 
to be effective in this mission critical role. I recommend 
that this book be added to college and technical school 
curricula that teach any level of fire officer. Further, this 
is a textbook that everyone should add to their personal 
library if they are a fire officer or aspire to be an officer at 
any level. It would be great to think that every department 
can provide the needed training to be successful at the 
job at hand. However, in some cases, that is not possible, 
so the member must and should take on the responsible 
to prepare themselves. Clinton Smoke’s newest textbook 
is a great place to start!
Chief Dennis L. Rubin
District of Columbia Fire and EMS Department, 
Washington, DC
SECOND 
EDITION
I
t has been many, many 
years since I have served 
as a company officer, but 
I will never forget two things. 
The first is the influence 
my first company officer, 
Captain Larry May, had on 
my career. The second thing 
I will never forget is the day 
I was appointed as a fire 
captain and given the command of a fire company. Both 
events have had a profound influence over my current 
perspective on both creating fire officers and being one.
In the case of the former, Captain May was not just 
the guy in the right front seat. He was my mentor, my 
teacher, and my conscience as it were. I will never 
forget his speech to me one morning at Fire Station 
Two. I was an engineer. He asked me if I knew my job 
as an apparatus operator. I stated yes. He asked me 
if the unit was ready to roll. Again, affirmative. He then 
asked me if I knew the job of being a captain. I knew 
better than to bluff, so I said no! He answered, “Good, 
because I want to be the one to teach you how to 
be a fire officer.” From that day forward, Captain May 
prepared me to be ready when my time came.
And when it did come time for me to accept the 
badge and the obligation, I was ready. I was prepared 
by the best to be able to deal with the worst. I was 
grateful to Captain May then for having the interest in 
helping me to be ready. I am grateful now to Clinton 
Smoke for creating a textbook that captures what is 
the core of being a good company officer. What Smoke 
has prepared in this text is the journalistic version of a 
thousand Captain Mays who are providing both wisdom 
and perspective in the written word.
Yet I am reasonably sure both Captain May and Clinton 
Smoke would agree that the act of being mentored or 
reading a textbook does not result in the finished product. 
What does create this final product is the person who 
absorbs this information and does everything possible to 
continue to become more and more proficient in the job.
The role of the company officer is mentioned many 
times in this text, ranging from the challenges and the 
opportunities of the position to the company officer’s 
part in incident management. It is a role that has 
continued to evolve as the fire service has taken on 
more diversified responsibilities in society. It is not just a 
case of a single performance at a singular event, but it is 
also a need to be equal to the next greatest challenge.
Between the pages of this textbook is a lifetime of 
experience that will become part of your background 
and knowledge as you gain stature in taking on the 
responsibility of a fire officer. No matter how large 
or small your department is, the company officer is 
almost always the first one on the scene. Be they major 
emergencies, a problem in the firehouse, or something 
you have not expected to ever occur, it is your job as 
the company officer to do the right thing, the right way.
Good luck in your pursuit of that role in the future.
Ron Coleman
Retired State Fire Marshal and Business 
Development Manager for Emergency Services 
Consulting Incorporated (ESCI), Wilsonville, OR
FIRST EDITION
I 
am pleased that my friend 
Clinton Smoke asked me 
to write this foreword for his 
new textbook. Clinton has 
been teaching and writing 
about fire department 
operations for a long time. 
He brings that practical 
experience to his new book 
along with his excellent 
communications skills. 
xiv  Foreword

He has been associated with many important and 
progressive developments during his career. I have 
enjoyed our friendship and mutual involvement in many 
of these projects.
How we select, prepare, and support company 
officers is a challenge that is critical to the day-to-day 
delivery of fire department services. Throughout my 
entire career I have heard fire department managers 
(me included) articulate that challenge by saying “if I 
could ’have’ any group within my department, make that 
group our company officers.” To “have” a group means 
to somehow capture the consistent effectiveness of 
that group. Another indication of how important the 
company officer is to our overall effectiveness is hearing 
an experienced fire chief say that the quickest and 
most accurate way to evaluate the effectiveness of a fire 
company is simply to look at the profile of the company 
officer in charge of that unit.
A major reason the company officer is so important 
is that he or she is the only boss who has continuous 
access to our workforce. Company officers directly 
supervise the workers who deliver services to our 
customers. The company officer is the up-close and 
personal working boss who is always with and part of 
the crew of Engine 1 throughout the entire shift. There 
is no other middle person between the workers and the 
work. He rides in the right front seat, he sits at the head 
of the dinner table, he controls the TV remote (if he has 
enough seniority), he holds the IV bag and the flashlight, 
and he backs up the nozzle. When the workers do 
good, the boss smiles (big deal); when there is a 
problem, the company officer helps fix it. He can make 
a bad day better by whispering the answer to a worker 
who gets disconnected from the answer. He is the on-
line safety officer for the crew and has the most direct 
control over how (and if) the crew goes home at the end 
of the shift with all their body parts and faculties intact.
Another major reason that the company officer is 
so critical to us is that he manages the business of 
our business, right at the point where the customer’s 
problem occurs. He is in Mrs. Smith’s kitchen at 
3:00 A.M. when she smells smoke, and at that point, 
he is the entire department to her. He is able to create 
a positive feeling and memory in Mrs. Smith based 
on how quickly his company responds, how well they 
solve her problem, and, most of all, how nice they are 
to her. Simply, between 3:00 A.M. and about 3:20 A.M., 
we get one chance to win or lose, based on how well 
Engine 1 performs at Mrs. Smith’s house. The memory 
that Mrs. Smith has of the night her kitchen caught fire 
is the product of how Engine 1’s crew made her feel; 
how Engine 1’s crew feels is the product of how their 
company officer treats them. This is how the company 
officer gets to connect the inside (crew) with the 
outside (customer) and this creates our most important 
relationship.
I am involved both professionally and personally with 
company officers, so my comments and feelings are not 
those of a casual observer. I was a company officer (at 
Engine 1) in an earlier life. The Phoenix Fire Department 
now employees 255 fire captains (our company 
officer title). Nearly one third are on duty as I write this 
foreword, and today they will respond to 450-plus 
requests for service. How they perform will regulate how 
327 on-duty firefighters and thousands of customers 
will live, or die.
On a personal basis, my three children are all 
Phoenix firefighters. My son Nick was a company 
officer for 10 years before he was recently promoted 
to battalion chief. My son John is a captain on a busy 
downtown ladder company. My firefighter daughter 
Candi is going through the company officer promotion 
preparation process. Throughout the years, I have 
followed the standard going-on-duty send-off with them 
by saying, “be careful today,” and the regular post-shift 
question, “what’d you guys do yesterday?” This book 
is directed at how to effectively manage the activity that 
happens in between these two rituals—the duty shift. 
Pay attention as you go through this material. It is the 
most important part of what we do.
Alan V. Brunacini,
Fire Chief, Phoenix Fire Department
Foreword  xv

xvi
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
Preface
Welcome fi refi ghters and fi re offi cers, to Company 
Offi cer, Third Edition! Whether you are seeking 
 certifi cation at the Fire Offi cer I level or are aspir-
ing for a promotion to the Fire Offi cer II level, this 
 comprehensive book provides insight into the role of 
the offi cer as defi ned by the 2009 Edition of NFPA 
1021, Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi ca-
tions. The basic principles of planning and  prevention, 
communicating, managing resources, leading others, 
and incident management are covered, including an 
emphasis on safety in responding to incidents.
This book is a great resource for both paid and vol-
unteer fi refi ghters and fi re offi cers to further their ca-
reers within the fi re service. By the same token, we 
have attempted to make the material in this book use-
ful and interesting for a broader audience. Issues of 
management and supervision for administrators, res-
cue squads and EMS organizations that are indepen-
dent of a fi re department are essentially the same as 
those in the fi re service. Where appropriate, this book 
is intended to help these managers as well as those of 
the fi re service—we hope that you will fi nd the mate-
rial interesting, informative, and useful. As an offi cer, 
you will be called upon to lead others in your role as 
an offi cer, and you will make a difference in the lives 
of many others. Be prepared, develop your skills, and 
never stop learning.
DEVELOPMENT OF THIS BOOK
Becoming certifi ed as a fi re offi cer is important, but 
becoming a profi cient company offi cer in the fi re ser-
vice is even more important. Company Offi cer, Third 
Edition was created not only to address the require-
ments of the 2009 Edition of NFPA 1021 but also to 
focus on developing the soft-skills necessary to hit-
the-ground running with the new responsibilities of 
being an offi cer. Through the dedication of our author, 
 contributors, as well as content and technical review-
ers, the new edition of Company Offi cer remains up to 
date with the revisions to the Job Performance Require-
ments (JPRs) in the 1021 Standard, and presents the 
content in a realistic, straightforward, and challenging 
way. Street Stories and case studies accompany each 
chapter, highlighting the theme of the content through 
accounts of actual incidents experienced by offi cers 
from across the United States—the decisions made, 
and the lessons learned. Full-color photographs bring 
to life the everyday activities of the offi cer, while the 
text presents the information in a clear and concise 
manner. Featured text boxes integrated throughout 
the book provide important advice from experienced 
offi cers, essential facts, tips on remaining safe on the 
fi reground, and ethical considerations. All content is 
presented in an easy-to-understand method to ensure 
that you are properly equipped with the knowledge 
to not only accomplish your responsibilities but also 
 excel in your role as offi cer.
OUR REVIEW AND VALIDATION 
COMMITTEES
Through the dedication of our authors, content and 
technical reviewers, as well as our Fire Advisory 
Board members and validation committee, the third 
edition of Company Offi cer continues to remain up 
to date with the changing landscape of the fi re ser-
vice world. As part of the development process, each 
chapter is carefully reviewed by a select number of 
 practicing individuals in the fi re service who offer 
their expertise and insight as we revised the content. 
Additionally, technical reviewers thoroughly check 
the manuscript in detail for clarity and accuracy.

Preface  xvii
We are excited to announce that for the third edition 
of this book, we have created a validation committee 
to ensure that the content meets 100% of the NFPA 
Standard 1021. Learning objectives, which have been 
validated by this committee of subject-matter ex-
perts, are included at the beginning of each essentials 
of fi refi ghting chapter. The learning objectives tie all 
components of the learning solution (textbook, curric-
ulum, test banks, supplements) to the NFPA standard, 
providing instructors and students a pathway to meet 
the intent of the JPRs outlined in the Standard.
THE VALIDATION PROCESS
The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 
professional qualifi cations standards identify the min-
imum JPRs for fi re service positions. JPRs state the 
behaviors required to perform specifi c skill(s) on the 
job. The JPR statements must be converted into in-
structional objectives with behaviors, conditions, and 
standards that can be measured within the teaching/
learning environment.
Our process includes the development of the learn-
ing objectives from the JPR by a subject-matter ex-
pert. The learning objectives are then reviewed and 
validated by a committee. The committee reviews the 
learning objectives to ensure that the JPR was cor-
rectly interpreted and also makes recommendation for 
additional learning objectives within our materials. 
Our authors are provided with the validated learning 
objectives to develop the materials. This ensures that 
100% of the standard is met within our materials.
The learning objectives are used throughout the 
entire development process. This includes the devel-
opment of the book, curriculum, and the certifi cation 
test question banks. This process ensures consistency 
among all materials and offers the best possible mate-
rials available on the market.
For a complete list of our review and validation 
committee members, as well as other contributors to 
this book, please refer to the Acknowledgments sec-
tion of this Preface.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
This book is intended as a text to help you gain com-
petency in the requirements of NFPA 1021. That 
Standard lists the requirements for Fire Offi cer I and 
II in six categories: administration, community and 
 government relations, human resource management, 
inspection and investigation, emergency service 
 delivery, and safety. This book is organized into chap-
ters covering those major topics. The early chapters 
deal with communications, organizations, manage-
ment, and leadership. In later chapters, these tools are 
then applied to the process of preparing for and man-
aging emergency incidents.
■ Chapter 1 starts with a discussion of the vital role 
of the company offi cer and examines the chal-
lenges that face company offi cers and outlines rea-
sons why preparedness is so key when moving into 
this important position.
■ Chapter 2 is about effective communications, a 
 vital topic that touches every aspect of the role of 
an offi cer. It is a tool that you will use throughout 
the remainder of the course, and throughout your 
career.
■ Chapter 3 addresses organizations and the com-
pany offi cer’s role in the organization. Understand-
ing your organization helps defi ne your place and 
purpose in that organization. This chapter sets the 
stage for the discussions of management and lead-
ership that follow.
■ Chapter 4 briefl y reviews the fi eld of management 
science and examines the company offi cer’s role as 
a manager. Understanding the concepts of modern 
management can have a great impact on how effec-
tive you are as a leader.
■ Chapter 5 provides guidelines for practical appli-
cations of modern management principles at the 
company level. The ability to effectively manage 
your resources contributes to the smooth operation 
of your department.
■ Chapter 6 briefl y examines leadership principles 
and the company offi cer’s role as a leader. Under-
standing how groups work and function can contrib-
ute to how successful you are in managing people.
■ Chapter 7 offers some effective tools for making 
leadership work at the company level. Applying the 
concepts from Chapter 6 can help you to develop 
the leadership skills that you need for the offi cer 
level.
■ Chapter 8 addresses the important role of the com-
pany offi cer in administering the department’s 
 occupational safety and health programs at the 
company level. You must be able to implement 
such programs in order to prevent injuries or death 
occurring from accidents on the job.
■ Chapter 9 acknowledges that the prevention of 
 civilian injuries, fatalities, and property loss due 
to fi re is a part of the job, too, and what company 

xviii  Preface
■ Effective Leadership: Lead your team with confi -
dence, by studying a new section on employee and 
self-assessments with the 360 Degree Assessment. 
Also included is a new section on the Leadership 
Tetrahedron, which covers the promotional pro-
cesses within the fi re service.
■ Ongoing Emerging Issues: A new section on Stan-
dard Operating Procedures (SOPs) outlines the 
many important functions these SOPs serve, in-
cluding examples to help illustrate the various 
types that are typical to the fi re department—in 
both emergency and nonemergency situations.
FEATURES OF THIS BOOK
The following is a list of features that serve to en-
hance learning of the material and help you gain 
competence and confi dence in mastering fi re offi cer 
essentials.
NFPA 1021 Correlation Grid
This grid provides a correlation between Company 
Offi cer, Third Edition and the requirements for Fire 
Offi cer I and II, as stipulated by NFPA 1021, Stan-
dard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, 
2009 Edition. These sections from the Standard are 
correlated to the book chapters and are referenced by 
page numbers.
Street Stories
Each chapter opens with personal experiences contrib-
uted by fi re offi cers from across the nation. These per-
sonal accounts bring to life the content of the chapters 
that follow and highlight important lessons learned.
offi cers should be doing more to support their de-
partment’s efforts to prevent these losses from 
occurring.
■ Chapter 10 reviews how fi re destroys, and how 
understanding the way various building types are 
constructed can help prevent fi re loss.
■ Chapter 11 provides a brief overview of fi re-cause 
determination, so company offi cers can accurately 
determine the cause of fi res, especially when arson 
is indicated.
■ Chapter 12 covers the company offi cer’s responsi-
bilities for keeping themselves and their company 
trained, fi t, and ready to deal with the inevitable 
emergencies. A proactive approach to training and 
preparation will reduce the negative consequences 
of these emergencies.
■ Finally, Chapter 13 deals with management of the 
emergency scene. When fi res or other emergency 
events do occur, the company offi cer will likely be 
the fi rst on the scene. His or her assessment of the 
situation and initial actions will have a major im-
pact on all of the events that follow.
NEW TO THIS EDITION
■ Fire Offi cer I and II Levels: Revised to meet the 
intent of the 2009 Edition of NFPA 1021, includ-
ing new learning objectives validated by a com-
mittee of experts to ensure 100% compliance with 
the Standard. All-new design provides color-coded 
objectives to easily differentiate Fire Offi cer I and 
II requirements.
■ Safety: Emphasized throughout the chapters, in-
cluding expanded information on personnel safety 
in order to keep you and your team safe on the fi re-
ground through proactive actions.
■ Fire Prevention: To help keep you, your team, and 
the community safe, included is a fully revised 
chapter on fi re prevention. This chapter outlines 
the most up-to-date fi re codes and inspection poli-
cies. It also includes how to better educate the com-
munity on how to prevent fi res.
■ Communication: Communicate effectively in the 
fi rehouse and on the fi reground with new cover-
age on emerging forms of communications, such 
as email, emergency radio contact, and public rela-
tions. From verbal communication to written, this 
section shows how to get your message across in a 
clear and professional manner.
STREET 
STORY
A
s a company officer, I serve many functions in my organization. It is some-
times easy to get caught up in finding and maintaining your proper place in 
the department’s organizational scheme. In my fire service career, I managed to 
learn from other company officers some very valid truths that I have carried with 
me as I progressed to a leadership role.
During a fire in a single-story commercial structure, I was crawling behind my 
lieutenant into the building through the dark smoke-filled office area, looking for the 
seat of the fire. Flames were coming out the floor registers, and the building was 
getting hotter and hotter.
We were crawling toward what appeared to be an open area, and the floor 
seemed to be slanting. It was hard to tell in the severe smoke condition, but I kept 
following him, still searching for the fire. All of the sudden in a muffled yell I heard, 
“Get back, get the hell back, back. . . .” Immediately, we retreated as fast as we 
could. Once outside, I heard the blasting of truck air horns, which was our depart-
ment’s structure evacuation signal. As it turns out, the floor inside the building really 
was slanting. In fact, in the room my lieutenant and I were headed for, the floor had 
fallen into the basement! We almost went with it.
My lieutenant came up to me after the fire was contained and apologized for 
“cussing” at me. I just looked down and shook my head and said, “You don’t need 
to apologize. You just saved my life. Thank you.”
From that day forward, I knew that whatever place I occupied on my 
 department’s organizational chart, or whatever my job descriptions spelled out 
as my  duties, my first and foremost responsibility over all others was the safety 
of the people on my team. Whenever I get bogged down with the various roles 
I play as a company  officer, I will never lose sight of this most important “role” 
that I play: to protect the safety of my team members.
—Sally L. McCann-Mirise, Lieutenant, Liberty Twp.  
Fire Prevention, Powell, Ohio

Preface  xix
Safety
These note boxes offer advice on how to react and, 
more important, be proactive in protecting the safety 
of yourself and your personnel.
Learning Objectives
Each chapter includes a list of objectives; satisfy your-
self that you have learned each objective so that you 
are assured of gaining the appropriate competency 
for certifi cation.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
2-1 Distinguish between formal and informal 
communication.
 
2-2 Define the communication process.
 
2-3 Describe the communication order model.
 
2-4 Identify the forms of communication.
 
2-5 Describe the methods used to determine fire-
fighter comprehension of verbal directions.
 
2-6 List the barriers to effective nonemergency 
communication.
 
2-7 Identify public relations practices when dealing 
with the media.
 
2-8 Explain the Company Officer’s role in dealing 
with on scene media.
 
2-9 Explain the Company Officer’s role in writing a 
press release.
 2-10 List common components found in a news 
release.
 2-11 Explain the policies, procedures, and statutes 
that govern news release.
 2-12 Explain the policies and procedures for releas-
ing agency information.
 2-13 List the barriers to effective emergency 
communications.
 2-14 Identify the methods of improving communica-
tions on the fireground.
*The FO I and II levels, as defi ned by the NFPA 1021 Standards, are identifi ed in different colors: 
FO I  black, FO II  red.
Key Terms
Throughout the text you will fi nd key terms and notes 
of particular importance. These important items will 
provide you with the knowledge and terminology for 
effectively communicating with your superiors, sub-
ordinates, and your peers.
Officer Advice
These note boxes provide tips from experienced offi -
cers to guide you successfully through the challenges 
in your new position.
OFFICER ADVICE
Fire departments would do well to publish a guide with 
some good examples of correspondence and report 
writing.
Fireground Fact
These note boxes outline important data, safety in-
formation, and considerations when responding to 
incidents.
FIREGROUND FACT
Supervision is generally defined as the act of watching 
over the work or tasks of another. The NFPA defines a 
supervisor as an individual responsible for overseeing 
the performance or activity of other members.
Based on this definition, a company officer can be 
 described as a first-line supervisor responsible for the 
performance and safety of assigned personnel in an 
emergency service organization.
SAFETY
Where the risk justifies entering the building, you 
should realize that just because you can safely enter 
the building does not mean that you can safely stay in 
the building.
Ethics
These note boxes emphasize the need to build re-
spectful relationships with fellow fi refi ghters within 
your department, with the public, and with adminis-
tration in order to be an effective leader.
ETHICS
Two well-known authors, Dr. Kenneth Blanchard, the 
coauthor of The One Minute Manager and many other 
books, and Dr. Normal Vincent Peale, the author of 
The Power of Positive Thinking and many other books, 
collaborated on a book entitled The Power of Ethical 
Management.2 In that book, they suggest a simple 
three-question test to help guide our actions. The three 
questions follow:
■ Is it legal?
■ Is it balanced?
■ How will it make me feel about myself?
Case Studies
Each chapter ends with a report on an incident expe-
rienced by fi re offi cers from across the nation. Each 
 report is followed by a set of questions to develop 
 critical thinking skills so that you are ready as an 
 offi cer to respond effectively to incidents.
In this day and age, ﬁ reﬁ ghters are being provided with 
the most advanced tools and safety equipment that 
have ever been provided to the ﬁ re service, but we con-
tinue to lose more than 100 ﬁ reﬁ ghters in the line of duty 
each year. More disturbing is the fact that we are re-
sponding to fewer and fewer actual working incidents 
each year, yet still losing the same amount of ﬁ reﬁ ghters 
in line-of-duty deaths.
The ﬁ res faced by today’s ﬁ re service are much differ-
ent than 40 to 50 years ago. Fuel loads have increased 
and changed signiﬁ cantly affecting the ﬂ uctuation of the 
time-temperature curve as it relates to ﬂ ashover. I re-
member learning in the ﬁ re academy nearly 20 years 
ago that ﬂ ashover would normally take place within 12 
to 16 minutes. Time frames to reach ﬂ ashover conditions 
losing more and more members to retirement who have 
served in a busier era of the ﬁ re service. Rapid promotion 
is also becoming part of the overall challenge. As we lose 
the experienced members, we are being left with a gener-
ation of ﬁ reﬁ ghters that may be the most highly educated 
generation ever, due to their access to information through 
avenues such as the Internet, but may come up short in 
other areas that are necessary to successfully lead our 
ﬁ reﬁ ghters. It is realistically possible, in today’s ﬁ re service, 
that some departments may actually promote a ﬁ reﬁ ghter 
to the company ofﬁ cer level who has never gained prac-
tical hands-on experience at an actual ﬁ re. These should 
not be looked upon as shortcomings but rather as chal-
lenges that we will need to overcome. Fault does not fall 
onto any particular generation—each one only has to deal 
with the economic, political, and social environments that 
inﬂ uence the time period in which they live.
The ﬁ re service environment requires ﬁ re ofﬁ cers to 
make life-and-death decisions in a quick manner based 
on incomplete information. When we are exposed to 
a situation, our brain stores that experience in its own 
ﬁ le, almost like a photographic slide within a tray. When 
 another situation is experienced, our brain will try to 
“draw” on another past experience or “slide” that closely
LOSING FIREFIGHTER LIVES 
IS NOT OUR TRADITION
Contributed by Jeff Pindelski, Battalion Chief, Downers 
Grove Fire Department, Downers Grove, Illinois, and 
Western Regional Director, Fire Department Safety 
Officer’s Association.

xx  Preface
the course is conducted. It contains the information 
necessary to conduct fi re offi cer courses. It is divided 
into sections to facilitate its use for training:
■ Administration provides the instructor with an 
overview of the various courses, student and in-
structor materials, and practical advice on how to 
set up courses and run skill sessions.
■ Equipment Checklist offers a quick guide for en-
suring the necessary equipment is available for 
hands-on training.
■ Modularized Lesson Plans are ideal for instruc-
tors, whether they are teaching at fi re departments, 
academies, or longer-format courses. Each lesson 
plan presents learning objectives, recommended 
time allotment, equipment, reading assignments, 
and an outline of key concepts presented in each 
chapter with coordinating PowerPoint presentation 
slides, Job Performance Requirements, and Skill 
Sheets.
■ Answers to Review Questions and Workbook Ques-
tions are included for each chapter in the book and 
student workbook.
■ PowerPoint Presentations outline key concepts 
from each chapter, and contain graphics and pho-
tos from the book, to bring the content to life.
■ Test Bank containing hundreds of questions helps 
instructors prepare candidates to take the written 
portion of the certifi cation exam for Fire Offi cer I 
or Fire Offi cer II.
■ Skill Sheets outline important skills that each can-
didate must master to meet requirements for cer-
tifi cation and provide the instructor with a handy 
checklist.
■ Progress Logs provide a system to track the prog-
ress of individual candidates as they complete the 
required skills.
■ Quick Reference Guides contain valuable infor-
mation for instructors. The following grids are 
included:
 NFPA Standard 1021 Correlation Guide to cross-
reference Company Offi cer, Third Edition with 
NFPA Standard 1021
 New Edition Correlation Guide to cross-
 reference the revisions between the second and 
third editions of Company Offi cer
■ Additional Resources offer supplemental resources 
for important information on various topics pre-
sented in the textbook.
■ An Image Library containing hundreds of graph-
ics and photos from the book offers an additional 
Review and Discussion 
Questions
There are questions at the end of each chapter. Some 
will prompt you to review the material, while oth-
ers are intended to make you think and analyze what 
you have learned. When you complete the unit, you 
should be able to answer each question without refer-
ring back to the chapter.
Additional Resources
Each chapter includes a list of additional resources. 
Each of the suggested items offers additional infor-
mation on the topic covered in that particular chapter. 
The goal is to give you as much information as pos-
sible to help you in your duties as a company offi cer.
This information will help you better perform your 
duties, not just to meet the requirements of the Stan-
dard, as important as they are. Whether you are  reading 
this book to improve your skills or taking a structured 
program leading to certifi cation, we hope that you will 
fi nd this book informative, interesting, and useful.
A NOTE ON THE 
CERTIFICATION PROCESS
This book is the result of a need for a single up-to-date 
comprehensive text for teaching a certifi cation course in 
any setting for persons seeking certifi cation as fi re offi -
cers. Your mastery of the material can be demonstrated 
in several ways. If you have seriously studied the mate-
rial and satisfactorily answered all of the questions in 
the text and workbook had communicated effectively 
with your instructor, you should be ready for the chal-
lenges of certifi cation and, ultimately, for the job.
CURRICULUM PACKAGE
This book was created not only as a stand-alone man-
ual for fi refi ghters and fi re offi cers, but as a special 
package of materials for the full instructional expe-
rience. The supplement package provides a variety 
of tools for students and instructors to enhance the 
learning experience.
Instructor’s Curriculum CD
The Instructor’s Curriculum CD is designed to allow 
instructors to run programs according to the stan-
dards set by the authority having jurisdiction where 

Preface  xxi
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Lead Author
Clinton H. Smoke
Professor Clinton Smoke is the chair of the Fire Pro-
tection Department at Asheville-Buncombe Techni-
cal Community College in Asheville, North Caro-
lina. Prior to this position, he had a similar position at 
Northern Virginia Community College in Annadale, 
Virginia. His fi re service background includes over 
20 years of volunteer and paid experience in several 
fi re departments. He has also served over 20 years 
in active military duty in the U.S. Coast Guard, dur-
ing which time he commanded four cutters. Other as-
signments included duties as the senior instructor at 
the Coast Guard’s Offi cer Candidate School and as 
head of the service’s Vessel Safety Branch. Professor 
Smoke has a B.A. in Fire Science Administration, an 
M.S. in Communications Management, and an MBA. 
He is a certifi ed Fire Protection Specialist and a Fire 
Offi cer III.
Contributing Authors
Charles Keeton
Charlie Keeton served 35 years on the Wichita Fire 
Department, where he rose through the ranks to serve 
as the chief training/safety offi cer. Charlie coordinated 
the in-service training provided to the personnel of 
the Fire Operations Division, including  management 
and oversight of all fi re, hazardous materials, medi-
cal, and special operations training functions. Charlie 
also served as the department’s safety offi cer, over-
seeing its accident and injury prevention programs. In 
addition, Charlie was the coordinator of the depart-
ment’s Heavy Rescue Team as well as a training coor-
dinator for the University of Kansas Fire and Rescue 
Training Institute.
In 2008, Charlie was awarded the J. Faherty Casey 
Award for his activities in the National Fire Acade-
my’s Training Resource and Data Exchange (TRADE) 
program as well as the Insurance Women of Wichita 
“Firefi ghter of the Year” award in 2007. Charlie cur-
rently serves as the emergency preparedness coordi-
nator for hospitals within a 19-county area in south 
central Kansas.
Charlie is a Wichita native and has been married to 
his wife, Dianna, for over 33 years. He has two chil-
dren and four grandchildren.
resource for instructors to enhance their own class-
room presentations or to modify the PowerPoint 
presentations provided on the CD.
Order #: 978-1-4354-2726-6
Study Guide
A classroom tool for assessing progress and preparation 
for the certifi cation exam, the Study Guide consists of 
questions in multiple formats as well as homework as-
signments and additional information for each chapter 
to help guide students through lessons. It completely 
covers the 2009 Edition of NFPA 1021 requirements.
Order #: 978-1-4354-9311-7
Fire Officer I and II DVD
Adhering to NFPA 1021, Standard for Fire Offi cer 
Professional Qualifi cations, this four-part program 
focuses on the soft skills essential to Fire Offi cers 
at Levels I and II. Intended as visual reinforcement 
for Company Offi cer or other classroom learning 
 materials, the Fire Offi cer I and II DVD offers chal-
lenges that an offi cer may face in relation to Human 
 Resource Management, Community and Govern-
ment, Inspection and Investigation, and Emergency 
Services—Delivery and Safety. Each program con-
tains two to four scenarios depicting common situa-
tions through role-play and reenactments. The DVD 
encourages classroom discussion through a series 
of follow-up questions following each scenario, and 
presents the necessary information to effectively train 
the next generation of fi re offi cers.
Key Features
■ Adheres to NFPA Standard 1021, keeping up to 
date with the latest expectations in the industry. Ac-
tual lieutenants and captains reenact the segments, 
bringing their own experiences to the situations.
■ Provides an Instructor’s Guide in PDF format, in-
cluding learning objectives, discussion questions 
for classroom distribution, and answers to discus-
sion questions that present best practices to be used 
as a guideline.
■ Lively scenarios bring common situations to life, 
providing candidates with a realistic view of the 
challenges that they will need to face as an offi cer.
■ Provides a set of NFPA requirements with each 
program for a quick reference.
■ Plays on DVD-equipped television or computer.
Order # 978-1-4018-8293-8

xxii  Preface
Billy Jack Wenzel
Billy Jack Wenzel is a 29-year veteran of the Wich-
ita Fire Department, currently serving as the division 
chief of safety and training. Chief Wenzel worked 
through the ranks as fi refi ghter, lieutenant, and cap-
tain, earning multiple awards and letters of recogni-
tion. He worked as captain at one of Wichita’s busiest 
houses and spent time as a member of Special Opera-
tions. Chief Wenzel holds certifi cations in many areas, 
including hazardous materials technician, high angle 
rescue, trench rescue, N.A.U.I. SCUBA, confi ned 
space rescue, and advanced crash rescue and holds a 
bachelors degree in business administration. He spent 
19 years as a member of the Wichita Fire Department 
Honor Guard and served as the unit commander.
Chief Wenzel is the author of “Kansas Grain Dust 
Explosion” and “Training Tips” for Fire Engineer-
ing magazine. He has been published in several fi re 
service trade publications. He is an adjunct instruc-
tor for the National Fire Academy, Department of 
Homeland Security, Emergency Management Insti-
tute, and National Fallen Firefi ghter Foundation and 
a past instructor at FDIC. He is a training manager 
for the University of Kansas Fire and Rescue Train-
ing Institute and is the co-developer of Wichita HoT, 
a regional fi re school providing affordable hands-on-
training to hundreds of fi refi ghters every year. He is 
also a member of the Kansas Firefi ghters Association 
Training Committee, Kansas Historical Museum, 
and the South Central Kansas Incident Management 
Team.
Chief Wenzel has been married to his wife, Sheri, 
for 21 years and has three children: Anna, Jacob, and 
Jared.
Bradford Boyd
Bradford Boyd is a 16-year veteran of the Wichita 
Fire Department, currently serving as the medical of-
fi cer in the Safety/Training Division. Captain Boyd 
worked through the ranks as fi refi ghter, lieutenant, 
and captain, earning multiple awards and letters of 
recognition. He currently works as “C” shift medical 
offi cer and spends time in the classroom delivering 
medical and fi refi ghter safety courses.
Captain Boyd is a national fi re Instructor as well 
as a disaster medical adjunct instructor for Rescue 
Training Associates. He is also an NIMS 300-400 
instructor, NFA emergency incident safety offi cer 
instructor, Kansas Board of Emergency Medical in-
structor  coordinator, and National Registry paramedic 
and holds certifi cations in many other areas. Cap-
tain Boyd holds an associate’s degree from Cowley 
County Community College and is currently working 
on a bachelor’s degree.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many people made this work possible. I am pleased 
to share any credit that may be due with them; on the 
other hand, any errors or omissions are mine alone. 
Selecting a few to name here is challenging, but 
I’ll try.
Jerry Laughlin helped me get started at NFPA. 
Working there opened many doors and set the stage 
for all that followed. My role in offi cer development 
started when Warren Isman, the late chief of the Fair-
fax County Fire and Rescue Department, asked me to 
help him start a Career Development Program for that 
organization. Battalion Chief Roy Nester and Captain 
Mike Ward, among others, helped me get that pro-
gram started. Northern Virginia Community College 
cooperated and provided most of the college courses 
required in that program. Over the years I met Alan 
Brunacini; Ron Coleman; Dr. Denis Onieal and 
 Edward Kaplin, both of the National Fire Academy; 
the late Jim Page; and many others who share my in-
terest in offi cer development. I am grateful to all of 
them for their support, suggestions, and friendship.
I acknowledge that many of the great ideas here 
came from students and I am grateful to them for 
their contributions. I also thank the National Fire Pro-
tection Association, the National Fire Academy, the 
 International Association of Fire Chiefs, and the Inter-
national City Management Association for generously 
allowing me to use their material in this edition.
To Margaret Magnarelli, Andrea Walter, and 
Cheryl Lock: thanks for all your assistance in acquir-
ing and interviewing candidates for the Street Stories 
and case studies.
To the fi re offi cers, our gratitude goes to you for shar-
ing your stories:
Dave Dodson, Lead Instructor, Response Solutions
Sally L. McCann-Mirise, Lieutenant, Liberty Twp. 
Fire Protection
James M. Grady III, Chief, Frankfort Fire Protection 
District

Preface  xxiii
Greg 
Grayson, 
Fire 
Chief, 
Asheville 
Fire 
Department
Scott Windisch, Lieutenant, The Woodlands Fire 
Department
Linda F. Willing, Principal Trainer, Real World Train-
ing and Consulting
Dominic Depaolis, Captain, Metropolitan Washing-
ton Airports Authority
Craig Ibanez, Captain, Los Angeles County Fire 
Department
Steve Chikerotis, Battalion Chief/Assistant Director 
of Training, Chicago, Fire Department
David Short, Senior Training Analyst, MPRI, and As-
sistant Chief, Sterling Volunteer Fire Department
Steve Kropf, Captain, City of Eugene Fire 
Department
Melvin Byrne, Past Chief, Ashburn Volunteer Fire 
and Rescue
Bryan Tyner, Captain, Minneapolis Fire Department
Michael Washington, Fire Lieutenant, Cincinnati Fire 
Department
Jeff 
Lytle, 
Battalion 
Chief, 
Henderson 
Fire 
Department
Steve Mormino, Lieutenant, FDNY
Tony Tricarico, Captain, Squadron 252, Special Op-
erations Command, FDNY
Stephan Solomon, Engine Captain, Village of Owego 
Volunteer Fire Department
Julie Miller, Captain, Inuvik Fire Department
Christopher Naum, Captain, Battalion 2, Moyers Cor-
ners Fire Department
George Lucia, Sr., Fire Marshall, City of Vista Fire 
Department;
Aaron Heller, Captain, Hamilton Township Fire Dis-
trict #9
Grant Mishoe, Captain, North Charleston Fire 
Department
The photographs that appear in this book are due in 
part to the services of Lieutenant Kevin Terry and the 
Fuller Road Fire Department in Albany, New York. 
Your technical expertise and friendship have been an 
invaluable gift and have contributed greatly to the ed-
ucation of the next generation of fi refi ghters.
We wish also to thank the fi refi ghters, models 
Kevin Craig West and Rodney Wiltshire, and pho-
tographer Mike Gallitelli for their participation in the 
photo shoot.
Finally, I thank my wife, Judith, for her encourage-
ment, contributions, and support throughout both the 
fi rst and second editions.
Our Reviewers 
and Contributors
Delmar Cengage Learning and I wish to especially 
thank the many reviewers and contributors whose as-
sistance and dedication to the project have made this 
book possible:
Michael Arnhart, High Ridge Fire Department, High 
Ridge, MO
James Barnes, Baltimore County Fire Department, 
Towson, MD
Tom Bentley, John Wood Community College, 
Quincy, IL
Jimmy Bryant, Shreveport Fire Training Academy, 
Shreveport, LA
Mike Bucy, Red Devil Training, Portage, IN
Dave Casey, Florida State Fire College, Ocala, FL
Dennis Childress, Orange County Fire Authority, 
Rancho Santiago Community College, Orange, CA
Mike Cox, Florida State Fire College, Ocala, FL
Mike Connors, Naperville Fire Department, Naper-
villle, IL
Brian Dodge, Kent Fire Department, Kent, WA
Pete Evers, Auburn Fire Department, Auburn, CA
Gary Fox, San Antonio College, San Antonio, TX
Christopher Gilbert, Alachua County Fire Rescue, 
Gainesville, FL
Robert Hancock, Punta Gorda Fire Department, 
Punta Gorda, FL
Tom Harmer, Titusville Fire and Emergency Services, 
Titusville, FL
Edward Hojnicki, Jr., Wilmington Fire Department, 
Wilmington, DE
Rudy Horist, Elgin Community College, Elgin Fire 
Department, Elgin, IL
Gail Ownby-Hughes, Chattanooga State Technical 
Community College, Chattanooga, TN

xxiv  Preface
We would also like to extend a special thank you 
to Dave Diamantes for his contributions to chapters 9 
and 10 of the text
Our Advisory Board Members
To those experts who work behind the scenes and pro-
vide us with continuing guidance on this book as well 
as other learning materials on our emergency services 
list, we extend our gratitude:
Steve Chikerotis, Battalion Chief, Chicago Fire 
Department, Chicago, IL
Tom Labelle, Executive Director, New York State 
Association of Fire Chiefs, East Schodack, NY
Jerry Laughlin, Deputy Director of Education 
Services, Alabama Fire College, Tuscaloosa, AL
Jeff Pindelski, Battalion Chief, Downers Grove Fire 
Department, Downers Grove, IL
Peter Sells, District Chief of Operations Training, 
Toronto Fire Services, Toronto, Canada
Billy Shelton, Executive Director, Virginia Department 
of Fire Programs, Glen Allen, VA
Doug Fry, Fire Chief , City of San Carlos Fire 
Department, San Carlos, CA
Pat McCauliff, Director of Fire Science and EMS, 
Colin County Community College, McKinney, TX
Michael Petroff, Western Director for Fire Department 
Safety Offi cers Association, St. Louis, MO
Adam Piskura, Director of Training, Connecticut Fire 
Academy, Windsor Locks, CT
Theresa Staples, Program Manager, Firefi ghter and 
HazMat Certifi cations, Centennial, CO
Our Validation Committee 
Members
These committee members met and meticulously 
 reviewed the 2009 Edition of the Standard 1021 along 
with the learning objectives of Company Offi cer, cre-
ated by a JPR subject-matter expert for the third edi-
tion. The result of this meeting was a set of validated 
learning objectives that would tie the entire Company 
Offi cer package together with the new edition of the 
Standard. We whole-heartedly thank those who at-
tended this meeting and helped to initiate a new learn-
ing solution for this series:
Brad Boyd, Captain, Medical Training Offi cer, City 
of Wichita Fire Department, Training/Safety Divi-
sion, Wichita, KS
John Kingyens, Sarnia Fire Rescue Services, Sarnia, 
Ontario, Canada
Stephen Korpf, Eugene Fire and EMS, Eugene, OR
Robert Laford, Mt. Wachusett Community College, 
Petersham, MA
Bob Leigh, Aurora Fire Department, Aurora, CO
Murrey E. Lofl in, Virginia Beach Fire Department, 
Virginia Beach, VA
Ron Marley, Shasta College, Reddig, CA
Jack K. McElfi sh, Chief, Richmond Fire Department, 
Richmond, VA
Mike Morrison, Consumnes River Community Col-
lege, Elk Grove Community Services District Fire 
Department, Elk Grove, CA
Marion B. Oliver, Midland College, Midland, TX
Jeff Pindelski, Downers Grove Fire Department, 
Downers Grove, IL
Timothy Pitts, Guilford Technical Community Col-
lege, Greensboro Fire Department, Greensboro, 
NC
Chris Reynolds, Hillsborough County Fire and Res-
cue, Hillsborough County Community College, 
Tampa, FL
Jake Rhoades, Jenks Fire Department, Jenks, OK
Marty Rutledge, Antarctica Fire Department, 
 McMurdo Station, Antarctica
Alan Shelder, St. Petersburg College, Seminole, FL
W. G. Shelton, Jr., CEM, Virginia Department of Fire 
Programs, Richmond, VA
Jeff Simkins, Director Fire Service Ext., West Vir-
ginia University, Morgantown, WV
Shawn Smith, London Fire Department, London, On-
tario, Canada
Captain Kevin P. Terry and members of the Fuller 
Road Fire Department, Albany, NY
Scott Vanderbrook, Oveido Fire Rescue Department, 
Oveido, FL
Cindy Willett, Baltimore County Fire Department, 
Towson, MD
Gary Wilson, Training Chief for the Olathe KS Fire 
Department
Tom Wutz, Deputy Chief Fire Services Bureau, Of-
fi ce of Fire Prevention and Control, Albany, NY
A special thank you goes to our Technical Editor, 
Matthew Thorpe from the King Fire Department in 
King, North Carolina, for all his work on the learning 
objectives and corresponding content.

Preface  xxv
Doug Goodings, Executive Coordinator,  Certifi cation/
Accreditation Program, Ministry of Community 
Safety and Correctional Services, North York, On-
tario, Canada
Dave Hanneman, Deputy Chief–Fire Marshal, Boise 
Fire Department, Boise, ID
Eric Perry, Training Captain, Tucson Fire Depart-
ment, Tucson, AZ
Tom Ruane, Fire and Life Safety Consultant, Peoria, 
AZ
Donna Moucha Brackin, Ed.D., NBCT, Assistant 
Dean for Off-Campus Graduate Advising, The 
University of Mississippi, Southaven, MS
Mike Brackin, Ed.D., Fire Chief, Southaven Fire De-
partment, Southaven, MS
Melvin Byrne, EFO–MS, Division Chief, Virginia 
Department of Fire Programs, Leesburg, VA
Derrick Clouston, Fire and Rescue Training Spe-
cialist, North Carolina Department of Insurance, 
 Raleigh, NC
Patrick Draper, Fire Program Manager, Alabama Fire 
College, Tuscaloosa, AL

xxvi
NFPA 1021, 
2009 Edition 
Correlation 
Guide
Fire Officer I 
4.1.1
General Prerequisite  
Learning
Knowledge 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Organizational structure  
 
 
48, 50, 51,
of the department 
3-1, 3-23, 3-19 
3 
65, 66, 67, 70
Geographical confi guration and 
characteristics of response districts 
3-3, 3-17 
3 
51, 61, 63 
Departmental operating procedures 
for administration, emergency operations, 
incident management system, and safety 
4-2, 4-3, 8-8 
4 and 8 
90, 202
Departmental budget process 
This component covered 
 
by LOs in JPR 4.4.3. 
 
Information management and record keeping 
5-39, 5-40, 9-4 
5 and 9 
117, 118, 119, 240
The fi re prevention and building 
codes and ordinances 
applicable to the jurisdiction 
9-20 
9 
245
Current trends, technologies, 
and socioeconomic and political 
factors that impact the fi re service 
4-4, 5-43, 3-12 
4 and 5 
89, 92, 93, 94, 
 
 
 
95, 122
Cultural diversity 
6-16, 6-17 
6 
145, 148, 149, 150
Methods used by supervisors to obtain 
cooperation within a group of subordinates 
6-1, 6-2, 6-6, 6-7, 6-8, 
 
6-11, 6-12 
6 
135, 136, 139, 140, 
 
 
 
141, 142, 143, 144
The rights of management and members 
5-6, 5-7, 5-9 
5 
110, 111, 112
Agreements in force between the 
organization and members  
5-8 
5 
111
Generally acceptable ethical practices, 
including a professional code of ethics 
4-5, 4-6 
4 
95, 96, 97
Policies and procedures regarding 
the operation of the department as 
they involve supervisors and members 
4-1 
4 
88
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.

xxvii
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4.2.1
Task Statement  
Learning
 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Assign tasks or responsibilities to unit 
members, given an assignment at an 
emergency incident, so that the 
instructions are complete, clear and 
concise; safety considerations are 
addressed and the desired outcomes 
are conveyed.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Verbal communications during  
 
 
23, 24, 30, 31, 
emergency incidents 
2-2, 2-4, 2-13, 13-7 
2 and 13 
35, 39, 40, 360
Techniques used to make assignments 
under stressful situations  
2-3, 2-14 
2 
23, 41
Methods of confi rming understanding 
13-8 
13 
360
4.2.2 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Assign tasks or responsibilities to unit 
members, given an assignment under 
nonemergency conditions at a station 
or other work location, so that the 
instructions are complete, clear, 
and concise; safety considerations 
are addressed; and the desired 
outcomes are conveyed.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task 
Statement above. 
2-1, 8-19, 8-20 
2 and 8 
23, 24, 213, 214-227
Verbal communications under 
nonemergency situations, 
2-6, 13-11 
2 and 13 
25, 26, 27, 361, 362
Techniques used to make assignments 
under routine situations 
13-5 
13 
356
Methods of confi rming understanding 
2-5 
2 
24, 25
4.2.3 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Direct unit members during a training 
evolution, given a company training 
evolution and training policies and 
procedures, so that the evolution is 
performed in accordance with safety 
plans, effi ciently, and as directed.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task  
12-17, 12-18, 
Statement above. 
12-19, 12-20 
12 
332, 333, 335
Verbal communication techniques 
to facilitate learning 
12-16 
12 
331

xxviii
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4.2.4 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Recommend action for member-
related problems, given a member 
with a situation requiring assistance 
and the member assistance policies 
and procedures, so that the situation 
is identifi ed and the actions taken 
are within the established policies 
and procedures.
(A) Requisite Knowledge* 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task Statement above. 7-22, 7-24, 7-25 
7 
183
The signs and symptoms of 
member-related problems 
7-5 
7 
168
Causes of stress in emergency 
service personnel 
8-21 
8 
228
Adverse effects of stress on the 
performance of emergency 
service personnel 
7-23, 8-22 
7 and 8 
183, 229, 230
Awareness of AHJ member 
assistance policies and procedures 
7-26 
7 
183
4.2.5 
Learning
Task Statement* 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Apply human resource policies and 
procedures, given an administrative 
situation requiring action, so that 
policies and procedures are followed.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task Statement above. 7-3, 7-4, 7-6 
7 
165, 166, 168
Human resource policies and procedures 
6-18, 8-23 
6 and 8 
150, 151, 152, 153, 
 
 
 
154, 230, 231
4.2.6 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Coordinate the completion of assigned 
tasks and projects by members, given 
a list of projects and tasks and the job 
requirements of subordinates, so that 
the assignments are prioritized, 
a plan for the completion of each 
assignment is developed, and 
members are assigned to specifi c 
tasks and both supervised during 
and held accountable for the 
completion of the assignments.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task Statement above. 5-5 
5 
108, 109
Principles of supervision 
1-1, 1-2, 1-4 
1 
5, 6, 7, 8
Basic human resource management 
5-4, 5-38 
5 
108, 119, 120

xxix
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4.3.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Initiate action on a community need, 
given policies and procedures, so 
that the need is addressed. 
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task Statement above. 2-6, 9-2, 9-5, 9-14, 9-16 
2 and 9 
36, 37, 239, 240, 
 
 
 
241, 242
Community demographics 
9-15 
9 
241
Service organizations 
9-7, 9-17 
9 
240, 242
Verbal and non-verbal communication 
9-10 
9 
241
An understanding of the role 
and mission of the department 
9-18 
9 
243, 244
4.3.2 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Initiate action to a citizen’s concern, 
given polices and procedures, so that 
the concern is answered or referred to 
the correct individual for action 
and all policies and procedures are 
complied with.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the 
Task Statement above. 
9-9, 9-11 
9 
240, 241
Interpersonal relationships and  
Same as 4.2.2(A)(1)
verbal and non-verbal communications 
and 4.2.2(A)(2) 
 
4.3.3 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Respond to a public inquiry, given 
policies and procedures, so that the 
inquiry is answered accurately, 
courteously, and in accordance with 
applicable policies and procedures.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task 
Statement above. 
9-8, 9-12, 9-13 
9 
240, 241
Written communication techniques 
Same as 4.1.2(a) 
 
and 4.1.2(b) 
 
Oral communication techniques 
Same as 4.2.2(A)(1) 
 
and 4.2.2(A)(2) 
 

xxx
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4.4.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Recommend changes to existing 
departmental policies and/or implement 
a new departmental policy at the unit 
level, given a new departmental policy, 
so that the policy is communicated to 
and understood by unit members.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task Statement above. 3-27, 3-28 
3 
73
Written communications 
Same as 4.1.2(a) and 
 
4.1.2(b) 
 
Oral communications 
Same as 4.2.2(A)(1) and 
 
4.2.2(A)(2) 
 
4.4.2 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Execute routine unit-level 
administrative functions, given forms 
and record-management systems, 
so that the reports and logs are 
complete and fi les are maintained in 
accordance with policies and procedures.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LO for the Task Statement above. 
3-24 
3 
70, 71, 72
Administrative polices and procedures  
3-30, 9-31 
3 and 9 
73, 74, 75, 253, 254
Records management 
9-32 
9 
253, 254
4.4.3 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Prepare a budget request, given a 
need and budget forms, so that the 
request is in the proper format and is 
supported with data.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Policies and procedures  
5-3, 5-13, 5-29 
5 
107, 108, 113, 115
Revenue sources and budget process 
5-18, 5-22 
5 
113, 114
4.4.4 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Explain the purpose of each 
management component of the 
organization, given an organization 
chart, so that the explanation is current 
and accurate and clearly identifi es 
the purpose and mission of the 
organization.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Organizational structure of the 
department and functions of management 
3-2, 3-20, 3-21, 3-22 
3 
50, 67, 68, 69

xxxi
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4.4.5 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Explain the needs and benefi ts of 
collecting incident response data, given 
the goals and mission of the organization, 
so that incident response reports are 
timely and accurate.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LO for the Task Statement above. 9-6, 9-33 
9 
240, 257
The agency’s records management system 
Same as 4.1.1(k), 4.1.1(l), 
 
and 4.1.1(m) 
 
4.5.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Describe the procedures of the AHJ for 
conducting fi re inspections, given any of 
the following occupancies, so that all 
hazards, including hazardous materials, 
are identifi ed, approved forms are 
completed, and approved action is initiated: 
  (1) Assembly 
  (2) Educational 
  (3) Health care 
4.5.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
  (4) Detention and correctional 
  (5) Residential 
  (6) Mercantile 
  (7) Business 
  (8) Industrial 
  (9) Storage 
(10) Unusual structures 
(11) Mixed occupancies 
(A) Requisite Knowledge
Additional LOs for the Task 
Statement above. 
9-29, 9-30 
9 
251, 252
Inspection procedures 
9-19, 9-21, 9-22,  
9 
244, 247, 248,
 
9-23, 9-24, 9-25 
 
249, 250
Fire detection, alarm, and protection  
10-9, 10-12, 10-14, 
 
269, 270, 272,
systems 
10-15, 10-16, 10-17 
10 
273, 274, 275, 276
Identifi cation of fi re and life safety hazards; 
10-18 
10 
276
Marking and identifi cation systems for 
hazardous materials 
10-10, 10-11 
10 
272

xxxii
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4.5.2 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Identify construction, alarm, detection, 
and suppression features that contribute 
to or prevent the spread of fi re, heat, 
and smoke throughout the building or 
from one building to another, given 
an occupancy, policies and forms of 
the AHJ so that a pre-incident plan 
for any of the following occupancies 
is developed:
  (1) Public Assembly    
  (2) Educational 
  (3) Institutional
  (4) Residential 
  (5) Business 
  (6) Industrial 
  (7) Manufacturing
  (8) Storage 
  (9) Mercantile 
(10) Special properties
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task 
Statement above. 
12-2, 12-3, 12-4, 12-11 
12 
315, 317, 320, 327
Fire Behavior 
10-2, 10-5, 10-6 
10 
266, 267, 268, 269
Building construction 
10-1, 10-3, 10-4, 10-19 
10 
266, 270, 271, 
 
 
 
276, 277
Inspection and incident reports 
12-1 
12 
314
Detection, alarm, and 
suppression systems 
10-8, 12-5 
10 and 12 
269, 270, 322
Applicable codes, ordinances, 
and standards 
12-7 
12 
324
4.5.3 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Secure an incident scene, given rope 
or barrier tape, so that unauthorized 
persons can recognize the perimeters 
of the scene and are kept from 
restricted areas, and all evidence or 
potential evidence is protected from 
damage or destruction.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Types of evidence 
11-10 
11 
301
The importance of fi re scene security 
11-12 
11 
301
Evidence preservation 
11-8, 11-9, 11-11 
11 
301

xxxiii
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4.6.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Develop an initial action plan, given 
size-up information for an incident 
and assigned emergency response 
resources, so that resources are 
deployed to control the emergency.
(A) Requisite Knowledge* 
 
 
Elements of a size-up 
13-3 
13 
347, 348, 349, 350, 
 
 
 
351, 352
Standard operating procedures for 
emergency operations 
12-12, 13-10 
12 and 13 
330, 362
Fire behavior 
Refer to 4.5.2(A)(1) 
 
and (A)(2) 
 
4.6.2 
Learning
Task Statement* 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Implement an action plan at an 
emergency operation, given assigned 
resources, type of incident, and a 
preliminary plan, so that resources 
are deployed to mitigate the situation.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Standard operating procedures 
Same as 4.6.2(A)(2) 
 
Resources available for the mitigation of 
fi re and other emergency incidents, 
13-6 
13 
356, 357
Incident management system 
Same as 4.1.1(h) 
 
and 4.1.1(i) 
 
Scene safety 
13-1 
13 
344, 345, 346
Personnel accountability system 
13-2 
13 
350
4.6.3 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Develop and conduct a post-incident 
analysis, given a single unit incident 
and post-incident analysis policies, 
procedures, and forms, so that all 
required critical elements are identifi ed 
and communicated, and the approved 
forms are completed and processed 
in accordance with policies and 
procedures.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Elements of a post-incident analysis 
13-17, 13-18 
13 
371, 372
Basic building construction 
Same 4.6.1(A)(3) 
 
Basic fi re protection systems, and features 
Same as 4.6.1(A)(4) 
 
Basic water supply 
12-6 
12 
322
Basic fuel loading 
Same as 4.6.1(A)(7) 
 
Fire growth and development 
Same as 4.5.2(A)(1) 
 
Departmental procedures relating 
to dispatch, response, tactics and 
operations, and customer service 
12-13, 12-14, 12-15 
12 
330

xxxiv
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4.7.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Apply safety regulations at the unit level, 
given safety policies and procedures, 
so that required reports are completed, 
in-service training is conducted, and 
member responsibilities are conveyed.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
The most common causes of personal 
injury and accident to members 
8-2, 8-7 
8 
197, 201
Safety policies and procedures 
8-3 
8 
198, 207
Basic workplace safety  
8-9 
8 
202
The components of an infectious 
disease control program. 
8-18 
8 
212 
4.7.2 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Conduct an initial accident 
investigation, given an incident and 
investigation forms, so that the incident 
is documented and reports are 
processed in accordance with policies 
and procedures of the AHJ.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task 
Statement above. 
8-13 
8 
208
Procedures for conducting an 
accident investigation 
8-14 
8 
208, 209
Safety policies and procedures 
8-12 
8 
206, 207
4.7.3  
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Explain the benefi ts of being physically 
and medically capable of performing 
assigned duties and effectively 
functioning during peak physical 
demand activities, given current fi re 
service trends and agency policies, 
so that the need to participate in 
wellness and fi tness programs is 
explained to members.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
National death and injury statistics 
8-1 
8 
196, 197
Fire service safety and wellness initiatives 
8-6 
8 
200
Agency policies 
8-5 
8 
200, 207

xxxv
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
Fire Officer II 
5.1.1
General Prerequisite  
Learning
Knowledge 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
The organization of local government 
3-7, 3-8, 3-9 
3 
53, 54, 56, 57
Enabling and regulatory legislation 
and the law-making process at the 
local, state/provincial, and federal levels 
3-4, 3-5, 3-6, 3-11 
3 
53, 58
The functions of other bureaus, 
divisions, agencies, and organizations 
and their roles and responsibilities 
that relate to the fi re service 
3-10 
3 
57, 58
5.2.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Initiate actions to maximize member 
performance and/or to correct 
unacceptable performance, given 
human resource policies and 
procedures, so that member 
and/or unit performance improves 
or the issue is referred to the next 
level of supervision.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Human resource policies and procedures 
7-27, 7-28 
7 
184
Problem identifi cation 
7-19, 7-20 
7 
181, 184
Organizational behavior 
7-21, 7-29, 7-31 
7 
183, 184, 185 
 
 
 
186, 187
Group dynamics 
7-17, 7-18 
7 
181
Leadership styles 
6-4, 7-2 
6 and 7 
138, 139, 162, 163
Types of power  
6-5, 6-9, 6-10,  
 
139, 142, 143,
 
6-13, 6-15 
6 
144, 145, 146, 147
Interpersonal dynamics 
6-3, 6-14 
6 
136, 137, 138, 
 
 
 
144, 145
5.2.2 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Evaluate the job performance of 
assigned members, given personnel 
records and evaluation forms, so each 
member’s performance is evaluated 
accurately and reported according 
to human resource policies and 
procedures.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LOs for the Task Statement above. 7-13, 7-16 
7 
179, 182, 183
Human resource policies and procedures 
7-7, 7-9, 7-12 
7 
168, 169, 171, 172, 
 
 
 
173, 175, 176
Job descriptions 
7-1, 7-14 
7 
161, 162, 176
Objectives of a member evaluation program 
7-8 
7 
169, 170, 171
Common errors in evaluating 
7-10, 7-11 
7 
174

xxxvi
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
5.2.3 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Create a professional development plan for 
a member of the organization, given the 
requirements for promotion, so that the 
individual receives the necessary 
knowledge, skills, and abilities to be eligible 
for the examination for the position.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Development of a career development guide 
1-5, 1-6, 1-7, 7-15 
1 and 7 
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
 
 
 
13, 14, 178, 179
Job shadowing 
1-3 
1 
7, 14, 15
5.3.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Explain the benefi ts to the organization 
for cooperating with allied organizations, 
given a specifi c problem or issue in 
the community, so that the purpose 
for establishing external agency 
relationships is clearly explained.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Agency mission and goals 
3-14, 3-18 
3 
60, 63
Types and functions of external  
3-13, 3-15, 12-8,  
 
58, 59, 60, 61, 
agencies in the community 
12-9, 12-10 
3 and 12 
325, 326
5.4.2 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Develop a project or divisional budget, 
given schedules and guidelines 
concerning its preparation, so that 
capital, operating, and personnel costs 
are determined and justifi ed.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
The supplies and equipment necessary 
for ongoing or new projects  
5-41 
5 
120, 121
Repairs to existing facilities 
New equipment, apparatus  
5-11, 5-16, 5-31,
maintenance, and personnel costs 
5-34, 5-35, 5-36
 
 
5 
112, 113, 115, 116, 
Appropriate budgeting system 
5-10, 5-12, 5-14, 
 
5-15, 5-17, 5-30 
5 
112, 113, 115
5.4.3 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Describe the process of purchasing, 
including soliciting and awarding bids, 
given established specifi cations, in order 
to ensure competitive bidding.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LO for the Task Statement above. 
5-33 
5 
116
Purchasing laws 
5-20, 5-21, 5-23, 
 
5-25, 5-27 
5 
113, 114
Policies and procedures 
5-24, 5-26, 5-28, 5-37 
5 
114, 115, 116

xxxvii
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
5.4.4 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Prepare a news release, given an event 
or topic, so that the information is 
accurate and formatted correctly.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Policies and procedures 
2-8, 2-9, 2-11, 2-12 
2 
37, 38, 39
The format used for news releases 
2-10 
2 
37-38
5.4.5 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Prepare a concise report for transmittal 
to a supervisor, given fi re department 
record(s) and a specifi c request for 
details such as trends, variances, or 
other related topics.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
The data processing system 
9-3 
9 
240, 244
5.4.6 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Develop a plan to accomplish change in 
the organization, given an agency’s 
change of policy or procedures, so that 
effective change is implemented in a 
positive manner.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Planning and implementing change 
3-25, 3-26, 3-29 
3 
72, 73
5.5.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Determine the point of origin and 
preliminary cause of a fi re, given a fi re 
scene, photographs, diagrams, pertinent 
data and/or sketches, to determine if 
arson is suspected
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LO for the “Task Statement” above. 11-3 
11 
298 299
Methods used by arsonists 
11-1 
11 
297
5.5.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Common causes of fi re 
9-1 
9 
239, 241
Basic cause and origin determination 
11-2, 11-4, 11-5, 11-7, 
 
11-13, 11-14 
11 
297, 300, 301, 302
Fire growth and development 
11-6 
11 
299, 300, 301
Documentation of preliminary fi re 
investigative procedures 
11-15 
11 
305

xxxviii
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
5.6.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Produce operational plans, given an 
emergency incident requiring multi-unit 
operations, the current edition of 
NFPA 1600, and AHJ-approved safety 
procedures, so that required resources 
and their assignments are obtained and 
plans are carried out in compliance with 
NFPA 1600 and approved safety 
procedures resulting in the mitigation 
of the incident.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LO for the “Task Statement” above. 13-13 
13 
367
Standard operating procedures 
13-9 
13 
361
National, state/provincial, and local 
information resources available for 
the mitigation of emergency incidents 
13-20 
13 
375
Incident management system  
13-14, 13-21 
13 
368, 369, 370, 
 
 
 
374, 375, 376, 377, 
 
 
 
378, 379
Personnel accountability system 
13-4 
13 
355
5.6.2 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Develop and conduct a post-incident 
analysis, given multi-unit incident and 
post-incident analysis policies, procedures, 
and forms, so that all required critical 
elements are identifi ed and 
communicated and the approved forms 
are completed and processed.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Elements of a post-incident analysis 
13-15, 13-16, 13-19 
13 
371, 372
Basic building construction 
10-21 
10 
282
Basic fi re protection systems and features 
10-13 
10 
273
Basic water supply 
10-22 
10 
283, 284, 285
Basic fuel loading 
10-7 
10 
269
Fire growth and development 
10-20 
10 
278
Departmental procedures relating 
to dispatch response, strategy, 
tactics, and operations, and  
 
 
362, 363, 364,
customer service. 
13-12 
13 
 365, 366
5.6.3 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Prepare a written report given incident 
reporting data from the jurisdiction, so 
that the major causes for service 
demands are identifi ed for various 
planning areas within the service area 
of the organization.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Analyzing data 
9-26, 9-27, 9-28 
9 
250

xxxix
Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright © 2009, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
5.7.1 
Learning
Task Statement 
Objective(s) 
Chapter(s) 
Page(s)
Analyze a member’s accident, injury, or 
health exposure history, given a 
case study, so that a report including 
action taken and recommendations 
made is prepared for a supervisor.
(A) Requisite Knowledge 
 
 
Additional LO for the “Task  
 
 
202, 203, 204,
Statement” above. 
8-10, 8-15, 8-16 
8 
205, 209, 212
The causes of unsafe acts 
8-4 
8 
198, 199
Health exposures 
8-17 
8 
212
Conditions that result in accidents, 
injuries or occupational illnesses or deaths 
8-11 
8 
205, 206

The Company Officer’s 
Role—Challenges 
and Opportunities
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ The Role of the Company Officer
■ The Company Officer’s Role as a 
Supervisor in the Department
■ Promotion to Company Officer
■ The National Competency Standard 
for Fire Officers
■ Professional Development: An 
Opportunity for Company Officers
■ Strategies for Success 
as a Company Officer
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
1

3
STREET 
STORY
T
oo many people hire a yes-man in the type of position I’m in because they 
want to hear that they themselves are doing a great job. I don’t want to hear 
that I’m doing a great job; I want to be challenged every day. I want to be able to 
change things for the better consistently.
I will have 20 years with the Portage Fire Department, in Portage, Indiana, this 
year, and I was fire chief at a volunteer department and worked for the Delaware 
County EMS prior to that. My role as the assistant chief is, first and foremost, to 
back up and support the fire chief. Our overall goal is to protect the citizens. On 
a daily basis, I work on fire operations, apparatus maintenance, and personnel 
policies. We have 61 full-time firefighters, and I interact with all of the department 
heads as well.
When I think about challenges that face new company officers, I always think 
back to my first days , as a new member of the team. That time can be difficult, 
 because 90% of the departments out there are small, and you end up knowing 
everyone. On the other hand, if you’re with a larger city, you end up working with 
people you do not know. Either one of those scenarios is a challenge. One of the 
main obstacles at the smaller department, where you might know everybody, is 
working with friends. That could be a benefit, but sometimes friends find it hard 
to see you as a boss. A lot of people want to walk into a situation like that and lay 
down the law right away to differentiate between being a boss and a friend. I think 
you can keep both of those titles and maintain respect by doing just that. Work-
ing with friends presents an opportunity also, because, as friends, people are more 
likely to work with you and work for you. That’s key, because when you work with 
labor management and people aren’t willing to work for or with the boss, then 
problems arise.
When I first took over at Portage, there were a lot of instances where people 
knew me ahead of time, and what my attitude was, and they didn’t expect that to 
change. They were able to keep me grounded in that way. I told people that if I ever 
got to a point with them as their boss where I would have complained if I were in 
their position, they needed to let me know; there were a few times they did.
When it comes to separating friendship and work, it’s important to remember 
that there are times when people will need their space if you discipline them. Some 
friends who have worked for me have needed some low-level discipline, and I’ve 
been able to give them that, and as soon as that’s over we go back to our friend-
ship because they understand when I’m talking about discipline that that’s part of 
our work process, and then it’s behind me. I don’t hold that against them. It’s not 
a perfect routine, though, and some things get under your skin more than others. 
Sometimes things are said and feelings are hurt, and you have to give the hurt per-
son some space when that occurs.
In my job, and in life, I try to be as forthcoming and honest as possible, and 
sometimes that comes across the wrong way. In the end, I always just keep in 
mind that my ultimate job is to protect the citizens. It’s a challenge for me some-
times because being brutally honest with people can put them on the defen-
sive. When that happens, I make sure to just give them their space. Nothing gets 
 accomplished when heated feelings are involved. 
—Mike Bucy, Assistant Chief, 
Portage Fire Department, Portgage, Indiana

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
1-1 Define the term supervision.
 
1-2 List the responsibilities of a supervisor.
 
1-3 List the responsibilities the company officer 
is required to fulfill.
 
1-4 Describe the role of a fire department 
supervisor.
 
1-5 Identify professional development opportunities 
for company officers.
 
1-6 List the components of a development plan for 
unit members.
 
1-7 Explain the rationale for assigning the various 
levels of professional qualifications.
INTRODUCTION
It is a dark and stormy night. The big fi re truck moves 
slowly along the narrow mountain road, red lights 
fl ashing, spotlights drilling holes into the darkness 
along either side. The fi refi ghters are looking for a 
car that was reported to have run off the road in this 
remote area.
Everyone in the truck is a little uneasy. It is raining 
hard. Trees and wires are down, and there is always a 
chance of fl ooding when it rains this hard. While the 
inside of the truck’s cab is relatively dry, comfortable, 
and safe, there is an uncomfortable feeling of tension. 
Riding in the cab are two fi refi ghters, a driver, and 
you, the company offi cer. In diffi cult conditions like 
these, you are expected to be calm and to reassure 
the others. But you have some anxieties, too. Not only 
are you sharing the same concerns about the weather 
as your young fi refi ghters, but also you are responsi-
ble for managing them and the event. Suddenly one of 
your fi refi ghters yells, “Stop!” Your driver puts on the 
brakes and brings the big vehicle to a safe stop. As you 
look out into the darkness, the spotlight illuminates a 
wrecked vehicle against a tree. The car door is open, 
and it looks like someone is inside. Now, not only are 
you responsible for those who came with you, but also 
you are expected to assess and manage this entire sit-
uation, assist those who might be trapped in the car 
or lying injured on the ground, and keep everyone, 
including your own personnel, from further injury. 
You think about the situation for a moment. You pick 
up the radio microphone; you are not yet sure of what 
to say. As you open the door, the cab lights come on, 
revealing the anxiety of your colleagues as they look 
to you for direction. A lot of responsibility is in your 
hands right now.
For the company offi cer, it is just another day at 
work.
*The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021 Standards, are identiﬁ ed in different colors: 
FO I  black, FO II  red.
THE ROLE OF THE COMPANY 
OFFICER
What is the role of the company offi cer? Company 
offi cers are fi rst-line supervisors responsible for the 
performance and safety of assigned personnel in an 
emergency service organization. Company offi cers 
should be capable of leading their personnel dur-
ing both emergency and nonemergency activities (as 
shown in Figure 1-1).
4  CHAPTER 1
NOTE
This book is for all fire officers. It is written with both 
volunteer and paid departments in mind. Throughout 
this text, we will refer to professional behavior, profes-
sional competencies, and similar terms that may sug-
gest we are talking only about paid personnel. That is 
not the case: All references to professionalism address 
the calling of both volunteer and paid officers. NFPA 
1021, the Standard for Fire Officer Professional Qualifi-
cations, applies to all fire officers.
Many of the concepts presented in this book 
are applicable to leaders in other emergency ser-
vice organizations. This text has been used to help 
new officers in emergency medical services (EMS) 
and rescue organizations, as well as in the fire 
service, learn the communications, leadership, and 
management skills they needed to become effective 
officers.

The Company Officer’s Role—Challenges and Opportunities  5
offi cer manages the resources: people, equipment, 
and time.
In most departments, companies spend less than 
10 percent of their time dealing with emergencies. That 
means they spend 90 percent of their time in other activ-
ities, including providing fi re safety public education 
programs for citizens, preplanning for fi res and other 
emergencies, training, and maintaining good physical 
fi tness. Regardless of the activity, the company offi cer 
is expected to plan, manage, and lead the company.
FIREGROUND FACT
Supervision is generally defined as the act of watching 
over the work or tasks of another. The NFPA defines a 
supervisor as an individual responsible for overseeing 
the performance or activity of other members.
Based on this definition, a company officer can be 
 described as a first-line supervisor responsible for the 
performance and safety of assigned personnel in an 
emergency service organization.
FIGURE 1-1 The company offi cer. One of the most  exciting 
jobs in the fi re service. The company offi cer  manages 
resources during both emergency and  nonemergency 
activities.
FIREGROUND FACT
In most departments, companies spend less than 
10 percent of their time dealing with emergencies.
As a fi rst-line supervisor, the company offi cer has 
many responsibilities. The company offi cer’s job is 
as varied as all of the activities of the organization. 
Company offi cers are often the senior representatives 
of the fi re department at the scene of countless emer-
gencies ranging from automobile accidents to fi res 
and from treating sick and injured persons to mitigat-
ing hazardous materials spills. In nearly every case, 
the company offi cer is one of the fi rst persons on the 
scene and is likely to be the last to leave.
But there is more to being a company offi cer than 
managing emergency situations. When the company 
is not involved in an emergency, the company offi -
cer essentially runs a small part of the fi re depart-
ment, rescue squad, or emergency medical services 
(EMS) organization. The company offi cer is the most 
 infl uential member of the department and key to 
daily operations. At the company level, the  company 
These duties may not sound as important as those 
in which the company is on the scene of an emergency, 
but they are. The company offi cer is also expected to 
be a full-time leader and instructor for the personnel 
assigned to the company, so human relations skills 
are very important for company offi cers. Look at the 
following list: How many of these activities deal with 
human relations?
Coach 
Manager
Communicator 
Mediator
Counselor 
Motivator
Decision maker 
Planner
Evaluator 
Public relations representative
Firefi ghter 
Referee
Friend 
Role model
Innovator 
Safety offi cer
Instructor 
Student
Leader 
Supervisor
Listener 
Writer
THE MANY ROLES AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
OF THE COMPANY OFFICER
Company offi cers must learn how to perform these 
roles while retaining their previous skills and knowl-
edge. Company offi cers do not have the luxury of 
standing around at the scene of emergencies with a 
radio in one hand, directing the fi refi ghters’ activities. 
They frequently fi nd that they must help fi ght fi res or 
help diagnose and treat patients, along with the rest 
of the crew. In addition, they are expected to manage 
and supervise their subordinates. The company  offi cer 
has one of the most demanding jobs in the organi-
zation. Leading others and ensuring everyone goes 
home is the company offi cer’s principal job (see 
Figure 1-2). The capabilities, effi ciency, and morale 

6  CHAPTER 1
of the company are direct refl ections of the company 
offi cer’s leadership ability. The personnel are the 
company offi cer’s responsibility. If the company offi -
cer does not take care of them, no one else will.
NOTE
Leading others is the company officer’s principal job.
FIGURE 1-2 Leading others is 
the company offi cer’s principal 
job.
In the fi re service we use the term “company” to 
describe the work teams. Clearly there is a need for 
FIGURE 1-3 When an offi cer takes a 
position as a fi refi ghter on the attack 
hose line one has to ask “Who is in 
charge?”  Who is looking out for the 
fi refi ghter’s accountability and safety? 
teamwork at the company level. With the reduced 
staffi ng that many fi re departments face, the company 
offi cer is not only the leader of the team but one of the 
players, too. Company offi cers are expected to lend 
a hand when needed, whether it be advancing hose, 
forcing doors, or performing similar activities that do 
not compromise their role as leader. There is noth-
ing wrong with helping out, but be careful: When an 
offi cer takes a position as a fi refi ghter on the attack 
hose line, one has to ask, “Who is leading? Who is in 
charge of the fi refi ghters’ accountability and safety?” 
(see Figure 1-3).

The Company Officer’s Role—Challenges and Opportunities  7
THE COMPANY OFFICER’S 
ROLE AS A SUPERVISOR 
IN THE DEPARTMENT
In later chapters, we discuss organization and man-
agement principles. For now we use a simple graphic 
device to represent a typical fi re service organiza-
tion (Figure 1-4). Notice that the company offi cer 
plays an important role in the organizational struc-
ture. For fi refi ghters, the company offi cer is not only 
their supervisor but also their next link in the chain 
of command. That link connects them with the rest 
Although company offi cers are required to ful-
fi ll many responsibilities, along with often helping to 
resolve the problem at hand, the offi cer’s primary job 
is to lead. Many new offi cers fi nd the most diffi cult 
part of becoming an offi cer is accepting the fact that 
they are no longer fi refi ghters. The best fi refi ghters 
are promoted and usually become good offi cers. But 
these same individuals sometimes fi nd that the transi-
tion from doer to leader is diffi cult. They want to be 
involved with the work. In most cases they are very 
good at performing fi refi ghting tasks and fi nd a great 
sense of enjoyment in doing them. They fi nd it diffi cult 
to give up the physical tasks and to think about super-
vision and management. For many, the physical tasks 
are easier and more enjoyable than the mental effort 
and the paperwork that accompany the offi cer’s job.
The opposite situation occurs from time to time when 
an offi cer will not have anything to do with the fi refi ght-
ers or their work. These company offi cers seem to for-
get where they came from and what life was like as a 
fi refi ghter. There are various reasons for this situation, 
but sometimes fi refi ghters see these offi cers as placing 
their own careers ahead of those of the fi refi ghters. Offi -
cers should remember that fi refi ghters are the backbone 
of the service delivery  system. Firefi ghters are valuable 
assets to the  community who have the knowledge, skills, 
and abilities to serve the citizens of their communities. 
The offi cer has to take care of them, nurture them, and 
help them develop their full potential.
NOTE
Company officers are expected to lend a hand when 
needed, whether it is advancing hose, forcing doors, 
or performing similar activities that do not compromise 
their role as leader.
NOTE
Firefighters are the backbone of the service delivery 
system. The officer must take care of them, nurture 
them, and help them develop their full potential.
of the department. The company offi cer may also be 
considered their link to the public, for it is the com-
pany offi cer who likely speaks for the company and 
the department both at the scene of an emergency and 
during nonemergency situations.
To the fi re chief and other senior offi cers, the com-
pany offi cer represents the company. If the chain of 
command is being followed, the company offi cer is 
both the voice of the chief to the fi refi ghters and the 
voice of the fi refi ghters to the chief.
Two other factors affect the company offi cer’s posi-
tion in the organization. First, we often take relatively 
inexperienced personnel (at least in a leadership role) 
and place them in one of the most challenging posi-
tions in the fi re service (Figure 1-5). Second, we 
CHIEF
SENIOR STAFF
COMPANY OFFICER
FIREFIGHTERS
FIGURE 1-4 The company offi cer occupies a vital link 
in the fi re department’s structure.
FIGURE 1-5 The company offi cer is expected to manage 
resources, people, time, and money, at the company level.


The Company Officer’s Role—Challenges and Opportunities  9
THE NATIONAL COMPETENCY 
STANDARD FOR FIRE 
OFFICERS
A signifi cant step in the certifi cation process occurred 
when the Joint Council established the National 
 Professional Qualifi cations System in 1972. That 
system provided a means of representing the profes-
sional opportunities in the fi re service and specifi ed a 
particular body of knowledge required for each level 
and for each specialty area in the fi re service profes-
sional ladder. The standards apply to volunteer and 
paid  personnel alike. Volunteers, just as paid person-
nel, need to know what to do and how to do it at the 
scene of any emergency. The lives of their colleagues 
as well as the lives and property of the citizens of 
their community are often at stake.
These standards started and remain a product of 
a peer group process and are not the result of any 
 regulatory action. The present standards provide 
nationally recognized competency criteria for fi re-
fi ghters, fi re service instructors, fi re offi cers, inspec-
tors, investigators, public fi re educators, and others.
The present certifi cation standards are part of the 
National Fire Protection Association’s (NFPA) codes
and standards-making process. There are approxi-
mately 300 NFPA codes and standards dealing with 
every aspect of fi re protection. These documents have 
a profound impact on improving safety where we live 
and work. They are widely adopted for legislation 
and regulation at the federal, state, and local levels. 
Many federal agencies, including the Occupational 
NOTE
Officers should be aware of the existence and role of 
these national and federal organizations, for they have 
had a significant impact on changing the character of 
the fire service over the past 35 years.
in all fi re science programs. These included communica-
tions skills, human relations, government, fi re prevention, 
fi refi ghting strategy and tactics, and building construc-
tion, among others. (Note the date of publication—1969. 
These issues have been around for 35 years!)
These topics are still included in fi re science programs 
today, and they are also part of the national compe-
tency standards addressed in the next section. Interest-
ingly, that report listed nearly 150 degree programs in 
existence. Today, there are nearly twice as many. (Refer 
to Appendix A for a special note regarding the future of 
training in the fi re service, by Denis Onieal, Superinten-
dent of the National Fire Academy.)
The traditional way to prepare to enter a profession is 
to attend college or a technical school. Community 
 college–based fi re science programs have been around 
for more than 30 years. They were created to help indi-
viduals  enter and move up the fi re service organizational 
ladder. A 1969 publication entitled Guideline for Fire 
 Service Education Programs in Community and Junior 
Colleges identifi ed basic courses that should be included 
PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCIES 
AND COLLEGE PROGRAMS 
PROVIDE SIMILAR OUTCOMES
 increased fi nancial and moral support to aid the fi re 
service in carrying out its mission
■ To reassess public fi re protection in light of contempo-
rary demands, ensuring appropriate fi re protection for 
all communities at a reasonable cost
■ To establish realistic standards of educational achieve-
ment and to provide to every member of the fi re ser-
vice equal educational opportunities commensurate 
with professional requirements
■ To identify and establish nationwide information 
 systems that will enable improved analysis of the fi re 
problem with particular emphasis on the life and safety 
factors for the public and its fi refi ghters
■ To encourage and undertake the research and de-
velopment necessary for the prompt and successful 
 implementation of these goals
■ To develop nationally recognized standards for compe-
tency and achievement of skills development,  technical 
profi ciency, and academic knowledge appropriate to 
every level of the fi re service career ladder
■ To make the public aware of the signifi cant con-
tributions made by the fi re service of this nation in 
protecting life by providing increased fi nancial and 
moral support to aid the fi re service in carrying out 
its mission
■ To make public offi cials at every level of govern-
ment more aware of their responsibilities in providing 
GOALS OF THE JOINT COUNCIL 
OF NATIONAL FIRE SERVICE 
ORGANIZATIONS

10  CHAPTER 1
The present version of NFPA 1021, Standard for 
Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, outlines the 
requirements for fi re offi cers at four levels of com-
petency. The fi rst level, Fire Offi cer I, focuses on the 
needs of the fi rst-line supervisor, clearly including 
company offi cers. For Fire Offi cer II, the require-
ments focus on the management aspects of the com-
pany offi cer’s job and help prepare individuals to move 
into staff assignments. The requirements for Offi cer 
III deal mostly with administration and management, 
preparing  offi cers to move into positions of increasing 
responsibility at the mid-management level within their 
organizations. At the top of the offi cer certifi cation lad-
der, the requirements for Offi cer IV satisfy the needs of 
senior staff and chief offi cers (see Figure 1-7).
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), National 
 Institutes of Health (NIH), and Department of Energy 
(DOE), reference NFPA’s codes and standards in their 
own regulations. Many insurance companies use 
NFPA documents for guidelines in assessing risks 
and setting premiums. NFPA’s codes and standards 
are the result of more than 200 committees consisting 
of more than 5,000 individuals who serve voluntarily. 
Built into the codes and standards-making process is 
an opportunity for the public to comment on docu-
ments at every stage of their development. Only after 
the public comment phase is complete is the docu-
ment brought before the membership of NFPA for 
formal adoption. Once this phase is completed, the 
standards are published and available for voluntary 
adoption by local jurisdictions.
Ten of the NFPA documents deal with the qualifi -
cations of those who serve in the fi re service. As pub-
lic organizations, fi re service organizations are open 
to public scrutiny and are held accountable for their 
actions. There is considerable value in being able to 
demonstrate that the personnel of these agencies are 
certifi ed as meeting the competency standards of an 
entity that has itself been evaluated by an independent, 
thorough, objective, and public process and approved or 
accredited as meeting the requirements of the process.2
NFPA published the fi rst national standard for fi re 
service offi cers in 1976. It defi ned the knowledge, 
skills, and abilities needed by the company offi cer. 
Over the years the document has been revised sev-
eral times, with each revision improving the list of 
requirements for those seeking certifi cation as fi re 
offi cers (see Figure 1-6).
FIGURE 1-6 Good communication 
skills are important for the company 
offi cer as indicated by the NFPA 
Standard 1021.
NOTE
The present version of NFPA 1021, Standard for Fire 
Officer Professional Qualifications, outlines the require-
ments for fire officers at four levels of competency.
Comparing NFPA 1021 
and College Programs
The requirements in NFPA 1021 are the result of a 
task analysis that determined the work done by typical 
fi re offi cers at four levels within their organization.
For example, for Fire Offi cer I, that standard 
requires the following:
■ Effective oral and written communications skills
■ Leadership skills so that one can make assign-
ments, supervise work, and evaluate performance

The Company Officer’s Role—Challenges and Opportunities  11
■ Skills to deal with member-related problems
■ Skills to respond to a citizen’s concern and deal 
with public inquiries
■ Skills to solve problems and recommend changes 
in department policy
■ Skills to manage safety by demonstrating knowl-
edge about the most common causes of injury acci-
dents and the spread of infectious disease
■ Skills to conduct an initial accident investigation 
and report the results in writing
■ Skills to develop a pre-emergency plan, under-
stand the community’s emergency action plan, and 
explain fi re growth and development, building con-
structions, relevant fi re and building code require-
ments, and the value of fi re protection features
■ When emergencies do occur, the skills needed to 
implement a plan so that resources are safely and 
effectively deployed to mitigate the incident
If you will look at the preceding list of requirements, 
you will see that all of these topics are addressed in 
FIGURE 1-7 An example of a certifi cation ladder utilized by the Virginia Department of Fire Programs. 
courses offered in most college fi re science programs. 
Indeed, the courses in college fi re science programs 
and the requirements of the fi re offi cer certifi cation 
process are similar, and both represent the needs of 
individuals moving into and ascending the supervi-
sory ranks of the fi re service.
In addition to pragmatic courses (for example, 
building construction and hydraulics) taught in most 
college-level fi re science courses, most community 
college programs provide the following learning out-
comes for all students:
■ The ability to effectively communicate through 
speaking, writing, reading, and listening
■ The ability to locate, evaluate, and use information 
to analyze problems and make decisions
■ The ability to apply math skills to organize, 
 analyze, and use information appropriately
■ The ability to apply critical thinking skills to 
 analyze and solve problems ranging from physical 
to emotional
Certified Fire Training Progression Chart
NFPA and ProBoard Standards
Fire
Instructor 3
Pre: Instructor 2
Fire
Instructor 2
Pre: Instructor 1
Fire
Instructor 1
Pre: NFPA 1041
Fire Officer 4
Pre: Officer 3
Fire Officer 3
Pre: Officer 2,
Instructor 2
Fire Officer 2
Pre: Officer 1,
Instructor 1
Fire Officer 1
Pre: Firefighter II
Instructor 1
Firefighter
Level 2
Pre: FF 1 HMO
Firefighter Level 1
Pre: First Aid
HMA, CPR
Civilian
Entry
Airport Firefighter
Pre: FF2
HMO
Driver/Operator
Pre: Firefighter I
Fire Officer Path NFPA 1021
Fire Inspector Path
NFPA 1031
Fire Instructor
NFPA 1041
Fire Instructor 1
NFPA 1041
Required
Optional
Acceptable
NFPA 1001
NFPA 1002
NFPA 1003
Fire
Inspector 3
Pre: NFPA 1031
Fire
Inspector 2
Pre: NFPA 1031
Fire
Inspector 1
Pre: NFPA 1031
Public Educator Path
NFPA 1035
Public
Educator 3
Pre: NFPA 1035
Fire Investigator
NFPA 1033
Fire Investigator
Pre: NFPA 1033
Public
Educator 2
Pre: NFPA 1035
Public
Educator 1
Pre: NFPA 1035

12  CHAPTER 1
and be ready to go to work. However, new promotions 
are not quite that way. Offi cers learn something new 
every day, and yet they will never know all the answers. 
Company offi cers can prepare to make the transition 
from fi refi ghter to fi re offi cer with study and effort.
There have been many ways of promoting offi cers 
over the last century, but we are seeing more and more 
departments adopt an organized career development 
program for their members (see Figure 1-8). Such 
programs usually require courses from various disci-
plines from a local community college. The  program 
PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT: AN 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
COMPANY OFFICERS
The public’s need to resolve any problems encoun-
tered places a high level of responsibility on every 
member, including the newest fi refi ghter. For these 
reasons, demanding entry-level requirements and rig-
orous recruit training are vitally important. To main-
tain these skills and learn new ones, a continuing 
 program of training and education should be provided 
to all members. This training helps members main-
tain profi ciency at their present levels, meet certifi ca-
tion requirements, learn new procedures, and keep up 
with emerging technology.
Training to maintain skills should be provided by 
the department. Preparing for advancement should 
involve some individual initiative on the part of the 
member. In other words, if you want to get promoted, 
you have to put a little extra effort into the process. 
Although advancement brings greater prestige, it also 
brings added responsibilities. You should have an 
opportunity for promotion, but at the same time, you 
should take some personal initiative.
The company offi cer’s job is vast and varied, and 
it covers many diverse topics. Company offi cers are 
expected to walk into the new job, know all the answers, 
NOTE
It is envisioned that in addition to the requirements of 
NFPA 1021, the authority having jurisdiction may require 
additional credentials. These can include fire degree 
programs and general education in business, manage-
ment, science, and associated degree curricula.
In addition to meeting the requirements for certifi cation 
set forth in NFPA 1021, one can become designated as 
a chief fi re offi cer. This is a voluntary program designed 
to recognize individuals who can show their excellence 
in seven areas: experience, education, professional 
 development, professional contributions, association 
membership, community involvement, and technical 
competencies. Several fi re departments use a variation 
of this model to promote offi cers at all levels.
Since 1993, when a task force was formed within the 
International Association of Fire Chiefs to begin looking 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER DESIGNATION
at recognition for chief fi re offi cers, many dedicated indi-
viduals have labored to create a program that recognizes 
individual excellence throughout the fi re and emergency 
services. A commission composed of fi re service, mu-
nicipal, and academic leaders administers the program. 
The mission of the Commission for Chief Fire Offi cer 
Designation is to assist in the professional development 
of the fi re and emergency service personnel by providing 
guidance for career planning through participation in the 
Professional Designation Program.
For 
further 
information, 
go 
to 
http://www 
.publicsafetyexcellence.org/.
FIGURE 1-8 Professional development is a shared re-
sponsibility. Both you and your community have an obli-
gation, and both will benefi t from your growth. (Courtesy of 
the Phoenix, Arizona, Fire Department)
THE
INDIVIDUAL'S
RESPONSIBILITIES
MOTIVATION
PREPARATION
THE
DEPARTMENT'S
RESPONSIBILITIES
OPPORTUNITY
ENVIRONMENT
INDIVIDUAL
GROWTH
ORGANIZATIONAL
GROWTH
BOTH GET BETTER!

The Company Officer’s Role—Challenges and Opportunities  13
duty as well as throughout the rest of one’s life (see 
Figure 1-9).
In the fi nal analysis, professional development 
provides members with an established program 
of advancement opportunity. For the individual, 
advancement means increased responsibilities. As 
advancement occurs, the department and ultimately 
the citizens of the community benefi t from having 
knowledgeable, productive, and effective members. A 
well-planned professional development program is a 
good deal for everyone: It benefi ts the member, the 
department, and the community.
However, these benefi ts imply some responsibili-
ties. The department should encourage participation, 
provide an environment that offers opportunities for 
preparing for advancement, and establish a valid sys-
tem to select candidates for advancement. The mem-
ber must be motivated to prepare for and accept the 
additional responsibilities and duties that come with 
promotion.
High standards should be set for promotion to the 
fi rst supervisory ranks. These standards refl ect the 
signifi cant demands placed on supervisory person-
nel while performing their duties. The primary pur-
pose of the requirements is to ensure that personnel 
are fully prepared to face the complex challenges 
of the new positions they are assuming. Most of the 
requirements focus on administration, management, 
and supervisory issues.
content should be carefully considered so that once it 
is in place, it remains constant. Thus, members can 
know exactly what is required for advancement. To 
help members prepare for advancement and, more 
important, prepare to capably serve in the new posi-
tion after advancement, the new skills, knowledge, 
and abilities should be mastered before the member 
becomes eligible for promotion to the next rank.
The value of a structured professional devel-
opment program is further reinforced in a recent 
change to NFPA 1021. Not only should a depart-
ment have such a program, with offi cers enrolled 
in such a  program, but offi cers are expected to help 
others. The standard states that for certifi cation at 
the Offi cer II level, offi cers should “create a profes-
sional development plan for a member of the orga-
nization, given the requirements for promotion, so 
that the individual acquires the necessary knowl-
edge, skills, and abilities to be eligible for the exam-
ination for the position”.3
OFFICER ADVICE
To help members prepare for advancement and, more 
important, to prepare to capably serve in the new posi-
tion after advancement, the new skills, knowledge, and 
abilities should be mastered before the member  becomes 
eligible for promotion to the next rank.
Clearly, and appropriately, this places a burden 
on those who seek promotion. The department can 
ease this burden by encouraging participation through 
tuition assistance and arranging with a local commu-
nity college for courses to be scheduled at convenient 
times and locations. Where members work alternating 
shifts, this means asking the college to offer courses 
to accommodate the members’ work schedules. Thus, 
members can be assured of both the convenience and 
the opportunity to take courses without having to take 
time off from duty.
Some personnel may view these training and edu-
cation requirements as barriers to their advance-
ment; others will see them as opportunities. Taking 
the courses helps them develop new skills, knowl-
edge, and abilities so that they can perform duties 
in additional areas, perform current duties in a more 
effective and safe manner, and learn new proce-
dures as they are introduced. Much of the training 
and education required of a professional develop-
ment program can also help in one’s personal life. 
The information obtained while learning computer 
skills, improving communications skills, or becom-
ing more effective in interpersonal relations does 
not have to be left in the station—it can be used off 
FIGURE 1-9 Today’s fi re offi cer must be competent in 
 using the computer. Computers are needed for e-mail, 
access to the Internet, writing reports, and countless 
other applications.
OFFICER ADVICE
Be aware that a program leading to fi re offi cer certifi ca-
tion is only the fi rst step; additional training and education 
are strongly recommended.

14  CHAPTER 1
To make the system work best, these courses should 
be completed before you take the test for advance-
ment. To validate the process, the test or assessment 
process should carefully consider the content of all of 
these courses in their selection criteria. Because of the 
upfront effort on the part of the candidates, fewer can-
didates may appear for the test, but it is more likely 
that all will be qualifi ed. On the test day, all that is 
required is to select the best qualifi ed and rank them. 
Once promoted, these individuals should be ready to 
assume the duties of their new position.
Once promoted, you should continue your profes-
sional development by reading relevant books and 
magazines and by attending professional confer-
ences. These activities will help keep you current in 
the  ever-changing world and let you see how others 
are solving problems that are similar to yours. Read-
ing for pleasure and professional growth is much dif-
ferent than reading a textbook for a course in which 
you are enrolled, but both are important.
STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS 
AS A COMPANY OFFICER
We have talked about the qualities of a good offi cer 
and how you can be prepared to meet the challenges 
of this very responsible position. Before we close this 
chapter, let us leave you with a short list of qualities 
that will enhance your success. These qualities are 
foundational and the key to success as a company 
offi cer.
■ Be a professional. Being a professional means that 
you are dedicated and committed to the job, learn-
ing all that you can and giving as much as you can. 
Work to make yourself, your company, and your 
department the very best possible, whether you are 
paid or a volunteer.
■ Set personal goals. Every time you go to the sta-
tion, make some contribution to the improvement 
of the place and your organization.
■ Continuously work on your own training and edu-
cation and encourage the same in others. Training 
Lieutenants
■ Fire Offi cer I certifi ed (NFPA 1021)
■ Instructor I certifi ed (NFPA 1041)
■ A semester (or similar length course) of the 
following:
 College English
 Building Construction for the Fire Service
 Fire Suppression (sometimes called Strategy and 
Tactics)
Captains
■ Fire Offi cer II certifi ed (NFPA 1021)
■ Instructor II certifi ed (NFPA 1041)
■ A semester (or similar length course) of the 
following:
 A second English course, preferably in report 
writing
 College mathematics
 Administration or management
 Leadership or supervision
Many of these courses are part of a college-level 
degree program. Completion of these courses and 
the other requirements listed here will place you 
well along the path toward a college degree. Trans-
fer credit for prior college efforts and relevant courses 
taken at the National Fire Academy and state training 
programs should always be accepted.
NOTE
Many of the courses offered by the National Fire Acad-
emy have been reviewed by the American Council on 
Education and are recommended for college credit. 
Most colleges accept such courses when they can 
be substituted for a similar course with the college’s 
existing program. For more information, see the cur-
rent National Fire Academy catalog and consult with 
the counselors at your local college.
NOTE
NFPA 1021 does not mention fire officer ranks as such, 
allowing individual departments to align the four levels 
of qualification with their organization as they see fit. 
However, for purpose of illustration, we will use the tra-
ditional company officer titles of lieutenant and captain. 
Regardless of a department’s rank structure, an officer 
in charge of a company should meet the requirements 
for Fire Officer I, and one could make a strong case 
that they should also meet the requirements for Fire 
Officer II.
In the NFPA standard, the focus of the requirements 
for Fire Officer I is on supervision. The requirements 
for Fire Officer II continue that focus but add manage-
rial requirements as well. Many departments are now 
expecting company officers to manage their company 
(people), including the physical (station and equipment) 
and sometimes even the financial resources (money) 
needed to accomplish that task. The requirements for 
Fire Officer II address the skills, knowledge, and abili-
ties needed to accomplish these tasks.

The Company Officer’s Role—Challenges and Opportunities  15
is a part of the job, so obtain all of the training and 
education that you can. Set personal training and 
education goals, and use your time and energy to 
attain them.
■ Be loyal to your colleagues and your department. 
Speak well of your job, your department, and your 
associates. Although the U.S. Constitution guaran-
tees freedom of speech, good judgment suggests 
that this freedom must be tempered with reason 
and sometimes with constraint.
■ Be a role model. You will likely be able to recall the 
fi rst offi cer or fi rst instructor you had as a  fi refi ghter, 
EMT, or rescue squad member. These individuals 
leave a lasting impression with us—hopefully posi-
tive. For those who are in your charge, the same 
holds true; be a role model for them. Help them to 
develop a professional attitude about the job, and 
help them to be all that they can be. Being a good 
role model does not mean that you must be per-
fect. It means you try hard and work to improve 
so that you can do better tomorrow. Being a role 
model means being a professional. Professionalism 
encompasses attitude, behavior, communication 
style, demeanor, and ethical beliefs. It is as simple 
as A, B, C, D, and E.
 Attitude is at the core of your performance. 
A good positive attitude suggests that you are 
working to be a role model.
 Behavior is how you act. You are watched by oth-
ers, both while you are on duty and when you are 
off duty. Your actions refl ect upon yourself, your 
department, and your profession (see Figure 1-10).
 Communication is how you get your ideas across 
to others. Communication can be oral, written, 
or nonverbal. We are in a people business; we 
work with people, and we serve people. Today’s 
emergency service organizations spend a great 
deal of time working to improve the human rela-
tions side of us so that we work together better 
and serve our citizens better. Communication 
also involves effective listening and seeking to 
understand before being understood.4
 Demeanor embraces all three of the previously 
listed items. Focus your energies on the mission of 
FIGURE 1-10 The successful company offi cer is a role 
model for others.
your organization and use positive attitude, good 
personal behavior, and effective communications 
to accomplish the goals of your organization.
 Ethics deals with conforming to the highest pro-
fessional standards of your organization. It is 
more than just words and it is more than just act-
ing out words. It is doing the right thing, every 
time, every day.

16  CHAPTER 1
The company offi cer is the most important position within 
the fi re department.
This statement is profound and will garner many opin-
ions within the fi re service, but I fi rmly believe it to be 
true. Balancing the objectives of chief offi cers—whether 
you agree with them or not—with the needs of fi refi ght-
ers that help company offi cers achieve ultimate harmony 
and performance on a daily basis is a critical talent that 
is learned over time. The company offi cer is the link be-
tween these two disparate groups and requires a well-
developed skill set. Where do these skills come from, 
and how are they achieved?
When I was promoted to lieutenant, I was like many 
other fi rst-time offi cers, receiving little to no training and 
making an amazingly fast transition from riding backward 
to supervising in the span of a few days based on my 
success on a promotional exam. Like many other depart-
ments across the nation, the department I worked for at 
the time did not have an offi cer development program to 
teach me a new skill set, and the strategies and tactics 
had to be learned on the job. But now I was a company 
offi cer and was assigned to an unfamiliar station and 
tasked with the supervision of several seasoned veter-
ans who were set in their ways as fi refi ghters. My thought 
process changed quickly as I soon realized the responsi-
bilities placed on company offi cers: administrative duties, 
documentation, time management, and, most important, 
the safety of my personnel. The actions of fi refi ghters re-
fl ect their company offi cer, and their shortcomings and 
training were my responsibility. The truth is, company of-
fi cers have a direct infl uence on the performance, pro-
fessionalism, and morale of the department, and this is 
refl ected throughout the organization and, ultimately, in 
the community in the quality of service that is delivered. 
These realizations set in, and I realized that I had a lot of 
work to do in order to become an effective company of-
fi cer, and that work would never stop if I wanted to be-
come a successful company offi cer.
Over the next several years, I became a student of 
the fi re service, reading everything that I could, attending 
ACCEPTING THE COMPANY 
OFFICER CHALLENGE
Jake Rhoades, Deputy Chief for Rogers Fire 
Department, Arkansas (effective July 2009)
training events and conferences, obtaining additional for-
mal education, and, more important, learning my trade 
on the job through the daily experiences that it provided. 
I became active in many organizations such as the Ev-
eryone Goes Home program, Firefi ghter Near Miss, and 
the Fraternal Order of Leatherheads. These organizations 
provided tools that I could use on a daily basis, as well 
as a group of like-minded individuals with whom I could 
confer about my thoughts and problems. These individ-
uals reconfi rmed what we all know—fi refi ghters are the 
same all over the world and the fi re service is evolving—
and to be effective, company offi cers must continue to 
learn and be willing to embrace these changes.
The evolution of the fi re service has caused me to 
continue to grow and pursue the knowledge and skills 
necessary to be an effective offi cer. The lessons in lead-
ership that I gained from my fi rst day as a lieutenant still 
follow me today, and serve as the foundation for my ca-
reer as an offi cer. I am now an assistant chief with the 
City of Jenks, and, even considering my new position, 
I continue to profess that the key to our organizational 
success is the company offi cer.
The fi re service will continue to change, and it is the 
responsibility of every company offi cer to continue to 
welcome these changes and to do whatever it takes to 
become an effective company offi cer. You should strive 
to guarantee that everyone for whom you are responsible 
has the knowledge and the skills to perform his or her job 
as a fi refi ghter—it is your responsibility to ensure that ev-
eryone goes home.
Questions
1. What challenges did Jake Rhoades face in his fi rst 
promotion to a company offi cer position?
2. What did Lieutenant Rhoades do to overcome the 
challenges he faced as a new company offi cer?
3. How does Assistant Fire Chief Rhoades describe the 
role of a company offi cer?
4. Do you agree with Assistant Chief Fire Rhoades that 
the company offi cer is the most vital position in a fi re 
department? Why or why not?
5. What advice would you give a newly promoted com-
pany offi cer to help in overcoming the challenges he 
or she might face?

The Company Officer’s Role—Challenges and Opportunities  17
 1. What knowledge do you expect a good company 
offi cer to possess?
 2. What skills do you expect a good company offi cer 
to possess?
 3. What abilities do you expect a good company 
offi cer to possess?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 4. What behaviors do you expect a good company 
offi cer to demonstrate?
 5. Are there any other qualities you expect to see in 
a good company offi cer?
 6. Other than those listed in the text, what are the 
roles of a good company offi cer?
B
eing an offi cer in the fi re service is one of the great-
est jobs on earth. At times you are your own boss. 
You also supervise others. Often you are empowered to 
do many of the things you came into the fi re service to 
do. There is no higher calling. Being a company offi cer 
is not easy, but it has its rewards. One of those rewards 
is that you get to work with others, often as a leader, to 
do the very things that motivated you to enter this pro-
fession in the fi rst place—to save lives and property.
There are signifi cant rewards associated with the 
position of company offi cer, but there are also signifi -
cant responsibilities. Our purpose here is to help you 
prepare to meet these responsibilities.
The topics of offi cer development and increasing 
the professionalism in the fi re service are getting a 
lot of attention these days. You can turn to any of the 
leading trade journals or look on the Internet and fi nd 
plenty of evidence to substantiate this statement.
LESSONS LEARNED
Look at the National Fire Academy’s Web site, 
where you will fi nd information about professionalism 
and higher education in the fi re service. National Fire 
Academy Superintendent Denis Onieal speaks about 
this topic at many conferences and wrote about the 
subject in 2003. A condensed version of Dr. Onieal’s 
essay appears in Appendix B of this textbook. You 
can read the article in its entirety in the following 
magazines: Firehouse, FireRescue, and The Voice 
(the member magazine of the International Society of 
Fire Service Instructors).
At the end of this chapter, you will fi nd a list of 
additional resources. Note how much material has 
been recently published on the relevant topics of 
higher education and professional development for 
the fi re service. Several of the nationally circulated 
trade journals have an article on these topics every 
month.
certification document that attests that a person 
has demonstrated the knowledge and skills neces-
sary to function in a particular craft or trade
 1. List fi ve roles of the company offi cer.
 2. Where does the company offi cer fi t into the fi re 
department organization?
 3. List some of the rewards of being a company 
offi cer.
 4. List some of the challenges that face company 
offi cers.
 5. What is the name of the document that identifi es 
competency standards for fi re offi cers?
codes systematic arrangement of a body of rules
standard rule for measuring or model to be 
followed
 6. Why should fi re offi cers be certifi ed?
 7. List the fi ve strategies for success.
 8. What is the company offi cer’s primary job?
 9. What is the company offi cer’s role in leading the 
company?
 10. What is the company offi cer’s role in the 
department?
KEY TERMS
REVIEW QUESTIONS

18  CHAPTER 1
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
 9. What are your personal (as opposed to the profes-
sional) goals? What are you doing to meet these 
goals?
 10. What are your motives in becoming a company 
offi cer?
 7. If you could design a course that addresses the 
items listed in questions 1–6, which would you 
include?
 8. What are the qualities you personally need to de-
velop to be a good company offi cer?
ENDNOTES
Systems, Copyright © 2006, National Fire Protection Associ-
ation. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is repre-
sented only by the standard in its entirety.
3. NFPA 1021, Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi ca-
tions, 2009, Section 5.2.3.
4. Steven Covey, 7 Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: 
Fireside,1989).
NFPA 1000. Fire Service Professional Qualifi cations Accredita-
tion and Certifi cation Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Pro-
tection Association.
Onieal, Denis. “Professional Status: The Future of Fire Service 
Training and Education,” Firehouse, August 2003.
Prziborowski, Steve. “What Every ‘Route’ Company Offi cer Needs 
to Know.” Firehouse, February 2009.
Prziborowski, Steve. “Prepare for Your Promotion Now!” Fire 
Engineering, July 2007.
Prziborowski, Steve. “What’s Keeping You from Getting Pro-
moted?” Firehouse, August 2008.
Rubin, Dennis, and Edward Kaplan. “Could Higher Education Be 
in Your Future?” Firehouse, February 2008.
Schaefer, James J. “University and Community-Based Interoper-
ability.” Firehouse, November 2008.
Snodgrass, Paul. “Building an Educational Foundation to a Fire 
Service Career.” Firehouse, February 2009.
Snodgrass, Paul. “Rich Media: Enhancing Content in Online 
Courses. Firehouse, August 2008.
Snodgrass, Paul. “Characteristics of Successful E-Learners.” Fire-
house, October 2007.
Stocker, Alan. “Help Make Your Employees Successful.” Fire 
Engineering, July 2008
Terpak, Michael. “Promotional Assessment Centers: Understand-
ing the Process.” Fire Engineering, July 2006.
Thompson, Scott, and Eddie Bachanan. “It’s All about Attitude.” 
Fire Engineering, July 2004.
Wakeham, Ron, and Bill Lowe. “Getting Educated about Being 
College Educated.” Firehouse, August 2004.
1. Among the organizations represented were the International 
Association of Fire Chiefs, the International Association of 
Firefi ghters, the International Fire Service Training Associa-
tion, the International Society of Fire Service Instructors, the 
National Fire Protection Association, and the National Volun-
teer Fire Council. The council, having accomplished its initial 
goals, disbanded in 1992.
2. Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1000, Fire Service 
Professional Qualifi cations Accreditation and Certifi cation 
Bennett, Jack A. “Effectiveness at the Company Offi cer Level.” 
American Fire Journal, August 1996.
Carter, Harry. “What Higher Education Means for My Fire Service 
Career.” Firehouse, August 2007.
Carter, Harry. “A Personnel Growth Plan for Future Development.” 
Firehouse, February 2009.
Carter, Harry R. “Developing a Plan for Self-Evaluation.” Fire-
house, November 2008.
Clark, Burton. “Who Needs a Ph.D.?” Fire Chief, February 2004.
Clark, Burton A. “Higher Education and Fire Service Professional-
ism.” Fire Chief, September 1993.
Curmode, Rick, and John Leslie. “Promotional Progress.” Fire 
Chief, March 2007.
DeMint, Tom. “So You Want to Be Promoted.” Fire Engineering, 
July 2006.
Favreau, Donald F. Guidelines for Fire Service Education Pro-
grams in Community and Junior Colleges. Washington, DC: 
American Association of Junior Colleges, 1969.
Ford, Travis. “What Is FESHE?” Firehouse, February 2007.
Gayk, Ray. Company Offi cer Development.” Fire Rescue, April 
2008.
Goodwin, Scott. “What They Did and Didn’t Give You with the 
Badge,” Fire Engineering July 2004.
“Higher 
Education,” 
www.usfa.fema.gov/fi reservice/nfa/
highereducation.
Leath, Eric. “Higher Education = Better Skills, Better Future.” Fire 
Engineering, April 2007.
Mourchid, Younes. “Earning a Fire Science Degree FESHE Style.” 
Firehouse, August 2008.
Mourchid, Younes. “Where Public Safety Policy Meets Higher 
Education.” Firehouse, November 2008.


The Company Officer’s 
Role in Effective 
Communications
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ The Importance of Communications 
in Our Work and Life
■ Oral Communications
■ Improving Writing Skills
■ Using E-mail
■ Public Relations
■ Emergency Communications
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
2

21
STREET 
STORY
O
ne of my early weaknesses was trying to control the adrenaline buzz I would 
get when a structure fire was dispatched. I would get excited, and this was 
reflected in my communications—whether on the radio, with my crew, or with 
victims. More often than not, my style did not help matters. In an effort to make 
up for this lack of experience, I spent off-duty hours riding with engine and truck 
companies in busy fire departments. These professional visitations taught me 
much about company leadership and communications. One communication trait 
I noticed right away was the calm, confident nature that experienced company 
officers used when dealing with station issues, incidents, and conflict. One 
particular captain became a mentor of sorts for me—he was always quiet, firm, 
and clear. I was amazed how easily he switched his communications style to fit 
specific situations, yet he always remained calm and confident. When responding 
to incidents, he would communicate any known information to his crew and 
would ask if they had knowledge of the building or area to contribute. When the 
apparatus turned the corner and the incident came into view, he would always 
tell his driver to “slow down.” After hearing this a few times, I asked him why he 
always told the driver to slow. He simply replied, “I’m stalling!” Then he went on 
to explain that it was his way to control his excitement and to channel that energy 
into evaluating the environment. In doing this, he could pick up on the presence 
of electrical lines, hydrant locations, bystander reactions, and other hazards—not 
to mention analyzing the building construction and features and reading smoke 
conditions.
Of course, I tried to emulate that in my own role as a lieutenant and started 
using the “slow down” technique. After several incidents, my driver became very 
frustrated. It was not long before he cornered me and defensively asked if I felt his 
driving was bad! I realized right there that my communication was not clear and the 
message was interpreted differently than I had intended. After a bit of discussion, 
we found an understanding of my needs and the intent of the message. A few 
months later, my company was dispatched to a structure fire in a residential area. 
As my driver turned the corner, we could see a large crowd gathering near a 
working fire that was blowing through the front windows of a house. As if on cue, 
my driver said, “Don’t worry, lieutenant, I’m slowing down!”
Being mindful of the message, audience, and tone is a learned communication 
skill. As a company officer, I have learned that the WAY you communicate is more 
important than the message itself. Over time, I realized that calm is usually best—
even when things are getting hairy. I have learned that “telling” is not “teaching”—
creating a discovery environment is worth the extra effort. I have learned that a 
brief second used to compose oral communications is a wise investment. I have 
learned that critical written communications should be read by someone outside 
the intended reader BEFORE sending it. Most important, I have learned that 
“hearing” and “listening” are very different.
—Dave Dodson, Lead Instructor, Response Solutions, Colorado

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
2-1 Distinguish between formal and informal 
communication.
 
2-2 Define the communication process.
 
2-3 Describe the communication order model.
 
2-4 Identify the forms of communication.
 
2-5 Describe the methods used to determine fire-
fighter comprehension of verbal directions.
 
2-6 List the barriers to effective nonemergency 
communication.
 
2-7 Identify public relations practices when dealing 
with the media.
 
2-8 Explain the Company Officer’s role in dealing 
with on scene media.
 
2-9 Explain the Company Officer’s role in writing a 
press release.
 2-10 List common components found in a news 
release.
 2-11 Explain the policies, procedures, and statutes 
that govern news release.
 2-12 Explain the policies and procedures for releas-
ing agency information.
 2-13 List the barriers to effective emergency 
communications.
 2-14 Identify the methods of improving communica-
tions on the fireground.
INTRODUCTION
Effective communications are a vital part of your 
professional life. Consider these generally accepted 
truths:
■ Those who can communicate effectively get more 
out of life.
■ Those who cannot communicate effectively will 
not reach their full potential.
Given these statements, you should realize that 
good communications skills are essential in both your 
work and your personal life. Many fi re offi cers will 
gladly sign up for a weekend of training on a tech-
nical aspect of fi refi ghting. Many would also benefi t 
from making a similar commitment to improve their 
communications skills. Effective communications 
skills will also add value to your personal life.
individuals. You may have the best ideas, but to imple-
ment them you must communicate them to others. 
You have to communicate to make recommendations 
to your superiors and to motivate your subordinates. 
You have to communicate to a variety of audiences, 
including the public you serve. When you represent 
yourself, your communications shortcomings will 
only hurt yourself. However, when you represent your 
department, community, or profession, your inabili-
ties to communicate your ideas and knowledge have a 
much greater impact.
*The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021 Standards, are identiﬁ ed in different colors: 
FO I  black, FO II  red.
The second reason for placing this material in the 
front of the text is that communications skills are a 
tool needed to complete the requirements for certifi ca-
tion. According to NFPA 1021, Standard for Fire Offi -
cer Professional Qualifi cations, good oral and written 
communications skills are a prerequisite for most of 
the certifi cation requirements for Fire Offi cer I.1
22  CHAPTER 2
NOTE
Good communications skills are essential in both your 
work and your personal life.
NOTE
A lack of good communications skills will hurt even the 
best of individuals.
NOTE
Communications can be defined as a process by which 
information is exchanged between two individuals.
This chapter appears at the front of the text for 
 several good reasons. First, it is one of the most 
important topics in the book. Many fi re chiefs report 
that the one weakness prevalent among their offi cers 
is their inability to communicate effectively. A lack of 
good communications skills will hurt even the best of 

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  23
directives, standard operating procedures, and offi cial 
correspondence are examples of formal communica-
tions. Such formal communications usually have legal 
standing within the organization.
Informal communications are simpler and more sponta-
neous. We write with less formality when sending memos, 
short notes, and e-mail to others. Likewise, we tend to be 
less formal during social events such as meals and other 
situations where we might be together with colleagues.
Written communications can be either formal or 
informal. We have already cited some examples of for-
mal communications (for example, formal orders), but 
many organizations use informal written communica-
tions as well. We usually communicate up and down 
the organization using formal communications. When 
we need to communicate across the organization, we 
usually use a more informal communications style.
For example, you might ask a peer in another sec-
tion for information or an opinion on a new idea. 
Because this communication is based more on friend-
ship than on any formal relationship, informal com-
munications are more comfortable.
Informal communications works well in estab-
lished organizations where there are stable relation-
ships among the work units and among the individual 
members. When work units are emerging, when there 
THE IMPORTANCE OF 
COMMUNICATIONS IN OUR 
WORK AND LIFE
Being able to communicate effectively is important 
for both you and your fi re department. Think about 
how much of your time is spent communicating; it is 
an important part of your life.
Formal versus Informal 
Communications
To begin our discussion of personal communications, 
we start by distinguishing between formal and infor-
mal communications. Because we are focusing on the 
needs of the job as an offi cer in the fi re service, we 
are focusing on the formal aspects of both oral and 
written communications.
Formal communications are conducted according to 
established standards. They tend to follow the customs, 
rules, and practices of the industry or workplace. The 
fi re service has its established practices. The medical 
community has its practices. The legal profession has 
quite a different set of practices. Formal communica-
tions transmit offi cial information. Formal orders and 
Regardless of whether you are speaking or writing, the 
communications process is generally thought to include 
fi ve elements, called the communication model.
Communication Model
■ Sender: The process starts with the sender. The 
sender is the person who has the information and 
who wishes to send it to another person. Selecting 
the method of communications, forming thoughts, 
and expressing these thoughts in words form an im-
portant part of this process. All of this activity is ac-
complished by the sender.
■ Message: The sender selects the message. The mes-
sage is the information, which is usually communi-
cated using words, although certain symbols, such as 
the signs used in mathematics, are also considered 
part of the message. The proper selection of the mes-
sage is vital to the communications process.
■ Medium: The sender also selects the method of trans-
mission, sometimes referred to as the  medium. The 
 medium is the means by which the message is trans-
mitted. Media include oral and written  communications, 
ELEMENTS OF THE 
COMMUNICATIONS PROCESS
signs, and graphic representations. A stop sign is 
a medium. When a police offi cer is standing in the 
 center of an intersection, the offi cer’s upraised hand 
is a medium. The sound of a siren might also be a 
medium. All send the same message. Other media of 
communication include books, the spoken word, and 
images on the screen in class.
■ Receiver: The receiver is the recipient of the message. 
Although the receiver is thought to be a passive role, 
we shall soon see that the receiver plays an active role 
in the communications process.
■ Feedback: The fi nal step in the communications pro-
cess is called feedback. Feedback tells the sender 
that the message was received and understood. 
Feedback comes in many ways (see Figure 2-1 and 
Figure 2-2). Compliance with a request is an obvious 
example of feedback. If you ask someone to turn on 
the light, and the person does, that is feedback. The 
act of turning on the light indicates that the person re-
ceived the message, understood the message, and 
complied with the request.
In this situation, the feedback was obvious. Some-
times getting feedback is much more diffi cult. The lack 
of feedback leaves the sender wondering if the message 
was received, if it was understood, and if anyone is going 
to respond. We discuss feedback later in this chapter.

24  CHAPTER 2
 one-way or two-way; for example, a recorded  message 
on an answering machine is considered one-way com-
munication, while a conversation on the telephone is 
a form of two-way communications. Oral communi-
cation can be accomplished with one receiver or a 
large audience in a conference or classroom. Or it can 
be done in daylight or total darkness. However, oral 
communications are limited—they may be inhib-
ited by barriers such as language diffi culties or back-
ground noise, and they may not be documented.
is confl ict, or when there is a lack of trust, we tend to 
see greater use of formal communications.
Forms of Personal 
Communications
The spoken word is the most commonly used method 
of personal communications. It is fast, practical, 
and usually effective. Oral communications can be 
NOTE
The spoken word is the most commonly used method 
of personal communications.
The second form of personal communications is writ-
ten communications. Written communications provide 
a record that can be used for future reference, showing 
that the message was sent, and in some cases there is 
evidence to show that the message was received.
The third form of communications is communi-
cating without words, sometimes referred to as body 
language. A smile or a frown can express more than 
words, or an extended hand can make a clear state-
ment. When appropriate, a pat on the back can send 
an obvious message of support and confi dence.
There are other forms of communications, such as 
symbols or signs, that can be used to relay a message 
or emotion (see Figure 2-3).
ORAL COMMUNICATIONS
Of all communication forms listed, oral communica-
tion is easiest, most commonly used, and effective. It 
is effective because there is immediate feedback from 
the listener; as a result, most of us prefer face-to-face 
contact when speaking with others. Face-to-face con-
tact allows the feedback process to work at its best. 
Good eye contact allows us to look directly at the 
other individual and watch that person’s facial expres-
sions and gestures. A nod of understanding encour-
ages the speaker to continue. On the other hand, a 
frown should cause the speaker to pause and cover 
the material in another way. Even the most effective 
speakers should realize that there will be times when 
their message is not understood.
FLAMMABLE
STOP
FIGURE 2-3 Signs are a form 
of communications. Some are 
more personal than others.
FIGURE 2-1 Effective communications skills are an 
 important tool for officers.
MESSAGE
RECEIVER
SENDER
FEEDBACK
FIGURE 2-2 The communications model represents 
a continuous process.

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  25
respective activity, it allows for feedback, and it allows 
the listener a chance to ask questions, if needed.
It is best if the listener only has to concentrate on 
listening, and at times that can be diffi cult. This means 
removing the barriers that get in the way of good com-
munications and also means that the receiver should 
avoid anticipating what the sender will say or interrupt-
ing the speaker with questions. Often, when a person 
attempts to multitask, such as talking on the telephone 
and working on the computer at the same time, the lis-
tener becomes distracted and the messages are lost.
NOTE
The speaker should stop from time to time and ask the 
listener a question.
NOTE
The listener should have to concentrate only 
on listening.
Although most of us like to communicate face-to-
face, it is not always possible. When a telephone or 
radio is used to communicate with words, there is no 
face-to-face contact (see Figure 2-4). Facial expres-
sions and gestures cannot be seen; therefore, com-
munications is deprived of some feedback that may 
be essential to the communications process. When 
using such forms of oral exchanges, it is impor-
tant the sender make sure the receiver has received 
and has understood the correct message that was 
communicated.
In any case, the speaker should stop from time to 
time and ask the listener a question. This practice 
allows the sender and the receiver to trade places for a 
moment and makes the communications process eas-
ier for both parties. This works, regardless of whether 
you are speaking to one or one hundred.
When speaking and making a habit of pausing 
occasionally and asking a question, several things 
happen. As we have already indicated, this practice 
allows the sender and the receiver to momentarily 
trade places. The change is usually welcomed on both 
sides. Also, you will get questions, and with those 
questions, you get additional feedback that helps to 
confi rm understanding.
Another advantage of this process is that the 
receiver will anticipate that a pause is coming and 
will hold any questions until the appropriate oppor-
tunity is presented. So this practice allows the sender 
and the receiver to have a short break from their 
FIGURE 2-4 Communicating by phone or radio can be 
more difficult than communicating face-to-face.
FIGURE 2-5 There are many barriers to effective 
communications.
Barriers to Effective 
Communications
We have discussed some of the characteristics of 
effective communication. Now let us consider some 
of the barriers that make communications diffi cult. 
Any obstacle in the communications process is called 
a barrier. Consider a barrier to be like a fi lter. One or 
more fi lters, or barriers, reduces the information fl ow 
between the sender and the receiver. There are several 
types of barriers (see Figure 2-5).
■ Physical barriers: Physical barriers are environ-
mental factors that prevent or reduce the sending 
and receiving of communications. Walls, distance, 
and background noise are examples of physical 
barriers. These are usually obvious barriers.
■ Personal barriers: Personal barriers are less obvi-
ous. They arise from the judgments, emotions, and 
SENDER
RECEIVER
M E S S A G E
?
BIG WORDS
TECHNICAL TERMS
BOREDOM
CONFUSION
MONOTONE
COMMUNICATIONS BARRIERS

26  CHAPTER 2
a group of senior citizens. The next day, you may go 
into a community where English is the second lan-
guage. Although the purpose of your visit is similar 
on each occasion, the way you communicate your 
safety message should be quite different.
Part of the Communications 
Process Is Listening
We have indicated the importance of good, effective 
communications and that the sender has quite a respon-
sibility to select the medium and the message, to check 
for feedback, and to be aware of the potential barriers. 
Communicating also involves listening. In fact, listen-
ing may be the most important part for the company 
offi cer. Understanding others requires an active role on 
the part of the listener. This role is called active lis-
tening. As a listener, you can show the sender that 
you are actively listening by focusing all of your atten-
tion on the speaker and by showing genuine interest in 
the speaker’s message. This usually means looking at 
the speaker, doing nothing but listening, and allowing 
your facial  expressions to indicate interest and under-
standing (see Figure 2-6). Alert facial expression and 
good posture indicate a good listener. This is what the 
world renowned authority on leadership, Dr. Steven 
Covey refers to in his book 7 Habits of Highly Effective 
People. The fi fth principle is “Seek fi rst to understand 
before being understood.” Mr. Covey writes:
If you’re like most people, you probably seek fi rst to be 
understood; you want to get your point across. And in 
doing so, you may ignore the other person completely, 
pretend that you’re listening, selectively hear only cer-
tain parts of the conversation or attentively focus on only 
social values we place on people. These factors 
cause a psychological barrier, which can be just as 
real as a physical barrier. Personal barriers act as 
fi lters in nearly all of our interactions with others. 
We see and hear what we want to see and hear, and 
we remain selectively “tuned out” to that which we 
do not wish to see or hear.
■ Semantic barriers: Semantic barriers arise from 
language problems. Our language is fi lled with 
words that have multiple meanings and words that 
have vague meanings. Consider the word “round.” 
There are several dozen meanings to this word in 
a standard dictionary. In fact, there are more than 
500 words in common use that have more than 20 
meanings. Consider the word “dummy.” A dummy 
is a rescue training tool. A dummy has a differ-
ent meaning in the publishing industry. The word 
“dummy” is also used in the game of bridge. None 
of these terms is offensive. But just call someone 
a “dummy” and see what happens. No wonder we 
sometimes have trouble communicating!
You should be aware of the impact of barriers and 
change the conditions that impose the barriers when the 
communications process is adversely affected. Some 
things can be easily controlled. You can control the 
choice of words; the use of technical terms, acronyms, 
or trade jargon; and the speed of delivery. You can 
sometimes control the time and place of the commu-
nication. You can enhance understanding and retention 
by repeating vital information and showing the same 
information in some graphic form. All of these tech-
niques will have considerable impact on the listener.
So it is with a new fi refi ghter who may be working 
for you. New fi refi ghters may be bright and highly 
motivated, but when you are teaching them something 
new and you talk over their heads or speak too fast 
for their comprehension, you will not be effectively 
communicating. Place yourself in the role of that new 
fi refi ghter. Provide the information in small bits and 
ask questions to be sure that the communications pro-
cess is still working. Other things to consider include 
the age, educational levels, possible language differ-
ences, the background and experience, and the work-
ing relationship. Overcoming communications barri-
ers can be achieved by being adaptive to the audience, 
by having a specifi c purpose, and by staying focused, 
brief, and clear.
When you are speaking to groups of people and 
when you are speaking to individuals outside of the 
fi re department, the process is even more challeng-
ing. For example, consider the delivery of the depart-
ment’s public life safety education message. One 
day you might be asked to speak to a group of third 
 graders. That evening you might be asked to speak to 
FIGURE 2-6 Good listening skills are part of communicating.

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  27
Listening to others is an important part of your 
job and probably takes up a good part of your day as 
company offi cer. Good listening skills are important. 
Research has shown that we take in a very small part 
of what we hear and that we remember only a small 
part of what we take in. Listening is an active process 
that requires considerable effort.
the words being said, but miss the meaning entirely. So 
why does this happen? Because most people listen with 
the intent to reply, not to understand. You listen to your-
self as you prepare in your mind what you are going to 
say, the questions you are going to ask, etc. You fi lter 
everything you hear through your life experiences, your 
frame of reference. You check what you hear against 
your autobiography and see how it measures up. And 
consequently, you decide prematurely what the other 
person means before he/she fi nishes communicating.2
NOTE
Understanding others requires an active role on the 
part of the listener.
When the message is unclear or not understood, 
the listener should ask questions when appropriate. 
Questions and comments usually indicate interest and 
encourage the speaker to expand on an area that was 
not clearly presented.
While questions are signs of good listening, inter-
rupting with too many questions or offering solutions to 
the speaker’s problems before the speaker has fi nished 
is not good practice. These activities show that the lis-
tener is impatient to bring the conversation to a close.
Certainly there are times when the process must 
be hurried and even interrupted. That is part of life in 
the fi re service. When interruptions occur, both par-
ties should make an effort to resume the conversation 
as soon as circumstances permit. The real mark of a 
good leader is a comment that one sometime hears 
from one of the fi refi ghters: “I like the captain. She 
listens to me when I have a problem.”
NOTE
Alert facial expression and good posture indicate 
a good listener.
Consider the following situation: You walk into your 
supervisor’s offi ce with a question. If your boss stops 
work, looks at you, and gives you 100 percent of his/
her attention, it is likely that he/she is actively listening. 
On the other hand, if one or more of these conditions is 
not met, it is likely that he/she is not actively listening. 
Which situation would you rather encounter?
NOTE
When you are actively listening, three important things 
happen:
• First, you actually hear what is being said.
• Second, you are more likely to remember what 
was said.
• Third, you show respect for the sender.
Good Communications 
Is a Part of Leadership
As a supervisor, the way you communicate with your 
people has a lot to do with your leadership style. Sup-
pose a subordinate stops at your offi ce with a question. 
If you take time to focus on that person, show respect 
for and interest in him/her as a person, and actively 
listen to his/her idea or question, you are doing a lot 
to enhance both the communications process and the 
personal relationship. Not only are you listening but 
also you are showing a genuine interest in the visitor 
and his/her thoughts. Whether you do this or not, the 
time and energy spent in the conversation are about 
the same. But look at the difference in the outcomes. 
With active listening, you hear better and you under-
stand better, and you say, “I care about you.”
Regardless of whether you are communicating 
through the spoken word or through your writing, 
there is a need to consider the human relations aspect 
in every communications activity. Human relations 
are discussed in greater detail in Chapters 6 and 7, but 
we should note here that consideration for the other 
person is important to the communications process.
When we communicate, we have an opportunity 
to show respect for the person or persons with whom 
we are communicating. That respect, or the lack of 
it, will be clearly apparent in the speaker’s tone as 
well as the words that are used. When the sender uses 
words and phrases that show respect and consider-
ation for the receiver’s interests and point of view, it 
is far more likely that the message will be accepted, 
even when it brings bad news.
OFFICER ADVICE
At several points in this text, we depart from preparing 
you to become an offi cer in the fi re service and offer some 
friendly advice. This is one of those occasions. Consider 
the preceding information about active listening in your 
personal life. How well do you communicate in an infor-
mal setting? How well do you listen to your friends, your 
spouse, or your children? They also deserve 100 percent 
of your listening talent. Try some active listening at home 
or in a social setting.

28  CHAPTER 2
Making Practical 
Use of Effective 
Communications
Consider the following example: “Bill, I have noticed 
that on our last three calls you were the last one get-
ting to the truck. On our most recent call, the driver 
and I had to wait 30 seconds for you to arrive and get 
properly seated. Those delays may seem minor, but 
as you well know, there are times when every second 
counts. Although no one else has noticed it, this con-
cerns me. Is there a problem? Can I do anything that 
might help you get there a little faster?”
Notice that the offi cer has not directly accused Bill 
of anything wrong, nor has the offi cer threatened Bill 
in any way. The offi cer has only stated professional 
observations and expressed a personal concern about 
the situation. The offi cer asked Bill two open-ended 
questions. Hopefully, these will give Bill an opportu-
nity to recognize that there is a problem and to realize 
that the boss is both concerned and willing to help. In 
this case, the offi cer has shown concern for the fi re-
fi ghter and has given Bill a chance to identify and 
solve his own problems.
Contrast that action with the following: “Bill, you 
are too slow on all of our alarms! I guess you just 
don’t think that others are very important. That is, if 
you can think . . . .”
In summary, show respect, get to the point, focus 
on specifi cs, express your own personal feelings, and 
make the discussion a two-way process.
Although you should show a concern for the human 
relations aspect of communications, there must come 
a time in the conversation when you have to get to 
the point of the meeting. Getting to the point does 
not mean that there is any lack of respect, nor does it 
mean that the sender has to be blunt or abrupt. This 
problem is especially true when dealing with perfor-
mance issues in the workplace. We are often afraid of 
hurting the other person’s feelings.
It is important to remember the human relations 
aspect of communications, but you have to commu-
nicate a message. That requires effective communi-
cations and the ability to focus on specifi cs. After a 
brief warm-up, get to the heart of the message and 
tell it like it is. Avoid generalities and exaggerations. 
“I’ve told you a million times, don’t exaggerate!” is 
a perfect example. In the workplace, a supervisor’s 
comment such as “You are late again! It seems that 
you are late every day” is likely to start a confronta-
tion rather than a productive session in which solu-
tions can be achieved.
As a supervisor, you (sender) should be able to 
talk about performance issues without talking about 
the personality or personal traits of the subordinate 
(receiver). If the subordinate’s work is not up to stan-
dard, you should talk about the standard and the fact 
that the subordinate is not meeting the standard. You 
might show how this impacts others and what this does 
to the organization’s overall performance. These are 
facts. What does this do to the conversation? In this 
case, the member’s performance becomes the issue, 
not the member’s personality, attitude, or ability.
As the sender, you should be able to express your own 
feelings and reactions, when appropriate, especially 
when dealing with performance problems. For example, 
you might say, “I am disappointed with this work.”
NOTE
When we communicate, we have an opportunity to 
show respect for the person or persons with whom we 
are communicating.
NOTE
Remember to make your communications a two-way 
process.
Finally, remember to make your communications a 
two-way process (see Figure 2-7). As the supervisor, 
you can usually ask a question that will bring more 
information to light or help the other person under-
stand the issue. Likewise, when writing, always close 
with an offer to continue the discussion or provide 
additional information.
FIGURE 2-7 When discussing a members’ performance 
remember to let the member tell his/her side as well.

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  29
within their department, and they should also be 
interested in what is going on elsewhere in the fi re 
service. You should facilitate this process. By vir-
tue of your rank and experience, you probably have 
more access to what is happening at headquarters and 
elsewhere. You should be reading the directives from 
headquarters and the trade magazines. In both cases, 
you should pass on to the troops appropriate informa-
tion as soon as practical.
If fi refi ghters have a question, you should take the 
initiative to help them fi nd the answer (see  Figure 
2-8). That answer may be to simply (and politely) 
tell them where to look for help. Some questions will 
require a call to headquarters. In many cases, it cer-
tainly would be far more appropriate for you to make 
the call. Besides, you are more likely to know whom 
to call and what questions to ask.
Other Ways to Improve Your 
Speech Communications
Most adults speak well. However, many adults would 
benefi t from some further training on this most com-
monly used form of communications. One way to 
improve your communications skills is to watch your-
self on videotape. Make a speech and record it. Then 
sit down by yourself and critically watch what you 
did. Be forewarned: It can be a painful experience.
Effective oral communications require some 
effort. Your speech should be clear and distinct. The 
pace should be such that the listener has time to hear 
and understand what you are saying.  Common prob-
lems in oral communications include not  looking 
At this point you may likely say, “Well, that is okay 
in the fi re station, but when we get out on the fi re-
ground, things change.” Surely the tempo picks up, 
and the communications tend to be very directive in 
nature. “Do this! Do that!” Some of that is justifi ed 
by the urgency of the situation. But even under these 
conditions, your leadership style is heard in the tone 
of your voice and in what you say. If you remain polite 
and reasonable in your communications, you will get 
just as much, if not more, from the troops.
FIGURE 2-8 When you do not 
know the answer, admit it. 
Then, make an effort to find the 
answer.
One of the company offi cer’s many jobs is to facili-
tate the communications process. Firefi ghters tend to 
be interested in matters that are going on elsewhere 
OFFICER ADVICE
Show respect, get to the point, focus on specifi cs, ex-
press your own personal feelings, and make the discus-
sion a two-way process.
OFFICER ADVICE
Be careful what you say. Speak as if the radio or a tape 
recorder were capturing your every word. Even though 
these things rarely happen by accident, it’s always a 
good practice to be careful what you say. This is good 
advice for everyone. Offi cers should set a good exam-
ple, withholding comments that are inappropriate or 
unprofessional.

30  CHAPTER 2
Principles of Effective Writing
Use the following principles whenever you employ 
writing in your communications.
■ Consider the reader: First and foremost, consider 
who the target reader is. Use plain language. Use 
terms and abbreviations that readers will clearly 
understand. If in doubt, spell out the term at its 
fi rst use followed by the abbreviation or acronym. 
Technical terms, jargon, and abbreviations are like 
hurdles on the track: They slow the reader rather 
than helping.
■ Emphasis: Memos, letters, and directives should 
usually be limited to one topic. This practice allows 
the writer and the reader to focus on just one issue 
and discuss it as needed until the issue is under-
stood and resolved. This rule also helps satisfy the 
next item.
■ Brevity: Brevity is desired. Consider the material 
you get in the mail every day. The letters that are 
brief and to the point usually get read right away. 
Brevity is often misunderstood. Brevity does not 
mean too short; it just means not too long. It means 
that it is long enough to do the job.
■ Simplicity: Use everyday words when possi-
ble. Use the same words you would use while 
 speaking. When writing, we frequently resort 
to bigger words, thinking that it will impress 
the reader. Our efforts should be to impress the 
reader with the information we are sharing, not 
with the writing style. In many cases, the use of 
larger words actually slows the communications 
process. Here is an example: “Long, rambling, 
and elaborate dissertations will usually languish 
in the receiver’s mailbox until they die of 
old age.”
Here is another: “It is the policy of the fi re chief 
that all activities of this fi re department shall be 
carried out in a manner that will ensure the pro-
tection and enhancement of the environment 
through control and abatement of environmental 
pollution.” It might have been easier to say, “Don’t 
pollute.”
On the other hand, use specifi c terms when 
 appropriate. A report that contains “. . . it was a 
large fi re” leaves too much to the imagination 
of the reader. The message here is use 
language that is appropriate for the occasion and 
the reader.
at the person to whom you are speaking and using 
 distracting activities. Distracting activities can 
range from using a word or phrase to the point that 
it becomes annoying or repeating some physical 
activity such as jingling keys or coins.
As a part of your offi cer training, you should be 
looking for ways to improve your oral communica-
tions skills. Taking a training course leading to becom-
ing a fi re instructor is a good start. Other options 
include courses by Dale Carnegie and Toastmasters 
International. Both programs offer opportunities for 
individuals to come together to become friends and 
gain experience in communicating orally with others 
in a friendly environment. College courses are also 
available.
IMPROVING WRITING SKILLS
Effective fi re offi cers must be able to write. You must 
be able to express your ideas to your supervisors. Most 
of the signifi cant recommendations and requests you 
submit are written. It is also important that you be 
able to express your ideas to your subordinates. This 
is how most policies, procedures, and directives are 
published. Finally, you have to complete a variety of 
reports (see Figure 2-9). All of this activity requires 
writing skill.
FIGURE 2-9 Writing reports is another important job for 
the company officer.
NOTE
Effective fire officers must be able to write.

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  31
Underlining or italics are generally used to  identify 
the titles of books, plays, works of art, magazines, 
and newspapers. An article within one of these pub-
lications is usually set off in quotation marks. For 
example, we might have a sentence that reads: Those 
interested in fi refi ghter safety issues should read the 
report entitled “U.S. Firefi ghter Injuries,” published 
annually in the NFPA Journal.
There are generally accepted rules for using num-
bers in text. For the numbers one through nine, you 
spell out the word. Starting with 10, you use the digits.
Many writers make mistakes using capital let-
ters; most of the mistakes result from using capitals 
when they are not needed, such as when the word is 
not associated with any specifi c person. Capitals are 
usually used when referring to a specifi c individual, 
place, or thing, whereas lowercase letters generally 
refer to the generic term, for example, the training 
offi cer, the lieutenant, and the fi re chief, but Captain 
Wright and Chief Coffman. Consider the following 
examples:
a captain 
Captain Joe Friday
a chief 
Chief Jim Flynn
a lake 
Lake Michigan
a street 
Main Street
a textbook 
The Company Offi cer
■ Objectivity: Most of your writing requires an 
impersonal viewpoint. In most situations where 
facts are being reported, there is little place for 
personal bias. Some reporting formats invite a per-
sonal opinion, and at that point the writer should 
clearly establish that these statements are her own 
opinion. For example, a standard reporting format 
for an accident investigation includes a provision 
for the writer’s personal opinion. After determin-
ing and outlining the facts, the writer has more 
knowledge about the accident than anyone else on 
earth. The writer’s opinion is valuable at this point 
and should be accepted in light of her expertise. 
However, under normal conditions, we are simply 
part of the communication process: Our own bias 
should not be apparent in our writings.
Instead of 
Try
commence 
start
facilitate 
help
enhanced method 
better
fi nalize 
end
improved costs 
less expensive
in order to 
to
in the event of 
if
it is requested 
please
it is the recommendation
 of this offi ce 
we recommend
it is necessary that you 
you should
optimum 
best
prioritize 
arrange
prorogate 
issue
utilize 
use
USING EASIER WORDS AND PHRASES
ETHICS
Our own bias should not be apparent in our writings.
■ Mechanical accuracy: This term describes the var-
ious rules of good written communication. Most of 
us have been taught the rules, but some of us need 
to review them from time to time. We will cover 
the most common problems here. At the end of the 
chapter is a list of additional references that may 
be useful.
Another communication problem is the use of pas-
sive voice. Consider the following conversation:
Doctor: 
 When did you fi rst notice your use of 
verbs in the passive voice?
Patient: 
 The use was fi rst noticed by me shortly 
after the fi re service was  entered. The 
fi re service was also entered by my 
brother. The same condition has been 
noticed by him.
Doctor: 
 Do you know that most of the verbs 
we read and speak with are active 
voice?
Sentence
Proper noun
Line of verse
Name of a human race
Name of a government body
Noun used to refer to a deity
Direct quote when within a sentence
Name of a planet, constellation, or star
Holiday, day of the week, or month of the year
CAPITALS ARE USED AT THE 
START OF A
OFFICER ADVICE
Use language that is appropriate for the occasion and 
the reader.

32  CHAPTER 2
Putting It All Together
The following are some suggestions for effective 
writing.
■ Organize your thoughts: Organization may be the 
most important part of writing. Unfortunately, for 
many writers it is also the most diffi cult part of 
writing. Like building a house, organizing does 
not have to be done all at once. Start with what 
you know, and add the other facts as they come to 
mind. Outlines help some writers. Word processing 
helps, too. The ability to easily arrange and rear-
range sentences and paragraphs has been one of 
the signifi cant improvements brought by the word 
processor. Rewrite! Paper is cheap. Time and good 
impressions are priceless.
■ Start with facts, explain as necessary, then stop! 
When you write, think about the one sentence you 
would keep if you were allowed to keep only one. 
That sentence should be in the fi rst paragraph and 
may even be the fi rst sentence of the fi rst paragraph. 
With this approach, you put requests before justi-
fi cations, answers before explanations, conclusions 
before discussions, and summaries before details.
You might be saying, “Wait a minute! That’s 
not what we were taught in school.” In today’s fast-
paced business world, managers want answers and 
information in the shortest possible form. If your 
answer is reasonable, they do not need a lot of 
detail. Those who can provide information in this 
style are appreciated.
Patient: 
 Well, it is believed by me that most 
verbs are made passive by fi re ser-
vice writers. In the letters and re-
ports that have been prepared by this 
speaker, passive voice has been used 
extensively.
Are problems caused? Yes, problems are caused. 
It would be better to say that writing in the passive 
voice causes problems. Using passive voice usually 
results in wordy, roundabout, and confusing writing. 
Avoid these problems by putting the subject of the 
sentence (the doer) ahead of the verb. For example: 
The station was inspected by the fi re chief. Who did 
the action? The fi re chief. This sentence would be 
better if it read as follows: The chief inspected the 
station. There are times when the passive voice may 
be the only choice. For example, if the person who 
performed the act is unknown, the passive voice may 
be appropriate. For example: The fi re was started by 
unknown causes. Also the passive may be more effec-
tive when the receiver of the action is more impor-
tant than the doer. For example: “Any person who 
violates this rule will be fi red.” Your writing will be 
more interesting and more effective when you use the 
active voice.
We have limited this discussion to the most com-
mon problems. There are others, of course. Fire 
departments would do well to publish a guide with 
some good examples of correspondence and report 
writing. The guide should also include information 
regarding the details of style that may be unique to the 
organization. Regardless of whether such information 
is available from your agency, it would be smart to 
obtain one of the several generally accepted writers’ 
guides. These can be found in bookstores everywhere. 
Several are listed at the end of this chapter.
In addition to these standard references, most dic-
tionaries contain several pages of good information 
on grammar. In addition, a good modern diction-
ary is invaluable for checking the spelling and the 
exact meaning of words. Do not be ashamed to look 
at these references when you have a question. The 
fact that so many references are available suggests 
that many writers need to look things up from time 
to time.
■ Consider busy readers: If the answer can be pro-
vided in one or two sentences, put those at the top 
of the page. If that information satisfi es the read-
ers’ needs, they may stop as soon as they have 
what they need. If they need more explanation or 
justifi cation or want to read more about the way 
you obtained your information, they can read on. 
While it is important to provide the “big bang” up 
front, it is also important to provide the other infor-
mation. If facts are presented, they should be docu-
mented. If conclusions are drawn, they should be 
supported with logic.
■ Use short paragraphs: Long paragraphs often 
swamp ideas and overwhelm the reader. Cover one 
topic before starting another, and let the topic take 
OFFICER ADVICE
Fire departments would do well to publish a guide with 
some good examples of correspondence and report 
writing.
OFFICER ADVICE
When you write, think about the one sentence you would 
keep if you were allowed to keep only one.

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  33
to make compromises that will not be in your best 
 interests. By doing the work in advance, you also have 
the opportunity to review and edit your work before 
submitting it.
With computers in widespread use, the ability to use 
word processing software is available to nearly every-
one (see Figure 2-10). Use this technology to enhance 
your writing. Write your letter or memo. Review it on 
the screen and run the spell-check. Then print a draft 
copy. Read it and mark up the copy with corrections 
or areas where you think it needs improvement. Wait 
about 24 hours (at least until the next day) and repeat 
the process. In nearly every case you will make addi-
tional corrections. When you reread the document, 
you will want to add a word or two or rearrange sev-
eral sentences to enhance the reader’s understanding. 
Make the corrections and print a second draft. If time 
permits, repeat the process again.
Although your second reading is always important, 
for real benefi t try to get someone else to read the 
document. That person does not have to be an editor 
or a grammar teacher but should be someone who has 
reasonably good communications skills and who has 
the patience to read very carefully. Good proofread-
ing is not like reading the sports pages of the paper; 
it requires a slow, deliberate reading. Some writers 
even read aloud to themselves when proofreading. In 
so doing, they will hear mistakes more readily than 
if they were just reading in the usual manner. In any 
case, you (or someone else) should read the document 
carefully and make corrections where necessary. 
These steps will signifi cantly enhance your writing. 
Good writers perform both all of the time.
several paragraphs if necessary. The white space 
between the paragraphs helps to separate your 
thoughts, makes the reading easier, and encour-
ages your reader to continue. Listings are a use-
ful technique to provide information in a quick and 
easy-to-read format. This is often done with bul-
lets. This technique is used throughout this book.
■ Use a natural writing style: Write as if you were 
speaking. Imagine that the reader is sitting next to 
you and that you are speaking aloud the same words 
you are writing. Use personal pronouns, everyday 
words, and short sentences. Try to avoid “I” except 
when speaking about yourself or expressing an 
opinion that is clearly your own. When represent-
ing your organization, the use of “we,” “our,” and 
“us” is more appropriate.
■ Be direct: Try to avoid roundabout sentences. Again, 
think about the situation as if you were speaking, 
and imagine the reader sitting next to you.  Consider 
the following two sentences as examples:
 It is necessary that your reply be received by the 
fi rst of next week.
 We want your reply by the fi rst of the week.
Which statement are you more likely to say in a con-
versation? Which statement is easier to understand?
Review Your Work
When it comes to writing, several habits will help. 
First, avoid waiting until the last minute to do your 
work. The pressure of the deadline will force you 
FIGURE 2-10 Computers make  writing 
a lot easier. But you still need to un-
derstand the rules to be an  effective 
writer. 

34  CHAPTER 2
A good course, workshop, or other formal learning 
activity in which you are asked to write will always 
be benefi cial. Many high schools, libraries, commu-
nity centers, and colleges offer short courses as well 
as the traditional semester-long classes in writing 
skills for adults. Most colleges offer a variety of com-
munications courses, and many provide a testing ser-
vice to help you to identify your own personal needs. 
Take advantage of these opportunities.
In addition, bookstores and libraries have a wealth 
of good information on this topic. Several useful 
books of particular value for fi re service writers are 
listed at the end of this chapter. Take advantage of 
as much of this information as you can and work to 
improve your communications skills. You will be 
more effective at work and in other activities where 
communications are important. You may even want 
to try writing an article for one of the trade journals 
(they are all looking for fresh authors) or something 
even more ambitious.
Take care with the fi nal form and appearance of your 
product. In many cases, the paper you submit is like 
a sales effort; it represents you and your organization. 
You want it to make a good impression. Be sure that the 
fi nal product is clean and well groomed. Make sure that 
the printer is working properly. When you submit good 
work, you can be proud of your accomplishments.
Other Ways to Improve 
Your Writing Skills
In Chapter 1, we suggested that you might benefi t from 
taking a writing course. Let us mention that again: 
Example 1
Unedited: This program promotes life safety in homes 
and businesses throughout the country by offering 
a simple way to make purchasing decisions by 
providing additional information about life safety 
products without sacrifi cing quality or product 
performance.
Edited: This program helps homeowners and businesses 
buy life safety products without sacrifi cing quality or 
performance.
Example 2
Unedited: Right of use means any authorization issued 
under this part that allows use of Department related 
equipment or property.
Edited: “Right of use” means any authorization under this 
part to use department property.
Example 3
Unedited: Although the aforementioned language was 
not included in the FY2007-2008 budget authoriza-
tion, we believe that the continuation of this special 
initiative is important.
Edited: Although this language is not in the FY2007-2008 
budget authorization, we believe it is important to con-
tinue this special initiative.
COMPARATIVE WRITING EXAMPLES
Example 4
Unedited: All issues and questions were discussed and ex-
plained very clearly. Following the completion of every 
task I received a full feedback from my supervisor which 
gave me an opportunity to improve and refl ect on my per-
formance continuously. I was given support in terms of 
addressing my personal objectives such as improvement 
of interviewing skills and building technical knowledge.
Edited: After completing every task, my supervisor cri-
tiqued all the issues and fully answered my questions. 
His comments helped me refl ect on and improve my 
performance. He constantly encouraged me to ad-
dress my objectives, such as improving my interview-
ing skills and building my technical knowledge.
Example 5
Unedited: Procedures for electronic processing of mul-
tiple department forms are being explored and may 
be developed in the future.
Edited: We are exploring and may develop procedures 
for electronically processing of department forms.
Example 6
Unedited: When a fi ling is prescribed to be fi led with more 
than one of the foregoing, the fi ling shall be deemed fi led 
as of the day the last one actually receives the same.
Edited: A document is considered “fi led” only when all 
those who are supposed to receive it actually receive it.
OFFICER ADVICE
Take care with the fi nal form and appearance of your 
product.

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  35
from what your correspondent uses. Your message’s 
visual qualities may be quite different by the time it 
gets to someone else’s screen. Thus, your e-mail com-
positions should be different from both your paper 
compositions and your speech. Even when writing 
business communications, make it personal. Write for 
an audience of one. Use common conversation, and 
avoid formal speech.
Here are some suggestions for writing effective 
e-mails:
■ Use useful subject lines. Many people are swamped 
with e-mail; useful subject lines will help them sort 
their mail and will help your message get noticed. 
Your subject line determines whether your e-mail 
gets read or not.
■ Give complete information, but try to keep your 
message short. That will help your readers respond 
to you most effectively.
■ If you are responding to previous e-mail, quote the 
text that you are referring to. Instead of sending 
an e-mail that says “yes,” indicate the question you 
are replying to with your response. When trouble-
shooting, we often include all of the details so no 
signifi cant detail is missed.
■ Replace pronouns with detail. Carefully exam-
ine the pronouns in the fi rst few sentences of your 
e-mail. If they do not refer to objects specifi cally 
stated in your e-mail, replace them with words that 
are more descriptive.
■ Use shorter paragraphs. They are easier to read 
than long ones in most e-mail programs. It is a good 
idea to pare your paragraphs down to a couple of 
sentences, using a line of space between them.
■ Use capital letters sparingly. In e-mail, ALL CAP-
ITAL LETTERS READ LIKE SHOUTING; 
please do not shout unless you feel STRONGLY 
about something.
■ If there is something you want the reader to do, 
include a call to action. Tell people exactly what 
you want them to do. Do not leave them wondering 
what to do next. Point them to your “most desired 
action.” Otherwise, they may just close your mes-
sage and forget it.
■ Never send an e-mail when you are angry or upset. 
E-mails can become permanent admissible records 
that can be attained by anyone through the open 
records act. So be careful what you send to whom. 
If you are unsure, let it set overnight and reread it 
the next day when your mood may be different.
For more information, check any of the many 
sources on the Web. Using your favorite search engine, 
enter “using e-mail.”
USING E-MAIL
Electronic communication, or e-mail, is fundamen-
tally different from paper-based communication 
because of its speed and broadcasting ability. E-mail 
is cheaper and faster than a letter, less intrusive than 
a telephone call, and less hassle than a fax. With 
e-mail, differences in location and time zone are 
less of an obstacle to communication. E-mail tends 
to be a more open process, encouraging the shar-
ing of thoughts and information. Because of these 
advantages, e-mail is common in both business and 
personal communications.
This is not about the mechanics of sending e-mail. 
Those details are different for every e-mail software 
package and are better handled at the local level. We 
will focus here on the content of an e-mail message: 
how to say what you need to say. While these guide-
lines may show you how to be a nice person while 
communicating, the real purpose is to show you how 
to be more effi cient, clear, and effective.
In a paper document, it is absolutely essential to 
make everything completely clear because your 
audience may not have a chance to ask for clarifi ca-
tion. With e-mail documents, your recipient can ask 
questions immediately. E-mail thus tends, like con-
versational speech, to be sloppier than communica-
tions on paper. This is not always bad. It makes little 
sense to slave over a message for hours, making sure 
that your spelling is faultless, your words eloquent, 
and your grammar beyond reproach, if the point of 
the message is to tell your coworker that you are ready 
to go to lunch.
You should be aware, however, of when your e-mail 
can be casual and when it has to be meticulous. For 
the latter, your facility with language is crucial so 
that your correspondents understand your message. 
Because e-mail messages lack face-to-face cues such 
as facial expressions, body language, tone of voice, 
and a shared environment, you must rely on language 
itself to communicate clearly. So you need to choose 
words carefully and spell them correctly. You need 
to avoid anything—for example, humor or sarcasm—
that could diminish clarity. Finally, you need to proof-
read your message.
Another difference between e-mail and older 
media is that what the sender sees when composing 
a message might not look like what the reader sees. 
Your vocal cords make sound waves that are per-
ceived basically the same by both your ears and those 
of your audience. The paper that you write your love 
note on is the same paper that the object of your affec-
tion sees. But with e-mail, the software and hardware 
that you use for composing, sending, storing, down-
loading, and reading may be completely different 

36  CHAPTER 2
Dealing with the Media
Now let us look at the needs of the media. The media 
(newspapers, radio, and television) provide a link to 
the public. Instead of speaking to one individual, you 
might be speaking to 100,000. Sounds a bit intimidat-
ing; and you might say, well, we have a public relations 
offi cer who takes care of the media. Most departments 
do have a public relations person, but that individual 
may not be present when the press wants its story. So 
it falls back on the company offi cer.
Certainly, you want to see your organization favor-
ably presented on the late evening news or in the 
morning newspaper. Fire departments, like it or not, 
are in the news-making business. And we can safely 
add that fi re departments engage in public relations 
activities every day. Some of these public relations 
opportunities are the result of an incident that is cov-
ered by the press. (Remember, members of the press 
are listening to the dispatch frequencies for fi re, EMS, 
and police; they know what is going on.) Sometimes 
we seek the media’s attention to our activities: fi re 
prevention activities, the graduation of a new class 
of rookie fi refi ghters, a new fi re station, and similar 
activities we want to share with the citizens we serve 
(see Figure 2-11).
But many departments, or at least some individu-
als within these departments, shun the press. Offi cers 
(and fi refi ghters) are told that only the chief talks to 
the media. If the chief and the media do not talk, they 
do not get a story, and we are disappointed that our 
late-evening efforts to save someone’s house are not 
on the front page of the morning newspaper.
PUBLIC RELATIONS
Dealing with Individuals
So far our discussion on communications has focu-
sed on internal communications—communications 
with others within our organization. Let us turn 
now to how well we deal with those outside the 
organization.
Most likely, we do fairly well in one-on-one com-
munications during an emergency situation. Almost 
everyone in public service realizes that we have to 
be civilized with others, sometimes even when they 
are uncivilized. Unfortunately, we often fall short 
when dealing with citizens who seek our assistance 
for nonemergency needs and when speaking to 
members of the press. Let us consider the citizens’ 
needs fi rst.
A common situation occurs when citizens call or 
visit a fi re station asking for information. They may 
have a concern or a complaint or just want informa-
tion. Company offi cers should be prepared to handle 
these situations as well. In many cases, the citizens 
will visit the fi re station because they identify you 
as a very visible and accessible part of local govern-
ment. Maybe they just want directions. We should be 
able to do that—we should know our city well. Maybe 
they want to get a burn permit or to ask a question 
about the fi re code. These are clearly issues for the 
fi re department. On the other hand, they may want to 
complain about their water bill. It would be easy to 
dismiss them with “That’s not our job.” How would 
you feel in a similar situation?
Good, effective, active listening skills are needed 
here. Invite them in, offer them a cup of coffee, and 
take them to your offi ce. Take time to listen to them 
and help them get a handle on their problem. Show 
understanding and support. If an apology is war-
ranted, make it on the behalf of your government. It 
does not cost anything, and in many cases, the  citizens 
will feel a lot better, maybe even satisfi ed. Sometimes 
simply telling them where the appropriate govern-
ment offi ce is located can help them.
In many cases, the issue can be resolved with a 
telephone call. If appropriate, make the call for them. 
You probably have a better knowledge of local gov-
ernment than they do, and your listing of government 
telephone numbers is probably better than the one in 
the local telephone book. In any case, take a personal 
interest in seeing that their concerns, complaints, or 
inquiries are resolved satisfactorily. It is easy to get 
defensive when people are complaining, and it is easy 
to tell them that it is not your responsibility. Make 
it your responsibility to satisfy their needs. Provide 
understanding, offer assistance, and try to help make 
the situation better.
FIGURE 2-11 Television crews will show up at the scene 
of a large fire and want an interview. An officer should 
be designated, briefed, and prepared to tell the reporter 
what happened. While the fire itself is a tragic event, a 
well-presented story provides an opportunity to present 
a very positive image of the fire department to a very 
large audience.

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  37
should be avoided, and company offi cers should 
follow simple department media guidelines—for 
example, describe what crews found upon arrival 
and explain how crews mitigated the situation. 
Company offi cers should try to relay to the citizens 
a safety message when giving an interview as well 
(see Figure 2-12).
■ Stick to the facts. If you are not certain about 
how a fi re started or why it may have spread so 
fast, say you don’t know or that it is under inves-
tigation. But do not editorialize or offer up an 
unfounded opinion. Bad information is worse than 
no information!
■ Remember, anyone can capture pictures, video, and 
audio. You and your crew are always “on stage.” 
Conduct yourself accordingly!
The News Release
The news release is a standard form of communication 
used by organizations to alert the media to news per-
taining to the organization’s activities. News releases 
are often used to announce a new product or service. 
Public organizations, such as fi re departments, often 
use a news release to announce public events.
The news release is usually printed on a form that 
makes it conspicuous (see Figure 2-13). The text 
includes a description of the event, date, time, and 
location of the fi rst session and any pertinent back-
ground information. To be successful, the news 
release should be no more than one page and should 
be sent so that the information can be processed and 
published in time to benefi t the public. Copies are 
normally mailed to the media (television, radio, and 
newspapers that serve your community).
There are two issues here—fi rst, we have to under-
stand that the press is looking for a story, and mem-
bers of the press will talk to anyone we put in front of 
the camera provided that the person is articulate and 
reasonably well informed. Second, we have to real-
ize that inaccuracies or incompleteness in a story may 
be our fault. If we give the press good information, it 
will usually report good information.
As company offi cers, especially the fi rst company 
offi cer to arrive at the scene of any emergency, you 
are most likely the best-informed individuals avail-
able. Given a few moments to compose your thoughts, 
you can provide an excellent perspective on what 
 happened. At large-scale events, with a fully staffed 
Incident Management System, the Public Information 
Sector will help with this activity, but for the average 
event, you may be not only the best informed but also 
the most available person present.
Our space here limits the amount of detail we can 
cover. The topic is worthy of at least a chapter, if 
not more. In fact, several good books are available 
on this topic. (Please see the listing at the end of the 
chapter.)
Let us conclude this section by offering a few point-
ers to help company offi cers:
■ First, build a positive relationship with members of 
the media. You likely know who they are; you see 
their faces or read their articles every day. Let them 
get to know you. Invite them into your fi re station. 
Share a training activity or a meal. Some depart-
ments routinely offer ride-along opportunities. 
(Make sure you clear this sort of thing in advance.)
■ Remember that it is the media’s job to report the 
news. If the fi re department makes a mistake, you 
might expect the media to report it, just as, you 
hope, the media reports your successes. If you have 
done a good job with the items listed previously in 
terms of building a good relationship with mem-
bers of the media, they might be more willing to 
hold off their report until you have had a chance to 
tell them your side of the story.
■ Learn how to give members of the media the kind 
of information they want. They do not want tech-
nical stuff, and they do not want gruesome stuff. 
But there is much you can say. If upon entering the 
house, the smoke was so thick that you could not 
see your hand a foot in front of your face, tell them 
that in just so many words. If the heat made you 
feel as if you were in a furnace, use those words. 
The reporters and, more important, their audience 
can relate to the conditions you experienced.
■ The most important take-away point when deal-
ing with the media is to follow your department’s 
guidelines. Attempts to overdramatize the incident 
FIGURE 2-12 Representatives of the press frequently in-
terview fire investigators and other officers at the scene 
of fires and other emergencies. Try to include a Safety 
Message in the interview. (Photo courtesy of Asheville Fire and 
Rescue Department)

38  CHAPTER 2
■ Be well-written, free of factual or grammatical 
error
■ Contain all the information needed to write a story 
about your event
The fi rst paragraph should be a summary of what 
the news release is all about. In three or four lines, 
A good news release will:
■ Be on recognizable letterhead
■ Contain the name, telephone number, and e-mail 
address of the contact person
■ Be simple and lack technical jargon
FIGURE 2-13 Sample news release. (Courtesy of U.S. Fire Administration)

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  39
 companies were dispatched by telegraphing the box 
number to the fi re stations. At the fi reground, offi cers 
used a megaphone to convey commands. Things have 
changed a bit.
Today, reports of fi re are transmitted by auto-
matic detection/reporting equipment and by citizens 
using a telephone. The information is processed by 
an emergency communications center with elabo-
rate  computer support and instantly forwarded to fi re 
stations. Voice radios and data terminals connect all 
responding units, and portable radios are used exten-
sively at the scene. It would seem as if this technology 
has solved all of our communications problems. But 
we still read reports about communications problems 
during emergency operations.
As fi re offi cers, you should understand the basics 
of the communications system in which you oper-
ate. Starting with the emergency communications 
center, you should understand how calls are received 
and processed and how companies are assigned and 
dispatched. Regardless of the source of the call, the 
information about the location and nature of the 
emergency must be quickly and accurately gathered 
and rapidly followed by a timely dispatch or appropri-
ate resources. The time allocated for processing the 
call is quite precious. During this time, a life might be 
fading or a fi re might be growing (see Figure 2-14).
Computer-aided dispatch can help the dispatcher 
get accurate information and assign appropri-
ate resources to the call. Computer-aided dispatch 
can provide occupancy information to responding 
units, assisting in their size-up activities, track the 
you should try to answer all the questions and sell 
your story. Try to address the what, when, where, and 
who. For example:
The Plain City Volunteer Fire Department invites 
the public to its annual fundraising barbeque at the 
County Fairgrounds on Saturday, October 8, from 
4 until 8 p.m.
In one sentence we have answered all of those 
questions.
The next several paragraphs should follow a logi-
cal order. Use simple sentences, and short paragraphs. 
Expand upon the basics as needed—the what, where, 
when, why, who, and, if appropriate, the how. Cover all 
the facts, but don’t bury the reader in details. You also 
should ensure the news release has value—show that a 
community need or good is being met, or that your peo-
ple or organization are providing a valuable service.
As with all forms of written communication, you 
should always proofread your work before making 
copies and mailing to the media. Make sure that the 
release meets all of the department’s policies and 
procedures that govern the release of information. 
In some instances, it may be necessary to have the 
department’s legal counselor approve the coverage 
before it is released to the media. There have been 
some recent cases where confi dential information was 
released to the media without approval. This is why it 
is essential that departments have policies in place for 
the release of information to the media.
ETHICS
There are some things you should not talk to the  media 
about. Internal issues, especially personnel matters, 
are properly referred to the public information offi-
cer or to the fire chief. Other examples would include 
statements regarding a change in the department’s 
 policies, budget information, and staffing or unit de-
ployment changes. Clearly these are not “break-
ing news” types of events or stories. They should be 
 handled during business hours by the staff at fire de-
partment headquarters.
Whether you are speaking to one citizen at your fire 
station or representing your department in front of a 
television camera, your job is to address the concern 
or inquiry accurately, courteously, and in accordance 
with your organization’s policy.
EMERGENCY 
COMMUNICATIONS
The technology of communications has changed 
over the years. In the early twentieth century, fi re 
alarms were transmitted by fi re alarm boxes, and fi re 
FIGURE 2-14 The dispatcher is a vital link in the 
emergency communications process. They provide 
the first notification of the event to responding units, 
 provide information while the units are en route, and 
provide  on-scene units with additional information and 
resources.

40  CHAPTER 2
Several recent incidents involving fi refi ghter fatalities 
demonstrate that, despite technological advances in 
two-way radio communications, important information is 
not always adequately communicated on the fi reground 
or emergency incident scene. (Several of these incidents 
are discussed later in this text.) Inadequate communica-
tion has a defi nite negative impact on the safety of emer-
gency personnel and may contribute to injuries or deaths 
of fi refi ghters, rescue workers, and civilians. Several key 
issues follow:
■ Unsuitable equipment: The primary communication 
problem reported by fi refi ghters and company of-
fi cers is the diffi culty in communicating when using 
full  personal protective equipment, including SCBA. 
The majority of portable radios currently used by fi re 
 departments are ill suited for the task.
■ Portable radios needed for all fi refi ghters: Despite 
some technical limitations, portable radios are a 
proven lifesaver during fi res and emergency incidents; 
they should be considered a critical item of personal 
protective equipment akin to SCBA. Ideally, every fi re-
fi ghter working in a hostile environment should have a 
portable radio with an emergency distress feature.
■ Little attention paid to human factors: There is a dearth 
of available literature pertaining to the impact of hu-
man factors on effective fi reground communication.
■ Furthermore, while fi re departments devote substan-
tial time to manipulative skill training, relatively little 
IMPROVING FIREFIGHTER 
COMMUNICATIONS
training is provided to help fi refi ghters develop stress-
tempered communication skills.
■ Importance of active listening: All fi refi ghters on an 
emergency incident should actively monitor their ra-
dios for important information at all times, not just 
when specifi cally queried. Communications should be 
emphasized as an essential part of fi refi ghters’ func-
tioning as a tactical team, not just operating as indi-
vidual entities.
■ Standard message formats and language: Fire de-
partments can enhance fi reground communication 
by creating standard message formats and keywords 
used consistently. Plain English is usually preferred 
over codes, especially when transmitting a complex 
message.
■ Tiered message priority: Keywords to prompt imme-
diate action can be tiered based on their priority; for 
example, “Mayday” signals a life-or-death situation, 
whereas “urgent” may be used to signify a potentially 
serious problem. Such message headers prompt 
each crew’s listening priorities and radio discipline.
■ Attention to cultural factors: If necessary, fi refi ght-
ers are not usually reluctant to circumvent the chain 
of command to report critical safety issues. There 
may be greater hesitation to communicate problems 
in completing an assigned task; however, this is usu-
ally due to a lack of situational awareness and not 
to a fear of reprisal from other members. Studies on 
fi refi ghter communications show that sometimes the 
culture of bravery in the fi re service is refl ected in a 
reluctance to communicate quickly enough when 
help is needed.3
responding units, and provide dispatchers informa-
tion regarding the status of the remaining units.
At the company level, fi refi ghters must get infor-
mation quickly and accurately to respond promptly. 
In Chapter 12, we will explore some of the things that 
can be done to safely shorten the response time.
Once the response is under way, radio communi-
cations help the process immeasurably. Responders 
will hear other companies responding, and the fi rst-
arriving company will mark on the scene, providing 
a benchmark for all that follows. One of the very fi rst 
actions needed is a good size-up report, an accurate 
description of what is going on. Here clear communi-
cations are absolutely essential. The fi rst arriving offi -
cer must describe in a sentence or two what the scene 
is, what the company is doing, and what help, if any, 
is needed. We will talk more about this in Chapter 13, 
but the point here is that, once again, a company offi -
cer must have good communications skills.
At the scene, radio communications help connect 
people and equipment that may be spread over long 
distances. Gone are the days of shouting commands 
(with or without a megaphone). In fact, a well-run 
emergency scene will be amazingly quiet. Ideally, all 
fi refi ghters at the scene will have a radio. They can 
receive directions and information, call for help if 
needed, or transmit vital information that otherwise 
would be lost. But the fact that everyone has a radio 
leads to two problems. Sometimes there is too much 
radio traffi c. This can be corrected by good training 
for company offi cers and effective leadership (and apt 
radio discipline) at all levels. The other problem is 
one of human nature. When fi refi ghters miss a mes-
sage, they may be inclined to let it go, rather than to 
risk the embarrassment of going on the radio to ask 
for a repeat of information they should have received. 
The best way to manage this is to make sure that all 
messages are transmitted in a clear, calm voice and 

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  41
with a deliberate pace. Again, good training and well-
managed communications are keys to the solution 
(see Figure 2-15).
Even with the best technology, we still have com-
munications problems. Unless someone is using one 
of the new self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) 
units that has a built-in microphone, communicating 
effectively by radio while wearing a facemask is chal-
lenging. Radio communications in large buildings is 
also challenging, and frequently the available radio 
channels are overwhelmed with radio traffi c. In many 
cases, offi cers have to understand the limits of the 
equipment and must work with what they have.
Good communications are a critical part of effec-
tive emergency activities. As company offi cer, you 
play a vital role in this process, considering that you 
probably send and receive a majority of the reports 
transmitted during emergency activities.
FIGURE 2-15 Good fireground communications are  vital. 
Radio transmissions should be made in a clear, calm 
voice and at a deliberate pace which conveys to all who 
are listening that someone is in charge, and that they 
know what they are doing.

42  CHAPTER 2
A few years ago, the volunteer fi re department of which 
Melvin Byrne was chief started experiencing rapid 
growth. The years preceding had seen limited change in 
personnel, and since most people had been in their roles 
for some time, they knew their job. But as the community 
expanded, the fi re department needed to do so, too; that 
meant heavy recruitment.
The only problem was that the new people would 
show up and would not know what to do. The chief found 
he would have to walk each individual from one duty to 
the next, which used to work fi ne when there would be 
one new person every few months or so. But having so 
many new people to coordinate at the same time was a 
struggle, and it took 6 to 8 months before all were fully 
organized in their responsibilities. The old system—word 
of mouth—just was not working on this scale.
Then Byrne came up with a solution: putting in place 
written expectations of each position. The operational 
THE VALUE OF GOOD 
COMMUNICATIONS
Melvin Byrne, Past Chief, Ashburn Volunteer Fire and 
Rescue, Loudon County, Virginia
 offi cers got together to decide what the expectations 
were. That meant getting in sync with the county’s pre-
requisites and paperwork and letting new offi cers know 
even the basics of when and how to get their CPR 
certifi cation.
The chief acknowledged that he should have started 
the process sooner and that he should have asked for 
more input from his offi cers. Good two-way communica-
tions are the key to effective management in any orga-
nization. And communications are a two-way process: 
Someone may have a great idea, but that person has to 
be able to communicate that idea. And someone else 
has to be willing and able to listen to the idea.
Questions
1. What are the communications issues here?
2. What are the advantages of providing written 
policies?
3. Chief Byrne acknowledged that he should have got-
ten more input. How could he have invited that input?
4. What else could he have done to get his offi cers 
involved?
5. How could the offi cers let their concerns be known to 
the chief?

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  43
 1. What are the benefi ts of effective communication?
 2. When writing, what steps can you take to enhance 
the fi nished product?
 3. How do improved communication skills help you 
in your professional life?
 4. How do improved communication skills help you 
in your personal life?
 5. List any barriers to effective communication 
found in your organization or workplace.
 6. How has the communication process changed the 
way emergency response organizations are noti-
fi ed of an emergency?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 7. How has the communication process changed 
for emergency response organizations in the way 
they are dispatched to the emergency?
 8. How has the communication process changed for 
emergency response organizations are notifi ed of 
an emergency the way they communicate at the 
scene?
 9. While communication technology has improved 
in recent years, many issues are still apparent. 
What are the issues in emergency communication 
in your community?
 10. What do you think the future will bring in the 
way of changes in communication technology?
G
ood communications skills have a positive impact 
on every aspect of your work. Being able to com-
municate effectively enhances your leadership abil-
ity, helps you gain respect from your supervisors and 
peers, and makes you more effective in talking to the 
LESSONS LEARNED
public, the media, and others. In all cases, your abil-
ity to communicate creates an impression about you, 
your organization, and your profession. Work to be 
an effective communicator. And remember—practice 
what you preach!
active listening deliberate and apparent process by 
which one focuses attention on the communications 
of another
barrier obstacle; in communications, a barrier 
prevents the message from being understood by the 
receiver
feedback reaction to a process that may alter or 
reinforce that process
 1. What is the communication process?
 2. What is the role of the company offi cer in 
communications?
 3. What are the fi ve parts of the communications 
model?
 4. What are the common barriers to communication?
 5. How can these barriers be minimized?
 6. What is meant by the term “active listening”?
message in communications; the message is the 
information being sent to another
receiver in communications, the receiver is the 
intended recipient of the message
sender part of the communications process, 
the sender transmits a thought or message to the 
receiver
 7. How does your communication style indicate 
your leadership style?
 8. Name several of the principles of effective 
writing.
 9. What steps can you take to improve your 
writing?
 10. What is the company offi cer’s role in the commu-
nication process?
KEY TERMS
REVIEW QUESTIONS

44  CHAPTER 2
ENDNOTES
3. Adam Thiel, Improving Firefi ghter Communications (Emmits-
burg, MD: U.S. Fire Administration, 1999).
1. There are several ways to assess profi ciency in communications. 
One alternative would be to ask you to successfully complete a 
college-level English class. This idea has a lot of merit and many 
departments use this approach.
2. Steven Covey, 7 Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: 
Fireside, 1989).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Jerz, Dennis. “Writing Effective E-Mail: Top 10 Tips.” jerz
.setonhill.edu/writing/e-text/e-mail.
Lasky, Rick. “Starting the Shift Off Right.” Fire Engineering, 
March 2007.
Markley, Rick. “The Great Communicator.” Fire Chief, October 2008.
“Media Primer for the Fire Service.” www.nfpa.org/PressRoom/
Primer.
Sovick, Mary. “Importance of Workplace Writing Skills in Fire and 
EMS Services.” The Instructor, April 2004.
Thiel, 
Adam. 
Improving 
Firefi ghter 
Communications. 
Emmitsburg, MD: U.S. Fire Administration, 1999.
Turabian, Kate L. A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses 
and Dissertations. 5th ed. Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press, 1996.
Werner, Charles. “Communications: The ‘Avalanche Effect,’ ” Fire-
house, March 2004.
Writing Effective E-Mail. www.customnet.on.ca.
“A Beginner’s Guide to Effective E-Mail.” http://webfoot.com/
advice/email.top.php
Bigrigg, Brad, and Cynthia Tustin. “From Note Taking to Note 
Making.” Fire Engineering, July 2006.
The Chicago Manual of Style. 15th ed. Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press, 2003.
Curtis, Timothy. “Personality Puzzle.” Fire Chief, August 2007.
Dils, Jan. “Writing Fire and Non-fi re Report Narratives,” 1990. 
Published by the author, P.O. Box 50544, Pasadena, CA 91115.
Dunne, Thomas. “In the Spotlight: Preparing for the Media.” Fire 
Engineering, March 2008.
Fowler, H. Ramsey, and Jane E. Aaron. Little, Brown Handbook. 
10th ed. New York: Addison Wesley Education Publisher, Inc., 
1998.
Hunschuh, Rita, Bob Hunschuh, and David Hunschuh. National 
Media Guide for Emergency and Disaster Incidents. Durham, 
NC: National Press Photographers Association, 1995.

The Company Officer’s Role in Effective Communications  45

The Company Officer’s Role 
in the Organization
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ Groups and Organizations
■ Authority for the Local Fire 
Department
■ The Fire Service in America Today
■ The Evolving Role of Fire 
Departments
■ Organizational Structure
■ The Organizational Chart
■ The Company Officer
■ Principles of Good Organizations
■ Organizing Your Own Company
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
3

47
STREET 
STORY
A
s a company officer, I serve many functions in my organization. It is some-
times easy to get caught up in finding and maintaining your proper place in 
the department’s organizational scheme. In my fire service career, I managed to 
learn from other company officers some very valid truths that I have carried with 
me as I progressed to a leadership role.
During a fire in a single-story commercial structure, I was crawling behind my 
lieutenant into the building through the dark smoke-filled office area, looking for the 
seat of the fire. Flames were coming out the floor registers, and the building was 
getting hotter and hotter.
We were crawling toward what appeared to be an open area, and the floor 
seemed to be slanting. It was hard to tell in the severe smoke condition, but I kept 
following him, still searching for the fire. All of the sudden in a muffled yell I heard, 
“Get back, get the hell back, back. . . .” Immediately, we retreated as fast as we 
could. Once outside, I heard the blasting of truck air horns, which was our depart-
ment’s structure evacuation signal. As it turns out, the floor inside the building really 
was slanting. In fact, in the room my lieutenant and I were headed for, the floor had 
fallen into the basement! We almost went with it.
My lieutenant came up to me after the fire was contained and apologized for 
“cussing” at me. I just looked down and shook my head and said, “You don’t need 
to apologize. You just saved my life. Thank you.”
From that day forward, I knew that whatever place I occupied on my 
 department’s organizational chart, or whatever my job descriptions spelled out 
as my  duties, my first and foremost responsibility over all others was the safety 
of the people on my team. Whenever I get bogged down with the various roles 
I play as a company  officer, I will never lose sight of this most important “role” 
that I play: to protect the safety of my team members.
—Sally L. McCann-Mirise, Lieutenant, Liberty Twp. 
Fire Prevention, Powell, Ohio

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
3-1 Describe the organizational structure of the 
department.
 
3-2 Describe the purpose of an organizational chart.
 
3-3 Identify the jurisdictional boundaries of the 
agency.
 
3-4 Define the terms laws, statutes, regulations, and 
ordinances.
 
3-5 Describe the law-making process at the 
local level.
 
3-6 Explain how the state/provincial and/or federal 
laws may affect local laws and ordinances.
 
3-7 Describe the different types of local 
government.
 
3-8 Identify the chain of command within the local 
government structure.
 
3-9 Describe the major departments and divisions 
that comprise local governmental structure.
 3-10 List the functions of local, state, and federal bu-
reaus, divisions, and agencies that affect the fire 
service.
 3-11 Define enabling and regulatory legislation.
 3-12 Explain the socioeconomic and political influ-
ences that impact the fire service.
 3-13 List the allied agencies that the fire department 
may need to cooperate with to address com-
munity issues.
 3-14 Correlate the mission and goals of the agency to 
those of allied agencies.
 3-15 Categorize by function, the allied  agencies 
within the community that assist the fire 
department.
 3-16 Identify the geographic configuration and com-
position of the department’s response district.
 3-17 Classify the demographic composition of the 
department’s response district.
 3-18 Describe the strategic plan for the agency.
 3-19 Identify each level of supervision and manage-
ment in the department.
 3-20 Explain the role of each position on the chart.
 3-21 Distinguish between line and staff functions.
 3-22 Differentiate the roles of operation (line) manag-
ers and administration managers.
 3-23 Describe the chain of command of the 
department.
 3-24 Identify those routine administrative functions 
pertinent to unit-level supervision.
 3-25 Explain the company officer’s role in planning 
and implementing change.
 3-26 Plan the steps required for implementing a 
change of policy and/or procedure.
 3-27 Determine how the new policy affects existing 
policy.
 3-28 Identify the differences between the new and 
existing policies.
 3-29 Describe the process for evaluating change.
 3-30 Identify the policies and procedures related to 
unit-level administrative functions.
*The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021 Standards, are identiﬁ ed in 
different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.
Looking at Table 3-1, we see a list of the largest 
fi re departments in the United States and Canada. 
While these departments represent less than 1 percent 
of the fi re departments, they serve over 15 percent of 
the population.
Although large cities are protected by large and 
often well-known fi re departments, most of America 
is protected by small fi re departments, many of them 
comprised entirely of volunteer members. Most of the 
departments are staffed by volunteer members, have 
INTRODUCTION
There are more than 30,000 fi re departments in this 
country. Fire departments range in size from small 
departments with a dozen members and one vehicle to 
departments with thousands of members and hundreds 
of vehicles, but they are all organizations. Despite the 
vast variation, many characteristics are common to 
all fi re departments. Understanding the characteris-
tics of effective organizations will enhance your role 
in your organization.
48  CHAPTER 3

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  49
Jurisdiction 
Fire Deptartment 
Members
Population 
Served
Total Calls
United States
New York, NY
15,600
8,000,000
1,854,660
Chicago, IL
5,101
2,800,000
667,375
Los Angeles County, CA
4,780
4,040,392
284,744
Houston, Tx
4,025
2,016,582
278,345
Los Angeles City, CA
3,694
4,018,000
363,022
Miami-Dade, FL
2,541
1,715,574
231,581
Washington, DC
2,071
588,000
153,778
Phoenix, AZ
2,060
1,551,009
145,279
Prince Georges Cty, MD
2,037
828,770
131,007
Memphis, TN
1,892
646,356
115,714
Baltimore City, MD
1,679
675,000
235,000
Dallas, TX
1,670
1,210,390
113,895
San Francisco, CA
1,658
800,000
98,959
San Antinio, TX
1,622
1,322,900
159,965
Columbus, OH
1,549
769,934
131,007
Boston, MA
1,491
650,000
71,630
Fairfax County, VA
1,392
1,077,000
92,087
Jacksonville, FL
1,289
817,210
113,710
San Diego, CA
1,153
1,300,000
104,191
Nashville, TN
1,152
580,450
95,910
Seattle, WA
1,100
580,000
79,827
Charlotte, NC
1,083
658,848
87,796
Baltimore County, MD
1,082
809,300
113,800
Honolulu, HA
1,054
371,657
38,669
Atlanta, GA
1,038
420,000
61.956
Canada
Toranto, ON
3,144
2,700,000
142,515
Montreal, QC
2,671
1,854,442
53,786
Winnipeg, MB
1,165
706,800
79,817
Halifax Region, NS
1,129
382,200
11,540
Edmonton, AB
944
730,372
33,569
Courtesy of Firehouse Magazine.
TABLE 3-1 Largest Fire Departments in United States and Canada

50  CHAPTER 3
An organizational chart is only a graphic represen-
tation of what the organization should look like. In 
larger organizations, there are always changes, as new 
activities are added and people are transferred from 
one assignment to another. And there are always a few 
vacancies due to leave, promotions, and retirements. 
Despite these fl uctuations, it is always a good idea to 
have an organization chart and to have it posted where 
members can see it. Keeping it up-to-date and putting 
the members’ names in the blocks bring the chart to 
life and help everyone associate the organization with 
the real people who occupy its ranks. From the chart 
we should be able to see who works together, as well 
as to see the lines of communications and authority 
within the organization.
Understanding organizational structure and one’s 
place in the organization is important.
Informal Organizations
So far we have talked only about the formal organi-
zation. In any workplace, there is also an informal 
 organization. Informal organizations are not bad. 
 Informal organizations exist because certain people 
like certain other people. They chat over a cup of 
coffee or have lunch together. Sometimes members 
even take time to get together after work for softball 
or bowling. Trying to defi ne this type of  organization 
Understanding organizations is more than just 
understanding our fellow members. We look at the 
human aspect of organizational relationships in Chap-
ters 6 and 7, but here let us look at organizations from 
a theoretical point of view and examine some of the 
principles of organizations. In due time, we will see 
how people fi t into and behave within organizational 
structures.
When studying any organization, we should start 
by looking at the organizational chart. Organization 
charts can be a lot more than a bunch of boxes con-
nected with lines. If the chart is prepared properly, the 
actual structure of the formal organization is refl ected 
in the chart. The organizational chart indicates the 
formal lines of authority and responsibility, lines of 
communications, and so forth. We could take all per-
sons in the organization to a large fi eld, arrange them 
neatly according to the way they fi t into the organiza-
tion, and take their picture, but this action is usually 
not practical. An organizational chart provides a sim-
ilar graphic representation on paper.
NOTE
The organizational chart indicates the formal lines of 
authority and responsibility.
one or two pieces of equipment, and serve communi-
ties of fewer than 10,000 people.
Even in this environment, good leadership and man-
agement skills are important (see Figure 3-1A-D).
GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Formal Organizations
Groups exist whenever two or more people share a 
common goal. Organizations are groups of people. 
Typically, these people share a common goal, have 
formal rules, and have designated leaders. Obviously 
this is a rather simplistic description of an organiza-
tion, but organizations are really nothing more than 
just large groups of people. But organizations can eas-
ily become quite complicated. Just think about all the 
one-on-one relationships that might be possible in an 
organization of fi ve or ten people. As organizations 
grow, the number of relationships multiplies quickly.1
We would like to think that each of these rela-
tionships is positive and that the outcome of any 
 interaction between two or more members of the 
organization has positive results, but we know from 
experience that this is not always the case. Good com-
munications plays an important role in  organizations. 
Understanding the relationships within the organiza-
tion is also important to the success of the  individuals, 
their  relationships, and the success of the entire 
organization.
NFPA estimates that there were approximately 1,148,800 
fi refi ghters in the U.S. in 2007.
Of the total number of fi refi ghters 323,350 or 28% 
were career fi refi ghters and 825,450 (72%) were volun-
teer fi refi ghters. Most of the career fi refi ghters (74%) are in 
communities that protect 25,000 or more people. Most 
of the volunteer fi refi ghters (95%) are in departments that 
protect fewer than 2,500 people.
There are an estimated 30,185 fi re departments in the 
U.S. Of these, 2,263 departments or 8% are all career, 
1,765 (6%) mostly career, 4,989 (17%) are mostly volun-
teer and 21,168 (70%) are all volunteer. In the U.S., 13,221 
or 44% of departments provide EMS service, 4,472 
 departments or 15% provide EMS service and advance 
life support, while 12,492 departments or 41% provide no 
EMS support.
Source: U.S. Fire Department Profi le through 2007. Quincy, MA:  National 
Fire Protection Association, 2008. Reprinted with permission.
PROFILE OF THE U.S. FIRE SERVICE

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  51
and represent it with a chart would probably be 
impossible. Although we cannot represent it on paper, 
 informal organizations really do exist concurrently 
with most formal organizations.
AUTHORITY FOR THE LOCAL 
FIRE DEPARTMENT
In the past, fi re offi cers and, sometimes, even fi re 
chiefs did not realize the importance of understand-
ing how government works. Fire chiefs went to city 
hall only when the mayor called them, and they gen-
erally took a low profi le in anything pertaining to the 
government process. Fortunately, that has changed in 
most jurisdictions.
The fi re department is a part of local government. 
We could think of our organization as being at the 
center of the universe, but closer study will reveal that 
we are just a small part of something that is much 
larger (see Figure 3-2). Let us review some of the 
things we learned in school about government.
Government can be defi ned as a political organiza-
tion comprised of individuals and institutions autho-
rized to formulate public policy to improve the public 
welfare. To that end, governments are empowered to 
establish and regulate the action of the people within 
their jurisdiction.
FIGURE 3-1 In many communities, the fire station is a prominent structure. Some are quite fancy and others rather 
 simple. All provide a shelter to the fire department that provides service to the community.
(A)
(C)
(B)
(D)

52  CHAPTER 3
ELECTORATE
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
ELECTED OFFICIALS
COUNCIL APPOINTED
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
COUNCIL APPOINTED
POSITIONS
CITY DEPARTMENTS
BUILDING CODE
BOARD OF APPEALS
BOARD OF LIBRARY
TRUSTEES
PARKS, BEACHES, AND
RECREATION COMMISSION
CITY ARTS COMMISSION
HARBOR COMMISSION
CIVIL SERVICE BOARD
PLANNING COMMISSION
CITY CLERK
CITY ATTORNEY
CITY MANAGER
ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER
Community and Economic Development
Labor Relations
Code/Environmental Enforcement
PLANNING
Current Plans and Projects
Advance Planning
LIBRARY SERVICES
Library
Cultural Arts
HUMAN RESOURCES
Personnel Administration
Benefit Management
Risk Management
Labor Relations
ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER
Harbor Resources
Public Information
Code and Water Quality Enforcement
BUILDING
Plan Checking
Inspections
Permits
FIRE
Fire Suppression
(Operations)
Training and Education
Fire Prevention
Administration
Ocean Lifeguards
Hazardous Materials
Junior Lifeguard
Program
Emergency Medical
Services
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Accounting
Treasury Management
Geographic Information
System
Management Information
Systems
Purchasing and
Warehousing
Billing And Receivables
Telecommunications
Revenue
UTILITIES
Water
Wastewater
Electrical
Oil and Gas
Administration
RECREATION AND SENIOR SERVICES
Recreation
Senior Services
POLICE
Patrol
Traffic
Detective
Support Services
Animal Control
Parking
GENERAL SERVICES
Parks and Trees
Field Maintenance
Building Maintenance
Equipment Maintenance
Operations Support
Traffic Signs and Markings
Refuse Collection
Recycling
Engineering
CIP Management
Construction Management
Developmental Services
Traffic
PUBLIC WORKS
FIGURE 3-2 This is a representative organizational chart for a city. The citizens are at the top of the chart; they elect 
the council to represent them. The council will select the city manager who usually hires the assistant managers and 
 department heads. (Graphic courtesy of ICMA Washington, D.C.)

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  53
Types of Local Government
At the local level, there are fi ve forms of government: 
council-manager, mayor-council, commission, town 
meeting, and representative town meeting.
Council-Manager
In the council-manager form of government, the 
council is the governing body of the city elected by 
the public, and the manager is hired by the coun-
cil to carry out its policies. The council usually 
 consists of fi ve to nine members including a mayor 
Our System of Government
Our governments are built around the U.S. Constitu-
tion. That remarkable document establishes the form 
of our federal government. It also limits the role of the 
federal government. The Constitution authorizes the 
three branches of the federal government—the execu-
tive, the legislative, and the judicial. The federal gov-
ernment provides a variety of services to promote the 
general welfare of the citizens of the United States. To 
this end, it conducts foreign relations, controls foreign 
and interstate commerce, provides currency, provides 
for the national defense, and collects taxes to pay for 
these activities.
The executive branch, comprised of the president 
and the various departments, provides most of these 
services. One of the newest departments in the federal 
government is the Department of Homeland Security. 
That department includes the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, the U.S. Fire Administration, 
and many other organizations that provide security at 
our borders and within our homeland.
The legislative branch of the federal government 
is the U.S. Congress, made up of the House of Rep-
resentatives and the Senate. Congress enacts legisla-
tion. Legislation that passes both houses of Congress 
is sent to the president for approval. If approved, it 
becomes a law.
The executive branch creates laws, too. The vari-
ous departments within the executive branch create 
rules and regulations that affect all of us. The Inter-
nal Revenue Service collects taxes to pay for govern-
ment services. Under the authority granted to it by 
Congress, it publishes and enforces rules pertaining 
to the tax code. Likewise, the Equal Employment 
Opportunity and the Occupational Health and Safety 
Administration, both a part of the Department of 
Labor, have rules and regulations that affect nearly 
every workplace. These rules are generally referred 
to as administrative laws. As we will see later in this 
book, administrative laws are very important to us as 
citizens and to us as a tool in fi re prevention.
The U.S. Constitution also provides that all powers 
not specifi cally established for the federal  government 
are reserved to the states and to the people. Thus, a 
great part of the burden for providing services to citi-
zens is left to state government.
Most states are governed by a government that is 
similar in structure to the federal government. They 
have an executive, called the governor, and the various 
departments that report to the governor. State govern-
ments also have a legislative body, usually made up of 
two bodies, and a judicial system. The state also infl u-
ences our lives by enacting laws and regulations that 
affect our daily lives.
Like the federal government, the state governments 
turn many of the details of governance and provid-
ing services to the citizens over to local governments. 
Cities, towns, and counties represent local govern-
ments. Local governments also have an executive and 
a legislative branch and may have a judicial branch. 
The executive branch is usually made up of a city or 
county manager and various departments. Local gov-
ernments can enact laws in the form of local ordi-
nances. A local ordinance is a law usually found in a 
municipal code. In the United States, these laws are 
enforced locally in addition to state law and federal 
law. The fi re department is usually one of the depart-
ments of local government.
There are a variety of defi nitions of law, but for our pur-
poses we will consider a law to be that which must be 
obeyed subject to sanction or consequences by the gov-
ernment. There are a wide variety of things that meet 
such a defi nition. For example, there are laws that autho-
rize fi refi ghters to order buildings and areas evacuated.
The United States Congress is responsible for passing 
laws. The laws that Congress passes are called statues. 
Federal statutes are organized into a large body of laws 
called the United States Code. State legislatures enact 
laws which are also called statutes or general laws. State 
statutes must comply with the United States Constitu-
tion as well as the state constitution. On the local level, 
the legislative body of a municipality, such as city or town 
council, has the authority to pass laws called ordinances. 
Ordinances must comply with both the state constitu-
tion and the United States Constitution. In addition, local 
 ordinances can not violate any state statues.
Source: Defi nitions from Legal Considerations for Fire and Emergency 
Services by J. Curtis Varone (Clifton Park, NY: Delmar, Cengage 
Learning, © 2007).
THE LAW—DEFINED

54  CHAPTER 3
(or  council  president) who is either selected by the 
council or elected by the people as defi ned in the 
city charter. Typically, the mayor is recognized as 
the political head of the municipality; however, he or 
she is also a member of the legislative body (coun-
cil) and does not have the power of veto. The size of 
the council is generally smaller than that of a mayor-
council municipality, and council elections are usu-
ally nonpartisan.
The council provides legislative direction, whereas 
the manager is responsible for day-to-day administra-
tive operation of the city based on the council’s rec-
ommendations. The mayor and council as a collegial 
body are responsible for setting policy, approving the 
budget, and determining the tax rate. The manager 
serves as the council’s chief advisor. Managers also 
serve at the pleasure of the council and are respon-
sible for preparing the budget, directing day-to-day 
operations, and hiring and fi ring personnel.
This form of government provides professional 
leadership at the highest level and is increasing in 
popularity. The article by former ICMA Executive 
Director William H. Hansell Jr. outlines some of 
the benefi ts of this form of government (see feature 
box, “Evolution and Change Characterize Council-
 Manager Government”).
Mayor-Council
The mayor-council (council-elected executive coun-
ties) form of government is the form that most closely 
parallels the U.S. federal government, with an elected 
legislature and a separately elected executive. May-
ors or elected executives are designated as the heads 
of city or county governments; however, the extent 
of their authority can range from purely ceremonial 
to full-scale responsibility for day-to-day operations. 
The mayor’s (or elected executive’s) duties and powers 
generally include hiring and fi ring department heads, 
preparation and administration of the budget, and, in 
some cases, veto power (which may be overridden) 
over acts of the legislature. In some communities, the 
mayor or executive may assume a larger policy- making 
role, and responsibility for day-to-day  operations is 
delegated to an administrator who is appointed by 
and is responsible to the chief executive.
The council adopts the budget, passes resolutions 
with legislation, audits the performance of the gov-
ernment, and adopts general policy positions.
Commission
The commission form of government, character-
ized by an elected governing board that holds both 
 legislative and executive powers, is the oldest form 
of government in America. A descendent of the old 
English shire-moot, or county governing board, the 
board is usually comprised of three to fi ve members, 
although the number varies.
The board of commissioners is the county gov-
erning board, and it serves as the head of the 
 government. It has responsibility for adopting the 
budget, passing resolutions, and enacting ordinances 
and  regulations. A number of other offi cials are also 
popularly elected and serve as heads of some of the 
major county  departments (although the number of 
these  independently elected offi cials varies consid-
erably). Some of the most common are the sheriff, 
 treasurer, and clerk.
Town Meeting
In many smaller towns, especially in New England, 
all of the qualifi ed voters of the town gather on a 
given day (usually once a year, but more often if nec-
essary) to elect a board of offi cers and to make major 
policy decisions. The board, in turn, has the respon-
sibility for carrying out the policies set by the citi-
zens. In some towns, a manager or administrator is 
appointed to carry out the administrative operations 
of the town.
Representative Town Meeting
The representative town meeting form of govern-
ment is structured in much the same way as the 
town meeting form, with the exception that a large 
number of citizens are chosen by the general elec-
torate to represent them in voting. All citizens can 
attend the meetings and participate in debates, 
but only those chosen as representatives have a 
direct vote.
Although all of the branches of all levels of gov-
ernment affect us as citizens, probably the lawmak-
ing process is the one area that is understood the 
least. The writers of the Constitution very care-
fully created the powers held by the three branches 
of the federal government. Their intent was to pro-
vide a system in which the powers of each of the 
three branches would be kept in check by the power 
of the other two. Thus, it takes the action of both 
houses of Congress and the president for legislation 
to become law. These laws are statutory laws—laws 
that become a part of the federal statutes. As we 
have already seen, the various departments within 
the executive branch publish rules and regulations 
called administrative laws.

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  55
The 20th century could well be called the century of 
 local government in American democracy. The Ameri-
can system of governance is based on a federal  system, 
which divides the powers of sovereign governance 
 between, on the one hand, a central or national govern-
ment and, on the other, 50 state entities. The powers of 
the national government are limited to those specifi cally 
delineated in the United States Constitution. All other 
powers are reserved for the people or given to each of 
the 50 states.
This preference for decentralized government has 
been advanced by the 50 states as they  empower 
their local governments, resulting in the strongest 
and most decentralized local governments in  history. 
 Throughout the 50 states, for example, there are 
27 large  consolidated cities/counties, 3,043 indepen-
dent counties, 19,279 municipalities, 16,656 towns 
and townships (in 20 of the states), 14,422 indepen-
dent school  districts educating American children, and 
31,555 special districts.
This is a signifi cant amount of local government for 
295 million people. But as the French observer Alexis 
de Tocqueville said in the early 1830s, “Local institutions 
are to liberty what primary schools are to science: they 
put it within the people’s reach; they teach people to ap-
preciate its peaceful enjoyment and accustom them to 
make use of it. Without local institutions, a nation may 
give itself a free government, but it has not got the spirit 
of liberty.”
Stability and Change
By the end of the 20th century, local governments in 
the United States had become the most trusted level of 
American government. Year after year, citizens ranked lo-
cal government higher than state or national government 
as the level from which they felt they got the greatest 
value for their money.
This has not always been the case. During the 1900s, 
local governments evolved from holding the dubious dis-
tinction of the most troubled component of the American 
system of governance to becoming the most trusted. 
This evolution has been accomplished through a se-
ries of radical changes that began in the early part of the 
century, continued throughout it, and is generally known 
as the progressive reform movement. The reforms have 
included:
EVOLUTION AND CHANGE 
CHARACTERIZE COUNCIL-MANAGER 
GOVERNMENT
William H. Hansell Jr., former Executive Director
International City/County Management Association
■ Instituting civil-service personnel systems.
■ Promoting personnel on a merit basis.
■ Mandating competitive tendering or purchasing of 
goods and supplies.
■ Requiring performance budgeting and measurement.
■ Ensuring open, transparent government that is fully 
accessible to citizens and the media.
■ Implementing alternative service-delivery mecha-
nisms, including contracting, volunteerism, franchis-
ing, and privatization.
■ Developing the council-manager system of organizing 
and operating local government.
Of the reforms, the development of the council-
 manager system may have been the most signifi cant 
step in improving the performance and credibility of local 
government.
The Flexible System
The council-manager form continues to prove its adapt-
ability. The system’s developers originally conceived 
elected councils as consisting of only fi ve to seven 
 members, elected at large on a nonpartisan basis. The 
council would select one member to serve as mayor. 
 Initially, elected council members received little or no 
compensation for what was viewed as volunteer service 
to the community.
Data collected by International City/County Manage-
ment Association (ICMA) in 1996 show that council-
 manager communities in the United States elect an 
average of six council members; however, councils con-
sisting of 12 to 13 members have become increasingly 
common among larger jurisdictions. Often, some or all 
council members are elected to represent a particular 
section of the community. Seventeen percent of council-
 manager communities nominated and elected council 
members by ward or district; an additional 18.5 percent 
used a combination of at-large and by-district elections. 
Seventeen percent of responding council-manager com-
munities also held partisan elections.
To fulfi ll development needs in public works and capital 
infrastructure, local governments initially recruited man-
agers with engineering backgrounds or undergraduate 
degrees. In the book The Rise of the City Manager, au-
thor Richard Stillman reported that in 1934, 77 percent of 
responding managers with college degrees had majored 
in engineering and that 51 percent listed a bachelor’s 
 degree as their highest level of educational attainment.
According to information in Stillman’s book and in 
ICMA’s 1996 Municipal Year Book, appointed manag-
ers often are trained in the general management fi eld of 
public administration, and the proportion of managers 
with a graduate or professional degree has risen steadily, 
from 27 percent in 1971 to nearly 73 percent in 1995. 
A manager’s course of study may include such diverse 
topics as public fi nance, resource allocation, economic 

56  CHAPTER 3
 development, technology, intergovernmental relations, 
planning, public policy, and environmental and human 
resource management.
Roles and Responsibilities
An appointed manager constantly must be aware that 
the powers of the local government belong to the coun-
cil. Any authority or responsibility assigned to the man-
ager by the council or by the citizens through a local 
charter can be removed at any time, for any reason. The 
illusion of power that may appear to rest with a manager 
must be accepted as a temporary acquisition based on 
the manager’s knowledge and expertise.
In fact, the manager can be removed at any time. Many 
managers serve without a guaranteed term or tenure, how-
ever, the number of managers with employment agree-
ments which set the terms and conditions of employment 
and separation and give clear guidelines for performance 
evaluation continues to grow. The results of a 1998 ICMA 
survey showed that nearly 80 percent of responding local 
government managers and chief administrative offi cers 
 reported having a contract or letter of agreement with their 
councils, compared with 14 percent in 1974.
Managers who serve a jurisdiction for an extended 
period come to understand this community’s values, 
traditions, and goals. Yet, the manager must remem-
ber that the council represents the community, and they 
must  defer to the elected offi cials as refl ecting the policy 
wishes of the citizenry.
Elected Leadership
In most communities, the citizens perceive their mayor 
as their most visible leader, and the elected leaders of 
council-manager communities are no exception. In this 
way, mayors are analogous to corporate board chair 
persons.
Mayors in council-manager communities fulfi ll two 
critical leadership functions. The fi rst is that of consen-
sus building: the mayor unites the community’s disparate 
constituencies so they can work together successfully. 
The second role held by the mayor in council-manager 
communities is to guide the development and imple-
mentation of policies that improve community service 
delivery.
Over the past 86 years, the position of mayor within 
council-manager communities has been strengthened in 
a variety of ways. Under the original understanding of 
the form, the mayor was selected annually by the council 
from among its members. Councilors frequently rotated 
into the mayor’s position, over time leaving no clearly 
identifi able political leader. But ICMA’s 1996 form-of-
government survey showed that 62 percent of all coun-
cil-manager communities now elect their mayors directly 
by a vote of the citizens, for a two or four year term. The 
people elect their political leader, and the council must 
accept that selection.
By 1918, there were 98 council-manager localities; in 
1930, ICMA recognized 418 U.S. cities and seven coun-
ties as operating under the council-manager form. And by 
1985, the number of council-manager communities had 
grown to 548 cities and 86 counties in the United States. 
Currently, 3,302 U.S. cities with populations greater than 
2,500 and 371 U.S. counties operate under this system 
of local government.
■ More than 75.5 million individuals live in communities 
operating under council-manager governments.
■ During the past 16 years, an average of 63 U.S. com-
munities per year have adopted the council-manager 
form.
■ Sixty-three percent of U.S. cities with populations of 
25,000 or more have adopted the council-manager 
form.
In recent years, some communities have chosen to 
strengthen the mayor’s authority, providing the mayor 
with one or more of these powers:
■ Veto actions of the council that require an extraordi-
nary majority to overturn the veto.
■ Power (1) to organize the council by assigning council-
ors to chair or serve on committees and (2) to assign 
matters to these committees.
■ Power to appoint citizens to serve on advisory or 
 quasi-judicial authorities, boards, or commissions.
■ Power to receive the annual budget prepared by 
the manager and to present that budget, with com-
ments and suggestions, to the council for their 
consideration.
■ Power to make an annual report to the council and the 
citizens on the state of the community.
■ Power to initiate the hiring and/or involuntary termina-
tion of the person serving as manager.
The manager remains the chief executive offi cer with 
clear authority to:
■ Hire and terminate all senior offi cers and staff.
■ Purchase all goods, supplies, equipment and services 
required by the government.
■ Prepare an annual budget and fi nancial plan for con-
sideration by the council.
■ Administer and enforce all contracts involving the local 
government.
■ Enforce all laws adopted by the council.
Communities with a delegation of authority to an ap-
pointed manager and a strongly empowered mayor might 
be seen as working under a mayor-council-manager 
form. Under this scenario, the elected leadership comes 
“from the people” via the election process. The citizens 
oversee the operations of the government through an 
open and transparent system that guarantees that it will 
continue to be “by the people.”

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  57
Day-to-day management of the government is  directed 
by an experienced professional manager who is selected 
by the elected offi cials and who facilitates the govern-
ment by operating “for the people” who live in the com-
munity and who will live there in the future. Here are the 
values these managers add to the system of governance 
for the communities they serve:
■ Establishment of policy and service delivery strategies 
on a basis of need rather than of demand.
■ An emphasis on the long-term interests of the com-
munity as a whole.
■ Promotion of equity and fairness.
■ Recognition of the interconnection among policies.
■ Advancement of broad and inclusive citizens’ 
participation.
For nearly 90 years, the council-manager form has 
successfully adapted to American community needs. 
Cities and counties are not static, and the changes 
 taking place in them involve the core of our values. 
Professional managers and the council-manager form, 
however, continue to evolve so that today, as in the 
early 20th century, this system offers government of 
the  people, by the people, and for the people. In short, 
council-manager government is a system of  reform 
that will continue to serve communities well in the 
21st century.
Every state has a constitution that is the basic plan for 
its government, along with numerous supporting laws. 
The constitution of each state describes the process for 
making, deleting, or amending the laws. Laws are gen-
erally adopted because of a perceived need. The need 
for making a law is generally transmitted to the legislative 
body by a group or individual activity, publicity generated 
by interest groups or powerful individuals, a crisis gener-
ating action, or by personal contact.
A sponsor introduces proposed legislation, usually 
 referred to as a bill. The more powerful a sponsor of 
the bill is in terms of legislative assignments, affi liations, 
knowledge, and seniority, the better chance of a piece of 
legislation becoming law. The sponsors are usually mem-
bers of one of the houses of the legislature.* The sponsor 
of the proposed legislation presents it to the chair of their 
legislative body who presents it to the legislative body for 
its fi rst reading. The chair assigns the bill to a committee. 
The chair of the committee has considerable discretion 
on what bills will be considered, the order of consider-
ation, and the amount of time to debate the merits of 
the bill. The committee is usually a bipartisan committee, 
but the chair is a member of the party that controls that 
house of the legislative body.
Many bills die in committee and no further action will 
be taken on that proposed legislation during that ses-
sion of the legislature; however, some legislatures have 
the ability to call the bill out of committee with a “super” 
majority. If the bill makes it out of committee, it goes to 
the fl oor of the house for a second reading. At this time 
the bill is debated and is subject to amendment. The pre-
siding offi cer then schedules a third reading, which may 
THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS
Mr. Carl Peterson
or may not have signifi cant priority depending on the 
 attitude of the presiding offi cer concerning the legisla-
tion. After the third reading, the bill is put to a vote. If it is 
adopted, the bill, now referred to as an “act,” is  submitted 
to the other body of the legislature where the same pro-
cess occurs.
If there is a modifi cation of the bill by the other body of 
the legislature, a conference committee of both houses 
is formed to attempt to reconcile the differences. If the 
differences cannot be reconciled in the conference com-
mittee, the bill can die in committee and is generally dead 
until a later legislative session.
If the members of both houses approve the act it is 
presented to the governor. Every state has different rules 
concerning the effect of actions or inactions of the gov-
ernor concerning the act at this juncture. Generally, if the 
legislature is still in session the governor must either sign 
the bill or veto it. In many states the act becomes law 
if the governor fails to take any action after a period of 
days. Vetoed bills are returned to the house and sen-
ate for reconsideration. If a “super” majority (the number 
differs in different states) of the legislature overrides the 
veto the act will become law in spite of the veto of the 
governor.
Fire service leaders can be a valuable resource for 
 articulate and well-reasoned testimony in committee 
hearings. A registered lobbyist can be an effective tool 
in infl uencing the voting behavior of a legislator. While it 
is appropriate as an individual to discuss pending legis-
lation with a legislator, in most states it is illegal to make 
the same request on behalf of a group or organization 
unless that person is a registered lobbyist. Enlisting the 
aid of other interested groups that may be sympathetic 
to the proposed legislation is an effective tool in the per-
suasive process.
Many fi refi ghters are members of local fi re ser-
vice  organizations, state organizations, and national 

58  CHAPTER 3
THE FIRE SERVICE 
IN AMERICA TODAY
As a result of the decentralization of power, most 
of the matters pertaining to fi re protection are del-
egated to the states and to local government. As a 
result, there are approximately 30,000 fi re depart-
ments in the United States individually organized 
to meet the specifi c needs of the communities they 
serve. (Although public fi re protection is usually a 
function of local government, provincial, state, and 
federal property may also have organized fi re depart-
ments for their protection.)
Public Fire Departments
A public fi re department is part of local govern-
ment. The head of the fi re department (fi re chief) 
reports to the chief executive offi cer (city manager) 
or to the senior elected offi cer (mayor). As such, the 
chief is responsible for all things related to the fi re 
department’s operations. The most common type of 
public fi re protection in larger cities is the public fi re 
department. A less common form of municipal fi re 
protection is provided by a fi re bureau, a part of the 
department of public safety. A variation of this is pro-
vided when employees of the public safety depart-
ment provide both police and fi re protection. In 
some jurisdictions, these personnel are called public 
safety offi cers.
County Fire Departments 
and Fire Districts
County fi re departments are a little more complicated. 
County fi re departments are becoming more common 
as suburban communities grow and the demands for 
emergency service response outpace the capabilities 
of the volunteer fi re companies. A model that works 
well is to have a county fi re chief or administrator 
 organizations. Fire chiefs are often members of their 
state and regional fi re chiefs’ associations. Regional as-
sociations are often affi liates of national associations. 
These organizations are generally politically active and 
can also be a valuable resource for providing information 
and technical support. Depending on the issues, trade 
organizations or other professional organizations should 
be recruited to assist in mutually using their infl uence to 
enhance the possibility of the adoption and passage of 
the proposed legislation. The process of infl uencing the 
passage of desired legislation is not an exact science, 
but the tools that are available must be utilized to provide 
any hope that the desired legislation will become law.
—Mr. Peterson is a retired judge. He teaches Fire Ser-
vice Law at Asheville-Buncombe Technical Community 
College in Asheville, NC.
*Most states have a bicameral legislature, meaning that their legisla-
tive branch is comprised of two groups of elected offi cials, like the 
U.S. Congress. However, the names of these two bodies vary from 
state to state.
The Role of the Courts
So where do the Supreme Court and the federal 
courts fi t into all of this? Their job is to make sure 
that the provisions of the Constitution are followed. 
Generally, the federal appeals courts are concerned 
with matters of a constitutional nature. When these 
courts hear cases in which the law is deemed to be 
unconstitutional, Congress may react by amending 
the law to prevent similar occurrences in the future. 
An example of this was the Do-Not-Call legislation 
enacted in 2003. Several federal courts found the law 
exceeded the authority of the executive branch. Con-
gress and the president responded by amending the 
law. Of greater signifi cance were the actions of the 
Supreme Court with regard to the Civil Rights Act. 
Once again, Congress and the president responded by 
amending the law.
It is important that we understand the safeguards 
provided by the Constitution. They ensure an effec-
tive government balanced with democracy, individual 
freedom, and equality for all. These protections are 
fundamental to life in our great country.
Enabling acts [or enabling legislation]: Statutes enacted 
by Congress or state legislatures that authorize the cre-
ation of administrative agencies and provide the legal 
authority for the agency to operate.
Regulations [or regulatory legislation]: Laws that are 
created by administrative agencies pursuant to authority 
delegated by the legislature. They are rules that carry the 
weight of law and are designed to carry out the quasi-
legislative authority of the agency.
Source: Defi nitions from Legal Considerations for Fire and Emergency 
Services by J. Curtis Varone (Clifton park, NY: Delmar, Cengage 
Learning, © 2007).
THE LAW—DEFINED

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  59
■ A third critical issue is fi refi ghter health and safety. 
Although the overall number of fi refi ghter deaths 
and injuries has declined over the years, a majority 
of the deaths and injuries in recent years are in the 
volunteer fi re service. Most of the deaths are from 
heart attacks and vehicle accidents. The volunteer 
fi re services, represented by the National Volunteer 
Fire Council and the U.S. Fire Administration, are 
working together on both of these issues and have 
issued several reports that highlight the problems 
and offer solutions.3
In many states, the counties are divided into fi re 
districts as provided by state law. These fi re districts 
become essentially separate, independent units of 
government, administered by some form of commis-
sion. The citizens of a fi re district can elect the type 
of fi re protection they want, and, in some cases, they 
can elect the level of protection afforded. Usually, 
these citizens pay a special tax for the level of service 
they desire.
Another form of fi re protection is established with 
the creation of a fi re protection district. A fi re pro-
tection district is a legally established tax-supported 
unit that contracts for fi re protection with a neighbor-
ing fi re department.
Volunteer organizations may be supported by taxes, 
subscriptions, or fund-raising activities.
Regardless of the basis of authority and how the 
department is organized and funded, it is important 
to know the laws that pertain to its existence. When 
a department is not legally organized or when it does 
not operate in full accord with state laws, local ordi-
nances, and its own regulations, it operates outside 
the scope of the local government and misrepresents 
 responsible for countywide fi re protection, with a 
responsibility for coordinating the efforts of the inde-
pendent paid and volunteer fi re companies. As the 
need arises for hiring paid staff for the volunteers’ fi re 
stations, the paid fi re chief is involved with selecting, 
training, and assigning these people, and supervising 
them once they are hired. (This model has proven to 
work better than hiring the fi refi ghters fi rst and then 
looking for a fi re chief to lead them.) As the orga-
nization grows, the county fi re chief will likely add 
staff assistants to deal with training and communica-
tions. As the county continues to grow, the demand 
for service increases proportionally. Gradually, more 
functions, including emergency response activities, 
are shifted from the volunteers to the paid staff as 
the volume of calls and the demand for additional 
 service increase.
The Volunteer Fire Service
We sometimes forget that America’s fi re service was 
once all-volunteer. With the growth of large cities 
and the accompanying development of paid depart-
ments in the late nineteenth century, America had 
both volunteer and paid fi refi ghters. That statement 
is still true, but when one looks at fi re departments 
as organizations, the picture becomes a bit more 
complicated. There are paid departments with some 
 volunteers, and there are volunteer departments with 
some paid personnel. And there is an infi nite array of 
 combinations in between.
Today, volunteer fi refi ghters make up about 
74  percent of all fi refi ghters. Just like their paid col-
leagues, volunteer fi refi ghters are the fi rst line of 
defense against fi res, medical emergencies, hazardous 
materials incidents, all forms of specialized  rescue, 
and responses to natural disasters and terrorist attacks.
Volunteer fi refi ghters face several major challenges:
■ During the past 25 years, many volunteer depart-
ments, like many other organizations, have faced 
the problem of retaining veteran members and 
attracting new members. During the same time, 
the number of emergency calls has increased as 
well as the requirements for training. Although 
the problem is national in scope and applicable to 
many departments, we should note that some vol-
unteer emergency response organizations have had 
no problems in this area. The U.S. Fire Admin-
istration is also well aware of these issues. They 
recently published Retention and Recruitment for 
the Volunteer Emergency Services which discusses 
the concerns and offers solutions.
■ Another critical issue is the lack of communication 
between some volunteer fi re departments and the 
communities they serve. In many areas, commu-
nity leaders have little understanding of the signifi -
cant issues facing volunteer emergency responders. 
Unlike most other agencies, volunteer departments 
are independent and must survive on their own. 
They often raise the bulk of their funding with lit-
tle support from local government.
FIREGROUND FACT
Nearly three-quarters of the nation’s 1 million firefight-
ers are volunteers. Almost half of these volunteers serve 
in communities with a population of less than 2,500. 
They are found in  cities, towns, fire districts, and coun-
ties. There are  all-volunteer departments in cites with a 
population over 100,000, and there are all paid depart-
ments in communities of fewer than 2,500 people. 

60  CHAPTER 3
itself to the citizens of that community. As such, it 
exposes itself to considerable legal risk.
Federal Fire Departments
Although most fi refi ghters are a part of local gov-
ernment or a volunteer fi re department, there 
are federal fi refi ghters who are employees of the 
 federal government. They work at government 
 installations, including military bases, around the 
world. Most federal fi re departments are relatively 
small, but, collectively, federal fi refi ghters comprise 
the  largest fi re department in the United States. In 
addition to their traditional duties of fi re suppres-
sion and  emergency medical response, most  federal 
 fi refi ghters are very actively involved with fi re pre-
vention activities. As a result of these and other 
efforts, fi re loss on  government property is usually 
lower than average.
Both the U.S. Forest Service and the U.S. Park 
Service have fi re personnel, including dispatch-
ers, fi refi ghters, fi re managers, safety specialists, 
researchers, and others, who work together for the 
common goal of fi re management, fi re use, fi re pre-
vention, and fi re suppression. Many states have simi-
lar opportunities.
Several branches of the military also have fi refi ghter 
specialties among their enlisted personnel. The U.S. 
Army, Air Force, and Marine Corps all have fi refi ght-
ers. They are primarily involved with providing fi re 
and rescue support for aircraft operations, both at home 
and while deployed abroad. The U.S. Navy and Coast 
Guard have a specialty rating that designates personnel 
who maintain the fi refi ghting equipment on ships and 
smaller shore units, but actual fi refi ghting is generally 
an all-hands event, especially on ships at sea.
Most departments have some sort of automatic/
mutual aid agreement set up with allied agencies. 
For smaller organizations, it becomes essential to 
have these types of agreements so that the required 
protection can be given to their citizens. For these 
agreements to work, however, it becomes necessary 
for allied agencies to develop goals and objectives 
that mirror one another. For example, departments 
that respond together should have an accountabil-
ity system that emulates one another so that all 
members can be adequately tracked. Without mis-
sion specifi c goals and objectives, automatic and 
mutual aid departments will often lack the ability to 
effectively serve.
Allied agencies do not necessarily have to be emer-
gency-related departments. Just about any type of busi-
ness or community-based organization can be an ally 
to the fi re department. Take, for instance, an incident 
that involves a trench rescue. Where would you fi nd the 
necessary lumber and tools needed to properly shore a 
trench? Who would you call if your department was in 
immediate need of a large  shelter for abandoned citi-
zens? These are questions that need to be asked ahead 
of time and then put together in an Emergency Ser-
vices Plan for the organization. This plan will list all 
of the allied agencies within the jurisdiction and list 
what supplies and services they can offer.
The following is a small list of those allied agen-
cies that assist with fi re department functions and 
emergency response:
■ Police department: The police department and the 
fi re department work hand-in-hand on numerous 
types of incidents. However, not all of their inter-
action is on an emergency scene. Many organiza-
tions have banded together to teach the  community 
about public safety. By working together to educate 
their citizens, these organizations have seen a dras-
tic decrease in fi re or police related emergencies.
■ Local industry: Building relationships with local 
industry can have many advantages. These types 
of relationships can lead to something as simple as 
assistance with a local fi re prevention campaign to 
providing materials for catastrophic events.
■ Private non-profi t agencies: These types of agen-
cies can range from a local group that cleans the 
streets to a volunteer fi re department. The Ameri-
can Red Cross is a good example of such an orga-
nization. This organization can be essential during 
response to a natural disaster, since this agency is 
equipped to provide relief and resources to vic-
tims requiring aide. The fi re department is rec-
ommended to affi liate themselves with as many of 
these organizations as possible. By assisting them 
they will in-turn assist the fi re department in a time 
of need.
■ EMS/hospitals/clinics: Emergency situations hap-
pen every day in every community across the 
nation. But what happens when the emergency 
involves a large number of people? It is essential 
to work with not only the local EMS agencies, 
but also the local hospitals and clinics to devise a 
response plan for these types of situations.
■ Local/state/federal emergency management agen-
cies: These agencies are critical during response to a 
disaster. First response to a disaster is responsibility 
of local and state government emergency services, 
but upon request from the governor of a state as a 
result of a catastrophic event, federal assistance can 
also be called in to work with the local municipali-
ties. These agencies have the resources required for 

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  61
both response and recovery to a disaster and are an 
essential mutual aid partner.
We have learned that there are about 30,000 fi re 
departments and about 1 million fi refi ghters in the 
nation. These departments, and their fi refi ghters, 
respond to nearly 20 million calls for assistance annu-
ally. Fire calls make up less than 10 percent of the 
total call volume. (See Figure 3-3.)
Across the country, calls for emergency medical 
service continue to increase. In communities where 
the fi re department can provide such service, calls for 
hazardous materials incidents and technical rescue 
are also increasing.
■ Most U.S. fi re departments are volunteer fi re 
departments; however, most of the United States is 
protected by paid fi refi ghters.
■ Three of every four U.S. fi re departments are all-
volunteer fi re departments; such departments pro-
tect one-fourth of U.S. residents.
■ One in seventeen departments is all-paid; these 
departments protect 40 percent of the nation’s 
population.
Generally speaking, volunteers are concentrated 
in rural communities, whereas paid fi refi ghters are 
found disproportionally in large communities. Rural 
communities, defi ned by the U.S. Bureau of Cen-
sus as a community with a population of less than 
2,500, are 99 percent protected by all- volunteer 
or mostly volunteer departments.  Collectively, 
these communities account for about half of the 
 all- volunteer or mostly volunteer departments in the 
United States.
The size and type of fi re department in a given 
community are usually related to community size. 
As we have seen, the mix of paid and volunteer per-
sonnel is generally a function of community size. 
And one might tend to make conclusions about the 
level of fi re protection and the degree of risk from 
the  consequences of fi re based on community size. 
However, one should be careful in making such a 
conclusion, for even a small community may have a 
large  factory complex, a sports stadium, or a high-
rise building with all the technical complexities and 
potential for high concentrations of people or val-
ued property that such property entails. Even a large 
city can have a wildland/urban interface region and 
 exposures to the unique fi re dangers attendant to such 
an area. It is likely that every fi re department will 
need to have some familiarity with every type of fi re 
and every type of emergency, if not in protecting its 
own community, then at least in its role as a source of 
mutual aid or as a component in a regional or national 
response to a major incident.
In the fi nal analysis, fi re burns the same way 
in the open or in enclosed spaces in all communi-
ties. Fire harms people and their property in the 
same ways in all communities (see Table 3-2). And 
the resources and best practices required to safely 
FIREGROUND FACT
Until World War I, paid members of fire departments 
worked a continuous-duty system with limited time 
off. By World War II, most departments had adopted 
a two-platoon system that allowed additional time off 
and reduced the amount of time worked per week. 
Since then, the number of hours has continued to 
 decline; however, paid firefighters still work more hours 
per week than do other workers in municipal employ-
ment or private industry. Today, the most common 
 arrangement is to have three platoons each working 
24-hour shifts in some sort of rotation. This works out 
to an average of approximately 56 hours per week or 
10 days on per month.
FIREGROUND FACT
Historically, America was protected entirely by volunteer 
fire departments. During the second half of the nine-
teenth century, the arrival of steam-powered equipment 
and the growth of large cities gradually set the stage 
for the arrival of paid firefighters. As cities grew, so did 
the need for fire protection, and the demands—in terms 
of call volume and work hours—were, in many cases, 
beyond the reasonable capabilities of the volunteer fire 
departments.
FIGURE 3-3 Volunteer firefighters make up a large majority 
of all firefighters.

62  CHAPTER 3
address the fi re problem—or any other emergency—
tend to be the same everywhere. What may differ 
are the defi ned scope and the quality and quantity 
of resources available to the department to perform 
those responsibilities.
THE EVOLVING ROLE OF FIRE 
DEPARTMENTS
Many fi re departments are doing more than just 
 fi ghting fi res. Total responses may be increasing, but, 
in most jurisdictions, the number of fi re responses is 
down signifi cantly (see Table 3-3).
In many communities, fi re departments are 
responding to an ever-increasing variety of situations, 
including natural and human-made disasters. In some 
cases, the fi re department reacts to the situation and 
does the best it can to serve the needs of the commu-
nity. Fire departments are among the fi rst to respond 
to natural disasters—fl oods, earthquakes, tornadoes, 
and similar events—that often tax the resources of 
the organization. Fire departments are also among 
the fi rst on the scene at man-made disasters—terror-
ist events.
Some departments are trying to be proactive 
rather than just reactive and are developing plans 
and  procedures to deal with these threats. For many 
progressive departments, planning the community’s, 
including the fi re department’s response  activities 
for such events is now at the forefront. Much of the 
effort at the National Emergency Training Center 
in  Emmitsburg, Maryland, where the National Fire 
Academy and the Emergency Management Institute 
are located, is focused on planning for responses to 
chemical and biological agents and weapons of mass 
destruction. Clearly, the fi re department has taken 
on roles that would not have been considered just a 
 generation ago.
NOTE
Like other organizations, a fire department  consists 
of people working together in a coordinated effort to 
achieve a common goal.
National
Year
Fires
Deaths
Injuries
Direct Dollar Loss 
In Billions
1997
1,795,000
4,050
23,750
$8.5
1998
1,755,000
4,035
23,100
$8.6
1999
1,823,000
3,570
21,875
$10.0
2000
1,708,000
4,045
22,350
$11.2
20011
1,734,500
3,745
20,300
$10.6
20012
-
2,451
       800
$33.4
2002
1,687,500
3,380
18,425
$10.3
2003
1,584,500
3,925
18,125
$12.3
2004
1,550,500
3,900
17,875
$9.8
2005
1,602,000
3,675
17,925
$10.7
2006
1,642,500
3,245
16,400
$11.3
2007
1,557,500
3,430
17,675
$14.6 billion
1 Excludes the events of September 11, 2001.
2 These estimates reflect the number of deaths, injuries and dollar loss directly related to the events of September 11, 2001.
Note: The decrease in direct dollar loss in 2004 reflects the Southern California wildfires with an estimated loss of 
$2,040,000,000 that occurred in 2003.
The 2007 dollar loss includes the California Fire Storm 2007 with an estimated damage of $1.8 billion.
Source: Michael J. Karter, Jr., Fire Loss in the United States 2007, NFPA, August 2008 and previous reports in series.
TABLE 3-2 Fires, Deaths, Injuries, and Dollar Loss in the United States 1997–2007

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  63
ORGANIZATIONAL 
STRUCTURE
Like other organizations, a fi re department consists 
of people working together in a coordinated effort to 
achieve a common goal (see Figure 3-4). To function 
effectively, a fi re department must have an organiza-
tional plan that shows the relationship between the vari-
ous divisions and activities. Work should be divided 
among the divisions and the individuals within these 
units according to a plan. The plan should be based on 
functional activities such as prevention, emergency oper-
ations, and support activities. This plan is often referred 
to as the strategic plan. The strategic plan defi nes the 
strategy of the organization and gives direction by allo-
cating resources to pursue the strategy. While the strate-
gic plan is often defi ned as a 3- to 5-year, or sometimes 
20-year, budgetary plan, most see it as a way to direct 
the entire organization into a new era.
Coordination of these activities is important. In small 
departments, coordination can usually be easily 
accomplished because of the relatively few number of 
people involved. However, as the size of the depart-
ment increases, the number of relationships increases, 
and the effort required to coordinate their efforts 
grows accordingly. There should be a job descrip-
tion for every position in the organization including 
chief offi cers. The job description should identify 
the skills required, the principal work expected, and 
the working relationships required of the position. In 
addition to the job description, organizations usually 
have rules and regulations that defi ne the policies of 
the organization, the conduct that is expected, and 
standard procedures for handling frequently occur-
ring situations. Many people fi nd all of this organi-
zational structure rather distasteful. The alternative 
may be less pleasant and certainly less effective. 
Many organizations have lost much time and money 
Total
Fires
Medical aid
False 
alarms
Mutual aid
Hazardous 
materials
Hazardous 
condition
Other
1986
11,890,000
2,271,500
6,437,500
992,500
441,000
171,500
318,000
1,258,000
1987
12,237,500
2,330,000
6,405,000
1,238,500
428,000
193,000
315,000
1,328,000
1988
13,308,000
2,436,500
7,169,500
1,404,500
490,500
204,000
333,000
1,270,000
1989
13,409,500
2,115,000
7,337,000
1,467,000
500,000
207,000
381,500
1,402,000
1990
13,707,500
2,019,000
7,650,000
1,476,000
486,500
210,000
423,000
1,443,000
1991
14,556,500
2,041,500
8,176,000
1,578,500
494,000
221,000
428,500
1,617,000
1992
14,684,500
1,964,500
8,263,000
1,598,000
514,000
220,500
400,000
1,724,500
1993
15,318,500
1,952,500
8,743,500
1,646,500
542,000
245,000
432,500
1,756,500
1994
16,127,000
2,054,500
9,189,000
1,666,000
586,500
250,000
432,500
1,948,500
1995
16,391,500
1,965,500
9,381,000
1,672,500
615,500
254,500
469,500
2,033,000
1996
17,503,000
1,975,000
9,841,500
1,816,500
688,000
285,000
536,500
2,360,500
1997
17,957,500
1,795,000
10,483,000
1,814,500
705,500
271,500
498,500
2,389,500
1998
18,753,000
1,755,500
10,936,000
1,956,000
707,500
301,000
559,000
2,538,000
1999
19,667,000
1,823,000
11,484,000
2,039,000
824,000
297,500
560,000
2,639,500
2000
20,520,000
1,708,000
12,251,000
2,126,500
864,000
319,000
543,500
2,708,000
2001
20,965,500
1,734,500
12,331,000
2,157,500
838,500
381,500
605,000
2,917,500
2002
21,303,500
1,687,500
12,903,000
2,116,000
888,500
361,000
603,500
2,744,000
2003
22,406,000
1,584,500
13,631,500
2,189,500
987,000
349,500
660,500
3,003,500
2004
22,616,500
1,550,500
14,100,000
2,106,000
984,000
354,000
671,000
2,851,000
2005
23,251,500
1,602,000
14,373,500
2,134,000
1,091,000
375,000
667,000
3,009,000
2006
24,470,000
1,642,500
15,062,500
2,119,500
1,159,500
388,500
659,000
3,438,500
2007
25,334,500
1,557,500
15,784,000
2,208,500
1,109,500
395,500
686,500
3,593,000
Source: Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, www.nfpa.org. Used with permission.
Table 3-3 Fire Department Calls 1986–2007

64  CHAPTER 3
because they lacked the essential tools for good orga-
nizational management.
To aid our discussion, let us invent a fi re depart-
ment, the Plain City Fire Department (see the feature 
NOTE
There should be a job description for every position in 
the organization.
FIGURE 3-4 In many de-
partments, having a well-
prepared 
dinner 
is 
a 
 well-established tradition 
and helps foster relation-
ships. Here we see paid 
members of two fire de-
partments and the crew of 
a county EMS unit eating 
together.
box, “The Plain City Fire Department (PCFD)”. The 
Plain City Fire Department could be a paid or a vol-
unteer organization; at this point, it does not really 
make any difference. Firefi ghting personnel are com-
prised of paid, volunteer, and paid-on-call fi refi ght-
ers. When one or more of these groups is combined 
into one department, we have what is referred to as a 
combination department. Many factors determine the 
type of arrangement that might work best in a given 
community. Community size and fi nancial resources 
What does it take to organize a fi re department?
Suppose that your community needs fi re protection. 
Someone says, “Let’s organize a fi re department.” The 
local government has been planning for this event and 
has some money set aside to help get started.
■ How do you start a fi re department?
■ How do you establish organized fi re protection?
Let us look at what is represented in an organization 
and what represents organized fi re protection. Based on 
your previous experiences, you have been selected to 
help start the Plain City Fire Department. Knowing that 
THE PLAIN CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT 
(PCFD)
it takes several fi refi ghters to staff one company, you get 
a couple of friends to join you in this venture. And be-
cause you want to be able to provide both fi re and EMS 
services, you realize that you will actually need to divide 
the company according to function. Because a major 
highway is being built through the city, it will soon be 
necessary to have separate stations on each side of the 
 highway. Even though the department is small, you can 
see some of the issues of organizations starting to arise.
■ What are the legal requirements for starting a 
department?
■ What services will we provide?
■ Where do we get the people?
■ Should we hire any paid personnel?
■ Who will be in charge?
■ Where do we get a station?

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  65
must always be considered. It is also important to 
consider the services that are expected, the risks that 
can be expected, the frequency of incidents, and the 
availability of the volunteer fi refi ghters. All of these 
factors must be considered by a community to deter-
mine what works best.
Increasing demands for service and limited funding 
have prompted fi re chiefs to attempt new approaches 
to service delivery. For example, fi re chiefs have tried 
various combinations of mixing fi refi ghters and EMS 
personnel—using volunteers to staff stations when 
paid personnel are on vacation, and using paid per-
sonnel to staff stations when volunteers are away 
from their community at work—to provide effective 
and effi cient emergency services. These initiatives 
have occasionally met with resistance. Tradition, turf 
battles, and political issues arise when new ideas are 
being considered and when change is introduced. 
Strong leadership and open communications are vital 
to the success of any organization.
chief can be selected by any one of several meth-
ods, but, once installed, the fi re chief is expected 
to perform the duties as the leader of the fi re 
department.
Fire chiefs are usually tasked in their job descrip-
tion with providing all the services required, both for 
the department itself and for the public they serve. 
Few fi re chiefs can perform all of these functions all 
of the time, so they delegate some of the work. When 
done properly, the fi re chief has an organization to 
undertake these activities in a structured manner. To 
make things work well, the chief delegates some of 
the responsibility to the subordinates in the organi-
zation. The fi re chief is usually supported by staff 
that includes other offi cers and an administrative 
support staff to make the entire operation function 
effectively. The size and function of the senior staff 
will vary based on the size of the department and 
on something we will call “corporate attitude” (see 
Figure 3-6).
In these days of increased concern over the cost 
of government, many fi re departments are taking a 
hard look at the size of their senior staff, especially 
in paid fi re departments. In many older departments, 
fi re chiefs have become dependent upon large staffs 
to help them run the department, yet the cost of main-
taining that staff is signifi cant. One senior offi cer may 
be paid as much as several fi refi ghters. When forced 
to reduce budgets, chiefs are forced to make hard 
decisions between eliminating a senior staff  position 
or eliminating line fi refi ghters. Ideally, departments 
with more than 10 percent of their employees in 
staff assignments should look at the way they are 
doing business.
NOTE
Strong leadership and open communications are vital 
to the success of any organization.
NOTE
Most organizations have a pyramid structure, with one 
person in charge and an increasing number of sub-
ordinates at each level as you move downward in the 
organization.
To effectively manage the Plain City Fire Depart-
ment, it is necessary to create some sort of organiza-
tional hierarchy. Most organizations have a pyramid 
structure, with one person in charge and an increas-
ing number of subordinates at each level as you move 
downward in the organization. There are good rea-
sons for this traditional form of structure. Here we 
see our familiar pyramid representing the organiza-
tional structure of the Plain City Fire Department (see 
 Figure 3-5).
The Fire Chief
Let us examine the pyramid from the top. In the 
fi re service, the top of the organization is usually 
referred to as the fi re chief. Some organizations 
are using other terms, such as director or chief exec-
utive offi cer (CEO), to designate the top offi cial in 
the fi re department, but we use the traditional term. 
The fi re chief is the head of the agency. The fi re 
CHIEF
SENIOR STAFF
COMPANY OFFICER
FIREFIGHTERS
FIGURE 3-5 Organizational structure of the Plain City Fire 
Department.

66  CHAPTER 3
Assistant Chiefs 
and Deputy Chiefs
The senior staff represents middle management. 
This is where the vice presidents are located in the 
corporate world. In the fi re service, we have assis-
tant, deputy, and battalion chiefs. These offi cers fi ll 
many of the middle-management positions within the 
department. They serve as division offi cers and heads 
of major components of the headquarters staff. In 
many departments, captains and lieutenants are also 
assigned to the headquarters staff as section heads.
We realize that this is not a text for fi re chiefs, 
although we hope that you are interested in being a 
fi re chief some day. However, there is an important les-
son here for everybody in the organization. Regardless 
of where you are in the organization, the treatment of 
your second in command is important. Keeping that 
person in the information fl ow, delegating the fun-
to-do as well as the not-so-fun jobs, and preparing that 
person for the position you hold are signifi cant parts 
of what organizational relationships are all about and 
should involve every aspect of training, management, 
and leadership, for yourself and for your unit. Delegat-
ing some of this activity not only prepares another to 
take your place but likely increases overall understand-
ing and support of the work at hand. It also provides 
you with a very well-qualifi ed assistant.
Battalion Chiefs
Battalion chiefs usually represent the middle-man-
agement layer of a fi re department. In larger organi-
zations, they may have responsibility for part of the 
department and supervise three to six companies. In 
smaller communities, they may be responsible for all 
on-duty emergency response personnel. In either case, 
they will probably become the incident commander at 
an emergency response of any consequence.
FIGURE 3-6 The fire chief should 
meet regularly with senior staff 
members. Such activities keep 
all of the senior staff informed 
of the activities and plans of the 
organization. 
Fire departments tend to be very conscious of rank within 
their own organization. Clearly the fi re chief is the boss, 
and all others are subordinate. But when they are out 
of their own town, all fi re chiefs seem to be considered 
equal. You can see this at a fi re chiefs’ conference. The 
chief of a single-station fi re department might wear a uni-
form that is just like the uniform worn by the chief in a city 
of 250,000. An assistant chief (or other rank) may be a far 
more conspicuous player in a state or national organiza-
tion than the chief of the same department.
When these personnel work together in commit-
tees and other activities, they have an equal voice and 
are respected based on their contribution, not on their 
organizational rank or on the number of fi re stations 
back home.
THE ROLE OF THE CHIEF
Company Officers
Moving down the pyramid to the next level, we 
have the company offi cers. Most company offi cers 
are supervisors of fi refi ghters and, as a result, are 
OFFICER ADVICE
Regardless of where you are in the  organization, the 
treatment of your second in command is important.

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  67
referred to as fi rst-line or front-line supervisors. As 
we have already noted, company offi cers wear many 
hats. Company offi cers are expected to be profi cient 
in their jobs as fi refi ghter. They are also expected to 
have the managerial ability to understand the organi-
zation and the supervisory skills needed to effectively 
lead their subordinates.
Firefighters
Throughout the fi re department organization are fi re-
fi ghters. Most fi refi ghters are assigned to companies 
and work at fi re stations. However, fi refi ghters can 
also be found throughout the headquarters staff in 
many fi re departments.
THE ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
The pyramid diagram shown in Figure 3-5 was ade-
quate for the discussion in Chapter 1, but you can 
quickly see the limitations of this representation, 
even for our small fi re department. It might be more 
appropriate to represent our department as shown in 
Figure 3-7. This chart more accurately represents the 
organizational relationships of the department. For 
this small department, it represents the line author-
ity. An offi cer with line authority manages one or 
more of the functions that are essential to the depart-
ment’s mission. When we see an organizational chart, 
we usually think of the authority that offi cers have 
over the activities that fall under them. In addition 
to authority, offi cers also have accountability and 
responsibility.
We have taken care of the essential activities of the 
department. However, as the new department takes 
shape, the fi re chief recognizes the need for preven-
tion and training, so a prevention offi cer and a train-
ing offi cer are established (see Figure 3-8). We could 
debate the placement of these activities but consider 
that the prevention and training positions are staff 
assignments. We discuss the details of line and staff 
authority in the next section.
Let us go back to the Plain City Fire Department. 
Suppose that there is no real organization, that every-
one is the same rank and has the same responsibili-
ties, and that the department is called to a structural 
fi re. What do you think would happen?
As a department grows, we see a continuation of 
the evolution that has already started. Figure 3-9 is 
an example of an organizational chart for a medium-
size fi re department.
As our hypothetical community grows, so does 
the need for fi re protection. The department shown 
in Figure 3-9 can no longer keep up with the demand 
for services. The fi re chief and the senior staff are 
overwhelmed with just keeping up with the growth, 
and they fi nd that they cannot really effi ciently super-
vise those personnel assigned in the fi eld. In addition, 
delays in the arrival of senior offi cers responding to 
large-scale emergencies are affecting the way the 
department deals with these emergencies.
As the department grows, the number of relation-
ships also continues to grow. In addition, as the organi-
zation grows, there are more options for further growth 
(see Figure 3-10). We see that the department has added 
a senior position, a person who is called the shift com-
mander. This position takes some of the burden off the 
senior staff of actually running the department 24 hours 
a day. The shift commander has command authority over 
all except the largest events. Even more important, the 
shift commander has authority to deal with most of the 
administrative issues that arise within the department 
that were formerly approved by offi cers at headquarters.
TRAINING
SUPPRESSION
EMS
CHIEF
Fire Prevention
Company
Company
Training
Company
Assistant Chief
Fire Chief
FIGURE 3-7 A more traditional organizational chart rep-
resenting the Plain City Fire Department.
FIGURE 3-8 Chart of the Plain City Fire 
Department showing fire prevention 
and training as staff functions.

68  CHAPTER 3
Another alternative is to divide the community into 
three geographical divisions and place a senior offi -
cer in charge of each division (see Figure 3-11). The 
division commander has complete responsibility for 
all fi re department functions within a certain part of 
the city.
Both of these approaches are widely used. Each 
has its advantages and each has its disadvantages. A 
third alternative would be to establish a separate EMS 
support organization. Our purpose here is not to reor-
ganize your department but to introduce ways that 
departments are organized and some of the reasons 
that these organizations are essential.
Staff versus Line Organization
In the fi eld of industrial management, line functions 
refer to the activities that accomplish the manufac-
turing process. Many fi re service textbooks draw a 
 parallel here, suggesting that the fi re service has gen-
erally considered the line function to be synonymous 
with providing emergency services. This service 
delivery activity is called by various names, includ-
ing suppression, operations, and emergency services. 
This defi nition of the line organization suggests that 
everything else is a supporting role, performed by 
staff personnel.
ASSISTANT CHIEF
FIRE
PREVENTION
FIRE CHIEF
EMERGENCY
SERVICES
SUPPORT
SERVICES
BATTALION
CHIEF
BATTALION
CHIEF
BATTALION
CHIEF
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
ASSISTANT CHIEF
FIRE
PREVENTION
FIRE CHIEF
EMERGENCY
SERVICES
SUPPORT
SERVICES
BATTALION
CHIEF
BATTALION
CHIEF
BATTALION
CHIEF
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
DIVISION
COMMANDER
DIVISION
COMMANDER
DIVISION
COMMANDER
FIGURE 3-9 Chart of the Plain City Fire Department 
showing the addition of three shift commanders in the 
emergency services division.
FIGURE 3-11 As an alternative to shift commanders, the 
fire department’s resources in Plain City might be geo-
graphically divided among three division commanders. 
The division commanders would work a normal work 
week. Each division commander would have three bat-
talion chiefs, possibly one for each shift.
ASSISTANT CHIEF
FIRE
PREVENTION
FIRE CHIEF
EMERGENCY
SERVICES
SUPPORT
SERVICES
BATTALION
CHIEF
BATTALION
CHIEF
BATTALION
CHIEF
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
COMPANY
SHIFT
COMMANDER
SHIFT
COMMANDER
SHIFT
COMMANDER
FIGURE 3-10 As more companies are added in the 
Plain City Fire Department, another layer of managers is 
needed.
NOTE
The support staff is essential in the overall operation 
of the department, and without it the fire department 
would quickly grind to a halt.
Staff functions are those activities that support the 
department’s basic purpose. Staff functions do not 
normally get directly involved with delivering emer-
gency services. However, the support staff is essen-
tial in the overall operation of the department, and 
without it the fi re department would quickly grind to 
a halt. Traditional staff functions include fi re preven-
tion and support services (see Figure 3-12). Each of 
these major functions may be represented by a divi-
sion that performs a variety of activities, based on the 
size of the department.

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  69
The terms “line” and “staff” are traditionally used 
to describe the activities of many organizations, 
including fi re departments. Many fi re service text-
books follow this pattern and put fi re prevention on 
this staff side of the organization.
We tend to disagree with this approach. As shown 
elsewhere in this textbook, for most fi re departments, 
fi re prevention activities are on the increase and fi re-
fi ghting is decreasing.
In most cases, the decrease in the number of fi res 
is the result of fi re prevention efforts. In some depart-
ments, fi re prevention plays a greater role than fi re 
suppression, both in terms of the daily lives of the 
fi refi ghters and in the way the department serves the 
community.
In a large fi re department, the prevention division 
may have separate sections dealing with inspections, 
investigations, life safety education, plans review, and 
systems testing. Likewise, in a large fi re department, 
support services may include communications, pay-
roll, personnel, research, recruiting, resource man-
agement, safety and health, and training.
On the other hand, in small communities, many 
of the support activities common to all government 
agencies are gathered together under a central agency. 
Purchasing and personnel activities are good exam-
ples. As the fi re department grows, it eventually 
becomes benefi cial to perform these activities within 
the fi re department’s organization.
Before we conclude this discussion, it is important 
to note that titles vary from department to department. 
In some departments the second level offi cers are dep-
uties, and in other departments they are referred to as 
assistant chiefs. Where there is only one level of mid-
dle management, they could be called by either title. 
In smaller departments, the second-in-command offi -
cer may be a battalion chief. Titles are important but 
sometimes confusing. Checking the organizational 
chart usually clears up these issues.
FIGURE 3-12 Staff functions are important to the life of 
any organization. 
NOTE
Titles vary from department to department.
NOTE
The company officer is usually the first supervisory 
level in a fire service organization.
THE COMPANY OFFICER
The company offi cer is usually the fi rst supervisory 
level in a fi re service organization. In many ways, 
company offi cers have an opportunity to exercise 
more infl uence than that of any other rank when one 
considers the role of the company for all of the inter-
nal activities of the department as well as the activ-
ities associated with the department’s delivery of 
emergency services. The company offi cer provides 
the tone of the company in terms of morale, prepared-
ness, and service delivery.
The Fire Chief’s Perspective 
of the Company Officer
Most fi re chief offi cers see their company offi cers as 
a part of the organization’s management team. Many 
fi re chiefs allow and even encourage their company 
offi cers to get involved in the decisions that have 
strategic impact on the department. Such fi re chiefs 
value the input from their company offi cers and sup-
port their ideas. This implies trust in one another. 
Effective team building is encouraged in this organi-
zational environment. This environment also places 
a value on education. Education enhances your abil-
ity to think through complex issues and to effectively 
express your ideas to others.
The Firefighter’s Perspective 
of the Company Officer
Regardless of the relationship of the company offi -
cer to the fi re chief and the other members of the 
department’s senior staff, fi refi ghters usually see their 

70  CHAPTER 3
 company offi cer as part of the department’s man-
agement team. We have already indicated that the 
 company offi cer has a greater impact on company 
members than does any other offi cer in the depart-
ment. After all, it is the company offi cer who enforces 
department policies, grants the fi refi ghters’ requests, 
and evaluates their performance. Indeed, the com-
pany offi cers hold a lot of the strings that control the 
fi refi ghters’ work and attitude.
Firefi ghters informally evaluate their company offi -
cers based on how well they (the offi cers) perform their 
duties. The fi refi ghters evaluate how well the company 
offi cers can perform their job, how well they apply pol-
icy, and how fair they are in their actions among the 
members of the company. They can assess whether the 
offi cer can teach and coach the members. They can 
evaluate if the company offi cer is up-to-date on new 
ideas and techniques and is composed under pressure. 
They can evaluate communications skills. The list goes 
on and on. Unfortunately, fi refi ghters seldom get to 
express their opinions on these matters.
Most company offi cers would like to be respected 
by both their bosses and their subordinates. Some 
company offi cers are focused on pleasing the boss 
and looking good. Other company offi cers focus their 
energies on the welfare of their subordinates, some-
times at the expense of their relationship with their 
own supervisors. Being successful in both areas can 
be quite a challenge and essential.
How the company offi cer fi ts into the overall orga-
nizational structure impacts many others. It certainly 
impacts on the daily lives of the fi refi ghters who work 
for that offi cer. Eventually, it will impact on the com-
pany’s readiness to deal with anything other than 
the simplest emergencies. Good companies become 
standouts in the organization. Companies that per-
form poorly tend to pull from the talents of other 
companies and drag down the average of all the oth-
ers. Poor performing companies eventually affect the 
entire department and possibly even the community 
they serve.
rules. However, most organizations run into problems 
when these principles are forgotten.
Offi cers in the fi re service should be concerned 
about the organization in which they function and the 
job they perform within that organization. Most posi-
tions are essential to the department’s mission: Few 
fi re departments have positions that exist just to fi ll 
a block on an organization chart. People in some of 
those positions perform duties directly in support of 
the mission, whereas others perform duties in support 
of those who are out on the street. Both are essential!
NOTE
How the company officer fits into the overall organiza-
tional structure impacts many others.
NOTE
Some positions perform duties directly in support of 
the mission, whereas others perform duties in support 
of those who are out on the street. All positions and 
duties should support the mission of the department.
PRINCIPLES OF GOOD 
ORGANIZATIONS
There are several principles of organizations. Suc-
cessful organizations seem to follow most of these 
“rules” quite well. Sometimes organizations are suc-
cessful, even though they do not follow all of these 
Let us look at the organization we call our fi re 
department. Even though it is likely that you did not 
invent it, and even though it is almost as likely you 
will not change it right away, you should understand 
the organization and how your particular position fi ts 
into the overall scheme of things.
Scalar Organization Structure
The scalar principle relates to the continuous chain 
of command in the organization. Like playing a scale 
on a musical instrument where every note is sounded, 
the scalar principle suggests that every level in the 
organization is considered in the fl ow of communica-
tions, authority, and responsibility. Most fi re depart-
ments are established along the traditional lines of a 
scalar organization (see Figure 3-13).
Unity of Command
This concept is frequently confused with chain of 
command. Unity of command refers to the concept 
of having one boss. In examining the organizational 
structures in this chapter, you will note that each sub-
ordinate reports to only one boss. This concept is 
known as unity of command. Unity of command is an 
essential organizational concept.
Division of Labor
Organizations break the accountability process into 
small units that can be managed. A fi re company, such 
as an engine or a truck company, is usually assigned 
a specifi c task and is usually assigned to cover a spe-
cifi c part of the community. Every company has a job 
to do at the scene of a fi re or other emergency. Every 

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  71
 company has a place where it is expected to do that job. 
These are essential components of the fi re department’s 
organization and are essential to fi re department man-
agement. When companies are divided into geographic 
areas and assigned to specifi c tasks, they illustrate the 
fi rst principle of organization—division of labor.
As the department becomes larger, the adminis-
trative activities must be organized into manageable 
sections. This activity also illustrates the  division 
of labor. Division of labor allows an organization to 
divide large jobs into specifi c smaller tasks. Most 
fi re departments provide EMS. Where this occurs, a 
fairly senior offi cer probably coordinates the depart-
ment’s overall EMS policy. Likewise, at the succes-
sive levels in the organization, there are offi cers who 
manage the EMS program and supervise some or all 
of the EMS responders’ activities. For departments 
of any size, this management/supervisory activity of 
fi eld personnel would be impossible for one person to 
manage. However, by logically dividing the activity 
among several people, the task is quite manageable.
Assignment of Specific 
Responsibilities
Another good principle of organizations is that no 
specifi c responsibility should be assigned to more 
than one person. Now, this does not mean that we no 
longer work in teams, nor does it mean that we no 
longer have backup personnel. We are saying that the 
primary responsibility is vested in one person. What 
happens when that person is out for the day? Clearly 
the assignment is moved to another member, but our 
standard procedures normally take care of this. Typi-
cally, every riding position on a truck or engine com-
pany has a specifi c duty upon arrival at a fi re or other 
emergency event. It is important to have the position 
covered, and it is important that the person in that 
position is aware of the overall responsibilities before 
fulfi lling that assignment. Likewise, those in staff 
assignments should have an alternate trained and pre-
pared to fulfi ll their duties when they are absent.
NOTE
No specific responsibility should be assigned to more 
than one person. The primary responsibility is vested 
in one person.
FIGURE 3-13 The badges shown represent all of the 
steps from firefighter to chief, as does the principle of 
scalar organizations. (Photo courtesy of the Fairfax County Fire 
and Rescue Department)
Control at the Proper Level
Supervisors should not get lost in a maze of details. 
Violations of this rule are a common complaint. The 
fi re chief should not be dealing with the details that 
are rightly the job of the company offi cer. Likewise, 
the company offi cer should avoid overmanaging fi re-
fi ghter activities at the station level. This practice is 
often referred to as micromanaging.
Span of Control
The principle of span of control is simple: Do not 
have too many subordinates. The number of people 
you can effectively supervise is usually referred to as 
the span of control. The number of people you can 
effectively supervise varies, of course, based on many 
factors, but generally that number is between three 
and seven with fi ve being the optimal span.
Delegation
Along with the other principles, delegation plays into 
the workings of an organization. As the organization 
expands, we assign certain duties to subordinates. This 
activity is called delegation. It is important that the 
delegation be mutually understood and that authority 
be provided along with the responsibilities.

72  CHAPTER 3
Delegation allows dividing or sharing the work 
and allows subordinates to take on part of the 
 supervisor’s work. However, the supervisor is still 
ultimately responsible for the assignment. We discuss 
the art of delegating in Chapter 5. For our purposes 
here, it is an important part of the overall concept of 
organizational structure.
Good supervisors take the heat from their super-
visors without passing it down to subordinates. The 
supervisor acts as a buffer in the communications 
process, knowing that the troops will get the job done 
without using pressure from the fi re chief’s position 
to make it happen. Consider the following sentences. 
Which sentence will do more to strengthen the offi -
cer’s position?
“The chief said that we need to do more preplanning.”
“I think that we should be doing more preplanning.”
A fi nal thought about delegation. You should feel 
free to delegate to your subordinates. Delegation is 
an important empowerment tool and generally makes 
subordinates feel better about their jobs.
fear the uncertainties of change. Nonetheless, it is the 
company offi cers duty to lead subordinates through 
the ever revolving door of change. To accomplish this, 
the company offi cer must do the following:
■ Evaluate yourself: For subordinates to accept 
change they must fi rst see their superior accept it. 
Negative comments made by the company offi cer 
will only discourage subordinates and turn them 
away from any possibility of acceptance. To help 
with this, the company offi cer needs to understand 
that they themselves are also fearful of unknowing 
the outcomes. They must talk with other offi cers 
within the organization and make sure that they 
understand all aspects of the proposed adjustment.
■ Celebrate the past: It needs to be understood that 
just because there is a change forthcoming, it does 
not necessarily mean that the old way was the 
wrong way of doing it. However, we all need to 
understand that as the fi re service progresses, we 
must also. New technologies and equipment are 
making the job of fi refi ghting safer.
■ Involve them in the process: It is important to ask 
subordinates their opinions on change. Depend-
ing on the situation, you will fi nd that the majority 
of them will be tolerable of change if they under-
stand why change is being introduced. Feed them 
as much information as possible. Show them that 
this is a positive change and that it will improve the 
safety of the organization.
The process of introducing change starts with an 
evaluation of why a change is considered necessary. 
Change that appears to have occurred for no apparent 
reason will often be resented by all. This is why an 
evaluation period must take place. Take, for instance, 
an outdated policy on SCBA safety inspections. To 
move forward with a recommended change, the com-
pany offi cer should fi rst review the current standards 
and trends need to conduct a thorough inspection. 
Next the company offi cer should evaluate how the 
change will affect the organization as a whole. Will 
the change improve safety? Will the change have any 
costs associated? Will the change require additional 
training of personnel? These are just a few of the 
questions that will need to be answered before a rec-
ommendation for change can take place. Once all of 
the questions have been answered, the company offi -
cer should place the change recommendation in writ-
ing and pass it up the chain of command.
Another item to look at that relates to changing 
policies and/or procedures would be how the new 
policy affects existing policies. It may prove evident 
that because of a new or updated policy, other poli-
cies may need to change as well. Take, for instance, 
Most citizens are not concerned about your organiza-
tion’s structure or rules. Nor do average citizens know 
or care whether the department has an assistant chief 
in support services or whether it uses a fully integrated 
incident management system. They do know and care 
about the service you offer, and they expect the service 
to be fast and dependable. Understanding your organi-
zation’s structure may not be important to citizens, but it 
should be important to its members.
THE ORGANIZATION IS 
TRANSPARENT TO THE AVERAGE 
CUSTOMER
Organizations Are Ever 
Changing
The number one initiative listed in the National Fallen 
Firefi ghters Life Safety Initiatives declares that the fi re 
service needs a cultural change. However, when you 
mention the word “change,” people tend to become 
defensive. They become defensive because people 
OFFICER ADVICE
Delegation is an important empowerment tool and gen-
erally makes subordinates feel better about their jobs. 
However, the supervisor is still ultimately responsible for 
the assignment.

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  73
a change in a promotional policy. Changing or add-
ing to a policy of this nature would entail numerous 
other changes throughout the organization’s policies 
and procedures. It becomes essential to monitor all 
changes to policies so that the differences between 
the new and existing policies are found. This is often 
done with a focus group that evaluates each new addi-
tion or change to a policy.
Once all of these steps have been completed, it is 
important to evaluate the change. Evaluating change 
can prove to be diffi cult. However, using the above 
example, a department might fi nd that the SCBAs 
are now in full working order on 98 percent of all 
 incidents. In other instances, change can be hard to 
evaluate without some indicators. It might be neces-
sary to conduct some interviews or surveys with all 
members of the department to see if the outcome has 
been attained. In other instances, it might be as obvi-
ous as a reduction in injuries. Whatever the case, a 
documented review of the change should take place.
Introducing change is often not an easy pro-
cess. However, even if we ignore it, change is still 
occurring.
Flat and Tall Organizations
Linked to the span of control principle is the con-
cept of fl at and tall organizations. When the span 
of control is smaller, that is when supervisors have 
fewer people to supervise, we tend to see organiza-
tions with a narrower or “taller” structure. This works 
well, but with the concern over the cost of doing busi-
ness these days, organizations, especially government 
organizations, are taking a hard look at the span of 
control of their managers and the size of the middle-
 management structure. Many organizations are elim-
inating positions at the middle-management level. 
This results in an organization that appears fl atter. 
Reduced costs are one benefi t of fl atter organizations; 
another benefi t is that communications are usually 
improved because there are fewer layers in the orga-
nization, fewer levels of management between the fi re 
chief and the fi refi ghters. In the early 1980s, Thomas 
Peters and  Robert Waterman Jr. published In Search 
of Excellence, a book that became a best seller. It is 
still in bookstores and still worth reading. The authors 
looked at some of America’s best-run companies and 
found eight practices that seemed to be characteristic 
of these companies. Some of the items on their list 
may fi t better into our upcoming chapters on manage-
ment and leadership, but several are directly tied to 
the subject of organizational style.
One of the eight items they listed was called “sim-
ple form, lean staff.” The idea is to keep the company 
organization simple. This involves reducing the  layers 
in the organization, reducing middle- management 
positions, and minimizing the number of staff 
positions.
Along with the smaller staff is the idea of keep-
ing things as simple as possible. This means that you 
do not have a staff specialist for every conceivable 
idea and problem that might come along. You have a 
few good people, and you give them authority over a 
broad range of management issues.
Autonomy and 
Entrepreneurship
A couple of big words describe a very simple but often 
overlooked principle. Again, the idea comes from 
In Search of Excellence. The authors use the words 
“autonomy” and “entrepreneurship” to describe a 
management style. This concept follows the charac-
teristics discussed in the preceding paragraph. With 
a well-developed organization that is lean and simple, 
the next step is to develop an understanding of who is 
responsible for the various functions. If all decisions 
have to fl ow up to the fi re chief, why have a staff? The 
manager (fi re chief) should assign specifi c responsi-
bilities and give the person who gets the assignment 
a feeling that the activity is his or hers to manage, a 
feeling of entrepreneurship, if you will. Once this is 
done, problems should be addressed and resolved by 
the responsible offi cer.
Discipline
Before we conclude our discussion on the princi-
ples of management, we need to mention one more 
word: discipline. Discipline is usually considered to 
be synonymous with punishment. We look at disci-
pline/punishment as a leadership tool in Chapter 7. 
In this discussion, we are looking at discipline as the 
organizational and individual responsibility to do the 
assigned job.
OFFICER ADVICE
Keep the company organization simple.
OFFICER ADVICE
If all decisions have to fl ow up to the fi re chief, why have 
a staff? The manager (fi re chief) should assign specifi c 
responsibilities and give the person who gets the assign-
ment a feeling that the activity is his or hers to manage.

74  CHAPTER 3
The Plain City Fire Department is now operating 
and has a mission statement. Offi cers are assigned 
specifi c responsibility in support of that statement. 
Companies are expected to respond to emergencies 
and take action in accordance with the department’s 
policies and procedures. You expect this to happen. It 
happens because of discipline, not because you will 
be punished if you fail to perform, but rather, because 
you accept the duty. You also expect others to accept 
their share of the duty.
Suppose that you, as a company offi cer, fi nd that 
all of this stuff about training, pre-emergency plan-
ning, building surveys, physical fi tness, and so forth 
are not really important. You might get away with 
that for awhile, but one day an alarm is transmitted 
for a working fi re in your fi rst-due area. The fi rst-
 arriving companies are expected on the scene within 
4 or 5 minutes, ready to quickly mount an aggressive 
fi re attack. But because of your approach to  company 
readiness, your people are not ready, your equip-
ment is not ready, and you are not ready. By the time 
you get things sorted out, second-due companies are 
already at the scene, and so is the battalion chief. The 
fi re puts the department to quite a test. The fi re is in 
an occupied apartment building. Because of delays in 
the fi re attack, the fi re extends into several adjacent 
exposures, and what should have been a simple job 
becomes a major event. Several people are injured 
during the rescue operations and there is signifi cant 
property loss. Organizational discipline helps keep 
this sort of thing from happening.
Every company in a fi re department has a job and 
a place to perform that job, but it is also important 
that the company be competent in the performance of 
that job. We all know that some companies are better 
than others in certain tasks. Companies in larger cit-
ies often get more experience and are probably more 
profi cient in those tasks they routinely encounter. But 
even within a city, some companies are better than 
others. Regardless of the size of the city, company 
preplanning and training activities are important. 
Well-disciplined companies do both and usually per-
form better during emergency activities.
ORGANIZING YOUR 
OWN COMPANY
Even within the company, there are ways to organize 
the few people that work there. Suppose that you are 
the company offi cer. You have four fi refi ghters work-
ing for you. One is an seasoned and experienced 
driver. Another is a respected fi refi ghter who recently 
became a paramedic. One is a fi refi ghter with 5 years 
on the job. The fourth is a fi refi ghter with 5 weeks 
on the job. Using the traditional approach, you might 
organize as shown in Figure 3-14.
This organization certainly follows some of the 
rules about fl at and lean organizations and allows for 
good communications among you, the offi cer, and all 
of the fi refi ghters. It reinforces the rules about unity 
of command and span of control.
COMPANY OFFICER
EXPERIENCED DRIVER
PARAMEDIC
FIREFIGHTER
PROBIE
SCALAR COMPANY STRUCTURE
COMPANY CHIEF
EXPERIENCED
DRIVER
PARAMEDIC
FIREFIGHTER
PROBIE
FLAT ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
FIGURE 3-14 A traditional approach to organizing a 
company.
FIGURE 3-15 This organizational approach reinforces the 
scalar principle.
COMPANY OFFICER
EXPERIENCED DRIVER
PARAMEDIC
FIREFIGHTER
PROBIE
CIRCULAR COMPANY STRUCTURE
FIGURE 3-16 A circular organizational structure may be 
appropriate occasionally.

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  75
You could also organize along the lines shown in 
Figure 3-15. This diagram illustrates the scalar orga-
nizational structure. Here we have a tall vertical struc-
ture. You can sort the four personnel into the slots as 
you feel appropriate. This organization reinforces the 
chain of command.
Another alternative might be to organize along the 
lines of a circular organization (see Figure 3-16). In 
this environment, everyone is at an equal level in the 
organization, and everyone has the opportunity to 
communicate with all of the others. As King Arthur 
explained to Lancelot as the latter was shown the 
round table at Camelot for the fi rst time, “We are all 
equal here.”
Each of these organizational structures has appro-
priate uses within the fi re service. As an offi cer, you 
should understand the advantages and the limitations 
of each and use them appropriately.
Bryan Tyner recognized that things were going to change 
when he became a company  offi cer—he would now have 
to distance himself from his fi refi ghters in order to super-
vise them and be respected. What he did not know was 
that part of that distance meant aligning himself more 
with his own supervisors. It means that he now was the 
voice of the administration in his fi rehouse.
Tyner has found that this comes into play especially 
when a new rule or policy comes down from headquar-
ters. As captain of his station, it is his role to pass that 
information down. He must organize a meeting that ev-
eryone is required to attend, then read the department 
communication of the rule, and require all members to 
sign and acknowledge that they know the policy. The 
rule is then posted in the station as a constant reminder. 
His superiors, including the fi re chief, will expect him to 
make this communication clear to his department.
Tyner does not always agree with the policies, but his 
role requires him to hold his tongue. That happened re-
cently when a new sick leave rule came out—now when 
people take a day off, they must see their doctor and 
BECOMING A SUPERVISOR
Bryan Tyner, Captain, 
Minneapolis Fire Department, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota
bring in a note confi rming their illness. Tyner knew this 
rule would be unpopular, especially considering that the 
department’s new insurance requires members to pay 
the whole medical bill. And, indeed, it did meet with 
 resistance when he announced the policy. But he could 
not let on that he thought this was unfair, because his 
staff looks to him for guidance. If he were to indicate that 
he would not follow the policy, neither would they.
Although not supporting his fi refi ghters may make 
Tyner uncomfortable, Tyner also knows it would refl ect 
badly on him to his superiors if his department disre-
garded the rules. He will be held accountable for his 
department’s infractions. As a further emphasis on the 
importance of the policy, he followed through by impos-
ing the appropriate punishment on anyone who ignored 
the rule.
Questions
1. When a fi refi ghter becomes a supervisor, what cha n-
ges does management expect?
2. When a fi refi ghter becomes a supervisor, what cha n-
ges might other fi refi ghters expect?
3. What are the offi cer’s responsibilities in a situation 
like this?
4. Where should the offi cer’s loyalties lie in a situation 
like this?
5. How should offi cers communicate a policy they may 
not personally agree with?

76  CHAPTER 3
T
he company offi cer has two roles in the organi-
zation. First, as a company offi cer, you represent 
the fi re department to the average customer. You are 
often the fi rst on the scene and often the last to leave 
and, for many events, are the only person the cus-
tomer talks to.
At larger events, other units of the department may 
be represented. Other companies may be present, and 
other parts of the organization are supporting the 
operation, whether or not they are at the scene of the 
emergency. As company offi cers, you must understand 
how the entire organization works, how you (as a com-
pany) fi t into the total organization, what resources are 
available and appropriate for any type of incident, and, 
if appropriate, how to help the customer connect to the 
appropriate part to get the service needed.
Second, as a company offi cer, you are a vital part 
of the organization that you represent. You should 
 understand your role, how you represent your  company 
LESSONS LEARNED
and its needs to the department’s management team, 
and how you represent the rest of the organization to 
the fi refi ghters within your company.
Understanding organizations is important. In the 
past, people worshiped organizational structure, paid 
homage to the chain of command, and measured orga-
nizations by the number of rules they had. Those are 
good things, and we should understand their value, 
both in today’s organizations and for those who grew 
up in this culture. But today we are learning that there 
may be better ways to run an organization. We are 
seeing more organizations move away from rules and 
structure. They are focusing more on values, espe-
cially where the members are concerned.
Modern management concepts are discussed 
in Chapter 4. We do not want to leave you with an 
impression that all of this information about organi-
zational principles is the end of the story. Far from 
it—it is only the beginning!
accountability being responsible for one’s per-
sonal activities; in the organizational context, 
accountability includes being responsible for the 
actions of one’s subordinates
administrative law body of law created by 
administrative agencies in the form of rules, regula-
tions, orders, and court decisions
delegate to grant to another a part of one’s author-
ity or power
delegation act of assigning duties to subordinates
discipline system of rules and regulations
line authority characteristic of organizational 
structures denoting the relationship between supervi-
sors and subordinates
line functions those activities that provide emer-
gency services
 1. Defi ne organization.
 2. Why do we need structure in organizations?
 3. How do organizational charts show lines of 
authority?
local ordinance law usually found in a municipal 
code. In the United States, these laws are enforced 
locally in addition to state law and federal law
public fire department part of local government
responsibility being accountable for actions and 
activities; having a moral and perhaps legal obliga-
tion to carry out certain activities
scalar principle organizational concept that refers 
to the interrupted series of steps or layers within an 
organization
span of control organizational principle that 
addresses the number of personnel a supervisor can 
effectively manage
staff functions activities that support those provid-
ing emergency services
unity of command organizational principle 
whereby there is only one boss
 4. How do organizational charts show lines of 
communication?
 5. Defi ne division of labor.
 6. Defi ne span of control.
KEY TERMS
REVIEW QUESTIONS

The Company Officer’s Role in the Organization  77
ENDNOTES
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
 10. What is the role of the company offi cer in the 
organization?
 7. Defi ne unity of command.
 8. What is meant by “ delegation”?
 9. Distinguish between “line” and “staff” in an 
organization.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 6. What is the legal authority for fi re departments 
where you live?
 7. What are the roles of your department’s senior 
offi cers?
 8. Where are these roles defi ned?
 9. What are the roles of the company offi cer within 
the department?
 10. Why is the company offi cer important to the 
organization?
2. Based on information published by the National Volunteer Fire 
Council and the U.S. Fire Administration and on a report from 
the National Volunteer Fire Summit held at the National Fire 
Academy, December 2–3, 2000.
3. A Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service. Emmitsburg, 
MD: U.S. Fire Administration, 2002.
National Fire Protection Association, Standard 1201. Developing 
Fire Protection Services for the Public. latest ed. Quincy, MA: 
National Fire Protection Association.
Paulsgrove, Robin. “Fire Department Administration and Ope-
rations,” Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: 
 National Fire Protection Association, 2003.
Peters, Thomas J., and Robert H. Waterman, Jr. In Search of Excel-
lence. New York: Harper and Row, 1982.
 1. What type of local government do you have where 
you live/work?
 2. Describe the composition of the fi re service in the 
United States.
 3. What are the challenges facing the volunteer fi re 
service today?
 4. The statistics in Table 3-3 suggest that total call 
volume is up while the number of fi res is down. 
What is making up the difference? Will this trend 
continue?
 5. The above statistics represent the national picture. 
What is happening in your community?
1. Although this is not a math text, remember that in math we 
learned a formula for determining the combinations possible 
from a certain number of objects taken two or more at a time. 
For example, with a group of 25 people, there are 300 sepa-
rate two-way relationships possible. With a group of 100 people, 
nearly 5,000 such combinations are possible. As the group gets 
larger, the number of relationships increases dramatically.
A Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service. Emmitsburg, MD: 
U.S. Fire Administration, 2002. In cooperation with NFPA.
Bruegman, Randy. Fire Administration. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2009.
Four Years Later—A Second Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire 
Service. Emmitsburg, MD: U.S. Fire Administration, 2006, in 
cooperation with NFPA.
Klinoff, Robert. Introduction to Fire Protection, 2nd edition. 
 Albany, NY: Delmar Publishers, 2003.

The Company Officer’s Role 
in Management
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ What Is Management?
■ The Beginnings of Modern 
Management
■ Functions of Management
■ Contributors to Modern 
Management
■ Management in Modern 
Organizations
■ The Role of Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs)
■ The SOP Development Process
■ How Well Is Your Fire Department 
Managed?
■ The Role of Ethics in Management
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
4

79
STREET 
STORY
W
hen I was promoted to captain, I was in charge of managing Fire Station 6 
on the West side of town in Wilmington, which meant I was in charge of 
18 firefighters and all of the responsibilities in the station. A few years ago I was 
promoted to battalion chief. I am now assigned to the South district, in charge of 
three stations, five companies, three engine companies, the ladder and heavy 
rescue unit, and I’m in charge of the personnel of those shifts.
When I was thrown into management, I did not feel as though I had been 
properly trained—one day you can be a firefighter and the next day you can 
be promoted and be in charge of supervising three firefighters. As a front line 
supervisor, you’re given this promotion, but there is also a definite increase in 
responsibility and accountability.
As a chief officer you have to wear two hats. You are management, and you’re in 
charge of disciplinary action, but you also have to work and live with these guys, so 
you want to be their friend as well.
There are three things I suggest when you are thrown into management. One, 
you have to seek advice from a senior person, or someone who has been in the 
position as an officer who can give you advice and guidance for certain situations.
The second thing is to attend classes, even if you have to go on your own time. 
There are a lot of classes available on management skills for dealing with people, 
which can be especially helpful.
The third, and most important to me, is to keep your core ethics strong. My 
father was a captain, and he always said you have to be firm but fair. I live by 
that. The rulebook will always be there, but you have to keep in mind that certain 
circumstances lend themselves to flexibility, and every situation is unique.
We get all the training that we need for fires, EMS, all kinds of emergency 
response situations. What we sometimes lack is the personnel skills.
One other thing to keep in mind when managing is that it’s always best when 
everyone stays busy. The old cliché that busy hands are happy hands is true. If 
your department ends up going for six months at a time with no fires, that is a lot 
of down time, and that’s the time when I get my issues. When it comes to dealing 
with fires, my guys are great, but when there is nothing going on, that’s when we 
have trouble. You need to have a backup plan for that.
Sometimes the job isn’t all glory. Firefighters are now delivering babies and 
putting out fires—we’re multifaceted individuals now, and that comes with a lot of 
other issues that can really trip up a company if there is a lack of training. If you try 
to get some advice ahead of time, take a class or two and keep your core ethics 
strong, then you’ll be on the right track for management.
—Ed Hojnicki, Battalion Chief, District 2, A Platoon, 
Wilmington Fire Department, Wilmington, Delaware

THE BEGINNINGS OF MODERN 
MANAGEMENT
There is evidence throughout recorded history of 
the use of management concepts. During the past 
100 years, much attention has been focused on the 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, you should be able to do 
the following:
 
4-1 Identify the standard operating procedures 
(SOPs) pertaining to supervisors and members 
regarding the operation of the fire department.
 
4-2 Identify within departmental operating pro-
cedures those SOPs governing emergency 
 operations, incident management systems, 
and safety.
 
4-3 Identify within departmental operating proce-
dures those that pertain to administration.
 
4-4 Recognize the current trends that impact the fire 
service.
 
4-5 Identify the various ethical dilemmas that may 
confront a supervisor serving in a public or pri-
vate agency.
 
4-6 Explain the ethical obligations of a supervisor 
serving in a public or private agency.
*The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021 Standards, are identiﬁ ed in different colors: 
FO I  black, FO II  red.
INTRODUCTION
Many words describe you as the company offi cer. You 
are a supervisor, a leader, and a manager. Certainly 
you are expected to effectively manage the depart-
ment’s resources at the station level. To be effective as 
a manager, you should understand what management 
is and the basic management concepts used in mod-
ern organizations.
WHAT IS MANAGEMENT?
The traditional defi nition of management is the activ-
ity of getting things done through people. Updating this 
defi nition a little, we can say that management is the act 
of guiding the human and physical resources of an orga-
nization to attain the organization’s objectives. Manage-
ment includes determining what needs to be done and 
the accomplishment of the task itself. From this defi ni-
tion it is clear that managers plan and make decisions 
about how others will use the organization’s resources. 
Managers should also be committed to accomplishing 
these activities effi ciently and effectively.
80  CHAPTER 4
science of management. One of the fi rst contributors 
was Henry Fayol (1841–1925), a very successful man-
ager of a French coal mine. In addition to his ongo-
ing management activities, Fayol was interested in 
understanding the process by which work was accom-
plished. Fayol’s writings on this topic fi rst appeared 
in 1900.
By 1916, Fayol had enough material for a book. 
Though originally published in French, the work was 
soon translated into English under the title General 
and Industrial Management. Fayol proposed some 
14 principles of management. Some of his principles 
related to organizational structure, and some related 
to the work process itself. Even at this early date, Fayol 
was concerned about the importance of the human 
resources in the organization. (We see an evolution of 
his ideas in several other writers who follow.)
As you look at Fayol’s list, you will recognize that a 
few of these items were addressed in Chapter 3. Some 
writers are critical of Fayol where his ideas cross 
between organizational structure and the manage-
ment process. But let us be kind here and remember 
that Fayol’s ideas were developed a century ago. To 
say that he was ahead of his time would be an under-
statement: Fayol is called the “Father of Professional 
Management.” Many of Fayol’s ideas are still valid 
and quite relevant to our discussion here on manage-
ment in the fi re service.
Fayol also noted that management activities increase 
as one moves up in rank in an organization (see 
Figure 4-1). That was certainly the case in his time, 
and it remains true in many organizations today. 
 However, where modern management is practiced, 
there is a clear pattern to decentralize management 
activities as much as possible. Where these  modern 
NOTE
Management includes determining what needs to be 
done and the accomplishment of the task itself.

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  81
management ideas are accepted, organizations are 
putting increasing responsibilities upon a greater 
number of managers, especially on fi rst-line supervi-
sors. In the fi re service, the fi rst-line supervisors are 
the company offi cers.
FUNCTIONS OF MANAGEMENT
Many years ago, Fayol and the other pioneers of 
management science recognized that management 
activities could be broken down into several discrete 
components: planning, organizing, commanding, 
coordinating, and controlling. Over the years, various 
authors have renamed these activities, and some have 
repackaged them a bit. However, Fayol’s concept of 
fi ve basic activities or functions fi t our needs here. Let 
us look at Fayol’s fi ve basic functions.
MANAGEMENT SKILLS
TECHNICAL SKILLS
FIREFIGHTER
CHIEF
POSITIONS OF INCREASING RESPONSIBILITY
THE NEED FOR MANAGEMENT SKILLS INCREASES AS
ONE MOVES UP THE ORGANIZATIONAL LADDER
FIGURE 4-1 Management activity increases as you move 
up the organizational ladder.
 1. Division of labor. Divide the work into manageable 
portions and specialize the activities to improve 
effi ciency.
 2. Authority and responsibility. These terms go hand 
in hand. Where authority arises, responsibility must 
follow. Managers must have the authority to make 
 decisions and give directions.
 3. Discipline, as a characteristic of authoritarian organiza-
tions, includes good leadership and clear agreement 
between management and labor on the role of each.
 4. Unity of command suggests that one should receive 
orders from only one supervisor.
 5. Unity of direction suggests a commitment from all to 
focus on the same objectives.
 6. Subordination of individual interests to general in-
terests in an organization suggests that the general 
 interest must take precedence over the individual 
 interests of the members.
 7. Proper remuneration, a fair wage for fair work.
 8. Centralization of authority, like the division of 
work, brings order to the organization. It provides 
 accountability and responsibility where necessary. 
However, decentralization (we might think of it more 
as delegating) usually increases the worker’s impor-
tance and value.
 9. Scalar (continuous) chain of ranks or layers in an 
 organization, and the notion that authority fl ows from 
the highest to the lowest ranks in the organization’s 
chain of command.
10. Order, or a place for everything and everything in its 
place. Fayol was interested in both material  order 
and social order. Today, we would say that order 
 refers to having the right personnel and the right ma-
terials ready to do the job so that employees are ef-
fective and effi cient.
11. Equity and fairness are important in the treatment of 
the employees of any organization.
12. Initiative is important to the organization and its 
members. The ability to think out a plan and see 
it through to completion is one of man’s greatest 
satisfactions.
13. Stability of our personnel, recognizing that there is 
value in a long-term relationship with our employees.
14. Esprit de corps, an organizational spirit, is essential 
to the survival of any organization.
NOTE
Fayol is called the “Father of Professional Management.”
NOTE
Management activities can be divided into five  discrete 
components: planning, organizing, commanding, 
coordinating, and controlling.
Planning
Any activity should start with planning. You may 
be among the many who fi nd planning to be a diffi -
cult and frustrating experience. Planning is largely a 
FAYOL’S PRINCIPLES

82  CHAPTER 4
Organizing
The second function of management is called orga-
nizing. We have already discussed organizations, but 
in this case we are looking at the activity of organiz-
ing itself. The organization breaks down the depart-
ment’s activities into manageable tasks. Likewise, the 
process of organizing is the breaking down of large 
tasks into manageable activities.
In a sense, the development of the organizational 
structure of the department is the result of organiz-
ing. We indicated the benefi ts of this process when 
we talked about organizations in Chapter 3. When the 
Plain City Fire Department is established, the devel-
opment of a structure and the assignment of tasks 
form the start of the organizing process.
Organizing keeps the department’s functions in 
mind and, when done properly, focuses energy on 
the department’s goals and objectives. Organizing 
includes managing the resources available to the 
department. At the company level, these resources 
typically include human resources, physical resources, 
time, and in some cases, money.
Commanding
Commanding is the third management function. 
Because others become involved in this area, the 
job of commanding can be diffi cult. Here we see the 
application of leadership skills and other human rela-
tions activities. We discuss the details of leadership in 
Chapters 6 and 7.
Commanding does not mean that you stand in the 
hall or in the street and shout orders. Commanding 
means that you exercise your delegated authority to 
get things accomplished, and because you are also 
 mental process and often requires the ability to envi-
sion things that have not yet happened. When plan-
ning is done properly, you challenge these visions 
with “what if” situations that make you think through 
the consequences of your proposals. This envisioning 
can be diffi cult. You can be frustrated when things 
do not turn out exactly as you planned or your ideas 
are not approved. As a result of such experiences, you 
may see planning as a waste of time and shy away 
from good planning activity.
Planning covers everything from the next hour 
to the next decade. We usually divide planning into 
three areas (see Figure 4-2):
■ Short-range planning looks at the rest of today, 
tomorrow, and the rest of the year. Many planning 
activities are driven by annual events. As a result, 
budgets, training, certifi cation, and such are usually 
scheduled on a 1-year cycle. For our purposes, we 
arbitrarily limit short-range planning to 1 year.
■ Mid-range planning reaches out from 1 year to 
5 years. During this time, we can usually convert 
goals into defi nitive plans. Most budget, procure-
ment, recruiting, and training activities fall into the 
realm of mid-range planning. Most departments 
have plans in the mid-range category, although 
some do this planning better than others. All 
departments should be looking well ahead at the 
needs for personnel, equipment, and facilities.
■ Long-range planning looks at the needs of the organi-
zation beyond 5 years. Many departments do not get 
involved with long-range planning, but those that do 
see the benefi ts of keeping ahead of the community’s 
needs. When communities are changing, long-range 
planning is essential if the department is to change 
and provide service as the community changes. As 
planners, you must look at present growth and antici-
pate future growth. You have to increase (or  relocate) 
resources to serve the expanding community. As 
managers, some of the things that you should con-
sider are fi re station location or relocation, access 
to as well as the impact of major highways, and the 
increasing concern for the environment.
LONG-RANGE—GOALS
5, 10, 20 YEARS DISTANT
MEDIUM-RANGE—GOALS
1 TO 5
YEARS DISTANT
SHORT-RANGE—GOALS
1 HOUR TO 1
YEAR DISTANT
FIGURE 4-2 Planning activities are generally divided into short, medium, and long range.
OFFICER ADVICE
When planning precedes the action, the action is easier 
and is often accomplished faster.

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  83
Controlling
Controlling is the fi fth and fi nal item on Fayol’s list. 
Controlling is monitoring our progress. If we say that 
planning was looking ahead to see what we are going 
responsible for controlling the resources of an orga-
nization, it means that you are using the talents of 
 others to attain these goals. The essence if command 
is leading, motivating, and building teamwork among 
your team members.
Coordinating
The fourth management function involves the coor-
dination of the available resources. These resources 
can include money, equipment, and personnel (see 
Figure 4-3). You should always consider time as a 
resource as well. To some extent, these resources can 
be substituted for each other. For example, if time and 
money are available, and personnel or equipment are 
scarce, you might consider contracting for a particu-
lar service you need.
As managers, you should be constantly looking for 
the proper mix of resources to best meet the needs of the 
organization. Effective managers are constantly fi nding 
ways to do more for less. In the private sector, this is 
important if the company is to remain competitive. In 
the public sector, it is important because the citizens and 
their elected representatives are expecting good man-
agement practices from everyone in government.
Although most fi re departments are nonprofi t 
 organizations, they operate in a competitive environ-
ment. Public fi re departments are constantly compet-
ing with other government organizations, such as the 
police, libraries, and schools, for funds and support.
Coordinating is putting the various functions together 
into a smooth and well-operating organization. For the 
manager who is effective in planning,  organizing, and 
directing, it would appear that coordinating would be 
easy. Indeed, if these three activities have been well 
accomplished, coordination will be a lot easier.
Any one of several factors may interfere with good 
coordination. Poor communications, poor timing, 
resistance to change, lack of clear-cut objectives or 
at least the lack of understanding or acceptance of 
these objectives, and ineffective policies, practices, 
and procedures all can hinder your efforts to coor-
dinate activities. The group’s acceptance of you as a 
leader plays an important part, too. If the team mem-
bers accept you as the leader, you will have a greater 
opportunity to coordinate their efforts.
The resources of a station
The resources of a department
The resources of a community
FIGURE 4-3 For company officers, the greatest resource is your teammates. Effective coordination of their efforts is es-
sential for company excellence.
THINGS THAT CAN BE COORDINATED

84  CHAPTER 4
to do, then we can also say that controlling is looking 
back to see how we have done. Controlling is similar 
to the feedback we talked about in Chapter 2; it tells 
us how we are doing (see Figure 4-4).
Controlling allows you to measure the effectiveness 
of your efforts, to help you maintain your goals, to seek 
new ways to improve, to increase production, and to 
help plan for future undertakings. It should also give 
you an opportunity to identify those who should be 
recognized for their accomplishments.
increased and corrective action greatly expedited 
when you concentrate on the exceptions to expected 
results. In other words, most of your controlling effort 
should be directed to the exceptions or to those sit-
uations that do not conform to the standards. This 
makes sense for two reasons: First, the exceptions are 
relatively few in number, and, second, the exceptions 
are the cases that require remedial action.
Why spend time reviewing the results that are con-
sistent with expectations and require no corrective 
action? Instead, you should concentrate on the few 
that are out of line and will require corrective action. 
FIGURE 4-4 Managers should always 
be watching performance, measuring 
effectiveness, and looking for ways to 
improve.
When aircraft fl y to a destination of any distance, they 
fi le a fl ight plan. Ships fi le a similar document when 
they leave port. There are several reasons for this infor-
mation, some associated with safety, but for the crew 
members involved in navigating the trip, it gives them a 
plan to follow during that trip. If they fi nd that they are off 
schedule or off course, they can take appropriate cor-
rective action early in the trip so that they arrive in the 
right place at the right time. Controlling is similar for you 
as managers; you want the organization’s management 
actions to arrive at the right place and at the right time.
CONTROLLING HELPS US GET 
TO THE RIGHT PLACE AT THE 
RIGHT TIME
The Principle of Exception
Some textbooks mention another management 
 principle—the principle of exception. The principle of 
exception suggests that management control is greatly 
Management by exception (MBE) suggests that the 
manager gets involved only when something unusual 
occurs. This approach allows you to focus on complex 
and urgent matters. The idea is to defi ne the normal 
 parameters. When something gets outside these bound-
aries, attention is called to the problem. Budget tracking 
is a good example. If expenses are tracking according 
to plans, there is little need to spend time going over the 
numbers. A lot of things are like this. For example, most 
cars no longer have an engine temperature gauge on the 
dashboard. Most of us really do not need to know how 
hot the engine is, as long as it is not too hot! A red light 
will warn of this condition. We only need to take action 
when the situation is outside the normal.
MANAGEMENT BY EXCEPTION

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  85
CONTRIBUTORS TO 
MODERN MANAGEMENT
During the twentieth century, industry sought 
ways to increase production. The assembly line 
was  est ab lished, and machines were invented to 
increase the  individual worker’s productivity. As the 
pace increased, workers became subordinate to the 
machines they  operated. Whereas Fayol and other 
management scientists had set out to create more 
 pleasant work conditions, management had created 
situations that reduced the work to simple repeti-
tive tasks. Workers became detached from both the 
product and from the work itself. Worker satisfaction 
decreased, and with it, the quality of work decreased.
Many studies of management took place during the 
fi rst half of the twentieth century. They make inter-
esting reading to the serious student of management, 
and you will fi nd a good discussion of these events in 
any good text on management. We briefl y cover sev-
eral of the signifi cant contributors to this evolution, 
for they help us understand where organizations are 
headed today.
Frederick Taylor
Frederick W. Taylor (1856–1915) was an American 
engineer working as a superintendent in a steel mill. 
Like Fayol, Taylor was concerned with increasing the 
productivity of both humans and machines. How-
ever, Taylor’s focus was on the fi rst-line manager and 
the effi ciency of the worker. He reasoned that if effi -
ciency could be improved, the workers’ productively 
could be improved, and with increased productivity, 
workers would have a good, steady job and would be 
well paid for their efforts. Taylor is called the “Father 
of Scientifi c Management.”
Dr. Taylor studied the resources—the machines, 
tools, equipment, materials, methods, and workers’ 
skills. He analyzed the sequence of events needed to 
perform a job, varied the inputs, and collected data. 
In a sense, Taylor was applying one of the character-
istics of the Industrial Revolution to human behavior: 
Most managers understand this concept and many 
practice it without realizing that they have applied 
this principle.
He saw machines as having standardized interchange-
able parts. He saw humans as parts of a “human orga-
nization” with standardized tasks.
Taylor made a science of looking at each element 
of work and looking for ways to improve the worker’s 
productivity. Taylor’s studies included the interaction 
of humans in the workplace—the social environment, 
if you will, as well as the physical environment. The 
results were profound: With the application of his 
recommendations, productivity went up dramatically. 
Many of the core elements of his efforts remain popu-
lar today.
NOTE
Management control is greatly expedited and increases 
when managers concentrate on the exceptions to 
expected results.
NOTE
Dr. Taylor reasoned that one of the major problems in 
the workplace was the lack of expression by managers 
of what they expected in terms of a day’s productivity, 
and of the employees in knowing and understanding 
what that expectancy was.
Application of Taylor’s work is evident in the fi re 
service. We have division of labor, of course, but for 
many departments, the tasks have been narrowly 
defi ned so that little fl exibility is allowed.  Taylor 
would be pleased to know that many departments 
design their apparatus with standardized  hose-bed 
and 
compartment 
arrangements 
“to 
increase 
 productivity” and have SOPs that provide standard-
ized  solutions to routine situations.
Abraham Maslow
Abraham H. Maslow (1908–1970) concerned himself 
with the full range of human relationships. In 1954, 
he published his Hierarchy of Needs. We discuss the 
application of Maslow’s theory in Chapter 6, but we 
introduce it here because of the role he played in the 
evolution of management theory. Maslow recognized 
that most of us have fi ve levels of needs, and that the 
very fi rst of these are the basic physiological needs—
the need for air, food, and water, and for clothing and 
shelter to protect us from the elements. Maslow said 
that these basic needs must be satisfi ed before any 
worker can be productive.
Peter Drucker
Peter Drucker (1909–2005) is credited with invent-
ing a concept known as management by objectives 
(MBO). Drucker was a professor who had real-world 
experience as a consultant in a variety of settings in 
the United States and elsewhere. He wrote several 
books including The Practice of Management, pub-
lished in 1954.

86  CHAPTER 4
The basis for MBO lies in managers defi ning areas of 
responsibility for their subordinates. Measurable goals 
are set for these areas of responsibility, and these goals 
are used as a standard to evaluate the results obtained. 
MBO requires planning and thus reduces some of the 
surprises that face managers. It encourages innovation 
and improves performance because people are work-
ing together to meet the unit’s goal. MBO has been 
challenged because it is labor intensive for managers; 
it places a heavy burden on them to plan, set goals, and 
provide a frank appraisal of the results. Many manag-
ers fi nd that it is not worth the effort.
Douglas McGregor
Douglas McGregor (1906–1964) was also a professor. 
In 1960, McGregor wrote a book entitled Human Side 
of Enterprise. In that work, McGregor introduced the 
now well-known concept of Theory X and Theory 
Y. McGregor said that many managers feel that they 
need to have tight controls over their organization 
because workers are lazy and resist the demands of 
their managers. McGregor called this traditional style 
of management Theory X and said that it was not a 
good way to manage.
McGregor proposed an alternative style, something 
he called Theory Y. He felt that people would accept 
work and responsibility if given a chance, and that 
management should provide suitable working con-
ditions so that people could achieve personal goals 
while satisfying the organization’s goals. We will 
return to McGregor in Chapter 6.
William Ouchi
In the early 1980s yet another professor, William G. 
Ouchi, developed a concept he called Theory Z. Pro-
fessor Ouchi focused on workers’ needs. Building on 
Maslow’s and McGregor’s ideas, Ouchi said that work-
ers really want more than just the satisfaction of work-
ing productively; workers want to be involved in their 
own destiny. He also found that workers wanted to be 
trusted and to be entrusted. He found that many Jap-
anese companies using this approach were realizing 
higher productivity and often getting better products.
With Theory Z, the focus is on the employees 
rather than on the work itself. The company encour-
ages employee involvement at every level of decision 
making and accepts these ideas. Teams, rather than 
individuals, assemble products, rather than parts. As 
a result, workers share in the satisfaction that comes 
in seeing the results of their work and share in con-
tributing to make the product even better.
In Theory Z, the relationship goes beyond the 
 worker—family needs are recognized, too. The 
workers reciprocate by being totally involved with the 
company over a long period of time.
W. Edwards Deming
We would be remiss if we failed to mention the work 
of W. Edwards Deming (1900–1995). Deming wrote a 
book entitled Quality, Productivity, and Competitive 
Position. Deming’s ideas were used by the Japanese 
in their manufacturing process (similar to Theory Z), 
and he eventually brought his ideas to the American 
workplace. The acceptance of his ideas is still ongo-
ing. In some circles, Deming’s ideas are referred to as 
total quality management, or TQM.
Theory X
■ People dislike work.
■ People work only for money.
Theory Y
■ People want to feel important.
■ People want to be recognized.
Theory Z
■ People want to contribute and be part of the process.
■ People represent unlimited potential.
NOTE
Total quality management was a fad that passed 
through many organizations in the latter twentieth cen-
tury. Although the term may be passé, many of the 
ideas embraced by TQM remain very much a part 
of modern management. We will use the term TQM 
as a shorthand way to refer collectively to these ideas 
and concepts.
Deming’s Fourteen Points (altered a bit for the 
fi re service)
 1. Understand and accept the organization’s mis-
sion, goals, and objectives.
 2. Seek ways to improve the process and train the 
people to do it better. All improvements, big and 
small, are important.
 3. Use inspections as an improvement tool, not a 
threat.
 4. Think beyond the bottom line. Consider quality and 
personal value along with the cost in every decision.
COMPARING THEORIES X, Y, AND Z

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  87
 5. Demand quality, not better numbers, in every-
thing you do.
 6. Accept the idea of quality. Do every job right, 
the fi rst time, every time.
 7. Use training time effectively; some organiza-
tions train just to meet quotas.
 8. Promote pride in the job. As supervisors, be sure 
that your team members have the equipment 
and materials they need, and recognize their 
good work.
 9. Promote leadership. Work on giving supervisors 
the best tools possible to deal with the organiza-
tion’s most valuable resource—its people.
 10. Create an atmosphere of trust and open 
communication.
 11. Get rid of the organizational barriers that inhibit 
trust and effective communications, and force 
people to cooperate rather than compete.
 12. Use analytical tools to help better understand 
and monitor the job.
 13. Work as a team.
 14. Use TQM all the time.
sions. Data can be used to defi ne the process, identify 
problems, indicate solutions, and monitor improve-
ments. TQM is not driven by analytical data; it is 
merely supported by such information.
Total quality management focuses on a continuing 
process of improvement. This approach combines all 
that we have learned about human resource manage-
ment and adds the ability to use modern quantitative 
analytical techniques to provide timely data for mak-
ing accurate decisions.
Kenneth Blanchard
The One Minute Manager, written by Kenneth 
Blanchard and Spencer Johnson in 1981, caused quite 
a stir when published. One of the key items in the 
book was the suggestion that we should try to fi nd 
more ways to make people feel good about them-
selves. The authors suggest that people who feel good 
about themselves do good work. The lesson is that as 
managers, you should focus on what is going well. 
The key action is this: Find someone doing something 
right and give this person recognition.
NOTE
Consistency of these purposes must be defined and 
maintained.
NOTE
TQM is based on employee participation and the con-
cept that all must work together to achieve quality 
goals while also focusing on a continuing process of 
improvement.
To be successful, TQM must put the focus on the 
customer’s needs. Long-term TQM commitments 
include establishing a vision, defi ning a mission, and 
providing guiding principles for the organization. 
Consistency of these purposes must be defi ned and 
maintained. The TQM process involves everyone in 
the organization, but, because of traditional values 
(we expect the leaders to lead), it is usually necessary 
for top management to sell TQM to the other mem-
bers of the organization.
But it takes more than just words of inspiration from 
the leaders. TQM is based on teammate participation 
and the concept that all must work together to achieve 
quality goals. Teamwork is essential. Effective com-
munication, both vertical and horizontal, is critical to 
the process. TQM uses analytical techniques to pro-
vide the data necessary for timely and accurate deci-
Traditional values 
 Total quality 
 management
Looks for quick answers 
 Takes new management 
 approach
Maintains old ways 
 Uses small innovations to 
 improve
Focuses on short term 
Focuses on long term
Looks for errors 
Prevents errors
Decides using opinions 
Decides using facts
Motivated by cost factors 
 Motivated by customer 
 satisfaction
SOME COMPARISONS
OFFICER ADVICE
A measurement of a good leader is ability to develop 
other leaders, not followers. In today’s world, many new 
supervisors are thrust into a “baptism by fi re” manage-
ment environment. The One Minute Manager is an easy-
to-read guide that arms newcomers to supervisory posi-
tions with the basic tools for building worker relationships 
and getting the best out of their staffs. As a result, their 
efforts are guided into decisions that generate increas-
ingly positive outcomes in uncomfortable situations. 
As a result, their self-confi dence builds and their lead-
ership skills improve. Every new supervisor should read 
this book.

88  CHAPTER 4
Alan Brunacini
Management evolution has led managers in many 
organizations to focus on a concept called customer 
service. Many companies are focusing on serving 
the customer better and starting that process with 
attention to the members of the organization, often 
called the internal customers. The logic here is that 
if you make the internal customers (the members) 
happy, they will make the paying customers (the cit-
izens) happy. The goal is to create an environment 
where every member wants to delight the customer. 
For businesses, it means they want the customer to 
come back. The employee handbook of a major res-
taurant chain illustrates the point beautifully. The job 
description for waiters is simply this: “Do whatever 
it takes to convince each of our guests to come back 
here for their next meal.”
Alan Brunacini, a former chief of the Phoe-
nix (Arizona) Fire Department, played a key role 
in introducing the concept of customer service 
to the fi re service. He suggested that you look 
closely at what you are doing and think about 
how you treat our customers, both those inside the 
 organization as well as the public you serve. While 
you are not looking for repeat business, you do 
want your customers to be delighted with your ser-
vice. After all, they are paying the bill, including 
your salary.
His department’s mission statement read some-
thing like this: “Prevent harm, survive, be nice.” 
Clearly, turning this concept into a reality is not 
easy nor is it quickly accomplished; it takes time and 
energy to change attitudes. However, being nice and 
taking care of the customers should be an essential 
part of every organization, especially for a public-
service organization. We explore this topic further 
in Chapter 5.
MANAGEMENT IN MODERN 
ORGANIZATIONS
Management is the active part of making an orga-
nization run and includes planning, organizing, 
 commanding, coordinating, and controlling. We 
 usually think of management as something done by 
the senior staff of an organization, and as a result, 
we usually relate management to the administrative 
or nonoperational activities essential to the organi-
zation. For many organizations, this includes the 
 support activities, such as human resources man-
agement, training, purchasing, and communications. 
But management activities are found at all levels and 
functions of modern organizations. Most fi re chiefs 
spend more time working at their desks than com-
manding emergency activities (see Figure 4-5). Most 
senior offi cers spend more time managing the orga-
nization than managing emergency incidents. Most 
company offi cers spend more time managing than 
fi ghting fi res.
Management can be enhanced through good policy, 
procedures, and even by personal observation. Policy 
is usually developed by fi re department administra-
tion. Such policy prescribes what should be done in 
response to various situations. Policies are broad in 
nature and should be clearly understood. Personnel 
need to know where they stand with regard to the 
department’s directions. The department’s statement 
regarding harassment in the workplace is an example 
of a policy.
Procedure may be also be developed by the 
administration, but a good part of procedure is ini-
tiated at the company level. Established procedures, 
like established policy, simplify the daily routine for 
fi refi ghters and supervisory personnel alike. Instead 
of each problem having to be resolved each day it 
comes up, established procedures make these activi-
ties routine.
Procedure has a lot to do with  organization and 
management. Procedure is how tasks are assigned. 
Procedure 
deals 
with 
questions 
regarding 
responsi bilities and the order in which tasks are 
 accomplished. Established procedure provides stan-
dardized solutions to similar problems and usually 
simplifi es life at work. People like having solutions; 
members tend to be more productive when they have 
standard solutions to recurring events. Some proce-
dures are essential to the mission of the organization 
and to the safety of those who work there. The pro-
cedure for raising an extension ladder must always 
FIGURE 4-5 Fire chiefs do most of their managing from 
their desks, not from the middle of the street.

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  89
be the same. It takes practice and teamwork to do 
it well. Practice and teamwork do not bring rewards 
every day but they increase the likelihood that the 
ladder will be raised quickly, correctly, and safely 
when it is needed most.
Procedures written for administrative personnel are 
often developed by the city or town administration. 
These procedures often spell out what is required of 
the individual, what duties they are required to per-
form, and their place within the city or town’s organi-
zational structure.
Some procedures may not be so fi rmly fi xed. For 
example, items dealing with the fi re station main-
tenance program and meal preparation may vary, 
depending on your management style as the company 
offi cer. Some company offi cers may treat these pro-
cedures the same as that dealing with ladder raising, 
and never allow for variations. Others will allow their 
members to try alternative approaches to routine tasks 
as long as the job gets done. It is important that the 
members be able to separate those essential tasks that 
have very fi xed procedures from those where some 
discretionary latitude is appropriate.
Another management technique is observation of 
the work and the workers. When company offi cers sit 
in their offi ce doing necessary paperwork, they may 
think that they are managing. When this situation 
occurs to excess, these company offi cers are over-
looking the most important resource they manage—
the human resources under their command. Company 
offi cers who dedicate their energies to their personnel 
will fi nd that the overall productivity of the company 
is improved.
Comparing Organizational Values
Traditional 
Modern
Focused on function 
Focused on process
Centralized decision 
Decentralized
 making 
 decision making
Tall structure, many 
Flat structure, few
 layers 
 layers
Distinction between 
Both are joined as
 line and staff 
 teams
Narrow job defi nitions 
Wide-ranging job
 
 descriptions
Heavy reliance on rules 
Heavy reliance on
 
 innovation
Emphasis on vertical 
Emphasis on
 communications 
 horizontal
 
 communications
Emphasis on individuals 
Emphasis on teams
Focus on stability 
Focus on change
HOW WELL IS YOUR FIRE 
DEPARTMENT MANAGED?
We introduced organizations in Chapter 3. Fire depart-
ments are organizations, and their ability to perform 
as such is a refl ection of how well they are managed. 
Some departments provide excellent service to the cit-
izens they serve, whereas others just exist. In the past, 
it was diffi cult to accurately assess the worth of a fi re 
department: We could count personnel and  apparatus 
and get a general feel for how well the department 
was prepared to deal with emergency situations. 
Today, there are several good  analytical tools to help 
determine the quality of fi re protection provided in a 
community.
Because the safety of people, property, and the 
environment is so vital, questions that focus on the 
organization and deployment of fi refi ghting resources 
are especially important to communities. Fire preven-
tion activity is also important. Although fi re preven-
tion and life-and-fi re safety education efforts are less 
costly than fi re suppression, many do not see the value 
in these preventive activities. As a result, we tend to 
focus on fi re suppression resources to deal with emer-
gencies that do occur. Both are important.
Many communities are faced with signifi cant bud-
get issues: public safety, comprising both fi re and 
police protection, is a relatively expensive undertak-
ing. Consequently, the fi re department is in competi-
tion for the community’s limited fi nancial resources 
that also fund schools, parks, and better streets. As a 
result, the department’s budget is usually less than it 
should be and in turn, limits the resources that might 
be available for prevention and suppression activity.
Much has been written recently about the art 
of managing by walking around and observing the 
work and the workers fi rsthand. Where practiced, it 
is important to remember the respective role of every-
one in the organization and not violate the rules we 
have covered. Personal observation allows you to see 
what is going on, engage team members in polite con-
versation, and make inquiries about the job as well as 
personnel issues. But be careful about saying things 
that might be inferred as direction or as responding 
to an organizational or personal need. You may be 
bypassing that chain of command.
OFFICER ADVICE
Company offi cers who dedicate their energies to their 
personnel will fi nd that the overall  productivity of the 
company improves.

90  CHAPTER 4
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have many im-
portant functions in fi re service organizations. In par-
ticular, a complete set of SOPs is the best method for 
departments to “operationalize” other organizational 
documents—by-laws, plans, policies, operational strate-
gies, mutual aid agreements, etc. In simple terms, SOPs 
“boil down” the important concepts, techniques, and 
requirements contained in these documents into a for-
mat that can be readily used by personnel in their daily 
jobs. As such, SOPs help to integrate departmental op-
erations, linking the work of managers and planners with 
the  activities of other workers. SOPs are also essential 
for addressing the diverse legislative and regulatory re-
quirements that affect fi re service operations. Many laws 
and regulations state that fi re departments must follow 
“safe work practices.” Courts have generally agreed 
that this includes the development and maintenance of 
SOPs. In addition, many communities have ordinances 
that mandate compliance with standards developed by 
NFPA or other professional organizations. A very effec-
tive way to implement these legal requirements and na-
tional  standards is to incorporate them into SOPs. By 
documenting the department’s effort and intention to be 
compliant, SOPs may also help to limit liability when inci-
dents go awry. SOPs have many other applications and 
benefi ts for fi re service organizations, including:
■ Explanation of performance expectations: SOPs de-
scribe and document what is expected of personnel in 
the performance of their offi cial duties. As such, they 
provide a benchmark for personnel, an objective mech-
anism for evaluating operational performance, and a 
tool for promoting a positive organizational culture.
■ Standardization of activities: SOPs identify planned 
and agreed-upon roles and actions. This information 
helps standardize activities and promote coordination 
and communications among personnel. SOPs also 
simplify decision-making requirements under poten-
tially stressful conditions.
■ Training and reference document: Written SOPs can 
provide the framework for training programs, mem-
ber briefi ngs, drills, and exercises. These activities, in 
turn, improve the understanding of work requirements 
and help identify potential problems. A comprehen-
sive SOP manual also serves as a self-study and ref-
erence document for personnel.
■ Systems analysis and feedback: The process of 
 researching and developing SOPs provides opportu-
nities for managers to compare current work  practices 
with the state-of-the art in the fi re service. Feedback 
THE ROLE OF STANDARD OPERATING 
PROCEDURES (SOPs)
from outside groups, technical experts, and staff can 
help to identify potential problems and innovative 
solutions.
■ External communications: SOPs clarify the depart-
ment’s operational philosophy and recommended 
practices. As such, they may prove useful in commu-
nicating organizational intentions and requirements 
to outside groups, or enhancing the public’s under-
standing of the fi re service.
The SOP Development Process
The SOP development process can be viewed as essen-
tially eight sequential steps that address the most impor-
tant organizational and management considerations for 
department personnel. The methodology used for these 
steps can vary, depending on the scope of the project, 
local needs and resources, and other variables. The 
steps are listed below, with additional detail on each pre-
sented in the following sections:
1. Build the development team
2. Provide organizational support
3. Establish team procedures
4. Gather information and identify alternatives
5. Analyze and select alternatives
6. Write the SOP
7. Review and test the SOP
8. Ratify and approve the SOP
Build the Development Team
The constantly changing environment in which fi re and 
EMS agencies operate requires that departments reg-
ularly analyze and update their SOPs to meet current 
needs. To manage this ongoing requirement, managers 
may fi nd it helpful to appoint a standing group or com-
mittee to oversee SOP-related work. This team is given 
authority and responsibility for gathering information 
from department members and other sources; identi-
fying,  analyzing, and selecting from among alternative 
 operating procedures; writing SOPs that address the 
 department’s needs; distributing draft materials for peer 
review and testing; and submitting fi nal SOPs to the fi re 
chief or agency head for approval.
SOPs are usually most effective when members of 
the organization are included in every step of the devel-
opment process. As a general rule, departments should 
get input from all groups potentially affected by the 
SOPs. This strategy borrows on concepts described in 
Total Quality Management, a business philosophy that 
 encourages managers to get feedback from those using 
a service, as well as from workers who provide it. Mem-
ber participation helps boost employee morale, increase 

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  91
“buy-in,” and promote a better understanding of the fi nal 
product.
Whenever possible, all affected viewpoints should be 
represented on the SOP development team. Regular 
members of the team might include:
■ Operational or line emergency responders, who 
carry out SOPs and have the greatest stake in their 
success
■ Safety program representatives, such as the health 
and safety offi cer, incident safety offi cer, operational 
medical director, department physician, and safety 
and health committee members
■ Managers, who have a broad organizational perspec-
tive that includes budgeting, public relations, political 
considerations, and other factors
■ Representatives of labor unions and employee asso-
ciations, who understand contractual issues, articu-
late the viewpoints of their members, and provide in-
sight on alternative procedures
■ Mutual-aid and regional response agency represen-
tatives, to help integrate and coordinate multijurisdic-
tional responses
■ Representatives from other local government agen-
cies that may interface with department operations, 
such as a third-service EMS agency or municipal 
health agency
■ Legal counsel or other personnel familiar with the con-
tent and implications of related laws, regulations, and 
standards
■ People with technical expertise in policy or systems 
analysis, operations research, evaluation theory, sur-
vey design, statistical analysis, technical writing, etc.
Implementation Planning
The development or modifi cation of SOPs must be 
 accompanied by a plan to implement the new pro-
cedure within the department. The implementation 
plan provides an opportunity to think through related 
tasks,  assignments, schedules, and resource needs. The 
 planning process may be formal or informal, depending 
on the requirement.
The fi rst step is to decide on the purpose and scope 
of the task to be accomplished. Several important ques-
tions need to be considered:
■ How many SOPs are being implemented? A whole 
new set of SOPs? A major portion of the SOPs? One 
or two SOPs?
■ How signifi cant are the changes to existing SOPs? 
What are the potential consequences if the SOPs are 
not implemented quickly or effectively?
■ Who needs to know about the changes to the 
SOPs? Do different groups need different types of 
information?
■ What are effective ways of disseminating information 
within the department? What methods have worked 
before and what methods have been unsuccessful?
■ Is training necessary to ensure competence in the 
new SOPs? How will performance be monitored and 
enhanced?
■ Would the SOPs be most effectively implemented by 
using a well publicized changeover date or a defi ned 
phase-in period?
The answers to these questions determine the strategy 
and methods in the implementation plan. The approach 
might vary from simple notifi cation during member meet-
ings to on-the-job training for selected members to formal 
classroom sessions for the entire department. For exam-
ple, a small volunteer fi re department creating its fi rst set 
of SOPs will take a drastically different approach than a 
larger career department doing a minor update of one or 
two SOPs affecting only the hazardous materials team.
NOTE: SOPs can prove to be diffi cult to write without a guideline. The 
information listed here will assist in the writing and implementation pro-
cess. In addition, Appendix B provides examples using the standard 
SOP format for both emergency and non-emergency operations.
Source: Excerpts from “Developing Effective Standard Operat-
ing Procedures for Fire and EMS Departments,” FA-197, December 
1999, Federal Emergency Management Agency, 500 C Street, SW 
 Washington, DC 20472.
In evaluating the effectiveness of fi re protection, 
there are several issues: First is the already mentioned 
high cost. Fire stations, fi re apparatus, and on-duty 
personnel are indeed expensive. A second problem is 
determining the level of protection required. Issues 
include determining the number of on-duty personnel, 
the maximum allowable time allowed for response, 
and the capabilities of these responders once they 
arrive on the scene.
In the United States, fi re protection has always 
been a function of local government, but sometimes, 
local governments and the citizens they serve lack 
an understanding of the complex nature of fi re pro-
tection and may not be qualifi ed to determine what 
is best. This raises a signifi cant question: Who can 
best judge? Should local communities determine their 
own needs, or should some sort of national standard 
be applied?
These are challenging questions. Determining the 
appropriate level of protection, assessing the cost of 
such protection, and determining the means by which 
these decisions are made are daunting tasks. Citizens 
are often presented information about the cost of fi re 
protection, but many have no real interest, and those 
who are interested often lack the expertise to answer 
these questions. The benefi ts of fi re  prevention, 

92  CHAPTER 4
 public safety education, and code enforcement are 
not well publicized, and, therefore, there is often lit-
tle pressure exerted on their behalf. Thus, relatively 
few resources are allocated to these activities. On the 
other hand, most fi re protection experts know that 
investments in these very activities will pay off and 
eventually reduce the need for more expensive fi re 
suppression resources.
Several organizations have developed methods to 
assist communities in evaluating the effectiveness of 
their local fi re department. We will introduce three of 
them here.
Insurance Service Office
Fire insurance is unique in that the cost of the prod-
uct (insurance payout) is unknown at the time of the 
sale when payment is made in the form of a premium. 
To help the insurance industry better determine the 
probability of future losses, several fi re insurance rat-
ing organizations joined together in 1971 to form the 
Insurance Service Offi ce (ISO). Today, ISO  publishes 
the Fire Suppression Rating Schedule, a succes-
sor to the previously mentioned Grading Schedule. 
The  rating schedule evaluates three areas of a fi re 
department: receiving and handling of fi re alarms, 
the fi re department resources, and the community’s 
water supply.
Each of these areas is important in the timely and 
effective intervention of the fi re department at a typi-
cal structural fi re. ISO representatives conduct fi eld 
surveys to determine appropriate scores in each of 
these categories. Their survey involves an on-site 
review of the fi re department’s records, an evaluation 
of the fi re department’s personnel and equipment, 
and an assessment of the community’s water supply 
system. Normally, this evaluation is conducted every 
5 years.
The results of these surveys provide a rating. A rat-
ing of 1 through 8 indicates that there is some sort 
of recognized fi re department, that the nearest engine 
company is fewer than 5 miles travel distance from 
any protected property, and that there is either an 
adequate fi re hydrant within 1,000 feet or other water 
supply resource. (The “other water supply” is a new 
concept in the rating schedule; in the past, ISO gave 
credit only for hydrants. The new schedule recognizes 
the availability of surface water such as lakes and 
ponds. In such cases, ISO allows fi re departments to 
demonstrate their ability to deliver an adequate water 
supply using tankers.) A class 9 rating is similar to a 
rating of 1 through 8 but it lacks an adequate water 
supply. A class 10 rating indicates that there is essen-
tially no fi re protection. Such a situation would typi-
cally exist where the protected property is beyond the 
5-mile travel distance of the nearest fi re station, and 
there is no water supply.
In each category, the fi eld evaluators are guided by 
a detailed list of performance indicators upon which 
to base their evaluations.
■ Receiving and handling of fi re alarms (10 per-
cent of the total score) considers telephone service, 
including the number of incoming lines, equip-
ment, and listings in the local telephone directory, 
the number of personnel on duty, and the number 
and types of dispatch circuits.
■ Fire department resources (50 percent of the total 
score) considers engine companies, reserve pump-
ers, pump capacity, ladder companies, reserve lad-
ders, the distribution of these resources, the staffi ng 
of these companies, and the training of assigned 
personnel.
■ Community’s water supply (40 percent of the total 
score) includes water main capacity and hydrant 
distribution, types and method of installation of 
hydrants, and hydrant inspection and maintenance 
activity.
These scores are converted to ratings as shown in 
Table 4-1.
ISO evaluations provide a method of determin-
ing fi re insurance classifi cations for the purposes of 
determining fi re insurance premium calculations. 
Some think, incorrectly, that ISO mandates certain 
elements of fi re protection. In fact, ISO sets no man-
dates, nor does it provide recommendations regarding 
loss prevention and life safety.
How does all of this improve the fi re department 
and the fi re protection provided within a community? 
The fi re protection grading process not only deter-
mines insurance rates for individual properties but 
also points out defi ciencies in the community’s fi re 
defenses. A good fi re department will see that certain 
actions will improve its rating. Recognizing these 
needs, the department can systematically go about 
the process of making incremental steps to improve 
its next evaluation. It is important to note that this rat-
ing is only applicable to a department’s fi re suppres-
sion activities and does not provide an evaluation of 
how well a department may be able to provide other 
services such as medical.
FIREGROUND FACT
There is a clear correlation: Better fire protection leads 
to lower insurance costs. Local jurisdictions can take 
steps to improve their capabilities and lower the cost 
of fire insurance for their citizens. Few, if any, other mu-
nicipal services have this opportunity.

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  93
NFPA Standards for Fire 
Department Response
The ISO rating system provides a valuable service; 
however, because of ISO’s focus on fi re suppres-
sion and because of the relatively infrequent on-site 
evaluations, some feel that it is too limited to help 
 communities face future issues. In response to this 
need, NFPA developed two documents.
NFPA 1710
The fi rst, NFPA 1710, Standard for the Organiza-
tion and Deployment of Fire Suppression Opera-
tions, Emergency Medical Operations, and Special 
Operations to the Public by Career Fire Departments, 
defi nes response capabilities for fi re and medical inci-
dents for the fi rst-due engine company, for the entire 
fi rst-alarm assignment, and for fi rst-level, basic, and 
advanced emergency medical responders. The number 
of fi refi ghters necessary for initial fi re attack and other 
roles are specifi ed in the standard, as are other aspects 
of the organization, suppression, operations, and emer-
gency medical and other specialized services.
NFPA 1720
NFPA 1720, Standard for the Organization and 
Deployment of Fire Suppression Operations, Emer-
gency Medical Operations, and Special Operations 
to the Public by Volunteer Fire Departments, deals 
with similar issues for organizations that are staffed 
predominately by volunteers.
While these standards provide benchmarks, it is up 
to the local jurisdictions to determine their level of 
performance and to determine what changes, if any, 
are needed to improve services.
Accreditation
Accreditation is a process by which an agency or 
institution evaluates and recognizes a course of study, 
such as Fire Science Program, or an institution, such 
as a college or university, as meeting certain pre-
determined standards. Accreditation is awarded 
only to programs or institutions, not to individuals. 
Thus, a program may be accredited by an agency, 
such as the International Fire Service Accreditation 
 Congress (IFSAC) or the National Professional Qual-
ifi cations Board (NPQB); a college may be accredited 
by one of the several regional accrediting agencies. 
For colleges and universities, accreditation is essen-
tial to their ability to award recognizable degrees.
An accreditation process is now available for fi re 
departments through Certifi ed Fire Accreditation, 
International (CFAI). CFAI is affi liated with the 
International Association of Fire Chiefs. In this case, 
accreditation is purely voluntary.
Insurance Premium
Score as evaluated 
by ISO Surveyors
ISO Classification
$150,000 
residence
1,000,000 
office building
90 to 100
 1
  $650
$2,950
80 to 89
 2
  $650
$2,980
70 to 79
 3
  $650
$3,020
60 to 69
 4
  $650
$3,040
50 to 59
 5
  $650
$3,060
40 to 49
 6
  $650
$3,120
30 to 39
 7
  $670
$3,230
20 to 29
 8
  $777
$3,330
10 to 19
 9
  $972
$3,440
0 to 9
10
    $1,072
$3,710
While these figures are reasonably representative of the difference an ISO rating can have in the 
midwest portion of the United States, the actual premium and credit for the various ISO classifications 
will vary based on the insurance company utilized and the geographic region in which the structure is 
located.
TABLE 4-1 How ISO Ratings Can Affect Fire Insurance Premiums

94  CHAPTER 4
The objectives of accreditation follow:
■ To create organizational motivation and self-
improvement
■ To provide a voluntary activity focused on self-
 evaluation and education as a viable means to 
improve service delivery
■ To provide a means to recognize quality 
performance
■ To protect the interests of the general public1
Generally, accrediting agencies set standards by 
which agencies, programs, and institutions are mea-
sured, and they defi ne the evaluation process. Most 
accreditation programs involve a self-assessment by 
the agency, program, or institution itself, a process 
that can take several years. This is followed by a brief 
(2 to 3 days) on-site visit by a team representing an 
independent accrediting body to validate the self-
assessment. The team will issue a report of its fi nd-
ings, commenting on the strengths and weaknesses of 
the organization and will make recommendations for 
further improvement. The report is usually fi rst pre-
sented to the applicant for validation and then to the 
accrediting agency.
The intent of the CFAI program is to provide an 
accreditation process that is credible, realistic, and 
achievable. It can be used by fi re departments, city 
and county managers, and elected offi cials to evalu-
ate community fi re risks and to improve the delivery 
of emergency services. The thrust of the program is to 
improve these services and to reduce the risks associ-
ated with fi re and related hazards. The self-study pro-
cess provides a list of questions to be answered by the 
department seeking accreditation. Certain core-value 
questions must be answered affi rmatively.
ISO evaluations, meeting NFPA standards, and 
seeking accreditation through CFAI are all good tools 
for managers. All three use accepted benchmarks to 
objectively measure a department’s abilities. Using 
these accepted tools, a department can determine its 
own strengths and weaknesses and can undertake 
action to make improvements. With these improve-
ments, the department will better serve the needs of 
the citizens of its community.
Evaluating Service Demands
Fire management should continually monitor the 
response characteristics of its department using the 
best available data. Not only should the response of 
the fi rst-in units be measured, but the average time 
for the second-in units as well as the time to get a 
complete response on the scene (according to the 
appropriate NFPA standard presented earlier) should 
be analyzed. In addition, the workload of individual 
units should also be measured to see if there are any 
excess workloads. Excess workloads can lead to low 
response reliability for a company, meaning they 
may already be out on a call within their immediate 
response area when another call comes in. Conse-
quently, the next closest unit needs to be dispatched, 
resulting in longer response times. If an overload 
exists, the fi rst strategy considered should be to share 
workloads among existing co-located units, e.g., have 
another unit from the same station pick up some of 
the call overloaded. This observes Fayol’s fi rst prin-
cipal, which is to “Divide the work into manage-
able portions and specialize the activities to improve 
effi ciency.” This may go against the grain of some 
departments where certain companies have function-
specifi c assignments and may not normally respond 
to call of a particular nature.
If a particular area of the city develops unexpect-
edly heavier demand than can be handled by the units 
in the stations, then adding another unit to the over-
loaded station or neighboring station should be con-
sidered to relieve the load. The next option would be 
to consider opening a new station.
Fire risk levels should also be evaluated as part of 
the response demand. Some areas may not be equipped 
with fi re hydrants, which create additional challenges 
related to response and fi refi ghting tactics.
Other factors that should be included into evaluat-
ing a department’s response capability is the level of 
training that personnel are trained to. In other words, 
does your department respond to medical calls as fi rst 
responder or advanced life support? The level that 
your department’s personnel are trained to will dic-
tate if or how well they can provide a service.
Finally, does your department have mutual aid 
or fi rst response agreements with other departments 
within fringe areas of your protection district? First-
response agreements can have both a positive and 
negative impact on your department’s ability to pro-
vide service in its fi rst in coverage area.
Data available to evaluate and manage these issues 
can be collected from a number of sources. One of the 
most valuable services is a Geographic Information 
System, commonly referred to as GIS. This system 
uses statistical response data to create maps that can 
graphically illustrate: where the most responses occur, 
average time for certain response areas, call types, call 
demands and many other services. The advantage of 
the graphic displays is that they are quick and easily to 
read. So it is easy to make an analysis about an issue 
or even a number of very complex issues without hav-
ing to be a statistician. Data that are normally evalu-
ated include number of responses, call type, time of 
call, time to be en route to a call, response time, and 

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  95
time of arrival of additional units (if required). Most 
of this information is available from dispatch. How-
ever, valuable information can also be garnered from 
the incident reports. For example, the type of call that 
a unit actually responded to can be collected from the 
report and compared to the type of call that the unit 
was dispatched to. This can be used to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the call taker.
THE ROLE OF ETHICS 
IN MANAGEMENT
This discussion on management would not be com-
plete without some mention of ethics.
The fi re service has a long and rich history of pro-
viding service to the citizens of our communities and 
generally enjoys an excellent reputation, a reputation 
that has been well earned and that we do not want to 
lose. The ethical standards of a fi re department are 
infl uenced by what society expects and what the local 
community believes is the function of the depart-
ment. Recent polls indicate that more people have 
trust in their fi re department than almost any other 
public institution.
Anyone in public offi ce faces a challenge of hav-
ing a greater ethical obligation than that of the aver-
age citizen. Everyone in the fi re service is serving in 
a public offi ce. For offi cers, there is an increased obli-
gation, because, on or off duty, you are expected to 
lead by personal, positive example and take appropri-
ate corrective action when things are wrong.
What are ethics? Ethics can be described as a sys-
tem of conduct, principles of honor and morality, or 
guidelines for human actions. For the most part, these 
defi nitions are rather vague. Even where a profes-
sional organization sets standards for its individual 
members, there is always some degree of variance in 
how these “rules” are to be interpreted, and there are 
always a few who will try to beat the system.
If members precisely followed the formal rules for orga-
nizational behavior, the only people they could talk to 
would be their own supervisor and their own subordi-
nates. All other communications should fl ow through the 
chain of command.
Suppose the offi cer of Ladder Company 1 wants to 
use the training academy’s facilities during the com-
ing weekend. Following all the formal rules, you, as the 
company offi cer, would have to ask your boss who in 
turn would ask another boss up to a point where there 
is a person who has supervisory authority over both the 
 department’s fi eld activities (the ladder company) and 
the academy. In many departments, that person might 
be the fi re chief. Then the request fl ows down the orga-
nization until it gets to the academy. The answer would 
have to fl ow back the same way.
This arrangement is obviously impractical. While 
we usually think about delegation and decentraliza-
tion as relatively modern concepts, we can look back 
to Henry Fayol for a solution to this basic organiza-
tional  problem. Fayol realized a century ago that  rigidly 
 following the chain of command was an impractical 
 arrangement. He said that for organizations to be effec-
tive, the  manager in one section should be able to com-
municate with the manager in another section, without 
 having to go all the way to the top of the organizational 
structure. The shorter path is called Fayol’s bridge
(see Figure 4-6).
If the fi re chief authorizes the offi cer of Ladder Com-
pany 1 to call the training offi cer of the academy to use 
the academy’s facilities, and if the fi re chief authorizes 
the training offi cer to respond directly to such requests, 
the chief has created an environment where members 
do not have to refer routine issues up the organizational 
chain of command for resolution. This speeds the pro-
cess and leaves the senior offi cers free to deal with more 
important issues.
For those who work in organizations where this takes 
place daily, you may be wondering why we have taken 
half a page of text to describe the process. For those 
of you who work in organizations where this direct liai-
son never occurs, you may be wondering, “How can this 
work?” Our purpose here is to point out that this practice 
is common in well-run organizations, yet there are a lot of 
places where using Fayol’s bridge would be unthinkable. 
How about your department?
Modern management suggests that we should 
do away with as many of the obstacles to getting our 
business done as we can. Certainly we need to have 
 organizations and understand organizational structure. 
 Certainly we need to have some rules of conduct for 
those who work in these organizations. But at the same 
time, we need to provide a workplace where business 
can be done effectively.
There will always be exceptional situations that are 
outside the parameters of the normal day-to-day busi-
ness that should be referred to upper management. But 
resolving the routine issue at the lowest possible level 
adds to the quality of life of the organization and for all 
who work within it.
FAYOL’S BRIDGE

96  CHAPTER 4
Ethics are not new. We usually have a feeling of 
guilt when we do something wrong. This feeling is 
manifested in many ways, including physical reac-
tions on our skin and in our stomach. The history 
of ethics goes back thousands of years. You can fi nd 
evidence of ethics in the earliest recorded history. 
Many civic, fraternal, professional, and even religious 
organizations have a set of ethical values and princi-
ples. These organizations provide guidelines for their 
members and encourage members to follow these 
practices at all times. These rules cover our actions 
with others: honesty, courage, justice, tolerance, and 
the full use of our talents. Doing so improves the rela-
tionships within the group, and the group’s image also 
enhances our relations with others.
personal example and positive leadership qualities, 
you are expected to set an example for others in the 
department.
There are laws and regulations that address ethi-
cal issues, but these have little infl uence on those 
who wish to be unethical. What is effective is a well-
 defi ned culture or a value system within the depart-
ment that acts as a regulator of conduct. The laws and 
regulations that impact us as citizens change. Eth-
ics often begin where laws leave off. In the area of 
team member relations, issues surrounding diversity 
and harassment are very much in the news these days. 
These are ethical issues. We read stories of allegations 
being brought against individuals regarding their per-
sonal conduct on these matters. Not too many years 
ago, such conduct was accepted, although it was just 
as improper then as it is now.
FIGURE 4-6 Information relationships and effective del-
egation within organizations facilitate crossing the orga-
nizational lines to get things done. This concept is known 
as Fayol’s bridge.
FIRE CHIEF
REQUEST
TRAINING
OFFICER
REQUEST
DEPUTY CHIEF
SUPPORT SERVICES
DEPUTY CHIEF
EMERGENCY SERVICES
BATTALION CHIEF
COMPANY OFFICER
REQUEST
REPLY
FAYOL’S BRIDGE
REPLY
REPLY
ETHICS
Two well-known authors, Dr. Kenneth Blanchard, the 
coauthor of The One Minute Manager and many other 
books, and Dr. Normal Vincent Peale, the author of 
The Power of Positive Thinking and many other books, 
collaborated on a book entitled The Power of Ethical 
Management.2 In that book, they suggest a simple 
three-question test to help guide our actions. The three 
questions follow:
■ Is it legal?
■ Is it balanced?
■ How will it make me feel about myself?
ETHICS
Ethics often begin where laws leave off.
Ethics have a direct impact on the management of 
the fi re service, from the chief to the company offi -
cer. At the company level, you, as the company offi -
cer, must often make decisions for which there are 
no clear-cut guidelines. At the same time, through 
With a change in public attitude, increased litiga-
tion, and the attention brought on by the press, what 
used to be acceptable no longer is. These changes in 
attitude impact our delivery of services as well as the 
way we operate within our own organization.
Laws and regulations and even an organizational 
code of ethics can only serve as guidelines. Our per-
sonal system of values is what really determines our 
behavior. This system is infl uenced by many fac-
tors, including family values and culture, community 
Fire offi cers are expected to be ethical in their conduct. 
Ethical conduct includes being honest, doing “what’s 
right,” and performing to the best of one’s ability. For 
public safety personnel, ethical responsibility extends 
beyond one’s individual performance. In serving the 
citizens, public safety personnel are charged with the 
 responsibility of ensuring the provision of the best pos-
sible safety and service.
Ethical conduct requires honesty on the part of all 
public safety personnel. Choices must be made on the 
basis of maximum benefi t to the citizens and the com-
munity. The process of making these decisions must 
also be open to the public. The means of providing ser-
vice, as well as the quality of the service provided, must 
be above question and must maximize the principles 
of fairness and equity as well as those of effi ciency and 
effectiveness.3
NFPA 1021 INCLUDES A FEW WORDS 
ON ETHICS

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  97
 attitudes, the infl uence of laws, our own set of val-
ues, and life’s experiences. We all have ethical values. 
Where we get into trouble is when our values do not 
coincide with those of our organization or society.
The decisions faced by offi cers in the fi re service 
do not fi t neatly into a tidy framework of values. Often 
operating without supervision, you, as the company 
offi cer, are responsible not only for the conduct of the 
company members but also for their productivity. It 
is up to you to see that the company remains ready 
to deal with emergencies and that the many activities 
needed to maintain readiness are accomplished.
If company personnel are expected to have daily 
physical activity, conduct fi re safety inspections, and 
prepare preplans for their fi rst-due area, the zeal and 
effectiveness with which these activities are conducted 
will probably go unnoticed by the public and to a large 
extent by the department. It becomes a question of doing 
what is right. If you fail to properly accomplish these 
tasks, who will step forward to see that they are done?
The standards for ethics change. Today, there seems 
to be increased attention on ethics, especially for those 
in public offi ce. Nearly every day’s news contains at 
least one story of alleged unethical conduct on the part 
of someone in public offi ce. Although our Constitu-
tion guarantees that all citizens are presumed innocent 
until proved guilty, public opinion can quickly con-
demn an individual or group without the benefi t of a 
trial. Once an individual or organization is tainted by 
allegations of unethical conduct, restitution is diffi cult. 
A lifetime of ethical behavior can be wiped out by a 
single breach of the ethical principles.
■ Maintain the highest standards of personal integrity, 
be honest and straightforward in dealings with others, 
and avoid confl icts of interest.
■ Place the public’s safety and welfare and the safety 
of fi refi ghters above all other concerns; be supportive 
of training and education that promote safer living in 
 occupational conduct and habits.
■ Ensure that the lifesaving services offered under the 
members’ direction are provided fairly and equitably 
to all without regard to other considerations.
■ Be mindful of the needs of peers and subordinates and 
assist them freely in developing their skills, abilities, and 
talents to the fullest extent; offer encouragement to 
those trying to better themselves and the fi re service.
■ Foster creativity and be open to consider innovations 
that may better enable the performance of our duties 
and responsibilities.4 
THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION 
OF FIRE CHIEFS’ CODE OF ETHICS
■ Be loyal to the highest moral principles and place 
 allegiance to country above loyalty to any person, 
party, or government department.
■ Uphold the Constitution, laws, and regulations of the 
United States and all of the governments therein.
■ Give a full day’s labor for a full day’s pay, giving ear-
nest effort and best thought to the performance of 
duties.
■ Seek to fi nd and employ more effi cient and economi-
cal ways to accomplish tasks.
■ Never discriminate by dispensing special favors or 
privileges to anyone, and never accept favors or ben-
efi ts under circumstances that might be construed by 
reasonable people as infl uencing the performance of 
duties.
■ Make no private promises of any kind that are binding 
on the duties of your offi ce because your private word 
cannot be considered as binding on your public duty.
■ Engage in no business that is inconsistent with the 
conscientious performance of duties.
■ Never use any information gained confi dentially in the 
performance of duties as a means to make a private 
profi t.
■ Maintain high standards of personal integrity, honesty, 
and straightforwardness.
■ Provide fair and equal lifesaving service to all.
■ Expose corruption wherever you discover it.
■ Uphold these principles, ever conscious that a public 
position is a public trust.5
CODE OF ETHICS
NOTE
The standards for ethics change.
ETHICS
Ethics are an important management issue.
As offi cers, you have an obligation to act in an ethi-
cal manner at all times, to demonstrate integrity, hon-
esty, courage, and faithful productivity. Some will 
say, “That’s not the way we have been doing things 
here.” We acknowledge that, and we note that few of 
us can make major changes in history. However, all of 
us certainly can control the present and maybe even 
shape the future in some small positive way. Ethics is 
an issue today and must be faced by all organizations. 
As managers, you must accept the fact that you are 
responsible for your actions as well as those of your 
team members. You must defi ne your ethical values 
and follow these values through personal example.

98  CHAPTER 4
When Michael Washington was promoted to lieutenant 
in 1999, he was moved to a new station where he knew 
none of the people who would be working with him. He 
knew this would be a challenge, earning their respect 
and also getting them to think of him as the head of their 
team, all aligned for the same purpose: to get the job 
done.
As a new offi cer he thought that it might be best for 
him to run things at status quo—the way the department 
was used to operating—for several months before insti-
tuting any new rules or programs. It kept the team com-
fortable, but it also gave him a chance to get to know the 
company—its people, its assets, and its fl aws.
He made it a point to meet with each of the fi refi ghters, 
letting them know his expectations of their positions, set-
ting a bar for them to aim for. The meeting immediately 
established that Washington, though young, was not to 
be taken lightly; the meeting also let him get to know 
what each person liked best about his or her job. Com-
bined with watching each person on calls, he was able 
to determine what each individual’s strengths were: One 
person was particularly good at technical operations 
like rope-rescue extrication, another was the go-to for 
INTRODUCING CHANGE
Michael Washington, Fire Lieutenant, Cincinnati Fire 
Department, Cincinnati, Ohio
emergency medical, another had an unmatched brute 
strength. Understanding this was an asset because he 
could lead the company more smoothly, putting in the 
right person for the job. He has followed up regularly dur-
ing the review process, asking all persons what grade 
they feel they deserve.
When he eventually started implementing new proce-
dures, a few people did leave, but Washington expected 
that; he knew he could not make everyone happy. Their 
departures gave him the opportunity to get people who 
truly wanted to be working for him.
And in the end, Washington ended up with a smoothly 
run company. In fact, when he had to take a month of 
leave last year, the company actually ran itself.
Questions
1. What do you think about Lieutenant Washington’s 
 approach—go with the “status quo” for a while?
2. What do you think about his approach for sizing up 
each member of the team?
3. Why did people leave after Lieutenant Washington 
started to implement changes?
4. When Lieutenant Washington took leave, he found 
that the company “ran itself.” Do you think this is 
desirable?
5. What had he done to make this happen?
A
s a company offi cer, you are part of the depart-
ment’s management team. In keeping with con-
temporary management trends, many departments 
are passing much of the management process down 
to you, and beyond. When permitted to do so, you 
can have a great impact on the effectiveness and effi -
ciency of the entire organization.
The information in this chapter can be used at 
the company level. As company offi cers, you should 
be aware of and should be using all the functions of 
management. You should be aware of the models of 
management style that have evolved through the sci-
ence of management and use them as needed.
As with other tools you use on the job, no one uses 
all of the tools all of the time. However, it nice to 
know which tool is the right tool for the job at hand 
and to know how to use it effectively.
Ethics are important for you too. The best way 
to have good, fair, and honest people in the station 
environment is for you, the company offi cer, to set a 
good personal example and to expect the same level 
of performance and behavior from all others. We fur-
ther explore practical applications of management in 
Chapter 5.
LESSONS LEARNED

The Company Officer’s Role in Management  99
commanding third step in the management pro-
cess, commanding, involves using the talents of oth-
ers, giving them directions and setting them to work
controlling fi fth step in the management pro-
cess, controlling, involves monitoring the process to 
ensure that the work is accomplishing the intended 
goals and objectives, and taking corrective action 
when it is not
coordinating fourth step in the management 
 process, coordinating, involves the manager’s 
 controlling the efforts of others
customer service service to people in the 
community
ethics system of values; a standard of conduct
Fayol’s bridge organizational principle that 
recognizes the practical necessity for horizon-
tal as well as vertical communications within an 
organization
internal customers members of the organization
management accomplishment of the organiza-
tion’s goals by utilizing the resources available
management by exception (MBE) management 
approach whereby attention is focused only on the 
exceptional situations when performance expecta-
tions are not being met
organizing second step in the management pro-
cess, organizing, involves bringing together and 
arranging the essential resources to get a job done
planning fi rst step in the management process, 
planning, involves looking into the future and deter-
mining objectives
policy formal statement that defi nes a course or 
method of action
procedure defi ned course of action
Theory X management style in which the man-
ager believes that people dislike work and cannot be 
trusted
Theory Y management style in which the manager 
believes that people like work and can be trusted
Theory Z management style in which the manager 
believes that people not only like to work and can be 
trusted, but that they want to be collectively involved 
in the management process and recognized when 
successful
total quality management focus of the organiza-
tion on continuous improvement geared to customer 
satisfaction
KEY TERMS
 1. Defi ne management.
 2. What are the functions of management?
 3. Among the functions of management, planning 
seems to get a lot of attention. Why is planning 
so important?
 4. Are company offi cers managers?
 5. What resources are available for management by 
company offi cers?
 6. Describe the characteristics associated with The-
ories X, Y, and Z.
 7. Who are the customers of a fi re department?
 8. What resources are available to assess the quality 
of a fi re department?
 9. What is meant by the term ethics?
 10. How do ethics tie in with the company offi cer’s 
position?
REVIEW QUESTIONS

100  CHAPTER 4
  1. How does management theory apply to the fi re 
service?
  2. Discuss Fayol’s principles in the context of a mod-
ern fi re department.
  3. Which of Fayol’s functions would be represented 
in each of the following:
 
■ Selecting the site for a new ﬁ re station
 
■  Arranging resources at the scene of an 
emergency event
 
■  Examining the most efﬁ cient use of existing 
apparatus
 
■  Determining the cause of a gradual increase 
in response time
 
■  Assigning tasks to accomplish the daily 
needs of a ﬁ re station
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
  4. What lessons can be learned from a study of man-
agement theory?
  5. How has management practices changed over the 
past 50 years?
  6. How do you think management practices will 
change over the next 10 years?
  7. The text discussed several ways to assess a fi re 
department’s capabilities. What value is there in 
using such external benchmarks in measuring 
such an organization?
  8. How do you feel about ethics in public service 
organizations?
  9. Why are ethics important in such organizations?
 10. Explain the management roles of a company 
offi cer.
ENDNOTES
 complete and offi cial position of the NFPA on the referenced sub-
ject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
4. Code of Ethics of the International Association of Fire Chiefs. 
Used with permission.
5. Robert D. Carnahan, “A Code of Honor.” FireRescue Magazine, 
January 1998, p. 78. Reprinted with permission.
1. Commission on Fire Accreditation International. Fire and Emer-
gency Service Self-Assessment Manual. Fairfax, VA: The Com-
mission, 2003.
2. Kenneth Blanchard and Norman Vincent Peale. The Power of 
Ethical Management. New York: Fawcett Crest, 1988.
3. Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1021, Fire  Offi cer 
Professional Qualifi cations, Copyright©2009, National Fire 
 Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the 
Blanchard, Kenneth, and Spencer Johnson. The One Minute Man-
ager. New York: William Morrow, 1981.
Blanchard, Kenneth, and Norman Vincent Peale. The Power of Eth-
ical Management. New York: Fawcett Crest, 1988.
Bryan, Peter, and Pamela Pane. “Evaluating Fire Service Delivery.” 
Fire Engineering, April 2008.
Compton, Dennis, and John Granito, eds. Managing Fire and Res-
cue Services. Washington, DC: International City Management 
Association, 2002.
Favreau, Donald. Fire Service Management. New York: Dun-
 Donnelley, 1973.
Hickey, Harry. Fire Suppression Rating Handbook. Louisville, KY: 
Chicago Spectrum Press, 2002.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
McGregor, Douglas. The Human Side of Enterprise. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1960.
McLaughlin, Patrick. “Growing Pains: Strained Resources Chal-
lenge Fire Departments and Insurers Alike.” Fire Chief, Janu-
ary 2004.
Newman, Jerry. My Secret Life on the McJob. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2007.
Peter, Lawrence J., and Raymond Hull. The Peter Principle. New 
York: William Morrow, 1969.
Peters, Tom. Thriving on Chaos. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1987.


The Company Officer’s Role 
in Managing Resources
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ Vision and Mission Statements
■ Goals and Objectives
■ Using the Functions of 
Management
■ Solving Problems
■ Managing Change
■ Managing Customer Service
■ Building a Management Team
■ Ongoing and Emerging 
Management Issues for the Fire 
Service
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
5

103
STREET 
STORY
W
hile I am the captain at the fire department and deal with fires, I also 
 specialize in EMS and other related incidents, most commonly  Hazardous 
Materials Response. I have had several incidents where I have commanded 
the Haz-Mat response portion of the situation, and what I have found is that 
while each incident is similar, all are unique and come with their own set of 
 management issues.
The first thing I have always found to be important is to know ahead of time 
what resources you will need in any job to accomplish the goals you set for your-
self. The goals and tasks may keep growing as the incident moves forward and 
develops, but if you have the right resources to start you moving in the correct 
 direction, you’re off to a good start. I have also learned throughout the years that 
the resources you have may be the only ones you will get, so you need to make the 
most of them. Many times our Haz-Mat team travels to other fire department dis-
tricts to assist them, and what we bring with us is truly all we will have to accom-
plish the task.
Another resource at any team leader’s disposal, and perhaps the most impor-
tant one, is his or her personnel. One thing that an officer must do when moving to 
get a job done is take stock of all the resources, including personnel, equipment, 
and time. Personnel will most likely be the toughest one to get and deal with, but 
choosing the right person for each job can make all of the other resources more 
effective. In larger incidents, I have found that you certainly cannot manage it all by 
yourself. I realize that even as the ranking officer at the scene, that does not au-
tomatically make you the smartest person in the room. When you share the goals 
that need to be met and ask for input from your crew, that’s making the most of all 
of your resources. It also usually turns out that your span of control is more limited 
in relation to how difficult the task is. When I am at a Haz-Mat incident, I am always 
limited in the number of qualified Haz-Mat responders whom I have on the scene. 
I have to be able to look at the people I have available and know which person to 
set to which tasks.
As an officer, you have to know your crew members and their capabilities, and 
you have to know that some jobs will run more smoothly with some people leading 
compared with others. Managing those kinds of skills and resources will make for a 
more effective operation.
—Tom Bentley, Captain, Quincy Fire Department, Quincy, Illinois

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
5-1 Describe the importance of organizational vision 
and mission statements.
 
5-2 Understand how goals and objectives support 
the department’s mission.
 
5-3 Describe the business plan.
 
5-4 Identify principles of human resource 
management.
 
5-5 Define the principles of project management.
 
5-6 Compare management and member rights.
 
5-7 Describe the rights of members within the 
scope of their duties.
 
5-8 Describe the types of labor agreements that are 
commonly utilized between the organization and 
its members.
 
5-9 Describe management’s rights within the scope 
of their duties.
 5-10 Describe the purpose of a budget.
 5-11 Determine the resources needed to establish 
a budget.
 5-12 Explain the parts of a budget.
 5-13 Identify the various data fields found on 
budget forms.
 5-14 Identify the various types of budgets.
 5-15 Describe how a budget affects the overall devel-
opment of the agency business plan.
 5-16 List material needs for annual departmental 
programs.
 5-17 Describe the approval process for the budget.
 5-18 Describe the timeframes for budget 
development.
 5-19 Describe the purchasing process guided by the 
laws governing purchasing.
 5-20 Differentiate between a vendor and a contractor.
 5-21 Apply the purchasing laws including soliciting 
and awarding bids for an item or a service to 
be purchased.
 5-22 Describe the parts of a budget request.
 5-23 Explain how to legally expedite purchases.
 5-24 Explain the guidelines needed to submit a 
request for purchasing equipment.
 5-25 Define Request for Purchase (RFP).
 5-26 Explain the approval process for a purchase 
request.
 5-27 Define Request for Quote (RFQ).
 5-28 List the criteria for bidding purchases.
 5-29 Describe the departmental policies as they 
relate to requesting a budget item.
 5-30 Describe how to assemble the information for 
budget inclusion.
 5-31 Identify agency policies required for funding 
a budget.
 5-32 Define how to effectively manage human re-
sources, time, and the department’s financial 
resources.
 5-33 Identify procedures for the development of item 
specification requirements.
 5-34 Identify potential sources of needed resources.
 5-35 Estimate the cost of proposed needed 
resources.
 5-36 Construct a timeline for ordering materials.
 5-37 Identify agency policies required for acquiring 
resources.
 5-38 Identify time management skills that will help 
make efficient use of human resources.
 5-39 Identify the types of records that are retained by 
the department.
 5-40 Understand the necessity of maintaining accu-
rate, up-to-date records.
 5-41 Explain the process for implementing project 
management principles.
 5-42 Describe the steps for solving problems.
 5-43 Identify the emerging technologies within the 
fire service.
INTRODUCTION
This chapter brings together everything we have cov-
ered so far. We look at your role as the company offi cer 
in the organization, how the  organization works, how 
management helps the organization do its assigned 
mission, and fi nally how we  communicate effectively 
within the organization. Some of this material may 
seem like a repeat of the previous chapter, but the 
focus here is on your practical application of the mate-
rial presented in previous chapters and on how you 
104  CHAPTER 5
* The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, 
are identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  105
statements tell your members and your customers the 
services you provide. Many mission statements defi ne 
the priorities and values of the organization.
In the past, a fi re department may have had it a 
little easier in writing its mission statement. In those 
days, a completely adequate mission statement may 
have read something like this:
Our job is to prevent fi res, but when fi re occurs, to 
protect life and property and confi ne and extinguish 
the fi re.
In recent years, the job of the fi re service has become 
more complicated (see Figure 5-1). Many depart-
ments have worked hard to defi ne their mission in the 
face of these changes. Here are two examples:
Our mission is to provide emergency and nonemer-
gency services for the protection of the lives and prop-
erty of the citizens entrusted to our care.
Our mission is to save lives, preserve property and the 
environment, and ensure the health and safety of our-
selves and the community.
Expanding the basic list of services for the Plain City 
Fire Department, we get the following:
The mission of The Plain City Fire Department is to 
provide a range of programs to protect the lives and 
property of the inhabitants of Plain City from the 
adverse effects of fi re, sudden medical emergencies, 
or the exposure to dangerous conditions created by 
humans or nature.
Some mission statements go beyond defi ning the 
scope of services that are provided to the community 
to say something about the organization’s philosophy 
apply these to being a supervisor and function as the 
offi cer in charge of a fi re company or operation. As 
the company offi cer, you have direct regular contact 
with the employees you supervise. In fact, you prob-
ably have more contact and infl uence on the station 
fi refi ghters than any other person within the organi-
zation. Often, company offi cers do not have subordi-
nate supervisors or other supervisors under them. As 
a result, they are not only required to assist in per-
forming the work functions but also provide leader-
ship to get it accomplished. It is a demanding but very 
rewarding position.
VISION AND MISSION 
STATEMENTS
Let us start with the big picture, a vision of what you 
are and where you are going. With a clear understand-
ing of your organization’s vision, you can set goals 
and plan your own destiny. Remember that personal 
life and professional life are equal and should be 
interchangeable. In this chapter, we look at how we 
do this for your work position, and to some extent, for 
your personal life.
Organizations should have a vision, too. As mem-
bers, we should be part of that organizational vision 
and realize that if we want to be comfortable and 
effective in our activities at work, we need to share at 
least some of the same vision that has been adopted 
in our workplace.
Mission statements declare the vision for the 
organization. A mission statement is like putting up a 
sign that says what you are and what you do. Mission 
FIGURE 5-1 As fire departments take 
on new missions, their  personnel are 
expected to take on new skills. (Photo 
courtesy of Mark D. Baker) 

106  CHAPTER 5
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
Following the mission statement, goals and objectives 
must be established to bring the vision of the mis-
sion statement to life. Goals are the larger, strategic 
statements that may take several years to accomplish. 
Goals help you identify where you are going.
Objectives are usually an element within a 
goal and represent the efforts of a shorter period. 
Goals and objectives should be consistent with the 
department’s mission, and in fact, they should sup-
port it. Goals and objectives help us identify where we 
are going and help us measure progress as we make 
the trip.
To illustrate, let us suppose that you are undertak-
ing a signifi cant personal trip, one that will require 
several days of driving. Because the purpose of the 
trip is to attend an event that is occurring at your 
 destination, let us say your grandmother’s surprise 
birthday party next Saturday, you must be there at a 
certain time, or the whole effort is a waste of time. As 
you plan the trip, your goal is to arrive at your desti-
nation on Friday afternoon. Your objective may be to 
arrive at specifi c intermediate points by suppertime 
of each day while en route.
You might question the value of all this goal-setting 
activity and say that it appears to be a waste of time 
and energy. Most successful organizations have mis-
sion statements and set goals. They train their mem-
bers on the importance of these visions and provide 
training to prepare them to do their duties consistent 
with these goals.
or to suggest the way that these services will be pro-
vided. The following is an example:
This department will provide emergency services to 
the citizens and businesses of the city at fi res and other 
disasters. We will also attempt to prevent such emer-
gencies through safety education programs and code 
enforcement. These services will be provided in a 
prompt, courteous, and professional manner.
A mission statement may also suggest that there is a 
continuing effort to improve on what the organization 
does as well as a comment about management style. 
The mission should also suggest everyone is  committed 
to the mission. This commitment must be a voluntary 
all-hands everyday action. Here is an example:
We serve with honor and integrity. We treat everyone 
with fairness and respect. We provide friendly and effi -
cient service. We value the public’s confi dence and 
trust. We are responsible for our actions. We pursue 
excellence. We work as a team. We make our commu-
nity even better.
Another mission statement follows:
Our mission is to protect the lives, property, and envi-
ronment of all the people within our community by pre-
venting the occurrence of and minimizing the adverse 
effects of fi res, accidents, and other emergencies. This 
will be accomplished through community education, 
preparedness and professionalism, and a focus on qual-
ity customer service.
Mission statements should be more than just nice 
words and a sign: They should accurately refl ect the 
focus and the philosophy of the organization and 
should be the result of a collaborative effort to gather 
ideas from representatives of the entire department, 
working together in a committee process. The mis-
sion statement should be accepted and supported from 
the top down, not just with words but with actions 
that clearly indicate that these words are really what 
we are all about. Most importantly, the words in the 
statement should be understood and practiced by 
everyone in the organization. Does your organization 
have a mission statement? Do you know it? Review 
it to see if you think it fi ts the concept as described 
above. If not, why?
We will see more about management style, 
employee commitment, and a focus on improvement 
in the following sections.
NOTE
An effective mission statement needs to be more than 
just nice words and a sign. It needs to be something 
that you can put into action.
NOTE
Goals and objectives help us identify where we 
are going and help us measure progress as we make 
the trip.
■ GOAL: Do something each day to make this place 
better.
■ OBJECTIVE: Make each day productive.
SETTING PERSONAL GOALS
You may think that all of this goal-setting activity 
is done by the department’s top management, but it is 
better if everyone has an opportunity to contribute to 
the setting of goals and objectives for the organiza-
tion. The more participation in the process, the bet-
ter the results. Participation also enhances acceptance 
by those upon whom these goals and objective will 
impact.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  107
Most organizations and successful company offi cers 
develop and operate off of a plan. A business plan is 
a written formal set of goals that convey the mission 
of the organization, the company, or the individual; 
the reasons why these goals should be attained; and 
how and when the organization, company, or individ-
ual intends to reach those goals. Do you want to attain 
an associate’s degree this year because you want to 
eventually attain a bachelor’s degree 3 years from 
now? Most business plans also contain background 
information about where the organization, company, 
or individual has been.
The most important part of any business plan is 
that it puts down on paper where you want to be 1, 3, 
or 5 years from now. Do you know for sure? If you do 
not know where you intend to go, how are you going 
to get there? It is not possible to plan without knowing 
where you are going. Sometimes it takes a little cre-
ative thinking or dreaming, but in the end it is worth 
it. A good way to get started is think about where you 
were a year ago and what you have accomplished and 
how it came about. Then build on that and fi gure out 
where you want to be a year from now and how you 
are going to get there.
A business plan can focus on a number of differ-
ent issues, including fi nancial goals, organizational 
goals, or project goals. Do you want to get a degree 
or a certifi cation? What steps are you going to take to 
get it? Maybe you do not think it is accomplishable 
in a year. That is when your 1-year plan becomes a 
multiyear plan! Your individual plan is based on how 
determined you are to succeed, how willing you are 
to invest your own time and possibly money, and what 
you intend to do if it does not work out as planned.
USING THE FUNCTIONS 
OF MANAGEMENT
In Chapter 4, we listed the fi ve functions of manage-
ment as planning, organizing, commanding, coordi-
nating, and controlling. Many modern managers also 
reference the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge, or the PMBOK ® Guide. The PMBOK ® Guide
is a recognized standard that identifi es the fundamen-
tals of project management across a wide range of 
responsibilities and projects, including the automo-
tive, construction, and engineering industries. The 
guide describes processes by which to accomplish the 
work and is consistent with other management stan-
dards such as ISO 9000®. ISO 9000 is a family of 
standards for quality management systems. ISO 9000
is maintained by ISO, the International Organization 
for Standardization, and is administered by accredi-
tation and certifi cation bodies. It is a good guide by 
which to manage most regularly scheduled projects. 
The fi ve processes the guide identifi es are Initiating, 
Planning, Executing, Controlling and Monitoring, 
and Closing.
Let us see how planning and organizing relate to 
goal setting at the company level.
Planning
Planning is a systematic process and should be ongo-
ing. Planning should always start with a clear under-
standing of the goals and objectives. A good plan 
has clearly defi ned goals, a logical set of objectives, 
a list of resources needed, and a method to measure 
progress.
■ QUESTIONS you should ask yourself: What can I do 
at the company level
 To defi ne work that needs to be done?
 To provide the training, if needed?
 To provide the necessary materials?
 To plan and schedule the activity?
 To check the progress of our efforts?
 To recognize the accomplishments of individuals?
NOTE
The more participation in the process, the better 
the results. Participation also enhances acceptance 
by those upon whom these goals and objectives 
will impact.
NOTE
Planning should always start with a clear understand-
ing of the goals and objectives.
A good plan has
■ A clearly defi ned goal
■ A logical set of objectives
■ A list of resources needed
■ A method to measure progress
CHARACTERISTICS OF A GOOD PLAN
Proper planning also involves research and data 
analysis, looking for emerging trends and variances. 
There are many sources available from which to 

108  CHAPTER 5
In Chapter 4, we listed Fayol’s Principles of 
 Management. In larger organizations, these principles 
cover the way we manage in an organization where a 
management hierarchy is inevitable. As an organiza-
tion gets larger, increasing number of managers are 
needed to supervise the work. The consequences are 
additional layers of managers. One way to slow this 
process is through delegation.
Delegation is a process of entrusting some of our 
work to others. Delegation happens in large organiza-
tions and in small ones. A mom-and-pop ice cream 
stand has some degree of delegation, especially if 
mom and pop hire their kids to work there during 
the summers. In the delegation process, two things 
happen:
 1. The supervisor assigns duties to the subordinate.
 2. The subordinate takes on an obligation or responsi-
bility to perform these duties.
The supervisor should also assign authority to do the 
job. To be effective, delegation of the duty and accep-
tance of the obligation for the job should be coupled 
with the authority to do the job. Limits are usually set 
upon how much authority is granted, but the author-
ity should be suffi cient to allow the subordinate to be 
productive in the assigned task.
Delegation is often referred to as the granting of 
authority to another to carry out an assigned task. 
Delegating requires that the task be clearly identi-
fi ed and that the duties and limits of the delegation be 
spelled out. Effective delegation does not mean that 
the task is eliminated from the supervisor’s respon-
sibilities. Rather it implies that partnership has been 
established in which the actual accomplishment of the 
task may be done by another. However, the supervi-
sor ultimately remains responsible for the work being 
accomplished. As such, the supervisor is expected to 
continue to manage the activity and provide appropri-
ate guidelines (see Figure 5-2).
With the exception of a few specifi cally identifi ed 
tasks, most of your duties as the company offi cer can 
be delegated. How well this delegation occurs is a 
clear refl ection of how well you understand yourself 
and your team members. In both cases, it is important 
to understand the strengths and weaknesses involved 
and the experience and motivation of all concerned 
for effective project management.
Once delegation has taken place, you must con-
tinue to manage. Hopefully, planning and organi-
zation have already taken place. But you should 
continue to coordinate and control the activity, mon-
itoring the progress. Provide help and assistance 
where needed. Give encouragement and recognition 
when appropriate.
gather this data. It is important when accessing data 
that you use trusted and reliable sources. It is critical 
that data from these systems be validated for accu-
racy. Only data that are accurate, complete, and vali-
dated should be used. Otherwise, what you are using 
is just arbitrary information and fi gures. Two of the 
most notable national resources are the National Fire 
Academy and the National Fire Protection Associa-
tion. Both agencies publish an inordinate amount of 
data related to departmental activities. The internal 
and state reporting systems are also a valuable source 
of information that can be accessed for relative data. 
Most of the data are available in electronic format, 
making it easy to insert into tables or convert to 
graphs for further analysis.
There are many reasons that the data that offi cers 
input into such systems must be as accurate and com-
plete as possible. For example, if you respond to a 
grass fi re that extended to a shed but you only com-
plete a report for a grass fi re, because you did not want 
to complete the details of the report associated with a 
structure fi re, the data is skewed for the entire depart-
ment. How can the department recognize that there 
has been additional dollar loss? How can the owner 
verify the event for insurance purposes? In addition, it 
is extremely important that medical records be entered 
as accurately and completely as possible. This is the 
offi cer’s responsibility. Even if the task is delegated to 
a subordinate, the company offi cer should review the 
report to verify the information within.
Quite often the data by themselves do not tell us 
what we need to know or deliver the big picture we 
may need for planning purposes. It is therefore nec-
essary to be able to analyze the data to provide the 
answers we seek. It is important that the data not be 
interpreted with a bias or distorted for self-serving 
purposes. Not only is it immoral and does it poten-
tially provide misdirection for the department, but if 
it is discovered that you have done this (intentionally 
or not), you will lose creditability that you may never 
be able to regain.
Organizing
Organizing involves the integration of human and 
physical resources, money, and time.
Managing Human Resources
As company offi cers, you are assigned personnel to 
staff your company. How effectively you use these 
personnel is a function of your leadership style. We 
discuss leadership in Chapters 6 and 7, but let us look 
here at how you manage these human resources.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  109
member into the picture to explain what you want. 
When delegating to trained and qualifi ed members, 
defi ne the purpose of the work and leave the details 
to the member.
There are many benefi ts of delegating. Certainly 
it will take some of the work off of the supervisor. 
It will also make the supervisor look good—the 
 company is a team, not the work of individuals. Indi-
viduals that are part of that team will be motivated to 
do more by their own accomplishments.
Delegation is diffi cult for some people, especially 
for new fi rst-time managers. And that is quite under-
standable, for in many cases they have never had 
opportunities to delegate work before and are hesi-
tant, either due to a lack of knowledge or experience 
in the process.
■ I can do it better myself.
■ It will take time to train someone.
■ I am not sure that anyone else can do this.
■ I really cannot take a chance on this project.
■ I think my boss would want me to do this myself.
BARRIERS TO DELEGATION
Delegation is like other management activity: It 
should follow a regular pattern. You start by plan-
ning, giving some thought to the delegation pro-
cess. Maybe you are bringing a new member into the 
team or maybe you are reallocating some of the work 
among existing members. Some planning must pre-
cede the actual handoff of work. You should defi ne 
the work and establish procedures for its accomplish-
ment. At some point, you should actually bring the 
In many cases, some training is needed to prepare 
the new person for the duties at hand. But eventually, 
it will become time for the new member to start the 
work. Usually, the new member works with someone 
else, then gradually takes on the task alone. Finally, 
some sort of feedback is necessary to make sure that 
our expectations as supervisors are being met. You 
might ask for a regular meeting time or some sort of 
reporting system so that you can effectively monitor the 
member’s progress. You have probably been through 
this process many times, as the delegated member.
Managing Human Resources 
on a Larger Scale
Personnel within some departments are repre-
sented by a labor union. As a result, management 
is required to enter into formal relations with the 
union  concerning such things as wages, hours, and 
FIGURE 5-2 Effective management 
of any organization involves the 
 ability to delegate certain tasks.
OFFICER ADVICE
When delegating to trained and qualifi ed members, 
 defi ne the purpose of the work and leave the details to 
the member.

110  CHAPTER 5
In the private sector, union membership has been 
declining, and, today, less than 20 percent of all non-
farm workers are union members. However, some 
employment sectors are seeing growth in union mem-
bership. Whatever their status, unions remain a strong 
social, political, and organizational force. Where 
unions exist, management must work with the union 
rather than directly with the workers on many issues.
Union representation among public sector employ-
ees is a signifi cant part of total union membership. 
These employees work for federal, state, and local 
governments. At the federal level, labor relations are 
regulated by the president. At the state and local level, 
labor relations are determined by state law. Most states 
have passed legislation pertaining to labor relations 
issues for state and local government employees. The 
laws differ in the states, and you would be prudent 
to understand the laws in your particular state. Most 
fi refi ghters are represented by the International Asso-
ciation of Fire Fighters (IAFF), a union with 260,000 
members.
 conditions of employment as well as the interpre-
tation and administration of the contract over the 
period of the contract.
The administration of the contract lies with both 
the personnel specialists of the organization and the 
organization’s managers. Personnel specialists deal 
with the details of administering the union contract. 
Hopefully, these specialists provide some guidelines 
to the managers on how to make the contract work 
effectively.
NOTE
The attitude of top administrative and labor manage-
ment filters down throughout the organization and per-
meates the relationship at every level.
As with most everything else in an organization, 
the attitude of top administrative and labor manage-
ment fi lters down throughout the organization and 
permeates the relationship at every level. It is impor-
tant for the fi re chief and other top offi cials to look 
upon labor relations as a positive opportunity. Like-
wise, union leaders should look at their relation-
ship with the department’s management as a positive 
opportunity.
When you think about the benefi ts that unions 
have advocated for their members, you should think 
of several major issues: improved wages and benefi ts 
and formal rules for hiring, promotions, pay, disci-
pline, and remuneration. Ideally, management and 
union leadership will have developed a collaborative 
and partnering relationship so they can effectively 
and effi ciently deal with any issues that impact union 
members.
The questions of unionization and the selection of 
the union to represent the workers are subject to an 
election among the workers. Collective agreements 
are of fi xed duration and provide a binding contract 
between the workers and management. Collective 
bargaining allows the workers to be represented by 
the union.
NOTE
A characteristic of unions is that they have exclusive 
representation—only one union is authorized in a 
given job territory. The questions of unionization and 
the selection of the union to represent the workers 
are subject to an election among the workers. Labor 
 contracts are of fixed duration and provide a bind-
ing contract between the workers and management. 
 Collective bargaining allows the workers to be repre-
sented by the union.
In addition to these training activities, the union 
is supporting a revolutionary program to help recruit 
and train qualifi ed candidates for fi re departments. A 
major component of this initiative is the Candidate 
Physical Aptitude Test (CPAT) that helps the fi re ser-
vice recruit candidates prepare for the rigors of the 
test, and provides a validated measure of their ability 
to perform job related skills.
For most paid fi re and emergency medical services 
(EMS) personnel, the right to form, join, or assist a 
labor organization is governed by state law. These 
laws are generally modeled after the federal laws. 
The most conspicuous law in this area is the Labor 
 Management Relations Act. Provisions of this act 
protect the interests of both sides. For example, the 
act protects the rights of individuals to form, join, or 
assist in the activities of the union. The act also pro-
tects the unions from interfering with an employee’s 
rights as a citizen and as an employee.2
FIREGROUND FACT
IAFF, the International Association of Fire Fighters, is the 
AFL-CIO affi liated labor union for the fi re service. The 
union has more than 2,700 affi liates in the United States 
and Canada. While its main purpose is to negotiate for 
the rights, health, and safety of paid fi refi ghters, the union 
provides free training for all fi refi ghters and fi re depart-
ments, with worthwhile programs addressing hazardous 
materials, special rescue response, terrorism response 
and health and fi tness.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  111
■ Management security: In this area, the contract 
defi nes those issues that are the exclusive domain 
of management.
■ Contract duration: The length of the contract. 
Contracts usually run from 1 to 5 years.
Most labor relations contracts spell out a grievance 
procedure. Grievances occur when there is a differing 
interpretation of the contract between representatives 
of labor and management; when a violation of the con-
tract has occurred; when there is a perceived violation 
of a law, regulation, or procedure; or even when there 
is just a perception of unfair treatment. The employee 
grievance process is a systematic process for resolv-
ing these differences. Most union contracts defi ne 
how the grievance process should work. The idea is 
to bring the problem to resolution as quickly and as 
fairly as possible. There are generally three steps in 
the grievance process. The fi rst step involves fi ling a 
complaint with the supervisor. Most grievances are 
resolved at this level.
A closed shop usually results from an agreement be-
tween their union and the employer that requires pro-
spective employees to become members of the union 
prior to being hired. Such agreements are generally 
unlawful.
A union shop usually results from an agreement 
 between the employer and the union that requires mem-
bership within a specifi ed period of being hired. This 
practice is lawful.
In an agency shop, the agreement provides that 
union membership is not required, but payment of union 
dues is mandatory for all employees.
Finally, there is the open shop where employees are 
free to decide if they will join the union. If they do join 
the union, they must pay union dues. If they do not join, 
they do not have to pay dues. Usually, employees can 
terminate membership only during certain periods, such 
as when the contract is up for renewal. In those states 
where right-to-work laws have been adopted, only the 
open shop is authorized.
LABOR RELATIONS ARRANGEMENTS
Other provisions of labor relations contracts usu-
ally address several major issues as follows:
■ Compensation and working conditions: Many of 
these provisions cover personnel administration 
issues—hiring, pay, benefi ts. However, many also 
address items related to working conditions, items 
that are under the purview of the supervisor.
■ Employee security: Issues addressed here include 
such things as protecting an employee’s position 
during times of promotions and layoff.
■ Union security: These provisions pertain to what 
the union can do to encourage employees to 
become members.
NOTE
Typical labor–management issues include the follow-
ing: discharge, discipline, discrimination, grievance 
process, health and safety, hiring, insurance, leave, 
promotion, and shift duties.
The role of the federal government in union con-
tracts is relatively passive. The National Labor Rela-
tions Act of 1935 provided employees with the right 
to engage in union activities. That act also established 
the National Labor Relations Board to supervise rep-
resentation elections and to investigate allegations of 
unfair labor practices.
The power of strike has been reduced in recent 
times. Growing antiunion sentiment, court decisions, 
and a pool of workers ready to replace the strikers 
have generally reduced the unions’ power through 
strike action. We frequently hear about strikes in 
the news, but in reality a very small percentage of 
employee time is lost through labor confl ict.
Typical labor–management issues include dis-
charge, discipline, discrimination, grievance process, 
health and safety, hiring, insurance, leave, promotion, 
and shift duties. When the union and management 
cannot agree on the issues, they may agree to a third 
party coming in to help them settle their differences. 
There are three levels of involvement: mediation, fact 
fi nding, and interest arbitration.
Mediation involves a third party acting as a 
 facilitator. The mediator opens communications 
channels, persuades the two sides to meet, helps the 
 parties readjust their positions on issues, and con-
trols the process by scheduling the meeting time and 
agenda. The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Ser-
vice may be invited to participate in the negotiations. 
There is no specifi c time in the process at which it 
enters, and in most cases, it does not enter at all. Most 
labor contracts are settled without any assistance.
The next level of involvement is fact fi nding. The 
third-party fact fi nder investigates the truthfulness 
of facts that are relevant to the impasse. The fact 
fi nder can also make a recommendation to the parties 
regarding the reasonable settlement of the issue.
Arbitration is the fi nal step. Arbitration allows 
the third party to settle the issue. The arbitrator hears 
both sides and determines the results. Arbitration is 
a last resort: It provides a solution, but neither party 

112  CHAPTER 5
adoption, implementation, and analysis or evaluation. 
Most commonly, items or programs within the bud-
get are tied to the department’s goals and objectives 
and identify the resources needed to achieve these 
goals. If you want to provide basic or advanced EMS 
capabilities on every engine and truck company in 
your department, you have to think about the training 
and equipment needed to support this program. You 
should plan for the procurement of these resources, 
determine the costs involved, and calculate these 
costs into the budget for the coming years.
Capital budget items are large, expensive items 
that last longer than 1 year. Most capital budgets are 
set up on a 10-year span. For the fi re service, classic 
examples of capital budget items are fi re stations and 
apparatus (see Figure 5-3). Local jurisdictions usu-
ally have a defi nition for capital budget items in term 
of cost and expected life span. Because of their cost, 
capital budget items get a lot of attention and are usu-
ally clearly identifi ed and carefully defended in the 
overall budget process. Smaller departments’ and a lot 
of volunteer departments’ capital budgets are set up 
on 5-year spans due to smaller tax bases. The operat-
ing budget includes nearly everything not covered in 
the capital budget. Most of the department’s expenses 
are in the operating budget. For most paid fi re depart-
ments, 90 percent or more of the operating budget is 
typically dedicated to salaries and related personnel 
costs. Within a budget, this is typically referred to as 
FTEs, or full-time equivalent positions. Other obvi-
ous operating expenses include fuel, utilities, supplies, 
and equipment. It is common for operating budgets 
to also refl ect multiple years. Not only will it include 
the actual year for which the department is operating, 
but also it can refl ect an adopted budget for the com-
ing year, a proposed budget for the year after that, and 
perhaps even a revised budget showing changes that 
had to be made to the current operating budget due to 
unforeseen circumstances. Once approved, the budget 
becomes the plan or guide for the coming year’s activi-
ties. The same fi elds are almost always defi ned with 
a budget. The beginning balance or operating budget 
may like the results. In some states, the fi ndings of an 
arbitrator are nonbinding, meaning the employer can 
choose to ignore the fi ndings.
To achieve long-term success, labor and manage-
ment must learn to collaborate with each other rather 
than to confront one another. By so doing, labor and 
management can learn to increase productivity and 
improve the quality of work life. Unions and man-
agement groups should work to achieve established 
goals and initiatives and avoid establishing an adver-
sarial  relationship.
NOTE
To achieve long-term success, labor and management 
must learn to collaborate with each other rather than to 
confront one another.
Research has shown that good labor relations occur 
when there is mutual trust and respect, honest and 
open communications, mutual problem solving, good 
(consistent) contract administration, and timely reso-
lution of grievances.
Managing Financial Resources
Money is another resource you manage. The prin-
cipal tool for managing money is called a budget. 
In the simplest of terms, budgets are a management 
tool that represents nearly all of the fi ve functions 
of  management: Budgets allow us to plan, organize, 
coordinate, and control our fi nancial activities and to 
represent the overall plan of the department in terms 
of intended revenues and expenditures. Budgets tend 
to be unpopular topics and consume a lot of time and 
effort, yet they are a very critical part of running a 
department. If you do not understand the budget pro-
cess and life cycle, it is unlikely that you will be suc-
cessful in implementing new projects or acquiring new 
equipment; without proper planning, it is unlikely that 
the fi nancial support will materialize, as budgets sel-
dom contain “extra” money that can be used to fund 
unplanned projects or purchases. Ideally, funding for 
new projects or equipment acquisitions should be jus-
tifi ed and built into the upcoming budget cycle. This 
is especially true in light of the rising cost for liability 
coverage, compensation packages, medical costs, and 
workers’ compensation.
Budgets are usually broken down into two catego-
ries: operating and capital. The operating budget of 
a department usually encompasses a single year and 
is tied to a “fi scal year” or a “calendar year.” Dur-
ing this timeframe, the budget usually goes through 
several phases in its life cycle: planning/preparation, 
FIGURE 5-3 A new fire truck represents a significant 
long-term investment.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  113
funding or, in many cases, have no funding at all. 
Therefore, the priority ranking of these programs 
becomes even more necessary.
Most budgets must undergo a two- or three-phase 
approval process. The three-phase system involves 
approval by the fi re chief or department head, and 
then the budget must be approved by the city or town 
administration and, fi nally, by the city’s or town’s 
elected offi cials. Once approved, the budget will 
begin at the start of the fi scal year and must be man-
aged throughout that year.
If you are dealing with multiyear projects, be sure 
to include infl ationary costs into the budget. Rule of 
thumb is to add 5 percent of the overall cost for each 
project year. This is also true if it may be a year or lon-
ger before the funding becomes available (i.e., Assis-
tance to Firefi ghters Grant). By the time you get the 
funding to start the project, the supplies, materials, 
and labor may have increased in cost and as a result 
you will start out underfunded if you did not account 
for infl ation. Once funding is approved, the depart-
ment’s purchasing agent or the individual in charge 
of the project will begin the acquisition process. This 
typically means that specifi cations are developed for 
the purpose of soliciting a formal bid, a request for 
quote, or a request for proposal.
A Formal Bid or a Request for Bid is a  formal 
bid for products and/or services that are typically 
over a certain dollar amount. Most organizations now 
accept bids online as well as on hardcopy. A formal 
bid process usually works the best when the contrac-
tor is soliciting competitive prices from vendors for 
a specifi c piece or pieces of equipment. Most com-
monly, specifi cations or specifi c brands and model 
numbers relating to the equipment is sent out at least 
2 weeks in advance. Vendors then provide a written 
response identifying what they will sell and for what 
price. All bidders should have the opportunity to 
bid on the same items on equal terms and have bids 
judged by the same standards as set forth in the spec-
ifi cations. The purchasing agent for the department, 
otherwise known as the contractor, is responsible 
for reviewing the bids, not only looking at the costs 
but also ensuring that the vendor’s proposal and/or 
product meets all of the specifi ed criteria. Contro-
versy related to bids most commonly centers around 
a department having to settle for less than what they 
intended to purchase because details regarding what 
they wanted were not identifi ed in the specifi cations. 
That is why it is essential that bid specifi cations be 
written to defi ne exactly what the department needs. 
If a specifi cation is written too loosely, then a vendor 
may interpret it differently than intended and sup-
ply a product that does not meet the department’s 
need. Readers are encouraged to review recent 
is typically the overall dollar amount that you or the 
department has to operate within. Revenues show the 
sources for the incoming money. For most fi re depart-
ments, this is in the form of special funds, taxes, or 
mill levies. Some departments are functions of a larger 
government organization and are simply allocated a 
 percentage of an organization’s overall income stream 
(General Fund). There is also a column for expen-
ditures or expenses. This identifi es how much the 
department is going to spend and on what. This can 
be broken down into great detail and in this fashion is 
often referred to a line-item budget. Today, most orga-
nizations use some form of line-item budgeting. With 
line-item budgeting and accounting, like items are 
collected for purposes of keeping track of the expen-
ditures during the year. Suppose we consider the cost 
of electrical utility service as a line item. We can plan 
for a certain expenditure for electricity, but extreme 
weather conditions may cause this cost to increase. 
A comparison of weather data and the electric bills 
will show that the expenditures were unpredicted but 
appropriate. On the other hand, suppose the depart-
ment planned on spending money on urgent replace-
ments for turnout gear. Six months into the year, the 
money is still in the account. Managers should be ask-
ing the personnel responsible for this purchase some 
questions about their “urgent” procurement needs.
Like the management process, developing the bud-
get or a budget proposal starts with planning. The 
planning should focus on what resources are needed 
to turn the organization’s goals and objectives into 
reality. Depending on the size of the department and 
the complexity of local government, this may take 
anywhere from a month to a year to accomplish and 
involves a lot of estimating. However, because it is a 
direct refl ection of you and your knowledge of what is 
required to accomplish the proposed project or acqui-
sition, you should be as accurate as possible. Most 
approving authorities are reluctant to provide any 
additional monies to complete a project. As a result, 
if you start a project and come up short of funds, you 
may have to cut corners or go back to the approving 
authority and beg for more, while having to explain 
why you did not request enough in the fi rst place. The 
worst-case scenario is that you may have to terminate 
the project.
This is why good planning is a necessity before sub-
mitting a fi nalized budget proposal. All departmental 
programs should be analyzed for material needs so 
that adequate funding is available. It may be neces-
sary to perform a priority ranking of all budgetary 
categories. This ranking, while often used for capital 
items, can be used as a decision-making tool for all 
departmental programs. In time of economic hard-
ships, fi re department programs often have reduced 

114  CHAPTER 5
selects companies to interview (depending on the 
total amount of the proposed purchase or proposal), 
interviews companies, and makes a recommendation 
to the purchasing agent. The committee should use 
a standard evaluation process. The purchasing agent 
then negotiates and prepares the contract, and takes it 
through the appropriate approval process.
The approval process often differs based on the 
total dollar amount. If the total dollar amount is 
below a certain amount, an administrator can typi-
cally approve the process. However, if the total dollar 
amount exceeds that amount, then the approval by an 
auditor and governing body (commission or council) 
is often required.
Like an RFP, a Request for Quote, or RFQ, com-
municates requirements from vendors and contrac-
tors. However, it is typically just for informational 
purposes and not necessarily binding in nature. Basi-
cally, it is an informal bid for a smaller quantity of 
products and services. An RFQ may or may not need 
to be advertised based on your agency’s purchasing 
guidelines. Most commonly, it is not, but rather solici-
tations are sent to selected vendors. The approval pro-
cess for RFQ’s is typically less stringent due to the 
lesser dollar amounts involved.
Two factors to assist in deciding whether to use an 
RFP, an RFQ, or a bid is to determine if you are deal-
ing with vendors or contractors and the overall dol-
lar amount. Typically, a vendor sells a commodity or 
commodities. It is usually a one-time sell and no ser-
vice is required, so a RFQ is most appropriate. How-
ever, if a signifi cant total dollar amount is involved, 
then you may want to consider doing a formal bid 
process. If you are negotiating for a contractor to pro-
vide a service over a given period of time you should 
perhaps consider doing a RFP. The following is an 
example of a bid request: “The Fire Department is 
soliciting Request for Proposals (RFPs) from qual-
ifi ed contractors to provide physical fi tness assess-
ment evaluations and screenings. Assessments are to 
meet the specifi cations described herein by the end 
of the performance period.” Be sure to write perfor-
mance requirements that the contactor is required to 
meet within the contract. It is also important to rec-
ognize the difference between a vendor and a con-
tractor. A vendor is typically one who supplies goods 
or services. This can be a manufacturer, importer, or 
wholesale distributor. A contractor is usually hired 
or makes an agreement to perform a specifi c service or 
piece of work. Consultants, independent  contractors, 
physicians, lawyers, and construction contractors are 
common professions that are contracted. Be aware 
that most states allow contractors and subcontractors 
to place liens on departments, cities, and counties 
until they are paid.
 specifi cations used by their department and compare 
them against the  identifi ed need.
Once accepted, the bid becomes a formal con-
tract between the contractor and the successful ven-
dor. The contractor typically then develops and sends 
the vendor a purchase order. The vendor fulfi lls the 
purchase order. Unless other arrangements have been 
made, full payment is typically made once all items 
have been received and the order is complete.
Occasionally, there is a need to sole source the pur-
chase of an item. Most commonly, this is due to the 
overarching need to buy a certain type of equipment 
for compatibility or safety reasons. Be aware, how-
ever, that most grant programs require that a depart-
ment solicit competitive bids for any items purchased 
with grant funds. Failure to comply with this require-
ment could result in a competing vendor in fi ling a 
complaint, causing the department to reject all bids 
and send the item back out for bid, which can result in 
a lengthy delay in the acquisition process. At the very 
worst, you could lose funding altogether. 
A Request for Purchase, also referred to as 
Request for Proposal (RFP), is a solicitation used 
when you need design, consultant, products, or ser-
vices and you are looking for answers. An RFP is 
most commonly used when the specifi cations are 
broader in nature and the department is open to more 
than that one specifi c brand of equipment or ven-
dor or the department is requesting a rather complex 
commodity rather than a single commodity or tangi-
ble goods. A prime example is the difference between 
purchasing computer hardware and selecting a soft-
ware designer or consultant. One is rather straight-
forward and can be specifi ed by brand or exacting 
performance specifi cations. The other is rather arbi-
trary and as a result may include things like past work 
references, performance measures, and time lines in 
which to get the job done. As you can tell, one is more 
complex than the other and therefore more diffi cult to 
write specifi cations for and evaluate. An RFP should 
describe all your requirements, terms, and conditions 
that will apply to the contract from prospective ven-
dors or contractors. The advantage of the RFP over 
a formal bid process is that it allows the contractor 
to compare what each vendor has to offer relating to 
different components of the bid in comparison to the 
other bidders and make a selection based on the over-
all proposal, rather than price alone. For example, you 
can evaluate things such as warranties, timeframe in 
which the service is to be performed, etc.
Award of an RFP is not based on low bid but 
on what is in the best interest of and value for the 
department. Depending on the solicitation, you may 
be required to advertise. Typically, a screening and/
or selection committee meets, reviews the  proposals, 

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  115
The Role of the Company Offi cer in Budgeting.
Your level of participation as the company offi cer in 
budgeting varies. Some departments control budget 
planning and administration at the very top, whereas 
other departments maintain control at the top but 
keep everyone informed through a variety of timely 
reports. This approach allows everyone to at least see 
what is going on and to have some understanding of 
why things are or are not happening.
As the control of the budget is more decentral-
ized, you, as the company offi cer, have increasing 
involvement with the procurement process. Many 
departments allow you to identify needs for the com-
ing year. These are forwarded up the chain of com-
mand and then ranked in some order of priority. As 
money becomes available, procurement is authorized. 
The funding for these projects are often spelled out in 
policies set forth by the governing body. However, in 
some instances, as in private fi re departments, budget-
ary policies are developed by the department. These 
policies must outline where and how received monies 
are to be allocated.
Occasionally, there is a need to expedite purchases 
or make emergency purchases, either as the result of 
an actual emergency or because a commodity or ser-
vice is needed to keep your organization operational. 
In these times, there may be justifi cation to step out-
side of normal purchasing guidelines, but it cannot 
be an habitual process, nor can it violate purchasing 
laws, as they are in effect even during an emergency. 
The best way to handle these situations is to have pre-
established contracts or Memorandum of Under-
standing (MOUs) in place with these vendors prior 
to an emergent event. This is one of the reasons as 
soon as you recognize the need, it is critical you place 
qualifi ed staff in the fi nance section of the command 
structure. 
One fi nal word is needed about soliciting bids and 
awarding contracts. Be sure to consult with your pur-
chasing agent and follow the procedural framework 
and purchasing guidelines of your governing agency. 
Violation of city, county, state, or federal purchasing 
laws is a very serious offense that could ultimately 
result in termination or, as a worse case scenario, 
incarceration. Your legal department should always 
review fi nal draft before soliciting and/or awarding 
bids or contracts.
As the weeks and months unfold, it is appropri-
ate to check the level of activity in the budget. The 
budget can be set up in a variety of ways to facilitate 
this check. This not only allows you to make sure you 
are fi nancially on target; it affords you the chance to 
assess the performance of the department relative to 
its stated mission and goals.
You might note that the controlling function of 
management is necessary as the budget year passes. 
Suppose that the extreme cold weather added signifi -
cantly to the total cost of electricity and heating fuel. 
With the cold weather, it is likely that during this same 
season there was an increased amount of alarm activ-
ity, further adding to departmental costs. These added 
costs may not be apparent right away but will show up 
in time. These obligations may require some adjust-
ments to the budget to keep the department operating 
as the end of the year approaches. Purchases may be 
deferred. Travel and training may be cancelled. Other 
discretionary costs may be delayed or eliminated to 
keep the department in business. It is necessary to 
have some sort of budget controls in place to make 
sure that the department adheres to its adopted plan 
and the priorities, policies, and programs are appro-
priately funded.
Many organizations use a program budget. A 
program budget gathers expenses that support a par-
ticular program. For example, if the department pro-
vides EMS, a program budget would identify all of 
the costs associated with the EMS program.
Even when traditional budget controls are in place, there 
should be incentives for saving money. Turning out lights 
that are not being used, setting the thermostat at a rea-
sonable level, easing off the “gas” pedal, and shutting 
down engines that may idle for long periods may seem 
like small gestures, but collectively, they can have a sig-
nifi cant impact on the department’s fi nances. These 
small savings can be converted into purchases that are 
really needed.
SAVING MONEY HELPS EVERYONE
For routine supplies, many departments allow you 
to draw supplies against a specifi ed account. Some 
departments take care of this supply activity by pro-
viding a stocking service where needed supplies are 
provided and stocked by a private contractor.
If the department makes it a practice to look at its 
spending activities regularly, it can determine if the 
spending is following the planned budget. Deviation 
reports, monthly position reports, and other meth-
ods are available to help managers keep track of the 
budget.
When the expenditures are racing ahead of the 
budget plan, it may become necessary to slow things 
down a bit through procurement delays and curtail-
ment of travel and/or training. Theoretically, training 
should be the last thing cut, but because so much of 
the budget (often 90 percent or more) is for salaries, 
there is little left to cut!

116  CHAPTER 5
 6. Construct the timeline—When the resource is 
ordered, how long is it going to take to receive it? 
Most of the time ordering directly from the manu-
facturer is not the fastest way to receive a product. 
This was proved in the 9/11 attacks of 2001. The 
Fire Department of New York recognized early 
that their fi refi ghters needed something other than 
turnout gear to work the rubble pile. Hundreds 
of sets of turnout gear were ruined while sifting 
through the pile. The plan was to order two sets 
of heavy duty coveralls for each member so that 
they could always have a clean set. Logistics per-
sonnel called various manufacturers to try to place 
the order. The problem was that the manufacturers 
could not turn out the coveralls fast enough. As a 
back-up plan, Logistics offi cers started calling all 
of the smaller vendors within a three-state area and 
were able to purchase all of the needed coveralls.
Whatever the method used, departments must have 
a plan. Departmental policies and procedures need 
to be developed to outline the steps for obtaining 
resources for any given situation. These procedures 
need to list where to obtain resources and how they 
will be funded.
Empowering the Company Offi cer with Money.  
Some departments have taken the rather radical 
 approach of empowering you, as the company offi cer, 
with funds, based on historical data, to run your sta-
tion. If you can plan and manage well, you will likely 
be able to save some funds to buy discretionary items 
that the station needs. On the other hand, if you make 
no effort to reduce costs, it is unlikely that the station 
will see any rewards from the process.
Acquiring Needed Resources
Even after ensuring that the department will have 
the necessary funds to operate throughout the bud-
get year, the planning does not stop. The department 
must plan, for major incidents within their jurisdic-
tions. To accomplish this, departmental offi cers need 
to conduct a needs assessment for their districts. Con-
ducting a needs assessment will outline the specifi c 
resources that will be needed for different types of 
incidents. Even the largest departmental budgets 
cannot accommodate for unforeseen incidents that 
require resources beyond its capabilities. Conducting 
a needs assessment for major incidents should include 
the following steps:
 1. Play the “what if” game—Planning for target haz-
ards within a jurisdiction can prove to be diffi cult. 
The process starts by mapping out the hazard and 
planning for any and all possibilities.
 2. Spawn ideas—Once all of the possibilities have 
been mapped out, ideas must be generated on how 
to mitigate these hazards. In this step, the order 
of importance is not as signifi cant as is generat-
ing all achievable ways that the hazards can be 
mitigated.
 3. Organize ideas—After all of the ideas for 
 mitigation have been generated, they must be 
placed in order of signifi cance. This step should 
fall in line with the three fi re service priorities: 
Life Safety, Incident Stabilization and Property 
Conservation.
 4. Identify sources for resources—As discussed ear-
lier, the normal operating budget does not plan for 
incidents that requires specialized resources for 
a catastrophic event. Therefore, within the needs 
assessment, an outline of needed resources must 
be developed ahead of time. Plan for the needed 
resources and devise a list of where these resources 
can be obtained.
 5. Paying for the resources—Nothing is free; there-
fore, the plan should estimate the cost for each 
individual resource. The plan should also include 
an arrangement on how these resources are to be 
purchased.
The company offi cer should do the following:
■ Keep track of the station’s needs.
■ Identify items that would improve effi ciency.
■ Involve everyone in the budget process.
■ Talk with other company offi cers to learn how to effec-
tively manage the station’s resources.
GOOD FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
You are encouraged to review the procurement 
process for your respective department and develop 
a budget for your station using the identifi ed pro-
cess. This may necessitate creating a budget line for 
each separate item your station is going to need for 
the entire budget year or it may mean grouping items 
within categories. If there is a need for items that you 
do not normally receive, complete the appropriate 
acquisition forms or prepare a budget request for those 
items, justifying and prioritizing the need. Readers 
are also encouraged to write a specifi cation for one of 
these items and have others review the specifi cation 
to see if it clearly and accurately defi nes what is to be 
purchased. What you will discover is that developing 
budgets and specifi cations is a time-consuming and 
laborious process. However, they are the lifeblood 
of your organization and require devoted attention 
and detail.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  117
prepare for events, rather than react to them. When 
you are in a reaction mode, you are ineffi cient and 
unproductive.
Some people seem to enjoy this mode. They operate 
in a crisis mode, and run from one crisis to another, 
never being able to break out of the rat race and get 
ahead of the events of their life. People who wait until 
the last moment to do their Christmas shopping or 
prepare their income tax reports are good examples. 
Most would benefi t on focusing their time and energy 
on fewer things and concentrate on doing them well.
Of course, there are many things in your life that 
you cannot control. In the fi re station, you should be 
available to your personnel, to your boss, and to the 
public. You also need to be available to respond to 
alarms. But there is still a lot of time you can manage. 
Set up a program that makes the day become a rou-
tine, and where your precious time is used effectively 
(see Figure 5-4). Here are several suggestions:
■ If meetings are needed, have them at a regular time 
and have an agenda. Make the meeting brief but 
effective.
■ If you want time to work in the offi ce, let your peo-
ple know when that is. Ask your people not to dis-
turb you unless they have an urgent need.
■ Avoid putting things off. Taking time to decide 
to put something off simply wastes time and gets 
nothing done.
■ Distinguish between important and urgent matters. 
Important things need to be done, but not right 
away. We know about most important events well 
in advance of any deadline. Most important events 
take time to plan and execute. A training program 
for the coming year is an important event.
■ Urgent events usually need to be done right away. 
Some urgent events are unexpected. You cannot 
anticipate emergency responses; you have to deal 
Managing Time
Of the three resources on this short list, time may be 
the most precious for everyone. As previously stated, 
in most paid departments, salaries for your and the 
other members’ time accounts for 90 percent or more 
of the budget. So time management is essential for 
running an effi cient department. Yet, some members 
are content to come in, put in their hours, and go home. 
What they do on their days off is their business. What 
they do when they are on duty is your business. Wast-
ing the day away is not acceptable and should not be 
tolerated by them, you, or the customer.
Have you ever noticed that activities take about as long 
as the time allowed? This is called Parkinson’s Law, a 
concept named for C. Northcote Parkinson and fi rst pub-
lished in 1957. According to Parkinson, work expands to 
fi ll the time available for its completion.
PARKINSON’S LAW
You should manage your time just as you man-
age any other resource. You should fi nd new ways of 
doing things so that you are not just putting in your 
time, but you are making good things happen, all the 
time.
A lot of attention has been given to time manage-
ment in recent years. The popularity of this topic sug-
gests that many people have problems managing their 
time. Like management in general, time management 
starts by setting goals and objectives. In this case, we 
are probably setting personal goals and objectives.
Next comes personal planning and scheduling. 
This activity is more than just making a list of things 
that need to be done. Good time management cor-
relates the management of our time with our previ-
ously set goals and objectives. Planning allows us to 
■ Plan and prioritize.
■ Delegate as appropriate.
■ Establish goals for yourself.
■ Be organized and reduce clutter.
■ Make a schedule and stick to it.
■ Fit other things around these events.
■ Identify and work to eliminate time wasters.
■ Give fi rst attention to diffi cult and complex tasks.
■ Announce meetings, start them on time, and have 
an agenda.
TIME MANAGEMENT
PLANNING
TIME
TIME REQUIRED
FOR EXECUTION
PLANNING
TIME
TIME
REQUIRED
FOR EXECUTION
SAVE TIME BY PLANNING
FIGURE 5-4 Good planning will save time in the 
long run.

118  CHAPTER 5
group associated with the record (e.g., Haz-Mat team), 
 budget or project number (e.g., line item 7021), project 
name (e.g., rescue truck specifi cations), department 
name (e.g., Public Education), version number (e.g., 
Version 1.1), date of creation (document 9-21-08), 
name of creator (e.g., Clinton), description of con-
tent (equipment inventory), or a combination of any 
of these (e.g., Meeting Minutes 9-21-08). Consistently 
named records foster organization and collaboration 
based on a mutual understanding of how to name fi les 
and use electronic media.
Subfi les can be kept within the main menu fi les, 
but remember that the main thing is to manage your 
electronic fi les so you can effectively fi nd what you 
want. If you get too many subfolders or subfi les, you 
can spend a lot of time opening the main folders look-
ing for what you want. Likewise, if you get too many 
fi les on the main menu, you can still spend a lot of 
time searching.
Files can also be stored on other portable electronic 
media such as computer disks (CDs) or fl ash drives. 
Portable hard drives are also available. The advantage 
of the portable media is that you can take it with you 
and access it on another computer.
Electronic fi les are also typically more secure than 
paper fi les, since most computers are set up for mul-
tiple users, requiring that you have a username and 
password to access them. However, the fi les are sus-
ceptible to being accessed by the public if the com-
puter is connected to the Internet and you do not have 
proper fi rewall protection,
One should remember that electronic fi les, just like 
emails, are subject to the open records act, and as a 
result, anything you have stored or sent on a depart-
ment computer can be requested for public review and 
used as evidence in a court of law. If you delete docu-
ments subsequent to any litigation, you can be guilty 
of destroying or spoliation of evidence. So keep all 
you do professional and above board.
Most organizations have some type of policy that 
identifi es how long department-related fi les should be 
maintained. Absent of any policy, there are no hard-
and-fast rules concerning record retention. Files or 
documents related to personnel issues usually have to 
be maintained for at least 5 years. If a person has an 
accident or a medical-related issue, fi les or documen-
tation related to these issues usually has to be kept for 
the term of employment, if not longer. When in doubt, 
use the 10-year mark as a good rule of thumb.
When you dispose of electronic media with sensi-
tive information, make sure it is deleted from all in 
boxes, out boxes, deleted items, and trash bins. Oth-
erwise, deleting a fi le from a single location often 
just moves it to another, where it can be accessed by 
others. When destroying paper fi les, make sure you 
with them when they arise. Likewise, a call from 
your supervisor asking for some information that is 
needed right away is an urgent event. A call from 
home that indicates that your spouse or child is 
seriously ill is also an urgent event.
People allow important events to become urgent 
events through the lack of good time management 
techniques. Putting off the work on the training pro-
gram until the last moment makes it become an urgent 
event. Avoid urgent events as much as possible. Your 
goal should be to manage time, and not let time man-
age you.
Protect your time by setting goals and objectives. 
Starting with goals and objectives helps you decide 
what really must be done by you, what can be dele-
gated to others, and what can be omitted. Remember, 
without a goal, you will not know your destination.
Time management requires organization and some 
method of record keeping. Being organized allows 
you to readily access information and prevents you 
from wasting valuable time looking for documenta-
tion and/or records. If you take the time to establish 
and maintain an effective fi ling system, it will save 
time in the long run. This also includes electronic 
fi les. An electronic fi ling system refers to a computer-
based system that allows you to receive and store doc-
uments in electronic form. An electronic fi ling system 
also capitalizes on the use of automated technologies 
and promotes cost savings. Some departments have a 
network of computers with a central server where the 
fi les are stored in a centralized location and always 
backed up. Others use stand-alone computers, relying 
on the local hard drives to store the information. The 
problem with the latter scenario is that if the local 
computer “crashes,” you can lose all of your stored 
information. This is why it is important that the com-
puter be protected with an antivirus program and that 
your fi les be backed up in some fashion.
It is not only important how and where you store 
your fi les, but it is also important how you name your 
fi les. Some name electronic fi les by the last name of 
the person who sent the information; others name and 
organize fi les by topic. In most organizations, there 
are no policies for how to name or keep an electronic 
fi le; hence, the format is left to the individual. Just 
remember that the fi le name is the principal identifi er 
for a record and should place some context of what is 
in the record or how the record is related to other fi les, 
records, and/or projects. If your electronic records 
relate to a particular subject or function or result from 
the same activity, they should be similarly named and 
kept within the same set of folders.
When naming your fi les, you may wish to include 
some of the following common elements: name 
of intended audience (e.g., school groups), name of 

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  119
devices such as the personal data assistant (PDA) 
(see Figure 5-5). Whatever form is used, it is impor-
tant to keep the planner up-to-date. Use it to help set 
priorities and to identify items that can be delegated 
to others.
shred them. If you leave personal information for oth-
ers to fi nd, you can be at fault for disclosing personal 
information. It is just a lot easier to do things right the 
fi rst time.
One fi nal note on records—understand the laws 
and department policies that govern the use, access, 
and release of information. While you should try to 
meet the needs of your citizens, and make your orga-
nization a transparent one, there are certain laws per-
taining to what information the public and you have 
access to. If a citizen comes in and wants to know 
who got hurt in a wreck you just got back from, you 
cannot release that information. You may be able to 
tell them that a 45-year-old man suffered back inju-
ries, but you cannot release a name or any identifi ers 
because that violates the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA, Title II). A 
good tactic to use in these situations is take the oppor-
tunity to talk about preventative issues related to the 
event. If the event was related to a fi re, take the time 
to discuss the home evacuation plan and how it can 
help if such an event was to happen to them.
Department policies related to the use and release 
of information may also be applicable. Some depart-
ments have a policy not to release anything but rather 
refer them to the administrative section or public 
information offi cer. There are also laws related to 
access, use, and release of personnel information. For 
example, you should not discuss discipline issues with 
anyone other than your supervisors and the involved 
employee. Some agencies terminate employees who 
access personal patient or employee information with-
out proper authorization and/or justifi cation.
Using a personal planner also assists with organiza-
tion. Many planning tools are available, ranging from 
the traditional paper-based planner to computer-based 
your schedule to meet the need of the organization 
or other individuals.
 5. Telephone interruptions. They are frequently un-
wanted and frequently unnecessary. Learn to con-
duct business in a polite, businesslike way and get 
off the phone.
 6. Drop-in visitors. Same comments as the preced-
ing telephone item. Be polite, do your business, and 
move along.
 7. Trying to do too much yourself. Learn to focus 
on what is important, and learn to delegate what 
you can.
 8. Ineffective delegation. When delegating, learn the 
steps for doing it effectively.
 1. Lack of personal goals and objectives. Where are 
you headed?
 2. Lack of planning. Set priorities, set a schedule to 
meet your goals, and follow through on your priori-
ties. Manage your time; do not let time manage you.
 3. Procrastination is putting off things that need to be 
done. It is poor time management. Making the deci-
sion to put off the activity takes time. It is often more 
effective to just bite the bullet and do it.
 4. Reacting to urgent events, often the result of pro-
crastination. These events force you to rearrange 
TEN PROVEN TIME EATERS
FIGURE 5-5 Keeping track of your personal time and 
commitments is also important.

120  CHAPTER 5
we often spend inappropriate amounts of time dealing 
with trivial issues, thus saving little of our time for the 
really important items. Give priority to the important 
management tasks.
Most fi re offi cers have come up through the ranks, 
and some spend an inappropriate amount of the time 
doing fi refi ghter stuff rather than managing fi re-
fi ghter activities (Figure 5-7). Many feel more com-
fortable doing the job themselves. They are profi cient 
and enjoy these activities. Quite often, this is how 
they got promoted (see Leadership Tetrahedron in 
 Chapter 6). These offi cers may also have some anxi-
eties about delegating. They may have some concern 
about their work being evaluated and are unwilling to 
let that  evaluation rest on the accomplishments of a 
team member. And many would rather perform phys-
ical work than sit at a desk and perform strictly men-
tal work. As we indicated earlier, the management 
 functions, such as planning and organizing, require 
considerable mental effort.
As you rise through the ranks, you will fi nd that 
you will become increasingly concerned with man-
agement activities. At the lower levels in our organi-
zation, technical skills are important. In the middle 
Of those items that remain on your list, number 
them to identify their priority. Try to avoid the temp-
tation to clear up the little things fi rst or simply do the 
things you enjoy the most. Do the important things 
fi rst. The little things can be fi tted in later or held over 
until another day.
Planning your time helps you to control your time. 
When you are managing your time, you are effective 
and productive. When you let time control you, you 
will become frustrated and stressed as work piles up 
around you.
Planning can be done at the start of the day and at 
the end of the day. At the start of the day, your mind 
is fresh and you probably have a pretty good idea of 
what the day will bring. On the other hand, plan-
ning at the end of the day allows you to focus on the 
accomplishments of the day and helps you identify 
what remains to be accomplished. A listing of these 
items is the starting point for the next day of work. An 
advantage of this practice is that you and your team 
members can subconsciously think about the work, 
even while you are off duty.
Give attention to the vital few tasks that are really 
important (see Figure 5-6). Research has shown that 
 9. Personal disorganization. In its milder forms, disorga-
nization presents problems due to scheduling con-
fl icts, the inability to fi nd things when needed, and 
so forth. In a more serious form, it means that you 
have not set goals and objectives and that you lack 
focus.
10. Inability to say “no.” For some, this item may be 
the hardest on the list. Tie your time to your goals, 
and focus on priorities. If the request supports your 
goals, go for it. If it does not, politely say that you 
are sorry, but you are unable to take on that activity. 
Obviously, this may not set well with your supervisor, 
but even here, supervisors sometimes can overload 
your plate. Show your supervisor a list of what you 
are working on, and ask for help in setting priorities. 
Your supervisor will give you the guidance that you 
need and may also fi nd (possibly as a surprise) that 
you really are overloaded.
80% OF
THE
TIME
20% OF
THE
TIME
20% OF
THE
RESULTS
80% OF
THE
RESULTS
DOING THE
VITAL VIEW
DOING THE
TRIVIAL MANY
FIGURE 5-6 Effective time management increases pro-
ductivity and requires management give appropriate at-
tention to the tasks that are really important.
FIGURE 5-7 Planning the day involves all affected 
personnel.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  121
compromises. If the answer were easy, you would 
not be in this process.
 6. Take action. Usually at this point, you must get 
approval to implement your solution. You have 
done all the work—identifi ed the problem, gath-
ered data, considered alternative solutions, and 
listed one or more solutions you are recommend-
ing. This information is usually conveyed to the 
supervisor in a short memo. Your supervisor should 
be able to quickly review what you have done and 
give approval.
 7. Monitor the results. This step is also important 
but often overlooked. You want to be sure that you 
follow the process and see what happens. Most 
changes bring about some negative consequences. 
You want to be sure that the good consequences 
outweigh any bad consequences the change brings 
with it.
 8. Take corrective action if necessary. At this point, 
you may have to simply start all over.
Notice how the fi ve management functions show 
up here: In steps 1 and 2 you are planning, in step 3 
you are organizing your information, in step 6 you are 
commanding and coordinating, and in steps 7 and 8 
you are controlling.
When the answer to the problem comes too easily, 
make sure that you correctly identifi ed the real prob-
lem and that you found the correct solution. When 
you solve your problem, you may have to change a 
procedure or policy within your organization.  Policy 
changes should be carefully managed and not the 
result of a knee-jerk reaction to a one-time event.
This method is applicable, regardless of how the 
problem is recognized. As an offi cer, you could simply 
recognize the problem yourself or it could be brought 
to you by a supervisor, subordinate, or citizen. Some 
departments have structured ways in which to han-
dle each; however, the methodology to solving them 
is basically the same. If you recognize the problem 
yourself, you need to analyze the situation, accurately 
identify the problem, look for solutions to that prob-
lem, take action, and monitor the results. This process 
may or may not involve others or require feedback 
be given. If the problem is reported to you from an 
outside source or a subordinate, this usually requires 
some sort of notifi cation process to your supervisor.
Notifi cation could be in verbal or written form. 
The form of notifi cation is usually dependent upon 
the severity of the reported problem. For example, if 
a subordinate reports that he or she recognizes a prob-
lem with the facility and/or equipment, it typically is 
reported to the appropriate personnel and handled 
at the offi cer level. This situation would typically 
require the offi cer to only verbally report the issue to 
ranks, interpersonal skills are critical. In the upper 
ranks, management skills become most important 
(see Figure 5-8).
We defer commanding and coordinating for now. 
That leaves us with controlling. When controlling, 
you are looking for problems. Solving problems is 
one of the manager’s jobs.
SOLVING PROBLEMS
From time to time, you will face problems that will 
require a bit of thinking for their solution. When you 
have a problem, you should follow a proven, logical 
approach to fi nd the solution. The fi rst step may be 
simply recognizing that you have a problem. Many 
managers do not see problems occurring, or, if they 
do, they fail to take any corrective action. Here are 
the generally accepted steps for solving problems:
 1. Accurately defi ne the problem. That may seem 
simple, but in many cases it is the most diffi cult 
step. And in many cases, it is the most critical step, 
for if you do not correctly identify the root of the 
problem, the rest of the process is doomed.
 2. Gather information. Get ALL of the facts and hear 
ALL sides of the issue. Review the laws, policy 
statements, and regulations from federal, state, and 
local sources that may address the issue.
 3. Analyze the information. See if you have every-
thing you need.
 4. Look for alternative solutions and list all possible 
solutions. At this point in the process, you want to 
be open minded. Invite others to offer ideas.
 5. Select one or more of the best solutions. At this 
point, you want to start ranking the solutions in 
terms of expected outcomes. Some solutions may 
cost too much or take too long. There are always 
DEPARTMENT
MANAGEMENT
BATTALION
MANAGEMENT
COMPANY
MANAGEMENT
FIRST LINE
SUPERVISION
ACTUAL
IDEAL
OPERATING
70%
10%
30%
90%
MANAGING
GIVE PRIORITY TO MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONS
FIGURE 5-8 Give proper attention to management 
functions.

122  CHAPTER 5
Some departments have very specifi c guide-
lines for certain types of complaints. It is the offi -
cer’s responsibility to know how to properly han-
dle a complaint and use the appropriate forms and 
communications channels. Readers are encouraged 
to examine the reporting policies of their respec-
tive department.
his or her respective supervisor and note it within the 
station log. If the subordinate’s reported problem was 
related to some form of harassment, then this rises to 
a higher level and should be immediately reported to 
the offi cer’s supervisor in verbal fashion to make him 
or her aware of the issue and then followed up with 
written documentation that states the specifi cs related 
to the complaint. The same basic guidelines are true 
for a citizen’s complaint. If a citizen is complaining 
about trash in the yard of the station, this issue would 
be addressed at the offi cer’s level and noted in the sta-
tion log. The defi ning, analyzing, and solution process 
would be very brief. If the citizens reports that a fi re 
truck caused damage to their personal property, this 
would require a more formal handling of the com-
plaint, requiring extensive investigation, fact fi nding, 
and documentation. The solution process for this type 
of complaint usually takes place above the level of the 
company offi cer and often involves the department’s 
administrative staff, risk manager, and others. There-
fore, it is critical that the offi cer’s information be as 
detailed and accurate as possible.
MANAGING CHANGE
As a manager, you should make change a requirement 
in your organization. Identify the desired outcomes, 
sell the benefi ts, involve your people, and reward the 
participants. Some individuals and organizations deal 
OFFICER ADVICE
When you feel the answer to a problem has comes too 
easily, review the problem-solving steps and make sure 
that you correctly identifi ed the real problem and that you 
found the correct solution.
(5%) TECHIES
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
(10%) VISIONARIES
(35%) PRAGMATISTS
(35%) CONSERVATIVES
(15%) SKEPTICS
(5%) TECHIES
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
(10%) VISIONARIES
(35%) PRAGMATISTS
(35%) CONSERVAT
V
IVES
(15%) SKEPTICS
When change is ongoing, some accept it more rapidly 
than do others. In today’s fast-paced world, change of-
ten comes with the development of new technology. 
TECHNOLOGY ADAPTATION 
LIFE CYCLE
FIGURE 5-9 The Technology Adaptation Curve indicates 
an approximate distribution of members ability to deal 
with the changes brought by new technology. Where do 
you fit in?
Personnel adapt to new technology in various ways 
(see Figure 5-9). These individuals can usually be 
 identifi ed and placed into one of fi ve categories:
 1. Techies or Innovators: This small minority is the fi rst 
to the store to buy any new product. New technology 
is their main interest. They like the challenge of being 
in the forefront. Their opinions are important as they 
often infl uence those who follow.
 2. Visionaries or Early Adopters: Like the pioneers be-
fore them, these individuals are ahead of the pack. 
They are interested in using technology to improve 
productivity. They are more challenging and more 
demanding of new technology, for they are looking 
at the results, not the means.
 3. Pragmatists: Pragmatists are not pioneers. They are 
pushed into the adoption of technology by the need 
to increase productivity, rather than being pulled by 
technology itself. They need support, understand-
ing, and interaction with peers to survive.
 4. Conservatives: Conservatives are not comfortable 
with technology. Tradition is strong with them, and 
they join only when there is no real alternative. When 
they do adapt to new technology, they tend to adopt 
popular concepts and proven products.
 5. Skeptics: Skeptics resist new technology. They 
will cost the organization more than the results are 
worth. Best leave them alone.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  123
service. The same would apply whether we were 
buying tools or shoes. What would provide that 
satisfaction? Well, courtesy and prompt, personal 
attention from the employees would be a good start. 
And maybe, having them stay with us long enough 
to be sure that we received everything we expected, 
maybe even everything we wanted, would give us 
satisfaction. The ultimate test is having them do 
more than just what is required, having them exceed 
our expectations.
Today, many fi re departments are doing just that: 
They are trying to provide the customer with the best 
possible service. During emergency situations, you 
are often placed in situations with very uncertain out-
comes, accompanied by signifi cant dangers where 
you have to offer the best possible service. You work 
in burning buildings or in the middle of a dangerous 
highway. You work at all hours of the day or night, 
often in the worst weather. Whenever and wherever 
you go, you go because people are having a problem, 
and they need your help. They call you when there 
is a fi re or a leak, when someone gets sick, or when 
someone is injured. In nonemergency situations, we 
should be still trying to provide the best possible 
service as well. We should continually see and treat 
these people as our customers.
Three Major Components 
of Customer Service
First: Always be nice. Treat people with respect 
and consideration. Show patience and consideration, 
even if it is three o’clock in the morning. Your cus-
tomers may be impressed by your quick arrival but 
what really matters, and what they will remember 
the longest is what you do after you get there. Fire 
trucks do not treat medical problems or put out fi res; 
people do. People also show compassion. Remember 
to treat the customer, every customer, the way you 
would want your mother to be treated. Provide the 
best service, and show compassion.
Second: Regard everyone as a customer. Many 
times the problem is straightforward and simple for 
us, but for the victim’s family and friends, things are 
very complicated. Factor these folks into the cus-
tomer equation as well. What you do and say has a 
lasting impression on everyone present. Regardless of 
whether you do well, or not so well, they will tell oth-
ers what happened. Which story do you want them 
to tell?
There are others who wander into our workplace. 
Most of what you do attracts spectators. While you 
must control them and keep them out of harm’s 
way, you should be aware that they have a  natural 
with change quite well. They carefully analyze their 
problems, rapidly adapt new ideas, and go on with 
business. Others tend to be more resistive. In these 
cases, change often passes them by.
Change breeds resistance. With change, confl ict 
may become more apparent. We should convert the 
energy of confl ict into positive values: Recognize that 
competition is healthy and that we can use the results 
of the confl ict to further positive outcomes. With con-
fl ict, we tend to take a position, and as a result, there 
are winners and losers.
NOTE
With change, conflict may become more apparent.
Change that is easily accomplished, or that has 
the highest visibility, or that makes you look good to 
your boss may not be what is really needed for the 
organization.
We discuss how to introduce change in Chapter 7.
MANAGING CUSTOMER 
SERVICE
Most fi re service organizations enjoy a noncompet-
itive environment when it comes to the delivery of 
services. However, most fi re departments, and cer-
tainly most public fi re departments, are in a very 
competitive environment when it comes to obtain-
ing fi nancial resources. Fire departments must com-
pete for their share of the community’s tax dollars. 
Their competition comes from the other agencies: the 
police department, the school board, the public works 
department, and all of the other agencies that contrib-
ute to the security and welfare of the citizens. Today, 
communities are faced with increasing demands for 
their services. At the same time, many are also faced 
with funding these demands with limited resources. 
Increasing taxes is one answer, but from a citizen’s 
viewpoint as well as a politically viewpoint, this is 
an unattractive option. For much the same reasons, 
funds from state and federal resources have dimin-
ished recently, all of which has been aggravated by a 
slow economy.
Given this situation, one would wonder why a 
fi re department would be concerned about its rela-
tionship with the recipients of its services, its cus-
tomers. Think about yourself as a customer for a 
moment. If we had a choice between several well-
known fast-food restaurants, two that offer similar 
menus and nearly identical pricing, we would likely 
patronize the one that offered the better customer 

124  CHAPTER 5
job done. How well they perform is a direct refl ec-
tion on you.
Part of your customer service is how you look. 
Uniforms are a big deal for most members of the 
fi re service. They indicate pride and identity. They 
connect us to our local government and the long 
and glorious tradition of the fi re service. The uni-
form should be complete, neat, and worn properly. 
As company offi cer, it is up to you to make sure 
your crew is in the appropriate uniform and that the 
uniform is maintained and presentable. This also 
relates to your turnout gear; make sure it is properly 
maintained and that you and your crew wear it when 
you should.
Your vehicles are another highly visible clue 
that you are out and about (see Figure 5-10). They 
should be over maintained with a personal and pro-
fessional labor of love. The tools you use are also 
impressive. They range from primitive to space-age, 
but they all have a function, and all should work 
when needed. Anyone watching you will be quickly 
able to tell if your vehicle, your tools, and yes, 
even you, are sharp and ready for the task at hand. 
A well-maintained crew and a well-maintained 
vehicle send a positive action-packed message to 
the world: You are ready, willing, and able to han-
dle your customer’s needs.
Third: Constantly raise the bar, raise the perfor-
mance standard, and look for ways to improve, to 
offer more and better service to your customers. You 
should be constantly working to improve yourself 
and your organization (see Figure 5-11). We have 
to do that just to keep up with the not-so-perfect 
but constantly changing world around us. Remem-
ber, you want your customers to be delighted with 
your work.
and  genuine concern about what is going on. You, 
as a provider, have the advantage of a front row 
seat at every show. But that does not mean that they 
cannot stay and watch from a safe distance. Good 
Samaritans also stop to help and must  sometimes 
be relieved with an informal and polite  transfer 
of command. Imagine finding that the apparently 
uninformed foreign-born female civilian who is 
helping at the scene of an accident involving a 
child with a broken leg is actually an orthopedic 
trauma surgeon.
Our customers are everywhere. They walk into 
fi re stations looking for directions to the post 
offi ce across the street or directions to a street that 
is located across town. There are school kids and 
scouts who come to visit and high school students 
working on a science project. Always remember you 
are part of a bigger picture. Your department is one 
organization of many that are set up within the com-
munity to protect and SERVE the citizens of that 
community. Consequently, your job is to meet the 
needs of the citizens to the best of your capabilities. 
This is exactly what  Brunacini was referring to in 
his customer service book. If they are looking for 
resources, help them fi nd that resource, even if it is 
not related to what the department does. For exam-
ple, a citizen may come into the fi re station look-
ing for a location where he can pay a water bill or 
wanting to fi nd out how he can get a permit to hold 
a garage sale. Your job is to help the citizen locate 
that resource. If you don’t know, take the time to 
fi nd out!
The fi re department is not a silo independent of 
other city, county, and state organizations. Just think 
how much better off the community would be if all 
departments within the community worked with the 
common goal of meeting the needs of the citizens. It 
starts at the company offi cer level. The company offi -
cer is typically the highest ranking offi cer in contact 
with the citizens. If he or she does not initiate this 
service, who will? Take a little time to learn about 
your city, county, or state organization and what ser-
vices they have to offer so that you will be able refer 
a citizen’s concern to the appropriate authority. Learn 
about your organization’s policies and procedures 
related to public inquiries.
Firefi ghters are heroes to the citizens, but do not 
forget all those folks behind the scenes who seldom 
get the glory—the mechanics, payroll clerks, and 
dozens of others who provide support to the front-
line fi refi ghters and make it possible for us to do our 
job. They are customers, too. As company offi cer, 
your fi refi ghters are also your customers. Your job 
is to make them successful. That means providing 
them with the tools, knowledge, and skills to get the 
FIGURE 5-10 Over maintenance of vehicles and equip-
ment should be performed as a personal and profes-
sional labor of love.

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  125
BUILDING A 
MANAGEMENT TEAM
The following are characteristics of good manage-
ment in a committee or group activity, including your 
company3:
■ Provide an open, relaxed working atmosphere 
in which people are involved and engaged (see 
 Figure 5-12).
■ Provide an environment that encourages discussion 
in which virtually everyone participates. There can 
be no fear of retribution.
■ Provide an environment in which the objective is 
well understood and accepted by the members.
■ Provide an environment in which the members lis-
ten to each other, in which the discussion does not 
jump from one idea to another. Every idea is given 
FIGURE 5-11 The citizens paid for 
this equipment. They let you man-
age it for them. Show pride in the 
way it is maintained and operated. 
(Photo courtesy of Fairfax County Fire and 
Rescue Department)
■ Seek feedback from customers about their needs.
■ Seek feedback from customers (including your crew) 
about their degree of satisfaction.
■ Defi ne requirements of the workplace to meet these 
needs.
■ Establish goals.
■ Defi ne a management philosophy.
■ Develop a self-directed team.
■ Provide feedback to the team regarding 
performance.
■ Incorporate new ideas and technologies.
■ Seek to make continuing improvements to the pro-
cess and the product.
■ Fine-tune the mission.
ASSESS THE NEEDS OF YOUR 
CUSTOMERS
FIGURE 5-12
Successful com-
pany officers create an envi-
ronment where there is open 
discussion and collaboration.

126  CHAPTER 5
be involved in one or more of these issues. As a mem-
ber, you may be involved in helping deal with some 
of these as well. Most of these topics are addressed in 
this book.
Ongoing Issues of National 
Importance
■ Leadership: To move successfully into the future, 
the fi re service needs leaders capable of developing 
and managing their organizations in dramatically 
changed environments.
■ Prevention and public education: The fi re ser-
vice must continue to expand the resources allo-
cated to prevention and health and safety education 
activities.
■ Training and education: Fire service managers 
must increase their professional standing in order 
to remain credible to community policy makers 
and to the public. This professionalism should be 
grounded fi rmly in an integrated system of nation-
ally recognized and/or certifi ed education and 
training.
■ Fire and life safety systems: The fi re service must 
support adoption of codes and standards that man-
date the use of detection, alarm, and automatic 
fi re sprinklers with special focus on residential 
properties.
■ Strategic partnerships: The fi re service must reach 
out to others to expand the circle of support to 
assure reaching the goals of public fi re protection 
and other support activities.
■ Data: To successfully measure service delivery 
and achievement of goals, the fi re service must 
have relevant data and should support and par-
ticipate in the revised National Fire Incident 
Data System. Likewise, NFIRS should provide 
the local fi re service relevant analysis of data 
collected.
■ Environmental issues: The fi re service must com-
ply with the same federal, state, and local ordi-
nances that apply to general industry and which 
regulate response to and mitigation of incidents, 
personnel safety, and related training activities.
Emerging Issues 
of National Importance
■ Customer service: The fi re service must broaden 
its focus from the traditional emphasis on suppres-
sion to a focus on discovering and meeting the 
needs of its customers. This may include preparing 
for and being able to deliver an effective response 
a hearing, and people are not afraid of being fool-
ish by putting forth a creative idea, even if it seems 
extreme.
■ Provide an environment in which disagreement is 
allowed. The group is comfortable with this concept 
and shows no signs of having to avoid confl ict.
■ Provide an environment in which agreements are 
not suppressed or overridden by premature group 
action. On the other hand, there is no tyranny in the 
minority. Individuals who disagree do not appear 
to be trying to dominate the group or to express 
hostility. Their disagreement is an expression of a 
genuine difference of opinion, and they can expect 
a hearing in order that a solution may be found.
■ Provide an environment in which most decisions 
are reached by a kind of consensus, where it is 
clear that everybody is in general agreement and 
willing to go along.
■ Provide an environment in which criticism is 
allowed but which there is little evidence of 
 personal attack, either openly or in a hidden fash-
ion. The criticism has a constructive fl avor in that 
it is oriented toward removing an obstacle that 
faces the group and prevents it from getting the 
job done.
■ Provide an environment in which people are free to 
expressing their feelings as well as their ideas on a 
problem and on the group’s operation.
■ Provide an environment in which clear assignments 
are made and accepted.
■ As the leader, provide an environment in which 
you lead but do not dominate. In fact, allow the 
leadership to shift from time to time, depending on 
the circumstances. Different members, because of 
their knowledge or experience, are in a position at 
various times to act as resources for the group. The 
members utilize themselves in this fashion, and 
they occupy leadership roles while they are thus 
being used.
To be a good manager, help make these conditions 
happen at your workplace.
ONGOING AND EMERGING 
MANAGEMENT ISSUES FOR 
THE FIRE SERVICE
Before we close out this two-chapter discussion 
of management, we should look at where the fi re 
and emergency services are headed and give some 
thought to the major issues that face management in 
these organizations.4 Your department may already 

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  127
■ Wellness: The fi re service must develop holistic 
wellness programs to ensure that fi refi ghters are 
physically, mentally, and emotionally healthy and 
that they receive the support they needed to remain 
healthy.
■ Political realities: Fire service organizations 
operate in local government arenas. Good labor– 
management and customer service relations are 
crucial to ensuring that fi re departments have max-
imum impact on decisions that affect their future.
■ Interagency cooperation: Today’s environment 
requires that the fi re service create and maintain 
effective working relationships with all elements of 
the community before a disaster occurs.
to all forms of local disasters, be they natural or 
human-made.
■ Managed care: Managed care may have the poten-
tial to reduce or control health care costs. It also 
will have profound impact on the delivery and 
quality of emergency medical care.
■ Competition and marketing: In order to survive, 
the fi re service must market itself and the service it 
provides, demonstrating to its customers the neces-
sity and value of what it does.
■ Service delivery: The fi re service must have a uni-
versally applicable standard that defi nes the func-
tional organization, resources in terms of service 
objectives (types and level of service), operation, 
deployment, and evaluation of public fi re protec-
tion and emergency medical services.
opportunity is gone, it will be up to a year before it pres-
ents itself again.
How else does this environment impact everyday fi re-
fi ghting decisions?
■ Rescue is a unique challenge with the unusual ques-
tion, “Where do I send the victims once they are evac-
uated and/or rescued?” Victims not attired in extreme 
cold weather gear must be quickly evacuated to a safe 
warm area; minutes, or sometimes even seconds, in 
the environment could render an unprotected person 
dead or incapacitated.
■ Fire attack could be no more than a total exposure 
protection scenario. The air in Antarctica is very dry 
and it is usually windy. Any wooden building could be 
a loss by the time an engine company arrives, even if 
the response time is quick! Fire attack almost always 
involves advancing dry hoselines as any hoseline not 
fl owing water will quickly freeze. Ice on the fi reground 
presents a hazard that will remain for months and 
must be a consideration in the total strategy and tac-
tics plan. Wet turnout gear will quickly freeze and ren-
der fi refi ghters handicapped while attempting normal 
duties. Firefi ghters can also quickly become hypother-
mic on a fi re scene, and provisions must be made for 
fi refi ghter rehabilitation.
■ Salvage operations must be quick and coordinated. 
Anything usable that is not damaged by fi re or water 
must be protected and moved, if at all possible. Prod-
ucts of combustion remaining must also be cleaned 
thoroughly to comply with the Antarctic Treaty. No 
waste can remain on the continent—it all must be 
packaged and shipped off continent for disposal.
Training, tabletop exercises, and constant fi re tactical dis-
cussions are a must for Antarctica’s fi refi ghters and com-
pany offi cers. The things that many people are used to 
I think that company offi cers tend to take resource man-
agement for granted—it is a skill that often comes eas-
ily, especially to those who have been in the area and in 
the fi re department for any length of time. I am no ex-
ception. I certainly understood making changes in the 
way the fi re department does business under certain 
circumstances, like in ice and snow and freezing tem-
peratures, but it was a very small part of my thought 
process. Then I took a job as a fi refi ghter in Antarctica, 
and resource management became critical. Once I was 
promoted to lieutenant, I realized that I would have to in-
corporate issues related to resource management into 
every decision I make—not only to get the job done, but 
also to protect fi refi ghters.
If one word was given to describe the biggest chal-
lenge it would most likely be the word “cold.” The en-
vironment presents the greatest challenges, and these 
challenges go much further than one might think. The 
extreme cold is very hard on all mechanical equipment. 
Even new vehicles are as prone to weather-related prob-
lems as are much older vehicles. There is always the 
question in my mind, “Will the equipment function as it 
should?” The cold affects the physical and mental abili-
ties of the fi refi ghters and rescuers as well as general 
fi refi ghter attitude. Summer season here can present 
some mild temperatures (mild relative to the continent), 
but these are short-lived and usually there are about 4 to 
6 weeks of temperatures in the mid 30s ∫ F. This presents 
the possibility of outdoor training scenarios, annual hose 
testing, and driver/operator training, but all of this has 
to be accomplished during this short season; once the 
EXTREME RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Lieutenant Marty Rutledge, Antarctic Fire Department, 
McMurdo Station, Antarctica

128  CHAPTER 5
in fi refi ghting back in the United States can be totally dif-
ferent here in this land of ice and cold. The basis for the 
fi refi ghting work we do here shares many similarities with 
the training and fi refi ghting done in the United States, but 
a constant focus on resource management in the condi-
tions we face in Antarctica is what keeps our fi refi ghters 
safe and effective.
Questions
1. Why is a focus on resource management so important 
for Lieutenant Rutledge?
2. What similarities do you see between resource 
 management in your fi re department and resource 
management in the fi re department in Antarctica de-
scribed in this case study?
3. What differences do you see between managing com-
pany resources within your fi re department and how 
Lieutenant Rutledge’s must manage his?
4. Provide an example of how resource management 
can affect the safety of fi refi ghters in this case study.
5. Now, provide an example of how resource man-
agement can affect the safety of fi refi ghters in your 
own department. Although this case study provides 
an extreme example, can you see the critical im-
pact that management of resources has on your own 
department?

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  129
T
his chapter contains practical tools to assist you 
in managing your resources. Learn to use your 
resources well, especially your own time.
These chapters only scratch the surface. To learn 
more about management, check for the newest man-
agement books in your library or bookstore.
LESSONS LEARNED
agency shop an arrangement whereby employees 
are not required to join a union, but are required to 
pay a service charge for representation
arbitration the process by which contract disputes 
are resolved with a decision by a third party
authority the right and power to command
budget a fi nancial plan for an individual or 
organization
capital budget a fi nancial plan to purchase high-
dollar items that have a life expectancy of more than 
1 year
closed shop a term in labor relations denoting that 
union membership is a condition of employment
fact finding a collective bargaining process; 
the fact fi nder gathers information and makes 
recommendations
Formal Bid a formal request for cost of prod-
ucts and/or services that are over a specifi ed dollar 
amount
goal a target or other object by which achievement 
can be measured; in the context of management, a 
goal helps defi ne purpose and mission
ISO a family of standards for quality manage-
ment systems. ISO 9000 is maintained by ISO, the 
International Organization for Standardization, and 
is administered by accreditation and certifi cation 
bodies
line-item budgeting collecting similar items into 
a single account and presenting them on one line in a 
budget document
mediation the process by which contract disputes 
are resolved with a facilitator
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) a pre-
established contract to provide goods or services 
from a vendor prior to an emergent event
mission statement a formal document indicating 
the focus and values for an organization
objective something that one’s efforts are intended 
to accomplish
open shop a labor arrangement in which there is 
no requirement for the employee to join a union
operating budget a fi nancial plan to acquire the 
goods and services needed to run an organization for 
a specifi c period of time, usually 1 year
program budget the expenses and possible 
income related to the delivery of a specifi c program 
within an organization
Request for Bid a formal request for cost of prod-
ucts and/or services that are over a specifi ed dollar 
amount
Request for Proposal (RFP) a solicitation 
 typically used when you need design, consultant, 
products, or typically services
Request for Quote (RFQ) a non binding solicita-
tion typically to determine cost for goods or services 
from pre-established vendors or contractors
union shop a term used to describe the situation 
in which an employee must agree to join the union 
after a specifi ed period of time, usually 30 days after 
employment
vision an imaginary concept, usually favorable, of 
the result of an effort
KEY TERMS

130  CHAPTER 5
 9. What are the benefi ts of writing well-defi ned 
specifi cations?
 10. How can you, as a company offi cer, improve the 
use of the department’s fi nancial resources?
 11. How can you, as company offi cers, improve the 
use of the department’s human resources?
 12. How can you, as company offi cers, improve the 
use of the department’s time resources?
 13. How can you, as company offi cers, improve the 
use of your personal time?
 14. What is your role, as a company offi cer, in man-
aging customer service?
 12. What does your department purchase that is let 
out for bid and what is purchased directly?
 13. What are the benefi ts of writing well-defi ned 
specifi cations?
 14. What are the applicable purchasing laws and who 
is responsible for ensuring your department fol-
lows them?
 15. What required policies does your agency have in 
place for acquiring resources?
 16. Who within can your agency can legally expedite 
purchases?
 17. What are the guidelines needed to submit a 
 request for purchasing equipment?
 18. How well do you manage your own time? What 
could you do to improve your time management?
 19. What is the operating cost for your station and 
what percentage is for staffi ng?
 20. What is the importance of accurate data entry and 
what are the effects of inaccurate data entry?
 21. What are the ongoing and emerging management 
issues in your department?
 22. Why is it important to develop and maintain 
working relationships before a disaster with other 
elements of the community?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. What is a mission statement?
 2. What is meant by labor relations?
 3. What are some of the typical issues covered by 
union contracts?
 4. What are the major differences between manage-
ment and member rights?
 5. What is the process for implementing project 
management principles?
 6. What is a budget?
 7. What is the difference between a capital budget 
and an operating budget?
 8. What is the difference between a formal bid and 
an RFQ?
 1. What are the benefi ts of having a mission 
statement?
 2. What is the mission statement of your organiza-
tion? Do you agree with what it says? If you could 
make changes to your department’s mission state-
ment, what would you suggest?
 3. What are some ways to assess the performance of 
your department relative to its stated mission and 
goals?
 4. Why is customer service an import issue for emer-
gency response organizations?
 5. What are the major differences between manage-
ment and member rights?
 6. What is your department’s procedure for data col-
lection, recording, retention, and disposition?
 7. Why is delegating diffi cult?
 8. Why do some supervisors have problems delegat-
ing work?
 9. Much of an offi cer’s time is spent doing adminis-
trative work. What administrative duties would be 
appropriate for delegating? What administrative 
duties would not be appropriate for delegation?
 10. How does your department manage routine 
expenditures?
 11. How does your department manage capital 
expenditures?

The Company Officer’s Role in Managing Resources  131
1. Unions are discussed here for several reasons, even though we 
realize that not all fi refi ghters are union members or that they 
even benefi t from union representation. This section discusses a 
process that while formalized by a labor–management relation-
ship, can bring benefi ts to the employees of any organization.
2. Unfair labor practices include interference with employees in 
their right to organize, interference with a labor organization, 
interference with employees who do not want to participate in 
union activities, discrimination in employment because of union 
participation, refusing to bargain in good faith, asking the em-
ployer to discriminate against an individual, and featherbedding 
provisions in the contract.
3. Adapted from Douglas McGregor, “The Managerial Team,” 
in The Human Side of Enterprise (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1960).
4. Conference Report, Wingspread IV (Fairfax, VA: International 
Association of Fire Chiefs, 1996).
ENDNOTES
Anthony, Derrick. “10 Common Mistakes New Company Offi cers 
Make.” FireRescue, November 2007.
Carlson, Richard. Don’t Sweat the Small Stuff. New York: 
 Hyperion, 1997.
Cascio, Wayne F. Managing Human Resources. 5th ed. Boston: 
Irwin McGraw-Hill, 1998.
Cavette, Chris. “Runs per Gallon.” Fire Chief, December 2007.
Coleman, Ronny. “To Pursue Progress, Ask Yourself ‘What If?’” 
Fire Chief, March 2007.
Cooper, Frank. The Customer Signs Your Paycheck. Everett, WA: 
Frank Cooper Publishing Company, 1984.
Covey, Stephen R. First Things First. New York: Simon and 
 Schuster, 1995.
Johnson, Spencer, Who Moved My Cheese? New York: G.P. 
 Putnam’s Sons, 1998.
Lasky, Rick. “Customer Service that Serves Your Department.” 
Fire Engineering, March 2004.
Lasky, Rick. “Pride and Ownership: The Love of Our Job—Our 
Mission.” Fire Engineering, May 2004.
Lasky, Rick. “Pride and Ownership: The Love of Our Job—The 
Firefi ghter.” Fire Engineering, June 2004.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Lasky, Rick. “Pride and Ownership: The Love of Our Job—The 
Company Offi cer.” Fire Engineering, July 2004.
McGregor, Douglas. The Human Side of Enterprise. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1960.
Okray, Randy and Thomas Lubnau. Crew Resource Management 
for the Fire Service. Saddle Brook, NJ: Fire Engineering, 2004.
Poulin, Thomas. “Managed Expectations.” Fire Chief, November 
2008.
Project Management Institute, A Guide to the Project Management 
Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide. 3rd ed.). PMI Institute, 
October 2004
Ritvo, Roger A., et al. Managing in the Age of Change. Burr Ridge, 
IL: Irwin Professional Publishing, 1995.
Serio, Gregory. “Re-evaluating Risk.” Fire Chief, June 2008.
Urbano, Paul. “Company Offi cer Time Management.” Fire Engi-
neering, July 2008.
Wallace, Mark. Fire Department Strategic Planning. Saddle Brook, 
NJ: PennWell, 1998.
Wilmoth, Janet. “Union United.” Fire Chief, February 2004.

The Company Officer’s 
Role: Principles 
of Leadership
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ What Is the Difference between 
Management and Leadership?
■ Organizations and Groups
■ What Is Leadership?
■ Modeling Human Behavior
■ Understanding Power
■ How to Determine the Leadership 
Style that Is Right for You
■ Good Leadership in Today’s 
Workplace
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
6

133
STREET 
STORY
I 
have the unique and very satisfying opportunity to be a paid and a volunteer 
officer at the same time in two separate organizations. The opportunities I have 
in these two positions offer unique challenges to me in developing both as a 
manager and, more importantly, as a leader.
I believe the most important factor in successful leadership at any job is 
attitude. A person must be responsible for his or her actions, must be educated 
and trained, and must be able to communicate well. Firefighting is a very special 
job. Does it really matter if you are volunteer or paid? The job has to be done, and it 
has to be done right—every time. The foundation of attitude helps me to cope with 
the challenges of being a leader. Focusing on what to do, or what is wrong, is easy 
if you leave the personalities and the issue of “paid versus volunteer” out of the 
equation. The problem is just that, the PROBLEM, usually not the people.
Expectations are another part of the foundation for a positive attitude. 
“Good enough” simply does not cut it. If a company officer is solid, makes 
intelligent decisions, and continually acts and performs as a leader, then this lays 
the groundwork for the success of the entire team. The right attitude and defined 
expectations remove many of the obstacles to success and allow everyone to 
play by the same rules. If a leader can be consistent, fair, accept team input, 
and attempt to remove the personalities from the issues at hand, the team can 
thrive, no matter whether they are paid for their work or they provide service as 
volunteers.
Many firefighters are quick to place blame and foster negativity based simply 
on the paid versus volunteer issue. I firmly believe that the mark of a great fire 
service leader is that he or she can lead any type of firefighters, paycheck or no 
paycheck. Remembering that we are a service to our citizens and that we must be 
trained and make intelligent decisions helps to build a bridge between the paid and 
volunteer services—and get over it with success!
—Street Story by Scott Windisch, Lieutenant, The Woodlands Fire Department,
The Woodlands, Texas, and Deputy Chief,
Ponderosa Volunteer Fire Department, Houston, Texas

134  CHAPTER 6
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
6-1 Define interpersonal and group dynamics.
 
6-2 Describe the principles (elements) of interper-
sonal and group dynamics used to obtain group 
cooperation.
 
6-3 Explain how understanding the human behav-
ior of employees assists the company officer in 
performing their daily duties.
 
6-4 Describe the elements that determine leader-
ship style.
 
6-5 Discuss ways to use leadership to build positive 
teamwork.
 
6-6 Identify the uses of leadership power.
 
6-7 Compare the principles (elements) used by 
supervisors to obtain cooperation of subordinates.
 
6-8 Define the different types of leadership styles 
available to the company officer.
 
6-9 Define the term power as it relates to company 
officer.
 6-10 Describe the positive and negative aspects of 
power.
 6-11 Identify the sources of leadership power.
 6-12 Identify the types of leadership power.
 6-13 Differentiate between the various types of 
leadership.
 6-14 Determine which type of power is appropriate 
for a given situation.
 6-15 Interpret when it is appropriate to use different 
types of leadership styles.
 6-16 Describe cultural diversity.
 6-17 Analyze the effect of cultural diversity on the fire 
service.
 6-18 Explain the human resource policies and proce-
dures that apply to the department.
*The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for 
Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, are identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.
INTRODUCTION
We discussed organizations in Chapter 3. In Chapters 4 
and 5, we discussed management in organizations. We 
now look at the human side of our organizations, the 
people who work in the organization.
To be effective, the people in those organizations 
need leadership. Leadership focuses on people— 
people working together in organizations. In this 
chapter, we look at some principles of leadership. In 
Chapter 7, we look at the applications of these prin-
ciples in your workplace.
ing, controlling, and problem solving. Leadership is a 
set of processes that creates organizations in the fi rst 
place or adopts them to signifi cantly changing circum-
stances. Leadership defi nes what the future should 
look like, aligns people with that vision, and inspires 
them to make it happen in spite of the obstacles.1
ORGANIZATIONS 
AND GROUPS
An organization is a group of people working 
together to accomplish a task. There are many types 
of organizations. Fire departments are formal organi-
zations. A fi re department bowling league represents 
an informal organization. Both meet the defi nition: a 
group of people working together for a common pur-
pose. In spite of the varied nature of organizations, 
they share several common characteristics:
All organizations have a purpose. The purpose may 
be to make a profi t, protect the environment, provide an 
essential service to the community, or just have fun.
Second, all organizations are made up of people. 
Although a purpose statement is essential to provide 
the organization with goals and objectives, it takes 
people to make these things happen.
NOTE
Leadership focuses on people working together in 
organizations.
WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE 
BETWEEN MANAGEMENT 
AND LEADERSHIP?
Management is a set of processes that can keep a com-
plicated system of people and technology running 
smoothly. The most important aspects of manage-
ment include planning, budgeting, organizing, staff-

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  135
Third, these people will arrange themselves 
into some type of organizational structure. They 
will defi ne the duties and responsibilities of the 
organization’s members and establish rules and 
procedures.
A group is two or more people who come together 
for a common purpose. Therefore, group dynam-
ics can be defi ned as how those individuals inter-
act and infl uence one another. Groups will tend to 
develop numerous dynamic practices that separate 
them from other individuals. These practices can be 
referred to as interpersonal dynamics. In a group 
environment, the two major factors that are consid-
ered are the task at hand and the relationships within 
the group. Groups must be able to resolve confl ict, 
build trust, and, above all, communicate. Interper-
sonal dynamics molds these groups into effective 
team units.
By their very nature, groups represent people 
who share common interests and goals. They may 
share a vision of what their group can do. For many 
groups, there is also a sense of permanence, a desire 
to see that the group fl ourishes and survives. As a 
result of these common interests and visions, the 
members work together to satisfy these interests. 
These shared values are what bind the members 
together as a group.
As we have already indicated, most of us like to be 
affi liated with groups. The members of a fi re depart-
ment are a group, and they are part of at least one 
group at work. There are also informal groups at 
work, groups of individuals who share common inter-
ests. Their interests may be bowling, softball, golf, 
fi shing, photography, or other pursuits. Even here, 
we see some variation in how groups work. Softball 
requires a group just to fi eld a team, and at least two 
teams are needed to play a game. Clearly, there is 
organizational structure here, for the team members 
must be able to play the various positions and must be 
able to work together to be successful. On the other 
hand, individuals in a group that goes fi shing together 
may be more autonomous and unstructured. In these 
informal situations, we have the right to select what 
we want to do.
We may also belong to groups away from work. We 
may be active in a church, civic association, or neigh-
borhood resident association. We may be involved 
with activities that support the development of our 
children, such as scouting or soccer leagues. All of 
these are groups. Within all groups, there are posi-
tions to be fi lled. Someone has to be the leader. That 
person may be appointed or elected. In most informal 
groups, that person may be the one who comes for-
ward with an idea. The group accepts the idea and 
responds to the requests for help.
WHAT IS LEADERSHIP?
What is leadership? Leadership is defi ned as the 
personal actions needed by managers to get team 
member’s to carry out certain activities. Leadership 
is achieving the organization’s goals through others. 
Simply put, leadership is getting other people to do 
what you want done. Management, leadership, super-
vision, and administration: we hear these words used 
often, and we may confuse them. Indeed, they are 
often used interchangeably.
Leadership is one’s infl uence over others. This def-
inition infers that leadership is a management tool. If 
you think of the management of the resources of the 
organization, you must include the human resources. 
Managing human resources deals with personnel 
administration, the administrative activities associ-
ated with staffi ng an organization. These activities 
include hiring, promoting, and so forth, which are 
usually the job of the human resource or personnel 
department.
Suppose that one of your neighbors suggests a party. 
If the weather is nice, it can be held outdoors. Some-
one starts with an idea; others add their ideas and 
agree to participate. The group comes to a consensus 
on the time and place that work best. Everyone agrees 
to make great food and to make purchases to support 
the gathering. The weather cooperates and everyone 
has fun.
Is it work? Yes, of course it is work. Does someone 
have to take the lead? Yes, at least initially. Will there 
be some who do not participate? Of course. But for 
most, the benefi ts far outweigh any efforts. All who at-
tend go home feeling great and agreeing to do this 
again next year.
Who elected the leaders? Who made the rules? Clearly 
they were there, but they were very informal. All agreed 
to the idea and in so doing accepted some responsibility 
to the others for the overall success of the event. A group 
of people with a purpose. In this case, the purpose was 
just to have fun.
WE ALL BELONG TO 
INFORMAL GROUPS
NOTE
Leadership is one’s influence over others.
For the supervisors in the organization, managing 
human resources is more about leadership, the human 
relationships in the organization. Effective leadership 

136  CHAPTER 6
deals with changing the personal conduct of others. 
Leadership skills are based on the feelings and atti-
tudes that have grown out of both the relationship 
with a team member and the sum of all of the experi-
ences that have occurred during the supervisor’s life.
service because of a love for the job. Most look for 
opportunities for professional growth and for serving 
their community; they like working with others, and 
they are generally willing to take on any reasonable 
task to help the citizens.
NOTE
We let our leaders use their experiences to attempt to 
influence our actions.
NOTE
President Harry Truman said, “A leader is a [person] who 
has the ability to get other people to do what they don’t 
want to do, and like it.”
We let our leaders use their experiences to attempt 
to infl uence our actions. How much tolerance we have 
for this control over us is determined both by our per-
sonality and the personality of the leader. Some are 
more tolerant than others. We all know people who 
are tolerant of their organizational situation and stick 
around, regardless of the conditions. We also know 
people who frequently change jobs for one reason or 
another. In some cases, they may lack the tolerance 
needed to survive in a diffi cult work environment.
Several things generally help make the work envi-
ronment a better place:
■ Sound organizational objectives
■ Clear policies and guidelines
■ Consistent management
■ Clear defi nition of duties
■ Open lines of communications
■ Individuals well matched with jobs
■ Recognition of good work
We have discussed several of these important issues 
in previous chapters. Where these characteristics are 
present, it is easier to be a good leader. When members 
can see their place in the overall organization, when 
they are given information and allowed to contribute 
their ideas, and when their services are appreciated, 
they will be satisfi ed and productive. Textbooks, mag-
azine articles, and professional development seminars 
all address the positive values of these important con-
cepts. Yet we still see organizations where these basic 
qualities are missing. In these cases, effective leader-
ship is more challenging. Many of the members as well 
as the leaders become frustrated. The organization is 
likely to be operating at less than full potential.
When poor work conditions exist in a fi re depart-
ment, everyone loses. Most fi refi ghters join the fi re 
NOTE
When the essential qualities of effective organization 
are missing, members become disillusioned.
When the essential qualities of effective organization 
listed previously are missing, these members become 
disillusioned. Some members quit, while others just 
hang around, doing as little as they can. In these cases, 
everyone loses, and the department is probably not really 
serving the community as well as it could. As company 
offi cer you may not be able to do much that will have 
a department wide impact, but you should do what you 
can to ensure these qualities exist within your crew.
When we looked at simple organizational struc-
ture in Chapter 3, represented by a triangle, we saw 
that there were four major categories of employees: 
employees, supervisors, middle managers, and top 
managers. Applying these generic labels to the fi re 
service, we usually call these same layers fi refi ghters, 
company offi cers, senior staff, and the fi re chief (as 
shown in Figure 6-1). In this chapter, we are focusing 
on the supervisory role of the company offi cer.
Company offi cers supervise fi refi ghters. Because 
you are the fi rst supervisory rank in the organiza-
tion, and because you usually do not supervise other 
 managers, we call you fi rst-level supervisors. The 
leadership component of the supervisor’s job is a large 
part of your overall responsibility.
The perception of the supervisor’s job has changed 
over the last few years. Before World War II, and even 
CHIEF
SENIOR STAFF
COMPANY OFFICER
FIREFIGHTERS
FIGURE 6-1 Company officers represent the first 
 supervisory rank in the organizational structure of the 
fire service.

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  137
for a period afterward, the supervisor’s role was simply 
to see that the work got done. This was where man-
agement interfaced with the members. The supervi-
sor had the authority to defi ne the job, monitor the 
 workers’ performance, discipline those who needed 
it, and fi re those who did not respond.
Today, the role of the supervisor is much expanded. 
You might think of some other titles that help defi ne 
the leader’s job. Today’s team leader is also a coach, 
foreman/forewoman, and supervisor. Regardless of 
the exact title or the perception it implies, the job is to 
lead the organization’s human resources. An impor-
tant part of that job is to develop and maintain the 
organization’s human resources to their fullest poten-
tial. The role of the supervisor is important today in 
any organization and it appears that the importance 
of the supervisor’s role will continue to grow.
increasing services. Increasing services while hold-
ing the line on budgets means that fi re departments 
must become more effi cient. In organizations of every 
kind, part of this cost reduction is being accomplished 
through the streamlining of the organization. In par-
ticular, middle management is a common target. For 
the fi re service, this means that there are fewer layers 
of supervision between the fi re chief and the station 
offi cers. More responsibility for the day-to-day opera-
tion of the organization is being passed to you, as the 
company offi cer.
NOTE
Today’s supervisor is also a coach, foreman/fore-
woman, and team leader.
NOTE
An important part of the leader’s job is to develop and 
maintain the organization’s human resources to their 
fullest potential.
NOTE
Increasing services while holding the line on  budgets 
means that fire departments must become more 
efficient.
FIGURE 6-2 As company officers, 
you are expected to provide leader-
ship in the fire station as well as at 
the scene of emergency events.
Increasing Responsibilities 
for the Company Officer
In many communities, the cost of providing gov-
ernment services is under close scrutiny. At the 
same time, fi re departments are expected to provide 
For many fi re service organizations, the greatest 
opportunities for further improvements in effi ciency 
will come at the company level. While the organiza-
tion is getting smaller, the job at the company level 
is becoming more complicated. We just noted that 
more work is being passed down to the company offi -
cers, and at the same time, most fi re departments are 
responding to an increasing variety of emergency 
situations. As company offi cers, you must person-
ally remain profi cient in the skills needed to respond 
to the myriad of emergency situations that can be 
expected, and at the same time, you must see that 
your  personnel are profi cient and ready to perform 
their respective duties (see Figure 6-2).
In addition to the duties required at the emergency 
scene, many other supervisory tasks crowd the day. 
Preplanning, company inspections, and physical 

138  CHAPTER 6
training all compete for the company’s time. Other 
issues, such as diversity training and improved cus-
tomer service beg for attention. All of these require 
good leadership.
Where Do We Get 
Good Leaders?
It has been said that there are only two positions in a 
fi re department to which outsiders can apply. One is the 
fi re chief, and the other is as an entry-level fi refi ghter. 
With few exceptions, all other positions are fi lled by 
promoting people from within the organization.
There are many benefi ts of such a promotion pro-
cess. Certainly, you, as the company offi cer, need to 
understand the fi refi ghter’s job, and you will even 
be a fi refi ghter during certain emergency activities. 
You, by the nature of your experience, also know the 
organization, understand the rules, and in most cases 
know the people with whom you work.
Emergency service organizations usually promote 
our personnel based on some combination of past 
performance, test scores, and evidence of relevant 
training and education. But new supervisors soon 
fi nd that their technical competence does not mean 
as much at the supervisory level; they fi nd greater 
challenges in people issues, administrative duties, 
and the responsibility for managing others.
MODELING HUMAN BEHAVIOR
To be a good leader, you should understand human 
behavior. Most of us in the fi re service have had thou-
sands of hours of training on the technical aspects 
of the job. You have been trained in fi re suppression, 
emergency medical procedures, and how to deal with 
hazardous materials. Most fi re companies spend about 
10 percent of their time dealing with emergency activ-
ities. They spend most of the rest of the time they are 
together relating as humans. Few of us have had much 
formal training in human relations. Most of us would 
work better together if we could better understand 
how others react in various situations.
communities and ethnic groups. We look briefl y at 
several of the signifi cant contributions to this fi eld.
It is hard to take a photograph of human behavior. 
It would be even harder to show a picture of an atti-
tude. Yet, we all have some concept of these terms. To 
help us understand these ideas, many of the writers on 
human behavior have conceived models to represent 
some aspect of human behavior. A diagram or chart 
usually represents these models.
Models are used to represent real things. When 
we model human behavior, we attempt to represent 
real human behavior. We use diagrams or draw-
ings to help convey our thoughts in books. Unfortu-
nately, the models do not always give a complete or 
precise picture.
Using models of human behavior helps us under-
stand people. We do not need to be behavioral psy-
chologists to realize that not all people are alike. But 
we can all benefi t from the available information that 
enables us to better understand people. Understanding 
helps us get along better with others. These basic con-
cepts are important to everyone, especially leaders.
To truly understand people a good leader must fi rst 
evaluate themselves. They must decide if they are in 
it for the team or for themselves. There are a lot of 
people in this business who will try to achieve great 
things for themselves for the purpose of feeding their 
own ego. Good leaders develop the team along their 
journey, their personal agendas support the team’s 
vision, and they continually try and improve the team. 
By evaluating human behavior, a leader can provide 
values, improve work ethic, and ultimately lead the 
team to success.
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
Abraham Maslow is best known for establishing the 
theory of a hierarchy of needs. Maslow suggested that 
human beings are motivated by unsatisfi ed needs and 
that certain lower needs need to be satisfi ed before 
higher needs can be satisfi ed. According to Maslow, 
there are four general types of needs (physiological, 
safety, love, and esteem) that must be satisfi ed before 
a person can act unselfi shly. He called these needs 
“defi ciency needs,” and, once they are fulfi lled, other 
(higher) needs emerge, and these, rather than physi-
ological hungers, tend to dominate. When these are 
satisfi ed, again new (and still higher) needs emerge, 
and so on. As one desire is satisfi ed, another pops up 
to take its place. The layers in Maslow’s Hierarchy of 
Needs can be described as follows (see Figure 6-3):
■ Physiological needs: Physiological needs are the 
very basic needs such as air, water, food, sleep, 
sex, and so on. When these are not satisfi ed, we 
may feel sickness, irritation, pain, discomfort, 
OFFICER ADVICE
Most of us would work better together if we could better 
understand how others react in various situations.
Working together is all about group behavior. Study-
ing group behavior is a part of the science of sociol-
ogy. Sociology includes the study of groups ranging 
from families and small workplace groups to entire 

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  139
and so on. These feelings motivate us to alleviate 
them as soon as possible to establish homeosta-
sis. Once they are alleviated, we may think about 
other things.
■ Safety needs: Safety needs have to do with 
 establishing stability and consistency in a chaotic 
world. These needs are mostly psychological in 
nature. We need the security of a home and fam-
ily. Many in our society cry out for law and order 
because they do not feel safe enough to go for a 
walk in their neighborhoods.
■ Social needs: Love and belongingness are next 
on the ladder. Humans have a desire to belong 
to groups: clubs, work groups, religious groups, 
family, gangs, and so on. We need to feel loved 
(nonsexual) by others and to be accepted by oth-
ers.  Performers appreciate applause. Beer commer-
cials, in addition to playing on sex, also often show 
how beer makes for camaraderie.
■ Esteem needs: There are two types of esteem 
needs. First is self-esteem, which results from com-
petence or mastery of a task. Second, there is the 
attention and recognition that comes from others. 
This is similar to the belongingness level; however, 
wanting admiration also has to do with the need 
for power. People who have all of their lower needs 
satisfi ed may drive very expensive cars because 
doing so raises their level of esteem. “Hey, look 
what I have!”
■ Self-actualization needs: The need for self-
 actualization is “the desire to become more and 
more of what one is, to become everything that 
one is capable of becoming.” People who have 
everything can maximize their potential. They 
can seek knowledge, peace, aesthetic experiences, 
and self-fulfi llment.
Life is not as easy as Maslow’s model might suggest. 
One does not suddenly meet the needs on one level 
and step up to the next level; we move in small incre-
ments up and down life’s road, gradually moving from 
one level to another. There are no road signs along the 
way; in fact, it is unlikely we will know when we have 
moved from one level to another.
To some, Maslow’s concept suggests one-way 
movement, that we are always moving up the steps 
in the hierarchy. Unfortunately, that is not true, as we 
move up and down the steps of the hierarchy during 
life’s journey. We have good days and we have set-
backs: We lose our job, our home is destroyed by fi re 
or fl ood, our spouse or a child is injured. We are all 
at motion in this system, sometimes moving so slowly 
that we cannot perceive the motion. At other times, 
we move through the system rather quickly, especially 
when descending.
Although you may think of human behavior theory 
as being removed from our purpose here, today’s fi re 
offi cers should understand and apply Maslow’s ideas. 
They should understand where their personnel are at 
on the scale and be able to help them move up the 
scale when they are interested in doing so. As com-
pany offi cers, you should realize that as you attempt 
to motivate people, you must fi nd motivational tools 
that are consistent with your members’ needs. Fame 
and glory are nice, but for the young fi refi ghter who 
has a sick child or who is struggling to pay the rent, 
the basic needs are more important.
In the case of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, we are 
looking at a useful model, or tool, to help us under-
stand and motivate others. As a company offi cer, you 
should recognize that your workers have needs on 
one or more levels, and you should try to determine 
which level they are on. You should also realize that 
once those needs have been satisfi ed, your workers 
will have greater needs. In other words, as workers’ 
needs change, so do the factors that are effective in 
motivating them. Understanding human needs helps 
you better motivate others to improve themselves and 
the organization.
MASLOW'S HIERARCHY OF NEEDS
SELF-ACTUALIZATION
ESTEEM
LOVE
SAFETY
PHYSIOLOGICAL
FIGURE 6-3 Maslow’s Hierarchy of Human Needs.
NOTE
As members’ needs change, so do the factors that are 
effective in motivating them.
Herzberg’s Perspective 
on Motivation
Many consider money to be the ultimate motiva-
tor in the workplace. But experience has shown that 
when you provide workers with a raise, the  euphoria 

140  CHAPTER 6
lasts about one payday; after that, most people set-
tle back into their same old level of attitude and 
performance.
Frederick Herzberg described two factors that act 
on personnel at work. He called the fi rst set hygiene 
factors, factors that are needed just to get people to 
come to work and to prevent dissatisfaction. Hygiene 
factors include company policies and administra-
tion, supervision, salary, interpersonal relations, and 
working conditions. Herzberg suggested that if these 
are done well, the workers will be satisfi ed. If they 
are done poorly or not at all, the workers will be 
dissatisfi ed.
Just as good physical hygiene helps prevent dissat-
isfaction with our health and fi tness, so do the hygiene 
factors at work help prevent worker dissatisfaction. 
Good hygiene does not cure disease, but it does help 
prevent it. By the same token, Herzberg’s hygiene fac-
tors do not motivate workers; they prevent workers 
from having bad feelings about the workplace.
Dr. Herzberg called his second set of factors moti-
vators. Motivators encourage workers to rise above 
the satisfactory level and do excellent work. As he 
defi ned them, motivators include achievement, rec-
ognition, the work itself, responsibility, and advance-
ment. Keep Herzberg’s ideas in mind when you are 
motivating others.
When you really stop to think about it, both Maslow 
and Herzberg suggest a similar hierarchy of needs. 
Maslow had fi ve layers; Herzberg has only two. In the 
case of Herzberg’s model, remember that everything 
below the line will just keep workers from feeling 
bad. As supervisors, we have to add the items above 
the line to get positive results.
Needs Theory2
There is yet another way of looking at motivational 
factors. We have already seen that affi liation and rec-
ognition show up consistently as motivators. Research 
has also shown that some individuals like to have 
some infl uence over the group as well. So we add sta-
tus, or power, to our list of motivators as we look at 
the way we can best motivate others.
Consider persons with high-status or power needs. 
They like to be in charge and to have  infl uence over 
others. They like the structure of organizations 
and they like to get work done. Remember these 
three important characteristics: Persons with high-
power needs like to be in charge, persons with high-
 achievement needs like challenges, and persons with 
high-affi liation needs like to work in groups.
People who have high-achievement needs typi-
cally take personal responsibility for their efforts, 
set their own goals, and take on new and demanding 
challenges. They tend to be creative, and for many 
Motivators
■ Responsibility
■ Job with a purpose
■ Recognition of good work
■ Opportunity for promotion
■ Opportunity for achievement
■ Opportunity for personal growth
■ Threshold of satisfaction
Hygiene Factors
■ Good working relationships
■ Considerate supervisors
■ Good working conditions
■ Good pay and benefi ts
■ Job security
HERZBERG’S MODEL
We have been discussing what motivates others and 
how understanding their motivations will make us more 
effective in motivating them. Let us look at other factors 
that might determine leadership style. These factors are 
more a function of the leader’s needs and feelings, rather 
than those of the worker.
Leaders have various styles based on their own needs. 
We mentioned in Chapter 4 that, according to Douglas 
McGregor, there were two generally held management 
styles, determined by the leader’s belief about the work-
ers. McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y are called man-
agement style, but they have a great deal to do with the 
way you supervise. How you supervise is how you moti-
vate others to do what you want to get done.
While having concern for people is admirable, in the 
real world, we are all expected to get the job done. Some 
might see the needs of the people and the need for get-
ting the work done as a confl ict. Being nice, as sug-
gested by the Theory Y style of leadership, might not 
give you the productivity you want. On the other hand, 
being a taskmaster, as possibly represented by the The-
ory X style of leader, will not be well accepted in most 
situations by your teammates. It would appear therefore 
that these two forces, namely a concern for people and 
a concern for production, are in opposition, or at least 
in competition with one another, as you determine your 
own leadership style.
DETERMINING THE BEST 
LEADERSHIP STYLE FOR 
MOTIVATING OTHERS

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  141
with achievement needs, the strongest characteristic 
may be their need for feedback. These individuals 
usually set high goals for themselves, and they look 
for ways to get feedback on their performance.
for people. Position A may be similar in some ways 
to Theory X. Persons having this style of leader-
ship use their power to control people, telling them 
what to do and how it is to be done.
 2. At position B, we see a minimum regard for both 
people and production. Here, the leader provides 
the minimum amount of supervision needed to 
survive within the system.
 3. At position C, the leader has a strong bias for inter-
action with people, while having a relatively mild 
concern about production. In some ways, this per-
son is a strong advocate of McGregor’s Theory Y.
 4. In the center of the grid we have a leadership 
style that is represented by a middle-of-the-road 
approach on both scales. While position D may be 
somewhat better than the person who operates from 
position A, B, or C, we see that neither people nor 
production gets full attention and that either can be 
compromised to accomplish the other.
 5. At position E, we have the supervisor who has a 
high regard for both the workers and for produc-
tion. These leaders use their own talents to inte-
grate all the positive leadership qualities to bring 
out the full potential of all of their workers.
UNDERSTANDING POWER
The word power has been used several times in this 
chapter. How do you defi ne power in the context of 
leadership? Leadership is the exercise of power, and 
we said that leadership is achieving the  organization’s 
NOTE
Persons with high-power needs like to be in charge, 
persons with high-achievement needs like challenges, 
and persons with high-affiliation needs like to work in 
groups.
The third group are those who have high-affi liation 
needs. We have already discussed group dynamics to 
some extent. These people thrive on it. They desire to 
belong and be accepted by the group. Although they 
like to work, they prefer to work as part of a group. In 
many ways, these individuals are on Maslow’s third 
layer—they have a need to belong.
These three characteristics, the need to have status, 
to achieve, and to affi liate with others, are present in 
all of us. In many people, one of these needs charac-
teristics may be far more dominant. When that is the 
case, you may be able to fi nd work that fi ts their needs 
well. When you can match their needs with the task 
or the environment, they will be more than just satis-
fi ed, they will be motivated to work well. However, 
you should realize that you cannot always put people 
into the roles that they would most like. Frequently 
the organization’s needs must also be considered.
NOTE
While having concern for people is admirable, in the 
real world we are all expected to get the job done.
The Managerial Grid
The grid represents a fi eld in which the leader’s 
 concern for people and production are plotted (see 
Figure 6-4). The vertical axis represents the leader’s 
concern for people, and the horizontal axis represents 
the leader’s concern for production. The Managerial 
Grid was introduced in 1964 by Drs. Robert R. Blake 
and Jane S. Mounton. Their model of managerial 
behavior in an organizational setting suggested that 
morale (the people factor) and productivity are inde-
pendent of one another. Thus, either one could fl our-
ish, or fail, in spite of the other.
There are infi nite positions on the grid, but fi ve 
positions are noted here for purposes of explanation:
 1. In the lower right-hand corner, we see position A. 
Position A represents a leader with a passion for 
production while having a relatively low concern 
FIGURE 6-4 The Managerial Grid.
CONCERN FOR EMPLOYEES
C
HIGH
LOW
CONCERN FOR PRODUCTION
LOW
HIGH
B
A
E
D

142  CHAPTER 6
goals through others. To have this infl uence, the com-
pany offi cer must have some sort of power over team 
members. Power is the ability to infl uence others in 
a constructive way that supports the individual and 
the department; it should not be seen as a negative 
or bad thing. Company offi cers acquire power in 
several ways, some of which comes from formal or 
informal processes. Being promoted brings with it 
several types of leadership power, and company offi -
cers should be aware of this power; these forms of 
power should never be used to gain negative infl u-
ence over the company offi cer’s subordinates. Misuse 
of power can create a hostile work environment and 
tear down the ability to build trust among the crew. 
Leadership power should be used to build strong rela-
tionships within the group and when used in a fair 
and encouraging way power will assist in completing 
assigned task.
to reward people, or reward power. As a supervisor, 
you have the power to approve requests, recommend 
individuals for special assignments, and write recom-
mendations and evaluations that will help the person-
nel in your company attain their personal goals.
Reward power is more than giving someone a 
medal or some time off. Reward power may be 
nothing more than name recognition, a smile, or an 
acknowledgment of effort. Reward power can be tak-
ing a moment to help someone who is having a bad 
day. Reward power is not taking your bad day out on 
someone else.
Type of Power
Source
Use
Legitimate
Bestowed
Offi cial position
Reward
Comes with the 
badge
Power over 
others
Punishment
Comes with the 
badge
Power over 
others
Identifi cation
Individually 
earned
Charisma
Expert
Individually 
earned
Unique 
knowledge
LEADERSHIP POWER
Company offi cers work in a socially complex orga-
nization where they will need the support of subor-
dinates, peers, supervisors, and external parties such 
as the community to achieve organizational goals. 
Building an effective infl uence strategy using a per-
suasive power base will be a challenge for new com-
pany offi cers.
For fi re service personnel, the fi rst type of leader-
ship power comes with the badge of the offi ce. Some 
refer to this as legitimate power, the power that is 
bestowed upon you as an offi cer in the organization. 
As an offi cer, you wear insignia that indicates you 
are a representative of local government. The name 
of the governing agency is usually prominently dis-
played on that insignia. So, some power comes with 
the position.
With that legitimate power, two additional types 
of power are implied. The fi rst of these is the power 
Kimberly Alyn, a popular author and speaker on fi re-
 service training and development, says, “Empowering 
people to think and make decisions wherever possible 
accomplishes many things:
■ Building better teams
■ Improves morale
■ An increased sense of ownership
■ A greater feeling of trust
■ Higher productivity
■ Better service to the customers
■ A stronger public image
■ A more effi cient fi re department
■ Better succession planning.”3
EMPOWERING OTHERS
The other implied power that goes with the job is 
the power to punish, or punishment power. We usu-
ally think of punishment power as the authority to 
administer discipline, although, fortunately, this is 
not really an issue for most personnel.
Far more often, we punish people by simply fail-
ing to give recognition for a job well done or by with-
holding information that might be useful. This is not 
done on purpose; it is just a failure on the part of the 
supervisor to do things that are important in the job of 
being a good leader. Legitimate, reward, and punish-
ment power come with the badge.
There are additional forms of power that one 
earns. While the legitimate, reward, and punishment 
power come with the position, this added power is 
earned by individuals through their personal actions. 
It may be infl uenced by the way they treat people, 
by their ability to communicate, and by their knowl-
edge of the job. These qualities can be illustrated 
with terms like charisma and  knowledge. Clearly 
these qualities are much more subjective than the 
legitimate power evidenced by the gold badge, but 
they are just as real. Terms such as  identifi cation 

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  143
HOW TO DETERMINE THE 
LEADERSHIP STYLE THAT 
IS RIGHT FOR YOU
Effective leaders work at achieving the organization’s 
goals through the effi cient labor of others. They strive 
to do this as well as possible, and at the same time, 
they are helping members reach their full potential.
But these goals are seldom easily attained in real 
life. We are frequently faced with the old debate: 
Which is more important—the task or the people? 
Sometimes, the task is critical. At other times, the 
people are far more important. Sometimes, both 
are important; sometimes, neither requires much 
attention.
Three factors can help determine your own leader-
ship style: the team member, the leader, and the situ-
ation. Let us look at how each of these impacts on a 
leader’s style.
Elements that Determine 
Leadership Style
■ The Team Member
 The team member’s experience
 The team member’s maturity
 The team member’s motivation
■ The Leader
 The leader’s self-confi dence
 The leader’s confi dence in the team members
 The leader’s feeling of security in the 
organization
 The leader’s perception of the organization’s 
value system
■ The Situation
 Risk factors involved
 Time constraints imposed
 Nature of the particular problem
 The organizational risk climate
 The ability of the individuals to work as a team
power and expert power are often used to describe 
the qualities of role models and knowledgeable 
individuals.
Many leadership styles can be used. Dynamic and 
effective leaders make their style fi t the situation. 
Certainly, the factors we have been discussing here 
should be integrated into the process. Four represen-
tative styles follow:
 1. Directing. This style is characterized by lots of 
direction and mostly one-way  communications. 
The supervisor tells what has to be done,  provides 
direction, and monitors the results. The task gets 
more attention than the people. The person-
nel have little input into the decision-making 
process.
 2. Consulting. Here, there is some discussion in which 
the supervisor seeks ideas, explains the needs and 
decisions, and “sells” the idea. The supervisor still 
gives lots of direction but maintains close pres-
ence, providing encouragement and reassurance. 
In this mode, the supervisor is available to provide 
support to both the task and the people.
 3. Supporting. The leader encourages participa-
tion at all levels and shares responsibility for the 
process. Two-way communications are encour-
aged on a continuing basis. There is a sharing of 
the decision-making process. The leader facili-
tates growth by sharing information and ask-
ing questions that will enhance the workers’ 
understanding of the situation. In this case, the 
leader has taken a supporting role, supporting the 
workers. There is little direction, but the leader 
continues to provide support, encouragement, 
and recognition.
 4. Delegating. The supervisor essentially turns the 
management of the task over to team members. 
Direction is limited to setting the goal and  defi ning 
the parameters. Communication may be lim-
ited, but when it occurs, it will be a cordial two-
way process.
In these four defi nitions, you see a gradual change 
from the strong directive-type of leadership behav-
ior to one in which the leader is more of a support-
ing player (see Figure 6-5). The fi rst type is mostly 
supervisor-centered leadership, and communications 
are mostly one-way. As the process moves toward a 
more member-centered leadership style, you see two-
way communications that are more effective, more 
freedom of thought and expression for the members, 
NOTE
Legitimate, reward, and punishment power come with 
the badge.
OFFICER ADVICE
Many leadership styles can be used. Dynamic and 
 effective leaders make their style fi t the situation.

144  CHAPTER 6
and members that are more involved with the deci-
sions and the outcome.
Many of us tend to be too directive. Ease up a bit, 
and learn how and when to use each of the four lead-
ership styles effectively. During a normal day, there 
are situations in which each is appropriate. Use the 
one that is most productive.
PROPORTION OF SUPERVISOR/MEMBER
PARTICIPATION
DIRECTING
CONSULTING
SUPPORTING
DELEGATING
AMOUNT OF SUPERVISOR PARTICIPATION
AMOUNT OF MEMBER PARTICIPATION
FIGURE 6-5 Leadership style var-
ies depending upon the amount of 
member input allowed.
OFFICER ADVICE
“Never tell people how to do things. Tell them what to do 
and they will surprise you with their ingenuity.”—George 
S. Patton Jr.
It is not due to a lack of trying, for the fi re service typically 
has one of the most stringent testing systems of any pro-
fession. In fact, most of us are a product of this very sys-
tem or are involved in a similar system right now. But are 
these systems evaluating ALL of the attributes required 
to be a good offi cer? To that end, the Leadership Tet-
rahedron was developed adding another facet that we 
should consider incorporating into our promotional pro-
cesses (see Figure 6-6).
The Leadership Tetrahedron simply places traits re-
quired to be a fi re offi cer, in place of the components 
essential for a fi re. At the top of the Leadership Tetra-
hedron is “Desire.” Good offi cers will always have the 
desire to aspire as well as to inspire, and possess the 
desire to excel at everything they do. They continually 
seek ways to improve themselves and others. They at-
tend training sessions, seek feedback from their subor-
dinates and their superiors on how they are doing, and 
strive to pass on to others what they know and have 
learned. Training is a top priority for these individuals, 
Anyone who has any familiarity with the basics of fi re be-
havior and combustion should be familiar with the Fire 
Tetrahedron. For decades, the Fire Triangle with the com-
ponents of heat, fuel, and oxygen was used to describe 
the chemical structure of fi re. It was then discovered that 
a fourth component was necessary for combustion to 
occur; Chemical Chain Reaction was added, and the Fire 
Tetrahedron was born.
The same is true of the promotional processes used 
within the fi re service. For many years, we have oper-
ated under the assumption that seniority, written tests, 
and assessment exercises identifi ed and measured the 
key components required to be a fi re offi cer.  However, 
just like the Fire Triangle, we may not be identifying all of 
the key components necessary to identify the best per-
son to promote. As a direct result, the fi re service often 
struggles with identifying and promoting the right people. 
GOOD LEADERSHIP IN 
TODAY’S WORKPLACE
Several major social issues have confronted our soci-
ety in recent times. These issues deal with diver-
sity and harassment in the workplace. Diversity and 
harassment in the workplace are generally considered 
to be management issues, but we consider them here 
in the context of good leadership. Indeed, the organi-
zational tone for policies regarding these important 
issues must come from the top of the  organization. 
But this is not a book for fi re chiefs, nor is it a book 
about what fi re chiefs should do. The focus of this 
THE LEADERSHIP TETRAHEDRON

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  145
Ability
Courage
Desire
Interpersonal
Skills
FIGURE 6-6 According to the Leadership Tetrahedron a 
well rounded officer must be assessed in all areas.
Ability
Courage
Desire
Interpersonal
Skills
FIGURE 6-6
According to the Leadership Tetrahedron a 
well rounded officer must be assessed in all areas.
because they do not operate under the assumption 
they know it all or have nothing left to learn. Persons 
who have lost this desire typically  accept the status quo 
and merely perform duties expected of them, without 
striving to excel. Typically, chief-level offi cers, especially 
battalion-level offi cers, are probably the best and worst 
examples of this. The rank of battalion chief is as high 
as many wish to attain within the fi re service. Anything 
higher typically requires a transition from shift work to 
an 8-to-5/Monday-through- Friday schedule, and anyone 
who has worked both realizes the 24-hour shift is a much 
more attractive schedule that  affords a person a lot more 
time off, to pursue other ventures. Therefore, typically 
when a person attains chief, he or she has “made it.” 
With no aspiration to go any higher, one subsequently 
loses the desire to learn. 
Additional training classes are not required to retain the 
position, so why should they attend any? It is very likely 
they will earn the same amount of money whether they 
spend every day off attending a class or whether they at-
tend none. Besides, submitting a new idea or policy or 
anything outside of status quo could potentially cause 
more work, so status quo it is.
We all have either worked for or know someone like 
this. They usually operate by a seat-of-pants manage-
ment style. They are not up to date on the latest technical 
or management information, and while they may do 
their best, they are lacking the necessary skills because 
they are operating within a limited bubble of information. 
What they gain, they gain from mandatory in-service 
training sessions, or what they pick up from others who 
have not lost their desire and took the time to attend out-
side training sessions. It is interesting to note that these 
same individuals are by and large the biggest com-
plainers and spend most of their time tearing down the 
department and its administration, while those who 
have the desire normally possess a positive attitude to-
ward the department. The second component of the 
Leadership Tetrahedron is “Ability.” No matter how much 
desire one possesses to become an offi cer, he or she 
may lack the required abilities or skills to do the job. It 
may simply be a matter of more training, or it may be 
something that they will never possess. There was once a 
fi refi ghter who had a desire to become a pump operator. 
Countless hours were spent attempting to train this in-
dividual, but he could never fully grasp the mechanics 
of pumping and would fall to pieces when placed under 
pressure. He had all the desire in the world; however, 
he lacked the skills needed to be an effi cient pump op-
erator and likely will never possess what it takes. The 
same can be true with an offi cer candidate. To be an 
effective offi cer, one needs to learn, practice, and be 
effective in certain skills. Ability can be broken down 
into a series of  different skills sets, including but not lim-
ited to Standard Operational Guidelines, ICS system, 
code  enforcement, building construction, basic fi refi ght-
ing tactics,  leadership, etc. Typically, these are areas 
tested; evaluating how well a candidate knows opera-
tional guidelines and other basic fi re-related  information. 
If an assessment process is used, then it may attempt to 
place a value on a candidate’s ability to put this informa-
tion to use. Dependent on the process, it may be a small 
portion of the total score, or it may be the only score 
used in evaluating a candidate. The point being, it only 
tests the knowledge the candidate possesses at that 
time in a play situation, and it does not test all four com-
ponents of the Leadership Tetrahedron. The third com-
ponent of the Leadership Tetrahedron is “Courage,” but 
not the run-into-a-burning-building-and-save-the-baby 
kind of courage. While it is necessary for an offi cer to be 
able to perform this task, this act should be done based 
on a risk/benefi t analysis of the situation and not an 
abandonment of all common sense because someone 
is screaming, “Save my baby.” The courage spoken of 
here is the ability of an offi cer to stand on his or her own 
two feet, assume responsibility for his or her actions, 
and make decisions based on his or her judgment and, 
when necessary, step outside the box and take risks. 
Offi cers who want a policy for everything, so they do not 
have to assume risks, will never be good offi cers. He or 
she typically operates this way because he or she be-
lieves they cannot get in trouble if they follow policy. Offi -
cers are needed who use discretion and common sense 
and who are not afraid to make decisions and do the 
right thing, even if occasionally it does not follow policy. 
If you do not believe this concept, try to write Standard 
Operational Guidelines for every situation you are likely 
to encounter, taking away an offi cer’s discretionary de-
cision making. If you are successful, then you will not 
need offi cers, only robots that can be programmed 
with the volumes of operational guidelines you develop. 
Furthermore, a good offi cer possesses the courage to 
assume his or her duties and not dodge those respon-
sibilities just so they can remain one of the troops. He 
or she also possesses the courage to discipline when 
required. Additionally, a good offi cer should also have 
the courage to stand up for the troops when a new 

146  CHAPTER 6
policy is unjust or unfair, or a new procedure is unsafe, 
and not roll over or look the other way because it is good 
for his or her career. If you do not believe these things 
take courage, then you have never been an offi cer.
The fi nal chain reaction component of the Leadership 
Tetrahedron is “Human Relations.” For no matter how 
much desire an offi cer has to inspire his or her subordi-
nates, if that offi cer cannot relate to them, or if he or she 
does it in a manner that generates resentment, then the 
offi cer will not be effective.
No matter how many classes he or she may have at-
tended, or skills sets an offi cer has perfected, or ability 
he or she has attained, the offi cer will be ineffective if he 
or she cannot relate to his or her subordinates how to get 
the job done.
No matter how much courage an individual pos-
sesses, if he or she has continually bullied his or her sub-
ordinates to get his or her way, then he or she will be 
ineffective.
A good offi cer needs to be able to communicate with 
others orally. A good offi cer needs to be able to relate to 
subordinates and occasionally express empathy for what 
he or she, as an individual, may be experiencing. If an of-
fi cer is cold and removed, always goes by the book, and 
does not communicative with subordinates, it is unlikely 
that he or she will ever bond with the subordinates. The 
atmosphere will become and likely remain an us-versus-
them atmosphere. These are not the types of offi cers 
whom the troops will follow. A good offi cer, while remain-
ing an authoritative fi gure of the group, bonds with the 
group and comes to know who they are, what motivates 
them, and what their interests are. He or she also learns 
their strengths and weaknesses and then, if he or she 
possesses the desire, begins to make use of their knowl-
edge and skills, capitalizing on the strengths of each in-
dividual while diminishing their weaknesses.
If you remove one of the components from the Fire 
Tetrahedron, you will not have a fi re. If an offi cer does not 
possess all the components of the Leadership Tetrahe-
dron, he or she will not be an effective fi re offi cer. 
Therefore, offi cers should be developed and evaluated 
through a process that evaluates all four components of 
the Leadership Tetrahedron. An offi cer candidate needs 
to be evaluated in all of these factors in real-world situa-
tions throughout his or her career, not just within the last 
few months or 15 minutes of an assessment exercise.
To that end, utilization of a promotional process that 
uses a written test, assessment exercises, and a peer 
evaluation to measure all of the Tetrahedron compo-
nents is recommended. A written test will evaluate a 
candidate’s basic knowledge as well as reduce the num-
ber of candidates to a manageable size for the other 
processes. A written test will also, to a limited degree, 
measure a candidate’s desire, assuming the amount of 
time one puts into preparing for a test determines how 
well he or she will perform. An assessment exercise will 
evaluate a candidate’s desire and ability. If properly de-
signed, an assessment exercise can also determine a 
candidate’s human relations skill; however, one must re-
alize it will typically be limited, as most candidates are 
placed in the role of dealing with a member of the public 
or with a personnel matter one on one. The leaderless 
group exercise can evaluate a person’s ability to work 
within a group setting; however, it, too, is limited due to 
the short time a candidate is evaluated and the dynam-
ics of a small group. Despite these limitations, an as-
sessment exercise is a valuable testing tool and should 
be used. The third and fi nal evaluation tool recommend 
is a peer evaluation. A peer evaluation can measure the 
components of the tetrahedron that are missed with the 
written and assessment exercises. If candidate were 
evaluated by their peers, with whom they work on a 
regular basis and who have nothing to gain (or lose) in 
the process, then they will truly and accurately be evalu-
ated in all the components of the tetrahedron. Promo-
tional candidates would be assessed on their ability to 
perform in the real world and their ability to make de-
cisions and think on their feet. Additionally, candidates 
would be evaluated on their courage and the capacity 
to do the right thing. Candidates would also be evalu-
ated on their desire for self-improvement and their de-
sire to work with others and pass on their knowledge. 
This could be done by rating the candidates in differ-
ent characteristics like responsibility, job performance, 
communication skills, leadership abilities, attitude/
demeanor, judgment, team player, integrity, human rela-
tions skills, problem analysis, handles stress/problems/
adaptability, and initiative/motivation.
Unfortunately, seniority does not fi t anywhere within 
the Tetrahedron. Seniority, while easy to calculate, only 
tells us how long a person has been on the job, not how 
good of a job that person has been doing during that 
time. A potential candidate may have 10 years of experi-
ence, but is it 1 year 10 times over, where they continue 
to make the same mistakes, or is it truly 10 years of wis-
dom and knowledge? Was it 10 years at a busy station, 
or was it 10 years at the slowest station in the depart-
ment? Did that person have the desire to be part of a 
committee during those 10 years, or did he or she simply 
show up for the shift and go home at the end, forgetting 
he or she even worked for the department? Perhaps this 
person showed up for work on a regular basis but spent 
half the time conducting business for his or her part-time 
job. Seniority is a very poor indicator of whom is the best 
candidate for promotion and should not be used.
If one believes in this theory, then we hope that you 
can understand why there is a need to change the way 
we develop and identify the best offi cers.

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  147
text is the company offi cer, and in that regard, the 
leadership issues that company offi cers face.
judgment and morality failed, the laws now provide 
incentives for proper action.
In 1964, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act. 
Title VI of the act deals with programs and activities 
that receive federal funding and prohibits discrimi-
nation on the basis of race, color, national origin, or 
sex. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act deals with 
employment and prohibits discrimination by employ-
ers on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national 
origin. The act also authorized the establishment of 
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) to enforce the act. Of these two, Title VII 
has the greater impact on our workplace.
FIREGROUND FACT
The fi re service has had signifi cant problems in the area 
of diversity and harassment.
NOTE
Both diversity and harassment deal with personal atti-
tudes toward others.
Both diversity and harassment deal with personal 
attitudes toward others. Those attitudes may be the 
product of a lifetime of family and community values 
over which we have little control. Regardless of our 
past culture and present beliefs, we must realize that 
within the workplace, laws and regulations determine 
the legal boundaries of our actions. To avoid problems, 
we should understand these laws and regulations.
Many federal laws prohibit discrimination. Start-
ing with the U.S. Constitution, the Fifth Amend-
ment provides that “No person shall . . . be deprived of 
life, liberty, or property without due process of law.” 
The Fourteenth Amendment provides that “No state 
shall . . . deny any persons within its jurisdiction the 
equal protection of the law.”
Given these constitutional guarantees, one has to 
wonder how these problems have occurred. Some 
suggest that the government failed to address the soci-
ological problems in the communities and workplace 
with quick and positive leadership action and that, if 
it had, these problems would not have happened. Oth-
ers suggest that employers were not fair in provid-
ing an equitable workplace for their personnel; that 
if their action had been more effective, we would not 
see the headlines in the newspapers nearly every day 
 regarding diversity and harassment issues in our gov-
ernment, our military, and our major corporations.
If we lived in a perfect world, and if all government 
offi cials and all employers were good and consider-
ate human beings, these things would not happen. But 
our world is not perfect, and people sometimes fail to 
understand the problem or the solution. Where good 
A condition in which all employees, and potential 
 employees, are treated fairly. Equal employment oppor-
tunity is more than a legal right; it is a human right.
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
■ Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits em-
ployment discrimination based on race, sex, color, 
 religion, or national origin.
■ The Equal Pay Act of 1963 prohibits sex-based wage 
discrimination when men and women perform sub-
stantially equal work in the same establishment.
■ The Age Discrimination Employment Act of 1967 pro-
tects individuals who are 40 years of age and older.
■ Title I and Title V of the Americans with Disabilities 
Act of 1990 (ADA) prohibit employment discrimination 
against qualifi ed individuals with disabilities in the pri-
vate sector and in state and local governments.
■ The Civil Rights Act of 1991 provides mone-
tary damages in cases of intentional employment 
discrimination.
FEDERAL LAWS PROHIBITING 
JOB DISCRIMINATION
Several other signifi cant laws bolster the power of 
the Civil Rights Act. The Equal Pay Act of 1963 pro-
hibits discrimination in compensation on the basis of 
sex. The Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972 
strengthened the authority of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 and expanded the power of the EEOC. The Civil 
Rights Act of 1991 provided that individuals may be 
personally liable (as well as their  organizations) for 
discrimination in the workplace. It authorized jury 
trials and increased the limits on fi nancial settle-
ments. As a result, we have seen increasingly larger 
punishments, especially in cases involving sexual 
harassment.
The fi re service has had signifi cant problems in the 
area of diversity and harassment. We still see head-
lines in the trade journals and local papers  suggesting 
that personal prejudice and a lack of good leader-
ship on the part of a few have cast a cloud over many. 
 Although much progress has been made, there is still 
plenty of evidence to suggest that the fi re service 
needs to continue to train offi cers and other personnel 
in dealing effectively with diversity and harassment 
issues.

148  CHAPTER 6
The EEOC enforces all of these laws. EEOC also 
provides oversight and coordination of all federal 
equal employment opportunity regulations, practices, 
and policies.
Changes are taking place in the fi re service as well. 
For the most part, the fi re service has long been domi-
nated by white males. However, that is changing, and 
women and minorities are entering the fi re service in 
increasing numbers (see Figure 6-7).
Women deserve special mention here. They repre-
sent slightly over half the total population, but they rep-
resent a very small percentage of the fi re service. Most 
of those who have entered the fi re service have proved 
themselves to be quite capable of performing all the 
tasks associated with fi refi ghting. In spite of some for-
mative barriers that they had to overcome, many of the 
women who entered the fi re service have done well. 
Some of those pioneers have proved themselves over 
and over and are serving capably as chiefs and senior 
offi cers in large, progressive fi re departments.
Think about America’s great history. Nearly all 
of our ancestors were immigrants, and at one time, 
they too were minorities. Half of them were female. 
Yet our parents and their parents were able to become 
successful. Many have given great service in public 
offi ce, academia, and industry. Today’s generation 
and tomorrow’s generation should have the opportu-
nity to accomplish their personal goals.
Public and private organizations are responding 
to these changes by seeking ways to hire, train, pro-
mote, and retain the best talent available, regardless 
of the gender, race, or ethnic background. As a result, 
we are seeing a more diverse workforce. Effectively 
supervising a diverse workforce is what good leader-
ship is all about.
Benefits of Diversity
We should all be committed to making our orga-
nization the best it can be. We should be looking 
at the total community and all of its citizens as a 
The Civil Rights Act of 1991 made major changes in the 
federal laws against employment discrimination enforced 
by EEOC. Enacted in part to reverse several Supreme 
Court decisions that limited the rights of persons pro-
tected by these laws, the act also provides additional 
protections. The act authorizes compensatory and pu-
nitive damages in cases of intentional discrimination and 
provides for obtaining attorneys’ fees and the possibility 
of jury trials. It also directs the EEOC to expand its tech-
nical assistance and outreach activities.
What Is EEOC and How Does It Operate?
The EEOC is an independent federal agency originally 
created by Congress in 1964 to enforce Title VII of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964. The commission is composed of 
fi ve commissioners and a general counsel appointed by 
the president and confi rmed by the Senate. Commission-
ers are appointed for 5-year staggered terms; the gen-
eral counsel’s term is 4 years. The president designates 
a chair and vice-chair. The chair is the chief executive of-
fi cer of the commission. The commission has authority to 
establish equal employment policy and to approve litiga-
tion. The general counsel is responsible for conducting 
litigation. The EEOC carries out its enforcement, educa-
tion, and technical assistance activities through fi fty fi eld 
offi ces serving every part of the nation.
THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1991
Finally, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
of 1990 prohibits discrimination on the basis of dis-
abilities, and covers employment, public accommo-
dations, transportation, and telecommunications. The 
ADA is a complex law that applies to employment 
issues, our 911 systems, and providing proper access 
for citizens and employees in public places such as 
fi re stations. Questions regarding local application of 
the ADA should be referred to higher management 
levels of your department or local government.
Diversity
Our communities are becoming more diversifi ed. 
Likewise, most government and private business 
activities are, or at least should be, becoming more 
diversifi ed. Until recently, white males dominated 
the workplace in nearly every industry, but this is 
 changing, and in the very near future, the white male 
will be a minority member of the workforce!
FIGURE 6-7 Today’s students are tomorrow’s firefighters. 
Tomorrow’s firefighters will be more diverse than those in 
the fire service today.

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  149
source of new members for our organization. As 
new members enter our organizations, we must 
be aware that they may have different values. As 
standing members of the organization, we should 
look on these new values as an opportunity, rather 
than a problem. The new members may have new 
perspectives on existing social problems, may be 
able to speak a second language, and may provide 
many other benefi ts that we lack. But all too often 
we close the door on these opportunities because 
these members are different.
All of us want highly motivated individuals 
working for us. Opening the doors of the fi re sta-
tion to groups that have been traditionally excluded 
allows a greater number of interested and quali-
fi ed persons to apply to our organization. A greater 
applicant pool means that departments can be more 
selective about the people they hire. Many large 
metropolitan fi re departments have the luxury of 
selecting one candidate from 20 or more applicants. 
If done carefully, the selection process provides 
highly qualifi ed candidates who are likely to sur-
vive the recruit training process and become well-
motivated, long-term members of the organization. 
Their gender, race, or ethnic background should not 
be an issue.
How to Supervise Diversity
Understanding and effectively managing diver-
sity must start at the top of any organization. But 
we quickly see that top management can have little 
impact without the understanding and cooperation 
of everyone in the organization. We all need to pro-
actively embrace the positive values of diversity and 
work hard to give all of our personnel the very best 
opportunity to grow to their full potential and satisfy 
their own goals.
Supervisors should take the time to learn about all 
new personnel and their personal values. The fact that 
these values may not be identical to our own should 
not be considered as a barrier but rather as an oppor-
tunity for learning more about ourselves and our 
personnel.
Supervisors should also be sure that women and 
minorities are fairly represented and involved with all 
of the department’s activities. Put them on commit-
tees. Listen to their opinions with an open mind, and 
give their ideas a fair try. Give recognition and sup-
port when appropriate. If these actions are not com-
pletely comfortable and natural, supervisors should 
be honestly assessing their own weaknesses in this 
area and looking for opportunities to improve their 
dealings with others. Many of the problems facing 
supervisors today are the result of inappropriate 
actions in the past.
NOTE
All of us want highly motivated individuals working 
for us.
ETHICS
Supervisors should be sure that women and minori-
ties are fairly represented and involved with all of the 
 department’s activities.
ETHICS
Many of the organization’s rules are unwritten. We 
must be sure that the same information is presented 
to all of our members, regardless of our personal feel-
ings about them.
Maintaining good working relationships for this 
increasingly diverse group of members is another 
matter. The new members enter a culture that has 
been traditionally a white male organization. They 
may be uncomfortable. The more senior members of 
the fi re service have had little experience in dealing 
with diversity issues, and some do not know how to 
deal with these diverse groups or how to handle the 
problems that arise.
For many women and minorities, the path to accep-
tance and the opportunities for advancement are a lit-
tle harder than for the traditional member. In some 
cases these are merely perceptions, and in some cases, 
there are real barriers that prevent them from having 
an equal opportunity.
Many of the organization’s rules are unwritten. We 
must be sure that the same information is presented 
to all of our members, regardless of our personal feel-
ings about them.
Harassment
To harass means to annoy, tease, or torment. 
 Harassment of any kind should not be allowed in 
the workplace. This ban includes harassment of new 
members or any other efforts to make any individual 
feel uncomfortable. Where this harassment has sex-
ual overtones, it is a clear violation of federal law. The 
law deals with both those who harass and those who 
permit harassing.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 covers 
sexual harassment in the workplace.4 The act states 

150  CHAPTER 6
that the behavior must be unwelcome sexually ori-
ented conduct of a verbal or physical nature. There are 
two situations in which sexual harassment generally 
occurs. The fi rst of these is considered a hostile work 
environment. A hostile work environment occurs 
when there are pictures, comments, and other offen-
sive acts that inhibit a worker’s performance. A sec-
ond situation occurs when one asks for sexual favors 
as a condition of employment, promotion, or transfer. 
This implies an act of power by one over another in 
which a favor is requested in exchange for some per-
sonal action. Such harassment is referred to as quid 
pro quo, a Latin phrase meaning “this for that.”
■ Have you talked to anyone else about this?
■ Has this happened before?
■ How long has this been happening?
■ Did you try to stop (this conduct) on your own?
■ What was the reaction?
■ What do you want me to do?
Notice especially the last question in the series. In 
some cases, no corrective action is desired. The com-
plainant may just want you to know that the event 
occurred, to sort of “get it on the record.” Be sure that 
you follow your organization’s policy. Many organi-
zations require at least some notifi cation be made, 
even in these situations.
NOTE
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 covers sexual 
harassment in the workplace.
We usually think of harassment situations in which 
there is a male–female relationship between two 
employees, with the male being the aggressor. In 
this stereotypical male–female harassment situation, 
the female is often the victim. Because of physical 
size and organizational position, men are generally 
thought to be more powerful. Sexual harassment is 
often about power.
While such circumstances do occur, you should 
realize that many other gender combinations can occur 
as well. The roles might be reversed—the female may 
be the aggressor. And it is possible that both parties 
could be of the same sex. Likewise, you should real-
ize that not all of the parties have to be members. 
Harassment may come from a visitor, a vendor, a 
 contractor, or a service provider in your workplace. 
Finally,  sexual harassment need not be about sex; it 
may be a general derogatory comment about a person 
because of that person’s gender.
What to Do when Harassment Occurs
Supervisors have a special obligation to protect per-
sonnel from the consequences of sexual harassment. 
When a person comes to you, as a supervisor, with 
a complaint about sexual harassment, you must take 
action promptly. Encourage the complainant to pro-
vide you with specifi c information. You may need to 
help the process by asking open-ended questions like 
the following:
■ Where did this occur?
■ When did this occur?
■ Who was involved?
■ Were there any witnesses?
ETHICS
Supervisors have a special obligation to protect per-
sonnel from the consequences of sexual harassment.
In some cases, you will have to take some action. 
Be sure to follow your department’s policies. Protocol 
may require the reporting and the presence of human 
resources personnel in the investigation, interviews, 
and corrective actions. Some departments direct the 
company offi cer to make the initial investigation, 
whereas others expressly preclude such action. If the 
policy directs you to conduct an investigation, you 
should follow the initial interview by checking with 
the witnesses, if any. Find out what they might have 
seen or heard. If talking to witnesses, start by say-
ing that you are investigating a complaint of sexual 
harassment and that they have been named as a wit-
ness to the act. Do not provide them with specifi c 
information regarding either the name of the accused 
or the accuser; just focus on their observations.
Finally, after you have a good understanding of 
what has happened, talk to the accused. Again, do not 
reveal the names of the accuser or of any witnesses 
you have interviewed. Be serious and to the point, but 
at the same time, be open minded and fair. Here are 
some guidelines on asking questions:
When talking to witnesses, start by saying, “I am 
investigating a complaint of sexual harassment. I 
would like to ask you a few questions regarding what 
you may have seen or heard earlier today . . . .”
When talking to the accused, start by saying, “I 
am investigating a complaint of sexual harassment by 
you. I would like to ask you a few questions regarding 
your actions (or conversations) this morning . . . .”
This approach makes the process a little easier for 
both you and the person you are questioning.
In talking to the accused, ask the individual to 
respond to the allegation(s). In most cases, the accused 

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  151
will acknowledge the action and will offer an excuse 
that the actions were misunderstood. Instruct the per-
son on the seriousness of the accusation, and advise 
the person regarding what is and is not acceptable 
workplace conduct. Advise the accused that there are 
laws and regulations that deal with these matters and 
those violations can have serious consequences.
The laws provide clear guidelines for organizations 
to follow in these matters. Most organizations have 
established policies for dealing with these issues. 
Know and follow your organization’s policies. You 
may be personally at risk if you violate the law or 
your organization’s policies in this important area. As 
a supervisor, you are a key player in the prevention, 
recognition, and resolution of any harassment-related 
problems in the workplace.
EEOC’s Guidelines for Employer Liability 
for Sexual Harassment by Supervisors
■ When does harassment violate federal law?
Harassment violates federal law if it involves dis-
criminatory treatment based on race, color, sex 
(with or without sexual conduct), religion, national 
origin, age, or disability or because the employee 
opposed job discrimination or participated in an 
investigation or complaint proceeding under the 
EEOC statutes. Federal law does not prohibit sim-
ple teasing, offhand comments, or isolated inci-
dents that are not extremely serious. The conduct 
must be suffi ciently frequent or severe to create a 
hostile work environment or result in a “tangible 
employment action,” such as hiring, fi ring, promo-
tion, or demotion.
■ Does the guidance apply only to sexual harass-
ment? No, it applies to all types of unlawful 
harassment.
■ When is an employer legally responsible for 
harassment by a supervisor? An employer is 
always responsible for harassment by a supervisor 
that culminates in a tangible employment action. If 
the harassment did not lead to a tangible employ-
ment action, the employer is liable unless it proves 
that (1) it exercised reasonable care to prevent 
and promptly correct any harassment; and (2) the 
employee unreasonably failed to complain to man-
agement or to avoid harm otherwise.
■ Who qualifi es as a “supervisor” for purposes of 
employer liability? An individual qualifi es as an 
employee’s “supervisor” if the individual has the 
authority to recommend tangible employment 
decisions affecting the employee or if the individ-
ual has the authority to direct the employee’s daily 
work activities.
■ Move quickly.
■ Let everyone you talk to understand that you are con-
cerned, that you take these matters seriously, and that 
you will make every effort to be fair and just.
■ Meet in private.
■ Make notes of the meetings and safeguard them.
■ Provide feedback to the accuser as to what you 
found.
■ Follow your organization’s policies to the letter.
GENERAL COMMENTS REGARDING 
ANY HARASSMENT ISSUE
NOTE
Most organizations have established policies for deal-
ing with harassment. Know and follow your organiza-
tion’s policies.
NOTE
As a supervisor, you are a key player in the prevention, 
recognition, and resolution of any harassment-related 
problems in the workplace.
The EEOC is charged with enforcing Title VII of the Civil 
Rights Act, which prohibits employment discrimination 
based on race, color, religion, sex (including sexual ha-
rassment), or national origin, and protects personnel who 
complain about such offenses from retaliation.
In 2003, the EEOC heard a case in which an employee 
did the right thing and got fi red! In this case, a nursing 
 supervisor in a large hospital was terminated after she took 
complaints of an operating room employee, complain-
ing about inappropriate behavior of a sexually  harassing 
 nature by a nurse, to her supervisors, the hospital’s top 
management. As a result of the supervisor’s action, the 
nurse complained to several doctors who, in turn, com-
plained to top management. One prominent physician 
even threatened to take his surgical business elsewhere. 
Instead of responding to the supervisor and dealing with 
the matter appropriately, the hospital took no action on the 
behavior or the initial complaint and terminated the super-
visor who brought the charges forward. She appropria-
tely asked the EEOC for help. A 4-day jury trial resulted in 
a $4 million award against the hospital.
RETALIATION

152  CHAPTER 6
In 1998, the U.S. Supreme Court heard four cases 
 regarding sexual harassment. The number of cases 
reaching the Court suggests that sexual harassment is 
still a signifi cant problem in the workplace. In writing for 
the Court, Justice David Souter noted, “It is well recog-
nized that sexual harassment by supervisors is a per-
sistent problem in the workplace. When a person with 
 supervisory authority discriminates, his actions neces-
sarily draw upon his superior position over the people 
who report to him.” Justice Souter’s comment is sup-
ported by the fact that the number of complaints fi led 
with the EEOC more than doubled (from 6,500 to 16,000) 
between 1991 and 1998.5
Two of the 1998 cases dealt with the employer’s li-
ability. In Burlington Industries v. Ellerth and Faragher v. 
Boca Raton, the Court held that an employer could be 
held liable for its supervisors’ sexual harassment under 
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, even if it did not 
know of the misconduct. In some cases, the employer 
can defend itself by showing it took steps to prevent or 
correct harassment. In these cases, the Court redefi ned 
the employer’s liability, not sexual harassment itself.
In another case, Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Ser-
vices, the Court held that the federal laws against sexual 
harassment on the job cover misconduct, even when the 
victim and the aggressor are the same sex. The fourth 
case, involving a school district, is not germane to this 
discussion. All of these decisions (except the school is-
sue) were against the employer.
In past decisions, the Supreme Court defi ned sexual 
harassment and made clear that it was covered under 
the Civil Rights Act. The case of Meritor Savings Bank v. 
Vinson (1986) was the fi rst signifi cant sexual harassment 
to reach the Supreme Court. The Court held that an em-
ployee might sue the employer when discrimination based 
on sex has created a hostile work environment. The criti-
cal issue in this case was whether members of one sex 
were treated differently or discriminated against because 
of their sex. Under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, it is 
unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an em-
ployee with respect to compensation, terms, conditions, 
or privileges of employment because of the employee’s 
race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. In this case, the 
Court also held that a plaintiff need not show economic or 
other tangible injury as the result of such action.
In Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc. (1993), the Court held 
that employees who sue for sexual harassment are not 
required to show that they suffered loss of their psycho-
logical well-being, much less any tangible injury, as the 
result of a hostile workplace environment—only that the 
condition existed and that they were subject to the condi-
tion. The test is whether a reasonable person subjected 
to the same discriminatory conduct would fi nd that the 
harassment altered the working conditions and made it 
more diffi cult to do the job.
What does all of this have to do with your organiza-
tion? These Supreme Court decisions support the em-
ployer who is proactive in taking action to stop sexual 
harassment in the workplace. They also suggest your or-
ganization not only needs to have policies but you need 
to enforce them.
In 
that 
regard, 
the 
following 
policies 
are 
recommended:
■ Provide sexual harassment training for workers and 
supervisors.
■ Have a policy of no tolerance, and make sure all per-
sonnel understand the rules.
■ Create a system in which workers have an opportunity 
to complain without fear of retaliation.
■ Promote supervisors carefully by recognizing leader-
ship qualities as well as technical competency.
■ Train supervisors to identify and investigate complaints.
■ Take complaints seriously.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT IS 
STILL A PROBLEM
■ What is a tangible employment action? A “tan-
gible employment action” means a signifi cant 
change in employment status. Examples include 
hiring, fi ring, promotion, demotion, undesirable 
reassignment, a decision causing a signifi cant 
change in benefi ts, compensation decisions, and 
work assignment.
■ How might harassment culminate in a tangible 
employment action? This might occur if a super-
visor fi res or demotes a subordinate because 
the subordinate rejects the supervisor’s sexual 
demands, or promotes the subordinate because 
the subordinate submits to the supervisor’s sexual 
demands.
■ What should employers do to prevent and correct 
harassment? Employers should establish, distrib-
ute to all employees, and enforce a policy prohib-
iting harassment and setting out a procedure for 
making complaints. In most cases, the policy and 
procedure should be in writing.
■ What should an antiharassment policy say? 
An employer’s antiharassment policy should make 
clear that the employer will not tolerate  harassment 

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  153
based on race, sex, religion, national origin, age, 
or disability, or harassment based on opposition to 
discrimination on participation in complaint pro-
ceedings. The policy should also state that the 
employer will not tolerate retaliation against any-
one who complains of harassment or who partici-
pates in an investigation.
■ What are important elements of a complaint 
procedure? The employer should encourage 
employees to report harassment to manage-
ment before it becomes severe or pervasive. The 
employer should designate more than one indi-
vidual to take complaints and should ensure that 
these individuals are in accessible locations. The 
employer also should instruct all of its supervisors 
to report complaints of harassment to appropriate 
offi cials. The employer should assure employees 
that it will protect the confi dentiality of harass-
ment complaints to the extent possible.
■ Is a complaint procedure adequate if employees 
are instructed to report harassment to their 
immediate supervisors? No, because the super-
visor may be the one committing harassment 
or may not be impartial. It is advisable for an 
employer to designate at least one offi cial out-
side an employee’s chain of command to take 
complaints, to assure that the complaint will be 
handled impartially.
■ How should an employer investigate a harass-
ment complaint? An employer should conduct a 
prompt, thorough, and impartial investigation. The 
alleged harasser should not have any direct or indi-
rect control over the investigation. The investigator 
should interview the employee who complained 
of harassment, the alleged harasser, and others 
who could reasonably be expected to have relevant 
information.
■ How should an employer correct harassment? If 
an employer determines that harassment occurred, 
it should take immediate measures to stop the 
harassment and ensure that it does not recur. Dis-
ciplinary measures should be proportional to the 
seriousness of the offense. The employer also 
should correct the effects of the harassment by, 
for example, restoring leave taken because of the 
harassment and expunging negative evaluations in 
the employee’s personnel fi le that arose from the 
harassment.
■ Are there other measures that employers should 
take to prevent and correct harassment? An 
employer should correct harassment that is clearly 
unwelcome regardless of whether a  complaint 
is fi led. For example, if there is  graffi ti in the 
 workplace containing racial or sexual  epithets, 
management should not wait for a complaint before 
erasing it.
 An employer should ensure that its  supervisors 
and managers understand their responsibilities 
under the organization’s antiharassment policy 
and complaint procedures.
 An employer should screen applicants for super-
visory jobs to see if they have a history of engag-
ing in harassment. If so, and the employer hires 
such a candidate, it must take steps to monitor 
actions taken by that individual in order to pre-
vent harassment.
 An employer should keep records of harass-
ment complaints and check those records when 
a complaint of harassment is made to reveal any 
patterns of harassment by the same individuals 
(see the “Managing Time” section in Chapter 5 
for more on keeping records).
■ Does an employee who is harassed by his or her 
supervisor have any responsibilities? Yes. The 
employee must take reasonable steps to avoid harm 
from the harassment. Usually, the employee will 
exercise this responsibility by using the employer’s 
complaint procedure.
■ Is an employer legally responsible for its super-
visor’s harassment if the employee failed to use 
the employer’s complaint procedure? No, unless 
the harassment resulted in a tangible employment 
action or unless it was reasonable for the employee 
not to complain to management. An employee’s fail-
ure to complain would be reasonable, for example, 
if the employee had a legitimate fear of retaliation. 
The employer must prove that the employee acted 
unreasonably.
■ If an employee complains to management about 
harassment, should the employee wait for man-
agement to complete the investigation before fi l-
ing a charge with the EEOC? It may make sense 
to wait to see if management corrects the harass-
ment before fi ling a charge. However, if man-
agement does not act promptly to investigate the 
complaint and undertake corrective action, then 
it may be appropriate to fi le a charge. The dead-
line for fi ling an EEOC charge is either 180 or 
300 days after the last date of alleged harass-
ment, depending on the state in which the allega-
tion arises. This deadline is not extended because 
of an employer’s internal investigation of the 
complaint.
Further guidance on harassment can be found on the 
EEOC’s Web site: www.eeoc.gov.

154  CHAPTER 6
Although a general statement elsewhere in this 
book indicates that the terms “employees” and “sub-
ordinates” include volunteer members of the fi re and 
rescue services, for purposes of this text, let us be very 
clear that the laws regard members of volunteer orga-
nizations in much the same way as they do employees 
and employers. Volunteer organizations are expected 
to provide a fair and equitable workplace for their 
members and for the public they serve. Although the 
threat of liability may be present, the risk of adverse 
publicity should be an even greater motivator to do 
the right thing. The loss of the reputation of a volun-
teer organization could lead to the loss of community 
support; most volunteer organizations need strong 
community support to exist.
Good leaders can prevent harassment in their work-
place. Take a proactive stance on harassment. Should 
you become aware of any form of harassment, take 
quick, fi rm action to let people know that the action is 
inappropriate. Failure to do so could be embarrassing 
and expensive for both you and your organization.
ETHICS
Volunteer organizations are expected to provide a fair 
and equitable workplace for their members and for the 
public they serve.
Lieutenant Steve Mormino says arguments between 
his fi refi ghters are not uncommon—when you are liv-
ing in the close quarters of a fi rehouse, there are  going 
to be disagreements—but for a good leader, they are 
also controllable.
Recently, an issue came up between fi refi ghters over 
a policy confusion. In their company, the most senior 
 fi refi ghter on a call has the fi rst choice of position. One 
fi refi ghter with seniority, who was on duty for someone 
else, thought he should have had fi rst choice. Another fi re-
fi ghter of less standing knew the company policy— the rule 
only applies if you are working your own shift. The two 
started arguing about who should have gotten the senior 
 position. At fi rst, Mormino let them argue it out, but when 
their chests started to rise and one pushed another, he 
got involved, getting in between them before things got 
out of control.
Then, he sat down with both of them together, reiter-
ated the policy, and let them cool down. The battalion 
chief, who had been upstairs in his offi ce, heard every-
thing—so he called Mormino later to make sure every-
thing was OK. Mormino assured him it was. Typically, 
Mormino will not bring minor arguments to a higher level 
if they are resolved.
If they are to a point where the issue could 
 continue—racial slurs or sexual harassment—or if a 
LEADING OTHERS
Steve Mormino, Lieutenant, FDNY, New York
 serious infraction had been made or a crime commit-
ted, he would have taken the matter to a higher level. 
But Mormino does not see that too often because the 
policies on expected behavior are clearly posted in the 
 fi rehouse and stated in the regulations manual, which 
 everyone is required to read annually. The fi refi ghters, 
he says, also know that punishment could have involved 
loss of mutual privileges or vacation days; the knowledge 
that these rewards could be taken away usually keeps 
problems from escalating.
Things between the two fi refi ghters ended up fi ne 
within minutes. One of them was on the lieutenants’ list, 
and because things were calmed down, that possibility 
for promotion has not changed.
Questions
1. Why do adults act like this?
2. What do you think of Lieutenant Mormino’s approach 
to this situation?
3. What would have likely happened if Lieutenant Mor-
mino had not intervened?
4. A mark of a good leader is the ability to anticipate 
problems like these and head them off as early as 
possible. Do you agree with that statement? How can 
it be accomplished?
5. What approach would you take in a situation like 
this?

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  155
O
ne of your most important roles as a company 
offi cer is leading others. Leading involves work-
ing with others and trying to infl uence others to 
accomplish the organization’s goals. This can be done 
in many ways, but when done effectively, productiv-
ity is increased and both supervisors and  workers 
LESSONS LEARNED
seem happier and more satisfi ed. Part of working 
with  others involves accepting proper organizational 
behavior where everyone is treated fairly and with 
respect. We continue this discussion on leadership 
and provide some practical tools for effective leader-
ship in Chapter 7.
consulting seeking advice or getting information 
from another; as a leadership style it implies that the 
leader seeks ideas and allows contributions to the 
decision-making process
delegating sharing work, authority, and responsi-
bility with another; as a leadership style, delegating 
implies the most generous sharing of the offi cer’s 
leadership role
directing controlling a course of action; as a lead-
ership style, it is characterized by an authoritarian 
approach
diversity a quality of being diverse, different, or 
not all alike
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) federal government agency charged with 
administering laws related to nondiscrimination on 
the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, or national 
origin
expert power a recognition of authority by virtue 
of an individual’s skill or knowledge
first-level supervisors the fi rst supervisory rank 
in an organization
group dynamics how individuals interact and 
infl uence one another
harassment to disturb, torment, or pester
high-achievement needs according to the 
needs theory of motivation, individuals with high-
 achievement needs accept challenges and work 
diligently
high-affiliation needs according to the needs 
 theory of motivation, individuals with high- affi liation 
needs desire to be accepted by others
hygiene factors as used by Frederick Herzberg, 
hygiene factors keep people satisfi ed with their work 
environment
identification power a recognition of authority by 
virtue of the other individual’s character or trust
interpersonal dynamics dynamic practices 
developed by groups that separate them from other 
individuals
leadership the personal actions of managers and 
supervisors to get team members to carry out certain 
actions
legitimate power a recognition of authority 
derived from the government or other appointing 
agency
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs a fi ve-tiered rep-
resentation of human needs developed by Abraham 
Maslow
model representation or example of something
motivators factors that are regarded as work 
incentives such as recognition and the opportunity to 
achieve personal goals
organization a group of people working together 
to accomplish a task
power the command or control over others, status
power needs a recognized motivator to be in 
charge or have group affi liation
punishment power a recognition of authority 
by virtue of the supervisor’s ability to administer 
punishment
reward power a recognition of authority by virtue 
of the supervisor’s ability to give recognition
supporting as a leadership style, the supporting 
process involves open and continuous communica-
tions and a sharing in the decision-making process
KEY TERMS

156  CHAPTER 6
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 7. How does diversity help the fi re service better 
serve its community?
 8. Name and briefl y describe the principal laws that 
provide guidelines to encourage diversity in the 
workplace.
 9. Name and briefl y describe the federal laws that 
prohibit sexual harassment in the workplace.
 10. What action should you take, as a company offi -
cer, when a member comes to you with an allega-
tion of sexual harassment?
 1. What is a group? What are some of the character-
istics of a group?
 2. Why do people like to work in groups?
 3. What is leadership?
 4. What is leadership power?
 5. How does Maslow’s theory apply to the leader’s 
job in the fi re service?
 6. Why should the demographics of the fi re depart-
ment mirror those of the community it serves?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
ENDNOTES
 7. Discuss the fi ve types of power discussed in the 
chapter.
 8. Which type of power is most effective for com-
pany offi cers?
 9. How does one determine the leadership style that 
is best for them?
 10. The text suggests that diversity and harassment 
have been issues in the fi re service. Would you 
agree? How did the fi re service in your commu-
nity respond to these issues? What has or is being 
done in the fi re service in your community in re-
sponse to these issues?
explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s 
employment, (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by 
an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions af-
fecting such individuals, or (3) such conduct has the purpose 
or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work 
performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive 
working environment.”
5. “For Employers, a Blunt Warning,” Washington Post, June 27, 
1998.
 1. Is leadership a learned or a natural skill?
 2. Is there any benefi t of studying the leadership 
traits of others?
 3. How are leaders selected in your organization? 
Is this a valid process? Might there be a better 
solution?
 4. Which leadership style is best for dealing with 
routine activity at the fi re station?
 5. Which leadership style is best for dealing with 
implementing a new procedure?
 6. Which leadership style is best for dealing with the 
conditions at the scene of an emergency?
1. Frederick Taylor, The Principles of Scientifi c Management. 
New York: Harper, 1911.
2. Not to be confused with “needs” as used earlier by Maslow.
3. Kimberly Alyn. “The Power of Empowerment in Leadership.” 
Firehouse (October 2008).
4. The U.S. Code defi nes sexual harassment as follows: “Unwel-
come sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other 
 verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual 
harassment when (1) submission to such conduct is made either 

The Company Officer’s Role: Principles of Leadership  157
Alyn, Kimberly. “The Power of Empowerment in Leadership.” 
Firehouse, October 2008.
Bell, A. Fleming. Ethics in Public Life. Chapel Hill, NC: The Insti-
tute of Government, 1998.
Bendrick, Mark. “A Fair Shake.” Fire Chief, April 2008.
Certo, Samuel. Supervision: Concepts and Skill Building. 3rd ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000.
Covey, Stephen R. Principle-Centered Leadership. New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1992.
Crane, Bennie and Julian Williasm. Personnel Empowerment. 
 Saddle Brook, NJ: Fire Engineering, 2002.
Edwards, Steven. Fire Service Personnel Management. Upper 
 Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2000.
Hogan, Lawrence J. Legal Aspects of the Fire Service, 3rd ed. 
 Frederick, MD: Amlex, Inc., 2003.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Kanterman, Ronald. “Leadership Excellence: Balancing Manage-
ment with Leadership.” Fire Engineering, October 2008.
Maxwell, John. There Is No Such Thing as Business Ethics. New 
York: Warner Business Books, 2003.
Schneid, Thomas D. Fire and Emergency Law Casebook. Albany: 
Delmar Publishers, Inc., 1997.
Schrage, Doug. “Offi cer Mentoring Preserves Fire Service Heri-
tage.” Fire Engineering, July 2007.
Swinhart, Dominick. “360-Degree Performance Evaluations.” Fire 
Engineering, August 2008.
Wilmoth, Janet. “Where Are the Leaders?” Fire Chief, June 2006.
Wilmoth, Janet. “A Leader’s Book Club.” Fire Chief, February 
2008.

The Company Officer’s 
Role in Leading Others
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ Being a Supervisor Is Different
■ Building a Relationship with Your 
Team Members
■ Four Effective Tools for Team 
Member Development
■ The 360-Degree Assessment
■ Performance Evaluation Systems
■ Giving Recognition
■ Taking Disciplinary Action
■ Taking Care of Your Teammates
■ Introducing Change
■ Still Not Convinced?
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
7

159
STREET 
STORY
I
’ve been with the London, Ontario Fire Department for more than 20 years now, 
working in a range of different areas. At one point I became a team coordinator 
for our special teams units, and then I became an officer. After working as an 
officer for a while, I moved on to training, where I have been for 5 years. Within 
the past year, I became the assistant director. I am responsible for all aspects of 
training for our department of about 400 people, along with the five other people in 
this division.
When I was working on the teams, I built up a lot of experience, and it was hard 
to find a way to turn around and give back that experience. You can give it to a 
couple of people on your team, but I wanted to turn it into something that I could 
invest in and create a wider audience. So much of what we do as company officers 
is on-the-job learning, and I think it is important for company officer candidates 
to see the action models. We can learn details and statistics in a classroom, but 
that is not the same as it is in a real world situation. I always say that it is critical 
when there is a new crew or group for them to see everything in action. So basic 
competency that you can learn in the classroom is the foundation, and then you 
have to get out there in the real world, and sometimes that is not as easy, and 
sometimes discipline is necessary. We get skilled people here all the time who just 
need to develop their qualities.
Sometimes a difficult situation can arise when you have talented groups of 
people all working together, and one or two people may be causing a problem 
within the group. One such thing happened about 2 years ago. We were working 
with a group from many different municipalities. They were all experienced before 
they came to us. We ran them through some basic training exercises, and I saw 
there was no challenge for them in that particular training. So we compounded 
the situation, and what we found was that the increase in pressure caused them 
to make mistakes. When I found that there were individuals who were able to 
adapt to those changes, I put them in charge of their team. One of these teams 
was not performing up to par. There was one individual on the team who was not 
performing as well as the others. So I gave the group a new, complex scenario; left 
it open ended for them to figure out how to solve it; and then had an immediate 
debriefing with them after they tried. Then I got on the offensive and asked them 
if they were aware that they were not performing the way they should be. One 
of the positive things I saw was that the group told me what they knew about 
their performance. I pointed out some other things they could do to improve their 
performance they might not have otherwise noticed, and the team leader took 
responsibility. I then gave them time to go away with what they had learned. They 
had their own discussion, and we saw their cohesion go way up. I think the notion 
of giving people the space to go off and digest everything on their own and then 
bring it back is important when it comes to corrective action.
Supervising teamwork can be hard, but one of the big things that I’m a fan of is 
that in a team, everyone brings something to the table. As a leader, you have to be 
a model of that behavior and enable others to bring their strength to the table, and 
there’s a trust and understanding that get built, and the leader has to foster that.
—Shawn Smith, Assistant Director of Training, 
London Fire Department, London, Ontario, Canada

160  CHAPTER 7
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
7-1 Describe how a job description impacts a unit 
member’s evaluation.
 
7-2 Identify the company officer’s role in the profes-
sional development of agency members.
 
7-3 Distinguish between coaching and counseling 
of employees.
 
7-4 Analyze a given situation and apply the appro-
priate coaching or counseling techniques.
 
7-5 Identify the responsibilities of the supervisor in 
recognizing those behaviors requiring referrals 
to a member assistance program.
 
7-6 Identify the appropriate use of coaching and 
counseling.
 
7-7 Explain the purpose of unit member evaluations.
 
7-8 Explain the evaluation process as it pertains to 
job performance.
 
7-9 Identify the standard operating procedures per-
taining to unit member evaluations.
 7-10 Discuss how each of the common evaluator 
errors affects a member’s evaluation.
 7-11 List the common evaluator errors that influence 
a member’s evaluation.
 7-12 Identify forms required for conducting a mem-
ber evaluation.
 7-13 Explain the agency’s policy for documenting an 
individual’s disagreement with the content of the 
evaluation.
 7-14 Describe how a job description impacts a unit 
member’s evaluation.
 7-15 Explain how the components found in a suc-
cession plan interact to produce a comprehen-
sive career development guide for fire personnel 
(e.g., FESHE, Emergency Services Professional 
Development Model).
 7-16 Describe the role of discipline as it relates to 
employee evaluation.
 7-17 Identify the characteristics of a group.
 7-18 Analyze the various phases of group dynamics 
within a work unit.
 7-19 List individual behaviors that constitute a 
 problem within the department.
 7-20 Identify the generally accepted steps for 
 resolving problems.
 7-21 Explain how individual behavior can affect 
 organizational culture.
 7-22 Describe the services available to a member in 
need of assistance.
 7-23 Explain how work-related stress can impact the 
performance of unit members.
 7-24 Explain how to encourage unit members to 
seek professional assistance.
 7-25 Explain how to follow up the unit member’s 
request.
 7-26 Describe the policies and procedures that 
 define the supervisor’s role in the member 
 assistance referral process.
 7-27 Identify the standard operating procedures 
 pertaining to federal, state, municipal, and 
 departmental human resource management.
 7-28 Interpret federal, state, municipal, and 
 departmental human resource management 
policies and procedures and how they impact 
members of the organization.
 7-29 Explain how change can affect organizational 
culture and behavior.
 7-30 Identify the process used by the agency to 
 develop a new policy or procedure.
 7-31 Describe how to implement change in a  manner 
that minimizes organizational and individual 
conflict.
* The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional 
Qualifi cations, are identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.
INTRODUCTION
This chapter continues our discussion on leadership. In 
Chapter 6, we discussed the basic concepts of leader-
ship. Here, we fi t them into the reality of the fi re service. 
Remember that the focus of this book is the company 
offi cer, the fi rst-line supervisor in the fi re service.
BEING A SUPERVISOR 
IS DIFFERENT
When people are promoted to supervisors, they quickly 
fi nd that the work is different and in some ways, more 
diffi cult than when they were one of the workers. The 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 161
As supervisors and as company offi cers, it is your 
job to develop the new fi refi ghter into a true profes-
sional. This is a critical time for both you and the new 
fi refi ghter. For most of those entering the fi re service, 
the person who has the greatest impact on them in their 
entire career is probably their fi rst company offi cer. You 
have an awesome opportunity and responsibility here!
You might look upon new fi refi ghters as simply 
resources. Indeed, they are now a part of the com-
pany team. At the same time you should look on new 
fi refi ghters as part of your team and your profession, 
and help them move along in a continuing process of 
development, just as you have done. In fact, a signifi -
cant part of any supervisor’s time should be devoted 
to the development of his or her subordinates. The 
task of developing subordinates is one of the most 
challenging tasks a company offi cer faces, and at the 
same time is one that can provide great personal satis-
faction. There is nothing more satisfying than watch-
ing a subordinate develop to full potential.
typical fi refi ghter has developed an impressive array 
of technical skills, knowledge, and abilities that make 
the fi refi ghter quite competent in that role. The new 
job as a supervisor is quite different.
NOTE
When people are promoted to supervisors, they quickly 
find that the work is different and in some ways, more 
difficult than when they were one of the workers.
Administrative duties, understanding the organi-
zation’s rules and regulations, and supervising oth-
ers are demanding tasks. Communications skills are 
vital. As a supervisor, you have to communicate with 
your team members. As a company offi cer, you are 
expected to be able to communicate with the rest of 
the organization and the public.
Few organizations, including most fi re departments, 
prepare prospective supervisors for the position. Fire 
departments promote good fi refi ghters and expect 
them to become good offi cers. Some fi re departments 
provide excellent training as new supervisors enter 
the offi cer ranks, whereas others provide a continuing 
program of professional development to provide the 
supervisor, leader, and manager with the leadership 
tools needed for the increasing responsibilities.
No one can anticipate every situation that may 
occur in the role as a new supervisor. The fact that you 
are reading a book on the topic is a positive step, but 
even here, what is learned from the book or in a class-
room will only begin the process of personal profes-
sional development. You are encouraged to continue 
the development process: Read every article and take 
every class on leadership you can.
OFFICER ADVICE
Continue the development process: Read every article 
and take every class on leadership you can.
The selection of new fi refi ghters into your organi-
zation and the new fi refi ghters’ entry-level training 
are normally not the province of the company offi cer. 
However, once these new fi refi ghters have survived 
the selection and initial training process, they are usu-
ally handed to you—the company offi cer. They will 
likely work in that environment until they too become 
company offi cers.
NOTE
For most of those entering the fire service, the person 
who has the greatest impact on them in their entire 
career is probably their first company officer.
Leaders take risks. Leaders have to have the confi dence 
to try new things. Leaders motivate people to work as 
a team and accept responsibility, even in failure. Lead-
ers understand that failure is only an event that can be a 
learning tool. Like the best of sports teams, good leaders 
sometimes lose, but like good teams, they come back 
and are willing to try again.
Many famous Americans were great leaders in their 
time. George Washington was a great general in the Rev-
olutionary War. He went on to become president of the 
United States. But he was not always successful: Wash-
ington lost eight engagements early in the war. Ulysses S. 
Grant was a great Civil War general. He too went on to be-
come president of the United States. Before the Civil War, 
Grant was a failure in business and in military service.
As you work to become a leader, try to demonstrate 
your leadership skills at every opportunity. Let the people 
you work with know that you are not afraid to take rea-
sonable risks. Let them know that you believe in sharing 
the praise when things go well and personally accepting 
the responsibility when they do not.
ON LEADERSHIP
BUILDING A RELATIONSHIP 
WITH YOUR TEAM MEMBERS
The First Meeting
The fi rst meeting with a new fi refi ghter should defi ne 
the job, establish positive relationships, and build a 
friendly atmosphere. Although new fi refi ghters are 

162  CHAPTER 7
clearly defi ne the members’ role and show them how 
they fi t into the overall organization. Give the team 
member a chance to talk and to ask questions.
qualifi ed to serve in that position, they may not have 
actually worked in this particular environment.
You may have to show them some pretty basic things, 
like where their lockers and bunks are located, where to 
hang their turnout gear, and where you want them to sit 
on the apparatus. You will have to pick up where the 
recruit academy left off in terms of training. Many fi re 
departments have a structured program that allows the 
new fi refi ghter to review what was covered in recruit 
school while learning new material that is needed on 
the job. And the new fi refi ghter should be expected to 
become familiar with the buildings and streets in the 
company’s fi rst-due response area. Much of this can be 
done using a senior fi refi ghter as a mentor.
NOTE
Many fire departments have a structured program that 
allows the new firefighter to review what was covered 
in recruit school while learning new material that is 
needed on the job.
The supervisor should establish a clear defi nition 
of the job. This seems rather elementary to the estab-
lished fi refi ghter, but think back to the fi rst days when 
you were on the job: Think about how nice it would 
have been if someone had taken a few minutes a day 
to explain the job in some detail to you.
When you are talking to a new team member, try to 
avoid information overload. Take just a few minutes 
a day to cover the needed items, rather than trying to 
do it all at once. When we get too much information, 
it is diffi cult to sort out all that we have heard, and it 
is certainly diffi cult to remember all the details, espe-
cially when we are entering a new profession. When 
you are explaining the tasks that need to be done, 
OFFICER ADVICE
The supervisor should establish a clear defi nition of 
the job.
OFFICER ADVICE
Give the team member a chance to talk and to ask 
questions.
Teaching individual small activities may seem triv-
ial to the seasoned professional, but we all know that 
profi ciency in the little details is what keeps us pre-
pared for the big emergencies. For example, if the new 
fi refi ghter is responsible for maintaining some piece 
of equipment on the apparatus, explain what the tool 
does and why the maintenance is important, both in 
terms of being able to use the tool effectively and the 
personal safety of the fi refi ghter using the tool.
Set well-defi ned job standards with new fi refi ght-
ers. There should be plenty of information available 
to help you determine what these job standards are. 
Your organization should have a detailed position 
description of the fi refi ghter’s duties. That position 
description may refer to additional requirements, such 
as those listed in NFPA 1001, Standard for Firefi ghter 
Professional Qualifi cations. Make sure that your fi re-
fi ghters understand the way the job should be done, 
which may not necessarily be the way that it is done 
now. Having this set of standards and expectations for 
the job provides a gauge for fi refi ghter profi ciency and 
ultimately evaluation of this profi ciency.
OFFICER ADVICE
Set well-defi ned job standards with new team members.
For most new members, sorting through all of this 
information will be a bit overwhelming. As a super-
visor, you should help them by assigning some pri-
orities. If appropriate, put some deadlines on the fi rst 
few items on the priority list to give the new member 
some specifi c goals to attain in the fi rst few days and 
weeks on the job.
An important part of this process should include 
a regular review of the new member’s progress. 
Although a formal review will occur after some spe-
cifi c time of service, typically 6 months or a year, you 
should not wait that long with a new member. Hold a 
mini review to help track the new member’s accom-
plishments, provide positive reinforcement for the 
good work the member is doing, make adjustments 
where necessary, and set new goals for the short-term 
future (see Figure 7-1). Such meetings should be held 
once or twice a month.
■ Share information about the job and the organization.
■ Share knowledge about the role of the department 
and how they fi t in.
■ Share knowledge about trends in growth, promotions, 
and opportunities.
■ Identify alternative career plans and the implications 
of each.
THINGS THAT YOU CAN DO 
FOR YOUR TEAM MEMBERS

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 163
■ Type 4: Low competency/low commitment 
unwilling and unable. You may need to review the 
individual’s goals. Look for learning disabilities. 
Take shorter steps and have patience. Provide posi-
tive motivation and evidence of your confi dence.
OFFICER ADVICE
An important part of setting standards should include a 
regular review of the new member’s progress.
FIGURE 7-1 Encourage your team 
members to openly discuss their 
performance. 
Determining the Team 
Members’ Competency 
and Commitment
The team members’ performance is determined by 
their competence and their commitment to the work. 
Their competence is determined by their knowledge, 
skills, and abilities; their commitment is determined 
more by their attitude, motivation, and confi dence in 
themselves. Together these two dimensions present 
four possible situations:
■ Type 1: High competency/high commitment 
good performer. This member has the skill and self-
confi dence needed and is ready to move to areas of 
greater responsibility. Keep this member challenged.
■ Type 2: Low competency/high commitment  good 
student. This characterizes many of us while we are 
on the learning curve. The novice member is learn-
ing new skills but now realizes that this process is 
a lot more complicated than initially thought. As 
a supervisor, your role is to provide assurance and 
help this novice gain self-confi dence.
■ Type 3: High competency/low commitment  poor 
attitude. In this case the member is learning but 
lacks the self-confi dence or motivation needed to go 
it alone. Work on attitude and self-confi dence.
■ Plan the assignment of responsibilities.
■ Patiently guide team members toward effective 
performance.
■ Recognize that there may be more than one way to do 
something. Be fl exible.
■ Avoid constant interference so that team members 
can develop and become more independent.
■ Use effective communications techniques.
■ Document examples of noteworthy performance, both 
good and bad.
TIPS FOR GOOD LEADERSHIP
FOUR EFFECTIVE 
TOOLS FOR TEAM 
MEMBER DEVELOPMENT
We have discussed at some length the leadership role of 
the supervisor in the company environment. Although 
the role is critical to the collective productivity and 
safety of the members assigned to that company, we 
should also look at the role of the supervisor as it relates 
to each member as an individual. Effective supervision 
promotes an environment that encourages each member 
to develop to their full potential, which not only benefi ts 

164  CHAPTER 7
a method for fi nal evaluation of both the process 
and the new member’s knowledge at the end of the 
program. Even if your department does not have a 
formal program should not stop you from institut-
ing one at your station. Just be sure to put in bench-
marks or some way to monitor progress. Remember; 
you can not manage what you can not measure!
A key to the process is the mentor. A “mentor” is 
a trusted counselor, guide, tutor, or coach. Mentors 
should have a positive attitude about the department 
and the mentoring process. They should have the pos-
itive qualities of good character and set a good posi-
tive personal example.
Good communications skills are also important in 
a mentor. As with any instructor, the mentor should 
be able not only to convey the information but also to 
offer constructive criticism to help the new member. 
Recruits should be encouraged to ask lots of ques-
tions. The mentor must have lots of answers. This is a 
time to review the material covered in recruit school 
at a slower pace. The instruction is individualized, 
and emphasis can be put upon the individual’s needs 
without having to be concerned about a class sched-
ule. It is an especially good time to cover the material 
required in NFPA 1001 for Firefi ghter II.
Ultimately, you, as the company offi cer, are respon-
sible for the fi refi ghter’s performance. You have to 
oversee the mentor and the mentoring process to 
assure its successful outcome.
the department but also provides the very kind of intan-
gible rewards that separate the good workplaces from 
the great workplaces. This interaction is accomplished 
in four ways: mentoring, coaching, counseling, and per-
formance evaluations. Later in this chapter, we will dis-
cuss a fi fth effective tool—discipline.
Mentoring
In some departments, the new member spends up to 
20 weeks in recruit school learning all the skills needed 
to be a good fi refi ghter and EMT. Upon assignment to the 
company, the new recruits fi nd that the only skills they 
use are related to cleaning the station and fi re trucks.
On the other hand, some departments immediately 
start the new recruit through a mentoring program—a 
formal, structured process that continues the training 
that was a part of the recruit school. (This is even 
more important when a member does not go through 
a full recruit school process.) This is more than just 
pairing the new member with a seasoned one: That 
process has some benefi ts, but in many cases the new 
member becomes an underling for the older one.
A good mentoring process must start with a for-
mal decision from a senior offi cer. The next step 
is to get the training division to develop a men-
toring program—a formal program that includes 
goals, objectives, topics to be covered, evaluation 
instruments, a defi nition of the mentor’s role, and 
The word mentor comes to us from Greek mythology. 
Mentor was the name of Odysseus’ wise and faithful ad-
visor. Today, we use the term to describe a friend and 
role model, a person who lends support in many ways to 
help one pursue a goal.
The mentoring process can be briefl y summarized 
with the words “Lead, follow, and get out of the way.” 
Lead, as used here, is showing the way by being a 
teacher and role model. Follow involves watching, ad-
vising, and counseling the student or new member. 
And by get out of the way, we mean letting go, del-
egating, or withdrawing. The process is not linear. It 
involves concurrent activity in all three areas. As a new 
member masters one skill, the mentor can move on 
to another area and start the process all over. A good 
mentor will continue to observe, advise, and counsel 
when appropriate.
The process should be done at all levels. As a good 
company offi cer, you should be the mentor for that se-
nior fi refi ghter who looks like promotion material. And 
MENTORING
that  senior fi refi ghter should be the mentor for the new 
fi refi ghter who just joined the company.
Who is the company offi cer’s mentor? One would like 
to think that a good battalion chief would take on that 
task, and that same process should work all the way 
up the chain of command to the very top. The fi re chief 
should be mentoring one or more of the senior staff so 
that they are prepared to take on the additional responsi-
bilities as the chief of the department.
We might draw an analogy here. In the U.S. Navy and 
Coast Guard, there is a defi nite path to the top, especially 
for those in operational commands such as ships and air 
stations. The assignment process facilitates that activity, 
but the real value lies in the personal values of the individu-
als  involved in the chain of command. Good commanding 
offi cers will take their executive offi cers under their wing and 
teach them everything needed to become a good com-
manding offi cer. This is an operational necessity in wartime, 
for the commanding offi cer could conceivably be a casualty. 
But the process has everyday value—good executive offi -
cers should be groomed to be good commanding offi cers. 
No book or school can cover all that is needed. Likewise, the 
process should be working down the chain of command 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 165
Coaching
Coaching is a term we borrow from the sports world, but 
it fi ts well here. When coaching, you are helping a team 
member improve knowledge, skills, and abilities. Coach-
ing usually focuses on one aspect of the job at a time, and 
the coach works with the student until the desired level of 
competence is demonstrated (see Figure 7-2). We do this 
with our children. We should do it with our team mem-
bers, too. It is an easy and satisfying process.
One excellent example of this program provides a special 
position called master fi refi ghter. In this department, there is 
one (and only one) master fi refi ghter in each company. The 
master fi refi ghter is a seasoned member and could be com-
pared with the fi rst sergeant in an army unit—although neither 
is an offi cer, both have an abundance of expertise. This ex-
pertise is acknowledged with respect; the master fi refi ghter 
has both the expert and identifi cation power discussed in 
the previous chapter. The master fi refi ghter has demon-
strated profi ciency as a fi refi ghter, and if the department has 
technicians serving in specialty areas (for example, hazmat 
or rescue), the master fi refi ghter should be  currently qualifi ed 
in at least one of these. The master fi refi ghter should also be 
a certifi ed instructor. Finally, a competitive process will help 
identify the best-qualifi ed individuals to serve as master fi re-
fi ghters. Ideally, there will be a pay increase for the individual 
to make this all worthwhile. The master fi refi ghter is the des-
ignated mentor who guides the new members successfully 
through the mentoring process.
THE MASTER FIREFIGHTER 
AS A MENTOR
NOTE
When coaching, you are helping a team member 
improve knowledge, skills, and abilities.
so that the newest and most junior person in the unit has a 
designated mentor.
What motivates this process? In the fi re service as in 
the military, the senior offi cer (fi re chief) is responsible 
for the performance of the entire organization. To bring 
out and develop the best talent in any organization, good 
supervisors should be facilitating the development of all 
of those who report to them. This means being a good 
mentor, coach, counselor, and advisor. All of these are 
part of the job of a good supervisor. The goals are to im-
prove performance and to prepare the team member for 
moving to positions of greater responsibility.
In addition to helping the member master today’s 
responsibilities and prepare for those of tomorrow, 
a good mentor provides information on survival skills: 
how to dress, what to say, and how to get ideas 
approved.
Remember the three steps:
 1. Lead—pass on knowledge and skills allowing the 
student or new member to safely and effectively 
function in the new environment.
 2. Follow—advise and counsel, providing a continuing 
program of development as the new member actu-
ally functions in the new environment.
 3. Get out of the way—initiate the process of handing 
off as the student or member gains the skills and 
ability to do the job alone.
FIGURE 7-2 The traditional coach helps people develop 
physical skills.

166  CHAPTER 7
Performance is often a function of how members 
are treated and the expectations that are indicated. 
Where success is expected, success will likely follow. 
Where failure is expected, it will surely follow. Suc-
cessful leaders have the ability to transmit high expec-
tations to their members. Members, more often than 
not, will perform to these expectations. High expecta-
tions lead to high performance. This, in turn, reinforces 
the high expectations, and even higher performance is 
expected next time. The converse is also true.
Think about what happens when you have a good 
working relationship with good members. You tend 
to be comfortable with them and are likely to spend 
Coaching is usually initiated by the leader. It is an 
informal process that requires little preparation. The 
leader already knows the technical aspects of the task. 
Teaching the task and having the patience to work with 
the member may require some self-control, but the pro-
cess is really quite easy. Take time to describe the steps 
that make up the job, demonstrate the proper method, 
and ask the member to demonstrate the same sequence. 
Ask the member to talk through the task, just as you did 
when you were demonstrating the task. This does two 
things: First, it reinforces the learning process, and sec-
ond, it verifi es that the member’s thinking, as well as the 
actions, are correct. While watching and listening to your 
team member, give feedback and reassurance.
Coaching is an informational process that helps 
members improve their skills and abilities. Coaching 
implies a one-on-one relationship that treats members 
as full partners, that communicates a sense of mutual 
respect and trust, a willingness to listen, and even a 
willingness to compromise. An effective coach has 
self-confi dence and the ability to win the confi dence 
of others. A good coach is fl exible enough to recog-
nize the vision of success and the fact that there may 
be several paths to getting to that goal.
■ You are a role model. The example you set is one of 
the most important elements in your effort.
■ Gain the agreement of your members regarding the 
goals that are set. They must be high, mutually agree-
able, and attainable.
■ Progress toward these goals must be measured 
against reasonable standards and on a regular basis.
■ Feedback is essential. Be as positive as possible. Crit-
icize when necessary, but also provide suggestions 
for improvement.
TIPS FOR EFFECTIVE COACHING
FIGURE 7-3 Company officers coach people to help 
them develop professional skills.
Let us use teaching knot tying as an example of coach-
ing. Knot tying is a basic skill, but some fi refi ghters have 
a hard time remembering the basic knots, especially 
when they are not often used. The offi cer or a more se-
nior fi refi ghter can take the new fi refi ghter to a quiet cor-
ner of the station and work on just one knot. Help the 
student, and then watch the student tie it a few times. 
A few hours later, ask the student to do it again. Next 
day, have this student tie the knot again and then try 
another knot. Within a few days, the fi refi ghter will have 
the skill and self-confi dence to tie every knot on the list. 
This same idea works with just about any lesson be-
ing taught. Coaching takes time, but the satisfaction for 
both parties is huge!
AN EXAMPLE OF COACHING
NOTE
Coaching is an informational process that helps mem-
bers improve their skills and abilities.
An effective coach has that vision, the self-
image of success, and the ability to communicate that 
vision effectively to others. An effective coach can 
see beyond the obvious.
For a new person entering a workplace, this means 
that the coach or supervisor can see beyond the pres-
ent and envision the full potential of the new member 
(see Figure 7-3). There is much to be learned from 
the way coaches treat their players and from how the 
players react to that treatment.

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 167
NOTE
Counseling is the second leadership tool available to 
help members. Counseling may focus on some spe-
cific aspect of the job, but more likely, the focus is on 
general attitude or behavior.
For example, a new fi refi ghter while on an emer-
gency medical services (EMS) call shows some rather 
obvious signs of displeasure at having to treat a patient 
at the scene of the incident. Although no one said any-
thing, other fi refi ghters and bystanders saw what was 
happening. The time to correct this problem is back 
at the fi re station (see Figure 7-4). As the company 
offi cer, you should call the fi refi ghter into your offi ce 
and ask the fi refi ghter to discuss relevant feelings. 
Counsel the individual that while these feelings are 
understandable, they should be suppressed, at least in 
public. If this is the fi rst time this situation has been 
noted, just point out to the member the action at issue, 
why it is unacceptable, and defi ne what is acceptable. 
Most members will get the message.
The counseling session should be as construc-
tive as possible under the circumstances. Good lead-
ers are able to counsel members without either one 
becoming emotional. If you and the member have a 
good relationship, and if the communication process 
is working well, the information can be quickly and 
effectively conveyed without having to make a major 
production of the event. Ridiculing, threatening, or 
verbally attacking a member is generally ineffective.
OFFICER ADVICE
To be effective, counseling should be accomplished 
shortly after the unsatisfactory behavior was observed.
FIGURE 7-4 Counseling focuses on 
improving some specific aspect of 
member performance, attitude, or 
behavior.
more time with them. You fi nd favor with their work, 
and, therefore, you fi nd it easier to talk to them and 
compliment them on their work. As a result, they 
will probably continue to get better. But what 
happens when you do not have a good working rela-
tionship with a member? You probably are not com-
fortable with that person. Therefore, you do not spend 
time with this person, and you do not see this person’s 
work, good or bad. As a result, this member probably 
does not improve. Whose fault is that?
Counseling
Counseling is the second leadership tool available to 
help members. Counseling may focus on some spe-
cifi c aspect of the job, but more likely, the focus is 
on general attitude or behavior. Counseling should 
always be done in private. Keep the counseling ses-
sion business like but friendly. In fact, counseling 
can be very informal. After all, the purpose is to help 
the member improve. To be effective, it should be 
accomplished shortly after the unsatisfactory behav-
ior was observed.

168  CHAPTER 7
Mentor 
Helps members learn the job
Coach 
Helps members with self-assessment
Appraiser 
Provides members with a reality check
Adviser 
Helps members identify their goals
Referral agent 
 Connects members with their own 
 future goals
THE FIVE PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT ROLES 
OF A LEADER
Performance Evaluations
Performance evaluations are another important mem-
ber development tool. Many members and even some 
supervisors look upon performance evaluation as a 
necessary but undesirable part of the job. If we look 
upon evaluations as a way of improving performance, 
things might be a lot easier.
NOTE
Performance evaluations are another important mem-
ber development tool.
Compared to coaching and counseling, evaluations 
are usually quite structured. Evaluations are struc-
tured in that they are usually done on a regular sched-
ule, and they follow a standard procedure, usually 
dictated by a reporting form.
If coaching and counseling have been taking place as 
they should, there should be no surprises for members 
in the evaluation interview. In fact, the members should 
be able to write the evaluation themselves. Although the 
written record is important, the performance evaluation 
interview is important too, especially for newer mem-
bers of the organization (see Figure 7-5).
In most organizations, formal personnel evalua-
tions occur once or twice a year, but in reality, the 
evaluation procedure should be a continuous cycle. 
Counseling is a tool for member improvement, 
but it also is a problem-solving process. The problem 
should be clearly identifi ed, and an explanation should 
be offered as to why it is a problem. Have agreement 
with the member about the problem and the correc-
tive action that must be taken. Give the member an 
opportunity to explain the actions at issue or express 
relevant feelings on the matter. Close the session by 
agreeing on the next step. A follow-up meeting may 
be needed in some cases. Pick a specifi c time and 
date that are mutually convenient for the next meet-
ing, and make a point to log that meeting in your per-
sonal activity planner.
Do any of the team members you supervise have any 
of the following characteristics?
Absenteeism
■ Excessive sick leave
■ Frequent Monday, Friday and/or weekend absences
High accident rate
■ Accidents on the job
■ Accidents off the job (but affecting job performance)
Difﬁ culty in concentration
■ Work requires greater effort
■ Jobs take more time
Confusion
■ Diffi culty in recalling instructions, details, and so forth
■ Increasing diffi culty in handling complex assignments
Spasmodic work patterns
■ Alternate periods of high and low productivity
■ Missed deadlines
Generally lowered job efﬁ ciency
■ Mistakes due to inattention or poor judgment
■ Improbable excuses for poor job performance
Poor team member relationships on the job
■ Overreaction to real or imagined criticism
■ Complaints from coworkers
CHECKLIST OF UNSATISFACTORY 
JOB PERFORMANCE IDENTIFYING 
THE TROUBLED TEAM MEMBER
If you have checked any of the items, you may 
have identifi ed a team member whose work per-
formance is affected by a personal or emotional 
 problem. Document each occurrence in your supervi-
sory records, and when the situation warrants action, 
conduct appropriate supervisory intervention. When 
the performance defi cit cannot be attributed to a “man-
agement problem,” your intervention should include a 
referral to the Employee Assistance Program (EAP).
One fi nal comment: Remember that the member 
will naturally be feeling down after the discussion. 
Once the counseling session is over, consider the 
option of rebuilding the relationship. Go and get a cup 
of coffee. Together!

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 169
employee development, and customer service, the 
emphasis has shifted to employee feedback from the 
full circle of sources depicted in the diagram below. 
This multiple-input approach to performance feed-
back is sometimes called “360-degree assessment” to 
connote that full circle.
There are no prohibitions in law or regulation to 
using a variety of rating sources, in addition to the 
employee’s supervisor, for assessing performance. 
Research has shown assessment approaches with 
multiple rating sources provide more accurate, reli-
able, and credible information. For this reason, the 
U.S. Offi ce of Personnel Management supports the 
The cycle should start with goal setting, then move 
to encouragement, self-assessment, watching perfor-
mance and providing feedback during the period, and 
a formal performance review and goal setting. The 
cycle is continuous (see Figure 7-6).
THE 360-DEGREE 
ASSESSMENT
Typically, performance appraisal has been limited to 
a feedback process between employees and supervi-
sors. However, with the increased focus on teamwork, 
FIGURE 7-5 Performance evaluations 
are an important member develop-
ment tool.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
INTERVIEW
PERFORMANCE PLANNING
SETTING EXPECTATIONS
DOCUMENTING PERFORMANCE
PROVIDING ONGOING FEEDBACK
MID-YEAR REVIEW
PROCESS
CYCLE OF PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT
FIGURE 7-6 The cycle of performance 
management represents the continu-
ous process of goal setting, observa-
tion, and performance evaluation.

170  CHAPTER 7
“How do you feel you have performed?” In a somewhat 
more formal approach, supervisors ask employees to 
identify the key accomplishments they believe best 
represent their performance in critical and noncritical 
performance elements. In a 360-degree approach, if 
self-ratings are going to be included, structured forms 
and formal procedures are recommended.
What does this rating source contribute?
The most signifi cant contribution of self-ratings 
is the improved communication that results between 
supervisors and subordinates.
Self-ratings are particularly useful if the entire cycle 
of performance management involves the employee in 
a self-assessment. For example, the employee should 
keep notes of task accomplishments and failures 
throughout the performance monitoring period.
The developmental focus of self-assessment is 
a key factor. The self-assessment instrument (in a 
paper or computer software format) should be struc-
tured around the performance plan but can emphasize 
training needs and the potential for the employee to 
advance in the organization.
The value of self-ratings is widely accepted. Approx-
imately half of the federal employees in a large survey 
thought that self-ratings would contribute “to a great 
or very great extent” to a fair and well-rounded per-
formance appraisal. (Of the survey respondents who 
received ratings below “Fully Successful,” more than 
75 percent thought self-ratings should be used.)
Self-appraisals should not simply be viewed as a com-
parative or validation process but also as a critical source 
of performance information. Self-appraisals are particu-
larly valuable in situations where the supervisor cannot 
readily observe the work behaviors and task outcomes.
Peers
With downsizing and reduced hierarchies in organiza-
tions, as well as the increasing use of teams and group 
accountability, peers are often the most relevant eval-
uators of their colleagues’ performance. Peers have a 
unique perspective on a coworker’s job performance, 
and employees are generally very receptive to the 
concept of rating each other. Peer ratings can be used 
when the employee’s expertise is known or the per-
formance and results can be observed. There are both 
signifi cant contributions and serious pitfalls that must 
be carefully considered before including this type of 
feedback in a multifaceted appraisal program.
What does this rating source contribute?
Peer infl uence through peer approval and peer pres-
sure is often more effective than the traditional empha-
sis to please the boss. Employees report resentment 
when they believe that their extra efforts are required to 
“make the boss look good” as opposed to meeting the 
unit’s goals.
use of multiple rating sources as an effective method 
of assessing performance for formal appraisal and 
other evaluative and developmental purposes.
The circle or, perhaps more accurately, the sphere of 
feedback sources consists of supervisors, peers, sub-
ordinates, customers, and oneself. It is not necessary, 
or always appropriate, to include all of the feedback 
sources in a particular appraisal program. The organi-
zational culture and mission must be considered, and 
the purpose of feedback will differ with each source. 
For example, subordinate assessments of a supervi-
sor’s performance can provide valuable developmental 
guidance, peer feedback can be the heart of excellence 
in teamwork, and customer service feedback focuses 
on the quality of the team’s or agency’s results. The 
objectives of performance appraisal and the particular 
aspects of performance that are to be assessed must 
be established before determining which sources are 
appropriate. The following information discusses the 
contributions of each source of ratings and feedback. 
NOTE
In addition to the positive aspects of the system, there 
are cautions that need to be considered. For the full 
version of the 360-degree assessment, visit: http://
www.opm.gov/perform/wppdf/360asess.pdf.
Superiors
Evaluations by superiors are the most traditional source 
of employee feedback. This form of evaluation includes 
both the ratings of individuals by supervisors on ele-
ments in an employee’s performance plan and the eval-
uation of programs and teams by senior managers.
What does this rating source contribute?
The fi rst-line supervisor is often in the best  position to 
effectively carry out the full cycle of performance man-
agement: Planning, Monitoring, Developing, Apprais-
ing, and Rewarding. The supervisor may also have the 
broadest perspective on the work requirements and be 
able to take into account shifts in those requirements.
The superiors (both the fi rst-line supervisor and the 
senior managers) have the authority to redesign and 
reassign an employee’s work based on their assess-
ment of individual and team performance.
Most federal employees (about 90 percent in a 
large, government-wide survey) believe that the great-
est contribution to their performance feedback should 
come from their fi rst-level supervisors.
Self-Assessment
This form of performance information is actually quite 
common but usually is used only as an informal part 
of the supervisor-employee appraisal feedback ses-
sion. Supervisors  frequently open the discussion with: 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 171
averaging adds validity and reliability to the feedback 
because the aberrant ratings get averaged out and/or the 
high and low ratings are dropped from the summary 
calculations.
Customers
Executive Order 12862, Setting Customer Service 
Standards, requires agencies to survey internal and 
external customers, publish customer service stan-
dards, and measure agency performance against these 
standards. Internal customers are defi ned as users of 
products or services supplied by another employee 
or group within the agency or organization. External 
customers are outside the organization and include, 
but are not limited to, the general public.
What does this rating source contribute?
Customer feedback should serve as an “anchor” for 
almost all other performance factors. Combined with 
peer evaluations, these data literally “round out” the per-
formance feedback program and focus attention beyond 
what could be a somewhat self-serving hierarchy of 
feedback limited to the formal “chain of command.”
Including a range of customers in the 360- degree 
performance assessment program expands the focus of 
performance feedback in a manner considered abso-
lutely critical to reinventing government. Employees, 
typically, only concentrate on satisfying the standards 
and expectations of the person who has the most con-
trol over their work conditions and compensation. 
This person is generally their supervisor. Service to 
the broader range of customers often suffers if it is 
neglected in the feedback process.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
SYSTEMS
Performance evaluations are clearly an important 
supervisory activity. The real purpose of performance 
evaluations is to document the member’s performance. 
In reality, we are looking at the performance levels of 
three sets of people: those who are above average, those 
who are well below average, and all the rest.
Regardless of the offi cial system that is in place, 
all members should be receiving constant feedback 
on their performance. A word of acknowledgement or 
praise is feedback. A need for coaching or counseling is 
feedback. These are informal tools, whereas the perfor-
mance evaluation process is a formal tool. In reality, we 
have two appraisal systems working side by side. The 
fi rst, the information appraisal system, is based on the 
interpersonal relationship between the supervisor and 
the member. The second, the formal appraisal system, 
provides a formal method of documenting the mem-
ber’s performance on a regular and systematic basis.
Peer ratings have proved to be excellent predictors 
of future performance. Therefore, they are particu-
larly useful as input for employee development.
Peer ratings are remarkably valid and reliable in 
rating behaviors and “manner of performance” but 
may be limited in rating outcomes that often require 
the perspective of the supervisor.
The use of multiple raters in the peer dimension of 
360-degree assessment programs tends to average the 
possible biases of any one member of the group of rat-
ers. (Some agencies eliminate the highest and lowest 
ratings and average the rest.)
The increased use of self-directed teams makes the 
contribution of peer evaluations the central input to 
the formal appraisal because by defi nition the super-
visor is not directly involved in the day-to-day activi-
ties of the team.
The addition of peer feedback can help move the 
supervisor into a coaching role rather than a purely 
judging role.
Subordinates
An upward-appraisal process or feedback survey (some-
times referred to as a SAM, for “Subordinates Apprais-
ing Managers”) is among the most signifi cant yet contro-
versial features of a “full circle” performance evaluation 
program. Both managers being appraised and their own 
superiors agree that subordinates have a unique, often 
essential, perspective. The subordinate  ratings provide 
particularly valuable data on performance elements con-
cerning managerial and supervisory behaviors. How-
ever, there is usually great reluctance, even fear, con-
cerning implementation of this rating dimension. On 
balance, the contributions can outweigh the concerns if 
the precautions noted next are addressed.
What does this rating source contribute?
A formalized subordinate feedback program will 
give supervisors a more comprehensive picture of 
employee issues and needs. Managers and supervisors 
who assume they will suffi ciently stay in touch with 
their employees’ needs by relying solely on an “open 
door” policy get very inconsistent feedback at best.
Employees feel they have a greater voice in orga-
nizational decision making and, in fact, they do. 
Through managerial action plans and changes in work 
processes, the employees can see the direct results of 
the feedback they have provided.
The feedback from subordinates is particularly 
effective in evaluating the supervisor’s interpersonal 
skills. However, it may not be as appropriate or valid 
for evaluating task-oriented skills.
Combining subordinate ratings, like peer ratings, can 
provide the advantage of creating a composite appraisal 
from the averaged ratings of several subordinates. This 

172  CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-7 Evaluation forms from three organizations are shown.
(A)
(B)

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 173
FIGURE 7-7 Continued.
Objectives of member appraisal systems:
■ To provide feedback on the member’s performance
■ To serve as a foundation for member guidance to 
continue the development of the member
■ To document the work of members with talent for 
positions of greater responsibility
■ To justify adjustments in compensation and posi-
tion classifi cations
There are a number of systems for evaluating mem-
bers: Some are very complicated; others are easy to 
use. Some have a series of questions addressing vari-
ous traits of the member’s performance. Others sim-
ply ask for a pass/fail assessment. Whatever system 
is used, all employee evaluations should follow both 
the department’s guidelines and the city’s or town’s 
guidelines. Let us briefl y examine several of the more 
common systems (see Figure 7-7).
Graphic Rating System
In this case, the evaluator marks the box that best 
describes the member’s quality of work, attitude, 
cooperation, and so forth, not unlike a report card. 
A problem with this system lies in the evaluator’s 
interpretation of the words. This problem is com-
pounded by the fact that many new evaluators lack 
experience in the system and tend to rate people 
with excessive leniency or strictness, based on 
their own standards. Even when the evaluation sys-
tem suggests a distribution of marks, for example, 
10 percent are outstanding, 20 percent are above 
 average, and so forth, the average company offi -
cer is evaluating three or four people, all of whom 
are at different levels of professional growth and 
 maturity. These factors make this system very 
 diffi cult to use.
(C)

174  CHAPTER 7
In many cases, developing scores is necessary. For 
example, in the military, performance, as documented 
on semiannual performance evaluation reports, is a 
major criterion for selection for promotion, and for 
offi cers is the major criterion for selection for promo-
tions or selection for graduate school.
Another approach is to eliminate the score concept 
all together. In many cases, the members are not in 
competition for promotion, and even if they are, their 
past performance is but a small part of the overall 
selection process. In a majority of the cases, the real 
purpose is to identify those who are well above average 
and all who are well below average. The well-above-
average members are the rising stars of the organiza-
tion. They should be identifi ed and given an oppor-
tunity to strive for positions of greater responsibility. 
Those who are well below average must also be iden-
tifi ed; their defi ciencies must be pinpointed, and they 
must be informed that their work is not up to standard. 
Additional training, coaching, and counseling may be 
indicated. 
Some would argue that this is ultimately the role of 
the member evaluation process. Identify those who are 
not doing their fair share, address the problem, and take 
appropriate corrective action. When such action fails to 
bring improvement, it may be necessary to terminate 
that member. We think that a better approach would be 
for supervisors to do their job and address any defi cien-
cies in performance early on, long before it surfaces in 
the member performance evaluation system.
■ Performance appraisal should be a continuous 
process.
■ Continually observe and monitor members’ 
performance.
■ If the member is doing a good job, let the member 
know that.
■ If problems develop, let members know that, too. 
In this case, it is even more important to discuss 
with the member the nature of the problem. Allow-
ing the inadequate activity or attitude to continue 
could lead to a signifi cant performance failure dur-
ing an emergency situation. Such action could lead 
to an accident, with injury or worse.
■ Likewise, do not save up negative performance 
observations for the appraisal interview, for all the 
reasons listed in the preceding paragraph.
■ Implement a regular process of systematic per-
formance review so that there are no surprises at 
the appraisal interview. This is a very simple step, 
and yet it is the one that leads to the greatest anxi-
ety. Many members (and many supervisors) dread 
 dealing with the surprise bit of bad news at the 
interview. Deal with issues as they arise.
Rank Ordering
Another commonly used system is a process of rank 
ordering. In this system, supervisors are asked to rank 
their members from good to bad. This can be diffi -
cult, but most supervisors can pick out the top 10 per-
cent and the bottom 10 percent, and that may be all 
that we are interested in. Again, because of the rela-
tively few number of members under the command of 
any one supervisor, and because these members are 
most likely at different points in their professions, this 
process is also diffi cult to use.
■ Halo effect. The halo effect is based on a rater’s ten-
dency to overweight certain factors among the overall 
information available. This results in a score that is dis-
torted either too high or too low.
■ Central tendency. The opposite of the halo effect, 
here, the rater tends to put scores in the center of the 
scale. This type of error defeats the purpose of the 
process.
■ Contamination. A rating score that is based on 
 information that is not relevant to the performance 
standard. This raises questions about the integrity of 
the entire rating process and could well lead to scores 
that are not indicative of the member’s worth.
■ “Like me” syndrome. In this situation, the raters use 
themselves as the benchmark, rather than using a 
performance standard. Raters should be measuring 
performance against common standards, using job 
descriptions and similar objective criteria.
COMMON RATER ERRORS
Behaviorally Anchored System
Another common system is the behaviorally 
anchored system. In this case, brief descriptions 
defi ne the level of competence in a range of perfor-
mance measures.
There are several advantages of this system. First, 
it asks the evaluator to assess the performance against 
the standard, something that should be taking place in 
all systems. In this case, that is reinforced because the 
levels of performance are clearly stated. Second, this 
clear listing of performance parameters helps reduce 
errors introduced by rater bias, making the system 
more creditable.
Most of the systems ultimately reduce the words 
to numbers, resulting in a fi nal score. Many members 
and many evaluators see the score as the overall out-
come of the process and lose sight of the fact that the 
performance appraisal system is meant to be a perfor-
mance improvement tool.

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 175
Writing Member Evaluations
Many fi nd that writing the member evaluation is an 
arduous task. Here are several suggestions:
First, make a habit of noting something about the 
performance of every member on a regular basis (see 
Figure 7-8). During each work cycle or work week, a 
supervisor should have seen something good, or bad, 
about each member. There are many different types of 
evaluation forms; therefore, it is important for the fi re 
offi cer to research the forms used by the department.
Remember the lessons of The One Minute Man-
ager: Look for people doing something right. We often 
remember to record shortcomings; make it a habit to 
record accomplishments, too. And remember that when 
you see something that requires corrective action, you 
should counsel the individual right away. There should 
be no surprises at the evaluation session. Unlike most 
records within the fi re department, employee evalua-
tion records are not available to the public. All employee 
evaluations should be recorded and placed within their 
The performance appraisal interview is the pri-
mary formal feedback members receive on their 
work. In many organizations, it is (unfortunately) the 
primary means by which members are told what (and 
how) they need to improve. Regardless of their role, 
performance appraisal interviews are an important 
step in the overall process of member development.
The interview should include both positive and neg-
ative feedback. Negative feedback does not mean that 
one has to look for something wrong in every member. 
Many are doing superior work in all areas. But almost 
everyone has some area of weakness, especially when 
compared to the relative strengths of other performance 
areas. In such cases, the supervisor should help guide 
the member to continued improvements that will pro-
duce even greater amounts of excellent work.
Many members complain that the interview is really 
one-sided, because the supervisor does all the talking. 
Generally, the better approach is for the supervisor to 
be less dominant, talking less and listening more. This 
means that the supervisor has to let the member do a 
lot of the talking. For this to be effective, the member 
has to have adequate notice of the pending interview. 
Another issue is that the member may not agree with 
the contents of the evaluation. If this is the case, the 
fi re offi cer must follow the department’s guidelines for 
documenting the disagreement. The next step is for the 
evaluation to be reviewed by the next link in the chain 
of command. The outcomes from this process are not 
healthy for the organization because in essence some-
one is going to lose. The fi re offi cer’s evaluation points 
could be overruled, which can cause confl ict, or the 
member’s disagreement could be overruled, and that 
can also cause confl ict. It is better served for the fi re 
offi cer and the member to discuss the issues and work it 
out among themselves.
Ideally, interviews should be scheduled a week or 
two in advance. (In some organizations, members are 
given the option of picking their own time within an 
established framework. For example, members may 
sign up for an interview at any time during the after-
noons of the following week.) At such interviews, the 
supervisor should ask members to evaluate themselves. 
Then, the member and the supervisor can compare their 
results. This makes the member a more equal player in 
the interview process and reinforces the supervisor’s 
role as a coach and member developer.
Regardless of the approach, all such interviews are 
important tools. As such, both the member and the 
supervisor should be well prepared. The interviews 
should be scheduled so that there is complete pri-
vacy, free of interruptions, and that there is no sense 
of hurry. Instituting these systems and rules properly 
would help relieve the sense of dread that arises dur-
ing member evaluation times.
OFFICER ADVICE
Make a habit of noting something about the performance 
of every member on a regular basis.
Employee's Name:
Supervisor's Name:
Date
Behavior Observed
Discussed
(Yes or No)
LOG FOR OBSERVING PERFORMANCE
FIGURE 7-8 Good supervisors have an organized sys-
tem that simplifies the recording of observations of mem-
ber performance.

176  CHAPTER 7
respective personnel fi les. The law requires that all eval-
uations must be maintained and documented.
OFFICER ADVICE
Let your members know what you expect, and when 
they give a little bit more, give them some recognition for 
their effort.
Through these recorded observations, you will 
likely have plenty of quality material to use on the 
evaluation itself. In fact, you will probably have too 
much. That is okay; you can select the best and most 
representative material and write great evaluations 
fi lled with specifi c details. And you will not have to 
try to remember 6 month’s or a year’s worth of accom-
plishments as you try to write the report. Once you 
Measure your employees against a fi xed and known 
standard. Several tools are helpful in benchmarking per-
formance levels. First, there are national performance 
standards for fi refi ghters, emergency medical techni-
cians (EMTs), and the various technical specialties in 
the fi re service. Use these as a measurement gauge in 
determining competence. Most departments add some 
OFFICER ADVICE
Measure your members against a fi xed and known 
standard.
A good evaluation interview starts with a review of the sig-
nifi cant accomplishments of the period. It should focus on 
the positive accomplishments. Good news is always eas-
ier to deliver and receive. Every counseling session, even 
for the best members, should identify areas where im-
provement is desired. It may be a matter of improving per-
formance levels in existing skills, or it may be a matter of 
motivating the member to move on to new areas. Give your 
members a specifi c target to aim for. Your expectations 
 become their goals for the following reporting period.
When the interview is over, the member should have 
a clear understanding of the completion to the following 
sentences:
■ My leader wants me to do more __________________ 
__________________
■ My leader wants me to do less __________________ 
__________________
■ The part of my job that matters most is ____________
■ Excellent performance in my job requires ___________
■ I should learn to take care of __________________ 
__________________
■ I think that my leader would say that my performance 
is __________________ 
The member should be motivated to set some goals, too. 
Examples might include the following:
■ I want to do more ______________________________
_______________
■ I want to do less ________________________________
_______________
STEPS FOR AN EFFECTIVE 
EVALUATION REVIEW
When the member and the supervisor concur in this 
process, they are almost certain to see some progress. 
It may be necessary to compromise on a few of the 
items, but remember that your job as supervisor is to 
motivate your members to their full potential.
To motivate the member, it is recommended to come 
up with a succession plan for him or her. A succession 
plan takes key individuals and starts training them for 
the next level within the fi re department. Most depart-
ments today use some form of development model for 
their employees. The U.S. Fire Administration has devel-
oped the Fire and Emergency Services Higher Education 
(FESHE) Program. This program establishes an organi-
zation of post–secondary institutions to promote higher 
education and to enhance the recognition of the fi re and 
emergency services as a profession to reduce loss of life 
and property from fi re and other hazards. Fire offi cers 
should always keep in mind that part of their job is to train 
the people who work with them for the next level within 
the department. Train them to do your job.
During a good evaluation interview, it is important to 
let the subordinate talk too. Many members, especially 
younger ones, are silent during these interviews, but 
they should be encouraged to express their feelings and 
views on matters pertaining to their own performance 
and goals as well. Frequently members are their severest 
critic; they overestimate their shortcomings while under-
estimating their own accomplishments.
At every counseling session or evaluation interview, 
you should be sure to reinforce your member’s contribu-
tions with compliments about what was done well. Show 
confi dence and express personal pleasure in the mem-
ber’s abilities and contributions. Always give the member 
an opportunity to ask questions or speak freely before 
the meeting is ended.
get in the habit of doing this recording, the process 
becomes easy. Several examples of the forms that you 
will have to fi ll out are provided (see Figure 7-7).

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 177
OFFICER ADVICE
A good evaluation interview starts with a review of the 
signifi cant accomplishments of the period.
OFFICER ADVICE
Every counseling session, even for the best members, 
should identify areas where improvement is desired.
In addition, many departments have professional 
development programs for their members. These pro-
grams usually involve both training and educational 
requirements to help members increase their skills 
and abilities in the workplace. Successful accomplish-
ment and application of these professional develop-
ment requirements should be encouraged and formally 
recognized.
GIVING RECOGNITION
We may differ in the way we want to be recognized 
for our work, but recognition is one of our basic 
needs. Maslow, Herzberg, and others have identifi ed 
the need for recognition. If you only talk to your 
members when their performance is below accept-
able standards, you lose the value that comes from 
positive recognition. Let your members know what 
you expect, and when they give a little bit more, 
give them some recognition for their efforts (see 
Figure 7-9).
Giving recognition is easy; however, there are sev-
eral pitfalls. Do not be overly zealous in giving praise. 
If you compliment every act, you eventually dilute the 
recognition process. On the other hand, it is also easy 
to fail to give recognition when it is due or to acknowl-
edge that the work is worthy of special recognition.
There will be times when exceptional perfor-
mance should be recognized with an award from 
the department. The award may be for valor at 
the scene of an emergency, or it may be for excep-
tionally meritorious service during nonemergency 
activities. The recognition may come in the form of 
a medal, citation, or other formal presentation (see 
Figure 7-10). As the company offi cer, you should 
remember that the awards process starts with you; 
if you do not take the initiative to recommend the 
award, it is unlikely that anyone else will. There 
will be plenty of opportunity for the department’s 
senior staff members to pass judgment on the  
merits of the award. They will never have that 
opportunity if the member’s act or performance is 
not brought to their attention by you—the company 
offi cer.
Recognition does not have to be a medal or pay 
raise. It might be just a comment, a word of appre-
ciation, or only a nod. At times, such gestures are 
as good as any tangible reward you could provide. 
Whatever form the recognition may be in, make 
sure that it is sincere. One of the basic tenants of the 
Dale Carnegie program is “Show sincere, genuine 
appreciation.”
Recognition should be personal. It should identify 
the individual, the act, and that you are personally 
grateful for the work. We usually teach students to try 
to avoid starting a sentence with “I.” This is one of the 
exceptions. It means a lot when you say something 
like, “I was very pleased with the way that you. . . .” 
Think about how your team member will feel!
As we have already stated, recognition fulfi lls 
a basic human need. Recognition motivates mem-
bers to want to do even more and to be even more 
effective.
Sometimes a new name helps make an old problem eas-
ier to manage. We know of one organization that calls 
its annual performance review process the Performance 
Enhancement Plan, or PEP. The process is similar to 
what we are describing here but is structured so that ev-
eryone shares the work more equally.
The members start the process by evaluating their 
own work and completing their portion of the report 
form, including both the evaluation of specifi c per-
formance items and the narrative. The form is then 
 forwarded (sometimes electronically) to the supervi-
sor, who reviews what the member has prepared. Su-
pervisors can concur or differ with (but not change) 
the marks and remarks, and then supervisors add 
their own comments. There are only two choices in 
marking: meets expectations or does not meet ex-
pectations. During the performance interview, any dif-
ferences are reconciled, overall performance is dis-
cussed, and goals for the coming year are identifi ed 
and recorded.
PUT PEP IN YOUR PERFORMANCE 
EVALUATIONS
additional performance requirements. Keep these in 
mind and let your subordinates know that you are using 
these as the criteria for performance measurement.

178  CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-9 Awarding certificates of accomplishment or providing notes of exceptional 
performance are an important part of the recognition process.
RECORD OF EXCEPTIONAL PERFORMANCE
PHOENIX FIRE DEPARTMENT
Phoenix, Arizona
Original:
Copy:
Personnel File
Employee Chief
Fire Chief
Initiator
90-1 D
615-8215-0027
Rev. 9/95
10. Employee's Signature
9. Supervisor's Signature
8. Employee's Comments
7. Supervisor's Comments
6. Description and Date of Exceptional Performance
5. Initiator of Commendation
3. Employee's Classification
4. Date Prepared
2. Division/Section
1. Employee
ENGINE

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 179
■ Focus on the behavior, not the individual.
■ Help the member maintain self-esteem.
■ Work to maintain a constructive relationship.
TAKING DISCIPLINARY ACTION
Having talked with a member about a performance 
problem and having seen no change, your next step 
may be to take some form of disciplinary action. If 
you do not take such action, the problem will likely 
continue. In addition, if you do not take action, you 
will lose part of your credibility and part of your 
authority as a leader.
When taking disciplinary action, think of it as 
another way of improving member performance and 
behavior. This is usually far more comfortable for 
both you and the member than thinking about disci-
plinary action as a form of punishment.
When counseling or administering punishment, 
remember the following:
FIGURE 7-10 A formal award provides highly visible rec-
ognition of a member’s accomplishments. (Photo courtesy 
of Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department)
It is by no means enough that offi cers of the fi re service 
be capable fi refi ghters. They must be that, of course, but 
also a great deal more. They must have a liberal educa-
tion, refi ned manners, punctilious courtesy, and the nic-
est sense of personal honor.
They should be the soul of tact, patience, justice, fi rm-
ness, and charity. No meritorious act of a team member 
should escape their attention or be left to pass without 
its reward, even if the reward is only a word of approval. 
Conversely, they should not be blind to a single fault in 
any team member, though at the same time, they should 
be quick and unfailing to distinguish error from malice, 
thoughtlessness from incompetence, and well-meant 
shortcomings from stupid or headless blunders.
With apologies to John Paul Jones, USN.
QUALIFICATIONS OF A FIRE OFFICER
OFFICER ADVICE
When taking disciplinary action, think of it as another pro-
cess for improving member performance and behavior.
Make an effort to be consistent and fair in the treat-
ment of members over a period of time. This is often 
diffi cult. No two members are the same, and no two 
offenses are quite the same. However, you should 
consider several factors when deciding whether to use 
discipline. First, the discipline should have some rela-
tion to the offense. Stealing and dishonesty are far 
more serious than arriving 5 minutes late for duty. 
You should also take into consideration members’ 
recent work, their past disciplinary record, and any 
mitigating circumstances. Finally, some organiza-
tions require that the company offi cers inform their 
supervisors of the action taken. Find out what is 
appropriate.
ETHICS
Make an effort to be consistent and fair in the treat-
ment of members over a period of time.
Discipline Procedures
Most organizations have an established discipline 
procedure. In most cases, there is a progressive sys-
tem that generally follows the steps of oral reprimand, 
written reprimand, suspension, demotion, and fi nally, 
termination. Let us briefl y look at each of the steps 
and see how they might be effectively used to help 
improve a member’s performance.
Oral Reprimand
An oral reprimand is much like a private counseling 
session between the supervisor and the member, except 
that it is likely that the unsatisfactory conduct in ques-
tion has been discussed previously. You should let the 
member know that the conversation constitutes an oral 
reprimand and that the next step in the progressive dis-
ciplinary process is a written reprimand. The nature of 
the unsatisfactory behavior problem and the corrective 
action that is desired should be clearly identifi ed dur-
ing this session. Try to get the member to understand 
the nature and consequences of the actions at issue. 
Ask the member to help spell out the corrective action. 
Although no formal report is required, it is a good idea 
to make notes of the conversation.

180  CHAPTER 7
Demotion
The punishment of demotion has a lasting impact. 
It takes away both pay and power. Obviously demo-
tion is not very effective in the case of fi refi ghters, 
because they are already in an entry-level position. As 
with suspension, the disciplinary procedure is usually 
conducted by a senior fi re department offi cer. Make a 
detailed record of the procedure.
Termination
Termination is used when all other steps have failed. 
Termination is costly for both the member and the 
organization. A terminated member must be replaced. 
A replacement must be recruited, selected, trained, 
and brought into the organization. However, in spite 
of these considerations, termination may be appropri-
ate in some situations.
For serious offenses, one or more of these steps 
may be omitted.
Written Reprimand
This second step in the disciplinary process indicates 
that the unsatisfactory behavior has continued. As the 
company offi cer, you should administer the written 
reprimand. Lacking any established procedure to the 
contrary, a brief memo to the member that identifi es 
the nature of the unsatisfactory behavior, the fact that 
previous discussion has been had, and the fact that the 
unsatisfactory behavior has continued should be spelled 
out, along with the desired corrective action. A sen-
tence or two on each of these topics is adequate, often 
in memo form. The member should be asked to sign a 
copy of the reprimand acknowledging its receipt. Give 
the original to the member. Company offi cers should 
keep signed formal documentation for oral or written 
conversations.
Transfer
The next step might be a possible transfer. A transfer 
may provide a solution to the problem, not just shifting 
the problem to someone else. Transferred members are 
entitled to the same fair treatment you would give any 
other member, but at the same time, the new supervisor 
should be aware of the prior discipline problem.
Suspension
At this point, we are well beyond the punishment 
authority of most company offi cers in the fi re ser-
vice. Suspension is a serious punishment and is usu-
ally administered by a senior fi re department offi cer. 
Disciplinary procedures vary, but most departments 
provide for a formal hearing, usually in the more 
senior offi cer’s offi ce, with the company offi cer and 
the member each having an opportunity to present 
their version of the story. Most of the real evidence 
will be in the form of written records showing that 
the unsatisfactory conduct occurred and that previous 
disciplinary action has not been effective.
Again, we should emphasize that the purpose of 
the disciplinary process is to improve the member’s 
performance or conduct. If that occurs, the punish-
ment is effective. There are plenty of senior fi re offi -
cers on duty today who have been on the carpet at 
some time during the early part of their profession. 
The punishment, coupled with a natural maturing 
process, helped them to correct the problems they 
may have had in their younger days.
NOTE
The purpose of the disciplinary process is to improve 
the member’s performance or conduct.
■ Focus on taking corrective action, not on administer-
ing punishment.
■ Be sure to coach and counsel before using discipline.
■ When disciplining, be fair, be fi rm, and DO care.
WHEN USING DISCIPLINE
Fundamental to the process is the fact that before 
any disciplinary action can be implemented, the 
supervisor must fi rst give a warning. Members must 
be informed clearly that certain actions will result 
in disciplinary actions. This is a very important 
step. It is not the members’ fault if they do not know 
the  company’s rules, ethics, and standards. It is the 
supervisor’s responsibility to educate and inform. It is 
 easier to accept discipline if the rules and standards 
are clearly stated beforehand and understood.
In order for this to be productive, the supervisor 
must take timely disciplinary action. The sooner the 
discipline is imposed, the closer it is connected to the 
violation. This enables the member to associate the dis-
cipline with the offense, rather than with the dispenser 
of the discipline.
This is important, because you do not want your 
team members to associate the punishment with you; 
you want them to know that they broke the organiza-
tion’s rules, and as the supervisor, it is your duty to 
 punish. You are there to help them and guide them to 
perform to the best of their abilities to the betterment of 
the association. Your discipline has nothing to do with 
the supervisory relationship; it merely establishes stan-
dards to work by. As the dispenser of the discipline, 
you should react as soon as possible to the violation.

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 181
Maintaining fairness has taken on new dimensions 
with the increasingly diverse workforce we see in 
today’s fi re service. Diversity comes in many dimen-
sions. Variations in race, gender, age, experience, 
and other factors tend to make each member unique. 
Leading such a diverse group presents it own special 
challenges. The key to understanding and leading a 
diverse workforce lies in understanding and fl exibil-
ity. Take time to understand each teammate’s needs. 
Try to be fl exible in accommodating those needs.
Along with being fair, the supervisor must take the 
lead in making sure that the workplace is comfortable 
for all who work there. Set a personal example and 
encourage others to imitate your lead in the following:
■ Avoid disrespectful slang terms and names.
■ Eliminate offensive pictures, cartoons, and other 
printed matter from the workplace.
■ Avoid ethnic and sexist jokes.
■ Speak calmly and slowly.
■ Listen equally to each teammate.
■ Spell out those unwritten rules.
Dealing with Conflicts
With all the demands upon them, your people are 
under considerable pressure. In the fi re service, one 
may see more of life’s raw edges in a day than most 
citizens see in a lifetime. We expect our fi refi ghters 
to treat people and to go places that most citizens 
would like to avoid. We expect our drivers to oper-
ate on busy streets, getting us safely and quickly to 
the scene, without the risk of an accident. And we ask 
our teammates for increasing efforts around the fi re 
station and in the community. It is no wonder that our 
people are under pressure.
Pressure can create confl ict. Often times, these 
confl icts stem from personnel behavior problems. 
When people work together under pressure, confl ict is 
natural. Confl ict can be healthy. It implies that people 
are working hard and trying to be successful in meet-
ing their goals, both their personal goals and those of 
the organization. Confl ict can be unhealthy when it 
involves personality clashes. When this type of con-
fl ict occurs, it needs to be quickly resolved—another 
job for you, as the company offi cer.
TAKING CARE OF 
YOUR TEAMMATES
Fairness for One and All
Throughout the process of developing your team, it 
is important to remember that everyone should be 
treated fairly. People have different needs and goals. 
Some have a high need for recognition. Others have 
a greater need for affi liation. Recognize these needs 
in your teammates. Finding the best way to motivate 
each of your teammates is one of the most important 
things you do in being an effective leader. Use the 
most effective approach on each teammate.
Punishment should have the following characteristics:
■ Be associated with a specifi c unsatisfactory conduct 
or behavior
■ Occur soon after the offense
■ Be fi rm and fast
■ Be uniform among all persons
■ Be consistent over a period of time
■ Have informational value
■ Clearly identify the problem and the desired corrective 
action
■ When possible, be administered by the same person 
who can reward good performance, usually the com-
pany offi cer
APPLYING DISCIPLINE
OFFICER ADVICE
Finding the best way to motivate each of your teammates 
is one of the most important things you do in being an 
effective leader. 
We have discussed the importance of setting goals. 
Be sure that the goals are reasonable and fair for each 
teammate. Although all fi refi ghters should have the 
same skills, some will be better in some things than 
others will. Some learn some skills faster than oth-
ers do. However, it should all balance out in the fi nal 
analysis. Work with individuals to help them over-
come their weaknesses, and recognize their strengths 
by letting them do that which they do best, at least 
some of the time.
Encourage all of your teammates to participate in 
the goal-setting process for themselves and for their 
company. Get them involved in working together 
to help the company reach its full potential. Get-
ting teammates involved is called empowerment.
Empowerment allows members to have a feeling of 
ownership in the organization.
NOTE
When people work together under pressure, conflict 
is natural.
As an effective company offi cer, you should be able 
to detect a confl ict arising while it is still in its incipient 
stages. Although it is not always easy, you should work 

182  CHAPTER 7
greater detail in private.” You are politely saying; lets 
discuss this at the appropriate time and place. When 
members have a problem, they should take the initiative 
to discuss the issue with the offi cer in a private setting, 
not in front of the crew, especially newer fi refi ghters.
with both parties to understand what is happening and 
resolve the problem. Here are some suggestions:
■ It takes two (or more) to have a confl ict. Get the par-
ties together, tell them that you think “we have a prob-
lem,” and ask the parties to help you fi nd a solution.
■ Try to get the parties to acknowledge that there is a 
problem and that the confl ict is causing a problem 
in the workplace.
■ Work with the involved parties to calm the situa-
tion and to solve the problem.
■ When a solution is found, get a verbal commitment 
from each party on how each is going to support 
the solution. Make sure that everyone understands 
the other’s position.
■ Set a specifi c time to review progress on the 
situation.
Employee Complaints and Grievances
It is natural for team members to complain about things 
in the workplace, especially in fi re stations. When you 
take four or fi ve bright and active young people and 
lock them up together in a building away from their 
own homes for 24 hours, and complaints are inevitable. 
Some of this is just ordinary grousing, but sometimes 
the issues and the people involved can get quite serious.
A fi rst expression of dissatisfaction might be consid-
ered a gripe. Prolonged or repeated dissatisfaction over 
the same topic might lead to a complaint. The differ-
ence is not important. However, the next step, a griev-
ance, is serious and can occur when the complaining 
becomes signifi cant or does not bring relief. All three 
deserve your attention as the company offi cer.
If someone complains about the weather, there is 
not much you can do about it. If someone complains 
about the coffee pot not working, that may require 
some action. You need not resolve every gripe or com-
plaint personally, but you should provide a healthy 
atmosphere where perceived problems can be dealt 
with in a healthy and respectable manner. Understand 
that perception is reality to those who come to you. 
You may not perceive the issue to be a problem, but 
if they come to you, obviously they think it is and it 
should be taken it seriously.
Complaints should be channeled into positive action. 
You should expect adults to solve some of their own 
problems and to try to get help from others when this 
does not work. When neither of these works, members 
may turn to their supervisor for help. You should set 
some ground rules here. If a team member complains 
about some work-related item at the dinner table or 
while the crew is engaged in recreational activity, you 
can say, “I would like to hear more about that. Please 
come see me about that when we can discuss this in 
NOTE
Complaints should be channeled into positive action.
Sometimes, just letting the member talk over the 
problem helps to resolve the issue. At other times, 
you may suggest some form of action to help mem-
bers to help themselves. And at times, you will have 
to take action to help resolve the problem. Listening 
to and acting on material complaints will improve 
the  workplace environment. At the same time, you 
do not want to pamper our people by listening to 
and attempting to accommodate their every whim.
Solving problems can be diffi cult if there is no out-
lined plan. Although there are many types of prob-
lem-solving processes, the steps listed next contain 
the basic elements for solving most problems that 
occur in and around the fi rehouse.
 1. Problem defi nition: What exactly is the problem? 
Writing down the issue will validate that you are 
focusing on the problem at hand and makes sure 
that nothing is overlooked. In the problem defi ni-
tion, the fi re offi cer should also list what he or she 
wants to achieve through this process.
 2. Problem analysis: Break down the problem into 
the following:
 Where are we?
 What is the current situation?
 Who or what is involved?
  By breaking down the problem, a fi re offi cer can 
focus on the root causes and determine if the prob-
lem is affecting the organization as a whole or if it 
is an individual or isolated problem.
 3. Analyze the solutions: This step turns into a 
 positive-versus-negative competition. The fi re offi cer 
should brainstorm and write down all of the possible 
solutions to the problem. Then the offi cer should take 
each proposed solution and write down the positive 
and negative points that are relative to each solution.
 4. Select the best solution(s): Look through all of the 
factors, both positive and negative. While this pro-
cess is often a “gut instinct” choice, it is often found 
that this choice is not the most obvious solution. After 
this process is over, fi re offi cers may fi nd that they 
have numerous solutions or they may fi nd that they 
do not have a solution at all. In the case of numerous 
solutions, rank them in order of preference and then 
proceed with the top ranked. If no solution is found, 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 183
personnel face deal directly or indirectly with stress. Nar-
rowing down all of the indicators of stress would prove 
to be impossible; therefore, we will focus on work-re-
lated stress indicators. Work-related stress is a destructive 
physical reaction that occurs when the job demands do 
not match the ability or capabilities of the worker. Work-
related stress often results from the demands of the job 
as well as the working conditions that fi refi ghters face. 
There are many different perspectives on how to deal 
with work-related stress problems. One such perspective 
says that the differences in individual characteristics are 
important in predicting whether certain job conditions 
will result in stress. In looking at the characteristics of a 
fi refi ghter and the job conditions that he or she will face, 
we can see a rapid road to stress overload. The problem 
is that the majority of fi refi ghters bottle-up these feelings 
for fear of being looked down on by their peers. There-
fore, it is imperative that fi re offi cers learn the signs of 
stress so that they can encourage the member to seek 
professional assistance. Some of the more obvious signs 
include mood swings, sleep disorders, eating problems, 
and relationship issues. Company offi cers will probably 
be the fi rst people within the department to notice these 
signs. This is why it is important for the company offi cer 
to let subordinates know that they can always come and 
talk no matter what the circumstances.
Ideally, members will refer themselves to an EAP 
long before their work is affected. However, this is rarely 
the case when dealing with emergency service workers. 
If job performance has suffered and the employee does 
not seek help on his or her own, it is suggested that the 
company offi cer take the initiative and offer to arrange 
an appointment with an EAP. This can prove to be a dif-
fi cult discussion. Therefore, here are some tips on how to 
handle these types of discussions:
 1. Make sure that all performance issues have been 
properly documented.
 2. Tell the employee that you have noticed that his or 
her performance has been suffering and refer the 
employee to your documentation.
 3. Let the employee know the circumstances for con-
tinuing performance problems.
 4. DO NOT try to diagnose the problem.
 5. Let the employee give his or her view on the issue.
 6. DO NOT engage in discussions that deal with per-
sonal issues. Focus on work performance issues only.
 7. Review the EAP procedures with the employee.
Whether the employee seeks assistance on his or her 
own or the company offi cer offers to help, it is important 
to follow up on all requests for assistance. Documenta-
tion must be placed within the members personnel fi le. 
These steps should be listed within departmental as 
well as the city’s or town’s policies and procedures.
then the process starts back over. Make sure that the 
problem has been correctly defi ned.
 5. Move forward: Institute the solution and monitor 
the outcomes.
NOTE
Sometimes just letting the member talk over the prob-
lem helps to resolve the issue.
Company offi cers must be familiar with their organiza-
tion’s grievance procedure. Where members are rep-
resented in a bargaining unit by union, the grievance 
procedure is part of the union contract, and contracts 
usually allow the members to have someone from the 
union with them during any action that may be taken.
If member frustration has escalated to the grievance 
level, it indicates that there is a problem that members 
cannot resolve, that they are unhappy with the situa-
tion, and that they have decided to make a formal issue 
of their complaint. It may also indicate that there is a 
 communications problem in the organization. Most orga-
nizations have a formal grievance procedure; the proce-
dure forces the issue to be heard in a timely manner.
Dealing with the Disenchanted 
Firefighter
Some fi re companies have a seasoned fi refi ghter who 
has developed a negative attitude. This fi refi ghter may 
be sullen or even openly hostile. When he or she does 
speak, he or she complains a lot, but offers few sugges-
tions and seldom takes the initiative to solve problems. 
He or she also tries to do as little work as he or she can. 
Not only does he or she set a bad example, his or her neg-
ative attitude can become contagious if left unchecked.
As a supervisor, you should take the lead and try to 
gradually restore the disenchanted fi refi ghter. You may 
want to start with improving his or her attitude. Give 
him or her a specifi c task that he or she can accom-
plish. When it is successfully accomplished, give him 
or her some recognition for effort. Repeat the process. 
By taking the rehabilitation process in small incre-
ments, you may be able to turn the fi refi ghter with a 
negative attitude into a positive performer.
Employee Assistance—When 
Is It Warranted?
Employee Assistance Programs, or EAPs, were brought 
up earlier in this chapter. While mentioned previously, 
it is important to take a broader look at when these 
types of programs should be recommended. EAPs were 
developed to help employees deal with personal or work-
 related issues that would otherwise adversely affect their 
work performance and/or health. Many of the issues that 

184  CHAPTER 7
 ladder with increasingly important positions, more chal-
lenging assignments, larger spans of control, more peo-
ple to supervise, and more power. When departments 
have professional development programs, planned pro-
fessional progression provides a succession of gradual 
and critical development activities that prepare leaders 
for subsequent positions.
Good leaders are informed. Skills and knowledge create 
leadership power. Good leaders are constantly renewing 
their knowledge base in both administrative and operational 
skills. They are up-to-date on what others are doing. In turn, 
they are setting a pace that others will try to follow.
Good leaders are good communicators—good speak-
ers, good writers, and good listeners. Since so much of 
good leadership involves informing and persuading oth-
ers, those who cannot communicate cannot succeed.
Good leaders also have a sense of humor. Humor is 
an enormous asset. Fire offi cers endure trauma on the 
street and boredom in meetings. Anger and hostility 
can be present in either setting. Humor, appropriate and 
timely of course, often provides a much needed relief.
John Buckman, chief of the Germantown Township 
(Indiana) Volunteer Fire Department and recent past pres-
ident of the International Association of Fire Chiefs, notes 
that good leaders in the fi re service, and elsewhere, dem-
onstrate several common and predictable characteristics 
(there are always exceptions of course):1
Good leaders are bright, mentally agile, and alert. In-
telligence is the quality that helps one gather information, 
sort through the information, and make accurate critical 
decisions in a timely manner.
Good leaders seek out responsibility. First, there are 
a few dominant people who have the necessary skills to 
be in charge, the courage to make things happen, and 
the willingness to accept responsibility when things go 
wrong. Chief Buckman says these are the qualities of a 
natural leader. Second, and more commonly, we see a 
pattern in people who spiral upward into leadership roles. 
They start early and gradually ascend the leadership 
WHAT GOOD LEADERS DO
HUMAN RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT AT A GLANCE
All of the information in this chapter thus far can be 
bundled into the human resource management realm. 
Leading members, developing members, evaluating 
members, and even taking disciplinary action are all 
parts of human resource management. To become an 
effi cient leader and manager of human resources, it is 
important to understand the federal, state, municipal, 
and departmental human resource management poli-
cies, procedures, and laws. One such law that affects 
the majority of fi re service members is the Fair Labor 
Standards Act (FLSA). Also known as the Wages and 
Hours Bill, the FLSA enforces the rights and wages 
of nonexempt employees. It is recommended that all 
fi re offi cers study the FLSA laws so that they can be 
ready for questions from members. There have been 
numerous lawsuits fi led between fi re departments and 
municipalities that deal with these laws. The FLSA 
applies to “any individual employed by an employer” 
but not to independent contractors or volunteers 
because they are not considered to be “employees” 
under FLSA. While there are some exceptions to the 
FLSA laws, the one that the fi re service most often 
deals with is the “white collar” exemption. This 
exemption is applicable to those employees deemed 
“exempt” by the employer. However, courts have 
overturned this ruling by the employers because they 
could not prove that the employee fi t “plainly and 
unmistakably” within the exemption terms.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administra-
tion, or OSHA, is tasked with preventing work-related 
injuries, illnesses, and deaths by issuing and enforc-
ing standards for workplace safety and health. The 
Occupational Safety and Health Act, which created 
OSHA, also created the National Institute for Occu-
pational Safety and Health (NIOSH), which is the lead 
research agency for occupational health and safety.
While there are many different laws and standards 
that deal with human resource management, fi re offi -
cers are encouraged to study those that pertain directly 
to themselves and their subordinates. Firefi ghters are 
notorious for fi nding presumed loopholes in just about 
any law or standard; therefore, it becomes necessary 
for their offi cer to have an understanding of these laws 
and standards before the questions arise. Understand 
the local policies and procedures at the federal level 
as well as the state and municipal levels. Know the 
department’s policies and procedures on how to deal 
with questions and/or complaints.
INTRODUCING CHANGE
It is important that an organization be able to change. 
If it cannot, it may not survive. Likewise, it is impor-
tant for individuals to be able to change.
Most change is good; it allows us to keep up-to-date 
and to use modern ideas and technology to get the job 
done. As the speed with which we share information 
and technology increases, so will the rate of change. 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 185
present process. We may not have the training or edu-
cation to deal with the change or the new process that 
comes as a result of the change. We are intimidated 
by the unknown or by the rumors we have heard. All 
are valid reasons why people resist change. We all 
want to share the benefi ts of change, but few of us 
want to pay the price of changing from the present.
As one sage put it, “If you think we have had a lot of 
change in the last 10 years, wait until you see what 
happens in the next 10 years!” (See Figure 7-11.)
We all change during our lifetime, but accepting 
change is an individual thing: Some do it better than 
others do. For us as individuals, accepting change is 
something we can plan, control, and monitor on our 
own. When it becomes too painful, we can slow down 
or reverse our decision.
FIGURE 7-11 New equipment may break from tradition, and require changes in attitude and 
procedure.
NOTE
Most change is good; it allows us to keep up-to-date 
and to use modern ideas and technology to get the 
job done.
Changes in organizations are another matter. 
Although the change will impact upon us as individu-
als, just as with our own initiatives, with organizational 
change, we probably do not have much opportunity 
to set the pace. We often have little or no knowledge 
of the change in advance of its implementation, and 
we have little opportunity to plan, control, and assess 
its impact. As a result, changes in organizations are 
much more diffi cult on the team members.
It is natural to resist change. Our resistance may 
come from the fact that we are comfortable with the 
NOTE
It is natural to resist change.
NOTE
Introducing change and managing its effective imple-
mentation is a leadership skill.
Although things may be running well at your fi re 
station, there will come a time when you have to 
make a change. Make sure there is a valid reason for 
the change. Change that is easy to accomplish or that 
has the greatest visibility may not be what is really 
needed. Change may be the result of one of your own 
ideas, or it may be the result of an initiative that has 
come down the chain of command. Regardless of its 
source, it has to be implemented at the station level. 

186  CHAPTER 7
Work to overcome the obstacles of change. We 
usually fear the unknown. Change introduces uncer-
tainty into our lives and often introduces new events 
over which we have no control. We often do not know 
all the details when changes occur. We do not know if 
or how they will affect us. We do not understand why 
the change has occurred and what future change may 
be about to occur. All of these anxieties can be over-
come with good communications.
When introducing change, keep your team mem-
bers informed of what is going on, and let them be a 
part of the process, rather than a victim of its passing. 
Let them know the time frame and the depth of the 
impact it will bring. Depending upon the time, cir-
cumstances, and conditions involved, you may be able 
to use one of the leadership styles described in the last 
chapter to sell the idea, rather than ramming the idea 
down your members’ throats. Let them ask questions. 
Try to provide honest answers to their questions. Be 
positive and supportive of both them and the change 
(see Figure 7-12).
You can expect to hear some negative comments. 
Let those comments be heard and try to respond 
with honest and positive answers if you can. If 
you need information from elsewhere in the orga-
nization, say so. One of the main components of 
successfully introducing change is to keep the com-
munications open.
Introducing change and managing its effective imple-
mentation is a leadership skill.
Good leadership provides a culture where change 
is not only welcomed but also required. With good 
leadership, you should have open lines of communi-
cations. You should be encouraging members to offer 
new ideas about their work and the service they pro-
vide to the community they serve. As a supervisor, 
you should provide a climate where a member’s ideas 
are given serious consideration.
Changes in fi re apparatus design are among the 
most conspicuous changes in the fi re service. When 
one of these vehicles arrives in your community, citi-
zens, as well as fi refi ghters, will quickly note the dif-
ferences in appearance.
Introducing changes to an organization may be evi-
dent to the outsider and may have a profound impact 
on the way the department serves its community. In 
Richmond, Virginia, the fi re chief was directed to 
reduce the cost of services. After a careful analysis, 
he determined that the city needed a new fl eet of fi re 
trucks. In May 1997, the city placed an order for over 
$12 million in new equipment. Included in the pack-
age are new quints and new rapid-response rescue 
vehicles. One might wonder how spending $12 mil-
lion would save money, but the chief was able to con-
vince everyone, including the fi refi ghters, that these 
new vehicles could provide better service to the citi-
zens of the city. At the same time, the initial expense 
would allow for a modest and gradual reduction in 
personnel, the retiring of an old fl eet of vehicles that 
were expensive to maintain, and the closing of sev-
eral no-longer-needed fi re stations. In the long run 
(15  years), the department expects to save more than 
the acquisition cost of the new equipment.
The new concept provides an all-quint response 
concept for working fi re alarms. The rapid-response 
vehicle will be used in situations when a quint is not 
required, such as auto accidents and smaller fi res, 
since the rapid-response units have 750-gpm pumps 
and 500 gallons of water. What is unique is that 
the quints and rapid-response units will be located 
together and staffed by the same personnel. The com-
pany will determine which unit to take, based on the 
dispatch information.
Introducing a change of this magnitude requires a 
great amount of work. You need to have a good con-
cept, to do your homework and to get all the answers, 
and then to work to win the support of the members 
and the community.
Let us look at several key ingredients for provid-
ing the environment where change is accepted. First, 
keep your members involved in the process. Let 
them know that you want to hear about their ideas. 
Let them know that you are open to other ways to do 
things, even where the present system may be of your 
own creation. We are surrounded with hard working 
teammates. Some take the job more seriously than do 
others, but all have the ability to offer ideas on how to 
do things better.
NOTE
Change introduces uncertainty into our lives and often 
introduces new events over which we have no control.
OFFICER ADVICE
One of the main components of successfully introducing 
change is to keep communications open.
The greatest fear occurs when change involves 
personnel action. We all like to know what is hap-
pening in our lives, especially when we are at work. 
When people get moved around, when they have their 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 187
 working hours changed, and when they have to take 
on new duties, they want to know about these things 
in advance. Try to keep these events to a minimum, 
but at the same time, let your people know about the 
necessary events well in advance.
Others you work with—the police, other fi re 
departments, hospitals, and of course the public—
may be affected by the change. Let them know what 
is going on. For most organizations, this is an excel-
lent time to build some good public relations.
Once a change has been introduced, it is always 
a good idea to follow up, to remain in touch with 
what is happening in the organization. Review the 
change and the impact it has brought to the organi-
zation. Change seldom comes without a price. With 
each good event, there are usually some negative side 
effects. The goal is to have the positive effects out-
weigh the negative ones. Monitoring and fi ne-tuning 
the results of the change will increase the net results 
(see Figure 7-13).
When change is successfully implemented, it 
is a good time to recognize those who made it 
happen. Recognize the individual and the team 
that led the change. Also give some recognition 
to those who were able to successfully accommo-
date the change. Use these steps to update, change, 
or even create a new policy or procedure. The 
following are some key steps for successfully intro-
ducing change:
■ Create a climate where change is welcomed and 
not feared.
■ Let team members be involved in fi nding new ways 
and in implementing new ideas from others.
■ Reduce stress and anxiety by keeping people 
informed.
■ When introducing change, be positive.
■ Consider the impact of the timing of the change on 
your team members and introduce the changes as 
gradually as possible.
■ Follow up and monitor the total impact of the 
change.
FIGURE 7-12 New ideas are 
not always welcomed.
FIGURE 7-13 New ideas should always be given fair con-
sideration. This foam unit is an effective urban interface 
vehicle.

188  CHAPTER 7
commanding offi cer of the USS Benfold, tells of the 
changes that occurred while he was aboard. When 
Abrashoff went aboard Benfold, he found a ship 
with all of the best technology but with an unmo-
tivated crew. Their lack of motivation led to safety 
and readiness problems. He set about changing that 
by fi rst working on his own leadership skills and 
then those of the crew. Within months, he created a 
crew of inspired problem solvers, eager to take the 
■ Only 4 percent of the departments have the equip-
ment to collect chemical or biological samples for re-
mote analysis.
■ Only 3 percent of the departments have mobile data 
terminals.
■ Only 2 percent of the departments have advanced 
personnel location equipment.
In general, those departments that reported they did not 
have the equipment also reported they did not have any 
plans for getting the new equipment.
Any list of “new” ideas will bring laughter from some read-
ers. For some, these ideas have been around for so long 
they are no longer considered new. Others may not even 
have heard of these ideas or realized their value as ap-
plied to the fi re service.
A Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service reported 
the result of a survey of departments on using new tech-
nology. They found the following:2
■ Only 25 percent of all departments have thermal im-
aging cameras.
WHAT’S NEW?
Our leader is leaving us. I can recall when he arrived. 
We were concerned, as we always are when a new 
 offi cer is assigned to the company. What will the new 
company offi cer be like? What things will he change? 
Well, we were soon to fi nd out. First, we noticed how 
personable he seemed; he seemed comfortable with 
everyone. As the days passed, we noticed that he made 
it a point to spend some quality time with everyone. 
Sure, he spoke with everyone, but, more importantly, 
he listened to everyone, too. He did not make prom-
ises that he could not keep and did not try to solve all 
of our problems by himself. But he always listened and 
offered encouragement.
We also noticed that the new offi cer was refreshingly 
unassuming. He was not here on some ego trip. He was 
here because he wanted to be, because he had earned 
it, because he was qualifi ed for the job, and because he 
enjoyed being here. He was as sharp as anyone around, 
but he sometimes admitted he did not know the answer. 
But he always knew where to go to fi nd it.
He enjoyed the job and maintained a sense of humor. 
He worked us hard, but he also made sure we had fun. 
We recently won an award for being the best company in 
the department. At the award ceremony, our company of-
fi cer thanked the chief for the award, but he also publicly 
thanked each of us and made sure that everyone present 
knew that we had done the work. We excelled because 
of his leadership; he did not mention that, however.
We also performed well because of his teaching. I guess 
you might call it mentoring or coaching. He was always con-
cerned about our professional growth and gave us room and 
motivation to grow. He let us make decisions and take re-
sponsibility for our actions. He praised us when we did well. 
When we did not do as well as he thought we could, he let us 
know that too, but always calmly, tactfully, and fairly.
Our boss is getting a promotion and a transfer. We will 
miss him. But we are far better off for his having been 
here with us these past several years. He helped each 
of us grow to be better than we were before, and col-
lectively, we are now a far better team—the best one 
around, in fact! I guess some of his infl uence will still be 
here. In many ways, he taught us to think and work as he 
does. And I think we are getting pretty good at it.
Do you suppose that he was preparing us to take his 
place?
REFLECTIONS ON THE DEPARTURE 
OF OUR LEADER
STILL NOT CONVINCED?
Taking command of a fi re department is much like tak-
ing command of a ship. As the chief, you are the boss, 
and you can make a difference. Some choose to be care-
takers, and some choose to make improvements. In either 
case, the vision has to start at the top, but the actual work 
to implement the change takes place at all levels.
In a book entitled It’s Your Ship, Michael 
Abrashoff, a retired navy captain and the  former 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 189
initiative and ready to take responsibility for their 
own actions.
The chapter headings read like an action plan for 
change:
■  Take command
■  Lead by example
■  Listen aggressively
■  Communicate with purpose and meaning
■  Create a climate of trust
■  Look for results, not salutes
■  Take calculated risks
■  Go beyond standard procedure
■  Build up your people
■  Improve your people’s quality of life
Look at the chapter headings. Do these titles look like 
what we have been discussing in this text?
This is a book for leaders at all levels. Certainly, 
it is good reading for fi re chiefs, but it is even better 
reading for fi re offi cers on their way up: These “ris-
ing stars” are the ones who will make the changes 
today and in the future as their sphere of infl uence 
increases.
From the size-up, it was apparent to Tricarico that 
the entire roof would have to be taken off the car, so 
EMS personnel could get access to the driver. The next 
step was taking off the driver’s side door, and fi nally, he 
 decided it was necessary to displace the dash, as the 
patient’s legs were trapped underneath it. Supervising 
the scene, Tricarico guided his group in the action they 
had practiced, and he was pleased to see that they did 
exactly as they had been trained. Though the driver did 
not survive, there was no way they would have been able 
to free him any more quickly, and Tricarico was proud of 
his men. Later, he told them so, because he stresses the 
importance of letting your staff know they have done a 
terrifi c job, even when it seems most thankless.
Questions
1. What kind of leadership power does Captain Tricarico 
have at his volunteer company?
2. Does good leadership transcend the organization? In 
other words, can an effective leader in one organiza-
tion take those leadership skills to another organiza-
tion and be effective?
3. Captain Tricarico notes that he has to supervise his 
volunteer personnel more closely than he does at his 
Special Operations Unit at FDNY. Do you think that 
statement is correct? Why?
4. How would you feel about someone like Captain Tri-
carico bringing ideas like those in the story to your 
department?
5. Sometimes, in spite of the best of efforts, we lose the 
customer. How do you think the leader should deal 
with their personnel in this kind of situation?
As a captain in Special Operations for the FDNY, Tony 
Tricarico has had the opportunity to work with some of 
the most experienced fi refi ghters in the country. And be-
ing part of that department affords him the opportunity 
to get cutting-edge training. But when he goes home to 
Long Island and serves as truck company captain at his 
volunteer fi re department, it is a much different situation. 
That company is made up of everyone from lumbermen 
to insurance salesmen; Tricarico is quick to say they are 
a terrifi c group, but for as hard as they work, they do not 
necessarily have the same training opportunities as the 
FDNY. This requires that Tricarico supervise them a little 
more closely. That is why he feels it is his responsibility to 
take his own training experiences and disseminate them 
to his company.
Not long ago, he was taught an impressively fast and 
simple way to displace a dashboard, in which the “jaws 
of life” angled at such a degree that it did not block ac-
cess to the passenger. Afterwards, he decided to hold a 
practice training session with his Long Island group and 
coach them through the process in a hands-on manner.
He saw the virtue in doing this not a few weeks later, 
when his company was called to the scene of a bad ac-
cident. The car had pulled out of an intersection into a 
7-lane road—where drivers typically go 70 mph—and 
was T-boned. The car had spun out, hit a curb, and was 
in pretty bad shape when the company arrived.
LEADING OTHERS
Tony Tricarico, Captain Squadron 252, 
Special Operations Command, 
FDNY, New York

190  CHAPTER 7
LESSONS LEARNED
tunities for their growth and learning.  Encourage 
them to seek training and education at every op-
portunity. Provide opportunity and incentive for 
individuals to increase their knowledge.
 6. Provide instruction and help, be available, show 
interest and support, and recognize accomplish-
ments. But do not supervise, unless necessary.
 7. Ask your members for ideas and suggestions. 
 Listen to the members’ ideas and suggestions. Re-
spond to all of them, and, when appropriate, see 
that the ideas are forwarded up the chain of com-
mand for action. Be sure that members get credit 
for their work and suggestions.
 8. Be a role model. Do the right thing.
Throughout the chapters on management and lead-
ership, we have tried to share with you some new 
ideas, ideas that are being used in modern organiza-
tions. Maybe some of these are ideas that you have 
seen used in your organization, and maybe they are 
some that you have not seen. All have been used in 
the fi re service and elsewhere with good results.
Michael Abrashoff discusses ownership in the 
book It’s Your Ship. Many modern managers, includ-
ing fi re chiefs, see this approach as a way to resus-
citate tired organizations, providing better and more 
effi cient service to citizens. These ideas are valid but 
face signifi cant challenges from years of tranquility 
and status quo. Introducing change is a challenge 
in itself, but with something as bold as empowering 
people and suggesting that they have “ownership in 
the organization,” things can be diffi cult.
The message for company offi cers—you can make 
changes in the way you do things a lot easier than 
your chief can: You are much closer to your people, 
and there are fewer of them to convince. Try some of 
the ideas discussed here, and see what happens. Do 
not be content to just do it the way we always have 
and then complain about the organizational climate. 
Take on small challenges fi rst and then work your 
way up to larger undertakings. As you move to posi-
tions of greater responsibility and infl uence, continue 
to introduce new ideas. Read the trade journals. You 
will fi nd that nearly every issue has something about 
these modern concepts in management, leadership, 
and supervision.
So, what is the company offi cer’s role? You should 
aspire to be the best company offi cer in your depart-
ment. That means you manage the best company in 
the department. You should have the cleanest fi re 
station and fi re apparatus in town. Your teammates 
should be enthusiastic about their job. They should 
T
he following information summarizes what we 
have covered in Chapters 6 and 7 and should 
provide you with a list of practical tools to help you 
become an effective leader.
 1. Have an orientation session. We usually have an 
orientation session for new fi refi ghters. What do we 
do for experienced fi refi ghters who are transferred 
to a new station? What do we do when the supervi-
sor changes? In every case, there is a need for taking 
a few minutes to get acquainted. For the supervi-
sors who do this regularly, it is a good idea to have 
a short checklist, not unlike a teaching outline, to 
help facilitate the transition and cover every issue 
with every member. This session is a good time to 
explain personal values as well as any policies that 
may be unique to this workplace. This session is a 
good time to listen to the members, hear about their 
goals and ambitions, and possibly their problems 
and needs. Remember—do not try to cover every-
thing in one session. Give the new member informa-
tion in installments that can be easily absorbed.
 2. Have regular meetings and share information 
with employees. One effective meeting that should 
happen regularly is a planning meeting. The plan-
ning meeting may be nothing more than get-
ting together with everyone after the equipment 
checks at the start of the shift for a cup of cof-
fee and a brief discussion about what will happen 
during the upcoming shift. Some planning meet-
ings may be longer, such as planning the training 
schedule for the next 3 months. Plan for future 
events, and let your teammates share the informa-
tion. Let teammates be involved in the decision-
making process whenever possible.
 3. Set goals for the company and for every member. 
Some goals will be collaborative efforts that re-
quire group acceptance, whereas other goals may 
be for individual accomplishment. In any case, 
get the member(s) actively involved in goal set-
ting. Use these goals as a benchmark for measur-
ing progress during evaluations.
 4. Provide regular feedback on performance. This 
does not require a formal evaluation with a compli-
cated report. It may only take a minute or two, and 
usually focuses on some specifi c task or time frame. 
It is a lot easier for both the supervisor and the mem-
ber to deal with these performance issues when they 
are addressed in small increments. When corrective 
action is desired, it will come a lot sooner.
 5. Empower your people. Offer opportunities for your 
people to enhance themselves and provide oppor-

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Leading Others 191
be the best-trained, fi ttest, and most-qualifi ed fi re-
fi ghters anywhere. They should all be competing for 
advancement, and you should have prepared them to 
take your place.
While coaching and counseling those around you, 
take time to work on your own development needs. 
Steve Covey, author of the best seller Seven Habits of 
Highly Successful People, calls this taking time off 
from your work to improve your skills as taking time 
to “sharpen the saw.” Covey compares our learning 
process to working with tools, noting that more gets 
done with sharp tools, but that production is sacrifi ced 
in the process. He suggests that we also have to take 
time off to sharpen our thinking tools. His message: 
“Take time to keep your mental saw sharp!” There 
is a wealth of information on the topic of supervi-
sion and leadership. Every library and bookstore has 
books and tapes on the subject. You are encouraged 
to learn all that you can and to share your ideas and 
experiences with others.
coach a person who helps another develop a skill
complaint an expression of discontent
conflict a disagreement, quarrel, or struggle 
between two individuals or groups
counseling one of several leadership tools that 
focuses on improving member performance
demotion reduction of a member to a lower grade
disciplinary action an administrative process 
whereby a member is punished for not conforming 
to the organizational rules or regulations
empowerment to give authority or power to 
another
grievance a formal dispute between member and 
employer over some condition of work
grievance procedure formal process for handling 
disputed issues between member and employer; 
where a union contract is in place, the grievance pro-
cedure is part of the contract
gripe the least severe form of discontent
oral reprimand the fi rst step in a formal disciplin-
ary process
succession plan the formal or informal training 
of subordinates to assume your position within the 
organization
suspension disciplinary action in which the mem-
ber is relieved from duties, possibly with partial or 
complete loss of pay
termination the fi nal step in the disciplinary pro-
cess or the incident command process
transfer a step in the disciplinary process that pro-
vides the member a fresh start in another venue
written reprimand documents unsatisfactory 
performance and specifi es the corrective action 
expected; usually follows an oral reprimand
KEY TERMS
 1. What is leadership?
 2. What is coaching?
 3. What is counseling?
 4. The text suggests that the performance evaluation 
system is a continuous process. Explain.
 5. Describe the disciplinary process in your 
department.
 6. What are some general rules for effective 
punishment?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 7. How should you, as company offi cers, deal with 
confl ict?
 8. How should you respond to complaints and 
grievances?
 9. How should you introduce change?
 10. How can you, as a company offi cer, become an 
effective leader?

192  CHAPTER 7
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 6. As a company offi cer, how would you introduce 
a new procedure (or a change to an existing one) 
that is the result of your own initiative?
 7. As a company offi cer, how would you deal with a 
new idea suggested by one of your teammates?
 8. How is change accepted in your department?
 9. Other than those mentioned in the text and in the 
Student Manual, what changes are occurring in 
our industry?
 10. What changes do you foresee in our business over 
the next fi ve years?
 1. As a company offi cer, describe how you would 
treat a new fi refi ghter joining your company.
 2. Describe how you would integrate this new fi re-
fi ghter into your team.
 3. Describe how you would encourage the new fi re-
fi ghter’s professional development.
 4. Describe something you would do at your fi re sta-
tion to make it more attractive to the fi rst minority 
member to join your company.
 5. As a company offi cer, how would you introduce 
a new procedure (or a change to an existing one) 
mandated by law or regulation?
ENDNOTES
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. A Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service, Emmitsburg, MD: 
U.S. Fire Administration, 2002.
Krames, Jeffrey A. The Rumsfeld Way: Leadership Wisdom of a 
Battle-Hardened Maverick. New York: McGraw Hill, 2003.
Marinucci, Richard. “Counseling: Listen, Don’t Judge.” Fire Engi-
neering, August 2007.
Martinette, C. V. “Surviving the Leadership of Others.” Fire Engi-
neering, April 2004.
Maxwell, John C. Leadership 101. Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson, 
2002.
Peters, Tom and Nancy Austin. A Passion for Excellence. New 
York, Random House, 1995.
Plunkett, Richard. Supervision: Diversity and Teams in the Work-
place. 8th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996.
Simpson, Jeff. “Is Your Leadership Bicycle Broken?” Fire Engi-
neering, October 2006.
Shoebridge, Todd. “To Become a Respected Company Offi cer, 
Know Your People.” Fire Engineering, July 2006.
Staley, Michael. Igniting the Leader Within. Saddle Brook, NJ: Fire 
Engineering, 1998.
Woodbury, Debbie. Excellence in Supervision: Essential Skills for 
the New Supervisor. Boston, MA: Crisp Learning, 2001.
Zeiss, Tony. Nine Essential Laws for Becoming Infl uential. Tulsa, 
OK: Triumphant Publishers International, 2000.
1. Jon Buckman, “What Good Leaders Do,” Fire Engineering, 
 August, 2003.
Anthony, Derrick. “To Enact Departmental Change, Company 
 Offi cers Must Become Team Players.” FireRescue, March 2008.
Bennis, Warren. On Becoming a Leader. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley, 1994.
Blanchard, Kenneth and Spencer Johnson. The One Minute Man-
ager. New York, NY: Berkley Books, 1982.
Calfee, Mica. “Leadership Do’s and Don’ts.” Fire Engineering, 
April 2008.
Compton, Dennis. When in Doubt, Lead! Still  water, OK: Fire Pro-
tection Publications, 1999.
Effective Supervisory Practices. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Interna-
tional City Management Association, 1984.
Emery, Mark. “How to Give Your Crew What They Need to Suc-
ceed.” FireRescue Magazine, April 2004.
Emory, Mark. “The Fire Station Pyramid of Success.” Firehouse, 
fi ve part series starting Feb 2008.
Gayk, Ray. “Fire Offi cers Should Emulate Military Leaders to Im-
prove Leadership Under Stress.” FireRescue, October 2008.
Gayk, Ray. “What to Do When You Inherit a Personnel Problem.” 
FireRescue, August, 2008.
Goswick, William. “Power and Infl uence: A Guide for Fire Offi -
cers.” Fire Engineering, July 2007.
Humphrey, B., and J. Stokes. The 21st Century Supervisor: Nine 
Essential Skills for Frontline Leaders. Hoboken, NJ: John 
 Wiley, 1999.


The Company Officer’s 
Role in Personnel Safety
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ The Value of Safety
■ Annual NFPA Reports 
on Firefighter Safety
■ Theory of Accident Causes
■ Regulatory and Standards 
Setting Bodies
■ Fire Department Occupational 
Safety and Health Program
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
8

195
STREET 
STORY
A
fter many years of serving as a firefighter, I was uncertain of what to think 
about a promotion to a captain’s position managing the department’s Health 
and Safety Program. I would be giving up the schedule and stations I was used to 
for a desk job at headquarters. Worst of all, I would be giving up the emergency 
 responses and the excitement of working in the field.
Little did I know how valuable the experience would be in returning to the field 
several years later as a company officer. While managing the department’s safety 
program, I had gained a wealth of knowledge about Self Contained Breathing 
 Apparatus (SCBA) and the wide variety of regulations and equipment associated 
with respiratory protection for firefighters. When operating in the field, we typi-
cally do not realize all the complexities of the equipment and the issues we face. 
The SCBA is a tool that all firefighters use to protect themselves and to keep their 
 respiratory systems safe while performing their jobs, right? But what about SCBA 
equipment that fails or is not properly maintained? What about the great impor-
tance of the fit testing program and its relationship to the overall effectiveness 
of the SCBA in making firefighters safe on the job? There are so many factors to 
consider beyond the daily checks and throwing the packs on before entering a 
structure.
In retrospect, I am thankful for my experience in managing my department’s 
safety program as it has given me an invaluable perspective on how complex the 
issues are related to firefighter safety. It has also helped me realize the importance 
of training on safety issues, such as SCBA emergencies, and to place high priori-
ties on the seemingly mundane tasks associated with safety, like fit testing, PPE 
gear checks and fittings, and SCBA maintenance. As a company officer, I believe 
that instilling the value and respect of the safety program in my team members is 
critical and is an important responsibility of my position.
—Dominic Depaolis, Captain, 
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, Dulles, Virginia

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
8-1 Identify death and injury statistics for emergency 
incident-related duties.
 
8-2 List the common causes of accidents and inju-
ries in the fire service.
 
8-3 Identify general safety policies and procedures.
 
8-4 List the common causes of accidents and inju-
ries in the fire service from unsafe conditions or 
actions.
 
8-5 Describe fire department policies as they apply 
to firefighter wellness and fitness.
 
8-6 Describe the sixteen (16) Firefighter Life Safety 
Initiatives.
 
8-7 List the common causes of personal injuries at 
a selected emergency operation.
 
8-8 Identify departmental operating procedures per-
taining to on-the-job safety.
 
8-9 Describe hazard mitigation measures for emer-
gency and non-emergency situations.
 8-10 Identify the theories of accident causes.
 8-11 Review in-house and national reports address-
ing trends and conditions that result in acci-
dents, injuries, and occupational illnesses and 
deaths.
 8-12 Describe the safety policies and procedures of 
the agency.
 8-13 Explain the need for accident records and 
reports.
 8-14 List the steps for conducting an initial accident 
investigation.
 8-15 Describe the procedures for responding, report-
ing, and processing line-of-duty deaths.
 8-16 Describe the laws affecting the releasing of 
medical records and reports affecting the 
member.
 8-17 List the types of health exposures with which 
fire personnel may come in contact.
 8-18 Describe the components of an infectious dis-
ease control program as contained in the de-
partment standard operating procedures.
 8-19 Describe safe procedures and/or practices that 
are applied during non-emergency operations.
 8-20 Identify the standard operating procedures ad-
dressing safety for non-emergency operations.
 8-21 Identify the stresses that may be encoun-
tered by unit members involved in emergency 
services.
 8-22 Describe the supervisor’s role in unit member 
crisis intervention.
 8-23 Describe the confidentiality requirements per-
taining to the unit member outlined in the hu-
man resources policy and procedures.
INTRODUCTION
An article in a fi re service magazine stated that the 
leading causes of accidents among fi re service per-
sonnel are managers who do not manage, supervisors 
who do not supervise, and fi refi ghters who do dumb 
things.1 Safety is an organization value. In addition to 
the deaths and injuries reported each year, a growing 
number of fi refi ghters are being exposed to situations 
that lead to occupational illnesses and conditions that 
have debilitating and sometimes fatal consequences. 
Firefi ghters have long had a high rate of heart and 
respiratory disease and cancer. Firefi ghters providing 
emergency medical care may be exposed to a wide 
range of biological hazards.
* The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, 
are identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.
196  CHAPTER 8
FIREGROUND FACT
In the United States, approximately 100 firefighters are 
killed, and approximately 80,000 are injured each year 
while on duty.
Company offi cers should be intimately involved 
with the department’s health and safety program. Most 
injuries occur to fi refi ghters. Most fi refi ghters have a 
company offi cer as their supervisor. Most fi re depart-
ments, several NFPA standards, and the courts hold 
the supervisor responsible for the fi refi ghter’s safety.
Each year in the United States, approximately 100 
fi refi ghters are killed while on duty, and approximately 

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  197
80,000 are injured. Although the number of fatalities 
and injuries has decreased by 15 percent over the past 
20 years, the rate of these losses (the number of injuries 
per fi re call) has increased by 25 percent. In the past 
decade, several high-profi le incidents involving fi re-
fi ghter fatalities have brought the public’s attention to 
the issue of fi refi ghter mortality. Although the attention 
from the national media was fl eeting, the awareness of 
these events has changed the fabric of the fi re service 
and prompted many organizations and fi re depart-
ments to initiate programs to protect fi refi ghters.2
THE VALUE OF SAFETY
You cannot put a value on safety, but you sure can put 
a price on the consequences. Regardless of whether 
the fi refi ghter is a paid or a volunteer member, injuries 
cost money. Anyone who has had recent contact with 
a health-care system knows the cost of good medical 
care. In the case of fi refi ghters, someone is going to 
have to pay these costs, and ultimately, it is the citi-
zens of the community. For paid departments deal-
ing with tight budgets and minimum staffi ng issues, 
an injured fi refi ghter brings an added cost in terms 
of providing a replacement. While the injured fi re-
fi ghter is in a “no duty” or “light duty” status, another 
fi refi ghter is working for the injured person, proba-
bly at overtime rates. Thus, the injured $20-an-hour 
fi refi ghter is actually costing the community $50 an 
hour. Additional costs to the department include med-
ical insurance, workers’ compensation insurance, and 
repairs for damaged equipment.
There are additional impacts—indirect costs—
that cannot be measured in dollars. For the injured 
 fi refi ghter, there is the pain, suffering, possible 
 permanent injury, and even the embarrassment that 
comes from the injury. The fi refi ghter’s working col-
leagues also suffer, not only in working additional 
shifts for the injured teammate but also in the emo-
tional costs associated with their sympathy for a 
hurt friend. And fi nally, the injured fi refi ghter’s fam-
ily pays a cost for its anxiety, support, and concerns 
associated with the member’s injury.
All of these concerns resulted in the adoption of 
NFPA 1500, Standard on Fire Department Occupa-
tional Safety and Health Program. We discuss NFPA 
1500 later in this chapter.
Background of Safety Activity 
in the Workplace
Concerns for workplace safety and health issues are 
not new or unique to the fi re service. In the United 
States, awareness of workplace safety and health 
issues date back to the 1600s. Textbooks on indus-
trial safety usually include a history of workplace 
safety concerns dating back to the start of recorded 
history.
As technology advanced, so did the hazards. The 
demand for steam power increased with the arrival 
of the industrial age. With the increased need for 
power, there was an increased demand for coal. Most 
of the coal had to be mined, which was and still is 
dangerous work. Long hours, poor ventilation, and 
extremely demanding work conditions led to black 
lung disease and a host of other problems. Min-
ers were essentially the slaves of the mine owners. 
Efforts to bring some balance to the mining indus-
try started in the 1860s. It took 60 years and the full 
efforts of both the United Mine Workers of America 
and the U.S. Congress to increase the use of safety 
appliances in the coal mines.
■ Sixty-eight volunteer fi refi ghters and 50 career 
 fi refi ghters died while on duty.
■ There were 7 fi refi ghter fatality incidents where 2 or 
more fi refi ghters were killed, claiming a total of 21 fi re-
fi ghters’ lives.
■ Eleven fi refi ghters were killed during activities involving 
brush, grass, or wildland fi refi ghting, the lowest in over 
a decade.
■ Activities related to emergency incidents resulted in 
the deaths of 76 fi refi ghters.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE 
118 FIREFIGHTERS WHO DIED 
WHILE ON DUTY IN 2007
■ Thirty-eight fi refi ghters died while engaging in activi-
ties at the scene of a fi re.
■ Twenty-six fi refi ghters died while responding to or 
returning from emergency incidents.
■ Eleven fi refi ghters died while they were engaged in 
training activities.
■ Fifteen fi refi ghters died after the conclusion of their 
on-duty activity.
■ Heart attacks were the most frequent cause of death 
for 2007, resulting in 52 fi refi ghter deaths.
Source: Emmitsburg, MD, USFA, News Release, USFA Releases 
 Firefi ghter Fatality Report.

198  CHAPTER 8
The workplace changed as the United States became 
more industrialized and technology improved. Instead 
of a company focusing on production at any cost, 
worker safety was also considered. In many instances, a 
process change brought on by a concern for safety also 
brought increased productivity. For example, during the 
early years of the Industrial Revolution, gears and belts 
were unguarded, and workers were frequently required 
to place themselves in dangerous situations. When 
workers were injured, they were replaced with little or 
no compensation. The growth of organized labor and 
the development of laws dealing with workplace condi-
tions started a process that continues today.
One industry that has made remarkable progress in 
the area of worker safety in recent times is the rail-
road industry. America’s railroads, possibly prod-
ded by the government, their labor unions, and the 
cost of workplace accidents, have made a dramatic 
change in their accident statistics over recent years. 
These improvements were accomplished by elimi-
nating unsafe equipment and procedures, having and 
enforcing policies that provide for safety, and by hav-
ing highly viable recognition programs at all levels 
that reinforce both the company’s and the industry’s 
commitment to worker healthand safety.
One of the best examples of this today is Norfolk 
Southern Corporation, one of the nation’s largest 
railroad companies. Recognized by government and 
industry for its safety practices, Norfolk Southern 
started a process in 1987 of training top executives in 
the principles of industrial safety, including the con-
cept that teamwork is required to reduce accidents. 
Since implementation, that teamwork has reduced 
injuries by 80 percent, and, as a result, the company 
has earned the industry’s highest safety award each of 
the past 15 years.
Norfolk Southern’s business is transportation, and 
its goal is to make a profi t. However, its vision state-
ment is quite revealing: “Our vision: to be the safest, 
most customer focused and successful transportation 
company in the world.” As a part of its vision, safety 
gets top priority. Its goal is simple: zero accidents and 
zero injuries. At the core of Norfolk Southern’s safety 
program are the following six tenants:
■ All injuries can be prevented.
■ All exposures can be safeguarded.
■ Prevention of injuries and accidents are the respon-
sibility of each employee.
■ Training is essential for good safety performance.
■ Safety is a condition of employment.
■ Safety is good business.
What has all of this got to do with the fi re service? 
We can draw several parallels between the railroad 
industry and the fi re service. Both are dangerous pro-
fessions, and safety and health issues are a concern 
for both industries. During the past 25 years, we have 
seen increased awareness for safety in both industries. 
Let us look at ourselves. Are you as safe as you can 
be? Are you looking for and sharing ways to improve 
health and safety for your fi refi ghters? Does your fi re 
department have programs to improve health and 
safety? Do you have programs that reward safety?
SAFETY
Safety comes from eliminating unsafe equipment and 
procedures, having and enforcing policies that provide 
for safety, and having viable recognition programs at all 
levels that reinforce both the company’s and the indus-
try’s commitment to worker health and safety.
Safety Activities 
in the Fire Service
By the nature of the occupation, emergency respond-
ers are at risk from accidents that can result in ill-
ness, injury, and death. Incident safety is a concern 
for all emergency response personnel. Firefi ghters are 
taught to deal with these problems. Why then, do we 
have the injury statistics we do?
Firefi ghters tend to be aggressive, action-oriented 
people, especially around other fi refi ghters. At times, 
this behavior is desirable, but over aggressiveness can 
lead to a disregard for fi refi ghter safety. As the com-
pany offi cer, you must learn to channel this enthu-
siasm and energy into productive activity. Although 
it is sometimes diffi cult to change attitudes about 
safety, some fi refi ghters will respond to a discussion 
that focuses on their importance as a member of a 
team. In this context, every fi refi ghter is dependent 
upon every other fi refi ghter for success and survival. 
If one member of the team is injured, everyone is at 
risk. This logic can also be extended to how we serve 
the public. When we are not able to perform, we are 
not able to help our customers. For most fi refi ghters, 
serving  others is our mission.
FIREGROUND FACT
Nearly half of all on-duty firefighter fatalities are the re-
sult of heart attack. Personal fitness and good health 
are within the realm of everyone’s personal control.
NOTE
Regardless of whether the firefighter is a paid or a vol-
unteer member, injuries cost money.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  199
Many fatalities occur as a result of physiologi-
cal and psychological stress, manifested as a heart 
attack or stroke, rather than some traumatic event 
(see Figure 8-1 and Figure 8-2). The work can be 
very demanding at times and is often undertaken in 
unfamiliar settings with uncertain outcomes. These 
facts suggest that proper rest, good physical condi-
tion, proper health care, and proper lifestyle are just 
as important as protective clothing and an effective 
incident command system.
Many of these factors—attitude, conditioning, 
health care, and lifestyle—are individual concerns. 
Supervisors should set a good positive example, encour-
age fi tness and good health practices, and even pro-
vide on-duty opportunities for improving every team 
member’s fi tness and health.
Knowledge of the job is also a matter of personal 
concern and initiative; it all comes down to the fi re-
fi ghter’s attitude and awareness. In many cases the 
fi refi ghter may need motivation and some help from 
the supervisor, and for most fi refi ghters, the supervi-
sor is the company offi cer.
Firefi ghting is a hazardous occupation. The action 
is fast paced and hot, and there are often problems 
with the structure itself. Many ask, “What reasonable 
person would go into a burning building while every-
one else is running out?” Going into burning build-
ings is no longer what the fi re service is all about. 
Firefi ghters are expected to understand how fi re 
grows and to assess the fi re situation. The conditions 
may suggest that not entering the building is the right 
action. Interior fi re fi ghting involves advancing hose 
lines to the seat of the fi re. Nearly half of those who 
are killed during structural fi refi ghting operations 
were advancing hose lines at the time of their injury.4
This task is typically assigned to the newest fi refi ght-
ers; you cannot expect those in their fi rst year on the 
job to be aware of all the dangers involved.
SAFETY
Proper rest, good physical condition, proper health care, 
and proper lifestyle are just as important as  protective 
clothing and an effective incident command system.
SAFETY
Every firefighter is dependent upon every other fire-
fighter for success and survival.
FIREGROUND FACT
Nearly half of those killed during structural firefighting 
operations were advancing hose lines at the time of 
their injury.
Nature of injury
Deaths
Percentage
Sudden cardiac death
39
37.9%
Internal trauma
29
28.2%
Asphyxiation
23
22.3%
Crushing
1
1.0%
Stroke/aneurysm
2
1.9%
Drowning
2
1.9%
Electrocution
1
1.0%
Burns
4
3.9%
Projectile wounds
2
1.9%
Total
103
100.0%
FIGURE 8-1 Firefighter fatalities by nature of injury.
(Source: Rita F. Fahy, Paul R. LeBlanc, Joseph L. Molis, Firefighter 
 Fatalities in the United States 2007, NFPA, July 2008.)
Cause of injury
Deaths
Percentage
Exertion/Stress/Other
41
39.8%
Struck by/contact with object
32
31.1%
Caught or trapped
23
22.3%
Fell or jumped
6
5.8%
Electrocuted
1
1.0%
Total
103
100.0%
FIGURE 8-2 Firefighter fatalities by cause of injury.
(Source: Rita F. Fahy, Paul R. LeBlanc, Joseph L. Molis, Firefighter 
 Fatalities in the United States 2007, NFPA, July 2008.)
Some accidents are considered surprises. A col-
lapse might be an example; however, even in these 
circumstances, a better understanding of fi re behav-
ior and building construction should have suggested 
a different course of action. During a recent fi re in 
a commercial building, the truss roof collapsed trap-
ping two fi refi ghters who had ventured inside this 
well-involved structure. The building had been there 
for years. One has to wonder if the department had 
been there to survey and preplan, or if anyone told 
the fi refi ghters about the dangers of a truss roof. The 
collapse of a truss roof during a fi re should not come 
as a surprise.
National Fallen Firefighter Foundation
Recognizing the need to do more to prevent line-
of-duty deaths and injuries, the National Fallen Fire-
fi ghters Foundation has launched a national initiative 
to bring prevention to the forefront.

200  CHAPTER 8
In March 2004, the Firefi ghter Life Safety Sum-
mit was held in Tampa, Florida, to address the need 
for change within the fi re and emergency services. 
Through this meeting, 16 Life Safety Initiatives were 
produced to ensure that Everyone Goes Home®.
The fi rst major action was to produce 16 major ini-
tiatives that will give the fi re service a blueprint for 
making changes.
The National Fallen Firefi ghters Foundation will 
play a major role in helping the U.S. Fire Administra-
tion meet its stated goal to reduce the number of pre-
ventable fi refi ghter fatalities. The foundation sees fi re 
service adoption of the summit’s initiatives as a vital 
step in meeting this goal.
ANNUAL NFPA REPORTS 
ON FIREFIGHTER SAFETY
Each year, the NFPA publishes two reports on fi re-
fi ghter safety. One of the reports focuses on fi re-
fi ghter injuries; the other on fi refi ghter fatalities. Both 
reports are published in the NFPA Journal. Although 
these topics are not pleasant, these reports provide 
valuable lessons learned and should be reviewed by 
all fi re service professionals.
Safety professionals look at past statistics for several 
reasons. First, they provide considerable information 
about what causes the accidents that lead to fi refi ghter 
deaths and injuries. The published safety statistics are 
indications of the activities that are causing the great-
est problems for the fi re service at the national level. 
However, these statistics can indicate problems that 
may not yet be apparent in a particular department. 
In such cases, these statistics should be a wake-up call 
and suggest changes in policy or the need for training.
Departments that do not enforce their policies (or 
do not have any policies) regarding the use of per-
sonal protective equipment or that do not have and 
routinely use a good incident command system at the 
scene of every event cannot expect positive results 
from members regarding occupational safety. How 
do your department’s accident statistics compare 
with the published data?
 1. Defi ne and advocate the need for a cultural change 
within the fi re service relating to safety, incorporating 
leadership, management, supervision, accountabil-
ity, and personal responsibility.
 2. Enhance the personal and organizational accountabil-
ity for health and safety throughout the fi re service.
 3. Focus greater attention on the integration of risk man-
agement with incident management at all levels, includ-
ing strategic, tactical, and planning responsibilities.
 4. All fi refi ghters must be empowered to stop unsafe 
practices.
 5. Develop and implement national standards for train-
ing, qualifi cations, and certifi cation (including regular 
recertifi cation) that are equally applicable to all fi re-
fi ghters based on the duties they are expected to 
perform.
 6. Develop and implement national medical and physi-
cal fi tness standards that are equally applicable to all 
fi refi ghters, based on the duties they are expected 
to perform.
SIXTEEN FIREFIGHTER LIFE SAFETY 
INITIATIVES
 7. Create a national research agenda and data collec-
tion system that relates to the initiatives.
 8. Utilize available technology wherever it can produce 
higher levels of health and safety.
 9. Thoroughly investigate all fi refi ghter fatalities, injuries, 
and near misses.
10. Grant programs should support the implementation 
of safe practices and/or mandate safe practices as 
an eligibility requirement.
11. National standards for emergency response poli-
cies and procedures should be developed and 
championed.
12. National protocols for response to violent incidents 
should be developed and championed.
13. Firefi ghters and their families must have access to 
counseling and psychological support.
14. Public education must receive more resources 
and be championed as a critical fi re and life safety 
program.
15. Advocacy must be strengthened for the enforcement 
of codes and the installation of home fi re sprinklers.
16. Safety must be a primary consideration in the design 
of apparatus and equipment.
■ A 25 percent reduction in on-duty fi refi ghter fatalities 
within 5 years
■ A 50 percent reduction in on-duty fi refi ghter fatalities 
within 10 years
THE U.S. FIRE ADMINISTRATION 
GOALS

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  201
Understanding the Nature 
of the Injuries
The largest percentage of fi refi ghter injuries and 
deaths occur at the scene of fi res. However, sta-
tistics show that every aspect of the fi refi ghter’s 
work routine has the potential for injury. Each year, 
a signifi cant number of fi refi ghters are killed and 
injured while responding to and returning from 
calls, as well as at the scene of emergencies (see 
Figure 8-3). Note that while fi refi ghter fatalities 
have declined over the last 30 years, the numbers 
in all categories have remained fairly constant over 
the past decade.
Year
Total
Firefi ghting, 
fi reground
Responding, 
returning
On scene at non-
fi re calls
Training
Other on-duty
1977
157
78 (49.7%)
41 (26.1%)
14 (8.9%)
10 (6.4%)
14 (8.9%)
1978
173
84 (48.6%)
48 (27.7%)
19 (11.0%)
5 (2.9%)
17 (9.8%)
1979
125
83 (66.4%)
20 (16.0%)
9 (7.2%)
3 (2.4%)
10 (8.0%)
1980
138
74 (53.6%)
37 (26.8%)
9 (6.5%)
4 (2.9%)
14 (10.1%)
1981
136
75 (55.1%)
35 (25.7%)
8 (5.9%)
7 (5.1%)
11 (8.1%)
1982
128
67 (52.3%)
40 (31.3%)
8 (6.3%)
6 (4.7%)
7 (5.5%)
1983
113
60 (53.1%)
26 (23.0%)
12 (10.6%)
4 (3.5%)
11 (9.7%)
1984
119
59 (49.6%)
37 (31.1%)
8 (6.7%)
3 (2.5%)
12 (10.1%)
1985
128
63 (49.2%)
33 (25.8%)
9 (7.0%)
6 (4.7%)
17 (13.3%)
1986
119
48 (40.3%)
42 (35.3%)
6 (5.0%)
6 (5.0%)
17 (14.3%)
1987
132
54 (40.9%)
37 (28.0%)
12 (9.1%)
17 (12.9%)
12 (9.1%)
1988
136
65 (47.8%)
39 (28.7%)
10 (7.4%)
11 (8.1%)
11 (8.1%)
1989
118
59 (50.0%)
29 (24.6%)
6 (5.1%)
12 (10.2%)
12 (10.2%)
1990
108
48 (44.4%)
24 (22.2%)
17 (15.7%)
8 (7.4%)
11 (10.2%)
1991
108
53 (49.1%)
26 (24.1%)
8 (7.4%)
14 (13.0%)
7 (6.5%)
1992
75
38 (50.7%)
21 (28.0%)
4 (5.3%)
5 (8.0%)
7 (8.0%)
1993
79
34 (43.0%)
21 (26.6%)
8 (10.1%)
7 (8.9%)
9 (11.4%)
1994
105
61 (58.1%)
19 (18.1%)
7 (6.7%)
7 (6.7%)
11 (10.5%)
1995
98
42 (42.9%)
32 (32.7%)
12 (12.2%)
4 (4.1%)
8 (8.2%)
1996
96
32 (33.3%)
32 (33.3%)
8 (8.3%)
8 (8.3%)
16 (16.7%)
1997
99
41 (41.4%)
27 (27.3%)
12 (12.1%)
7 (7.1%)
12 (12.1%)
1998
91
40 (44.0%)
17 (18.7%)
15 (16.5%)
11 (12.1%)
8 (8.8%)
1999
112
56 (50.0%)
32 (28.6%)
10 (8.9%)
4 (3.6%)
10 (8.9%)
2000
103
39 (37.9%)
24 (23.3%)
8 (7.8%)
14 (13.6%)
18 (17.5%)
2001*
443
38* (36.9%)
26 (25.2%)
2 (1.9%)
12 (11.7%)
25 (24.3%)
2002
97
46 (47.4%)
19 (19.6%)
10 (10.3%)
11 (11.3%)
11 (11.3%)
2003
106
29 (27.4%)
37 (34.9%)
9 (8.5%)
12 (11.3%)
19 (17.9%)
2004
105
30 (28.6%)
36 (34.3%)
9 (8.6%)
12 (11.4%)
18 (17.1%)
2005
87
25 (28.7%)
26 (29.9%)
4 (4.6%)
11 (12.6%)
21 (24.1%)
2006
89
38 (42.7%)
18 (20.2%)
6 (6.7%)
8 (9.0%)
19 (21.3%)
2007
103
36 (35.0%)
31 (30.1%)
7 (6.8%)
13 (12.6%)
16 (15.5%)
* Percentage breakdowns do not include the 340 fi reground deaths at the World Trade Center, September 11, 2001.
Note: These fi gures are based on NFPA’s annual tracking of all fi refi ghter deaths. Some fi gures have been updated since the publication 
of the reports for those years.
FIGURE 8-3 Firefighter fatalities by type of duty. (Source: Rita F. Fahy, Paul R. LeBlanc, Joseph L. Molis, Firefighter Fatalities in the 
United States 2007, NFPA, July 2008.)

202  CHAPTER 8
With departments providing a greater variety of 
service to their communities, fi refi ghters are also 
being injured at the scene of non-fi re emergencies. 
Many injuries occur at fi re stations. Injuries and even 
a few deaths occur during training activities.
The most frequent injuries are sprains and strains 
(see Figure 8-4). These invisible injuries usually are 
the result of improper lifting. A second large  category 
of injuries is wounds. Wounds include all kinds of 
skin injuries from cuts to the hands to stepping and 
falling on sharp objects. Given the nature of these 
injuries, it would seem logical that most of the inju-
ries occur at the scene of fi re-related emergencies (see 
Figure 8-5).
Domino Theory
Herbert Heinrich developed his widely held theory in 
the 1920s, while working for Travelers Insurance. He 
suggested a “fi ve-factor accident sequence” in which 
each factor would actuate the next step in the manner 
of toppling dominoes lined up in a row. The sequence 
of accident factors is as follows:
■ Ancestry and social environment
■ Unsafe practice (personal fault)
■ Unsafe actions or condition
■ Accident
■ Damage or injury (loss)
In the same way that the removal of a single domino 
in the row would interrupt the sequence of toppling, 
Heinrich suggested that removal of one of the fac-
tors would prevent the accident and resultant injury 
(see Figure 8-6). He noted that the third element, the 
unsafe act, led to nearly 90 percent of all accidents. 
For most of us, the greatest opportunity is preventing 
the unsafe act.
Human Factors Theory
Another popular theory is called the human factors 
theory. This theory also promotes the idea that most 
accidents are the result of human error and suggests 
that three broad factors lead to accidents:
■ Overload. Overload might be affected by the envi-
ronmental conditions, internal factors, and situa-
tion factors such as the level of risk or the lack of 
good instructions and supervision.
■ Inappropriate response. Examples might include 
the removal of safety guards or ignoring safety 
instructions.
■ Inappropriate activity. An example might be per-
sons taking on a task for which they are not quali-
fi ed, misjudging the degree of risk involved, and 
not telling their supervisor that they are not able to 
do the task.
Multiple Causation Theory
Multiple causation theory is an outgrowth of the dom-
ino theory, but it suggests that for a single accident 
there may be many contributory factors. According to 
this theory, the contributory factors can be grouped 
into two categories:
■ Behavioral. This category includes factors pertain-
ing to the worker, such as improper attitude, lack of 
knowledge, lack of skills, and inadequate physical 
and mental condition.
FIREGROUND FACT
The most frequent injuries are sprains and strains.
Check your own department’s safety records. The 
statistics should suggest opportunities for corrective 
action to improve safety performance. If 50 percent 
of your department’s injuries are back injuries and are 
occurring as the result of improper lifting, it makes 
sense to focus corrective actions in this area. Select-
ing the biggest target usually provides the greatest 
opportunity for improvement.
Reducing These Injuries
Sprains and strains can be reduced by proper physi-
cal conditioning and by using proper lifting methods. 
When a department is experiencing a large percentage 
of sprain-and-strain-type injury from a particular activ-
ity, some revision in procedure is indicated. Reducing 
cuts and other wound-type injuries may require pro-
viding and using proper protective equipment. Effec-
tive supervision and fi re scene management can also 
help reduce the fi refi ghter’s injuries from falling and 
from exposure to sharp objects and other dangerous 
conditions that exist on the fi reground.
THEORY OF ACCIDENT 
CAUSES
Accidents can be defi ned as unplanned occurrences 
that result in injuries, fatalities, and damage to or loss 
of equipment and property. Preventing accidents is 
extremely diffi cult in the absence of an understanding 
of the causes of accidents. Many attempts have been 
made to develop a prediction theory of accident cau-
sation. Here are several popular theories.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  203
Year
Total
Sprain, 
strain
Wound, cut, 
dislocation, 
fracture
Smoke, gas 
inhalation or resp. 
distress (other)
Eye 
irritation
Burns and 
smoke 
inhalation
Fire or 
chemical 
burns
Heart 
attack, 
stroke
Thermal 
stress
Other
1981
67,510
16,530
20,455
12,485
5,315
n/a
7,545
300
n/a
4,880
1982
61,370
14,955
16,450
10,880
6,155
n/a
5,990
315
n/a
6,625
1983
61,740
15,415
17,470
11,470
5,025
n/a
6,470
370
n/a
5,520
1984
62,700
16,870
16,295
10,105
4,205
n/a
6,640
430
3,990
4,165
1985
61,255
16,545
15,435
 9,625
4,580
n/a
6,215
230
4,520
4,105
1986
55,990
15,455
15,200
 8,090
3,985
n/a
6,270
360
3,260
3,370
1987
57,755
16,565
14,770
 8,040
4,905
n/a
5,770
240
4,260
3,205
1988
61,790
20,695
14,205
 7,400
3,825
n/a
6,475
260
4,955
3,975
1989
58,250
22,360
13,625
 7,220
4,025
n/a
4,815
255
3,040
2,910
1990
57,100
20,885
13,120
 7,095
4,025
n/a
5,180
235
3,505
3,055
1991
55,830
19,655
11,285
 7,525
3,645
n/a
4,960
325
4,630
3,805
1992
52,290
19,020
11,920
 6,335
3,805
n/a
5,105
335
2,775
2,995
1993
52,885
18,810
11,910
 5,540
3,145
n/a
5,990
295
3,430
3,765
1994
52,875
18,855
12,275
 6,175
3,115
n/a
5,470
330
3,160
3,495
1995
50,640
19,280
11,680
 5,700
3,140
n/a
4,890
345
2,935
2,670
1996
45,725
17,455
 9,865
 5,400
2,735
n/a
4,360
300
2,720
2,890
1997
40,920
15,590
 9,710
 3,820
2,265
n/a
3,755
205
2,840
2,735
1998
43,080
18,735
 9,010
 3,745
2,215
n/a
4,040
300
2,760
2,275
1999
45,550
17,925
 9,880
 4,435
2,615
n/a
4,060
395
3,570
2,670
2000
43,065
19,500
 8,695
 3,725
2,220
n/a
3,850
250
2,175
2,650
2001
41,395
16,410
10,355
 3,925
n/a
1,190
3,255
310
2,315
3,635
2002
37,860
15,735
 9,200
 2,790
n/a
975
3,205
345
2,415
3,195
2003
38,045
16,830
 9,195
 2,890
n/a
980
2,765
235
2,145
3,005
2004
36,880
17,890
 7,370
 2,915
n/a
585
2,860
290
1,875
3,095
2005
41,950
18,620
 8,570
 3,390
n/a
750
2,930
315
2,480
4,895
2006
44,210
20,655
 8,705
 3,755
n/a
575
3,070
350
2,280
4,820
2007
38,340
17,280
 8,195
 2,710
n/a
695
2,650
395
2,410
4,005
Note: Prior to 1981, somewhat different categories were used. “Wound,cut” also includes bleeding and bruising. Dislocations and fractures can be provided separately from wounds
and cuts. From 2001 onward, the category ” eye irritation” was dropped and the category ” burns and smoke inhalation” was added.
FIGURE 8-4 Firefighter injuries by nature of injury. (Source: Michael J. Karter, Jr., United States Firefighter Injuries 2007, NFPA, October 2008 and previous reports in series.)

204  CHAPTER 8
■ Environmental. This category includes improper 
guarding of other hazardous work elements and 
degradation of equipment through careless use and 
unsafe procedures.
The major contribution of this theory is to show that 
rarely, if ever, is an accident the result of a single 
cause or act.
Pure Chance Theory
According to the pure chance theory, every one of 
any given set of workers has an equal chance of being 
involved in an accident. It further implies that there 
is no single discernible pattern of events that leads to 
an accident. In this theory, all accidents are treated as 
acts of God, and there are no existing interventions to 
prevent them.
Symptoms versus Causes 
Theory
The symptoms versus causes theory is not so much 
a theory as an admonition to be heeded if accident 
causation is to be understood. Usually, when inves-
tigating accidents, we tend to fasten upon the obvi-
ous causes of the accident to the neglect of the root 
Year
Total
Firefi ghting, 
fi reground
Responding, 
returning
On scene at 
non-fi re calls
Training
Other on-duty
1981
103,340
67,510 (65.3%)
4,945 (4.8%)
 9,600 (9.3%)
7,090 (6.9%)
14,195 (13.7%)
1982
 98,150
61,370 (62.5%)
5,320 (5.4%)
 9,385 (9.6%)
6,125 (6.2%)
15,950 (16.3%)
1983
103,150
61,740 (59.9%)
5,865 (5.7%)
11,105 (10.8%)
6,755 (6.5%)
17,685 (17.1%)
1984
102,300
62,700 (61.3%)
5,845 (5.7%)
10,630 (10.4%)
6,840 (6.7%)
16,285 (15.9%)
1985
100,900
61,255 (60.7%)
5,280 (5.2%)
12,500 (12.4%)
6,050 (6.0%)
15,815 (15.7%)
1986
 96,450
55,990 (58.1%)
4,665 (4.8%)
12,545 (13.0%)
6,395 (6.6%)
16,855 (17.5%)
1987
102,600
57,755 (56.3%)
5,075 (4.9%)
13,940 (13.6%)
6,075 (5.9%)
19,755 (19.3%)
1988
102,900
61,790 (60.0%)
5,080 (4.9%)
12,325 (12.0%)
5,840 (5.7%)
17,865 (17.4%)
1989
100,700
58,250 (57.8%)
6,000 (6.0%)
12,580 (12.5%)
6,010 (6.0%)
17,860 (17.7%)
1990
100,300
57,100 (56.9%)
6,115 (6.1%)
14,200 (14.2%)
6,630 (6.6%)
16,255 (16.2%)
1991
103,300
55,830 (54.0%)
5,355 (5.2%)
15,065 (14.6%)
6,600 (6.4%)
20,450 (19.8%)
1992
 97,700
52,290 (53.5%)
5,580 (5.7%)
14,645 (15.0%)
7,045 (7.2%)
18,140 (18.6%)
1993
101,500
52,885 (52.1%)
5,595 (5.5%)
16,675 (16.4%)
6,545 (6.5%)
19,800 (19.5%)
1994
 95,400
52,875 (55.4%)
5,930 (6.2%)
11,810 (12.4%)
6,780 (7.1%)
18,005 (18.9%)
1995
 94,500
50,640 (53.6%)
5,230 (5.5%)
13,500 (14.3%)
7,275 (7.7%)
17,855 (18.9%)
1996
 87,150
45,725 (52.5%)
6,315 (7.2%)
12,630 (14.5%)
6,200 (7.1%)
16,280 (18.7%)
1997
 85,400
40,920 (47.9%)
5,410 (6.3%)
14,880 (17.4%)
6,510 (7.6%)
17,680 (20.7%)
1998
 87,500
43,080 (49.2%)
7,070 (8.1%)
13,960 (16.0%)
7,055 (8.1%)
16,335 (18.7%)
1999
 88,500
45,550 (51.5%)
5,890 (6.7%)
13,565 (15.5%)
7,705 (8.7%)
15,790 (17.8%)
2000
 84,550
43,065 (51.0%)
4,700 (5.6%)
13,660 (16.2%)
7,400 (8.8%)
15,725 (18.6%)
2001
 82,250
41,395 (50.3%)
4,640 (5.6%)
14,140 (17.2%)
6,915 (8.4%)
15,160 (18.4%)
2002
 80,800
37,860 (46.9%)
5,805 (7.2%)
15,095 (18.7%)
7,600 (9.4%)
14,440 (17.9%)
2003
 78,750
38,045 (48.3%)
5,200 (6.6%)
13,855 (17.6%)
7,100 (9.0%)
14,550 (18.5%)
2004
 75,840
36,880 (48.6%)
4,840 (6.4%)
13,150 (17.3%)
6,720 (8.9%)
14,250 (18.8%)
2005
 80,100
41,950 (52.4%)
5,455 (6.8%)
12,250 (15.3%)
7,120 (8.9%)
13,325 (16.6%)
2006
 83,400
44,210 (53.0%)
4,745 (5.7%)
13,090 (15.7%)
7,665 (9.2%)
13,690 (16.4%)
2007
 80,100
38,340 (47.9%)
4,925 (6.1%)
15,435 (19.3%)
7,735 (9.7%)
13,665 (17.1%)
Note: Prior to 1981, the categories were somewhat different.
FIGURE 8-5 Firefighter injuries by type of duty. (Source: Michael J. Karter, Jr., United States Firefighter Injuries 2007, NFPA, 
October 2008 and previous reports in series.)

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  205
causes. Unsafe acts and unsafe conditions are often 
the symptoms—the proximate causes—and not the 
root causes of the accident.
Structure of Accidents
The belief that accidents are caused and can be pre-
vented suggests that we study those factors that are 
likely to favor the occurrence of accidents. (A good 
example is the study that follows any large-loss fi re.) 
By studying such factors, the root causes of accidents 
can be isolated, and necessary steps can be taken to 
prevent the recurrence of the accidents. These root 
causes can be grouped as “immediate” and “contrib-
uting.” The immediate causes are unsafe acts of the 
worker and unsafe working conditions. The contribut-
ing causes could be management-related factors, the 
environment, and the physical and mental condition 
of the worker. In most cases, a combination of causes 
must converge in order to result in an accident.
Summary of Accident 
Causation Theory
Accident causation is a very complex fi eld. No one the-
ory dominates; in fact, many theories are commonly 
taught. From all of these, we can learn two things: 
Accidents do not just happen, and through good pre-
ventative action, we can prevent many accidents.
REGULATORY AND 
STANDARDS SETTING BODIES
There are several federal and nongovernmental enti-
ties that have established standards related to fi re-
fi ghting and fi refi ghter safety.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administra-
tion (OSHA) is a regulatory agency under the U.S. 
Department of Labor that was created by Congress in 
1970. Its role is to work with employers and workers 
to reduce workplace hazards and to implement new, 
or to improve existing, workplace health and safety 
programs. One of OSHA’s functions is to develop and 
enforce mandatory job safety and health standards.
The National Institute of Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH) is an agency of the Department of 
Health and Human Services that conducts research on 
various safety and health problems, provides techni-
cal assistance to OSHA, and recommends standards 
for OSHA’s adoption. NIOSH establishes permissible 
exposure limits to chemicals and other workplace haz-
ards, and tests and approves self-contained breathing 
apparatus.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
has created several regulations that affect fi refi ghters in 
the area of hazardous materials response. The Super-
fund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) 
of 1986 got the EPA involved in regulating response 
to hazardous material incidents. Title I of SARA made 
training and response planning mandatory for all fi re 
departments that intend to respond to hazardous mate-
rials incidents. EPA regulations also help to support 
local efforts for hazardous materials safety for commu-
nities and the environment. Title II of SARA includes 
the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-
Know Act, which requires the EPA to work with states 
and localities to plan for hazardous materials incidents 
and to give communities the tools to obtain informa-
tion about hazards in their localities. Under this section, 
businesses and citizens who store hazardous materials 
Fault of Person
Unsafe Practices
Unsafe Condition
Accident
Loss
Fault of Person
Unsafe Practices
Unsafe Condition
Accident
Loss
FIGURE 8-6 The Domino Theory. Removing any 
element breaks the chain and reduces the risk of an 
accident.
The National Fire Fighter Near-Miss Reporting System 
(www.fi refi ghternearmiss.com) is a voluntary, confi den-
tial, nonpunitive, and secure reporting system with the 
goal of improving fi refi ghter safety.
Submitted reports will be reviewed by fi re service pro-
fessionals. Identifying descriptions are removed to pro-
tect your identity. The report is then posted on this web 
site for other fi refi ghters to use as a learning tool.
THE NATIONAL FIRE FIGHTER 
NEAR-MISS REPORTING SYSTEM

206  CHAPTER 8
are required to inform the fi re department about the 
types of materials, their quantities, and their hazards.
The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) is 
involved in fi refi ghter health and safety issues in sev-
eral ways. First, DOT regulates the construction, testing, 
and maintenance of compressed gas cylinders. Second, 
DOT has umbrella authority for developing hazardous 
materials transportation safety policy and helps provide 
sources of funding for hazardous materials training. For 
example, the Hazardous Materials Transportation Uni-
form Safety Act of 1990 directed DOT to collect reg-
istration fees from shippers and carriers of hazardous 
materials. These funds are then put into a national grants 
program to help train emergency responders to deal with 
hazardous materials incidents. DOT has also estab-
lished requirements for drivers of certain motor vehicles 
(including fi re trucks in some states) to obtain commer-
cial drivers’ licenses. Finally, DOT has established stan-
dards for training of emergency medical responders as 
well as standards for equipment carried on ambulances.
The foregoing are government agencies. In addi-
tion, we have the National Fire Protection Association 
(NFPA). Although it has no regulatory enforcement pow-
ers, it serves an extremely important function by bring-
ing together experts to write and update standards that 
affect fi refi ghting and fi re protection. The NFPA works 
through a consensus process, which means that experts 
and interested parties representing different points of 
view are assigned to a technical committee where they 
present and debate ideas and ultimately agree on the 
most reasonable language for each standard.
FIRE DEPARTMENT 
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY 
AND HEALTH PROGRAM
In 1987, the membership of NFPA adopted a new and 
somewhat controversial document entitled NFPA 1500, 
Standard on Fire Department Occupational Safety 
and Health Program. Although NFPA 1500 introduced 
many new concepts to the fi re service, much of its con-
tent is taken from well-accepted practices of private 
industry. NFPA 1500 is the start of a major undertak-
ing; it provides a framework for a series of new stan-
dards that would help fi re departments plan, implement, 
and manage effective health and safety programs.
NFPA 1500 has had a signifi cant impact on the fi re 
service. NFPA 1500 was designed to help fi re depart-
ments reduce the frequency and severity of acci-
dents and injuries to their members. It has increased 
the awareness level about safety in every aspect of the  
job. Equipment has changed, procedures have 
changed, and new incident management systems and 
personnel accountability systems have been added. 
But no law or standard can make you safe. In spite of 
all of these advances, personal safety is still a matter 
of your own attitude.
FIREGROUND FACT
NFPA 1500 was designed to help fire departments 
 reduce the frequency and severity of accidents and 
 injuries to their members.
NFPA 1500 contains the “minimum requirements” 
for a fi re department health and safety program. The 
term “fi re department” includes all organizations 
that provide fi re suppression functions, including 
private, government, military, industrial, and pub-
lic sector organizations. As used in the standard, the 
term “member” applies to volunteers, whether paid 
or unpaid, and paid personnel, whether full-time or 
part-time, of any such department. As company offi -
cers, you should be familiar with its contents. The fol-
lowing is a brief summary of its contents with some 
commentary.
Chapter 1. Administration
The fi rst chapter of NFPA 1500 defi nes the scope, 
purpose, and application of the standard and defi nes 
the terms used in the following chapters.
Chapter 2. Referenced 
Publications
This chapter, new to the current NFPA 1500, provides 
an extensive list of publications referred to within the 
standard.
Chapter 3. Definitions
Chapter 3 is also new. It provides an extensive glos-
sary of safety-related terms.
Chapter 4. Fire Department 
Administration
Chapter 4 of NFPA 1500 explains risk management, 
provides information for starting a health and safety 
program, and defi nes the role of the various offi cials. 
It requires a written health and safety policy and 
establishes goals to help reduce accidents and inju-
ries. This chapter also discusses the concept of risk 
and risk management, the role of the department’s 
health and safety offi cer, and the value of accident 
investigations.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  207
NOTE
The HSO’s most important job is the implementa-
tion and management of the department’s safety 
program.
The Health and Safety Officer
According to NFPA 1500, every fi re department 
should have an individual assigned to the duties of a 
health and safety offi cer. The health and safety offi -
cer (HSO) must be an offi cer from within the agency 
and should be formally appointed by the fi re chief or 
the head of the agency. The health and safety offi cer 
must have access to the chief and other senior offi cers 
in the department. As such, the HSO also needs the 
personal skills to work with people and build strong 
collaborative relationships.
The health and safety offi cer’s role varies, depend-
ing upon the direction of the chief and the sup-
port one gets from other members of the staff. The 
HSO should have a thorough knowledge of activities 
undertaken by the department and the hazards asso-
ciated with these activities. The HSO should also be 
familiar with the department’s policies as well as the 
laws, standards, and regulations that affect fi refi ghter 
safety.
The HSO’s most important job is the implementa-
tion and management of the department’s safety pro-
gram. In some corporations, this person is frequently 
called the organization’s “risk manager.” Although 
the ultimate responsibility for the safety of the depart-
ment’s personnel lies with the fi re chief, the chief can 
delegate some of the daily management activity of the 
health and safety program to the HSO.
NOTE
Section 5.5 of NFPA 1521, the Standard for Health and 
Safety Officer, provides the following: The health and 
safety officer shall investigate, or cause to be inves-
tigated, all occupational injuries, illnesses, exposures, 
and fatalities, or other potentially hazardous condi-
tions involving fire department members and all acci-
dents involving fire department vehicles, fire appara-
tus, equipment, or fire department facilities, develop 
corrective recommendations that result from accident 
investigations, and shall submit such corrective rec-
ommendations to the fire chief or the fire chief’s desig-
nated representative.
Source: Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1521, Fire Depart-
ment Safety Offi cer, Copyright©2008, National Fire Protection Asso-
ciation. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial position 
of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is represented only by 
the standard in its entirety.
■ Researching, testing, and evaluating planned pur-
chases of such items as apparatus and protective 
clothing and equipment
■ Keeping up-to-date on new laws, regulations, and 
standards that affect fi refi ghter safety and health is-
sues and keeping appropriate members of the de-
partment informed of the impact of these documents
■ Investigating accidents that result in injury or property 
damage
■ Respond to work incidents, including fi res, hazard-
ous material incidents, and technical rescue activities 
where fi refi ghters are at risk, and identifying and miti-
gating such risks
■ Attending critiques of such incidents
■ Attending safety committee meetings
■ Developing standard operating procedures (SOPs) for 
activities that present risks to the organization, includ-
ing procedures to deal with both routine and unusual 
events
■ Developing and providing safety training programs
■ Developing and managing injury and exposure report-
ing systems
■ Reviewing draft directives to ensure that safety con-
siderations are adequately addressed
■ Developing and managing a viable fi tness program with 
periodic testing for all personnel in the organization
■ Reviewing regular and special reports that deal with 
fi refi ghter health and safety issues
DUTIES FOR THE HSO
While the HSO’s normal activity is administrative 
in nature, the HSO should also be available to assist at 
the scene of an emergency as the incident safety offi -
cer (ISO). Such events allow the HSO to see fi rsthand 
the activities of the fi re department’s personnel at work. 
At times like these, training and procedural defi ciencies 
become evident. The incident commander may not have 
time to notice or record these problems, but the ISO 
should. Corrective action can be implemented later.
Investigating the Cause of Accidents
One of the HSO’s duties is to investigate accidents. 
Accidents should be investigated whenever some-
one is injured or when fi re department equipment or 
property is damaged. Accident investigations tend to 
be clouded with a negative gloom, especially when a 

208  CHAPTER 8
department uses the investigation to fi nd fault with an 
individual rather than with the environment in which 
the accident occurred. As a result, many people get 
defensive when the department starts asking questions 
about their performance. Accident investigations play 
an important part in a department’s overall safety pro-
gram. Accident investigations should focus on fi nding 
ways to improve workplace safety and should become 
the basis for developing new procedures and training 
programs to help prevent similar circumstances from 
happening again. In many cases, the accident investi-
gation and its report are required by law.
■ To indicate a need for revising a procedure or 
practice
■ To help reduce or eliminate the conditions that led 
up to the accident
■ To establish or revise policies that would prevent 
similar accidents
■ To train and instruct personnel on ways to prevent 
the accident from reoccurring
■ To serve legal purposes, either to establish a basis 
for fi ling a claim or to defend against a claim fi led 
against the fi re department
In all cases, the principal reasons for investigat-
ing and documenting accidents are to prevent similar 
situations in the future. The knowledge gained from 
the information gathered during such investigations 
should become the basis for training and for shar-
ing the experience with others to inform them of the 
 hazards involved. “Training shall address recommen-
dations arising from the investigation of accidents, 
injuries, occupational deaths, illnesses, and exposures 
and the observation of incident scene activities” (Sec-
tion 4.9.2 of NFPA 1500).
Usually, the investigation process involves fi lling 
out various forms. The forms help guide the investiga-
tion and help the offi cer conducting the investigation 
obtain and record all of the necessary information.
What Should Be Investigated?
NFPA 1521, Standard for Fire Department Safety 
Offi cer requires an investigation for all occupational 
injuries, illnesses, exposures, and fatalities, or other 
potentially hazardous conditions involving fi re de-
partment members, and all accidents involving fi re 
department vehicles, fi re apparatus, equipment, or 
fi re department facilities. Usually, department pol-
icies spell out the threshold for investigations, in 
terms of severity of injury or estimated property 
damage. In general, all accidents with injuries re-
quiring medical care and all accidents in which 
property damage exceeds a certain value should be 
investigated.
Who Should Investigate?
Some departments appoint a health and safety offi cer 
and make that person the designated accident inves-
tigation offi cer. Some departments use command 
offi cers (for example, battalion chiefs) for accident 
investigations. Where vehicles are involved, some 
departments and some state and local government 
policies require that law enforcement personnel con-
duct the investigation.
OFFICER ADVICE
Accident investigations should focus on finding new 
ways to improve workplace safety and become the 
basis for developing new procedures and training 
 programs to help prevent similar circumstances from 
happening again.
Any fi re offi cer may be asked to conduct an acci-
dent investigation. Asking offi cers to conduct acci-
dent investigations will increase their knowledge of the 
investigation process and increase their awareness of 
the causes and consequences of common accidents, as 
well as gather the information needed by the investiga-
tion process.
Why Accident Investigations 
and Reporting are Important
There are many good reasons for investigating acci-
dents. Let us start with the legal requirements. For 
accidents involving injuries, department or local 
 government policy commonly requires an accident 
investigation. OSHA and NFPA 1500 also require such 
investigations. In cases involving vehicles,  accident 
investigations are required by the state department of 
motor vehicles (or similar agency).
The information gathered during an investigation—
possibly required by procedure, policy, or regulation—
provides a wealth of information that can be used for 
a variety of purposes:
■ To identify sources of accidents by determining 
and documenting the materials and equipment fre-
quently involved in accidents
■ To compile information that will allow compari-
sons of accident data from other jurisdictions and 
agencies
■ To indicate a need for a revision of an unsafe 
practice
■ To indicate a need for the modifi cation of the design 
of equipment or apparatus

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  209
As a general rule, the investigation should be con-
ducted by someone not involved with the accident or 
in the chain of command of those who were involved 
in the accident. Using investigators with no vested 
interest in the outcome of the investigation will avoid 
even the appearance of a confl ict of interest. Another 
consideration is the seriousness of the accident. The 
seniority and the experience of the investigating offi -
cer should also match the seriousness of the event: 
A fatality will require a much more detailed investi-
gation than a $500 fender bender.
Responder Injuries
Depending upon the severity of the injury, the health and 
safety offi cer or other designated offi cer may conduct 
the investigation. Where equipment failure is known 
or suspected, the equipment should be impounded for 
further testing by appropriate authorities. Statements 
from the injured person(s) and witness(es) should be 
obtained as soon as possible. Today, it seems that 
everybody has a camera; if the accident was recorded 
on fi lm, try to get a copy of the print or tape. In any 
case, take photographs of the accident scene.
Responder Fatalities
The death of a responder is a stressful event for any 
organization. While there is concern for family and 
teammates of the lost member, there are several agen-
cies that will require information about the event, 
and many require prompt reporting. There are sev-
eral places to go for assistance: Both the International 
Association of Fire Chief (IAFC) and the Interna-
tional Association of Firefi ghters (IAFF) provide 
information to their members, and the federal Public 
Safety Offi cers Benefi t (PSOB) program is explained 
on the web at http://www.ojp.gov/BJA/grant/psob/
psob_main.html. The National Fallen Firefi ghter 
Foundation provides the following information at 
www.fi rehero.org.
Here are important steps that a department needs 
to take to help the fi refi ghter’s family, members of the 
department, and the community.
 1. Notify the family of the fallen fi refi ghter.
 2. Once you are sure the family has been notifi ed, get 
information to members of the department, local 
and state offi cials, and the National Fallen Fire-
fi ghters Foundation. Help is available from the 
Foundation’s Local Assistance State Teams. To 
report a Line of Duty Death (LODD) please call 
toll free at 1-866-736-5868.
 3. Contact the Department of Justice’s Public Safety 
Offi cers’ Benefi ts (PSOB) Program. When you 
report a fi refi ghter death, have basic information 
available on the incident, your department, and the 
fallen fi refi ghter and his or her immediate next-of-
kin. You may contact the PSOB Offi ce at 1-888-
744-6513.
  PSOB offers a lump sum death benefi t to survivors of 
public safety offi cers who die in the line of duty from 
a traumatic injury or heart attack. There are many 
procedures that need to be followed. Call PSOB even 
if you are not sure whether your fi refi ghter’s family 
will qualify for benefi ts under this program.
 4. Use a checklist to determine what needs to be done 
immediately, before and during the funeral, and 
longer term. Be sure you know what the require-
ments are in your jurisdiction for conducting an 
autopsy.
  If you would like to speak directly with another 
senior fi re offi cer who has lost a fi refi ghter in the 
line of duty and can offer some professional and 
personal support, please contact the Foundation.
 5. Find out what benefi ts exist for survivors of fallen 
fi refi ghters in your state. Then start contacting the 
state offi cials for each program. Benefi ts may include 
lump-sum death payments, workers’ compensation, 
funeral benefi ts, pensions and retirement programs, 
scholarships, and nonprofi t/private support.
 6. At the family’s request, begin preparations for 
a fi re service funeral or memorial service. A com-
prehensive Funeral Guide will help you plan a  fi tting 
tribute. Download a copy or call the  Foundation to 
have one sent immediately.
Accidents Involving Vehicles
Accidents involving vehicles (with or without fatalities 
and injuries) require a report because of the  damage to 
government equipment and private property. Because 
of the complexities of such investigations, the health 
and safety offi cer or other designated offi cers may 
be needed for such investigations. In many jurisdic-
tions, the police conduct the investigation. However, 
we must be careful here. Since both the fi re depart-
ment and police department are part of the same local 
government, many jurisdictions—to avoid any appar-
ent confl ict of interest by the police investigators—
ask the state police to conduct the investigation where 
there is damage to civilian property.
If the fi re department conducts the investigation, 
there are specifi c reports required for traffi c accidents. 
In addition to completing the appropriate reports, the 
investigating offi cer should take photographs of the 
overall accident scene as well as close-up photographs 

210  CHAPTER 8
showing damage. Such photographs should provide 
the following information:
■ Position of the fi nal resting places of all vehicles 
involved in the accident
■ Accident damage to each vehicle including close-up 
photographs
■ Accident damage to any objects relevant to the 
accident
■ Evidence of the path of travel both before and after 
the impact
■ Evidence of the point of impact (tire marks, debris, 
and so on)
■ The view that each driver had when approaching 
the accident scene
When vehicle or equipment failure is suspected 
or known to be a factor in the collision, the vehicle 
or equipment should be impounded for further test-
ing. When fi re department vehicles are involved in an 
accident, they should be carefully inspected for dam-
age before being placed back in service.
In such cases, department policy should require that 
all persons involved in the accident be tested for use 
of alcohol or drugs. Because of the urgency for such 
tests, all offi cers should be aware of any such require-
ments and comply with the organization’s policies.
Benefits
No one wants an accident to occur, but when one 
does occur, we should try to learn something from the 
experience. After the accident, the following should 
be routine:
■ Investigate the accident.
■ Identify the causes.
■ Report the fi ndings.
■ Develop a plan for corrective action.
■ Implement the plan.
■ Evaluate the effectiveness of the corrective action.
■ Make changes for continuous improvement.
A safety program that routinely follows these steps 
will help reduce accidents (see Figure 8-7).
Health and Safety Committee
Important provision for improving the health and 
safety of members in any organization is the creation 
of a safety committee. To be effective, the committee 
should include members from management, member 
organizations, and the safety offi cer.
Safety committees have several functions: They 
recommend policy, respond to reports of unsafe con-
ditions or practices, provide information for the orga-
nization and its members, and provide research and 
recommendations in matters pertaining to health and 
safety issues.
So Who Is Really Responsible 
for Safety?
The fi re chief shall have the ultimate responsibility 
for the fi re department occupational safety and health 
program as specifi ed in NFPA 1500, Standard on 
Fire Department Occupational Safety and Health 
FIGURE 8-7 Safety programs, utiliza-
tion of PPE, and safety officers can 
have a significant positive impact on 
reducing injuries and fatalities.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  211
Program. A health and safety offi cer (HSO) shall be 
assigned to manage the fi re department occupational 
safety and health program. The HSO shall report 
directly to the fi re chief or to the fi re chief’s desig-
nated representative.
Each fi re department should have a designated 
HSO. The HSO can be assigned as a full-time or part-
time position, depending on the size and character of 
the fi re department. Additional assistant health and 
safety offi cers shall be appointed when the activities, 
size, or character of the fi re department warrants extra 
safety personnel. If the health and safety offi cer is not 
available, additional assistant health and safety offi -
cers shall be appointed to ensure proper coverage.
The incident commander shall have ultimate 
responsibility for incident scene safety as specifi ed in 
NFPA 1561, Standard on Emergency Services Inci-
dent Management System. An incident safety offi cer 
(ISO) shall be appointed when activities, size, or need 
occurs. The incident safety offi cer function can be pre-
designated or appointed by the incident commander as 
needed. If the pre-designated incident safety offi cer is 
not available, the incident commander shall appoint 
an incident safety offi cer (see Figure 8-8).
The function of incident scene safety must be car-
ried out at all incidents. It is the responsibility of the 
incident commander who cannot perform this func-
tion, due to the size or complexity of the incident, to 
assign or request response of an incident safety offi -
cer to do this function. There are, however, incidents 
that require immediate response or appointment of an 
incident safety offi cer, such as a hazardous materials 
incident or special operations incidents. These types 
of incidents should be defi ned in the fi re department’s 
response policy or procedure to ensure that the inci-
dent safety offi cer responds.
Because you, as a company offi cer, could well be 
assigned as an incident safety offi cer, let us review 
the duties of that position, as outlined in NFPA 1521, 
Standard for Fire Department Safety Offi cer:
At All Incidents
■ The incident safety offi cer shall monitor conditions, 
activities, and operations to determine whether 
they fall within the criteria as defi ned in the fi re 
department’s risk management plan.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall ensure that the 
incident commander establishes an incident scene 
rehabilitation tactical level management unit dur-
ing emergency operations.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall monitor the scene 
and report the status of conditions, hazards, and 
risks to the incident commander.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall ensure that the fi re 
department’s personnel accountability system is 
being utilized.
■ The incident commander shall provide the  incident 
safety offi cer with the incident action plan. The 
incident safety offi cer shall provide the incident 
commander with a risk assessment of incident 
scene operations.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall ensure that estab-
lished safety zones, collapse zones, hot zones, and 
other designated hazard areas are communicated 
to all members present on scene.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall evaluate motor 
vehicle scene traffi c hazards and apparatus place-
ment and take appropriate actions to mitigate 
hazards.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall monitor radio 
transmissions and stay alert to transmission barri-
ers that could result in missed, unclear, or incom-
plete communication.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall communicate to 
the incident commander the need for assistant inci-
dent safety offi cers due to the size, complexity, or 
duration of the incident.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall survey and evalu-
ate the hazards associated with the designation of 
landing zone and working with helicopters.
During Fire Suppression Operations
■ The incident safety offi cer shall ensure that a 
rapid intervention crew is available and ready for 
deployment.
■ Where fi re has involved a building or buildings, 
the incident safety offi cer shall advise the incident 
commander of hazards, collapse potential, and any 
fi re extension in such building(s).
FIGURE 8-8 The incident safety officer is just as 
important at training fires as at real incidents.

212  CHAPTER 8
■ The incident safety offi cer shall evaluate visible 
smoke and fi re conditions and advise the incident 
commander, tactical level management units’ 
offi cers, and company offi cers on the poten-
tial for fl ashover, backdraft, blow-up, or other 
fi re events that could pose a threat to operating 
teams.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall monitor the acces-
sibility of entry and egress of structures and the 
effect it has on the safety of members conducting 
interior operations.
During Emergency Medical 
Service Operations
■ The incident safety offi cer shall ensure compli-
ance with the department’s infection control 
plan and NFPA 1581, Standard on Fire Depart-
ment Infection Control Program, during EMS 
operations.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall ensure that inci-
dent scene rehabilitation and critical incident stress 
management are established as needed at EMS 
operations, especially mass casualty incidents 
(MCIs).
During Hazardous Materials 
Operations
■ The hazardous materials incident safety offi cer 
shall meet the requirements of NFPA 472, Stan-
dard for Professional Competence of Responders 
to Hazardous Materials Incidents.
During Special Operations
■ The individual who serves as the incident safety 
offi cer for special operations incidents shall have 
the appropriate education, training, and experience 
in special operations.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall attend strategic 
and tactical planning sessions and provide input on 
risk assessment and member safety.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall ensure that a safety 
briefi ng, including an incident action plan and an 
incident safety plan, is developed and made avail-
able to all members on the scene.
■ The incident safety offi cer shall meet with the 
incident commander to determine rehabilitation, 
accountability, or rapid intervention needs. For 
long-term operations, the incident safety offi cer 
shall ensure that food, hygiene facilities, and any 
other special needs are provided for members.
Infectious Disease 
Control Program
Most fi re departments have a designated infection 
control offi ce; however, this can be included as one of 
the many duties of the HSO. Regardless, this person 
is responsible for developing policies and procedures 
referred to as the infection control plan. This plan is 
written to cover both the spread of infections and the 
investigation of suspected exposures to infections. 
The plan should include the following elements:
■ Records maintenance section—Medical records 
are strictly confi dential for both employees and citi-
zens, so it is essential to have a section that lists how 
these records will be maintained. It should explain 
that the employee is allowed to review his or her own 
medical record. In turn, it should explain what is 
contained within those fi les. Often, the employee’s 
medical fi le includes all memos referring to medi-
cal conditions, leave adjustment forms that pertain 
to medical comments, medical history forms, and 
immunization records. In addition, patient records 
cannot be released without the consent of the patient; 
this is included in the 1996 HIPAA the Health Insur-
ance Portability and Accountability act. For more 
information on HIPAA visit the Center for Medi-
care & Medicaide Services (CMS) website at http://
www.cms.hhs.gov/HIPAAGenInfo/. For fi re depart-
ments to be legally covered, they should have an 
approved HIPAA release of information form that 
needs to be signed by the patient. This form needs 
to be approved by the department’s legal representa-
tive. When in doubt, do not release any information. 
Under HIPAA regulations, the person who releases 
the information is liable. In addition to federal issues, 
the patient could also take civil action.
■ Education section—This section should outline the 
steps for initial and annual refresher trainings. Per-
sonnel should be trained in the following areas:
 Epidemiology and symptoms of bloodborne 
diseases
 Transmission modes
 The entire exposure control plan
 Methods for recognizing activities that may 
involve exposures
 Information on the types, proper uses, location, 
removal, handling, decontamination, and dis-
posal of personal protective equipment (PPE)
 Information on vaccinations
 Actions to be taken in the event of an exposure
■ General sanitation section—This section involves 
the steps for cleaning and sanitizing equipment and 

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  213
PPE. At no time should kitchens, bathrooms, or liv-
ing areas be used to disinfect or decontaminate any 
equipment or PPE.
■ PPE section—This section should include depart-
mental policies and procedures for the use of PPE. 
It should list the department and individual respon-
sibilities regarding the use of PPE.
■ Preresponse and postresponse section—This sec-
tion will outline the steps for removal and replace-
ment of equipment that has been contaminated.
■ Exposure section—This section is a guide for 
employees and supervisors in the management of any 
and all exposures. It should outline all of the steps 
that need to take place in the event of an exposure.
■ Program evaluation section—This section summa-
rizes the quality monitoring of the program, the steps 
for inspecting station facilities, analysis of reported 
exposures, and a quality and compliance report.
Fire department personnel are susceptible to all types 
of health exposures both inside and outside the sta-
tion walls. Fire offi cers should ensure that all person-
nel are trained on the hazards that they face as well as 
how to deal with them upon being exposed.
Chapter 5. Training and 
Education
Chapter 5 of NFPA 1500 provides direction for train-
ing programs at all levels. Firefi ghter safety is closely 
related to good fi refi ghter training. When new recruits 
enter the fi re service, they enter a new culture that 
includes training on a variety of basic procedures, 
many of which will remain with the fi refi ghters for the 
rest of their lives. That training must include informa-
tion about fi refi ghter safety. While safety should be a 
topic of instruction itself, it is also important to incor-
porate safety into all training activities. For example, 
when teaching the proper use of power tools, safety 
considerations must always be included.
If fi refi ghters are trained properly, they will know 
the correct actions to take during emergency activities. 
If the training is suffi cient, they will have acquired 
good, safe working habits and, hopefully, will have for-
gotten any bad habits that they may have brought with 
them before entering the fi re service. During times of 
stress, and sometimes when no one else is looking, fi re-
fi ghters may have the tendency to forget some of the 
good habits they learned during their recruit training. 
Many accidents occur during these moments. Safety 
practices and good habits learned during recruit train-
ing must be reinforced throughout the fi refi ghter’s work 
life. As the company offi cer, you have a leading role in 
this activity, both by setting a positive personal exam-
ple and by reinforcing safety practices at all times. 
Correcting unsafe acts during training, and even dur-
ing actual events, reduces accidents among fi refi ghters. 
The approach should be positive and constructive.
SAFETY
Correcting unsafe acts during training, and even during 
actual events, reduces accidents among firefighters.
Firefighter Training Need 
Not Be Dangerous
It is important that fi re departments train fi refi ghters 
in conditions that are as realistic as possible, while at 
the same time protecting fi refi ghters from harm. The 
challenge of accomplishing both is very real. Since 
1987, reported training-related injuries have increased 
by nearly 21 percent. In 2001 alone, almost 7,000 
training-related injuries were reported. That year, a 
fi refi ghter died and two were injured while participat-
ing in a live-burn training situation.
Live-fi re training buildings and simulators, fed by 
propane or natural gas, have many built-in safety fea-
tures. Unfortunately, they may not provide the same 
quality of realism as live-fi re training in acquired 
structures. The training buildings, for example, fail 
to teach students to react to the diverse conditions 
encountered in real fi re operations. In addition, the 
need to provide training in situations other than fi res, 
such as hazardous material incidents, increases the 
danger to participants. In 1997, for example, a mem-
ber of a unit training to respond to a chemical inci-
dent was overcome by a nerve agent and needed to be 
administered an antidote to stop the seizures.
The U.S. Fire Administration (USFA), after review-
ing the risks of fi refi ghting training and identifying the 
risks, has recommended ways to reduce deaths and 
injuries associated with training activity. The USFA 
report underscores the inherent danger of such train-
ing, but it also reiterates the importance of experience 
gained in real, rather than closely controlled, training 
fi res. The report also highlights the importance of fol-
lowing currently accepted procedures and standards 
to avoid training deaths and injuries and the need for 
instructors to avoid situations for which the students 
are not yet prepared. In that regard, students should 
be trained and certifi ed to the Firefi ghter I level before 
being exposed to the hazard of live-fi re training.
Lessons learned cited in the special report include 
the following:
■ It is increasingly important that fi refi ghters receive 
training in fi re behavior and extinguishment meth-
ods for different types of buildings.

214  CHAPTER 8
■ Because modern protective equipment may make 
life-threatening fi re conditions less obvious, fi re-
fi ghters must be trained to recognize the visual and 
physical clues to impending danger.
■ During training, a fi refi ghter’s physical stress level 
should be monitored continuously, and departments 
should consider stronger physical screening pro-
grams and long-term health and wellness programs 
to reduce training-related heart attacks and strokes.
Where these training activities are conducted in 
acquired structures, extreme care must be given to the 
condition of the building. These structures are typically 
old and burn readily. Where these training activities are 
conducted in training facilities, care must be given to the 
type and size of fi re that is built. Even the best live-fi re 
training facility will fail when repeatedly subjected to 
intense fi res and fi refi ghting activity. NFPA 1403, Stan-
dard on Live Fire Training Evolutions in Structures, 
provides directions for safe training in either environ-
ment, and it must be understood and followed if train-
ing is to be conducted safely. In addition, it is impor-
tant that the training be conducted in accordance with a 
plan and under the supervision of persons who have the 
experience needed to conduct such training activity.
impact of NFPA 1500 is apparent in the design of 
today’s fi re apparatus.
Vehicle Safety 
Is Important, Too
The second leading cause of fi refi ghter fatalities is 
the result of motor vehicle accidents. Over the past 
20 years, motor vehicle accidents have accounted for 
between 20 and 25 percent of all fi refi ghter fatalities. 
Approximately 25 percent of these fatalities were fi re-
fi ghters who died while responding to an emergency 
in their own vehicle. The second largest category 
(about 20 percent) involved accidents with fi re depart-
ment tanker vehicles. In both categories, failure to use 
seat belts was a contributing factor. In many cases, 
these accidents were preventable.5
In many cases, the accident involved injuries and 
property damage to civilians as well as to the fi re-
fi ghters. This activity is inconsistent for an organiza-
tion that has a mission of saving lives and protecting 
property.
SAFETY
The training should be conducted in accordance with a 
plan and under the supervision of persons who have the 
experience needed to conduct such training activity.
Chapter 6. Fire Apparatus, 
Equipment, and Drivers/
Operators
Chapter 6 of NFPA 1500 provides directions for the 
safe design and operation of fi re department vehi-
cles, tools, and equipment. Probably the most visible 
We continue to see evidence of training efforts that, 
 although well-intended, result in dangerous situations, 
especially for the newest members of fi re departments. 
Some departments look upon live-fi re training for their 
 recruits as an initiation ceremony or rite of passage in 
which the instructors build fi res that will cause at least 
a few of the new members to retreat. (Instructors with 
melted visors should be considered suspect.) Every year 
we see reports of injuries and occasionally even deaths 
resulting from such reprehensible conduct.
UNNECESSARY DANGERS CREATED 
DURING TRAINING
FIREGROUND FACT
The second most frequent situation in which firefight-
ers are killed is while responding to and returning from 
incidents.
Although you may think of accidents involving 
apparatus and volunteers’ privately owned vehicles 
racing to the scene as the source of these  injuries, 
many of these injuries occur as the result of less 
spectacular acts. Firefi ghters sometimes slip and fall 
while running to board apparatus. Watching the fi re-
fi ghters’ response at a well-disciplined fi re station is 
almost a nonevent; the fi refi ghters walk rapidly to their 
assigned apparatus, deliberately put on their gear, and 
mount up with little if any conversation. All of this is 
easily done in less than a minute. As a result, the crew 
leaves the station without gasping for air or pounding 
hearts. Their trip to the scene and their performance 
at the scene are certain to be safer.
While the driver of the emergency vehicle is respon-
sible for the safe operation of the vehicle, you, as the 
company offi cer, are responsible for the safety of all 
the personnel in the company and the citizens with 
whom they come into contact. In the fi nal analysis 
you, as the offi cer, are responsible for the safe opera-
tion of the vehicle.
Before the apparatus moves, all fi refi ghters should 
be seated and their seat belts properly secured. This 
is usually routinely accomplished when the company 

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  215
is departing the station, but it is sometimes forgotten 
when the response starts from another site. Take that 
extra moment to make sure everyone is present and they 
are all properly secured. Once the response starts, you 
will be busy with traffi c, both radio and vehicular.
Surprisingly, accidents also occur when crews are 
returning to quarters. Some of this is due to fatigue 
and the letdown that comes after the excitement has 
passed. You must keep your guard up for such events. 
Once the apparatus is back in quarters, all hands 
should work together to help restore the vehicle to a 
“ready” status for the next call.
We must remember that issues involving apparatus 
design and use were on everybody’s mind in the mid-
1980s when NFPA 1500 was developed and adopted. 
Chapter 4 addresses the role of the driver as well as 
the design of the vehicle. Provisions of NFPA 1500 
indicate that the driver is responsible for the safe oper-
ation of the vehicle; for seeing that all fi refi ghters are 
seated and secured before moving the vehicle; and 
for obeying all traffi c laws, rules of the road, and all 
department policies regarding the use of emergency 
vehicles. The standard also indicates that the offi cer is 
responsible for the overall safety of assigned personnel 
and equipment, including the actions of the driver.
■ The fi re department shall enact specifi c rules and 
regulations pertaining to the use of private vehicles 
for emergency response. These rules and regula-
tions shall be at least equal to the provisions regu-
lating the operation of fi re department vehicles.
■ Drivers of fi re apparatus shall be directly respon-
sible for the safe and prudent operation of the vehi-
cles under all conditions.
■ When the driver is under the direct supervision of 
an offi cer, that offi cer shall also assume responsi-
bility for the driver’s actions.
■ Drivers shall not move fi re apparatus until all per-
sons on the vehicle are seated and secured with 
seat belts in approved riding positions.
■ Drivers of fi re apparatus shall obey all traffi c con-
trol signals and signs and all laws and rules of the 
road of the jurisdiction for the operation of motor 
vehicles.
■ The fi re department shall develop standard operat-
ing procedures for safely driving fi re apparatus dur-
ing nonemergency travel and emergency response 
and shall include specifi c criteria for vehicle speed, 
crossing intersections, traversing railroad grade 
crossings, and the use of emergency warning 
devices. Procedures for emergency response shall 
emphasize that the safe arrival of fi re apparatus at 
the emergency scene is the fi rst priority.
■ During emergency response, drivers of fi re appara-
tus shall bring the vehicle to a complete stop under 
any of the following circumstances:
 When directed by a law enforcement offi cer
 Red traffi c lights
 Stop signs
 Negative right-of-way intersections
 Blind intersections
 When the driver cannot account for all lanes of 
traffi c in an intersection
 When other intersection hazards are present
 When encountering a stopped school bus with 
fl ashing warning lights
■ Drivers shall proceed through intersections only 
when the driver can account for all lanes of traffi c 
in the intersection.
■ During emergency response or nonemergency 
travel, drivers of fi re apparatus shall use caution 
when approaching and crossing any guarded rail-
road grade crossing, shall come to a complete stop 
at all unguarded railroad grade crossings, and shall 
ensure that it is safe to proceed before crossing any 
railroad track(s).
FIREGROUND FACT
According to NFPA there were an estimated 16,020 
 collisions in 2006 involving fire department emergency 
vehicles, where departments were responding to or 
 returning from incidents. These collisions resulted in 
1,250 fire fighter injuries.
Also, 1,070 collisions involving fi re fi ghters’ per-
sonal  vehicles occurred in 2006 while responding to or 
 returning from incidents. These collisions resulted in an 
estimated 210 injuries.
NFPA 1500 Requirements 
for Safe Operations of 
Fire Apparatus
■ Fire apparatus shall be operated only by mem-
bers who have successfully completed an approved 
driver-training program or by trainee drivers who 
are under the supervision of a qualifi ed driver.
■ Drivers of fi re apparatus shall have a valid driver’s 
license.
■ Vehicles shall be operated in compliance with all 
traffi c laws, including sections pertaining to emer-
gency vehicles, and any requirements of the author-
ity having jurisdiction.

216  CHAPTER 8
Using Seat Belts and 
Maintaining Safe Speed
Every year fi refi ghters are killed in collisions involv-
ing their personal vehicles as they respond to emergen-
cies. The majority of these fi refi ghters are volunteers.
Two separate USFA studies of emergency vehicle 
crashes reveal that over 70 percent of those killed in 
these crashes were not wearing seat belts at the time 
of the incident. Ironically, fi refi ghters preach the ben-
efi ts of seat belts and child safety seats. They often 
fail to heed their own advice.
USFA suggests the following actions to help 
improve the safety of fi refi ghters:
■ Fire departments should adopt a policy that man-
dates the use of seat belts in all fi re department 
vehicles and in fi refi ghters’ personal vehicles while 
responding to or returning from an incident.
■ Fire departments should place warning signs in all 
department vehicles to remind fi refi ghters of their 
responsibility to use seat belts.
■ Drivers should limit response speed to the posted 
speed limit. The maximum speed may be lower 
than the posted speed in situations such as extreme 
weather, darkness, or congested traffi c.
■ Company and chief offi cers who observe unsafe 
driving should remind the offending fi refi ghter of 
the department’s policy. Firefi ghters who do not 
obey the policy should face disciplinary action.
Proper Use of Warning Lights 
Can Enhance Firefighter Safety
To enhance fi refi ghter safety, recent editions of NFPA 
1901, Standard for Automotive Fire Apparatus, have 
given increasing attention to the warning lights on fi re 
apparatus. The standard now requires that apparatus 
have warning lights that are divided into two modes of 
operation: responding and blocking. The responding 
mode shall signal other drivers and pedestrians that 
the apparatus is responding to an emergency and is 
calling for the right-of-way. The second, the blocking 
mode, shall signal that the apparatus is stopped and 
blocking the right-of-way. Movement of the parking 
brake and/or movement of the automatic transmission 
gear selector automatically accomplishes the change-
over from the response mode to the blocking mode.
Under ordinary conditions the specifi ed warning 
lights provide an effective and balanced warning sys-
tem. However, in some situations, turning off some 
warning devices can increase the safety of both civil-
ians and emergency personnel. Consider the follow-
ing examples:
■ If other traffi c needs to pass within close proximity 
to the parked apparatus, the possibility of distract-
ing other drivers can be reduced if the headlights 
and lower-level warning lights are turned off.
■ When responding in snow or fog, it could be desir-
able to turn off forward-facing strobes or oscil-
lating lights to reduce visual disorientation of the 
apparatus driver.
■ Flashing headlights are used in many areas as 
warning lights and provide an inexpensive way to 
obtain additional warning to the front of the appa-
ratus. Daylight fl ashing of the high beam fi laments 
is very effective and is generally considered safe. 
However, nighttime fl ashing can affect the vision 
of oncoming drivers as well as make driving the 
apparatus more diffi cult.
In some jurisdictions, headlight fl ashing is prohib-
ited. However, in all areas, if fl ashing headlights are 
employed on fi re apparatus, they should be turned 
off when the apparatus is responding at night and the 
regular headlights are needed. They should also be 
turned off, along with all other white warning lights, 
when the apparatus warning lights are in the blocking 
mode. Steady-burning headlights are not considered 
warning lights; consequently, they can be used in the 
blocking mode to illuminate the work area in front 
of the apparatus. However, in such situations, careful 
consideration should be given to avoid shining head-
lights into the eyes of oncoming drivers. (Additional 
information can be found in Chapter 13 of NFPA 1901, 
Standard for Automotive Fire Apparatus, 2009.)
These policies are the result of reports of seri-
ous accidents involving emergency apparatus while 
responding. For those who say, “We do not need to 
follow those rules because we have not adopted NFPA 
1500,” you might start thinking about the defense you 
will use after an accident in which you or one of your 
personnel was involved, and the attorney for the state 
or the injured party asks about your awareness of a 
nationally recognized standard on fi refi ghter safety 
and health.
Firefighter Deaths from Tank 
Truck Rollovers
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH) routinely looks at systematic prob-
lems in the fi re service. Heart attacks and vehicle 
accidents have been the subject of several of their 
recent studies.
NIOSH reports that mobile water supply vehicles, 
known as tankers or tenders, are widely used to trans-
port water to areas beyond a water supply system 

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  217
or where the water supply is inadequate. Incidents 
involving motor vehicles account for approximately 
20 percent of U.S. fi refi ghter deaths each year; cases 
involving tankers are the most prevalent of these 
motor vehicle incidents. During 1977–1999, 73 deaths 
occurred in 63 crashes involving tankers. Of those 
deaths, 54 occurred in 49 crashes in which tankers 
rolled over (no collision), and 8 occurred in 6 crashes 
in which the tankers left the road (no collision). The 
other cases involved collision with another vehicle 
(10 deaths in 7 crashes) and collision with stationary 
object(s) (1 death) (NFPA 2000 statistics).
Tanker drivers may not be fully aware that tanker 
trucks are more diffi cult to control than passenger vehi-
cles. A tanker truck requires a much greater distance 
to stop. Tankers weigh substantially more, and their 
air brake systems take more time to activate than the 
hydraulic/mechanical brake systems on smaller passen-
ger cars. The effect is infl uenced by the amount of water 
the tanker is hauling and whether the tanker is baffl ed.
To reduce the risk of tanker truck rollovers, NIOSH 
recommends that fi re departments take the following 
precautions:
■ Develop, implement, and enforce standard oper-
ating procedures (SOPs) for emergency vehicles, 
particularly with regard to the use of seat belts.
■ Ensure that drivers have necessary driving skills 
and experience and provide them with periodic 
refresher training.
■ Consider terrain, weather, and bridge and road condi-
tions when purchasing a mobile water supply vehicle.
■ Adhere to the requirements of NFPA 1911 Stan-
dard for the Inspection, Maintenance, Testing, and 
Retirement of In-Service Automotive Fire Appa-
ratus, for keeping a vehicle on a maintenance 
schedule and documenting the performance of the 
maintenance.
■ Inspect the complete vehicle at least once per year 
to comply with federal and state motor vehicle 
regulations.
■ Adhere to the requirements of NFPA 1901, Stan-
dard for Automotive Fire Apparatus for an 
approved mobile water supply vehicle.
■ Equip all vehicles with seat belts.
■ Ensure that water tank capacity is adequate and 
has proper tank mounting and suffi cient front and 
rear weight distribution.
■ Ensure that the weight of the fully loaded vehicle does 
not exceed the gross axle weight rating of any axle 
and the gross vehicle weight rating of the chassis.
■ Ensure that the center of gravity of the vehicle does 
not exceed the chassis manufacturer’s specifi ed 
center of gravity.
■ Provide proper baffl es to control water movement 
for all vehicles equipped with water tanks.
■ Verify that vehicles are of proper design and have 
adequate suspension, steering, and braking ability.
All drivers should do the following:
■ Recognize that they are responsible for the safe 
and prudent operation of the vehicle under all 
conditions.
■ Wear a seat belt when operating a vehicle.
■ Take training to meet the job performance require-
ments stated in NFPA 1002 Standard for Fire 
Apparatus Driver/Operator Professional Qualifi -
cations before driving and operating the vehicle.
■ Take refresher driver training at least twice per 
year.
■ Understand the vehicle characteristics, capabilities, 
and limitations.
■ Be aware of the potential for unpredictable driving 
by the public (excessive speed, failure to yield to 
emergency vehicles, and inattentiveness).
■ Adjust speed when driving on wet or icy roads, in dark-
ness or fog, or under any other conditions that make 
emergency vehicle operation especially hazardous.
For more information on NIOSH’s research of fi re-
fi ghter safety and health issues, go to http://www.cdc.
gov/niosh/fi re.
Manual on Safe Operations 
of Fire Tankers Available from 
USFA
Noting that vehicle crashes are the second leading 
cause of all fi refi ghter on-duty fatalities, the USFA 
published a report, entitled Safe Operation of Fire 
Tankers. This manual provides comprehensive infor-
mation regarding the safety practices and principles of 
tanker vehicles for local fi re departments. Safe Oper-
ation of Fire Tankers provides information related to 
human performance (driver training and operations) 
and technology (vehicle design) to enhance the safety 
of fi re tanker operations. The manual also examines 
past incidents of crashes involving fi re tankers that 
have killed fi refi ghters, with a focus on how these 
fatalities could have been prevented. Fire depart-
ments will fi nd Safe Operation of Fire Tankers a 
NOTE
NFPA 1500 clearly states that the officer (of the unit) is 
responsible for the overall safety of assigned personnel 
and equipment. This includes providing proper super-
vision of the driver.

218  CHAPTER 8
valuable resource that provides information related to 
the current and applicable federal standards and regu-
lations as well as national-level consensus standards 
and guidelines. The document can be downloaded 
from the USFA web site at http://www.usfa.dhs.gov/
downloads/pdf/publications/fa-248.pdf.
Chapter 7. Protective Clothing 
and Protective Equipment
Chapter 7 of NFPA 1500 sets requirements for fi re 
departments regarding providing and requiring 
the wearing of appropriate PPE (see Figure 8-9). 
Although the standard deals with some aspects of the 
design of protective clothing, it also states that mem-
bers shall be provided with protective helmets, hoods, 
coats, trousers, gloves, and shoes to make a com-
plete protective ensemble for the fi refi ghter, and that 
departments shall establish policies requiring mem-
bers to wear their protective clothing when exposed 
to the dangers of the job.
NFPA 1500 also provides that the equipment shall be 
cleaned at least once every 6 months. By design, turnout 
gear protects you from a host of hazards. In the process of 
providing you with that protection, the protective cloth-
ing becomes contaminated with all the products encoun-
tered during the emergencies you encounter, including 
carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, asbestos, bodily 
fl uids, gasoline, diesel fuel, and other  contaminants. You 
A 16-year-old Explorer fi refi ghter riding as a passenger 
died as the result of injuries sustained when a fi re depart-
ment tanker rolled over. Following the accident, the driver 
of the vehicle was charged with operating while intoxi-
cated and aggravated vehicular homicide.
The two fi refi ghters were responding, along with four 
other units, to a rekindle of railroad ties. Since the tanker 
rolled over, questions about the vehicle’s speed and the 
ALCOHOL, SPEED, AND 
THE LACK OF SEAT BELTS
justifi cation for an emergency response have surfaced 
and may be the subject of litigation. Many articles have 
been written about responding to “true emergencies.” 
Several recent articles question if a rekindle of railroad 
ties constitutes a true emergency worthy of a fi ve-vehicle 
emergency response.
It also appears that neither the Explorer fi refi ghter 
nor the driver was wearing seat belts at the time of 
the accident. As shown elsewhere in this chapter, 
failure to use seat belts is a signifi cant contributor to 
the fatalities associated with accidents involving fi re 
apparatus.
FIGURE 8-9
Well-dressed firefighters ready for 
business. To get the intended benefit from PPE, 
one must use it properly.
NOTE
With the arrival of NFPA 1500, the standards, for the 
first time, addressed human behavior. Other NFPA 
standards provide specifications regarding protective 
clothing, apparatus, and so on. In NFPA 1500, we see 
a requirement for departments to issue this equipment 
and for firefighters to use it.
NFPA 1500 declares that self-contained breathing 
apparatus (SCBA) must be worn (and used) when the 
atmosphere is hazardous, is suspected of being haz-
ardous, or may rapidly become hazardous. To ensure 
a good seal, the standard prohibits beards, spectacles, 
and other objects that could interfere with the seal of 
SCBA against the face. The standard also provides 
for providing and using a personal alert safety system 
(PASS) device.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  219
then expose yourselves, your colleagues, other citizens, 
and even your family to all of that material. NFPA 1581, 
Fire Department Infection Control Program, provides 
additional important information.
■ The majority of fi re service portable radios are not 
water-resistant, and more than three-fourths lack 
intrinsic safety in an explosive atmosphere.
■ An estimated one-third of fi refi ghters per shift are 
not equipped with SCBA equipment. Nearly half 
of the SCBA units are at least 10 years old.
■ Nearly half of the emergency responders per shift 
are not equipped with PASS devices.
■ An estimated 57,000 fi refi ghters lack adequate per-
sonal protective clothing, and an estimated one-
third of all protective clothing is over 10 years old.
SAFETY
Wearing a PASS device is not going to help others find 
you unless it is turned on.
SAFETY
One of the most important areas of firefighter safety, 
addressed in this revision of the NFPA 1500, is respira-
tory protection. There are numerous NFPA standards, 
NIOSH regulations, and other publications that ad-
dress this area. The technical committee, working in 
conjunction with other committees, has developed a 
complete section that sets the requirements for a fire 
department complete respiratory protection program. 
It provides the user, as well as the enforcer, of the stan-
dard one source in which to find and implement its re-
spiratory protection program.
Firefi ghters are expected to perform normal human feats 
in superheated environments. To do this, fi refi ghters 
are encased in a suit of protective clothing that, despite 
considerable technological advances, is considered by 
some to be about as comfortable as medieval body ar-
mor. That discomfort is a small price to pay for the pro-
tection from fi re and other sources of injuries offered by 
today’s modern PPE. But it only works if it is worn. Hav-
ing an SCBA on your back is not good enough; you have 
to be breathing out of it to get the intended benefi t!
And wearing a PASS device is not going to help oth-
ers fi nd you unless it is turned on. When fi refi ghters re-
peatedly fail to properly use their SCBA or PASS device, 
and you, the company offi cer, do nothing to change the 
habit, who is responsible for injuries to the fi refi ghters 
when they are caught in a situation where they lose their 
lives because the SCBA was not used or the PASS de-
vice not activated?
PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT ONLY 
WORKS WHEN YOU USE IT
Outdated Equipment 
and Firefighter Safety
Over the past few years, the NFPA standards for PPE, 
fi re apparatus, and other fi refi ghter-related equipment 
have embraced modern technology and made the 
workplace safer for fi refi ghters. The previously men-
tioned Needs Assessment discussed facilities, appara-
tus, and equipment owned and operated by America’s 
fi re service. With regard to fi refi ghter safety, the report 
noted the following:
■ Over half of all fi re engines are over 15 years old, 
and over 10 percent are over 30 years old, mean-
ing that they were designed and built before any 
of the current standards for fi re apparatus were in 
place and are likely to be defi cient in many safety-
related features.
■ Overall, fi re departments do not have enough por-
table radios to equip more than about half of the 
emergency responders on a shift.
The technical committee can continue to develop 
and revise standards, but there must be a fundamen-
tal behavioral change in how fi refi ghters and fi re 
departments address fi re service occupational safety. 
In turn, they must continue to educate their members 
and, most importantly, the administration, and the 
citizens to the hazards of the fi refi ghting profession. 
The utilization and implementation of this standard 
can go a long way in reducing the staggering statistics 
involving fi refi ghter fatalities and injuries, but only if 
given the training and resources to do so.
SCBA
The use of self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) 
would greatly reduce the number of fi refi ghter asphyx-
iation injuries, which account for 20 percent of all 
fi refi ghter injuries. The requirements for the use of 
SCBA in NFPA 1500 are very defi nitive:
SCBA should be provided and shall be used by all 
members working in areas where
■ The atmosphere is hazardous
■ The atmosphere is suspected of being hazardous
■ The atmosphere may rapidly become hazardous
Many fi re departments claim to have policies that 
mandate the use of SCBA, but in many cases, it is 
just a mandate to wear the cylinder. The pictures in 

220  CHAPTER 8
many popular fi re publications of fi refi ghters wearing 
the SCBA cylinder but not using the facepiece clearly 
demonstrate the lack of enforcement efforts of their 
department’s policies.
Enforcement of department policy starts at the 
highest level, but the real enforcer has to be you, the 
company offi cer. You should see that SCBAs are worn 
while doing interior fi refi ghting, while on the roof of 
a burning structure, during defensive operations, and 
even after the fi re is knocked down, because the pro-
duces of incomplete combustion become airborne 
during the overhaul process. All personnel exposed to 
these products should wear their SCBA until the air 
has been determined to be safe by a safety offi cer.
Only with a concerned effort by fi refi ghters, com-
pany offi cers, safety offi cers, and command offi cers 
will there be a reduction in these injuries. The equip-
ment, training, and awareness are all there. Every 
fi refi ghter needs to become part of the solution.
Chapter 8. Emergency 
Operations
Chapter 8 of NFPA 1500 maintains that emergency 
operations and other situations, including training, shall 
be conducted with appropriate safety considerations, and 
it requires the use of incident management and person-
nel accountability systems. Most injuries occur while 
fi refi ghters are at the scene of fi res and other emergen-
cies. Here, you, as the company offi cer, can have a great 
impact on the accident rate in the department. You must 
set a positive personal example in conduct, following 
the department’s policies, wearing personal protective 
clothing, supporting the incident command system, 
and keeping your cool when the heat is on. Firefi ghters 
will see and remember a lot more from your example 
than they will from any lecture they may have heard in 
recruit school. Once the pattern is set, all members of 
the company must follow your example.
Firefi ghters should be continually reviewing the lat-
est information regarding fi re behavior, building con-
struction, fi reground tactics, the proper use of tools, 
and of course, the proper use of the incident com-
mand system (see Figure 8-10). Many fi re depart-
ments get few opportunities to practice these activities 
in real fi re situations, and as a result, some companies 
become weak on basic skills. As company offi cers, 
you should recognize this fact and use every opportu-
nity for training and safely practicing basic skills.
Recognizing that emergency activities present the 
greatest threat to fi refi ghters, NFPA 1500 provides 
policies for managing such events. These policies 
indicate that an incident management system must be 
used and the incident commander is responsible for 
the overall management of that system.
Personnel accountability is also addressed in NFPA 
1500. Personnel accountability during emergency 
operations has become an important topic for the 
fi re service in recent years, and much has been done 
to enhance fi refi ghter safety through better tracking 
of personnel during emergency events. To enhance 
accountability and personnel safety, NFPA requires 
that fi refi ghters work in teams of two or more. Dur-
ing the initial phases of an event, such as a structural 
fi re, where a team of two may be required to enter the 
structure, a backup team of at least two individuals 
must be outside the structure, immediately ready to 
assist the members who are inside the hazardous area. 
This is the “two in, two out” policy. These personnel 
must be in constant contact with one another by radio 
or other means.
The emphasis on accountability and safety during 
emergency operations has led to the requirement for 
FIGURE 8-10 The incident commander is responsible for 
managing the overall incident and for the safety of the 
members at the scene.
The concept of risk management shall be utilized on the 
basis of the following principles:
■ Activities that present a signifi cant risk to the safety of 
fi refi ghters shall be limited to situations where there is 
a potential to save endangered lives.
■ Activities that are routinely employed to protect prop-
erty shall be recognized as inherent risks to the safety 
of fi refi ghters, and actions shall be taken to reduce or 
avoid these risks.
■ No risk to the safety of fi refi ghters shall be acceptable 
when there is no possibility of saving lives or property.
Risk a lot to save a lot; risk a little to save a little; but 
risk nothing to save nothing.
RISK MANAGEMENT

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  221
rapid intervention teams (RIT). NFPA 1500 indi-
cates that at least one team, consisting of at least two 
individuals, shall be kept immediately available for 
purposes of rescuing fi refi ghters if the need arises.
While accounting for and ensuring the safety of 
fi refi ghters during emergency operations are vital for 
the safety of our personnel, caring for fi refi ghters also 
includes rotating crews out of action, offering them 
food and liquids, rendering medical examinations and 
care, and furnishing shelter from extreme weather con-
ditions (see Figure 8-11). The U.S. Fire Administra-
tion (USFA), working with the International Associa-
tion of Fire Fighters (IAFF) issued in 2008 an updated 
version of Emergency Incident Rehabilitation. The 
revised manual examines critical topics related to 
emergency incident rehabilitation, including opera-
tional issues, human physiology, weather issues, and 
technology and addresses ways to better protect fi re-
fi ghters and other emergency responders through the 
use of PPE and improved tactical procedures.
Emergency responder rehabilitation is designed 
to ensure that the physical and mental well-being 
of members operating at the scene of an emergency 
do not deteriorate to the point where it affects their 
safety. It can prevent serious and life-threatening 
conditions—such as heat stroke and heart attacks—
from occurring. Fireground rehab is the term often 
used for the care given to the fi refi ghters and other 
responders while performing their duties at an emer-
gency scene. Fireground rehab includes monitoring 
vital signs, rehydration, nourishment, and rest for 
responders between assignments.
Rapid Intervention Teams6
■ Fire departments shall provide personnel for the 
rescue of members operating at emergency inci-
dents. Such personnel will be designated the rapid 
intervention team.
■ A rapid intervention crew/company shall consist of 
at least two members and shall be available for res-
cue of a member or a crew. When an incident esca-
lates beyond an initial full alarm assignment or 
when signifi cant risk is present to fi refi ghters due 
to the magnitude of the incident, the incident com-
mander shall upgrade the initial rapid intervention 
team to a full rapid intervention team that consists 
of four fully equipped and trained fi refi ghters.
■ A rapid intervention team shall be fully equipped 
with the appropriate protective clothing, protec-
tive equipment, SCBA, and any specialized rescue 
equipment that could be needed given the specifi cs 
of the operation under way.
■ The composition and structure of a rapid interven-
tion team shall be permitted to be fl exible based on 
the type of incident and the size and complexity of 
operations.
■ The incident commander shall evaluate the situa-
tion and the risks to operating crews and shall pro-
vide one or more rapid intervention team commen-
surate with the needs of the situation.
■ In the early stages of an incident, which includes 
the deployment of a fi re department’s initial attack 
assignment, the rapid intervention team shall be in 
compliance with one of the following:
1. On-scene members designated and dedicated as 
rapid intervention crew/company
2. On-scene members performing other functions 
but ready to re-deploy to perform rapid interven-
tion crew/company functions
■ The assignment of any personnel shall not be per-
mitted as members of the rapid intervention team 
if abandoning their critical task(s) to perform res-
cue clearly jeopardizes the safety and health of any 
member operating at the incident.
■ As the incident expands in size or complexity, 
which includes an incident commander’s requests 
for additional resources beyond a fi re department’s 
initial attack assignment, the dedicated rapid inter-
vention team shall on arrival of these additional 
resources be either one of the following:
1. On-scene members designated and dedicated as 
rapid intervention team
2. On-scene personnel located for rapid deploy-
ment and dedicated as rapid intervention teams
NOTE
The requirements for two in, two out and for rapid 
intervention teams enhance firefighter safety by dedi-
cating some of the on-scene resources for the rescue 
of firefighters who may need assistance.
FIGURE 8-11 Fire departments should develop a sys-
tematic approach for providing rehabilitation for person-
nel at the scene. 
(Photo courtesy of the Fairfax County Fire and 
Rescue Department.)

222  CHAPTER 8
■ During fi refi ghter rescue operations, each team 
shall remain intact.
■ At least one dedicated rapid intervention team shall 
be standing by with equipment to provide for the 
rescue of members that are performing special 
operations or for members that are in positions that 
present an immediate danger of injury in the event 
of equipment failure or collapse.
Rapid Intervention Is NOT Rapid
The Phoenix Fire Department has a sobering mes-
sage for fi refi ghters operating in large buildings: “If 
you extend an attack line 150 feet, get 40 feet off the 
line, and run out of air, it will take 22 minutes to fi nd 
and remove you from the structure.”
This statement is based on 200 rapid-intervention 
drills conducted by the department following the loss 
of a fi refi ghter in a fi re in a supermarket. Clearly, the 
message is this: Do not let go of the hoseline. Several 
other messages came out of the experience:
■ It takes 12 fi refi ghters to rescue one.
■ One in fi ve rescuers will get in trouble themselves.
■ A 3000-psi SCBA bottle lasts 18 minutes.
The study also looks at the roles of company and 
command offi cers at the fi reground. A company offi -
cer’s core competency is to command a fi re company. 
A chief offi cer’s core competency is to command fi re 
companies. Assigning company offi cers as sector 
offi cers places them in a situation where they have to 
wear two hats: company offi cer and command offi cer. 
That is too much to expect of anyone.
Phoenix suggests that it would be more effective to 
send more command offi cers to a fi re event to func-
tion as sector and division offi cers and to allow the 
company offi cers to command their companies, not-
ing that it is a waste of resources to allow command 
offi cers to sit in their offi ces while a low-frequency, 
high-risk event, such as a fi re in a commercial occu-
pancy, is occurring in the city. As a result of this 
experience, Phoenix changed the way it operates its 
rapid-intervention teams by assigning more suppres-
sion companies to rapid intervention and by assigning 
more offi cers to the command process.
Who Is Leading When the 
Leader Is Working?
Helping your teammates and getting involved in the 
work are admirable qualities, but we have seen several 
instances when this activity leads to tragic outcomes.
U.S. Fire Administration data suggest that the most 
dangerous activity at the fi reground is advancing 
 hoselines. During interior fi re attack, we expect you, as 
the company offi cer, to be close to the action. However, 
when you take the fi refi ghter’s place on the hoseline, we 
have to wonder who is supervising. Our guess is that 
nobody is supervising. In fact, that may be why this 
activity is so dangerous. Firefi ghters may need assis-
tance at times, but your job is to supervise. As such, you 
are responsible for an ongoing size-up of the situation in 
your immediate area, for keeping an open link of com-
munications back to the incident commander, and for 
scene safety. You cannot delegate these tasks.
When you get involved in the actual task at hand, 
you lose your ability to perform the other activities 
listed here. The activity that concerns us most is scene 
safety. You should be watching the progress of your 
teammates, watching for signs of building collapse and 
other structural problems, and watching for signs of 
rapidly changing fi re conditions. You cannot do these 
tasks when you are down next to the nozzle, focusing 
your attention and energy on advancing the line.
The second situation where you might get involved 
and compromise the safety of your team is when you 
slide into the driver’s seat of a fi re apparatus. NFPA 
1500 identifi es clear and specifi c duties for the driver 
and for you with regard to safety. We would expect 
you to help by watching for traffi c on your side and by 
locating street names. You also act as a safety valve 
by keeping the driver’s actions in check.
Many accidents involving fi re apparatus are the 
result of excessive speed. The speed may have been 
excessive for the road conditions (wet pavement, dark-
ness, and traffi c) or excessive for the nature of the call. 
Not all calls require a maximum effort. However, driv-
ers (especially younger ones) frequently get caught up 
in that inevitable adrenaline rush that accompanies 
any response. Their zeal has to be tempered with your 
good judgment as a more mature offi cer.
But what happens when you move to the driver’s 
seat? The safety responsibilities of the driver and the 
offi cer have now been placed on one individual, with 
no system of checks and balances. Few fi refi ghters 
will know what constitutes a dangerous condition. Few 
will have the courage to tell you, their boss, “Slow 
down, you’re going too fast!”
The message: Do not get so involved with the tasks 
at hand that you compromise the safety of all those 
around you.
Chapter 9. Facility Safety
Chapter 9 of NFPA 1500 requires that all fi re depart-
ment facilities must meet all applicable health, safety, 
building, and fi re code requirements and that all 
 facilities shall be inspected at least once a year to 
determine their compliance.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  223
When you look at the injury statistics, you will notice 
that “other on-duty” is the second largest category after 
“fi reground” as the place where fi refi ghters are injured. 
Even in the busiest companies, fi refi ghters spend most 
of their on-duty time at the fi re station (see Figure 8-12
and Figure 8-13). This area should be an easy target 
for improving occupational safety and health.
Most fi re stations are reasonably safe and healthful. 
In many cities, however, older fi re stations have suf-
fered from years of neglect. Equipment does not work 
properly, fl oors and steps are smooth from years of 
wear, and many stations still have the traditional brass 
pole. Stations should be designed and maintained so 
that tripping hazards, areas that are poorly lit, and prob-
lems resulting from poor ventilation are eliminated.
Since fi refi ghters live in this environment, they tend 
to become tolerant and take many of these hazards for 
granted. Firefi ghters spend a lot of time in the station, 
and it is their home, if you will, while working. The 
combination of increased exposure and decreased vigi-
lance provides an environment in which accidents are 
likely to occur. Although everyone has a responsibil-
ity for helping keep the fi re station safe, you, as the 
company offi cer, are clearly the person who will have 
the greatest impact. If you tolerate a sloppy and unsafe 
environment, few others will take the initiative to cor-
rect the problems. On the other hand, if you set a good 
positive example and take an active interest in keeping 
FIGURE 8-12 Interior views of two spaces of the station. (A) A typical bedroom. (B) The decontamination area of the 
 apparatus bay. All dirty equipment is cleaned here before being returned to service or storage. ( Photographs courtesy of 
Stewart-Cooper-Newell Architects)
(A)
(B)
NFPA 1500 indicates that a minimum of four individu-
als is required to start interior operations in a hazardous 
environment, which means that fi rst-arriving units must 
assemble at least four members at the scene before 
entering a hazardous area. Although this policy may ap-
pear to limit the practices of some fi re departments, it 
provides a signifi cantly safer working environment for all 
members at all situations. The policy was established 
after careful consideration and considerable debate. In 
the fi nal analysis, the purpose is to enhance fi refi ghter 
safety.
A hazardous environment is defi ned here as an area 
where there is immediate danger to life and health (IDLH). 
It includes areas inside of a structure where SCBA is re-
quired for protection from smoke, the products of com-
bustion, particulate matter given off by any materials, and 
oxygen-defi cient atmospheres.
IMPROVING SAFETY 
FOR OUR FIREFIGHTERS
SAFETY
After the fireground, other on-duty injuries rank sec-
ond. Because personnel spend a significant part of 
their duty time in the station, the station environment is 
an opportunity for improving firefighter safety.

224  CHAPTER 8
FIGURE 8-13 A modern fire station showcasing many safety features. The photograph (A) was taken from a position 
that corresponds to the lower right-hand corner of the drawing (B). This arrangement provides safety for the public and 
 firefighters by controlling access and traffic flows. (Photo and drawing courtesy of Stewart-Cooper-Newell Architects)
(A)
(B)
DAY ROOM
TRAINING/
COMMUNITY
ROOM
OFFICER ADVICE
If you set a good positive example and take an active 
interest in keeping the fires station safe, as well as pre-
sentable, others will be more likely to join in the effort.
the fi re station safe, as well as presentable, others will 
be more likely to join in the effort.
As company offi cers, you should tour the station 
every day and inspect it once a month. Look for unsafe 
acts as well as unsafe conditions. Unsafe acts should 
be corrected immediately in a constructive manner, 
and many unsafe conditions can be fi xed right away. 
Other problems may take longer.
The fi re department should also have a program of 
regular station visits conducted by the fi re chief or other 

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  225
SAFETY
Company officers, as part of their supervisory duties, 
should be taking an active role in the station’s safety 
management activities to be sure that such accidents 
are eliminated.
During a rainstorm, personnel entering the station tracked 
the fl oor with their wet shoes because someone had 
 removed the door mat in order to sweep it. After sev-
eral hours of this, a member, ironically returning from a 
doctor’s appointment, entered, slipped, fell, and was 
 seriously injured.
In another station, the lighting in the apparatus area 
was either on or off. Turning all the lights on at night 
blinded those coming from the darkened quarters and 
left drivers momentarily blind as they entered traffi c. 
Leaving the lights off presented dangers to fi refi ghters 
moving rapidly to their apparatus.
Both cases had easy solutions, but in each case, 
someone had to take the initiative. In the fi rst case, the 
problem could be easily fi xed. In the second, several 
additional light fi xtures may be needed and that may 
 require some help. In both cases, someone, likely you—
the company offi cer—should take the initiative. Once the 
idea catches on, others will offer ideas and take action to 
make the station a safer workplace.
TWO OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE 
COMPANY OFFICER
Chapter 8 of NFPA 1500 requires that all fi re department 
facilities comply with all legally applicable health, safety, 
building, and fi re code requirements, to wit:
■ All fi re department facilities shall be designated smoke 
free.
■ Fire departments shall provide facilities for disinfect-
ing, cleaning, and storage in accordance with NFPA 
1581, Standard on Fire Department Infection Control 
Program.
■ All existing and new fi re stations shall be provided 
with smoke detectors in work, sleeping, and general 
storage areas. When activated, these detectors shall 
sound an alarm throughout the fi re station.
■ All existing and new fi re department facilities shall have 
carbon monoxide detectors installed in sleeping and 
living areas.
■ All fi re stations and fi re department facilities shall com-
ply with NFPA 101, Life Safety Code®.
■ The fi re department shall prevent exposure to fi refi ght-
ers and contamination of living and sleeping areas 
from exhaust emissions.
The operation of a fi re department requires the stor-
age of, and indoor operation of, fi re apparatus that are 
PROVIDING A HEALTHY WORKPLACE
senior offi cers. The department’s health and safety offi -
cer should also be involved, helping locate and docu-
ment problems, and helping fi nd solutions to correct 
them (see Figure 8-14). The safety offi cer is the depart-
ment’s expert on station safety. Problems that are noted 
at one station are often present at others. Conducting 
these safety inspections becomes far more effi cient and 
effective as you become experienced in doing so.
Ideally fi re departments should provide appropri-
ate training to enhance station safety. However, we all 
know time and money are usually in short supply. So fi re 
departments and you, as company offi cers, should work 
together to obtain, maintain, and provide practical pro-
cedures regarding the safe use of all equipment, includ-
ing the physical fi tness equipment in the station. You 
and your department should also provide positive moti-
vation to the fi refi ghters concerning fi re station safety 
by recognizing the safest companies and stations.
generally housed in an enclosed building. The need to 
keep the apparatus and other vehicles ready for im-
mediate service and in good operating condition 
requires running vehicles indoors for response and rou-
tine service/pump checks. This makes storage in an en-
closed area, such as an apparatus bay, necessary. The 
exhaust from all internal combustion engines, including 
diesel/gasoline-powered engines, contains over 100 in-
dividual hazardous chemical components that, when 
combined, can result in as many as 10,000 chemical 
compounds.
A large majority of these compounds are today listed 
by state and federal regulatory agencies as being can-
cer causing or suspected carcinogens. Over the past 
decade, it has been documented that fi re department 
personnel exposed to vehicle exhaust emissions have 
had adverse health effects, including death, even in 
 areas where only short-term exposure had taken place. 
Secondary effects of vehicle exhaust have been cited 
in the storage of sterilized medical equipment. The 
 equipment is contaminated by exhaust emissions and 
handled by emergency services personnel while  treating 
the public, thus creating a path for cross-contamination 
to the general public. In addition, there has been an ef-
fect on contamination to computers and emergency 
service electronics due to carbon deposits that lead 
to malfunction.

226  CHAPTER 8
Firefi ghters injured at fi re stations are just as hurt 
as those who were injured at the fi reground. These 
injuries result in the same lost time and medical costs 
as the injuries that occur during operational activities. 
Fire station injuries are often embarrassing and are 
almost always avoidable. You, as part of your man-
agement duties, should take an active role in improv-
ing the safety conditions in the station to be sure that 
such accidents are eliminated.
Chapter 10. Medical and 
Physical Requirements
Chapter 10 of NFPA 1500 requires that all members 
shall be given a physical examination before they start 
their recruit training and periodically thereafter; that 
departments shall establish and support programs that 
enable members to develop and maintain appropriate 
levels of physical fi tness needed for the job; and that 
they shall establish physical performance standards 
for candidates and members who engage in emer-
gency operations.
Reducing the Risk of Heart Attack
Approximately 40 to 50 percent of all on-duty fi re-
fi ghter fatalities are the result of heart attack. To reduce 
this toll, the USFA recommends the following:7
■ Having an annual physical examination. Although 
especially important to older (40 or older) fi refi ght-
ers, all fi refi ghters will benefi t from having an 
annual physical. The physical exam should include 
checking for high cholesterol and cancer.
■ Modifying eating habits. All fi refi ghters should 
take steps to reduce fat intake and foods high in 
sodium and salt.
■ Considering supplements. Although there is no clear 
consensus on the benefi ts of dietary supplements, a 
FIGURE 8-14 Fire station 
inspection form.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  227
great deal of medical attention is given to the pos-
itive benefi ts of vitamin E, aspirin, multivitamins, 
and fi sh oil.
■ Taking a walk. Good exercise is as important as what 
you eat. Walk or run every day and maintain muscu-
lar conditioning by regular workouts in the gym.
■ Avoiding the use of tobacco products. For those who 
do use tobacco products, the greatest step you can take 
to enhance your present and future health is to stop.
Firefi ghting and many of the other tasks that fi re-
fi ghters perform are physically demanding. These 
activities require both good physical condition and 
strength. In many ways, the work is similar to that 
performed by professional athletes. Good professional 
athletes work out all year to maintain their excellent 
physical condition. They also have the advantage of 
having an opportunity to warm up before their work-
outs and games. Here we see a major distinction 
between the athlete and the fi refi ghter: Firefi ghters are 
frequently called upon to perform at their best at the 
very start of an event, with no opportunity for men-
tal or physical warm-up. No wonder strain and sprain 
injuries represent 49 percent of all injuries and heart 
attacks and strokes represent nearly 42 percent of all 
deaths in the fi re service when fi refi ghters do not have 
an opportunity to warm up (see Figure 8-15).
Having an opportunity to warm up would be ben-
efi cial, but other things can be done to reduce the 
risks fi refi ghters face. All kinds of fi tness programs 
are available, and although some are better than oth-
ers, any program is likely to be better than none. Good 
physical condition does not eliminate the risk of injury, 
but it certainly reduces it, and good personal fi tness 
FIGURE 8-15 Good physical conditioning is a part of 
good health.
other areas that will have a positive impact on volunteer 
fi refi ghters.
“With heart attack, overexertion, and strain causing 
more fi refi ghter deaths and injuries than any other cause, it 
is critically important for departments and personnel to fo-
cus on health and wellness,” said NVFC Chairman Philip C. 
Stittleburg. The Health and Wellness Guide demonstrates 
ways to overcome these obstacles and provides direction 
for developing and implementing a department program.
This project also provides information on how volun-
teer fi re departments can enhance compliance with ap-
propriate National Fire Protection Association fi refi ghter 
health and safety standards such as NFPA 1583, Health 
Related Fitness Programs for Firefi ghters.
This project complements existing USFA fi refi ghter 
wellness and fi tness partnerships with the IAFC and the 
IAFF to support the expansion of the IAFF and IAFC Fire 
Service Joint Labor-Management Wellness Fitness Initia-
tive to additional fi re departments.
Heart attacks are the leading cause of fatalities among 
both paid and volunteer fi refi ghters. The USFA and the 
National Volunteer Fire Council (NVFC) are continuing to 
work together to support a Volunteer Fire Service Fitness 
and Wellness Project—a partnership initiative to reduce 
loss of life among volunteer fi refi ghters from heart attach 
and stress.
The USFA, working with the NVFC, issued in February 
2009 a revised Health and Wellness Guide for the Volun-
teer Fire and Emergency Services. The Health and Well-
ness Guide now provides updated information on health 
and wellness issues, trends, and programs focused on 
the needs of the volunteer fi re service. The document 
addresses fi tness including aerobic exercise, fl exibil-
ity, strength training, and diet; smoking cessation; and 
WORKING TOGETHER TO IMPROVE 
FIREFIGHTER SAFETY
 usually reduces the recovery time when injuries do 
occur (see Figure 8-15). Good body strength and fl ex-
ibility reduce the likelihood for most of the types of 
accidents that lead to strain and sprain injuries. Good 

228  CHAPTER 8
aerobic conditioning, along with body strength, reduces 
the effort required for any task.
NFPA 1500 indicates that all fi re departments shall 
have a fi tness program “to enable members to develop 
and maintain an appropriate level of fi tness to safely per-
form their assigned functions, and . . . shall require the 
structured participation of all members in the physical 
fi tness program.” Notice that the emphasis is on safety—
“to enable members . . . to safely perform their assigned 
functions.” This suggests a program that benefi ts the 
member. Many departments are showing the benefi ts 
of fi tness to recruits when they join the department and 
are providing opportunities for them to develop to peak 
fi tness and maintain that fi tness until they retire.
Fitness testing should offer events that represent the 
tasks that fi refi ghters are expected to perform on the 
job. Tests that combine such tasks as lifting objects, 
carrying something that represents an unconscious 
adult victim, dragging a hose, and simulating the 
motions of cutting a roof with an axe, are all fair and 
legal (see Figure 8-16). Every fi re department should 
have this type of testing in place for all hands.
Along with a good fi tness program, good nutri-
tion can have a profound impact on how you feel and 
how well you perform. The fi refi ghter’s lifestyle has 
changed from one of sitting around drinking coffee 
and smoking cigarettes to a routine that allows lit-
tle time for either. Many fi refi ghters are also turn-
ing away from the traditional heavy meals that added 
inches around their waists (see Figure 8-17).
Company training programs should include infor-
mation and activities to improve the fi refi ghters’ 
health and safety through exercise and proper diet. As 
a company offi cer, you can do a lot to improve your 
fi refi ghters’ health just by setting a positive personal 
example for your teammates to follow.
FIGURE 8-16 Participating in a firefighter combat 
challenge can be one way of keeping fit.
OFFICER ADVICE
As a company officer, you can have a significant impact 
on the health and safety of your personnel by just set-
ting a positive example for them to follow.
Chapter 11. Member Assistance 
and Wellness Programs
Chapter 11 states that departments shall provide pro-
grams to help members and their families deal with 
problems associated with substance abuse, stress, and 
personal problems that might affect a member’s on-
the-job performance. Members should have access to 
member-assistance programs that provide the train-
ing and counseling needed to deal with the physical 
and mental problems associated with the job.
Chapter 12. Critical Incident 
Stress Program
Chapter 12 of NFPA 1500 deals with critical incident 
stress (CIS), stating that departments shall have a pro-
gram for dealing with CIS.
We are seeing more and more about this topic in the 
trade journals. Only recently has the fi re service rec-
ognized that mental condition, as well as physical con-
dition, is a part of the fi refi ghter’s overall well-being. 
Many fi refi ghters, especially those providing EMS care, 
tend to burn out from the routine aspects of the job. This 
gradual burnout is just as real and just as debilitating as 
the stress that comes from “the big one.”
We usually recognize the stress that comes from 
large-scale events—the event that results in prolonged 
operations and multiple loss of life. For example, air-
plane crashes are probably near the top of the list, but 
everyday exposure to lesser stressors can have the same 
long-term impact. More typical situations may include 
fatalities of all kinds, but especially those involving 
children or fi re department members, prolonged unsuc-
cessful rescue efforts, and others. What are you and 
your fi re department doing to protect members from 
the effects of these events and to enhance the psycho-
logical or physical well-being of your members?

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  229
Critical incident stress cannot be avoided, but its 
effects can be lessened by having a support system in 
place. Once again, you, as the company offi cer, have a 
pivotal role in helping fi refi ghters cope with stress. As 
FIGURE 8-17 Good nutrition 
will improve the way you feel, 
the way you look to  others, and 
the way you perform.
NOTE
Critical incident stress cannot be avoided, but its effects 
can be lessened by having a support system in place.
take quick action to provide peer support for endan-
gered fi refi ghters.
 4. Debriefi ng. As used here, a debriefi ng is frequently 
conducted after an incident where there is poten-
tial for a stressful impact on the members. The 
debriefi ng team may consist of fellow fi refi ght-
ers, trained mental health professionals, or others 
qualifi ed in dealing with such situations. All mem-
bers exposed to the stressful situation should go 
through this process.
 5. Counseling. Counseling involves a mental health 
professional. Counseling may be needed for an 
 especially stressful event or for the compounded 
 effects of a series of events.
As a supervisor, you should know that a fi re-
fi ghter who is having problems at home is less likely 
to be immune to stress in the workplace. Since you 
are responsible for the members’ overall perfor-
mance, health, and safety, you should be interested 
in helping members resolve their problems, regard-
less of the source.
 1. Training. Fire departments have an obligation to 
prepare their personnel for what they will likely en-
counter. This does not need to be a course in the 
macabre, but rather a realistic presentation of what 
fi refi ghters will see.
 2. Scene management. At the scene of emergencies, 
you, as company offi cers, can reduce the impact of 
gruesome scenes by telling fi refi ghters what they can 
expect to see, covering bodies, controlling entry, and 
otherwise reducing the unexpected and unwelcome 
sight of human carnage.
 3. Peer support. Peer support comes from other mem-
bers of the department. Following a critical incident, 
and sometimes even after several minor events, fi re-
fi ghters might be getting “near the edge.” This is a 
critical point, one that can turn either way. As the 
company offi cer, you should recognize the signs and 
FIVE GENERALLY ACCEPTED TOOLS 
FOR DEALING WITH CIS
take quick action to provide peer support for endan-
gered fi refi ghters.
4. Debriefi ng. As used here, a debriefi ng is frequently 
conducted after an incident where there is poten-
tial for a stressful impact on the members. The 
debriefi ng team may consist of fellow fi refi ght-
ers, trained mental health professionals, or others 
qualifi ed in dealing with such situations. All mem-
bers exposed to the stressful situation should go 
through this process.
5. Counseling. Counseling involves a mental health 
professional. Counseling may be needed for an 
especially stressful event or for the compounded 
effects of a series of events.
As a supervisor, you should know that a fi re-
fi ghter who is having problems at home is less likely 
to be immune to stress in the workplace. Since you 
are responsible for the members’ overall perfor-
mance, health, and safety, you should be interested 
in helping members resolve their problems, regard-
less of the source.
1. Training. Fire departments have an obligation to
prepare their personnel for what they will likely en-
counter. This does not need to be a course in the 
macabre, but rather a realistic presentation of what 
fi refi ghters will see.
2. Scene management. At the scene of emergencies,
you, as company offi cers, can reduce the impact of 
gruesome scenes by telling fi refi ghters what they can 
expect to see, covering bodies, controlling entry, and 
otherwise reducing the unexpected and unwelcome 
sight of human carnage.
 3. Peer support. Peer support comes from other mem-
bers of the department. Following a critical incident, 
and sometimes even after several minor events, fi re-
fi ghters might be getting “near the edge.” This is a 
critical point, one that can turn either way. As the 
company offi cer, you should recognize the signs and 
FIVE GENERALLY ACCEPTED TOOLS
FOR DEALING WITH CIS

230  CHAPTER 8
supervisors, you must know and understand the men-
tal makeup of your fi refi ghters. You must be sensitive 
to the fi refi ghters’ needs and supportive of programs 
that will help the fi refi ghters avoid or overcome men-
tal stress. Discussion about the event and the emotions 
that follow and assurance that these feelings are nor-
mal help reduce more severe and long-term stress.
Company Officers Play a Key Role 
in the Physical and Mental Health 
of Their Teammates
Fire departments should have a written policy that estab-
lishes a program designed to relieve the stress generated 
by an incident that could adversely affect the psycholog-
ical and physical well-being of fi re department mem-
bers. Firefi ghters frequently experience trauma, death, 
and sorrow. Critical incident stress is a normal reac-
tion experienced by normal people following an event 
that is abnormal. Such stress should not be perceived 
as  evidence of weakness, mental instability, or other 
abnormality. The emotional trauma can be serious. 
Symptoms can appear immediately after the incident, 
hours later, or sometimes even days or weeks later. The 
symptoms can last for a few days, weeks, or months so 
that the person can no longer function effectively. Occa-
sionally, a professional counselor could be needed.
Critical incident stress is the inevitable result of 
trauma experienced by fi re service personnel. It can-
not be prevented, but it can be relieved. Knowing the 
signs and symptoms and how to respond to them after 
the occurrence of a critical incident can greatly reduce 
the chance of more severe and long-term stress. Rapid 
intervention, talking about the situation, and reassuring 
that these are normal reactions and feelings can help 
prevent more serious problems later on, such as family 
and marital problems.
To provide this intervention, the fi re department 
should have access to a critical incident debriefi ng 
(CID) team. The main objective of the CID team is to 
lessen the impact of the critical incident, put it into the 
proper perspective, and help maintain a healthy out-
look. The CID team should consist of other fi refi ght-
ers, support personnel, and mental health professionals 
specifi cally trained in stress-related counseling. The 
team should be well represented by all types of mem-
bers whether volunteer, call, or paid, and by all ranks.
All members should have a minimum of a two-day 
training seminar with continuing education in stress-
related training as an ongoing part of the team’s regu-
lar meetings. (Monthly meetings are recommended 
for active departments, whereas quarterly meetings 
could be suffi cient for less active departments.) All 
personnel should be able to initiate the debriefi ng pro-
cedure by contacting their supervisor or offi cer or the 
dispatch center. A contact list of the debriefi ng team 
members should be available in the dispatch center.
Debriefi ngs should be held for incidents that have 
the potential for having a stressful impact on members. 
It is important to remember that an event is traumatic 
when experienced as such. Generally, debriefi ngs should 
be held at a station within 1 to 3 hours after the inci-
dent. Debriefi ngs should encourage brief discussions of 
the event, which in themselves help to alleviate a good 
deal of the stress. Debriefi ngs are strictly confi dential 
and are not a critique of the incident. Information should 
be given on stress reactions and steps that members can 
take to relieve the symptoms so that they can continue 
their normal activities as soon as the debriefi ng is over.
Phoenix Fire Chief Alan Brunacini was writing about fi re-
ground management and fi refi ghter safety 25 years ago. 
His words are still true today.
 1. Think.
 2. Drive defensively.
 3. Drive slower, rather than faster.
 4. If you don’t see, stop.
 5. Don’t run for a moving rig.
 6. Always wear your seat belt.
 7. Wear full turnouts and SCBA.
 8. Attack with a sensible level of aggression.
 9. Always work under sector command; no freelancing.
10. Don’t ever breathe smoke.
CHIEF ALAN BRUNACINI’S TWENTY-
FIVE SAFETY TRUTHS
11. Keep your crew intact.
12. Maintain a communications link to command.
13. Evaluate the hazard—know the risk you’re taking.
14. Follow standard fi reground procedures; know and 
be a part of the plan.
15. Vent early and vent often.
16. Use a hoseline that’s big enough and long enough.
17. Don’t ever go beyond your air supply.
18. Always have an escape route (hoseline or airline).
19. Provide lights in the work areas.
20. If it’s heavy, get help.
21. Always watch your fi reground position.
22. Look and listen for signs of collapse.
23. Rehab fatigued companies—assist stressed com-
panies.
24. Pay attention all the time.
25. Everybody looks out for everybody.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  231
■ Fitness programs should be established.
■ Participate in the National Fire Fighter Near-Miss 
Reporting System.
Training and Research
■ Create a national data collection center.
■ Firefi ghter death and injuries should be discussed 
on the company level.
■ Everyone should be held accountable for their actions, 
and the chief offi cers must lead by example.
Vehicles
■ Make safety a core value by supporting LACK 
(Leadership, Accountability, Communication, and 
Knowledge).
■ Require initial and refresher training for drivers.
■ Champion the use of seatbelts.
Some common signs and symptoms of critical inci-
dent stress are fatigue, headaches, inability to con-
centrate, anxiety, depression, inappropriate emotional 
behavior, intense anger, irritability, withdrawal from the 
crew and/or family, change in appetite, increased alco-
hol consumption, and a change in sleeping patterns. To 
help alleviate some of the emotional pain, members can 
rest more; contact friends; maintain as normal a sched-
ule as possible; eat well-balanced, schedu. led meals; 
keep a reasonable level of activity to fi ght boredom; 
express feelings; and talk to loved ones. Recent studies 
and research also indicate that exercise, especially soon 
after an event, can greatly reduce mental pain. Mem-
ber assistance programs should always be available to 
members. The CID team is often the fi rst step in pro-
viding the help that is needed and should be ready to 
serve to help minimize stress-related injury.8
Safety Will Always 
Be a Top Priority
The chapter on safety continues to be written. The 
second National Line-of-Duty Death Prevention Sum-
mit, held in 2007, reinforced the following topics:
Health and Wellness
■ Every fi re department should implement a 
no-tobacco use policy.
■ Obtain vital signs on all crew members at the 
beginning of the shift.
■ Every fi re department should have a medical 
screening/fi tness program in place.
■ Firefi ghters’ mental health should be monitored 
and counseling should be available.
Prevention
■ Fire prevention should be included in fi re depart-
ment mission statement.
■ Every fi refi ghter should have training in public 
education and fi re prevention.
■ Personnel responsible for code enforcement should 
possess proper credentials.
Structural
■ Stop rewarding unsafe behavior regardless of the 
outcome.
■ Defi ne responsibilities of every position.
■ Teach fi refi ghters the legal ramifi cations of engag-
ing in unsafe practices.
Wildland
■ Make sure all fi re service personnel are familiar 
with all of the safety programs.
 1. Know the job. Company offi cers should constantly 
be working on improving their knowledge and skills.
 2. Be observant of the actions of others.
 3. Be a team player. Build team spirit and interdepen-
dence among all of the players.
 4. Set a good personal example. Don’t just talk the talk; 
walk the walk, too.
 5. Be obviously concerned about safety at all times.
 6. Provide constructive feedback to fi refi ghters.
 7. Communicate effectively in all your dealings, but 
 especially in the area of safety.
 8. Be assertive when necessary! Sometimes, it is the 
only way you can get compliance.
 9. This is not a time to be timid about your feelings.
10. When all else fails, feel free to take appropriate disci-
plinary action.
11. Be truly positive about safety and health issues.
ELEVEN SUGGESTIONS TO HELP 
COMPANY OFFICERS IMPROVE 
THEIR FIREFIGHTERS’ SAFETY
■ It takes 1 minute to write a safety rule.
■ It takes 1 hour to hold a safety meeting.
■ It takes 1 week to plan a safety program.
■ It takes 1 month to put the plan into full operation.
■ It takes 1 year to win the chief’s safety award.
■ It takes just 1 second to destroy it all with an accident!
Let us be careful out there!
SOMETHING TO REMEMBER

232  CHAPTER 8
In this day and age, fi refi ghters are being provided with 
the most advanced tools and safety equipment that 
have ever been provided to the fi re service, but we con-
tinue to lose more than 100 fi refi ghters in the line of duty 
each year. More disturbing is the fact that we are re-
sponding to fewer and fewer actual working incidents 
each year, yet still losing the same amount of fi refi ghters 
in line-of-duty deaths.
The fi res faced by today’s fi re service are much differ-
ent than 40 to 50 years ago. Fuel loads have increased 
and changed signifi cantly affecting the fl uctuation of the 
time-temperature curve as it relates to fl ashover. I re-
member learning in the fi re academy nearly 20 years 
ago that fl ashover would normally take place within 12 
to 16 minutes. Time frames to reach fl ashover conditions 
in today’s environment have been demonstrated to take 
place in as little as 3 to 3½ minutes. Things once fabri-
cated out of natural materials are now made of plastic. It 
has been demonstrated that 1 pound. of wood releases 
8,000 BTUs when ignited; a small plastic shopping bag 
weighing much less than ½ of an ounce, however, has 
been shown to release as much as 19,900 BTUs.
Another tremendous challenge that faces the fi re ser-
vice is that of experience. Each day, the fi re service is 
losing more and more members to retirement who have 
served in a busier era of the fi re service. Rapid promotion 
is also becoming part of the overall challenge. As we lose 
the experienced members, we are being left with a gener-
ation of fi refi ghters that may be the most highly educated 
generation ever, due to their access to information through 
avenues such as the Internet, but may come up short in 
other areas that are necessary to successfully lead our 
fi refi ghters. It is realistically possible, in today’s fi re service, 
that some departments may actually promote a fi refi ghter 
to the company offi cer level who has never gained prac-
tical hands-on experience at an actual fi re. These should 
not be looked upon as shortcomings but rather as chal-
lenges that we will need to overcome. Fault does not fall 
onto any particular generation—each one only has to deal 
with the economic, political, and social environments that 
infl uence the time period in which they live.
The fi re service environment requires fi re offi cers to 
make life-and-death decisions in a quick manner based 
on incomplete information. When we are exposed to 
a situation, our brain stores that experience in its own 
fi le, almost like a photographic slide within a tray. When 
 another situation is experienced, our brain will try to draw 
on another past experience or “slide” that closely resem-
bles the situation being presented. From there, a solu-
tion to the situation will be developed. Obviously, the 
more fi les or “slides” in the bank will increase the odds 
of choosing the most correct solution to the problem. If 
we do not have exposure to a similar situation, there is a 
greater chance of failure.
Succession development and mentoring programs 
need to be placed at the forefront of our fi re service. 
Tapping into the senior, experienced members before they 
retire needs to be a priority. Lessons learned over their 
career, as well as how the fi reground environment has 
changed, can be invaluable to the newer members of the 
service. In addition, we must couple this information pass-
ing with scenario-based training that is repeated on a reg-
ular basis to help reinforce the principles being conveyed 
so that our future offi cer’s “slide tray” has reliable informa-
tion to draw upon. Situational awareness and risk/benefi t 
analysis need to be understood by each and every person 
on the fi reground and they must be empowered to speak 
up when they see potential problems.
Information added to these “slide trays,” however, should 
not only focus on the positive or right ways to  perform a 
task but should predominantly focus on things that may 
have gone wrong. It is important that we  celebrate our suc-
cesses, but if you think about our experiences throughout 
our lives, the most complete learning messages are taken 
from instances where we have not gotten the response or 
action that we desired. We have tremendous resources 
available to us to help share important lessons from fi re-
fi ghter fatalities and we talk about them when the case 
reports are issued but yet we continue to lose fi refi ghters 
over and over for the same exact reasons. Just looking 
at the reports and “armchair quarterbacking” and placing 
blame is not going to lead to effective learning. We must 
take the reports and open our minds to what they are ac-
tually saying. How many times do we pick up a fi refi ghter 
fatality or near-miss report and say, “I can see how this 
happened or I can see myself or my department falling 
into the same trap? It is from analysis such as this that we 
can learn and make the necessary changes at our depart-
ment to reduce the chances of a similar event  taking place 
in our own backyard.
It is an honor for every fi refi ghter to be part of the rich 
fi re service traditions that we partake; however, losing our 
life in the line of duty is not a tradition. Our attitude and 
culture are truly what lead us to be what we are. We must 
challenge the traditions and attitudes that lead us down 
the roads to failure. Just because we have done some-
thing a particular way for a long time does not necessar-
ily mean that it is correct; it may just mean that we have 
been lucky. Look for the loopholes in your actions or your 
department’s operations—if you think that something is 
good, try to fi nd ways to break it and make it better.
LOSING FIREFIGHTER LIVES 
IS NOT OUR TRADITION
Jeff Pindelski: Battalion Chief, Downers Grove Fire 
Department, Downers Grove, Illinois; and Western 
Regional Director, Fire Department Safety Officer’s 
Association.

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  233
A
lthough individual fi refi ghters have a responsi-
bility for their own well-being, you, as company 
offi cers, also have a moral and legal responsibility for 
the safety and survivability of your fi refi ghters. If an 
accident occurs, you must explain your action, or lack 
thereof.
NFPA 1500 compressively addresses a fi re depart-
ment health and safety program. As fi re departments 
start to implement some or all of the procedures out-
lined in the standard, they will see improvements in 
the health and safety of their members. Many depart-
ments have already undertaken these steps, and the 
results are already apparent: There has been a signifi -
cant reduction in the number of injuries and deaths in 
the fi re service.
Providing a safe and healthful workplace should 
be the goal of every employer. The results of such 
an approach usually mean fewer accidents, higher 
morale, more productivity, and reduced liability 
resulting from accidents. This proactive approach can 
result in reduced risk to the members of the fi re ser-
vice as well as a reduced risk to their departments. 
Many fi re departments tend to be reactive, rather than 
LESSONS LEARNED
proactive, when it comes to fi refi ghter safety. This 
position is unfortunate for all.
Accident, injury, and line-of-duty death statistics 
reinforce the need for comprehensive safety and health 
programs that address the needs of the fi re service in 
both paid and volunteer organizations. Such programs 
must include policies regarding vehicle operations that 
address speed, the use of seat belts, the avoidance of 
alcohol, and obeying traffi c laws. All are within your 
domain as company offi cers to manage.
Regardless of the fi re department’s organizational 
attitude about safety, you, as company offi cers, can have 
a signifi cant impact on your own and your members’ 
health and safety. Many of the requirements of NFPA 
1500 can be introduced at the company level. As with 
many of the topics discussed in this book, setting the 
tone and enforcing the department’s policies regard-
ing safety is one of your many responsibilities. During 
emergency response, whether the call be a single-unit 
response for a dumpster fi re, or a three-alarm event, you 
are responsible for the safety of the entire crew. At the 
scene of an emergency as well as in the fi re station, fi re-
fi ghter safety is ultimately your responsibility.
Today’s fi re service operates and competes in a very 
volatile environment—both on and off the fi reground. 
 Being ready for these challenges related to personnel 
safety and overcoming them begins with the most inte-
gral position in the fi re service—the company offi cer. Are 
you ready for this challenge?
Questions
1. What changes have occurred since Battalion Chief 
Pindelski entered the fi re academy nearly 20 years 
ago?
2. Why are fi refi ghter fatality statistics even more alarm-
ing than before?
3. What does Battalion Chief Pindelski think about the 
value of experience? How does he advocate we use 
Today’s fi re service operates and competes in a very 
volatile environment—both on and off the fi reground. 
 Being ready for these challenges related to personnel 
safety and overcoming them begins with the most inte-
gral position in the fi re service—the company offi cer. Are 
you ready for this challenge?
Questions
1. What changes have occurred since Battalion Chief 
Pindelski entered the fi re academy nearly 20 years 
ago?
2. Why are fi refi ghter fatality statistics even more alarm-
ing than before?
3. What does Battalion Chief Pindelski think about the 
value of experience? How does he advocate we use 
the experience of others to improve new company 
offi cers?
4. Where can you fi nd experience within your own de-
partment? How can you use that experience to help 
your own personal and professional development?
5. Has the fi re service resigned itself to the fact that los-
ing fi refi ghters every year is part of our tradition? Do 
you agree with Battalion Chief Pindelski that this is not 
and cannot be considered fi re service tradition? Why 
or why not?
Battalion Chief Pindelski is a co-author of another Delmar Cengage 
Learning publication, Rapid Intervention Company Operations, a great 
resource for company offi cers to learn more about fi refi ghter emer-
gencies, how to prevent them, and how to react to them.

234  CHAPTER 8
KEY TERMS
available for the potential rescue of other emergency 
responders
rehabilitation as applies to fi refi ghting personnel, 
an opportunity to take a short break from fi refi ghting 
duties to rest, cool off, and replenish liquids
health and safety officer a person assigned as 
the manager of the department’s health and safety 
program
personnel accountability the tracking of personnel 
as to location and activity during an emergency event
rapid intervention team (RIT) a team or com-
pany of emergency personnel kept immediately 
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 7. What actions can you take as company offi cers to 
reduce injuries at the fi re station?
 8. What action can you take to reduce injuries while 
responding to emergencies?
 9. What actions can you take to reduce injuries at 
the scene of emergencies?
 10. What is your department’s commitment to fi re-
fi ghter safety and health?
 1. About how many fi refi ghter injuries and fatalities 
occur each year?
 2. Where do most fi refi ghter injuries and fatalities 
occur?
 3. List the most common causes of fi refi ghter 
fatalities.
 4. List the most common causes of fi refi ghter 
injuries.
 5. Under what conditions do these injuries occur?
 6. What are some of the conditions that bring stress 
to fi refi ghters? What are the signs and symptoms 
of stress?
 1. What can you do as company offi cers to enhance 
the safety of your personnel?
 2. What signifi cant changes have occurred in the 
fi re service within the last 10 years as a result of 
health and safety concerns?
 3. Based on your own observations, what causes 
fi refi ghters to get injured?
 4. If you were assigned duties as the incident safety 
offi cer at the scene of a working structure fi re in 
a residence, what would be your concerns? What 
would be your duties?
 5. What are some of the signs and symptoms of 
stress? What role do you have as a company 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 offi cer in providing help for teammates showing 
signs or symptoms of stress?
 6. What steps can you take to maintain a healthier 
body?
 7. What steps can you take to maintain a healthier 
mind?
 8. What steps can you take to personally maintain a 
healthier mind?
 9. What steps can be taken by your company to im-
prove fi refi ghter safety and health?
 10. What steps can be taken by your department to 
improve fi refi ghter safety and health?

The Company Officer’s Role in Personnel Safety  235
1. Frank C. Schaper and Gregg Gerner, “Why Firefi ghters Con-
tinue to Get Injured and Killed,” Firefi ghter’s News, March 
1996, 1–2.
2. Firefi ghter Fatality Retrospective Study, 1990–2000. Emmits-
burg, MD: U.S. Fire Administration, 2002, 13; and “2002 Fire-
fi ghter Injuries,” NFPA Journal (November–December 2002).
3. Firefi ghter Fatality Retrospective Study, 1990–2000. Emmits-
burg, MD: U.S. Fire Administration, 2002.
4. Firefi ghter Fatalities in the United States in 1998. Emmitsburg, 
MD: United States Fire Administration, 1999, 26.
5. Firefi ghter Fatality Retrospective Study, 1990–2000, 21.
ENDNOTES
6. Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1500, Fire Department 
Occupational Safety and Health Program, Copyright©2007, 
National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is 
not the complete and offi cial position of the NFPA on the refer-
enced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its 
entirety.
7. For more information, see Firefi ghter Fatalities in the United 
States for 2001, published by the U.S. Fire Administration. This 
report is available on the Web at www.usfa.gov.
8. This material is taken from Chapter 12 of NFPA 1500.
Alder, Mike and Mat Fratus. “The Impact of Department Culture 
on Fireground Safety.” Fire Engineering, June 2007.
Arnold, Brian. “Who Wants to Go Home?” Fire Engineering, April 
2007.
Byrne, Jarret. “Understanding Fireground LODDs.” FireRescue, 
April 2007.
Coleman, John. “The Role of the Safety Offi cer.” Fire Engineer-
ing, June 2008.
Comstock, “Safety and Liability.” Fire Engineering, June 2007.
De Lisi, Steven. “Strategies for Safer Driving.” Fire Engineering, 
February 2009.
Dittmar, Mary. “Firefi ghters and Heart Disease: Beyond the Statis-
tics.” Fire Engineering, December 2006.
Dunn, Vincent. “Does Aggressive Firefi ghting Cause Firefi ghters 
to Become Caught and Trapped?” Firehouse, July 2008.
Eisner, Harvey and Steve Kalman. “Hackensack: 20 Years Later.” 
Firehouse, October 2008.
Ellis, Jeff and Martha Ellis. “Survival of the Fittest.” FireRescue, 
April 2008.
USFA, USFA Releases Firefi ghter Fatality Report. Emmitsburg, 
MD, News Release. The statistics from USFA and NFPA may 
differ slightly due to their respective methods of gathering and 
analyzing the data.
Fahy, Rita F. U.S. Firefi ghter Deaths Related to Training, 1996-
2005. June 2006, National Fire Protection Association.
Fahy, Rita F. U.S. Firefi ghter Fatalities Due to Sudden Car-
diac Death, 1995-2004. June 2005, National Fire Protection 
Association.
Fahy, Rita F. U.S. Fire Service Fatalities in Structures. July 2002, 
National Fire Protection Association.
Firefi ghter Fatalities in the U.S. is published regularly by the USFA 
at Emmitsburg, MD. It is available at no cost by contacting them 
at usfa.dhs.gov.
Gerardi, Paul. “Fitness and Training Are Keys to Safety.” Fire En-
gineering, June 2007.
Havner, J. M. “Having a Safety Committee Is Critical.” Fire Engi-
neering, June 2008.
Karter, Michael J. Jr. and Joseph L. Molis, Firefi ghter Injuries 
in the United States, October 2006, National Fire Protection 
Association.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
McGrath, Mary. “Special Access.” Fire Chief, April 2007.
Moore, Ron. “Safe Parking” (while working on the highway). 
 Firehouse, October, 2003.
Routley, J. Gordon. “National Fallen Firefi ghters Foundation  Firefi ghter 
Life Safety “Summit Report.” Firehouse, June 2004.
Salka, John. “The Start of the Tour.” Firehouse, June 2008.
Schneider, Jason. “Is Your Firehouse Making You Sick?” Fire-
house, July 2007.
Shouldis, William. “Getting it Right: Clink it!” Fire Engineering, 
June 2006.
Stagnaro, Victor. “Firefi ghter Fatalities: The Preventable Loss.” 
Fire Engineering, June 2006.
The Health and Wellness Guide for the Volunteer Fire and Emer-
gency Services and Emergency Incident Rehabilitation are both 
available without cost. Go to.usfa.dhs.gov to order or download 
a copy
USFA. Firefi ghter Fatalities in the United States in 1998. Emmits-
burg, MD: United States Fire Administration, 1999.
Wilson, Kevin. “Use SOGs to Prepare for a Mayday.” Fire Engi-
neering, February 2009.
The following NFPA standards pertaining to fi refi ghter safety are 
available from the National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, 
MA: http://www.nfpa.org/index.asp
 
NFPA 1403. Live Fire Training Evolutions in Structures. latest ed.
 
NFPA 1451. Fire Service Vehicle Operations Training Program. 
latest ed.
 
NFPA 1500. Fire Department Health and Safety Program. lat-
est ed.
 
NFPA 1521. Fire Department Safety Offi cer. latest ed.
 
NFPA 1561. Fire Department Incident Management System. 
latest ed.
 
NFPA 1581. Fire Department Infection Control Program. 
latest ed.
The National Fire Academy has two excellent two-day hands-off 
training programs that can help any fi re department start and 
improve its safety program. These are entitled Health and Safety 
Offi cer and Incident Safety Offi cer. Contact your training offi cer 
or your state fi re training director for additional information.

The Company Officer’s 
Role in Fire Prevention
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ The U.S. Fire Problem
■ Preventing Fires through Regulation
■ Model Codes
■ Code Adoption
■ Establishing Inspection Priorities
■ Company Inspections
■ Use and Occupancy Classes
■ Preincident Plans
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
9

237
STREET 
STORY
W
e took on a job of stupendous proportions with the idea of being honest, 
factual, and frank. We have been told by members of the fire service that the 
report was just that. The team dedicated all its efforts to the nine brave firefighters 
who so tragically lost their lives in that fire. I hope that the lessons we learned do 
not fall on deaf ears. I am fearful that they may be doing just that.
Task force members delivered an in-depth presentation to an extremely large audi-
ence at Fire-Rescue International in August. The presentation, like the report, is clearly 
divided into two equally important parts: fire prevention; and strategy, tactics, and risk-
management. The first half of the presentation dealt with fire prevention. The audience 
was very polite, but facial expressions and body language showed their impatience. 
When we started the second part, about hoses, fire engines, and the like, the entire 
audience perked up and sat at the edge of their seats for 2 hours. This was a typical 
reaction at presentations we made around the country.
After the formal presentation, we opened the floor to questions. Hands flew up, 
but only two questions related to fire prevention. One of those came from a friend 
I asked to pose a question. This was despite the fact that one entire slide in the 
summary read, “The fire could have been prevented if the property had been 
constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local codes.”
One man asked, “Charleston is one of many tragic events that have resulted in 
firefighter deaths. What can we learn that could help prevent this from continuing?” 
We discussed reactive measures like risk management, accountability, and inci-
dent command. These are highly important and we must be trained and retrained 
on them. The proactive elements of preventing fire and its spread are often an af-
terthought, if that. The three Es in fire prevention—engineering, enforcement, and 
education—are as important as strategy and tactics—and they are directly related 
to saving firefighter’s lives and preventing injuries.
Code compliance issues—such as additions constructed without permits; lack 
of automatic sprinklers; inadequate fire walls; improperly stored flammable liquids, 
trash, and debris outside the loading dock (where the fire began); smoking; inad-
equate exits, nonworking fire doors; and locked or obstructed exits—were ma-
jor factors in this tragedy. The building was last inspected in 1998. The inspector 
found exit obstructions, exit sign infractions, and storage practice issues. But there 
wasn’t much follow-up. When the city began to follow the International Building 
Code, it discontinued the annual inspection program. At the same time the duty to 
perform fire inspections went from the fire department to the building department, 
with little or no communication between the two.
The fire could have been prevented if the property had been constructed and 
maintained in accordance with code. The additions would have been built to code 
or taken down. They would have either had 2-hour separations or been sprinklered. 
Flammable liquids would have been stored properly. In all likelihood, the fire would 
not have spread beyond the loading dock and, if the building had been sprinklered, 
would have been out when firefighters arrived.
In the wake of the fire, Charleston hired a fire inspection supervisor to be the 
 liaison between the building and fire departments. The city also hired a plans 
 reviewer, with extensive experience as a firefighter. Charleston is taking fire 
 prevention seriously. I hope the fire service learns a message from the Sofa  Super 
Store: Proactive emergency planning should be given top priority. This fire is a 
clear example of how fire prevention, engineering, enforcement, and education 
are  directly related to saving firefighter lives and preventing injuries. It is worth a 
 significant investment of time and budget. Do you have a building like the Sofa 
 Super Store in your community? Are you putting firefighters at risk?
—“Code Concerns” by Mike Chiaramonte, from 
Fire Chief Magazine, November 2008

238  CHAPTER 9
INTRODUCTION
Ask fi refi ghters why they were drawn to the fi re ser-
vice. You probably won’t hear “I felt a deep need to pre-
vent fi res, reduce property loss, make my city a more 
attractive place to live and do business; and to reduce 
the number of injuries and deaths.” The mission of 
America’s fi re departments has dramatically expanded 
over the last century as public demands for emergency 
response have increased. Few could have envisioned 
fi re departments performing urban search and rescue 
or swift water rescue or providing the level of emer-
gency medical care that has become common in much 
of the United States today. When faced with new pub-
lic threats, the fi re service has always risen to the occa-
sion, but it’s important not to forget our primary mis-
sion: the protection of lives and property from fi re.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 
9-1 List common causes of fire.
 
9-2 Identify a particular community need for which 
the fire department would need to be involved.
 
9-3 Identify where to find the data required for a 
report concerning trends, variances, or other 
given topic.
 
9-4 Describe the departmental information manage-
ment and/or record keeping system(s).
 
9-5 Identify fire prevention education programs.
 
9-6 Describe the benefits of accurate collecting and 
reporting incident response data.
 
9-7 Identify the service organizations or other stake-
holders within the community concerned with 
the specific need.
 
9-8 Select the appropriate policies and procedures 
in dealing with a public inquiry.
 
9-9 Identify the particular citizen’s concern as it ap-
plies to the fire department.
 9-10 Describe techniques (verbal and nonverbal) 
used to communicate with the public.
 9-11 Describe policies and procedures pertinent to 
the citizen’s concern.
 9-12 Identify the particular public inquiry as it applies 
to the fire department.
 9-13 Describe policies and procedures pertinent to 
the public inquiry.
 9-14 Identify public relations practices when dealing 
with individuals and the public.
 9-15 Describe how community demographics relate 
to the identified need.
 9-16 Describe policies and procedures pertinent to 
the identified community need.
 9-17 Describe the approach to use when requesting 
assistance from a service group or stakeholder 
within the community.
 9-18 Describe the role and mission of the department 
relative to the identified need.
 9-19 Explain the purpose of conducting a fire inspection.
 9-20 Identify the model fire prevention and building 
codes available for adoption by municipalities.
 9-21 List the steps necessary to the conduct a fire 
inspection.
 9-22 Describe the permit model.
 9-23 Explain the necessity of obtaining an inspection 
or administrative warrant prior to performing a 
fire inspection.
 9-24 Describe the inspection model.
 9-25 Describe the limits of the right of entry provisions 
contained in the model fire prevention codes.
 9-26 Categorize the data collected into types of re-
sponses (e.g., EMS, fire, rescue, etc.).
 9-27 Determine the response levels required by unit 
type to meet the needs of the response area.
 9-28 Collect incident data history for the response 
area to be included in a report.
 9-29 List the building occupancy classifications that 
are found in the current model building code.
 9-30 Describe the characteristics of each occupancy 
classification found in current model building 
codes.
 9-31 Identify the records-retention policies applicable 
to the organization.
 9-32 Explain the procedure for data collection, 
 recording, retention, and disposition.
 9-33 Examine the mission and goals of the organization.
* The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, 
are identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 239
The primary mission of the fi re service has always 
been the protection of people and property from fi res. 
As public resources diminish, the role of the fi re ser-
vice will continue to expand even more.
THE U.S. FIRE PROBLEM
Between 1998 and 2007, there was an aver-
age of 1,664,500 fi res resulting in an estimated 
$10,949,900,000 in direct dollar loss each year (see 
Figure 9-1). An average of 3,695 Americans lost their 
lives and another 19,405 were injured annually as the 
result of fi re.
Fire Causes
Cooking is the leading cause of fi res in the United 
States. Food preparation resulted in 28 percent of fi res 
in the United States from 1995 to 2004. Incendiary or 
suspicious fi res (arson) caused another 21 percent. The 
two leading causes of civilian deaths were arson, at 
28 percent, and smoking, at 18 percent. The leading 
cause of injuries was cooking (24 percent), followed 
by open fl ame (18 percent) and arson (17 percent). 
Arson was, by far, the leading cause of property loss, at 
26 percent.2
FIRE RESEARCH 
AND FIRE DATA
Data collection and analysis is a key element of your 
department’s effect effort to protect your citizens from 
fi re. It is of vital importance that fi re data be timely 
and accurate, in order to identify trends and develop 
effective fi re prevention strategies. Collecting no data 
is better than collecting inaccurate data. Consider your 
department’s fi re incident records as a key link in the 
chain that makes up the nation’s fi re statistics. Consider 
your department’s information management system as 
one of the most important tools your department pos-
sesses. Without it, you’re like a traveler without a map.
NOTE
When faced with new public threats, the fire service 
has always risen to the occasion, but it’s important not 
to forget our primary mission: the protection of lives 
and property from fire.
NOTE
While the United States has made progress in slightly re-
ducing the number of fi res, civilian fi re deaths, and civilian 
fi re injuries over the past decade, total property losses 
continue to climb.1
NOTE
It is of vital importance that fi re data be timely and accu-
rate, in order to identify trends and develop effective fi re 
prevention strategies. Collecting no data is better than 
collecting inaccurate data.
TOTAL LOSS FROM FIRE 1998 – 2007
25,000.0
20,000.0
15,000.0
10,000.0
5,000.0
0.0
1
2
3
4
5
1998 – 2007
6
7
8
9
10
Fire in thousands
Deaths
Injuries
Direct loss in millions
FIGURE 9-1 Statistics from Fire Loss in the U.S. 2007, 
National Fire Protection Association. (Source: Michael J. 
Karter, Jr., United States Firefighter Injuries 2007, NFPA, August 2008 
and previous reports in series)
In the fourteenth edition of Fire in the United States 
(August 2007) the editor noted: “Many records sub-
mitted to NFIRS by participating fi re departments 
provide either incomplete or no information in some 
of the fi elds. Additionally, in preparing this report, it 
is assumed that participating fi re departments have 
reported 100 percent of their fi re incidents; however, 
this is not always the case. The completeness of all the 
information in the NFIRS modules will contribute to 
the refi nement and confi dence level of future analy-
ses.” 3 Unfortunately this is not new. It is important to 
follow national trends, as well as watch for local trends 
and conditions that may affect your community, and 
not necessarily the rest of your state or the nation.
The 1968 Fire Research Safety Act, established the 
National Commission on Fire Prevention and  Control, 
a 24- member panel appointed by President Richard 
Nixon. Their report, America Burning, has proved to 
be one of the most signifi cant forces for fi re prevention 

240  CHAPTER 9
and protection in United States history. Among the 
fi ndings of the commission:4
■ The need for more emphasis on fi re prevention
■ The need for fi re departments to expend more 
effort on fi re safety education, inspection, and code 
enforcement
■ The need for better training and education for the 
fi re service
■ The need for improved built-in fi re protection fea-
tures in structures
■ Increased involvement of the U.S. Consumer Prod-
uct Safety Commission in regulation of materials 
and products affecting fi re safety
■ That important areas of research such as fi re fi ght-
ing, burn prevention and treatment, and protection 
of the built environment from combustion hazards 
were neglected
The commission called for the establishment of the 
U.S. Fire Administration (USFA) that would estab-
lish a national fi re data system, monitor fi re research, 
provide block grants to states and local governments 
for fi re protection and prevention, and establish the 
National Fire Academy (NFA).5
USFA Data Collection, Analysis, 
and Dissemination
America Burning contained 90 recommendations. 
The fi rst was for Congress to establish and fund the 
USFA to provide a national focus for fi re protection 
and prevention issues. The second was that a national 
fi re data system be established to “provide a continu-
ing review and analysis of the entire fi re problem.”6
Lacking valid national statistics, the code devel-
opment process must rely on anecdotal evidence that 
may or may not be valid. The National Fire Data 
Center studies and reports on the nation’s fi re prob-
lem, proposes solutions and priorities, and monitors 
proposed solutions. Fire in the United States is pub-
lished by the USFA and distributed free of charge. 
The USFA Web site is a good place to start your data 
collection regarding a fi re problem in your commu-
nity. Your state fi re marshal’s offi ce is another. The 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) col-
lects fi re data, and performs data analysis. Reports 
and studies are available at the USFA and NFPA Web 
sites. Many are free of charge.
Using Data to Attack a Problem
Every community has fi re protection needs that can 
be addressed with the support of the public, elected 
offi cials, and the business community. In many 
 communities, particular groups such as senior citi-
zens or college students may be disproportionally 
affected by fi re. Identifying the problem is the fi rst 
step in addressing it. Gaining the cooperation of the 
affected group in recognizing that a problem exists 
and wanting to tackle it, and then enlisting the com-
munity to help solve the problem, is where the heavy 
lifting starts. Gaining the support of elected offi -
cials, the media and different stakeholder groups in 
the community should be the goal of every fi re offi -
cer. Trust is slowly earned and can be quickly lost or 
destroyed.
The Stakeholders
People naturally form groups. Some are formal orga-
nizations with memberships. Some are merely neigh-
borhood groups that form in response to a particular 
need or threat. Identifying these groups and enlisting 
their aid is a key element in addressing community 
needs. Reach out to these organizations. It is some-
times useful to contact them through intermediaries 
they trust such as the clergy, particularly if language 
is a communications barrier. Service and fraternal 
organizations, faith-based service groups, business 
associations and professional associations should all 
be enlisted to help develop and implement solutions. 
Form relationships with community organizations 
before the need is required.
Communication
Honesty and forthrightness is the key to effective com-
munication with the public and the media. As an offi -
cer you will be expected to represent your department 
in public venues. Know and understand your depart-
ment’s policies and procedures for handling inquiries 
from the press and the public. Most state and local 
governments have specifi c policies for Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) requests that include fi xed 
timeframes. Failure to follow the policies potentially 
exposes your department and you to judicial penal-
ties. Ignorance of the applicable laws or departmen-
tal policies is never an excuse. Remember, you are an 
offi cer.
Concerned Citizens
No matter what the concern, company offi cers must 
act in a professional and considerate manner. Citizen 
concerns can run a wide gambit of issues. The fi rst 
thing that a fi re offi cer must do is distinguish if this 
particular concern can be handled by the fi re depart-
ment. Many concerns that are voiced by citizens have 
nothing to do with the fi re department. However, it is 
important to let the citizen voice his or her concern 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 241
before they are routed to another department. If the 
concern can be handled by the fi re department it is 
important to receive all of the information. Fire offi -
cers are encouraged to document all citizen concerns 
for record keeping purposes. Let the citizen know 
that you understand the issue and that you will fi nd 
an answer for him or her. Give them a time and date 
when they can expect a return call. This will give him 
or her a verbal confi rmation that the concern has been 
understood. The next step is to be seen trying to han-
dle the situation. For example, Mr. Smith calls into the 
fi re station and voices his concern over his neighbor 
who is burning trash. The fi re offi cer tells Mr. Smith 
that the department will look into it and call him back 
later on in the evening (verbal confi rmation). The 
next step is to go and educate the neighbor on local 
burning ordinances. This allows Mr. Smith to see the 
fi re truck and know the personnel are handling the 
 concern (nonverbal confi rmation).
Fire departments should develop policies and pro-
cedures for handling concerns raised by citizens. The 
procedures should outline what concerns should be 
handled at the company level and which concerns 
should be given to higher ranking offi cers. An example 
here would be a concern raised by Mr. Smith in regards 
to the fi re inspection that was conducted at his busi-
ness. This type of concern needs to be addressed by 
the fi re inspector or the fi re marshal. Policies and pro-
cedures should also outline the steps for documenting 
concerns. These concerns can be used when evaluating 
the community needs discussed later in this chapter.
Inquiries are not that different from concerns. These 
may be as simple as a citizen wanting to know the start 
time for the July 4th fi reworks display or they could 
be as intense as a citizen wanting to know the cost of 
the new ladder truck. Either way, the fi re offi cer must 
remain professional and handle the inquiry to the best 
of their abilities. If unknown, it is recommended that 
the offi cer take down all of the information and give the 
citizen a timeframe of when they can expect a return 
call from someone who can assist them. Once again, it 
is important for policies and procedures to outline the 
steps for handling public inquiries and it is important 
for you to know them. The policies should list steps for 
moving information up the chain of command as well 
as how they need to be documented.
Fireplace Ash Fires—A Local Problem
Fires involving the improper disposal of fi replace 
ashes are common in certain parts of the country, 
particularly around the Christmas holidays. In many 
homes, fi replaces are only used during the holidays, 
more for effect than for heat. Too often, these home-
owners clean their fi replaces and remove the ashes 
before they have completely cooled. It is a national 
problem, but the greatest impact is in the Northeast 
and Mid-Atlantic states.
Fairfax County, Virginia, instituted a public educa-
tion campaign after a rash of dwelling fi res in the mid 
1990s. Fires that involved ashes that reportedly had 
cooled for up to 24 hours accounted for 62 percent 
of the incidents. Fires that involved ashes cooled for 
up to 72 hours accounted for 8 percent.7 The Fire and 
Rescue Department partnered with local retailers and 
had grocery bags printed with a warning against dis-
posing of ashes in bags or plastic buckets.
Perception versus Reality
The public’s perception of the fi re department is often 
one that lacks knowledge. Most of the people within a 
community are satisfi ed that when they drive by the fi re 
station and see fi re trucks sitting in the bays. The per-
ception that the job of a fi refi ghter consists of washing 
trucks, play cards, eating, and getting cats out of trees 
is mostly the fault of the fi re service. The fi re service 
has often times failed to educate the public in what it 
really does. The reality is that the fi re department must 
have the public’s support. The public needs to know the 
reason that the fi re truck is washed everyday is because 
it is one of our most important tools and we must keep 
in in top working order. Besides, the citizens paid for it 
and it should look good to show we are good stewards 
of community property. The public needs to know why 
the “big” fi re truck is responding to medical calls in 
addition to an ambulance. By educating the public, a 
fi re department earns respect. A fi re department that is 
respected by the public will thrive when seeking new 
equipment, personnel, or even tax increases.
One sure way to earn the respect of the public is to 
identify their needs. This is an intricate process that 
involves the community’s opinions and outlooks. To 
accomplish this, fi re offi cers should use a community 
plan outline. When developing a community plan, 
there are some aspects that needed to be completed by 
the department and some that must be completed by 
members within the community. Community mem-
bers should focus on the following elements:
■ Description of community partners and committees
■ Description of meetings and community, social 
services, and agency stakeholders
■ Environment and natural resources, population, 
demographics, and socioeconomic data
■ Residential density
■ Community strategy for risk reduction
■ Economic and ecological values
■ Education steps for the entire community

242  CHAPTER 9
Would some of these steps be easier for the agency to 
handle? Probably, but how else is the community going 
to fully understand the need if they do not do some 
studying for themselves? 
The next elements of the plan need to be handled by 
the agency or agencies.
■ Policies and procedures for all involved agencies
■ Review of current studies and strategic planning
■ Hazards and risks descriptions
■ Materials and resources currently available
■ Community safety education plans
■ Outline policies and procedures based on the fi nd-
ings of the community
By putting together a community plan, the stakehold-
ers will have a better understanding of the community 
needs. By involving the community, they will have 
a better understanding of the challenges that emer-
gency service organizations face. The fi nal outcome 
is respect for the fi re department.
So—What’s in It for Me?
The notion that fi re departments are indispensible agen-
cies, not subject to the same economic conditions that 
drive local government budgets, has always a been false 
one. For those who harbored any doubts, New York 
Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced the closing of 
sixteen fi re companies in 2009. Facing a budget defi cit 
of $4 billion, no city agency was considered too impor-
tant to cut. The Big Apple isn’t the only city grappling 
with the budget axe. When Philadelphia Mayor Michael 
Nutter ordered the closure of fi ve engine and two ladder 
companies, IAFF Local 22 fi led suit. The city’s attor-
ney’s response was terse: “I think the fi re fi ghters should 
acknowledge that they’ve already lost this issue. The cur-
rent state of the law is that the city has the right to close 
fi re companies. And it had done it, mindful of the safety 
of the fi re fi ghters and the safety of the citizens.”8
Economic downturns affect the tax base, resulting 
in less revenue for governments to provide services. 
But downturns aren’t always caused by problems on 
Wall Street or Washington. When fi res strike major 
employment centers, the impact might not have the 
same national implications, but for the commu-
nities involved, the blow is no less severe. When a 
welder’s torch started an easily preventable fi re at 
Farmland Food’s processing center in Albert Lea, 
Minnesota, in 2001, 400 people lost their jobs over-
night. The facility, which at the time was the larg-
est employer in the region, never reopened. But 
the problems caused by the fi re did not end there. 
Farmland Foods was the city sewer plant’s biggest 
customer. Left with a sewer plant operating at 
50 percent capacity, rates have risen 55 percent over 
the last seven years.9 Twice the rates of Owatonna, 
35 miles south on I-35. Businesses looking to expand 
or relocate began looking elsewhere. Most communi-
ties have factories, business parks, or tourist attrac-
tions that employ large numbers of people, generate 
sales and property taxes, and pump money into the 
economy by purchasing materials and services. The 
loss of a major employment center can change the eco-
nomic climate within a jurisdiction overnight. The 
impact on government services including fi re protec-
tion is usually swift and certain.
As a fi re offi cer, the well-being of the public and 
your own people should be a primary concern. If you 
do not believe that preventing fi res is a worthy effort 
for the good of the public, believe in it for your own 
job security and that of your people at the very least. 
As a fi re offi cer, Chief Chiaramonte’s words at the 
beginning of this chapter should come to mind every 
time you report for duty. Your fi rst job as an offi cer is 
to safely bring all your people home.
OFFICER ADVICE
As a fire officer, Chief Chiaramonte’s words at the 
beginning of this chapter should come to mind every 
time you report for duty. Your first job as an officer is to 
safely bring all your people home.
PREVENTING FIRES 
THROUGH REGULATION
On February 20, 2003, fi re erupted at Station night-
club in West Warwick, Rhode Island, during a rock 
concert. Indoor pyrotechnic devices ignited foam 
plastic material that had been installed for acoustics 
purposes. The initial toll of 97 fatalities rose to 100 
within three months, making it the fourth deadliest 
nightclub fi re in U.S. history. State and local gov-
ernments across the country scrambled to determine 
their vulnerability to a similar catastrophe. Fire chiefs 
and fi re marshals were summoned to testify before 
elected offi cials, often in televised sessions.
The elected offi cials wanted reassurances that a 
system was in place to prevent such a large loss of 
life in their jurisdictions. Many fi re offi cials were 
forced to admit that a comprehensive inspection pro-
gram that included evening and weekend checks of 
public assembly occupancies did not exist. Few if any 
fi re offi cials were given the opportunity to mention 
that the reason inspections were not being conducted 
was due to the lack of staff resources—resources that 
can only be provided by the same elected offi cials. 
Like the Sofa Super Store fi re, the Station fi re got the 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 243
public’s attention. It also got the attention of elected 
representatives on city and county councils. At least 
for a time, they demanded effective fi re inspections 
programs, and they wanted them right now.
Demand for Inspections
The level of support from the public and elected offi -
cials for the inspection process is a constantly evolv-
ing one. Acceptable risk, which is a measure of the 
level of hazard potential that the public is willing to 
live with, constantly changes (see Figure 9-2). Inci-
dents like the Station fi re or the Oakland Fire Storm 
of 1991 result in a public demand for government offi -
cials to take some action that will provide assurance 
to the public. What elected offi cials want to hear is 
why the catastrophic event that has aroused the pub-
lic concern couldn’t have happened in their commu-
nity. What they usually get is what will be done in the 
future to keep the same thing from happening in their 
community. In other words, has it been luck or an 
effective proactive prevention program that has pre-
vented the catastrophe from happening? Most have to 
reply that their prevention programs are lacking and 
need to do better. We have been lucky up to know.
Government programs are very often reactive not 
proactive. Government agencies have fi nite resources 
that must be allocated to achieve the greatest impact 
in support of their stated mission. Resources are often 
stretched thin.
Routine inspections by the fi re service range from 
courtesy residential fi re safety surveys by in-service 
companies, to specialized inspections for code com-
pliance in business and industrial occupancies (see  
Figure 9-3). The preservation of property and protec-
tion of the public is the fundamental mission of the fi re 
service. The reduction of hazards through the inspec-
tion process is one of the most effective means of 
accomplishing the mission. The inspection process is 
truly underestimated and often maligned by some fi re-
fi ghters who would rather fi ght fi res, and by some fi re 
FIGURE 9-2 The Oakland, California, fire in the fall of 
1991 is one of the largest fire losses in American history. 
This picture was taken one year after the fire destroyed 
an entire community. (Photo courtesy of Kim Smoke) 
NOTE
What elected officials want to hear is why the cata-
strophic event that has aroused the public concern 
couldn’t have happened in their community. What they 
usually get is what will be done in the future to keep the 
same thing from happening in their community.
FIGURE 
9-3 Company 
in-
spections afford an excellent 
opportunity to preplan while 
conducting safety inspections.

244  CHAPTER 9
chiefs who can not see past the allocation of resources 
for training and staff, or the potential for political con-
fl ict caused by enforcement. Fire inspections reduce the 
rate and severity of hostile fi res. To most people, the 
question “Just how many fi res does an effective inspec-
tion program prevent?” is almost a rhetorical question 
and very diffi cult to answer. However, the effectiveness 
of inspections programs has been statistically proven.
In the 1970‘s the National Fire Protection Associa-
tion (NFPA) and Urban Institute (UI) published a series 
of reports about the effectiveness of fi re inspections. 
These studies are still cited as the leading resource 
for measuring inspection effectiveness. 1974: Measur-
ing Fire Protection Productivity in Local Government 
1976: Improving the Measurement of Local Fire Pro-
tection Effectiveness 1978: Fire Code Inspections and 
Fire Prevention: What Methods Lead to Success? The 
1978 study was undertaken to determine, whether some 
fi re code inspection practices actually resulted in fewer 
fi res, lower fi re loss, and fewer civilian casualties. 
The study focused on properties covered by fi re codes, 
excluding one- and two-family dwellings.
The study used fi re data from seventeen cities and one 
metropolitan county and grouped fi res into three catego-
ries, based on the potential for intervention through the 
inspection process. The categories were those fi res that 
were (1) due to visible hazards, (2) fi res caused by fool-
ish or careless actions, and (3) incendiary, suspicious, 
or natural-cause fi res. The study determined that fi res 
due to visible hazards that can be directly remedied by 
inspectors were responsible for only 4 to 8 percent of all 
fi res. Fires due to carelessness or foolish actions or elec-
trical or mechanical failures (sometimes due to lack of 
maintenance) accounted for 40 to 60 percent of all fi res. 
The remaining fi res (32 to 66 percent) were identifi ed as 
incendiary, suspicious, or natural-cause fi res, and were 
considered unpreventable by inspection.10 When this 
information was compared to inspection practices, the 
fi ndings underscored the effectiveness of routine fi re 
inspections (see Figure 9-4):
Fire rates appeared to be signifi cantly lower in cities that 
annually inspected all, or nearly all public buildings. 
Jurisdictions that did not annually inspect most public 
buildings had rates of fi res exceeding $5,000 that were 
more than twice that of those that did inspect them.
Cities that used fi re-suppression companies for a large 
share of their routine fi re code inspections had substan-
tially lower rates of fi re, presumably because cities that 
exclusively used fi re prevention bureau inspectors did 
not have suffi cient personnel within the bureau to make 
annual inspections at all public buildings.
Fires due to carelessness or foolish actions or electrical 
or mechanical failures (40 to 60 percent of all fi res) are 
not preventable through direct action by inspectors, since 
these causes are not readily visible during an inspection. 
Yet the rate at which these fi res occurred was signifi -
cantly lower in cities with regular inspection programs, 
indicating that the department that inspects more fre-
quently, has more opportunities to motivate occupants. 
This also underscores the value of company inspections, 
recognizing the fact that although company inspections 
cannot be as in depth, due to the differences in training 
between inspectors in the bureau and those with other 
responsibilities, inspections by in-service companies 
have a signifi cant impact on the incidence of fi re within 
the jurisdiction.
In a nutshell, the study showed that although only 4 
to 8 percent of fi res were caused by conditions that 
inspectors could detect and take action to mitigate the 
hazard, yet the incidence of fi re could be reduced by 
50 percent by undertaking a comprehensive program in 
which every public building is inspected. Inspection is a 
positively motivating factor for the prevention of fi re.
60%
32%
8%
Fires caused by
arsun or adture
not observable
during inspection
Fire caused by carelessness or
mechanical or electrical failures
not observable during inspections
Fires caused by conditons
observable during inspection
FIGURE 9-4 Only 4-8% of fires were caused by condi-
tions that were observable during inspection, yet juris-
dictions that inspected every building noted reductions 
in fires up to 50%.
FIREGROUND FACT
The incidence of fire could be reduced by 50 percent 
by undertaking a comprehensive program in which 
every public building is inspected. Inspection is a posi-
tively motivating factor for the prevention of fire.
MODEL CODES
Fire prevention and construction regulation are com-
plementary efforts of state and local governments to 
protect the public and preserve property. Both are 
driven by codes. Codes are merely systematically 

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 245
arranged bodies of laws or rules. Codes tell us what to 
do, or what not to do. Examples are the United States 
Code, the Georgia Code, and the King County Code. 
These are the codifi ed laws of the United States, State 
of Georgia, and King County, Washington. The term 
codifi ed refers to the fact that the laws are arranged 
according to a system.
Model codes are technical rules that are developed 
by organizations and are made available for govern-
ments to formally accept and put into effect within 
the jurisdiction. We refer to this formal acceptance as 
adoption of the code. Model codes are available for 
governments to adopt free of charge. In order to under-
stand why private organizations invest thousands of 
hours of hard work into developing these codes, and 
why governments would adopt them, a look at the fi re 
protection and construction regulation failures of the 
past is necessary.
The Development 
of Model Codes
Disastrous fi res have been a staple of the American 
experience from our earliest days. The Jamestown Col-
ony was almost totally destroyed by fi re within a year of 
its founding. Fires ravaged our young cities, from coast 
to coast and border to border. Homes and businesses 
were destroyed, lives were lost, and insurance compa-
nies were bankrupted, leaving thousands of policyhold-
ers’ claims unpaid. In the aftermath of every major fi re, 
there was an outcry for action, followed by the passage 
of a new law or laws. These laws were overlooked or 
forgotten as soon as compliance became inconvenient 
or inexpedient. The political process is not necessar-
ily the best medium for development of highly techni-
cal rules. Perhaps the most striking example was the 
City of Chicago, where within three years of the great 
fi re that killed 300 and destroyed over 17,000 build-
ings, fi re safety conditions were identifi ed by insurance 
inspectors to be worse than before the fi re!11
If governments were not capable of technical code 
development, then who was? In its own self-defense 
and without the assistance of government, the fi re 
insurance industry embarked on a method of ensuring 
profi ts and their own viability. The fi rst attempts of the 
industry’s technical arm, the National Board of Fire 
Underwriters, at developing standards involved setting 
specifi cations for “fi rst class” woolen mills and sugar-
houses, which would qualify for reduced rates by virtue 
of their class rating. When fi res involving a whale oil 
substitute sold under the name of “kerosene oil” began 
to occur because there was no standard fl ashpoint for 
the lamp fuel, the board developed one.12
In 1892, a marked increase in fi res at facilities 
considered to be better risks underscored a new hazard 
associated with economic success and innovation—
electricity. An emergency meeting held in New York 
resulted in the formation of the Board’s Underwriter’s 
International Electrical Association, and development 
of the National Board Electrical Code, known today as 
the National Electric Code (NEC) NFPA 70. (NFPA 70). 
By 1901, the code was being enforced by 125 municipal 
governments. The National Board of Fire Underwriters 
transferred responsibility to the National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) in 1911. The NEC may well be the 
most widely used model code in the world.
By 1896, the National Board voted to expand the 
proposed building code, to be called the National 
Board’s Model Building Law. In 1905 the fi rst edition 
of the Board’s National Building Code was distributed 
free of charge to all cities with population over 5,000 
and to contractors, architects, fi re marshals, and tech-
nical schools.13 The National Board of Fire Underwrit-
ers later developed the National Fire Prevention Code. 
The Board published the National Building Code and 
National Fire Prevention Code through 1976.
THE EVOLUTION OF 
REGIONAL MODEL CODES
While several large cities had their own locally devel-
oped building and fi re codes, many jurisdictions 
adopted the National Board’s codes. In the twenti-
eth century, three regional model code organizations 
emerged: Building Offi cials and Code Administra-
tors International (BOCA) in the Northeast, South-
ern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI) in 
the Southeast, and International Conference of Build-
ing Offi cials (ICBO) in the Western states. Each pub-
lished a complete complement of construction, fi re 
prevention, and property maintenance codes for the 
better part of the twentieth century.
The International Codes
The regional code organizations formed the Interna-
tional Code Council in 1994, with the intention of coop-
eratively developing a single set of codes for the entire 
United States. Their efforts were so successful that they 
merged in 2003. BOCA, SBCCI, and ICBO no longer 
exist. The “I-Codes” have been widely accepted by state 
and local governments across the United States:
■ The International Building Code (IBC) is adopted 
at the state or local level in 50 states and the Dis-
trict of Columbia (Washington, D.C.).
■ The International Residential Code (IRC) is 
adopted at the state or local level in 48 states, Dis-
trict of Columbia, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

246  CHAPTER 9
■ The International Fire Code (IFC) is adopted at 
the state or local level in 42 states and the District 
of Columbia.
International Fire Code 
Council (IFCC)
The International Fire Code Council (IFCC) was estab-
lished by the ICC to represent the common interests of 
the fi re service and the ICC, by providing leadership and 
direction on matters of fi re and life safety, and to meet 
government, industry, and public needs. The IFCC was 
formed prior to the development of the International 
Fire Code (IFC). Fire service infl uence on the develop-
ment of the IFC through the IFCC, is readily apparent. 
The IFC is a comprehensive, user-friendly document, 
clearly designed with the inspector in the fi eld in mind.
The IFCC is comprised of 15 members, one each 
from the eight International Association of Fire Chiefs 
regions, four representatives from the National Asso-
ciation of State Fire Marshals, and three at-large mem-
bers. Through the efforts of the IFCC, the International 
Association of Fire Chiefs and ICC are working toward 
a memorandum of understanding that would grant the 
fi re service greater infl uence on fi re-related matters, 
including the appointment of committee members.
Codes vs. Standards
The phrase “codes and standards” lumps together two 
important regulatory instruments in a way that makes 
it easy to conclude that they are the same thing—they 
are not. Both are key tools in fi re prevention and con-
struction regulation; both are developed through for-
mal consensus processes, with public input; both are 
adopted by governments as regulatory tools. A code 
is systematically arranged body of rules—when and 
where to do or not to do something. A standard is 
a guide or rule to be followed. Codes tell you what 
to do. Standards tell you how. The IBC requires hos-
pitals to be equipped with automatic sprinklers. The 
IBC references NFPA 13, Standard for the Instal-
lation of Sprinkler Systems for specifi cs on design, 
materials, installation, and performance.
CODE ADOPTION
The act of state or local governments to accept a model 
code and give it the effect of law is called adoption. 
Two basic methods are used, based on the laws in 
effect within the jurisdiction. Adoption by reference 
is simply the passage of legislation that states that a 
specifi c edition of a certain code will be enforced 
within the jurisdiction. Local governments typically 
do this by passing an ordinance, or local law. When 
model codes are adopted at the state level, the adopt-
ing legislation is generally in the form of a statute. 
Within the legislation, the code document is men-
tioned by reference only, and copies of the codes must 
be purchased from the model code groups. In some 
localities, adoption by reference is not legally possi-
ble. Adoption by transcription is a legal requirement, 
and the code is republished, usually with a numbering 
system for each section or article that complies with 
the requirements of the jurisdiction.
Model code groups permit adoption by reference 
for free—they make their money by selling books. 
Adoption by transcription is a different matter. A 
license to republish can be negotiated or, the model 
code organizations can be contracted to publish a spe-
cial edition that meets the requirements of the adopt-
ing jurisdiction, and they get to sell the codebooks.
State and Local Adoption
Whether a code is adopted as a state minimum code 
that can be locally amended, adopted as a state mini-
maxi code with no option of local amendment, or as 
simply a locally adopted code, there are legal require-
ments to ensure that adequate public notice is given, 
and citizens and special interest groups are given an 
opportunity to be heard regarding the proposed codes. 
Mini-maxi codes are favored by most business inter-
ests and by developers because they create unifor-
mity within the state and all lobbying efforts can be 
directed at the state capital, not within each political 
subdivision. The fi re service generally opposed mini-
maxi codes since local control is reduced. One posi-
tive aspect of mini-maxi codes is that they promote 
training and political action on a statewide level, forc-
ing fi re service organizations to work together.
NOTE
The fire service generally opposed mini-maxi codes 
since local control is reduced. One positive aspect 
of mini-maxi codes is that they promote training and 
political action on a statewide level, forcing fire service 
organizations to work together.
NOTE
A code is systematically arranged body of rules—when 
and where to do or not to do something.
NOTE
A standard is a guide or rule to be followed. Codes tell 
you what to do. Standards tell you how.

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 247
WHAT CODES CANNOT DO
The cycle catastrophe followed by a public outcry of 
“there ought to be a law” isn’t new, and won’t be ending 
anytime soon. Sometimes, a legitimate need for new 
regulations is recognized, and new code provisions 
are adopted. In 1985, a fi re at the Valley Parade Soccer 
Stadium in Bradford, England, claimed 86 lives and 
injured 200. Investigators identifi ed the large volume 
of combustible materials beneath the grandstands as 
a signifi cant factor in the fi re spread. The fi re, caused 
by discarded smoking materials that ignited trash and 
rubbish beneath the bleacher seats, engulfed a 290-
foot-long grandstand in less than 5 minutes, and was 
televised live with the soccer match.14
The Bradford stadium fi re identifi ed a potential prob-
lem that was not clearly covered by fi re code provisions. 
A provision regulating waste and combustible materi-
als storage under grandstand seats was added to national 
model codes and exists today in both the UFC and IFC.
In the aftermath of the 2003 Station nightclub fi re 
in West Warwick, Rhode Island, many called for new 
codes to ensure that such a catastrophe could never 
occur again. The lack of sprinklers was rightly iden-
tifi ed as a signifi cant factor in the fi re that claimed 
100 lives, but existing code provisions in place in the State 
of Rhode Island could have prevented the incident had 
they been enforced. The Rhode Island Fire Code, based 
on NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code included provisions that 
addressed indoor pyrotechnic displays and foam plastic 
as an interior fi nish. All the codes or laws in the world 
will not prevent tragedies from occurring if they are 
not obeyed, and the largest fi re prevention bureau in the 
nation cannot inspect every building every day.
THE NATIONAL FIRE 
PROTECTION ASSOCIATION 
(NFPA)
NFPA was organized in 1896 and incorporated in 
1930. It was originally formed by the stock insurance 
industry to develop a single sprinkler standard that 
would be acceptable to all its member companies. In 
the late 1800s, there were nine different standards for 
sprinkler pipe size and head spacing within 100 miles 
of the city of Boston.15 The group adopted the name 
of National Fire Protection Association and developed 
that standard. It lives on today as NFPA 13, Standard 
for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems.
NFPA publishes almost 300 codes, standards, and rec-
ommended practices developed by more than 205 tech-
nical committees. Many of the documents originated as 
National Board of Fire Underwriters pamphlets, and car-
ried the subtitle “as recommended by the National Fire 
Protection Association.” NFPA’s recommended prac-
tices are one of the great, untapped resources for munici-
pal fi re offi cials. They are not designed to be enforceable 
documents, rather, a guide to good practice within given 
industries. Alerting business owner to the existence of 
these documents may do more for the prevention of fi res 
than simply enforcing the code.
In 2003, NFPA partnered with the Western Fire 
Chiefs Association and incorporated the provisions of 
the Uniform Fire Code into NFPA 1, Fire Prevention 
Code. The new Document is titled NFPA 1, Uniform 
Fire Code. The Uniform Fire Code is adopted state-
wide in twenty states.
ESTABLISHING INSPECTION 
PRIORITIES
One of the initial steps in establishing an inspection 
program is the determination of which occupancies will 
be inspected, how often, and in what order. In the after-
math of a tragic fi re in a particular type of facility, that 
group generally becomes the focus of public attention. 
Although understandable and not totally without merit, 
this system of “closing the barn door after the horse has 
run off” doesn’t lend itself to success.
OFFICER ADVICE
A well-disciplined approach that prioritizes inspec-
tions based on risk and the actual hazards associ-
ated with certain occupancy classes is by far the 
better course.
A system of inspections based on the actual fi re expe-
rience within the jurisdiction would appear to be the 
 surest method of addressing the most pressing fi re pre-
vention and life safety issues. An accurate assessment 
of fi re statistics for the jurisdiction should be a regular 
function of the fi re prevention bureau. Unfortunately, the 
results of the study of a statistical sample as small as most 
cities or counties will not reveal a true picture of the rela-
tive risks associated with particular hazard classes.
For the purpose of discussion, let’s assume you have 
been tasked with determining inspection priorities and 
in the course of your study of fi re causes within your 
jurisdiction, you determine that welding and cutting 
were insignifi cant fi re causes with negligible losses 
for the statistical period. Welding, cutting, and other 
hot work might go to the bottom of the list of inspec-
tions, if it made the list at all. In reality, it is a serious 
fi re cause, with signifi cant losses. The 2006 Interna-
tional Fire Code Commentary described losses by a sin-
gle insurance company within a fi ve-year period of 290 
hot-work related fi res, with an average $1.4 million loss  

248  CHAPTER 9
per incident.16 Sooner or later, welding and cutting would 
rightly assume its place in your jurisdiction’s fi re statis-
tics, and would become an inspection priority—after 
the damage is done (see Figure 9-5). What method can 
be used to develop priorities that refl ect actual hazards? 
The method is actually an integral part of the model fi re 
codes, the permit system.
The Permit Model
The permit model of determining inspection pri-
orities is simply inspecting those occupancies that 
are required to have a fi re code permit. The 2006 
International Fire Code contains forty-six operational 
permit categories and twelve construction permit 
 categories; the UFC has seventy operational and nine 
construction permit categories. Operational permit 
categories include special amusement buildings, carni-
vals, compressed gases, covered mall buildings, cutting 
and welding, explosives storage and use, and operation 
of lumberyards and woodworking plants. Construc-
tion permits include installation or modifi cation of fi re 
alarm and detection systems, fl ammable and combusti-
ble liquid tank installation or modifi cation, installation 
or modifi cation of spray rooms or booths, and erection 
of tents and air-supported structures. Permit categories 
across both model fi re codes are quite similar.
If you compare the list of permits from the model fi re 
codes with large loss fi res from the past, you will see a 
direct relationship. Permit categories are based on our 
national fi re experience, and were established over the 
years in response to incidents involving large loss of life 
or signifi cant fi nancial loss from property damage.
The list is constantly evolving. The requirement 
in each of the model fi re codes to operate a “special 
amusement building” can be traced directly back to 
the 1984 “Haunted Castle” fi re at Six Flags Great 
Adventure Park in Jackson Township, New Jersey.
FIGURE 9-5 Cutting torches use a mixture of acetylene 
and oxygen to generate a high-temperature flame. They 
cut metal by melting it.
FIREGROUND FACT
If you compare the list of permits from the model fire 
codes with large loss fires from the past, you will see a 
direct relationship. Permit categories are based on our 
national fire experience and were established over the 
years in response to incidents involving large loss of life 
or significant financial loss from property damage.
Special amusement buildings are temporary or per-
manent structures for entertainment or amusement, in 
which the means of egress are intentionally confounded 
or not apparent due to visual or audio distractions, or are 
not readily available because of the nature of the attrac-
tion or mode of conveyance through the structure. Exam-
ples run from an attraction at Disney World on the high 
end, to a carnival fun house in a tractor-trailer, or even 
a Halloween maze put on by a local service club. In the 
Six Flags fi re, eight of the approximately thirty visitors 
within the structure were killed when foam plastic mate-
rial lining the interior of the structure was ignited. The 
combination of dense smoke, a rapidly spreading fi re, 
and built-in confusion as to the location of exits within 
the structure was deadly.17 In the aftermath, the member-
ships of the model code organizations voted to approve 
code changes regulating such structures and ensuring 
their inspection by requiring operational permits.
When faced with the prospect of inspecting a lim-
ited number of processes and occupancies, the deci-
sion to inspect those requiring permits under the fi re 
code is a wise one. Not only are the facilities with 
the greatest risk for fi re or life loss being afforded 
the attention of the fi re department bureau fi rst, the 
choice is based on the national fi re experience.
A particular industry’s cry of “why are you picking 
on us?” can be quickly answered by identifying the 
code requirement.
OFFICER ADVICE
When faced with the prospect of inspecting a limited 
number of processes and occupancies, the decision 
to inspect those requiring permits under the fire code 
is a wise one. Not only are the facilities with the great-
est risk for fire or life loss being afforded the attention 
of the fire department bureau first, the choice is based 
on the national fire experience.

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 249
A signifi cant benefi t of the permit system that is 
often overlooked is the leverage that permits offer in 
gaining compliance and gaining entry inspect. Oper-
ation without the required permit is a violation of the 
model fi re codes. Permits can be revoked for fail-
ure to comply with the code, or violation of permit 
 conditions. Permit conditions include submission of 
the required application, payment of fees and permis-
sion for the fi re inspect the facility.
The courts have consistently upheld the right of prop-
erty owners, including business owners, to prohibit the 
entry of government offi cials without a search  warrant. 
In other words, an owner of the local body shop owner 
has the constitutional right to refuse the entry of a fi re 
inspector. What the owner doesn’t have is the consti-
tutional right to a fi re code permit—no inspection, no 
permit. Spray painting cars in his body shop without the 
required fi re code permit, for spray application of fl am-
mable fi nishes, is a violation of the fi re code.
Another benefi t of using the permit model is that 
permit requirements are based on the incidence of fi re 
in the nation. The previous discussion of fi re losses 
attributed to welding and cutting not being signifi cant 
in a single jurisdiction, yet being a major fi re cause 
nationally, points to the pitfalls of statistical analysis 
with too little data. Inspection priorities based on the 
permit model are the easiest to justify to elected offi -
cials, the public, and the courts.
The Inspection Model
The other method of determining inspection priorities is 
the inspection model. Occupancy classes and types of 
processes are selected for inspection based on perceived 
need. The need must be based on fi re risk, or life haz-
ard, and should be backed up with statistics of actual fi re 
loss. The fi re offi cial must be able to justify why particu-
lar industries, processes or occupancies are selected, and 
why others are not. Inspecting by district or area imme-
diately raises the question, “why were we selected fi rst?” 
There may be a legitimate reason. The fi re offi cial must 
be ready to provide valid reasons to a skeptical press and 
public. The elected offi cial who presses the fi re offi cial 
to “clean up” a particular part of the city for other than 
legitimate reasons will disavow any knowledge of the 
demand when the story hits the newspaper.
When prioritizing inspections using the inspection 
model, develop a written plan.
If the need does arise to secure an inspection war-
rant, the judicial offi cer will want to know why the par-
ticular occupancy was selected for inspection to start 
with. A good answer would be “Our standard operat-
ing procedure requires that all fuel storage facilities are 
inspected annually. We last inspected the  facility twelve 
months ago,” or “We inspect all fuel storage facilities 
every fall.” The judicial offi cer represents the people 
and is supposed to make certain that your request for 
an inspection warrant is not based on the fact that the 
business owner no longer gives fi refi ghters a discount 
or that the mayor is a business competitor.
OFFICER ADVICE
When prioritizing inspections using the inspection 
model, develop a written plan.
What type of hazard reaches the level of signifi cant 
is subjective, and has been debated among fi re offi -
cials, civil libertarians, and the courts for years.
NOTE
With very few exceptions, all buildings and structures, 
including residential occupancies, are within the scope 
of the model fire codes. What separates residences 
from other types of occupancies is that they are exempt 
from routine inspection.
NOTE
The right of entry clauses in the model codes, that 
permit the fi re offi cial to enter and inspect structures on a 
routine basis, exempt one and two-family dwellings and 
residential portions of multifamily structures. The code 
still applies, and must be enforced when conditions exist 
that pose a signifi cant hazard.
INSPECTIONS OF EXISTING 
OCCUPANCIES
Within the big picture of inspection and enforcement of 
codes by state and local governments, the fi re offi cial 
probably has the broadest mandate. Most jurisdictions 
have a building offi cial charged with the enforcement of 
a construction code that regulates new construction and 
renovations. Many jurisdictions have a property main-
tenance code that targets residential occupancies, par-
ticularly rental properties, to ensure that landlords meet 
minimum standards for safety and hygiene. Health 
inspectors are normally involved in food service and 
processing, health care, and other facilities that may 
have public health implications. In many states, assisted 
living facilities, foster care, and day care for both adults 
and children may be regulated by social service agen-
cies. The fi re offi cial is generally the only offi cial whose 
code applies to all the above, and should interact with 
all the other offi cials.
With very few exceptions, all buildings and struc-
tures, including residential occupancies, are within 
the scope of the model fi re codes. What separates res-
idences from other types of occupancies is that they 
are exempt from routine inspection.

250  CHAPTER 9
When Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart wrote 
his famous opinion regarding obscenity in 1964, he 
stated, “I shall not today attempt to further defi ne the 
kinds of material I understand to be embraced . . . but 
I know it when I see it. . . .”18 Wrestling with just what 
constitutes a hazard that is signifi cant enough to war-
rant government intrusion within someone’s home is 
similarly perplexing. The hazard must be suffi cient to 
justify what our forefathers wrote the Fourth Amend-
ment to the Constitution to guard against. The condi-
tion of a 12-year-old’s room probably does not reach 
the level of hazard, whereas 55 gallons of lacquer thin-
ner, stored in the ground fl oor apartment of a painting 
contractor, certainly does. The fact that lacquer thin-
ner is highly fl ammable, and a leak in such a large 
container would pose a threat to all the residents of 
the building, would probably lead the judicial offi cer 
to determine that the potential threat to the neighbors 
is greater than the possible harm caused by the intru-
sion into the painter’s home. In most cases, inspec-
tion warrants can only be obtained after a request 
for entry to inspect has been denied by the tenant or 
property owner.
COMPANY INSPECTIONS
Most jurisdictions do not have suffi cient staff within 
the fi re prevention bureau to inspect every occupancy, 
yet studies have shown that jurisdictions that inspect 
every occupancy realize reductions in fi re loss. The 
use of in-service companies to perform inspections 
has been successful in many jurisdictions.
Personnel should be trained to perform a basic 
safety inspection and directed to request assistance 
from the fi re prevention bureau if they encounter 
imminent hazards.
The assignment of fi re prevention bureau inspec-
tors as a resource for specifi c improves communica-
tion. Checklist forms are a useful method of ensuring 
consistent inspections and provide a record of the visit 
for the department and the business owner. Company 
personnel should be informed that the inspection is a 
combination of a preplan visit, safety inspection, and 
chance to interact with the community they serve.
The opportunity to preplan hazards, provide build-
ing familiarization, and establish cordial relations with 
the community can literally make in-service inspec-
tions the excuse that every chief wants to advertise the 
department (see Figure 9-6). By conducting thorough 
preplans, the department can assure that adequate 
resources will be available if an incident occurs. It is 
essential for preplans to devise a plan for each type of 
emergency that may occur. For example, if a school 
is being preplanned, then there should be a plan for a 
fi re incident as well as a mass causality incident. Dif-
ferences in incident types will dictate what resources 
are needed. Training for company inspections should 
be prefaced with the fact that the goals of the in-
service inspection program are building familiar-
ization to increase fi refi ghter safety, fi re and hazard 
reduction, and community relations. This information 
must be collected, documented, and distributed. Fire 
offi cers should train their fi refi ghters on each of the 
preplans that are within their district.
FIREGROUND FACT
The right of entry clauses in the model codes, which 
permit the fire official to enter and inspect structures 
on a routine basis, exempt one- and two-family dwell-
ings and residential portions of multifamily structures. 
The code still applies and must be enforced when con-
ditions exist that pose a significant hazard.
OFFICER ADVICE
Personnel should be trained to perform a basic safety 
inspection and directed to request assistance from 
the fire prevention bureau if they encounter imminent 
hazards.
FIGURE 9-6 The chance to establish cordial relations 
with the community can literally make in-service inspec-
tions the excuse that every chief wants to advertise the 
department.
NOTE
The goals of the in-service inspection program are 
building familiarization to increase firefighter safety, fire 
and hazard reduction, and community relations.

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 251
THE MODEL CODE SYSTEM 
OF SAFETY
The model building code system attempts to balance 
fi re protection and safety features based on the needs 
of the occupants and the potential hazard level within 
a structure. This is achieved through the classifi cation 
of buildings and areas within buildings based on use 
and occupancy. The fi rst job of a building designer is 
to assign the appropriate classifi cation to every room 
or space. The fi rst job of every inspector for the life of 
the building is to ensure that the use or occupancy has 
not changed and, if it has, to take action.
The use of group classifi cation is the fi rst aspect 
that must be established in the design of a building. 
It should also be your fi rst consideration during an 
inspection of a building.
The use and occupancy classifi cation of a building 
is the most signifi cant single design factor that will 
affect the safety of the occupants as well as the fi re 
suppression forces that are called upon in the event of 
fi re. The building’s height and size, type of construc-
tion, type and capacity of exit facilities and fi xed fi re 
suppression systems are all dependent on this classi-
fi cation. The system of use group classifi cation is the 
foundation for the building and fi re prevention codes. 
A mistake in laying the foundation can prove to be a 
disaster later on. Failure to maintain the foundation 
can also prove to be a disaster.
built-in levels of protection. The occupants of the 
church are probably very familiar with the build-
ing that they occupy. They have been there before 
and know the location of alternate exits. The occu-
pants of the night club may not be so familiar. Dim 
lighting, loud music, and impairment by alcohol are 
all common features that may affect the ability of 
the occupants to identify a fi re emergency and take 
appropriate measures to escape.
Group A: Assembly
Group A is subdivided by the IBC into fi ve subcatego-
ries, based on function. The biggest hazard in Group 
A occupancies is the large number of people who are 
often unfamiliar with their surroundings. People gen-
erally feel safer exiting by the same route they entered. 
This can prove deadly if main exits are inadequate in 
size or are compromised. Additional hazards posed 
by large fuel loads such as sets, scenery or decorative 
materials, entertainment, and the effects of alcohol 
can increase the threat level. Building code require-
ments for fi re protection and life safety features are 
among the highest.
Group B: Business
Group B includes physicians and other professional 
offi ces, civic administration, banks, barber shops, and 
post offi ces. Colleges and adult education rooms with 
occupant loads under 50 are Group B occupancies, 
as are dry cleaning pick-up and delivery. Group B is 
one of the least hazardous and has much less strin-
gent requirements for fi re protection and life safety 
features.
Group E: Educational
Group E occupancies include areas not used for busi-
ness or vocational training (shop areas) for students up 
to and including the 12th grade. Colleges and univer-
sities are Business or Assembly areas depending on 
the number of occupants. Group E features a robust 
mix of life safety and fi re protection features, and 
a requirement for 60-inch minimum corridors. The 
fi re codes complement these built-in features with 
requirements for emergency planning and fi re drills. 
Day care facilities may be classed as Educational or 
Institutional depending on the number and age of the 
children.
Group F: Factory and Industrial
Group F occupancies include buildings used for man-
ufacturing and repair and are subdivided into moder-
ate and low hazard facilities. High hazard factory and 
industrial areas are classifi ed as Group H.
OFFICER ADVICE
The use of group classification is the first aspect that 
must be established in the design of a building. It should 
also be your first consideration during an inspection of 
a building.
Use and Occupancy Classes
The model codes separate buildings and areas within 
into 10 general uses based on three factors:
 1. Capacity of the occupants for self-preservation
 2. Relative fi re hazards associated with the activities 
inside the structure
 3. Types and quantities of regulated materials within 
the structure
The classes are further subdivided into sub-
groups. A church, a museum, and a nightclub are 
all assemblies. The hazard is a life hazards, gener-
ally based on the large number of people. But the 
specifi c characteristics of their occupants and func-
tions are  drastically different, requiring different 

252  CHAPTER 9
Group H: High Hazard
Group H occupancies are those in which the quan-
tities of regulated materials exceed the permissible 
threshold established by the code. Group H is based 
on the quantity of materials in the building or area of 
the building, not what is being done with the materi-
als. Group H is subdivided into fi ve subgroups, based 
on the level of hazard.
Group I: Institutional
Group I occupancies are those in which persons 
whose capacity for self-preservation has been dimin-
ished, whether by age, illness, infi rmity, or incarcera-
tion. Group I has the most restrictive fi re protection 
and life safety requirements because in many cases, 
the occupants either cannot or should not evacuate 
the structure in a fi re situation. Group I is subdivided, 
based on the ability of the occupants to escape or 
shelter in place. The fi re and life safety features of a 
hospital are among the most stringent.
Group M: Mercantile
Group M occupancies include retail shops and stores, 
and areas displaying and selling stocks of retail goods. 
Automotive service stations that sell fuel and gro-
ceries are Group M. The difference between Group 
B-Business and Group M-Mercantile is the fuel load 
created by goods that are displayed and sold. Group B 
occupancies provide services. Group M occupancies 
display and sell merchandise.
Group R: Residential
Group R occupancies include hotels and motels, dormi-
tories, boarding houses, apartments, town houses, and 
some one- and two-family dwellings (see Figure 9-7). 
Most single-family, duplex, and townhouses are now 
constructed using the International Residential Code. 
Group R occupancies are statistically the most hazard-
ous. Consistently, more fi re fatalities occur in Group R 
occupancies than any other.
Group S: Storage
Group S occupancies are used for the storage of goods 
and include warehouses, storehouses, and freight 
depots. Storage uses are separated into low and mod-
erate hazard storage uses. Auto repair facilities that 
perform major repairs, including engine overhauls 
and body work or painting, are considered moder-
ate hazard storage occupancies. Occupancies that 
store over the threshold quantities of regulated mate-
rials must be designed and constructed as Group H 
occupancies.
Group U: Miscellaneous
Group U occupancies are those that are not classifi ed 
under any other specifi c use and include tall fences, 
cooling towers, retaining walls, tanks, etc.
Mixed Use Buildings
Buildings will often contain multiple occupancies, 
with different uses. A three-story offi ce building 
might have a restaurant (Group A-2) and computer 
store (Group M) on the fi rst fl oor and professional 
offi ces (Group B) throughout the rest of the build-
ing. Hotel/convention centers typically have Group 
R-1, Group B, and several Group A divisions (see 
Figure 9-8). The model building codes provide for 
these situations either by requiring that the whole 
building be constructed to all the requirements of 
the most restrictive use group or by separating the 
areas with fi re rated assemblies or by separating the 
building with fi re walls. Separating with fi re walls 
actually allows the occupancies to be treated as sep-
arate buildings.
Changes in Use and Occupancy
Detecting and prohibiting illegal changes in use is 
a primary responsibility of the fi re inspector. Some 
changes in use do not appear that drastic on the sur-
face, while some pose immediate hazards to the occu-
pants. Illegal changes in use are a violation of the fi re 
prevention code. Changes in use require a complete 
analysis of a building prior to approval. It is as if the 
owner is building a new building on the site.
FIGURE 9-7 This apartment building is classified Group 
R-2. Group R occupancies are statistically the most 
hasardous. (Photo by Jeff Payne)

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 253
CONDUCTING INSPECTIONS
At times, the basic issues involving the establish-
ment of an inspection program are obscured by the 
sheer volume of information that has to be consid-
ered. It is clear that the desired result of any fi re 
inspection program is fewer fi res, reduced fi re loss 
from those fi res that do occur, and fewer deaths 
and injuries. The 1975 American Insurance Asso-
ciation’s Special Interest Bulletin No. 5, The Value 
and Purpose of Fire Department Inspections, listed 
seven objectives for an inspection program, which, 
if accomplished, would render a substantial service 
to the community they serve.19 These points have 
value today.
 1. To obtain proper life safety conditions—Life safety 
inspections warrant attention to the adequacy of 
exits, obstruction to adequate and orderly egress at 
the time of fi re, the adequacy of building evacua-
tion plans, and determination of the number of per-
sons permitted in places of assembly.
 2. To keep fi res from starting—Persons who work 
among materials or situations that are hazard-
ous often become negligent of their own safety, 
just as long periods without a fi re overconfi dence 
FIGURE 9-8 Hotel/convention centers typically have 
Group R-1 guest rooms, Group B offices, and several 
Group A divisions such as restaurants, meeting rooms 
and ausitoriums.
and underestimation of the fi re problem (see 
Figure 9-9).
 3. To keep fi res from spreading—The general pub-
lic has little appreciation of the great value that 
structural features, such as stair and elevator 
enclosures, fi re doors, and fi re partitions, have in 
preventing the spread of fi re.
 4. To determine the adequacy and maintenance of fi re 
protection systems.
 5. To preplan fi re fi ghting procedure—It is diffi cult to 
attack a fi re intelligently without fi rst knowing the 
building and its occupancy.
 6. To stimulate cooperation between owners and occu-
pants and the fi re department—Nothing will assure 
closer cooperation between owners and occupants 
of buildings and the fi re department than the inter-
est of the department in not only preventing fi res 
but also being better prepared to handle fi res when 
they occur.
 7. To assure compliance with fi re protection laws, 
ordinances, and regulations—In many places, 
some or all of these matters will be under the juris-
diction of the fi re department.
Whenever possible, review the records for previous 
inspections before you go to the site. If the same defi -
ciencies and unsafe conditions are encountered, it may 
FIGURE 9-9 Inspectors should remember that sometimes 
people who work with dangerous materials or in poten-
tionally hazardous environments may become complacent 
and neglect to comply with the basic rules of safety.

254  CHAPTER 9
indicate the need for a frank discussion about condi-
tions and ways to improve them. It might also indi-
cate the need for assistance from the fi re prevention 
bureau, especially if the defi ciencies are particularly 
hazardous. This is the reason that departments must 
have record-retention policies in place. These poli-
cies safeguard the information so that it can be readily 
accessed and maintained.
Inspections and building surveys should be thor-
ough, methodical and start on the outside of the 
building. Drive around the entire perimeter of a large 
building if you can, before you go in. You can inspect 
the exterior of the building on foot, as part of your 
inspection after checking in with the owner’s rep-
resentative. Cars or storage blocking hydrants, fi re 
department connections, or exit discharges can be 
moved while you are touring the inside of the build-
ing if you notify the manager when you fi rst arrive.
One fi nal word about conducting company inspec-
tions. Remain professional. Make sure you and 
your crew looks professional, project a professional 
appearance and keep your crew together. Keep your 
behaviors professional; this is not the time to tell 
jokes or eye the opposite sex. If the property repre-
sentative does not agree with what you are telling 
him or begins to get upset, do not argue. Politely 
excuse your self and call in the inspection bureau 
or your supervisor to complete the inspection, per-
haps at a later time when emotions have had time to 
cool down.
NFPA 550, FIRE SAFETY 
CONCEPTS TREE
NFPA 550, Fire Safety Concepts Tree (see Figure 9-10) 
was fi rst developed in 1974 and identifi es fundamental 
strategies and lists objectives for achieving a fi re-safe 
environment. The fault tree analysis system was fi rst 
developed by H. A. Watson of Bell Telephone Labs 
in 1962 and made famous by Boeing Corporation in 
its application to the Minuteman Ballistic Missile 
Program.20
The goal of fi re inspection programs is the 
 safeguarding of life and property, and it is 
achieved through two basic strategies: prevent fi res 
from occurring, and when they do occur through 
some failure, manage the impact on people and 
property.
Prevent the Ignition of Fires 
by Effectively Segregating 
the Three Elements of the Fire 
Triangle
■ Control heat sources such as smoking, unsafe heat-
ing appliances, electrical hazards, open fl ames, and 
burning.
■ Control fuels by regulating the storage and han-
dling of specifi c materials.
FIGURE 9-10 NFPA 550, Fire Safety Concepts Tree was first developed in 1974 and identifies fundamental strategies 
and lists objectives for achieving a fire safe environment. (Source: Reproduced with permission from NFPA 550, Fire Safety Concepts 
Tree, Copyright © 2007, National Fire Protection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and official position of the NFPA on the 
referenced subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety)

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 255
■ Control the interaction of fuel, oxygen, and the heat 
source in storage, handling, transportation, and 
processing (see Figure 9–11).
Manage the Fire Impact 
by Effectively Regulating 
Construction, Use 
and Occupancy, and 
Occupant Training
■ Limit building height and area based on the 
 combustibility and fi re-resistance of construction 
elements.
■ Provide adequate fi re-resistance for structural ele-
ments and separation assemblies.
■ Provide adequate emergency egress facilities.
■ Provide built in fi re protection systems to detect 
and suppress fi res.
■ Ensure that hazardous processes and occupancies 
are adequately separated from other occupancies.
■ Ensure that occupants and employees in critical 
occupancies receive appropriate training in evacu-
ation and emergency response.
PREINCIDENT PLANS
In the fi rst edition of Building Construction for the 
Fire Service, Frank Brannigan observed that:
A building does not drop from the sky as does a dis-
abled aircraft. Neither is it transient, such as a ship, 
truck or a train. Very often it has been inexistence 
since long before any of the fi refi ghters at the scene 
were born. Yet, sad to say, in many cases the building 
might as well be a space ship from Mars for all the fi re 
department really knows about it.21
Company inspections are one of the best opportuni-
ties to develop or update pre-incident plans. Preplans 
typically consist of the following:
■ Occupancy classifi cation(s)
■ Type of construction, height, area, and number of 
stories
■ Fixed fi re protection systems
■ Building utilities
■ Nature of the activities conducted in the building
■ Life hazards and evacuation considerations
■ Water supply features
■ Access points to the site and building interior, both 
horizontal and vertical
■ Hazardous materials or processes
■ Exposure potential
■ Safety issues and features for civilians and fi re 
personnel
■ Special resources that may be required
■ General fi refi ghting concerns
FIRE TRIANGLE
FUEL
HEAT
OXYGEN
FIGURE 9-11 The strategy used by the model fire codes 
to prevent fires is to segregate the three legs of the fire 
triangle.
NOTE
“A building does not drop from the sky as does a dis-
abled aircraft. Neither is it transient, such as a ship, 
truck or a train. Very often it has been inexistence since 
long before any of the firefighters at the scene were 
born. Yet, sad to say, in many cases the building might 
as well be a space ship form Mars for all the fire depart-
ment really knows about it.”—Frank Brannigan15
Preincident Plans 
and the Codes
Often, the building and fi re code are viewed as having 
little, if anything, to do with fi re departments’ operations. 
This is unfortunate, since the use classifi cation is a key 
indictor of what the structure was designed for and the 
occupant’s capacity for self-preservation. The occupancy 
classifi cation listed on the certifi cate of occupancy must 
match the actual use, and structure should be consistent 
with the construction classifi cation listed. Hazardous 
Materials Inventory Statements (HMIS) and Hazardous 
Materials Management Plans (HMMP) required by the 
fi re code should also be included in preplans.
The model fi re codes require buildings to employ 
the NFPA 704 marking system to identify areas 
where hazardous materials are manufactured, han-
dled, used, or stored. The marking system is intended 
to alert fi rst responders to the presence of hazardous 
materials (see Figure 9-12).

256  CHAPTER 9
FIGURE 9-12 NFPA 704 marking system is intended to alert 
first responders to the presence of hazardous  materials.
Last April, in an isolated 190-person community in the 
Canadian Northwest Territory close to the Arctic Ocean, 
a park ranger’s house burned to the ground. Witnesses 
had indicated kids were seen leaving the scene.
As a company offi cer for the Inuvik Fire Depart-
ment, Captain Julie Miller had made it her goal to instill a 
district-wide prevention program, which included running 
the juvenile fi re-setters intervention program. So several 
days after the house fi re, she fl ew into the community 
and spoke to a 5-year-old and two 6-year-olds.
She interviewed the parents, and then each child 
 separately to determine whether the fi re was a curiosity or 
if psychological issues were to blame. It was found to be 
the former: The kids had no concept of the consequences 
of fi re. They had entered the abandoned house and were 
playing with matches they had found, setting pieces of the 
couch on fi re. One piece started to burn, and fl ames went up 
the wall, which caused the rapid fi re spread. At that point, 
the kids were scared. By the time Miller got to them, they 
were terrifi ed. Having worked with kids previously, she knew 
it was important to stress that they were not in  trouble and 
FIRE PREVENTION
Julie Miller, Captain, Inuvik Fire Department, Canada
that she just wanted to prevent this from happening again. 
She discussed with them how fi re works, using activity 
books that bolstered the talk and showing them videos of 
kids who had been burned.
After spending the day in the community, she gave the 
local fi re department the resources to follow up if nec-
essary. It is incidents like the one mentioned above that 
compels her to do Risk-Watch® public education pro-
grams in local schools several times a year and to train 
several other fi refi ghters to do the same. According to 
Miller, there has been a direct correlation between pub-
lic education and preventing fi re occurrences within the 
community. An ounce of prevention . . . 
Questions
Captain Miller made quite an effort to connect with the 
children involved in this incident.
1. Do you think her actions were appropriate?
2. Do you think her actions were benefi cial to the chil-
dren and others in that remote community?
3. What are the benefi ts of such activity?
4. Would you or your department have undertaken similar 
activities to prevent a recurrence of this type of situation?
5. Does your department have an organized juvenile fi re-
setter intervention program? If so, how is it used? If 
not, how would you start one?

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 257
T
he primary mission of the fi re service has always 
been the protection of people and property from 
fi re. The role of the fi re service continues to expand at 
the same time public resources diminish. It would be 
easy to make the false assumption that fi re prevention 
regulation and inspection are aimed at the protection 
of property and are somehow less worthy than direct 
efforts aimed at life safety. If the loss of nine fi refi ght-
ers in the 2007 Charleston Sofa Super Store fi re does 
LESSONS LEARNED
not convince you that fi re inspection and code enforce-
ment, prefi re planning, and fi refi ghter safety are not 
necessary and complementary elements of fi refi ghter 
safety, consider the economic impact of fi re on the tax 
base. The loss of jobs, homes, careers, and the opportu-
nity for a good education for our children are tied to the 
economic vitality of the community. Your fi rst job as 
an offi cer is the protection of the public you serve and 
the safety and welfare of the fi refi ghters that you lead.
acceptable risk the level of hazard potential that 
the public is willing to live with, that constantly 
changes based on public perception of the news and 
current events.
adoption to formally accept through legislative 
action and put into effect.
adoption by reference a method of code adop-
tion in which the specifi c edition of a model code is 
referred to within the adopting ordinance.
adoption by transcription a method of code 
adoption in which the entire text of the code is pub-
lished within the adopting ordinance.
code a body of law or rules which is systemati-
cally arranged. When and where to do, or not to do 
something.
inspection model a method of setting inspection 
priorities based on a jurisdictions actual fi re experi-
ence or identifi ed hazards.
inspection warrant an administrative warrant 
issued by a judicial offi cer to search or inspect a 
property, or perform a noncriminal investigation.
mini-maxi code a code developed and adopted 
at the state level for either mandatory or optional 
enforcement by local governments; that cannot be 
amended by the local governments.
model code technical rules developed and main-
tained by organizations and made available for gov-
ernments to adopt and enforce. They are generally 
developed through a consensus through the use of 
technical committees.
ordinance a law of an authorized subdivision of a 
state, such as a county, city or town.
permit model a method of setting inspection 
priorities by inspecting those occupancies and 
processes that require fi re code permits.
right-of-entry clause a code that permits the fi re 
offi cial to enter and inspect structures on a routine 
basis, exempt one and two-family dwellings and resi-
dential portions of multifamily structures.
standard a rule for measuring or a model to be fol-
lowed. How to do something, what materials to use.
statute a law enacted by a state or the federal 
legislature.
warrant a legal writ issued by a judicial offi -
cer commanding an offi cer to arrest a person, seize 
property, or search a premises.
KEY TERMS
 1. List the three elements that determine use and oc-
cupancy classifi cations.
 2. What is the difference between a code and a 
standard?
 3. What is the key difference between Group B and 
Group M occupancies?
 4. The NFPA 550, Fire Safety Concepts Tree identi-
fi es what two broad strategies for fi re safety?
 5. Which method of determining inspection priori-
ties is the easiest to defend?
 6. What is the principal hazard associated with 
Group A buildings?
 7. Explain the term “acceptable risk.”
 8. Describe how a high-profi le event can affect a 
community’s tolerance for a particular hazard.
 9. When is a warrant NOT necessary to conduct an 
inspection?
 10. Defi ne the terms ordinance and statute.
REVIEW QUESTIONS

258  CHAPTER 9
ENDNOTES
12. Ibid, page 22.
13. National Board of Fire Underwriters, Pioneers of Progress. New 
York, NY: National Board of Fire Underwriters, 1941, page 125.
14. Tom Klem, “Investigation Report: Fifty-six Die in English 
Stadium Fire,” Fire Journal, May 1986, page 126.
15. National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 100 Years, a Fire 
Protection Overview. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection 
Association, 1996, page 9.
16. 2000 International Fire Code Commentary. Falls Church, VA: 
International Code Council, 2002, page 577.
17. International Building Code Commentary: Volume 1, 2000. Falls 
Church, VA: International Code Council, 2001, page 4–63.
18. Jabobellis v. Ohio, 378 U.S. 184, 197, 1964.
19. Special Interest Bulletin No. 5, The Value and Purpose of Fire 
Department Inspections. New York: American Insurance As-
sociation, 1975, page 1.
20. NFPA 550 Fire Safety Concepts Tree. Quincy, MA: National 
Fire Protection Association, 1986, page 14.
21. Francis Brannigan, Building Construction for the Fire Service, 
1st ed. Boston: National Fire Protection Association, 1971, 
page 1.
 1. Fire Loss in the U.S. 2007, Boston, MA: National Fire Protec-
tion Association.
 2. Fire in the United States, 14th ed. Emmitsburg, MD: US Fire 
Administration, National Fire Data Center, 2007, page 3.
 3. Ibid, page 5.
 4. America Burning, the Report of the National Commission on 
Fire Prevention and Control. Washington: National Commis-
sion on Fire Prevention and Control, 1973, page XI.
 5. Ibid.
 6. America Burning, the Report of the National Commission on 
Fire Prevention and Control, page 167.
 7. Can Your Ashes, Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department 
Press Release, January 2003.
 8. Chris Brennan, “Firefi ghters Sue City to Stop Budget Cuts,” 
Philadelphia Daily News, December 16, 2008.
 9. Albert Lea Tribune, “City Sewer Rates at the Center of Com-
pany’s Expansion,” September 20, 2008.
10. John R. Hall, et al., Fire Code Inspections and Fire Prevention: 
What Methods Lead to Success? Boston, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association, 1978, page viii
11. Harry Chase Brearley, Fifty Years of Civilizing Force. New 
York, NY: Frederick A. Stokes, 1916, page 42.
 1. Which model fi re code is adopted within your juris-
diction, and is it adopted at the state or local level?
 2. What percentage of buildings are inspected each 
year by the fi re department in your jurisdiction? 
What steps would you take in order to inspect 
them all?
 3. How are fi re inspection priorities determined 
within your jurisdiction? Can you justify them?
 4. What single building, facility, or complex would 
have the greatest impact on your local economy if 
it was destroyed by fi re?
 5. What single building, facility, or complex poses 
the greatest potential for loss of life in the event 
of a major fi re?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 6. What building code is in effect in your jurisdic-
tion? Is it adopted on a local or state level?
 7. What is the most hazardous occupancy classifi ca-
tion in your jurisdiction?
 8. Why can illegal changes in use create potentially 
hazardous conditions?
 9. Why does the United States have such a high in-
cidence of fi re?
 10. What are the potential public relations benefi ts of 
a company inspections program?

The Company Offi cer’s Role in Fire Prevention 259
Ahrens, Marty, et al. “Use of Fire Incident Data and Statistics.” In 
Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association, 2003.
America Burning, The Report of the National Commission on Fire 
Prevention and Control. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Offi ce, 1973.
America Burning Recommissioned. Emmitsburg, MD: U.S. Fire 
Administration, 2000.
America Burning Revisited. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Offi ce, 1990.
Bryan, John L. “Human Behavior in Fire.” In Fire Protection 
Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection 
Association, 2003.
Crawford, Jim. “Code Enforcement Never Goes According to 
Plan.” FireRescue, April 2008.
Farr, Ronald R. and Steven F. Sawyer. “Fire Prevention and Code 
Enforcement.” In Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, 
MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2003.
Fire in the United States. 14th ed., is published regularly by the 
USFA at Emmitsburg, MD. It is available at no cost by contact-
ing them at usfa.dhs.gov.
Hall, John R. “Using Data for Public Education Decision Making.” 
In Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National 
Fire Protection Association, 2003.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Hall, John R. and Arthur E. Cote. “An Overview of the Fire Prob-
lem and Fire Protection.” In Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. 
Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2003.
Kirtley, Edward. “Fire and Life Safety Education.” In Fire Protec-
tion Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection 
Association, 2003.
Robertson, James C. Introduction to Fire Prevention. 5th ed. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2000.
Schaenman, Phillip. “U.K. Prevention Works.” Fire Chief April 
2008.
Regular reports regarding annual fi re loss, loss fi res, and fi refi ghter 
injuries and fatalities appear in the NFPA Journal, the member-
ship publication of the National Fire Protection Association.
Publications available from the U.S. Fire Administration: Children 
and Fire in the United States, Fire Risks for the Older Adult, 
Heating Fires in Residential Properties, Protecting Your Fam-
ily from Fire (FA 130), Socioeconomic Factors and the Inci-
dence of Fire (FA 170), and The Rural Fire Problem in the 
United States (FA 180).
These and many other reports are listed on the U.S. Fire Admin-
istration’s Web site: www.usfa.gov or www.FEMA.gov. All can 
be ordered free of charge, and many can be downloaded.
Most of the reports from NFPA are available on the Web site: 
http:www.nfpa.org.

The Company Officer’s Role 
in Understanding Building 
Construction and Fire Behavior
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ Today’s Firefighting Requires 
Experience, Knowledge, and Skill
■ Understanding the Community’s 
Needs
■ Building Construction
■ Types of Construction
■ Fire Behavior
■ Putting It All Together
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
10

261
STREET 
STORY
S
ome years back as a young firefighter, I had two close calls in a 2-week 
period. Through these near-death experiences, I learned a valuable lesson that 
I carried with me as I progressed to a company officer position.
On the occasion of the first close call, I was detailed to a busy truck company. 
It was a Sunday evening in January, and it had been a slow shift with only a few 
minor fires. As the structure fire alarm came in, the shift was relaxing and watching 
the Super Bowl. Our laid-back evening was about to change dramatically.
On arrival, we found a bowstring truss government building that measured 
approximately 65 feet by 125 feet. In the locked and darkened building, we could 
see heavy smoke conditions and the faint glow of fire in the rear. My partner and 
I used a K-12 saw, halligan bar, and a sledge to force a heavy steel door located 
in the rear of the structure. Then, with the use of 12-foot pike poles, we started 
bumping down the ceiling tiles, exposing a heavy volume of fire. An engine 
company led their 2½  -inch line in the rear door and started hitting the fire.
A few minutes into our attack, one of the company officers started yelling for us 
to back out. Reluctantly, we backed out of the building and helped set up defensive 
operations. I was sure we were pulled out too early. I felt we were winning. Within 
a few minutes, I was proved wrong when, with a thunderous crash, the entire 
rear of the structure collapsed. The area where we had been working was now a 
debris pile with intense heat and flames rising some 60 feet into the air. Our lives 
were saved by a company officer who was savvy about building construction and 
the effects of fire on building components. His knowledge of this key fire service 
principle protected the safety of the firefighters under his command.
Just over a week later, I was in an attic apartment of a 2½  -story balloon frame 
building with my rescue squad and an engine company. We came up a center 
stairway and were fighting a large fire in the rear of the structure. I crawled toward 
the front to search the bedroom and to vent the front window. Thick, dark smoke 
with intense heat banked down to the floor. The conditions were rapidly changing; 
superheated smoke now had me down into a belly crawl. Suddenly, the entire 
ceiling lit up in a flashover. I was almost melting. I quickly belly crawled in the 
direction of the screams of firefighters as they dove down the stairs. By the time I 
dove down the stairs behind the others, some of my gear was burning. A firefighter 
hit me with a fog line as I rolled to the bottom of the staircase. Once again, I 
was lucky and escaped with only partial-thickness burns, and again I learned a 
valuable lesson about the power of knowledge of the enemy when fighting fire. 
The conditions of the room I entered were ripe for flashover. Recognizing these 
conditions and taking alternate actions could have saved me painful burns.
Neither of these close calls had to happen. They could have been prevented 
if I had a better understanding of building construction and fire behavior and I had 
applied them to the situation. As a company officer, I strove to learn and apply 
these critical bodies of knowledge in everything I did, for the safety of my crew.
Today, firefighting has gotten even more dangerous than ever before. I believe 
this to be true for two reasons: Fires burn hotter due to the increase in synthetic 
fuels, and buildings are weaker due to lightweight construction. This is a dangerous 
combination. We cannot use 20-year-old knowledge and tactics in these changing 
times. Doing so could cost lives. Become a student of building construction and 
fire behavior. I sure did. Always remember to share your experience and knowledge 
with your brother and sister firefighters, as it is everyone’s responsibility to make 
firefighting safer.
—Steve Chikerotis, Battalion Chief/Assistant Director of Training, 
Chicago Fire Department, Chicago, Illinois

262  CHAPTER 10
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 10-1 List the five general classes of building con-
struction and alternative construction methods.
 10-2 Describe the five general classes of build-
ing construction and alternative construction 
methods.
 10-3 Describe fire dynamics within the five types of 
building construction.
 10-4 Describe the impact of performance-based 
codes on building construction types and alter-
native construction methods.
 10-5 Describe the effects of alternative construction 
methods on fire dynamics.
 10-6 Describe the meaning of fuel load as it applies 
to the potential size and intensity of a fire.
 10-7 Describe the effects of fuel load on the tactics 
and strategies employed during structural fire 
suppression.
 10-8 Identify fire detection and suppression systems 
in the pre-incident plan.
 10-9 Describe the function of the different types of 
fire protection systems currently in use.
 10-10 Describe the importance of hazardous materials 
management plans and hazardous materials in-
ventory statements to the inspections process.
 10-11 Describe the NFPA 704 Hazard Identification 
System.
 10-12 Describe the types of fire detection systems 
currently in use.
 10-13 Describe the effects of fire protection systems 
on the tactics and strategies employed during 
structural fire suppression.
 10-14 List the appropriate standards for the mainte-
nance and inspection of sprinklers, standpipes, 
wet and dry chemical extinguishing systems, 
and fire alarm systems.
 10-15 Explain the function of each fire detection sys-
tem currently in use.
 10-16 Identify the various types of alarm systems that 
are currently found in use.
 10-17 Explain the operation of each alarm system that 
is currently found in use.
 10-18 Describe NFPA 550, The Fire Safety Concepts 
Tree and its uses.
 10-19 Explain each of the risk factors and community 
consequences related to structure fires within a 
response area.
 10-20 Describe the effects of fire growth on the tactics 
and strategies employed during structural fire 
suppression.
 10-21 Describe the effects of building construction 
on the tactics and strategies employed during 
structural fire suppression.
 10-22 Describe the effects of water supply on the tac-
tics and strategies employed during structural 
fire suppression.
* The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for 
Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, are identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.
time and many unknown factors. Working in these 
conditions is diffi cult and dangerous; leading others 
under such conditions can be extremely challeng-
ing. In such adverse conditions, you, as the company 
 offi cer, are expected to be calm and decisive, to issue 
clear orders, and to keep track of all the activities. 
You are responsible for the safety of others. You are 
 responsible for at least some aspect of the  management 
of the incident and, in many situations, may be the 
incident commander.
INTRODUCTION
Many experienced fi refi ghters have successfully 
moved from fi refi ghter to fi re offi cer with little or no 
formal training. To their credit, they were quite suc-
cessful. But just think how much better they would 
have been if they had been trained and given a chance 
to prepare for that assignment.
This situation is especially true for new offi -
cers in operational situations. A new offi cer,  riding 
on an engine or truck company arriving at the 
scene of a working fi re or other emergency, may be 
 overwhelmed. Some of this is due to a lack of experi-
ence, but some may be due to a lack of training.
At the scene of emergencies, the fi rst-arriving offi -
cers are usually concerned with limited resources, 
SAFETY
Working in emergency conditions is difficult and dan-
gerous; leading others under such conditions can be 
extremely challenging.

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  263
As you move to the offi cer’s position in the organi-
zation, the roles change quite a bit. As an offi cer, you 
are now the manager and leader of the company. We 
have talked about management and leadership in pre-
vious chapters. All of that information applies in your 
role as a leader during emergency activities as well.
In the next four chapters, we discuss your role as 
the company offi cer in identifying and mitigating 
problems at the scene of emergencies. This chapter 
focuses on information needed for fi ghting fi res in 
structures; we saw in Chapter 9 that structural fi res 
are frequent and the loss is often high. This chapter 
deals with building construction and fi re behavior. 
We will get to tactics in Chapter 13.
TODAY’S FIREFIGHTING 
REQUIRES EXPERIENCE, 
KNOWLEDGE, AND SKILL
Modern fi refi ghting requires more than just expe-
rience; it requires knowledge and skill. With the 
 gradual decline in the number of serious fi res encoun-
tered, good offi cers will learn from every opportu-
nity, including actual working incidents, participating 
in training and drills, attending seminars, and read-
ing about the subject as much as possible.
During the 1870s, the chief of the London Fire Bri-
gade, Massey Shaw, visited the United States. Chief 
Shaw later wrote the following:
When I was last in America, it struck me very forcibly 
that although most of the chiefs were intelligent and 
zealous in their work, not one that I met even made a 
pretense to the kind of professional knowledge that I 
consider so essential. Indeed one went so far as to say 
that the only way to learn the business of a fi reman was 
to go to fi res. A statement about as monstrous and as 
contrary to reason as if he had said that the only way to 
become a surgeon would be to commence cutting off 
limbs without any knowledge of the human body or of 
the implements required.
There is no such short cut to profi ciency in any profes-
sion and the day will come when your fellow country-
men will be obligated to open their eyes to the fact, 
that, as a man learns the business of a fi reman only by 
attending fi res he must of necessity learn it badly. Even 
that which he does pick up and may seem to know, he 
will know imperfectly and be incapable of imparting 
to others.
I consider the business of a fi reman a regular profession 
requiring previous study and training as other profes-
sions do. I am convinced that where training and study 
are omitted and men are pitchforked into the practi-
cal work without preparation, the fi re department will 
never be capable of dealing satisfactorily with great 
emergencies.1
Chief Shaw’s comments may seem disrespectful 
to some, but in the time frame in which they were 
offered, they may have been amazingly perceptive. 
Before you take sides here, we want to point out that 
the fi re service has made a lot of progress in the devel-
opment of the very professional knowledge that Chief 
Shaw found defi cient.
Even the Best 
Will Be Challenged
Regardless of one’s experience, training, and educa-
tion, even the best offi cers will be challenged. Eman-
ual Fried, in his classic text Fireground Tactics, 
offered the following advice:
Command on the fi reground is a demanding task 
for the offi cer. To improve the ability to handle the 
situations we have to concede certain basic faults that 
we fi nd in ourselves.
Admit these possibilities:
■ You are going to get excited.
■ You are going to yell.
■ You are going to make mistakes.
■ You are going to lose buildings.2
In spite of these challenges, you and your fi re 
department are in the business of saving lives and 
property during fi res and other emergencies. You 
respond to a variety of events, using your skills and 
abilities to contribute something toward the success-
ful outcome. Fortunately, most events do have suc-
cessful outcomes. This does not happen by chance: 
Many factors contribute to the company being ready 
to deal with emergency situations, including your 
knowledge of the job.
Fighting Fires Is Still 
Our Business
Most textbooks and training programs still refl ect the 
traditional nature of the fi re service: They focus on 
fi re-related emergencies. In reality, fi re departments 
provide a host of other services to their community, 
including the delivery of emergency medical care, the 
mitigation of incidents involving hazardous materials, 
NOTE
Many factors contribute to the company being ready to 
deal with emergency situations, including your knowl-
edge of the job.

264  CHAPTER 10
in dealing with emergencies. The company has a role 
in this process, as well, and should have a signifi -
cant interest in the outcome. Regardless of whether 
the community has one fi re company or a hundred, 
some part of the community should be a particu-
lar fi re station’s primary concern. Members of the 
company responsible for that area should be inter-
ested in the risk factors in that area. They should 
look at specifi c situations where they may be called 
upon to save lives and protect property and should 
also be thinking about the overall community 
consequences.
We will review two items that were probably cov-
ered in your basic training—building construction 
and fi re behavior. This information is not offered as 
an insult to your knowledge; however, it is possible 
that you may have forgotten some of this important 
material. It is also possible that some new information 
has been added, information that will make your job 
a little easier and a whole lot safer.
and various rescue capabilities usually tailored to 
the local community’s needs (see Figure 10-1). As 
a result, we are seeing a decrease in the percentage 
of fi re-related emergencies as a part of the number of 
total calls received by the fi re department.
There is another factor that affects the department’s 
fi refi ghting activities. Where good fi re prevention 
activities are in place, there are fewer fi res. And where 
automatic fi re detection and suppression equipment 
are present, timely fi re notifi cation and control lead to 
confi ned and smaller fi res. This is good news for the 
fi re service and for the community. However, it does 
present the fi re service with a challenge: The basic fi re 
department component, the company, is expected to be 
profi cient in doing a greater number of things, while 
having fewer opportunities to practice the basic skills 
needed for its original task, effective fi re suppression.
FIGURE 10-1 Firefighters are called upon to deal with 
many emergencies.
OFFICER ADVICE
 Firefi ghters and fi re offi cers should take advantage of 
every opportunity to plan and train for the various situ-
ations they may face.
All of this suggests that there is much to be done 
to prepare the company for the challenges it faces. 
Firefi ghters and fi re offi cers should take advantage of 
every opportunity to plan and train for the various sit-
uations they may face. They must be familiar with the 
community they serve and the activities that regularly 
take place in that community. They must be familiar 
with the special hazards that exist, hazards that pose 
threats to themselves and the citizens they are obli-
gated to help during an emergency.
UNDERSTANDING THE 
COMMUNITY’S NEEDS
Fire departments should be assessing their commu-
nities’ risk factors. This is the fi rst step in identify-
ing the strengths and weaknesses of the department 
For company offi cers, a general knowledge of your 
area of responsibilities is essential for effective opera-
tions. This knowledge includes the following:
■ Physical factors: geographical size, population, valua-
tion, response time, and topography of the community
■ Access factors: access and barriers to all areas
■ Occupancy factors: the nature of the businesses that 
occupy the buildings
■ Structural factors: age, type, and density of structures
■ Resource factors: fi re department resources, and for 
fi refi ghting purpose, water supply capabilities
■ Survival factors: stairwells and other penetrations to 
allow for rescue, fi re spread, and potential falling haz-
ards for fi refi ghters
Life risk factors are affected by the number of people at 
risk, their danger, and their ability to provide for their own 
safety.
Property risk factors are affected by the characteris-
tics of building construction, exposures, occupancy, and 
available resources.
Community consequences are related to the impact 
of the event upon the community, both during and after 
the event is concluded. Some of these consequences 
are immediate; some last for generations.
RISK FACTORS AND COMMUNITY 
CONSEQUENCES

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  265
using less than a tank of water. The same fi re in a 
Hilton Hotel killed two people and injured 36 others.
Fire intensity and behavior will, for the most part, be 
affected by the types of building materials used, the 
construction methods, and the build-in fi re protection 
features installed during construction.
TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION
There are three key points to remember when dealing 
with building construction types:
 1. All construction is either combustible (it will burn) 
or noncombustible (it won’t).
 2. The term protected, when applied to construction 
materials, means protected from the effects of fi re 
by encasement. Concrete, gypsum and spray on 
coatings are all used to “protect” construction ele-
ments. Protected construction does not mean the 
building has a sprinkler system.
 3. The code specifi es the minimum requirements, 
but permits the use of materials that exceed those 
requirements. Making assumptions based on your 
view from the street is risky and potentially haz-
ardous for you and your crew.
Some buildings with combustible components are 
actually more fi re resistant than some noncombusti-
ble buildings. That is where protection of the struc-
tural elements comes into play. A lightweight steel 
building may be noncombustible but will fail quickly 
when exposed to a fi re involving combustible con-
tents. Conversely, buildings with masonry exterior 
walls and heavy timber joists have combustible com-
ponents that hold up quite well compared to light-
weight steel.
Determining 
Construction Type
A design professional lays out the building in a set 
of plans. The occupancy classifi cation(s), building 
area, number of stories, location on the lot, distance 
from the lot lines, fi re department access to the exte-
rior of the structure, and whether the building will be 
equipped with sprinklers all have to be established 
before the minimum construction type can be deter-
mined. Occupancy classifi cations that are more haz-
ardous, based on the vulnerability of the occupants 
(hospitals and nursing homes) or the relative hazards 
associated with the function of the building (repair 
garage versus an offi ce building) or the materials 
handle or stored (manufacturing or processing haz-
ardous materials), have more stringent construction 
requirements.
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
During the course of your fi re service career, vir-
tually every commercial building and all but a few 
 residential buildings you encounter will have been 
constructed or renovated under a construction code.
There is a good reason. The design professional’s 
client has a budget. Every construction project has a 
budget. Most buildings are built using the minimum 
type of construction that is permitted by the code.
The primary purpose of a building code is to pre-
scribe standards that will keep buildings from falling 
down. Besides gravity, there are many forces that act 
against buildings. Snow loads, wind loads, and poten-
tial earthquake loads are all provided for the building 
codes. But the force that is addressed by the largest 
number of provisions is fi re. The goals of the code 
are to:
■ Maintain the integrity of the structure and prevent 
collapse
■ Limit fi re size by preventing fi re spread
■ Provide adequate time for occupants to escape or 
shelter in place
The goals can be met in a variety of ways, using 
fi re resistance–rated construction, fi re extinguish-
ing systems, and noncombustible building materials 
and providing adequate fi re separation distance. Two 
important terms to understanding construction types 
are noncombustible and fi re resistance. In broad 
terms, a noncombutible building material will not 
burn, and fi re resistance is the resistance of a build-
ing to collapse or to total involvement in fi re. The late 
Frank Brannigan described it as fi re endurance. It 
is measured by the length of time typical structural 
members and assemblies resist specifi ed tempera-
tures under test conditions.
How Construction Type 
Affects You
In his fi rst edition of Building Construction for the Fire 
Service, the late Francis Brannigan noted: “In general 
it can be said the building makes the problem.”3 For 
the most part, fi res that occur in buildings pose the 
greatest risk to the occupants and fi refi ghting forces, 
and pose the greatest challenge. Brannigan made his 
point by describing a fi re involving 50 upholstered 
chairs stacked in a barren fi eld as one-unit response 
NOTE
There is an axiom in the construction code business: 
Which of the fi ve types of construction is preferred by 
design professionals for their projects? The cheapest.

266  CHAPTER 10
walls, including windows, spandrel panels, and mul-
lions, were almost completely destroyed by the fi re. 
Minor fi re extension also occurred via poke-through 
penetrations for electric communications cables, 
HVAC shafts, and heat conduction through the fl oor 
slabs. A minor fi re occurred in a storeroom on the 
27th fl oor, ignited by fi re products escaping from an 
HVAC shaft that originated on the 12th fl oor.4
Type II: Noncombustible
In Type II construction, the structural elements are 
also noncombustible. The difference between Type I 
Fire Resistive and Type II Noncombustible is in the 
level of protection of the structural elements. Type I 
is protected to the highest level. Type II is subdivided 
into subtypes; one is protected less than Type I and 
the other has no protection. Type II buildings are non-
combustible but are afforded limited or no fi re resis-
tance for the structural elements.
FIVE CONSTRUCTION TYPES
There are fi ve basic construction types recognized by 
the International Building Code (IBC). The IBC’s 
predecessor regional building codes used slightly dif-
ferent terms for the same basic types. Every juris-
diction has a large number of buildings constructed 
under one or more of the regional codes and fewer, 
relatively new buildings designed and constructed 
under the IBC. All of the codes use a combination 
letter/number system to identify the different types of 
construction. For simplicity, we will also include the 
common name associated with each type.
Type I: Fire Resistive
In Type I construction, the structural elements are non-
combustible and are protected to the highest level. Type 
I is divided into two subtypes. The difference between 
them is the level of protection for the structural elements 
(expressed in hours). Only noncombustible materials 
are permitted for the structural  elements. Structural 
steel is encased in concrete, gypsum, or cementaceous 
coating (see Figure 10-2). Fire-resistive construction 
holds up well under fi re conditions,  provided the struc-
tural protection remains intact. High-rise buildings 
with steel structural elements encased in concrete are 
examples of Type I buildings.
While the possibility of collapse during normal fi re 
conditions is remote, fi re spread from fl oor to fl oor 
via windows, or through vertical openings that have 
not been properly fi restopped in accordance with the 
code, is possible. During the First Interstate Bank fi re 
in Los Angeles (1988), the fi re extended upward from 
the 12th to 16th fl oors. Flames were estimated to have 
lapped 30 feet up the face of the building. The curtain 
FIGURE 10-2 Type I construction features noncombus-
tible structural elements that are protected from the ef-
fects of fire through encasement with concrete, gypsum, 
or spray appled coatings.
FIGURE 10-3 Type II construction features noncom-
bustible structural elements that may be protected or 
 unprotected depending on the subtype.
The Sofa Super Store in Charleston, SC, was orig-
inally constructed in the 1960s under the Standard 
Building Code’s equivalent of IBC Type IIB con-
struction. Automatic sprinklers were not required by 
the code at that time. The roof structure failed and 
collapsed 43 minutes from the time the fi rst hand line 
was deployed on the fi re that started on the exterior 
loading dock.5 Steel is a superior building material, 
with good strength in both tension and compression. 
However, steel loses almost half of its strength at 
900 degrees. In issuing Preventing Injuries and 
FIREGROUND FACT
The typical strip shopping center or big box store with 
masonry block walls, steel bar joists, unprotected steel 
columns, and a steel roof deck is a Type IIB (unprotected) 
building (see Figure 10-3). If there is a sprinkler system 
failure, the roof structure can fail quickly and collapse.

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  267
Deaths of Fire Fighters due to Truss System Failures 
in 2005, NIOSH noted:
Steel has a high thermal conductivity, which means it 
can transfer heat away from a localized source and act 
as a heat sink. If an intense fi re is evenly distributed 
along the steel member, the critical temperature may be 
reached very quickly. Steel also has a high coeffi cient of 
expansion that results in the expansion of steel members 
as they are heated. A 50-foot-long steel beam heated uni-
formly over its length from 72° to 972° F will expand in 
length by 3.9 inches. The same beam uniformly heated 
to 800° F would expand by 3.2 inches; if heated to
1,200° F, the beam would expand by 4.9 inches.6
Type III: Ordinary
In Type III construction, the exterior of the  building is 
noncombustible, typically masonry, and may be rated 
depending on the horizontal distance to  exposures. The 
interior structural elements may be of any approved 
material, combustible or noncombustible. The build-
ing code reference to any approved  material refers to 
the referenced standards for building materials such 
as lumber, steel, concrete, glazing, and plastic. There 
is a standard of quality for every  building material. 
For example, only graded lumber may be used.
Type III construction is divided into two subtypes: 
protected and unprotected. The brick, wood-joisted 
buildings that line our city streets are of Type III con-
struction, or “ordinary construction.” The term “ordi-
nary” dates back to the time when most city and town 
building codes established fi re districts where combus-
tible building exteriors were prohibited to reduce con-
fl agration potential (see Figure 10-4). It was the least 
expensive type permitted. Ordinary construction is not 
very ordinary anymore—it has become too expensive! 
Buildings with a masonry veneer over combustible fram-
ing are not Type III. Most Type III buildings are older 
and many have been renovated or remodeled. Combus-
tible voids that may allow fi re to travel undetected pres-
ent challenges to the fi reground commander.
Type IV: Heavy Timber
Type IV construction dates back to the New England 
cotton and woolen mills of the mid-1800s. Mill own-
ers banded together and formed mutual fi re insurance 
companies, but only insured the best risks. Type IV 
Heavy Timber construction is also called Mill con-
struction. The exterior walls are noncombustible 
(masonry), and the interior structural elements are 
unprotected wood of large cross-sectional dimensions 
(see Figure 10-5). Columns must be at least 8 inches 
if supporting a fl oor load, and joists and beams must 
be a minimum of 6 inches in width and 10 inches in 
FIGURE 10-4 Type II construction is referred to as “ordi-
nary” construction because it was the predominate type 
in American cities and towns through the 1960’s.
FIGURE 10-5 Type IV Heavy Timber or Mill construction 
features large dimension lumber structural members, non-
combustible exterior walls and has no void spaces where 
fire can travel undetected. Its origin dates back to the New 
England woolen and cotton mills of the mid-1800s.

268  CHAPTER 10
code identifi es the performance required, such as 
resisting the passage of heat and some for a given time. 
The design professional is permitted to use any listed 
assembly that provides that fi re-resistance rating.
Fire-resistive assemblies required by the code have 
performance requirements prescribed. The building 
designer species the assembly (by design number) to 
be used to attain the required rating, or uses one of 
the approved equivalent fi re-resistance methods from 
the code. It’s important to remember that rated assem-
blies such as fl oor/ceiling assemblies and fi re doors are 
tested and listed together. If any portion of the assem-
bly is left out or altered, the assembly is no  longer 
the listed item, and more importantly, the assembly 
may not function as designed. Do not confuse perfor-
mance codes with performance-based design.
Performance-Based Design
Performance-based design is an alternative method 
for satisfying the fi re protection and life safety intent 
of construction codes. The ICC Performance Code 
for buildings and facilities defi nes performance-based 
design as:
An engineering approach to design elements of a build-
ing based on agreed upon performance goals and objec-
tives, engineering analysis, and quantitative assessment 
of alternatives against the design goals and objectives 
using accepted engineering tools, methodologies, and 
performance criteria.7
The IPC requires the owner to retain the services 
of qualifi ed design professionals and qualifi ed peer 
reviewers to assess the design. The process involves 
the use of scientifi c modeling tools and methods for 
determining fi re growth, exit times, system activation 
times, smoke movement, and other variables. Exten-
sive computer modeling is involved. The process 
is very expensive and labor intensive. In all but the 
 largest, tallest, or most unusual buildings, designing 
to the prescriptive provisions of the IBC is the most 
cost-effective approach.
depth. Type IV is not subdivided. The inherent fi re-
resistive nature of large-diameter wood members is 
taken into account. A key strength is that concealed 
spaces are not permitted within the structure.
Type V: Frame
In Type V construction, the entire structure may be 
constructed of wood or any other approved material 
(see Figure 10-6). Type V was called “wood frame” 
in the past, because wood was usually the least expen-
sive material for the job. The high cost of lumber has 
led to an increase in lightweight combustible com-
posites, and to the use of lightweight steel for studs. 
How well wood structural members will resist the 
effects of fi re is directly related to their mass. The 
6  10-inch fl oor joists in a Type IV building can 
be expected to support the fl oor for some time when 
exposed to fi re. Lightweight trusses (see Figure 10-7) 
may fail in minutes. Brick veneer is often added to 
frame buildings for decorative purposes (usually only 
to the side facing the street), but the building is still 
Type V. Type V construction is subdivided into pro-
tected and unprotected types, again depending on the 
protection provided for the structural elements.
PERFORMANCE CODES
Fire walls, fi re barriers, and fi re partitions are all are 
designed to resist the spread of fi re, but are they are 
not the same thing. Fire walls are structurally inde-
pendent and separate buildings. Fire barriers and fi re 
partitions are constructed within a building and sepa-
rate fi re areas, or block the passage of heat and smoke 
from corridors or other areas.
Modern building codes are for the most part 
 performance codes. Rather than specify the exact 
construction of a component such as a fi re wall, the 
codes identify a performance features. Where a speci-
fi cation code might require all fi re walls to be of a cer-
tain thickness of masonry block, a performance merely 
FIGURE 10-6 In Type V construction, any approved ma-
terial is permitted. A combination of wood, lightweight 
steel, and combustible composites are common.
FIGURE 10-7 Lightweight trusses have replaced dimen-
sion lumber in Type V construction.

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  269
edition model code and was not protected with auto-
matic sprinklers (see Figure 10-8). NIST scientists 
were requested to model the fi re as part of the overall 
investigation of the incident.
NIST engineers surveyed the damage (see 
Figure 10-9) and then took undamaged representa-
tive samples of offi ce furniture and contents to their 
lab for testing. Both full scale (see Figure 10-10) and 
cone calorimeter tests of 0.1 meter square (0.33 ft.) 
samples were tested (see Table 10-1).
The difference in the heat released by the paper/
cardboard stack and the trash can and letter trays. The 
test results underscore Dr. Bukowski’s comments on 
the value of heat release rate.
Fuel Load and Fire Behavior
As Dr. Bukowski noted, fuel load is the total amount of 
available fuel within a fi re area, but heat release rate is 
a better indicator of fi re severity. Both factors are crit-
ical in developing and implementing a strategy to pro-
vide for the safety of the occupants, and to confi ne and 
extinguish the fi re. A room and contents fi re involving 
common combustible materials in a noncombustible 
one-story building is entirely different from the exact 
same fi re on the fi rst fl oor of a multistory frame build-
ing. Both started with the same materials, but in the 
case of the combustible frame building, the building 
itself is part of the fuel load. The size, shape, form, 
and arrangement of the combustible structural mem-
bers will affect the heat release rate and the rapidity at 
which a fi re grows and spreads.
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Fire protection systems is a broad term that includes 
built-in extinguishing systems such as automatic 
sprinklers, clean agent extinguishing systems, fi re 
detection and alarm devices, smoke control and 
removal equipment, fi xed extinguishing systems for 
cooking operations and industrial equipment, and 
even portable devices such as fi re extinguishers. Each 
is designed for a specifi c hazard and is installed in 
accordance with a standard to address that hazard.
In March 2007, the International Forum of Fire 
Research Directors issued a position paper on 
 performance-based design for fi re code applications. 
The title is slightly confusing. The paper addresses 
performance-based design for fi re safety aspects of 
building codes. The committee noted the limited 
potential use for performance based design:
For the majority of traditional buildings with low haz-
ard occupancies, modern prescriptive building, and fi re 
codes, when enforced, achieve this objective. Nontra-
ditional buildings include many of society’s largest and 
iconic structures, such as opera houses, museums, sports 
stadiums, transportation centers, super-high-rise struc-
tures, and some government buildings. Prescriptive codes 
cannot anticipate all of the requirements that these non-
traditional structures impose; prescriptive codes do not 
adapt rapidly to changing materials and methods of con-
struction, nor to radical architectural designs; and pre-
scriptive codes based upon historical loss experiences are 
not designed to deal with very low probability, very high 
impact events or other threats such as from terrorism.8
FUEL LOAD
Fuel load or fi re load is the total amount of combus-
tible material within a fi re area, expressed in terms of 
pounds per square foot. The fi re load concept dates 
back to early tests of columns, wall and other building 
components by the Bureau of Standards (now NIST). A 
correlation between fuel load and fi re duration (termed 
fi re severity) was established and became the basis for 
fi re protection ratings that are still in the codes. The 
tests were based on common combustibles (wood pal-
lets) as very few synthetic materials existed. A more 
accurate way to determine fi re severity is based on the 
heat release rate (HRR) of the materials. Dr. Richard 
Bukowski of NIST puts it into plain-speak this way:
Most plastics have twice the heat of combustion and 
burn with a higher radiative fraction that accelerates 
fi re development. The development of heat release rate 
measurements provided the ability to measure energy 
as an extensible property that explained what was hap-
pening. The shortcomings of fuel load became appar-
ent; that the rate at which energy is released can vary 
greatly for the same fuel load depending on the fuel 
characteristics (a solid block of wood will burn very 
differently from a wood crib or a pile of sawdust, each 
of which may represent the same fuel load).9
Cook County Administration 
Building Fire
In 2003, a fi re that started in a storage room of the Cook 
County, Illinois, administration building resulted in 
six fatalities and several injuries. The 37-story Type I 
(fi re-resistive) building was constructed under a 1960 
The presence or absence of fi re alarm, fi re extin-
guishing, and other fi re protection systems will have a 
direct impact on the strategy and tactics of the  incident 
commander, as will their effectiveness and operational 
readiness. The lack of a working fi re alarm system 
moves notifi cation of the occupants to the top of the 
NOTE
If the hazard changes, the fi re protection system must be 
reevaluated to determine its potential effectiveness given 
the new condition.

270  CHAPTER 10
FIRE EXTINGUISHING 
SYSTEMS
Standards referenced by the model building and fi re 
code reference standards for the installation, test-
ing and maintenance and testing of fi re extinguish-
ing systems (see Table 10-2). Additional sprinkler 
requirements are included in NFPA standards that 
pertain to specifi c processes and occupancies. NFPA 
30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code and 
incident commander’s priorities. Lack of a working 
sprinkler system places the responsibility of confi ning 
the fi re squarely on the shoulders of the incident com-
mander. In both cases, operational fi re protection sys-
tems would have shifted the fi re department’s role to 
that ensuring that all the occupants were able to self-
evacuate or shelter in place, and mopping up the fi re. 
By adequately pre-planning these buildings, fi re offi -
cers will have a superior advantage to knowing what 
type and how to access the protection system.
FIGURE 10-8 Exterior of the 
fire-resistive Cook County, 
Illinois Administration Build-
ing two days after the fatal 
fire. (Source: National Institute 
of Standards and Technology)
FIGURE 10-9 View of the 12th 
floor of the Cook County Admin-
istration Building. Six fatalities 
were discovered in the locked 
stairwell after the fire was extin-
guished. (Source:  National Institute 
of Standards and Technology)

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  271
and investigate when they appear to be closed (see 
Figure 10-11).
NFPA 13 Sprinkler Systems
NFPA 13 systems are by far the most commonly 
found installed in buildings in the United States. 
FIGURE 10-10 Representative sam-
ples of furniture and office  contents 
were tested at NIST’s Building and 
Fire Research Laboratory. View 
of the test enclosure, approxi-
mately 300 seconds after ignition. 
(Source: National Institute of  Standards 
and Technology)
NFPA 30B, Code for the Manufacture and Storage 
of Aerosol Products are examples. Each standard pro-
vides a signifi cant and different level of protection to 
address a specifi c hazard or hazards.
The best designed and installed system will not 
operate if the valves are closed. Fire offi cers should 
make it a habit to observe exterior supply valves 
Exposure Heat Flux 
35 kW/m2 
70 kW/m2
Item 
Avg. Peak HRR (kW/m2) 
Avg. Peak HRR (kW/m2)
Carpeting 
260 
380
Ceiling Tile (face-down) 
10 
40
Ceiling Tile (face-up) 
70 
90
Computer Monitor Case 
410 
490
Letter Tray 
1020 
1170
Office Chair 
210 
350
Paper (stacked flat) 
260 
340
Paper (stacked on edge) 
210 
250
Paper (stacked flat – covered 
320 
460
with cardboard)
Plastic Wastebasket 
1560 
2970
Vinyl Blinds 
110 
160
Wall Covering 
340 
460
Workstation—Side Panel 
140 
230
Workstation—Work Surface 
340 
590
Source: National Institute of Standards and Technology
TABLE 10-1 Cone Calorimeter Test-Average Peak Heat Release at 35 and 70 kw/m2

272  CHAPTER 10
FIGURE 10-11 Closed valves are a major cause of sprin-
kler system failures. Fire Officers should make it a habit 
to observe the condition of exterior sprinkler valves.
NOTE
The NFPA 13 system is a property protection system that 
has had remarkable success at protecting people by 
quickly suppressing and often extinguishing fi res in their 
incipient stages.
NOTE
The notion that all sprinklered buildings are equally pro-
tected, regardless of the contents or system design is 
a dangerous one, embraced unfortunately, by too many 
in the fi re and building regulation communities. Take for 
instance a building that contains hazardous materials. 
Depending on the type and quantity of the material will 
determine what type of system is to be installed. The 
problem is that some of the buildings that house hazard-
ous materials have either increased their amounts of the 
material or changed the type of material without proper 
notifi cation. This is why it is essential for fi re inspectors to 
review hazardous material management plans (HMMP) 
and hazardous material inventory statements on a fre-
quent basis.
OFFICER ADVICE
All responders and fi re offi cers should understand the 
NFPA 704 placard system. In essence the system was 
designed to show three principal categories of mark-
ings: health, fl ammability, and instability. They are color 
coded to make them easily identifi able.
■ Blue is the health category
■ Red is the fl ammability category
■ Yellow represents the instability category
The ratings, however, are issued by “competent and ex-
perienced” persons who are trained in the interpretation 
of the material and the hazards that it poses. The prob-
lem with these signs is the same as the sprinkler sys-
tems. They must be inspected and updated as needed.
NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinklers, 
is the direct descendent of the original sprinkler stan-
dard developed by NFPA in 1896.
Heat from the fi re rises to the ceiling where sprin-
klers are installed and act as combination heat detec-
tion and fi re suppression devices. Once the operating 
elements of the sprinkler head (generally a solder link 
or frangible bulb) reach their operating temperature, 
they fail and water is discharged onto the fi re through 
the open orifi ce.
Standard automatic sprinklers are designed to oper-
ate at specifi c temperatures. Ordinary- temperature 
rated heads that operate at between 135 and 
170 degrees are required to be installed throughout 
buildings unless the area is subject to high heat con-
ditions. Boiler rooms, skylights, attic spaces, and 
areas above certain machinery and equipment may 
all require the use of sprinkler heads that have higher 
operating temperatures.
The standard attempts to minimize the amount of 
time that it takes for the sprinkler system to discharge 
water on a fi re by requiring that ordinary-temperature 
heads be installed. This is important if fi re spread is 
to be checked and early notifi cation accomplished. In 
the design of sprinkler heads, thermal lag becomes 
the enemy.
A sprinkler head that is rated to operate at 
165 degrees does not operate the minute that the sur-
rounding air reaches that temperature. The detection 
device itself has to become heated to that temperature 
NFPA 13 
Installation of Sprinkler Systems
NFPA 13D 
Installation of Sprinkler 
 
Systems in One- and Two-
 
Family Dwellings and 
 
Manufactured Homes
NFPA 13R 
Installation of Sprinkler 
 
Systems in Residential 
 
Occupancies Up to and 
 
Including Four Stories in 
 
Height
NFPA 25 
Inspection, Testing and 
 
Maintenance of Water-Based 
 
Fire Protection Systems
TABLE 10-2 Sprinkler Standards

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  273
building is very real. Hotels, motels, boarding houses, 
and apartment buildings are typically protected with 
NFPA 13R systems.
NFPA 13D Systems are designed to protect one- 
and two-family dwellings. Like NFPA 13R systems, 
they are primarily designed to protect the occupants 
by preventing fl ashover from occurring and giving the 
occupants time to escape. They have similar limita-
tions to NFPA 13R systems, in that bathrooms and 
closets as well as garages, attached porches, carports, 
and some foyers are not required to be sprinklered. All 
sprinkler systems are not equal. They are designed for 
specifi c hazards and to perform specifi c functions.
Types of Sprinkler Systems
There are four basic types of sprinkler systems. What 
differentiates them is the method in which water is 
supplied to the system. The four types are wet pipe, 
dry pipe, preaction, and deluge. Each has specifi c 
applications and system specifi c requirements from 
the sprinkler standards and in a few cases from the 
building codes themselves.
Wet Pipe Sprinklers
Wet pipe sprinkler systems are by far the most com-
monly found systems in most jurisdictions. Water 
enters the sprinkler system from a dedicated supply 
or fi re line, unless the system is a limited area sprin-
kler system or a system designed to protect one- and 
two-family dwellings and manufactured homes. The 
supply valve is left open and water at street pressure 
is always on the system. For this reason, they are the 
quickest at getting water on the fi re and are the sim-
plest to maintain.
Wet pipe systems are installed where indoor tem-
peratures can be maintained at 40 degrees. Below that 
temperature, there is the danger of freezing pipes. If 
the outside temperature is below freezing and the inte-
rior temperature is less than 40 degrees, steel sprinkler 
piping, which rapidly conducts heat and rapidly loses 
it, will drop below freezing. The frozen area may be 
isolated and near an opening or noninsulated portion 
of the building. It may be a small area, but it could be 
enough to put the whole system out of service.
Antifreeze systems are sometimes used where 
freezing is expected, but these systems are usually 
limited to 40 gallons or less. Each year, antifreeze 
systems must be drained into containers and the anti-
freeze solution must be replenished to restore the 
specifi c gravity required to prevent freezing. This is 
costly and labor intensive. Larger systems subject to 
freezing are normally designed as dry pipe systems.
The wet pipe system’s advantage of getting water 
to the fi re area quickly is also its weakness in areas 
where water damage is of great concern. Mechanical 
before it will operate.10 In the case of a fi re involving 
readily combustible material or fl ammable liquids, 
the surrounding temperature will have continued to 
rise and may be signifi cantly higher by the time the 
head operates and water is discharged.
Thermal lag is the difference between the operating 
temperature of a fi re detection device such as a sprin-
kler head and the actual air temperature when the device 
activates. It is minimized by designing sprinkler heads 
and other detection devices with less mass and greater 
surface area. This concept played an important role in 
the design of sprinklers for residential applications and 
will be discussed with the other sprinkler standards.
NFPA 13 uses an occupancy type system of haz-
ard classifi cation to determine the operational 
requirements of sprinkler systems, which is not to be 
 confused with the use group classifi cation from the 
building codes.
NFPA 13 systems provide excellent property protec-
tion by requiring that the entire building, including 
combustible void spaces such as attics be protected 
with sprinklers.
Residential Sprinklers
NFPA 13R systems are designed to protect residential 
occupancies up to four stories in height. The systems 
enhance life safety by using listed residential sprin-
kler heads, which are designed to minimize thermal 
lag and respond quickly in the event of fi re.
NOTE
Sprinkler head spacing and discharge per square foot 
known as density are dependent upon occupancy clas-
sifi cation. Occupancy classes are based on the amount 
and combustibility of the contents and processes that 
occur within the building.
NOTE
By quickly suppressing the fi re, fl ashover is prevented 
and occupants are able to escape from the building.
NOTE
NFPA 13R systems do not provide the same level of 
property protection as afforded by NFPA 13 systems.
Combustible voids, as well as closets not exceeding 
24 square feet and bathrooms not exceeding 55 square 
feet, are not required to be sprinklered. The total 
building area exempted from sprinkler protection has 
been estimated as high as 67%.11 The potential prop-
erty damage resulting from fi res that “burn around, 
over and under” the sprinkler system is signifi cant. 
The possibility of a “total loss” in a 13R sprinklered 

274  CHAPTER 10
valve. The deluge valve operates much like the supply 
valve in a preaction system. When activated by a fi re 
detection device, the deluge valve automatically opens 
and water is discharged from all of the heads. Manual 
 activation is also provided. Aircraft hangers, fl amma-
ble liquid tank vehicle loading racks, and industrial 
facilities that process fl ammable or explosive materi-
als are among those protected by these systems.
Standpipes
Standpipe systems are required in tall and very large 
buildings where advancing hand lines the entire dis-
tance would be prohibitive. Standpipe systems are 
classifi ed according to their intended use, by the 
building occupants, fi re department, or both. Stand-
pipes are generally required in high-rise buildings, 
covered mall buildings, buildings over three stories, 
large- assembly occupancies, and adjacent to stages 
in theaters. Generally, standpipe connections are 
required on each fl oor at every exit stairway and on 
each side of a horizontal exit. Buildings under con-
struction are generally required to have at least one 
standpipe or temporary standpipe, capable of fl owing 
500 gpm within one fl oor of the top of the building.
Fire Department Connections
Fire department connections are required for all water-
based fi re extinguishing systems and standpipe systems 
with the exception of limited area sprinkler systems of 
less than 20 heads and NPPA 13D sprinkler systems.
Wet and Dry Chemical 
Extinguishing Systems
Wet and dry chemical extinguishing systems are used 
in various applications including range hood and 
duct fi re protection, paint spray booth protection, and 
even at unattended self-service motor vehicle fuel-
ing sites (see Figure 10-12). Each has a standard that 
damage from machinery such as forklifts or from van-
dals can lead to the soaking of valuable  equipment, arti-
facts, merchandise or records. The public’s  perception 
that all the sprinkler heads within a system discharge 
at once has caused undo concern on the part of many.
Dry Pipe Systems
Dry pipe sprinkler systems are installed in ware-
houses, parking garages, factories, and other buildings 
where there is a danger of freezing. They may also be 
installed in unheated attics or portions of buildings 
where providing heat is impractical. A dry pipe valve 
is installed at the sprinkler riser and keeps water out of 
the system piping until a fi re activates a sprinkler head 
or heads. Dry pipe valves are designed so that a mod-
erate amount of air pressure in the system above the 
valve is capable of holding back a much greater water 
pressure. The ratio of air pressure to water pressure at 
which the valve will open or trip is called the differen-
tial. Dry pipe systems are equipped with two pressure 
gauges. One gauge measures the incoming water pres-
sure below the dry pipe valve, and the other measures 
the air pressure on the system above the valve.
Preaction Systems
Preaction sprinkler systems are installed in properties 
where potential water damage from broken piping or 
sprinkler heads is of particular concern. Preaction sys-
tems are dry systems in which the water supply valve 
is opened on a signal from detection devices such as 
heat or smoke detectors. The potential for accidental 
water damage is minimized since no water is in the 
system unless a detection device has been activated or 
the valve is manually opened.
The sprinkler heads in a preaction system are tra-
ditional closed heads, which must be fused by heat to 
open, discharging water only over the fi re. Early noti-
fi cation also minimizes water damage associated with 
suppression of the fi re since an alarm is  transmitted 
upon activation of the detection device, which pre-
cedes the fusing of sprinkler heads and activation of a 
sprinkler fl ow switch.
Deluge Systems
Deluge sprinkler systems are installed in extra haz-
ard occupancies where there is the possibility of a 
fl ash fi re or fi re growth so rapid that the response of a 
standard sprinkler system is too slow. Facilities with 
large quantities of fl ammable liquids or materials that 
pose a defl agration hazard are protected with these 
 systems. The activation of the system is designed to 
apply water over the entire area covered by the sys-
tem, rapidly and simultaneously. Deluge systems are 
dry systems that use open sprinkler heads and a deluge 
FIGURE 10-12 Wet chemical extinguishing systems pro-
tect commercial cooking operations.

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  275
Fixed Foam Systems and 
Water Spray Systems
Fixed foam and water spray systems are generally 
installed to protect hazards outside of buildings. Foam 
systems protect fl ammable liquid storage facilities 
and water spray systems are generally for exposure 
protection. Both have associated NFPA standards and 
specifi c acceptance tests that should always be wit-
nessed by code offi cials, preferably by the end user, 
the fi re department.
The following standards were put into place to gov-
ern the maintenance and inspection of fi re protection 
systems:
■ NFPA 
12, 
Standard 
on 
Carbon 
Dioxide 
 Extinguishing Systems
■ NFPA 12A, Standard on Halon1301 Fire 
 Extinguishing Systems
■ NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of  Sprinkler 
Systems
■ NFPA 14, Standard for the Installation of 
 Standpipes and Hose Systems
■ NFPA 15, Standard for Water Spray Fixed Systems 
for Fire Protection
■ NFPA 
17, 
Standard 
for 
Dry 
Chemical  
Extinguishing Systems
■ NFPA 
17A, 
Standard 
for 
Wet 
Chemical 
 Extinguishing Systems
■ NFPA 25, Standard for Inspection, Testing, and 
Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection 
Systems
■ NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code
Fire Alarm Systems
Fire alarm systems are required in buildings so that 
occupants will receive prompt notifi cation to evac-
uate, or in the case of institutional occupancies, to 
take appropriate action. In addition to the require-
ments for manual fi re alarms by use group, fi re alarm 
components are required in specifi c locations in all 
buildings. Smoke detectors are required in elevator 
lobbies to ensure that elevators do not return to the 
fi re fl oor. Air handling units over 2,000 cfm must 
automatically shut down upon activation of a duct 
smoke detector installed upstream from the air han-
dler. Smoke alarms are required in residential occu-
pancies and must be interconnected within individual 
dwelling units.
The design, installation and maintenance of 
fi re alarm systems are regulated by NFPA 72, the 
National Fire Alarm Code. Unlike most humans, fi re 
alarm systems are quite good at doing several things 
addresses the design, installation, and maintenance 
of the  system. They use four signifi cant mechanisms 
of extinguishing fi res: smothering, cooling, radiation 
shielding, and chain breaking.12
Halogenated and Clean Agent Fire 
Extinguishing Systems
Halon and other extinguishing agents that do not leave 
a residue are the agent of choice for certain high-value 
commodities and equipment. Halogenated extin-
guishing agents, or halon, are chemical compounds 
that contain carbon and one or more elements from 
the halogen series (fl uorine, chlorine, bromine, and 
iodine). Most of the halogenated agents are toxic and 
unsuitable as extinguishing agents. Two compounds, 
Halon 1211 and Halon 1301, are effective extinguish-
ing agents and are considered nontoxic.
Halon 1301 is used in total fl ooding systems that 
discharge quantities suffi cient to create up to a 10% 
concentration in the areas protected. Halogenated 
agents suppress fi res by interrupting the chemical 
chain reaction and will not extinguish deep-seated 
fi re in class A materials. Under the Clean Air Act, 
the U.S. government banned the production and 
importation of halons 1211 and 1301 effective Jan-
uary 1, 1994. The ban did not affect the continued 
use of halon systems, and replacement halon can be 
purchased for existing systems. In light of the gov-
ernment ban on manufacture and importation, other 
clean extinguishing agents such as Great Lakes Cor-
poration’s FM200, Dupont’s FE-13, and Ansul’s 
INERGEN were developed. Fire protection for 
areas where the prevention of accidental water dam-
age is a concern has also been rethought. The use of 
 preaction  sprinkler systems, which nearly eliminate 
the possibility of accidental discharge, has increased 
signifi cantly.
Carbon Dioxide 
Extinguishing Systems
Carbon dioxide is one of the most plentiful com-
pounds on earth. It is a byproduct of combustion 
and fermentation. We exhale carbon dioxide with 
every breath. It is cheap, leaves no residue and is 
a highly effective extinguishing agent for Class B 
and C fi res. The major drawback to carbon diox-
ide systems is that carbon dioxide in concentrations 
of over about 9% will render persons unconscious 
almost immediately,13 so they are not suited for the 
total fl ooding of computer rooms and other occupied 
areas. NFPA 12, Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extin-
guishing Systems contains installation, maintenance, 
and testing procedures.

276  CHAPTER 10
companies to determine the risk factors associated with a fi re 
in this type of construction. Lessons regarding  importance 
of initial company actions, constant re-evaluation of action 
plans, strong command and coordination of units on the 
fi reground, and recognition of signs of impending  structural 
failure were also reinforced.
Summary of Key Issues
■ Staffi ng. The fi rst-alarm response provided a small at-
tack force with limited capabilities. The full response 
brought only 10 personnel.
■ Size-up. The fi rst-arriving company offi cer was not 
able to determine the location and extent of the hid-
den fi re.
■ Pre-emergency plan information. This complex re-
quired a pre-emergency plan due to the complex ar-
rangement, multiple occupancies, mixed construction, 
lack of fi xed protection, limited access and diffi cult wa-
ter supply problems. The fi rst-due company did carry 
Two fi refi ghters died when they were trapped by a rap-
idly spreading fi re in an auto parts store and a pre-en-
gineered wood truss roof assembly collapsed on them. 
The cause of the fi re was an electrical short created 
when a power company truck working in the rear of 
the building drove away with its boom in an elevated 
position, accidentally pulling an electrical feed line from 
the main breaker panel at the rear of the store. Post 
incident investigations indicate that the electrical fault 
may have sparked multiple points of fi re origin through-
out the roof structure of the building, due to improperly 
grounded wiring.
This is another incident illustrating the rapid failure of 
lightweight construction systems when key support com-
ponents are involved in a fi re. It points out the importance 
of pre-emergency planning and accurate size-up by fi re
TWO FIREFIGHTERS LOST WHEN 
WOOD TRUSS ROOF COLLAPSES14
at once. Fire alarm systems are comprised of a series 
of devices and circuits normally linked by a control 
panel. Detection devices sense the presence of heat 
or smoke, sprinkler fl ow or manual activation by a 
building occupant, and signal the control panel. Sig-
naling devices display audio and visual signals to the 
building occupants that there is a potential or actual 
fi re in the building. Fire alarm systems also perform 
auxiliary functions such as elevator recall, automatic 
actuation of smoke removal or stairwell pressuriza-
tion fans and shut-down of certain air handlers. The 
system may also notify the fi re department or a cen-
tral station monitoring company.
Fire alarm systems range in size from the single-
station battery-powered smoke alarm found in an 
existing one-story home, to a complex system in a 
high-rise building. Each has detection devices, sig-
naling devices, and a control center. In the $5 battery-
powered unit, they are all housed in a 6-inch plastic 
box. In a high-rise building, the circuitry may go for 
miles and cost many thousands of dollars.
Most complex modern systems are computerized. 
Fire alarm technicians do a signifi cant amount of 
work during installation within the system’s software 
program. When the fl ow switches are found to be 
annunciating in the fi re control room as duct smoke 
detectors, technicians simply go into the program and 
make the correction with a few key strokes. Before 
the advent of computerized systems, a technician  had 
to rewire the panel to accomplish such a change—and 
that is the potential problem.
Schedules for routine testing and maintenance of 
systems are contained in NFPA 72, as well as require-
ments for completion documents and for records of 
all tests. A review of these documents should be a 
routine part of the inspection or pre-incident of the 
building. Do not wait until after the fi re when the sys-
tem has malfunctioned to ask if the system was being 
maintained.
Smoke Control Systems 
and Smoke and Heat Vents
Systems that control the movement of smoke or pro-
vide for the rapid exhaust of smoke are required in 
atriums, covered malls, high-piled combustible stor-
age facilities, underground structures and large the-
aters. High rise buildings and malls are required to 
provide manual controls for all air handling equip-
ment so that fi re fi ghters can use the equipment for 
ventilation of the structure.
Smoke and heat vents are required in large factory 
and storage buildings where the length of exit access 
travel is long, or over stages due to the large quan-
tity of combustible sets. Curtain boards, which extend 
from the ceiling a minimum of 6 feet (but not within 
8 feet of the fl oor), are installed to retard the lateral 
movement of smoke and gases. Smoke and heat vents 
must operate automatically and may be required to be 
provided with a means for manual activation by the 
fi re department.

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  277
a pre-emergency plan that showed the layout of the 
shopping center and the fl oor plan for the auto parts 
store, but the pre-emergency plan was not referenced 
by the crew during the fi re.
■ Delayed response. The fi rst-arriving company was on 
the scene alone for several minutes with only three 
personnel. The backup companies had long response 
times. The lack of evidence of a working fi re prompted 
the initial incident commander to return some of the 
responding units, resulting in even longer response 
times.
■ Water supply. The fi rst-in company did not establish a 
water supply. This required the second engine com-
pany to be committed to this task.
■ Incident command. The battalion chief was faced with 
a complicated and rapidly changing situation. He was 
not able to effectively transfer command from the ini-
tial offi cer and direct the operations of widely sepa-
rated units.
■ Operational risk management. The offi cers involved in 
the initial part of the operation had to make critical risk 
management decisions with limited information.
■ Accountability. Accountability for the personnel oper-
ating in the hazardous area was not established prior 
to the structural collapse. As the situation became 
critical, no one realized that a crew was still inside the 
building.
■ Rapid intervention crew. Additional crews did not ar-
rive in time to assist the crew that was in trouble inside 
the building.
■ Radio communications. The lack of clear radio chan-
nel for fi reground communications caused serious 
problems with command and control of the incident, 
including the failure to maintain communications with 
the crew inside and the failure to hear their request for 
assistance.
■ Lightweight construction. The roof collapsed quickly 
and with very little warning. This should be anticipated 
with a lightweight wood truss roof assembly. This haz-
ard was not recognized by the crews. If the construc-
tion of the building had been known or recognized, 
the early failure of the roof structure should have been 
anticipated and the interior crew should have been 
withdrawn. This requires pre-emergency planning to 
identify high-risk properties and a reliable system to 
label the building or to inform the responding units of 
the risk factors of the building. It is usually diffi cult or 
impossible to make this determination when the build-
ing is burning.
This fi re reinforced many operational issues that are 
essential to safe and effective fi refi ghting operations.
■ RISK ASSESSMENT is the primary responsibility of 
the incident commander. This incident presented a 
very high risk to the fi refi ghters who were attempting to 
make an interior attack. However, the risk factors were 
not recognized and the interior crew was not directed 
to abandon the building. Risk assessment should be 
a continual process, particularly when a situation is 
changing very quickly.
■ ACCOUNTABILITY is an essential function of the in-
cident command system. The location and operation 
of the initial attack crew was not tracked according 
to the incident command system that was in effect 
at the time of the fi re. The system must keep track of 
the location, function, status, and assignment of ev-
ery individual unit or company operating at the scene 
of an emergency incident. In order to be effective, the 
accountability process must be routinely initiated at 
the beginning of every incident, and updated as the 
incident progresses and units are reassigned to dif-
ferent tasks.
■ TACTICAL RADIO CHANNELS are essential for fi re-
fi ghter safety. The fi reground operations were con-
ducted on the same radio channel as the routine 
dispatch and transfer of additional units, hamper-
ing the fi reground communications during the im-
portant early stages of the incident. Designated ra-
dio channels should be set aside specifi cally for 
communications between the incident commander 
and the units operating at the scene of an incident. 
The exchange of information, orders, instructions, 
warnings, and progress reports is essential to sup-
port safe and effective operations. Tactical chan-
nels should be assigned early and routinely to avoid 
the confusion that occurs when units that are al-
ready working are directed to switch to a different 
radio channel.
■ FIRE OPERATIONS must be limited to those func-
tions that can be performed safely with the number 
of personnel that are available at the scene of an inci-
dent. The initial response to this incident did not pro-
vide enough resources to safely initiate an effective 
interior attack for the situation that was encountered. 
The fi rst-arriving company initiated interior operations 
that could not be adequately performed or supported 
with the limited number of personnel at the scene or 
responding. The delayed arrival of backup companies 
increased the risk exposure of the fi rst-due company. 
The situation called for a more conservative initial at-
tack plan and/or an early retreat when the magnitude 
of the fi re became evident.
■ WATER SUPPLY is a critical component of a safe 
and successful operation. The failed attempt to es-
tablish an adequate and reliable water supply for the 
interior attack was a critical problem at this incident. 
This task occupied the second-due engine company, 
which was needed to provide either a backup hose 
line to support the interior attack or a rapid interven-
tion crew.
■ LIGHTWEIGHT WOOD TRUSS CONSTRUCTION is 
prone to rapid failure under fi re conditions.

278  CHAPTER 10
DUPLICATION OF OR GAPS 
IN PROTECTION
NFPA 550 outlines a concept called the Fire Safety 
Concept Tree. This concept shows the link between 
fi re prevention activities and fi re damage control 
strategies. It provides an overall structure with which 
to analyze potential impact of various codes and stan-
dards on a particular safety problem. Departments 
can use this model as a way to communicate with 
building designers to assist in developing the role of 
fi re protection requirements within a structure. Often 
times this communication does not take place and 
there can be a duplication of fi re protection features 
with a building. In contrast, failure to communicate 
effectively can lead to gaps in fi re protection.
NOTE
Fire science is the body of knowledge concerning the 
study of fire and related subjects (such as combus-
tion, flame, products of combustion, heat release, heat 
transfer, fire and explosion chemistry, fire and explosion 
dynamics, thermodynamics, kinetics, fluid mechanics, 
fire safety) and their interaction with people, structures, 
and the environment.
FIRE TRIANGLE
FUEL
HEAT
AIR
FIGURE 10-13 The fire triangle helps explain how fires 
start. To have fire, fuel, heat, and air must be present.
FIGURE 10-14 The fire tetrahedron helps explain how fires 
burn and how they are extinguished. A fourth side, called 
a continuous chain reaction, recognizes the presence 
of an ongoing complex chemical process. Fires can be 
extinguished by removing one or more of the four sides.
FUEL
OXYGEN
HEAT
CHAIN REACTION
agent (usually as oxygen in the air) is reduced to a 
level where it can no longer support combustion, the 
heat is removed at a rate that prevents the feedback 
process from continuing, or the process is altered by 
the addition of some chemical.
All fi res eventually go out. Some go out because all 
of the fuel was consumed; some go out because you 
altered one of the other conditions or ingredients. All 
are used as fi re extinguishment techniques. The Fire 
Tetrahedron better explains how fi res burn and how 
fi res are extinguished (shown in Figure 10-14). By truly 
understanding the behavior of a fi re, a fi re offi cer can 
assess the fi re growth capabilities and employ accept-
able strategies and tactics to combat the situation.
Fire Science
The processes involved in fi re ignition and growth 
are essential for fi re to survive, and our understand-
ing of these processes is essential for effective fi re 
extinguishment. The following brief summary is not 
intended to be an exhaustive treatment of the subject 
of fi re behavior; however, a brief review may help in 
your understanding of the information in this section.
OFFICER ADVICE
You should understand these systems and how to 
control them so that you can use them safely and 
effectively, or secure them, as appropriate.
FIRE BEHAVIOR
As a fi re offi cer, you should also thoroughly under-
stand fi re behavior. Fire behavior is a term used to 
defi ne the way fi re performs or reacts in given situa-
tions. Every fi re is unique, but there are some general 
concepts that help us better understand fi re behavior. 
Understanding fi re behavior helps us to be more effec-
tive at fi re suppression. Understanding fi re behavior 
is also important from a safety  perspective, both for 
the occupants of the structure and for the fi refi ghters.
We need three things to start a fi re: fuel, heat, and 
an oxidizer, represented by the three sides of the fi re 
triangle (see Figure 10-13). The process is interac-
tive. The fuel must be heated to its ignition tempera-
ture, and the continuation of the process is dependent 
upon the heat being fed back into the process. This 
heat, in turn, helps warm the fuel. This process con-
tinues until all of the fuel is consumed, the oxidizing 

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  279
When fi refi ghters enter a space and start fi re 
 suppression operations, they can easily disturb the 
natural process that sends the heat to the highest areas 
in the room. When this occurs, fi refi ghters endanger 
occupants and themselves alike. Because most fi re 
operations deal with ordinary combustibles, water is 
used as an extinguishing agent. It works well; how-
ever, the inappropriate application of water disrupts 
the natural process of thermal balance.
Rollover
When materials burn, they consume oxygen and give 
off combustible gases. These combustible gases are hot 
and, therefore, less dense. These fuel-rich gases rush 
upward in the column of heat above the fi re and fi ll 
the area. As additional gases are heated, they also rise 
and try to displace the gases that are already there.
In an open environment, these heated gases escape 
(see Figure 10-15). However, in an enclosed environ-
ment such as found in structures, the gases spread out 
and travel along the ceiling well in advance of the 
front of the actual fi re (see Figure 10-16). In areas 
Fire usually develops from a small fl ame to where 
there is signifi cant involvement of the fuel. When this 
process takes place within an enclosed building, it 
usually passes through three stages.
 1. First stage—called the incipient phase. A fi re may 
smolder for a period of time that ranges from sec-
onds to hours before there is suffi cient heat to pro-
duce open fl ame. During this time, there is little 
heat buildup, but some smoke is evident.
 2. Second stage—called the free-burning phase, as 
the fuel is burning free of nearly any constraint. 
Flames become visible along with an increased rate 
of heat generation and fuel consumption. Since the 
heat expands the air, there is a slight increase in air 
pressure within the structure. Where there are open-
ings in the structure, smoke and heat are pushed 
from the building. Hot gases heat the fuel above the 
fi re, accelerating its ignition. The process continues 
and accelerates. Because of the dynamic forces at 
work, we see rapid fi re extension during this phase.
 3. Third stage—called the smoldering stage. Assum-
ing that the structure is still intact, the fi re will have 
consumed a portion of the oxygen in the air, and 
the fi re is reduced to where it just smolders again. 
However, unlike the fi rst phase, the room is fi lled 
with hot fl ammable gases.
The change from a free-burning fi re where there is 
21 percent oxygen to a smoldering fi re with an oxygen-
defi cient atmosphere requires only a slight reduction 
in the oxygen concentration. Anyone who has ever 
adjusted the burners on the gas grill knows that it 
takes only a slight adjustment to signifi cantly change 
the characteristic of the fl ame.
Fire Phenomena
When fi re burns in structures, several fi re-related 
phenomena occur. These include thermal stratifi ca-
tion, rollover, fl ashover, and backdraft explosions.
Thermal Stratification
When a fi re burns in an open area, the heat rises and 
is dissipated into the atmosphere. When a fi re occurs 
in an enclosed space, a very different process occurs. 
Part of this difference is due to the fact that the hot 
gases cannot escape as fast as they are created. While 
the feedback process that allows some of these hot 
gases to be reintroduced back into the fi re presents 
some very complex concepts of fi re dynamics, we 
know from our own experience that most of the heat 
from a fi re rises and stratifi es within an enclosed 
space. This natural process is called thermal strati-
fi cation. The heat is at the top of the room, and the 
cooler air is near the fl oor. This is why we tell people 
to crawl low in smoke.
FIGURE 10-15 In an outdoor fire, the heat dissipates into 
the air.
FIGURE 10-16 In a fire inside a structure, the heat banks 
down, accelerating the chain reaction and placing civil-
ians and firefighters in grave danger.

280  CHAPTER 10
room by the doorway that led into the fi re room. A 
fl ashover occurred, and that hoseline crew retreated 
due to severe heat conditions (at least one crew mem-
ber received thermal burns).
After the fi re was knocked down by a third crew, 
the two search and rescue team fi refi ghters were 
found, evacuated to the exterior, medically treated, 
and transported to a hospital where they were declared 
dead. The deaths were the “result of smoke inhala-
tion and thermal injuries suffered during the training 
exercise.”
While a universal defi nition of fl ashover does not 
exist, this event is generally associated with rapid 
transition in fi re behavior from localized burn-
ing of fuel to involvement of all the combustibles 
in the enclosure. Experimental work indicates that 
this transition can occur when upper room tempera-
tures are between 750 and 1112°F (400 and 600°C). 
The critical importance of fl ashover is explained in 
many fi refi ghter training courses, such as the fol-
lowing from Firefi ghter’s Handbook (2000): “Fire-
fi ghter Fact: At best, the survival time of a fi refi ghter 
in bunker gear and breathing apparatus, fully encap-
sulated with gloves, hood, and helmet fl aps down, 
is estimated to be less than 10 seconds.” Unless the 
fi refi ghters can immediately exit the room or have 
a hoseline that can cool the fi re down, they are 
doomed. The key to preventing fi refi ghter deaths 
and injuries from fl ashovers is to prevent the fl ash-
over, as noted in the NFPA 1403, Standard on Live 
Fire Training Evolutions:
■ 4.3.5 The fuel load shall be limited to avoid condi-
tions that could cause an uncontrolled fl ashover or 
backdraft.
■ 4.3.7* The instructor-in-charge shall assess the 
selected fi re room environment for factors that 
can affect the growth, development, and spread of 
fi re [*refers to the following annex designated as 
A.4.3.7].
■ A4.3.7 The instructor-in-charge is concerned with 
the safety of participants and the assessment of con-
ditions that can lead to rapid, uncontrolled burning, 
commonly referred to as “fl ashover.” Flashover can 
trap, injure, and kill fi refi ghters. Conditions known 
to be variables affecting the attainment of fl ash-
over are as follows:
 1. The heat release characteristics of materials 
used as primary fuels
 2. The preheating of combustibles
 3. The combustibility of wall and ceiling materials
 4. The room geometry (e.g., ceiling height, open-
ings to rooms)
where there is limited opportunity for these hot gases 
to expand, such as in a long hallway, they may pre-
cede the main body of fi re by as much as 20 feet. 
When these hot, fuel-rich gases meet fresh air, they 
ignite and burn. This dynamic process appears to roll 
along the ceiling and hence the name, rollover. This 
situation has this potential for placing fi refi ghters in 
considerable danger.
Flashover
Flashover is another fi re phenomenon that presents 
signifi cant risks to fi refi ghters. As a fi re burns in an 
enclosed space, the contents of the room are gradu-
ally heated. Everything in the room has an ignition 
temperature, and as the room temperature approaches 
the ignition temperature of the furnishings, they will 
ignite. Flashover can occur within a few minutes 
after ignition. Many factors determine when fl ash-
over will occur. Unfortunately, you seldom know all 
of these factors in a given fi re situation.
FIREGOUND FACT
 Flashover is another fire phenomenon that presents 
significant risks to firefighters.
FIREGOUND FACT
Someone in the room at the moment of flashover has 
little chance of survival.
Numerous demonstrations of fl ashover have been 
captured on fi lm and many fi refi ghters have been 
trained in a device called a “fl ashover trainer.” While 
not always predicable, the process is very real. Results 
on the other hand are predictable and are very real. 
Anyone in the room at the moment of fl ashover has 
little chance of survival. Firefi ghters have experi-
enced and survived fl ashover conditions. Those who 
survived their experience had and were using all the 
components of their personal protective clothing. In 
spite of their protection, most were injured, and all 
tell of the tremendous heat they experienced.
Investigation of Training Accident Addresses 
 Dangers of Flashover. A live-fi re exercise conducted 
in a vacant one-story single-family dwelling con-
structed of cement block, turned tragic for two fi re-
fi ghters.15 During the exercise, two fi refi ghters entered 
as a crew without a hoseline to simulate a search and 
rescue operation. They were to look for a mannequin 
dressed as a fi refi ghter. To reach the fi re room, they 
had to pass through two doorways and two narrow 
spaces. A crew with a hoseline was located in the next 

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  281
■ Firefi ghters participating in a live-fi re exercise 
should be thoroughly briefed on the nature of a 
fl ashover and techniques for immediately (15 to 30 
seconds maximum) exiting the danger area.
■ Firefi ghters should be equipped with a hoseline 
that can either be used to immediately apply water 
onto the fi re or provide an unobstructed path out of 
the room by following the hose. Other personnel in 
the building should be instructed not to block this 
exit path, since exiting must be immediate.
■ The fi re room should have access to one exit (the 
entry door) and also a second remote means of 
escape, such as a door or a window large enough 
for a fi refi ghter with SCBA to immediately exit.
 
In addition, the arrangement of the initial mate-
rials to be ignited, particularly the proximity to 
walls and ceilings, and the ventilation openings are 
important factors to be considered when assessing 
the potential fi re growth.
Flashover is a very complex phenomenon contain-
ing several variables. For example, adequate ven-
tilation can prevent fl ashover by removing heat and 
 carbon monoxide gases from the room. However, in a 
training fi re, the scenario may be to produce enough 
smoke to obscure vision, which would directly con-
fl ict with the ventilation needed to prevent fl ashover. 
In addition, closing the door and preventing any ven-
tilation will also prevent fl ashover (although this can 
create a situation that may cause a backdraft). This 
is a very complex subject with many variables. Since 
the NFPA 1403 standard speaks only about the effect 
of fuel in preventing a backdraft or fl ashover, the fol-
lowing should be included in a mandatory training 
program for instructors and safety offi cers:
■ Flashover must always be considered.
■ Appropriate training on techniques to prevent or 
reverse a fl ashover must be provided to lead instruc-
tors and lead safety offi cers who organize and super-
vise live-fi re exercises. Combustible materials that 
may create a very fast, hot or smoky fi re should 
only be used with a thorough, deliberate evaluation 
and analysis of the fuel load. For example, the abil-
ity to provide emergency ventilation and/or apply 
water directly onto the main body of fi re must be 
provided. Openings into the fi re room can be closed 
off, using materials that can be quickly removed.
■ A safety hoseline crew must be pre-positioned 
where they have an unobstructed view of the fi re, 
allowing them to apply water directly onto the 
fi re. One technique to accomplish this would be 
the opening in a wall (preferably an outside wall) 
of the fi re room at the fl oor level. This would not 
affect the fi re other than to provide additional ven-
tilation. In most cases, except a fl ashover or a non-
fl aming fi re (oxygen deprived), the visibility at the 
fl oor level would allow this hoseline crew to see 
the fi re and any fi refi ghters in the room.
■ Portable temperature meters (thermocouples) can 
also be used to monitor the temperature in the 
room. Appropriate techniques to include the height 
above the fl oor and the maximum temperature that 
would indicate a possible fl ashover situation should 
be formulated. These temperature meters are used 
in some training center burn buildings to detect 
unusual and dangerously high temperatures. Con-
sultation with subject matter experts would help 
facilitate this technique.
NOTE
The 2007 edition of NFPA 1403 allows utilization of 
normally closed roof ventilation openings that can be 
opened in the event of an emergency. This can consist 
of precut panels or hinged covers.
Summary of Findings to Reduce Risk of Similar 
Incident16
 1.  Agencies conducting live-fi re training must com-
ply with NFPA 1403.
 2.  Agencies conducting “search and rescue” train-
ing should limit their use of live fi re. Realistic 
conditions can be simulated without the danger 
of live fi re.
 3.  When live fi re is used the following safety mea-
sures are needed:
• It is preferable to have any crew being trained 
be equipped with a charged hoseline.
• The safety team must be in place to monitor 
the progress of the crew being trained and the 
fi re. The safety team must have a hoseline of 
suffi cient fl ow (minimum of 95 gpm) to extin-
guish a fi re involving the entire fi re room.
• Training mannequins should be readily identi-
fi able as such, so as not to be confused with a 
fi refi ghter.
• No fi re room shall be used where two separate 
means of egress/escape are not available.
• Live fi re used in training should never be in a 
position to block the main or planned second-
ary exit of fi refi ghters.
• Emergency ventilation must be planned to 
limit fi re spread and to improve tenability in 
the event such action is necessary. Normal 
room venting shall not be through the primary 
or secondary egress point.

282  CHAPTER 10
process. Eventually, the fl ames diminish and the 
materials smolder, producing hot fl ammable gases. 
When fi refi ghters open a door or window, they allow 
oxygen to enter the space. When the right combina-
tion of heat, fuel (as a combustible gas), and  oxygen 
are present in the space, the triangle is complete 
once again. Since the fuel is in a gaseous form, and 
since it is at or above its ignition temperature and 
spread fairly uniformly throughout the space, a rapid 
ignition of these gases occurs, sometimes with explo-
sive force.
These events are commonplace and dangerous 
events that present great danger to every fi refi ghter. 
There are usually clues that can be used to forecast 
these events; fi re offi cers should understand all of 
them and avoid the conditions that kill and injure 
fi refi ghters.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
There are two other issues that deal with both build-
ing construction and fi re behavior.
The fi rst term, fi re extension, describes the spread 
of the fi re through the fuel load and the structure itself. 
Remember that in Type III, IV, and V buildings, some 
or all of the structure itself is made of combustible 
material. Fire will follow fairly predictable paths to 
fi nd the fuel needed to sustain its own life. It will gen-
erally travel upward, sometimes travel horizontally, 
and sometimes even downward, moving through the 
walls and ceilings, through voids and shafts where 
both fuel and oxygen are available to satisfy the fi re’s 
ravenous appetite.
While engaged in structural fi refi ghting, we should 
check for fi re extension as quickly as possible. Some 
will be obvious, and you will deal with that while 
extinguishing the original fuel. But in many cases, the 
fi re cannot be seen, as when it is within the wall or con-
cealed space. Firefi ghters have to open up these spaces 
to check for signs for fi re extension. Whenever open-
ings are made in walls or other spaces of a building that 
contain fi re, or are even suspected of containing fi re, 
fi refi ghters should be immediately ready to deal with 
fi re suppression. This means full turnout gear, SCBA, 
and a charged hoseline in hand. This also applies to 
opening doors and windows, cutting holes in roofs, or 
pulling ceilings to check for hidden fi re extension.
The second term we want to look at is ventila-
tion. Ventilation can be described as the procedures 
necessary to effect the planned and systematic direc-
tion and removal of smoke, heat, and fi re gases from 
within a structure. Ventilation is a key tactical opera-
tion that affects how the fi re behaves. Firefi ghters in 
many departments do not fully understand, nor effec-
tively use, good ventilation practices in structural 
 4.  Training fi res are no different than hostile fi res, 
and must be ventilated suffi ciently to reduce the 
chance of unexpected fl ashover and to maintain 
visibility at the fl oor level. Adequate emergency 
ventilation must be provided for the fi re room 
and any combustible attic space above.
 5.  Live-fi re training in acquired structures must 
include planning for secondary means of egress 
or escape in case of unexpected fi re condition 
changes. The use of rooms with limited access 
should not be considered.
 6.  Firefi ghters should be trained to constantly iden-
tify hazards and alternative escape routes dur-
ing interior fi re suppression operations inclusive 
of training exercises. Prior to live fi re training 
drills, fi refi ghters need to identify two ways out 
of each area.
 7.  Firefi ghters need training specifi c to recognizing 
the signs of a fl ashover, backdraft, proper ven-
tilation techniques, and/or water application to 
reduce the chance of fl ashover.
 8.  All participants’ protective clothing, PASS, and 
SCBA must be inspected for proper use and 
serviceability.
 9.  Formal communications plans must be in place 
inclusive of alternate channels, incident com-
mand communications versus crew-to-crew, 
emergency operations, medical operations and 
scene to dispatch.
 10.  Formal training for instructors conducting live-
fi re training is necessary.
Backdraft
Of all the fi re-related events described here, back-
draft explosions are the most forceful. As a fi re 
develops in an enclosed space, it consumes oxygen 
and produces hot combustible gases. We have already 
described how this process produces what is known 
as fl ashover and rollover. As this process continues, 
it moves into the third phase of fi re where the atmo-
sphere within the room or building reaches a point 
where there is insuffi cient oxygen to support the open 
combustion process.
As this process continues, the entire space 
becomes fi lled with hot combustible gases. One side 
(the oxidizer) of the fi re triangle has been removed, 
and this has interrupted the complete combustion 
FIREGOUND FACT
Of all the fire-related events described here, backdraft 
explosions are the most forceful.

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  283
What Makes the Fire Go Out?
Most structural fi res are extinguished with water. Water 
has many desirable properties that make it an effec-
tive extinguishing agent. It is cheap, readily available, 
and it has a great capacity to absorb heat. Many  factors 
affect both the ways and the effi ciency with which 
water absorbs heat from a particular burning combus-
tible. The application rate and droplet size of the water 
impact on its effectiveness. The form and type of mate-
rial burning have a signifi cant impact on the amount of 
heat being generated as well as the ability of the water 
to cool the burning material and control the fi re.
During fi refi ghting, it appears that water cools the 
burning materials. In reality, effective fi re suppres-
sion occurs when the heat from the involved materi-
als is transferred to the water being applied. When 
applied effectively, a large portion of that water is 
converted to steam. Under ideal conditions, nearly all 
of the water is converted to steam in this process.
Let us talk science for a minute. The amount of 
heat required to raise the temperature of one pound 
of water one degree Fahrenheit is called a British 
 thermal unit (BTU). You might think that a Brit-
ish thermal unit is a metric unit, but it is not. We use 
BTUs for many purposes in life, but we use them to 
our advantage here, not so much to show that water 
works well as an extinguishing agent, but rather to 
estimate how much water is needed.
Another scientifi c term we need is specifi c heat, a 
term used to describe the heat-absorbing capacity of 
a substance. As we have already noted, water is very 
effective in absorbing heat. In extinguishing fi res, we 
apply water to absorb the heat generated by the fi re. 
What we have is a heat transfer process: We reduce 
the temperature of the burning fuel and raise the tem-
perature of the water.
If you were to raise the temperature of the water from 
60°F to 212°F when applying it to burning  materials, 
fi refi ghting. Ventilation is often considered as an 
afterthought, when the main body of the fi re has been 
knocked down, and we want to dissipate the smoke. 
Good ventilation is needed to support all fi reground 
activities from rescue to investigation, and it is needed 
to some degree in every type of building. Good timely 
ventilation greatly alters the conditions within the 
structure, allowing for the more rapid removal of heat 
and fi re gases, thus affecting the fi re-related phenom-
ena we discussed in the preceding section and virtu-
ally eliminating the dangerous conditions that lead to 
backdraft and fl ashover.
Ventilation can be accomplished in two ways, 
 generally referred to as natural ventilation and 
mechanical ventilation. Natural ventilation is effec-
tive for small fi res and may require nothing more than 
opening a few doors and windows. Natural ventila-
tion has its limitations, however, and, in some cases, 
can be both time consuming and labor intensive. If 
not done early, the real benefi ts are lost.
Mechanical ventilation is an alternative that uses 
fans or blowers to force the movement of air through 
the structure. Fire departments have been using fans 
to pull smoke and gases from buildings for years, and, 
in the 1980s, some departments started using fans to 
push fresh air into the building, thus forcing some of 
the smoke and fi re gases out. Those who understood 
the concept used this approach quite effectively. Those 
who did not understand were skeptical about the idea 
of forcing fresh air into a structure during interior fi re 
attack or were just unwilling to learn a new approach 
to an old problem.
Change comes slowly, but many departments are 
now routinely using positive pressure fi re attack. 
However accomplished, ventilation activities during 
fi refi ghting operations, especially in large structures, 
must be carefully coordinated with other fi re suppres-
sion activities. If used effectively, ventilation is a key 
tactical activity that can greatly affect the positive 
outcome of any fi re suppression effort.
OFFICER ADVICE
Whenever openings are made in a building that con-
tains a fi re or suspected fi re, whether to fi ght the fi re 
or to check for fi re extension, fi refi ghters should have a 
charged hoseline available to extinguish any fi re that is 
found.
■ Where is the fi re?
■ Where is the fi re likely to spread?
■ Is there an immediate likelihood of a fl ashover?
■ Is there an immediate likelihood of a backdraft 
explosion?
■ Is there a likelihood of a collapse?
■ Is there any building feature that will help slow the fi re’s 
advance?
■ Are there any installed fi re protection features to assist 
in fi re suppression efforts?
■ Are there civilians present in the building? How will 
your activities affect them?
QUESTIONS THAT YOU FACE 
AT EVERY FIRE
SAFETY
Ventilation alters most of the fire-related phenomena 
described previously and reduces the probability of 
backdraft and flashover.

284  CHAPTER 10
hot. Not surprisingly they are used as fuel gases. 
These include methane, propane, and natural gas. 
However, for purposes of illustration, assume that the 
fuel is wood.
Research has shown that the average load of fuel 
in typical residential structures is about 4 pounds per 
square foot. Of course, this factor is much higher in 
warehouses and in some industrial and commercial 
facilities. Here is where the knowing this benefi ts the 
company offi cer. Most structure fi res are extinguished 
by using water to absorb the heat created by the fi re. 
From basic training, we recall that reducing the tem-
peratures of the items that are burning below their igni-
tion temperature will cause the fi re to go out. In order to 
control the fi re, the quantity of water applied to control 
the fi re must be able to absorb the heat being produced. 
152 BTUs would be absorbed for every pound of water 
applied. Water weighs about 8.3 pounds per  gallon. 
Thus, each gallon of water has the potential for absorb-
ing 1,266 BTUs when heated from 60° to 212°.
212  60  152 BTUs/pound
152 BTUs/pound  8.3 pounds/gallon
 1,266 BTUs/gallon
If you continue to heat the water, it will turn to steam.
Another advantageous property of water is that 
in the process of converting to steam, water will 
absorb many more BTUs. We know from research 
that every pound of water will absorb 970 additional 
BTUs. Scientifi cally this phenomena is called the 
latent heat of vaporization—the quantity of heat 
absorbed by a substance when it changes from a liq-
uid to a vapor. Again, multiplying by 8.3 pounds per 
gallon, the latent heat of vaporization for a gallon of 
water is 8,080 BTUs. Adding 1,266 and 8,080 we get 
9,346 BTUs per gallon.
970 BTUs/pound  8.3 pounds/gallon
 8,080 BTUs/gallon
Combining the results of the two:
1,266 BTUs/gallon  8,080 BTUs/gallon
 9,346 BTUs/gallon
One gallon of water will absorb 9,346 BTUs of energy. 
What does this mean to you as a company offi cer? 
You will see the signifi cance of this in a moment. 
If you continue to heat the steam, it will continue to 
expand, as evidenced by billowing of steam during 
fi re fi ghting operations.
We now look at the other side of the equation: How 
much heat do you have? Except for the kind of fi res 
that fi re protection engineers and scientists build for 
research purposes, you usually do not really know 
how many BTUs are being generated during a fi re. 
But that research allows you to estimate the heat that 
is produced in the fi res you typically encounter.
We do know that when materials burn, they gen-
erate heat. Scientists use the term heat of combus-
tion when measuring the quantity of heat or energy 
released per unit of weight. Looking at some of the 
types of materials we commonly see involved in fi re, 
we can get some idea of the approximate amount of 
heat being generated. For example, wood and paper 
yield about 8,000 BTUs/pound, polystyrene yields 
18,000 BTUs/pound, and gasoline yields 19,000 
BTUs/pound. In general, fl ammable liquids and gases 
burn more readily than solids. Some gases burn very 
FIREGROUND FACT
Research has shown that the average load of fuel in 
typical residential structures is about 4 pounds per 
square foot.
If you can estimate the amount of heat being produced, 
you can estimate the amount of water needed.
In real life, you do not know exactly what is burn-
ing, and, even if you did, you would not have time to 
do the math. What you do want to know is how fast 
you have to apply the water to make an effective fi re 
attack. The rate of water needed to control the fi re 
is called the theoretical fi re fl ow. There are several 
formulas for determining the fi re fl ow, but one of the 
easiest ones to use is the one currently taught by the 
National Fire Academy (NFA). It is based on the area 
in square feet of the burning structure. The area is 
determined by multiplying the length by the width. 
The NFA formula follows:
Fire fl ow (in gpm)  Area in square feet
3
NOTE
In order to control the fire, the quantity of water applied 
to control the fire must be able to absorb the heat 
being produced.
For example, take a room of a building 20 by 
30 feet, or 600 square feet. Divide the area, 600, by 3, 
and you have 200. The answer is in gallons per min-
ute, so the answer is 200 gpm. Remember that we are 
talking about fl ow rate, not the total quantity of water 
required. Knowing the fi re fl ow helps in preplanning 
and fi refi ghting operations.

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  285
assumptions about the size of the fi re at the time you 
start fi re suppression operations, but you can make 
some estimate of the needed fi re fl ow while preplan-
ning for the emergency. From this, you can determine 
how many and what size hoselines are needed, the 
pumping capacity required, and the water supply and 
the number of personnel needed.
A second application of the NFA formula facili-
tates size-up of the situation after arrival. Lacking a 
preplan, you can use the NFA formula to deal with 
the same questions regarding fi re fl ow and resources 
that are previously listed. If you estimate the size of 
the involved area and level of involvement, you can 
better determine number and size of lines needed, if 
you have adequate pumping capacity to supply these 
lines, if the existing water supply resources are ade-
quate, and if there are adequate personnel to initiate a 
safe fi re attack. In most cases, the number of fi re fi ght-
ing personnel present is the critical element. Where a 
hydrant is available, water supply, pumper capacity, 
This brief explanation of the NFA formula has not 
addressed how to deal with additional fl oors for fi re 
involvement, exposures, and other important issues 
associated with fi re fl ow. We will discuss this topic 
further in Chapter 13.
How can this help you in preplanning and fi re-
fi ghting? If you estimate the area, fuel, and level of 
involvement at the time you start fi re suppression 
operations, you can
■ Determine number and size of lines to provide the 
needed fi re fl ow
■ Determine the pumping capacity to supply these 
lines
■ Determine if existing water supply resources are 
adequate
■ Determine the number of personnel and compa-
nies needed to initiate a safe fi re attack
This information will serve you in two ways. It 
helps you preplan for fi re attack. You have to make 
NOTE
Where a hydrant is available, water supply, pumper 
capacity, and available hoselines generally exceed 
the capabilities of the personnel of the first arriving 
companies.
The call came in at 2:30 AM—an incident occurring in 
a garden apartment of woodframe construction. The 
200 foot   100 foot  building, which appeared to have 
been constructed in the 1960s (when building codes 
may have been more lax), housed 24 units. When Cap-
tain Christopher Naum’s company got to the scene, the 
fi refi ghters found fi re originating in a below-grade parking 
garage.
The company members sized up the situation and made 
some assumptions based on their training—the fi re should 
have stayed in one compartment. But it broke all the rules. 
Instead, it got into voids in the walls and traveled horizon-
tally, then vertically, breaking out into various apartments. 
As it did so, the company then had to deal with a rescue 
component; one fi refi ghter was on search detail when two 
fl oors collapsed, and he fell through to the basement, just 
missing the burning cars. Fortunately, Naum’s company 
could hear his PASS alarm and was able to save him.
What should have been a contained fi re ended up 
being four-alarm, taking 100 fi refi ghters 6 hours to 
UNDERSTANDING BUILDING 
CONSTRUCTION
Christopher Naum, Captain, 
Battalion 2, Moyers Corners Fire Department, 
Liverpool, New York
extinguish. For Naum, the lesson learned was that 
company offi cers should anticipate construction features 
in building types—but also be acutely aware of what can 
go wrong and anticipate what to do if the worst hap-
pens. That means understanding that construction, code 
 defi ciencies, or materials might not be in your favor; be 
cautious and aware when looking at size-up factors.
It also provided a lesson to the fi re department for 
the future. There were more than 35 other similar struc-
tures in the community, so from now on, the fi re depart-
ment knew to treat those buildings as it would an older 
balloon-type structure. It would change its strategy and 
placement of interior personnel to be more aggressive. 
Based on the performance of this building, the fi re de-
partment could build a profi le to help assess the high risk 
potential for rapid fi re spread in others.
Questions
1. What are the fi re-related problems associated with 
woodframe construction?
2. What can we learn from this incident?
3. Can the lessons learned at one fi re be applied to simi-
lar structures?
4. Can these lessons be applied in your jurisdiction?
5. We learned from the story at the start of this chapter 
that in today’s world, fi res burn hotter and buildings fail 
OFFICER ADVICE
Knowing the fi re fl ow helps in preplanning and 
fi refi ghting operations.

286  CHAPTER 10
W
e recognize that this chapter was a review of 
material you may have learned while in recruit 
school. We make no apology, for as a company offi -
cer, you must have thorough understanding of fi re 
behavior and building construction. (If you are an 
EMT, consider how much human anatomy and phys-
iology you learned to get that certifi cate.) Think of 
these topics as the anatomy and physiology courses 
for fi refi ghters as these areas of knowledge are funda-
mental to the task of fi re suppression. Understanding 
and being able to control the forces that control the 
growth and extension of a fi re will likely result in less 
fi re loss, and fewer injuries to fi refi ghters. You should 
keep these goals in mind as you plan, train, and oper-
ate at structural fi res.
In addition to understanding these topics, it is 
important that we apply them to specifi c buildings. 
This planning activity allows companies to prepare 
for certain expected operations by better identifying 
and analyzing the building, the potential for fi re, and 
LESSONS LEARNED
the hazards associated with fi refi ghting in that partic-
ular structure. Planning also allows for better assess-
ment of the fi re department’s needs during a fi re, and 
identifi es limitations that may suggest alternative 
strategies to interior fi refi ghting operations. We will 
discuss this further in Chapter 13.
As we close Chapter 10, we urge you to con-
tinue your studies in this area. If you are fortu-
nate enough to have a community college with a 
fi re  science  program in your area, they likely offer 
courses in building construction and fi re suppres-
sion. These are in-depth studies of what we have only 
briefl y addressed here. You will also fi nd worthwhile 
 articles on these topics in nearly every issue of the 
major trade journals. Study them and discuss them 
with your teammates. The more you know, the better 
you will be. Improvements in fi re suppression skills 
mean less fi re loss and a safer work place, two goals 
we should all embrace.
automatic fire protection sprinkler self-operating 
thermosensitive device that releases a spray of water 
over a designed area to control or extinguish a fi re
backdraft explosion a type of explosion caused 
by a sudden infl ux of air into a mixture of burning 
gases that have been heated to the ignition tempera-
ture of at least one of them
British thermal unit the amount of heat required 
to raise the temperature of one pound of water one 
degree Fahrenheit
community consequences an assessment of the 
consequences on the community, which includes the 
people, their property, and the environment
fire behavior the science of the phenomena and 
consequences of fi re
fire extension the movement of fi re from one area 
to another
fire resistance the resistance of a building to col-
lapse or to total involvement in fi re or the property 
of materials and their assemblies, which prevents or 
retards the passage of excessive heat, hot gases or 
fl ames under conditions of use
flashover a dramatic event in a room fi re that rap-
idly leads to full involvement of all combustible 
materials present
free-burning phase second phase of fi re growth, 
has suffi cient fuel and oxygen to allow for continued 
fi re growth
fuel load or fire load the total amount of combus-
tible material within a fi re area, expressed in terms 
of pounds per square foot.
heat of combustion the amount of heat given off by 
a particular substance during the combustion process
ignition temperature the minimum temperature 
to which a substance must be heated to start combus-
tion after an ignition source is introduced
incipient phase fi rst stage of fi re growth, limited 
to the material originally ignited
life risk factors the number of people in danger, 
the immediacy of their danger, and their ability to 
provide for their own safety
listed equipment or materials included in a docu-
ment prepared by an approved testing agency indi-
cating that the equipment or materials were tested in 
accordance with an approved test protocol and found 
suitable for a specifi c use.
noncombustible construction in broad terms, 
constructed of materials that will not burn
performance-based design an alternative method 
for satisfying the fi re protection and life safety intent 
KEY TERMS

The Company Officer’s Role in Understanding Building Construction and Fire Behavior  287
of construction codes based on agreed-on perfor-
mance goals and objectives, engineering analysis, 
and quantitative assessment of alternatives against 
the design goals and objectives
performance code a prescriptive code that assigns 
an objective to be met and establishes criteria for 
determining compliance
protected construction protected from the effects 
of fi re by encasement; concrete, gypsum, and 
sprayed on fi re-resistive coatings are all used to pro-
tect structural elements
rollover ignition of gases that have risen and 
encountered fresh air, and thus a new supply of oxygen
size-up mental assessment of the situation; gather-
ing and analyzing information that is critical to the 
outcome of an event
smoldering phase third stage of fi re growth; once 
the oxygen has been reduced, visible fi re diminishes
specification code a prescriptive code that speci-
fi es a type of construction or materials to be used
specific heat the heat-absorbing capacity of a 
substance
structural factors an assessment of the age, con-
dition, and structure type of a building, and the prox-
imity of exposures
theoretical fire flow the water fl ow requirements 
expressed in gallons per minute needed to control a 
fi re in a given area
thermal lag the difference between the operating 
temperature of a fi re detection device such a sprin-
kler head as and the actual air temperature when the 
device activates
thermal stratification rising of hotter gases in an 
enclosed space
ventilation a systematic process to enhance the 
removal of smoke and fi re by-products and the entry 
of cooler air to facilitate rescue and fi re-fi ghting 
operations
 1. What is meant by life risk factors?
 2. What is meant by property risk factors?
 3. What is meant by community consequences?
 4. How do each of the following factors affect fi re-
fi ghting operations?
• physical factors
• access factors
• structural factors
• survival factors
 5. Defi ne the fi ve building classifi cations.
 6. Identify a fi re-related hazard associated with each 
type of building.
 7. Defi ne the following:
• rollover
• ﬂ ashover
• backdraft
 8. What is the NFA’s fi re fl ow formula?
 9. How does the NFA fi re fl ow formula help in pre-
fi re planning and fi re suppression operations?
 10. Why is an understanding of building construction 
and fi re behavior essential for you, as the com-
pany offi cer?
 1. What are the signifi cant risk factors in your 
community?
 2. What are the fi ve principle building types? What 
is the signifi cant problem from a fi refi ghter 
safety perspective while fi refi ghting in each type?
 3. Which types of buildings are found in your com-
munity? What are the signifi cant hazards of these 
building?
 4. List some of the target hazards in your community.
 5. How has building construction changed in your 
community in the last 50 years?
 6. How have the contents of buildings changed in 
the last 50 years?
 7. How have these changes affected fi re suppression 
activities?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS

288  CHAPTER 10
and available hoselines generally exceed the capabili-
ties of the personnel of the fi rst arriving companies.
 9. Explain the use of the fi re fl ow formula. What 
formula is used in your community?
 10. Have you used a fi re fl ow formula during preplan-
ning activities? Have you used it during size-up 
and fi re suppression activities?
 8. We hear a lot about fi refi ghters going where they 
have never gone before—that fi refi ghters, pro-
tected by better protective clothing and SCBA, 
can penetrate further into a building to locate and 
control fi res. In light of your answer to question 7, 
how has fi refi ghting changed in the last 10 years?
ENDNOTES
1. Lloyd Layman. Fire Fighting Tactics. Quincy, MA: National 
Fire Protection Association, 1953, 8. Reprinted with permission 
from National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, MA 02269.
2. Emanual Fried. Fireground Tactics. Chicago: Marvin Ginn 
Corporation, 1972, p. 357.
3. Francis Brannigan. Building Construction for the Fire Service. 
Boston: National Fire Protection Association, 1971, p. 2.
4. J. Gordon Routly. Interstate Bank Building Fire, Los Angeles, 
California USFA-TR-022/May 1988.
5. J. Gordon Routley. City of Charleston Post Incident Assessment 
and Review Team Phase II Report, Sofa Super Store Fire, May 
15, 2008.
6. Preventing Injuries and Deaths of Fire Fighters due to Truss 
System Failures, National Institute of Occupational Safety and 
Health, 2005, NIOSH publication 2005-132, p. 23.
7. 2006 ICC Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities, 2006, 
International Code Council, p. 10.
8. Paul A. Croce, et al.. Fire Safety Journal, 43, 234–236, 2008.
9. Richard W. Bukowski, P.E. Determining Design Fires for De-
sign-level and Extreme Events. Gaithersburg, MD: NIST Build-
ing and Fire Research Laboratory, 2006, p. 5.
10. Richard E. Hughey, P.E. “Property Protection or Life Safety: Can 
We Have Both?” Fire Marshal Quarterly, September 1996, p. 20.
11. Edward J. Kaminski, P.E. “Practical Aspects of Wet and Dry 
Chemical Extinguishing System Inspection and Acceptance.” 
BOCA Magazine, 4 (July/August 1995), p. 34.
12. Fire Protection Handbook. 13th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association, pp. 15-23.
13. For additional information about this incident, go to the USFA 
web site at www.fema.gov and look for Technical Report #087.
14. This information was extracted from the offi cial investigation 
report, prepared by the Bureau of Fire Standards and Training, 
Florida Division of State Fire Marshal. For the complete report, 
go to www.fsfc.ufl .edu. Go to link for state fi re marshal and look 
for report of July 30, 2002, incident.
15. For additional information regarding the NFA fi re fl ow formula, 
see the preparation course student manual for the NFA training 
program entitled Managing Company Tactical Operations. Ad-
ditional information about this course is contained at the end of 
Chapter 12 of this book.
16. Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1403, Live Fire Train-
ing Evolutions, Copyright©2007, National Fire Protection 
 Association. This reprinted material is not the complete and of-
fi cial position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is 
represented only by the standard in its entirety.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Brannigan, Francis L. “Effect of Building Construction and Fire 
Protection Systems.” In Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. 
Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2003.
Custer, Richard L. “Dynamics of Compartment Fire Growth.” In 
Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association, 2003.
Davis, Richard J. “Building Construction.” In Fire Protection 
Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection 
Association, 2003.
Drysdale, D. D. “Chemistry and Physics of Fire.” In Fire Protec-
tion Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection 
Association, 2003.
Fried, Emanual. Fireground Tactics. Chicago: Marvin Ginn Cor-
poration, 1972.
Friedman, Raymond. “Theory of Fire Extinguishment.” In Fire 
Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Pro-
tection Association, 2003.
Hicks, Harold, D. “Confi nement of Fire in Buildings.” In Fire Pro-
tection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protec-
tion Association, 2003.
Klinoff, Robert W. Introduction to Fire Protection. 2nd ed. Clifton 
Park, NY: Delmar Publishers, 2003.
Lloyd Layman. Attacking and Extinguishing Interior Fires. Quincy, 
MA: National Fire Protection Association, 1955.
Nelson, Floyd W. Qualitative Fire Behavior. Stafford, VA: Interna-
tional Society of Fire Service Instructors, 1991.
Quintiere, James G. Principles of Fire Behavior. Albany, NY: Del-
mar Publishers, 1997.
Watts, John M. “Fundamentals of Fire-Safe Building Design.” In 
Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association, 2003.


The Company Officer’s Role 
in Fire Investigation
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ Common Causes of Fire
■ Fire Investigation
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
11

291
STREET 
STORY
I
t was a quiet, spring morning, about 4:00 A.M., when we were jarred awake 
with the notification of a fire alarm. Our ladder company pulled up just behind 
the  battalion chief and the first engine. Heavy black smoke and flames were vis-
ible in the large front window of a darkened diner. We listened to the chief’s size-up 
as we approached, “One story ordinary construction, 30 feet by 100 feet, heavy 
fire  conditions in a restaurant.” This was followed quickly by a second message, 
 “Battalion 5 to dispatch, send us an ambulance, a civilian driving by saw a 
victim inside.”
As the lieutenant in charge of the truck company, I sent two firefighters to the 
roof and took two with me for search and rescue. We quickly vented the front 
 window and forced the front door. As the heavy smoke billowed out, I detected the 
strong scent of gasoline. Via the radio, I relayed this information to the chief, and he 
called for arson investigators to respond.
By relaying the information over the radio that this fire was possibly an arson fire, 
all firefighters were now aware of the arson potential. All the firefighters on scene 
knew to use extra caution because of the presence of accelerants, which can 
make the fire much more volatile and harder to control. Another potential danger 
is that arsonists may sometimes weaken structural components to aid in collapse, 
adding an additional element of danger for firefighters.
The engine company led a 2½-inch line into the front door and we started our 
search behind them. The rear door was locked tight and no victim was found 
 during our primary search of the restaurant. We found a stairway to the basement 
and continued our search down there. The basement was free of fire and had only 
a moderate amount of smoke. The rear door to the outside was forced open. My 
first reaction was that this is how the arsonist gained entry. On closer inspection, it 
was obvious by the damage to the door that it was forced from the inside. This was 
important evidence because the rear stairwell was in a well-lit area, which faced a 
large apartment building. This might indicate someone wanted it to look like forcible 
entry, but did not want to be seen while attempting this cover-up. It was clear to 
me this was an inside job, arson for profit.
We treated the fire scene like a crime scene and disturbed as little evidence as 
possible. Another team of firefighters found and preserved a gas can in the restau-
rant. I documented our actions thoroughly in the company journal and forwarded 
additional forms to arson investigators and my district chief. I also kept records in 
my own personal file. This turned out to be critical when, 4 years later, I was a key 
witness in the arson trial of the restaurant owner. Without good documentation of 
information, this criminal may have gotten away with arson.
Hundreds of people die in arson fires every year. Sometimes the victims of 
 arson are firefighters. All company officers should understand that arson investi-
gation starts with the first-arriving firefighters. Suspicious looking flame or smoke, 
low burn patterns, smells of accelerants, the presence of gas cans or timing de-
vices, and forced doors are just some of the examples of arson evidence. We must 
 detect evidence, preserve it, relay the information to arson investigators and chief 
officers, and ensure the safety of our firefighters in these dangerous situations.
—Battalion Chief Steve Chikerotis, Battalion Chief/Assistant 
Director of Training, Chicago Fire Department, Chicago, Illinois

292  CHAPTER 11
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 11-1 Describe the methods that are most commonly 
used by individuals that set fires.
 11-2 Describe the responsibilities of a fire officer 
while interacting with other agencies involved in 
a fire investigation.
 11-3 Describe the importance of a fire scene 
assessment.
 11-4 Identify evidence that will assist in determining 
fire origin and cause.
 11-5 Identify procedures employed to determine the 
origin and cause of a fire
 11-6 List the elements or the indicators of the fire 
growth and development to assist in determin-
ing the need for a fire investigator.
 11-7 Describe procedures for securing and preserv-
ing evidence at a fire scene.
 11-8 Define the term chain of custody.
 11-9 Describe the importance of maintaining the 
chain of custody.
 11-10 Describe the types of evidence that must be 
preserved.
 11-11 Identify methods used to protect evidence from 
damage or destruction (spoiliation).
 11-12 List the steps necessary to secure an emer-
gency scene.
 11-13 List problems caused by evidence removal from 
a fire scene prior to an investigation occurring.
 11-14 Explain the importance of evidence 
preservation.
 11-15 Explain procedures used to document a prelimi-
nary origin and cause investigation
INTRODUCTION
A major part of any active fi re prevention program 
should be the investigation of fi res. Fire investi-
gations help identify the community’s fi re risk by 
 determining the frequency and causes of the fi re. This 
information can be used to provide the basis for fi re 
prevention programs and for identifying the resources 
needed for fi re suppression. When a fi re may have 
been  intentionally set, a good fi re investigation is the 
fi rst of several steps needed to bring the perpetrator 
to justice. Fire offi cers have a signifi cant role in this 
process.
All Fires Should Be Investigated
Every fi re should be investigated to determine its 
 origin and cause. We often equate fi re investigation 
with arson and arson investigation. Although arson 
investigation is a part of the fi re investigator’s job, fi re 
investigation has other purposes. A majority of fi res 
(70 to 80 percent overall) are accidental in nature. 
(Statistics in your particular response area may 
 suggest a  different value.)
All fi res, including those that are obviously acci-
dental, should be investigated to determine their cause 
* The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional 
Qualifi cations, are identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.
OFFICER ADVICE
Every fi re should be investigated to determine its origin 
and cause.
NOTE
Fire investigators try to eliminate all possible accidental 
causes before considering arson.
so that patterns of human behavior or equipment fail-
ure can be discovered and corrected.
Before going much further, we need to clearly defi ne 
several words we are using in this chapter. First, we 
use the term accidental here to include all types of 
fi res that are not intentionally set. Some would argue 
that accidental is too kind a term, that while accidents 
do happen and mechanical devices do fail, and light-
ning and other natural causes do occur, human care-
lessness is the cause of all too many fi res. In many 
jurisdictions, all fi res are considered to be intention-
ally set until proven otherwise by a fi re investigator.
The term intentionally set is probably a more 
appropriate term for what is often referred to as arson. 

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  293
NOTE
The crime of arson requires criminal intent as well as 
the act itself.
Vina Drennan understands carelessness when it comes 
to fi res; she is the widow of New York City Fire Depart-
ment Captain John Drennan who, along with two other 
fi refi ghters, died in a fi re caused by a citizen’s careless 
act. (A bag of trash was left on top of a gas stove.) Cap-
tain Drennan survived the fi re but died several agonizing 
weeks later as a result of his injuries.
Shortly after his death, someone said to Ms.  Drennan, 
“I’ll bet you would like to get your hands on those who 
were responsible for the fi re.” She was surprised at the 
suggestion. She responded by saying, “Oh no, they 
didn’t mean it, they were just careless. Just careless . . . 
we tolerate a lot of carelessness in America.”
She has traveled all over the country and talked about 
John Drennan’s life. She also talks about fi res; she has 
learned a lot about fi res in the last several years. She 
compares the attitude toward fi re and the fi re loss in 
America with other countries, noting that we do not com-
pare very well. She tells those who will listen that Captain 
Drennan loved his job, and he died in that job because of 
someone’s carelessness.
She challenges all of you in this fi re service who hear 
or heed her message! “Tell the public that carelessness 
can kill!” If we can reduce the number who suffer injuries 
from fi res, and if we can reduce the number of fatalities 
from fi res, then we can fi nd even greater meaning in John 
Drennan’s life.
HAVE YOU HEARD MS. VINA 
DRENNAN TALK ABOUT THE COST 
OF CARELESSNESS?
NOTE
All fires, including those that are obviously accidental, 
should be investigated to determine their cause so that 
patterns of human behavior or equipment failure can 
be discovered and corrected.
In the past, the terms incendiary or suspicious were 
often used here, but the current National Fire Incident 
Reporting System (NFIRS) uses the term “intention-
ally set,” and current National Fire Protection Asso-
ciation data on fi re loss use the same term. We will 
follow their lead.
Arson, on the other hand, is a legal term. Arson is 
the result of a deliberately set fi re, but not all inten-
tionally set fi res are arson: It is not a crime to light a 
fi re in your fi replace. And where authorized, it is not 
illegal to burn brush or trash. But the intentional set-
ting of a fi re where there is criminal intent is arson. 
Thus, arson has two elements: a criminal intent, and 
a deliberate or intentional act. When you cannot fi nd 
reasonable evidence of an accidental cause, it would, 
indeed, be appropriate to consider the investigator’s 
logic: All fi res are considered to be intentionally set 
until proven otherwise. Fire investigators use this 
approach in both their fi re investigation and in their 
presentation of evidence in courts. They rule out all 
accidental causes fi rst and then prove that the fi re was 
intentionally set.
As company offi cers, you are often in a unique 
position for conducting fi re investigations. You are 
likely to be among the fi rst emergency responders at 
the scene and therefore have an opportunity to see 
the fi re while it is still burning. For smaller events, 
you may be the senior fi re department offi cial at the 
scene, so you must complete the fi re incident report. 
To complete the report, you have to determine the ori-
gin and cause of the fi re. Where an intentionally set 
fi re is involved, your observations and actions play a 
signifi cant role in any legal proceedings that follow. 
With these thoughts in mind, let us consider the com-
mon causes of fi re.
What Is Fire?
In Chapter 10, we reviewed fi re behavior. We noted 
that a fi re will not occur unless the three essential 
elements that comprise the fi re triangle are present. 
One of these is heat. Contemporary fi re science text-
books refer to this side of the fi re triangle as energy 
(see Figure 11-1). Heat, or energy, warms the fuel to 
cause vapors to form and provides the ignition source 
in the fi re triangle. Heat also promotes fi re growth 
and fl ame spread. There are many commonly found 
ignition sources including chemical reactions, electri-
cal energy, and mechanical energy.
The second essential element of fi re is fuel. Fuel 
can be anything that is combustible. Fuel can be pres-
ent as a solid, a liquid, or a vapor. Fuel for acciden-
tal fi res includes items that are all around us, ranging 
from household furnishings to trash.
Oxygen is the third requirement. Oxygen is natu-
rally present in the air. In fact, fi re is usually defi ned 
in simple scientifi c terms as the process of oxidation 
of a fuel by atmospheric oxygen. Fire is often defi ned 
as a rapid, self-sustaining oxidation process, usually 
accompanied by the evolution of heat and light in 
varying intensities.

294  CHAPTER 11
Cooking
Cooking is the leading cause of fi res in residential 
occupancies. Cooking is also by far the leading cause 
of fi re-related injuries. When used properly, cooking 
equipment is not hazardous. Unsafe practices, inat-
tentiveness, poor housekeeping, inappropriate attire, 
and lack of maintenance can lead to fi res associated 
with cooking equipment. In most cases, it is not really 
the equipment that is at fault; it is human error (see 
Figure 11-2).
Heating Equipment
Heating equipment is another leading cause of fi res. 
By design, heating devices get hot. When suffi cient 
quantities of that heat get close enough to combustible 
materials, you have a fi re. Most heating equipment is 
safe; what causes problems is usually not the equip-
ment, but rather the way the equipment is used. Fires 
occur when heating equipment is misused, improp-
erly installed or maintained, or placed too close to 
combustible materials, like bedding and clothing.
COMMON CAUSES OF FIRE
Accidental Causes
In Chapter 9, we discussed the common causes of fi re. 
Those same causes are discussed here briefl y, with 
the focus on looking at their origin and cause.
FIRE TRIANGLE (TRADITIONAL)
FUEL
HEAT
AIR
FIRE TRIANGLE (MODERN)
FUEL
HEAT
OXIDIZER
FIGURE 11-1 In Chapter 10, we noted that fuel, heat, 
and air are needed to start a fire. To better understand 
the chemistry and physics involved in the combustion 
 processes, air is replaced with the more scientific term 
oxidizer; likewise, heat is replaced with the term energy.
FIGURE 11-2 Fires in the kitchen 
can have serious consequences.
FIREGROUND FACT
Most heating equipment is safe; what causes prob-
lems is usually not the equipment, but rather the way 
the equipment is used.
Chimneys are designed to vent the hot and haz-
ardous by-products of the fi re to the outside. When 
the chimneys are not properly maintained, those by- 
products accumulate in the chimney. Eventually, when 
they get hot enough, they ignite and cause a chimney 
fi re. When the chimney is not properly maintained, 

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  295
before the fi re or any evidence of arcing or other mal-
function during the fi re.
When you are looking at wiring inside a struc-
ture after a fi re, it is often diffi cult to determine if the 
fi re caused damage to the wire or if the wire caused 
the fi re. The nature of the damage is a function of 
the cause of the fi res, the extent of the exposure of the 
wiring to heat, the duration of the fi re, and the protec-
tion on the wire. In a typical residential fi re involv-
ing a room and its contents, the wiring does not get 
hot enough to melt. On the other hand, wiring can 
be damaged by the heat generated by an excessive 
amount of electrical current. In this case, you may see 
melting of insulation in areas of the structure where 
there was no fi re damage and evidence that the wire 
was warm enough to deform due to the heat gener-
ated by the electrical current.
the hot gases that are intended to go up the chim-
ney can escape through the walls of the chimney. If 
they escape into the structure, they may ignite nearby 
combustible materials.
Hot fi replace ashes are another major concern in 
many parts of the country. Regardless of the type of 
fi re that produced the ashes, ashes that remain warm 
can set fi re to any nearby combustible material. Many 
people have carelessly set fi res by placing hot fi replace 
ashes in a plastic can or paper bag in their garages or 
on their wooden patio decks.
Firefi ghters everywhere attend fi res like these and 
can tell stories about how fi res they have seen were 
started. But not many homeowners know what you 
know about fi res, and some of those who do know, do 
not seem to care. So, we keep having the same kinds 
of fi res. Nearly every fi re department in the country 
attends fi res involving heating equipment during the 
winter season.
FIREGROUND FACT
Leading accidental causes of the fire include the 
 following: cooking and cooking equipment heating 
equipment, the careless use and disposal of smoking 
materials, and electrical distribution systems.
FIREGROUND FACT
In a typical residential fire involving a room and its con-
tents, the wiring does not get hot enough to melt.
FIREGROUND FACT
Arcing usually leaves a distinctive mark on the wire 
 either in the form of beaded ends or one or more cavi-
ties in the wire itself.
Smoking Materials
Smoking and the careless discarding of smoking 
materials are the source of many of the nation’s fi re 
fatalities. Such fi res often involve a delayed ignition 
of upholstery materials, such as in a bed, chair, or 
sofa. The results are a slowly developing fi re that 
eventually produces enough heat and toxic vapors to 
kill everyone present. When undetected, these fi res 
are often signifi cant in terms of their intensity, and 
because they frequently occur after bedtime, or when 
the smoker is intoxicated, the results are fatal.
Electricity
Electricity is all around us. When properly used, it 
is a safe form of energy. However, that energy has 
tremendous potential for causing damage. Electrical 
appliances and electrical distribution systems cause 
fi res. Safeguards are built into appliances and elec-
trical distribution systems to protect us from fi re 
and personal injury. However, the safeguards do not 
always protect individuals from careless acts.
One of the major protection devices in any electri-
cal system is the electrical panel. It is a good place to 
check after any fi re. You should try to determine if the 
electrical circuit was energized at the time of the fi re. 
Examine the panel itself as well as the area around 
the meter to determine if there was any  tampering 
Arcing, as a result of poor connections, can dam-
age wiring. Arcing usually leaves a distinctive mark 
on the wire either in the form of beaded ends or one 
or more cavities in the wire itself. The arcing usually 
causes sparks, which may ignite nearby combusti-
ble materials. Finding one or more clues associated 
with electrical distribution systems and electrical 
equipment may help you determine the cause of the 
fi re. Electrical problems are often missed as a cause 
of fi re. Fires are also unfairly blamed on electrical 
problems.
Natural Causes
There are other causes of fi res. Many wildland fi res 
are the result of lightning. Lightning can strike 
 anywhere, even in the middle of congested areas. 
Storms often bring lightning strikes to structures, 
downed  powerlines, and other problems. Fires in the 
 wildland environment endanger any structure that is 
present. Even in the urban or suburban environment, 
fi res can start as a result of exposure to other fi res, 
or from fl aming materials carried downwind from the 
original fi re.
Another natural cause of fi res is the result of spon-
taneous combustion or autoignition. Autoignition is 

296  CHAPTER 11
the result of a chemical reaction; it does not require 
a spark or fl ame to start the fi re. The process is usu-
ally associated with rags or other combustible materi-
als containing a residue of fl ammable liquid. The fuel 
must be suffi cient and arranged to generate enough 
heat to reach the ignition temperature of the surround-
ing materials. When cleaning rags are improperly 
stored or casually discarded, they can be the source 
of ignition (see Figure 11-3).
Arson
The intentional setting of fi res is a pervasive  problem 
affecting many types of property. Every year, we read 
of statistics dealing with structure fi res, wildland 
fi res, and even vehicular fi res. In all three  categories, 
those fi res that were intentionally set contribute 
to the total loss. In the case of structure fi res, the 
loss also includes civilian fatalities and injuries, and 
to some extent, fi refi ghter deaths and injuries (see 
Table 11-1).
FIGURE 11-3 This furniture store 
was completely destroyed by a fire 
that started in an on-site refinishing 
facility. A thorough fire investigation 
revealed the cause of the fire as au-
toignition of cleaning rags in a trash 
can in the refinishing shop.
Arson is a legal term. Under common law, arson was de-
fi ned simply as the malicious burning of someone else’s 
house. Today, the defi nition of arson varies from state to 
state, but generally the defi nition has been extended to 
include any property including one’s own property, and 
to designate four levels or degrees of arson:
■ The burning of dwellings
■ The burning of buildings other than dwellings
■ The burning of other property
■ The attempted burning of buildings or property
WHAT IS ARSON?
FIREGROUND FACT
NFPA reports that there were 32,500 intentionally set 
fires in the United States in 2007. About half of these fires 
were in structures, resulting in almost 300 deaths and 
$733,000,000 in property loss. Most of the  remaining 
intentionally set fires were set in  vehicles,  resulting in 
an additional $145,000,000 in property loss.1
Rank 
Civilian Deaths 
Civilian Injuries 
Dollar Loss 
Number of Fires
1 
Smoking 
Cooking 
Arson 
Cooking
2 
Arson 
Arson 
Electrical 
Arson
3 
Cooking 
Smoking 
Heating 
Heating
Source: Fire in the United States, 12th ed. p. 62.
TABLE 11-1 Leading Causes of Residential Fires2

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  297
Individuals set fi res for many reasons. Many think 
of arson as a scheme to fraudulently collect money 
from the insurance company. In this context, an 
arsonist might be thought of as the hired torch that 
intentionally set the fi re. To some extent, that is still 
true, but today, we are seeing increasing use of inten-
tionally set fi res and explosions by spiteful individ-
uals or groups to hurt and kill people for revenge. 
These acts range from retaliatory acts against an indi-
vidual or family to large-scale events such as those 
in Oklahoma City in 1995 (see Figure 11-4) and in 
New York and elsewhere in 2001. In the last case, the 
results were the acts of terrorists. Many think of ter-
rorism as something new, but it has been around a 
long time, and when we look at the number of events 
worldwide, we should realize that the threat is very 
real. We will talk more about this in Chapter 13.
NOTE
Motives for arson include spite and revenge, fraud, 
intimidation, concealment of another crime, vanity, 
pyromania, emotional dysfunction, civil disorder, and 
the acts of juveniles.
The reason a person sets a fi re is known as the motive. 
There are several reasons or motives for arson-related 
fi res. Many fi res are set to obtain money. The usual sce-
nario is that property is deliberately destroyed by fi re in 
an effort to collect money from an insurance company or 
others. The motive here is fraud: an unfair or dishonest 
act to obtain something, in this case, to obtain money.
Another common motive for arson is revenge.  Revenge 
fi res are usually associated with rage related to a bro-
ken romantic relationship or particularly hostile labor- 
relations problems in the workplace. Because of the 
 attitude of the arsonist, these fi res are frequently started 
with a  fl ammable substance or even an explosive device 
with devastating results.
MOTIVE
FIGURE 11-4 The Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building. (Photo 
courtesy of Michael Regan)
an investigator, much less the fi re chief, is not practi-
cal or necessary. One of the reasons we fail to call out 
investigators is we may have to wait for them to arrive 
and may have to wait even longer until the investiga-
tion is completed. Another reason is that we are often 
quick to assume the fi re was accidental.
THE VALUE OF FIRE 
INVESTIGATION
In the state laws that regulate your fi re department’s 
operations, there should be a statement regarding fi re 
investigation. The following is typical:
The local fi re offi cial shall make an investigation into 
the origin and cause of every fi re occurring within the 
limits of the jurisdiction.
Taken literally, that statement suggests that you would 
call the fi re chief to every fi re. For most fi res, calling 
OFFICER ADVICE
Every fi re offi cer should become profi cient in determining 
the “origin and cause” of every fi re.
In many jurisdictions, fi re investigators do not 
respond to fi res that are considered accidental or 
that result in minor property damage. In such loca-
tions, it is important that every fi re offi cer become 
profi cient in determining the “origin and cause” of 
every fi re. The average fi re is attended with one or 
two engine companies. One of the offi cers is usually 
assigned the task of gathering the important informa-
tion and  fi lling out the fi re report. Part of the report 

298  CHAPTER 11
OFFICER ADVICE
Timely and careful gathering of evidence will aid in build-
ing a case that may bring someone to justice.
OFFICER ADVICE
If in doubt, ask for the fi re investigator and ask as soon 
as possible.
NOTE
Experienced fire officers should be able to determine 
the origin and cause of nearly all fires they attend.
It is suggested that an investigator should be called in the 
following situations:
■ Any event that involves an obvious incendiary fi re
■ Any fi re that results in death or serious injury
■ Any event that produces burn injuries, especially those 
involving direct fl ame contact, fi reworks, or is the re-
sult of an assault
■ Any event that involves an exploding or incendiary 
device
■ Any event that involves fi re damage beyond the origi-
nal room of origin
■ Any event that involves damage to government 
property
■ Any vehicle fi re that is not the result of an accident
■ Any event in which the offi cer in charge is unable to 
determine the cause
GUIDELINES FOR CALLING THE FIRE 
INVESTIGATOR
Although we are still assuming that the fi re is acci-
dental 80 to 90 percent of the time, we should still 
accurately determine the cause of the fi re all of the 
time. In cases where the fi re is determined to have 
been accidental, timely and accurate fi re cause deter-
mination is important for the owner, the insurance 
company, and the fi re department. In addition, timely 
and accurate fi re investigations help identify faulty 
equipment, unsafe habits, and patterns of activity. 
For example, a series of similar events may look like 
an unrelated series of accidents until one notices a 
 pattern of time, addresses, or causes.
asks for information about the cause and origin of 
the fi re. Experienced fi re offi cers should be able to 
determine the origin and cause of nearly all fi res they 
attend. These reports are important in that they help 
the community, state, and to some extent, the nation, 
better identify our true fi re problem. Therefore, we 
encourage every fi re department and every fi re offi -
cer to complete the report that supports the gathering 
of data. Most of the states participate in the National 
Fire Incident Reporting System (NFIRS). Reporting 
continues to get easier as new computer technology 
is introduced.
Although fi re offi cers should be able to determine 
the origin and cause of most fi res, there will be times 
when you have to call the investigator. The request for 
an investigator might be made as early as during the 
arrival of the fi rst-arriving companies, or it may not 
be evident until overhaul activity has started. Local 
policies and protocols suggest exactly how this should 
take place. If the company offi cer believes there is 
a reasonable cause for belief in existence of facts an 
investigator should be summoned as soon as possible. 
The investigator’s arrival during fi re suppression or 
at least during overhaul will assist in determining the 
cause of the fi re, help build a better case if arson is 
involved, and may even allow suppression companies 
to leave sooner than they might have otherwise.
In any event in which you have concerns about these 
or other issues, you should talk with a fi re investigator 
by phone or other means before leaving the scene.
Who does the fi re investigation? A needs assess-
ment of the U.S. Fire Service provides information 
that helps answer that question. While company offi -
cers and incident commanders are investigating many 
fi res, frequently there is a need for a certifi ed fi re 
investigator. Most large departments have such per-
sonnel on staff. In fact, in 90 percent of the jurisdic-
tions of 50,000 or more, the fi re department provides 
the investigator. In jurisdictions of less than 50,000, 
a variety of resources are used including fi re investi-
gators from the fi re department, from regional task 
forces, from the state fi re marshal’s offi ce, and from 
the state police.3
Although most fi res are accidental, you should 
be thinking about the possibility of arson on every 
call. In cases where you have a reason to believe that 
the fi re may have been deliberately set, timely and 
careful gathering of evidence will aid in building a 
case that may bring someone to justice. It may take 
some effort to note the things identifi ed in the fol-
lowing paragraphs while they are occurring, but these 
observations may be useful during the size-up pro-
cess, regardless of the cause of the fi re, and they may 
be very useful if it is later determined that the fi re 
was the result of arson. By performing a fi re scene 
assessment, the investigator can defi ne the extent of 
the scene. This assessment is a complete walk-around 
of the scene to determine the extent of damage. Most 
investigators prefer to start with the area that has the 

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  299
While en Route
Weather, traffi c conditions, time of day, and other fac-
tors should be noted and also incorporated into the 
response action. All of this information is important 
for the responders. Some of it may become important 
as you try to determine the cause of the fi re.
Upon Arrival
The fi rst emergency personnel to respond to the scene 
of a fi re have a unique opportunity to help determine 
the origin and cause of the fi re. These fi rst respond-
ers can observe the amount of smoke and fi re show-
ing, the condition of the building, and activities in the 
immediate vicinity. The fi rst responders may be able 
to note who is present at the scene upon their arrival, 
especially someone who is alone or demonstrating 
unusual behavior.
Upon arrival at the scene of a fi re, you would 
expect people to be exiting the building and show-
ing concern for those who may remain in the build-
ing. You should note the appearance and mental state 
of any occupants of the building. In most cases one 
or more of the occupants will meet the fi re offi cer. 
You would expect people to be dressed appropriately 
for the time of day. Finding the occupant in night-
clothes at 4:00 am is normal; fi nding the occupant of 
a residence dressed for travel at that hour should raise 
some questions.
Fires also generally attract spectators. For all 
sorts of reasons, people will stop and watch a fi re, 
and many will linger to watch the fi re department’s 
suppression activities. This is normal behavior, too. 
We usually do not have time to observe the crowd of 
spectators that gather at the scene of a fi re, but not-
ing any who may be demonstrating unusual behavior 
may be very useful. Concern and curiosity are nor-
mal behaviors, but any unusual behavior, especially 
indications of excitement or pleasure should be noted. 
If there has been a series of fi res in a neighborhood 
and a  particular  person has been present at several 
of these events, this person’s appearance should be 
carefully noted and pointed out to the investigator 
or police.
least damage and fi nish at the area with the most 
damage. This should be done on every fi re scene to 
protect the safety of personnel and to protect possi-
ble evidence. The investigator should adjust the scene 
perimeter based on the site examination. In many sit-
uations, it is very diffi cult to put these facts together 
after the fi re is over. With that thought in mind, let 
us look at the things that the fi rst responders may be 
able to note.
Observations of First 
Responders
Firefi ghters, especially those arriving fi rst at the 
scene of a working fi re, have a unique opportu-
nity to make observations regarding a fi re’s behav-
ior. Although their primary purpose is to save lives, 
protect  property, and extinguish the fi re, a moment 
of time making observations about the fi re and the 
surrounding conditions may help in both the suppres-
sion effort and in the fi re investigation that follows. 
Since even the best of fi re investigators is usually not 
present  during these fi rst few minutes, and since you 
cannot recreate these condition once an investigator is 
present, it is important that you retain enough of the 
details so that they can be recalled and shared with 
the investigator and included in your fi re report.
First responders have unique opportunities for 
making observations while en route to the fi re, upon 
arrival, during the initial stages of suppression, and 
during overhaul activities. Some information can even 
be obtained during the fi rst notifi cation of the fi re to 
the fi re department.
NOTE
First responders have unique opportunities for mak-
ing observations while en route to the fire, upon arrival, 
during the initial stages of suppression, and during 
overhaul activities.
During the Initial Notification
Most fi res are reported today by telephone. The fi rst 
clue of a fi re is usually a citizen’s call to the fi re 
department or emergency dispatch center. The caller 
may be an occupant or someone who just noticed the 
fi re. Multiple calls pertaining to the same event indi-
cate that it is probably signifi cant. The information 
from the caller, as well as the information previously 
gathered in conjunction with the company’s preplan-
ning efforts, is integrated to form the basis for the 
response action. The call taker should get the caller’s 
name, phone number, and location; you may want to 
talk to the caller later.
OFFICER ADVICE
Noting the appearance of the fi re itself is one of the most 
important observations that fi rst responders can make.
We should also be concerned about those who 
might be leaving. It is diffi cult to note details of a 
person’s appearance, activity, or even a description 
of the person’s vehicle during this time, but simply 
noting that the event occurred has its value. Persons 

300  CHAPTER 11
A completely separate issue deals with the secu-
rity of the building. For buildings in which there 
were people present at the time the fi re ignited, you 
would expect the doors, and possibly even the win-
dows, to be unlocked and maybe even open, depend-
ing upon the weather. Conversely, for buildings that 
are in use, but unoccupied at the time of the fi re, you 
would expect to fi nd these openings secured. Where 
automatic fi re doors are installed, you should expect 
to fi nd them closed. Deviations from these conditions 
should  defi nitely be noted and reported both to the 
incident commander and the fi re investigator.
who may have been working on the premises should 
be carefully noted. Construction activity, especially 
in cold weather, may have been the cause of the fi re. 
Careful observations help you note and later recall the 
details that may be useful to the fi re investigator (see 
Figure 11-5).
Noting the appearance of the fi re itself is one of 
the most important observations that fi rst responders 
can make. Information regarding the color and loca-
tion of fl ames, and the color, quantity, and location 
of smoke provides valuable information for both fi re 
suppression and for fi re investigation. if and where the 
fi re has vented itself, the number of rooms and fl oors 
involved, whether it was one fi re or perhaps several 
separate fi res burning simultaneously, any evidence 
of collapse or pending collapse, and the presence 
of explosions or other unusual sounds. Pay particu-
lar attention to the presence of sounds from any fi re 
alarm systems.
The appearance of the property itself should be 
noted. The question “Was the building occupied?” 
really has two meanings. Clearer understanding 
might occur if we were to ask, “Was the building in 
use at the time of the fi re?” and “Was anyone inside 
the building at the time of the fi re?”
Unoccupied buildings, that is, those abandoned 
by their owner, become a frequent shelter for home-
less persons. In this case, the answer to the fi rst ques-
tion (Was the building in use?) might be no, while the 
answer to the second question (Was anyone inside?) 
might be yes. These “unoccupied buildings” are 
often the scene of signifi cant fi res, especially during 
colder weather, when the occupants build fi res in the 
structures to keep warm. A homeless person is still a 
human being.
FIGURE 
11-5 Fire 
suppression 
 personnel should be prepared to 
describe their observations and 
 activities to the fire investigator.
NOTE
Observations made during the early stages of the event 
are critical.
The observations made during the early stages 
of the event are critical. Whether it be food on the 
stove or a fully involved structure as a result of arson, 
there are always indicators present that help in the 
investigation.
During the Initial Stages 
of Suppression
Once entry is gained and fi re suppression activity 
is started, there is often another opportunity for the 
fi rst responders to note the conditions present. Any 
unusual fi re conditions, including the fi re’s behavior 
during fi re suppression, should be the cause of con-
cern both during fi re suppression and later during the 
fi re investigation. From experience, you learn how 
fi re acts when appropriate fi re suppression actions 

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  301
types of evidence and have knowledge of how to pre-
serve the evidence if there is a delayed response for 
the investigator.
The chain of custody of evidence must be preserved 
and documented should the fi re become a crime. 
The chronological order in which evidence is moved 
starts with the fi rst responders. Company offi cers 
should document the order in which content is 
removed from the structure, who removed the items, 
and how the evidence was transferred. Strict control 
must be maintained until the evidence is transferred 
to the investigator, and the process in which the evi-
dence is transferred will also need to be documented. 
Often, the chain of custody of evidence is called into 
question during criminal trials.
Chain of custody refers to the chronological doc-
umentation, and/or paper trail, showing the seizure, 
custody, control, transfer, analysis, and disposition 
of evidence.
are started. In all properties, you should listen and 
note the sound of the fi re alarm system. If there was a 
sprinkler system in the building, you should be able to 
determine if the sprinkler system was operating and 
if the sprinklers were able to help control the fi re.
During Overhaul
For fi rst responders, overhaul activities may pres-
ent the best time to determine the cause of the fi re. 
Although the purpose of overhaul is to be sure that 
the fi re is completely extinguished, at the same time 
you can search for and gather clues to help determine 
the cause of the fi re. It is important for those conduct-
ing the fi re investigation to maintain a good command 
organization and to wear proper protective clothing 
during overhaul operation, but most of the urgency 
needed for effective fi re suppression activities is no 
longer required. With a more deliberate pace, you can 
work safely, carefully, and systematically to overhaul 
and look for the origin and cause of the fi re.
During overhaul, it may be necessary to pull down 
ceilings and wall materials. If present, the investi-
gator may want to look around before this activity 
takes place. When this occurs, the overall investiga-
tion may be completed sooner. Any effort to move 
and remove the contents of the room to facilitate over-
haul impedes the investigator’s efforts. If there is time 
to look at this material before it is moved and dis-
carded, the investigator will have a much better pic-
ture of the fi re scene and may see evidence that would 
otherwise be missed. There are many different types 
of evidence. However, they can often be placed into 
two distinct categories. The fi rst category includes 
non-fi re evidence (e.g., victims, blood stains, forcible 
entry marks). The second category is known as fi re-
related evidence (e.g., unburned ignition sources, fuel 
containers, ignitable liquids or solids in and around 
the area). In the fi nal analysis, if you can help the 
investigator save some time and effort, everyone may 
be able to go home a little sooner. If circumstances 
preclude an investigator being at the scene, then the 
company offi cer and others present must do some of 
the work of the investigator. The fi rst thing to look 
for might be whether any items appear to be miss-
ing. In most cases, pictures, personal property, and 
other items that one would expect to fi nd in the places 
where you would expect to fi nd them should still be 
in place. Fire crews may divide spoilage piles in sepa-
rate location if there is concern that evidence may be 
lost if overhaul must continue in order to extinguish 
the fi re before the arrival of the investigator. Overhaul 
crews will need to try to preserve possible evidences 
from destruction even if items are removed. Com-
pany offi cers should be able to identify the  different 
NOTE
Cooperation during the investigation and overhaul 
phases provides better results and may allow every-
one to go home sooner.
Sometimes the fi re investigator may be several 
hours away. This situation presents the fi re depart-
ment with some very diffi cult choices. Although the 
fi re suppression personnel may be most concerned 
with completing the overhaul of the fi re and getting 
back into service, they should realize that their over-
haul activities will likely destroy most of the evidence 
the investigator needs to determine the cause of the 
fi re. Therefore, it is essential that fi refi ghters and fi re 
offi cers secure the scene. They should restrict entry 
into any fi re affected structure and they should secure 
the structure against weather and any non authorized 
entry by posting personnel at each entry point.
Firefi ghters should also be able to note the con-
struction features that allowed for fi re, heat, and 
smoke to travel through the structure. Open stair-
ways, open windows, laundry chutes, and concealed 
voids all present opportunities for fi re travel. Where 
burn patterns are apparent, do they indicate normal 
fi re spread? Normally, these patterns help deter-
mine the nature of the fi re as well as its path of travel 
from the point of origin and preferably photograph 
as much evidence of the fi re’s behavior as possible. 
These methodical and careful observations will assist 
in making a complete investigation.
The information gathered at the time of the alarm, 
observations made during the response, size-up, and 
suppression activities and post fi re information can 
be combined to help determine the cause of the fi re. 

302  CHAPTER 11
Let us briefl y review the legal rights of fi refi ghters 
to enter the property of others. The Fourth Amend-
ment of the U.S. Constitution and other laws hold 
that all citizens have the right to be secure in per-
sons, houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable 
searches and seizures. The fi re service has some rights 
too. In general, members of the fi re service have the 
right to enter the property of another to extinguish a 
fi re. The logic of this law is that the fi re may spread 
to other property and that the concerns of the com-
munity and its citizens outweigh the rights of any one 
individual. This same right generally means that the 
fi re department has the right, within reason, to enter 
an adjacent property as needed to check for extension 
or facilitate fi re extinguishment.
In addition, the fi re department also has a respon-
sibility to determine the origin and cause of every 
fi re. As a result, confl icts may arise between the own-
ers’ constitutional rights of security in their property, 
and the community’s needs, represented by the legal 
responsibilities of the fi re department to conduct an 
investigation. These confl icting issues raise signifi -
cant legal questions:
■ How long can the fi re department remain on the 
property after the fi re is extinguished?
■ What is required for the fi re department to reen-
ter private property to start or conclude a fi re 
investigation?
More than 20 years ago, a fi re in Michigan pro-
vided us with guidelines to help answer these ques-
tions. To briefl y summarize the events, the fi re started 
about midnight in January. At 2:00 am, the fi re chief 
arrived and found evidence that the fi re had been 
intentionally set. Efforts to conduct a thorough inves-
tigation at that hour were hampered by darkness, cold 
weather, poor visibility, and other dangerous condi-
tions. At about 4:00 am, and with suppression activity 
complete, the fi re department departed the scene.
Around 8:00 am that same morning, the assistant 
chief, who was the primary fi re investigator for the 
department, went to the property to determine the 
cause of the fi re. Several weeks later, a representa-
tive of the state police entered the property to take 
photographs and seize evidence. Other searches fol-
lowed. The owner was eventually tried for arson. The 
owner tried to suppress the evidence, saying that the 
Each has an important part in the overall investiga-
tion, and for the most part, only fi rst responders are in 
a position to gather the information.
Legal Issues for Fire 
Investigations
As company offi cers, you should know several impor-
tant concepts about the legal issues of fi re investiga-
tion. Remembering these will help keep you out of 
trouble and, at the same time, reduce the chance that 
you interfere with the fi re investigation. This infor-
mation may seem to be more appropriate for the 
fi re investigator, but every fi refi ghter and fi re offi cer 
should realize that actions taken before the investiga-
tor arrives are signifi cant in setting the stage for any 
possible criminal action that may follow.
During the initial notifi cation of the event:
■ Identifi cation and location of the caller
■ Background noises
While en route to the fi re:
■ Additional information that may be provided by the 
caller, weather, time of day, and so forth
■ Delays due to highway construction, trains, and so 
forth
Upon arrival:
■ Any persons present and what they are doing
■ Any vehicles present and whether they are leaving
■ The fi re conditions: location and intensity of the fi re, 
color of the fl ames and smoke
During size-up:
■ Operation of any alarm or suppression equipment
■ Any unusual observations
■ Methods of escape of any occupants
During the initial stages of suppression:
■ Were furnishings and inventory in place?
■ Was the fi re alarm sounding?
■ Was the sprinkler system operating?
During overhaul activities:
■ Recheck items noted earlier
■ Determine origin and cause
■ Determine path of fi re travel
FIRST RESPONDERS’ 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MAKING 
OBSERVATIONS
OFFICER ADVICE
Every fi refi ghter and fi re offi cer should realize that actions 
taken before the investigator arrives are signifi cant in set-
ting the stage for any possible criminal action that may 
follow.

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  303
Now the rules change. In this situation, the fi re 
department will need a search warrant. There is 
reason to suspect that a crime has occurred, and this 
is now a criminal process. A criminal search war-
rant requires probable cause and spells out the con-
ditions of the search, the area or areas that may be 
searched, and the material that may be seized. Evi-
dence obtained under other conditions is inadmissible 
in court.
Hopefully at some point along this path, the fi re 
department has been able to obtain the assistance of a 
fi re investigator or a police offi cer who is more famil-
iar with this process (see Figure 11-6). The point of 
our brief discussion here is to make you aware of these 
basic rules so that your actions do not jeopardize the 
rights of the citizens or the opportunity to obtain legal 
evidence that might be used in court. As company 
offi cers, you should remember that you have a right 
to complete an investigation and that you should have 
continuous presence on the property until that inves-
tigation is complete or an investigator has released 
you. Maintaining security of the scene is important 
throughout these activities (see Figure 11-7).
searches were in violation of the protection provided 
by the U.S. Constitution. The case eventually made its 
way to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Three Legal Ways to Search 
the Property of Another
Just as any fi refi ghter has the right to enter the prop-
erty of another to suppress fi re, the person in charge 
has the right to enter the property to determine the 
cause of the fi re. But as the Supreme Court noted, 
there are conditions that must be satisfi ed.
There are three methods by which the fi re depart-
ment may reenter the property after the fi re is extin-
guished. The fi rst is with the owner’s consent. In 
many cases, simply explaining what needs to be done 
and asking permission to enter is all that is required 
to allow you to reenter the property and conduct an 
investigation. It is recommended that this consent be 
documented with a “consent to search” form. Most fi re 
departments have a standard form for this purpose.
Another alternative is to obtain an administra-
tive search warrant that the stated intent is to deter-
mine the origin and cause of the fi re, an administra-
tive process. So far, there is no reason to presume 
any criminal action. On the other hand, suppose that 
the evidence gathered during the department’s initial 
investigation, or at a subsequent  investigation, does in 
fact suggest that there is a possibility of intent.
As we can see, the court said that the fi re depart-
ment has a legal right to enter private property to extin-
guish the fi re and determine its cause. And as we can 
also see, the court said that citizens, under the Fourth 
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, have a right to pri-
vacy in their property, and that evidence obtained during 
warrantless searches will not be admissible in an effort to 
convict someone of arson. The major function of a war-
rant is to provide property owners with suffi cient informa-
tion to reassure them that the law enforcement agency’s 
(in this case the fi re department) entry onto their property 
is legal.
In summary, the court held that entry into a burn-
ing building for fi re suppression is acceptable, and that 
once inside, fi refi ghters have the right to determine the 
cause of the fi re and to seize evidence that is within 
plain view. Evidence obtained under these conditions 
is admissible.
In 1978, the U.S. Supreme Court laid down the rules for 
post fi re searches in a landmark case known as Michigan 
v. Tyler. In summary, the Court ruled that the fi re depart-
ment has the right to enter property under emergency 
conditions and has the right to remain on the property 
until the emergency is over to extinguish the fi re.
The court further ruled that the fi re department could 
remain on the scene for a reasonable time for purposes 
of determining the origin and cause of the fi re. Once 
the initial stage of the investigation is complete, the fi re 
 department should leave the property.
If a member of the fi re department wishes to return 
to the property, it should be under the auspices of an 
administrative search warrant or a criminal search war-
rant, as appropriate, or with the freely given consent of 
the owner. Evidence obtained under other conditions is 
in admissible.
MICHIGAN v. TYLER
NOTE
As company officers, you should remember that you 
have a right to complete an investigation and that you 
should have continuous presence on the property until 
that investigation is complete or an investigator has 
released you.

304  CHAPTER 11
an occasional fi re. Unfortunately, we do not know in 
advance which one it will be, so it would be wise to 
make a few notes about every fi re.
Why would you be questioned about the fi re or 
about your actions at a particular fi re? The owners 
might be interested in your actions. The insurance 
company might be interested in what you saw upon 
arrival and what you did. Certainly, if there is any 
evidence of arson, you will be asked about what you 
saw and what you did. Months may pass before some-
one starts asking you to recall the events of a particu-
lar fi re. In the meantime, you may have been to other 
fi res in similar structures. How will you be able to 
recall the facts regarding a particular event?
Recording the Information
It is important to record the observations made at a 
fi re. We do not expect to be questioned about every 
fi re we attend; however, we might be questioned about 
FIGURE 11-6 Fire investigators must work carefully to 
locate, gather, and preserve evidence.
FIGURE 11-7 Maintaining security of the fire scene is 
important for the safety of the firefighter and for the 
preservation of evidence.
NOTE
If there is any evidence of arson, you will be asked 
about what you saw and what you did.
First responders should note the address of the fi re, 
the type of building, the location and intensity of the 
fi re, the color and intensity of the smoke, and action 
taken. Your report should also note if anything was 
unusual within the structure. How did your fi refi ght-
ers get in, and what did they see after they gained 
access? These are simple questions that can be easily 
answered shortly after the call is complete. Trying to 
recall the events of a particular fi re a few weeks or 
months later may be impossible.
In most fi res, there are usual answers to these 
questions. In those cases where arson is involved, the 
answers may suggest unusual conditions that warrant 
closer examination. Some good questions to assist in 
the process follow:
■ Who discovered the fi re?
■ When was the fi re fi rst discovered?
■ When was the fi re reported?
■ Who provided the fi rst report of the fi re?
■ Who extinguished the fi re?
■ Who provided scene security?
■ Who has pertinent knowledge regarding the fi re?
■ Who had a motive for setting the fi re?
■ What happened during the fi re?
■ What actions were taken by fi refi ghters?
■ What damage occurred?
■ What do the witnesses know?
■ What evidence was found?
■ Where did the fi re start?
■ Where did the fi re travel?
■ Where were the occupants?

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  305
Photography provides a visual image of the fi re 
scene. Photographs can be used to assist the investi-
gator in recalling what was seen and may be used as 
evidence in court. If possible, the photographs should 
include scenes taken during fi re suppression opera-
tions and bystanders at the scene. As soon as the fi re 
is over and conditions permit, an organized series 
of pictures should be taken to document the entire 
scene.
The Fire Report
Careful recording of the observations made during 
the course of any fi re may be useful later, especially 
if the circumstances led to a trial. The informa-
tion should include recorded observations regard-
ing the response, size-up, suppression, and overhaul 
phases of the fi refi ghting activity. Many of the ques-
tions will be prompted by the requirements to com-
plete an offi cial report. For most departments, this 
is on an offi cial form that prompts many of these 
questions.
However, the most important part, and for some 
the most diffi cult part, is the written narrative state-
ment. It should answer any questions not required in 
the form, explain any unusual circumstances, and oth-
erwise complete any missing information. It is gen-
erally acceptable to express these statements using a 
personal style. “Upon arrival, I saw . . . Firefi ghter 
Smith and I forced the front door. We advanced a 
1 3/4-inch hoseline. . . .” Usually, it is easier to write 
and easier to read this sort of narrative if it is written 
in the fi rst person and if the facts are reported in the 
order in which the events occurred.
When writing your report, you should avoid using 
terminology that might not be fully understood by 
people who are not in the fi re service. Do not make 
assumptions and avoid opinions. If you do not know it 
is factual do not put it in your report or verify it before 
you do. One error in your report can cause the entire 
report to be suspect. Also, be aware that not only can 
your reports be called into court as evidence, but all 
of your notess related to the incident can as well. So 
only write down accurate, factual information.
After you have written the fi rst draft, proofread your 
work, and clean up the grammar and spelling errors. 
Drawings are also useful and should be attached to 
the report. Complete the fi re incident report as fully 
and as accurately as possible (see Figure 11-8). When 
you are writing this report, you have no knowledge 
of its potential use. It is wise to assume that every 
report could be reviewed by the department or used 
in court.
Documenting the Fire Scene
The fi re scene can be documented by notes, dia-
grams, and photographs. Notes should be consistent, 
impersonal, accurate, time and date stamped, and 
numbered. We have already discussed the fi re report. 
Notes are also important. Written notes can provide 
as much detail as necessary to help recall the facts at 
a later time. Some investigators use a tape recorder 
to facilitate the note-taking process, transcribing the 
recorded information to written documentation as 
soon as possible.
FIGURE 11-8 Writing a complete and accurate fire report 
is an important part of the company officer’s job.
OFFICER ADVICE
An organized series of pictures should be taken to docu-
ment the entire scene.
Just as the investigator follows a path toward the 
point of origin, so should the photographer follow a 
path that starts with external views, followed by inter-
nal views. The pictures should tell a story and work 
in a logical way toward the point of origin. This can 
also be done with a video recording. Regardless of the 
cause of the fi re, or the quality of the written report, a 
picture may well be worth a thousand words if ques-
tions later arise regarding the department’s actions, 
where items were located, the extent of the damage, 
evidence of other crimes, and so forth. Diagrams are 
also useful in documenting the fi re scene. Here, the 
entire fi re scene is captured on one piece of paper. 
Diagrams can be useful when used in conjunction 
with photographs, especially if the location of each 
photograph is noted on the diagram as the picture is 
being taken.
Regardless of the method by which the documen-
tation is obtained, it is important that the person be 
competent in using the equipment involved. Compe-
tency does not imply that one is an expert; rather that 

306  CHAPTER 11
photographs, diagrams, and notes that you made dur-
ing and shortly after the fi re prove their value. Review 
questions with the prosecuting attorney and anticipate 
defense questions prior to the court date.
The choice of wearing a uniform or civilian attire 
is often decided by the custom of the local court. Find 
out what is appropriate. Regardless of the attire, it is 
important that you appear professional. This means 
that you are well groomed in every regard from hav-
ing a neat haircut to having well-shined shoes. The 
following are also suggested:
■ Sit upright with your feet fl at on the fl oor.
■ Keep hands in a natural position and try to avoid 
gesturing.
■ Speak to the jury if you can, rather than to the 
attorney.
■ Refer to the defendant courteously as “the defen-
dant” or Mr. or Ms. 
.
■ Answer questions with confi dence gained by being 
familiar with the facts.
■ Take time to be sure you understand the question. 
If unsure of the questions, ask to have it repeated or 
rephrased. After all, you are not on trial.
■ If the opposing attorney objects to a question, 
wait until the judge rules on the question before 
answering.
■ Tell the truth at all times.
■ If you do not know the answer, say so.
■ Do not volunteer information.
one knows how to operate the equipment and has a 
reasonable expectation of getting the desired results. 
Photographing a fi re scene can be quite diffi cult. 
Challenges include the lack of good lighting, poor 
visibility, and the tendency of everything involved in 
the fi re to look black. All of these can be easily over-
come with training and experience.
Fire investigators take care of these activities when 
they are on the scene, but in many situations, you may 
not have the luxury of an investigator. The fi re may be 
considered accidental or too small to justify an offi -
cial investigation, or an investigator may not be read-
ily available. In such cases, the origin and cause of the 
fi re must be investigated and documented by you, the 
company offi cer.
OFFICER ADVICE
The fi re may be considered accidental or too small to 
justify an offi cial investigation, or an investigator may not 
be readily available. In such cases, the origin and cause 
of the fi re must be investigated and documented by you, 
the company offi cer.
Courtroom Demeanor
In cases involving arson, it is not unusual for fi re offi -
cers and even fi refi ghters of the fi rst-arriving com-
pany to be asked to report their observations in the 
courtroom. Since the trial might take place many 
months after the actual fi re, it is important to review 
the facts prior to appearing in court. In this case, the 
It was a cold January evening, about 5 PM, when the call 
came in about a passenger vehicle burning behind a 
 local shopping center. The late model BMW was aban-
doned; the company offi cer on duty noticed that the seat 
was burned and that there was a plastic container on it. 
Being a bit suspicious, he called in a trained company 
offi cer and fi re investigator, George Lucia, to the scene 
within 5 minutes.
When Lucia arrived, he secured the scene. He walked 
around with the company offi cer and a police detective 
at his side. Witnesses in the area were interviewed. In-
volving suppression crews allows them to understand his 
needs as an investigator.
The area of origin was determined to be the right front 
passenger seat. A container of ignitable liquid was found 
on the front fl oor. All areas were photographed and sam-
ples were taken, documented, and secured for testing. 
He also got the fi refi ghters involved, showed them the 
evidence and told them how he could look at the evi-
dence and start trying to determine how the fi re started. 
A search of the car to ensure no fi re extension found con-
tainers of auto coolant in the trunk, some open and used. 
The car displayed collision damage to the front grill. This 
damage appeared old and had some type of hair em-
bedded in the grill. This hair was also removed for test-
ing. Auto window glass was found under the front seat 
area indicating a prior damage incident. The vehicle was 
removed to the impound yard for secure storage.
Initially, it seemed to Lucia that maybe this was a case 
of kids stealing a car and taking it for a joy ride, but he had 
learned not to take anything as a slam dunk case. And 
some of the factors—for example, that this happened in 
daylight on an icy day when a joy ride would not have 
FIRE INVESTIGATION
George Lucia, Sr., Fire Marshall, 
City of Vista Fire Department, Vista, 
California

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  307
been wise—made him think twice. As a company offi cer, 
he had learned the importance of a broad evaluation.
At 6 PM, the owner reported the vehicle stolen from a 
shopping center 5 miles away from where it was found. 
The owner was asked to come in for an interview with fi re 
investigators and local police. He stated that he was at 
the mall and came out to fi nd his car gone. He also stated 
that there was no damage to his car when he parked it 
and that he knew of no reason why someone would take 
his property.
Further investigation found that the owner had left his 
employment early the day of the incident to take care 
of some “personal business.” His insurance carrier for-
warded records of previous claims for theft of a car stereo 
system, and the fi nancial institution forwarded records 
of a delinquent payment history for this car and owner. 
Lab results found the ignitable liquid to be gasoline and 
a match to the interior seat samples. Lab results found 
clear fi ngerprints on the ignitable liquid container and the 
coolant containers in the trunk. The lab also found the 
hair samples from the grill area to be from a deer.
The owner was called back for a follow-up interview, 
in which he was apprised of the evidence and lab results. 
Overwhelmed with the facts, the owner admitted that he 
had crashed his car a week ago and had impacted a 
deer on the road. The damage had caused a cooling 
system leak, causing overheating and the need to add 
additional fl uid to the cooling system. The owner stated 
that because of hard fi nancial times, being behind in his 
payments, and the new damage to the car, he planned 
the theft and arson to gain the insurance payment. A plea 
agreement was reached for charges of arson, and the in-
surance company levied an administrative penalty to the 
policyholder for insurance fraud. Lucia credits the suc-
cess of the case to good cooperation between the sup-
pression companies, the fi re marshal’s offi ce, the police 
department, and the insurance company. Lucia adds an 
important note—if the fi re offi cer had not taken note of 
the situation and called the investigator, the owner would 
have gotten away with his scam.
Questions
1. What type of fi re is this? What was the motive of the 
owner?
2. What evidence did the suppression offi cer have to 
arouse his suspicions?
3. What evidence did the fi re investigator have to arouse 
his suspicions?
4. What can fi refi ghters learn from participating in such 
investigations?
5. How would this situation be handled in your 
jurisdiction?

308  CHAPTER 11
A
s company offi cers, you should be aware of the 
causes of fi re and the impact of arson in your 
community. You should be able to determine the 
cause of most fi res and recognize the signs of arson. 
You should be able to conduct a basic investigation 
to properly determine and document the origin and 
cause of the fi re. You should understand both the 
rights of the property owner and the requirements for 
conducting a lawful investigation.
This chapter has only scratched the surface of the 
topic of fi re investigation. It is an area that deserves the 
attention of every fi re professional. You are encour-
aged to read additional information on this important 
topic and to take training and educational programs 
whenever the opportunity presents itself.
Training for fi refi ghters and fi re offi cers should 
include courses in determining the origin and cause of 
fi res and arson recognition. (NFPA standards for both 
fi refi ghter and fi re offi cer certifi cation include this 
requirement.) The fi re science program at most com-
munity colleges includes a course in fi re investigation. 
Many states offer training for fi refi ghters and offi cers 
and certifi cation programs for fi re investigators.
The National Fire Academy, recognizing the need 
for additional training in these topics, provides a 
series of training programs to help you learn about 
fi re investigation and arson recognition. A listing of 
these programs, starting with their basic awareness-
level training program, follows:
Course Name 
Course Length
Arson Detection for First 
2 days
   Responders
Fire Cause Determination 
6 days
   for Company Offi cers
Fire/Arson Investigation 
2 weeks
Management for Arson 
2 weeks
   Prevention and Control 
Contact your training offi cer or state fi re training 
director for additional information about these train-
ing programs.
Publications Available from the U.S. Fire 
Administration
Arson in the United States (FA 174)
Rural Arson Control (FA 87)
These and many other relevant reports are listed on 
USFA’s Web site. Go to www.FEMA.gov. All of these 
reports can be ordered free of charges and many can 
be downloaded.
accidental refers to those fi res that are the result of 
unplanned or unintentional events
administrative process a body of law that creates 
public regulatory agencies and defi nes their powers 
and duties
administrative search warrant a written order 
issued by a court specifying the place to be searched 
and the reason for the search
arson the intentional setting of a fi re where there 
is criminal intent
energy the capacity to do work; in the fi re triangle, 
heat represents energy
motive the goal or object of one’s actions; the rea-
son one sets a fi re
chain of custody refers to the chronological docu-
mentation, and/or paper trail, showing the seizure, 
custody, control, transfer, analysis, and disposition of 
evidence
oxidation a chemical reaction in which oxygen 
combines with other substances causing fi re, explo-
sions, and rust
probable cause a reasonable cause for belief in the 
existence of facts
search warrant legal writ issued by a judge, mag-
istrate, or other legal offi cer that directs certain law 
enforcement offi cers to conduct a search of certain 
property for certain things or persons, and if found, 
to bring them to court
vented opened to the atmosphere by the fi re burn-
ing through windows or walls through which heat 
and fi re byproducts are released, and through which 
fresh air may enter
LESSONS LEARNED
KEY TERMS

The Company Officer’s Role in Fire Investigation  309
 1. What are the most common causes of fi re?
 2. What is arson?
 3. What is meant by the term “motive”?
 4. What are some common motives for arson fi res?
 5. What information should be noted by the fi rst-ar-
riving personnel at the scene of any fi re?
 6. What information should be noted by fi re person-
nel during fi re suppression operations?
 7. What information should be noted during overhaul?
 8. What are the ways you can enter private property 
to conduct a fi re investigation
 9. Why is it important to complete a fi re incident 
 report for every event?
 10. What is your role as the company offi cer in fi re 
cause determination?
 11. How is evidence maintained and documented?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Why should fi refi ghters be concerned about in-
tentionally set fi res?
 2. What causes people to set fi res?
 3. What is the cost of these intentionally set fi res in 
this country?
 4. What is the extent of these intentionally set fi res 
in your community?
 5. What can be done to reduce the incidence of such 
fi res in your community?
 6. Explain how a fi re should be documented.
 7. What legal considerations must be kept in mind 
while searching for evidence of the origin and 
cause of a fi re?
1. Fire Losses in the United States 2007. Reprinted with permis-
sion from the NFPA Copyright © 2008, National Fire Protection 
Association.
2. Fire in the United States. 14th ed. Emmitsburg, MD: U.S. Fire 
Administration, 2007, p. 3.
Brannigan, Francis L. “Effect of Building Construction and Fire 
Protection Systems.” In Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. 
 Edited by Arthur E. Cote. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protec-
tion Association, 2003.
Codding, George and John Boyn. “Incident Commander’s Guide to 
Preserving Evidence.” Fire Engineering, August 2006.
Coleman, John. “SCBA Use During Overhaul.” Fire Engineering, 
September 2007.
Custer, Richard P. “Fire Loss Investigation.” In Fire Protection 
Handbook. 19th ed. Edited by Arthur E. Cote. Quincy, MA: 
National Fire Protection Association, 2003.
Dehann, John D. Kirk’s Fire Investigation. 5th ed. Saddle Brook, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002.
 8. Discuss the impact of the Michigan v. Tyler case 
as it applies to the actions that should be taken by 
the incident commander during and following a 
fi re?
 9. Under what circumstances would you call a fi re 
investigator?
 10. As a company offi cer, what can you do to reduce 
the number of fi res in your response area?
 11. What does chain of custody mean?
3. A Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service. Emmitsburg, MD: 
U.S. Fire Administration, 2002, 53.
Donahue, Michael. “Fire Investigations Anonymous.” Firehouse, 
April 2007.
Miller, Geoff. “Fire Cause Determination.” In The Firefi ghter’s 
Handbook. Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Publishers, 1999.
NFPA 921. Guide to Fire and Explosion Investigation. Current ed. 
Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association.
Watts, John. M. Jr. “Fundamentals of Fire-Safe Building Design.” 
In Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Edited by Arthur E. 
Cote. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2003.
Zerbe, Jess. “Determining the Fire’s Point of Origin. Fire Engi-
neering, September 2007.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
ENDNOTES
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

The Company Officer’s 
Role in Planning 
and Readiness
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ Managing Emergencies
■ Pre-incident Planning
■ What Is Pre-incident Planning?
■ Pre-incident Planning 
Activities
■ Pre-incident Planning for Other 
Events and Locations
■ Company Training
■ The Company Officer’s 
Responsibility for Company 
Readiness
■ One Final Comment
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
12

311
STREET 
STORY
A
lthough I had always associated preplanning with structural fire responses to 
dwellings or commercial structures, I learned a valuable lesson about preplan-
ning and its tremendous value on September 11, 2001.
In the mid-summer of 2001, the Washington metropolitan area was facing 
the possibility of large drains on emergency service resources because of the 
World Trade Organization (WTO) protests in Washington, DC, scheduled for 
mid-September. There were several meetings and planning initiatives that took 
place over that summer to preplan this event so that jurisdictions would not be 
overwhelmed, safety would be paramount, and mass chaos would not ensue.
The results of these planning efforts were not finalized, but there were high-level 
discussions and decisions about concentric forward staging areas throughout 
the region, responses based on task forces and functional groupings, and 
simultaneous activations of Emergency Operating Centers (EOCs).
In addition, August of 2001 saw parts of the metro region attending to a large 
mass gathering that turned into a mass casualty incident. This also required 
preplanning efforts on the part of many of the jurisdictions and prompted 
debriefings that attempted to solve perceived flaws in the acquisition of logistics 
and interagency cooperation and communication.
Then, out of the blue, the events of September 11, 2001, threw the Washington 
metropolitan region a more outrageous challenge than could ever have been 
expected. The Pentagon incident involved all the surrounding jurisdictions and 
required a massive deployment of resources and coordinated planning efforts.
The framework for a major multijurisdictional response had been laid out 
because of the WTO planning effort; therefore, the jurisdictions latched on to these 
preliminary plans to facilitate the Pentagon response. The forward staging areas 
were used in Loudoun, Fairfax, and Arlington Counties, the task force concept 
was put in place, and EOCs across the region were activated early to manage the 
mobilization of resources from the numerous jurisdictions. I am certain that the 
lessons we learned in my county from the mass casualty incident also assisted us 
in responding that day as well.
I think every member of the fire and emergency services had lessons that 
they learned from September 11, 2001. I discovered the great importance of 
preplanning and the much more far-reaching abilities of preplanning beyond water 
supply locations at commercial buildings or subdivision street layouts. In this case, 
a little planning went a long way towards the operational capabilities of our region. 
The preplanning processes that took place across the jurisdictions facilitated what 
I believe to be the largest coordinated response of resources in the Washington 
metropolitan area.
—David Short, Senior Training Analyst, MPRI, and Assistant Chief, Sterling 
Volunteer Fire Department, Sterling, Virginia

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 12-1 Explain the value of fire inspection and fire 
 incident reports regarding the development of 
pre-incident plans or surveys.
 12-2 Identify the policies and procedures regard-
ing the preparation and/or modification of pre-
 incident plans.
 12-3 Describe the information that must be collected 
for a pre-incident plan.
 12-4 List common human failures that may be identi-
fied during the pre-planning process.
 12-5 Describe how fire detection alarm and suppres-
sion systems affect a pre-incident plan.
 12-6 Identify local water supply sources.
 12-7 Explain how codes, ordinances and standards 
contribute to effective pre-incident plans.
 12-8 Describe the types of services or equipment 
that can be supplied by the agencies.
 12-9 Describe potential benefits from cooperative 
ventures with selected community agencies.
 12-10 List allied agencies and potential contributions 
to an incident or issue.
 12-11 Identify the proper approval process for the final 
pre-incident plan.
 12-12 Describe the elements of standard operating 
procedures concerning emergency operations.
 12-13 Describe the elements of standard operating proce-
dures concerning dispatch of emergency units.
 12-14 Describe the elements of standard operating 
procedures concerning tactics and emergency 
operations.
 12-15 Describe the elements of standard operating 
procedures concerning customer service.
 12-16 Select the instructional methods necessary to 
meet the needs of the unit members.
 12-17 Describe the procedure for issuing multiple 
tasks to unit members for a training exercise.
 12-18 Identify the company training needs to select 
the proper evolution to be completed.
 12-19 Describe the planning and preparation proce-
dures so that they comply with departmental 
and applicable NFPA standards.
 12-20 Identify the training policies and procedures for 
the department.
INTRODUCTION
Managing emergencies is part of the fi re department’s 
business. Up to now in this book, we have been look-
ing at the administrative activities that make up your 
day as a company offi cer. We now move to managing 
emergencies.
Emergency management is a combination of antic-
ipation, preparation, and action. For emergency 
service providers, anticipation is represented by pre-
planning; preparation is, in part, based in training. 
 Adequate preplanning and training are important activ-
ities for fi re departments and the companies that make 
up fi re departments. As this book focuses on the role of 
the company offi cer, the emphasis of this chapter is on 
your role in preplanning and training at the company 
level. We will save the action part for Chapter 13.
Today, the emphasis in emergency management is 
on all-risk preparation. Certainly the events of Septem-
ber 11, 2001, brought national attention to the role of 
emergency responders. It also brought to light the need 
for fi re departments and other emergency responders to 
be better prepared for large-scale events. Communities 
expect their fi re and police departments to be prepared 
to handle not only the normal daily events but also to 
be prepared to deal with hazardous materials incidents, 
fl oods, tornados, hurricanes, earthquakes, and build-
ing collapse. In recent years, a new emergency situa-
tion has been added—response to terrorist activities.
MANAGING EMERGENCIES
Consider these words of warning: “As a result of recent 
events, signifi cant threats over the past few years, and 
the increased ability and proliferation of nuclear, bio-
logical, and chemical materials, there is an increas-
ing concern for the potential of terrorist incidents 
occurring within the United States.” This sounds 
like something that might have been said last week. 
Actually, these words were written nearly 10 years 
ago by Kay Goss, director for preparedness, train-
ing, and exercises at FEMA. Her remarks were based 
on the then-recent events that included the bomb-
ings of the New York World Trade Center (1993) and 
the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma 
* The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, are 
identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.
312  CHAPTER 12

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 313
 levels. The National Fire Academy and the Emer-
gency Management Institute, both part of FEMA 
and both located at Emmitsburg, Maryland, have led 
the way in helping train representatives of federal, 
state, and local governments. Much of their training 
is based on the concept that comprehensive emer-
gency management is comprised of four activities. 
These activities are common to all types of events, 
ranging from weather-related disasters to terrorist 
attacks. These four activities can be summarized 
as follows:
 1. Mitigation. Mitigation refers to the activities that 
actually eliminate or reduce the chance of the 
occurrence of an event or the effects of the event if 
it does occur. For example, building dikes to keep 
out fl ood water would reduce the chance of occur-
rence, while eliminating the use of the fl ood plain 
for residential or commercial purposes would 
reduce the effect of the fl ood should one occur.
 2. Preparedness. Preparedness includes the preplan-
ning activity on how to respond and the effort to 
 increase resources available to respond effectively. 
To respond effectively, local jurisdictions must 
have an emergency plan, must have trained per-
sonnel, and must have the necessary equipment to 
respond to  anticipated emergencies. The purpose 
of this activity is to help save lives and minimize 
damage by preparing emergency responders for 
their role.
City (1995). But other events had taken their toll as 
well. In fact, during the 10 years that preceded the 
attack on the World Trade Center in 1993, there were 
over 18,000 explosive and incendiary bombing inci-
dents within the United States. These attacks resulted 
in 11,178 actual explosions, resulting in 236 deaths, 
3,215 injuries, and over $500 million in damages.
If the message had not been heard before the events 
of September 11, certainly that day was a wake-up 
call for many individuals and organizations. Many 
suddenly realized that what others were saying about 
the threat of terrorism was quite real. Suddenly, ter-
rorism was a threat to all of us, not something that 
happened in other places. Fire stations and other pub-
lic places became a little less accessible. Security was 
increased at airports and seaports, and at other vital 
installations. A new government agency, the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security, was established to better 
coordinate our nation’s security efforts.
All of this may seem as if it is a long way from your 
role as the company offi cer in preparation and train-
ing. Although there are national and state activities 
that deal with both preparation and response, every-
one recognizes that the fi rst responders on the scene 
of any emergency include representatives of the local 
fi re and police departments. The local fi re depart-
ment will, in all probability, be initially represented 
by you—the company offi cer.
Regardless of the nature of the emergency, there 
is a need for preplanning and preparation at all 
A review of the emergency response to an Amtrak de-
railment in Iowa showed the benefi ts of the all-hazards 
approach to incident planning.1 In this case, the local re-
sponders had not prepared specifi cally for a train de-
railment, but because they had planned for other types 
of large-scale events, they were much better prepared 
than most for the derailment of a passenger train in their 
community.
The accident occurred at night in a remote area 
 during cold weather. Many were injured. All aboard 
were suddenly plunged into a cold, dark, and unfamil-
iar  condition. The responders overcame these chal-
lenges and rescued 240 people from the train, nearly 
120 of them with injuries. Because of the planning 
and preparation, many things about the rescue went 
very well.
In spite of their planning, the rescuers ran into several 
challenges that frequently confront responders at any 
large-scale event:
PRE-INCIDENT PLANNING 
DOES WORK
■ The volume of emergency communications  traffi c 
quickly overwhelmed both the department’s  radios 
and the local 911 telephone system, and cellular 
phones were ineffective. Because of the vital role in 
coordinating emergency response activities, every 
possible effort must be made to assure that there will 
be adequate effective communications channels for 
emergency response personnel.
■ Because of the number of injured, the rescuers soon 
ran out of ambulances. School buses and private 
 vehicles were pressed into service to move some 
of the passengers to a safe shelter. Spouses of the 
members of the local fi re department were organized 
to assist with the injured at the local hospital and in 
providing food and shelter at the fi re station.
There is a lot to be learned from this incident. In 
this case, a small community fi re department had pre-
pared for large-scale events. Although its focus was 
 understandably more on tornado preparedness than on 
train derailments, it was ready and responded well. The 
rescue operation was quick, effective, and successful.

314  CHAPTER 12
The information and plan have a variety of uses. 
The primary purpose is to provide information dur-
ing the response and initial fi re fi ghting operations in 
a particular building, or other situation, but you can 
also use the same information for training purposes. 
For example, when the preplan calls for special evo-
lutions that are not undertaken on a regular basis, this 
should suggest that these evolutions become a regu-
lar part of your training program. The preplan itself 
should be a part of the training program. A regular 
review of the plan by every member of every company 
that will respond to a working event at that address 
will help everyone to better remember the features 
and hazards of a particular address.
 3. Response. Response activities are designed to pro-
vide emergency assistance to victims. In addition, 
 response activities usually include stabilizing the 
event and, thus, reduce the likelihood of second-
ary damage. In many cases, the fi re department 
is in the lead role here, providing both leadership 
and resources.
 4. Recovery. Recovery includes both public and pri-
vate efforts to restore the situation to normal. Since 
they are already on-scene, emergency service 
responders will likely be involved in the initial 
phases of the recovery operation. But the recov-
ery operation may go on for months or even years. 
In such cases, the role of emergency responders 
will be gradually reduced to be taken over by other 
government or private organizations.
Everyday Implications
Good preplanning is essential for the large-scale 
events, but it is important in our everyday activities 
as well. Good preplanning is essential for emergency 
scene management. When dealing with fi re situa-
tions, the plan should include information about lay-
out, access, construction features, occupancy, and 
other important information needed to effectively and 
safely manage the event.
The advantages of pre-incident planning are often 
overlooked. We continue to read of fi refi ghters who 
are injured and killed in structural fi re situations 
where there was no pre-incident plan, or if there was a 
preplan, the plan was not followed. Pre-incident plan-
ning should address the very topics that may likely 
become an issue during any signifi cant emergency in 
the building. These include layout, contents, construc-
tion, and type and location of installed fi re protec-
tion equipment. This is why inspection and incident 
reports are vital to the pre-incident planning develop-
ment process. By evaluating these reports and adding 
the information to the pre-incident plan, the fi re offi cer 
will have a better understanding of the building layout 
and contents before arrival on a scene.
NOTE
Most of the material in this chapter deals with fire-
 related situations, in part because this book was  written 
to address the requirements listed in NFPA 1021. You 
should be undertaking the same planning and training 
efforts for dealing with all of the emergency situations 
that you are likely to encounter.
Fortunately, many of the tools used in planning 
for fi re emergencies can be used to address the other 
problem areas as well. As a minimum, your planning 
and training programs should certainly address the 
medical emergencies, hazardous materials events, 
weather events, and rescue situations that you are 
likely to encounter in your particular community.
PRE-INCIDENT PLANNING
Pre-incident planning and preplanning are all terms 
that mean essentially the same thing. Pre-incident 
planning is a process of preparing a plan for emer-
gency operations at a given occupancy or hazard. 
 Pre-incident planning enhances effective and safer 
operations, helps you save lives, and protect property.
WHAT IS PRE-INCIDENT 
PLANNING?
The Fire Protection Handbook defi nes pre-incident 
planning as follows2:
A written document resulting from the gathering of gen-
eral and detailed information/data to be used by public 
emergency response agencies and private industry for 
determining the response to reasonably anticipated inci-
dents. In simple terms, pre-incident planning is ensuring 
that responding emergency personnel know as much as 
they can about a facility’s construction, occupancy, and 
fi re protection systems before an incident occurs.
OFFICER ADVICE
Pre-incident planning should address the very topics that 
may likely become an issue during any signifi cant emer-
gency in the building.
OFFICER ADVICE
Good pre-incident planning is essential for safe emer-
gency scene management.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 315
solving process is to recognize that we have a  problem. 
 Succeeding steps were to defi ne the problem, collect 
data, analyze that information, develop alternatives, 
select the best alternative, implement, monitor, and 
correct as needed.
Look at the fi re scene as a problem that needs to 
be solved. The fi rst two steps in the pre-incident plan-
ning process are to identify the problems and gather 
the facts needed to fi nd a solution.
Pre-incident planning is a problem-solving pro-
cess. You want to know as much as you can about the 
facilities and the activities that are within your area so 
that you are ready to deal with any emergencies that 
do occur. You are in a unique position of being able to 
defi ne the problems, gather information, and develop 
plans for dealing with the emergency situations that 
might be encountered.
Pre-incident planning information should be 
recorded and stored so that it is readily accessible 
to you in emergencies. The pre-incident plan or simply, 
“preplan,” allows you to make informed decisions 
while en route to and at the scene of an emergency. 
Preplanning benefi ts everyone involved with the event 
and contributes to more effective and safe incident 
management.
Always review your plan during training activities 
or at a real emergency. You will fi nd that real inci-
dents do not always turn out exactly like your plan, 
but the fact that you have a plan gives you a far better 
starting point than if you had nothing at all.
After you have a training exercise or an event in 
which the plan is used, you should review the plan 
and ask others for feedback. This is similar to the 
controlling or evaluation phase of the management 
cycle. From the feedback, you should be able to make 
some improvements to your plan. That entire process 
is what this chapter is all about.
NOTE
Pre-incident planning often starts with a survey of the 
property.
PRE-INCIDENT PLANNING 
ACTIVITIES
Pre-incident planning consists of these interrelated 
activities:
■ The pre-incident survey
■ The development of information resources that 
would be useful during the event
■ The development of procedures that would be used 
during an emergency
Pre-incident planning includes the gathering and 
storing of information to facilitate the strategic dis-
patch and placement of personnel and equipment 
to deal with fi re, rescue, and hazardous materials 
emergencies.
Pre-incident planning often starts with a survey of 
the property. This activity is called a pre-incident 
survey. Pre-incident surveys are essential for devel-
oping pre-incident plans. Pre-incident plans, in turn, 
are essential for developing strategies for safe and 
effective fi reground operations.
In Chapter 5, we described the problem-solving 
process. We said that the fi rst step in the problem-
OFFICER ADVICE
Look at the fi re scene as a problem that needs to be 
solved. The fi rst two steps in the pre-incident planning 
process are to identify the problems and gather the facts 
needed to fi nd a solution.
 occur. It is logical that it should be tasked with planning 
the actions that should be taken.
 This procedure has several other advantages. First, it 
 allows all of the fi refi ghters from the company to visit the site 
and become familiar with the layout of the building under 
 favorable conditions. A second benefi t is that it permits all of 
the fi refi ghters to have a chance to look at the process and 
storage hazards that may be present and how these would 
impact on any fi re or other emergency that might occur. Pre-
incident surveys are also an opportunity to let the building 
owner, occupants, and even the public knows that the fi re 
department is interested in protecting their property, just as it 
says in the fi re department’s mission statement. Pre-incident 
surveys are valuable in many ways.
Most fi re departments have standard policies for the 
pre-incident planning activity, including how to conduct 
a pre-incident survey. Your department can gather this 
information in several ways, but the most logical way is to 
assign the company or emergency response unit that is 
most likely to be the fi rst to arrive at the address during 
an emergency to make the survey. This response unit, 
usually referred to as the fi rst-due company, is likely to be 
there fi rst during any emergency and will probably have 
the greatest impact on mitigating any event that does 
USING FIRST-DUE COMPANIES FOR 
PRE-INCIDENT PLANNING ACTIVITY

316  CHAPTER 12
■ Large public assembly facilities, including airports, 
theaters, libraries
■ Multiple residential occupancies, including apart-
ment buildings, motels, and dormitories
■ Schools and educational centers
■ Occupancies such as jails and prisons
■ Occupancies that present diffi cult challenges—
high-rise buildings, and large buildings of any 
classifi cation
■ Occupancies where access by fi re department vehi-
cles precludes the normal method of operations
■ Occupancies where there may be high property 
value
■ Occupancies where there is a high likelihood of a 
fi re
■ Occupancies where there may be water supply 
issues
■ Large mercantile and business occupancies
■ Industrial facilities and hazardous storage facilities
■ Large unoccupied buildings
■ Buildings under construction or demolition
Even though residential occupancies (single-family 
homes, individual apartments, and so forth) collec-
tively represent the locations for the majority of 
fi re calls, specifi c single-family homes are gener-
ally exempt from the type of formal pre-incident 
planning discussed here. However, all departments 
should have standard procedures for dealing with 
Where to Start
If your fi re department has been involved with this 
activity for a number of years, your major task is 
 simply to maintain the system, keep the existing 
information up to date, and pick up new structures 
as they are built and occupied. On the other hand, if 
your department has not taken advantage of preplan-
ning, you may be asking, “Where do I start?”
Look fi rst at target hazards. It would be nice to 
plan for all of the emergencies that might occur at 
all of the facilities within your jurisdiction, but it 
is unlikely that this will happen. Given that you 
cannot plan for every situation, you should plan 
for those that present the greatest risk. We will call 
these facilities target hazards. Target hazards 
are those occupancies that present high risk to life 
safety and property.
Target hazards usually include the following:
■ Occupancies such as health-care facilities, includ-
ing convalescent homes
Hospitals should be identifi ed as target hazards for 
 almost all fi re departments. Hospitals are large build-
ings with continuous occupancy. Many of the occupants 
are nonambulatory or unable to rescue themselves due 
to physical illness, mental illness, age, and/or security 
measures and may require ongoing medical care while 
 being moved (i.e., ventilatory assistance). Hospitals and 
all health care facilities can present signifi cant logistical 
 issues when it comes to evacuation, especially down 
stairways of multistory buildings. As a result, most health 
care facilities plan to limit patient movement and rely on 
fi re doors, fi re-resistant corridor walls, smoke and fi re 
barriers, and fi re detection and suppression systems.
In addition to these challenges, consider the following:
HOSPITALS—A CONCERN IN 
EVERY COMMUNITY
■ Signifi cant occupant load consists of a mix of  patients, 
staff, and visitors, most of whom are not  familiar with 
the facility.
■ Most hospitals include a series of interconnected 
buildings constructed over a period of time when 
fl oors are added on top of existing buildings.
■ Limited access points may require you walk a great 
distance just to investigate the situation.
■ Parking around hospitals is usually at a premium.
■ Fire department access can be a challenge.
■ Fire apparatus can easily choke exits and assembly 
points.
■ Patients and staff gathering at predesignated assem-
bly points can block fi re department access.
We hope that we never get a fi re call at the hospital, 
but we must always be ready in case we do.
OFFICER ADVICE
Using fi rst-due companies for pre-incident planning 
 activities allows personnel to become familiar with the 
property and allows the public to see the fi refi ghters’ 
 interest in protecting the property.
OFFICER ADVICE
Given that you cannot plan for every situation, you should 
plan for those that present the greatest risk.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 317
Ask to have someone go with you and be sure 
that this person has keys to allow you access into 
as many areas as possible. This does several things. 
First and most important, for liability reasons, you 
do not want to be walking around the facility une-
scorted. Second, you may need to have access to 
areas that are generally kept locked, or you may 
want to ask questions about a particular area or 
operation. Having someone along with you facili-
tates the entire process.
The next step is to develop a systematic plan for 
seeing all of the facility. The complexity and size of 
the facility determines how long it will take to make 
the survey.
It is important that you get a good feel for the lay-
out of the building. Sometimes a picture, or in this 
case, a drawing is worth a thousand words. Actu-
ally, two drawings are useful. One of these is called 
a plot plan, an overhead view of the entire property 
showing the structure’s placement, access, utilities, 
water supply, and other major external features (see 
Figure 12-1). A second drawing is the floor plan (see 
Figure 12-2). This drawing shows the major internal 
structural features of the building and special haz-
ards. In buildings of more than one story, it may be 
necessary to have fl oor plans for each fl oor, unless all 
of them are alike.
If possible, try to obtain a copy of these drawings. 
This will save you considerable time in taking and 
recording dimensions. During the survey, note any 
variations between the drawing and the building as 
it appears. Be sure to return the documents if you are 
asked to do so.
Allow enough time to complete the survey prop-
erly. Figure 12-3 shows some examples of forms 
to facilitate pre-incident planning. In most cases, 
your company will be in service and available for 
calls.  However, many jurisdictions have established 
 procedures whereby companies that are involved with 
pre-incident surveys are not called unless they are 
really needed.
Even when a preplan already exists, it is advisable 
to visit the site once a year to make sure that the plan 
is still up to date, to see if there have been any struc-
tural or other alterations that might affect the plan, 
because it may be more hazardous to operate with an 
outdated plan than with no plan at all. Unknowingly 
using an outdated plan can cause you to make incor-
rect and perhaps deadly assumptions about the layout 
fi res and other emergencies that would likely occur 
in residences in the area they serve.
The fi rst step in the survey process is to make 
an appointment to visit the facility at a  mutually 
 convenient time. Try to reduce the  interference 
your intrusion may bring. Shopping facilities 
should be avoided during peak shopping days. 
Restaurants should be avoided during their busiest 
rush hours.
Once on the site, you should look for the  facility 
owner or manager. Once that person is found, 
you should introduce everyone (including all of 
the  members of your company) and clearly state 
the  purpose of your visit. Establish a pleasant but 
 businesslike relationship. While conducting these 
 surveys, remember that you are a guest on someone’s 
property and that good manners and good appear-
ances are important.
OFFICER ADVICE
While conducting these surveys, remember that you are 
a guest on someone’s property and that good manners 
and good appearances are important while you are on 
the premises.
NOTE
The pre-incident survey is the fact-finding portion of 
the pre-incident planning process.
Gathering Information
Pre-incident surveys are an essential part of devel-
oping pre-incident plan-of-action procedures to miti-
gate fi re, hazardous materials incidents, and medical 
service calls in advance of an emergency situation. 
The pre-incident survey is the fact-fi nding portion of 
 pre-incident planning. Pre-incident surveys provide 
valuable information to facilitate an effective response 
assignment and provide responding personnel with 
timely information regarding the features and haz-
ards of the facility. Features can include items such 
as fi re alarm and sprinkler systems, location of water 
sources, and location of the electrical room. Hazards 
can include anything from hazardous materials stor-
age to the types of building materials used to construct 
the building. In addition to ensuring the effective use 
of resources during an emergency, such surveys pro-
vide documents to help train new personnel and help 
all personnel become aware of the hazards that may 
result in an accident or other unexpected event during 
emergency operations.
OFFICER ADVICE
Ask to have someone go with you and be sure that this 
person has keys to allow you access into as many areas 
as possible.

318  CHAPTER 12
N
NOTE:
WALLS BETWEEN STORES
HAVE A 3 HOUR RATING
BARBER SHOP
90'
OVERHEAD
DOOR
33'
STORAGE
BUILDING
100'
FENCE
PLOT PLAN
PIZZA
H
A
R
D
W
A
R
E
JEANNE STREET
XXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
FIGURE 12-1 Sample plot plan.
LEGEND
FLOOR PLAN – MAIN LEVEL
Detail
Outer Exit Door
Fire Extinguisher
Alarm Pull Station
Symbol
FIGURE 12-2 Sample floor plan.
Skyland Fire Department
Pre-Incident Plan
Revision Date:
Revised By:
Occupancy Name
Address
District:
Facility Personnel (Name & Title)
Facility Maintenance
Phone No.(s)
Mutual Aid
Staging
Special Access/Response Info
Occupancy Type(s)
Telephone No.
Response
Emergency Contact Information
1st Alarm:  
2nd Alarm:   
3rd Alarm:    
Other:
Pre-Incident Plan Contact
Building Owner
Alarm System Maintenance
Alarm System Monitoring
Fire Suppression System Maintenance
Type/Source:  
Location:
Water Supply
Knox Box
Location:
Capacity:
Type/Source:  
Location:
Capacity:
Type/Source:  
Location:
Capacity:
Notes:
Access to: 
Electric:
Utilities
Gas:
Heating:
Water: 
FIGURE 12-3 Sample pre-incident planning form.
(a)

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 319
FIGURE 12-3 Continued.
Skyland Fire Department
Fire Suppression Systems/Alarm & Smoke Management
Occupancy Name
Manual
Revision Date:
Revised By:
Alarm System
Area of Coverage: 
Occupant Notification:
Notes:
Automatic
Combination
Smoke Detectors
Heat Detectors
Carbon Monoxide
Guard On Duty
Hours:
FACP (& Remote Annunciator Panel(s))
Location(s):
Automatic Sprinkler System
Type of System: 
Control Valves: 
Notes:
Control Valves: 
Notes:
Area of Coverage: 
Risers:
Standpipe System
Type of System: 
Location of Oulets
Risers:
Fire Pump
Location:
Capacity:
Water Supply Source: 
Type of Driver: 
Add. Suppression System
Smoke Mgmt. System
Area Served: 
Notes:
Type: 
Area Served: 
Control Valves: 
Notes:
Type: 
Area Served: 
Control Valves: 
Notes:
Skyland Fire Department
Occupants, Facility Site & Construction, & Notes
Occupancy Name
Revision Date:
Revised By:
General Occupant Information
Notes:
Maximum No. of Occupants: 
Special Occupant Hazards: 
Expected Variations: 
Construction Type: 
Roof Construction: 
Floor Construction: 
Interior Finishes: 
Structural Barriers: 
Concealed Spaces: 
Restrictions:
Exposures: 
Notes:
Notes:
No. of Floors: 
at Grade: 
Building Height:
Square Footage: 
Stories:
Fire Flow at 100%: 
Flow at 50%: 
Egress Considerations: 
Emergency Action Plan: 
Notes
Construction
Site Considerations
(b)
(c)
Skyland Fire Department
Hazards/Exposures/Processes (HEP)
Occupancy Name
Revision Date:
Revised By:
HEP1
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
HEP2
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
HEP3
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
HEP4
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
HEP5
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
HEP6
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
HEP7
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
HEP8
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
HEP9
Type: 
Location:
Notes:
Gas Cut-off
Compressed Nat. Gas Cut-off
Natural Gas Cut-off
LP Gas Shut-off
Domestic Water Shut-off
Electric Shut-off
Smoke Vent
Skylight
Fire Alarm Control Panel
Fire Alarm Reset Panel
Smoke Control & Pressurization
Water Flow Bell
Fire Department Access Point
Roof Access
Knox Box
Halon System
Dry Chemical System
CO2 System
Wet Chemical System
Foam System
Clean Agent System
Post Indicator Valve
Riser Valve
Sprinkler Zone Valve
Hose Cabinet/Connection
Wall Hydrant
Test Header
Inspector's Test Connection
Fire Department Connection
Fire Hydrant
Drafting Site
Water Tank
Air-Conditioning Eqpt Room
Elevator Equipment Room
Emergency Generator Room
Fire Pump Room
Telephone Equipment Room
Boiler Room
Electrical/Transformer Room
PIV
RV
ZV
HC
WH
TH
TC
FDC
FH
DS
WT
AC
EE
EG
FP
TE
BR
ET
G
CNG
NG
LPG
W
E
SV
SL
AP
RP
SP
WB
FD
RA
KB
HL
DC
CO
WC
FO
CA
(d)
(e)

320  CHAPTER 12
of the building and its contents. The visit also allows 
new members of your company to see the building for 
the fi rst time (see Figure 12-4).
Just as your fi rst priority during an emergency 
focuses on life safety, your fi rst priority during the 
survey should be to look for hazards that may impact 
on life safety. This means you should look for the loca-
tion of means of egress for everyone in the building, 
making sure they are clear of obstacles and  properly 
lighted.
Life Safety Concerns
You should be aware of the number of people who 
would be present and their physical ability to exit the 
building. Dealing with ambulatory children in the 
middle of the day is quite different from dealing with 
nonambulatory adults in the middle of the night. Age, 
mental and physical conditions, and time of day are 
all important life safety considerations. They should 
be addressed in your preplanning activities.
There are several alternatives available to protect 
the civilians who may be in the building. Although 
the most common approach is evacuation, there are 
several situations where evacuation is not the appro-
priate answer. An alternative may be to relocate the 
occupants to another part of the building, to an area 
of refuge. This is a likely situation in a large high-rise 
building or where you do not have suffi cient resources 
to perform rescue/evacuation and fi re control.
Another alternative may be to have the occupants 
remain in place or shelter in place, as would likely 
occur in a hospital. Obviously, in either of these situ-
ations where the occupants are in the building, life 
safety considerations must be incorporated into the 
building’s design and into your pre-incident planning. 
In most of these situations there are physical barriers 
like fi re doors and ventilations systems that prevent 
the occupants from being exposed to the fi re or its 
products of combustion. It is not acceptable to shelter 
occupants in place if they are exposed or have poten-
tial to be exposed to either.
FIGURE 12-4 A photograph of the building also helps. 
This is the same building shown in Figure 10-2, but a 
year later, after it was completed and occupied.
NOTE
The survey information and the pre-incident plan 
should give first consideration to life safety.
NOTE
You should be aware of the number of people who 
would be present and their physical ability to exit the 
building.
What to Look for during 
the Survey
Refl ecting on your organization’s mission statement, 
your fi rst obligation is to save lives. The survey infor-
mation and the pre-incident plan should follow the 
same principles and the incident command system, 
giving fi rst consideration to life safety, following the 
order of the fi re service priorities: life safety, incident 
stabilization, property conservation. We usually do 
this by making sure that everyone is safely evacuated 
from the building and accounted for.
Your second priority should be to attempt to save 
property loss by stopping the fi re, usually referred to 
as incident stabilization. Your fi nal concern should 
be to consider what you can do to reduce the loss 
that will result from the fi re and the fi re suppres-
sion efforts. Information regarding this aspect of the 
operation, usually referred to as property conser-
vation, should also be addressed during the prefi re 
planning.
SAFETY
The building type, age, and condition are all important 
for the occupants’ and fi refi ghters’ safety, as well as 
the way you fi ght the fi re. 
Building Type and Condition
You should also take interest in the structure itself. 
We addressed this topic at length in Chapter 11, but 
certainly the building type, age, and condition are all 
important for the occupants’ and fi refi ghters’ safety, as 
well as the way you fi ght the fi re. The design and con-
dition of the roof are important when planning strat-
egies for safe fi re fi ghting. Think about how the fi re 
will likely spread and how you stop that fi re. These 

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 321
should also be addressed in good pre-incident plan-
ning efforts (see Figure 12-5).
Building Contents
Ask the owner or the manager about high-value items. 
Ask about where the fi les are stored and where other 
items that would prevent the occupant from resuming 
operations are located. Make note of these items. You 
will want to give priority to these items during the 
salvage operations that would follow any fi re.
and the environment. More than one fi re suppression 
effort has resulted in creating a lake of highly con-
taminated water. If this contaminated water reaches 
the community’s drinking water, there could be long-
term problems associated with the incident. The over-
all mission of the fi re department is to protect the 
community. Saving the community’s water supply for 
the next generation may have far greater value than 
saving part of a building that will likely be torn down 
after the fi re is over. Along these lines, consideration 
should also be given to Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) guidelines. If contaminated water is 
allowed to run off in rivers streams and/or groundwa-
ter, the implications could be costly and long lasting 
and potentially shut down a community.
The more you know about these factors, the 
 better you will be able to deal with the emergency 
problems that occur. While the resource and time 
 constraints may remain, many of the unknown fac-
tors can be  eliminated. Elimination of unknown 
conditions will make the working conditions safer 
and more effective.
Building Systems
You should also note the location and function of 
elevators, material handling equipment, and other 
mechanical devices that may become hazards during 
fi re conditions. These hazards may present problems 
FIGURE 12-5 Preplanning includes a visit to the site on a regular basis.
OFFICER ADVICE
Your pre-incident plan should address the community’s 
overall risk. Sometimes, it may be more prudent to let a 
fi re burn and focus efforts on protecting exposures and 
the environment.
Contents Hazards
Some buildings contain chemicals and other hazards 
that when heated and mixed together, present signifi -
cant safety, health, or environmental problems. Again, 
preplanning should allow you to identify these haz-
ards and how effective your initial control efforts will 
be. If a signifi cant fi re should occur at one of these 
buildings, it may be better to allow the fi re to burn and 
focus personnel energies on protecting the exposures 

322  CHAPTER 12
for safe evacuation, as well as means by which the fi re 
may rapidly spread. Give attention to storage and pro-
cess operations involving fl ammable materials.
Check the ventilation system. Determine if it will 
help spread the smoke, heat, and fi re. Determine 
if the ventilation system would be used to control 
these same factors. Look for and make note of open-
ings in the building that would facilitate ventilation. 
Most modern buildings have skylights and other fi x-
tures that allow the roof to be opened without cut-
ting. Timely ventilation will signifi cantly help in the 
evacuation of the occupants, permit safer and more 
effective fi refi ghting, and greatly reduce property loss 
due to the spread of heat and smoke throughout the 
building. While you are not expected to know how to 
run the buildings’ ventilation system, you should note 
how to contact the appropriate personnel who do.
systems after false activations. However, do not auto-
matically reset an alarm system. If upon your initial 
investigation, you fi nd nothing is showing and further 
investigation is required, silence the system rather 
than resetting it. This will not only keep from dis-
turbing the occupants; it will also allow you to better 
communicate and allow the alarm company to iden-
tify the problem. If the system is always reset, not 
only will you not be able to locate the problem, but 
the alarm company will not fi x the problem and you 
will likely return. And if sprinkler systems and stand-
pipes are included, be sure that you understand the 
pipe arrangement and how to augment the existing 
water supply. When any of these features are present, 
they should be noted in the preplan. Tactical  planning 
considerations should work in harmony with the 
installed fi re protection equipment, not compromise 
its intended efforts (see Figure 12-6).
In December of 1999, a Worcester, Massachusetts, fi re 
in an abandoned building claimed the lives of six fi re-
fi ghters. The fatal fi re started when homeless individu-
als overturned a candle inside the warehouse. Eventually 
going to fi ve alarms, the fi re took more than 20 hours to 
extinguish. The six-story warehouse building was in the 
heart of the town’s former warehousing and cold storage 
district. It had been abandoned for a decade before the 
fi re but was frequented by homeless individuals.
Following the fi re, the U.S. Fire Administration (USFA) 
investigated the actions taken.3 That review emphasized 
that abandoned buildings are a serious threat to fi refi ght-
ers and fi re departments must make a concerted effort 
to maintain pre-incident data on abandoned buildings 
in their response districts. The review also notes that 
delayed reporting contributed to the warehouse fi re’s 
spread and that fi re services should initiate rapid inter-
vention teams earlier in a structure fi re response and use 
a strict system of personnel tracking on the scene.
DEADLY 1999 WORCESTER, 
MASSACHUSETTS, FIRE PROVIDES 
VALUABLE LESSONS ON 
ABANDONED BUILDINGS
Other lessons learned cited in the report include the 
following:
■  Fire prevention efforts should target abandoned and 
even temporarily vacated buildings to avoid fi res.
■ Proper permitting and ongoing building inspections 
for construction changes within businesses can help 
reduce noncompliant interior fi nishes that contribute 
to combustion.
■ Large buildings such as warehouses and high-rises 
require special search techniques and tools, including 
additional air tanks.
■ Better techniques must be developed to better track 
the movements of fi refi ghters within a structure.
■ Alternative radio channels should be explored as radio 
channels can be overloaded at multiple alarm fi res.
■ Thermal imaging cameras, while expensive, are in-
valuable equipment for all fi re departments.
“The Worcester fi re dealt a serious blow to the nation’s 
fi re service,” said U.S. Fire Administrator David Paulison. 
“It was one of the largest fi refi ghter death tolls for a sin-
gle event before the World Trade Center tragedy in 2001. 
It merited our study and resulted in fi ndings relevant to 
every department in the nation.”
OFFICER ADVICE
You should always be interested in any installed fi re pro-
tection equipment.
OFFICER ADVICE
Certain vital information should be incorporated into pre-
incident plans.
You should always be interested in any installed 
fi re protection equipment. Clearly understand the 
scope and function of any installed alarm systems. 
Your survey should capture appropriate information 
on how suppression personnel can safely reset these 
Water Supply
Take careful note of the water supply that may be 
available, both on-site and within the immediate 

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 323
FIGURE 12-6 During site visits, be 
sure to note the fire alarm and pro-
tection systems.
Figure 12-7). Where water may come from other 
sources, plans should be made and resources identi-
fi ed for moving the water to the scene of the fi re.
Exposures
There may be as many as six exposures in a fi re. 
Each should be considered in pre-incident planning. 
An exposure can present greater risks than the fi re 
building itself. In such cases, the planning effort 
should identify these risks. It may be that with limited 
resources, the exposures deserve the full attention of 
the fi re department, rather than the target building. 
These factors should be carefully addressed in any 
pre-incident planning documents.
vicinity of the building. It seems elementary to men-
tion that water supply is a critical item, but we point 
out that the best fi re departments with the best of 
pre-incident information and plans will need water 
to put out a fi re. Where a hydrant system is avail-
able, the hydrant’s capabilities should be verifi ed (see 
FIGURE 12-7 If in doubt, have the hydrant flow tested to 
be sure that it can provide adequate water during a time 
of need.
Pre-incident planning is a process of preparing a plan 
for emergency operations at a given building or hazard. 
Most pre-incident planning is directed to a specifi c loca-
tion or occupancy. When the target of the planning pro-
cess is a fi xed location, the following information should 
be incorporated into the plan information:
■ Building number and street address
■ Emergency contact information
■  Other names commonly used to describe the 
occupancy
■ Occupancy load during the day and night
■  Building description (number of fl oors, dimensions, or 
square feet of fl oor space)
■ Hazards to personnel
■ Installed fi re detection equipment
■ Installed fi re suppression equipment
■ Water supply
■ Access to utility cutoffs
■ Priority salvage area
■ Special considerations
INFORMATION NEEDS FOR  
PRE-INCIDENT PLANNING

324  CHAPTER 12
Recording the Information
Use a checklist or a copy of the form itself to  identify 
and record important information. Start by getting 
the correct address and the name of the building. Get 
the name of the owner, manager, and other key rep-
resentatives, and their telephone numbers both dur-
ing working hours and nonworking hours; it may be 
important to contact one of these individuals when 
the facility is closed.
You may also have information from the fi re pre-
vention division of the fi re department. It may be 
inspecting the facility on a regular basis due to the 
nature of its occupancy. It may have issued a permit to 
store certain material or conduct certain operations, 
either of which you should know about.
Upon completion of the survey, the company should 
work together to develop a plan that will address the 
most likely scenarios that would occur at that address 
(see Figure 12-8). While we often think of the threat 
of fi re, we should also consider EMS and hazardous 
materials control, and rescue situations as well.
The planning effort should address the same fac-
tors that were addressed during the survey. In addi-
tion, the plan should address the resources needed to 
deal with the emergency and how these resources will 
be initially organized. For example, the plan should 
include placement of fi rst-arriving companies, iden-
tify water supply sources, and provide a starting point 
for fi reground strategy. No building is worth risking 
a fi refi ghter’s life. Some buildings, because of their 
age, fi re load, type of construction, extent of fi re 
 involvement, or physical condition, may necessitate 
operating in defensive mode from the start. When 
these buildings are identifi ed, the initial mode of 
operations should clearly indicate that all  fi refi ghting 
OFFICER ADVICE
Use a checklist to identify and record important 
information.
A program for conducting pre-incident surveys 
does not replace the need for conducting regular fi re 
prevention inspections. Both should be ongoing activ-
ities, done for different reasons. Pre-incident surveys 
are best done by suppression personnel within their 
own response area.
Fire prevention inspections may be done by sup-
pression personnel or others. In any case, fi re code 
violations found during a pre-incident facility sur-
vey shall not be overlooked. Severe violations should 
be corrected at once. When immediate correction is 
not possible, immediately advise your fi re prevention 
division of the situation. In all cases, hazards should 
be reported using the appropriate reporting forms. 
Copies of the report should go to the person respon-
sible for the building as well as to the fi re depart-
ment’s fi re prevention division. Review the plan 
with the fi re prevention division personnel and see if 
they have found any additional issues with regard to 
the occupancy. In addition, fi nd out if there are any 
local ordinances or additional standards that should 
be recorded on the plan. This is important because 
sometimes codes and ordinances allow for excep-
tions based on the type of occupancy.
Converting Your Information 
into a Plan
Turning all of the information gathered during the 
survey into a pre-incident plan is the second step in 
pre-incident planning. Pre-incident planning gathers 
information from a variety of sources. We have the 
survey, of course. The information gathered during the 
survey, information about the department’s resources, 
and the department’s standard operating procedures 
suggest appropriate actions for planning the initial 
strategies that would be needed during a real emer-
gency. The topics listed on the previous pages will 
provide a guide for these planning efforts.
NOTE
Turning all of the information gathered during the sur-
vey into a pre-incident plan is the second step in the 
pre-incident planning process.
FIGURE 12-8 Get as much participation as possible in 
the preplanning activity.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 325
In addition to fi re department resources, you should 
consider the resources of other agencies. For example, 
will the police department be able to help with traffi c 
and crowd control? What resources may be available 
on-site and from other industrial or commercial facil-
ities in the immediate vicinity? What about resources 
from federal and state agencies? While preplanning 
activities may identify a need for these resources 
should the situation be signifi cant enough, offi cers 
should always use the normal chain of command pro-
cesses to request these resources. It should be noted 
on the pre-incident plan the types of services and the 
equipment that can be supplied by these resources. 
While it is diffi cult to list all of the possible scenar-
ios for a given occupancy, you can list the possible 
resources that will be needed.
Resource Needs to Deal with 
the Emergency
Part of the preplanning process includes forecast-
ing the resources that may be needed to mitigate the 
situation. Matching resources to the needs of rou-
tine operations is easily accomplished. Room-and-
 contents fi res, vehicle accidents, and standard EMS 
calls make up the bulk of most fi re department opera-
tions. The events can usually be controlled with fi rst 
alarm resources. But for large events, you will need 
additional resources. Your pre-incident planning 
efforts should address the potential for needing addi-
tional resources (i.e., rescue companies, aerial appara-
tus, and hazardous materials). If additional resources 
are likely to be needed, add that information to the 
pre-incident planning information. Many jurisdic-
tions provide special dispatch assignments, based on 
the pre-incident planning information.
activity will be from outside the structure. This is 
one of the most critical tasks an offi cer will perform, 
making the risk versus benefi t analysis and determin-
ing the operational mode. If there is any doubt about 
which mode to assume, always error on the side of 
caution and make sure your crew goes home at the 
end of their shift.
For example, when planning for operations at 
target hazards, you should always be thinking of 
the potential of an event that will require resources 
beyond the normal fi rst-alarm assignment. In shop-
ping centers and high-rise buildings, the mere trans-
portation of fi refi ghters and their equipment to the fi re 
requires a tremendous support team. Large or mul-
tistory  occupancies may necessitate the use of mul-
tiple or specialized ventilation equipment. Hazardous 
materials incidents also require considerable support. 
Pre-incident planning should look at these needs. 
Even during routine fi refi ghting, we should have relief 
crews on scene, ready to step in when needed.
Once you have identifi ed your resource needs, 
you should consider how these needs will be met 
and how rapidly these resources can be on-scene. 
Even in large cities, getting second- and third-alarm 
 companies to the scene can take some time. In smaller 
 communities, especially those communities where 
volunteer  fi refi ghters provide fi re protection, there 
may be appreciable time delays as the fi refi ghters 
and their equipment travel considerable distances to 
the scene.
NOTE
The planning effort should address the same factors 
that were addressed during the survey.
NOTE
Part of preplanning includes forecasting the resources 
that may be needed to mitigate the situation.
■ Life hazards problems, for occupants and fi refi ghters
■ Availability of egress for the occupants
■ Availability of access for fi refi ghters
■ Places where a fi re would most likely start
■ Factors that would infl uence the spread of the fi re
■ Factors that would infl uence the intensity of the fi re
■ Initial strategies for effective fi re containment and 
control
■ Factors that would limit the fi re department 
operations
■ Resource needs including those of other agencies
■ Apparatus placement
■ Location of the command post
PRE-INCIDENT PLANS 
SHOULD ADDRESS
OFFICER ADVICE
Once you have identifi ed what your resource needs are, 
you should consider how these resource needs will be 
met and how rapidly these resources can be on-scene.
OFFICER ADVICE
In addition to fi re department resources, you should con-
sider the resources of other agencies.
Interagency Cooperation
Identifying those resources is only the fi rst step. 
Resources from agencies outside of your own 
should have an opportunity to review your plans and 

326  CHAPTER 12
 understand their role. The time to develop a clear 
understanding of the lines of communication and 
authority are during the planning stages, not during 
the time of an actual emergency. There should also be 
a clear understanding of who is authorized to make 
the request for assistance, what will be sent, and a 
resolution of questions regarding liability issues that 
may arise during an actual emergency. These are nor-
mally identifi ed in Memorandums of Understanding 
(MOUs) or Mutual Aid Agreements. These are typi-
cally legal binding documents that require administra-
tive approval above the level of the company offi cer.
■ Department of Transportation. These agencies can 
be of extreme benefi t for highway issues or even 
hazardous materials incidents.
While this list is small, the reader can grasp the 
importance of adjoining themselves with other agen-
cies. Most departments cannot do it by themselves; 
therefore, it becomes necessary to join forces to pro-
tect the citizens.
NOTE
Interagency cooperation must be carefully planned 
to reduce conflict, confrontation, and confusion during 
an emergency.
Interagency cooperation must be carefully planned 
to reduce confl ict, confrontation, and confusion dur-
ing an emergency. Effective cooperation includes a 
study of each agency’s capabilities, regular sharing of 
information, and joint training exercises so that every-
one understands the capabilities and limitations of all 
of the other agencies. In short, you need to establish 
effective working relationships before the emergency 
occurs. By doing so, you enter an emergency incident 
with a level of trust and understanding that permits 
you and your respective agency to immediately begin 
dealing with the issues at hand.
Allied Agency Cooperation. It is important to plan 
your department’s interagency support. Some of the 
agencies that might be useful include:
■ Police or sheriff departments. They can help with 
traffi c issues, hostile patients or citizens, and assis-
tance with evacuation procedures.
■ Adjoining fi re departments.Most fi re departments 
have areas within their districts that have inad-
equate or insuffi cient fi re protection. By having 
these departments as allied agencies, the depart-
ment can ensure that their citizens’ needs will 
be met.
■ Emergency management. They can assist with 
equipment issues on large incidents. These agen-
cies often have the “key to the state” when it comes 
to needed equipment.
■ EMS agencies. While most departments have 
either their own EMS system or a city or county 
system, it is recommended that the department 
have additional support in the event of a large scale 
emergency.
■ Address
■ Owner
■ Occupancy
■ Means of access and entry
■ Personnel hazards
■ Fire behavior predictions
■ Locations of stairs and elevators
■ Ventilation system
■ Installed fi re protection systems
■ Exposures
■ Special hazards
■ Resource needs
■ Company assignments
■ Estimated fi re fl ow
■ Water supply
■ Predicted strategies
The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 
 publishes several documents that aid the pre-incident 
planning  process. NFPA 170, Standard for Fire Safety 
and Emergency Symbols, provides a good listing of 
standard symbols used in preplanning and other fi re-
related applications.
PRE-INCIDENT PLAN INFORMATION 
SHOULD INCLUDE
Common Human Failures in the 
Pre-incident Planning Process
■ Failure to become familiar with the location and 
surrounding areas of buildings within the response 
area
■ Failure to adequately identify the type of building 
construction and its hazards
■ Failure to adequately identify the hazards associ-
ated with the contents
■ Failure to keep the pre-incident planning informa-
tion up to date
■ Failure to keep personnel up to date on the 
changes
■ Failure to train and practice for the event
■ Failure to use the information during a real 
emergency

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 327
While this section has focused on what information to 
collect, how to conduct, and how to prepare a  preplan, 
offi cers should always know what departmental poli-
cies and procedures may exist concerning preplans. 
Many departments have specifi c guidelines on what 
information to collect and how to process that infor-
mation. There may also be some sort of approval or 
submittal process that your preplan is required to go 
through. Many times these policies are in place to 
ensure consistency and uniformity among all preplans. 
It may also be a requirement to ensure the preplan is 
compatible with the department’s computer applica-
tions. Once approved, it may be the company offi cer’s 
responsibility to distribute the preplan to appropriate 
personnel. This may mean making paper copies and 
inserting them into manuals, or it may be a simple as 
scanning it into the designated computer fi le. Regard-
less, if it is not done correctly, then all the effort up to 
this point will have been wasted. So be sure that you 
follow internal procedures related to conducting, sub-
mitting, and approval processes for the preplan.
PRE-INCIDENT PLANNING 
FOR OTHER EVENTS 
AND LOCATIONS
Over the last several pages, we have discussed the 
need for pre-incident planning at target hazards. We 
usually think of target hazards as fi xed sites with 
 specifi c addresses. You should also be thinking about 
the typical incidents that would benefi t from the same 
pre-incident planning process. In this case, we are 
thinking more in terms of typical or recurring events 
rather than specifi c hazards.
building, it should be communicated to him or her 
during these preplanning visits. It makes for a much 
more effi cient, smooth, and safe operation when you 
do this.
In addition to incidents that occur at structures, 
departments should be prepared to deal with other 
situations that are likely to occur within their juris-
diction. Nearly every fi re department has roads and 
highways, railroads, pipelines, and waterways. Each 
of these modes of transportation presents opportu-
nities for fi re and rescue situations that will involve 
the fi re department. You should drive them and dis-
cuss how to best access them given a wide variety of 
weather and enduring conditions.
The preplanning for these events often leads to a 
department wide standard operating procedure,
or SOP. The SOP is usually a several-page document 
that follows an established format and lists the vari-
ous hazards associated with the type of hazard, and 
establishes standard procedures for fi rst arriving com-
panies. Unlike the pre-incident plan information for 
site-specifi c hazards in which you will have time to 
look at information while en route to the emergency 
scene, many fi re departments expect offi cers to be 
able to recall from memory the general procedures to 
follow at these selected target hazards.
NOTE
In addition to events that occur at structures, depart-
ments should be prepared to deal with other situations 
that are likely to occur within their jurisdiction.
During some of your pre-incident planning efforts, 
you may lack a specifi c address, but the general char-
acteristics of the occupancy allow you to develop a 
pre-incident plan for the type of hazard, rather than 
for a specifi c address. Examples include various types 
of residential structures common to the fi rst-due 
assignment area, high-rise buildings, shopping cen-
ters, service stations, and schools. This allows you to 
communicate your expectations to your crew mem-
bers before the incident occurs. If you expect a mem-
ber of the crew to carry in a pressurized extinguisher 
when responding to a systems alarm in a multistory 
A Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service (U.S. Fire 
Administration) provides an indication of the ability of the 
nation’s fi re departments to deal with selected large-
scale events with locally trained personnel.
■ Only 11 percent of the departments indicated that 
they could handle a technical rescue with EMS at 
a structural collapse of a building with fi fty or more 
occupants.
■ Only 13 percent of the fi re departments indicated that 
they could handle a hazmat and EMS event involving 
chemical or biological agents and ten injuries.
■ Only 26 percent of the fi re departments indicated that 
they could handle a wildland/urban interface fi re af-
fecting 500 acres with locally trained personnel.
■ Only 12 percent of the fi re departments indicated that 
they could handle mitigation of a developing fl ood with 
locally trained personnel.
CAN YOUR DEPARTMENT RESPOND 
TO A LARGE-SCALE INCIDENT?
Storing and Retrieving 
the Information
The National Fire Academy suggests a very  simple 
form for recording the information for the pre-
 incident plan called a Quick Access Prefi re Plan

328  CHAPTER 12
(see Figure 12-9). Usually a follow-on page of typed 
information, a drawing of the plot plan, and a drawing 
of the fl oor plan accompany this basic information.
There are a variety of ways of storing pre-incident 
planning information. Regardless of the method 
selected, the main purpose of having the information 
is so that it is available when and where it is needed. 
If an emergency arises at a particular address, the 
preplan should be reviewed by companies while they 
are en route to the emergency. The information is 
also needed by companies operating at the scene. 
This information could be saved on a computer or 
on paper in a notebook or folder.
Each company should have access to pre-incident 
plans for its fi rst-due response area in its apparatus. 
An additional set of the pre-incident plans should be 
kept at the station near the watch desk for use by com-
panies that may be reassigned to fi ll in at the station. 
These companies would likely be called up if addi-
tional alarms are needed. This same copy can be used 
for training and drill purposes.
Building Address:  1020 Jeanne Street
1-story, ordinary construction; 2 occupancies in building
firewall between occupancies
Building Description:
Quick Access Prefire Plan
Roof Construction:
Floor Construction:
Wooden 2" x 10" rafters, plywood, composition roof covering
Concrete slab
Commercial
2 Eng., 1 Truck or Squad, 1 Amb., BC
Occupancy Type:
Initial Resources Required:
Hazards to Personnel:
Pesticides, flammable/combustible liquids
Location of Water Supply:
Hydrant across Jeanne Street
Available Flow:
1200 GPM
Estimated Fire Flow
Level of Involvement
Estimated Fire Flow
25%
50%
75%
100%
375
750
1125
1500
Fire flow of largest fire area–hardware store and 2 exposures
Fire Behavior Prediction:
Rapid horizontal spread within one occupancy
Predicted Strategies:
Confinement, ventilation, extinguishment
Problems Anticipated:
Poor rear access, limited horizontal ventilation
Standpipe:
Sprinklers:
Fire Detection:
None
None
Smoke Detectors
FIGURE 12-9 The 
 National 
Fire Academy’s Quick  Access 
Prefire Plan.
OFFICER ADVICE
Each company should have access to pre-incident plans 
for their fi rst-due response area in their apparatus.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 329
A computer provides a compact way of storing a 
great deal of information and retrieving it rapidly. 
The information may be stored at the dispatch cen-
ter and transmitted to a company when it is needed, 
or the information may be stored on a portable 
 computer located in the vehicle. Although there are 
many other modern ways of storing and using this 
information, many fi re departments still rely on the 
reliable three-ring notebook.
Good information in a readily available format per-
mits timely access and allows for better analysis and 
the quicker start of solutions to mitigate the problem.
When there is a lot of stored information about a 
particular facility, some departments keep the infor-
mation on the facility site in a lock box. The lock box 
should be located in an accessible location on the 
property and can contain pre-incident planning infor-
mation, material safety data sheets, the names and 
phone numbers of key personnel, and, most impor-
tantly, keys that allow emergency responders to enter 
the facility. Obviously, the fi re department must have 
access to the lock box. The lock box has many advan-
tages, especially in that it allows for items such as 
keys to be left at the site in a secure place. Having the 
detailed pre-incident planning information there may 
also be advantageous, especially when such informa-
tion requires storage space beyond the capabilities 
of fi rst-arriving units. If a lock box is used, the basic 
information (address, and so on) should be available 
to companies while en route (see Figure 12-10).
Training and Practice
Training is a vital part of pre-incident planning. If 
personnel do not know of the plan or do not know 
how to implement it during a time of need, the effort 
to gather the information and to plan for the emer-
gency has been largely wasted. Training and practic-
ing for dealing with emergency situations should be a 
continuing process.
FIGURE 12-10 A lock box provides 
 information as well as a means for  entry. 
(Photo courtesy of The Knox Company)
NOTE
Pre-incident plans should be exercised through regular 
training and practice.
The Standard for Providing Emergency Services to the 
Public, NFPA 1201 is intended for the use and guidance 
of those charged with providing fi re protection (safety) 
services to protect lives, property, and the environment 
from the effects of fi re and, in many cases, other perils. 
With regard to planning and emergency management, it 
includes the following:
■ This standard is intended for the use and guidance 
of persons charged with providing emergency ser-
vices to protect lives, property, critical infrastructure 
and the environment from the effects of hazards (e.g., 
fi re, medical emergency, hazardous materials, natural 
disaster, critical infrastructure disruption).
■ It is the requirement of the authority having jurisdiction 
to develop and utilize a policy or guideline for organi-
zations directives for the operation of the fi re depart-
ment (standard operating procedures).
■ A master plan shall be created to coordinate the 
 vision, mission, values and goals of the Emergency 
Service Organization (ESO).  Research and planning 
within each ESO shall include maintaining ongoing 
 relationships with other agencies involved in planning 
for the service area.
■ The emergency service system shall include a con-
tinuing program of research and planning that encom-
passes any or all aspects of the emergency services 
system, both generally and specifi cally.
LOOK TO THE NFPA STANDARDS 
FOR MORE INFORMATION

330  CHAPTER 12
Developing SOPs from 
Pre-Incident Plans
Gathering of information through a good pre-incident 
plan process will often fi nd information that may 
require an update to or a whole new SOP. The follow-
ing information outlines some of the SOPs that have a 
direct link to pre-incident plans.
 ■ Emergency Operations—Based on the information 
obtained in the pre-incident plan process, the fol-
lowing may need to be evaluated:
 Does the department have SOPs in place so that 
all department members understand their role 
on the emergency scene?
 Does the department have the resources needed 
to mitigate the situation?
 Does the department have contracts in place to 
request equipment from outside agencies?
 ■ Dispatch of Emergency Units—Information from 
the pre-incident plan may show a need to update an 
SOP for the dispatch of emergency units. Depart-
ments often have an SOP that map out the types 
of units that are to respond to different types of 
emergencies. For an example, it might be that the 
department has said that 2 engines, a ladder com-
pany, and a battalion chief are to respond to all 
reports of fi re in business occupancies. While this 
might work for stand-alone business, what if the 
business is in a strip mall? Or what if the business 
is 400,000 square feet?
 ■ Strategies and Tactics—SOPs written for strategies 
and tactics can be widely misinterpreted. They are 
often subjective to the views of the incident com-
mander. However, the pre-incident plan can add 
some objectivity by pointing out items that are 
not opinioned based. The pre-incident plan shows 
items such as whether the building has a suppres-
sion system and where the location of the water 
source is located and pinpoints the building occu-
pancy and classifi cation. Knowing these objective 
items will have a direct impact on the strategies 
and tactics for a given situation.
 ■ Customer Service—Pre-incident plans and SOPs 
are written for a lot of reasons. They are written for 
the safety of the department members, to reduce 
property loss, and to stabilize incidents. However, 
they are also written for the customers that the 
department serves. By properly conducting pre-
incident plans the department will know the life 
safety concerns of the buildings within the juris-
diction, they will know where the hazards are, and 
they will have a written plan on how to mitigate 
those hazards.
Many fi refi ghters are not well prepared to safely and 
 effectively deal with the emergencies they are likely to 
encounter. The U.S. Fire Administration recently reported 
the following:4
■ An estimated 233,000 fi refi ghters, most of them 
 volunteers serving in communities with less than 
2,500 population, are involved in structural fi refi ghting 
but lack formal training in those duties.
■ An estimated 153,000 fi refi ghters, most of them 
 volunteers serving in communities with less than 
2,500 population, are involved in structural fi refi ghting 
but lack certifi cation in those duties.
■ An estimated 27 percent of fi re department person-
nel involved in delivering emergency medical services 
(EMS) lack formal training in those duties, most of them 
serving in communities with less than 10,000 popula-
tion. The majority of fi re departments do not have all 
their personnel involved in emergency medical ser-
vices (EMS) certifi ed to the level of Basic Life Support, 
and  almost no departments have all those personnel 
 certifi ed to the level of Advanced Life Support.
TRAINING NEEDS
■ An estimated 40 percent of fi re department personnel 
involved in hazardous material response lack formal 
training in those duties, most of them serving in smaller 
communities. More than four out of fi ve departments 
do not have all their personnel involved in hazardous 
material response certifi ed to the Operational Level, 
and almost no departments have all those personnel 
certifi ed to the Technician Level.
■ An estimated 41 percent of fi re department person-
nel involved in wildland fi refi ghting lack formal training 
in those duties, with substantial needs in all sizes of 
communities.
■ An estimated 53 percent of fi re department personnel 
involved in technical rescue service lack formal train-
ing in those duties. In every population group of com-
munities with less than 500,000 population, at least 
40 percent of fi re department personnel involved in 
technical rescue service lack formal training in those 
duties.
■ An estimated 792,000 fi refi ghters serve in fi re depart-
ments with no program to maintain basic fi refi ghter 
 fi tness and health, most of them volunteers serving 
communities with less than 5,000 population.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 331
All company offi cers in a fi re department should 
fully support and augment the fi re department’s train-
ing program and should take personal interest in 
making sure that the department’s training activities 
are enthusiastically carried out within their area of 
responsibility.
FIREGROUND FACT
The realistic financial constraints of the world in which 
we work combined with the mission of the fire service 
require the greatest efficiency from every agency and 
from every member of these agencies.
COMPANY TRAINING
The remainder of this chapter discusses fi re department 
training at the company level. Training is the key to the 
fi refi ghter’s safety as well as the department’s effective-
ness. No factor has more effect on a fi re department’s 
operations than its training program. Because the fi re 
department’s main function is to save lives and protect 
property, members of the department must be qualifi ed 
to successfully and effi ciently  perform a wide range of 
tasks in carrying out these important functions. No one 
has more impact on a fi refi ghter’s attitude toward train-
ing than the company offi cer. Once the alarm goes off, 
it has to be right the fi rst time. You need to drive to the 
right address, select the right size hoseline, and select 
the right tactic the fi rst time. There is seldom, if ever, a 
chance for a redo.
The realistic fi nancial constraints of the world in which 
we work combined with the mission of the fi re service 
require the greatest effi ciency from every agency and 
from every member of these agencies. With decreased 
fi re activity, most fi refi ghters are not called upon to save 
lives and protect property on a daily basis. However, 
all fi refi ghters are expected to maintain a high level of 
readiness, should that need arise. Effi cient use of train-
ing time provides signifi cant opportunities to increase 
the readiness of the fi re department and its personnel.
OFFICER ADVICE
To be effective, a training program must provide a pro-
cess that will encourage fi refi ghters to learn information 
and develop skills that can be retained and used.
During the recent past, fi re service training has 
changed immensely. For many years, teaching a few 
basic manipulative skills was considered to have met 
the requirements of an adequate fi re service training 
program. But the role of the fi re service is constantly 
changing and becoming more complex. New tasks 
are being undertaken, and new challenges to existing 
procedures are being faced every day. The training 
process starts when an individual joins the fi re ser-
vice and should continue throughout that individual’s 
work years. The fi re service training program must 
prepare the member to meet the known challenges of 
today as well as to be ready to meet the future.
Educators tell us that training precedes learning. 
Learning is the process of acquiring new knowledge 
and skills. To be effective, a training program must 
provide a process that encourages fi refi ghters to learn 
information and develop skills that can be retained 
and used. Effective fi re department training programs 
are essential for the safe and effi cient operation of any 
fi re service organization and for its members.
In this regard, you are responsible for training mem-
bers assigned to you. Typically, most of the depart-
ment’s training program is conducted at the company 
level under your direction. Such training activity 
strengthens the bonds among personnel while devel-
oping profi ciency in individual and company evolu-
tions. You should periodically evaluate the abilities of 
your personnel to both determine the effectiveness of 
the training and to provide a valid basis for individual 
performance evaluations.
You should observe the performance of your per-
sonnel during emergencies to see that they are using the 
same techniques that were presented in training activi-
ties. Critiques of company operations at fi res and other 
emergencies can help identify the company’s perfor-
mance as a team. You are probably the best qualifi ed 
individuals in the department to assist the department’s 
overall training efforts by identifying topics, procedures, 
and conditions where training is required.
The overall relevancy of the department’s training 
program should also be continually evaluated by the 
department’s senior staff. The department and com-
pany training program, as well as the results of that 
training, should be reviewed on a regular basis. The 
results of that review should suggest topics for future 
training activities.
New Personnel
New personnel should receive comprehensive train-
ing during their recruit school. During the period fol-
lowing the successful completion of that school, they 
are usually required to serve as probationary fi refi ght-
ers. This period is important because the opportunity 
and motivation for individual learning is at its greatest 
during these fi rst few months. It is also a time to teach 
good habits and reinforce the training provided by the 
training academy. The training accomplished during 
this period will become the basis for that which follows 
throughout an individual’s work years. New person-
nel should be trained consistent with the performance 
objectives outlined in NFPA 1001, The Standard for 
Fire Fighter Professional Qualifi cations.

332  CHAPTER 12
Individual and Company Skills
NFPA 1001 provides a list of the requirements for 
basic fi refi ghter skills. These are skills that should 
be trained on and tested frequently. All fi refi ght-
ers should be able to pass any part of that test on 
any given day. To maintain this level of profi ciency, 
 company-level training activities should also include 
a regular review of the individual tasks required of all 
fi refi ghters during their probationary period, because 
the basic knowledge and skills are often quickly lost 
without regular use (see Figure 12-11).
Regular training on all the skills required of the 
fi refi ghter may well exceed the time available, so 
some selectivity in training topics is usually required. 
As company offi cers, you should be able to recognize 
the needs of your company and emphasize particular 
areas of training. These training needs can usually be 
recognized by observing the performance of individ-
uals and companies during training evolutions and at 
actual emergency situations. You should also encour-
age your fi refi ghters to individually study during any 
free time.
Multiple-Company Evolutions
Multiple-company training evolutions provide an 
opportunity to put it all together, to test the system 
as it will operate during a real situation. The pace of 
activity is sometimes slowed to permit monitoring 
the progress and directing the training activities, but 
the events should all occur and should be conducted 
under realistic conditions whenever possible.
FIGURE 12-11 Company personnel should maintain 
basic skills while learning new ones.
OFFICER ADVICE
As company offi cers, you should note the performance 
of your personnel during training and actual emergency 
situations and should provide training in those areas in 
which skills do not meet expectations.
Multiple-company 
training 
evolutions 
per-
mit fi refi ghters to use their skills in realistic activi-
ties under conditions that can approach those that 
can be expected during a real emergency (see 
Figure 12-12). By assigning multiple tasks to unit 
members, you can evaluate them on how the tasks 
were carried out. Were all of the tasks carried out? 
Were all of the tasks carried out safely? Were all of 
the tasks completed in a timely manner? Were com-
munication and accountability maintained during the 
assignment? In such evolutions, you—the company 
offi cers—take your place as leaders in the operation. 
Your leadership ability as well as your prior efforts in 
providing training for your personnel will be quickly 
apparent. Although these activities provide a test 
for the readiness of all individuals and their units, 
remember that these activities represent a training 
exercise: This is a time for learning, a time to identify 
and correct problems that may exist.
FIGURE 12-12 Multicompany training evolutions provide 
an opportunity to exercise the incident management 
system.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 333
Multiple-company training evolutions should 
also provide an opportunity to train and test the 
fi re department’s incident command and communi-
cation  systems. Such training activities provide an 
ideal opportunity for offi cers to move into  positions 
of increased responsibility in managing emergency 
incidents and in controlling increased numbers of 
resources. These activities also provide a realistic 
opportunity for using and evaluating the department’s 
communications resources.
Multiple-company training evolutions provide a 
unique opportunity to work with companies that would 
probably be encountered on a mutual aid response. 
These training sessions provide an opportunity for 
the mutual aid company to become familiar with the 
neighboring department’s procedures, response area, 
and high-risk targets. This is a good time to test those 
preplans and discover incompatibilities in equipment 
and communications capabilities. As a company offi -
cer, you do not have to wait until a more senior offi cer 
suggests the need for such evolutions; you should be 
able to make it happen on your own initiative.
Suggested training scenarios for individuals, com-
pany, and multiple-company training are included in 
Appendix B. These are just suggestions: You should 
have additional ideas for your company.
OFFICER ADVICE
This is a good time to test those preplans and discover 
incompatibilities in equipment and communications 
capabilities.
Two aspects of initial fi re attack are covered in NFPA 
1410: (1) engine company operations, including hand-
line operations, supply and operation of master streams, 
and automatic fi re sprinkler system support; and (2) truck 
company operations, including ladder evolutions, the use 
of hoisting tools and appliances, the use of SCBA, and 
ventilation and illumination of an incident.
Individual fi refi ghting evolutions involving the placement 
and connection of hoselines, the operation of hose streams 
and apparatus, the setting of ground ladders, the use of 
hoisting tools and appliances, the use of SCBA, and ven-
tilation and illumination of an incident are the essentials of 
good fi re department procedures. This standard provides 
the fi re chief and other department offi cers with a method 
of measuring the effectiveness of evolutions that involve 
fi re suppression and related tasks based on their normal 
fi rst-alarm engine and truck company response.
With the exception of very small communities and iso-
lated rural areas, the standard response to an emergency 
incident on the initial alarm is generally a minimum of two 
engine companies and a truck company. This practice is 
for several reasons. First, one engine company ordinarily 
cannot be expected both to operate the proper streams 
promptly for fast attack and to provide the necessary 
backup stream(s). Experience frequently has shown that 
small streams often prove to be inadequate. Second, 
fi res commonly necessitate prompt application of hose 
streams from at least two positions. Finally, the possibility 
that an accident or mechanical failure will delay the arrival 
of one company is always present.
This standard contains the minimum requirements for 
evaluating training for initial fi re suppression and rescue 
procedures used by fi re department personnel engaged 
in emergency scene operations. NFPA 1410 specifi es ba-
sic evolutions that can be adapted to local conditions 
and serves as a standard mechanism for the evaluation 
of minimum acceptable performance during training for 
initial fi re suppression and rescue activities. NFPA 1410 
can provide fi re departments with an objective method 
of measuring performance for initial fi re suppression 
and rescue procedures using available personnel and 
equipment.
It is recognized that most successful emergency 
scene operation efforts involve a coordinated engine, 
ladder, and rescue company operation. When perform-
ing the evolutions included in this standard for the pur-
pose of training, departments should use the number of 
personnel normally assigned to perform the initial op-
erations at the scene of an emergency incident. The 
evolutions should be planned according to department 
policies and procedures. These procedures should 
outline steps for the planning of a drill. They often in-
clude bulleted lists for the type of equipment needed 
for a drill, the location of the drill, and who is required 
to attend.
NFPA 1410, STANDARD ON TRAINING 
FOR INITIAL EMERGENCY SCENE 
OPERATIONS
Live-Fire Training
Live-fi re training provides unique opportunities for 
developing skills and self-confi dence at all levels. 
Live-fi re training permits those who have completed 
their basic training to operate under realistic condi-
tions (see Figure 12-13). This training provides an 
ongoing opportunity for maintaining and improv-
ing acquired skills for all personnel. Live-fi re train-
ing provides a means where the fi refi ghter can display 
many combinations of skills, and at the same time, 

334  CHAPTER 12
develop an appreciation of the necessity for personal 
safety during actual emergency evolutions. In order to 
ensure safety for all of the students and trainers dur-
ing live-fi re training exercises, all participants should 
have achieved a basic level of training by having com-
pleted the requirements for Firefi ghter I certifi cation.
In addition to the safety considerations for their 
own personnel during live-fi re training, fi re depart-
ments should carefully consider the safety, health, and 
environmental consequences of their live-fi re training 
activities on the community, both during and after the 
training activity.
Training for Officers
To the extent possible, fi re departments should encour-
age the continuing education and training of their per-
sonnel, not only to meet the minimum qualifi cations 
for promotion to positions of greater responsibility 
but also to provide these offi cers with the knowledge, 
skills, and abilities needed to be good managers and 
leaders.
Such education and training is available through 
many community colleges, state and regional fi re 
schools, various training conferences and seminars, 
and, of course, the National Fire Academy at Emmits-
burg, Maryland. When such training programs are 
offered in-house, the subject matter of offi cer training 
courses should be designed to permit individuals to 
enhance their abilities and at the same time, meet the 
performance objectives outlined in NFPA 1021, Stan-
dard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations.
Other Training
Specialized and advanced training should take place 
throughout a fi refi ghter’s work years. Such training 
includes courses in emergency medical procedures, 
recognition and control of hazardous materials, spe-
cialized rescue procedures, driving of emergency 
vehicles, equipment operation, fi re investigation, fi re 
prevention, fi re safety education programs, and cus-
tomer service. Fire departments should be alert to the 
changing needs of the fi re service and to the needs of 
their personnel. As we said at the start of this section, 
training is the key to a fi refi ghter’s safety and the fi re 
department’s effi ciency.
To ensure consistency in the delivery of training 
among various components of the fi re department 
and over a span of time, all training should be con-
ducted according to standardized lesson plans. Such 
lesson plans are intended only to assist instructors 
FIGURE 12-13 Live-fire training allows personnel to 
maintain both skills and confidence. When possible such 
training should be conducted at appropriate training 
structures, rather than acquired structures.
NOTE
Live-fire training provides unique opportunities for 
developing skills and self-confidence at all levels.
NOTE
Training activities allow you to prepare your personnel 
and evaluate your equipment in what might be consid-
ered a practice session for the real event. No sports 
team or show company would dare perform without 
practicing. Why should you?
When and where possible, training-facility burn 
buildings should be used instead of acquired struc-
tures for all live-fi re training events. When acquired 
structures are used, the building must be carefully 
inspected and prepared for the training evolution. 
Consideration shall be given to the presence of haz-
ards, including utilities, pressure vessels, closed 
tanks, and interior fi nishes that may contribute to 
the rapid spread of fi re. These hazards should be 
removed before the training starts. Consideration 
shall also be given to the age and condition of the 
structure itself, the presence of live and dead loads, 
and the probable effect that the fi re will have on the 
integrity of the structure.
SAFETY
When acquired structures are used, the building must 
be carefully inspected and prepared for the training 
evolution.
In all cases, live-fi re training evolutions should 
be conducted in accordance with the current edi-
tion of NFPA 1403, Standard on Live Fire Training 
Evolutions.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 335
in providing effective, consistent, and standardized 
training and should be looked upon as providing the 
minimum amount of material to be presented. Lesson 
plans should never be considered as restricting new 
approaches for presenting material, improving teach-
ing effectiveness, or maintaining student interest.
Training activities allow you to prepare your per-
sonnel and evaluate your equipment in what might be 
considered a practice session for the real event. No 
sports team or show company would dare perform 
without practicing. Why should you?
Company-level training includes classroom instruc-
tions, practice of evolutions, drills, street and building 
familiarizations, inspections, and pre-incident planning, 
to name just a few. Several hours of each workday 
should be devoted to such activity. Most departments 
have training policies and procedures that outline 
the required training activities. These policies often 
include what types of training are to be included in 
the training schedule, how and when they should 
be conducted, the re-certifi cation steps, and how the 
drills will be evaluated.
Physical Training Is 
Important, Too
In Chapter 8, we noted that the requirements of fi re-
fi ghting are physically demanding. Part of having 
your company ready for dealing with emergency sit-
uations includes that all company personnel be phys-
ically and mentally ready as well. Good physical 
condition increases all fi refi ghters’ ability to  perform 
their duties and reduces the likelihood of injuries 
while performing those duties. Once again, we see 
an important role in this process for the company 
 offi cer. As the company offi cer, you should dem-
onstrate good leadership and provide, by personal 
example, the benefi ts of a good fi tness program. 
The readiness, success, and safety of your company 
depend upon it.
THE COMPANY OFFICER’S 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR 
COMPANY READINESS
Throughout this book, we have talked about your role 
as the company offi cer. Nowhere is that more evi-
dent than in the performance of company personnel 
during emergency response. The ability of the com-
pany to respond in a timely manner, to operate effec-
tively to resolve the emergency, and to return safely 
is clearly within your area of responsibility. The pre-
planning process discussed earlier in this chapter is 
but one part of the process. Let us take a look at the 
larger picture.
The entire life cycle of fi re can be described by a 
series of steps starting with ignition and ending with 
extinguishment. In between these ten steps are nine 
intervals of time.
  Step 
Interval
  1.  Ignition point 
Free-burning time
  2.  Recognition point 
Permitted burn time
  3.  Detection point 
Transmission time
  4.  Notifi cation point 
Alarm handling time
  5.  Alert point 
Turnout time
  6.  Response point 
Travel time
  7.  Arrival point 
Setup time
  8.  Attack point 
Control time
  9.  Fire-contained point 
Overhaul time
10.  Extinguishment point
Starting with step 1, our fi re ignites and grows. What 
happens over the next few seconds, or minutes, will 
depend upon many factors. This is where good fi re 
prevention efforts pay off. Prevention activities like 
good housekeeping practices will minimize the fuel 
available for the fi re. With regard to detecting and 
suppressing incipient fi res, we also see the advantages 
of automatic equipment here, ranging from residential 
smoke detectors to elaborate integrated fi re detection 
and suppression systems.
Time is of the essence throughout this process. 
Unchecked, the fi re will grow exponentially. As it 
grows, it presents increasing dangers to civilians and 
fi refi ghters alike. Given the nature of construction 
and furnishing today, fl ashover and collapse can be 
anticipated in many occupancies. As the fi re extends 
beyond the room of origin, the risk to human life and 
property loss goes up dramatically.
At step 4, the fi re department, or the emergency 
communications center, is notifi ed of the fi re. The fi re 
department may or may not operate the emergency 
communications center, but it certainly should be 
involved with its operation. Ideally, calls are quickly 
processed and passed to the fi re department for 
response.
At step 5, the company or companies assigned 
to respond to the situation are alerted. From this 
moment on, the timeliness and effi ciency of the 
response is your responsibility, as the company offi -
cer. Turnout time, the next interval, is a refl ection of 
the readiness of the company. For paid departments, 
the ability of fi refi ghters to get to the vehicle, don 
protective clothing, and take their place within the 
vehicle should be a matter of a well-practiced rou-
tine. Running is not appropriate, but certainly every 

336  CHAPTER 12
member of the crew must be focused and ready to 
respond at all times. NFPA 1710 allows 1 minute for 
this activity. (See “Why Time I So Important” in the 
adjacent box.)
For volunteer departments where no one is in the 
station, there will be additional time while members 
respond to the station. For the safety of all concerned, 
volunteer departments should have and enforce 
 policies about safe driving of personnel vehicles 
and about how many and who must be on the appa-
ratus before it can leave the station. However, once 
a volunteer crew is assembled, the events from here 
on should look the same in both volunteer and paid 
organizations.
Once the fi rst vehicle leaves the station (step 6), 
we enter the interval known as travel or response 
time. Driver profi ciency, knowledge of the response 
area and safety of operation are critical. All are your 
responsibility as the company offi cer. Safe arrival 
on-scene is marked by step 7, arrival time. NFPA 
calls for all of this to occur within 7 minutes or less. 
What happens over the next few seconds is also your 
responsibility and, to a large extent, your responsibil-
ity alone. Events here include a good size-up, giving a 
good size-up report, and giving directions to the per-
sonnel on-scene.
If preplanning was done, this is where it pays off. 
Firefi ghting always presents unknowns, but prior 
knowledge of the building, its contents, operations, 
and hazards will give the fi rst-arriving offi cer the 
advantage of information and saved time. The profi -
ciency of the company will be revealed here as well. 
Once given their assignments, well-trained personnel 
will be able to quickly go to work. This includes fi nd-
ing and establishing a reliable water supply, advanc-
ing hoselines, making entry, and locating the fi re (see 
Figure 12-14). Compare the fi re propagation curve in 
Figure 12-15 to the time of arrival and the attack point. 
This clearly demonstrates the need for fi rst arriving 
crews to be effi cient and timely in their actions. Time 
wasted here can not be made up.
The next benchmark is the attack point, step 8. 
What happens next is the control time. Again, pro-
fi ciency in fi re suppression operations is essential 
for the  activity here to be effective. Fire offi cers and 
their companies should be constantly preparing for 
this moment. Because actual fi refi ghting is down in 
many communities (good news), some fi refi ghters do 
not get the fi refi ghting experience of earlier genera-
tions (bad news). This defi cit must be overcome at the 
company level by training, practice, and discussion. 
(Every trade journal has an article every month on 
fi refi ghting. Make sure your teammates read these 
articles.)
By now, you should see the importance of time 
in this series of events. And by now, you should see 
your importance as a company offi cer managing your 
resources to reduce these intervals of time.
ONE FINAL COMMENT
We started this chapter by drawing a parallel between 
the pre-incident planning process and the problem-
solving process. You have identifi ed the problem, 
gathered information, considered alternative solu-
tions, and implemented a solution. Remember the last 
steps in the process; after training activities or after a 
real event, take time to go back and review the pre-
incident plan to see how it worked. When appropriate, 
make the necessary changes. This process will enable 
you to have plans that really work and that people will 
readily accept.
FIGURE 12-14 Companies should practice basic skills on 
a regular basis.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 337
NFPA 1710, Standard for the Organization and Deploy-
ment of Fire Suppression Operations, Emergency Medi-
cal Operations, and Special Operations to the Public by 
Career Fire Departments, provides the following guide-
lines for response times by career departments:
The fi re department shall establish the following time 
objectives:
 1. One minute (60 seconds) for turnout time
 2. Four minutes (240 seconds) or less for the arrival of 
the fi rst-arriving engine company at a fi re suppres-
sion incident and/or 8 minutes (480 seconds) or less 
for the deployment of a full fi rst-alarm assignment at 
a fi re suppression incident
 3. Four minutes (240 seconds) or less for the arrival of 
a unit with fi rst responder or higher level capability at 
an emergency medical incident
 4. Eight minutes (480 seconds) or less for the arrival of 
an advanced life support unit at an emergency medi-
cal incident, when this service is provided by the fi re 
department without compromising safety. The fi re 
department shall establish a performance objective 
of not less than 90 percent for the achievement of 
each response time objective specifi ed above.5
NFPA 1710 spells out the specifi c parameters of ser-
vices to be provided that allow the fi re department to 
plan, staff, equip, train, and deploy members to per-
form these duties. This service delivery requirement is 
intended to have a fi re department plan and situate its re-
sources to consistently meet a 4-minute initial company 
fi re suppression response and an 8-minute full fi rst-alarm 
fi re response assignment.
The logic for these requirements is based on the 
knowledge that an early aggressive and offensive pri-
mary interior attack on a working fi re, where feasible, is 
usually the most effective strategy to reduce loss of lives 
and property damage. The graph shown in Figure 12-15 
represents a rate of fi re propagation, which combines 
temperature rise and time. It roughly corresponds to the 
percentage of property destruction. At approximately 
10 minutes into the fi re sequence, the hypothetical room 
of origin fl ashes over. Extension outside the room begins 
at this point.
Consequently, given that the progression of a struc-
tural fi re to the point of fl ashover (that is, the very rapid 
spreading of the fi re due to superheating of room contents 
and other combustibles) generally occurs in less than 
10 minutes, two of the most important elements in limit-
ing fi re spread are the quick arrival of suffi cient numbers 
of personnel and equipment to attack and extinguish the 
fi re as close to the point of its origin as possible.
The ability of adequate fi re suppression forces to 
greatly infl uence the outcome of a structural fi re is 
 undeniable and predictable. Data generated by NFPA 
provides  empirical data that rapid and aggressive interior 
attack can substantially reduce the human and property 
losses associated with structural fi res (see Table 12-1).
Although NFPA 1710 is for career departments, we 
must remember that fi res burn pretty much the same 
as in communities served by volunteer departments. 
Accordingly, response is just as important for volunteer 
organizations as it is in career departments. NFPA 1720, 
Standard for the Organization and Deployment of Fire 
Suppression Operations, Emergency Medical Opera-
tions, and Special Operations to the Public by Volunteer 
Fire Departments, provides similar performance stan-
dards, without the above standards for response time, 
for volunteer departments.
WHY TIME IS SO IMPORTANT
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Room of origin
Beyond
room
of origin
Minutes
Percent of property destruction
FIGURE 12-15 Fire propagation curve.

338  CHAPTER 12
TABLE 12-1 Fire Extension in Home Structure Fires: 2002–2005
Rate per 1000 Fires
Extension
Civilian Deaths
Civilian Injuries
Average Loss Per Fire
Confined fires (identified by incident type)*
0.08
9.52
309
Confined to room of origin
4.91
47.35
8,989
Confined to room of origin, including confined 
fires by incident type
2.14
25.64
4,008
Beyond the room, but confined to floor of origin
17.54
80.83
34,024
Beyond the floor of origin
27.77
60.33
59,317
* NFIRS 5.0 has six categories of confined structure fires, including cooking fires confined to the cooking vessel, confined chimney or 
flue fires, confined incinerator fire, confined fuel burner or boiler fire or delayed ignition, confined commercial compactor fire, and trash 
or rubbish fires in a structure with no flame damage to the structure or its contents. Although causal information is not required for these 
incidents, it is provided in some cases. In this analysis, all confined fires were assumed to be confined to the room of origin.
Note: Homes include one-and two-family dwellings, apartments, townhouses row houses and manufactured housing. These are 
 national estimates of fires reported to U.S. municipal fire departments and so exclude fires reported only to Federal or state agencies or 
industrial fire brigades. National estimates are projections. Casualty and loss projections can be heavily influenced by the inclusion or 
exclusion of one unusually serious fire. Property damage has not been adjusted for inflation.
Source: Marty Ahrens, Fire Extension in Home and Residential Structure Fires, NFPA, January 2008.
The after-hours alarm came in: a fi re in a 100,000-
square-foot warehouse. Captain Aaron Heller’s com-
pany members had done a preplan reconnaissance 
of the building and had a blueprint of it—marked with 
sprinklers, entrances, materials, and so forth. Because 
of that, they knew the building housed cosmetic chemi-
cal  compounds, none of which was harmful and should 
not have instigated the alarm, even if chemicals were in-
volved in the fi re. They also had the number of a contact 
for the building, whom they immediately called.
The problem was they had been getting calls to go 
to the same building over and over when something lit-
tle would trigger the alarm. That allowed the company 
members to let their guard down. On this night, it was a 
water fl ow alarm. When they came inside, they saw water 
running; Heller’s company and a company that mutually 
aids it split up to fi nd the cause.
It turned out that the thermostat on a processing oven 
had failed, and the oven was overbaking its contents. 
The oven was smoldering, and the heat had  activated the 
sprinkler. Once the fi re was extinguished, the  company 
members turned a corner to leave . . . and walked straight 
into an unexpected cloud. Heller and his fi refi ghters im-
mediately reached for their SCBA masks. They radioed 
command, who called the hazmat team and ordered 
them to evacuate. Their contact for the building, who 
had come out in his pajamas, confi rmed that the mate-
rial would not stimulate combustion, but it WAS semitoxic 
and could have been dangerous if enough was inhaled.
For Heller, it was a dual lesson: It reminded him of the 
importance of preplanning, but it also emphasized that 
he should never allow his fi refi ghters to get lackadaisical 
on their calls. You can go to the same site every day for 
weeks on a nuisance call, but the day you pull up and 
there is smoke coming out, you are already behind the 
eight ball.
Questions
1. What are the potential hazards faced in a large build-
ing such as that described in the story?
2. What are the lessons reinforced by this story?
3. What can fi re departments do to reduce the frequency 
of repeat “nuisance” calls?
4. How can offi cers help avoid complacency in such 
situations?
5. What would you do in a situation like this?
PLANNING AND READINESS
Aaron Heller, Captain, Hamilton Township Fire District 
#9, Mercer County, New Jersey

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 339
A
s company offi cers, you should develop a per-
sonal plan that will allow you to effectively lead 
your company to accomplish all of the tasks we have 
considered in this chapter. This will help the com-
pany become profi cient in its tasks and ready to 
safely respond to help the citizens of the community 
it serves. The ability of the company to provide these 
essential services lies with your knowledge and dedi-
cation. Understanding the problems and the solutions 
increases readiness and reduces the challenges. Read-
iness also involves being ready to perform. Constant 
planning, training, and physical fi tness are essential 
for company readiness.
area of refuge portion of a structure that is rela-
tively safe from fi re and the products of combustion
fire control activities associated with confi ning 
and extinguishing a fi re
floor plan a bird’s-eye view of the structure with 
the roof removed showing walls, doors, stairs, and 
so on
life safety the fi rst priority during all emergency 
operations that addresses the safety of occupants and 
emergency responders
lock box a locked container on the premises that 
can be opened by the fi re department containing pre-
planning information, material safety data sheets, 
names and phone numbers of key personnel, and 
keys that allow emergency responders access to 
the property
plot plan a bird’s-eye view of a property showing 
existing structures for the purpose of pre-incident 
planning, such as primary access points, barriers to 
access, utilities, water supply, and so on
 1.  a.  What is a pre-incident survey?
 
b.  What is a pre-incident plan?
 2. Why is it benefi cial for fi re suppression personnel 
to develop pre-plans?
 3. What information should be contained in a pre-
incident plan?
 4. What features of the building should be noted in 
the pre-incident survey?
 5. What 
types 
of 
occupancies 
should 
be 
preplanned?
 6. How is conducting a pre-incident survey or devel-
oping a pre-plan related to serving the best inter-
est of the community?
pre-incident planning preparing for operations at 
the scene of a given hazard or occupance
pre-incident survey the fact-fi nding part of the 
pre-incident planning process in which the facility 
is visited to gather information regarding the build-
ing and its contents property conservation the efforts 
to reduce primary and secondary (as a result of fi re-
fi ghting operations) damage
Quick Access Prefire Plan a document that pro-
vides emergency responders with vital information 
pertaining to a particular occupancy
standard operating procedure (SOP) an orga-
nized directive that establishes a standard course of 
action
shelter in place selecting a small, interior room, 
with no or few windows, and taking refuge there.
target hazards locations where there are unusual 
hazards, or where an incident would likely overload 
the department’s resources, or where there is a need 
for interagency cooperation to mitigate the hazard
 7. How can the pre-incident planning information 
be made available during a time of need?
 8. Should all members of the company be familiar 
with pre-incident plans for occupancies in their 
area? Why?
 9. Why is it important to have a continuing program 
of company level training?
 10. What are the benefi ts of multiple-company train-
ing activities?
 11. What is your role as the company offi cer in com-
pany readiness?
KEY TERMS
REVIEW QUESTIONS
LESSONS LEARNED

340  CHAPTER 12
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 9. FEMA’s programs are focused on mitigation, pre-
paredness, response, and recovery. Given the type 
of natural disaster most likely in your area, how 
should local, state, and federal resources prepare 
for and respond to such a disaster?
 10. How well prepared is your fi re department to deal 
with:
 
a. A structural collapse with 50 or more injured 
occupants
 
b. A HAZMAT event involving a toxic chemical 
and 10 or more affected citizens
 
c. A response to an event such as you proposed in 
question 8
 11. How does your company’s training program mea-
sure up in preparing fi refi ghters for emergency 
response?
 1. Identify several target hazards in your commu-
nity. What makes these “target hazards”?
 2. Take one of the occupancies you identifi ed in the 
previous question and describe the process of 
gathering the information and developing a pre-
plan for that situation.
 3. How well do you preplan target hazards in your 
fi rst-due response area?
 4. What use do you make of these preplans?
 5. What processes are in place for developing sub-
mitting and approving a preplan?
 6. How can the preplanning process be extended to 
emergencies other than fi re (for example, EMS, 
hazardous materials release, or technical rescue)?
 7. How does your company training program mea-
sure up in preparing fi refi ghters for emergency 
response?
 8. Why is time so critical in response to a fi re or 
EMS event?
ENDNOTES
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
4. A Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service. Emmitsburg, MD: 
U.S. Fire Administration, 2003.
5. Reproduced with permission from NFPA 1710, Organization 
and Deployment of Fire Suppression Operations, Emergency 
Medical Operations, and Special Operations to the Public by 
Career Fire Departments, Copyright © 2007, National Fire Pro-
tection Association. This reprinted material is not the complete 
and offi cial position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, 
which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.
Hewitt, Joel and Paul Landreville. “The Reluctant Company Offi -
cer.” Fire Engineering, November, 2006.
Hildebrand, Michael S., and Gregory G. Noll. “Public Fire Protec-
tion and Hazmat Management.” In Fire Protection Handbook. 
19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 
2003.
Managing Company Tactical Operations, published by the National 
Fire Academy, Emmitsburg, Maryland. This three-part training 
course focuses on preparation, preplanning, and managing typi-
cal structural fi refi ghting activities. The fi rst two parts, called 
“Preparation,” and “Decisionmaking,” are particularly relevant. 
Contact your training offi cer or your state fi re training director 
for additional information.
1. For more information about this event, go to www.usfa.fema.
gov/applications/publications/tr143.shtm.
2. Reproduced with permission from NFPA’s, Fire Protection 
Handbook®, Copyright © 2008, National Fire Protection Asso-
ciation. This reprinted material is not the complete and offi cial 
position of the NFPA on the referenced subject, which is repre-
sented only by the standard in its entirety.
3. A copy of the full report can be ordered by going to http:/www
.usfa.fema.gov/fi re-service/techreports/tr134.shtm.
Arnold, Brian. “Training to Increase Base Knowledge.” Fire Engi-
neering, April 2008.
Bachman, Eric. “Preparing Facility Emergency Plans.” Fire Engi-
neering, January 2007.
Brannigan, Francis L. “Effect of Building Construction and Fire 
Protection Systems on Firefi ghter Safety.” In Fire Protection 
Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection As-
sociation, 2003.
Foresman, Douglas P. “Training Fire and Emergency Services.” In 
Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association, 2003.
Halton, Bobby. “Training Every Day is the Answer.” Fire Engi-
neering, March 2007.

The Company Officer’s Role in Planning and Readiness 341
McAuliff, Pat. “Hot Drills.” Fire Chief, April 2007.
Mills, Steve. “The Firehouse Meal: Where the Learning Contin-
ues.” Fire Engineering, April 2008.
Oliver, Donald. “Multi-Use Mapping.” Fire Chief, March 2008.
Prziborowski, Steve. “The Qualities of an Effective Engineer-
Driver.” Fire Engineering, February 2008.
Salka, John. Basic Skills and Tactics that Firefi ghters and Offi cers 
Must Perform. Firehouse, April 2008.
Schultz, Gerald R. “Determining Water Supply Adequacy.” In Fire 
Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Pro-
tection Association, 2003.
Serapiglia, Michael. “Pre-incident Planning for Industrial and 
Commercial Facilities.” In Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. 
Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2003.
Shupe, Jeff. “25 Pointers for Your Engine Company.” Fire Engi-
neering, October 2006.
Smith, James P. “Vacant Buildings.” Firehouse (December 2004)
Wallace, Mark. “Fire Department Strategic Planning 101.” Fire 
Engineering, February 2009.
Wilson, Dean. “Fire Alarm Systems.” In Fire Protection Hand-
book. 18th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Associa-
tion, 1997.
Wood, Thomas R. “Formats for Fire Hazard Inspecting, Surveying 
and Mapping.” In Fire Protection Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, 
MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2003.
Wright, Richard. “Organizing Rescue Operations.” In Fire Protec-
tion Handbook. 19th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection 
Association, 2003.

The Company Officer’s Role 
in Incident Management
■ Learning Objectives
■ Introduction
■ Incident Priorities
■ The Command Sequence
■ Risk Analysis
■ The Incident Management System
■ Legal Issues for Fire Officers
■ Lessons Learned
■ Key Terms
■ Review Questions
■ Discussion Questions
■ Endnotes
■ Additional Resources
13

343
STREET 
STORY
A
s an incident commander, your job is to ensure the safety of personnel on the 
scene. It is very hard to stand back and not get involved in the nuts and bolts 
of the operation, especially if you are a new company officer. More often than not, 
however, the personnel operating on the scene are better off with you standing 
back with the “big picture,” ordering needed resources and watching their backs.
A great example of this type of situation happened one night when my engine 
was dispatched to a motor vehicle accident. We were only the second engine to 
arrive on the scene. The first engine’s company officer had given the size-up and 
passed command. There were two patients, one critical, the other serious, and the 
first engine crew was going to start extricating the critical patient.
I directed my crew to the serious patient and took command of the incident. The 
medic unit had been dispatched, and I asked for an additional engine because we 
needed another Hurst tool. As the police arrived I asked them to take care of traffic. 
It was at that time that my crew signaled me to help with our patient who had just 
lost consciousness.
As I was assisting my crew with the now critical patient, other cars started 
driving slowly through the scene; the medic unit had arrived and was assisting the 
other engine crew, and the additional engine I had requested arrived and the crew 
was asking for instructions—a request I did not even hear because I was so busy 
assisting my own crew.
Finally the company officer from the third engine came and asked me if I was still 
in command, and if so, what could he and his crew do to help. It was then that I 
realized that even though I had taken command of the incident, I was not literally in 
command, and the incident was rapidly getting out of control.
As a new company officer myself, I had fallen into the trap of being a worker 
and not an incident commander. I was comfortable working the line, and had 
taken up that task instead of calling for more resources and controlling the scene. 
Fortunately, I was able to regroup. I gave better directions to the police to stop all 
the traffic, and I split the medics so that both of the patients received advanced life 
support and rapid transport. Both patients did survive.
Had I been doing my job as an incident commander, I would have noticed a 
few things earlier—the battalion chief was not dispatched to the call because of a 
dispatch error, and the time from the first engine on scene to the third was about 
14 minutes. Luckily, both patients made it to the Level 1 trauma center within the 
hour and survived. I was lucky no one got hurt, and I definitely learned a lesson.
—Brian Dodge, Captain, Kent Fire Department, Kent, Washington

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter the reader should be able to:
 13-1 Describe the supervisor’s responsibilities re-
garding safety at the incident scene.
 13-2 Explain how to initiate and continually apply, 
throughout the incident, the personnel account-
ability system.
 13-3 Describe the elements of size-up.
 13-4 Describe the function of a personnel account-
ability system.
 13-5 Identify the principles of effective communi-
cations used to make clear assignments to 
subordinates.
 13-6 List the types of emergency and non-
 emergency service units available for use at 
the incident.
 13-7 List the elements of the communication model.
 13-8 Describe order confirmation procedures during 
an emergency.
 13-9 Describe the purpose of a standard operating 
procedure for emergency operations.
 13-10 Explain how to initiate an evacuation order.
 13-11 List the elements of a verbal command.
 13-12 Describe the standard operating procedures 
govern response strategy, tactics, and opera-
tions, and customer service.
 13-13 Identify departmental operating procedures that 
describe the application of an incident manage-
ment system.
 13-14 Evaluate the need for various components as 
they apply to the emergency incident.
 13-15 Describe the purpose of performing a post-
incident analysis.
 13-16 Outline the components typically covered in a 
post-incident analysis.
 13-17 Describe the parts of a unit critique.
 13-18 Explain how to conduct a unit critique.
 13-19 Explain the collection of data and how to distrib-
ute the results of the critique
 13-20 List potential informational resources available 
for emergency response.
 13-21 List the main components of an incident man-
agement system.
.
INTRODUCTION
As you pull up in front of Ms. Carmen Garcia’s house, 
you see enough smoke coming out of the back of the 
house to know that this is no false alarm, nor is it 
someone’s backyard barbecue. Ms. Garcia is in her 
front yard, her hands clutching a wet towel. She is 
understandably upset. Her kitchen is on fi re!
For you or any fi rst-arriving offi cer, this is show 
time, time to put all of your training, all of your 
 experience, and all of your equipment to work. And 
for you, and for all of those overqualifi ed, hard-
 charging fi refi ghters you brought with you, this is 
why you joined the fi re service. Will things go well? 
Will you stop the fi re with no additional damage to 
Ms. Garcia’s house? Will you and your fi refi ghters 
operate safely?
Strong leadership is needed at events like these. 
We know that every group has a leader, and in this 
case we expect the offi cer to be the leader, to be in 
charge, to be making decisions and give directions. 
You—the company offi cer—should be managing the 
event using a proactive management style.
Good scene management focuses on the priorities of 
the incident, provides for the safety of all concerned, 
and seeks to reduce further loss. The old philosophy 
“grab a line and put the wet stuff on the red stuff” has 
long been outdated. Today, as the company  offi cer, you 
are expected, within a very short timeframe, to take 
command, provide leadership, identify  problems, estab-
lish priorities, allocate resources, coordinate activities, 
and protect the safety of fi refi ghters. When these things 
occur, you are in a proactive mode and are properly ful-
fi lling the leadership role of the position you hold.
This chapter only introduces these concepts. We 
cannot cover all the aspects of incident management 
in one chapter, or even in one book. Clearly, consid-
erable learning and experience must be integrated 
to become an effective incident commander. But, as 
company offi cer, you should be able to command 
* The FO I and II levels, as deﬁ ned by the NFPA 1021, the Standard for Fire Offi cer Professional Qualifi cations, are 
identiﬁ ed in different colors: FO I  black, FO II  red.
344  CHAPTER 13
NOTE
Good scene management focuses on the priorities of 
the incident, provides for the safety of all concerned, 
and seeks to reduce further loss.

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 345
fi rst-alarm resources. For small events, you should be 
able to manage the event from start to fi nish. For larger 
events, you should be able to set the foundation for 
what will follow, pending the arrival of a more senior 
offi cer. In either case, action taken during the fi rst 
5 minutes sets the tone for the entire alarm and has a 
signifi cant impact on the overall outcome of the event.
 offi cer, are responsible for maintaining the account-
ability of the fi refi ghters assigned to you, even if your 
department has some other type of scene accountability 
system. You need to know where they are and that they 
are operating safely. It is your job to make sure they go 
home at the end of their shift (see Figure 13-2).
In structural fi refi ghting, we use the term rescue to 
describe the activities associated with the civilians who 
may be at risk. Rescue includes protecting the occu-
pants, removing those who are at risk, and  searching 
for those who may not be able to help  themselves. In 
some cases, based on the number of victims, the loca-
tion of the fi re and available resources, stretching a 
hose line may be the most appropriate action to save 
lives and affect a rescue.
The second priority is incident stabilization. You 
cannot be held accountable for what happened on scene 
before you arrived, but you are clearly accountable for 
what happens after you arrive. You must be sure that 
your information, your planning, and your actions all 
NOTE
As the company officer, you are expected to take com-
mand, provide leadership, identify problems, establish 
priorities, allocate resources, coordinate activities, and 
protect the safety of firefighters.
At an emergency event, the incident commander 
is responsible for the overall management of the inci-
dent and for the safety of everyone involved. At such 
events, the incident commander must assume com-
mand, evaluate the situation, initiate, maintain, and 
control communications, formulate strategy, and 
develop an organization to fi t the needs of the event 
(see Figure 13-1).
FIREGROUND FACT
Action taken during the first 5 minutes sets the tone 
for the entire alarm and has a significant impact on the 
overall outcome of the event.
INCIDENT PRIORITIES
The Plain City fi re department’s mission statement 
includes a phrase about saving lives and property. Your 
decision-making process at the scene of any emer-
gency should focus on this same statement: Save lives 
and property. The order of the fi re service priorities; 
life safety, incident stabilization and property conser-
vation, should always serve as the guiding principles 
for prioritizing activities at an emergency incident.
FIGURE 13-1 Action taken during the first 5 minutes sets 
the tone for the entire alarm and has a significant impact 
on the overall outcome of the event. (Photo courtesy of Andy 
Thomas)
NOTE
The order of the fire service priorities; life safety, inci-
dent stabilization and property conservation, should 
always serve as the guiding principles for prioritizing 
activities at an emergency incident.
Your fi rst priority is life safety for the civilians who 
may be at risk and for the fi refi ghters under your com-
mand. Life safety must always be the fi rst consideration 
of emergency responders. Your fi rst responsibility is to 
safeguard human safety; to protect the safety of those 
under your direct supervision; and to take all reasonable 
risks in protecting the lives of the public you are sworn 
to protect. We stressed safety in Chapters 8 and 12, 
but it cannot be stressed enough that you, as company 

346  CHAPTER 13
support an effective, coordinated, and safe operation. 
In fi refi ghting operations, we call this fi re control. In a 
hazardous material spill, we attempt to contain or miti-
gate the product. In both cases, we want to keep from 
doing any additional damage.
The third priority is property conservation. Fire-
fi ghters often think of property conservation in terms 
of salvage operations, often done after the fi re is con-
trolled or even extinguished. Property conservation 
should be addressed in pre-incident planning efforts 
and started upon arrival of fi re suppression forces. 
Property conservation involves using the least destruc-
tive means for entering, using early and aggressive ven-
tilation, using a coordinated fi re attack with the proper 
selection of hose and nozzles, effective fi re stream 
management, and throwing salvage covers early in the 
event before water has a chance to do any damage. 
Property conservation does not mean putting out the 
fi re at the expense of losing the building. Ms. Garcia will 
be pleased if you put her fi re out. She will be delighted 
if you do it without destroying her house.
of  operations will mean that workers are back at 
work earning money and spending that money in the 
community.
Effective property conservation was demonstrated 
by a department when a they responded to an alarm 
at a local computer manufacture. A plumber caught 
some insulation on fi re within the walls of the  facilities 
test lab. The fi re crew during a preplan inspection 
noted that the outside of the lab walls had copper 
sheeting behind the sheetrock to limit electrical inter-
ference. Therefore, they accessed the walls from the 
opposite side, which not only made access easier, it 
reduced the cost of repairing the wall.
Some departments have benchmarks to note the 
accomplishment of these three priorities. These bench-
marks are transmitted to the incident  commander 
who records the time. In some departments, they are 
also transmitted to the communications center. This 
transmission offi cially records the time of the event 
and provides a concise progress report for senior fi re 
department staff offi cers who may be monitoring the 
event by radio.
For fi re-related activities, these conditions are as 
follows:
Incident Priority 
Transmission
Life safety search, rescue 
“all clear”
Incident stabilization 
“under control”
Property conservation 
“loss stopped”
Things are not always tidy during emergen-
cies, and there are times when the incident com-
mander must overlap or mix activities to make these 
 priorities happen. For example, during interior fi re 
operations, it may be necessary to control the fi re 
while  searching and rescuing trapped civilians. In 
the auto accident scenario you may have to stabilize 
the vehicle before you start to treat or remove vic-
tims (see Figure 13-3). Both activities protect your 
own safety as well as the safety of the victims. In 
both examples, life safety (the fi rst priority) is the 
focus of all of the activity.
At the scene of incidents, you have to quickly sort 
out a lot of information and give directions. This pro-
cess is complicated, but it can be  simplifi ed by using 
the standard decision-making process at all emer-
gency events. Using a standardized approach helps 
you focus on the incident priorities just mentioned.
There are other benefi ts of using a standardized 
approach. When incident commanders follow a 
 consistent pattern, they reduce the tendency to over-
look important activities. For others at the scene, 
your plans and your directions will more likely be 
understood when using a standardized approach. A 
good approach is to use the command sequence.
FIGURE 13-2 The incident commander’s first priority 
should be life safety, including the safety of the firefighters 
involved in the operation. (Photo courtesy of Michael Regan)
OFFICER ADVICE
Positive property conservation measures can have a sig-
nifi cant positive impact on the property owner and the 
community.
Positive property conservation measures can have 
a signifi cant positive impact on the property owner 
and the community. Irreplaceable possessions can 
be saved, damage reduced, and the building reoccu-
pied within a minimum period of time. If the build-
ing is a commercial occupancy, the rapid resumption 

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 347
Understanding Size-Up
Before any action is undertaken, you should take a 
moment to analyze the problem and think about the 
action that you are going to take. That statement is 
true in nearly all of your endeavors and certainly true 
for those where you are leading personnel at the scene 
of emergency activities. The fi rst part of this process 
is called size-up. Size-up is process of gathering and 
analyzing information that is critical to the outcome 
of the event.
FIGURE 13-3 Incident stabilization focuses on reduc-
ing injuries and loss after operations are started. (Photo 
 courtesy of Michael Regan)
NOTE
The command sequence is size-up, developing an 
action plan, and implementing the action plan.
THE COMMAND SEQUENCE
It is critical you know, understand, and follow these 
command priorities, as they are fundamental to all 
incident command operations and the basis of the 
application of the Incident Management System 
(IMS). If you do not follow these simple rules, then 
it is likely that chaos and unsafe operations will fol-
low. The steps involve size-up, developing an action 
plan, and implementing the action plan. This system 
provides a tool to assist you in establishing the nec-
essary objectives in order to achieve the goals of life 
safety, incident stabilization, and property conserva-
tion. The steps involve size-up, developing an action 
plan, and implementing the action plan. Here the 
incident commander gathers information, analyzes 
the information, determines and ranks the problems, 
defi nes solutions, and selects tactics. Finally, the 
incident commander issues orders to implement the 
tactics selected.
For fi res, there are three possible situations: nothing 
showing, smoke showing, and fi re showing. Each situa-
tion should cue the fi rst-arriving offi cer on the appropri-
ate action to take, and for the instructions to be given to 
other units. Your pre-incident planning, training, and de-
partment SOPs should address these three commonly 
encountered situations.
“WHAT’S SHOWING?”
Most of us think of size-up as what is seen through 
the windshield when you pull up in front of a place 
such as Ms. Garcia’s residence. It is all of that and a 
whole lot more (see Figure 13-4). Size-up includes 
all of the information available. It includes the infor-
mation gathered during your pre-incident survey. It 
incorporates your preplanning efforts, based on the 
information gathered from those surveys. During 
size-up, you should also consider your department’s 
SOPs and the resources available to deal with the 
situation.
Hopefully, you have good pre-incident plans for 
your community. Given the time of day and the nature 
of the occupancy, the fi rst-arriving offi cer should be 
able to make some estimate of the nature of the life 
hazard encountered. Even without a formal or  written 
FIGURE 13-4 Size-up involves more than what you see 
upon arrival.

348  CHAPTER 13
to cross the multiple lanes of the highway to get to the 
other side on foot was the last thing many dead fi refi ght-
ers were trying to do as they were struck and killed.
There are ways to improve our safety on these big 
roads. By department policy, we can forbid respond-
ing directly to a limited access highway scene in a 
 privately-owned vehicle (POV). We can forbid stopping in 
lanes traveling in one direction and crossing the  highway 
median or barrier to access a crash or fi re scene in lanes 
of traffi c traveling the opposite direction. That’s a sure 
way to get killed! We can also send a second major 
 apparatus to establish an upstream block that increases 
the  advance warning at the incident scene.
The Second Company to Block
When a call is received for an incident on a limited access 
highway, an additional apparatus should be dispatched 
along with the fi rst-due companies. A tandem-axle lad-
der truck is preferred due to its long length and heavy 
weight. In lieu of that, a tanker (tender) is a good vehicle 
to send. If no ladder truck or tanker/tender is available in 
your department, the recommendation is made to add a 
second engine company to your initial assignment.
The primary function of this second vehicle is NOT to 
work at the crash or vehicle fi re scene. Their principal 
function is to establish a second upstream block at least 
1/2-mile from the main activity area. They block what-
ever lanes of the highway must be shutdown and any 
additional shoulder areas with their large vehicle. They 
assume their vital blocking position and set up so that 
their apparatus and its warning devices make approach-
ing motorists aware that there is an emergency scene 
ahead. Traffi c cones can be extended downstream of 
the blocking apparatus towards the activity area to keep 
vehicles out of the shadow area. A DOT color-colored 
retro-refl ective sign can also be deployed upstream to 
further expand the advance warning area.
to cross the multiple lanes of the highway to get to the 
other side on foot was the last thing many dead fi refi ght-
ers were trying to do as they were struck and killed.
There are ways to improve our safety on these big 
roads. By department policy, we can forbid respond-
ing directly to a limited access highway scene in a 
 privately-owned vehicle (POV). We can forbid stopping in 
lanes traveling in one direction and crossing the  highway 
median or barrier to access a crash or fi re scene in lanes 
of traffi c traveling the opposite direction. That’s a sure 
way to get killed! We can also send a second major 
 apparatus to establish an upstream block that increases 
the  advance warning at the incident scene.
The Second Company to Block
When a call is received for an incident on a limited access 
highway, an additional apparatus should be dispatched 
along with the fi rst-due companies. A tandem-axle lad-
der truck is preferred due to its long length and heavy 
weight. In lieu of that, a tanker (tender) is a good vehicle 
to send. If no ladder truck or tanker/tender is available in 
your department, the recommendation is made to add a 
second engine company to your initial assignment.
The primary function of this second vehicle is NOT to 
work at the crash or vehicle fi re scene. Their principal 
function is to establish a second upstream block at least 
1/2-mile from the main activity area. They block what-
ever lanes of the highway must be shutdown and any 
additional shoulder areas with their large vehicle. They 
assume their vital blocking position and set up so that 
their apparatus and its warning devices make approach-
ing motorists aware that there is an emergency scene 
ahead. Traffi c cones can be extended downstream of 
the blocking apparatus towards the activity area to keep 
vehicles out of the shadow area. A DOT color-colored 
retro-refl ective sign can also be deployed upstream to 
further expand the advance warning area.
SAFE OPERATION ON THE HIGHWAY
Ron Moore
As our line-of-duty-death statistics continue to show with 
each passing year, responders working in or near mov-
ing traffi c are placed at signifi cant risk of injury or death. 
Regardless of whether you volunteer your services or 
are paid for what you do, when you are at a crash or 
fi re scene and are working in or near moving traffi c, you 
are considered a “highway worker” and fall under  federal 
 Department of Transportation (DOT) standards and 
 regulations. The content of these national regulations 
is just now becoming known to the fi re service and the 
 impact of these federal highway standards is beginning 
to have an effect on our incident scene operations.
Laws and regulations did not stop the alcohol-
 impaired drivers that killed several of our fi refi ghters last 
year in struck-by incidents. Even DOT standards will not 
prevent the speeding 18-wheeler from crashing into your 
 emergency scene. Proper highway response training, 
 improved highway safety, PPE, special techniques for 
advance warning to approaching motorists, and the 
skills necessary to create a physical barrier between 
you and the moving traffi c will.
There is an art to properly and effectively blocking 
with an emergency vehicle at a highway incident scene. 
The driver must have an uncanny feel for the size of their 
 vehicle regardless of whether it is a sedan or a 40-ton, 
tandem-axle ladder truck. The process of blocking is 
done by the apparatus driver just as they come to a stop 
at the incident scene. With the intent being to physically 
block the shoulder of the road and the closest lane of 
traffi c or to block off several lanes of traffi c, the emer-
gency vehicle slows and before coming to a complete 
stop, makes a sharp turn to the right or left. This slants 
their vehicle at an angle across the lanes of traffi c.
You may call it the Expressway; your partner may call 
it the Interstate. It may be known as the Thruway, the 
Toll Way or by other names in your local area. What it is 
to you is a fi refi ghter killer. A multi-lane, divided highway, 
having a high posted speed limit, lots of traffi c day and 
night, few access points to get on and off, and few if any 
intersections is technically a limited access highway, the 
leading type of highway incident location known to kill 
emergency responders.
More fi refi ghters and EMS personnel have been struck 
and injured or killed on limited access highways than any 
other type of roadway system in the U.S. Contributing 
factors such as higher speeds, heavy volumes of traffi c 
plus a greater possibility of heavy trucks approaching the 
scene make these roadways extremely dangerous. Two 
major reasons for responder deaths on these highways 
have emerged. Lack of proper advance warning to ap-
proaching traffi c is one of the major causes. Attempting 
A fire department vehicle provides a visible barrier 
between the workers and oncoming traffic.

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 349
pre-incident survey, offi cers should know enough 
about their fi rst-due response area to know the type 
of construction, access points, water supply, probable 
fi re behavior, and safety concerns that are likely to 
be encountered. You should not wait until an alarm 
comes in to learn about the structure that is located 
just down the street from your fi re station!
Your knowledge of the fi rst-due area should also 
include information about the best response route, 
the natural barriers (rivers and terrain), the human-
made barriers (railroad tracks and highways), and all 
of the signifi cant hazards that may be encountered. 
Your mind should be like a little computer, constantly 
storing information about the area, and analyzing the 
information to deal with the problems that might be 
encountered.
Along with an assessment of the problem, you 
should have a good assessment of the resources that 
can be expected to help deal with the problem. Again, 
the time of day may be important, not just in terms 
of the conditions that are likely to be encountered but 
also in terms of the available resources.
a fi re department emergency medical services (EMS) 
unit is assigned on working fi res in many larger cities. 
Regional or state hazardous materials teams may be 
called when the local department is not prepared to 
deal with hazmat problems. You should know about 
these resources and how they can help at the scene of 
any emergency. If you do not know what resources 
are available in your community, how can you call 
for them?
Along with all of this information, you will make 
your own observations while en route and upon arrival 
at the incident. When you see Ms. Garcia’s house, 
you can focus on the specifi c problems you face (one 
excited woman; one kitchen on fi re). You now have a 
moment to make a rapid mental evaluation of the situ-
ation and of the relevant factors that may be critical to 
this unique incident.
All slowing of approaching traffi c, lane changes, and 
merging of traffi c should happen upstream of this block-
ing company. A PD unit should be working upstream of 
this blocking company to assist with upstream traffi c 
control. When done properly, by the time traffi c actually 
passes the main activity area, vehicles have slowed to 
a manageable speed, are moving smoothly in the open 
lanes, and are following each other in a controlled and 
predictable manner.
Remember, the ambulance, fi rst-due engine and pos-
sibly your heavy rescue unit, if that is what you send 
to crash scenes, should not be used as this upstream 
second blocker. Those units need to be close to the 
 patients and the wrecked vehicles. The fi rst-due engine 
should  already be in a blocking position upstream of the 
crashed vehicles and the ambulance and heavy rescue 
should be in the downstream shadow.1
OFFICER ADVICE
Remember that size-up is the fi rst step in the action plan. 
With good size-up information, you are better able to de-
velop an action plan.
OFFICER ADVICE
As the fi rst-arriving offi cer, you must assess the condi-
tions calmly and be proactive rather than reactive to the 
situation.
Depending upon the situation, there may be some 
non-fi re department resources on-scene as well. Many 
communities notify the police when the fi re depart-
ment is called out, and they often arrive ahead of the 
fi refi ghters. In some cases, they may undertake some 
of the size-up activities for you. A good working rela-
tionship needs to be established before this is done. 
Help the police by offering them training on providing 
the information you need and on what to do and what 
not do before your arrival (i.e., where to park and not 
park their police cars; do not kick in the doors; do not 
enter the structure without proper PPE, training, and 
resources, etc.). Private ambulance companies often 
respond to structural fi res, for the same reasons that 
For many offi cers, the fi rst few moments at the 
scene create a lot of stress. For a new offi cer, every 
call is a signifi cant event. With experience and matu-
rity, most offi cers routinely deal with these as ordinary 
events. However, even seasoned veterans sometimes 
encounter situations beyond their previous experience. 
 Hopefully, they will be able to draw on their previous 
experiences and remain calm, even though the event 
seems overwhelming. In any case, as the fi rst-arriving 
offi cer, you must take a moment to assess the condi-
tions calmly and be proactive rather than reactive to 
the situation. Many refer to this as accessing the slide 
tray of pictures in your head, comparing the incident 
before you to other similar incidents you have dealt 
with and noting what actions were and were not suc-
cessful at those incidents. This forms the basis for 
what actions you are likely to take to mitigate the 
current emergency. Pre-incident plans and standard 
operating procedures need to be  considered and used 

350  CHAPTER 13
system should  remain in place until the conclusion of the 
incident.
Other lessons learned cited in the report include the 
following:
■ An incident commander must be responsible for over-
all operations and should establish and maintain com-
mand throughout an operation as self-initiated and 
self-directed efforts of fi refi ghting crews lack coordi-
nation and control.
■ An operator can be assigned to handle radio traffi c, 
but the incident commander must be aware of all im-
portant messages, direct all assignments, and control 
the communications process.
■ Rapid intervention teams outfi tted with appropriate 
equipment should be provided to rescue trapped or 
missing fi refi ghters.
■ An insuffi cient number of radios for fi refi ghting person-
nel impacts the success of a fi re response.
■ Smoke detectors in homes and second exits from 
rooms for evacuation of occupants enhance the likeli-
hood inhabitants of a burning residence can escape.
“This was a terrible fi re that caused the death of two 
fi refi ghters and an elderly resident,” said U.S. Fire Admin-
istrator David Paulison. “Lessons learned from this re-
view are relevant to every department in the nation and 
underscore the importance of communication, training 
and established (accountability) systems.”
On February 6, 1997, in Stockton, California, a fi re began 
early in the morning in a second-fl oor master bedroom 
occupied by an 82-year-old resident. The small lot size, a 
crowded driveway, and limited access from the sides and 
rear complicated the fi re response. A second-story ad-
dition not visible to fi refi ghters entering the building from 
the front subsequently collapsed, killing two fi refi ghters. 
A third fi refi ghter was seriously injured. The resident also 
died from carbon monoxide poisoning.
The U.S. Fire Administration (USFA) conducted a re-
view and noted that large, open areas and nonstandard 
construction should have been indicators of potential 
collapse in a burning residence and that the existence 
of these hazards must be conveyed to interior fi re crews 
whose vantage point may prevent them from being aware 
of the potential danger.2
The review also pointed out that a standard account-
ability of personnel system is a critical part of an incident 
response, noting that when something does happen, the 
system should be in place, and the crews should have 
the unit discipline and self-control to quickly account 
for all  personnel and report their status to the incident 
 commander. Therefore, it is essential that a standardized 
accountability system be initiated on every scene. The 
system should  remain in place until the conclusion of the 
incident.
Other lessons learned cited in the report include the 
following:
■An incident commander must be responsible for over-
all operations and should establish and maintain com-
mand throughout an operation as self-initiated and 
self-directed efforts of fi refi ghting crews lack coordi-
nation and control.
■An operator can be assigned to handle radio traffi c, 
but the incident commander must be aware of all im-
portant messages, direct all assignments, and control 
the communications process.
■Rapid intervention teams outfi tted with appropriate 
equipment should be provided to rescue trapped or 
missing fi refi ghters.
■An insuffi cient number of radios for fi refi ghting person-
nel impacts the success of a fi re response.
■Smoke detectors in homes and second exits from 
rooms for evacuation of occupants enhance the likeli-
hood inhabitants of a burning residence can escape.
“This was a terrible fi re that caused the death of two 
fi refi ghters and an elderly resident,” said U.S. Fire Admin-
istrator David Paulison. “Lessons learned from this re-
view are relevant to every department in the nation and 
underscore the importance of communication, training 
and established (accountability) systems.”
On February 6, 1997, in Stockton, California, a fi re began
early in the morning in a second-fl oor master bedroom
occupied by an 82-year-old resident. The small lot size, a
crowded driveway, and limited access from the sides and
rear complicated the fi re response. A second-story ad-
dition not visible to fi refi ghters entering the building from
the front subsequently collapsed, killing two fi refi ghters.
A third fi refi ghter was seriously injured. The resident also
died from carbon monoxide poisoning.
The U.S. Fire Administration (USFA) conducted a re-
view and noted that large, open areas and nonstandard
construction should have been indicators of potential
collapse in a burning residence and that the existence
of these hazards must be conveyed to interior fi re crews
whose vantage point may prevent them from being aware
of the potential danger.2
The review also pointed out that a standard account-
ability of personnel system is a critical part of an incident
response, noting that when something does happen, the
system should be in place, and the crews should have
the unit discipline and self-control to quickly account
for all  personnel and report their status to the incident
 commander. Therefore, it is essential that a standardized
accountability system be initiated on every scene. The
if possible. Hazards need to be identifi ed and incor-
porated into the planning process (see Figure 13-5). 
When initiating a size-up, it may be helpful to answer 
these three questions:3
■ What have I got?
■ Where is it going?
■ How can I stop it?
During fi re-related events, you should be concerned 
about the following.
Building Construction
The important thing to remember here is that each 
type of building presents us with a different set of 
problems in dealing with fi re spread and fi re control. 
See Chapter 10.
Location and Access
Finding the building is part of your job. In addi-
tion, you need to know how to get past any fences 
and doors you may encounter. You should also have 
obtained information about exposures, water supply, 
terrain problems, and other features that impact on 
your operations (see Figure 13-6).
Occupancy and Contents
For Ms. Garcia’s house and its 2,000 square feet of 
living space, the fi rst-arriving offi cer can anticipate 
the size and contents of the structure just from know-
ing the neighborhood. Your pre-incident survey and 
planning efforts really pay off for larger structures.
FIGURE 13-5
The first arriving officer should take note of 
any hazards that may be present.
LESSONS FROM A DEADLY HOUSE 
FIRE IN STOCKTON, CALIFORNIA

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 351
Location of the Event 
within the Structure
You also need to know where the situation is located 
within the structure. Again, your prior knowledge 
will be useful here. If your problem is a fi re, know-
ing its location helps you answer all three of the ques-
tions: “What have I got, where is it going, and how 
do I stop it?” Lacking this information will adversely 
affect your ability to answer any of these questions.
FIGURE 13-6 Gaining access to the building can be a 
challenge.
Imagine the difference of pulling up to a well-involved fi re 
in a structure of 20,000 square feet of fl oor space in a 
building that you have carefully surveyed and planned. 
Contrast that with your situation while standing in front 
of a similar building that you have never seen before (see 
Figure 13-7). You may have trouble fi nding the front door.
THE IMPORTANCE OF PREPLANNING
Time of Day and Weather Conditions
Of course, you will know the time of day and the 
weather situation, but you should always be think-
ing about how these conditions will affect both the 
situation and how you can mitigate the situation. For 
example, a fi re at night in any residential  structure 
presents us with signifi cant life safety concerns. 
A fi re in a commercial building at night may  present 
reduced life safety concerns but will likely have a 
delayed discovery. Your ability to get to that fi re may 
also be delayed while you attempt to gain access. 
Again, you see some advantages to your pre-incident 
planning activity.
You will also need to consider the weather and other 
environmental factors that impact on your opera-
tions. Extremely hot or extremely cold weather affects 
fi refi ghting operations and fi refi ghters. Cold weather 
FIGURE 13-7 Certain structures have obvious hazards. 
What hazards do you see here?
FIGURE 13-8 Severe weather can hamper operations.
can make life diffi cult, especially when the cold is 
mixed with precipitation (see Figure 13-8). Cold 
weather will probably slow your response and your 
operations once you are on the scene. Cold weather 
can also have an impact on any citizens affected by 
the event. Imagine evacuating all the occupants of an 
apartment house or offi ce building while your fi re-
fi ghting activities are taking place. In nice weather, 
they will have a chance to watch your operations and 
visit with one another. In cold weather, they may be 
at greater risk from the elements than they were from 

352  CHAPTER 13
the fi re. The same can be said for those involved in 
some sort of transportation accident. We should not 
lose sight of the fi rst priority: human life.
Several acronyms can be used for keeping track 
of all of these factors. One of the traditional ones is 
COAL WAS WEALTH:
■ Construction
■ Occupancy
■ Apparatus and personnel
■ Life safety
■ Water supply
■ Auxiliary appliances
■ Street conditions
■ Weather
■ Exposures
■ Area
■ Location
■ Time
■ Height
Keeping track of all this information can be quite 
a challenge. Many departments use a tactical work-
sheet for larger events, but there are benefi ts of hav-
ing some sort of checklist for all events. Keep in mind 
that the main reasons for using an incident command 
system and some form of checklist are for fi refi ghter 
safety and to maintain an accountability of the fi re-
fi ghters at the emergency scene. Many offi cers keep 
a copy of some sort of worksheet folded up in the 
pocket of their turnout coat. A sample tactical work 
sheet is shown in Figure 13-9. This sheet provides a 
checklist for size-up factors, a place to record assign-
ments, and a space for a simple diagram.
RISK ANALYSIS
Although there are dangers associated with all activi-
ties, fi refi ghting certainly ranks high as a risky activ-
ity. One of the considerations for the fi rst-arriving 
offi cer is a risk/benefi t analysis that determines the 
strategy to be initially used for mitigating the event. 
Where lives are at risk, any reasonable risk that may 
result in saving those lives is warranted. However, 
where lives are not at risk or cannot be saved, you 
should never place fi refi ghters at risk. We have been 
reading about this for years, yet we continue to read 
of fi refi ghters taking unnecessary risks to save build-
ings that are scheduled for demolition. If you encoun-
ter residential fi re where the structure is almost fully 
involved and a dark hot smoke is emitting from every 
crack and crevice in the structure, it is very unlikely 
that anyone in the structure is still alive or savable. 
This is one of the toughest decisions that offi cers will 
face, but you have to be realistic about what you can 
and cannot accomplish. Is it worth risking a fi refi ght-
er’s life to save a corpse?
To sum it all up, in the simplest of terms this 
means after you look at what is showing, consider the 
type of building construction, consider the location 
and access, examine occupancy and contents, con-
sider the location of the event within the structure, 
and the environmental conditions you look at what 
you can save based on what you risk; you make a go 
or no go decision. This is all done in your head, in 
seconds. This may all sound overwhelming and for 
an  inexperienced offi cer it is. That is why training is 
so important. Failure to examine any of these factors 
could lead to an ill fated decision.
SAFETY
Where the risk justifies entering the building, you 
should realize that just because you can safely enter 
the building does not mean that you can safely stay in 
the building.
Where the risk justifi es entering the building, you 
should realize that just because you can safely enter 
the building does not mean that you can safely stay 
in the building. For many types of buildings, modern 
construction techniques are not designed to enhance 
structural integrity during fi re conditions, and some 
modern buildings will collapse, in some cases, sooner 
than one might expect. Normally the arriving fi re-
fi ghters do not know how long the fi re has been burn-
ing before they arrive, nor are they likely to know 
how the fi re has impacted on the structural integrity 
of the building. The length of time fi refi ghters can be 
expected to sustain an interior attack is usually very 
limited at best.
If there are suffi cient resources on hand to mount 
an aggressive interior fi re attack, the save might be 
worth the risk. But in many cases, especially where 
resources may be limited or where the building’s con-
dition is doubtful, it may be best to focus resources on 
protecting the exposures. Decisions regarding inte-
rior operations are among the hardest you can expect 
to face. Remember that the fi re is not your fault and 
that you may not be able to save all of the burning 
buildings you are likely to encounter. Property that 
is already lost is not worth losing a fi refi ghter (see 
 Figure 13-10).

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 353
Multi Agency Tactical Worksheet
TIME:
TIME:
S=STAGED
R=REHAB
TIME:
Unit
S
Assigned Reassign
R Bldg. Fire
10-48 PIN
Command
TIME
Fire attack
Patient care
Safety
OFF/DEF
PAR
TIME
RIC 
Safety
PIO
Major Event
PAR
WIND SP
S & R
Extrication
Staging
30 Minutes
PAR
WIND DIR
Water Supply 1 3/4 line
Investigation
Code 4
PAR
TEMP
Ventilation
Landing Zone
Primary AC
PAR
HUMIDITY
Back-up line
C
A
 y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
S
cis
a
B
PAR
Utilities
Major
Command
Ems unit
Ems unit
Ems unit
Ems unit
Green
Yellow
Red
Blue
Black
A=Gas meter/elec. at transformer
X=Gas:CO Leak
Y=Elec: Public Hazard
Z=Elec: Non-Public Hazard
RED CROSS
SALVATION ARMY
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
UNITS  ASSIGNED
COMMAND ASSIGNMENTS
OFFICER AND/OR UNIT
LOCATION
CHANNEL
Address:
Time of Alarm:
WEATHER
Personnel Accountability
E
D
O
M
 
E
V
I
S
N
E
F
E
D
#
 t
n
e
d
i
c
n
I
OFFENSIVE MODE
OFF/DEF MODE
MEDICAL SUPPORT
SEARCH & RESCUE
WATER SUPPLY
FIRE ATTACK
RIC  
VICTIMS
 VENTILATION
INCIDENT SUPPORT
B=Gas/Electric meters
TRAFFIC CONTROL
KG&E CODES
                Mutual Aid
FIGURE 13-9 A tactical worksheet helps keep track of the information.

354  CHAPTER 13
Selecting the Correct Mode
There are three modes of operation at a fi re: offen-
sive, defensive, and transitional.4 When in the offen-
sive mode, operations are conducted in an aggressive 
interior attack mode, taking the attack to the fi re. You 
must determine that the interior attack is worth the 
risk. You must also determine if you have suffi cient 
resources to safely mount and sustain a coordinated 
attack. The offensive mode is a good choice: Many 
fi res are put out this way and lots of lives and property 
are saved with this mode of attack.
 operations are shifted from one mode to another, 
Operations may have started in the offensive mode, 
but fi refi ghters were unable to make any headway, 
so the offi cers prudently withdrew their forces from 
within the building. Conversely, the event may have 
started as a defensive operation, with fi refi ghters 
knocking down some of the fi re or providing a hold-
ing operation while suffi cient companies arrived 
and prepared for a coordinated interior operation. 
In either case, the process of shifting from one 
mode to another presents its own risks and has to 
be carefully managed. Effective fi reground com-
munications become very important during these 
precarious moments.
Command Decisions
Another critical decision that has to be made is 
in regard to your personal role in the initial opera-
tions. There are three modes of command: command, 
attack, or a combination of both. Once again, you 
have a choice to make: You can take command, elect 
to start combating the situation, or seek a hybrid solu-
tion of trying to do both.
FIGURE 13-10 Property that is already lost does not jus-
tify risking firefighters.
NOTE
Property that is already lost is not worth losing a 
firefighter.
FIREGROUND FACT
There are three modes of operation at a fire: offensive, 
defensive, and transitional.
When fi re conditions have advanced to the point 
where there is little chance of saving lives or prop-
erty, or when there are insuffi cient resources on hand 
to safely mount and sustain an interior fi re attack, you 
must resort to defensive operations (see Figure 13-11). 
In the defensive mode, operations are conducted 
from a safe distance outside of the structure and may 
focus more on containing the fi re rather than on extin-
guishing it.
The third mode is called transitional. During 
the transitional mode, operations are changing 
from either an offensive to a defensive mode, or 
from a defensive to an offensive mode. Obviously, 
the transitional mode is not something you would 
start with, but rather a phase you pass through as 
FIGURE 13-11 At times, the mode will be obvious.
FIREGROUND FACT
There are three modes of command: command, 
attack, or a combination of both.
In selecting the command role, the fi rst- arriving 
offi cer elects to maintain control of the incident 
and coordinates the activities of the fi rst-arriving 
 companies. In essence, the company offi cer becomes 
the fi rst incident commander. As the incident com-
mander, you have overall control of the event, doing 
the size-up, directing personnel on scene, and giv-
ing instructions to arriving companies by radio. For 

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 355
smaller events, this is standard procedure. You may 
decide that one or two companies are suffi cient to 
handle the event and release the remaining companies 
from the assignment. In such cases, you, as the fi rst-
arriving company offi cer, will likely remain in charge 
of the event, complete the report, and perform all of 
the other duties of the incident commander.
The second option that you have is to person-
ally go into action. This option is referred to as the 
attack role. In this case, you decide that the urgency 
of the situation warrants your immediate personal 
action and that such action will likely have a signifi -
cant positive infl uence on the outcome of the event. 
This option may be justifi ed where an immediate 
 incident. The incident commander shall initiate an 
accountability worksheet at the beginning of the 
incident and maintain the system throughout the 
operation.
4. The incident commander shall maintain an aware-
ness of the location and function of all companies 
assigned to an incident.
5. The incident commander shall implement branch 
directors, division/group supervisors or team lead-
ers when needed to reduce the span of control for 
the incident commander.
6. Branch directors, division/group supervisors or 
team leaders shall directly supervise and account 
for companies operating under their command.
7. Company commanders are accountable for all 
company members, and company members are 
responsible to remain under the supervision of their 
assigned company commander. Members shall be 
responsible for following the personnel accountabil-
ity system procedures, which shall be used at all 
incidents.
8. The IMS shall provide for additional accountability 
personnel based on the size, complexity, or needs 
of an incident. The implementation of division/group 
supervisors or team leaders can assist the incident 
commander in this area by reducing the span of 
control.
9. The incident commander shall provide for control of 
access to the incident scene.
10. A department shall adopt and routinely use a 
 standard personnel identifi cation system to main-
tain accountability for each member assigned to an 
incident. There are several accountability systems 
used during structural fi refi ghting.
11. The personnel accountability system shall provide 
an accounting of those members actually respond-
ing to the scene in each company or apparatus.
12. The IMS shall include standard operating guide-
lines that use “emergency traffi c” communications 
to evacuate personnel from an area where an im-
minent hazard is found to exist and to account for 
their safety.
The IMS starts with the arrival of the fi rst fi re department 
company. The fi rst company to arrive integrates risk man-
agement into the routine functions of incident command. 
As indicated in NFPA 1500, Standard on Fire Department 
Occupational Safety and Health Program, the concept of 
risk management shall be utilized on the basis of the fol-
lowing principles:
 1. Activities that present a signifi cant risk to the safety 
of members shall be limited to situations where 
there is a potential to save endangered lives.
2. Activities that are routinely employed to protect 
property shall be recognized as inherent risks to the 
safety of members, and actions shall be taken to re-
duce or avoid these risks.
3. No risk to the safety of members shall be accept-
able when there is no possibility to save lives or 
property.
4. In situations where risks to fi re department members 
are excessive, activities shall be limited to defensive 
operations.5
As indicated in item 2, “actions shall be taken to reduce 
or avoid these risks.” Identifying potential safety con-
cerns to members and taking actions to reduce risks to 
fi refi ghters are without a doubt two of the most important 
things that can be accomplished. 
The following are just some of the ways to reduce the 
overall risks to members operating at the scene of emer-
gency incidents and that reinforce the purpose and func-
tion of the personal accountability system:
1. Written guidelines shall be established and used 
that provide for the tracking and inventory of all 
members operating in an emergency incident.
2. All members operating in an emergency are re-
sponsible to actively participate in the department’s 
accountability system.
3. The incident commander shall be responsible 
for the overall personnel accountability for the 
RISK MANAGEMENT DURING 
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS

356  CHAPTER 13
rescue is required and can be safely undertaken or 
where a quick fi re attack may knock the fi re down 
and prevent signifi cant extension. Once again, you 
are asked to make an on-the-spot risk/benefi t anal-
ysis and then take immediate action with limited 
resources based on that analysis. Times like these 
can be diffi cult.
When you select the option of going into action, 
you should pass command to another offi cer who is 
or who soon will be on-scene. There has been some 
misunderstanding about this process, especially in 
departments where it is not often practiced. When 
you select to commit to the attack mode, you com-
municate this over the radio to the next-arriving 
company; however, you essentially remain in com-
mand until another offi cer is on scene and offi cially 
assumes command. You are also effectively the scene 
safety offi cer until that function is assigned to another 
offi cer. If the second-arriving company is another 
engine company, their primary function is usually to 
establish a reliable water supply. The offi cer of that 
company may be in a good position to become the 
incident commander. Obviously, too much of a good 
thing can be harmful, and most departments have a 
rule about passing command again. The general rule 
is that the next time that command is passed, it must 
be to a chief offi cer. This policy precludes the con-
stant turnover of command as companies arrive.
In some situations, you may not really have the 
luxury of a choice, especially in smaller depart-
ments where the initial response might be limited 
to one or two engines and a handful of fi refi ght-
ers. Additional resources could be about a day 
away. In this case, you are likely to be involved 
with a  combination of both command and hands-on 
 fi refi ghting activities. This arrangement is obviously 
Effective management of emergency situations depends 
on proper use of command and communications. An 
effective command system defi nes how the incident is 
controlled and how the management of the incident is 
established and progresses. Communications tie the 
command system together and provide an opportunity 
for everyone to pass along and understand essential 
information. When you use the communications sys-
tem, your messages should be brief, impersonal, and to 
the point.
COMMUNICATIONS ARE THE GLUE 
THAT HOLDS THE COMMAND 
SEQUENCE TOGETHER
not good as it certainly places you in a position 
where the best you can hope for is to try to perform 
one task without serious risk of compromising the 
other. In such cases, another offi cer should attempt 
to get on-scene and relieve you of the responsibilities 
of command.
OFFICER ADVICE
The initial report should address four questions; What 
have I got, what am I doing, what do I need, and who is 
in charge.
Brief Initial Report
Part of the initial size-up is providing a good report of 
the situation you see. The initial report should paint 
a concise but vivid oral picture of the conditions you 
observe as well as a quick summary of your inten-
tions and needs. Specifi cally, the initial report should 
address four questions: “What have I got, what am I 
doing, what do I need, and who is in charge?” Advise 
everyone else what you are doing, your location, and 
your immediate plans.
The fi rst part is obvious and very important. In a 
sentence or two, you should describe what is happen-
ing in front of you. If a building is on fi re, describe 
the size and occupancy of the building and the evi-
dence of fi re conditions you can see. If you are arriv-
ing at the scene of a vehicle accident where you have 
more victims than you can likely handle with the 
resources on hand, the same rule applies: Describe 
what you see.
Advise everyone else what you are doing, your loca-
tion, and your immediate plans. Let everyone know if 
you are entering the building and if you are planning 
to operate in the offensive or defensive mode.
Next, give assignments to incoming units and 
ask for additional resources if needed. If you think 
that additional resources will be needed, now is the 
time to ask for them. Better to get them started and 
fi nd that you really do not need them than to dis-
cover 5 or 10 minutes later that you need some help 
and have to wait another 5 or 10 minutes until help 
arrives. Your department’s prefi re plans should list 
both emergency and nonemergency units that may 
be needed for use. Emergency units include any-
thing from police units to assist with traffi c con-
trol to additional ambulances to handle patient 
care. Nonemergency units can also encompass a 
wide range of available resources. Resources such 
as the  American Red Cross, wrecker services, and 

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 357
 hazardous material clean-up companies are all con-
sidered nonemergency units; however, their services 
cannot be overlooked.
Some departments use the acronym OSCAR 
(Occupancy, 
Size, 
Conditions, 
Actions, 
and 
Resources) to assist in remembering all of the com-
ponents of an initial size-up report. Occupancy 
can be described as single-family, multi-family, or 
commercial structures. The description does not 
have to be elaborate. Size can be communicated as 
small, medium, or large. It can also be communi-
cated in terms of square footage or in numbers of 
fl oors. When communicating conditions, you could 
say “heavy black smoke coming from the back door 
on side C” or “small fi re confi ned to the exterior 
of side B.” The important thing is to clearly and 
briefl y  verbalize what you are seeing because you 
are the eyes for the rest of the responders. Actions 
should communicate what you and your crew are 
preparing to do (i.e., “E-1 is initiating fi re attack 
with a 1¾-inch hose line through the front door.”). 
Resources are only communicated if needed. If a 
water supply or second alarm is needed, you should 
communicate this at that time. When you put it all 
together, it should sound something like, “E-1 we are 
on scene of a single story, single family residence 
with heavy black smoke coming from the back door 
on side C. E-1 is passing command and initiating 
fi re attack through the front door. The next arriving 
engine needs to bring me a water supply.”
You may not have specifi c assignments for all 
members and that is OK. Let them know that you 
want them to continue in or go to a staging area. 
They can wait there, ready to go to work. This gives 
you a moment to assess the situation. On the other 
hand, if you have one of those “nothing showing” 
situations, you may want them to slow down the 
response. Most departments have standard proce-
dures for doing this.6
Who is in charge? Here the command statement 
enters into the report. If the fi rst-arriving offi cer is 
assuming command, that should be clearly stated. 
The offi cer or the dispatch center identifi es the com-
mand, usually by street or building name. If there is 
any question as to your exact location, you should 
clearly indicate your location so the arriving units 
will know where to fi nd the command post.
A good initial size-up report provides incoming 
units with the information needed to mentally and 
physically prepare for the call. The majority of alarms  
do not involve working fi res. As a result, we fall into 
a pattern of “here we go again” for a report of a fi re 
alarm or sprinkler activation. A good size-up report 
will jolt fi refi ghters from the usual “here we go again” 
mindset into the reality that this is a real fi re and we 
have some real work to do. It also alerts the command 
center and senior offi cers who may be listening that 
fi refi ghters are about to go into battle. Here is another 
example:
“I’m on-scene of a two-story town house residence 
with heavy smoke and fi re showing on the Alpha and 
Bravo sides of the north unit. Engine 2: supply my 
line on Dawn Street and then report here for a backup 
line off Engine 1. I will assume Eight Street Com-
mand. Send me a second alarm and police units for 
traffi c control.”
Most fi re offi cers do a pretty good job on size-up 
reports at fi re situations, but some do not do a very 
good job at EMS and hazmat situations. Although both 
EMS and hazmat events present a host of unknowns, 
personnel should be able to describe what they see. 
Let us take an EMS call for example:
“Engine 1 is on-scene of a two-car accident at 
East Highway and Route 123. Both vehicles are 
extensively damaged. One car is on its side in the 
ditch and appears to have a small fi re under the 
hood. Approximately six people are involved, and 
all are still in their vehicles. Engine 1 is assuming 
East Highway command and is going to check the 
fi re and assess the patients in the overturned car. 
Rescue 2; assess the patients in the second car. Send 
two police units for traffi c control and two addi-
tional ambulances.”
Ongoing Size-Up
At this point, the action starts. However, size-up does 
not stop when the action starts. Size-up must be ongo-
ing throughout the event. Many responses start with-
out all the information, or fi refi ghters fi nd that the 
information is incorrect. As additional information is 
obtained, be sure that it is shared with those who need 
NOTE
A good initial size-up report provides incoming units 
with the information needed to mentally and physically 
prepare for the call. Some departments use the acro-
nym OSCAR (Occupancy, Size, Conditions, Actions, 
and Resources) to assist in remembering all of the 
components of an initial size-up report.
NOTE
Size-up must be ongoing throughout the event.

358  CHAPTER 13
the information to change tactics, actions, or mode of 
operation (see Figure 13-12).
Two things are certain to change. The fi rst is the 
situation. Hopefully, your actions will have some pos-
itive impact on the situation. Report those changes 
on a regular basis. Many departments have a sys-
tem in place that prompts a status report every 10 or 
15 minutes. These automatic prompts also provide an 
opportunity to be sure that the incident commander 
has everyone accounted for. After 10 or 15 minutes of 
interior fi refi ghting operations, you should see signifi -
cant progress. If that progress is not apparent, it may 
be time to withdraw and shift to a defensive mode. 
Sustained interior operations invite disaster!
Along with a status of the event, the incident com-
mander should keep track of the resources available 
for the operation. Are additional units needed? Are 
additional fi refi ghters needed to relieve those now 
engaged? Are support units needed to sustain the 
personnel and apparatus that are on-scene? Will you 
need lights, food, shelter, toilets, compressed air to 
recharge the (SCBA) units, and so forth? Only those 
at the scene can anticipate these needs. A good inci-
dent commander thinks about these things (or has 
someone else doing it) and has them on-scene before 
they are needed. If it starts getting dark before you 
think to call for scene lighting, then you are being 
reactive to the situation and not proactive. As incident 
commander, you need to think ahead!
Developing an Action Plan
An action plan is an organized course of action 
that addresses all phases of incident control within a 
specifi ed time frame. Note the keywords in this sen-
tence. First, it is an organized course of action. All of 
the operations should be conducted in an organized 
manner. This does not infer that it is necessary to 
have a meeting and vote on the actions you are tak-
ing; it just means that someone is in charge and that 
someone has analyzed the situation and issued orders 
that will permit safe and effective operations. This 
has to be done quickly. You can not take a lot of time 
to do this, or you have crew members standing around 
while the situation progresses. You are already behind 
from the time the call comes in. You can not afford 
to waste any more. Seldom will you have all the facts 
to start with, so you have to start operations based on 
what you do know, collect information as you go and 
modify your actions, and that of your crew, based on 
that additional information. Conceptionally this may 
sound like a “seat of your pants” management style, 
but this differs in that your actions are deliberate and 
not fl ippant or without consideration to the outcome 
of those actions.
Second, the action plan should address all phases 
of the emergency. Action planning does not stop until 
the last unit leaves the scene. Action planning, like 
the ongoing size-up, should be a continuing process.
FIGURE 13-12 Good fireground commanders keep 
 everyone informed of progress and plans.
OFFICER ADVICE
Along with a status of the event, the incident commander 
should keep track of the resources available for the 
operation.
NOTE
From Sections 4.6.1 and 4.6.2 of the 2009 edition of 
NFPA 1021 Fire Officer 1, the candidate shall be able 
to
■ “. . . Develop an initial action plan, given size-up 
information for an incident and assigned emergency 
response resources, so that resources are deployed 
to control the emergency.”
■ “Implement an action plan at an emergency opera-
tion, given assigned resources, type of incident, and 
a preliminary plan, so that resources are deployed 
to mitigate the situation.”7
The third key element in the defi nition of action 
plan is within a specifi ed time frame. With a little 
experience, you should be able to estimate how long 
certain actions will take. Your action plan should allow 
for the fact that it takes several minutes from the time 
you, as the incident commander, give an order, until 
the action starts. It may take additional time for the 
results to be seen. Meanwhile, the fi re is still burning, 
or the victim is still trapped. You may need to think 
about your actions in slices of time, especially when 
coordinating the efforts of several companies.

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 359
the hoseline was charged, she noticed that the hoseline 
had burned through at the entrance to the apartment. 
The burned length of hose was removed, and the nozzle 
 reconnected to the line as it was charged again. The fi re-
fi ghter played a hose stream into the burning apartment. 
She was only able to advance 6–8 ft into the apartment 
before being driven back by the intense heat.
Efforts continued to contact the three fi refi ghters that 
were in the fi re apartment. As additional call-back fi re-
fi ghters arrived they were ordered to begin to search for 
the missing fi refi ghters in the original fi re apartment. As 
the fi re was knocked back and a search could begin, fi re-
fi ghters quickly found one fi refi ghter in the fi rst fl oor room 
to the right of the main entrance corridor. The assistant 
chief’s body was then found at the top of the stairs, not 
far from the body of the remaining child, a 7-year-old girl. 
The third fi refi ghter was found in the master bedroom to 
the right of the top of the stairs. All had perished.
On the basis of the fi re investigation and analysis, the 
NFPA has determined that the following signifi cant fac-
tors may have contributed to the deaths of the three 
fi refi ghters:
■ Lack of a proper building/incident size-up (risk vs. 
benefi t analysis)
■ Lack of an established IMS
■ Lack of an accountability system
■ Insuffi cient resources (such as personnel and equip-
ment) to mount interior fi re suppression and rescue 
activities
■ Absence of an established rapid intervention team 
(RIT) and a lack of a standard operating procedure re-
quiring an RIT
On the basis of the fi re investigation and analysis, 
the NFPA has determined that the following signifi cant 
factor may have contributed to the deaths of the three 
children:
■ Lack of functioning smoke detectors within the apart-
ment to provide early warning of a fi re
At approximately 8:24 AM on Wednesday, December 22, 
1999, a fi re was reported in a multifamily dwelling in Ke-
okuk, Iowa.8 Several neighbors phoned the Keokuk 911 
center to report smoke coming from a residence, and 
that a woman was outside screaming that there were 
children trapped inside. At the time the fi re was reported, 
the on-duty force from the Keokuk Fire Department (an 
assistant chief, a lieutenant, and three fi refi ghters) were 
completing operations at a motor vehicle accident at a 
major intersection, two miles northwest of the fi re scene. 
The dispatcher notifi ed the units of the fi re and the report 
of people trapped. Both units at the accident (Rescue 3 
and Aerial 2) responded to the fi re.
During the response, additional calls were made to 
the 911 center reporting heavy smoke coming from the 
house. Upon arrival at 8:28 AM, the units found heavy 
smoke showing from a two-story multifamily dwelling. A 
water supply was established from a hydrant one block 
southwest of the scene.
The assistant chief requested a recall of six off-duty 
fi refi ghters back as he arrived at the house in Aerial 2. 
As the two truck operators set up the apparatus, the as-
sistant chief reportedly spoke to the female resident of 
the burning apartment. She reported that three of her 
children were still inside the apartment. The assistant 
chief completed donning his protective clothing, includ-
ing SCBA, and entered the right side apartment door.
The chief arrived not long after the assistant chief 
entered the building. The chief ordered the two appa-
ratus operators into the building to assist the assistant 
chief with the search for the children. In the meantime, 
a fi refi ghter that arrived with the fi re chief stretched an 
1½-inch hoseline to the front door of the fi re apartment 
and returned to the apparatus to don her SCBA. When 
LESSONS OF STAFFING AND 
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT 
REINFORCED AT IOWA FIRE
For some readers, this discussion about planning and 
applications of management science at the fi reground 
may look like a lot of modern textbook stuff with no prac-
tical application. However, these ideas have been around 
for a long time and they do have lots of practical appli-
cation. Consider that Chief Layman’s books were both 
published in the 1950s and Chief Emanual Fried’s classic 
Fireground Tactics was published in 1972.
Charles Walsh and Leonard Marks, both deputy chiefs 
of large fi re departments, wrote a book in the 1970s 
 entitled Firefi ghting Strategy and Leadership. Chapter 2 
of their book is entitled “Action Plan.” They compare de-
veloping an action plan at the scene of a fi re or other 
emergencies to the same problem-solving process we 
discussed earlier.
What’s the point? These ideas have been around for 
a long time. Many aspects of fi refi ghting have changed 
remarkably in that period of time, and some aspects are 
still as they were described years ago. As a good offi cer, 
it is important that you not only be up-to-date but that 
you also remember the basic and timeless concepts of 
effective fi refi ghting and fi reground management.
REALITY CHECK

360  CHAPTER 13
Strategy
Strategy is the overall plan that is used to gain con-
trol of an incident.
Chief Lloyd Layman, author of Fire Fighting 
 Tactics, gave us many ideas about fi refi ghting that are 
still with us. Chief Layman listed seven basic strate-
gies of fi refi ghting as follows9:
 
rescue
 
exposures
[size-up] 
confi nement 
ventilation
 
extinguishment 
salvage
 
overhaul
Notice that even in his time (the late 1940s), Chief 
Layman felt that the fi rst step was to conduct a proper 
size-up. In the second column, you see Chief Lay-
man’s list of basic strategies related to fi refi ghting in a 
logical sequence. Rescue comes fi rst, then protect the 
exposures, if needed. Next, focus on confi ning and 
extinguishing the fi re. Ventilation and salvage are 
also important strategies but do not lend themselves 
to a fi xed location in this sequence, and so Chief Lay-
man wisely listed them separately. They should be 
used whenever needed.
Defi ning the strategy has many advantages. One 
of the advantages is that when the strategy is well 
defi ned, all personnel understand the tasks at hand 
and can focus their efforts on making it happen. 
Without a strategic vision, everyone will contribute, 
but in a less organized manner. This leads to freelanc-
ing and confusion.
the fi refi ghters’ activities are preceded by the incident 
commander taking a moment to identify the problems 
and considering the various alternatives, we are more 
likely to have a satisfactory outcome. The action plan 
puts the planning and thinking phases into motion.
When assigning resources to carry out the action 
plan, the incident commander should have a realis-
tic assessment of what can be accomplished with the 
resources on hand. This applies to the resources, col-
lectively and individually. If the incident commander 
is blessed with three well-staffed engine companies 
and two truck companies, a lot can be accomplished. 
But even in this example, there are limitations. The 
crew from one of these companies can only be 
expected to deal with one problem at a time and be in 
one place at a time. If there are not enough resources, 
now is the time to ask for more.
NOTE
When the strategy is well defined, all personnel under-
stand the tasks at hand and can focus their efforts on 
making it happen.
NOTE
The action plan puts the planning and thinking phases 
into motion.
If strategy is the broad picture, then tactics will 
help you narrow your focus a bit and look at how to 
reach your strategic goals. As the strategic goals were 
related to time, so are the tactics. They must also be 
focused on a specifi c location and measurable so that 
you can see if the desired results are happening.
Strategy and tactics lead us to an action plan. After 
thinking about the event (size-up), and planning (strat-
egy and tactics), you fi nally get to make it happen. 
While it may initially seem like a waste of time, the 
fi rst two steps will save time in the long run by reduc-
ing redundancy and amount of communications to get 
the job done and improving the overall understanding 
of incident strategies. We have simply said that where 
Putting Your Action Plan 
to Work
To get things started, the incident commander com-
municates orders. It is critical that the national com-
munications order model be followed. Essentially, 
that means that the receiver provide a brief repeat of 
the original order given, allowing the sender to evalu-
ate if the order was received, understood, and resulted 
in the correct action being taken. Understand that a 
brief repeat is more than simply saying “10-4.” You 
are to restate what you heard.
Assigning tactics to individual companies is an 
effective way to communicate what you want done. 
The incident commander can direct a company to con-
fi ne the fi re or conduct a primary search. By assigning 
tactics, the incident commander allows the compa-
nies to determine the tasks that best accomplish the 
required action. The directions should be brief, clear, 
direct, and concise. Assigning tactics usually reduces 
radio traffi c. When giving a verbal order, you should 
describe what job the receiver needs to perform, not 
how he or she should perform the job. Some com-
manders tell crews, “Engine 1, the fi re appears to be 
in the back of the structure. I want you and your crew 
to put on your gear and airpacks and bring a saw with 
you to the rear of the structure and vent the roof on 
the back side near the top.” While this communicates 
what the commander wants done, it is not really stat-
ing the objective. Does the commander want to vent 

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 361
the fi re, vent the smoke out of the attic, or create an 
access hole to get to the fi re? Additionally, it takes up a 
lot of air time. If the commander had stated “Engine 1, 
perform vertical ventilation over the fi re,” it would 
not only have accomplished the same thing in a much 
shorter period of time, but the offi cer performing the 
work would then be the one determining what tools are 
needed and where to make the cut. This should pro-
vide for a more effi cient and safe operation, because 
the company offi cer should know best what PPE, what 
type of cutting tool, and what length of ladder are 
needed. The company offi cer, after determining the 
location of the fi re and obtaining a visual of the roof, 
should determine if it is fi rst safe to get on the roof 
and second where in the roof the vent hole should be 
cut. A lot of commanders resort to this type of com-
munication for several reasons. First, they were or are 
very comfortable performing these actions. This is 
what they did before they were elevated to the com-
mand function and under pressure they resort to what 
they are comfortable with. Another reason is that they 
may lack confi dence in their company offi cers. This 
again points out why training is so important. Train-
ing is the place to build confi dence and work out these 
issues—not the fi reground!
Once the task is under way, the incident com-
mander should get some feedback about progress. 
If the news is good, the incident commander wants 
to hear about that. And if the news is bad, the inci-
dent commander needs to hear about that too. The 
incident commander depends upon timely reports to 
make decisions. A progress report should be given 
anytime you experience a sudden change in condi-
tions (good or bad), change levels (up or down), have 
completed your assigned task, or need additional 
resources to complete your assignment. Just like the 
command assignments the progress reports should be 
brief, clear, and concise. You should know what you 
want to say before you depress the mic button. Also 
be aware that you cannot typically breathe and talk at 
the same time. That is why it is so important to prac-
tice communicating with an airpack on—so you learn 
where to hold the radio mic and at what rate you are 
best understood.
A commander may assign tasks with very spe-
cifi c directions. This option will probably increase 
the amount of radio traffi c and will require a little 
more of the incident commander’s time and attention, 
but there are times when this approach is appropri-
ate, for example, when the task is critical to the over-
all operation, or the incident commander wants the 
task accomplished in a way that departs from normal 
procedures, or when critical safety considerations are 
paramount. It also is appropriate to use this approach 
when the company involved is inexperienced. The 
best example of this might be when a mutual aid 
company is assigned the task.
Good Training and SOPs Pay Off
Many departments use standard operating procedures 
(SOPs) that outline what certain companies are to do 
upon arrival. These departmental policies provide a 
predetermined course of action for a given situation. 
With SOPs the companies can get to work and per-
form their assignments with little direction from the 
incident commander (see Figure 13-13). SOPs can 
work well, but you should be aware that some compa-
nies will race ahead with their assigned task, without 
the incident commander having had an opportunity 
to complete the size-up or give some coordinating 
instructions. Incident commanders can avoid this 
problem by making assignments to companies as 
soon as possible or by telling companies to wait for 
instructions. It may also be appropriate for the inci-
dent commander to tell arriving units that because of 
some unusual circumstances, the SOPs are not appro-
priate and will not be used.
FIGURE 13-13 Good training and SOPs allow compa-
nies to get to work with a minimum of direction from the 
incident commander.
NOTE
With SOPs, the companies can get to work and per-
form their assignments with little direction from the 
incident commander.
Basic communications skills are important at times 
like these. There is a lot going on, and things need to 
be resolved as rapidly as possibly. Everyone is look-
ing to the incident commander to give a few orders to 
put the operation into motion. Yelling, raising your 
voice, and speaking rapidly will certainly reveal to 

362  CHAPTER 13
everyone listening that you are excited. At this time, 
you want a calm, reassuring voice. As much as any-
thing else, the incident commander’s calm voice tells 
us that someone understands what is happening and 
has the solution well in hand. That is exactly what the 
incident commander is supposed to be doing. No one 
wants to hear an excited incident commander on the 
radio or see an excited incident commander running 
around the fi reground.
One of the most hectic moments on a fi reground 
occurs when some unexpected or catastrophic event 
occurs and the decision is made to shift from offen-
sive to defensive operations. This is usually done when 
either the incident commander or the safety offi cer has 
determined that the risk outweighs the benefi ts and as 
a result it is unsafe to be inside. Consequently, there is 
an urgency to get everyone out as soon as possible. If 
the commander is yelling into the radio and the order 
is not understood, it may actually delay the crews 
from hearing and understanding the order. This is no 
time to vary from the SOPs. A preestablished, under-
stood, and practiced evacuation procedure should be 
 implemented. Any variance from this could result in 
confusion and delay in getting the crews out.
Just as the incident commander gets the big picture 
and breaks it down into strategy, tactics, and tasks for 
companies, the company commander should do the 
same thing for the individuals who comprise the com-
pany. All persons need to have an idea of the big pic-
ture and the role they will play in the overall outcome 
of the event. All must also clearly understand their 
individual assignment. Only with understanding and 
coordination can you operate safely and effi ciently.
Fire Attack
The effectiveness of the initial attack often deter-
mines the outcome of the event. The effectiveness 
of the initial attack’s leader, company offi cer, chief, 
or whomever, is dependent on both that individual’s 
knowledge of fi re behavior and decisions with regard 
to the size, number, and placement of hoselines dur-
ing that initial attack.
The most common fi res encountered are con-
sidered free burning; that is, they are in the second 
of the three stages of fi re. When possible, such fi re 
should be fought by a direct, offensive attack. Direct 
attack is the surest and quickest way of controlling 
the fi re and reducing the loss. You should make every 
possible effort to attack the fi re from the unburned 
side and to push the fi re back to those areas where 
it has already caused damage. This is a fundamental 
concept of good fi refi ghting. It reduces property loss 
and usually enhances the safety of the operation (see 
Figure 13-14).
You may not be able to attack the fi re from the 
unburned side in certain situations. These might 
include a commercial occupancy where access is lim-
ited to one end of the building, in multiunit residences 
(apartments, town houses, and so on) where you do 
not have access to the unburned side, and where such 
action might endanger occupants or fi refi ghters.
Fire Control, Confinement, 
and Extinguishment
These three words are used quite a bit in connection 
with fi refi ghting operations. Let us take a moment to 
agree on what they mean. Fire control includes both 
confi nement and extinguishment of the fi re.
Confi nement means to cut off the fi re from further 
advance, to keep it from spreading and doing any fur-
ther damage.
Fire extinguishment means to extinguish all vis-
ible fi re. Not all of the fi re may be extinguished at this 
point; that will occur during overhaul. To be effec-
tive in fi re control, one must understand fi re behavior, 
building construction, and fi re fl ow requirements.
Most fi refi ghting is done with fi re hoses and fi re-
fi ghters. In spite of all of the advances we have made 
in the last few years, it still takes time to get a water 
supply established and a hoseline directing water 
onto the fi re in operation. As a fi re offi cer, you have 
to realize this and allow for this delay and factor it 
into your thinking. If the fi re has already passed you 
before your fi refi ghters can open the nozzle, then you 
were not realistic in your projections to get this accom-
plished. Do not be overly optimistic in your calcula-
tions to get everything in place. It is easier to advance 
forward to the fi re than back out and play catch-up.
During your planning, you should consider the num-
ber of fi refi ghters available and how many  hoselines 
FIGURE 13-14 Most firefighting is done with hoses and 
water. This activity is best accomplished by a direct at-
tack from the unburned side.

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 363
they can put into operation. From this information, 
you will have a good idea of how much water you can 
put on the fi re. And you have to decide if this fl ow 
rate, or fi re fl ow, is adequate to confi ne and extinguish 
the fi re. Finally, you need to coordinate the advance 
of the hoselines with other activities such as forcible 
entry, ventilation, search and rescue, and salvage.
Let us get back to Ms. Carmen Garcia’s house for a 
moment. You have learned that she was in the house 
alone and was cooking. She went into the next room 
to answer the telephone and while she was talking, 
“something happened in the kitchen.” The next thing 
she knew the smoke detector was going off, and the 
kitchen was fi lling with smoke. You may have seen 
this before, but Ms. Garcia has not. She was smart 
enough to call 911 right away. Then, she tried to get 
to the stove to turn things off. When she did that, she 
instinctively grabbed a pan handle that was very hot.
What do you do? You get one of your medics to 
take care of Ms. Garcia. Meanwhile, you calmly eval-
uate the fi re situation, select to go for an offensive 
 operation with an interior attack, mask up, take an 
attack line in through the front door, fi nd your way 
back to the kitchen (not really hard to do because the 
fi re is free burning and the interior is not fi lled with 
smoke which allows you to put the fi re out with a few 
gallons of water (see Figure 13-15).
One of your colleagues was smart enough to go 
around to the back door and carefully open it, allow-
ing some of the smoke and steam to vent outside 
through the doorway. You look around and fi nd smoke 
throughout the house and considerable damage in the 
kitchen. Although you will check further, it looks 
like the fi re did not get into the structure itself. You 
have been on-scene less than 5 minutes.
About this time, you hear the battalion chief say 
over the radio: “Engine 1 from Battalion 1 I’m on-
scene. What have you got?” (see Figure 13-16).
Interagency 
cooperation 
was 
discussed 
in 
Chapter 12; however, it is worth mentioning again 
that an effective company offi cer should know what 
resources are available. During an alarm is not the 
time to fi gure out what resources are available, where 
they are located, and how to request them. This means 
that prior to the alarm, you visit with your chief offi -
cer, visit surrounding stations, and review established 
mutual aid agreements, memorandums of under-
standing, and other related documents to garner this 
information. If you do not know a resource exists, 
you cannot request it. And just because you know a 
resource does exist does not mean that you can get it 
when you call for it. You need to know and follow the 
proper request channels. This may sound like a lot 
FIGURE 13-15 Firefighter in Ms. Garcia’s kitchen.
FIGURE 13-16 “What have we got?” 
(Photo courtesy of Andy Thomas)

364  CHAPTER 13
of bureaucracy, but in reality it saves time if proper 
channels are followed.
This very situation occurred one night in a rural 
community in the Midwest, when at the height of a 
severe storm, a car was washed of a rural road, trapping 
several occupants in the middle of a raging stream. 
The local fi re department did not have the training 
or equipment to deal with the situation; however, 
they attempted to rescue the three trapped occupants. 
After one of the fi refi ghters drowned, assistance was 
requested from a swift water rescue team in a larger, 
neighboring department. Because the rural chief did 
not use the pre-established mutual aid request pro-
cess, it took much longer than it should have for the 
metro department to get administrative approval to 
send resources outside their normal response dis-
trict. Fortunately, the occupants were saved, but not 
knowing how to access available resources or follow 
established mutual aid request procedures put the 
occupants in danger for a much longer period of time 
than needed.
As previously stated, other emergency and non-
emergency agencies can also be used as resources. For 
example, law enforcement agencies may be able to assist 
in establishing traffi c control, securing a fi re scene and/
or a crime scene. A public works agency such as the 
We have already discussed what we are doing for 
Ms. Garcia and her fi re. Let us look at what else we might 
do for her. Suppose that as you make your way to the 
kitchen, you notice several family pictures sitting on a ta-
ble in the hall. These will certainly be knocked over and 
likely broken as you and your fi refi ghters advance a hose-
line or start overhaul. And you also notice a very nice an-
tique chair that will certainly get in someone’s way.
So what, you ask; we have work to do in the kitchen. 
Yes, but property conservation includes little things that 
can mean a lot. Pick up those pictures and put them out 
of the way. You might even slide them into a drawer if you 
can fi nd one close at hand. And pick up the antique chair 
that is in the hallway and set it in the dining room where 
it will be out of your way and out of harm’s way. After the 
fi re is out, control the ventilation. Open windows or close 
doors to reduce the effects of the smoke that will smell 
up everything in the house for a month. Cover her hall 
carpet with a runner when you get a chance. Lots of little 
things that cost little but will mean a lot after you have 
gone (see Figure 13-17 and Figure 13-18). Remember, 
we want her to be satisfi ed. But would it be nice if she 
was delighted with your work?
TAKING CUSTOMER SERVICE 
TO MS. GARCIA’S HOUSE
FIGURE 13-18 Firefighters can also help citizens recover 
from the consequences of fire by moving their personal 
effects to a safe area. (Photo courtesy of Phoenix, Arizona, Fire 
Department)
FIGURE 13-17 Fire departments can do much to help 
their citizens recover from the consequences of a fire. 
The first step is providing materials to assist during sal-
vage operations. Boxes, bags, and plastic sheeting can 
help save a lot of property. (Photo courtesy of Phoenix, Arizona, 
Fire Department)
NOTE
On a typical fire or other emergency, command is 
transferred from the first-arriving officer to a chief offi-
cer upon the latter’s arrival. The officer being relieved 
should be prepared to provide the chief officer with an 
assessment of the general situation and tactical pri-
orities, the assignments of companies, the identifica-
tion of companies available, and the need for additional 
resources.

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 365
■ Notify Red Cross, Salvation Army, or other relief 
agencies.
■ Notify other necessary agencies and/or individuals.
■ Provide coordination of salvage efforts with the loss 
control offi cer.
■ Where safe to do so, and after approval from Inves-
tigations Sector, coordinate a “walk-through” of the 
structure with the responsible party.
■ Determine the location of valuables in the structure 
and notify command/loss control offi cer.
■ Work with loss control and proper utility services to 
restore power, gas and water, as quickly as possible 
to reduce additional losses through a loss of business 
to affected occupants.
■ Provide use of service vans as necessary.
■ Coordinate site security.
 Fire watch
 Private security company
 Necessary insurance services
 Any services identifi ed as necessary and possible
■ Handout and explain the “After the Fire” brochure.
■ Assist the occupant in notifying insurance agents, 
security services, restoration company, etc.
■ Provide blankets, and a shelter, where practical to 
do so (i.e. an apparatus cab, neighbor’s house, etc.) 
to get occupants out of the weather and at a single 
location.
■ Provide ongoing service and support until the cus-
tomer indicates our services are no longer needed.
The Occupant Services Sector shall report to Com-
mand unless a loss control branch/section is assigned, 
at which time he/she shall report to the loss control 
offi cer.
Mental Health Needs
Occasionally, the public is witness to a critical life 
 threatening event that can have substantial psychologi-
cal impacts on them. These persons may be survivors 
of a critical event or a witness to a mass casualty, or 
a  parent of a severely injured child, or a witness to the 
death of a family member, etc.
Additionally, witnesses may have misunderstand-
ings of fi re department operations that cause a delay in 
 removal of the patient (i.e. trench collapse, an electro-
cution rescue that is delayed due to energized contact, 
etc.). Addressing these issues early, on-site, or as soon 
as possible following the event, can minimize these mis-
understandings, and reduce psychological effects, and 
produce improved relations with the public.
The Occupant Services Sector should consider ad-
ditional help for these needs. Assistance and advice on 
availability of mental health services can be obtained 
through the department’s Critical Incident Debriefi ng 
Team, the Employee Assistance Program Contractor, the 
Occupant Services Sector
The purpose of this procedure is to establish the role and 
responsibilities of the Occupant Services Sector.
The Occupant Services Sector shall be established 
by the Incident Commander at all working structure fi res, 
and as early in the incident as is practical. The Occu-
pant Services Sector should also be established at any 
incident where the need is identifi ed: Fire, EMS, Special 
Operations, etc.
The Occupant Sector is a critical extension of our ser-
vice delivery, and serves as the liaison between the Fire 
Department and those citizens (responsible parties) di-
rectly, or perhaps indirectly, involved in or affected by the 
incident.
If necessary, Command will request additional re-
sources in order to establish the Occupant Services Sec-
tor. An additional engine, ladder, or battalion chief is ac-
ceptable. If necessary, at prolonged incidents, in order 
to return fi re companies and personnel to service, Com-
mand may assign staff personnel to this function. The 
Occupation Services Sector responsibilities may extend 
beyond the termination of the incident.
Responsibilities
The Occupant Services Sector should consider of-
fering the following services to the occupant/
responsible  parties. It should be noted that other oc-
cupant service needs may be identified and should 
be addressed as part of the Department’s customer 
service goals.
■ Carry out responsibilities under supervision of loss 
control offi cer.
■ Explain what happened, what we are doing and why, 
how long we expect to take until the incident is under 
control.
■ Obtain from occupant/responsible party, any signifi -
cant information regarding the structure and/or its 
contents that might assist Command tactically with 
the operation. Inform Command of this information.
■ Provide cellular telephone access.
■ Communicate the location to which evacuees have 
been sent. (Notify the Investigations Sector of this 
 location also when passing on this information.)
■ Identify any mental health needs of occupants/ 
responsible parties, as well as any spectators or evac-
uees (i.e., effects of shootings, mass casualty, highly 
visible critical rescue, etc).
PHOENIX FIRE DEPARTMENT 
STANDARD OPERATING 
PROCEDURES
Phoenix Fire Department

366  CHAPTER 13
state’s Department of Transportation may be able to 
assist in removing debris or setting up road blocks.
Other resources include informational resources. 
An effective offi cer knows how to access information 
to assist in mitigating an alarm. For example, you 
should know how to use a DOT guidebook. Do you 
know what the different color sections of the book tell 
you? Informational resources may also be located on 
the computer in the engine or the chief’s car. Infor-
mation may be available in the lock box or in a pre-
plan. Most dispatch systems have access to additional 
information through look-up systems or 800 call cen-
ters such as Chemtrec and the Poison Control Center. 
But if you are not familiar with these or do not know 
they exist, then they are of little value to you during 
an emergency.
Within the last several pages we have attempted 
to provide you with direction on how to manage an 
emergency scene until you are relieved by a chief 
offi cer. The fi rst 5 minutes of operation at an emer-
gency scene are the most critical. They set the stage 
and tempo for how the event will play out. As a good 
company offi cer, you should be able to get on-scene, 
conduct a size-up, give a report, and get the show 
started without having to wait for a more senior offi -
cer to arrive.
In situations like those at Ms. Garcia’s house, a 
good company offi cer should be able to coordinate the 
entire operation. The chief should show up and relieve 
the offi cer if needed, but if all is going well, should 
let the company offi cer continue to run the show. That 
is how company offi cers get trained to become good 
fi reground commanders. On the other hand, if the sit-
uation is escalating, getting out of hand, or is going to 
be a long-term event, it may be time for the chief to 
take over. In any case, an IMS should be used.
Jim Crawford, a well-known fi re offi cial, writer, 
and past president of the International Fire Marshals 
Association, suggests that limiting damage once the 
event starts is should also be part of our risk-manage-
ment process. He suggests that emergency response 
is the fourth E in the fi re prevention triad; engineer-
ing, enforcement, and education discussed in Chap-
ter 9. Emergency response is the traditional role of 
every fi re department. But in the overall scheme of 
risk management, fi refi ghting must be part of a con-
tinuum of effort that seeks to reduce life and property 
loss by using education, engineering, enforcement, 
and emergency response.
THE INCIDENT MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEM
Background
Prior to the 1970s, the concept of incident command 
was pretty much a local function. Since then, several 
signifi cant events have helped the nation’s fi re service 
move to a standardized program. During the 1970s, 
the FIRESCOPE incident command system and 
the Phoenix Fireground Command system became 
popular.
FIRESCOPE stands for FIre REsources of South-
ern California Organized for Potential Emergencies. 
Serious wildland fi res in southern California in those 
years challenged the fi refi ghting resources of south-
ern California. As a result, federal, state, and local 
agencies combined their talents to form a more orga-
nized response to the disastrous fi res that seemed to 
be occurring every year. FIRESCOPE focused on 
command procedures, resource management, termi-
nology, and communications.
Chief Alan Brunacini of the Phoenix Fire Depart-
ment realized that the organization and management 
concerns that faced fi refi ghters in wildland fi refi ght-
ing operations were also faced by fi refi ghters dealing 
with structural fi refi ghting back home. He took some 
of the ideas from FIRESCOPE and applied them to 
his department. Others followed suit. This led to the 
incident command system (ICS). While originally 
intended to serve as a command system for large 
American Red Cross, and in some cases, through 
the victim’s personal medical insurance. Support from 
the fi re department chaplain or local clergy may also be 
available.
American Red Cross Services
For residential fi res where the occupant has suffered a 
loss of living quarters and clothing, the American Red 
Cross may be used to provide support. The American 
Red Cross can provide some clothing, food, toiletries, 
and arrange for temporary shelter/housing for the occu-
pants. When contacting the Red Cross, provide the fol-
lowing information:
■ Address of the incident
■ Address where victims can be contacted
■ Phone number of contact location
■ Number of displaced persons with information on age, 
sex, etc.
■ Fire department incident number

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 367
structural fi res, ICS became a tool for dealing with 
emergencies of all kinds.
Incident management system (IMS) implies 
something more than just incident command; it 
implies that every aspect of controlling an incident 
is accomplished in an orderly and logical way. IMS 
looks upon emergency management as an extension 
of the type of management you should be doing on 
a daily basis. IMS is a management tool—it allows a 
department and its personnel to plan, organize, com-
mand, coordinate, and control emergency incidents 
(see Figure 13-19). The focus of IMS is on managing 
people and resources. You cannot do much to manage 
fi re and fl oods: Those events have already happened 
before you arrive. However, IMS allows you to man-
age response and mitigation efforts at these events.
As the incident grows in size or complexity IMS 
allows you to smoothly integrate with other respond-
ers and grow the management system with it. At the 
largest incidents you will be operating under the 
National Response Framework (NRF), formerly 
known as the National Response Plan. The National 
Response Framework defi nes the principles, roles, and 
structures that organize how we respond as a nation. 
The National Response Framework describes how 
communities, tribes, states, the federal government, 
private sectors, and nongovernment partners work 
together to coordinate national response; describes 
specifi c authorities and best practices for managing 
incidents; and builds upon the National Incident Man-
agement System (NIMS), which provides a consistent 
template for managing incidents.
The command function must be clearly established 
with the fi rst-arriving unit. This implies that the fi rst-
arriving unit is qualifi ed and has the authority (and 
the ability) to take command and that it is clear to 
all responding personnel who is in charge. IMS also 
incorporates the rules of organization and  management 
discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. When applied to the 
management of resources at an emergency incident, 
they improve safety, accountability, effi ciency, and the 
overall operation while reducing confusion.
While IMS defi nes how the management of an 
incident starts and progresses during the incident, the 
success of the operation is usually directly related to 
how well the initial command function is established 
and how effective the communications are handled 
during the event. Effective communications are vital 
to incident management.
“NFPA 1500, Standard on Fire Department Occu-
pational Safety and Health Program, states that fi re 
departments shall have written operating procedures 
for managing emergency incidents. The standard also 
requires training in incident management for all per-
sonnel involved in emergency operations. NFPA 1561, 
Standard on Emergency Services Incident Manage-
ment System, provides details regarding such a system. 
Incident Management Systems can provide better man-
agement of fi refi ghters during emergency operations. 
Better management will enhance fi refi ghter safety.”
NOTE
The focus of IMS is on effective management of people 
and resources.
As we know it today, the IMS is an all-risk all-
situation emergency management concept. The focus 
of IMS is on effective management of people and 
resources. To implement IMS you must fi rst accept 
IMS as a workable concept in your organization. 
Next, you must plan, prepare, and train for the events 
that you are likely to face. You should remember the 
basic rules of effective management and use them 
when you are managing emergency activities.
IMS can be used for nonemergency activities too. 
Many use IMS to manage large-scale training activi-
ties. There are other applications as well. Large-scale 
operations of any kind, from preparing for the Super 
Bowl size event in your city to having a fi re department 
funeral, can benefi t from the organizational concepts 
of IMS. IMS works across political and organizational 
lines. It can be used to manage any large-scale event.
For managing resources during emergency situa-
tions, IMS is designed to work from the time of alarm 
until the incident is concluded. The title “incident 
commander” may apply to an engine company offi cer 
or a chief of the department. And depending upon the 
situation, the commander may be an  individual asso-
ciated with another emergency organization. A county 
 sheriff was in command of the Columbine school 
shooting. The structure of the IMS can be established 
and expanded depending upon the needs of the event.
FIGURE 13-19 The incident commander is responsible 
for the overall management of the event.

368  CHAPTER 13
National Incident 
Management System
On March 1, 2004, the Department of Homeland 
Security published the National Incident Management 
System (NIMS). NIMS provides a consistent nation-
wide template to enable federal, State, tribal, and 
local governments, the private sector, and nongov-
ernment organizations to work together to prepare 
for, prevent, respond to, recover from, and mitigate 
the effects of incidents, regardless of cause, size, 
location, or complexity, in order to reduce the loss 
of life, property, and harm to the environment. This 
consistency provides the foundation for utilization of 
NIMS for all incidents, ranging from daily occur-
rences to incidents requiring coordinated Federal 
response. NIMS was updated in 2007 based on input 
from stakeholders at every level within the nation’s 
response community and lessons learned during 
recent incidents.
NIMS incorporates incident management’s best 
practices and represents a core set of doctrine, concepts, 
principles, terminology, and organizational processes 
that enables effective, effi cient, and collaborative inci-
dent management across all emergency management 
and incident response organizations and disciplines. 
The president of the United States of America has 
directed federal agencies to adopt NIMS and encour-
aged adoption of NIMS by all  stakeholders—federal, 
state, territorial, tribal,  substate regional, and local 
governments, private  sector organizations, critical 
infrastructure owners and operators, and nongov-
ernment organizations involved in emergency man-
agement and/or incident response. As initially laid 
out in Homeland Security Presidential Directive 
(HSPD), Management of Domestic Incidents, which 
established NIMS, adoption and implementation of 
NIMS by state, tribal, and local organizations are 
one of the conditions for receiving federal prepared-
ness assistance (through grants, contracts, and other 
activities).10
NIMS Courses
Currently, there are six required courses for com-
mand and general staff, select department heads with 
multi-agency coordination system responsibilities, 
area commanders, emergency managers to be NIMS 
compliant.
■ ICS-100: Introduction to ICS
■ ICS-200: Basic ICS
■ ICS-300: Intermediate ICS
■ ICS-400: Advanced ICS
■ FEMA IS-700: NIMS, An Introduction
■ FEMA IS-800: National Response Plan (NRP), An 
Introduction 
ICS-300 and ICS-400 courses are courses con-
ducted in a classroom. The Emergency Management 
Institute and the National Fire Academy both sponsor 
NIMS compliant ICS-300 and 400 training.
Additional NIMS-related recommended online 
courses are:
■ IS-701 NIMS Multi-Agency Coordination System
■ IS-702 NIMS Public Information System
■ IS-703 NIMS Resource Management
See Figure 13-20 to determine what level of train-
ing an individual needs according to their level of 
responsibility during a multi-jurisdiction, multi-
agency, multi-discipline incident. This is also avail-
able online at: www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nims/
TrainingGdlMatrix.pdf
For a complete listing of all online and live NIMS 
courses visit: http://training.fema.gov/IS/NIMS.asp
Key Features of NIMS
■ Incident Command System (ICS). NIMS  establishes 
ICS as a standard incident management organi-
zation with fi ve functional areas— command, 
operations, planning, logistics, and fi nance/admin-
istration—for management of all major  incidents. 
To ensure further coordination, and during 
 incidents involving multiple jurisdictions or agen-
cies, the principle of unifi ed command has been 
universally incorporated into NIMS. This uni-
fi ed command not only coordinates the efforts 
of many jurisdictions but also provides for and 
assures joint decisions on objectives, strategies, 
plans, priorities, and public communications.
■ Communications and Information Management. 
Standardized communications during an incident 
are essential, and NIMS prescribes interoperable 
communications systems for both incident and 
information management. Responders and manag-
ers across all agencies and jurisdictions must have 
a common operating picture for a more effi cient 
and effective incident response. Interoperable can 
mean a number of different things. It does neces-
sarily mean everyone has be able to talk on the 
same radio channel, but you do need to have pre-
determined procedures for how you are going to 
communicate and there should be redundancy built 
into the procedures so if one system fails you can 
immediately begin to use another.
■ Preparedness. Preparedness is essential for 
effective response. According to the National 

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 369
FY07NIMS Training Guidelines 
Audience 
 
 
 
 
Required Training
Federal/State/Local/Tribal/Private Sector & 
Non-governmental personnel to include: 
Entry level first responders & disaster workers 
• 
Emergency Medical Service personnel 
• 
Firefighters 
• 
Hospital staff 
• 
Law Enforcement personnel 
• 
Public Health personnel 
• 
Public Works/Utility personnel 
• 
Skilled Support Personnel 
• 
Other emergency management 
response, support, volunteer personnel 
at all levels 
• 
ICS-100: Introduction to ICS or 
equivalent
• 
FEMA IS-700: NIMS, An Introduction
Federal/State/Local/Tribal/Private Sector & 
Non-governmental personnel to include: 
First line supervisors, single resource leaders, 
field supervisors, and other emergency 
management/response personnel that require 
a higher level of ICS/NIMS Training. 
• 
ICS-100: Introduction to ICS or 
equivalent
• 
ICS-200: Basic ICS or equivalent
• 
FEMA IS-700: NIMS, An Introduction
Federal/State/Local/Tribal/Private Sector & 
Nongovernmental personnel to include: 
Required: Mid-level management including 
strike team leaders, task force leaders, unit 
leaders, division/group supervisors, branch 
directors, and; 
Recommended: Emergency operations center 
staff.
• 
ICS-100: Introduction to ICS or 
equivalent
• 
ICS-200: Basic ICS or equivalent
• 
ICS-300: Intermediate ICS or 
equivalent
• 
FEMA IS-700: NIMS, An Introduction
• 
FEMA IS-800.A: National Response 
Plan (NRP), An Introduction*
Federal/State/Local/Tribal/Private Sector & 
Nongovernmental personnel to include: 
Required: Command and general staff, select 
department heads with multi-agency 
coordination system responsibilities, area 
commanders, emergency managers, and; 
Recommended: Emergency operations center 
managers.
• 
ICS-100: Introduction to ICS or 
equivalent
• 
ICS-200: Basic ICS or equivalent
• 
ICS-300: Intermediate ICS or 
equivalent
• 
ICS-400: Advanced ICS or equivalent
• 
FEMA IS-700: NIMS, An Introduction
•    FEMA IS-800.A: National Response   
      Plan (NRP), An Introduction*
* NOTE: Not all persons required to take ICS-300 and ICS-400 will need to take IS-800.A. Emergency 
managers or personnel whose primary responsibility is emergency management must complete this training. 
FIGURE 13-20 The FY07 NIMS Training Matrix. (Source: FEMA, www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nims/TrainingGdlMatrix.pdf)

370  CHAPTER 13
Response Framework, there are six essential 
activities for responding to an incident. Those 
include: plan, organize, train, equip, exercise, and 
evaluate and improve. We will expand on these 
functions later. All of these serve to ensure that 
pre- incident actions are standardized and consis-
tent with  mutually agreed doctrine. NIMS fur-
ther places  emphasis on mitigation activities to 
enhance preparedness. Mitigation includes public 
education and outreach, structural modifi cations 
to lessen the loss of life or destruction of property, 
code enforcement in  support of zoning rules, land 
management, and building codes, and fl ood insur-
ance and property buy-out for frequently fl ooded 
areas.
■ Joint Information System (JIS). NIMS organi-
zational measures enhance the public commu-
nication effort. The Joint Information System 
provides the public with timely and accurate 
incident information and unifi ed public mes-
sages. This system employs Joint Information 
Centers (JIC) and brings incident communica-
tors together during an incident to develop, coor-
dinate, and deliver a unifi ed message. This will 
ensure that federal, state, and local levels of gov-
ernment are releasing the same information dur-
ing an incident.
■ NIMS Integration Center (NIC). To ensure that 
NIMS remains an accurate and effective manage-
ment tool, the NIMS NIC will be established by 
the Department of Homeland Security to assess 
proposed changes to NIMS, capture, and evalu-
ate lessons learned, and employ best practices. 
The NIC will provide strategic direction and 
oversight of the NIMS, supporting both routine 
maintenance and continuous refi nement of the 
system and its components over the long term. 
The NIC will develop and facilitate national 
standards for NIMS education and training, fi rst 
responder  communications and equipment, typ-
ing of resources, qualifi cation and credentialing 
of incident management and responder personnel, 
and standardization of equipment maintenance 
and resources. The NIC will continue to use the 
collaborative process of federal, state, tribal, 
local, multidiscipline and private authorities 
to assess prospective changes and assure con-
tinuity and accuracy. All issues related to train-
ing, compliance, certifi cation and other related 
articles and tools can be found on the National 
Integration Center (NIC) Incident Management 
Systems Division’s Web site: http://www.fema
.gov/emergency/nims/
Organizational and 
Management Theory in the 
Incident Management System
Back in Chapter 3, different organizations were intro-
duces along with a few concepts that enhance effec-
tiveness in organizations. One of those concepts was 
that organizations should have an organizational 
structure that embraces unity of command, span 
of control, division of labor, assignment of specifi c 
responsibilities, and clear lines of authority, responsi-
bility, and communication. Later chapters explained 
management and leadership concepts that bring orga-
nizations to life.
In Chapter 13, we look at the IMS that underlies 
incident command, and we see that it embraces all of 
the principles of organizational theory. It is a prede-
veloped system of management, with a structure that 
can be molded for just about any situation. We usually 
think of the IMS for controlling resources at large-
scale disasters, and NIMS was clearly developed with 
that intent. However, the same approach can be used 
for managing any event, from a large-scale drill to 
organizing a large function or exercise.
Several management concepts are so fundamen-
tal to success that they are defi ned in the NIMS 
example, span of control (the number of  individuals a 
supervisor is responsible for) and unity of  command 
(the concept that each person reports to one  person) 
are defi ned in the document itself. Clearly, the writers 
of this document understood organizational theory 
and the practical limitations of human beings work-
ing together in an organized effort.
The IMS is a perfect example of a practical appli-
cation of organizational and management theory. It 
reinforces the value of our earlier learning and shows 
that NIMS is based on sound ideas and principles.
Transfer of Command
The IMS should be applied to every incident from 
the arrival of the fi rst individual until termination. 
At small-scale incidents, the assumption of com-
mand can be informal, but the principle of one indi-
vidual in overall command of the incident always 
should apply. Routine application of the system is 
intended to increase familiarity with the concepts 
and procedures, even where the need to apply a for-
mal command structure is not obvious. The offi cer 
in charge of the fi rst-arriving company or the fi rst-
arriving individual of the emergency services organi-
zation, regardless of rank or function, should be the 
incident commander until relieved by more qualifi ed 

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 371
personnel. All personnel should be suffi ciently famil-
iar with basic responsibilities and communications 
protocols in order to assume the role of initial- arriving 
incident commander, if only until a more qualifi ed 
individual arrives.
The emergency services organization should estab-
lish a protocol of command authority based on rank 
structure, assignments, and qualifi cations to defi ne 
a hierarchy for transferring command. The qualifi -
cations required to perform as incident commander 
should increase with the size and complexity of the 
incident. Standard operating procedures should defi ne 
the circumstances under which an offi cer at a higher 
level should respond to an incident and whether the 
transfer of command to a more qualifi ed offi cer is 
mandatory or discretionary.
In certain cases, an individual with a higher level 
of command authority arriving at the scene can direct 
the current incident commander to continue in this 
role. Technically, just by virtue of rank, the higher-
level offi cer is responsible for the command of the 
incident but acts as an observer or advisor to allow the 
incident commander to benefi t from the experience. 
This should only be done if the situation is under con-
trol or not getting any worse, and at the discretion of 
the higher-level offi cer.
Post-Incident Analysis
The incident commander should analyze every inci-
dent to look for ways to improve personal, unit, and 
system performance. Certainly after any large inci-
dent, a post incident analysis should be conducted 
to examine the strengths and weaknesses of the 
response and lessons learned at the event. To simply 
say “The fi re went out and no one got hurt” is NOT an 
effective post incident analysis. Those types of com-
ments reinforce complacency and unsatisfactory per-
formance and should not be acceptable. We should be 
striving for perfection with the understanding that we 
will likely never achieve it, but nevertheless, it should 
remain our benchmark.
A formal post incident analysis should be con-
ducted in the following circumstances:
■ A civilian fatality
■ A fi refi ghter injury or fatality
■ A hazardous materials incident that results in 
chemical exposure to either civilians or emergency 
response personnel
■ Any multicasualty event, such as a bus, train, or 
multivehicle accident
■ Any fi refi ghting operation presenting unusual 
situations
■ Any event for which the information obtained dur-
ing the analysis would benefi t others
Each of these situations has the potential for pro-
viding valuable information to the organization for 
a variety of personnel, including off-duty personnel 
and personnel from other jurisdictions. Many depart-
ments use this process as a valuable training tool.
The incident commanders are often the best per-
sons to gather the information needed for the analy-
sis. In many cases, the decisions were theirs, and only 
they may know the reasoning for those decisions. 
Certainly, the post incident review should include as 
much information as can be learned about the struc-
ture, the strategic decisions made, the operational 
issues, and anything else that would be benefi cial to 
others.
As company offi cers, you should routinely do this 
for your own unit, even if formal critique is not war-
ranted. This is commonly called a tailboard critique 
and is a very simple verbal review of how you and 
your crew did, analyzing what went right and what 
you can improve on next time. Avoid only doing a 
critique when things go wrong. If this becomes the 
norm in your organization everyone will begin asso-
ciating a negative connotation to the occurrence of a 
critique. Lessons can also be learned from things that 
went right.
Most organizations have some sort of outline that 
provides a standardized approach to the formal post 
incident analysis that benefi ts both the writer and the 
reader. In its simplest form the post incident analysis 
should review the basic functions that were performed 
at the emergency (i.e., command, water supply, fi re 
attack, rescue, extrication, patient packaging, demo-
bilization, etc.).
The following is one example and a starting point 
that may be expanded, or condensed as necessary.
Post-Incident Analysis 
of a Structural Fire
 I. Introduction
 
a. Provide a general overview of the incident 
including an area diagram of the building, 
exposures, water supply, time of day, weather 
conditions, and so on.
 
b. Indicate any unique circumstances/problems, 
and so on.
 II. Building Structure/Site Layout
 
a. Review type of structure.
 
b. What construction or design features con-
tributed to the fi re spread or prevented fi re 
spread?

372  CHAPTER 13
 
c. Did the topography and/or type of fuel affect 
fi re control efforts?
 
d. Did fi re alarm and/or suppression devices 
work properly?
 
e. Did personnel or apparatus encounter any 
problems in gaining access?
 
f. What is needed to correct these problems?
 III. Fire Code History
 
a. Review relevant fi re code requirements and 
history.
 
b. Was the structure in compliance?
 IV. Communications
 
a. Did dispatcher provide all information avail-
able at the time of dispatch?
 
b. Was the fi reground channel adequate?
 
c. Were proper communications procedures 
followed?
 
d. Were there problems communicating with 
mutual aid companies?
 
e. Was the communications network controlled 
to reduce confusion?
 
f. Was radio discipline effective?
 
g. Did the incident commander provide timely 
updates?
 V. Pre-emergency Planning
 
a. Was a prefi re plan needed on the scene?
 
b. Was it available?
 
c. Was it useful?
 
d. Should it be updated?
 VI. On-Scene Operations
 
a. What was the structural integrity of the build-
ing upon arrival?
 
b. Was command identifi ed and maintained 
throughout the incident?
 
c. Was a command post established and readily 
identifi able?
 
d. Was a proper size-up made?
 
e. Were additional apparatus requested in a 
timely manner?
 
f. Was proper strategy developed?
 
g. Was there an action plan?
 
h. Did personnel, units, and teams execute tac-
tics effectively?
 
i. Were standard operating procedures used?
 
j. How was risk analysis applied to the incident?
 
k. Were the sectors used appropriate to the inci-
dent’s type and complexity?
 
l. Was a standby team established? If not, why?
 
m. Was a safety offi cer designated? How was 
this offi cer used?
 
n. Were actions taken to ensure accurate per-
sonnel accountability?
 
o. Was a rehab sector established?
Once the critique or post incident analysis is complete, a 
report should be developed noting the highlights of the 
critique, especially as it relates to specifi c functions and 
the ability to satisfactorily or unsatisfactorily complete 
these functions. The report should be disseminated to 
everyone who participated in the critique and made 
available to all. Again, the intent is not to place blame or 
make anyone look bad but rather to learn from past mis-
takes as well those things that were done well. A library 
of these reports should be kept for future reference.
Emergency Management
A disaster or emergency can strike anywhere and at 
any time. Disasters can be acts of nature such as a tor-
nado, fl ood, earthquake, or winter storm or can be 
human-made such as a hazardous materials spill, utility 
failure, or an act of terrorism. A disaster can build up 
slowly, taking days or weeks, or impact suddenly with-
out warning. Originally, the emergency management 
function was known as civil defense. The main objec-
tive was protection of the civilian population in the event 
of enemy attack. In the last two decades, this approach 
has been redefi ned to encompass the protection of the 
civilian population and property damage from the 
destructive forces of natural and human-made disasters. 
The approach then changed to a comprehensive emer-
gency management, or an “all hazards approach.” 
Comprehensive emergency management refers 
to any government’s responsibilities and capability 
for managing all types of emergencies and disasters 
by coordinating the actions of many organizations 
and agencies. Comprehensive emergency manage-
ment includes the four phases of disaster activity— 
preparedness, mitigation, response, recovery. Many 
of these organizations are now the lead agencies for 
the development and implementation of local disaster 
plans. If an emergency meets the criteria of a county-
wide or statewide disaster, the disaster declaration 
starts with the local county emergency manager. 
Once this system is activated, it provides a conduit to 
access state and/or federal resources.
Preparedness
Preparedness is the measures taken in preparation 
of a disaster or emergency and essential for effec-
tive response. According to the National Response 
Framework, there are six essential activities for 
responding to an incident. Those include: plan, orga-
nize, train, equip, exercise, and evaluate and improve 

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 373
(see Figure 13-21). Planning includes the collection 
and analysis of information, development of policies, 
procedures, mutual aid agreements, strategies, and 
other arrangements to perform critical missions and 
tasks. Organizing includes activities such as develop-
ing an overall organizational structure, strengthening 
leadership, and assembling, equipping, and train-
ing teams of paid and/or volunteer staff to perform 
essential tasks. Exercises provide the opportunity to 
test plans and improve profi ciencies. Evaluation and 
improvement activities should be an ongoing process 
that should evaluate performance against relevant 
capability objectives, identify defi cits, and institute 
corrective action plans. 
In addition to organizational preparedness, all citi-
zens should learn what to do in case of an emergency. 
Preparing in advance by learning what hazards may 
affect your community and by learning about how to 
deal with these hazards is an important part of emer-
gency preparedness. This includes how to take the 
necessary precautions to protect yourself, your fam-
ily, and your property. This is especially important for 
ire and EMS personnel, because, if you and or family 
are not personally prepared to deal with emergencies, 
it is likely that you, as a fi rst responders to a disaster 
can focus on your job, if you are worried about your 
family and/or your home. If you have a preestablished 
supply kit, escape plan, communications plan, evacu-
ation route, etc., then it provides you a peace of mind, 
allowing you to concentrate on the tasks at hand. 
For more information related to personal prepared-
ness go the FEMA website: http://www.fema.gov/
plan/
Response
Response is related to the activities that are taken 
during and immediately following a disaster. In most 
jurisdictions, the fi re and police departments are the 
lead agencies for handling day-to-day emergencies. 
In the event of an actual or threatened large-scale 
emergency situation, the designated emergency man-
agement coordinator is assigned emergency duties in 
addition to this person’s primary day-to-day func-
tions. These functions range from assessing damage 
to assisting with sheltering operations to maintaining 
detailed records of disaster-related expenses.
Mitigation
Mitigation refers to activities that actually eliminate 
or reduce the chance of occurrence or the effects of 
a disaster. The government has the responsibility for 
developing specifi c mitigation measures to reduce the 
effects of natural or human-made hazards and to iden-
tify and develop mitigation measures for other haz-
ards that may occur. These measures include, but are 
not limited to, the development of zoning laws and 
land use ordinances, state building code provisions, 
regulations and licensing for handling and storage of 
hazardous materials, and the inspection and enforce-
ment of such ordinances, codes, and regulations.
Recovery
Recovery is the activity or phase that involves restor-
ing all systems to normal. Short-term recovery involves 
returning vital life support systems to minimum oper-
ating standards. Long-term recovery may take years 
and may involve complete redevelopment of the area 
affected by the disaster. Local and state governments 
share the responsibility for protecting their citizens from 
disasters and for helping them to recover when a disas-
ter strikes. In some cases, a disaster is beyond the capa-
bilities of the state and local government to respond.
The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer-
gency Assistance Act, Public Law 93-288, as amended 
(the Stafford Act), was enacted to support state and 
local governments and their citizens when disasters 
overwhelm them. Federal disaster assistance is autho-
rized under the provisions of the Stafford Act when 
the governor requests and the president declares an 
emergency or a major disaster to exist in the state. 
The Stafford Act authorizes two types of assistance: 
individual assistance and public assistance.
While the Stafford Act is the most familiar mecha-
nism by which the federal government may provide 
support to state, tribal, and local governments, it is not 
the only one. Often, federal assistance does not require 
coordination by DHS and can be provided without a 
presidential major disaster or emergency declaration. 
In these instances, federal departments and agen-
cies provide assistance to states, as well as directly to 
tribes and local jurisdictions, consistent with their own 
authorities. For example, under the  Comprehensive 
Evaluate &
Improve
Plan
Capability
Building
Exercise
The Preparedness Cycel Builds Capabilities
Organize, Train
& Equp
FIGURE 13-21 The National Response Framework 
Preparedness Cycle. (Source: January 2008—National 
 Response Framework.)

374  CHAPTER 13
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liabil-
ity Act, local and tribal governments can request assis-
tance directly from the Environmental Protection 
Agency and/or the U.S. Coast Guard. This support is 
typically coordinated by the federal agency with pri-
mary jurisdiction rather than DHS. The Secretary of 
Homeland Security may monitor such incidents and 
may, as requested, activate framework mechanisms 
to support federal departments and agencies without 
assuming overall leadership for the incident.11
NFPA 1561, Standard on 
Emergency Services Incident 
Management System12
Since 1986, OSHA has required the use of an inci-
dent command system to manage the response and 
coordination of responders at hazardous materials 
incidents. These regulations also require that per-
sonnel operating at hazardous materials incidents be 
appropriately trained. In addition, OSHA requires 
that those in supervisory positions have additional 
training in incident command.
Meanwhile, other incident command systems were 
emerging including those developed by the National 
Fire Academy and the Emergency Management 
Institute. These programs established the beginning 
of what we know today as a standardized IMS that 
includes common terminology, modular expansion, 
and implementation at the incident scene.
Concurrently with these activities, NFPA was 
addressing many fi refi ghter safety issues. NFPA pub-
lished the fi rst edition of NFPA 1500 in 1987, and the 
fi rst edition of NFPA 1561 followed in 1990. You will 
note that the IMS standards in the 1500 series pertain 
to fi refi ghter safety and health. Incident management 
is a critical factor in fi refi ghter safety.
NFPA 1561 was a logical follow-on for the then 
brand-new NFPA 1500, Standard on Fire Depart-
ment Occupational Safety and Health Program. One 
of the areas addressed in NFPA 1500 was the need for 
an effective incident command. There is a very direct 
and obvious correlation between effective command 
and fi refi ghter safety.
The most recent changes to NFPA 1561 are the 
name of the document (from Fire Department to 
Emergency Services) and extension of its contents to 
include all emergency service providers, recognizing 
that many agencies are often present at the scene of 
emergencies, and they may not be as familiar with 
IMS as are fi re departments. Regardless of the agency, 
the critical factors of IMS follow:
■ Establishment of command
■ Routine evaluation of the risks involved
■ Well-defi ned strategic options
■ Standard operating procedures
■ Effective training
■ Appropriate protective clothing and equipment
■ Effective incident management
■ Effective incident communications
■ Safety offi cers and procedures
■ Personnel accountability
■ Backup crews for rapid intervention
■ Adequate resources
■ Provisions for rest and rehabilitation of personnel
■ Regular reevaluation of the conditions
■ Pessimistic evaluations of the situation
The key to success is knowledge, knowledge gained 
in knowing, understanding, and using the system. For 
those who lack experience, training must fi ll in the 
void, providing them with the information they will 
need to operate within the system, play an effective 
part in solving the problem, and survive.
Incident management, accountability, rapid 
intervention, risk management, safety factors, two-
in-two out, rehabilitation, safety offi cers. We hear 
these terms in our training programs and see them 
in the literature. Where do they come from and 
how do they fi t into the business of fi refi ghting? All 
of these terms deal with safety during emergency 
operations (see Figure 13-22). All are addressed in 
NFPA 1500 and were covered briefl y in Chapter 8 
of this book. NFPA 1500, NFPA 1561, NFPA 1710, 
NFPA 1720, and other documents provide vital 
information pertaining to enhancing safety during 
emergency operations. As company offi cers, you 
should be intimately familiar with these  concepts 
FIGURE 13-22 Firefighter safety is always important.

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 375
to ensure the safety of your personnel and the 
 ability to operate as an effective unit during large-
scale events.
What Makes IMS Work
Several characteristics make IMS work. Two of 
these have to do with communications. The fi rst 
is the use of plain language; the second is the use 
of common terminology. To be effective, the terms 
and defi nitions used in IMS must be understood 
and accepted, and the words must have a single 
defi nition over a period of time and the space of 
distances. If we use the same terms and understand 
their defi nitions, we can better communicate our 
thoughts.
Another characteristic of IMS is that it has a 
modular organization, meaning that you only apply 
the parts of the system that are needed, based on 
the size and complexity of the incident. In simple 
incidents, the IMS structure is a simple one. There 
are few problems, the event is resolved quickly, the 
resources are limited and adequate, and the incident 
commander (IC) can personally deal with all of the 
management functions. As the incident becomes 
more complicated, so does the IMS structure. You 
will need additional resources, and the event is likely 
to last longer. The IC may not be able to personally 
manage all of the activities. In such cases, the IMS 
structure must be expanded to meet the needs of 
the situation.
When the IMS expands to fi t the needs of a larger 
situation, the IC has to delegate some of the man-
agement functions to others. The IMS allows for 
an orderly and standardized way of doing this and 
allows for delegation of specifi c responsibilities (see 
Figure 13-23). These responsibilities can be along 
functional lines (fi re attack) or at specifi c locations 
(third fl oor.)
IMS is a performance-oriented system rather 
than a rank-oriented system meaning the function 
is more important than the rank of the person fi ll-
ing the position. The qualifi cations of the individual 
assigned should be the only concern. Let us outline 
the nine basic components of the incident manage-
ment system.
NIMS Training
In addition to the previously listed classes three are 
a number of additional related classes that address a 
number of different professions from the fi refi ghter to 
the healthcare worker to the emergency manager (see 
Table 13-1 and 13-2).
 established by the Secretary of Homeland Security to pro-
vide “strategic direction for and oversight of the National 
Incident Management System (NIMS) . . . supporting both 
routine maintenance and the continuous refi nement of the 
system and its components over the long term.” The Center 
oversees all aspects of NIMS including the development of 
compliance criteria and implementation activities at federal, 
state and local levels. It provides guidance and support to 
jurisdictions and incident management and  responder or-
ganizations as they adopt the system.
The Center is a multidisciplinary entity made up of 
federal stakeholders and over time, it will include repre-
sentatives of state, local and tribal incident management 
and responder organizations. It is situated within the De-
partment of Homeland Security’s Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency.13
While most emergency situations are handled locally, 
when there’s a major incident help may be needed from 
other jurisdictions, the state and the federal government. 
NIMS was developed so responders from different juris-
dictions and disciplines can work together better to re-
spond to natural disasters and emergencies, including 
acts of terrorism. NIMS benefi ts include a unifi ed ap-
proach to incident management; standard command and 
management structures; and emphasis on preparedness, 
mutual aid and resource management.
The National Integration Center (NIC) Incident 
Management Systems Integration Division was 
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
NATIONAL INTEGRATION CENTER
■ Can be used with a single jurisdiction or agency or 
can include multiple jurisdictions and/or agencies
■ Structure can be adapted to fi t any situation; The sys-
tem is easy to use and can be used at all types of 
events
■ Must have common elements of organization, termi-
nology, and procedures
■ Allows for expansion, transfer, and termination of 
operations
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR AN 
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

376  CHAPTER 13
INCIDENT COMMAND
INFORMATION
SAFETY
LIAISON
OPERATIONS
SECTION
PLANNING
SECTION
LOGISTICS
SECTION
FINANCE/
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
BRANCHES
DIVISIONS
       &
GROUPS
STRIKE TEAMS
       &
TASK FORCES
SINGLE
RESOURCES
AIR OPERATIONS
BRANCH
AIR SUPPORT
GROUP
AIR TACTICAL
GROUP
STAGING AREAS
RESOURCES
UNIT
SITUATION
UNIT
DEMOBLIZATION
UNIT
DOCUMENTATION
UNIT
TECHNICAL
SPECIALIST
SERVICE BRANCH
COMMUNICATIONS
UNIT
MEDICAL UNIT
FOOD UNIT
SUPPORT BRANCH
SUPPLY UNIT
FACILITIES UNIT
GROUND SUPPORT
UNIT
TIME UNIT
PROCUREMENT
UNIT
COMPENSATION/
CLAIMS UNIT
COST UNIT
FIGURE 
13-23 Incident 
command system organi-
zational flowchart.
Course Grouping 
Course ID 
Course ID
Overview 
IS-700 
National Incident Management System (NIMS) an Introduction
 
IS-800 
National Response Framework (NRF), an Introduction
ICS Courses 
ICS-100 
Introduction to the Incident Command System
 
ICS-200 
ICS for Single Resources and Initial Action Incidents
 
ICS-300 
Intermediate ICS
 
ICS-400 
Advanced ICS
NIMS Components 
and Subcomponents 
IS-701 
NIMS Multiagency Coordination System
 
IS-702 
NIMS Public Information Systems
 
IS-703 
NIMS Resource Management
 
IS-704 
NIMS Communication and Information Management
 
IS-705 
NIMS Preparedness
 
IS-706 
NIMS Intrastate Mutual Aid, An Introduction
 
IS-707 
NIMS Resource Typing
TABLE 13-1 Core Curriculum for the NIMS

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 377
■ Conciseness is important during emergency opera-
tions. Usually there is much to think about and to do, 
and there is usually a lot of radio traffi c.
■ Clearly worded and concise messages speed the 
 entire evolution. By the same token, clear and under-
standable messages increase the likelihood of com-
prehension and the probability that the requested 
 action will be accomplished.
■ Confi dence is exhibited with a calm voice and a nor-
mal speaking rate. Confi dence on the part of the inci-
dent commander is communicated with the message 
and shared by all those involved in the incident.
■ Control of communications is also important to the 
success of an operation. Communications control is 
established by the fi rst-arriving unit and maintained 
by the incident commander and the dispatch opera-
tor throughout the incident. Communications control 
requires that certain discipline be maintained and that 
certain rules be followed. Units must identify them-
selves when calling, and units being called must ac-
knowledge the message. This ensures the message 
was received and understood.
■ Capability deals with ability and the willingness to com-
municate at every level. Communications are a two-way 
process. Capability implies that the incident commander 
is willing to listen to others as well as to transmit orders.
■ Finally, confi rmation means that you get an acknowl-
edgement of orders. It is the feedback in the commu-
nications loop: “I got your message.” One of the main 
points of discussion in the after action reports of some 
of the most signifi cant incidents in this country; Katrina; 
California Fire Storm, World Trade Center, is communi-
cations. Once the breakdown in communications starts, 
it just seems to snowball. From the start, you should 
learn to communicate right and communicate smart.
Communications management is integral to effective in-
cident management. Communications management in-
volves making effective use of communications systems 
to provide for the timely and useful fl ow of information. We 
should have communications procedures that are easily 
used and widely understood. This implies the use of plain 
language and common terms that mean the same thing 
to all personnel.
Fire offi cers should also establish a procedure for 
providing initial reports and progress reports on a 
 regular basis. Initial reports provide other responding 
personnel with necessary information so that they can 
mentally and physically prepare for action. Initial  reports 
also provide information for fi re department manag-
ers regarding the commitment of resources and the 
need to expand the incident command system to meet 
the particular needs of the situation. Progress reports 
 provide vital information regarding the progress, prog-
noses, and expected duration of the event. As stated 
before, a progress report should be given anytime you 
 experience a sudden change in conditions (good or 
bad), change levels (up or down), have completed your 
assigned task, or need additional resources to com-
plete your assignment.
Whether you are speaking face-to-face or over a ra-
dio or telephone, good communications are enhanced 
by remembering to use the six Cs of communications: 
conciseness, clarity, confi dence, control, capability, and 
 confi rmation. Remember: A moment of thought be-
fore speaking usually makes the message shorter and 
clearer.
COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT  
GOOD INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
TABLE 13-1 Continued
Course Grouping 
Course ID 
Course ID
ICS Position-Specific 
Courses 
P-400 
All-Hazards Incident Commander
 
P-430 
All-Hazards Operations Section Chief
 
P-440 
All-Hazards Planning Section Chief
 
P-450 
All-Hazards Logistics Section Chief
 
P-460 
All-Hazards Finance Section Chief
 
P-480 
All-Hazards Intelligence/Investigations Function
 
P-402 
All-Hazards Liaison Officer
 
P-403 
All-Hazards Public Information Officer
 
P-404 
All-Hazards Safety Officer

378  CHAPTER 13
Key ICS Positions
The incident commander (IC) is the one position of 
the IMS that must be staffed at every alarm. Someone 
has to be in charge, responsible, and accountable for 
the safe and effective mitigation of the problem. The 
IC must understand the roles of the various positions 
within the IMS structure. Initially, the IC is respon-
sible for determining the strategy, selecting tactics, 
setting the action plan in motion, and developing the 
IMS organization.
Depending upon the size of the incident, the IC 
may also be responsible for managing resources, 
coordinating the activities of these resources, provid-
ing for scene safety, releasing information about the 
incident, and coordinating efforts with other agen-
cies. At smaller incidents, the IC will likely per-
sonally retain these tasks. At larger incidents, these 
functions will likely be delegated. In all cases, how-
ever, the IC is responsible for the overall outcome of 
the event. There is no requirement that the fi re chief 
automatically becomes the IC. The IC should be the 
most  experienced, capable and qualifi ed person, based 
on the experience level of the offi cer as well as the 
dynamics and complexity of the situation. In a hos-
tage situation this may be a law enforcement offi cer. 
In a multicasualty event it may be a medical repre-
sentative. It can also change as the situation changes. 
An incident may start out with a fi refi ghter as an IC, 
and once the fi re is under control, the position may 
be transferred to a law enforcement offi cer because 
an explosive ordinance was discovered and it is now 
a crime scene where they are preparing to insert an 
explosives unit and initiate an investigation.
Volumes could be added about the roles and 
responsibilities of the IC, but the main thing to take 
away from this section is to look at things from a stra-
tegic perspective and focus on the overall situation. 
This means the IC has to operate from a fi xed vantage 
point in order to see as much of the entire event as 
possible. If the commander becomes “hands-on” with 
tactical operations, then it is likely that he/she will 
lose that overall perspective. The IC needs to estab-
lish and remain at a location that will become known 
as the command post. The command post may be the 
hood of someone’s car or the inside of a custom vehi-
cle designed expressly as a command vehicle. It must 
be a visible, fi xed location that is capable of support-
ing the mission
Operations. The fi rst general staff position that 
should be delegated is the operations section. The 
operations section chief is responsible supervising, 
managing, and assigning tactical resources associ-
ated with the primary mission. The operations chief is 
 responsible for developing and implementing strate-
gies to achieve the objectives developed by command. 
The operations section may have just one offi cer, usu-
ally one of the fi rst offi cers to arrive on the scene. The 
operations chief reports to the incident commander 
(see Figure 13-24).
The terms divisions and groups are tactical-level 
management groups that command individual com-
panies, task force, or strike teams. The term divi-
sion indicates a geographical assignment, whereas 
the term group indicates a functional assignment. 
A task force is combination of mixed resources with 
TABLE 13-2 NIMS Core Curriculum Aligned with NIMS Components and Level of Training
Levels of Training
Awareness
Advanced
Practicum
Preparedness
IS 800
IS-700
Communications & Info 
Management
IS 705
IS 704
Resource Management
IS 703
Command & 
Management
ICS
ICS 100
ICS 300
Position-specific 
courses
MACS
ICS 701
Public Info
ICS 702
Ongoing Management & Maintenance
Components of NIMS
IS-700

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 379
OPERATIONS
SECTION
BRANCHES
DIVISIONS
    AND
GROUPS
STRIKE TEAMS
SINGLE
RESOURCES
AIR OPERATIONS
BRANCH
AIR SUPPORT
GROUP
AIR TACTICAL
GROUP
STAGING AREA
HELIBASES
FIXED WING
BASES (COOR)
HELISPOTS
HELICOPTER COORDINATOR
AIR TANKER COORDINATOR
TASK FORCES
FIGURE 13-24 Operations section.
DOCUMENTATION
UNIT
PLANNING
SECTION
RESOURCES
UNIT
SITUATION
UNIT
DEMOBLIZATION
UNIT
TECHNICAL
SPECIALISTS
FIGURE 13-25 Planning section.
a common communications and a single unit leader. 
A strike team is a set number of like resources that 
operate with common communications and a single 
unit leader. While not all agencies use these terms, 
they are standardized NIMS terms that are applica-
ble in all areas of the nation. These positions report 
directly to the IC unless the operations section is 
staffed and then they report directly to the operations 
chief. Branches are used when the number of divi-
sions or groups exceeds the span of control. These 
functions are typically only fi lled at larger or more 
complex alarms or where a department has staff per-
sonnel available to fi ll these positions. As a company 
offi cer, you should be aware of the functions of each 
of these positions, and be prepared to occupy any one 
of these positions if necessary.
Planning. The planning section is responsible for 
collecting, evaluating, and disseminating appropri-
ate information. The planning chief keeps track of 
the current situation, predicts the probable course 
of events, and prepares optional strategies and tac-
tics. The planning section should be staffed with a 
 senior offi cer who has considerable command expe-
rience (see Figure 13-25). Planning can be expanded 
to  include four units: resource unit, situation unit, 
documentation unit, and demobilization unit.
Logistics. The logistics section is responsible for ob-
taining the resources needed at the event.  Logistics 
comes into play at long-duration events (see Figure 
13-26). Logistics can be developed into two  different 
branches: service branch and support branch. If war-
ranted, the service branch can be expanded into com-
munications unit, medical unit, and the food unit. 
The support branch can be expanded to include the 
supply unit, facilities unit, and ground unit.
Finance. Finance is the last of the major  components 
of IMS. The fi nance section chief is  responsible 
for accounting for the costs associated with the 
event. This is not usually a concern, but for haz-
ardous  materials incidents or long-term operations, 
 especially where multiple agencies are involved, 
the fi nance section  becomes extremely important 
(see  Figure 13-27). The cost of a large alarm could 
 potentially  bankrupt a department unless costs are 
documented and  recouped through the reimburse-
ment methods listed above.
Staff Assistants. Depending upon the nature of 
the incident, the incident commander may fi ll com-
mand staff positions. These include a safety  offi cer, 
LOGISTICS
SECTION
SERVICE BRANCH
COMMUNICATIONS
UNIT
MEDICAL UNIT
FOOD UNIT
SUPPORT BRANCH
SUPPLY UNIT
FACILITIES UNIT
GROUND SUPPORT
UNIT
FIGURE 13-26 Logistics section.

380  CHAPTER 13
an  information offi cer, and a liaison offi cer (see 
Figure 13-28).
The incident safety offi cer (ISO) is one of the 
most important positions in the IMS organization. 
This position should be fi lled as soon as possible. 
The ISO is responsible for monitoring working con-
ditions and recommending appropriate action. Most 
organizations have policies that allow the ISO to take 
direct action when warranted to protect fi refi ghters 
from immediate danger. In such cases, the ISO should 
immediately advise the IC of these direct actions. In 
addition to spotting critical situations, the ISO acts 
as an advisor to the IC. The ISO has the advantage 
of being able to move about and see all sides of the 
action. Ideally, the ISO should be an experienced 
company offi cer.
The public information offi cer (PIO) is responsi-
ble for the development and release of timely informa-
tion regarding the event and for serving as a point of 
contact for the media. PIOs should have access to the 
incident commander so that they have timely and cor-
rect information about the present and projected status 
of the event. However, their job is to feed that infor-
mation to the media, thus allowing the  incident com-
mander to focus on the job at hand. Anyone can serve 
as a PIO, but they should have good  communications 
skills and enough understanding of the situation and 
the department’s operations so that they can answer 
questions.
Finally, we come to the liaison offi cer who works 
to liaison with other agencies. In some cases, these 
FINANCE
SECTION
TIME UNIT
PROCUREMENT
UNIT
COMPENSATION/
CLAIMS UNIT
COST UNIT
FIGURE 13-27 Finance section.
INCIDENT COMMAND
INFORMATION
SAFETY
LIAISON
OPERATIONS
SECTION
PLANNING
SECTION
LOGISTICS
SECTION
FINANCE
SECTION
FIGURE 13-28 Incident 
command 
system and general staff.
Some departments have introduced a new position 
called the occupant services sector. The basic func-
tion of this sector is to treat the uninjured survivors of the 
event. Leaving Ms. Garcia standing on the sidewalk while 
you attack her house and its fi re will not be a good expe-
rience for her. Watching a dozen fi refi ghters drag hoses 
and tools through her super neat house will not make 
her feel any better. Maybe you should fi nd a nice place 
for Ms. Garcia to sit down. Someone should check her 
over; make sure she is okay. An ambulance would be a 
good choice.
But lacking an ambulance, a staff car, the cab of a 
fi re truck, almost anything will do. You want to move her 
out of your way and get her to a safe and comfortable 
place, protect her from the weather, and keep track of 
her whereabouts. Someone should stay with her, treat 
her injuries, explain what is going on, and calm her. You 
might offer her the use of your cell phone to call a friend 
or relative.
TAKING CARE OF MS. GARCIA, 
OUR CUSTOMER
We often overlook the value of the media at events, think-
ing of them as a liability rather than an asset. The me-
dia can provide valuable information and services. If an 
evacuation is needed, the media are an excellent away to 
reach the public with timely information. Likewise, when 
people are missing, getting the word to radio and televi-
sion stations will bring many helpers. The media can also 
be used for effective life safety public education mes-
sages. While you are on television discussing the fi re 
at Ms. Garcia’s house, you have a good opportunity to 
point out that Ms. Garcia’s fi rst notice of her problem was 
her smoke detector. (Obviously, it was working.) Remind 
viewers about the value of smoke detectors and how im-
portant it is to check them once a month.
THE MEDIA CAN PROVIDE 
INFORMATION AND ASSISTANCE

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 381
and procedures also change. We cannot pretend we 
do not know or do not want to follow current pro-
cedure. Not too many years ago, fi refi ghters did not 
have SCBAs and PASS devices. Imagine sending a 
fi refi ghter into a structure today without this equip-
ment. A few years ago, we had open cabs and allowed 
fi refi ghters to ride on the back step. When someone 
got hurt, we just considered it part of the job. Imag-
ine that same situation today. In our litigious climate, 
a lawyer very possibly would try to persuade the hurt 
individual to sue.
Citizens and even other fi refi ghters have certain 
expectations when it comes to the activities of their 
fi re department and its personnel. Fire offi cers are 
occasionally thrust into situations for which they are 
unprepared. Training and experience help, but even 
well-trained, experienced offi cers can fi nd themselves 
in charge of a response where the circumstances are 
unlike anything seen before.
Most of the nation’s fi re departments are a part of 
local government. Local governments are expected to 
provide for the public’s safety, usually through the ser-
vices of a police department and a fi re department. As 
a result, fi re departments have generally been shielded 
from liability under a concept known as “government 
immunity.” Government immunity comes from an 
old concept called “sovereign immunity”; the sover-
eign could do no wrong. Under this principle, the fi re 
department could not be sued in court, no matter how 
negligent it may have been.
The concept left no recourse to citizens when the 
fi re department or its personnel were negligent. In 
recent years, the federal government and the leg-
islatures of most states have enacted some type of 
reform that has allowed governments to be sued for 
their actions, just as an individual or private com-
pany might be sued. These laws usually cap the lia-
bility at a certain level. Maryland, for example, sets 
the limit at $200,000 per claimant, and $500,000 
per occurrence.
Faced with these limits, claimants are nam-
ing  individuals as defendants in liability cases. 
Thus, as a company offi cer, you could well wind 
up as a defendant, along with your department and 
your municipality.
supporting agencies are not represented elsewhere 
in the command structure, so to ensure their effec-
tive use and to prevent confl icts, you need to com-
municate with them. The liaison offi cer works with 
the representatives of the other agencies and forwards 
any pertinent information to the IC. Any pertinent 
information that the IC needs to be relay to the agen-
cies is communicated though the liaison offi cer
LEGAL ISSUES FOR 
FIRE OFFICERS
The concept of standard of care is well known the 
fi refi ghters who have some form of training in emer-
gency medical care. Most textbooks in that fi eld deal 
with this important topic in the fi rst chapter. In this 
book, we are discussing legal issues last, in hopes 
that you will remember what you are reading here.
Unlike the emergency medical care business, fi re-
fi ghters and fi re offi cers have not had to concern them-
selves with the legal ramifi cations of their actions. For 
years, fi refi ghters and fi re departments have escaped 
legal scrutiny. That is changing, and although we 
would be the last to say that you should run your fi re 
department in ways tantamount to the legal profes-
sion, we should consider the laws and the risks associ-
ated with breaking those laws. In addition, we should 
be concerned about the concept of “standard of care,” 
that well-known phrase that says that you should do 
what another reasonable person would do with the 
same circumstances, training, and resources.
This standard of care is a dynamic process. Laws 
change, and so do our standards. Training, equipment, 
NOTE
An easy way to keep from confusing command staff 
with general staff is that command staff is made up of 
officers—safety officer, public information officer, and 
liaison officer—and the general staff is composed of 
chiefs—operations section chief, planning chief, logis-
tics chief, and finance chief.

382  CHAPTER 13
Captain Grant Mishoe’s company arrived at the same 
time as two other engines on the report of a structure 
fi re. When they arrived, they did a size-up: Heavy smoke 
was coming out of the rear of the building, a multilevel 
electrical supply warehouse located between a one-
story supermarket and laundramat on one side and a 
two-story Masonic lodge on the other. At the back of the 
building, there was a loading dock and two doors. The 
team forced the fi rst door. The smoke behind the door 
was cold. But after forcing the second, the team mem-
bers were faced with black, hot, pushing smoke, which 
signaled there was fi re behind it.
Mishoe was given the role of interior command, in 
charge of two attack teams that would go inside to fi ght 
that fi re. No one knew how deep seated it was. Once 
 inside, he radioed to command about the conditions: 
The room was 30 feet by 325 feet with cinder block on 
the bottom fl oor, metal on the top and wooden fl oors. 
There were wall-to-wall refrigerators on either side of the 
15-foot door and other various old electronics and plas-
tics that Mishoe suspected made for a dangerous fi re 
load. The visible fi re was in the corner of the room on 
the bottom fl oor, emanating a heat that made Mishoe 
uncomfortable—it meant it was burning fast. By sight 
and voice, Mishoe maintained location of his crew.
After working on the fi re on the bottom fl oor, he 
looked up and saw a glow on the second fl oor,  radioing 
“Should we advance the hoseline?” Command gave 
him the affi rmative. As he got halfway up the steps, the 
building made a peculiar groan—one he knew a con-
crete and steel structure should not make—and on 
instinct, he radioed that conditions were worsening; 
structural failure was imminent; and he was having his 
crew evacuate. He did not wait for an answer. His team 
members were hand over foot out the door and were 
just in time: Within 30 seconds, the ceiling opened up, 
and refrigerators and fi re collapsed into the bottom fl oor. 
For Mishoe, it was a split second decision, and one he 
does not regret. He knew it was a matter of choosing 
between his men or the building, and the building was 
not a priority.
At that point, the fi re was 30 feet through the roof, 
and after conducting a personal accountability for his 
fi refi ghters, Mishoe went along with command’s deci-
sion to surround and drown. The building turned into 
a six-alarm fi re, and after fi refi ghters had been on the 
job for 8½ hours, it had burned to the ground. The 
structure was lost, but the lives of the fi refi ghters had 
been saved.
Questions
1. What were the visible clues at the scene of this fi re?
2. What were the size-up factors?
3. What were the clues that suggested imminent struc-
tural failure?
4. What risks should be taken by fi refi ghters to protect 
such buildings?
5. What important lessons can be learned from 
this story?
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
Grant Mishoe, Captain, North Charleston Fire 
Department, North Charleston, 
South Carolina

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 383
T
his chapter provided a discussion of the role of the 
company offi cer during emergency operations as 
well as an introduction to the Incident Management 
System. Clearly, one chapter does not do justice to 
this important topic. As company offi cers, you should 
be able to analyze emergency scene conditions, con-
duct size-up, develop and implement an initial action 
plan, and deploy resources to safely and effectively 
control an emergency.
As you already know, the role of the fi re service has 
expanded far beyond fi re suppression. The name “fi re 
department” does not begin to accurately describe the 
real mission: public safety. As important as that is, 
public safety is more than a mission statement. It is 
a core value that underlies all of our prevention and 
response services.
Fire prevention and life safety education programs 
have already been discussed. Similar prevention pro-
grams are needed to help citizens prevent and pre-
pare for such diverse threats as medical emergencies, 
fl oods, and wildland fi res.
Citizens depend upon their fi re department to deal 
with nearly every conceivable emergency. Recent fi re 
department responses to help citizens dealing with 
severe weather, fl oods, earthquakes, and other natural 
disasters quickly come to mind. Add to that a list of 
human-made disasters—fi res, explosions, structural 
collapse, and technical rescues of every kind.
Recent events in Oklahoma City, New York City, 
and Arlington, Virginia, have added a new dimension 
to the concept of public safety. As fi rst responders on 
any emergency call, fi re service personnel must pre-
pare themselves for new threats: weapons of mass 
destruction. Tragically, in some cases, the target is the 
emergency responder.
The challenges are signifi cant. For the leaders of 
the fi re service, the challenge is to defi ne a competent, 
effective, competitive organization that is both pre-
pared for today and ready for tomorrow. These are not 
small issues. And we cannot pick and choose from a 
list of options those activities that are personal favor-
ites: We must be ready to face all of the threats and 
meet the need of our communities and the nation.
While the focus of this chapter and the entire book 
is to meet the performance standards of NFPA 1021, 
as company offi cers, you should be able to cope with 
EMS and hazardous materials events as well. Most 
fi refi ghters today are certifi ed as EMTs and haz-
ardous materials responders at the operations level. 
Training for both of these programs should include 
managing incidents in these specialty areas. If you 
can integrate the IMS information on the preceding 
pages with what you have learned in those courses, 
you should be ready to manage routine events involv-
ing medical emergencies, hazardous materials inci-
dents, and even a kitchen fi re at Ms. Garcia’s house.
Good luck.
action plan an organized course of action that 
addresses all phases of incident control within a 
specifi ed period of time
attack role a situation in which the fi rst-arriving 
offi cer elects to take immediate action and to pass 
command on to another offi cer
benchmarks signifi cant points in the emergency 
event usually marking the accomplishment of one of 
the three incident priorities: life safety, incident sta-
bilization, or property conservation
branches level of supervision between divisions and 
groups and operations that is used when number of 
divisions or groups exceeds acceptable span of control
command role a situation in which the fi rst-
 arriving offi cer takes command until relieved by a 
senior offi cer
communications unit prepares communication 
plan, distributes and maintains communication plan
confinement an activity required to prevent fi re 
from extending to an uninvolved area or another 
structure
defensive mode actions intended to control a fi re 
by limiting its spread to a defi ned area
demobilization unit ensures resources a released 
from the incident in an orderly, safe, and cost-
 effective manner
documentation unit maintains and archives all 
incident related documentation
division tactical level management group that 
commands individual companies, task force, or 
strike teams; a geographical assignment versus a 
functional assignment
emergency incident any situation to which a fi re 
department or other emergency response organiza-
tion responds to deliver emergency services
LESSONS LEARNED
KEY TERMS

384  CHAPTER 13
National Response Framework (NRF) defi nes 
the principles, roles, and structures that organize 
how we respond as a nation
occupant services sector that part of the incident 
management system that focuses on the needs of the 
citizens who are directly or indirectly affected by an 
incident
offensive mode fi refi ghting operations that make 
a direct attack on a fi re for purposes of control and 
extinguishment
operations section division in the incident man-
agement system that oversees the functions directly 
involved in rescue, fi re suppression, or other activi-
ties within the mission of an organization
overhaul searching the fi re scene for possible hid-
den fi res or sparks that may rekindle
planning section that part of the incident man-
agement system that focuses on the collection, 
evaluation, dissemination, and use of information 
(information management) to support the incident 
command structure
resource unit conducts check-in activities and 
maintains status of all resources
situation unit collects and analyzes information 
on the current situation
staff positions designated to aid the IC in fulfi ll-
ing the IC’s responsibilities, typically, an incident 
safety offi cer, an information offi cer, and a liaison 
offi cer
strategy sets broad goals and outlines the overall 
plan to control the incident
strike team set number of like resources that oper-
ate with common communications and a single unit 
leader
supply unit orders, receives, and distributes 
supplies
tactics various maneuvers that can be used to 
achieve a strategy while fi ghting a fi re or dealing 
with a similar emergency
task force mixed number of resources that oper-
ate with common communications and a single unit 
leader
tasks the duties and activities performed by indi-
viduals, companies, or teams that lead to successful 
accomplishments of assigned tactics
transitional mode the critical process of shifting 
from the offensive mode or from the defensive to the 
offensive
environmental factors factors like weather that 
impact on fi refi ghting operations
facilities unit sets up, maintains facilities, pro-
vides facility security
finance section that part of the incident manage-
ment system that is responsible for facilitating the 
procurement of resources and for tracking the costs 
associated with such procurement
fire extinguishment activities associated with put-
ting out all visible fi res
food unit supplies food and potable water, oper-
ates food services unit
ground unit arranges for transportation of person-
nel, supplies, food, and equipment
group tactical level management group that com-
mands individual companies, task force, or strike 
teams; a functional assignment versus a geographi-
cal assignment
incident command system a tool for dealing with 
emergencies of all kinds
incident commander (IC) the person in overall 
command of an incident
incident management system an organized sys-
tem of roles, responsibilities, and standard operating 
procedures used to manage an emergency operation
incident safety officer (ISO) as part of the IMS, 
that person responsible for monitoring and assessing 
safety hazards and ensuring personnel safety
public information officer (PIO) as part of the 
IMS, that person who acts as the contact between 
the IC and the news media, responsible for gathering 
and releasing incident information
initial report a vivid but brief description of the 
on-scene conditions relevant to the emergency
liaison officer as part of the incident management 
system, the contact between the incident commander 
and agencies not represented in the incident com-
mand structure
logistics section that part of the incident management 
system that provides equipment, services, material, and 
other resources to support the response to an incident
medical unit prepares medical plan, provides fi rst 
aid and light medical treatment; mutual aid assis-
tance provided by another fi re department or agency
National Integration Center (NIC) Incident Man-
agement Systems Integration Division estab-
lished by the Secretary of Homeland Security to 
provide “strategic direction for and oversight of the 
National Incident Management System (NIMS)”

The Company Officer’s Role in Incident Management 385
 1. What are incident priorities?
 2. What is meant by command sequence?
 3. What is meant by size-up?
 4. What are the parts of size-up?
 5. What are the three modes of fi refi ghting?
 6. What information should be included in the ini-
tial report?
 7. What is an action plan?
 8. How is the action plan effectively communicated 
to all units on the scene?
 9. When should an action plan be revised and why?
 10. How does the initial action plan provide direction 
to assign unit resources to accomplish specifi c 
tasks?
 11. What is meant by strategy? tactics?
 12. What is IMS? When should it be used?
 13. What is your role as company offi cer in incident 
management during the early phases of fi res and 
other emergency activity?
 14. What are the main components of an IMS?
 15. What are the functions of command staff, divi-
sion, or group offi cer within ICS?
 16. What is the role of the fi re offi cer in personnel ac-
countability system at an emergency incident?
 17. What are the elements of the communication 
model and how can they be used to make clear as-
signments to subordinates?
 18. What are the elements of a verbal command and or-
der confi rmation process during an emergency?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
The fi rst fi ve questions pertain to the kitchen fi re in 
Ms. Garcia’s home.
 1. What were the size-up factors at Ms. Garcia’s 
house?
 2. As the fi rst-arriving offi cer at this fi re, what would 
be your size-up report?
 3. Considering Chief Layman’s list of strategies, 
which would be relevant at this fi re?
 4. What could you do for her?
 5. Based on ICS principles, what pertinent assign-
ments and actions should be included in an initial 
report for arriving units?
 6. How would you use IMS at the scene of a traffi c 
accident on an interstate highway?
 7. Does your department have operating procedures 
that describe the application of an IMS?
 8. Are there any unoccupied buildings in your juris-
diction? If so, what is your department doing in 
anticipation of a response to a fi re or other event 
in one of these buildings? What preparation is 
being taken at the company level, and what ac-
tion would be appropriate if you were called to a 
structural fi re in one of the buildings today?
 9. How do you evaluate the effectiveness of the im-
plemented IMS?
 10. When and how should you revise the IMS to meet 
the changing needs of the incident?
 11. How do you evaluate and determine the need 
for various IMS components as they apply to the 
emergency incident?
 12. What factors determine how you should assign 
personnel at an incident?
 13. What factors determine when an incident safety 
offi cer(s) should be assigned at an incident?
 14. What is the evacuation procedure for your depart-
ment and how do you initiate it?
 15. What interagency agreements exist within your 
jurisdiction and what are the policies and proce-
dures for implementing them?
 16. What resources are available from other local 
emergency and nonemergency agencies and when 
should you request them?
 17. What potential informational resources are avail-
able to you during an emergency response?
 18. What interagency cooperation might be required 
for public safety?
 19. When and how do you conduct a unit critique?
 20. How does your department conduct a postinci-
dent analysis?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS

386  CHAPTER 13
ENDNOTES
   6. SOPs, training, and good fi reground discipline are important 
at times like these. The incident commander has quite enough 
to think about without having to decide where each apparatus 
should be placed. But the incident commander should remember 
that placement is important. Once pumpers and ladder trucks 
“go to work,” it is hard to relocate them.
   7. Copied from 2009 version of NFPA 1021, p. 9. 
   8. Reprinted with permission of NFPA. For more information, 
visit the NFPA Web site at www.nfpa.org.
   9. Chief Layman’s book is entitled Fire Fighting Tactics, and his 
original list was called Basic Divisions of Fire-fi ghting Tac-
tics. Chief Layman made some remarkable contributions to the 
fi re service and was way ahead of his time in many areas. His 
choice of words (tactics instead of strategy) is understandable. 
Reprinted with permission from National Fire Protection Asso-
ciation, Quincy, MA 02269.
10. Copied from the National Incident Management System 
(NIMS): Five-Year NIMS Training Plan. http://www.fema.gov/
pdf/nims/5year_nims_training_08.pdf.
11. Copied from the National Response Framework. Overview. 
http://www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nrf/nrf-overview.pdf
12. The entire document is available from NFPA. For more infor-
mation, visit the NFPA Web site at www.nfpa.org.
13. Copied from the National Integration Center (NIC) Web site at 
http://www.fema.gov/emergency/nims/
   1. Used with permission. For further information, see Ron Moore’s 
series entitled “University of Extrication” each month in Fire-
house Magazine. His series on operating safely on the highway 
ran in several installments starting in the October 2003 issue.
   2. The USFA develops reports on selected major fi res, usually in-
volving multiple deaths or a large loss of property. The objective 
reviews are intended to uncover signifi cant “lessons learned” or 
new knowledge about fi refi ghting or to underscore ongoing is-
sues in fi re service. A copy of the full report can be ordered 
by going to http://www.usfa.fema.gov/fi reservice/ techreports/
tr102.shtm.
   3. These questions seem to focus on fi refi ghting, but remember that 
we are discussing a thought process that can be applied to all 
emergency situations.
   4. Some suggest that there is really a fourth mode, the no-attack 
mode. There are two situations where no-attack might be the 
correct solution. Obviously, if there is no fi re, you do not need 
to mount an attack. The other possibility is where the fi re is so 
involved that saving the building is impossible, or where fi ght-
ing the fi re would present unacceptable risks to the fi refi ghters 
or the environment, so you elect to let it burn.
   5. Reprinted with permission from NFPA 1500, Standard on Fire 
Department Occupational Safety and Health Program, Copy-
right © 2007, NFPA. This material is not the complete and offi -
cial position of the NFPA, which is represented by the standard 
in its entirety.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Mason, James. “Setting the Stage with the First-Due Radio Re-
port.” Fire Engineering, January 2007.
The National Fire Academy also presents an excellent resident 
course entitled “Command and Control of Fire Department 
Operations at Target Hazards.” Contact your training offi cer or 
state fi re service training director for more information.
NFPA 1500. Standard on Fire Department Occupational Safety 
and Health Program. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection 
Association, 2002.
NFPA 1561. Standard for Emergency Services Incident Management 
System. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association.
Walsh, Charles V., and Leonard G. Marks. Firefi ghting Strategy 
and Leadership. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977.
National Integration Center (NIC) Incident Management Systems 
Integration Division. http://www.fema.gov/emergency/nims/in-
dex.shtm.
National Response Framework. http://www.dhs.gov/xprepresp/
committees/editorial_0566.shtm.
Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)-5: Management 
of Domestic Incidents. Washington, DC: White House, Febru-
ary 2003.
Salka, John. “Follow the Rules!” Firehouse, September 2007.
VanDoren, John. “The Debriefi ng: Another Tool for Your Box.” 
Fire Engineering, July 2007.
Brunacini, Alan. Fire Command. Quincy, MA: National Fire Pro-
tection Association, 1985.
Brunacini, Alan. “Rules of Engagement.” Fire Engineering, a 
monthly column.
Castro, Joseph. “One Nation, Under NIMS.” FireRescue, April 
2008.
Coleman, John. “Actions of the First-In Offi cer.” Fire Engineering, 
March 2007.
Crawford, Jim. “New Term, Old Concept.” FireRescue Magazine 
(April 2009)
Emory, Mark. “Introducing the Contemporary Fireground.” Fire-
house, February 2009.
Emory, Mark. “Ten The Commandments of Intelligent and Safe 
Fireground Operations.” Firehouse, multi-part series starting in 
February 2007.
Ennis, Rick. “4 for All.” Fire Chief, October 2008.
Fried, Emanual. Fireground Tactics. Chicago: Marvin Ginn, 1972.
Layman, Lloyd. Attacking and Extinguishing Interior Fires. 
Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 1955.
Layman, Lloyd. Fire Fighting Tactics. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association, 1953.
Managing Company Tactical Operations, developed by the Na-
tional Fire Academy, Emmitsburg, Maryland, is a three-part 
training course that focuses on preparation, preplanning, and 
managing typical structural fi refi ghting activities. The second 
course, “Decision-making,” is particularly relevant to the mate-
rial covered in this chapter.


 PROFESSIONAL STATUS: THE 
FUTURE OF FIRE SERVICE 
TRAINING AND EDUCATION
Dr. Denis Onieal, Superintendent, 
National Fire Academy
Professional status is a term that has been bandied 
about in the Fire and Emergency Services for years. 
What constitutes “professional” status is in the eye 
of the beholder? Were we to look at a “professional” 
 independent of the fi re service, to some, it means the 
performance of a series of skills in a manner that is 
far above average. To others, a professional is asso-
ciated with performing skills “full-time,” that is to 
say, for a living. Many feel that the distinguishing 
 characteristics of a professional are years of formal 
education, approval of an accrediting board, and con-
tinuing education requirements. More than likely, it is 
the last statement with which most would agree.
Defi nitions aside, it is the walk down the main street 
in any city or town in America that demonstrates who 
in the community is professional. The physicians and 
nurses, the architects and engineers, the attorneys and 
the accountants are among the top professionals in 
any community. What makes them so?
Each has a unique set of knowledge and skills that 
are independent of a particular organization or place; 
they are “portable” skills and held in equal regard no 
matter where the person practices. In the process of 
becoming a professional, there is an accredited and 
independent testing process that assures competency 
to the public. Professionals are associated with others 
in their profession through some formal organization; 
they typically put service to others as more important 
than profi t; and they assume responsibility for their 
professional acts. Typically, their profession has some 
continuing education requirements, and the work is 
client centered.
Then why aren’t we given the professional status of 
physicians and nurses, architects and engineers, and 
attorneys and accountants? Well, those professions 
have some things that the Fire and Emergency Ser-
vices do not yet have; there are a few more steps. 
It is interesting to see where our current “profes-
sions” were one hundred years ago. Most people 
 probably don’t realize that medical education was 
haphazard in this country until 1910. In the late 1700s, 
most physicians apprenticed, and a few attended med-
ical schools in Europe. Many people also don’t real-
ize that although Abraham Lincoln was a lawyer, he 
never went to law school; he apprenticed.
Thirty years ago, the foundations for professional 
status for the Fire and Emergency Services were laid. 
Performance standards were established. Colleges and 
universities recognized the need for formal education 
and began degree programs. Fire departments began 
to require certifi cations, and many began to  require 
degrees or advanced degrees for hiring or promotion. 
Uncommon thirty years ago, but quite common  today, 
is the hiring of people with professional training and 
education from outside the organization (instead of 
through the ranks) to come in to run it. That’s the evi-
dence that we’re ready to make the next move up the 
ladder of professions.
One of the principal challenges we have is that 
the number of independent systems of training and 
 education staggers aspiring fi re service profession-
als. There is no “one way” for the student to deter-
mine which is the most appropriate training and/or 
education. There’s no “one way” to become the chief. 
The problem is exacerbated by the reality that there 
is little chance that one system will recognize that 
Appendix A
388

Appendix A  389
 student’s performance in another system. Moving 
from fi re department to fi re department (or even more 
diffi cult—from a fi re department in one state to a fi re 
department in another), training or education already 
received may not be recognized.
The Fire and Emergency Services today are assur-
edly further along the path to professional status than 
those in medicine and law were one hundred years 
ago. We have a body of knowledge, we have standards 
and we have processes to assure competency (avail-
able through the International Fire Service Accredi-
tation Congress [IFSAC] and the National Board on 
Fire Service Professional Qualifi cations [NBFSPQ or 
ProBoard]). We have places to acquire professional 
knowledge, but right now, they are locally based—
they aren’t a part of a system that everyone recog-
nizes. The missing link is a nationally recognized, 
reciprocal system of training and education. The 
good news is that we have all the parts; nothing has 
to be invented or established—they just need to be 
integrated:
■ Training systems (available through local, state and 
the National Fire Academy);
■ Education systems (available through 2-year, 
4-year, graduate and National Fire Academy);
■ Independent assessment of skills (IFSAC and 
ProBoard);
■ Reciprocity among systems of training and 
education.
The current roles of local, state and national emer-
gency services training generally establish the bound-
aries for each to prevent costly duplication. Locally, 
larger departments are capable of training their 
own people to certain levels of competency. Smaller 
 departments will either seek training from a larger 
organization, work with other small departments to 
combine training resources, or seek training from 
 another government agency—either the county or the 
state training system. Depending on the size of the 
organization and its needs, local training tends more 
towards recruit, refresher and “hands-on” training.
State training organizations generally attempt to 
provide training that is not available locally—ranging 
from basic recruit training to courses for chief fi re 
offi cers, from hazardous materials awareness to fi re-
fi ghting strategies at petroleum facilities, and from 
farm rescue to wildland fi refi ghting. State training or-
ganizations vary in their size and capacity, from a few 
people to a complex, university based system.
At the national level, each State Fire Training Sys-
tem works with the United States Fire Administra-
tion’s National Fire Academy (USFA/NFA) to deliver 
USFA/NFA curriculum. The USFA/NFA develops 
and delivers the kinds of training that aren’t available 
at the local or state level. Community Risk  Reduction, 
Public Education, Codes and Standards, Detection 
and Suppression Systems, Executive Development, 
Terrorism, Command and Control of Incidents, Stra-
tegic Planning, Information Systems and Budgeting 
are among the USFA/NFA’s curriculum areas. This 
system isn’t something that is planned for the fu-
ture—this is the system as it exists today.
At the national level, most of you would proba-
bly be surprised to learn that the USFA/NFA does 
the least amount of training on its Emmitsburg cam-
pus—about 8,000 students per year. Most of NFA’s 
training occurs off-campus through the cooperative 
efforts of State and Metropolitan sized fi re training 
organizations. In 2002, the USFA/NFA trained over 
87,000 Fire and Emergency Services personnel in off-
campus course deliveries, self-study courses, CD 
based simulation training and other alternative deliv-
eries through its virtual campus. (For more informa-
tion see http://www.training.fema.gov).
Locally, many colleges and universities provide 
two- and four-year degree programs in fi re science 
and/or administration. Over the past several years, 
a few Master’s degree programs have emerged. For 
those who, for reasons of proximity or time, are un-
able to attend a local college, the USFA/NFA works 
with seven schools throughout the country to provide 
four-year degrees via the Degrees at a Distance Pro-
gram; there are no resident course requirements for 
these courses.
Those who have attended two- and four-year pro-
grams (currently there are 222 two-year and 26 four-
year programs in the US)1 are usually people who are 
“in-service,” that is to say, are going to school part-
time and working a full-time job. These individuals 
may be career or volunteer, but most don’t enjoy the 
luxury of full-time academia—it is a considerable 
sacrifi ce to them and their families.
The titles of “fi re” degrees vary—from Fire Tech-
nology all the way to Public Administration with a con-
centration in Fire Administration. Some degrees are 
called Fire Science, Fire Administration or Fire De-
partment Management, but the disparity creates mis-
understanding among employers and other schools of 
higher education. Everyone understands what a med-
ical, law or nursing degree means. Few understand 
what a “fi re” degree means. This makes it diffi cult for 
other schools and employers to assess the  education 
or skill of prospective students or  employees. Hence, 
1Sturtevant, Thomas B. “A Study of Undergraduate Fire Service Degree 
Programs in the United States—Fall 2000,” Doctoral Dissertation, Univer-
sity of Tennessee, Knoxville, May, 2001.

390  Appendix A
transfers of credits between schools (and true profes-
sional salaries) are elusive.
So, let me ask you, have you or someone you know:
■ taken fi re science courses at a two-year college;
■ taken courses at state and local fi re training acad-
emies and through the National Fire Academy 
(NFA);
■ achieved various levels of certifi cation;
■ and all combined, these achievements are “all 
over the map,” meaning none of them evolved in a 
coherent and planned way?
Most fi refi ghters and offi cers have earned college 
 credits and training certifi cates since their fi rst day 
in the fi rst service. However, this professional devel-
opment is usually uncoordinated and fragmented, 
 resulting in duplications of effort and ineffi cien-
cies for students. Lack of coordination between fi re-
 related training, higher education, and certifi cation 
contributes to this problem.
Collaboration and coordination are needed be-
tween all service providers responsible for Fire and 
Emergency Services’ professional development. Each 
has a major role to play. This report presents the rec-
ommendations that have evolved over the past four 
annual Fire and Emergency Services Higher Educa-
tion (FESHE) conferences. Combined, these products 
and outcomes represent a new strategic approach to 
professional development. They will help move the 
Fire and Emergency Services from a technical occu-
pation to a full-fl edged profession similar to physi-
cians, nurses, lawyers, and architects, who, unlike fi re 
service personnel, have common course requirements 
within their respective degree programs.
There are several major tenets on which a “profes-
sion” is built, including reciprocity for practicing in 
different states (with an exam), universally accepted 
standards of practice, and a professional development 
model, among others. The work accomplished during 
the FESHE conferences addresses one tenet—profes-
sional development.
The Role of FESHE 
Conferences
The U.S. Fire Administration (USFA) hosts the annual 
FESHE conference on its campus in Emmitsburg, 
Maryland. These conferences are a combination of 
presentations, problem solving, and consensus-building 
sessions that result in higher education-related prod-
ucts or recommendations for national adoption.
At the 2000 conference, two panel discussions were 
conducted. The fi rst panel included fi re service  leaders 
representing national fi re service  organizations, 
and the second was comprised of state directors of 
fi re service training. Both panels raised issues that 
formed the basis for these national recommendations, 
 including the need for:
■ degree programs that teach critical thinking skills 
by requiring signifi cant numbers of general educa-
tion, rather than mostly fi re science, courses;
■ appropriate recognition of certifi cation for aca-
demic credit and vice versa;
■ associate degree programs that are transferable to 
baccalaureate programs;
■ a model fi re science curriculum at the associate 
level that universally standardizes what students 
learn and facilitates the application of these courses 
towards certifi cation goals; and
■ collaboration between fi re service certifi cation and 
training agencies and academic fi re programs.
Fire and Emergency Services 
Professional Development 
Model
The professional development model is one prod-
uct fi nalized at the 2002 FESHE IV conference. It is 
not a promotion model addressing credentials; rather, 
it is an experience-based model that recommends an 
 effi cient path for fi re service professional development 
supported by collaboration between fi re-related train-
ing, higher education, and certifi cation providers. The 
model recommends what these providers’ respective 
roles should be and how they should coordinate their 
programs (see Figure A-1).
Focused on
Road
Ability to
Manage
EDUCATION
TRAINING
Ability to do
the work
Fire Officer IV
Fire Officer III
Fire Officer II
Fire Officer I
Special Certifications
Firefighter II
Firefighter I
Risk Management
Operations
Focused on
Horizon
Associates
Bachelors
Masters
 FIGURE A-1 Fire service development model.

Appendix A  391
Another result of the 2000 FESHE conference was 
the model fi re science associate degree curriculum. 
The FESHE attendees identifi ed six core associate-
level courses in the model curriculum, including:
■ Building Construction for Fire Protection
■ Fire Behavior and Combustion
■ Fire Prevention
■ Fire Protection Hydraulics and Water Supply
■ Fire Protection Systems
■ Principles of Emergency Services
In 2001, the National Fire Science Curriculum 
 Committee (NFSCC) was formed to develop stan-
dard titles, descriptions, outcomes, and outlines for 
each of the six core courses. In 2002, the FESHE IV 
conference attendees approved the model courses and 
outlines. The major publishers of fi re-related text-
books are committed to writing texts for some, or all, 
of these courses.
It was recommended that all fi re science associ-
ate degree programs require these courses as the 
 “theoretical core” on which their major is based. The 
course outlines address the need for a uniformity of 
curriculum and content among the fi re science courses 
within the United States’ two-year programs. Many 
schools already offer these courses in their programs, 
while others are in the process of adopting them. 
Once adopted, these model courses address the need 
for problem-free student transfers between schools. 
Likewise, they promote crosswalks for those who 
 apply their academic coursework toward  satisfaction 
of the national qualifi cation standards necessary for 
fi refi ghter certifi cations and degrees.
The committee also developed similar outlines 
for other courses that are commonly offered in fi re 
 science programs. If a school offers any of these 
“non-core” courses, it is suggested these outlines be 
adopted, as well.
In 2003, at FESHE IV, NFA announced it would 
 release its 13-course upper-level Degrees at a 
 Distance Program (DDP) curriculum to accredited 
 baccalaureate degree programs which have signed 
agreements with their state’s fi re service training 
agency. DDP will remain as NFA’s delivery  system 
for the 13 courses; however, release to other schools 
 enables the formation of model curriculum at this 
level.
With model lower-level (associate) curriculum out-
lines developed and established upper-level (bacca-
laureate) courses available, the major components 
are in place to move towards a national system for 
fi re-related higher education. Most core and non-core 
courses line up with baccalaureate courses of similar 
content, thus preparing associate degree graduates for 
their bachelor degree studies. This national system for 
fi re-related higher education is important because, as 
with other professions, a theoretical core of academic 
courses should be a prerequisite for entering these 
fi elds. As more schools adopt these curricula, the Fire 
and Emergency Services move toward becoming a 
full-fl edged profession.
Notes
Dr. Denis Onieal was appointed superintendent of the 
National Fire Academy at Emmitsburg, Maryland, in 
July 1995. A native of Jersey City, New Jersey, he has 
been a professional fi refi ghter in that city since 1971, 
rising through the ranks to become deputy chief in 
1991 and eventually acting chief of the department. 
His entire professional life has been in operations.
Dr. Onieal earned a doctorate in education from 
New York University, a masters in public administra-
tion from Farleigh Dickinson University, and a bach-
elors in fi re administration from Jersey City State 
College.
Dr. Onieal’s essay about the need for profession-
alism in the fi re service was condensed here and 
used with permission. You may read his remarks in 
their entirety in issues of The Voice, published by 
the  International Society of Fire Service Instructors, 
Firehouse magazine, and Fire/Rescue Magazine. The 
series was published in 2003.
Additional information about Fire and Emergency 
Service Conferences and the recommendations of 
those conferences is available at www.usfa.gov.

392
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE EXAMPLE: EMERGENCY
BURLESON FIRE DEPARTMENT
Standard Operating Guidelines
Section 105.12 – Emergency and Mayday Radio Trafﬁ c
PURPOSE
The purpose of this policy is to provide a clear, systematic set of procedures that will be used by the Burleson 
Fire Department in the event of a declared emergency.  
POLICY
Emergency Radio Procedures:
The Burleson Fire Department has established three levels of emergency radio trafﬁ c.
1. MAYDAY!!! MAYDAY!!! MAYDAY!!!
2. Emergency Trafﬁ c
3. Urgent
Mayday Procedures:
The call of MAYDAY will be used to signify that a person or crew is in imminent danger and in need of immediate 
assistance.  In order to be effective, the MAYDAY must be organized. This SOP is intended to provide a framework 
for an effective and efﬁ cient MAYDAY response. The MAYDAY will consist of the call, command response, and 
pre-assigned Mayday contingency and communications plans. If an “Operations” position is staffed at the 
Incident, the Operations Commander will answer the MAYDAY. 
Appendix B

SOP Example: Emergency 393
Calling Mayday
MAYDAY + Unit Number and Seat/Position + To Command + MAYDAY
Example: MAYDAY!!! MAYDAY!!! MAYDAY!!!, E1C to Command MAYDAY
Command (or Operations) Response to Mayday
Unit with a MAYDAY go…
Steps:
1. Initiate MAYDAY tone
2. Close Channel
3. Assign Rescue Chief – If stafﬁ ng is available
4. Move non-essential trafﬁ c/personnel to additional channel
5. Initiate Dispatch MAYDAY contingency plan
Mayday Rescue Chief
If stafﬁ ng permits, Command or Operations may elect to assign a Rescue Chief. The Rescue Chief will 
immediately assume control over RIT team deployments and the rescue of the distressed personnel. 
Dispatch MAYDAY contingency plan
When a MAYDAY is called, the IC or Operations Chief will advise dispatch to initiate the MAYDAY contingency 
plan. Dispatch will complete the following automatically.
1. Dispatch additional alarm from Ft. Worth Fire Department
2. Dispatch Ambulance to scene
3. Place Air Ambulance on Standby
4. Advise P.D. channel of MAYDAY and maintain priority to ﬁ re channel
Emergency Trafﬁ c:
The term “Emergency Trafﬁ c” will be used in the event that an extremely urgent message is being given that may 
have life safety information.
Example: “Command to all units EMERGENCY TRAFFIC, evacuate the building, eminent roof collapse.”
Urgent:
The term “Urgent” will be used in the event that a priority message must be given over the regular radio trafﬁ c.
Example: “Command to all units URGENT, tornado reported headed toward Burleson 2 minute ETA.”
Mayday Algorithm:
The following section contains the MAYDAY algorithm that will serve as a guide to Burleson Fire Department 
Mayday Procedures. Due to the unique nature of a MAYDAY situation, it may become necessary for the IC or 
Operations Chief to deviate from this algorithm. Therefore, this is provided as a guide only.

394  Appendix B
MAYDAY
MAYDAY!!! MAYDAY!!! MAYDAY!!!
(Unit Seat/Position) to Command
MAYDAY!!! 
Operations
(If Staffed)
Unit with a MAYDAY go...
Location, Situation
Mayday
Unit
Operations
RIT
Dispatch
Additional
Alarm
Ambulance
Air
Ambulance
on Stanby
Priority to
Fire Chennel
1. Mayday Tone
2. Close Channel
3. Deploy RIT
4. Reassingn Non-Essential Personnel
5. Initiate Dispatch Mayday Plan
IC
OR
Supervisors of the Department are responsible for 
insuring that this and all guidelines of the Department 
are followed. Deviations from this or any other guideline 
are permitted within the scope of authority granted all 
members of the Department, however, the deviation 
must be reported to the Chief, in writing, within 
24 hours of the deviation.
ACCOUNTABILITY

SOP Example: Non-Emergency 395
BURLESON FIRE DEPARTMENT
Standard Operating Procedures
106.02
Rev. July, 2007
UNIFORMS
Purpose:
It is the purpose of this SOP to ensure members reﬂ ect a neat and professional appearance. This appearance 
helps to establish the visibility and authority of Department personnel by fostering community recognition and 
acceptance. Although it is apparent that no single uniform is appropriate at all times for each of the varied jobs 
performed by Department personnel, a required conformance to speciﬁ ed standards of dress does help realize 
these general goals.
Policy:
A. All personnel shall at all times maintain an appearance that is neat, clean and in compliance with the spirit 
and intent of this policy. 
B. The uniform shall be kept clean, pressed and adorned with a full compliment of designated buttons, insignias, 
badges (as needed), and nametags. 
C. No Fire Fighter shall wear or attach any paraphernalia to the designated uniform unless directed to or 
otherwise authorized. 
D. The uniform designated for use by Fire Department personnel is comprised of items speciﬁ ed by the City. 
All uniform items issued to department personnel shall remain the property of the City. 
E. Personnel shall refrain from using the uniform or badge to attempt to inﬂ uence any person for any cause. 
F. 
Uniforms that have become unﬁ t for service due to poor condition shall be disposed of properly. They shall 
not be donated or sold to any group.
G. Those uniforms which are listed within this policy shall be the only ofﬁ cially recognized uniforms of the 
Burleson Fire Department.
H. A minimum of a tee shirt and shorts shall be worn except when employees are in separate restroom, locker, 
or bedroom areas.
I. 
The Department baseball cap, tee-shirt, shorts, sweatpants, sweatshirt, and the cold weather jacket are the 
only parts of the uniform which are authorized to be worn in an off-duty status. The off-duty use of these 
items must be done in “good taste” and not be worn under any circumstances where the reputation of the 
Department may be adversely affected. The items are not to be worn by personnel while publicly consuming 
alcohol or while in places of business where the serving of alcohol is the primary source on income.
J. When wearing a uniform shirt with buttons, the shirt shall be fully buttoned except for the top collar button.
Time Considerations:
A. All personnel shall be in the uniform of the day or dressed for the scheduled activity promptly by 9:30. 
B. From 1700 hours and until relieved, uniform regulations while crews are in quarters may be relaxed. Bunker 
Pants must be worn on all calls during this period, if personnel are in shorts.
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE EXAMPLE: 
NON-EMERGENCY
(Continues)

396  Appendix B
Exceptions:
A. Between May 1st and September 31st, personnel will be allowed to wear Fire Department Class “B” shorts 
and a tee shirt. Providing all personnel on that company are wearing the same.
B. Between May 1st and September 31st, personnel may choose not to wear the Nomex shirt with class “B” 
uniform when not at a public function. Providing all personnel on that company are wearing the same.
C. The Ofﬁ cer may make the decision as to what uniform is appropriate.
Uniforms:
Fire Department personnel will be issued three types of uniforms.
• Class A – Full “Dress Blues” 
• Class B – Nomex work uniform
• Class C – Dress down “work out” uniform
Class A:
The Class “A” Dress Uniform is issued by the Fire Department to ﬁ re suppression personnel upon successful 
completion of their six-month probation. The Class “A” uniform shall be worn during ceremonies, funerals, or 
when it is appropriate, i.e., public appearance, promotional interviews, or such times as the Fire Chief may 
direct. The following items comprise and will deﬁ ne the Class “A” Dress Uniform:
1. Dress Cap – Dress cap shall be the standard ﬁ re department service cap; navy blue with silver band for 
Engineers and Fireﬁ ghters, navy blue with a gold band for Lieutenants and Captains, and white with gold 
band for Chief Ofﬁ cers. The buttons on the side of the cap shall match the rank color designation. The cap 
buttons shall be issued determined by rank as follows:
• Chief - ﬁ ve crossed bugles (Gold)
• Assistant Chief – four crossed bugles (Gold)
• Battalion Chief – three crossed bugles (Gold)
• Captain – two parallel bugles (Gold)
• Lieutenant – one bugle (Gold)
• Engineer – “Scramble” (Silver)
• Fireﬁ ghter – “Scramble” (Silver)
2. Dress Shirt – “Flying Cross” brand. 65% Dacron Polyester, 35% Cotton. Two breast pockets, badge tab, 
long sleeve, Men’s Style #45W6600, and Women’s Style #102R660. Name plate, will be worn 1/4” centered 
below the top seam of the right pocket. Silver for Fireﬁ ghter and Engineer, Gold for Lieutenant and above. 
The nameplate will have two lines. Line 1 = Name, Line 2 = Rank. Arial font, block style. Commendation bars 
will be worn ¼” centered above the top seam of the right pocket. One or Two matching pins (gold/silver) 
may be worn in the left pocket. Line Personnel will wear blue shirts. Administrative personnel will wear white 
dress shirts. Shoulder patches will consist of the ofﬁ cial Burleson Fire Department patch (silver or gold) on 
the left side and the appropriate Texas Department of Health patch on the right side. The patch will be sewn 
on one inch below the shoulder seam and centered over the pressed seam. Dress shirt collar brass shall be 
15/16” size and worn with the bugles pointed to the tip of the collar, ¼” from edge of collar. The collar brass 
will be issued based on the following: 
• Chief – ﬁ ve crossed bugles, enameled and “raised” Red/Gold
• Assistant Chief – four crossed bugles, enameled and “raised” Red/Gold
• Battalion Chief – three crossed bugles, enameled and “raised” Red/Gold

SOP Example: Non-Emergency 397
• Captain – two parallel bugles, enameled and “raised” Red/Gold
• Lieutenant – one bugle, enameled and “raised” Red/Gold
• Engineer – Silver/Red “scramble”, enameled and “raised”
• Fireﬁ ghter - Silver/Red “scramble”, enameled and “raised”
3. Uniform Dress Jacket – navy blue, eight buttons stamped “FD”, Double breasted with badge tab and no 
breast pockets. Buttons shall match rank designation (gold/silver). Shoulder patch will consist of the ofﬁ cial 
Burleson Fire Department patch (silver or gold) on the left side. The patch will be sewn on one inch below 
the shoulder seam and centered over the pressed seam.  The sleeves of the jacket will have a sewn on band 
designating rank. The bands will be sewn as follows:
• Chief – ﬁ ve bands (Gold)
• Assistant Chief – four bands (Gold)
• Battalion Chief – three bands (Gold)
• Captain – two bands (Gold)
• Lieutenant – one band (Gold)
• Engineer – two bands (Gold)
• Fireﬁ ghter – one band (Gold)    
 
Dress Jacket collar brass shall be placed in the same manner as the shirt collar brass. The collar brass 
should be 15/16” and be gold or silver ﬁ nish to match rank. The Jacket collar brass will be issued by the 
same rank standards as found in the shirt collar brass above. Nameplates will not be worn with Jackets. 
“Maltese” service cross(es) shall be worn on the left sleeve only and placed above the rank strip. Members 
will receive one cross per ﬁ ve years of service to the Burleson Fire Department.
4. Tie – plain, navy blue uniform clip-on tie. Optional tie tack may be any ﬁ re service related tie tack with good 
taste and shall be placed in the center of the tie when worn. The tie tack should match the rank colors gold 
or silver.
5. Badge – One badge is issued by the Burleson Fire Department. Badges are to be worn on the outside of the 
jacket if the jacket is being worn, or on the shirt if no jacket is being worn. Badges will be “Rhondium”(Silver) 
in color for Fireﬁ ghters and Engineers and Gold for ranks above engineer.
6. Pants – navy blue, matching make of issued jacket.
7. Shoes – black, patent leather, plain toe, low cut, Uniform style, lace up shoe.
8. Socks – Black
9. Belt – Black leather uniform belt. Buckle is to match rank colors of gold or silver.
Class B:
The Class “B” Uniform is issued by the Fire Department to ﬁ re suppression personnel. The following items 
comprise and will deﬁ ne the Class “B” Dress Uniform:
1. Dark Navy Nomex Shirt – Gold Lettering/Patch for Lieutenant and Above, Silver Lettering/Patch for Fireﬁ ghter 
and Engineer.
2. Dark Navy Nomex Pants
3. Departmental gray undershirt
4. Departmental approved socks
(Continues)

398  Appendix B
5. Black boots or roper-type boots. Black shoes if in shorts – non-marking and no color designs.
6. Dark Navy Shorts (designated time)
7. Black Belt
The full Class “B” uniform shall be worn whenever the crew is out of quarters except as speciﬁ cally allowed to 
the contrary within this policy. Departmental sweatshirt may be worn in place of Nomex shirt.
Class C:
The Class “C” Uniform is issued by the Fire Department to ﬁ re suppression personnel. The following items 
comprise and will deﬁ ne the Class “C” Uniform:
1. Grey T-Shirt with departmental logo
2. Grey departmental shorts 
3. Grey departmental sweat pants
4. Grey departmental sweatshirt – May be worn with Class B
Miscellaneous:
1. Departmental Jacket – May be worn with class B or C
2. Departmental Cap – May be worn with class B or C
Awards Placement:
Please see policy 106.03 regarding the proper placement of awards on uniforms.
Replacement of Lost, Stolen, or Damaged Equipment:
Fire Department personnel shall be individually responsible for the proper care and safe keeping of uniform 
clothing. In the event of loss, damage or theft of these items, a full report of all appropriate facts and circumstances 
shall be promptly reported to the Fire Fighter’s immediate supervisor. The report shall be reviewed by the Chief 
and, if appropriates, replacement items shall be authorized.
Accountability:
Supervisors of the Department are responsible for insuring that this and all policies of the Department are followed. 
Deviations from this or any other policy are permitted within the scope of authority granted all members of the 
Department, however, the deviation must be reported to the Chief, in writing, within 24 hours of the deviation.

SOP Example: Non-Emergency 399

400
ELEMENTS OF 
EFFECTIVE ON-SCENE 
COMMUNICATIONS1
Ensuring that a message is received and understood 
by the intended parties is obviously a crucial part 
of communications. Besides the hardware, it is nec-
essary to consider encoding, noise, feedback, and 
discipline.
Encoding—Fireground verbal communications 
 often have been encoded to increase effi ciency by 
 reducing the number of words transmitted through 
the use of an agreed-upon code. Codes also increase 
privacy by making it harder for eavesdroppers to 
 understand the message. However, codes can confuse 
the intended receivers, too. The ten codes may be 
used incorrectly or be misunderstood. Diffi culties in 
using them include the commitment of time required 
to learn them and the problem of reliably remember-
ing the less-used codes. Most national organizations 
now recommend the use of plain text.
Reducing Noise—Anything that can interfere 
with a sender’s message before it arrives at the 
 person  receiving it is considered noise. Noise may 
be  induced by the equipment or environment used 
to communicate the message. Since emergency 
scenes are, by defi nition, uncontrolled environ-
ments, sources of  potential noise must be anticipated 
and controlled before an incident if possible. That 
means  identifying equipment that can operate effi -
ciently and  effectively in a wide range of environ-
ments.  Furthermore, it means adopting and using an 
incident management system that controls the send-
er’s and receiver’s  environment. Though not noise in 
a strict sense,  limiting the number of persons send-
ing and receiving messages in any communication 
system is  essential to ensuring that each sender and 
 receiver gets an  adequate  opportunity to be heard 
and understood. The incident command system also 
is an ideal vehicle for ensuring this.
Improving Feedback—For effective fi reground 
communications, not only must the receiver under-
stand the message transmitted by the sender but also 
the sender has to know that the message was received 
and understood. Feedback is a way of communicat-
ing that understanding from the receiver back to the 
sender.
Procedures for letting the sender know that a 
 message was received and understood are a part of 
communications that needs to be planned in advance. 
Like the message itself, feedback need not be verbal. 
In fact, the message and the feedback may not be in 
a common format. As an example, consider an order 
to allow smoke and hot gases to escape a building 
with a deep-seated, smoky fi re. Although the truck 
company offi cer directing fi refi ghters on the roof 
may acknowledge the superior’s instructions, the true 
test that the message was understood will come when 
changes occur in the avenue and character of smoke 
escaping the building. On the other hand, ordered 
actions do not always produce expected results, so 
feedback on the receipt and understanding of orders 
can be essential.
Fireground Communications Discipline—Offi cers 
and fi refi ghters should be aware of the importance of 
interpersonal and radio communications discipline. 
The communications network is extremely active at 
times, and a failure to exercise proper communica-
tions discipline may affect operations negatively. In 
critical situations, improper radio procedures could 
affect the safety of the operating force. Offi cers and 
fi refi ghters using the radio must be alert to avoid im-
proper or untimely transmissions that interfere with 
effective or critical communications.
Appendix C

Appendix C  401
Particular care should be exercised to avoid the fol-
lowing breaches of radio discipline:
■ Units with nonemergency transmissions breaking 
into radio traffi c. Units should not transmit routine 
traffi c until the air is clear.
■ Units transmitting unnecessarily long and detailed 
messages. Lengthy messages should be transmit-
ted by telephone or face-to-face.
■ Units calling the dispatcher to determine if they 
are assigned or should respond. If a unit has kept 
the dispatchers apprised of its status and availabil-
ity, it is not necessary to prompt them or encourage 
them to dispatch the unit. Dispatchers will assign 
available units, including those that are available, 
by radio.
■ Units failing to monitor the radio and acknowl-
edge transmissions as promptly as radio traffi c 
allows. Chief offi cers should be alert to radio traf-
fi c, improper use, and delayed communications 
responses. They should assure that unsatisfactory 
transmissions are investigated and are the subject 
of appropriate corrective action.
■ Radio users speaking prior to or simultaneously 
with depressing the microphone button. This 
practice causes the fi rst part of the message to 
be clipped. Users should wait a moment after the 
microphone has been keyed before speaking.
At the World Trade Center fi re and bombing in-
cident in 1993, several hundred fi refi ghters were 
crowded onto one of the three channels used, causing 
a major problem in on-air discipline. Similar prob-
lems are reported at many large-scale incidents.
Fireground Decisionmaking—Understanding the 
role of communications in incident management re-
quires an awareness of decision-making methods and 
the fl ow of information on the fi reground. Thinking 
about the nature of fi reground decision making is use-
ful as one plans the specifi cs.
Use of Mental Model—Previous personal ex-
perience appears to be a critical factor in the deci-
sion-making process of fi re department incident 
 commanders. The basis for their time-critical deci-
sions often is the ability to recognize a situation as 
a paradigm and match it with a plausible solution 
based on experience. They call this “recognition-
primed decision making.” This fi nding contradicts 
traditional decision-making models that assume 
decisions are based on a functional analysis of 
 available alternatives, followed by the selection 
of a best-fi t solution based on its effectiveness or 
 effi ciency. Recognition-primed decision making 
highlights the importance of experience. Rapid 
communication of the facts of the situation to the 
incident commander is crucial in forming the “para-
digm” and selecting the “solution.”
Situational Awareness—The ability to develop a 
sense of a situation and formulate a paradigm to aid 
decision making was based on the ability to develop 
what is referred to as “situational awareness.” Such 
awareness is diffi cult to establish in the real-time, 
large-scale, high-pressure world of an emergency. 
 Incident commanders must develop an ability to fi lter 
and focus their attention on the critical details about 
an incident.
This is precisely what the ICS does. By main-
taining the cohesiveness of the company, task force, 
and battalion units of the fi re department, incident 
 commanders can deal more effectively with a large 
number of resources by maintaining span of control. 
The ICS simply gives incident commanders the ability 
to do this without sacrifi cing unity of command and 
their control over the management of the incident.
Fireground Communications 
Philosophy
The importance of communications to achieve situ-
ational awareness and to implement command and 
control makes it essential that fi re service profession-
als understand what needs to be communicated, who 
at an emergency scene communicates with whom, 
and which way information must fl ow.
What Is Communicated?—The so-called navi-
gation analogy is a particularly apt way of describ-
ing what must be communicated to achieve effective 
 incident control. To discover how to get some place, 
we fi rst must know where we are, and then where 
we wish to be. Knowing how to get somewhere, 
regardless of how elegant and concise the directions 
may be, is irrelevant without some knowledge of 
where we begin and where we want to be. All of your 
knowledge about the streets and buildings of your 
city and years of experience fi ghting fi res are useless 
until you fi nd out where the fi re is.
Like the navigation example, communication at 
fi res and emergencies is task-oriented. We start with 
an emergency, and we orient all actions toward con-
trolling that incident as quickly as possible, with the 
least cost to people and property. Therefore, after the 
initial dispatch, emergency scene communications 
focus on how to do something—for example, fi ght 
a fi re or control a hazardous materials release—and 
the progress made to accomplish that objective. To 
 accomplish this, the incident commander must have 
a clear understanding of what the current  situation 
is (situational awareness) and must have formu-
lated a clear and concise strategy for dealing with it. 
 Establishing control in the midst of the turmoil and 

402  Appendix C
 confusion of a fi re or emergency scene is a primary 
function of communications.
These types of information then are the focus of 
most emergency scene communications: (1) orders 
or instructions for accomplishing the control or miti-
gation of the incident, (2) reports on progress, and 
(3) requests for resources to achieve control or mit-
igation of the incident. Orders and instructions in 
the task-oriented world of fi re and emergency scene 
 operations are messages that command or instruct 
 responders to perform tasks or implement tactics 
consistent with the incident control strategy selected 
by the incident commander. Effective orders and 
 instructions are clear, concise, and direct.
However, issuing orders and instructions is not 
enough to ensure effective communications. Orders 
must be issued to subordinates capable of responding 
to them. Therefore, to ensure that fi re and emergency 
scene communication is effective, a feedback mecha-
nism must exist. Subordinate commanders must have 
a means available to report their progress and request 
resources to accomplish their tasks to ensure effective 
communications, and in turn, effective incident con-
trol. By keeping this communication back-channel 
open, the incident commander is not only informed 
about the nature of the incident and the needs of sub-
ordinates but is also equipped with the capability to 
anticipate future developments and adapt the incident 
control strategy accordingly.
Who Communicates with Whom?—The principal 
communicators at any fi re are developing strategies 
and implementing tactics to control the scene. The 
proliferation of communications hardware makes 
communications among all emergency scene person-
nel more effective, and some fi re departments are now 
issuing communications hardware such as mobile or 
portable radios or telephones to more members.
However, one of the principal means of controlling 
who communicates verbally with whom at an emer-
gency scene has been to control the assignment of por-
table radios and other communications devices. The 
mere presence of radios in the hands of  emergency 
 responders encourages increased communications, 
since these devices enable people to overcome the 
noise in the communications environment more 
 readily than the unaided human voice. The communi-
cations roles of each person on the fi reground need to 
be spelled out and practiced in training to keep com-
munications from turning into noise.
Direction of Communications—As important as 
what or who is communicating is the place of these 
persons in the structure of the incident manage-
ment system and the nature of their communications. 
Communications between decision makers about the 
 tactics and strategies used to control an incident  create 
an environment where most formal communications 
about a fi re or emergency are vertical, that is, up and 
down the chain-of-command between command-
ers and subordinates. However, the larger and more 
complex an incident becomes, the more horizontal 
communications become. This results in part from 
the necessity to limit inputs—fi lter information—
coming to the incident commander.
Decisions that do not affect overall incident 
 strategy should be handled at the lowest possible 
level, and only major elements that require integration 
among major incident command functions should be 
 channeled back to the incident commander. Ideally, 
communications among emergency responders at the 
task implementation level should be primarily hori-
zontal and with their immediate superior.
Incident Command and Control—The term C3I 
is used to describe the four elements of a military 
 command and control system—command, control, 
communications, and intelligence. The concept also 
applies to the fi reground incident command  system. 
Considering the roles of command, control, and 
 intelligence at fi res is another useful model to help 
understand communications requirements at emer-
gency scenes.
Command is the authority to direct the opera-
tion. The incident commander (IC) in the inci-
dent  command system is the person responsible 
for  making decisions and issuing orders about how 
to control the incident. Lines of authority must be 
 understood for  communications to be effective, and 
vice versa. The IC decides what resources are needed 
and how they will be  deployed. The IC determines 
who will oversee subordinate or support functions, 
and  delegates responsibility for these functions. 
Nonetheless, the IC remains the individual vested 
with  primary  responsibility for the outcome of the 
incident. Although the incident command system 
makes no assumptions about the rank of the person 
in charge of the incident, most fi re departments see 
that only experienced offi cers assume incident com-
mand responsibilities.
To effectively control the fi reground requires that 
all personnel responding to, operating with, and com-
municating with fi reground personnel know, agree 
on, and use only one standard set of rules for com-
munication. The rules must be established prior to 
the response, be written down, and have someone 
 responsible for enforcing them. These rules and pro-
cedures outline what the priority of transmissions is, 
what transmissions are prohibited, the length and sub-
stance of transmission, and any other factors that will 
enhance, or detract from, effective communications.
Intelligence is the gathering or distribution of 
information about an incident or that information 

Appendix C  403
advanced nature of the fi re, and progress reports en 
route confi rming that the fi re had fully involved the 
180,000-square-foot building, simply reinforced his 
decision not to apply water to the burning volatile 
organic compounds inside the facility.
Pre-incident plans also exist in the minds of the of-
fi cer and crew. Armed with these plans, incident com-
manders and responders are better prepared to assess 
the risks posed by a fi re or emergency. For example, 
fi refi ghters arriving at a shopping mall during the 
holiday shopping season with smoke showing from 
the roof of an anchor store should know from a pre-
incident plan whether the building is well isolated 
from adjacent buildings; is of noncombustible con-
struction; has occupants representing a wide cross-
section of the population; may have, at certain times 
of the year, a larger-than-normal quantity of merchan-
dise on hand, and an increased number of shoppers 
and staff; and has (or does not have) automatic sprin-
klers, standpipes, smoke detection, and smoke control 
systems. Based on this information, one of the IC’s 
fi rst priorities may be to ensure that the fi re alarm 
system is sounding and that occupants are heeding 
it. Ordering the support of automatic sprinkler and 
standpipe systems and assessing the operation of any 
smoke control system also may be planned as the 
responding apparatus are en route.
In addition to verbal information relayed from the 
dispatcher, observation en route may provide impor-
tant clues about the nature of an incident. For ex-
ample, traffi c congestion en route to an automobile 
accident call usually indicates that the call is 
legitimate and may be obstructing the thoroughfare. 
Likewise, a large smoke plume or “loom-up” on the 
horizon usually indicates that the fi re call you are 
responding to is the real thing. When the observed 
conditions en route translate into an action plan, or 
will signifi cantly affect the decisions of the fi rst-
arriving companies, this information must be relayed 
to all responding units.
Communications upon Arrival—Up to this point, 
nearly all communications have fl owed from the 
dispatch center toward the responding units and 
the initial incident commander. From this point 
on, communications from the incident commander 
back to the dispatcher and out to the other respond-
ers will become the focus. The arrival of the fi rst 
unit at the emergency scene serves as the benchmark 
for this communications transition. The dispatcher 
must be notifi ed by the fi rst unit as it arrives on the 
scene. From then on, the incident commander is the 
focal point for communications. All communica-
tions from that time forward should be directed 
through the incident commander, unless the IC del-
egates otherwise.
itself. Prior to the occurrence of an incident, intel-
ligence gathering usually takes the form of prefi re 
plans. However, many fi re departments are fi nding 
other sources of information helpful in assessing in-
cidents. With the advent of computers, mobile data 
terminals, mobile facsimile machines, cellular tele-
phones, and sophisticated management informa-
tion systems, information about a given property or 
scenario can take many forms. Past event histories, 
inspection records, the arson information manage-
ment system (AIMS) data, property tax records, and 
building permit records are just a few of the data 
sources available to fi re departments. Once an inci-
dent is underway, the gathering and distribution of 
“intelligence” becomes the critical factor in main-
taining the situational awareness of the incident 
commander.
Incident Operations
Perhaps the best way to illustrate the preceding con-
cepts of the communications philosophy is to con-
sider emergency scene operations in chronological 
order from the time an emergency call is dispatched 
to the time the incident is terminated.
Notifi cation and Initiation of Response—Earlier 
chapters dealt extensively with the operation of com-
munications centers and dispatching. This discus-
sion of incident operations starts with the dispatch—
the order to emergency forces to respond. It must be 
received and acknowledged. At a minimum, the dis-
patch instructions must contain the location of the 
incident. Beyond that, additional information may 
provide helpful, even crucial details but still remains 
subordinate to the location of the incident itself.
Communication En Route—It has been said that 
size-up begins the moment an alarm is received, 
as a fi refi ghter’s or fi re offi cer’s mind becomes fo-
cused on the incident once the dispatch is received. 
Preparation for action actually begins even before an 
incident is dispatched, in the form of pre-incident or 
prefi re plans.
A good example of how this preparation  affects 
incident management occurred at the Sherwin 
 Williams Paint Warehouse fi re in Dayton, Ohio, 
May 27, 1987, which resulted in a multimillion  dollar 
loss. The fi re chief reported that the principal  reason 
for not aggressively attacking the fi re was a con-
cern about contaminating the city’s primary supply 
of drinking water, a large aquifer directly  beneath 
the warehouse. In consultation with the city’s  water 
department director, the chief had assessed the 
environmental exposure from fi refi ghting water run-
off at the warehouse long before he received notice 
that the warehouse was burning. Initial reports of the 

404  Appendix C
the IC’s situational awareness. Generally speak-
ing, the larger and more complex the incident, the 
further the command post should be from the actual 
incident site. At a small or routine incident, the IC 
should have good visual access to the scene to  receive 
feedback on the progress or effectiveness of the inci-
dent management strategies. A good rule of thumb 
for ensuring this type of visual contact is for the fi rst-
arriving unit to pull past the scene as it  approaches. 
The initial command post is usually established where 
this fi rst company sets up for initial operations. This 
approach ensures that the fi rst-arriving offi cer has 
seen what is happening on three sides of the  incident 
scene.
However, this approach may be imprudent or 
 impractical at some types of emergencies. Some-
times the terrain, street network, weather, or the na-
ture of the incident itself leave the IC with no choice 
about how to approach the incident, and therefore, lit-
tle choice about where to set up the initial  command 
post. Subsequently arriving offi cers may elect or be 
required to assume command of the  incident. Upon 
their arrival, the command post may be relocated to 
a site that remains accessible to the scene but ensures 
adequate insulation from it. The new command post 
should be clearly established and identifi ed. Signs, 
fl ags, lights, and special vehicles are a few of the 
ways a command post can be distinguished at the 
incident scene. The new location of the command 
post must be clearly announced to all companies op-
erating at or assigned to the incident. This ensures 
that nonverbal communications remain effective. 
Furthermore, this ensures that those who must con-
duct face-to-face communication can locate the IC 
 without delay.
Tactical Communications—Much of the com-
munication at emergency scenes is task oriented. 
Directing a fi re attack will primarily involve com-
munications between the incident commander and 
subordinate offi cers, and the companies and crews 
fi ghting the fi re. Most messages will consist of 
orders and instructions to perform tasks for control-
ling the fi re; reports about the conditions and progress 
 encountered; and requests for additional resources to 
fulfi ll assigned tasks. These communications must be 
clear, concise, and timely to ensure that communica-
tions fully support the incident command and control 
function. Many of the communications will involve 
intelligence about the nature of the incident, which 
increases the situational awareness of the IC and the 
fi refi ghters alike. The IC’s situational awareness is 
critical to effective management of the incident. The 
fi refi ghters’ situational awareness, keeping abreast of 
conditions beyond their immediate environment, is 
critical to their safety.
After the fi rst company arrives, an assessment of 
conditions (size-up) must be made immediately. This 
assessment integrates the information already in hand 
with the observed conditions upon arrival to formu-
late the initial incident control strategy. The inci-
dent commander must quickly take note of the same 
elements found in the pre-incident plan: the environ-
ment, occupants, operating features, and fi re protec-
tion features. This information then must be relayed 
to subsequently arriving units and the dispatcher via 
the initial report.
The initial report is critical because it sets the 
stage for the actions of each subsequently arriving 
company and prepares the dispatcher for requests for 
additional services or the redeployment of resources. 
A good initial report raises the situational awareness 
of all responders and the dispatcher. It should include 
the following fi ve elements:
■ Fire progress (for example, nothing showing, smoke 
showing, fi re showing, “working fi re”)
■ Fire location (for example, basement, rear of the 
building, second fl oor windows, roof, quadrant 
D-side 2)
■ Building information (for example, six-story brick 
and steel mercantile building, single-family wood-
frame residence, three-story ordinary construction 
garden apartment)
■ Occupant behavior (for example, occupants are 
evacuating, people at the windows)
■ Command post location and offi cer in charge (for 
example, front of the building or side 1, Lt. Velex 
in charge)
Some departments include one additional piece 
of information in the initial report—the capability 
assessment—in which the IC informs the respond-
ing companies and the dispatcher of an overall con-
fi dence that the incident can be controlled with the 
resources and personnel assigned. If conditions upon 
arrival indicate that control is unlikely or impossi-
ble with the assigned complement of personnel and 
resources, additional resources should be requested 
in suffi cient quantity and capability to assure opera-
tional success.
Establishing a Command Post—The initial inci-
dent commander must establish a command post. The 
location chosen for the command post may dramati-
cally affect incident command and control by the way 
it aids or impairs communications. Once established, 
the command post becomes the hub of the commu-
nications network at the emergency scene. A good 
 command post location must facilitate effective com-
munications by giving the incident commander access 
to the incident environment without overwhelming 

Appendix C  405
records themselves may be negligible, but when those 
records are the accounts receivable or inventory 
records of a fi rm, their protection may be considered 
priceless in the eyes of the owner.
Emergency Traffi c—The fi rst service is trained 
to accept emergency scene operations as “part of 
the job.” In fact, keeping a cool head in hot situa-
tions is what fi refi ghting is all about. However, some 
 situations  represent emergencies even to seasoned 
fi refi ghters and emergency responders. These in-
clude missing or injured fi refi ghters, deteriorating or 
extremely hazardous structural conditions, weather 
changes that will exacerbate the fi re situation or fur-
ther endanger lives, and dramatic changes in smoke 
conditions. All of these situations require prompt and 
coordinated  action to avert an operational disaster. 
Effective  communications are the key to assuring that 
appropriate action is implemented quickly. Therefore, 
procedures for distinguishing and conveying such 
emergency messages must be adopted.
The use of signal words, such as “Mayday,” “emer-
gency traffi c,” or “urgent,” or the broadcast of a pre-
defi ned signal like a radio alert tone, apparatus siren, 
or air horn blast must indicate to everyone operating 
at the incident that important, indeed vital, informa-
tion follows. To maintain their effectiveness, these sig-
nals must be coordinated before an incident occurs 
and reserved for exclusive use in life-threatening 
or extremely hazardous situations. Once broadcast, 
emergency signals should cause the interruption of all 
other communications until the message is received 
and acknowledged. Procedures for dealing with such 
emergencies should be defi ned before an incident and 
implemented immediately. For instance, if an alert 
tone is received from a personal alert safety system 
(PASS) device in a trapped fi refi ghter’s radio, the IC 
should immediately begin efforts to identify, locate, 
and rescue the missing fi refi ghter. (Radio equipment 
that integrates the features of PASS devices also may 
give an immediate identifi cation of the radio  assigned 
to the fi refi ghter in need of assistance. If radio 
 assignment data are accurate, the identity of both the 
 radio operator and the assignment can then be read-
ily  determined.) Similarly, if sector reports indicate 
that a structural collapse is imminent and defensive 
operations should be implemented, a signal should be 
sounded both outside on the fi reground (for example, 
three long blasts on an airhorn) and on the radio (for 
example, three long alert tones activated by the dis-
patcher or fi eld communications personnel) to direct 
fi refi ghters to evacuate the building, secure defensive 
tactical positions, and await further instructions.
Status Reports—Within a fi xed time interval fol-
lowing the preliminary or on-scene initial report, the 
IC should give a progress report to the CC. A  progress 
Even when an incident becomes a defensive 
 operation, a signifi cant degree of communication is 
required to ensure effective coordination. Defensive 
operations ordinarily require a signifi cant commit-
ment of personnel and resources. The more people 
that are involved in an operation, the more diffi -
cult communications become. For instance, when 
an  advanced fi re threatens to produce a structural 
 collapse and fi refi ghters are ordered out of a build-
ing, efforts must be made to quickly account for all 
personnel who were in, on, or around the involved 
structure. Once assembled and accounted for, these 
personnel will require new instructions for their 
 effective  deployment. The incident commander must 
recognize that the  functions performed by all per-
sonnel prior to the evacuation will be substantially 
affected by changes in the overall incident control 
strategy and prepare to communicate new instruc-
tions during the time it takes to regroup the forces.
In addition to tactical communications, there often 
are many other types of communications needed dur-
ing an incident. Locating, rescuing, and protecting en-
dangered people are usually among the fi rst priorities 
at any fi re or emergency. Often the victims of fi res and 
other emergencies are extremely agitated, anxious, or 
excited. The stress of the emergency may make civil-
ians behave irrationally, or they may be unresponsive, 
combative, or uncooperative. The emergency respond-
ers need to calm and reassure the victim(s) in order 
to gain their confi dence and cooperation to complete 
their rescue or secure their protection. Such commu-
nications must be authoritative, confi dent, and direct 
but should avoid melodrama, hyperbole, or vulgarity. 
Telling people what is really happening in the most 
concise and straightforward fashion usually works 
best, whether you are trying to effect an evacuation 
or reassure an accident victim. Incident analysis has 
demonstrated that people usually respond best when 
confronted with the facts about a dangerous situation. 
The more complete and accurate the information they 
receive, the better their response can be.
Managing exposures during an incident often 
 involves some degree of communication with peo-
ple other than the emergency responders themselves. 
The location of vital business records or people 
 requiring evacuation assistance, for example, may 
be identifi ed in pre-incident plans or by contact with 
the person reporting the incident, or from people at 
the emergency scene.
Salvage operations often involve establishing a 
sense of the relative value of exposed property and the 
degree of danger confronting it. This requires com-
municating with property owners or occupants as to 
what is of highest priority to save or if any areas need 
special protection. For example, the value of paper 

406  Appendix C
by keeping personnel abreast of changing conditions. 
And the reports prepare the dispatcher and other po-
tential responders for the deployment of additional re-
sources or redeployment of those still uncommitted.
Requests for Additional Resources—Requests for 
additional resources during an incident should include 
the nature and number of the required  resources. 
Most departments group their companies in alarm 
assignments based on the task force concept. With 
this concept, companies are grouped by capabil-
ity. Typically, each task force consists of one truck, 
aerial, ladder or service company assigned with two 
engine or pumper companies. For each group of two 
task forces, an offi cer of battalion or district chief 
rank is assigned to command. (While these groups 
of companies often are referred to as alarm assign-
ments, an alarm  assignment also may refer to all 
of the companies from a particular station or fi re 
 district.)  Occasionally, special service companies 
like  breathing apparatus supply units, canteen trucks, 
light towers or utility trucks, manpower squads, or 
medical units are assigned to round out the comple-
ment of capabilities of an assignment.
When additional companies or alarms are requested 
to control an incident, instructions also must be given 
to ensure their orderly integration into the incident. 
Units needed at the scene should be directed to their 
assignment and instructed as to whom they are to 
report. Units not immediately required at the scene, 
but whose assistance is needed for tools, equipment, 
or personnel, should be assigned to a staging area. 
The staging area should be established at a location 
with good access to the incident but far enough away 
to prevent uncommitted resources from interfering 
with emergency scene operations. Once established, 
the staging area represents a resource pool for the 
IC. At protracted incidents, a relief area and logistics 
sector may be established adjacent to the staging area. 
This way, as personnel and resources become avail-
able for reassignment, they can easily be attached to 
the staging sector.
Requests for Special Services—Often at large 
incidents, the assistance of other agencies is 
required to mitigate a situation. This assistance may 
include Red Cross disaster relief teams, social wel-
fare  agencies, environmental protection offi cials, util-
ity companies, emergency management offi cials, or 
National Guard personnel. Ordinarily, these ser-
vices remain under the direction and supervision of 
their own agency supervisors or commanders when 
assigned. To ensure effective communications with 
these outside agencies, someone from each agency 
should be included in the incident command hier-
archy according to the agency’s role in the incident. 
For example, organizations furnishing relief supplies 
report is a verbal picture of what is occurring at the 
scene and should include (1) a description of the fi re 
building or emergency zone, (2) location of the fi re, 
(3) description of the exposures, (4) description of 
the strategy, tactics, and resources being employed to 
control the situation, (5) an appraisal of the expected 
outcome of the current actions, and (6) any other facts 
that will be important to superior offi cers or surround-
ing companies listening to the report.
Some departments feel that progress reports 
should be transmitted at the discretion of the IC and 
should only be transmitted when there is a change in 
operations or when the operation is complete (such 
as an escalation or de-escalation). Another option is 
to  require the IC to formulate and transmit progress 
 reports at regular time intervals. Those who favor 
nonprogrammed progress reports want to give the IC 
an opportunity to manage the operation without higher 
levels of command interceding and to limit the radio 
traffi c to essential dispatch traffi c. Those who practice 
programmed progress reports believe the practice of 
regularly communicating a verbal picture of on-scene 
conditions helps the IC to better understand and ap-
preciate the problems; keeps the higher level of com-
mand better informed, thus allowing them to make 
judgments on the effectiveness of operations and the 
need to respond; creates a permanent record of the 
actions and reported conditions at regular intervals; 
and helps communications center personnel to have 
a clearer understanding of the incident and its devel-
opment. A suggested time interval for programmed 
progress reports is to give the fi rst progress report ap-
proximately 10 minutes after the preliminary report 
and, for the next hour of the operation, to give one 
every 10 to 15 minutes and whenever a signifi cant 
escalation of operations occurs. The transmission of 
additional alarms would be defi ned as escalation and 
would require the IC to inform the communications 
center of the reasons for this additional response.
Where fi re departments use multiple radio chan-
nels, such as a primary dispatch or operations chan-
nel and a command or tactical channel, the operations 
channel is the routine communications link from the 
incident to the communications center. The dispatcher 
should rebroadcast all progress reports of major oper-
ations on both the primary channel and the command 
or tactical channel. The procedure for rebroadcast-
ing reports should be predetermined and based upon 
the number of units working at the scene. Prelimi-
nary reports and progress reports for fi res or emer-
gencies smaller than the predetermined size need not 
be rebroadcast.
Status reports help personnel maintain their situ-
ational awareness and prepare them for operational 
changes and new tasks. The reports help ensure safety 

Appendix C  407
All Clear—The fi rst signifi cant benchmark in the 
control of an incident is usually the completion of a 
primary search or the removal of all trapped or injured 
victims from danger. Announcing the all clear indi-
cates to all personnel operating at the incident that all 
known or immediately apparent victims have been re-
moved, and the danger to civilians has been mitigated 
within reasonable certainty. In other words, there may 
still be some chance that lives are in jeopardy, but 
their status could not be determined and must wait for 
the secondary search, which will be conducted when 
the incident is controlled or conditions improve. This 
incident management priority holds for automobile 
accidents with trapped victims and hazardous mate-
rials incidents with contaminated or exposed victims 
as well as wildland and structural fi res. The actions 
of fi refi ghters and other emergency service personnel 
usually are dominated by actions to save lives during 
the early stages of any incident. Announcing the all 
clear tells all assigned personnel that the focus has 
shifted to fi re control or property protection.
Under Control (Situation Contained)—Once an in-
cident is no longer growing in magnitude or severity, or 
is at least doing so in a predictable, controlled fashion, 
an incident may be referred to as contained or under 
control. By announcing that the incident is contained 
or controlled, the incident commander is declaring 
that the incident can be managed with the resources 
assigned. Furthermore, this declaration prepares the 
dispatcher and assigned companies for an orderly 
return to normal operations. If companies are still 
responding to the incident scene or staging area, they 
should be considered assigned and continue their 
response, since they may be required for relief or other 
duties, unless released by the incident commander.
Available/In Service/Ready for Service—As 
companies are released by the incident commander 
through their sector offi cers, they should report their 
status to the dispatcher or communications cen-
ter. Companies that are fully staffed, equipped, and 
prepared for another assignment should report them-
selves as “available” or “in service,” or “ready” for 
service (depending on local jargon). Companies with 
reduced capabilities that do not impair their readi-
ness or response status should indicate their capabili-
ties in their message to the dispatcher. For example, a 
four-person engine company that sends a fi refi ghter/
EMT with a medic unit to the hospital might radio 
the dispatcher, “Engine 23 in service with three. 
One member assisting Medic 12.” Occasionally, a 
company must return to quarters but still be out of 
service. Although the unit is unavailable for reassign-
ment, the dispatcher still must be notifi ed that the 
company is no longer assigned to the incident. When 
the last company clears an incident, the command 
like cots, bedding, food, water, or shelter should be 
assigned to the logistics division.
Communications with outside agencies will prob-
ably remain diffi cult even if integrated into the 
incident command system. Hardware and operating 
procedures often vary considerably between fi re ser-
vice and nonfi re service agencies. Outside agencies 
with radios often cannot communicate with the fi re 
service on a common frequency. One way to overcome 
such diffi culties is to request each outside agency to 
supply the incident commander or division commander 
with one of its radios and an identifi er. However, even 
with a radio, the fi re service IC or division commander 
may have communications diffi culties with the outside 
agencies, because they often have less formal commu-
nications protocols and standard operating procedures 
than those of the fi re or EMS department. Face-to-
face communications may be the most reliable method 
in some cases. Once again, planning and practicing 
integrated emergency management operations can 
help overcome many of these diffi culties.
Avoiding Unnecessary Traffi c—Most communica-
tions at the scene of a fi re or emergency will be oral. 
Radios have become the primary means of commu-
nicating information among emergency responders. 
However, some communications, particularly at the 
operational or attack level, are most effective when 
conducted face-to-face. Bogging down radio commu-
nications with traffi c about where to direct a nozzle or 
how bad smoke conditions are can choke a communi-
cations network.
Some departments have been issuing radios to each 
fi refi ghter on duty to improve fi refi ghter safety, the 
rationale being that each member should be able to 
immediately report extremely hazardous conditions 
or emergencies such as a missing or injured fi refi ghter 
or a structural collapse. Procedures and controls must 
be adopted to ensure that all radio operators are main-
taining radio discipline, and sending and receiving 
the right information to the right people at the right 
time. It does no good for all personnel at an incident 
to have a radio if only half of them are listening to the 
right channel for instructions or if many are speaking 
at the same time.
Terminating an Incident
As an incident is brought under control, the need 
for personnel and resources diminishes. However, 
incident commands must be terminated in an orderly 
fashion so that control of the incident does not end 
prematurely and so that resources are only placed 
back in service when fully prepared to engage in new 
assignments. The life cycle of any incident readily 
facilitates scaling back in an orderly fashion.

408  Appendix C
assessments are an opportunity to share these 
insights among peers. Sharing the lessons learned 
from  every fi re and emergency operation from those 
with  diverse perspectives helps iron out opera-
tional defi ciencies, build teamwork, establish mutual 
respect among team members, and build a common 
core of  experience that will serve the responders well 
at other incidents. Postincident critiques should be 
critical to the extent that they examine every detail 
that contributes to or detracts from effective incident 
management.
Press Releases—One of the most diffi cult and chal-
lenging aspects of communications for any signifi cant 
incident is dealing with the media. Often it is vital that 
communications begin with the media while an inci-
dent is in progress. In fact, the sooner the demand for 
information about an incident can be met the better, 
provided the information is accurate. After an inci-
dent, all the loose ends about an incident should be 
cleared up. A complete press release should be issued 
following every major incident. Many departments 
also issue daily press released or briefi ngs through 
the communications center. A good press release 
should answer the fi ve Ws of journalism: who, what, 
when, where, and why (how). Keep press releases 
clear, complete, and to the point, and the media usu-
ally will be satisfi ed. And, when details are sketchy or 
incomplete, remember that accuracy is more important 
than timeliness.
Note
 1. Adapted from Fire Department Communications 
Manual (Emitsburg, MD: U.S. Fire Administration, 
1995).
should be formally terminated. This indicates that no 
further resources are committed to the incident and 
that the scene is no longer under the control of the fi re 
service. This is a particularly important distinction if 
the incident is a suspicious fi re or is associated with 
other criminal activity. When an incident scene is left 
under the control or supervision of another agency, 
the  responsible agency should be reported to the dis-
patcher as a matter of record.
Postincident Operations
After an incident is over, there may be an investi-
gation, critique, and a variety of dealings with the 
media.
Investigations—Every fi re and emergency inci-
dent should be investigated to determine its origin 
and causes as well as the contributing and mitigating 
factors. The actions and assessments of emergency 
responders aid immeasurably in the reconstruc-
tion of emergency scenes. Communications between 
emergency responders and investigators are vital to 
reconstructing the events surrounding most fi res and 
emergencies. Therefore, emergency response person-
nel should become skilled in observing, recording, 
and recollecting details about the incidents to which 
they responded. This information will aid them as 
well as the investigators.
Critiques, 
Postmortems, 
and 
After-Action  
Assessments—Even the best-trained and equipped 
fi re departments and emergency response orga-
nizations can learn from their experiences. Every 
incident is an opportunity to test responders’ knowledge 
while gaining new insights through experience. 
Postincident critiques, postmortems, and after- action 

409
acceptable risk the level of hazard potential that the public is 
willing to live with, that constantly changes based on public per-
ception of the news and current events
accidental refers to those fi res that are the result of unplanned or 
unintentional events
accountability being responsible for one’s personal activities; in 
the organizational context, accountability includes being respon-
sible for the actions of one’s subordinates
action plan an organized course of action that addresses 
all phases of incident control within a specifi ed period 
of time
active listening deliberate and apparent process by which one 
focuses attention on the communications of another
administrative law body of law created by administrative 
 agencies in the form of rules, regulations, orders, and court 
decisions
administrative process a body of law that creates public regula-
tory agencies and defi nes their powers and duties
administrative search warrant a written order issued by a court 
specifying the place to be searched and the reason for the search
adoption to formally accept through legislative action and put 
into effect
adoption by reference a method of code adoption in which the 
specifi c edition of a model code is referred to within the adopting 
ordinance
adoption by transcription a method of code adoption in which 
the entire text of the code is published within the adopting 
ordinance
agency shop an arrangement whereby employees are not 
required to join a union, but are required to pay a service charge 
for representation
arbitration the process by which contract disputes are resolved 
with a decision by a third party
area of refuge portion of a structure that is relatively safe from 
fi re and the products of combustion
arson the intentional setting of a fi re where there is criminal 
intent
attack role a situation in which the fi rst-arriving offi cer elects to 
take immediate action and to pass command on to another offi cer
authority the right and power to command
automatic fire protection sprinkler self-operating thermosensi-
tive device that releases a spray of water over a designed area to 
control or extinguish a fi re
backdraft explosion a type of explosion caused by a sudden 
infl ux of air into a mixture of burning gases that have been heated 
to the ignition temperature of at least one of them
barrier obstacle; in communications, a barrier prevents the 
message from being understood by the receiver
benchmarks signifi cant points in the emergency event 
usually marking the accomplishment of one of the three 
 incident priorities: life safety, incident stabilization, or property 
conservation
branches level of supervision between divisions and groups 
and operations that is used when number of divisions or groups 
exceeds acceptable span of control
British thermal unit the amount of heat required to raise the 
temperature of one pound of water one degree Fahrenheit
budget a fi nancial plan for an individual or organization
capital budget a fi nancial plan to purchase high-dollar items that 
have a life expectancy of more than 1 year
certification document that attests that a person has demonstrated 
the knowledge and skills necessary to function in a particular 
craft or trade
chain of custody refers to the chronological documentation, and/
or paper trail, showing the seizure, custody, control, transfer, anal-
ysis, and disposition of evidence
closed shop a term in labor relations denoting that union mem-
bership is a condition of employment
coach a person who helps another develop a skill
code a body of law or rules which is systematically arranged. 
When and where to do, or not to do something
codes systematic arrangement of a body of rules
command role a situation in which the fi rst-arriving offi cer takes 
command until relieved by a senior offi cer
Glossary

410  Glossary
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) federal 
government agency charged with administering laws related to 
nondiscrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, 
or national origin
ethics system of values; a standard of conduct
expert power a recognition of authority by virtue of an individu-
al’s skill or knowledge
facilities unit sets up, maintains facilities, provides facility security
fact finding a collective bargaining process; the fact fi nder gath-
ers information and makes recommendations
Fayol’s bridge organizational principle that recognizes the prac-
tical necessity for horizontal as well as vertical communications 
within an organization
feedback reaction to a process that may alter or reinforce that process
finance section that part of the incident management system that 
is responsible for facilitating the procurement of resources and for 
tracking the costs associated with such procurement
fire behavior the science of the phenomena and consequences 
of fi re
fire control activities associated with confi ning and extinguish-
ing a fi re
fire extension the movement of fi re from one area to another
fire extinguishment activities associated with putting out all 
visible fi res
fire resistance the resistance of a building to collapse or to total 
involvement in fi re or the property of materials and their assem-
blies, which prevents or retards the passage of excessive heat, hot 
gases or fl ames under conditions of use
first-level supervisors the fi rst supervisory rank in an organization
flashover a dramatic event in a room fi re that rapidly leads to full 
involvement of all combustible materials present
floor plan a bird’s-eye view of the structure with the roof 
 removed showing walls, doors, stairs, and so on
food unit supplies food and potable water, operates food 
services unit
formal bid a formal request for cost of products and/or services 
that are over a specifi ed dollar amount
free-burning phase second phase of fi re growth, has suffi cient 
fuel and oxygen to allow for continued fi re growth
fuel load or fire load the total amount of combustible material 
within a fi re area, expressed in terms of pounds per square foot
goal a target or other object by which achievement can be mea-
sured; in the context of management, a goal helps defi ne purpose 
and mission
grievance a formal dispute between member and employer over 
some condition of work
grievance procedure formal process for handling disputed issues 
between member and employer; where a union contract is in place, 
the grievance procedure is part of the contract
gripe the least severe form of discontent
ground unit arranges for transportation of personnel, supplies, 
food, and equipment
group tactical level management group that commands individual 
companies, task force, or strike teams; a functional assignment 
versus a geographical assignment
commanding third step in the management process, command-
ing, involves using the talents of others, giving them directions 
and setting them to work
communications unit prepares communication plan, distributes 
and maintains communication plan
community consequences an assessment of the consequences on 
the community, which includes the people, their property, and the 
environment
complaint an expression of discontent
confinement an activity required to prevent fi re from extending 
to an uninvolved area or another structure
conflict a disagreement, quarrel, or struggle between two indi-
viduals or groups
consulting seeking advice or getting information from another; as 
a leadership style it implies that the leader seeks ideas and allows 
contributions to the decision-making process
controlling fi fth step in the management process, controlling, 
involves monitoring the process to ensure that the work is accom-
plishing the intended goals and objectives, and taking corrective 
action when it is not
coordinating fourth step in the management process, coordinat-
ing, involves the manager’s controlling the efforts of others
counseling one of several leadership tools that focuses on improv-
ing member performance
customer service service to people in the community
defensive mode actions intended to control a fi re by limiting its 
spread to a defi ned area
delegate to grant to another a part of one’s authority or power
delegating sharing work, authority, and responsibility with 
another; as a leadership style, delegating implies the most 
generous sharing of the offi cer’s leadership role
delegation act of assigning duties to subordinates
demobilization unit ensures resources a released from the 
incident in an orderly, safe, and cost-effective manner
demotion reduction of a member to a lower grade
directing controlling a course of action; as a leadership style, it is 
characterized by an authoritarian approach
disciplinary action an administrative process whereby a mem-
ber is punished for not conforming to the organizational rules or 
regulations
discipline system of rules and regulations
diversity a quality of being diverse, different, or not all alike
division tactical level management group that commands 
 individual companies, task force, or strike teams; a geographical 
assignment versus a functional assignment
documentation unit maintains and archives all incident related 
documentation
emergency incident any situation to which a fi re department or 
other emergency response organization responds to deliver emer-
gency services
empowerment to give authority or power to another
energy the capacity to do work; in the fi re triangle, heat repre-
sents energy
environmental factors factors like weather that impact on 
fi refi ghting operations

Glossary  411
line authority characteristic of organizational structures denoting 
the relationship between supervisors and subordinates
line functions those activities that provide emergency services
line-item budgeting collecting similar items into a single account 
and presenting them on one line in a budget document
listed equipment or materials included in a document prepared by 
an approved testing agency indicating that the equipment or mate-
rials were tested in accordance with an approved test protocol and 
found suitable for a specifi c use
local ordinance law usually found in a municipal code. In the 
United States, these laws are enforced locally in addition to state 
law and federal law
lock box a locked container on the premises that can be opened 
by the fi re department containing preplanning information, ma-
terial safety data sheets, names and phone numbers of key per-
sonnel, and keys that allow emergency responders access to the 
property
logistics section that part of the incident management system that 
provides equipment, services, material, and other resources to sup-
port the response to an incident
management accomplishment of the organization’s goals by 
 utilizing the resources available
management by exception (MBE) management approach 
whereby  attention is focused only on the exceptional situations 
when performance expectations are not being met
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs a fi ve-tiered representation of 
 human needs developed by Abraham Maslow
mediation the process by which contract disputes are resolved 
with a facilitator
medical unit prepares medical plan, provides fi rst aid and light 
medical treatment; mutual aid assistance provided by another fi re 
department or agency
memorandum of understanding (MOU) a pre-established 
 contract to provide goods or services from a vendor prior to an 
emergent event
message in communications; the message is the information 
 being sent to another
mini-maxi code a code developed and adopted at the state level 
for either mandatory or optional enforcement by local govern-
ments; that cannot be amended by the local governments
mission statement a formal document indicating the focus and 
values for an organization
model representation or example of something
model code technical rules developed and maintained by organi-
zations and made available for governments to adopt and enforce. 
They are generally developed through a consensus through the use 
of technical committees
motivators factors that are regarded as work incentives such as 
recognition and the opportunity to achieve personal goals
motive the goal or object of one’s actions; the reason one sets 
a fi re
National Integration Center (NIC) Incident Management 
 Systems Integration Division established by the Secretary of 
Homeland Security to provide “strategic direction for and over-
sight of the National Incident Management System (NIMS)”
National Response Framework (NRF) defi nes the principles, 
roles, and structures that organize how we respond as a nation
group dynamics how individuals interact and infl uence one another
harassment to disturb, torment, or pester
health and safety officer a person assigned as the manager of the 
department’s health and safety program
heat of combustion the amount of heat given off by a particular 
substance during the combustion process
high-achievement needs according to the needs theory of moti-
vation, individuals with high-achievement needs accept challenges 
and work diligently
high-affiliation needs according to the needs theory of motiva-
tion, individuals with high-affi liation needs desire to be accepted 
by others
hygiene factors as used by Frederick Herzberg, hygiene factors 
keep people satisfi ed with their work environment
identification power a recognition of authority by virtue of the 
other individual’s character or trust
ignition temperature the minimum temperature to which a sub-
stance must be heated to start combustion after an ignition source 
is introduced
incident command system a tool for dealing with emergencies of 
all kinds
incident commander (IC) the person in overall command of an 
incident
incident management system an organized system of roles, 
responsibilities, and standard operating procedures used to 
manage an emergency operation
incident safety officer (ISO) as part of the IMS, that person re-
sponsible for monitoring and assessing safety hazards and ensur-
ing personnel safety
incipient phase fi rst stage of fi re growth, limited to the material 
originally ignited
initial report a vivid but brief description of the on-scene condi-
tions relevant to the emergency
inspection model a method of setting inspection priorities based 
on a jurisdictions actual fi re experience or identifi ed hazards
inspection warrant an administrative warrant issued by a  judicial 
offi cer to search or inspect a property, or perform a  noncriminal 
investigation
internal customers members of the organization
interpersonal dynamics dynamic practices developed by groups 
that separate them from other individuals
ISO a family of standards for quality management systems;
 ISO 9000 is maintained by ISO, the International Organization 
for Standardization, and is administered by accreditation and 
 certifi cation bodies
leadership the personal actions of managers and supervisors to 
get team members to carry out certain actions
legitimate power a recognition of authority derived from the 
government or other appointing agency
liaison officer as part of the incident management system, the 
contact between the incident commander and agencies not repre-
sented in the incident command structure
life risk factors the number of people in danger, the immediacy 
of their danger, and their ability to provide for their own safety
life safety the fi rst priority during all emergency operations that 
addresses the safety of occupants and emergency responders

412  Glossary
pre-incident planning preparing for operations at the scene of a 
given hazard or occupance
pre-incident survey the fact-fi nding part of the pre-incident plan-
ning process in which the facility is visited to gather information 
regarding the building and its contents property conservation the 
efforts to reduce primary and secondary (as a result of  fi re-fi ghting 
operations) damage
probable cause a reasonable cause for belief in the existence 
of facts
procedure defi ned course of action
program budget the expenses and possible income related to the 
delivery of a specifi c program within an organization
protected construction protected from the effects of fi re by 
encasement; concrete, gypsum, and sprayed on fi re-resistive coat-
ings are all used to protect structural elements
public fire department part of local government
public information officer (PIO) as part of the IMS, that person 
who acts as the contact between the IC and the news media, re-
sponsible for gathering and releasing incident information
punishment power a recognition of authority by virtue of the 
 supervisor’s ability to administer punishment
Quick Access Prefire Plan a document that provides emer-
gency responders with vital information pertaining to a particular 
occupancy
rapid intervention team (RIT) a team or company of emergency 
personnel kept immediately available for the potential rescue of 
other emergency responders
receiver in communications, the receiver is the intended recipient 
of the message
rehabilitation as applies to fi refi ghting personnel, an opportunity 
to take a short break from fi refi ghting duties to rest, cool off, and 
replenish liquids
request for bid a formal request for cost of products and/or ser-
vices that are over a specifi ed dollar amount
Request for Proposal (RFP) a solicitation used when you need 
design, consultant, products, or typically services
Request for Quote (RFQ) a non binding typically solicitation to 
determine cost for goods or services from pre-established vendors 
or contractors
resource unit conducts check-in activities and maintains status of 
all resources
responsibility being accountable for actions and activities; 
having a moral and perhaps legal obligation to carry out certain 
activities
reward power a recognition of authority by virtue of the supervi-
sor’s ability to give recognition
right-of-entry clause a code that permits the fi re offi cial to enter 
and inspect structures on a routine basis, exempt one and two-family 
dwellings and residential portions of multifamily structures
rollover reignition of gases that have risen and encountered fresh 
air, and thus a new supply of oxygen
scalar principle organizational concept that refers to the inter-
rupted series of steps or layers within an organization
search warrant legal writ issued by a judge, magistrate, or 
other legal offi cer that directs certain law enforcement offi cers to 
noncombustible construction in broad terms, constructed of 
 materials that will not burn
objective something that one’s efforts are intended 
to accomplish
occupant services sector that part of the incident management 
system that focuses on the needs of the citizens who are directly 
or indirectly affected by an incident
offensive mode fi refi ghting operations that make a direct attack 
on a fi re for purposes of control and extinguishment
open shop a labor arrangement in which there is no requirement 
for the employee to join a union
operating budget a fi nancial plan to acquire the goods and ser-
vices needed to run an organization for a specifi c period of time, 
usually 1 year
operations section division in the incident management 
system that oversees the functions directly involved in rescue, 
fi re suppression, or other activities within the mission of an 
organization
oral reprimand the fi rst step in a formal disciplinary process
ordinance a law of an authorized subdivision of a state, such as 
a county, city or town
organization a group of people working together to accomplish 
a task
organizing second step in the management process, organizing, 
involves bringing together and arranging the essential resources to 
get a job done
overhaul searching the fi re scene for possible hidden fi res or 
sparks that may rekindle
oxidation a chemical reaction in which oxygen combines with 
other substances causing fi re, explosions, and rust
performance code a prescriptive code that assigns an objective 
to be met and establishes criteria for determining compliance
performance-based design an alternative method for satisfy-
ing the fi re protection and life safety intent of construction codes 
based on agreed-on performance goals and objectives, engineer-
ing analysis, and quantitative assessment of alternatives against 
the design goals and objectives
permit model a method of setting inspection priorities by 
 inspecting those occupancies and processes that require fi re 
code permits
personnel accountability the tracking of personnel as to location 
and activity during an emergency event
planning fi rst step in the management process, planning, involves 
looking into the future and determining objectives
planning section that part of the incident management system 
that focuses on the collection, evaluation, dissemination, and use 
of information (information management) to support the incident 
command structure
plot plan a bird’s-eye view of a property showing existing struc-
tures for the purpose of pre-incident planning, such as primary 
 access points, barriers to access, utilities, water supply, and so on
policy formal statement that defi nes a course or method 
of action
power the command or control over others, status
power needs a recognized motivator to be in charge or have 
group affi liation

Glossary  413
tasks the duties and activities performed by individuals, compa-
nies, or teams that lead to successful accomplishments of assigned 
tactics
termination the fi nal step in the disciplinary process or the inci-
dent command process
thermal lag the difference between the operating temperature of 
a fi re detection device such a sprinkler head as and the actual air 
temperature when the device activates 
theoretical fire flow the water fl ow requirements expressed in 
gallons per minute needed to control a fi re in a given area
Theory X management style in which the manager believes that 
people dislike work and cannot be trusted
Theory Y management style in which the manager believes that 
people like work and can be trusted
Theory Z management style in which the manager believes that 
people not only like to work and can be trusted, but that they want 
to be collectively involved in the management process and recog-
nized when successful
thermal lag the difference between the operating temperature of 
a fi re detection device such a sprinkler head as and the actual air 
temperature when the device activates
thermal stratification rising of hotter gases in an enclosed 
space
total quality management focus of the organization on continu-
ous improvement geared to customer satisfaction
transfer a step in the disciplinary process that provides the mem-
ber a fresh start in another venue
transitional mode the critical process of shifting from the offen-
sive mode or from the defensive to the offensive
union shop a term used to describe the situation in which an 
employee must agree to join the union after a specifi ed period of 
time, usually 30 days after employment
unity of command organizational principle whereby there is only 
one boss
vented opened to the atmosphere by the fi re burning through win-
dows or walls through which heat and fi re byproducts are released, 
and through which fresh air may enter
ventilation a systematic process to enhance the removal of smoke 
and fi re by-products and the entry of cooler air to facilitate rescue 
and fi re-fi ghting operations
vision an imaginary concept, usually favorable, of the result of an 
effort
warrant a legal writ issued by a judicial offi cer commanding 
an offi cer to arrest a person, seize property, or search 
a premises
written reprimand documents unsatisfactory performance and 
specifi es the corrective action expected; usually follows an oral 
reprimand
 conduct a search of certain property for certain things or persons, 
and if found, to bring them to court
sender part of the communications process, the sender transmits 
a thought or message to the receiver
shelter in place selecting a small, interior room, with no or few 
windows, and taking refuge there
situation unit collects and analyzes information on the current 
situation
size-up mental assessment of the situation; gathering and analyz-
ing information that is critical to the outcome of an event
smoldering phase third stage of fi re growth; once the oxygen has 
been reduced, visible fi re diminishes
span of control organizational principle that addresses the num-
ber of personnel a supervisor can effectively manage
specific heat the heat-absorbing capacity of a substance
specification code a prescriptive code that specifi es a type of con-
struction or materials to be used
staff positions designated to aid the IC in fulfi lling the IC’s re-
sponsibilities, typically, an incident safety offi cer, an information 
offi cer, and a liaison offi cer
staff functions activities that support those providing emergency 
services
standard rule for measuring or model to be followed
standard operating procedure (SOP) an organized directive that 
establishes a standard course of action
statute a law enacted by a state or the federal legislature
strategy sets broad goals and outlines the overall plan to control 
the incident
strike team set number of like resources that operate with com-
mon communications and a single unit leader
structural factors an assessment of the age, condition, and struc-
ture type of a building, and the proximity of exposures
succession plan the formal or informal training of subordinates 
to assume your position within the organization
supply unit orders, receives, and distributes supplies
supporting as a leadership style, the supporting process 
involves open and continuous communications and a sharing in 
the decision-making process
suspension disciplinary action in which the member is relieved 
from duties, possibly with partial or complete loss of pay
tactics various maneuvers that can be used to achieve a strategy 
while fi ghting a fi re or dealing with a similar emergency
target hazards locations where there are unusual hazards, or where 
an incident would likely overload the department’s resources, or where 
there is a need for interagency cooperation to mitigate the hazard
task force mixed number of resources that operate with common 
communications and a single unit leader


Index
415
References are to pages. A page number 
followed by “f” indicates a fi gure.
Abandoned buildings, 322
Acceptable risk, 243
Access factor, 264
Accidental fi res, 292, 294–295
Accident causation theories, 202, 
204–205
Accident investigations, 207
benefi ts of, 210
reasons for, 208
responder fatalities, 209
responder injuries, 209
vehicle accidents, 209–210
what should be investigated, 208
who should investigate, 208–209
Accountability, 67
Accreditation, 93–94
Action plans
development of, 358, 360
implementation of, 360–366
Active listening, 26
Administrative laws, 53
Administrative search warrant, 303
Adoption by reference, 246
Adoption by transcription, 246
Adoption, defi nition of, 246
Agency shop, 111
Allied Agency Cooperation, 326
Alyn, Kimberly, 142
America Burning, 239, 240
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), of 
1990, 148
Arbitration, 111–112
Area of refuge, 320
Arson, 293, 296–297
Assistant chiefs, 66
Attack role, 355–356
Authority, 108
for local fi re department, 51–54
Autoignition, 295–296
Autonomy and entrepreneurship, concept 
of, 73
Backdraft explosions, 282
Barrier, 25
Battalion chiefs, 66
Benchmarks, 346
Blake, Robert R., 141
Blanchard, Kenneth, 87
Branches, 379
British thermal unit (BTU), 283
Brunacini, Alan, 88, 366
Brunacini’s twenty-fi ve safety 
truths, 230
Budgeting, company offi cer role in, 115
Budgets, 112
Building access, 350, 351f
Building construction, 265. See also Fire 
extin guishing systems; Pre-incident 
planning
fi re extension, 282
fi re resistive construction, 265, 266
fuel load, 269
heavy timber construction, 267–268
incident management, 350
noncombustible construction, 265, 
266–267
ordinary construction, 267
performance codes, 268–269
types of, 265, 266
ventilation, 282–283
wood frame construction, 268
Building contents, 350
pre-incident planning, 321
Building location, 350, 351
Building occupancy, 350
Building Offi cials and Code Administra-
tors International (BOCA), 245
Building systems, 321–322
Business plan, 107
Canada, largest fi re departments in, 48, 49
Candidate Physical Aptitude Test (CPAT), 
110
Capital budget, 112
Capital letters, use of, 31, 35
Captains, 14
Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems, 
275
Causes of fi res
accidental causes, 294–295
arson, 296–297
natural causes, 295–296
residential fi res, leading causes of, 296
Certifi cation, 8
Certifi cation ladder, 10, 11f
Certifi ed Fire Accreditation International 
(CFAI), 93, 94
Chain of custody, 301
Change management, 122–123, 184–187
Chief fi re offi cer designation, 12
City organizational chart, 52f
Civil Rights Act, 147, 148
Title VII of, 149–150
Clean Air Act, 275
Closed shop, 111
Clothing, protective, 218–219
Coaching, 165–167
COAL WAS WEALTH, 352
Codes, 244–245, 247. See also Model 
codes
and pre-incident plans, 255
versus standards, 246
College programs, 9
and NFPA 1021, compared, 10–12
Command decisions, 354–356
Commanding, 82–83
Command role, 354–355
Command sequence, 347
action plans
development of, 358, 360
implementation of, 360–366

416  Index
communications, 356
size-up, 347, 349–352, 357–358
Commission government, 54
Communication model, 23, 24f
Communications, 22
command sequence, 356
effective on-scene communications, 
400–408
E-mail, 35
emergency communications, 39–41
fi reground communications philosophy, 
401–403
fi re research and data, 240
formal communications, 23–24
importance of, 23–24
improving, 40
incident management system, 377
incident operations, 403–407
informal communications, 23–24
and information management, 368
oral communications. See Oral commu-
nications
personal communications, 24
postincident operations, 408
process, 23, 24f
public relations, 36–39
terminating an incident, 407–408
writing skills, improving. See Writing 
skills
Community college-based fi re science pro-
grams, 9
Community’s needs, 264
Company inspections, 250
Company offi cers, 66–67, 69–70
Company readiness, 335–336
Company training, 331–335
company skills, 332
individual skills, 332
initial emergency scene operations, 333
live-fi re training, 333–334
multiple-company training evolutions, 
332–333
new personnel, 331
Complaints, dealing with, 182–183
Computer-aided dispatch, 39–40
Conducting inspections, 253–254
Confl icts, dealing with, 181–182
Construction. See Building construction
Consulting, 143
Controlling, 83–84
Cook County Administration Building fi re, 
269, 270f, 271f
Coordinating, 83
Correct mode, 354
Council-manager government, 53–54
elected leadership, 56–57
fl exible system, 55–56
roles and responsibilities, 56
stability and change, 55
Counseling, 167–168
County fi re departments/fi re districts, 58–59
Courtroom demeanor, 306
Courts, role of, 58
Covey, Steven, 26
Critical incident stress (CIS) program, 
228–231
Customer service, 88
components of, 123–125
managing, 123
Customers, in 360-degree assessment, 171
Deaths. See Injuries and fatalities
Defensive mode, 354
Delegation of authority, 71–72, 108–109
leadership style, 143
Deluge sprinkler systems, 274
Deming, Edwards, 86–87
Demotion of employees, 180
Departmental role, 7–8
Department of Homeland Security, 53, 313, 
368
Deputy chiefs, 66
Directing, 143
Discharge of employees
retaliatory discharge for reporting ha-
rassment, 151
Disciplinary action, 179
demotion of employees, 180
oral reprimands, 179
procedures, 179–181
suspension of employees, 180
termination of employees, 180
transfer of employees, 180
written reprimands, 180
Discipline, 73–74
Discrimination, 147. See also Harassment, 
in workplace
Disenchanted fi refi ghters, dealing with, 
183
Distracting activities, 30
Diversity, in workplace, 144, 147, 148
benefi ts of, 148–149
supervision of, 149
Division of labor, 70–71
Documenting the fi re scene, 305–306
Domino theory, 202, 205f
Drucker, Peter, 85–86
Dry pipe sprinkler systems, 274
Duplication of fi re protection, 278
Education and training
activities, 335
advanced training, 334–335
company training. See Company 
training
Fire Department Occupational Safety 
and Health Program, 213–214
fi refi ghters, 213–214
future of, 388–391
lesson plans, 334–335
offi cer training, 334
physical training, 335
pre-incident planning, 329
specialized training, 334–335
Electronic fi ling system, 118
E-mail, 35
Emergency communications, 39–41
Emergency incident, 367
Emergency management, 312–314, 372–374
Emergency Management Institute, 62, 
368, 374
Emergency operations, 220–222
risk management during, 355
Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs), 
183
Employment discrimination, 147. See also 
Harassment, in workplace
Empowerment, 181
EMS/hospitals/clinics, 60
Energy, 293
Environmental factors, 351
Equal Employment Opportunity Commis-
sion (EEOC), 147, 148, 151
Equal Pay Act, of 1963, 147
Equipment
fi re equipment safety, 214–218
protective. See Personal protective 
equipment (PPE)
Ethics
diversity, 149
harassment, 150, 154
in management, 95–97
media relations, 39
written communications, 31
Evaluations. See Performance evaluations
Experience, 263–264
Expert power, 142, 143
Exposures, 323
Extinguishment of fi res. See Fire extin-
guishing systems
Facility safety, 222–226
Fact fi nding, 111
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), 184
Fairness, 181–183
Fatalities. See Injuries and fatalities
Fayol, Henry, 80–81
Fayol’s bridge, 95, 96f
Fayol’s principles, 81
FE-13, 275
Federal fi re departments, 60–62
Federal government, 53, 111
FESHE conferences, 390
Financial resources management, 112–116
Fire, 293–294
Fire alarm systems, 275–276
Fire attack, 362
Fire behavior, 278
fi re extension, 282
and fuel load, 269
ventilation, 282–283
Fire causes, 239
Fire chief, 65
company offi cer, chief’s perspective of, 69
role of, 66
Fire confi nement, 362

Index  417
Fire control, 362–364, 366
Fire department connections, 274
Fire Department Occupational Safety and 
Health Program, 206
administration, 206
critical incident stress (CIS) program, 
228–231
drivers/operators, 214–218
emergency operations, 220–222
facility safety, 222–226
fi re apparatus and equipment, 214–218
fi re department administration, 206
medical/physical requirements, 226–228
member-assistance programs, 228
persons responsible for safety, 210–212
protective clothing and equipment, 
218–220
referenced publications, 206
training and education, 213–214
Fire departments
accreditation, 93–94
battalion chiefs, 66
company offi cers, 66–67, 69–70
county fi re departments/fi re districts, 
58–59
evolving role of, 62–63
federal fi re departments, 60–62
fi re chiefs, 65, 66
fi refi ghters, 67
Insurance Service Offi ce, 92–93
local management, quality of, 89–95
NFPA standards for, 93
organizational chart, 67–69
organizational structure, 63–67
Plain City Fire Department (PCFD), 
64, 65
public fi re departments, 58
service demands, evaluating, 94–95
in U.S. and Canada, 48, 49
volunteer fi re departments, 59–60
Fire endurance, 265
Fire extension, 282
Fire extinguishing systems, 270, 283, 362
carbon dioxide extinguishing systems, 275
clean extinguishing agents, 275
fi re alarm systems, 275–276
fi re department connections, 274
fi xed foam and water spray systems, 275
halogenated extinguishing agents, 275
NFPA 13 sprinkler systems, 271–273
residential sprinklers, 273
smoke and heat vents, 276
smoke control systems, 276
sprinkler systems, types of, 273–274
standpipe systems, 274
wet and dry chemical extinguishing sys-
tems, 274–275
Firefi ghter Life Safety Summit, in March 
2004, 200
Fireground communications philosophy, 
401–403
Fireground rehab, 221
Fire growth control, 362–364, 366
Fire in the United States (August 2007), 
239
Fire investigations, 292, 297
documenting the fi re scene, 305–306
fi re reports, 305
fi rst responders’ observations, 299–302
guidelines for calling an investigator, 298
legal issues for, 302–304
post fi re searches, 303
recording the information obtained, 
304–306
Fire load. See Fuel load
Fire phenomena
backdraft explosions, 282
fl ashover, 280–282
rollover, 279–280
thermal stratifi cation, 279
Fireplace ash fi res, 241, 295
Fire prevention
fi re research and data, 239–242
inspections. See Inspections
model building code system, of safety, 
251–252
model codes. See Model codes
National Fire Protection Association 
(NFPA), 240, 244, 247
NFPA 550, Fire Safety Concepts Tree, 
254–255
preincident plans, 255
through regulation, 242–244
Fire problem, in U.S., 239
Fire protection systems, 269–270
Fire reports, 305
Fire research and data, 239–242
Fire Research Safety Act (1968), 239
Fire resistive construction, 265, 266
Fire science, 278–279
FIRESCOPE incident command system, 
366
First-level supervisors, 136
First responders’ observations, 299–302
Fixed foam and water spray systems, 275
Flashover, 280–282
Flat and tall organizations, 73
Floor plans, 317, 318f
FM200, 275
Formal appraisal system, 171
Formal bid, 113
Formal organizations, 50
Formal versus informal communications, 
23–24
Free-burning phase, 279
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 240
FTEs (Full-time equivalent positions), 112
Fuel, 293
Fuel load, 269
FY07 NIMS training matrix, 369f
Gaps in fi re protection, 278
Geographic Information System (GIS), 94
Georgia Code, 245
Goals and objectives, 106
Good leaders, 184
Government
federal government, 53
legislative process, 57–58
local government. See Local 
 government
Grievances, dealing with, 182–183
Gripe, 182
Group dynamics, 135
Groups. See Organizations
Guideline for Fire Service Education 
 Programs in Community and Junior 
Colleges, 9
Halogenated and clean agent
fi re extinguishing systems, 275
Halon 1211, 275
Halon 1301, 275
Harassment, in workplace, 144, 147, 149
continuing problem of, 152
EEOC’s guidelines for employer liability 
for its supervisors, 151–154
retaliatory discharge for reporting, 151
supervision of, 150–151
Hazardous materials incident safety 
 offi cer, 212
Hazardous Materials Inventory Statements 
(HMIS), 255
Hazardous Materials Management Plans 
(HMMP), 255
Hazardous Materials Transportation 
 Uniform Safety Act, of 1990, 206
Health and safety committee, 210
Health and safety offi cer (HSO), 206, 207, 
211
Healthy workplace, 225. See also Safety
Heart health, 226–228
Heat, 293
Heat of combustion, 284
Heavy timber construction, 267–268
Heinrich, Herbert, 202
Herzberg, Frederick, 140
Herzberg’s model, 139–140
hygiene factors, 140
motivators, 140
Hierarchy of Needs, 85, 138–139
High-achievement needs, 140
High-affi liation needs, 141
Highway safety, 348–349
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act), 212
Homeland Security, 53
National Incident Management System, 
368–370
Hospital target hazards, 316
Human behavior, 138
Herzberg’s model, 139–140
Managerial Grid, 141
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, 85, 
138–139
needs theory, 140–141

418  Index
Human factors theory, 202
Human resources management, 108, 184
360-degree assessment, 169–171
coaching, 165–167
counseling, 167–168
disciplinary action. See Disciplinary 
 action
diversity. See Diversity, in workplace
harassment. See Harassment, in work-
place
on a large scale, 109–112
mentoring, 164–165
performance evaluations. See 
 Performance evaluations
recognition-giving, 177–179
Human Side of Enterprise, 86
Hygiene factors, 140
“I-Codes”, 245
Identifi cation power, 142
Ignition prevention, 254–255
Ignition temperature, 278
Incendiary, 293
Incident commander (IC), 211, 220f, 367, 
375, 378, 402
Incident command system (ICS), 
366–367, 368
Incident management, 344
attack role, 355–356
building construction, 350
command decisions, 354–356
command role, 354–355
command sequence. See Command se-
quence
correct mode, 354
IMS. See Incident management system 
(IMS)
initial report, 356–357
risk analysis, 352–366
Incident management system (IMS), 366
command, transfer of, 370–371
communications, 377
design requirements, 375
emergency management, 372–374
fi nance section, 379, 380f
incident commander, 375, 378
incident safety offi cer, 380
key positions, 378–381
liaison offi cer, 380–381
logistics section, 379
management theory, 370
media, 380
National Incident Management System, 
368–370
National Integration Center (NIC), 375
NFPA 1561, 374–375
NIMS training, 375–378
occupant services sector, 380
operations section, 378, 379f
organizational theory, 370
planning section, 379
postincident analysis, 371–372
public information offi cer, 380
staff assistants, 379–380
what makes IMS work, 375–381
Incident priorities, 345–347
Incident safety offi cer (ISO), 207, 
211, 380
Incident stabilization, 320
Incipient phase, 279
INERGEN, 275
Infectious disease control program, 212–213
Informal communications
versus formal communications, 23–24
Informal organizations, 50–51
Information appraisal system, 171
Injuries and fatalities
fi refi ghters, 196–197, 199f
annual NFPA reports, 200–202
causation theories, 202, 204–205
factors contributing to injuries, 202
investigation of injuries. See Accident 
investigations
nature of injuries, 201–202, 203f, 204f
reasons for injuries, 198–200
reduction of injuries, 202
from tank truck rollovers, 216–217
Inspections
company inspections, 250
conducting inspections, 253–254
demand for, 243–244
of existing occupancies, 249–250
model, 249
permit model, 248–249
program establishment, 247
warrant, 249
Insurance Service Offi ce (ISO), 92–93
Intentionally set fi res, 293, 296–297
Interagency cooperation, 325–326
Internal customers, 88
Internal Revenue Service, 53
International Association of Fire Chiefs’ 
Code of Ethics, 97
International Association of Fire Fighters 
(IAFF), 110
International Building Code (IBC), 245, 
246, 251, 266
International Code Council, in 1994, 245
International Conference of Building Of-
fi cials (ICBO), 245
International Fire Code (IFC), 246, 248
International Fire Service Accreditation 
Congress (IFSAC), 93
International Residential Code 
(IRC), 245
Interpersonal dynamics, 135
Investigations
accidents. See Accident investigations
fi re investigations. See Fire 
 investigations
ISO (International Organization for Stan-
dardization), 107
ISO 9000®, 107
It’s Your Ship, 188
Job discrimination, 147. See also Harass-
ment, in workplace
Joint Council of National Fire Service 
 Organizations, 8
goals of, 9
Joint Information System (JIS), 370
King County Code, 245
Knowledge, 263–264
Labor Management Relations Act, 110
Labor relations, 110, 111
complaints and grievances, dealing with, 
182–183
Latent heat of vaporization, 284
Law, defi ned, 53, 58
Leadership, 135. See also Human 
 resources management
360-degree assessment, 169–171
change management, 184–187
coaching, 165–167
communications and, 27–28
complaints and grievances, dealing with, 
182–183
confl icts, dealing with, 181–182
consulting, 143
counseling, 167–168
delegating, 143
directing, 143
disciplinary action. See Disciplinary 
 action
disenchanted fi refi ghters, dealing with, 
183
diversity. See Diversity, in workplace
Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs), 
183
fairness, 181–183
harassment. See Harassment, in work-
place
increasing responsibilities, 137–138
management, distinguished, 134
mentoring, 164–165
modeling human behavior. See Human 
behavior
new fi refi ghters, meeting with, 
161–163
performance evaluations. See Perfor-
mance evaluations
power. See Power
recognition-giving, 177–179
risk-taking, 161
style, 143–144
supervisory role, 160–161
supporting, 143
team-relationship building, 161–163
Tetrahedron, 144–146
when the leader is working, 222
where we get good leaders, 138
Legal issues, for fi re offi cers, 381
Legislative process, 57–58
Legitimate power, 142
Lesson plans, 334–335

Index  419
Liaison offi cer, 380–381
Lieutenants, 14
Life risk factors, 264
Life safety concerns, 320
Line authority, 67
Line functions, 68
Line-item budgeting, 113
Listening, 26–27
Live-fi re training, 333–334
Local government
city organizational chart, 52f
commission government, 54
council-manager government, 53–54, 
55–57
county fi re departments/fi re districts, 
58–59
courts, role of, 58
mayor-council government, 54
public fi re departments, 58
representative town meetings, 54
town meetings, 54
types of, 53–54
Local industry, 60
Local ordinance, 53
Local/state/federal emergency manage-
ment agencies, 60–61
Lock box, 329
Long-range planning, 82
Management, 80
acquiring needed resources, 116
change management, 122–123, 184–187
commanding, 82–83
controlling, 83–84
coordinating, 83
customer service, 123–125
delegation of authority, 108–109
emergency management, 312–314, 
372–374
emerging issues, 126–127
ethics role in, 95–97
Fayol’s principles, 81
fi nancial resources, 112–116
functions of, 81–85, 107
goals and objectives, 106
human resources. See Human resources 
management
incident management. See Incident 
 management
labor relations, 110, 111
leadership, distinguished, 134
local fi re departments, 89–95
mission statements, 105–106
modern management
beginnings of, 80–81
contributors, 85–88
in modern organizations, 88–89
ongoing issues, 126
organizing, 82, 108–121
personal goal setting, 106–107
planning, 81–82, 107–108
principle of exception, 84–85
problem solving, 121–122
team building, 125–126
time management, 117–121
vision statements, 105
Management by exception (MBE), 84
Management by objectives (MBO), 85, 86
Managerial Grid, 141
Maslow, Abraham, 85, 138
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, 85, 138–139
Master fi refi ghter, as mentor, 165
Mayor-council government, 54
McGregor, Douglas, 86
Mechanical ventilation, 283
Media
dealing with, 36–37
incident management system, 380
news releases, 37–39
Mediation, 111
Medical requirements for fi refi ghters, 
226–228
Meeting with new fi refi ghters, 161–163
Member-assistance programs, 228
Memorandum of Understanding (MOUs), 
115, 326
Mentoring, 164–165
Micromanaging, 71
Mid-range planning, 82
Mill construction. See Heavy timber con-
struction
Mini-maxi codes, 246
Mission statements, 105–106
Mitigation, 313, 373
Model building code system, of safety
changes in use and occupancy, 252
use and occupancy classes, 251–252
Model codes, 244. See also Codes
code adoption, 246
development of, 245
international codes, 245–246
International Fire Code Council (IFCC), 
246
regional model codes, evolution of, 
245–246
Modeling human behavior, 138–141
Motivators, 140
Motives for arson-related fi res, 297
Mounton, Jane S., 141
Multiple causation theory, 202, 204
Multiple-company training evolutions, 
332–333
Mutual Aid Agreements, 326
National Board of Fire Underwriters, 245
National Board’s Model Building Law, 
245
National Electric Code (NEC), 245
National Fallen Firefi ghter Foundation, 
199–200, 209
National Fire Academy (NFA), 62, 108, 
284, 313, 327, 374
National Fire Fighter Near-Miss Reporting 
System, 205
National Fire Protection Association 
(NFPA), 5, 108, 206, 240, 244, 247
codes and standards, 9–10. See also spe-
cifi c NFPA standard
NFPA 1021. See NFPA 1021
National Incident Management System 
(NIMS), 368–370
training, 375–378
National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH), 184, 205, 216
National Integration Center (NIC)
Incident Management Systems Integra-
tion Division, 375
National Labor Relations Act, of 1935, 111
National Professional Qualifi cations Board 
(NPQB), 93
National Professional Qualifi cations Sys-
tem, in 1972, 9
National Response Framework (NRF), 367
Natural ventilation, 283
Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service, 
A, 188, 298, 327
Needs theory, 140–141
News media. See Media
News releases, 37–39
NFPA 13 sprinkler systems, 271–273
NFPA 13D systems, 272, 273
NFPA 13R systems, 272, 273
NFPA 25, 272
NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code, 275
NFPA 550, Fire Safety Concepts Tree, 
254–255, 278
NFPA 704 marking system, 255, 256f
NFPA 1021, 10
and college programs, compared, 10–12
ethics, 96
NFPA 1201, 329
NFPA 1410, 333
NFPA 1500, 206, 213, 214, 215, 218, 220, 
221, 222, 223, 226, 228, 374
NFPA 1521, 207, 208
NFPA 1561, 211, 374
NFPA 1710, 93, 336, 337
NFPA 1720, 93, 337
NIMS Integration Center (NIC), 370
Noncombustible construction, 265, 266–
267
Objectives and goals. See Goals and 
Objectives
Occupant services sector, 365, 380
Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration (OSHA), 184, 205, 374
Offensive mode, 354
One Minute Manager, 87, 175
Open shop, 111
Operating budget, 112
Opportunity. See Professional development
Oral communications, 24
barriers, 25–26
improving, 29–30
and leadership, 27–28

420  Index
listening, 26–27
practical uses, 28–29
Oral reprimands, 179
Ordinance, 53, 246
Ordinary construction, 267
Organizational chart, 50, 67–69
Organizations, 134. See also Fire depart-
ments
assignment of specifi c responsibilities, 71
autonomy and entrepreneurship, 73
changing, 72–73
control at the proper level, 71
delegation of duties, 71–72
discipline, 73–74
division of labor, 70–71
fl at and tall organizations, 73
formal organizations, 50, 134
informal groups/organizations, 50–51, 
135
principles of good organizations, 70–74
scalar organization structure, 70, 71f
span of control, 71
unity of command, 70
Organizing, 82, 108–121
Organizing your own company, 74–75
OSCAR (Occupancy, Size, Conditions, Ac-
tions, and Resources), 357
Ouchi, William, 86
Overhaul, 301, 362
Oxidation, 293
Parkinson’s Law, 117
Peer feedback, 170–171
Performance-based design, 268–269
Performance codes, 268–269
Performance evaluations, 168–169
behaviorally anchored system, 174–177
central tendency, 174
common rater errors, 174
contamination, 174
effective evaluation reviews, 176
graphic rating system, 173
halo effect, 174
“like me” syndrome, 174
putting “PEP” in, 177
rank ordering, 174
systems, 171–177
writing evaluations, 175–177
Permit model, 248–249
Personal barriers, in communication, 
25–26
Personal communications, forms of, 24
Personal goal setting, 106–107
Personal protective equipment (PPE), 213, 
218
outdated equipment, 219
self-contained breathing apparatus, 
219–220
Personnel accountability, 220
Physical barriers, in communication, 25
Physical requirements for fi refi ghters, 
226–228
Physical training, 335
Plain City Fire Department (PCFD), 64, 
65, 67f, 68f, 74, 345
Planning, 81–82, 107–108, 120
Plot plans, 317, 318f
PMBOK® Guide, 107
Police department, 60
Policy, 88
Power, 140, 141–143
expert power, 142, 143
identifi cation power, 142
legitimate power, 142
punishment power, 142
reward power, 142
Power needs, 140
Practice of Management, 85
Preaction sprinkler systems, 274
Pre-incident planning, 255, 314
abandoned buildings, 322
activities, 315–327
advantages of, 314
building contents, 321
building systems, 321–322
building type and condition, 320–321
and codes, 255
contents hazards, 321
effectiveness of, 314
exposures, 323
fl oor plans, 317, 318f
forms, 317, 318–319f
human failures in, 326–327
information needs for, 323
information obtained
converting into a plan, 324–327
recording and storage, 324, 327–329
what should be included, 326
interagency cooperation, 325–326
issues to address, 325
life safety concerns, 320
plot plans, 317, 318f
Quick Access Prefi re Plan, 327–328
resource needs, 325
standard operating procedure, 327, 330
typical or recurring events, 327–330
water supply, 322–323
where to start, 316–317
Pre-incident surveys, 315. See also Pre-
incident planning
gathering information, 317–320
what to look for, 320–323
Preparedness, 313, 368, 370, 372–373. See 
also Pre-incident planning
Principle of exception, 84–85
Private non-profi t agencies, 60
Probable cause, 303
Problem solving, 121–122, 182–183
Procedure, 88–89
Professional development, 12–14
model, 390–391
Program budget, 115
Project Management Body of Knowledge 
Guide. See PMBOK® Guide
Promotion to company offi cer, 8
professional development, 12–14
Property conservation, 320
Property risk factors, 264
Protected construction, 265
Protective clothing and equipment, 218–
220
Public fi re departments, 58
Public information offi cer (PIO), 380
Public relations
individuals, dealing with, 36
media, dealing with, 36–37
news releases, 37–39
Public Safety Offi cers Benefi t (PSOB), 209
Public’s perception versus reality, 241
Punishment power, 142
Pure chance theory, 204
Quality, Productivity, and Competitive 
Position, 86
Quick Access Prefi re Plan, 327–328
Quid pro quo, 150
Rapid intervention teams (RIT), 221–222
Recognition-giving, 177–179
Recovery, 314, 373–374
Representative town meetings, 54
Reprimands. See Oral reprimands; Written 
reprimands
Request for bid. See Formal bid
Request for Proposal (RFP). See Request 
for Purchase (RFP)
Request for Purchase (RFP), 114
Request for Quote (RFQ), 114
Residential sprinklers, 273
Resources, 116
Response, 314, 373
Response time, 336, 337–338
Responsibility, 67
Retaliatory discharge for reporting harass-
ment, 151
Reward power, 142
Right of entry clauses, 249
Risk analysis, 352–366
Risk-taking, 161
Roles and responsibilities, list of, 5
Rollover, 279–280
Safe Operation of Fire Tankers, 217–218
Safety. See also Fire Department Occu-
pational Safety and Health Program; 
Injuries and fatalities
Brunacini’s twenty-fi ve safety truths, 
230
facility safety, 222–226
hazardous materials incident safety 
 offi cer, 212
health and safety committee, 210
health and safety offi cer, 206, 207, 211
historical backdrop, 197–198
improving safety, 223
incident safety offi cer, 207, 211

Index  421
infectious disease control program, 
212–213
model code system, 251–253
regulatory and standards setting bodies, 
205–206
top priority, 231
value of, 197–200
vehicles. See Vehicle safety
who is responsible for, 210–212
SAM (Subordinates Appraising Manag-
ers), 171
Scalar organization structure, 70, 71f
Search warrant, 303
Seat belts, 216
Self-assessment, 170
Self-contained breathing apparatus 
(SCBA), 41, 218, 219–220
Semantic barriers, in communication, 26
Sexual harassment. See Harassment, in 
workplace
Shelter in place, 320
Shift commander, 67, 68f
Short-range planning, 82
Size-up, 347, 349–352
ongoing, 357–358
Skill, 263–264
Smoke and heat vents, 276
Smoke control systems, 276
Smoldering phase, 279
Southern Building Code Congress Interna-
tional (SBCCI), 245
Span of control, 71
“Special amusement buildings”, 248
Specifi cation code, 268
Specifi c heat, 283
Speed safety, 216
Sprinkler Standards, 272
Sprinkler systems, types of
deluge systems, 274
dry pipe systems, 274
preaction systems, 274
wet pipe systems, 273–274
Staff functions, 68, 69f
Staff versus line organization, 68–69
Stakeholders, 240
Standard of care, 381
Standard operating procedures (SOPs), 
361–362
example, 392–399
Phoenix Fire Department, 365–366
pre-incident planning, 327, 330
role of, 90–91
Standards versus codes, 246
Standpipe systems, 274
State and local adoption, 246
Statute, 246
Steel, 266, 267
Strategic plan, 63
Strategy, 360
Strike team, 379
Structural factors, 264
Succession plan, 176
Success strategies, 14–15
Superfund Amendments and Reauthoriza-
tion Act (SARA), of 1986, 205
Superiors rating, in 360-degree assess-
ment, 170
Supervision, defi nition of, 5
Supervisory role, 160–161
Supporting, 143
Suspension of employees, 180
Suspicious fi res, 293
Symptoms versus causes theory, 204–205
Tangible employment action, 151, 152
Tank truck rollovers, deaths from, 216–217
Target hazards, 316. See also Pre-incident 
planning
Task force, 378–379
Taylor, Frederick, 85
Team building, 125–126. See also Human 
resources management
Team members’ competency/commitment, 
determining, 163
Team-relationship building, 161–163. See 
also Human resources management
Technical schools, 9
Technology adaptation life cycle, 122
Termination of employees, 180
retaliatory discharge for reporting ha-
rassment, 151
Theoretical fi re fl ow, 284
Theory X, 86, 140
Theory Y, 86, 140
Theory Z, 86
Thermal lag, 272, 273
Thermal stratifi cation, 279
360-degree assessment, 169
customers, 171
peers, 170–171
self-assessment, 170
subordinates, 171
superiors, 170
Time “eaters,” 119–120
Time management, 117–121
Time of day, 351
Total quality management (TQM), 86, 87
Town meetings, 54
Training. See Education and training
Transfer of employees, 180
Transitional mode, 354
Union shop, 111
United States Code, 53, 245
Unity of command, 70
Upward-appraisal process/feedback sur-
vey, 171
U.S.
fi re problem, 239
fi re service profi le, 50
government, 53
largest fi re departments in, 48, 49
U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), 
206
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), 205
U.S. Fire Administration (USFA), 59, 213, 
216, 221, 222, 226
data collection, analysis, and dissemina-
tion, 240
goals, 200
Safe Operation of Fire Tankers, 
217–218
Vehicles
accident investigations, 209–210
safety. See Vehicle safety
Vehicle safety, 214–215
highway safety, 348–349
NFPA 1500 requirements, 215
Safe Operation of Fire Tankers, 
217–218
seat belts, 216
speed safety, 216
tank truck rollovers, deaths from, 
216–217
warning lights, 216
Ventilation, 282–283
Vision statements, 105
Volunteer fi re service, 59–60
federal fi re departments, 60–62
Wages and Hours Bill. See Fair Labor 
Standards Act (FLSA)
Warning lights, 216
Water supply, 322–323
Weather conditions, 351–352
Wet and dry chemical extinguishing sys-
tems, 274–275
Wet pipe sprinkler systems, 273–274
Wood frame construction, 268
Writing skills, 30
comparative writing examples, 34
easier words and phrases, use of, 
30, 31
E-mail, 35
improving, 34
principles of, 30–32
reviewing and editing, 33–34
suggestions for, 32–33
Written reprimands, 180

