
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING
for Beginners
4 Books in 1:
LINUX Command-Line for Beginners,
Python Programming for Beginners
Networking for Beginners,
Hacking with Kali Linux
Cybersecurity, Wireless, LTE, Networks, and Penetration Testing
by Dylan Mach

© Copyright 2020 by Dylan Mach - All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or
transmitted without direct written permission from the author or the
publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against
the publisher, or author, for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to
the information contained within this book. Either directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You
cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part, or the
content within this book, without the consent of the author or publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational
and entertainment purposes only. All effort has been executed to present
accurate, up to date, and reliable, complete information. No warranties of any
kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is not
engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice.
The content within this book has been derived from various sources. Please
consult a licensed professional before attempting any techniques outlined in
this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is
the author responsible for any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as
a result of the use of the information contained within this document,
including, but not limited to, — errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.

LINUX Command-Line for
Beginners
A Comprehensive Step-by-Step Starting
Guide to Learn Linux from Scratch to
Bash Scripting and Shell Programming
By Dylan Mach

© Copyright 2019 by Dylan Mach - All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or transmitted without direct
written permission from the author or the publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or author,
for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to the information contained within this book. Either
directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell,
use, quote or paraphrase any part, or the content within this book, without the consent of the author or
publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All effort has been executed to present accurate, up to date, and reliable, complete
information. No warranties of any kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is
not engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice. The content within this
book has been derived from various sources. Please consult a licensed professional before attempting
any techniques outlined in this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is the author responsible for
any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as a result of the use of the information contained
within this document, including, but not limited to, — errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.

Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: What is Linux and Why Using It?
What is Linux OS?
Why Using Linux?
A host of different distributions
Linux is the same as freedom
Linux is excellent in reliability
Linux saves you money
You can easily try Linux
Linux can run on outdated systems
More sophisticated than before
Chapter 2: Linux Distributions and Types of Installations
Linux distribution for multi-purpose
Advanced users best Linux distributions
Older computers’ best Linux distributions
Best distributions of Linux server
Beginners’ best Linux distributions
Server Roles and Types of Installations
Chapter 3: Introduction to Linux Kernel and Operating System
The System Preparation
Chapter 4: Installing Linux on Virtual Machine
VMware Workstation Player Installation
The Importance of Virtual Machine
Chapter 5: Linux User Management and System Administration
How to Manage Users and Groups as a Linux Administrator
Linux Group
The File System of Linux
Chapter 6: Linux Directory Structures
Basic functions of the filesystem
Directory Structure of Linux
Chapter 7: Working with Disk, Media, and Data Files (gzip – tar)
Analyze Disk Space and Hard Disk Partition on Linux with These
Commands
Linux Data Manipulation

Creating from the Command-line a File for Tar GZip
Chapter 8: File, Directory Manager, Permissions, Networking, and
SSH
SSH Command
Chapter 9: Linux Terminals, Editors, and Shell
Chapter 10: Basic Linux Shell Commands
Shell Commands
Other languages
Chapter 11: Shell Scripting
Features of Shell Scripting
Chapter 12: Building Script
Errors
Chapter 13: Basic Bash Shell Commands
Chapter 14: Advanced Bash Shell Commands
Conclusion

Introduction
Congratulations on purchasing your copy of LINUX Command-Line for
Beginners: A Comprehensive Step-By-Step Starting Guide to Learn Linux
from Scratch to Bash Scripting and Shell Programming and thank you for
doing so.
Linux is in virtually everything we use today. If you are a beginner or you are
just starting to learn everything about Linux operating system, you will soon
realize that downloading this eBook is a smart way into having a clear
understanding of the world of Linux as well as several of its distributions.
Usually, navigating through the Linux command-line can be quite tricky. In
this book, you will see multiple approaches that you can model to have a
smooth operation with Linux. Also, certain Linux distributions you can use
not only as a beginner but also those that can function if you attempt to use it
on your old system. Ultimately, this book takes a step further to analyze basic
Linux shell commands as well as shell scripting.
To this end, some of the chapters in this book will discuss Linux user
management and administration, where it examines some of the duties of
Linux system administrator, including handling directories, users extensively,
and files, basic bash commands, root, or superuser management, and so much
more. Also, this book will discuss Linux file functions as well as defining the
three types of Linux file ownership, permissions, and SSH commands. You
will learn about other SSH commands, Linux terminals, editors, and shell.
With a clear perception of directories, file managers, and editors out of the
way, this book will discuss how you can create a file for tar gzip from the
command-line, how you can mount and unmounts media, and also Linux data
manipulation.
On the shelves, there are several books on Linux Command-line, and for
making this book your choice, we will like to appreciate the gesture. From
our end, we are striving to see that this book provides you with all the
practical and necessary information you will need to succeed. Once again,
thank you!

Chapter 1: What is Linux and Why
Using It?
Strengthening almost everything from mobile phones, servers, and PCs,
Linux is a standard operating system that people commonly use. Indeed, all
over the world, several individuals use Linux in all fields and applications
you can imagine. Linux has been around since the 90s. From your TV stick to
the fridge and everything, Linux runs everything. And much of the internet
has support from Linux. Since the computer operating system has powered
several innovations, many scientific breakthroughs have Linux to thank. Even
though for decades, Linux has been supplying secure, reliable OS duties, the
word “Linux” has no familiarity with the general public.
But Linux operating system is everywhere, from enterprise servers to home
desktops, home appliances, supercomputers, cars, and smartphones.
Everywhere, you will find Linux, and it is on your television, Roku devices,
refrigerators, and thermostats. For being one of the stress-free, most secure
and reliable operating system available, Linux prides itself as a preferred
platform running embedded systems, servers, and desktops all over the world.
What is Linux OS?
In the first place, what do you understand by an OS or operating system? In a
physical computer, the management of the hardware is the duty of the
computer code known as the operating system. Between the hardware and
software, the operating system exists as a layer. Also, in assembler,
communicating with a graphics card or addressing a CPU is not what most
people want to know. And what acts as a middleman is an operating system
like Windows or Linux.
Therefore, Linux, like Mac OS, iOs, and Windows, is an operating system.
Essentially, Linux operating system powers Android, which is the most
popular platform in the world. The software is likely not to function without
the operating system since, as an operating system, Linux manages the
communication between the hardware and software.
There are so many different pieces that Linux operating system comprises
and they are:

Applications – not all the complete array of apps that the
desktop environments provide. As such, you can quickly find
and install several thousands of software that are high-quality
through Linux, typical of macOS and Windows. There are
simplicity and centralization in the application installation by
most modern Linux distributions. For example, typical of
GNOME Software, there is Ubuntu Software Center by Ubuntu
Linux that, from one centralized platform, speeds up the
discovery and installation of apps among thousands of them for
users.
Desktop environment – users can interact with this piece. You
can choose from several desktop environments like Xfce, KDE,
Enlightenment, Pantheon, Mate, Cinnamon, GNOME, and so
on. There are built-in applications for each desktop environment,
including games, web browsers, configuration tools, and file
managers.
Graphical server – on your monitor, you will get a graphic
display with this subsystem. It is known as X or X-server by
many people.
Daemons – after logging into the desktop or startup during boot,
these are background services such as scheduling, sound,
printing, and so on.
Init system – user space is bootstrapped by this subsystem, and
the control of daemons is in its charge. As such, systemd, as the
most controversial, is an init system most widely used. When the
bootloader, like Unified Bootloader or GRUB, handles the initial
booting, the init system manages the boot process.
OS Kernel – kernel can be referred to as a complete piece
known as Linux for the management of the peripheral devices,
memory, CPU, and the core of the system is the kernel.
Bootloader – this software manages the process of the computer
boot. It is a splash screen that pops up in the operating system

and soon goes away to boot for most users.
OS Shell – the shell is what we use to tell our operating system
the things we want it to do. As the command line by many, you
use text to instruct the OS. However, the code of command-lines
is known by quite a few people. As such, this caused people to
stay away from using Linux. The modern distribution of Linux
changed this since, just like Windows, Linux will use a desktop.
Why Using Linux?
Most people ask this question almost all the time. When the OS that ships
virtually all servers, laptops, and desktops function correctly, why would
anyone bother to learn a wholly different computing environment? The
answer to that question will pose another question rather than a response; are
you okay with the working of your current operating system? Or are you
struggling with license fees, costly repairs, crashes, slowdowns, malware, and
viruses? For you, Linux may be the perfect platform if you find yourself
struggling with the above. On the planet, right now, the most reliable
computer ecosystem is Linux. For a desktop platform, you will have a perfect
solution when you combine such the entry’s zero cost with reliability. As
there isn’t any payment for server licensing or the software, you can have as
many computers as you like to install Linux. Also, you won’t have any
requirement to make any payment to access Linux.
Besides that, what about having as long as you want, a stress-free, stable
operating system if you are not bothered about the zero cost implications?
There hasn’t been an issue of viruses, malware, or ransomware by so many
people using Linux, both on server platform and desktop, for more than two
decades. The thing is, such attacks have no power over Linux. If only the
kernel is updated, they are necessary for server reboots. And it may not be
entirely out of the ordinary for a Linux server to go for years without being
rebooted. You will surely enjoy dependability and stability when
recommended updates are strictly followed.
Also, our computers have most of the desktop operating systems we use, and
changing the operating system is something we rarely probe. What’s more?
Learning a new operating system is not what most people are inclined to do.
However, here are some of the reasons you need to try out Linux:

A host of different distributions
There is variance in the Linux different distributions or editions. Some are for
server software, while others are designed for desktop use. And while some
are designed with beginners in mind, others have their focus on the advanced
users. Most Linux editions otherwise referred to as distributions, use USB
drive for installation, an optical disk, or can be downloaded for free. The
Linux distributions are quite endless. Though some popular choices are
openSUSE and Debian, the default preferences for desktop users are mostly
Linux Mint, Arch, and Fedora. Courtesy of Ubuntu Unity, Ubuntu becomes
one of the most modern Linux distributions. Through the inclusion of
openSUSE, you can get a more traditional Linux look with KDE. Also, it is
quite a long list if you are looking for the list of server Linux OS. CentOS,
SUSE Enterprise, Ubuntu Server, and Red Hat are some of the most well-
known distributions. However, you may need to invest in some money with
the use of some Linux server distributions as licensing may be required to use
Red Hat. But, quite essential for your business is the support, which you get
for your license fee in return.
Linux is the same as freedom
There is a need to have the definition of an open source as equivalent to
Linux. There are a set of principles that any software follows, such as:
For any of your modified software, copies will have no
restrictions
The software distribution will have no limit
There will be permission to make any changes needed by you,
examine it, as well as study and disassemble the software
Irrespective of your goals or motive for running it, the full
freedom to run the software
Primarily, open-source software does not correlate to a community, and you
need to understand that. Linux is built by this community, and Linux enjoys
robust maintenance from that community. As such, people made Linux as
software for the rest of the world, if you are wondering what Linux is and

what has brought about the popularity of Linux. It is all about this philosophy
of open source.
Linux is excellent in reliability
Since it is quite reliable, for system administrators, life is comfortable with
the use of Linux. As such, not every day that you will need to monitor your
server, and there are no worries with running it. Also, without impacting the
whole Linux OS, you can often restart the separate services because of the
way they built Linux. You must rely on a tool called an operating system,
going by convention. You can have the game-changing effect of reliability
that Linux brings with it if the cost isn’t the most significant factor for you.
And what is the biggest benefit of the Linux operating system? The biggest
reason to adopt Linux is that Linux has overall immunity to random issues of
an operating system as well as malicious software and viruses and also its
inherent reliability.
Linux saves you money
For you to try out Linux, you won’t have to pay anything since Linux has a
collaborative and open-source nature. Without licensing payment, it doesn’t
matter if you have multiple computers; you can go ahead and have the
operating system installed freely on them. For many Linux distributions,
whether desktop or server editions, this is simply the situation. For example,
just for the software installation on one server, concerning the version of
2012, you will have to part with $1,200 to use the Windows Server of
Microsoft. You will have additional client access license charges if you are
the type that wants several clients to have access to it. And what about the
required licenses for you to run web, Windows-based services, etc.? Contrary
to that, there is an inclusion of open-source server software in Linux
distributions that comes without any cost. Also, without any payment for
licensing, you can make use of several web pages. And with just a few clicks,
you can have up and running, an entirely efficient Linux web server.
You can easily try Linux
Linux is quite simple to try when you are prepared to experiment with it. If
you are feeling hesitant, there’s no need for you to have your Windows
discarded. You may want to give the preferred operating system a whirl with

a live DVD or drive before installing on the hard drive of your PC on a Linux
distribution. You will have to install a flash drive or DVD on a Linux
distribution, a bootable system. Then, instead of your drive, have your system
configured to boot from that. The fuss and muss are quite minimal as you
quickly test-drive some operating systems of Linux, and the primary storage
drive you have is safe since it doesn’t touch it.
Linux can run on outdated systems
A while ago, they have Windows XP tossed to the wolves, and the Windows
Vista is swiftly on the brink to the end. However, some outdated PCs and
many people rely on them. If you select a lightweight distribution designed
for aging PCs, it can breathe a new life into your computer as well as
splashes updated OS on your system. For old PCs, you can choose Lubuntu
or Puppy Linux. You will also notice that there is nothing stressful
concerning the transition. Since they designed it for Windows XP refugees,
there is abundance when it comes to accessing Linux alternatives. For the
mimic of feel and look of the operating system of Microsoft, which is highly
revered, these distributions provide dedicated “Windows XP Modes.”
More sophisticated than before
The desktop’s fundamental values are what most main Linux distributors
follow. So, the established interface of the PC gets the spit-polish from
distributions such as Linux Mint and Fedora, while with the Windows 8
disaster, Microsoft enraged the world. People can wrap their head around
some Linux distributions if Windows 7 and Windows XP is their preference.
It is typical for them to switch to Linux because of the learning curve that
they will need to use Windows 8 or Windows 10. There is also a similarity
with the Start menu of the long-established Windows with the Start menu of
Linux Mint. Most fundamentally, using it with PC hardware, there is an
eradication of the widespread incompatibility of Linux, particularly audio
components and networking. Even though with Intel’s Secure Boot enabled
to have additional steps performed for the installation of Linux on your
system, there is a wide range of PC hardware and modern PCs that work with
most Linux operating systems. Better yet, to know whether it will work or not
before you go ahead with any installation, you can have Linux distributions
tested on your system to remember your preference.

There are several compelling reasons you might want to consider to try out
Linux on your computer, or at least, give it a hassle-free trial run. And if you
are set to go ahead with it, let’s discuss the Linux distributions and how you
can push forward and make the proper installation of Linux in the next
chapter.

Chapter 2: Linux Distributions and
Types of Installations
You may have no clear answer if you are asking for the best Linux
distributions since, in one way or the other, there are several numbers of
Linux distributions, and coming up with an exact amount also can be quite
tricky. As some of them appear to be unique, others are simply a clone of one
another. Well, that is the beauty of Linux, even if it’s a mess. However, you
don’t have to worry because, below, you will find the list of the best Linux
distributions even when there are thousands of them around. Since there is
always something for everyone, we must categorize these distributions.
Linux distribution for multi-purpose
For both servers and desktops, as an advanced/beginner-friendly OS, you can
utilize some Linux distributions. Thus, you will read below about a separate
segment of these distributions, and they are:
Debian:
As an excellent distribution itself, Debian has its base on Ubuntu. Debian
tends to be working correctly for not only the desktop but also the servers.
Though by scanning through the official documentation, you can quickly get
started, it may not be the ideal operating system for beginners. There are
some necessary enhancements and several changes introduced by the recent
release of Debian 10 Buster. So, test-drive it for you to see!
Manjaro:
The Arch Linux provides the source for Manjaro. For newbies, Manjaro
makes it quite easy to use Arch Linux even though it is tailored for advanced
users. So have no worries. This Linux distribution is indeed beginner-friendly
and straightforward. There are a bunch of useful built-in GUI applications, as
well as a fantastic user interface. While downloading Manjaro, there’s an
option of selecting a desktop environment. For Manjaro, most people have a
preference for the KDE desktop.
Fedora:
The two editions that Fedora provides are separate. It offers for servers and
also for laptops/desktops. Those are Fedora Server and Fedora Workstation.

Well, Fedora may be your option if you wish to opt for a user-friendly with a
possibility of a learning curve for a snappy desktop OS. Anyways, your
server can get a fresh breath of a new life when you choose Fedora if you are
looking for an operating system for Linux.
Advanced users best Linux distributions
First, before you begin your exploration into Linux distributions that are
designed for advanced users only, you need to get comfortable
troubleshooting your way to resolve issues with the different package
commands and managers. Indeed, there will be a need for you to collect
specific requirements if you are a professional. However, it will worth your
while to check out these distributions if, as a standard user, you have been
using Linux for some time.
Slackware:
Though still delighting in the preference of many people, one of the oldest
Linux distributions is Slackware. You may want to consider using Slackware
for setting up an ideal environment for yourself if you intend to develop or
compile software. Slackware tends to be a fantastic choice for advanced
users, even with a significant decrease in the number of developers and users
utilizing it. Also, it is believed that Slackware will continue to carry its
flagship as one of the best Linux distributions out there with the current news
of it getting a Patreon page.
Gentoo:
Gentoo Linux is quite compulsory for anyone who knows how to compile the
source code. Though there is a required necessary technical knowledge to
make it work, Gentoo is a lightweight distribution. If you need to know some
information about it, you can obtain it through the official handbook.
However, to make the most of it might take you a lot of time to figure if you
are not sure of what you are doing.
Arch Linux:
This distribution comes with a huge learning curve even though it is a
powerful yet simple distribution. Everything you need may not be installed at
a time, much unlike others. You will have to add packages required as you
configure the system. Also, without GUI, there are a set of commands you
will need to follow when you are installing Arch Linux. Also, it may be quite

essential to have a clear understanding of some critical things to do after you
install Arch Linux if you wish to go ahead with the installation. It’s indeed
useful to say that there is an active community behind Arch Linux in addition
to all the simplicity and versatility. As such, you won’t have any need to
worry if you run into a problem.
Older computers’ best Linux distributions
You can make use of some of the best Linux distributions available if you
don’t wish to upgrade your system or have an old one lying around. Here are
some of the best distributions you can use for your old computers.
Sparky Linux:
For low-end systems, based on Debian, Sparky Linux tends to be a perfect
Linux distribution. Different users can enjoy several special editions or
varieties provided by Sparky Linux, as well as a fast streaming experience.
For example, it rolls releases specific to a group of users while offering a
stable version with varieties. For gamers, one familiar type for them is the
Sparky Linux GameOver since a bunch of pre-installed games is included in
it.
antiX:
As a lightweight Linux distribution and partially responsible for MX Linux,
both new and old computers can use antiX. Though working quite correctly,
the UI of antiX is not that impressive. Without the need to install it, antiX can
be utilized as live CD distribution, and it is based on Debian. For you not to
lose settings with every reboot, you can save the settings as opposed to some
other distributions. Not only that, using its feature of “Live persistence,” your
root directory can also have some changes saved by you. As such, antiX can
be your choice if you intend to offer a snappy user experience on old
hardware with the use of a live-USB distribution.
Bodhi:
Though it runs well on older configurations, unlike Ubuntu, it is well on top
of Ubuntu that they designed and built Bodhi Linux. As a continuation of the
Enlightenment 17 desktop, Bodhi Linux’s Moksha Desktop is its main
highlight. The fast and intuitive streaming is the typical experience users will
get for using it. On your older systems, you can as well give it a try even
though people’s opinion of it is not for personal use.

Solus Budgie:
It is an impressive lightweight desktop OS with Solus 4 Fortitude as a recent
major release. Desktop environments such as MATE or GNOME are natural
for this when you want to opt into them. However, while being light on
system resources, as a beginners’ full-fledged Linux distribution, Solus
Budgie happens to be one of the favorites of so many people.
Puppy Linux:
One of the smallest distributions you can see out there is Puppy Linux. If you
want your outdated system to have a quick system execution, you can give it
a try. With the addition of several new useful features, the user experience
has improved over the years.
As for some of the lightweight Linux distributions, other options you can try
out in this category are Peppermint, Lubuntu, and Linux Lite.
Best distributions of Linux server
Enterprise support, performance, and stability are all that are essential when it
comes to a Linux distributions’ choice for servers. However, you need to pay
attention to some of these recommendations, whether the purpose is for
something crucial or a web server when installing it.
CentOS:
For RHEL, you will need to subscribe. Nevertheless, since the sources of Red
Hat Linux have been derived from it, RHEL’s community edition is quite
similar to CentOS. Also, it is a free and open-source as well. For sometimes
now, it tends to be an excellent preference. It is considerably less parallel to
the number of hosting providers using it. However, people’s opinion of
CentOS is that of a reliable Linux distribution since its software packages are
the latest. On several cloud platforms, CentOS images can be found. You can
as well decide on the CentOS image that is self-hosted, which it offers if you
don’t.
SUSE Linux enterprise server:
There’s a need to separate this distribution from OpenSuSE, and as such,
there’s no need to worry. Maintained by the community, OpenSUSE is an
open-source distribution even when everything comes under a standard brand
“SUSE.” For cloud-based servers, one of the most popular solutions is the
SUSE Linux enterprise server. And to manage your open-source solution and

to get priority support, you may need to go for a subscription.
Linux Red Hat:
For organizations and businesses, the top-notch platform is the Linux Red
Hat. For servers, the highly prevalent range may not be Red hat if we go by
the numbers. However, Lenovo, for instance, is among those that have their
reliance on RHEL as the primary selection of enterprise users. Technically,
there is a correlation between Red Hat and Fedora. And for RHEL to have it
on it, anything that Red Hats supports gets tested on Fedora. For you to be
sure it will suit your needs, the official documentation of the distribution is
worth checking.
Ubuntu servers:
Your server can get unique options depending on where you want it. Ubuntu
Cloud may be the perfect ideal for an optimized solution to run Google Cloud
Platform, Azure, AWS, and some others. In either case, you can have it
installed on your server if you want to opt for Ubuntu Server packages.
However, judging by the number, when it comes to deployment on the cloud,
the highly popular Linux distribution is Ubuntu. And unless you have
particular requirements, the recommendation will be the LTS editions.
As options for a few of the distributions mentioned above, Debian and Fedora
are some of the distributions to explore.
Beginners’ best Linux distributions
This segment deals with a list of distributions that are quite easy to use.
Without the requirement of knowing any tips or commands, you can begin
using it right away, and there’s no need to dig deeper.
Pop!_OS:
Computer science professionals or developers will experience an excellent
pick by Sytem76 from Pop!_OS. If you are beginning to use Linux, it is also
quite a great choice as it is not limited to coders. Though the UI feels smooth
and a lot more intuitive, it is based on Ubuntu. Also, it enforces full-disk
encryption out of the box in addition to the UI.
Zorin OS:

One of the most intuitive and good-looking OS for desktop is another
Ubuntu-based distribution, which is Zorin OS. Notably, the recommendation
for users without any Linux background will be this distribution after Zorin
OS 15 release. It also comes baked in as well as a lot of GUI-based
applications. Though ensure to choose the “Lite” edition because you can
also install it on older PCs. There are also “Ultimate,” “Education,” and
“Core” editions. However, consider getting the Ultimate version if you intend
to help improve Zorin and also support the developers. Otherwise, select the
Core edition for free.
MX Linux:
It has been a while now that MX Linux has been in the game. On
Distrowatch.com, at present, MX Linux is a highly preferred Linux
distribution. You will be amazed as to how you will get familiar with it if you
haven’t used it before. With Xfce being its desktop environment and also
based on Debian, an increasingly popular Linux distribution is MX Linux,
unlike Ubuntu. Also, any Mac/Windows user can easily use it as it is packed
with several GUI tools in addition to its excellent stability. Also, for
installation with one-click facilitation, the package manager is ideally tailored
for this. And as one of the sources that are already in the package manager,
you will see Flathub there, and in no time, you can install it after searching
for Flatpak packages.
elementary OS:
An elegant Linux distribution out there is the elementary OS. It is easy to get
comfortable with it if you have already used a Mac-powered system because
the UI has a similar resemblance to MacOS. While keeping the performance
in mind and also looking as pretty as possible, delivering a user-friendly
Linux environment is the focus of this distribution that is based on Ubuntu.
Linux Mint:
Among beginners, another popular Linux is Linux Mint Cinnamon. When
Windows XP was discontinued, as a result, many users opted for it since
there’s a resemblance between Windows XP and the default Cinnamon
desktop. It has the applications available for Ubuntu since it is on Ubuntu that
Linux Mint is grounded. It becomes a prominent choice for new users of
Linux because of the ease of use and simplicity.
Ubuntu:

One of the most undoubtedly popular Linux distributions is Ubuntu, and on
several laptops available, you can even find it pre-installed. You will get
comfortable with its user interface. As per your requirements, you can easily
customize the look of it if you play around. Mainly, theme installation is also
another option for you. When you want to get started with Ubuntu, you will
need to learn more about it. Also, Ubuntu users have a massive community
that you can find in addition to what it provides. So, go to a subreddit or the
forum if you face any issue. You need to check out some coverage online on
Ubuntu in case they require direct solutions in no time.
Ultimately, you can give some of these distributions recommended above a
try. And quite honestly, the choices will be subjective depending on personal
preferences to each of them even when there are quite several Linux
distributions that deserve mention.
Server Roles and Types of Installations
Since more operating systems have a great connection with it, this attribute is
a unique feature of Linux. Thus, you can have other OS running alongside
Linux. With more operating systems in place and for the installation of
Linux, the general process of installation is to install Linux again. When you
do that, the computer will have 100 percent resources dedication to run
Linux. However, as part of an OS sequence which is obtainable on a
computer, it is not quite hard to have Linux installed. Also, as an approach
you can use to run or install on a computer any distribution of Linux, you can
make use of some of these approaches below;
Linux fresh installation
One popular method of installation available is this method. From a
DVD/CD, you will install Linux after formatting the hard drive of your
computer when you jump into this technique. Then, it is only on the operating
system of your computer that Linux will then run. Available methods of
installation are:
PXE
Kickstart
Network installation through HTTP, FTP, or NFS

Hard drive
CD-ROM
Linux as a VM inside another operating system
Inside another operating system, you may want to consider running Linux as
a VM if you prefer to run your favorite open-source software or want an easy
way to access a Linux desktop even when you like your current, non-Linux
desktop OS. You will need to download and install a Virtual Server
application as a simple step, although there are several ways to go by it.
Then, under the host software, install your Linux distribution. Thus, you may
perform on Linux everything you can do with your other operating system.
Even when your other operating systems don’t offer some things, there are a
lot of things that Linux can provide you.
Live DVD/CD booting Linux
You may choose to try Linux from a Live DVD/CD when you want to retain
your primary operating system and to see if you like it, you want to give
Linux a try. As a Live CD, several Linux installations offer this running or
downloading. As such, from the DVD/CD, Linux will run as an entire
operating system that is quite bootable. And instead of running it on a hard
drive, you can load your files into the memory of your computer. That means,
from a DVD/CD, Linux can be run and then exclusive of any variance, return
to its old OS of your system as you remove the DVD/CD when you reboot
your computer. Until you discover your preferred choice, you can easily
sample some Linux distributions.
Dual-booting
You will have a dual booting system when you want to install Linux and also
keep an existing operating system as well. You will then need to decide
which one you would like to boot into during the boot process since you will
have a PC that can use two different operating systems.
By now, you must be having a bit of understanding of Linux, as well as some
distributions that you can use them. Now, it is time to take things further and
introduce to you Linux Kernel as well as the operating systems.

Chapter 3: Introduction to Linux
Kernel and Operating System
By what means does a computer manage the most complex tasks with such
accuracy and efficiency? Well, the short and simple answer is that a computer
does everything with the help of the operating system.  The operating system
makes life easier and performs different tasks through the efficient use of
hardware resources. At a high level, there are two parts we can divide the OS.
The first part will be the utility programs, while the other is the kernel. The
kernel services some of the system resources requests like network
connectivity, memory, storage, CPU, and so on, as asked by the various user
space processes. And in Linux/GNU, there will be an exploration of the
loadable kernel modules by this column. Since the whole operating system
solely run in supervisor mode, this makes Linux kernel monolithic. With each
subsystem responsible for performing specific tasks, it consists of several
subsystems, even though the kernel is a single process. Broadly, these
following tasks are performed by any kernel.
Dynamically loadable kernel modules
To ensure that our system is up-to-date, most times, we install security
patches and kernel updates. A reboot is often necessary in the case of MS
Windows. However, this is far from being suitable. For example, when it is in
a production server, the machine cannot be rebooted. Then, without a system
reboot, wouldn’t it be ideal for removing or adding functionality from or to
the kernel on-the-fly? For the kernel modules, the Linux kernels work on the
dynamic unloading and loading. And at runtime, any code piece is a kernel
module that you can add to the kernel. Without any interruption, when the
system is up and running, you can unload and load the modules. You can use
the insmod  command to dynamically link a kernel module to the running
kernel and also unlink it by using the rmmod  command, as an object code.
Networking
One of the vital parts of the operating system is the networking because it
works with data transfer between hosts and also allows communication. As
routing functionality gets enabled by it, it is also through it that network
packets get transmitted, identified, and collected.

Device control
There are several devices required for any computer system. However, for the
layer to offer functionality, there is a need for a device driver to make the
devices usable. Video/audio drivers, Bluetooth drivers, graphics drivers, and
so on are some of the types of drivers present.
File system
The file system heavily influences the Linux/GNU system. Nearly everything
is a file in Linux/GNU. Also, conventional for the organization of data
hierarchically, journaling and compression of data, deletion, and creation of
files, and so on are the storage relation requirements controlled by this
subsystem. All primary file systems have the support of the Linux kernel,
such as MS Windows NTFS.
Memory management
This subsystem handles every related request. The pages are chunks of fixed
size as divided from available memory, and on any demand, can be de-
allocated or allocated from or to the process. As it creates the illusions of
contiguous ample address space to a physical address space, it also maps the
process virtual address with the help of the memory management unit, MMU.
Process management
The life-cycle gets this subsystem to handle the process. Through inter-
process communication, it allows data sharing and connection between
processes as it also destroys and creates processes. Also, it enables resource
sharing and schedules processes with the help of the process scheduler.
Some Useful Utilities
For the provision of useful information about the kernel modules,
Linux/GNU offers several user-space utilities. Now, let’s dive into them.
dmesg:  though it is a different methodology that the kernel uses, it is on the
standard output stream that any user-space program displays its output, i.e.,
/dev/stdout . For us to manage the contents of the ring buffer, with the use of
the dmesg  command, the kernel appends its output to the ring buffer.
modinfo:  as a command-line argument, the module that passes such process
displays the information by this command. For modules, it searches the
/lib/modules/<version>  directory if the argument is not on a filename. Also,

it is on the field:value  format that modinfo  shows each attribute of the module.
It is essential to note that the kernel version is <version> , and it is through
the execution of the uname –r  command that we can obtain it.
rmmod:  when you want to unload modules from the kernel, you can make
use of this command. It is only when the current module is not in use that you
can unload. Also used to unload modules forcibly, the –force  or –f  has the
support of rmmod . However, the danger in using this option is extreme, and
to remove modules, you can still make use of a safer way. As it waits until
the module is no longer used, rmmod  will isolate the module with the option
of –-wait  or –w .
The System Preparation
Now, it’s action time. An environment for development is all we need to
create now. We will have a Debian-based Linux/GNU distribution like
Ubuntu and CentOS of a PRM-based Linux/GNU distribution installed as the
required packages.
CentOS installation
As a root user and by implementing the command below, the first step is to
have the compiler for GCC  installed:
[root]# yum –y install GCC
Now, the packages to develop the kernel are the next in the installation level:
[root]# yum –y install kernel-devel
In conclusion, the utility of the make comes next for the installation:
[root]# yum –y install make
Ubuntu installation
The compiler for GCC  is the first in the installation line:
[mickey] Sudo apt-get install GCC

Then, the packages for kernel development come next:
[mickey] Sudo apt-get install kernel-package
Then, the utility of the make installation:
[mickey] Sudo apt-get install make
And we have the kernel module
Now, we have prepared our system. Then, we will need to have the initial
module of a kernel written. Using the following contents, use hello.c  to have
the file saved when you open your favorite text editor:
#include <linux/kernel.h>
#include <linux/module.h>
Int init_module (void)
{
printk(KERN_INFO □Hello, World !!!\n□);
return 0;
}
void cleanup_module(void)
{
printk(KERN_INFO □Exiting …\n□);
}
MODULE_LICENSE(□GPL□);
MODULE_AUTHOR(□Narendra Kangralkar.□);
MODULE_DESCRIPTION(□Hello world module.□);
At least, there are two functions for any module. The function of cleanup is
the first and second initialization. As such, a cleanup utility is

cleanup_module()  while the initialization function is init_module() . And
once you load the module and before the module is unloaded, there will be a
call for the initialization function, and then the call for the function of
cleanup. Other macros, as well as MODULE_LICENSE , are quite easy to
follow. Relatively the same as printf() , the user-space is the syntax, which is
a printk() . However, at a regular productivity stream, it doesn’t print
messages, unlike printf() . Instead, it is the kernel’s ring buffer that receives
messages that it appends. There is a priority from each declaration of
printk() . In the example, KERN_INFO  priority is used. And between the
string of format and KERN_INFO , you won’t see any comma (,) there.
Without the presence of unconditional priority, you can make use of
DEFAULT_MESSAGE_LOGLEVEL  priority. As an indication of success,
there is the return 0  in init_module() final declaration.
cleanup_module()  and init_modules()  are the name of the cleanup and
initialization functions. However, we can make use of whichever name in
place of cleanup and initialization function with (>= 2.3.13) , which is the
new kernel. For rearward similarity, there is support for these dated names. In
place of the register of the cleanup and initialization functions, the macros
provided by the kernel are module_exit  and module_init . Now, with the
names of the preference we have for cleanup and initialization functions, let’s
rewrite the same module:
#include <linux/kernel.h>
#include <linux/module.h>
Static int_init hello_init(void)
{
printk(KERN_INFO □Hello, World !!!\n□);
return 0;
}
static void_exit hello_exit(void)
{
printk(KERN_INFO □Exiting …\n□);
return 0;

}
static void_exit hello_exit(void)
{
printk(KERN_INFO □Exiting …\n□);
}
module_init(hello init);
module_exit(hello_exit);
MODULE_LICENSE(□GPL□);
MODULE_AUTHOR(□Narendra Kangralkar.□);
MODULE_DESCRIPTION(□Hello world module.□);
MODULE_VERSION(□1.0□);
What we have in this place is that the cleanup and initialization functions
imply the _exit  and _init  keywords.
Module loading and compilation
Right now, the procedure for module compilation needs to be understood. We
will make use of the build system of the kernel for the compilation of the
kernel module. Before you have it saved as Makefile , you may want to have
the process of the collection written down as you, once again, open your
favorite text editor. Here, you need to pay attention because you must have a
similar directory for the modules of kernel Makefile  and hello.c .
There is a requirement for the kernel headers for us to have the modules built.
From the kernel’s source, the kernel build system is incited by the above
makefile , and finally, to complete the module, the makefile  of the kernel
may have our Makefile  invoked. You can complete the process as name
hello.ko  for the kernel module you develop since, to have the module built,
all the requirements are now in our possession.
The first compilation of the first module of the kernel is now successful.
Now, it is time to examine the way to, inside a kernel, unload and also load
this module. You must take note that to unload or load kernel modules; we
need to acquire the root user privileges. You will need to have the command
insmod  executed when you change to the mode of a super-user to load a

module as you will see the following:
[root]# insmod hello.ko
And the success job has been done by insmod . However, the output is
necessary for us to find. It is the ring buffer of the kernel that the output is
appended. Well, through the execution of dmesg  command, we can as well
find out:
[root]# dmesg
Hello, World !!!
Also, we can verify if or not the module is stocked by using the command
lsmod :
[root]# lsmod │ grep hello
hello 859 0
All that is required of you is to check the output of the dmesg  command as
you have the command rmmod  executed. As you see below, to unload the
module from the kernel. Now, through the function of cleanup, you will see
the message from dmesg . Some macros within the module give us the
module’s information. And in such an attractively configured style below,
displaying the information is the command modinfo .
How to identify the process’ PID
For us to identify a Process ID, which is the existing process’s PID, we may
need to compose one more module of the kernel. In the header, defined as the
<linux/sched.h> , it is in the structure of the task_struct  that the related
information of the kernel stocks all progression. As an indicator of the
existing process, it offers an existing variable. You are only required to have
the current->pid  variable value printed to have the current process PID
identified. The (pid.c) , a complete code of working, will then be given.
In the object file’s name, with a slight modification, similar to an original
makefile  is the Makefile . With the use of the dmesg  command, have the
output squared after inserting the module and then make the compilation.

Bridging several files with a module
From a single file, the module compilation has been explored. However,
dividing the module into multiple files can be quite convenient, and for a
single module, we have multiple source files in a large project. For the
building of a module that extends over two files, we must understand the
process. From the file hello.c , we can divide the cleanup and initialization
functions to become two individual files such as cleanup.c  and startup.c .
The change will be like this for cleanup.c . Then, we will have the exciting
part concerning the two modules, the Makefile . Self-explanatory enough is
the Makefile . Now, in our proposition: with the use of cleanup.o  and
startup.o , develop the final kernel object. It is time for the compilation and
testing of the module. When we utilize the command modinfo , we may
display module information. From each module, author-related information,
license, description, and versions are now shown through the command
modinfo . It is now the time for output verification by unloading and loading
the module for final.ko .
The best place to learn more about modules is the kernel source code. When
you go online, you can download the latest source code. Right now, we will
have to go ahead and discuss in detail how you can install Linux on Virtual
Machines. Let’s go!

Chapter 4: Installing Linux on
Virtual Machine
You might not be sure about dual booting even after installing Linux when
you try it from a live CD/DVD. It can be quite useful to use a virtual
machine, VM, to install your preferred Linux operating system. What this
translates into is that the conditions of a hardware environment are the
replication of a software environment. With the limit only coming from the
components inside it, the base of your physical PC’s hardware is the
environment. For example, with two cores, it may be impossible to have on a
processor, a virtual four-core CPU. However, on a CPU equipped computer,
the outcomes can be far superior, while virtualization can be achieved on
many systems. As there are several of them in Windows, for the installation
of the Linux operating system to be easy, several virtualization tools are quite
available. The one among them to produces the significantly accomplished
virtual machine applications is VMware. Now, with the use of VMware
Workstation Player, it is time to discover the process of Linux installation in
Windows.
VMware Workstation Player Installation
In the initial phase, you will need to have the latest version of the VMware
Workstation Player tool downloaded by going to the VMware website. With
the 64-bit version, it is about 80 MB for the release of 12.5. For home,
personal, and non-commercial use as an evaluation version, you can find
VMware Workstation Player for free. For non-profit organizations and
students, getting value from the free version is all that makes VMware
delighted. As for the functionality factor, the standard virtual machine tasks
hosts everything included in the VMware Workstation Player. However, for
the business of all levels are the extensive selections of virtualization
solutions offered by VMware.
Then, it’s time for installation after you must have downloaded VMware
Workstation Player. An Enhanced Keyboard Driver installation option will
be available for you as you get your guide from a standard installation
wizard. Also, you will be able to handle the international keyboards provided

by this feature. Just in case, you will see that it’s worth installing even as you
mightn’t need it in the first place. When prompted, restart Windows as you
proceed via the installation wizard.
Desired Linux operating system selection
For the kind of Linux that you want to give a try, you likely know it. In a
VM, while you will find some Linux distributions not especially suitable,
others will be. Conventionally, in VMware, for ARM architecture like the
Raspberry Pi, running Linux distributions may not be possible. As such, with
the x64 and x86, you may not be able to virtualize the ARM. However, it is
time to examine QEMU.
Virtual machine configuration
You can as well proceed with the setting of your VM with the download of
your Linux operating system. When prompted, input your email address as
you begin to launch VMware Workstation Player. Getting the software for
free is what this aspect is all about, and the email list of the VMware gets you
on board. The primary application of VMware Workstation Player will load
when you have completed that level. And to proceed, your virtual machine
will require the creation of an account. The ISO, installer disc image file is
the default that you will choose. Note that there is an option of installing the
OS later by merely having a blank disk to create a virtual system. Then, you
will click “Next” after the installation of your preferred operating system.
Your chosen guest OS will install automatically as a message about the
installation of VMware Easy Install.
Account creation
Your password, username, and the preferred name are all the information you
will enter in the next screen and then hit the “next” button when you name
your VM. For the operating system that you are installing, what most times
follow its name is the default, and also for your VM, you may go ahead and
choose a location. Hit the “next” button again, and you will select the disk
capacity for your VM. As a series of files or a file for the physical disk of
your computer, this is a saved virtual hard disk. Either option is there for you
to select. Meanwhile, you can either alter or accept a recommended size used
for your virtual HDD. It could be more than striking because increasing tends
to be a safer option. Hit the “next” button again, whatever your choice to
come to a screen with “ready to create the virtual machine.” Hit on the
“finish’ button, and the VM will start. So far, after creation, run your virtual

machine. Soon, you get the suggestion for the tools of VMware for Linux
package, which will arrive through an alert. As an approach to the Easy
Installation process, this may not be that necessary. But it’s fine when you
accept this.
Virtual hardware customization
The customize hardware is another option on the screen for “ready to
create…” Now, in another way beyond the HDD, you may want to tweak the
hardware of the virtual machine. There are so many options you can choose
from, including network adaptor configuration, processors, and memory. You
may want to check out the screen of Processors. You will come across a
reference to a Virtualization engine in the right-hand pane. This process is
already in Automatic by default. As such, indeed, for Linux, you may not
have to worry about anything. However, you can set this to Intel VT-x or
other alternatives if you run into any problems. Then, in the Memory screen,
you can deal with specific issues of performance. Here, also, as a
recommended maximum and minimum for your virtual machine, you can see
the diagram of the suggested size of RAM. Stick to these recommendations
as it tends to be ideal. You may likely slow everything from running the VM
software to standard system tasks with the impact on your PC performance
when you set the Ram too high, and you will still have issues at hand by
going too small.
Ultimately, your settings for display will require a bit of your time. Here, you
can decide to set up multiple monitors in your virtual machine or utilize the
host computer’s monitor settings since you will have the ability to toggle 3D
acceleration. There will be a display of a recommended amount as with
system memory for the guest operating system, and you can also adjust the
graphics memory.
Using Linux in VMware Workstation Player after installation
On a physical desktop machine, it is typical of the operating system installed
in the virtual machine to boot the ISO. You can go ahead and automate the
entire process through the method of Easy Install, and to apply for setting in
the guest, the virtual OS, you can use your Windows host OS configuration.
It is useful to pay attention here because you can have the overall control
over the operating system installation if you chose the option to install the OS
later. Then, you can begin to use the guest OS since you will have access to
log into the virtual machine when the installation is complete with the use of

Easy Install. As simple as that! Subsequently, with the menu where your
virtual machine can be opened, you can also launch the VM.
The Importance of Virtual Machine
For Linux, hardware happened to be a significant encounter in 2005. People
were having different issues with USB devices, graphics, Bluetooth, and even
wireless. And to make things work, you might have to find wrappers and
drivers all the time a new invention came people’s way. Since the virtual
machine appeared not to be the option, and for any user of Linux to identify
the solution, they must interact with the ‘real’ hardware. However, there have
been so many changes. On Linux, a handful of hardware works unplanned.
There has been a shift in the focus on the distributions’ unique features with
less essence on the support for hardware. You can write about them on a
similar machine if you can easily play with multiple distributions, and you
are a virtual machines’ heavy user.
Now, for new users of Linux and the ways they can take advantage of them,
let’s discuss some benefits of virtual machines even though in the enterprise
segment, virtual machines are used extensively.
Who needs to use a virtual machine?
Since there is no availability of specific proprietary services and software,
some users of Linux have to boot in twofold. And there is only support for
Windows concerning tax filling software as well as some related works by
the government in many countries. For you to run Windows software, you
can easily use a virtual machine instead of working through the pain and
complexity of dual booting. Then, it is only on gaming that the virtual
machines may not function. Mainly when you are playing resource-hungry
games such as Crysis, to have the desired gaming experience, you may need
to talk to real RAM, GPU, and CPU. Since between the hardware and the
application, you may not like a virtual layer, video, and audio editing may not
work either. Virtual machines work great outside of these and even a few
other capacities.
Also, by switching to Linux or formatting the operating system they were
used to or playing with Linux, for the individuals that attempt to make a
change as non-Linux users, a virtual machine may also be useful. When they
are ready, they will have the self-assurance to make the shift since virtual

machines get these individuals comfortable with Linux. As such, inside your
Windows 10 or Mac OS, you can be running Linux. Above all, to switch
between distributions without having to reboot on the same hardware, you
can run multiple Linux distributions on virtual machines. Instead of entirely
dependent on anyone or being vendor-locked, you will need to be versed with
several major distributions as a Linux user. And without having to log out to
change the environment, on the same system, you may similarly run various
desktop backgrounds with the use of virtual machines. You may not know the
type of operating system your client or employer would be using. Thus, in
any Linux, you will need some knowledge because you certainly don’t want
to know only one distribution if you’re aspiring to become a developer or
system admin. And for testing your applications, you will require several
distributions if you are a developer.
As you can see now, working with virtual machines has several advantages.
Also, operating virtualization has some significant benefits, which is
efficiency, 
apart 
from 
multi-booting. 
Switching 
between 
different
distributions and having hard drives formatted can be a waste of your time.
So, it is as simple as starting the latest application, and without affecting your
work, you can begin a new virtual machine for distribution with virtual
machines. A virtual machine can be bliss if you are an enthusiast or
distribution-hopper. Keep your attention on several other distributions such
as Linux Mint, Fedora, Ubuntu, Kubuntu, OpenSUSE, and so many others
even if you are an Arch Linux user. As it takes up space and misuse of
financial means, having several physical systems can be virtually impossible.
It pays to make a good investment in some multicore processor and more
RAM, which can run additional virtual systems than buying six physical
machines. Now, you won’t experience any form of downtime if, on the same
machines, you handle nearly a dozen distributions.
The types of virtual machines to use
You have some alternatives, including VirtualBox, Xen, KVM, Qemu,
VMware, and so much more. Others have their advantages and also their
disadvantages. Though, solutions such as KVM tend to be quite efficient and
more powerful even if you have a preference for VirtualBox. As a new user
of Linux, you will find the ease of use of the VirtualBox. And without
technical know-how that can be quite hard-core, you can access its tons of
functionalities and features. Since VirtualBox can be installed on Mac,

Windows, and Linux, and the support for cross-platform is its most
significant advantage.

Chapter 5: Linux User Management
and System Administration
In computing technology, the major strength is Linux. Linux powers several
of the cloud-servers, supercomputers, personal computers, mobile phones,
and webservers. In addition to using command-line interface tools and Linux
tools to take backups, creating, enhancing, and maintaining user reports or
accounts, managing the operations of a computer system is the job of a Linux
systems administrator. Linux powers most of the computing devices because
of its open-source environment, high security, and high stability. It is
essential to know and understand the specific qualities of an administrator of
a Linux system:
Handling users, directories, and file
Basic bash command
Managing superuser or root
Files system hierarchy
Linux file systems
A Linux administrator’s duties
For an institute or organization that needs an excellent IT foundation, a
reliable criterion is the system administrator. Hence, all-time requirements
will be the need for efficient Linux administrators. As there may be
additional duties and responsibilities to the role, from each organization, the
job profile might change. Here are a few responsibilities of a Linux
administrator:
During an issue with the server, it is the job of the administrator
to troubleshoot.
Essential security tools and system installation. To make
necessary 
recommendations 
after 
analyzing 
hardware
requirements, the administrator works with the data network
engineer and other departments or personnel.

Ranging from login issues to disaster recovery, Linux
administrator detects and solves the service problems.
For the Linux environments and its users, creating, maintaining,
and enhancing the required tools.
One of the characters of a Linux administrator is to
communicate at all times in a professional, cultivated manner
with customers, vendors, and staff.
Apart from offering excellent customer support for ISP, web
hosting, and LAN customers about troubleshooting all increased
support troubles, Linux administrator also fixes and analyzes all
error logs.
Part of the duties is listing backup, creating new stored
procedures, and taking regular backup of data.
Internet request maintenance, such as PHP, MySQL, Apache,
RADIUS, and DNS.
Linux system admin career process
Learn how to install and use Linux environment
Have Linux administration certification
Become an expert in documentation
Look for help and support by joining community or group of a
local Linux users
Necessarily, taking backup and managing the operations, such as examining
hardware and software systems, are a few roles of the Linux systems
administrator. Also, the admin must be able to describe technical knowledge
understanding quite profoundly.
How to Manage Users and Groups as a Linux
Administrator
All at the same time, more than one user can make use of Linux since it is a

multi-user operating system. And to manage users in a system, Linux offers a
beautiful mechanism. Therefore, getting along with the groups and users in a
system is the most significant function of a system administrator. And we
will use the CentOS Linux distribution to talk about all the commands used
below.
Linux user
The unique identification number, UID, is a binary number that uniquely
identifies an account of a user of a system. Normal users and super or root
user are the two types of users. There will be limited access to files for the
regular users while there will be full access to all the data for super or root
user. A user account can be modified, deleted, or added by a superuser. It is
in the /etc/passwd/  file that the full account information is stored and also on
the /etc/shadow/  file that a hash password is stored.
Using a default setting to create a user
At the command prompt, by running the useradd  command, a user can be
added. Use passwd  utility to set a password after creating the user like this:
[root@localhost handy32]# useradd enirban
[root@localhost handy32]# passwd anirban
Changing password for user anirban.
New password:
Retype new password:
passwd: all authentication tokens updated successfully.
There will be an automatic setting of the default shell to /bin/bash , creation
of the home directory (/home/<username>) , and the assigning of a UID by
the system. Anytime the system has added to it a new user and also uses the
user name for the group, a user private group is created by the useradd
command. When a user is created, specify the full name of the user. For the
specification of the full name of the user, use useradd  with the option –c  as
a system administrator:
[root@localhost handy32]# useradd –c “Anirban Choudhury” handy32

Using UID to create a user
Using the –u  option and a custom UID, a user can be created like this:
[root@localhost handy32]# useradd –u 1036 handy32
Using the home directory with a non-default to create a user
By doing the below, you can set a home directory with a non-default:
[root@localhost handy32]# useradd –d /home/test handy32
Having user added to a supplementary group and primary group
Through the specification of the –G  and –g  option, it is possible to specify
a complementary group and the primary one as an administrator.
[root@loaclhost handy32]# useradd –g “head” –G “faculty” handy32
User lock and unlock
A user account can be locked or unlocked by a superuser. Using the option -
/ , you only have to invoke passwd  to lock an account.
[root@localhost handy32]# passwd -/ handy32
For user handy32, Locking password
passwd: Success
To unlock an account, you can use passwd  and the –u  option:
[root@localhost handy32]#  passwd –u handy32
For user handy32 to unlock password
passwd: Success
Changing username
For username login change, use usermod  command with the -/  option:
[root@localhost handy32]# usermod -/ “nishant” handy32

User removal
Using the home directory and a user with the combination of the –r  option
and userdel :
[root@loaclhost handy32]# userdel –r handy32
Linux Group
A mechanism used for the collection and organization of users is the Linux
group. The group ID, GID, is a uniquely associated ID for each group, like
the user ID. We have the supplementary and primary groups as the two types
of groups. The primary group belongs to each user and of zero or more than
zero complementary groups. It is in /etc/group/  that the information of the
group is stored and also in the /etc/gshadow  file that the respective
passwords are stored.
Using the default setting to create a group
As a root user, run the groupadd  command with the default settings to add a
new group:
[root@localhost handy32]# groupadd employee
Using the group name, type gpasswd  if you want to add a password:
[root@localhost handy32]# gpasswd employee
For group employee, changing the password
New Password:
Re-enter new password:
Using a specified GID to create a group
With the use of the –g  option, execute the groupadd  command to specify
the group’s GID explicitly:
[root@loaclhost handy32]# groupadd –g 1200 manager
Group password removal
Using the proper group name, run gpasswd –r  to remove a group password:

[root@loaclhost handy32]# gpasswd –r employee
Changing the name of the group
As a superuser, use the  –n  option as you run the groupmod  command to
change the name of the group:
[root@loacalhost handy32]# groupmod –n hrsupervisor employee
Changing the GID of the group
Along with –g , run the groupmod  command to change the group’s GID:
[root@loaclhost handy32]# groupmod –g 1050 manager
Deleting a group
You will first need to delete the users of that primary group before you can
delete a primary group. With the group name, run the groupdel  command to
delete a group:
[root@loaclhost handy32]# groupdel employee
The File System of Linux
The technique of storing files on a hard disk is a file system. And Linux
supports several types of file systems including:
Special-purpose file systems: debugfs, tmpfs, sysfs, procfs, etc.
Flash storage file systems: YAFFS, JFFS2, ubifs, etc.
Conventional disk file systems: NTFS, JFS, Btrfs, XFS, ext4,
ext3, ext2, etc.
The hierarchy standard of the file system
The file system hierarchy is a standard layout used to store files for the Linux
system. Here are some directory structures for the most common Linux:
The online manual page for Linux
There is a help or support for every single command for Linux, and this is

one of the key features of Linux. You will have to type the following
command for the manual page of the Linux to be accessed:
[handy32@localhost~]$man /s
The command page of the manual will be provided when you do this.
Root or superuser
For anyone to do any alteration to a service or program of Linux with access
to all kinds of permission, this account is a special kind of user account. To
become root or superuser, you will use the su  command and to become one,
all you have to do is to enter the root password by typing the following
command:
[handy32@localhost~]$su
Directories and files handling
Everything is a file inside Linux. As such, through file operation related
commands, there’s an interaction with them during the time of dealing with
device files or standard text files. Below are a few operations on the files:
File creation:
For the creation of a file, two commands are quite necessary, and they are
cat  and touch . To create an empty file, you can make use of the touch  by
following the example below:
[handy32@loaclhost~]$touch filel
To view or create a file, you will use the cat  which you do by following this
step:
[handy32@loacalhost~]$cat>filel
Also, you can use the command below to view a file type:
[handy32@localhost~]$cat filel

Copying a file:
For you to copy a file from one location to another, you can use the cp
command like this:
[handy32@localhost~]$cp filel /home/sandra/Documents/
The current working directory will be copied by this command to
/home/bhargab/Documents/ .
Removing a file:
You can type the command below to remove a file:
[handy32@localhost~]$rm filel
Moving or renaming a file:
To rename or move a file; the command you can use is the mv . Use below
command to move a file from one place to another:
[handy32@loaclhost~]$mv file /home/sandra/Document
Under /home/sandra/ , the Document directory will get the file1 with the use
of the above command. Then, from file1 to file2, you can perform the below
command to rename a file.
[handy32@loaclhost~]$mv filel file2
Directories and files listing:
The contents are the ls  lists, which are directories and files of the specified
directory or current directory. For the contents of the current directory to be
displayed, use the below command:
[handy32@localhost~]$ls
The directory name, as well as the file name, will be listed by this command.
You can use the command below to list all files in the hidden files and also
your home directory:

[handy32@localhost~]$ls □a
With the /  option, type ls  to view files in a long-listing format:
[handy32@localhost~]$ls □1
Below, you will see a portion of the output:
Total of 48
drwxr-xr-x. 2 handy32 handy32 4096 Jan 25 21:32 Desktop
drwxr-xr-x. 2 handy32 handy32 4096 Apr 24 16:33 Documents
drwxr-xr-x. 6 handy32 handy32 4096 Jan 20 23:55 Downloads
-rw-rw-r--. 1 handy32 handy32    1024 Apr 28 22:18 file1
-rw-rw-r--. 1 handy32 handy32    1024 Apr 28 22:01 file2
-rw-rw-r--. 1 handy32 handy32    1024 Apr 28 22:01 file3
drwxr-xr-x. 2 handy32 handy32 4096 Dec 20 08:48 Music
drwxr-xr-x. 2 handy32 handy32 4096 Dec 20 08:48 Pictures
drwxr-xr-x. 2 handy32 handy32 4096 Dec 20 08:48 Public
drwxr-xr-x. 2 handy32 handy32 4096 Dec 20 08:48 Videos
48 is the total number of disk blocked, as indicated by the total 48. In each of
the lines, there are nine columns, and the following permission was
represented by each column, including file name, time and date, bytes sizes,
group name, and numbers of links. There are 10 subfields in the permission
field, and the type of file is what the first field represents. The (u) permission
denotes the next three fields, while the representations of the group (g)
permissions are the seventh, sixth, and fifth fields. The (o) permissions have
its representation in the last three fields with read permission from (r),
execute permission from (x), and write permission from (w).
The soft and hard links
In the hard disk, a connection between the actual data and a file name is a
link, and these, are soft and hard links. When you follow the command
below, you can create a hard link:
[handy32@loaclhost~]$ln filel file2
And by following the command below, create a soft link:
[handy32@localhost~]$ln □S filel file3

Changing Mod:
For every file in Linux, there are three types of connected permission, and
they are (x) for execute, (w) for write, and (r) for read. Through the superuser
or the owner of the file, it is easy to change the existing file permission. To
embed a write  permission to the group, use the command below:
[handy32@localhost~]$chmod g+w filel
Also, use the following command for other users to have an execute
permission:
[handy32@localhost~]$chmod o+x filel
You may use the following the command below when you want to take away
execute permission from a group:
[handy32@localhost~]$chmod g-x filel
Current working directory
Below, you will see the display of the current working directory through the
pwd  command:
[sandrahandy32@localhost~]$pwd
/home/sandra
As such, the /home/sandra/  is the current working directory.
Directory creation:
For the creation of a directory, you can use the  mkdir  command like this:
[sandrahandy32@localhost~]$mkdir myDir
Under /home/sandra/ , a directory will be created.
Directory removal:
For an empty directory to be removed, you will use the rmdir  command like

this:
[sandrahandy32@localhost~]$rmdir MyDir
You will also remove the parent directories and not only the specified
directory with the p  option using rmdir .
[handy32@localhost~]$rmdir □ p myDir.
So far, we have covered extensively so many angles on the system
administration and also Linux user management. You may want to go back
and read through them for some time to get abreast of some of the things
discussed in this segment. When you do, you can get over to the next section,
where we will go in-depth on Linux directory structures.

Chapter 6: Linux Directory
Structures
There are needs for data storage on an HDD, hard disk of several types, or a
few similarities, including a USB for every general-purpose computer. These
needs come with a couple of reasons. In the first place, anytime you switch
off your computer, the contents of the RAM can be lost. And as for the use of
solid-state drives and USB memory sticks, after the removal of power, the
maintenance of the stored data in them tends to be the function of non-
volatile RAM types. Quite expensive is the flash RAM than other related
categories like the volatile, standard RAM such as DDR3. The disk space is
not as expensive as the standard RAM because the data storage by hard
drives tends to be the second reason. Regarding per byte cost, RAM is still
more useful. There’s been a rapid drop in the value of both disk and RAM.
As per unit, the hard drive is about 71 times less expensive the RAM, based
on a 2TB hard drive costs against 16GB of RAM as a quick calculation of the
cost per byte.
In a few confusing and different ways, there are a lot of discussions from
several quarters about filesystems. With regards to the perspective of a
document or analysis, you will need to distinguish the exact meaning since
the word itself can have multiple meanings. For using it in distinctive
conditions and based on people’s observations, let’s attempt to define several
meanings of the term ‘filesystem.’ The intention is to make this definition
grounded on its several handlings as we strive to adapt to the conventional
official meanings.
1. With a specific kind of filesystem, a formatted logical or
partition volume that, on a Linux filesystem, can be mounted on
a specified point.
2. A particular formatted data storage like XFS, BTRFS, EXT4,
EXT#, EXT2, etc. 100 filesystems types have support on Linux,
including the newest in addition to the oldest. And to define
accessing and storing the data, these filesystem varieties
function by its metadata structures.

3. The start of the entire Linux directory structure is at the top (/)
root directory.
Basic functions of the filesystem
There are specific inescapable and exciting details that the disk storage
encompasses with it as a necessity. Essentially, the provision of non-volatile
data storage is one of the ultimate functions and purposes of a filesystem.
However, from that requirement, there are some other essential functions.
The provision of a namespace is what the whole filesystems have to execute;
a methodology of organizational and naming. And out of the entire set of
characters available, this process defines the manner with which you can
brand a file, particularly the subset of characters and the length of a filename
that you can use in place of filenames. Also, atop a disk, the data’s logical
structure is what it defines, including limping files in a vast, single
conglomeration as well as for organizing files with the directories usage. For
the provision of that namespace’s rational base, quite necessary is the
structure of metadata when the namespace has been defined. As such, for the
support of a classified directory structure, there is an obligatory addition of
data structures. These structures make the determination of the used space
blocks upon the disk as well as those available. As for the maintenance of the
directories’ names and files, the structures that allow that and also the
statistics about the data position or locations which, on the disk, belong to the
folder, last accessed or modified, as well as times and sizes they were created.
For the storing of the sophisticated material of the disk’s subdivisions, they
make use of other metadata, including logical partitions and volumes. It
represents the structures and more complex metadata, which, separated and
independent of the filesystem metadata, confine the data expressing the
filesystem accumulated on the partition or drive.
Also, for the provision of access to the function of the system calls that
control filesystem objects such as directories and files, API, Application
Programming Interface is also required for filesystems. The tasks of deleting,
moving, and creating files are provided by the APIs. Including the location
on a filesystem that you place a file, part of the things APIs offer is
algorithms that determine things. For minimizing and speeding the disk
fragmentation, objectives may be the purpose of such algorithms. As a
pattern for rights of entry definition to directories and files, there is also a

security model in the place provided by modern filesystems. As a user, you
can have a way into other people’s files or the OS as a result of the Linux
filesystem security model. For the implementation of these purposes, the
required software is the ultimate building block. And as a technique to
enhance programmer efficiency and both system, the application of two-part
software is what Linux uses. The virtual filesystem of Linux is this
implementation’s first part of the two. For the access to the filesystems of all
types and also the provision of a single command set for the developers and
the kernel is done by this virtual filesystem. And the driver of the specific
required device to interface gets a call from the virtual filesystem software to
the several kinds of filesystems. The second section of the execution is the
drivers of the filesystem-exclusive appliance. On the logical or partition
volume and to those explicit to the types of the filesystem, the filesystem
commands’ standard set is interpreted by the device driver.
Directory Structure of Linux
The file system structure of Linux can appear particularly alien if you are the
type that is coming from Windows. Now mostly with three-letter names, the
cryptic-sounding directories and a/  option have replaced the forgotten drive
letters as well as the C:\  drive. What defines some other Unix-related OS
and the structure of file systems on Linux is the FHS, Filesystem Hierarchy
Standard. However, also contained in the Linux filesystems are some
directories that are not yet defined by the standard.
/var – Variable Data Files
As it must be read-only in the usual operation, the writable counterpart to the
/usr directory is the /var directory. During normal operation, we can write to
the /var directory the log files as well as all things else that would normally
be written to /usr. For example, in /var/log, the log file can be found there.
/usr – Read-Only Data & User Binaries
Contrary to files and applications that the system uses, users use files and
applications that contain the directory /usr.  For example, rather than the
directory /sbin, the location of the non-elemental binaries of the system
administration, the location of non-essential applications is within the
directory /usr/bin. There are other directories contained in the /usr directory,
including architecture-free folder such as graphics which share location in
/usr/. This process prevents them from mucking up the rest of the system,

where the local directory usr/ is, by default, found installed in the locally
assembled applications.
/tmp – Temporary Files
Whenever your system is restarted, since it is in the /tmp directory where
application stored temporary files, the utilities like tmpwatch will have these
files deleted at any time.
/srv – Service data
The ‘data for services provided by the system’ is contained by the /srv
directory. You would probably store the files of your website in a directory
inside the /srv directory if you were using the Apache HTTP server to serve a
website.
/selinux SELinux Virtual File System
With SELinux, the directory /selinux contains special files if, for security
purposes, Red Hat and Fedora use SELinux by your Linux distribution. It is
the same as the /proc. On Ubuntu, this folder’s presence appears to be a bug
since Ubuntu doesn’t use SELinux.
/sbin – System Administration Binaries
The directory /bin is parallel to the directory /sbin. And for system
administration, it is generally intended to be run by the root user as it contains
essential binaries.
/run – State Files Application
For the requirement, such as process IDs and sockets, to store transient place,
the directory /run gives a standard place application as it is fairly new. Since
files in /tmp may be deleted, /tmp can’t store these files.
/root – Home Directory for Root
The home directory for the root operator is the directory /root. As the system
root directory, its location is at /root instead of /home/root for the location.
/proc – Kernel & Process Files
Since it doesn’t contain standard files, the directory /dev is the same as the
/proc directory. Special files to process and represent information are all that
it contains.
/opt – Optional Packages

For optional software packages, these directories are contained in the
directory /opt. Since the standard filesystem hierarchy doesn’t have its
respect, the proprietary software commonly uses it. For instance, as you
install it, it might dump the files of proprietary programs in /opt/application.
/mnt – Transitory Mount Points
While using them, where the temporary filesystems are mounted by the
system administrator is the directory /mnt. For example, for the execution of
a few operations of file recovery, you may well want to mount a partition on
windows /mnt/ for Windows if you are mounting it. However, to mount other
system files, you may choose any space on the system.
/media – Removable Media
Where the devices inserted into the computer are mounted is where
subdirectories contain the /media directory. For instance, a directory will
automatically be created inside the /media directory as you insert a CD into
your Linux system. And inside this directory, you can access the contents of
the CD.
/lost+found – Recovered Files
There is a lost+found  directory in each filesystem of Linux. As such, a
filesystem check will be performed at the next boot if the filesystem crashes.
And for the extensive recovery of data, it is in the lost+found  directory will any
corrupted files found be placed.
/lib – Essential Shared Libraries
In the /sbin and /bin directories, required essential binaries are contained
libraries in the /lib directory. Binaries needed by libraries within a /usr/bin
folder are located within /usr/lib.
/home – Home Files
For each user, the directory /home contains a file for home. For example,
/home/greg will be the location for the home folder if your username is Greg.
User-explicit formation file and user’s data files are contained in this home
folder. On the system, for you to have other files modified as the superuser,
each user needs to obtain elevated permission even when they only have the
write access to their home folder.
/etc. – Configuration Files
Though easily edited by hand in a text editor, the maintenance of the

configuration files is contained by the /etc. directory. Be aware that the
system-wide configuration files are contained by the /etc/ directory, and it is
in each home directory of the user that user-specific configuration files are
located.
/dev – Devices Files
As files, devices are exposed by Linux. As such, devices that have the
representation of some special files are the directory /dev. Though they seem
like files, much known to us, we can’t call them original files. For instance,
in the system, the major SATA drive is represented by the /dev/sda. For you
to inform it to edit /dev/sda, you could begin a compartment editor if you
want to partition it as virtual devices without any hardware correlation. Also,
pseudo-devices are contained in this directory. For example, there are only
random numbers that the /dev/random produces. As it creates no output, an
exceptional device is /dev/null that instinctively have all inputs discarded
when, toward /dev/ null, a command’s output is piped.
/cdrom – CD-ROMs Historical Mount Point
A directory that doesn’t belong to the standard of FHS is the directory
/cdrom. However, when you go to Ubuntu and other OS, you will find it. For
CD-ROMs inserted in the system, it is a temporary location. However, it is
inside the /media directory for the standard location of temporary media.
/boot – Static Boot Files
The files needed to boot the system is contained by the /boot directory. For
example, stored here are your Linux kernels and the GRUB boot loader’s
files. Though their location with other files is in the /etc directory, the
configuration files of the boot loader are not located here.
/bin – Essential User Binaries
When the system is mounted in a single-user mode, the essential user
binaries, otherwise known as programs that must be present, are contained
within the /bin directory. It is in /usr/bin that applications like Firefox is
stored, while the location for vital utilities and system programs like bash
shell are in /bin directory. You can also store in another partition the /usr
directory. Though, even if no other filesystems are mounted, you will be sure
to have these essential utilities when you place these files in the /bin
directory. As it contains crucial binaries for system administration, similar to

it is the /sbin directory.
/ - the Root Directory
Known as the root directory, it is under the / directory that you can locate
everything on the Linux system. On Windows, the C:\ directory is quite
similar to / directory. However, since Linux doesn’t have drive letters, this is
not strictly true. On Windows, while D:\ is the location for another partition,
on Linux, it is in another folder under / directory that other partition would
appear.

Chapter 7: Working with Disk, Media, and Data
Files (gzip – tar)
Before you can use them, you must structure storage devices like USB drives
and hard drives since the regular practice in Linux is deleting and creating
partitions. Partitions often host separate sections of devices with considerable
storage after they have been divided. Also, you can divide into isolated parts
of the hard drive using the partitions where, as a discrete hard drive, each
section behaves as such. If you administer several OS, partitioning can be
particularly useful. In Linux, otherwise known as disk partition manipulation,
you can remove or create this with the use of several powerful tools. As such,
devices with large disk can benefit as well as several disk partitions, and we
will go in-depth on how to use the parted  command. Here are some common
commands like cfdisk  and fdisk , as well as the difference between parted .
Reliability: in a DOS partition, only one copy of the partition
table is stored. At the end and the beginning of the disk, two
copies of the partition table are kept by the GPT. Also, done
with DOS partitions to check the partition table integrity, the
GPT uses a CRC checksum.
More partitions: it is only 16 partitions that the tables of DOS
partition permit with the use of extended and primary partitions.
Having many more is what you can choose and by default, can
get up to 128 partitions with GPT.
Larger disks: in some cases, up to 16TB is possible even
though a partition of the DOS table tends to format up to 2TB of
disk space. However, up to 8ZiB of space can be addressed by a
GPT partition table.
GPT format: while, to DOS partition tables, cfdisk  and fdisk  are
limited, a Globally Unique Identifiers Partition Table, GPT can
be created by the parted  command.
It is recommended to use parted  to function with disk partitions because
working with them will require more flexibility in today’s larger disks. Most
often, part of the operating system installation process is the creation of the

disk partition. When an existing system is getting an addition of a storage
device, direct use of the parted  command is most useful.
Analyze Disk Space and Hard Disk Partition on Linux
with These Commands
For you to check the partitions on your systems, there are some commands
you can use. Part of what the commands might do is checking what partitions
exist on every floppy disk and some additional details such as filesystem,
consumed space, total size, so many others. Though they can also modify
them, there are some tools for partitioning where the partition material can be
displayed, including cfdisk , sfdisk , and fdisk .
hwinfo
You can make use of hwinfo  to print out the partition and disk list, as a
general-purpose hardware information tool. However, like the other
commands, the output doesn’t print details about each partition.
blkid
Though it doesn’t report the space on the partitions, blkid  prints the block
devices, storage and partitions media, attributes such as uuid  and file system
type.
lsblk
Optical drives and disk partitions, as well as all the storage blocks, are listed
out by lsblk . If any, it lists out the mount point and, most notably, the total
size of the block/partition. On the partitions, free/used space is not reported.
It indicates that the filesystem is not yet mounted if there is no
MOUNTPOINT. Also, it means that there is no disk for DVD/CD. With a
device such as the model and label, lsblk  is capable of displaying more
information.
pydf
Written in Python is the improved version of pydf , and in an easy to read
manner, it prints out all the hard disk partitions. Also, it is only the mounted
file systems that pydf  is limited to show.
df
This command prints out details about only mounted filesystems even though

it is not a partitioning utility. Even filesystems that are not real disk partitions
are some of the list generated by df . When you use it, you will discover that
the actual partitions or devices are only the file systems that start with a /dev ,
and to filter out the real hard disk partitions or filesystems, you can use grep .
Then, use df  to display only actual disk partitions with the type of partition.
parted
If needed, this modifies the list as it also lists out the partitions being another
command-line utility.
cfdisk
Based on ncurses  with an interactive user interface, the partition editor of
Linux is cfdisk . Use it to modify or create current partitions in addition to
listing out those partitions. One partition can only run at a time with cfdisk ,
and as such, pass the device name to cfdisk  if the details of a specific disk are
required.
sfdisk
In addition to a goal similar to fdisk , however, with additional features,
another utility is sfdisk . Each partition’s size can be displayed in MB.
fdisk
For the checking of the partition on a disk, the most commonly used
command is the fdisk . Like filesystem type, you can get the display of the
partitions and details with the use of the fdisk  command. However, each
partition size report may not be available with fdisk .
Linux Data Manipulation
It can be confusing with the Linux world if you are the type that is quite used
to Windows. What with no image, link, or anything to click, few hints, no
wizards, and so on. And also, before anything can be done, you need to know
what it is you want. Let’s assume that, somehow contrary to your interest,
you have no choice but to use the shell prompt of Linux and learning the
agonizing, cryptic program where the xkcd forms its basis does not tally with
your burning desire. However, for the processing of your data, the use of the
command-line might have in it some good reasons.  Attempting to make use
of Excel to deal with this data may not be suitable even with the new

technologies offering digital data terabytes and more instruments providing a
digital output. You may not also get anywhere near luck with the use of CSV
files. However, with the use of free, reasonably simple utilities on Linux,
these can be easily managed. Also, another reason for taking this path is that
the powerful mainstream tools for Linux come with no cost.
Though we may want to leave out most of these, however, SAS,
Mathematica, MATLAB, and so on have been ported to Linux and are a few
excellent branded tools. As it works better on Linux and as second nature on
Linux, we may not imply that using native applications and utilities may not
do well on Windows. Also, there is a constant assurance that on Linux, it will
work always. Since there’s a payment option for Apple and Microsoft in
money and time by releasing yet another pointless upgrade to bump their
profit, you don’t need to learn a new interface every 6 months.
Identifying the file type
It is possible you are not aware of the kind of data it is even though the data
might have been generated in the lab. The file is a device that can proffer
some help even though it is not foolproof. The response it tends to give
comes from the question: “what file type is it?” If there are any diagnostic
characteristics, file peeks inside the file to see them, unlike the endings of the
file name mapping approach of Windows, which has filename.typ to a
specific type. And it can be quite helpful suppose there’s been name-mangled
or renamed in translation to the file.
Hypotheses
With the installation of Linux standard famous utilities, including R , the
hypothesis is that on a Linux, you have access to a bash shell. For this
exercise, a directory can be created. For DataDir, it is quite on $DDIR  that
you can give it your reference, though you can give it any name you like.
And to the DDIR variable of the shell, you may as well have actual term
assigned to it:
Export DDIR=/stephen/leo/
bash>  is the prefix of the shell commands and to test your shell, including
comments with embed (with # as a prefix; you may as well ignore them) can

mouse into it. Also, you may want to ignore the prefix bash> . Also, at the UC
Irvine and on the cluster nodes of the interactive BDUC, accessible here are
all the defined utilities. And for any Linux distribution, you can get them
without any costs, except they state otherwise.
The size of the file
red+blue all.txt.gz , a tab-bordered data file of 25MB is what we are going to use.
By pressing upon the link with a right-clicking, you can download it in
Firefox and hit ‘save.’ For this exercise, use the directory $DDIR  to save it.
Then, use gunzip blue+red_all.txt.gz  to decompress it. After that, with ls , the
result of the entire bytes will be achieved.
Using Linux to Mount and Unmount Media
With the use of the operating system of a Linux, you can have media
mounted and unmounted with this process. You must be aware that the
default Red Hat installation is what this process uses, and thus, with the use
of other Linux operating system types, the commands, structures, and file
names might not be the same. Now, let’s get down to the business!
If you are mounting a CD, follow the steps below:
1. Ensure that, on your server, there is a presence of the /nt/cdrom
directory. You can type mkdir/mnt/cdrom  if there’s no
existence of this directory. Then, hit the ‘enter’ button.
2. Then, have mount/dev/scd0 –t iso9660 –o ro /mnt/cdrom  typed
for you to mount the CD. Again, hit the ‘enter’ button.
If the disk is the instrument you want to mount, you can follow the below
command:
1. Be certain that on the server, you have /mnt/floppy  directory.
You may want to type the below command if there’s no
existence of this directory:
mkdir/mnt/disk
Again, hit the ‘enter’ button.
2. You can type the following command to have the disk mounted:

mount/dev/sda –o auto/mnt/disk
Then, hit the ‘enter’ button.
For you to unmount the media, you can follow the command below:
1. Input CD and hit enter.
2. Follow the commands below:
You can type the command below if it is your CD that you want
to unmount:
unmounts /mnt/cdrom
Then, hit the ‘enter’ button.
You can type the command below if it is a disk that you want to
unmounts:
unmounts mnt/floppy
Again, hit the ‘enter’ button.
Creating from the Command-line a File for Tar GZip
If you are managing your backups away from Time Machine or you want to
have file groups transferred, having the zip files made could have been
something you are probably doing. The command line can be an excellent
option for you to make a gzip and tar archive if you prefer better compression
and also additional advanced options using the user-friendly and accessible
tools of GUI zip. And typical of Linux elements, even in Mac OS X, the
syntax will be similar.
Bundle creation the archive of tar gzip
You can make use of the syntax from the (terminal/applications/) command-
line. For example, you could have jpg files directories compressed by typing
some specific commands.
Here, a wildcard is the *, which means that you can have .jpe compressed
from any file that has the extension .jpg, and that is all. Though offering
compression on its own, tar packages become a bundle of a single file from a

set of files as two distinctive products are the resulting .tar.gz.  file. Therefore,
gzip compression is quite valuable to supplement for you to have the tar
compressed. And if you want it, you can have them as different commands
while running them. However, as you can automatically have the tar file
gzipped since the flag –z  is what tar command offers, there is no much need
for it.

Chapter 8: File, Directory Manager,
Permissions, Networking, and SSH
As a layer generally, the operating system that handles your data positioning
on the storage is any filesystem on Linux. And even if you discover any
unsupported filesystem type, you will not know which file starts where and
what files end where without it. For software that can deal with it, you may
even download it. As such, what are the Linux filesystem types? You will
notice that Linux provides several filesystems such as the ones below when
you attempt to install it: swap, btrfs, jfs, ext4, ext3, ext2, ext
Therefore, what are these filesystems that Linux provides?
Btrfs
Oracle made this one, and in some distributions, it is not entirely stable as
Ext. However, if you have to, you may think that it is a replacement for it,
and it has excellent performance.
XFS
Using it with small files, it works slowly being an old filesystem
JFS
IBM made this old filesystem and, whether, with big or small files, it works
quite well. However, after a long time, as indicated by reports, it failed, and
files get corrupted.
Ext4
With a significant speed, this gives room for large files. If you are looking for
an option for SSD disk, you may want to go for this, and it is the suggested
default filesystem you will see when you want to install Linux.
Ext3
With backward compatibility and upgrades, it comes with Ext2. And since
this filesystem doesn’t give any support for disk snapshots or file recovery,
servers no longer use this type of filesystem.
Ext2
This gives room for 2 terabytes of data allowed as the Linux first filesystem.

Ext
Because of limitations, people are no longer using this old one.
High-Level Explanation
Now is the time to know from the high-level, what is inside those filesystems
since you are familiar with the Linux filesystem. If you are someone coming
from Windows, it will be possible to install partitions such as D:\ and C:\,
usually C:\, because Windows has partitions like them. Though we have
discussed it in some previous chapter, what is the filesystem structure of
Linux? You will see the Linux filesystem hierarchy when you navigate to the
root partition, which is /.
Linux Directory Management Commands
For us to translate between IP addresses and domain names, the domain name
system, DNS, is what we utilize. For example, on a Linux system, for DNS
hookup, you may use the host command or dig command. Similarly, it is not
by inode number but by file names that people refer to Linux files. As such,
what is the directory’s actual function? It is according to your usage that you
tend to group the files. For example, you can do that under /etc/  directory
that all configuration files are stored. Thus, making a connection between the
file names and their connected inode number is the purpose of a directory.
And you will discover two sub-directories inside every directory named:
1. .. (double period) – the pointer to the previous directory, i.e., the
directory above the one you are in at present. Except for the root
directory, it is in every directory that the “..”  appears. And to
the same inode as “.”  that the “..”  always points.
2. . (single period) – which means the current directory
For us to list directories and files, we can use the ls  command, including on
Linux .. and . directories.
ls –la
Directory
A sub-directory is contained inside another directory. A tree structure forms
at the end of the directories and to see directory tree structure, use the tree
command:

$ tree /etc │ less
Typical of a file, a directory has an inode. As it connects each name with an
inode number, it is a specially formatted file containing records. Under ex2/3
filesystem, it is quite vital to take note of the following limitation of
directories:
There is a chance for an unlimited number of subdirectories in
Ext4 and other modern Linux filesystems
In a single directory, there is a soft upper limit of about 10-15k
files
In a single directory, there is an upper limit of 32768
subdirectories
However, without any issues, using a hashed directory index, which is under-
development, allows 100k-1M+ files in a single directory, according to the
official documentation of ext2/3 filesystems. And related to directory, below
are some bash shell alias commands:
alias ..=‘cd..’
alias d=‘ls –l │ grep –E “^d”’
Linux directory management commands
For you to work with files and directories, here is a list of standard Linux
commands:
Command
Description
Example(s)
diff command
Compares the content of any
two files
diff old.c new.c
egrep command
Though, 
extended 
regular
expression supported, it is the
same as grep
egrep –I ‘err│cri│warn│’
/var/log/messages
grep command
In the specific files, it finds a
specific search string
grep “nameserver”
/etc/resolv.conf
more command
At a time, through text one
screenful, it serves as a filter
for paging.
more /etc/hosts

less command
The content of the specified
file is seen by it.
less resume.txt
cat command
Displays the contents of a file
cat data.txt
file command
This detects the contents of the
specified files.
file /etc/resolv.conf
find command
In a given directory, this
searches for a file
find $HOME –name “hello.c”
locate command
Finding in which directory of a
specified file is located
locate file!
chmod command
Changes 
the 
access
permissions
chmod 0444 dir1
chgrp command
With 
the 
specified 
group
name, this command transfers
the group ownership of a given
file to the group.
chgrp dir1
chown command
With the specified username, it
transfers ownership of a file.
chown username file
In command
From source to target, it
creates an internal link
ln –s /etc/hosts/tmp/link
rm command
From 
the 
filesystem, 
this
command 
removes 
the
specified files, and unless the
option –r  is used, rm  doesn’t
remove directories
rm files!
rm –r dir1
cp command
Copies source to the target
cp –r dir1 /path/to/dir2
mv command
Deleting 
the 
source 
after
copying to the target
mv dir1 dir2
cd command
cd changes to the home
directory of the user without
any parameters
cd
pwd command
This command displays the
name of the working or current
directory.
pwd
cd .. command
Go back to the previous
directory.
cd ..
cd command
Change the current directory
cd /etc/
rmdir command
If it is already empty, this
deletes the specified directory.
rmdir dir1
mkdir command
A new directory is created
through this command.
mkdir dir1

Managing Directories
Since, from Nautilus, you can copy, move, delete, or create them, you must
learn to treat your directories like files and related to files directories with the
use of commands from a shell prompt.
Creating directories
For you to have a fresh sub-directory conceived, you must learn to write
permission. It is at the /temp/ directory and the home directory, as well as the
subdirectories that most users have these permissions. You will have to
navigate to your new directory for you to use Nautilus in creating an original
directory. In the window’s blank potion, right-click and then choose to create
a folder. Then, using the untitled folder with the highlighted text, a new
folder icon will appear. Before you hit the ‘enter’ button, remember to give
this new folder a name. When you attempt to use a shell prompt to have an
original directory conceived, the mkdir  command is all you need to use. You
can replace the <directory-name>  by simply type in: mkdir <directory-name>  with the
new directory’s intended title.
Deleting directories
It is on the Desktop that you click and then Trash the icon or move it to the
Trash after right-clicking on it to delete a directory from Nautilus. You will
need to enter the rmdir  command to delete a directory that is empty from the
prompt of the shell. It is the rm –rf <directory>  command that you will need for
you to delete an unlikely empty directory and also all the things within such
directory.
Dot directories
Dotfiles are also part of the applications created by “dot” directories. Also,
other files required by the application, a hidden directory of configuration, is
a directory for dot, and these files are a single hidden configuration file.
Generally, these directories are user-specific non-configuration files, and
their accessibility is to the user that has them installed.
Linux File Permissions
Since several users can have access simultaneously, and as a multi-user
operating system, Linux is a clone of UNIX. Also, without any modifications,
anyone can use Linux in servers and mainframes. However, because vital

data can be removed, changed, or corrupted by malign or unsolicited
individuals, this situation raises security concerns. As such, there are two
levels of authorizations divided by Linux for adequate security, and they are:
1. Permission
2. Ownership
In Linux, a critical concept is ownership and permissions. We will begin the
discussion with the Ownership as both of them will be examined.
Linux file ownership
There are 3 types of owners assigned for every directory and file on your
Linux system.
Group:
There are multiple users contained in a user-group. Also, similar access
permissions to the files will be given to all users belonging to a group.
Several individuals will require access to a file if you have a project. You can
go ahead and add all users to a group instead of manually assigning
permissions to each user. Then, no one else can modify or read the files when
you assign group permission to file.
User:
The owner of the file us a user, and you will be the owner if, by default, you
are the one who creates a file. Thus, as an owner, you can also be called a
user.
Other:
This case points to having access to a file by any other users. This type of
user does not belong to a user group that owns the file or created the file.
Mostly, this can be anyone else. Therefore, it is also referred to as setting
permissions for the world when you set permission for others.
Ultimately, the question of distinction arises. How can you go about
separating these three user types without exposing vital information from one
group to another group? It is typical of hidden your image from your
computer from your colleague who works on your Linux computer. Now, this
is the case of permissions, and it is through user behavior that you can define
it. For you to have a full grasp of the permission system on Linux, we may

have to discuss more on it.
Permissions
For all the 3 owners discussed above, the 3 permissions below define every
directory and file in your Linux system.
Execute: as you can effectively run it, you have an extension
“.exe” as an executable program in Windows. However, you
won’t be able to run an application unless the execute
permission is set in Linux. And provided you set permission for
write and read, though you can’t run it, you might still be able to
modify or see the program code.
Write: you will have the influence of editing the contents of a
file through the write permission. Also, in the directory, you can
rename, remove, and add files as part of the authority you get
from the write permission. You can assume where the file is
stored, having no permission on the directory, and you have to
write permission on file. The file contents can be modified by
you. However, removing, moving, or renaming the file from the
directory will not be possible for you.
Read: you can read and open a file through the authority given
to you by this permission. Also, you can list the content of a
directory since you have the read permission.
SSH Command
Mainly, ssh  command is included in every Linux system. The SSH client
gets started through this command and on a remote machine, enables a secure
connection to the SSH server. From a remote machine to logging, the ssh
command is used for executing commands on the remote device and
transferring files between the two computers.
SSH command in Linux
Over an insecure network and between two hosts, the provision of a secure
encrypted connection is made by the ssh  command. Also, for tunneling other
applications, it can be used for file transfer and terminal access. From a
remote location, you can securely run Graphical X11 applications over SSH.

Other SSH commands
With each of them having its page, besides the client ssh , there are other SSH
commands.
sshd – OpenSSH server
sftp – file transfer with FTP-related command interface
scp – file transfer with RCP-related command interface
ssh-add – a tool to add a key to the agent
ssh –agent – agent to hold private key for single sign-on
ssh-copy-id – configures a public key as authorized on a server
ssh-keygen – creates a key pair for public-key authentication

Chapter 9: Linux Terminals, Editors,
and Shell
You can find help to get started with the terminal, whether it’s been a while
you have been using Linux or you are a new user of Linux. Without doubts, a
terminal is a powerful tool with lots of values, and it is not something that
can scare you. It is not really by reading a single book or article that you will
be able to learn everything you need to know about the terminal. Firsthand, to
play with the terminal takes experience.
Basic usage of terminal
You will see the bash shell on the application menu of your desktop when
you launch a terminal. And by default, bash is what most Linux distributions
use even though there are other shells. At the prompt, by typing its name, you
can launch a program. Then, it is all a program from command-line utilities
to graphical applications such as Firefox concerning everything you launch
here. Though those functions are typical of programs, for essential file
management, bash has a few built-in commands. And to launch it, you may
not need to have the entire path typed to a program, unlike on Windows. For
example, you will have to type the whole path to Firefox’s .exe file when, on
Windows, you attempt to open Firefox. You can type the command below on
Linux:
firefox
To run it, after typing a command, go ahead and hit ‘enter.’ On Linux,
programs don’t have file extensions, and there’s no need to add a .exe or
anything else. Also, accepting arguments is part of terminal commands. You
can utilize specific types of arguments concerning the program. For example,
as arguments, web addresses are accepted by Firefox.
Installing software
Installing software from the terminal is one of the most efficient things to do.
The fancy frontend of some terminal commands that they use in the
background, such as the Ubuntu Software Center, is the software
management applications. Then, you can install them with a terminal
background instead of doing it one after the other by selecting and clicking
around applications. Also, you can have several apps installed with a distinct

command. Since you can see the package management systems by other
distributions, you can follow the following command when you intend to
install a new software package on Ubuntu:
sudo apt-get install packagegename
Though it works similar to the Firefox command above, it may appear a bit
complicated. With root (administrator) privileges, before launching apt-get ,
sudo , you can have the above line launched. Installing a package named
packagegename  is what packagegename  will install by reading the argument apt-get
program. However, it is as arguments that you can also specify multiple
packages. For example, you could execute the command below to install
Pidgin instant messenger and the Chromium web browser:
sudo apt-get install chromium-browser pidgin
Also, you could do it with a single command like the above if you want to
install all your favorite software after installing Ubuntu. Since you can guess
them reasonably quickly, the package names of your preferred programs are
all you would need to know. Also, with the help of the tab completion trick,
your guesses can be refined.
Text Editors for Linux Desktop
It makes it quite useful for some text editors to also double up as an IDE.
Also, they are the default editors. In the Linux environment and for the Linux
desktop environment in developing an application, these are quite helpful.
The focus will be on a few text editors even though out there, there are a lot
of text editors. As such, let’s jump right into them:
GNU Emacs
For the Linux environment, one of the oldest text editors is GNU Emacs that
has been here for quite some time. GNU’s project founder, Richard Stallman,
was the one who developed it. All around the world, for thousands of Linux
programmers boast of it as their preferred and favorite text editors by using it.
With the use of C and LISP, they were able to develop it. To install emacs on
Linux Mint or Ubuntu, you can use the commands below:
linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~/Downloads$ sudo apt-get update

linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~/Downloads$ sudo apt-get install emacs
There are some included unique features of GNU Emacs, which are:
Extensive support and documentation
Debugger interface extension
News and mail options
For Linux Desktop, Atom and notepadqq can also be IDE and Text Editors,
apart from these text editors.
Nano
In the UNIX operating system, another popular text editor used is Nano. In
2000, it was released, and it is the same as the Pico text editor. Also, to make
it as an advanced and powerful text editor, it comes packed with some
additional functionality. And it is in the interface only that it can run in a
command-line. Here are a few unique features of Nano:
Autoconf support
Tab completion
Auto Indentation
Case sensitive search
Kwrite
It was in 2000 that Kwrite was first released to the public, and KDE
developed this text editor. From KDE, along with the KParts technology, it is
entirely based on the text editor for Kate. Making it a more powerful
development environment, to a large extent, you can extend the Kwrite’s
functionality with the help of additional plugin installation. Also, along with
encoding your file, it can be used to edit a remote file. On Linux Mint or
Ubuntu, to install kwrite, use the command below:
linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~/Downloads$ sudo apt-get install kwrite

A few unique features of Kwrite are:
vi input mode
Syntax highlighting
Auto indentation
Word completion
Eclipse
Eclipse editor can be a suitable option as an advanced and robust editor of
code/text for frontend designers and developers. Since it contains several
features that support developing and writing Java applications easily, it is
entirely in JAVA that it was developed. Also, it is popular among Java
developers. For anyone to accomplish extra language support, there may be a
requirement for additional plugins if they need it. As the editor can have
several advanced functionalities when you insert them with the help of
additional plugins, the Eclipse IDE becomes even more powerful. And for the
development of programs for COBOL, Ruby on Rails, C++, C, Python, and
PHP, you can as well use it. For you to have eclipse installed on Linux Mint
or Ubuntu, use the command below:
linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~$ sudo apt update
linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~$ sudo apt install eclipse
A few of Eclipse’s unique features are:
Plugin support
For Java developer, tools for Java Development are included
Open-source and free text editor
Kate
Loaded with the Kubuntu environment, as a default editor, you may have to
know about the text editor of Kate if you are familiar with the Kubuntu

desktop environment. Given that you can exploit it as a powerful IDE, you
also have the opportunity of working with multiple files simultaneously since
it is easy to use text editor, it is also a lightweight. Use the command below
to install Kate on Linux Mint or Ubuntu:
linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~$ sudo apt-get install kate
Kate has some exceptional features, and they are:
Sets indentation for documents automatically
Auto-detects languages
Supports several languages
A powerful IDE
Gedit
Gedit comes loaded by default as a text editor in a GNOME desktop
environment. Gedit follows similar objectives as it comes with a simple and
clean user interface, and it is lightweight, just as the objective of GNOME to
always offer functionalities that are straightforward and clean. With the
GNOME desktop environment, getting access to it by the public didn’t
happen until 2000. It supports entirely for internationalized text as it is
completely developed using C language. Gedit possess a few unique features,
and they are:
Supports several programming languages
Supports internationalized text
Syntax highlighting
Brackets
For the Linux environment, in 2014, the Brackets was launched by Adobe as
a text editor. It has exciting packed features that make working with this
editor a lot of fun as an open-sourced text editor. With a clean interface, it is
also simple and easy to use. For programmers and web designers to get
much-needed help, it is designed as a code editor and also as a text editor.

They used JavaScript, CSS, and HTML to develop it completely. With its
sophisticated qualities, a few quality text editors may not qualify for all the
features it has even as it is on the lightweight side. For the installation on
Linux Mint or Ubuntu, you can use the command below:
linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~$  sudo add-apt-repository ppa:webupd8team/brackets
linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~$ sudo apt-get update
linuxtechi@linuxtechi:~$ sudo apt-get install brackets
Brackets text editor has a few unique features, which are:
Focused visual tools Pre-processor support
Inline editing
Live preview
Sublime text editor
For the Linux environment, a text editor with so much esteem is a sublime
text editor. You can use it as a development environment as well as a text
editor; it is packed with several features. Along with various markup
languages, it supports a lot of programming. Also, by extending its
functionality to a great extent, the many available plugins have made the text
editor more sophisticated. You can navigate to any file in your system or
easily navigate to the code section through the help of the “Goto Anything”
feature, and this is one of the distinctive highlights of this text editor. On
Linux Mint or Ubuntu, to install the stable version of the sublime text editor,
all you have to do is to refer to some specific commands. A few of the
sublime text editor’s exclusive elements are:
Project-specific preferences
Parallel editing of code
Python-based plugin API
Excellent command palette

Geany
For the Linux environment, one relatively recognized text editor that has the
integration of the GTK+ toolkit is Geany. For developers and programmers,
Geany can also work as an exceptional environment for development. Geany
may be a suitable choice for you if you want a development environment and
also a text editor. Other packages are not necessary to be installed with it for
it to work quite well as it supports nearly all major programming languages
and it is lightweight. For the installation of Geany on Linux Mint or Ubuntu,
you only need to refer to a particular command. Geany has a few unique
features, and they are:
Interface that is easily pluggable
Line numbering for easy tracking of code
Lots of customized options
Syntax highlighting for easy development
Clean and easy to use interface
VIM
Vim will be your best choice if you prefer a lot of options and powerful
performance to edit your text in an advanced text editor since the default “vi”
editor in Linux may appear to bore you. As it is the default Linux text
editor’s advanced version, the meaning of vim is “vi improved,” as suggested
by the name. They have the specific need of the developers in mind when
they are designing it. Also, for its highly configurable options, it is called a
programmer editor. You can use it as a standalone GUI application or as a
command-line utility, which is the same as the Vi editor. Here are a few
unique features of VIM:
Automatic commands
Digraph input
Split screen
Session screen
Tab expansion

Tag system
Syntax coloring
Introduction to Linux Shell
You are indirectly interacting with a shell if you are using any major
operating system. And every time you use a terminal, you are interacting with
a shell if you are running Linux Mint, Ubuntu, or any other Linux
distribution. There are a few terminologies that are quite essential before we
proceed, and we will discuss them in-depth in the following chapter.

Chapter 10: Basic Linux Shell
Commands
On Linux, the command used for analysis is the shell. In a window of
terminal emulation, the program users interact with is the shell. On Linux, the
workstation’s mate-terminal GUI is the emulation window. Also, it is an
application like PuTTY  or secure shell client; SSH  secure on a system with
Windows that, around the network, you can register into Linux. In some
business or organizational settings, they make use of the Bourne Again Shell,
bash . If you prefer, you can choose from some of the available shells like the
TC-Shell, C-Shell, as well as the Bourne Shell. As specific features are
appropriate to each of them, they all boast of the same characteristics. The
features below belong to bash:
As it remembers the last few commands, the history mechanism
of the shell is indeed functional. In addition to a reference
number, to list the previous few commands, you can make use
of the history  command.
For you to rerun a command, you can cut and paste from the history in a
terminal emulation window of a workstation. Also, to rerun any command
from history, the symbol “i”  can be used.
There is also “job control” for the shell, and in the background,
you can run any programs that don’t require any terminal
interaction.
Available straightaway for other commands is the shell and the program sort
in the background. In this case, the job control number “1” is printed by the
shell as well as “3470,” which is the process identity number. As it is running
in the foreground, you can also use the special character Ctrl + z to suspend a
program. You can then use fg  to continue it in the foreground and even the
bg  command to put the program in the background. You can refer to them by
their job number if there is more than one running program in the background
or suspended. As such, use the jobs  command to list the status of all stopped
or background jobs to see your jobs and their job numbers.

You can write the scripts of shell commands, and similar to the
compiled programs, you can invoke them as such by merely
naming them. For example, we can first create a file in ~/bin
containing the specific command to create a script that counts
the number of C program files in this recent directory.
Before running it like normal, we can use the chmod  command to make the
file executable.
With if-then-else statements, for loops, and while loops, bash is
an interpretive programming language. When you type the
command below, you will get more details about the Linux on-
line documentation:
The shell possesses numeric and string-valued variables.
The directory for home is $HOME  as pre-set for some variables, and to see a
list of assigned variables, type the set  command.
You can find it cumbersome to enter, or for the frequent
execution of specific commands or groups of commands; you
may want to assign aliases . For example, in a recent directory,
to have the number of files of C program counted, we can assign
an alias “countc” for the number counting of lines output using
wc  and have the files listed using ls .
To pipe one program’s output to another program’s input, the
shell boasts of such a facility. “│”  is the symbol of the pipe.
For example, in the wc  program, we may have the output piped
after we might have cat  the file for us to count the number of
words in file A.
The standard output and standard input are the concept that
most Linux programs and commands observe. An onslaught of
output written by the program is the average output, and a flood
of data read by the programs is the standard input. Most times,
accompanying the terminal is most of these so that your screen
can get this output while it is from your keyboard that you get
the input. You can have the standard redirected to output and
input through the shell.

In your recent directory, to match filenames, the shell will
expand the wildcards. For example, you can use a specific
command to give a directory listing of the file with names
“anything.c”
Filenames are represented by the argument strings that the
commands have. For example, in your home directory, the
command can change the current directory to “bin , ”  and the
meaning of tilde is that the shell is your home directory.
For it to identify it, the process entails verifying to discover the
built-in element is connected to the command and may then
explore for a collection of directories by typing in a command
name. The search path is what this means and included in the
current directory is the search path, its subdirectory “bin,” and
your home directory. And through typing their names, you may
invoke them after you must have written your programs. No
matter what your current directory is, if in the directory, you
deposit such a program, it will be found and then run.
By naming them, you can invoke commands. Most Linux
commands are just programs that the shell executes. For
example, the command ls  can list the names of its files and read
the recent directory as you get a specific result when you run it.
There is an associated current directory that, similar to other
programs, the shell has. When locating files, as the starting
point, programs running on Linux use the current directory. In
the filesystem of Linux, getting a different location by changing
the recent directory is possible by using the cd  command of the
shell.
The user can configure this command prompt. A dollar symbol
preceded by “bash,” as well as the version number of the bash
program, is the default prompt.
With the use of the up-arrow keyboard, you can use previous commands of
edit and recall with the help of an additional mechanism of bash. On top of
the terminal, the final command will re-appear once you push the up-arrow,
and to get the earlier commands, press the up-arrow once more. Hit on

“RETURN” to have the command replayed. You can insert characters within
the command or to delete by repositioning the cursor with the use of the key
for back-arrow or from the end, remove characters by using the delete key to
amend the command before rerunning it.
Shell Commands
Below, you will find a summary of the commands available. For each
command, the reference on the manual page can give you more details. The
command man  can be used after your preferred name to see these online.
Database management
Available are Oracle and MySQL
Command
Description
MySQL-workbench
GUI interface for MySQL
Sqldeveloper
Oracle SQL Developer GUI interface
Mysql
Run the MySQL SQL interface
Sqlplus
Run the Oracle SQL interpreter
Word processing
LibreOffice is available and compatible with Microsoft Office.
Command
Description
LibreOffice
start applications for LibreOffice
Load at Antichi Colli EURU1269036 For developing high-quality printed documents
using Linux or other operating systems, an extensively used language of
typesetting is TeX . When you intend to format manual pages, the standard
typical Linux text formatting people generally use is another program
collection built on Troff .

TeX
Command
Description
Dvips
Convert a DVI file to POST SCRIPT
Xdvi
DVI previewer
Pdflatex
latex formatter with PDF output
latex
latex formatter
tex
text formatting and typesetting
Troff
Command
Description
Pic
troff preprocessor for drawing pictures
groff
GNU troff interface for laserprinting
nroff
text formatting language
troff
text formatting and typesetting language
Grap
pic preprocessor for drawing graphs
tbl
prepare tables for nroff or troff
eqn
mathematical preprocessor for troff
General commands
Command
Description
aspell
interactive  spelling checker
spell
check text for spelling error
acroread
PDF viewer
evince
GNOME PostScript previewer
fmt
simple text formatter
Programming
Available are these languages and programming tools.
FORTRAN
Command
Description

f95
GNU Fortran 95 compiler
JAVA
Command
Description
eclipse
Java integrated development environment on
Linux
javac
JAVA compiler
appletviewer
JAVA applet viewer
C++
Command
Description
g++
GNU C++ Compiler
C
Command
Description
cxref
generate C program cross reference
indent
indent and format C program source
ctrace
C program debugger
gcc
GNU ANSI C Compiler
cb
C program beautifier
General
Command
Description
strip
remove symbol table and relocate bits
nm
print program’s name list
Size
print program’s size
make
maintain groups of programs
Other languages (not on all systems are these available)
Command
Description
asp
web page embedded language

mathematica
symbolic maths package
php
web page embedded language
squeak
Smalltalk
python
object-oriented programming language
perl
general purpose language
gcl
GNU Common Lisp
mattab
maths package
bc
interactive arithmetic language processor
Networking
Command
Description
google-chrome
web browser
firefox
web browser
curl
transfer data from a url
rsh
remote shell
rlogin
gaining access remotely to a Linux host
ssh
secure shell terminal or command connection
telnet
getting to another host by connecting through the
terminal
wget
non-interactive network downloader
scp
copy of remote file for secure shell
rcp
remote file copy
sftp
program for transferring file in secure shell
tftp
trivial file transfer program
ftp
file transfer program
Messages between users
There is support for on-screen messages to other users and world-wide
electronic mail in the Linux systems.
Command
Description
thunderbird
GUI mail handling tool on Linux
Mail
mail program for easy read or send
pine
vdu-based mail utility
wall
send a message to all local users

Printing
Expect the printer name to be given following a –p  argument as most
commands which can be used to print files. And as simple text files, files
may be sent to the printers or for the laser printers; they may be processed in
various ways.
Command
Description
a2ps-Pprinter
format text file in PostScript and print on laser
printer
dvips-Pprinter
postprocess TeX file into PostScript and print on
a laser printer
LPR-Pprinter
send a file to a printer
Direct from some applications or with the use of the GUI print manager; you
can use the shell to print files. It is by name that you need to specify a printer,
and some of them are:
Printer Name
Location
tl4_lw
Teaching Lab 4 (C/2.10) laser printer
tl2_lw
Teaching Lab 2 (C/2.05) laser printer
tl3_lw
Teaching Lab 3 (C/2.08) laser print
tl1_lw
Teaching Lab 1 (C/2.04) laser printer
Status
These commands alter or list information about the system.
Command
Description
printenv
display value of a shell variable
who
list logged in users
w
show what logged in users are doing
netstat
show network status
vmstat
report virtual memory statistics
lun
list user names or login ID
users
print names of logged-in users
last
show last logins of users

uptime
display system status
kill
send a signal to a process
Tty
print current terminal name
iostat
report I/O statistics
homequota
show quota and file usage
time
time a command
groups
show group memberships
stty
Set terminal options
script
keep script of terminal session
du
print amount of disk usage
reset
reset terminal mode
quota –v
display disk usage and limits
date
print the date
ps
print process status statistic
Information
Here are some shell commands that give information.
Command
Description
yelp
GNOME help viewer
info
displays command information pages online
man
displays manual pages online
apropos
locate commands by keyword lookup
Compressed files
To save space, you may need to compress files. You can use the following to
examine and create compressed files.
Command
Description
zcmp, zdiff
compare compressed files
gunzip
uncompress gzipped files
zcat
cat a compressed file
uncompress
uncompress files
zmore
file perusal filter for crt viewing of compressed
text

gzip
compress files
Manipulating data
You can use the command below to alter or compare the contents of files.
Command
Description
wc
count characters, lines, and words
look
find lines in sorted data
join
join files on some common field
uniq
report repeated lines in a file
gawk
pattern processing and scanning language
tr
translate characters
expand, unexpand
expand tabs to spaces and vice versa
split
split file into smaller files
diff
differential file comparator
sort
sort file data
cut
cut out selected fields of each line of a file
sed
stream text editor
comm
compare sorted data
paste
merge file data
cmp
compare the contents of two files
perl
data manipulation language
awk
Pattern processing and scanning language
File editors
You can amend and create files by using editors.
Command
Description
vi, vim
standard text editor
gedit
GNOME text editor
pluma
Mate GUI text editor
pico
easy text editor for vdus
ex, edit
line editor
xemacs
emacs with mouse action
emacs
GNU project Emacs

Files directory
You can handle files and create file directory through these commands.
Command
Description
lpq
spool queue examination program
touch
update modification and access times of a file
just
text justification program
tail
print last lines from file
head
give first few lines
rm, rmdir
remove (unlink) directories or files
grep
search file for regular expression
pwd
print working directory
find
Find files
mv
rename or move file type
file
determine file type
more, page
display file data at your terminal
cp
copy file data
mkdir
make a new directory
chmod
change file mode
ls
list and generate statistics for files
chgrp
change file group
lprm, cancel
Remove jobs from line printer queue
cd
change current directory
lpr
spool file for line printing
Logging out
Command
Description
logout
log out of a Linux terminal
You must take note that you must exit the Desktop Environment instead of a
Linux workstation.

Chapter 11: Shell Scripting
For a Linux-based OS, a text file that has commands sequence is a shell
script. The commands sequence of the shell script would have to be typed
into a single script at a time into the keyboard. As an interpreter for
commands set that you use to communicate with the system, the shell is the
CLI, command-line interface’s operating system. For them to save time, a
user must repeatedly use the command sequence of a shell script. There are
subcommands, comments, and parameters that the shell needs to follow, just
like other programs. And it is by entering the file name on a command-line in
the shell that users can initiate the sequence of commands. A shell script is
known as a batch file in the DOS operating system as it also referred to as an
EXEC in the mainframe VM operating system of IBM.
You can enter the command for the system execution since it is within the
operating system of Linux that you will find the shell program. On a Linux
computer, the shell program will start, providing the chance to have your
commands entered through an interface when a terminal window is opened.
The command-line interface is what this interface is referred to by people. On
the screen, you can see the display of the output, and the shell executes it
when a command is entered. Also, stored in a file, some commands can also
be executed by the shell in addition to being able to execute and accept
commands interactively. Shell scripting is recognized as the mode of this
execution. 
How shell script works
Giving the shell executive permission, making the script accessible to the
shell, and writing the script are some of the fundamental steps involved with
shell scripting. You can use a graphical user interface, GUI, word processor,
or text editor to write shell script since it contains ASCII. The shell can
interpret the language of a series of commands in the content of the script.
Shortcuts, arrays, if/then/else  statements, variables, and loops are some of
the functions that shell scripts support. In a location that the shell can access,
you can use the .sh or .txt extension to save the file once complete.
Background to the shell
In the 1970s, Ken Thomson developed V6 Shell, a shell program to start with
Unix. Its scripting proficiency was quite lacking even as it was a shell with

interactive features. In 1977, Bourne Shell came on board and for the root
account; as the default shell, it remains in use today. And through the years, it
has been quite useful through the scripting abilities. By the 80s, Korn Shell
and C-Shell gave the public something to talk about as the highly popular
shell variants. There was a drastic difference from the original shell as
specific syntax has been brought by every one of these shells. As such, Bash
is an extremely prominent shell today. As the unique Bourne Shell’s
massively enhanced variant, it stands for Bourne-Again- Shell.
Shell script applications examples
By typing one line at a time, you can save quite a lot of time from doing
some repetitive task when you use a shell script. Below are some of the
examples of applications that you can use a shell script for:
Monitoring a system
Executing routine backups
Linking existing programs together
Manipulating files
Completing batch
Creating a program or running a programming environment
Automating the code compiling process
Shell script execution
As the shell’s argument, all you have to do is to pass the script path if you
want to execute a shell script. You need to pay attention to the fact that LF
characters, Line-Feed, are required for terminating the lines by the shell. It is
easy to run into errors if, on a Linux system, you attempt to execute shell
script promptly or write it on Windows. For line termination, Carriage-return-
Line-Feed, the combination of CR-LF is what Windows uses, and you will
need to have it in LF-only conversion. For means to go about achieving this,
you can check your Windows editor.
As a command, the shell script can be executed directly using another way.
As your shell script’s first line, you can insert the hashbang declaration
below:

#!/bin/bash
Then, you can do some command to make your script file executable. Right
now, without having to reference the shell explicitly, you can have the script
file executed directly.
Benefits of shell scripts
Things are meant to be efficient and simple when you use shell script. It
removes any interpretation issues since it is a similar syntax that it uses on
the shell command-line that it uses in the script. Also, more than other
programming languages, it requires less of learning curves and also faster
when it comes to writing code for a shell script. However, if left unnoticed,
this tends to prove extremely costly if there is an error in a shell script. Also,
there may not be compatibility with different platforms connected with shell
scripting, and more than individual commands; shell scripts can also be
slower to execute. All the same, here are more advantages of shell scripts.
Portable:
When the shell itself is present, you can transfer a shell script to another Unix
and Unix-related OS. Also, shell scripts are much more portable than C/C++
programs when you are in the process of transferring a shell script from
different architectures like Sparc, MIPS, x86, and so on. You will have to
attempt to run a C/C++, build the program, and copy the source code for you
to transfer and use a C/C++ program. Then, if it uses the architecture-specific
code, it may not work as expected.
Transparency:
Since it is a text file, you can check out the kind of actions the shell script is
performing by viewing it quite easily. By contrast, it is if you have access to
the source code or the source code wants to inform you that you can know the
type of program in a language like C/C++. For example, it is possible to find
out if any files are getting deleted by a shell script and then have those files
copied to another place if you need those files. Also, because you may gain
access to view the source code, shell scripts can be quite simple to diagnose
than the regular programs. Though to avoid such errors, creating and
checking programs are some of the responsibilities of a compliant shell
script. You can as well create the directory as you look in the script code.

Easier to develop:
Inside a regular program written in C/C++, you can efficiently perform
similar actions as the shell script. However, the shell script can be debugged
and written far easier than a program like C/C++. By redirecting output,
removing directories and files, and also execution of external commands, the
shell is great for all these specific system administration tasks and more. For
a much lower level operation, including manipulating data structures,
invoking system calls, and so on, C/C++ programs tend to be much suitable
for them.
Multiple commands combination:
One of the benefits of shell scripting is you can have multiple distinct
sequences of commands as well as automating frequent tasks. For you to
remember the direction in which you can execute multiple commands can be
quite challenging than a single command. The Linux OS system sequence of
boot-up is a perfect example here. For it to get the system into a proper state,
the operating system executes a series of commands as one aspect of the
boot-up process. The shell scripts that exist in the directory /etc  are these
commands. You may end up performing the process by hand in the absence
of shell scripts, and a system booting process complexity will come to your
realization if you take a look at these shell scripts types. The /etc/profile  is
an example of a shell script, and with the access of a user into the system, it
can thus be executed.
Task automation:
Your executed tasks can be frequently automated when you use shell scripts,
and this is the first benefit of it. Let’s assume that daily, you need to perform
a set of tasks. You can run these commands on the script after storing them in
a file when you have to execute multiple commands on your Linux daily. For
example:
For too low or too high prices, when specific conditions are met,
trigger an SMS or email as you parse the fetched data or fetch
stock prices.
As some log files appear to be growing every day, you can
compress them.

You can upload and archive a folder or file to a cloud storage
facility every day like S3.
Features of Shell Scripting
Shell scripting is powerful
For every Linux-based operating system, you can get help almost for every
one of them without any complaint, and it is convenient. You will have an
excellent basis when you marge it with the standard accessible tool such as
sed , grep , and awk .
Readability
It is much lower to develop anything that is unreadable with a shell script.
You can certainly make use of some unique features of the shell that others
do not know of them.
Regularly accessible
On all the programs you come across, you can always use shell scripting. By
automating repetitive steps, it makes your life quite easier. All you need do is
to insert your preferred commands in a file and run it happily after making it
executable. As it is quick to master, so it is quite simple to learn.
Repeating
In your shell script, you don’t need recurring similar statements every day.
Create a compelling set of functions and consist of that in your existing and
new shell scripts. While you can call your function “Display,” resist it when
you are about to use “echo.”
Conclusion
To write workflow for epsilon, ETL, and several other tools to save time,
quite useful for many organizations, is the scope of the shell scripts. And with
the use of any of the shell scripts, professionals and users of Linux who want
to automate tasks on Linux are the target audience of learning shell scripting
technologies. For conditional programs that contain limited functions, loops,
and statements, shell scripts can help to create these complex programs. Also,
you can store data with shell scripts.

Chapter 12: Building Script
Using the language of programming for the shell are short programs, while
the interpretation can be achieved through the shell scripts and a process of
the shell. On Linux and other operating systems, they are quite ideal for task
automation. For Unix-related OS, a program that provides the text-only,
traditional interface is a shell program. You can read commands that you type
into a terminal window as an all-text mode window, as well as console,
which is an all-text display mode, and then run its primary function. The very
common versatile and highly used bash is the default shell on Linux as
groups of commands that you can translate, which is compiled or interpreted
into a machine language form, and that can be wholly understood by the
system’s CPU, the central processing unit. You write computer programs
with artificial, precise language, which is a programming language.
To create shell scripts, shell scripting language or shell programming
language are the bash feature, and other Unix-related OS use shells with each
of them containing the programming language with built-in features. You can
easily have shell scripts created, and when you go online and in several books
are available for a comprehensive selection of undertakings with or without
notification. These factors are some of the advantages of using shell scripts.
Also, in the Unix-related OS default installation, shell scripts are used
extensively.
The first script
Here, you will see a useful introduction to shell scripts handling and creation
with the following example. All previous lines of the screen of your monitor
are cleared by the script, and on it, the text, Good morning, world, is written
by it. You may not need a word processor but only need to have a text editor
like vi or gedit opened when you want to create this script.
Also, with the functions of copy and paste used in the standard keyboard, you can copy the above code,
open the text editor, and paste it into it. Then, the script is complete and quite close to running it after
you have given a name to the file and have this plain text saved. By having the file name after a
forward slash and a dot typed without any spaces between them and then hit on the ‘enter’ button, you
will be ready to run scripts. For example, you can use the command below in the attempt to run it if you
have the above script saved as morning:
./morning
Nevertheless, since you must first set the file to be executable, on the screen,

you can see the message of error. In that situation, the script will not run. For
the new files, write and read are the only permissions they have by default.
With its option of 755, you can make use of the chmod  command to easily
solve the problem. Using this, however in the same directory as the one
below, you will have the ability not only to write and read the file, but you
can also execute it:
chmod 755 morning
Then, while in the same directory and by typing the command below, you can
prepare to run the script. To continue, hit the ‘enter’ button:
./morning
The operation process
The type of shell to use for the interpretation of the script and for locating the
shell is the first three lines will tell the operating systems. As the directory
/bin  is its location, the shell is bash, and as such, the /bin/bash  is what the
line contains. For the operating system to receive its signal that it is offering
the shell’s location and name and other scripting languages, an exclamation
mark, and a pound sign always precedes this instruction.
For you to dispense the command clear , it is the second line that the shell
informs. With this easy command, you can remove all previous output and
commands from the terminal or console window that there is a release of the
command. On the screen, the Good morning, world phrase is what the shell
gets from the third line. For whatever follows it to be repeated from the shell
instruction, it uses the echo command. In a more advanced script, the
quotation marks can make a big difference to use them as a useful
programming drill even though they may not be necessary. An input data, an
argument that the command echo  receives is the Good morning, world, which
is in slightly more technical terms. Also, scripts that people use freely are
echo  and clear , as is the case with other commands. For example, you will get
the prompt to enter the next command, and you will have the entire previous
output and commands removed when you type clear on the screen and hit the
‘enter’ button.
It isn’t working!
There can be some reasons for the phrase Good morning, world not to appear
at the top of the screen and some of them are:

1. For the owner of the file, they forget to change the permissions
to execute.
2. In the same directory, the command was not issued where the
file is located.
3. Instead of a text editor, a word processor was used to create it,
and as such, the file is not a plain text file.
4. After the slash or period, space was inserted.
5. In the command, you omit or reverse the forward-slash or the
period.
6. There is a difference in the name of the file and the one used in
the command. For example, there can be a difference between
capitalization, spelling, or even an extra or minor space.
7. You omit the word echo , and as a result, you made an error as
you attempt to copy the code.
As the administrative user or the root, it is vital not to practice executing and
writing scripts. You can damage the operating system with an improperly
written script. Also, it could lead to necessarily reinstalling the operating
system as a whole and result in the loss of valuable data in the worst-case
scenario. You can easily use a command like adduser  to quickly create one if
an ordinary user account does not yet exist on the computer because of this
reason.
Experiments
Before you make a move to more complicated examples, if you are a curious
user, you can do a variety of instructive, simple experiments. With the
suggestions below, they make up of code revision, using a different file name
or a similar name of a file to save the changes, and then with the above
explanation, executing them.
1. Attempt to have a few of the wording altered. For instance, have
the line changed to “Good morning, people!” echo .
2. For the line that you will write on the screen, you can have a

line, or more additional lines added as one horizontal space
follow them at in any case, with each beginning having the word
echo .
3. Concerning both lines of echo , you can also leave an empty line.
Though by having echo  typed on it, you can create a blank line,
and that is all. It will be seen that this will not affect the result.
4. Then, have blank horizontal spaces inserted. Based on if you
enter the primary reference marks before or after, there will be a
different result.
5. To have a different location directory for the execution of the
file. As such, when it is issued, you will have to add to the
command name beginning, the executable script path. For
example, if you have moved the file to test , a term of a
subdirectory, you will have ./test/morning .
6. You will want to add to the script file, some other command as
another experiment like df  that reveals the disk space usage,
uname , which gives information about the hardware and software
of a system, pwd  that informs the present directory, and ps  that
explains the processes currently on the system. It is vital to
understand that with any appropriate arguments or options, you
can use these as well as other commands within the script.
Hello, World!
For you to have the shell script created:
1. vi is the text editor suitable for you to use for this, and within the
file, have in its logic and commands of Linux that you required.
2. You will need to escape from vi, and before doing so, close after
saving the file.
3. The executable form of the script is quite essential
4. Then, you can move on to the environment of production once
the output satisfies you after testing the script.

5. A line in Bash, which is a straightforward program, informs a
command of the computer. So, use your preferred text editor
like vi to start it.
Necessary Commands of vi:
To vacate vi:
Type :q after pressing ESC
To search for a string:
type /wordToSearch after pressing ESC
To jump to a line:
type :the line number after pressing ESC
To quit after saving a file:
type :x after pressing ESC
OR
type :wq after pressing ESC
To store a file:
type :w filename after pressing ESC

To go into command mode:
press ESC
To go into edit mode:
type I after pressing ESC
To open a file:
vi filename
The script running after saving it
On the screen, a message of error is what the ./hello.sh  command displayed.
Since for the hello.sh script, you have not set executed permission, it may
end up not running the script.
Chmod command
To change the access permission of a file, you can make use of the chmod
command. As follows, below is the syntax:
chmod ugo+rwx filename
Where:
x: execute permission
w: write permission
r: read permission
=: overwrite current permissions

-: removes the permission
+: adds the permission
o: others
g: groups
u: users
Below is how you can express permission through a numerical way:
0: no permissions at all
7: read, write, and execute permissions
1: execute permission
2: write permission
4: read permission
Errors
The robustness of the program is often the measure used to differentiate a
good and inadequate program. As such, when things go wrong, this is the
ability of the program to handle these circumstances.
Exit status
When it finishes, returning to the exit condition is what every program that is
well-written does. Zero will be the exit status when a program completes
quite successfully. Then, in some way, the program failed if there is nothing
more than zero for the exit status. For the program exit status in the scripts
that you call, it is entirely vital to check them. Also, when they finish, there
must be a meaningful return on the exit status of your scripts. Specific lines
of code like $some_directory  can be written for the creation system by the
system administrator of a Unix.
If everything goes quite well enough, this way might not have been the
wrong way of going about doing this. To the name that the $some_directory
contained, the working directory was changed by the two lines and also in
such a directory, delete the file. That is quite the projected action. And if the

named directory in that $some_directory  doesn’t exist, what will then
happen? Then, on the directory that is currently operational, the script will
have the command rm  executed and the command cd  will fail. Indeed, not
the planned action!
The exit category check
For you to respond and get the program’s exit status, you can use several
ways. First, the environment alternative of the $?  and its contents require
adequate observation and for the execution of the last command is an exit
status that the $?  will contain.
Except to revert zero’s exit status and also one respectively, the false  and true
commands are programs that remain dormant. And for the previous program,
the exit position is what is contained in the $?  environment option. Hence, it
is quite essential to have the exit category checked.
The cd  command’s exit level is examined in this variety, and on standard
error, we can have the error message printed if it’s not zero and with 1 as the
exit status, have the script terminated. However, we can save ourselves a few
typing efforts by using some smarter techniques even when this happens to
be an effective way-out to the crisis. Since it is the given commands of the
exit status that it evaluates, we can make use of the statement if  precisely as
the next approach to attempt.
If there’s a success with the command cd , we can check it here. And for the
indication that an error has happened, a code of 1 is the program exit. As for
the output is the error message, you can then execute rm .

Chapter 13: Basic Bash Shell
Commands
In a circumstance that a directory tends to be a root directory by possessing
no parent directory or within a single other directories, it is a subdirectory
that is known as “parent.” Thus, modern filesystems have folder or directory
trees. And you can always get to the root directory by going from child
directory to parent directory, which is typical of traversing backward through
the file tree. Though Unix and Unix-like system only have \., a single root
directory, such as Windows’ drives: A:\ , C:\ , etc., some filesystems have
multiple root directories.
pwd / ls / cd
As we refer to the working directory or the current directory, it is always
within some directories that the user is always using when working within a
filesystem. With pwd , print the working directory of the user. Using ls ,
make a list of files and child directories, etc., that is, the content of this
directory. Here, you need to pay attention to some of these points:
Instead of ls -1 –a , you can sometimes chain flag like ls –la
Have a combination of several flags such as ls –l –a
Reveal file details with ls –l
Using ls –a  to reveal hidden (“dot”) files
Using cd (change directory) to change to a different directory and the parent
directory, the shorthand for 
cd  is 
cd . To home directory normally
/home/username or similar directory, the shorthand for cd  ~ or simply cd is
cd . For this directory, cd.  may not make any much impact since .  is
shorthand. Use cd –  to go back to the most recent directory. And by using
cd ../,,,etc. , you can jump multiple directories levels. To home directory user,
cd ~user  means cd .
; / && / &
Commands are the things that you type into the command-line and stored
somewhere on your computer; they always execute some machine code.
Sometimes, a built-in Linux command is this machine code, and sometimes

also, it is some code that you wrote yourself and perhaps an app.
Occasionally, right after another, we will want to run one command, and we
can as well use the “;” (semicolon) to do that:
The meaning of the semicolon is l  first (ls)  lists the contents of the working
directory, and then l  (pwd)  prints its location. Then, &&  can be used to
chain commands, which is another useful tool. If the command to the left
fails, the command to the right will not run. On the same line, you can use
both &&  and ;  multiple times.
Even if the first one fails, the second will run with ; . There is a completely
different function fulfilled by & even when it looks similar to &&. Usually,
before it gives you access to enter another one, the command-line will wait
for that command to finish when you execute a long-running command. You
will be able to perform a new command while an older one is still going and
also prevents this from happening when you put & after a command.
It is essential to know that we assume that the process or job is
“backgrounded” when, to hide it, we make use of &  after a command. Then,
use the job  command to see what background jobs are currently running.
Getting Help
man
For you to bring manual for that command (with q , quit man ), type man
before nearly any command.
-h
And for you to bring up a help menu for that command, type --help  or –h .
Viewing and editing files
nano / nedit
For people or beginners that want to learn a million shortcuts, as a command-
line text editor with minimalistic characteristics, nano  is a great editor. For
the first few years of coding career, it will be sufficient for any developer or
programmer. As it allows for syntax highlighting, drag-and-drop, point-and-
click editing, nedit  opens up an X Window as a small graphical editor. When
you plan to make some changes to a script and then rerun it over, you may
want to use nedit  for that. Atom, Notepad++, gedit, vim, vi, emacs, and some
others are other common editors like graphical user interface, GUI or

command-line interface, CLI. Others are VS Code, Light Table, and Micro.
The syntax highlighting, search and replace, and some other things are the
basic convenience that all modern editors provide. Though nano  and nedit
don’t have as many more features as emacs and vi(m), their learning curves
tend to be much steeper. You will discover the one that works for you after
trying out a few different editors.
head / tail / cat / less
File’s few first lines are the head  outputs. Though the default is 10, the
number of lines to show is specified by the –n  flag. File’s last few lines are
the tail  outputs. Beginning from the N –th  line with tail  –n  +N , you can
get the end of the file or, like above, you can get the last n  lines. Usually, the
terminal, but what sends files to the standard output stream and concatenates
a list of files is cat . You can use it to view files quickly, and with multiple
files or just a single file, you can make use of the cat .  But, here, pay close
attention; you may be accused of a UUOC, Useless Use of Cat if you use cat
in this way. You may not worry yourself too much about that because it’s not
a big deal.
For you to quickly view a file, another tool is less  as it opens vim –like, read-
only window. 
more  is another command. However, 
less  has a higher
recommendation than more  since it provides a superset of the functionality of
more . At their man  pages, you can learn about more  and less .
Creating and deleting directories and files
mkdir / rm / rmdir
For you to create new, empty directories, you can use mkdir . As this is non-
recoverable, you need to be cautious as using rm  can remove any file. Then,
with the –i  flag, an “are you sure?’ prompt can be removed. With the use of
rmdir , you can remove an empty directory. Then, you could see a reference to
its parent directory (..) as well as a reference to the directory itself (.) when
you ls –a  in an empty directory. It is only empty directories that rmdir
removes.
However, using rm –rf ( -r  = recursive, -f  =force) cannot remove a
directory and all of its content.
touch
It is to modify file timestamps that touch  was created. However, you can also

create an empty file using it and such as nano , by opening it with a text
editor, you can create a new file. You can also edit the file. Also, touch  can be
used as well. Note: ^z (Ctrl+z) is the background a process. Then, hit ^z with
editing file. Shown by the jobs command where N  is the job index, use kill
%N  to kill a background process. While it is running, press ^c (Ctrl+c) to kill
the current (foreground) from processing.
History of command, links making, and copying and
making files
mv / cp / ln
To rename or move a file, use mv . You can mv  a file to a new file, to rename
it, or keep the same file or mv  a file to a new directory. Then, copy a file
using cp . And for you to create a hard link to a file, use ln . Also, you can
get a soft link created to a file with ln –s . In memory that contains a file, the
same actual bytes are referenced in hard links, and while it points to those
bytes, the soft links refer to the original fine name.
Command history
For you to be able to rerun and complete commands, there are two main
features that you can get from bash . Tab completion is the first feature. For
guessing the precise action you are attempting to take, you only need to press
the key <tab> after you have the first section of the command typed. Then,
you will complete the command after you must have typed ls t  and press the
TAB key. Note that if an ambiguity case arises, it may be required of you to
press the <tab> several times. And as for your previously typed commands,
you can get the short history of them since bash keeps them, and by typing
^r(Ctrl+r), you will have the chance to have a search through for those
commands. If you want to see the command history search, hit ^r(Ctrl+r).
Processes, disk usage, and directory trees
ps / du / df
For the hard drives of your system or the disks, if you want to know the
amount of space your files have taken up, df  will be there to show you. If
you go through this command, you will notice that the meaning of –h  is
“human-readable” and not “help.” And rather than writing out integer, huge

bytes number, to display disk or file sizes, it is G  for gigabytes and K  for
kilobytes that some commands use. For the subdirectories of a specific
directory, the file space usage is what the du  shows. You may use df  for you
to discover the free space of a particular hard drive. Also, using du  will allow
you to know the quantity of a directory’s space. From the specified directory,
the flag --max-depth=N  are directories N  levels fewer or down, which du  takes.
For current processes running by the users, it is shown by the ps .
tree/ mkdir –p
It is only a single directory, by default, that mkdir  makes. As such, using
mkdir  only, it may be hard for you to make d/e/f  since d/e  directory has no
existence. And also, if there is no such existence for them, all directories in
the path can be made when we pass to mkdir  from the –p . Also, when we
have a nicely-formatted directory printed, we can visualize the structure of a
directory better through the help of the tree . With a specified directory, in the
beginning, the whole structure of the tree  is printed by it. However, using the
flag –L , you will have the power of restricting it to a particular number of
levels. Then, using –prune , in the output of the tree , the empty directory can
be hidden. You must know that the directory that is not that empty or the
“recursive empty” will also be removed by this command, but which has in
them other recursively empty directories or other empty directories.
Miscellaneous
exit / logout / passwd
You can use passwd  to have the password of your account changed. To verify
it, you may have to provide the current password you are using. Then, to
forestall any typo situation, it will want you to enter your new password two
times. In a situation where it is only a user account that you have, the shell
you have logged in will exit with the use of logout . And to have any shell
exited, then use the exit .
clear / *
For you to have your new terminal line moved on to the screen top, then run
clear . Below the line of your current prompt, you will have blank lines added
to them by this command. Thus, you can clear your workspace with this. And
in the situation of looking for specific files, wildcard, also known as Kleene

Star, *, is perfect for it. And since it is equivalent to more characters or zero,
in a command, you can make use of the glob several times.
Processor usage, memory, and disk
htop / top
The processes that are running recently as well as their memory usage,
owners, and many can be displayed through the top . The variant of the top ,
which is interactive and enhanced, is an htop . You need to know that the
display processes can be restricted by using a username  only to those owners
while passing the flag –u username .
ncdu
Typical of an enhanced du , it is the file space usage overview, which is
navigable that the ncdu  offers. Also, it is a vim -related window with a read-
only feature that it can open. When you want to quite, press q .
REPLs
Though they utilize it for specific programming languages, typical of the
command-line is Real-Evaluate-Print Loop, which is REPL. While you can
use the function quit()  for you to quit, the command python  is what you can
use to open the Python REPL. Also, using the command R , you can have the
R REPL opened as well as using the function q()  for you to quit. With the
command scala , you can also have the Scala REPL opened and the command
:quit  when you want to quit. With Java REPL, you can use command jshell  to
have it opened and /exit  command for you to quit. Optionally, with the use of
^d(Ctrl+d) , you can exit any of the REPLs. As ^d  signifies the input’s end on
Unix, it is also the marker for the end of the file, EOF.
-v / --version / -version
For most programs and commands to have the software version, they possess
the flag --version  or  –version . This information tends to be available easily for
most applications, even though there is a less intuitive factor for most. You
need to take notice of the use of –v  by some programs for the version flag,
and this means ‘verbose’ for using –v  by others, which, while debugging
information or printing several diagnostics, can run the application.

Environment variables
Within your bash  shell, the tenacious variables that you can use and create are
the environment variable, and “env vars” is their short-term. You can use it
with the sign of a dollar ( $ ), and for their definition, they make use of the
equal sign ( = ). When you use printenv , the entire recently-defined env vars
can be seen. Using the sign = , you can have a new environment variable set.
You must be careful to note that your = has no space after or before. Using
echo  with a preceding sign of $ , you can have a particular env var printed to
the terminal. Attempt to surround other whitespace or all spaces around the
environment variables with the quotes ( “…” ). Also, be cautious because you
won’t get any warning and will probably overwrite an env var by having a
value reassigned to it. Apart from those above, you can also use the command
export  to define the env vars. Also, they can be available to sub-processes,
which are commands you called from this shell when you provide the
meaning this way. When you use the command unset  or leave the right-hand
side of the =  blank, you can have the environment variables unset.

Chapter 14: Advanced Bash Shell
Commands
As a fairly powerful programming language and not only appropriating seam
connecting the user and the kernel of the operating system, the shell is a
command interpreter. And by gluing together compiled binaries, utilities,
tools, and system calls, you can build applications through a straightforward
device called a script inside a shell program. By a shell script, available for
invocation are indeed the whole catalog of Unix tools, utilities, and
commands. Also, there can be additional flexibility and power to scripts
through external shell commands like loop and testing constructs, if that were
not enough. Without requiring a complete compactly designed programming
language with plenty of the bells and whistles, it is to administrative systems
tasks as well as other routines, repetitive jobs that shell scripts exceptionally
lend themselves.
Introduction to Regular Expression
A sequence of characters is an expression. Metacharacters are those
characters that have an interpretation beyond and above the factual
connotation that they have. For example, a speech by someone may be
denoted by a quote symbol and ditto the subsequent symbols for a meta-
meaning. Metacharacters or characters that specify or match patterns are
regular expressions. Here are some of the components that a regular
expression contains:
Modifiers. By modifying, for the range of text that the regular
expression is to match, these narrow or expand it. The backlash,
brackets, and asterisk are some of the modifiers.
An anchor. For the match between the text line and the regular
expression, it is the anchor that designates this position. For
example, anchors are $  and ^ .
A character set. These characters retain their literal meaning.
And with no metacharacters, a character set is the simplest type
of regular expression.

String manipulation and text search are the significant applications aimed at
regular expression, and it is a part of a sequence or a string that matches a set
of characters or a single character for a regular expression.
Escaped “angle brackets” -- \<…\> --  mark word boundaries.
Since otherwise, they possess only their literal character and meaning, the
angle brackets need to be escaped.
The word “the” matches “ \<the\> ” and not the words “others,” “there,”
“them,” etc. The only way to be sure that a particular regular expression
works is to test it .
The backlash -- \ --  their character gets interpreted as it escapes
a unique character.
Instead of its regular expression meaning of end-of-line, a “ \$\ ” reverts to its
literal meaning of “ $ .” Also, the literal meaning of “ \ ’ is a “ \\. ”
Brackets – […] – for a single regular expression to have a
match, enclose a set of characters.
There is a match for common word patterns with the combination of
sequences of bracketed characters. “there is a match between yes, Yes, YES,
yEs, etc., and “[Yy][Ee][Ss].” Another matches for any Social Security
number are “[0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9].
Except for those in the range b to d, all characters match “[^b-d].” Inverting
or negating ^ is a typical instance for the meaning of the following regular
expression (in a different context, taking on a role similar to !).
Any digit or lowercase letter that matches “[a-z0-9]”.
In the ranges of k to y and b to P, any of the characters that match “[B-
Pk=y].”
In the range of c to n, any of the characters that match “[c-n].”
The characters x, y, or z match “[xyz].”
The end of a regular expression matches the end of a line, which
is the dollar sign -- $ --.
Matching blank lines is “^$.”

At the end of the line, XXX matches “XXX$.”
The beginning of a line matches the caret --^-- and which
negates the meaning of a set of characters in a regular expression
depending on context sometimes.
Except for a newline, any one character matches the dot --.—
Though, not 13 additional character missing, “13” matches 13 + at least one
of any character, including space: 1133, 11333.
As well as zero instances, any number that has the repetition of
the regular expression or character string matches the asterisk --
*--.
“1133*” matches 11 + one or more 3’s: 113, 1133, 1133333, and so on.
Extended regular expressions. Additional characters that the
basic set have also. It is in Perl, awk, and egrep that they use it.
One or more of a preceding regular expression matches the plus
--+--. Though it does not match zero occurrences, it is the same
role as in the * that it serves.
Zero or one of the previous regular expression matches the
question mark --?--. It is for matching single characters
generally.
Escaped “curly brackets” --\{\} – the previous regular
expression to match is the indication of the number of the
occurrences.
Because it is the literal character meaning that they only have otherwise, it is
quite vital to escape the curly brackets. Technically, the fundamental regular
expression arrangement does not correlate with this usage.
For the character in the 0 to 9 range, “[0-9]\{5}” matches precisely five
digits.
Note: as the non-POSIX compliant, classic awk  version with a regular
expression, curly brackets are not available. However, without being escaped,
they have permission from the option –re-interval  which gawk has. The
versions that have no obligation from escaping the curly brackets are some

egrep and perl.
Parentheses – () – has in its enclosure a set of regular
expressions. Using expr in substring extraction, with the
following operator “│” they tend to be quite useful.
The regular expression or the --│-- the alternate character set
matches it.
As do the GNU utilities, there is support for some version of ex, ed, and sed
the lengthy regular expressions escaped version in the above description.
Character Classes of POSIX. [: class :]
For the match of identifying characters range, this is an alternate method.
[: xdigit :] matches hexadecimal digits. This is the same as 0-9A-Fa-
f .
[: upper :] matches uppercase characters of alphabets. As such, A-Z
tends to be the same.
[: space :] matches whitespace characters (horizontal and space
tab).
[:print:] (printable characters) in the scope of ASCII 32 – 126, it
matches characters. Though adding the space character, this
tends to be similar to the [: graph :] below.
[: lower :] characters of the alphabet with a lowercase that
matches. The a-z  is quite the same as this.
[: graph :] (graphic printable characters). Though excluding the
space character, in the scale of ASCII 33 – 126, it matches
characters. This is similar to [: print :] above.
[: digit :] matches (decimal) digits. This is equivalent to 0-9 .
[: cntrl :] matches control characters.
[: blank :] matches a tab or space.
[: alpha :] matches alphabetic characters. This is equivalent to A-
Za-z .
[: alnum :] matches numeric or alphabetic characters. This is

equivalent to A-Za-z0-9 .
Conclusion
Thank you for making it through to the end of LINUX Command-Line for
Beginners: A Comprehensive Step-By-Step Starting Guide to Learn Linux
from Scratch to Bash Scripting and Shell Programming, let’s hope it was
informative and able to provide you with all of the tools you need to achieve
your goals whatever they may be.
Chances are if you’ve made it to this point, it is because you want to know
how you can navigate through the Linux operating system as well as having a
clear grasp of the several command-lines and also the best ways of using
them. You have made it to this point because you want to know all about
many different pieces than Linux operating system comprises and also how
you can install different distributions of Linux.
You will see that you can deal with types of installations for servers and also
their roles. Reading through this book, you have learned how you can use
Linux as a virtual machine inside another operating system, what dual
booting is all about, and how you can boot Linux with the use of live
CD/DVD.
In this book, you have read about Linux kernel and the operating systems,
Linux directory structures, some of the fundamental Linux shell commands,
how you can work with the disk, media, and data, and so much more. For you
to get an understanding of how you can ideally use Linux and some of the
associating programs, this book has shed enough light on essential terminals,
editors, and shell.

Python Programming for Beginners
The Ultimate Crash Course to Learn
Python Computer Language Faster
and Easier
Introduction to Machine Learning and
Artificial Intelligence
By Dylan Mach

© Copyright 2019 by Dylan Mach - All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or transmitted without direct
written permission from the author or the publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or author,
for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to the information contained within this book. Either
directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell,
use, quote or paraphrase any part, or the content within this book, without the consent of the author or
publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All effort has been executed to present accurate, up to date, and reliable, complete
information. No warranties of any kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is
not engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice. The content within this
book has been derived from various sources. Please consult a licensed professional before attempting
any techniques outlined in this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is the author responsible for
any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as a result of the use of the information contained
within this document, including, but not limited to, — errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.

Table of content
Conclusion
Introduction
Chapter 1: Introduction to Python
Chapter 2: Variables
Chapter 3: Operators
Chapter 4: Loops
Chapter 5: Functions
Chapter 6: Object-Oriented Programming-OOP
Chapter 7: Modules
Chapter 8: File handling
Conclusion

Introduction
Congratulations on purchasing Python programming for beginners: The
ultimate crash course to learn python computer language faster and easier
and thank you for doing so.
In this book, you will find a lot of really important and essential theories that
will help you to get started into the Python programming language. Besides,
you will find a lot of examples that will help you to understand in a more
visual way the things that we have explained here.
In the following chapters you will find a short introduction to how
programming languages started, who invented Python, who uses python
nowadays, and all the information that is needed to learn Python from scratch
such as variables, operators, data types, functions, loops, statements,
exceptions, how to create classes, modules, a whole chapter about Object-
Oriented Programming, also known as OOP, file handling of .txt, .PDF, .xlsx,
and a lot of information that will make you a Python programmer.
We strongly recommend reading the codes here written, analyze them,
understand them, and then try to do an example using each one of them in
order to remember them easily. Because as you will see, there are tons of
commands and statements that won’t be easy to learn and remember if they
are not used
There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much
useful information as possible, please enjoy!

Chapter 1: Introduction to Python
We can define programming as the process of designing, coding,
debugging and maintaining the source code of a computer program, which
means, that we say the steps to follow for the creation of the source code of
computer programs.
The programming language, are all those rules or regulations,
symbols and particular words used for the creation of a program, and with it,
offer a solution to a particular problem. The best-known programming
languages are: Basic (1964), C++ (1983), Python (1991), Java (1995), C#
(2000), among others.
Programming is one of the stages for software development;
programming specifies the structure and behavior of a program, verifying if it
is working properly or not. Programming includes the specification of the
algorithm defined as the sequence of steps and operations that the program
must perform to solve a problem, for the algorithm to work, the program
must be implemented in a compatible and correct language.
We could consider programming even easier than learning a new
language because the programming language will be governed by a set of
rules, which are, generally, always similar so you could say that it might be
considered as a natural language.
In order to better understand the subject of programming, we could
start with the beginnings of programming and how all this universe of
languages and programs we know today began. We could start saying that
programming began when the first computer was created in the fifteenth
century, when a machine capable of doing basic operations and square roots
appeared (Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz), although the one that actually

served as a great influence for the creation of the first computer was the
differential machine for calculating polynomials with the support of Lady
Ada Countess (1815-1852), known as the first person who entered
programming, and from whom comes the name of the programming language
ADA, created by the DoD (Department of the United States), in the 1970s.
Initially, it was programmed in binary codes (bi=2), in other words, it
consists of strings of 0s and 1s, which is the language directly understood by
the computer, or what is known as machine language, a language considered
fundamental for the commuter to be thus capable of interpreting the
information supplied. Later the languages of high level appeared, using
words in English, to give orders to follow, using intermediate processes
between the language and the computer, this process can be a compiler or an
interpreter.
The syntax of these programming languages is much simpler than our
languages and they use a much smaller vocabulary and set of rules. In
summary, we could say that programming is a set of sentences written in a
programming language that tells the computer what tasks to perform and in
what order, through a series of instructions that fully detail the process.
In the world of programming languages, we find interpreted
languages, such as javascript, where a program called interpreter executes the
sentences while reading the text file where they are written, which is why
these programs are often also called scripts.
On the other hand, we have compiled languages such as Java, in this
case, we must previously convert the text file to a ¨translation¨ through a
program called compiler and the resulting file is the one that will finally run
on the computer.

In this book we will speak specifically of the Python programming
language, being this an interpreted language whose main and most important
characteristic is the application of a syntax that favors the application of
readable code. We could say that the interpreter is a type of program that
executes a code directly, that is to say, it does not need to be compiled, and
that is the case of our target language.
What is Python?
Python is one of the most important programming languages
nowadays, being a general-purpose language, in this book you will have the
language bases so that you can start with it. With this language, you can
create a huge and variated amount of applications, because it allows you to
create different kinds of applications since it doesn't have a defined purpose.
History of Python
This language was created by Guido Van Rossum in the early 1990s,
at the Centre for Mathematics and Informatics (CWI, Netherlands),
specifically in 1989, as Van Rossum himself explained in one of his
interviews:
"In December 1989, I was looking for a hobby programming project
to keep me busy during the Christmas weeks. My office would be closed and
I would have nothing but my computer at home. I decided to write an
interpreter for the new scripting language I had been coming up with
recently: an ABC descendant that Unix/c hackers would like. I chose
Python's name for the project, finding myself in a slightly irreverent state of
mind (and being a big fan of Monty Python's Flying Circus)."
It began to be implemented in December 1989, and in February 1990
was released the first public version, version 0.9.0. Version 1.0 was released

in January 1994, version 2.0 was released in October 2000 and version 3.0
was released on December 2008.
This programming language has as fundamental philosophy to have a
syntax that favors a readable code, it is a high-level language that can be
extended with C or C++, it has several programming environments that allow
to edit programs, interact with the interpreter, develop projects, debug,
among others and at the moment it is supported by a large community that
facilitates its learning and that is producing a new progress in its already
known new versions.
Python is a high-level programming language, interpreted and
multipurpose, being currently one of the most used programming languages
for software development. In recent years it has become a very valuable tool
in the area of programming, this language is under a license of free software,
under a license of Open Source or open-source approved by OSI (Open
System Interconnect), so it is a program that can be used and distributed
freely, either for personal or commercial use. The purpose of Python
Software Foundation, "is to promote, protect and advance the Python
programming language and to support and facilitate the growth of a diverse
and international community of Python programmers".
The main advantage of an open and free technology is that it can be
used without having to cover licensing costs. Free software is one of the most
popular technological movements in the 21st century.
This language can be executed from any environment and distributed
at the discretion of the user, modify if necessary, thus having a quick and
easy basic tool for building programs.
To understand why we must learn python, it is necessary to

understand the main characteristics of this language, that is why we will start
talking about its main characteristics:
It is a multiparadigm programming language, which means
that we do not have to focus on a single way of
programming, but we can do object-oriented programming,
iterative programming, and functional programming, so we
are not forced to focus on a single paradigm, hence its name
of multiparadigm.
It is a multiplatform language, which indicates that we can
program in different environments or operating systems,
such as Windows, Linux, etc..
It is a very easy language to learn because it is simple and
minimalist, and this is one of the main reasons why most
people decide to have Python as their first programming
language, because it has the simplest syntax to learn, it is an
interpreted language, by this we mean that when executing a
program, it will have the ability to execute itself taking
instruction by instruction.
It uses a dynamic typed, that can be explained in the
following way, when we create a variable, and we store an
initial type of data to it, the dynamic typed means that
throughout the program this variable could change and store
another value of another type of data, that later we will see
this in detail.
At the moment, we can also point out that this language

occupies the position number four of the TIOBE index,
which is an index that catalogs the languages according to
their current popularity, being Java in first place, then in
second place is the C language, in the third place is the C++
language and in the fourth Python, which indicates that it is
a very popular and widely used language nowadays.
Now, knowing the characteristics of the program it is important to
differentiate why we should learn Python and how it will serve us, what we
can program with it, so well, being a general-purpose language, almost
everything can be programmed with it: such as desktop applications with
graphical interfaces and databases, web applications, games, custom
applications, as a point of sale system for your business, for example,
artificial intelligence, among others.
We will now talk about the development environment of this
language, we can say that a development environment is a text editor in
which we will be able to copy all the Python code, run our programs, do our
tests, and so on. We will mention some of these editors, such as PyCharm,
PyDev, Sublime Text 3, ATOM, VIM, as well as many others, in this book
we will work with Visual Studio Code.
What can I do with Python?
As it is an easy to learn language, meaning it has a quite high learning
curve, like many modern languages, as well as a very clean and simple
syntax, as explained above, it is a very versatile language, because with it and
the standard library we can write desktop applications and web applications.
Python has excellent support for object-oriented programming (OOP), the
only limitation for this language is your imagination. This programming
language is built in such a way that there will always be a more optimal way

to do things. This language is also used to work with artificial intelligence or
robotics, where it is currently most used is for Big Data as it is a language
that can handle a lot of data and complex operations.
In the area of video games:
The area of video games has its advantages and disadvantages, being
Python an interpreted language, it is twice (or more) slower than a compiled
language like Java, C++ or C#; you can do wonders of games in Python using
libraries such as Pygame, SDL2 (Binding), OpenGL (binding), only that your
game will not run as an executable made with C++ for example, instead it
will run with the Python interpreter. But you will have an excellent language
with a lot of support and documentation, and very few lines of code.
Finally, we can mention the scientific area, this is where Python
shines. The syntax of Python and the bunch of libraries it gives you by
default makes it perfect for scientific programming, plus in the Python
community, there are huge libraries for mathematics and all that this entails.
Why should we use Python as a programming
language?
Mainly we could say that we should use it because it is a very
versatile language and general-purpose, this means that if your scope is not
defined, you can create a huge number of applications using this language,
suppose that your main goal is to create a web application, with Python you
can do it, but probably tomorrow your interest will focus on scientific
applications, because with Python you can also do it. In fact, the main
development area of this language is the scientific area, if on the opposite you
want to develop a low-level application, or you would like to use it in
hardware because it is also possible to do it with this programming language,
it is absolutely possible. That is why we talk about it being a versatile

language since it does not have a rigorously defined scope.
Who uses Python today?
At the present time, this programming language is very commonly
used, in addition, it has a wide range of uses, from the compilation and
processing of data to the learning of a computer, which is why many of the
important companies are currently working with this versatile programming
language. We will mention some of these companies:
1. Google; it is a company that has handled this language from
practically its beginning, in fact, its founders explained in one of their
interviews that, "Python where we can, C++ where we must". This leads us to
think that C++ is used for Google when memory control is imperative. So it
is currently one of the company's official languages along with C++, Java and
Go, which are the other three languages used. It is worth mentioning that
Guido van Rossum himself worked in Google from 2005 to 2012, which
indicates how important Python is for Google.
2. Facebook; in this company, Python is also part of this important
social network, being in third place of language most used just behind C++,
for example; in this company are handled more than five thousand
confirmations of service and utilities such as infrastructure management,
binary distribution, hardware images, and operational automation. As we
have mentioned before, the ease of use of Python's libraries helps engineers
to avoid having to maintain so many codes, making it easier to focus on
brand optimization.
3. Spotify; one of the most important music companies today, is a
large Python operator, due to how fast it is to write and encode on it. To
provide suggestions and recommendations for all its users, Spotify relies
heavily on a large volume of analysis and has Luigi, which is a Python

module that synchronizes with Hadoop.
4. Netflix; this company uses python in a similar way to Spotify as it
relies on this language to enhance its server-side analysis. Most of the
engineers who work for this company are free to choose the language to work
with, and most of them choose this language to encode.
5. Dropbox; this cloud-based storage system uses this language in its
client's desktop. In 2012 Rossum joined this company on the condition that
they would allow him to be just an engineer, not a leader or a manager,
during his time at the company he helped to generate the ability to share data
warehouses with other users within the Dropbox community.
6. Industrial Light and Magic (ILM) is a special effects center,
founded by George Lucas himself in 1975, to create special effects for the
well-known movies Star Wars. ILM selected Python 1.4, because it is much
faster to integrate into their existing infrastructure, also, the easy
Interoperability of Python with C+ and C++ made easy for ILM to import
Python into their patented lighting software.
In this way we can see how Python is in more and more places, using
this language to wrap software components, expand graphic applications,
among other skills, it has a wide range of code libraries and is more sensitive
in development areas
How do I know which Python version should I use?
In Python, there are currently two versions that are incompatible
between themselves, which causes a lot of confusion to any user who is
starting to program or even any user who is starting in the same language.
These versions are called Python 2.x which was released in 2000 and was
updated until 2010, however, in 2008 was released version 3.x which is

currently in full development of new versions and improvements in their
commands.
But, do these versions contain the same tools?
Well, there is a big difference between each version of Python among
which highlights that in Python 3.x the print sentence is taken into account as
a function, so it is necessary to call it and enclose in parentheses what you
want to print. Unlike in the version 2.x which does not need parentheses to
print.
When you are going to iterate a dictionary in Python version 2.x, the
key-value elements are used through the items() and iteritems() methods. In
the current version of Python 3.x, this operation is done only through the
items(), keys() and values() methods and when using the iteritems() method
we will obtain an exception of the AttributeError type.
There is also a change in the input function, which in the Python 2.x
version takes the data without converting the variable type. In this version, if
we enter an integer variable, its entry will be of the "int" type and if we want
it to be treated as a string we would have to call the function "raw_input"
since this will be in charge of converting "int" data to string.
In the Python 3.x version, this takes a big step forward since the
"raw_input" function is suppressed and any conversion would be easily done
through the input() function.
Now that I know which version to use, how can I
install Python according to my operating system?
The Python programming language is included by default in the Mac
OS and Linux operating systems, the only thing to do is to update according

to the version you have, however, for Windows users, the program must be
installed since it is not included in the system.
Install Python on Windows
Go to https://www.python.org/downloads/
Choose the version of your preference to install: 2.x and 3.x. It is
always recommended for new users to use the latest version of Python (3.x),
this facilitates understanding thanks to its simplified tools. However, if you
are using a recycled code, it is recommended to use the version in which it
was written.
Once the download is finished, run the program.
If you are a new user, it is recommended to install Python with its
default settings. If you are a language experienced user, you can do the
custom installation.
Verify that the program and its interpreter work correctly.
Install or upgrade Python for Mac OS
Python comes by default in OS X with version 2.7. If you need to
upgrade your version to 3.x just follow these steps:
Enter python.org/downloads on your computer, the link will
automatically detect the operating system you have and it will show you the
files compatible with the computer to start the download.
Click on the PKG file to start its installation and if you are a new user.
Start the Python program by typing "Python3" in order to start the
interface of this new version.
Installing or Upgrading Python For Linux

In almost all Linux distributions Python is previously installed by
default, so it is not necessarily needed to install but rather update, the only
detail is that for a policy issue of installation the vast majority comes with
Python 2.x and not with Python 3.x, as should be, especially if we consider
that most modern applications require or recommend version 3.x to compile.
To upgrade Python, just follow these steps:
Check the Python version you have, since the Linux Operating
System is included with the program, however, its version may vary.
On the Linux terminal type "sudoapt-get install Python".
Then in the same terminal type "sudo yum install Python".
Enter as a root user by typing "pacman-S python".
Finally, start the program and check that it works correctly so you can
start programming.
Learning to use Python
Once Python is downloaded, you will need a code editor that allows
you to interpret and write code for programs. There is a great variety of
editors, this depends and goes according to the preference and level of
experience of the user with the programming since it will be your ally while
programming.
Among the best-known editors are:
Visual Studio Code: It is a multi-platform source code editor with a
dark interface; it has an optimized user interface. This editor has multiple
tools and even allows real-time updates of our code while compiling. You do

not need a complete IDE and it is possible to change the appearance of your
interface through the themes it brings.
Visual Studio Code supports a wide variety of languages, including
Python, Php, Java, C++, Ruby, Go, C, SQL, JavaScript, Batch, and
Objective-C.
Sublime text: This is a multiplatform editor with a dark interface,
which allows to execute a great variety of documents in multiple tabs and
offers a full-screen mode, thus facilitating the user's visual space in the
computer. This has a panel that allows you to move through the code quickly
and easily. Sublime text is capable of interpreting a wide variety of
programming languages such as Python, CSS, C++, HTML, Matlab, R, SQL,
C, Php) and has autosave, another fact and advantage of this editor is that it
allows running files in Python with just a shortcut on the keyboard; Ctrl+B.
Geany: This is a multiplatform code editor of the Linux operating
system, which is ideal for application development and even software
development for this operating system and also that it is possible to operate
on operating systems such as Windows, Mac OS or any other system with
GTK library support. In addition, this editor is distinguished for being fast
and lightweight, is completely independent and supports languages such as
HTML, C++, JAVA, PHP, PYTHON, and C.
Wing: This is another paid integrated development environment for
Python, it is owned by the company Wingware. It was created mainly for
professional developers. It offers a great set of tools and features necessary
for Python programming, it is compatible with Windows, OS X, and Linux
and works with Python 3.x versions. Wing has a free basic version, a
personal edition and a professional edition which can be considered very
powerful when creating a program.

Komodo Edit: This is an open-source editor oriented to dynamic
languages including Python, JavaScript, HTML, CSS, Perl, NodeJS. Komodo
is considered one of the most popular code editors for applications today and
also has a premium package that includes a number of useful tools, such as
allowing writing codes and collaborating in the development of other codes
in real-time, exploring databases, removing bugs. It is mostly focused on
small project developers.
Ninja IDE: This is a text editor for development, which will only
allow us to create projects in Python and at the same time run them in order
to correct any errors that may occur at any moment.
Python's Keywords:
It is well known that in every programming language there is a series
of words and commands which are found in a reserved way and can not be
used for anything other than to fulfill its function. In Python there is also has
a set of words, these are called: reserved words or keywords, and are nothing
more than a set of words in which each element contains a special meaning
and is an indispensable part of the syntax of its language for the correct
development of the code.
These words must be written exactly as shown in the following table,
which will contain some of the reserved words of the language. If this is not
done, the program will not be able to recognize them and can generate a type
of exception called: NameError, this is because Python does not distinguish
between upper and lower case or as it is formally known: case sensitive.
If we write false, the Python interpreter will not be able to understand
that we are referring to the False operator and will throw us an error because
this is not defined.

The following table will show the set of keywords for the Python 3.x
version (version with which we are going to work in the next programs),
which have defined approximately 33 reserved words; these same ones form
the nucleus of the syntax of this programming language.
“and”
“def”
“finally”
“in”
“or”
“while”
“as”
“del”
“for”
“is”
“pass”
“with”
“assert”
“elif”
“from”
“lambda”
“raise”
“yield”
“break”
“else”
“global”
“None”
“return”
“class”
“except”
“if”
“nonlocal”
“True”
“continue”
“False”
“import”
“not”
“try”
Of this group, there are a certain number of words which are
considered " essential ", these could be the ones we are going to use the most
and we will explain them in-depth in the next chapters.
True & False: These expressions are those whose values are thrown to
us by the program as a result of evaluating logical expressions.
and & or: These expressions are those that we use as connectors for
the logical expressions (True & False), in order to be able to create much
more complex expressions.
if, elif & else: These expressions are those which are used to build
blocks of conditions, in order to make certain decisions within the same
programs.
For & while: These expressions are used to build loops or formally:
repetitive blocks.
Def & return: These expressions are those that represent instructions,
which will be used to define our own functions. In other words: these
expressions represent a series of instructions that will be in charge of carrying

out a certain task as indicated.
Import & from: These expressions are those used to add additional
functionalities.
If you are using a code that has been written in Python 2.x version or
you simply want to start in this version, we can see that unlike Python 3.x
version, this version has only 31 reserved words or keywords.
“and”
“def”
“finally”
“in”
“print”
“yield”
“as”
“del”
“for”
“is”
“raise”
“assert”
“elif”
“from”
“lambda”
“return”
“break”
“else”
“global”
“not”
“try”
“class”
“except”
“if”
“or”
“while”
“continue”
“exec”
“import”
“pass”
“with”
What are the differences in keywords between Python 2.x and Python
3.x?
Below, we will mention those important differences that cannot be
noticed at first sight:
- Python 3.x incorporates the words "True", "False" and "None".
- In Python 2.x the words "exec" and "print" that were part of the
keywords, become integrated functions in Python 3.x with the syntax exec()
and print().
How can I find these words?
In Python, there is a module whose name is known as keyword
module of the standard library, this is responsible for exporting a list called:
kwlist. which contains all the keywords that are reserved in our programming
language, Python.

Another easier way to consult these keywords is through the help()
command, this is just a function that comes integrated and facilitates us to
consult information, documentation and get a clearer help on the components
of our program.
If in any given situation you need to quickly consult the operation or
meaning of a particular keyword (only of the Python programming language),
you can do it through the command help(), once introduced this, you must
write the keyword to consult and immediately will show us on screen all the
information of the word requested.
Python syntax and its importance   
Now we will talk about the most important thing and it will be what
will allow us to advance in our code and in programming in general: The
syntax; we know very well that Python is an interpreted programming
language, but what does this really mean?  
Our Python programming language works through tabulations, this is
informally known as indentation or spaces. This means that, at the moment of
executing a program, it is going to follow an order of interpretation, which
works through the tab key on our keyboard which is just the key containing
arrows located above Caps Lock, these tabs work in each loop or conditional
sentence.
When we have a correct indentation we can avoid the use of keys and
brackets and we can even avoid some reserved words to start and end a
program that marks a block of code. This allows the program to have better
use and operation. 
Having a good indentation also helps us to make our code look
uniform in order to facilitate reading and provide comfort to any third party

who reads it, and even to ourselves, because we can locate an error
effectively and quickly.
It is important to emphasize that the first line of the code should never
be indented, the indentation will always go after this and with 4 boxes of
space.
Physical and logical lines: A program in Python is composed of a set
of logical lines, they are formed by a certain amount of physical lines.
But... What are physical lines?
Physical lines are those lines that are used to enumerate our code
editor, or formally can be described as a sequence of characters which end
when entering the end-of-line character "\n".  
And what are logical lines?
Logical lines are those that go with Python syntax logic components
and their end is determined by the NEWLINE token which determines the
end of each line and starts another.
These physical lines have the ability to be united through an action
called "implicit union of lines" to form a single logical line, using characters
such as parentheses (), square brackets [] and keys {}.
If we start a logical line with the start characters such as "(", "[", "{" it
will extend through all the necessary logical lines until it ends with its closing
symbol ")", "[", "{".
There are two types of statements in Python:
Simple statements: These types of statements are those that must be
completed in a single logical line. For example:

Print objects in the program: print()
Generate exceptions: raise EndSearch (location)
Access Attributes: from sys import stdin 
Access modules: import sys
Execute functions through expressions: log.write()
Compound statements: These types of statements are those that must
begin with the compound statement clause, followed by the contained
statement on the next line. This must be correctly indented since it will be
part of the body of our code. It will always start with a keyword and end with
a colon ":".
An example of compound sentences is sequence and iteration for,
else, else, if, elif, loops while, and else.
Make comments in the code: A comment in Python refers to a set of
characters which are not executable, these are made in a text line of our
program. The comment is represented with the numeral character ( # ). At the
moment of programming, the comments can be very useful to be able to
explain in detail each action carried out in a program code to people outside
the code, or even for ourselves.
Our first program: Hello world
Once we have installed the code editor of our preference and already
knowing a little about the Python programming language syntax, we can
proceed to write our first program: Hello world.
If you already have experience in programming is common to ask
yourself, "Why is "Hello World" always the first program to enter any

programming language? Well, the simple phrase Hello World is characterized
by being an extremely simple code, especially at the time of running and can
serve as a test to ensure that we have installed our program well and its
interpreter. In this way, when working with heavy programs we are going to
be sure that everything will work correctly.
From now on all the examples will be based on version 3.x for better
understanding.
The syntax that we are going to use for this code will be: print("Hello
World");
Running a program on Linux
1. Create a directory called projects on your primary user's
desktop
2. Create a plain text file with the name: Helloworld.py
3. Type the syntax of your code
4. Run the following command: Home/projects/Helloworld.py.
5. Once this is done, your code should be displayed as
indicated.
To run in windows:
1. Create a directory called projects in unit C: \

2. Within this directory, we'll need to create a plain text file
3. Write the code syntax
4. Save the file as Helloworld.py (the name may vary
according to your preference)
5. Run from the MS-DOS console: C:Python27\Python
C:\Projects\Helloworld.py, or also from the same program
Visual Studio, you can do F5.
6. Once this is done, your code should be shown on screen as
indicated.
Running a program on Mac OsX
1. Click on File in a new browser window.
2. Create a folder with the name of your preference, in which
you will save future projects.
3. Within this folder, we will need to create a new folder called
Projects (all programs will be stored here).
4. Click on Applications and then on TextEdit.
5. Select Plain Text.
6. Type the syntax of the program.

7. Click on "save as" from the menu file in TextEdit.
8. Save the file as: Helloworld.py (or the name of your
preference) and select the folder already mentioned.
9. Select Applications, then utilities and terminal.
10. Select the folder in which you saved your program.
11. Run cd of the folder.
12. Execute ls and it should show on screen the file
Helloworld.py
13. Type the following command: Helloworld.py
Once this is done, your code should be displayed as indicated

Chapter 2: Variables
Flow control
What are flow diagrams?
They are tools that are used for any type of programming language,
which are used to represent or create the structure of the program or
algorithm.
The flow diagrams or also called flowchart, are a way to graphically
represent an algorithm (the steps that are executed in the program),
facilitating its interpretation to a person.
The creation of the structure of the algorithm or program can be
considered the first part of the development of the algorithm and the
preparation for the most important step that is coding.
At the time of elaborating a program, it is advisable to make a
flowchart so that any person can understand in a simple way the function of
the algorithm. Currently, there are a variety of software and online tools that
facilitate the elaboration of these diagrams.
Main figures and meaning:
Start / end: Indicates the starting or
ending of the diagram
Input / Output of data: These are
data which are assigned to the
input and output variables at the

beginning and ending of our code.
Process: This is what executes the
order of the operation
Decision: Indicates a position in
the flowchart, this is used for
logical expressions. In this case,
the sequence is going to split in
two cases, a positive and a
negative one. This is also used to
apply conditionals
Document: This is used generally
to make a document
Inspection: This is used for some
cases where an inspection is
required.
Flowline: This is used to indicate
the direction of the diagram
For example:


Variables
What are the variables in Python?
It is quite sure that we have always heard the concept of variable in
mathematics since these are defined as an unknown symbol represented by
letters (x, y, z, i, n) which (mostly) store a numerical value.
In this case, when we talk about variables in programming, these
represent a space reserved in the memory of our program or computer that
can be modified and used multiple times. These variables have a very similar
representation and meaning; since they represent a box capable of storing
values. Unlike mathematical variables, these can store complex words such
as cities, names, passes, simple letters, and ages.
In Python, a variable can be interpreted as a ''label'' to the data
information stored box, and these data can be understood as objects. Python
is also able to distinguish between upper and lower case letters (as we
previously mentioned this is known as case sensitive), which means that it
will not be the same to call a variable Song to a variable called song.
We cannot forget that being Python a programming language that is
object-oriented, the data structure of our programs will be based on these
same, therefore, the label we put to the variables cannot match the names of
the commands or otherwise it will throw us an error.
Declare variables in Python
Python has the advantage of being a dynamic programming language; this
means that it is not necessary to specify the type of data with which we will
work since its interpreter is able to infer the type of data to use. Unlike C++
that, to declare a variable, it is necessary and obligatory to specify the type of
data with which the variable will be stored in the memory so that its compiler

can be able to interpret it.  
For example:
As we can see, Python uses the symbol ''='' to assign the values to the
variable, once this is done the variable starts with this value, since there is no
possible way to declare a variable without any initial value. 
We can observe in this example the declaration of two variables of name x
with different values, this is totally valid since as we can observe, a variable
is written in small letters and another variable is written in capital letters. 
It is important to keep in mind that in Python there are operations that, when
defined, are not allowed between types (classes) that are not compatible, so

that when each data is identified it becomes an inherited object to the type of
data to which it belongs. 
To be able to declare a variable it is necessary for it to go from left to right,
otherwise, it will result in a syntax error. 
It is essential that variable names begin with a letter or underscore (the rest of
the name can contain letters, numbers, and underscores).
It is also possible to assign multiple values to multiple variables on the same
line, as long as there are the same number of arguments on both the left and
right.

Data Types
Integers: Integer data in Python can identify integers of
either decimal, binary, hexadecimal, or octal type.
There are two ways to declare a variable as integer: An int is placed
prior to the variable name as follows:
The other way is the most common, in which we only write the name of the
variable to be declared.
Float: The data of the type float are in charge of covering all
the set of real numbers ex: 3.14, 21, -85.6. When we
perform an operation with float type data, it will not always
give us a result with an exact number, many times it can be
an approximation and its declaration is very similar to the
declaration of variables of the integer type.

Complex: The data of the complex type refer to the set of
operations with complex numbers, these are expressed as
data of the type float separated by the operand symbol, the
first number is going to present to the real number and its
imaginary component is going to be identified being
accompanied by a letter j. At the moment of declaring a
variable of the complex type it must be declared in the
following way: 
String: Data of the string type refers to a sequence or string
of characters that are enclosed in apostrophes or quotation
marks. 
String types:
\'': double quotation mark.
\': single quotation mark.
\n: Line break.
\t: Tab horizontally.

Example:
Bool: Boolean data consists of only two (2) digits, which
evaluate logical expressions. This is very important for
future chapters because it will allow us to understand
conditionals or cycles.
If a logical expression is true, its numerical value will be 1.
If a logical expression is false, its numerical value will be 0.
Lists: List type data allows the program to store within it,
certain items of any different data type, as well as being able
to have repeated items. These same are written with curly
brackets.

Tuples: Tuples type data are able to store several items
within it, this type of data can be similar to lists but differs
in the following things: Their declaration is made with a
parenthesis (), unlike the lists that are declared with square
brackets []; when we declare Tuples, these same are
immutable, unlike the lists that when we declare them, can
be changed, and finally because they are immutable, their
search for data is much more effective than in a list.
His statement is as follows:

Set: This type of data in Python is based on a data structure,
which can consist of multiple elements whose order in the
set is not defined. Sets are able to add, remove and iterate
elements of a set, as well as perform common operations
such as differentiate, verify if an element belongs to the set,
differentiate and intersect.
To define a set we only need to name the function set (). If it has a list, a tuple
or a string, it will return a compound of the elements. Example:
Dictionaries: This type of data is defined as a structure that
has certain special characteristics that allow us to store any
integer value, list, string, and even functions. Dictionaries
allow us to identify each element by a key.
It is important to keep in mind that when working with dictionaries the 'keys'
cannot be repeated data, likewise, it is not possible to access the keys through
their associated value. It is also important to know that these do not meet a
specific order, but that this type of data is guided by the keys.
In order to define a dictionary, we enclose with curly brackets {} the list of
values to be entered. Each key pair is separated with commas and the key
together with the value is separated by a colon. For example: 

That will print:
Here we can see that we have created the dictionary and also the program
shows us that we have accessed each key separately.
Dictionary methods:
get(): This method receives a key as a parameter and returns its
value. If it doesn't find a value, it returns an object of type none.
For example:
In this case, it will return the value name, which in this case will
be John.
Item(): This type of method is in charge of returning a list of
tuples, in which each one is composed of two elements in which
the first element will be the key and the second element will be
its value. For example:

Keys(): This type of method only returns the keys of our
dictionary. Example:
Values(): This type of method only returns the values of their
respective keys from our dictionary.
Clear(): This method eliminates all the items and leaves our
dictionary empty. For example:
Copy(): This method returns a copy of the original dictionary.
For example:
Redeclaring variables in Python:
A great advantage that Python has is its ability to allow redeclaring
variables in a simple way, from changing their value to changing the type of
variable without complications. For example:

In the last example, we can observe that the first declaration of the
variable "a" is assigned the value 4, which is an integer, then the variable is
redeclared with the value 8, therefore, at that time the variable is integer, then
we have redeclared the variable again and we have converted it to a Boolean
value, since we have assigned it the value True. Finally, we have assigned to
the variable a string which we can see as a name "Julia" so at that time the
variable is of string type.
Concatenate strings
To concatenate character strings we will only need to use the addition
operand (+). It is important to note that you must specifically and explicitly
mark the place where we want to leave the space blank.

As we can see in the last example, the variable "a" was created, which
contained the value "Hello world", then the variable "b" was created, which
contained the value "this is an example" and later the final variable "c" was
created, this last one was in charge of carrying out the concatenation of "a"
and "b".
The concatenation of variables can also be done with integer and
boolean values, but to do this you must convert these variables into strings
beforehand. How do you do this? Well, it's very simple, we do it calling the
function str(). For example:

As we could see in the example, we have created a string variable that
contains the value "class of ", and then the integer type date variable is
created and contains the value "2019". Then we redeclare our variable date to
string type with the function str().
Another very common example is concatenating lists, this we do
through the function extend(), for example:
We can see in the previous example that a list has been created with
some lunch options; then another list has been created with some snack
options and finally, the command lunch.extend(snack) is created
concatenating list number 1 with list number 2.
Global Variables
Global variables are those used throughout the program; once
declared, they may be used as a main function or any other type of function.
This type of variable can be modified in any part of the program, this
could seem an advantage, but it could also cause confusion both for the
programmer or another external person who is going to read the program.
Another point that could be considered negative with global variables is that
they can take up more space than common ones because they cannot be
destroyed at the end of running the function, on the other hand, this one does
not allow the code to be reusable; this makes Python programming language

one of the most attractive.
In general terms, it is considered a bad practice to work with global
variables, but it is never too much to have complete knowledge. Next, we
will see how to declare a global variable.
For this it is necessary to use the global command:
As we could see in the last example, calling or declaring a global
variable is not very complicated. We could say that it is similar to what we
have seen to declare variables; the only difference is that from now on the
variable "var" is going to have a global character so that any function is going
to be able to access it in a simple way.
Local variables
Local variables are those that are only used in one function and are
deleted from memory when their execution is completed. Unlike global
variables, local variables allow us to save quantities of lines of codes, making
modular programming much more agile and easy, thus allowing the reuse of
the code, which makes Python one of the most striking programming
languages.
The main advantage of using local variables in a Python program is

that it facilitates the reading of the code, making it simple to understand;
global variables allow any error to be fixed more effectively and easily.
Having reduced lines of code, it is very unlikely that confusion will be
generated at the time of interpreting it.
It is considered a good practice to use local variables at the moment of
programming since nowadays it is intended to obtain much simpler codes to
interpret by users who do not have so much experience in programming.
To better understand this, we will make an example that explains in a
clear way the use of these variables at the moment of programming.
Example: We are going to create a problem in which it must be
responsible for taking the following data from a person:
1. Name and Lastname
2. Age
3. Country of origin
We can observe that the syntax focuses more than everything on the
input() command, what does this mean? This is only the function that allows
a user-program interaction to be possible. In this way, the variables
"full_name", "age" and "country_origin" will have the value that the user
introduces at the moment to the console.


Chapter 3: Operators
Operators are mathematical symbols that carry out a specific operation
between operands, operators can receive variable operands. Operands are
those arguments that operators receive in order to perform their functions. So
we can conclude that operators are those special symbols that are capable of
performing logical and arithmetic operations.
Types of operators:
- Logic operators.
- Arithmetic operators.
- Comparison operators.
- Assignment operators.
- Special operators.
Logical or conditional operators: This type of operators are
those that are commonly used to group, deny and exclude
some expressions of our code.
1. Operator not: This type of operator is the one in charge of
negating or returning a value opposite to the Boolean value.
not True=False.
not False=True.
2. Operator Or: This type of operator is the one that evaluates the

values on the right side and the values on the left side in order to
finally return a true value if at least one condition is met.
False or True = True
True or false = True
True or True = True
False or False = False
3. Operator And: This type of operator is responsible for assessing
whether the conditions between the value on the left side and the
value on the right side are met correctly:
True and False = False
True and True = True
False and True = False
False and False = False
Comparison operators: These types of operators are those
that we use to compare (as its name says) some values
stored in the program so that later this at the time of
compiling we can return a value of the True / False type as a
result of fulfilling a condition.
1. Operator !=: This type of operator is in charge of evaluating if
these stored values are different and depending on the result of
the analysis, this will give us a True/False. E.g.

20!=20 The result is going to be False
14!= 15 The result will be True
2. Operator ==: This type of operator is in charge of evaluating if
these values are the same for different types of data and
depending on the result obtained in its analysis, its result will
give us a True/False. E.g.
19 = = 19 The result will be True
10 = = 5 The result will be False
3. Operator >: This type of operator is in charge of evaluating
whether the value entered on the left side has a position greater
than that of the value positioned on the right side. E.g.
30>25 The result will be True
9> 28 The result will be False
4. Operator <: This type of operator is the one that will evaluate if
the value entered on the left side has a lower position than the
value positioned on the right side. E.g.
26<9 Result will be False
14 < 22 The result will be True
5. Operator >=: This type of operator is in charge of evaluating
whether the value entered on the left side has a position greater

than or equal to that of the value positioned on the right side.
E.g.
20> 14 The result will be True
10 > 26 The result will be False
10 >= 10 The Result will be True
6. Operator <=: This type of operator is the one that will evaluate if
the value entered on the left side has a position less than or
equal to the value positioned on the right side. E.g.
20 < 11 The result will be False
16 < 25 The result will be True
15 <= 15 The result will be True
Assignment operators: These types of operators are those
that are used in the program to assign (as its name says) a
value to a variable, in this case, these operators will be
followed by a symbol of equality ( = )
1. Operator Equality ( = ): This type of operator is considered the main one
and will always be positioned on the left side of the variable. E.g.
> A= 10 → The value of A will be 10
2. Operator Sum - equality ( += ) This type of operator is responsible for
adding to the variable on the left side, with the value located on the right side.
E.g.
> A= 10; A += 8 → A= 18

It would be equivalent to expressing: A=10; A + 8 → A=18
3. Operator subtracts - equality ( -= ) This type of operator is the one that
subtracts from the variable on the left side, with the value located on the right
side. E.g.
> A= 10; A -= 8 → A= 2
It would be equivalent to expressing: A=10; A - 8 → A= 2
4. Operator Rest - equality ( %= ) This type of operator is responsible for
returning the rest of the division on the left side, to the value located on the
right side.
>A= 10; A %= 8 → A = 2
It would be equivalent to expressing A= 10; A % 8 → A= 2
5. Integer Operator - equality ( // ) This type of operator is responsible for
calculating the integer division of the variable on the left side, with the value
located on the right side.
> A= 10; A //= 8 → A= 1
It would be equivalent to expressing A= 10; A // 8 → A= 1
6. Operator Product - equality ( *= ) This type of operator is responsible for
multiplying the variable on the left side, with the value located on the right
side. E.g.
> A= 10; A *= 8 → A = 80
It would be equivalent to expressing: A=10; A * 8 → A= 80
7. Operator Division - equality ( /= ) This type of operator is in charge of
dividing the variable on the left side, with the value located on the right side.

E.g.
>A= 10; A /= 8 → A= 1,25
It would be equivalent to expressing A= 10; A * 8 → A= 1,25
8. Exponent Operator - equality ( **= ) This type of operator is responsible
for calculating the exponent of the variable on the left side, with the value
located on the right side. E.g.
>A= 10; A **= 8 → A = 100000000
It would be equivalent to expressing A= 10; A ** 8 → A= 100000000
Special Operators: These types of operators are commonly
used in program loops, to check for repeated variables and
even to know if an element is stored within others.
1. Operator In: This operator will return a 'True' if an element is stored inside
another. E.g.
A= [80, 40] 80 in A
The result that is going to return will be of the true type because the value 80
is positioned in A
2. Operator Is: This type of operator will return a True if its values stored in
the variables are the same. E.g.
X= 80; Y= 80. → X is Y
The result to be returned will be of the True type because both variables
contain the same stored value.
3. Operator Not in: This type of operator will return a True if an element is

not stored inside another element. E.g.
A= [80, 40] 40 not in A.
The result that is going to return will be of the False type because the value
40 if it is positioned in A.
4. Operator Not is: This type of operator will return a True if the values
stored in the variables are not equal. E.g.
X= 80; Y=40. → X not is Y
The result that is going to return will be of the True type because both
variables contain stored different values, therefore, they are different.
Arithmetic Operators: These types of operators are those
used to perform simple mathematical operations.
1. Sum Operator ( + ): This type of operator will add values of the
numerical type. E.g.
40 + 40 = 80
2. Operator subtracts ( - ): This type of operator will subtract
values from the numerical type. E.g.
40 – 40 = 0
3. Operator multiplication ( * ): This type of operator will multiply
numerical values. E.g.
40 * 40 = 1600
4. Operator division ( / ): This type of operator will be responsible

for dividing numerical type values. E.g.
10 / 2 = 5
5. Exponent operator ( ** ): This type of operator will calculate the
exponent of a stored value between values with numerical data
type. E.g.
4** 2 = 16
6. Integer Division Operator ( // ): This type of operator is
responsible for calculating the integer division of a stored value
with numeric data type in which only the integer part will return.
E.g.
5 // 2 = 2
Note: It is important to note that, when working with two operands of
the integer type, the program will assume that you want the variable to yield a
result of the integer type. E.g.
If we operate A= 7 // 2 = Our result will be 3.
If you want to get the decimals as in the first example, just add at least one
decimal value to either of the two operands. E.g.
G = 7.0 / 2 = 3.5
7. Operator Module: This type of operator is responsible for
returning the rest of the division between the two operands.
Ex,=.
7 % 2 = 1. The division module is 1
The order of precedence or priority of arithmetic operators is as follows:

1. Exponent ( ** )
2. Multiplication ( * ), Division ( / ), Whole Division ( // ), Module ( % )
In line 2 we can see that the rest of the operators are grouped together,
this means that they all have the same order of priority, but at the time of
operating they will be resolved by that order of precedence.
Example:
When operating: 8*10/2
This means that the operation is to be carried out as follows:
8*10= 80 / 2 = 40. The result of our operation is 40.
On the other hand, this order of precedence can be manipulated by
using parentheses ().
Example:
When operating 80*(10/2)
This means that the operation is to be carried out as follows:
10/2= 5 * 4 = 20.
Let's make two small examples to work with operators, let's calculate the area
of a rectangle and the other is to see if the key is correct.
First example, area of the rectangle:

In this example, the first thing we do is to declare the variables, the
first is variable b, which is related to the base, which goes through several
stages, but we put it in a single line to save space.
To explain it better, the first thing we can observe is that there is an
input in the declaration of both b and h, which is an input type, so that it is
going to be saved as a string, for this reason, we can also observe the int
function, which will turn that string into an integer, to be able to do
operations on them. Do you know why is that?
Because it is impossible to add two strings, since it is very different to
add 1 + 1 than "1" + "1", because the first is a sum of integers, and its result
will be equal to 2, but the second we do not know, because it is a sum of
ASCII characters. And well, as you can see, the same thing is done with the
variable h, therefore, b and h are two integers entered by the user.
The next action is to print in screen the following string "The area is"
concatenated with the string related to the multiplication of the base and the
height, because it is not possible to concatenate a string with an integer, for
this reason, the function str() is used.
As you can see, this is a very basic example, and here comes a
question, what happens if you enter a negative value? If, for example, you
enter -5 and 2, the value returned will be -10, and this is a big mistake since
there are no negative areas, therefore, it is an error that our program has. The
errors can be solved by using conditionals, or also with the handling of
exceptions since they will take into account these cases.
Second example, key verification:

The first thing is that we define the password variable as a string
"12345", then, the passuser variable is declared, which is related to the input
function, it will show on the screen "Please enter the password here: ", the
same will make in passuser is a string.
Finally, it will be printed in screen if the key is correct or not, for it,
will be printed in screen "User" and this one will concatenate with the result
of comparing if password is strictly equal to passuser, but in order for this to
be concatenated, it will be necessary to convert this comparison into a string,
because it is necessary to delimit that when some comparison is made, the
return is a boolean, and it cannot be concatenated with a string, unless it is
converted, due to that, we made use of the function str().
Conditionals
With the help of logical operators, and well, of logic in general, we
will base ourselves in order to be able to use the instructions, because they
will allow us to make more complex programs, since they allow us to set
conditions, like what? Well, for example:
If it rains today, I take my sweater; if it doesn't rain, I don't take it.
In the same way, conditionals work, since an action is going to be
carried out if a certain circumstance is fulfilled, but if the expected does not
happen, something else will happen.

Among the conditionals, we will find the if, the else, and the elif;
there are also the cases in which we use exceptions, which are used to prevent
the program from collapsing.
if statement: This is a simple conditional, if a certain
circumstance happens, an action will be taken, otherwise
nothing will happen and the usual or expected flow will
continue. This can be used for simple programs such as
access by age, How? Well, in case the client is not old
enough, it will not let him get in.
The flowchart of the if conditional is as follows:
Now, the syntax of If in Python is as follows:

If + condition:  Then inside this block, with the required
indentation, the following commands will be executed,
obviously, if the condition is met.
Now some important things that have to be remembered when making
the if blocks, in terms of syntax:
- The first line is always the if + condition, followed by a colon ( : ), since
this way it is clear that a block is being started.
- The following lines indicate the instructions that will be fulfilled, but of
course, obviously, they will occur in case the condition is true.
- Finally, it is the indentation that the block of instructions must have since in
case these same are not placed correctly, the program will not understand
what you specifically want and it will happen that it is not going to do what
you requested or simply close the program.
A clearer example of the syntax is this, which will show whether a
student passed an exam or not:
As we can see here, a note variable was created, which is related to
the input function, awaiting the note that the user obtained, this variable is of
the string type.
Subsequently, we enter the conditional part, specifically the if, and the
condition to compare is that, if the note that the user obtained is lower than

five, then a screen will print that the user did not pass, and needs to try again.
As you can see, at the part of the if condition, the int() function was used,
which is needed because the note variable is a string, and a comparison of a
number with a string cannot be made, therefore it is necessary to change the
type of string variable to integer, in order to make the corresponding
comparison.
But what if the condition is false? Can you do another action? Well,
you do, since there is another statement, and it is the else, which is used when
the condition of the if is false and you need to do another action, then go to
the usual flow, if you want to see this statement better explained, read the
following paragraphs, which are responsible for explaining the statement.
else + condition: The else condition is used when the if
condition is false, what does this mean? This is nothing
more than if the clause of the condition is not fulfilled, the
program will close automatically; so that this does not
happen we make use of the else instruction which will tell
the program to perform another action.
The flowchart of the else conditional is the following:

We can observe that the syntax of the conditional else is very similar
to the syntax of the conditional if, only that, in this case, the conditional does
not have to be placed, but it is of fundamental importance to maintain a
correct indentation.
To observe in detail the programming of the else conditional, we will
make a test program, in this way we will be able to see clearly the difference
between conditionals.
It will be a modification to the past program, with the objective of
showing how powerful the use of conditionals can be.

In this example, we can see that the note variable was created, which
is an entry that the user will choose, well, in this case, he will put his note, so
that then the program will say if his note was enough to pass or not, so, to
make clear to the user that he has to enter his note, the following string "Put
your note here" will be printed on the screen, so the user knows that he has to
put his note in the program.
After this, the conditional block was placed, in which the condition
means that if the transformation to integer of the note entered by the user is
less than five, "You didn't pass" will be printed on the screen, and then the
program will end, since the block of the else will not be entered, because the
condition is true. But if the condition is not true, it will be passed to else,
which will print on the screen the next string "Congratulations, you passed",
in order to show users that with their note they passed or not the exam.
As you could have observed, the use of if and else, is very useful, we
would say that fundamental, because, thanks to it, you can make the program
able to have different results and not have a single simple flow, because as
you can guess, that type of programs that do not have logical bifurcations, are
not widely used.
Another example that we can see is the division, with the same, we

can see another very important utility of conditionals because the
denominator cannot be equal to zero, because the division between zero is not
defined and would be a mathematical error.
Here we can see the example of the division since we have the
problem previously explained.
The first thing is to create the variable num, it will be related to the
numerator of the division, it will be declared next to an input function, so that
the user enters the value he wants. Then the same will be done with the den
variable, which is related to the denominator of the division.
Then we will enter the block of conditionals, the condition we will
look for is that the variable den is equal to string "0", to know if, at the time
of making the division, it can be or not. If the condition is true, the following
string "Zero can't be denominator" will be printed on the screen, in order to
show the user that the number he put as denominator does not meet the
mathematical requirements. But, in the case that the condition is different
from zero, the division can be done, therefore, we enter inside the else block;
the first thing we do is to convert into integers the variable num and the

variable den, but what is the objective of doing this in this part of the code?
Well, to be able to do mathematical operations, both with num and den will
have to be integers, but it is done in the part of the else, as a part of code
optimization, because in the case that the denominator had been zero, time
would have been spent on unnecessary instructions, because no operation was
going to be performed, since the division between zero is not allowed, as you
already know. At this moment, you will say that there is no difference
between doing it here or not, but there is, imagine that you have to do that a
million times, that would generate a big computational expense in something
that is not going to be used, that is why it is always important to make this
type of reasoning, in such a way that it is trying to make the program as
optimal as possible.
The next action is to make the division between the numerator and the
denominator, and this value will be stored in the result variable, to finally
print the obtained result on screen.
If you are a little bit of a programmer, or already know how to
program in C or Arduino, to say some languages, you will be waiting, in
these explanations of the conditional sentences, the explanation of how the
switch is used here, because in Python these are not found, in Python it is
used the elif is used and its explanation can be seen below.
elif + condition: We use the elif conditional as a faster and
more effective way to join an else with elif for when there is
more than one condition. For example: in other
programming languages, it is very common to use the
switch() conditional for multiple conditions. In the case of
Python, this is replaced by elif(), this is nothing more than

placing an additional conditional on the else to obtain
multiple cases.
This is commonly used when you have multiple conditions, which
have many different ways to perform.
Now, we will see an example to be able to understand in a very clear
way how this works, and in this way, we will enter the conditionals.
In the elif example, we can see that the option variable has been
created, which is related to the option that the user wants to enter into his
program, as can be seen in the code, the options are 1 for the answer to be in
Spanish, 2 for the answer to be in English, and finally 3 for the answer of the
program to be in German.
When entering the conditional block, the first thing we see is the if,
which will have the condition that the variable option is the same strict as the
string "1", if it is true, the string "Hello" will be shown on the screen; then, if
this option is not fulfilled, it will go to the first elif, which will have a
different condition, in this case is the one that says that the variable option is
the same strict as the string "2", if this option is true, then it will show the
message on screen, which says "Hello"; the last elif has the condition which
indicates that the variable option has to be the same strict as the string "3", if
it is true, it will proceed to send a message in German that says the following:

"Halo". But if no case is fulfilled it will go to the else block, and this
indicates that it will print in the console, a message that says "Bad option".
Therefore, we could see that the program has three options, and each
one is a message that will be shown to the user saying hello in different
languages, such as Spanish, German and English.
As we could see the examples of conditionals, we could see the great
usefulness that they have in the programming, since they allow us to place an
accumulation of options to our programs, and that they respond in a different
way, depending on the situation.
But these conditionals are not the only ones that we can use for
special conditions, another very useful tool, which is used a lot in
programming, are the exceptions, as these catch any error, for the program to
run in a correct way, moreover, in the example of division by zero you can
use this tool, but not only for division by zero, but many more times, the only
thing you need is the tools that you will see below.
Exception handling:
When we program, it is very frequent that we find errors during the
execution of our programs. Two very common types of errors we might
encounter on our way are syntax errors and exceptions. As we have already
seen, syntax errors are those that occur when we enter code incorrectly.
In the case of exceptions, the syntax errors presented are different.
How is this? Well, they happen while during the execution of a program
something unexpected happens. For example, let's suppose a program in
which we ask a user to enter a number to fill in a requirement. Now imagine
that when the user is going to enter the data, he writes a string instead of a
number, the program will automatically show a TypeError error.

When we don't handle exceptions properly, our program will close
immediately because the interpreter won't know what to do in a special case
like that.
Returning to the example shown above, we know that as long as we
enter an integer value as an input value, our program will work correctly.
However, if we enter a string the other type of error will be an exception to
the ValueError type.
Some of the most common exceptions are:
NameError: The type of exception NameError, is the one that occurs
when a program is not able to locate a global or local name. When the
program is going to show us that it has not been possible to locate, it will
include the wrong name in the message.
TypeError: The type of exception TypeError, is the one that occurs
when an inappropriate object passes through the function as its argument.
When the program is going to show us the type of error that has been
presented, it will include in detail the correct ways to work with the
arguments.
ValueError: The type of exception ValueError, is the one that occurs
when an argument of the function contains its correct defined types, but its
value is not adequate.
NotImplementedError: The type of exception NotImplementedError,
is the one that occurs when an object that supports an operation has not been
implemented. These types of errors are considered not to be used when a
function supports an input argument, the most appropriate would be to use an
exception of the TypeError type.
ZeroDivisionError: The ZeroDivisionError type of exception is one

that occurs when a zero type of data is provided to the argument (such as a
denominator) in a division operation or module operation.
FileNotFoundError: The FileNotFoundError exception type, is the
one that occurs when a dictionary or file that has been requested is not
existing in the program.
Handling exceptions: It is known that in each programming language
there are certain quantities of reversed words, which make it easier for us to
handle any exception that may arise when programming. In this way, we can
take quick action to prevent the program from being interrupted.
In Python, when we handle exceptions we perform operations called
"blocks", these blocks will be mostly used with the try, except & finally
sentences.
So how does this work?
Raising the exception is going to happen in the following way: in the
try block, you will find all the code, which could be raised with an exception.
(It is known the term raise for programmers as the action of generating an
exception.)
Once this is done, the exception block will be located, this is the one
that will be in charge of enclosing the exception to obtain an opportunity to
process it by sending a specific sample message.
Lastly, we have the finally block, which we are going to use to
perform an action. This will be done no matter if the exception has been
made or not, this way the block will be executed regardless of the previous
conditions.
When we program exceptions the sentence finally is always
considered very useful but many times there is not much emphasis on its

importance.
Which is the finally block? What is it used for? What is it based on?
Let's suppose that we have written a code in the try block, it will take
care of a certain task and will use a large amount of resources which have to
be released once they cease to be used. These resources will be eliminated or
released through the finally clause and the code will be executed without
taking into consideration if the try block has been able to raise the exception
it had.
As we know, it is not possible to make a division by zero, so we will
use a similar example to show you how useful it is to work with exceptions.
The first thing is to declare the variable num, which is related to the
input function, it will be waiting for the data to be entered by the user, in such
a way that a decimal value will be expected to be stored in num; in an
analogous way, the same is done with the variable den, which is designed to
be the denominator of the division.

The following action to all this, is to change the type of format of
each variable, for it is used the function int(), to convert the variable num and
den to integers, since as they are related to an input, the same ones will be
stored as a string and it will be impossible to make arithmetic operations with
them, for this reason, they are transformed to variables of type int.
Now we will enter the exceptions, since we first enter the try block,
which is in charge, as its name indicates, of trying to do certain actions, if no
exception occurs; what we mean by this is that, in this case, if den is not
equal to zero, no exception should occur, therefore, the value of the division
between num and den should be stored in the variable result, then the value of
it will be printed on screen.
But in the case that some error occurs, specifically some exception,  it
will enter in the exceptions and will proceed to print in screen that the entered
values are not valid.
Another example that we must show, is one which takes the block
finally, so we can see its functionality, for this, we will continue with the
examples of divisions, but now we are going to put two exceptions, one that
will appear in the case that the values that are entered are not decimal,
therefore, it will be impossible to convert these data into integers, for this
reason, the first exception will be triggered. Then it will be verified if the
denominator is equal to zero, and if it is true, another exception will have to
be thrown.

Here we can see better the example, the first thing we see, and that we
should expect, is that both the variable num, and the variable den, are using
the input() function, which will be in charge of receiving the value that the
user wants, in this case, the value of the numerator and the denominator
respectively.
Then we enter the first block of instructions, What are we trying to do
in this section? The first thing is to convert the strings that are both num and
den, to integer variables in order to continue with the relevant mathematical
operations, for this reason, it is important to make the type transformation,
because as you know, it is not possible to divide a letter between another
letter, because mathematically it does not make sense. The first thing is the
try block, which as its name indicates, will try to do something, if there is not
anything that generates some error, then it will do it without any problem, but
in the case that it is not possible to do that, then it will enter inside the block

except, which will be in charge of processing the exception. That block, in
case, that an error has been found, will enter in action since it will try to fix
the error found, the first thing it will do is to show in screen the error, it will
transmit to you that erroneous ASCII data was placed, that please try again.
Then the num variable will be Redeclared, which will be input type since it
will be waiting for the values entered by the user, and then it will be
transformed to an integer type variable, the same will be done with the den
variable.
Later, the other block of exceptions will be entered, the first
instruction we find in it is to declare the result variable, which will be the
division between the num and den; to then place on the screen the result of
the division. And well, as you should know, this block will try to do that, but
there is the possibility of an error, but what could it be? Well, the main one is
the division by zero, more than a programming error, it is a mathematical
error, therefore, this block cannot be executed and the part of the exception
will be entered. The same one will try to communicate to the user that an
error exists, this message will say to him that the denominator has a value
equal to zero, for this reason, it is not going to be possible to execute the
division.
At last, we will enter the finally block, which will make an instruction
no matter what happens, no matter if the try or the excepts are executed, this
block will always be executed. It, in this case, will print a message, in which
it will be thankful to have used this program.
But if you verify the previous example and this one, the block finally
does not do anything very special, but it does, the difference is that this is
always done, now, if you want to get an example, in which is used more and
is more important the finally, you will see it when you use the databases,

because always, whatever happens, it is essential to close the connection to a
database, because if this is not done, it may cause some errors that any
programmers want to have.

Chapter 4: Loops
What is a Loop?
A loop (or cycle), is a control structure that is in charge of repeating a
block of instructions, while a certain condition is fulfilled, within the loops
we also have the so-called infinite loops in which their condition is never
fulfilled. As in most programming languages, Python has a while and for.
1. Loop For: Python's for statement iterates on the items of any
sequence (either a list, a string of characters or dictionary), in
the order they appear in the sequence. Where the code is called
"loop body" and its repetitions "iterations".
Where iteration is defined by performing a number of actions repeated
times. The for loop is in charge of going through these actions in order to
look for elements that fulfill certain conditions and that at the same time can
carry out the specified instructions. So all these elements must be iterable.
The syntax of a for loop is as follows:
for variable + an iterable element (list, string, range, etc.) :
loop body.
It is necessary to specify the variable in which the items of the
element are going to be saved, then we write our sentence for with a variable
that will store the items and finally we write in which will be our element to
iterate.
The loop is executed as long as it fulfills a condition, so once the
iteration is finished, this will make the loop stop.
Example:

The first thing we can see is that we define the variable x, which starts
at zero, this is because it is going to iterate, and must start with zero.
Then we fully enter the for cycle, and as you can see, it is specified
that the variable x, is going to iterate within the range of 4, What does this
mean? Well, x is going to iterate four times and take the value of zero, one,
two and three.
The next part is the block inside the for, which is a simple print, and
this is going to show us the value that has x in each part of the for, until it
gets to be valued four, when it has that value, it will automatically quit the
cycle.
Finally, End will be written to show that the program is finished and
the cycle was quit.
Types of for loops:
1. Loop "for" with lists: you can make for cycles with lists, in this case, it will
iterate within each value of the list.
In order to better understand what we are talking about, we will make some
examples of each one of these ways of using the for.
a. Loop "for" with list and the function "range"; in this loop are
presented list data types and with the help of the function len()

and range(), it is possible to make a for, these are very useful to
print data.
-range() is a function that, as mentioned above, returns a list of integers,
accepting as arguments the beginning of the list, the end and the increment
between one element and the next. We can also omit one or two of them, as
explained below;
- range ( n ); this type of function takes care of returning a list of integers
beginning with 0 and ending in n-1.
- range ( beginning, end); this type of function is in charge of returning the
list of integers located between the beginning and the end, without including
the latter.
- range (beginning, end, step); this type of function takes charge of returning
the list of integers, as in the previous case, only that between the beginning
and the next element will exist a difference of step, and so on.
Let's do two examples, one without the range function, and another with it.
1)    Use of for and lists, without the use of range:
As you can see in the example, first, a list was created, which has the
name sports, it has as items, different sports, such as soccer, baseball, tennis,
and polo.

Subsequently, the for cycle was defined, and, What does the x
variable do this time? What it does is iterate within the sports list, so x will
take the values of each item it has within the list.
The next thing is to define the for block, it is important to remember
the indentation because if this is not done, no action will be done because
Python takes this very seriously. Since we already placed the indentation, we
define the block, which is a simple print, and what this does is print the
values of x, and well, as we have already explained, x will take the value of
the items from the list in question.
And well, to finish, will be printed on-screen "End", to show that the
program has finished and quit the cycle correctly.
2)    Use of for and lists, with the use of range:
In the example, we can see a change; the first one is that in this case
we use the range, but we are going to go step by step to explain the code and
make it very simple.
The first thing, as we have already seen, is to make a list, in this case,
the same list of the previous example, with the consequences that this entails,
this means that the items of the previous example, will be the same as the
current ones.
Then, we define the for, in this case, we place the range, with which
we mean that x iterate from zero to the range of numbers that the len function

returns to us, but, what does this mean? Well, x is going to iterate within a list
of the length that the len function tells us, therefore, if len returns a value of
four, then the variable x will iterate from zero to three, taking the values zero,
one, two, three, and as you can see, it will iterate four times, as the len
function said, of course, if it gives us a value of four.
Afterward, we programmed the for block, which is a print, but in this
case, "The sport" was printed, then it was concatenated with the string that
returned the function str(x+1), but, why x+1? Because as x varies from zero
to the number that gives us the function range, the first position of the sport
will be zero, for that reason, we added one, and so it will appear on the
screen, that the first sport, is in position one. After this, it is concatenated
with " is " and it is also concatenated with sport[x], in this case, as if it is a
list, it is concatenated with the item of the position x of the list, and these
positions go from zero to the value n-1 of range.
And finally, "End" was printed on the screen, to say that the program
has finished, and the for cycle was finished correctly.
It is important to remember, that for the variable x to vary, this has to
iterate within a list, and as it has been said before, the function range returns a
list of m numbers, therefore if we say that a = range(10), we can obtain that a
will be equal to [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], therefore, the variable x will vary
from zero to nine.
b. Loop "for" with Tuples; tuples are sequence objects,
specifically, it is an immutable list data type, so it cannot be
modified after its creation. This type of program is not very
difficult to design, since, to program in tuples and cycles, it is
done in a similar way that with lists, the only detail is to keep in

mind the difference that exists between list and tuple.
Two examples will be shown in the same way, the first one will be
with range and the other one will obviate this function.
1)    Loop for with Tuples and range:
Here the first thing we see is that we create the tuple foods, which has
some items within it, among which are the strings "pizza", "hot dog" and
"sushi", and as you should know, after creating a tuple, it cannot be modified,
or changed, or anything like that.
Then a variable x was declared, which has the assigned value of zero.
Next step is to declare the for, and as you can see, in this case, it is not
going to iterate the variable x, but a food variable, which is going to iterate
within the list that is going to return the range function, which should give a
list of three elements, and, Why three elements? Well, as you already know,
the len function returns the value of the length of a list or a tuple, and as in
this case, the tuple foods has three elements, then the range function should
create a tuple that goes from zero to two.

Then, to see more clearly how the variable food iterates, the following
instructions were programmed, first the value that has the variable x was
printed in that instant, then, the value of food was printed in that instant, with
the objective of verifying if they have the same value, and as you already
know, to concatenate an integer with a string, the function str was used. Next
act is to print the item of the corresponding food, for that reason "The food
item is: " is concatenated with foods[food], since we can select a specific
value of the tuple foods, and well, in this case, it will be the one that is in the
food position. Last but not least, it is said that x will be updated to the next
value.
To finalize the code, the string "End" will be printed in the console, to
make it clear that the program has finished and that it ended in a correct way.
2) Loop for with Tuples and without range:
In this example, we can see that it is very nice since we send a
message with the tuple, but how does this work? Well...
First, we create the tuple messages, which has the following items,
"Hello", "my", "name", "is", "Marco", as we can see, is a tuple of five items,
therefore it has a length of five.
Next step is to create the for, in this case, the variable message, it will
iterate inside the tuple messages; Then the variable message will be printed,

in the position that it is, with which, you will be able to infer that each
message will be printed with a line break.
And finally, as it has been done in the previous examples, it will be
printed in console "End' to show that it has left the cycle and the program is
finished.
c. Loop "for" with dictionary; the dictionary defines a one-to-one
relationship between keys and values, the dictionary type objects
allow a series of operators integrated in the Python interpreter
for its management.
Analogous to the loops explained above, this "for" loop with
dictionary is worked in a very similar way, since all these types of data are
similar. But it is worth mentioning that they are different types and are treated
in a different way, therefore, even if they are handled similarly, it should
never be forgotten that they are different types of data.
Example:
In this example we can see how to work with dictionaries; with the
variable we created called clothes, which, as you know, is a dictionary. This
has the items “shirt”, which has a value associated with “red”, there is also

“shoes”, which is related to “black”, and finally “pant”, which relates to
“blue”.
After that, we created the for cycle, which tells us that the key variable
will iterate in all the values of the clothes dictionary. And if you run this
code, in your favorite text editor, you will note that the key variable, will only
have associated the values of "shirt", "shoes" and "pant", this can be
observed, because the cycle inside the for, what it does is to print the key-
value inside the dictionary.
Then, we create the clothe variable, which is a variable that will receive
an input, which will depend on the user. When receiving the user's value, an
if will be made, and in the case that the variable clothe is inside clothes, as
you can see in the condition of the if, it will be entered there, and it will be
printed that "Your clothe is" + the option chosen by the user + "of color "+
clothes[clothe]; but what are clothes[clothe]? It is the value associated with
the clothe selected by the user, better said, if the user chooses "pant", then
clothes[clothe] will throw the value of "blue".
Finally, the else condition means that if no clothe is found inside clothes,
then "Error" will be printed, and this is very useful since if no value is found
inside a database, it will be thrown that the requested value is found or not.
2. Loop "While"; it allows us to execute cycles or periodic
sequences that allow us to do things multiple times in a row.
This cycle will allow us to execute a block continuously, as long
as the while condition is true, and by this, we mean "True". This
loop will be in charge of evaluating the condition and if it is
correct, the loop is executed and the condition is checked again
at the end and if it is still true "True", the program will be

executed again, if this condition is not correct "False", it will be
omitted and the common execution of the program will be
carried out.
There are several types of "while" loops; like the "while" loop
controlled by counting, the infinite while and others; all very useful in
specific conditions.
Its syntax is very simple, and is as follows:
While (condition):
Block of instructions within the cycle
Now let's make a simple example, which will consist of the cycle
printing a number, as many times as the user wants.

Example:
In this example, we can observe several things, the first is that we
create a variable cycles, which is an entry, which will allow us, as users to
enter the number of cycles we want to do in this program, of course, you
must never forget that this type of entry is a string, therefore, to do
mathematical operations, it is necessary to transform this type of input.
Then another variable will be created, called count, which has a
fundamental function, and it is to be the cycle counter of our program, with
which we define that the same one will begin in zero, for then, to start the
count.
The next action is, to begin with the while cycle, as we can see in the
syntax previously explained, first it is declared that we are going to make a
while, then, between the parentheses we have the condition.
a. Loop "while" controlled by counting; in this cycle, there is a
counter, and this counter will increase as the cycles are carried
out, this process will be repeated as many times as necessary
until the expected number is reached. We will understand this
loop better with the example that we will see next.

Although we have already seen an example of the while controlled by
counting, that was the last one, it is never too much to take another example,
the same through the counting method, in this case, we are going to make the
counter go from higher to lower, as we will see below.
In this example, we make a turn of one hundred and eighty degrees,
because the counter does not have to reach the maximum value, but starts in
it and is going to decrease.
The first thing is that a variable called cycles is created, which is related
to an input that the user will write, in which he will enter the number of
cycles he wants to do. Next act is to create a variable a, which needs the
function int(), since it turns the variable cycles into an integer, because as you
should know, the variable cycles is a string, since the entries are saved that
way, and with the strings it is not possible to perform arithmetic operations.
In the following line, we declare the while loop, and as it can be
observed, the condition is that zero has to be lower strictly than a, therefore,
in the moment that a is equal to zero, the cycle will be exited and the other
instruction will be passed.
Then, inside the block of instructions that are inside the cycle, the
variable a has to be decreased, this is done through the instruction a-=1,

which is equivalent to saying that a = a -1, and it can be observed easily as
the variable a is decreased by a unit.
The next instruction is to print on screen the following message "Cycles
to end" concatenated with the number of missing cycles to exit the cycle.
Finally, the "End" string is placed on the screen to say that the program
has finished and that the while was exited correctly.
This type of cycles by counts are very useful, we are going to use them
first with the utility of those cycles in which it is necessary that the counter
grows, the first utility that comes to our head is to make a programmed
chronometer, in such a way that when arriving at the maximum value, it is
going to leave the cycle and show in screen that the required time has been
fulfilled, now, there are also other utilities as it can be to check a list with a
known length, therefore we will be moving item by item; although this last
utility easily can be replaced by a loop for. Now, while cycles per count, but
in this case, that the counter goes decreasing, could be used to make a
countdown to sound an alarm or something like that.
b. Infinite "while" loop: This type of while is very useful, in the
case that an accumulation of instructions is done a number of
times not determined, with this we mean that we do not know
how many times it is going to be done, therefore the
programmer, will make the condition a while( True), and of
course, as you can see, the True boolean, allows the while to
work constantly.
Let's code two examples, one that we use an infinite while, the strict way,
and another not so much, although the programmer does not know the

number of cycles that will be done, does not use the True condition to force
the block to be repeated indefinitely.
Examples:
1)    While with the True condition:
The first thing we observe that is different is the import of the time
module, but those are issues that we will see later, at this time is not
something very important.
Now what really interests us is the declaration of the variable x as one
since this will work as a kind of counter, so it will increase little by little.
The next step is to create or, better said, declare the while, and as you
can see, the condition inside the while is True, therefore, it will always be
fulfilled, which indicates that the cycle will be repeated at all times, unless
some sentences are declared, which we will see later.
Inside the while block, the variable x will be printed on the screen,
and this is where it makes sense to use x as a counter since it will allow us to
see in the console the specific second that has happened since the program
started. Then it increases the value of x, because as we have already said, it

has a counter function, and it will increase one by one.
Finally, we use the library time, so that will make a delay of a second,
that's why our program works as a chronometer, which will show us on
screen the second in which we are after running the code, and the same will
be updated every second.
Sentences used in the while loop:
1. Break Sentence: the word break is used to interrupt the cycles or
abandon the cycles even when they have not finished, meaning
that the evaluated expression of while remains in the true
position. To be able to evaluate and understand this sentence,
let's see the following example.
In this example, we see how to implement infinite while cycles,
because as you can see in the first line, the condition inside the while is
always going to be true, therefore we are in front of an infinite cycle.
Later, we declare the variable x, which is related to the input function,
which will be waiting for the user to enter any value, specifically, it is
necessary to enter a one so that it exits the cycle, in case that what user enters
is not the indicated value, then the cycle will be repeated.

As you can see in line three, you have a statement of an if, which asks
if x is equal to the string "1", Why is it compared with a string? Because, as
we already know, x is a string because it is related to the input function, at the
moment in which this variable is declared. If the condition is true, the "break"
sentence will be used, which specifies us to exit the infinite cycle.
If the condition is not true, then the following string "You don't put
the one, please try again" will be printed on the screen.
Finally, at the moment of exiting the cycle, the usual "End" will be
printed, to show that the cycle was executed correctly, and the program was
finished.
What we can learn from our example with the break? or what benefit
we can get from it? Well, the first thing is that the sentence break is
extremely useful to get out of the cycles, it does not have to be strictly an
infinite cycle, because it can be used in a cycle that is operated by counting or
another method, therefore, it is important to remember that.  Another
fundamental thing is that this type of sentence, not only works for a while but
can also be used in for cycles, therefore, are an essential tool when
programming.
But in what cases should this type of statement be used? Well, the first
case that comes to mind is the handling of some exception that may occur
within the cycles, in the event that something unwanted occurs, it gets out of
it and notifies the error or does what you desire to program. Another case
may be an access system since a specific key was requested, and in the case
that the correct key is not entered, the user will not be allowed to enter
another part of the program.
2. Sentence Continue: This sentence ends up being very useful

when programming, when applying it we will be omitting what
follows the sentence within the cycle. That is to say, if we fulfill
some previous conditions, as, for example, if after several "if" or
else, or other steps, we manage to reach a continue sentence, we
will proceed to omit the rest of the instructions of the cycle, and
then do another iteration. We could summarize that the
instruction continues inside a loop forces the interpreter to
return to the beginning of the loop ignoring all the instructions
and interactions that are inside it.
The next example will show a while cycle, which will omit the values
that are multiples of five, if these values are multiples, then it will not be
printed on screen and the next iteration will be done automatically.
To start, the variable cycles is created, which is an input, which asks the
user to enter the number of cycles he wants to do, and, as is well known, you
have that cycles is a string.

Next, it creates the variable count, which is integer type, this will have the
function of counter, to know the cycle in which we are, to reach the
maximum level that the user wants.
Now we will create the while loop, which specifies that count-1 has to be
lower than cycles, and, Why count -1? Well, in order to fulfill what the user
wants; since if the condition was, a lower or equal to cycles, the code will be
less optimal, for this reason, only a strict lower is placed, and as the counter
starts in one, it is necessary to subtract a unit and that the number of
corresponding cycles is met.
In the following line, the variable a is declared, which has the same count
value, because to know the current value of the cycle, and well, as it is
obvious, the counter is increased by one unit, through the instruction in line
five, which says count += 1.
Subsequently, one enters the block of conditionals, in this case, the
condition is a% 5 ==0, but what does this mean? Well, the rest that gives the
division between a and five, has to be strictly equal to zero, in order to enter
the if. In the case that the condition is true, the orders found in the if block
will be performed, these instructions are the following; the first thing is to
print on screen that there was an error, then the continue sentence will be
used. If this condition is false, the instruction containing the else block will
be passed, which is based on notifying that the cycle is a multiple of five.
At the end of the conditionals, the cycle number is printed on the screen
to know when we are in the program.
And finally, a screen print is placed to show that the program has been
completed and the cycle was exited correctly.
Now, what can we learn from this program? The first thing is the use of

the continue, because its function, specifically is to go directly to the next
while cycle, omitting the other lines of the block, well, in this case, it is the
same, since when arriving at the continue we pass to the other cycle, but in
the case that this sentence is not found, the value of a would be printed, as
you can see that it is the next instruction after the conditional block, but this
type of sentences, interrupt the natural flow of the program, being very useful
for the handling of some exception that happens within the cycles.
3. Pass Sentence: It is a null expression, in other words, this
sentence does nothing, but it allows us to create a loop without
placing code in its body to be able to add it later and use it in
this way as a temporary filler, with this we mean to add some
type of delay to the program; or as well in the case that you
manage the programming with assembler or with processors, it
is a way to make a nop. It is a sentence that will not affect in
anything the behavior of the code, and it should be noted that
not only can be used in cycles, it can also be used anywhere in
the code without any problem, with these words, we mean that
the sentence can also be used in a common function without any
trouble, but this is not worth to mention yet, because we have
not seen functions, but it is not excessive to know that the pass
can be implemented with the functions. We could say to
establish a difference that continues will take care of ending the
current interaction, but will continue with the next iteration of
that loop, going back to the beginning, while pass is not going to
do anything, just continue with the following instructions
without going back to the beginning. Next, let's see an example
of what it is.

By looking at the previous example, we can see how we declare the
variable cycles, which is going to wait for the user to specify how many
cycles to use, the input will be of the string type.
Then the count counter will be created, which will start from one for
convenience, but has the function of knowing what is the current position of
the cycle.
The following order, is the creation of the while cycle, with the
condition that count-1, has to be strictly lower than int( cycles), it is worth
noting that the use of the int() function, since the cycles variable is of string
type and making comparisons with strings and integers is not possible since
they are different types of data. The reason of the count- 1 is explained in the
previous example, so we don't have to repeat it, but remember that we are
making comparisons starting from zero and that is the reason why the
comparison is strictly lower and is not lower or equal since we would make
one more cycle.

The following instructions are to declare the variable a, which will be
assigned the value of count, this is to be able to make operations on this value
and not lose it; then the value of count will be increased by one unit, since if
this variable is not increased, we will be doing the same thing infinitely.
The next part is the conditional phase, which is in charge of verifying
if it is a multiple of five, and we do this by using the "%" operator since it
will return the rest of the division we place, so that if we place, for example
10% 3, it will return the value of 1, which is the rest; in an analogous way it
is done here, since when putting the following instruction a% 5, we are
asking for the rest between these values, and to know if a number is a
multiple of another, because the rest between both should be zero, for this
reason, the strict equality is made to zero, in the case that the condition is
fulfilled, because we will be in front of a number that is divisible by five, or
multiples of five, being those the numbers that we want to find.
Now in such a case that the if condition is met, we will proceed to
make a cumulus of instructions, the same will be, to print in screen that an
error has been produced and that it is going to continue, then, the following
instruction is the sentence pass, which will not do anything, is like causing a
small delay in the program, depending on the frequency of the clock of the
processor of our machine, but those are subjects that do not interest us very
much. But, if the condition is false, then it will enter inside the block of the
else, and this only will print that this number of the cycle is not multiple of
the five.
Now, at the moment that the conditional block was finished,
therefore, it does not matter if the condition is true or false, the number of the
cycle in which we are will be printed on screen, by the command print( a),
because a is the current position.

Finally, when exiting the while cycle, the "End" string will be printed
on the screen, which indicates that the while loop has been correctly exited
and the program has been completed.
Now, when trying to find a utility to the pass sentence, you don't
really find many at this moment that you haven't seen the functions, since
now it's just a delay, but it's not a delay appreciable by the user, since the
computer clock frequency is in GHz, therefore it's so fast that it's not
appreciable, but when you see the functions, there will be times when a
complex program is being developed, and there are parts that have not been
created, but for the program to work it already had to have created the
functions, but the body of the functions has not yet been developed, which is
why the use of these sentences is important, so that our software does not
break, for saying so.

Chapter 5: Functions
A function is basically a portion or block of reusable code that
performs a given task. It is a code block with an associated name, which
receives arguments as input, in addition, follows a sequence of sentences,
which executes a desired operation and then returns a value and perform a
task, this block can be called when we need, and this can be considered a
great advantage. Python is a language that gives us a lot of flexibility when
creating these functions.
The use of these functions is a very important component within the
paradigm of programming called structured and therefore has several
advantages:
* It allows reusing the same function in different programs, therefore, when it
does the functions, it is not necessary to repeat the code a lot of times.
* It allows segmenting a complex program in modules that are simpler, and
in this way, we will have an easier programming, as well as a more facilitated
debugging, it is as the saying goes, "Divide and conquer", therefore, it is a
very used technique.
The Python programming language has what we call functions
integrated into the language, which allows us to create functions defined by
the user himself to be used later in his own program. These functions are
presented below:
Function
Use
Example
Result
Print ()
This 
function
allows 
the
program 
to
Print (“Hello”)
“Hello”

print in screen
the 
desired
argument
Len ()
This 
function
allows you to
determine 
the
length of the
characters that a
string contains
Len (“Hello world”)
11
Join()
This 
function
allows you to
convert a string
to another by
using “-“
List=[‘Python’, ‘is’] ‘- ‘.
Join (List)
‘Python-is’
Split()
This 
function
will 
let 
you
convert a string
into a list
A=(“This will be a list”)
List2= a.split()
A=[ ‘This’,
‘will’, ‘be’,
‘a’, ‘list’]
Replace()
This 
function,
as 
it 
names
indicates, 
will
let you replace
a 
string 
for
another
Text= 
“The 
house 
is
green”
Print (Text)
Text=
Text.replace(“green”,
“yellow”)
Print(Text)
“The house
is green”
“The house
is yellow”
Upper() and
lower()
This 
function
allows 
us 
to
Text= 
“The 
house 
is
green”
“THE
HOUSE IS

convert 
into
upper or lower
case 
all 
the
letters 
in 
a
string
Text.upper()
Print (Text)
Text.lower()
Print(Text)
GREEN”
“the 
house
is green”
Ord()
This 
function
will let you use
ASCII data type
Print (ord(‘A’))
65
Tuple()
This 
function
will convert a
string 
into 
a
tuple
Words= tuple (“I am old”)
Print(Words)
(‘I’, ‘a’, ‘m’,
‘o’, ‘l’, ‘d’)
Type()
This 
function
will return the
type of data of
an element
X=5
Print(type(X))
<class ‘int’>
List ()
This 
function
will 
let 
you
create lists from
an element
Word= list(‘Hello’)
Print (Word)
[‘H’, ‘e’, ‘l’,
‘l’, ‘o’]
Round ()
This 
function
will round the
decimal part of
a number to its
nearest integer
Print (round(15,746))
16
Str()
This 
function
will convert a
X=5
A=str(X)
“5”

numerical value
into a string
Print (A)
Range()
This 
function
will create a list
of n elements. It
is mainly used
in the for cycle
X=range(3)
Print(X)
[0, 1, 2]
Float ()
This 
function
will allow us to
convert 
any
value 
to 
a
decimal type of
value
A=float(“5.55”)
Print(A)
5.55
Max() 
&
Min()
These functions
will
determinate the
higher and the
lower values in
a 
set 
of
numbers
X= [2, 6, 3, 8, 0]
Print (max(X))
Print(min(X))
8
0
Sum()
This 
function
will 
add 
the
numbers of a
set of numbers
X=[3, 1, 6]
Print(sum(X))
10
Int()
This 
function
will convert any
value into an
A=(“35”)
Print (int(A))
35

integer
What rules do I have to follow to be able to define a
function?
- The input parameters must be defined within the parenthesis of the function.
- When we develop the code, we must identify the indentation very well and
correctly (4 characters of space).
- The code of the function will always start after we place the colon. “: “
It should be noted that a function will not be executed until it is invoked, and
to be able to invoke a function it must be called by its name. For example:

As we can see in this example, which is quite complete, at first we
created variables a and b, they are lists, which have within them integer
values, specifically five items, a is a list of numbers ranging from one to five,
while b is an iteration of values of ones and zeros.

The second, is the creation of the variable num, it is a string, in which
is written "5 6 7 8 9", and as we saw previously, the function split(), creates
an arrangement of strings, each item will be a word, separated by white
space, in the code, specifically in line four, we make use of this function, in
which we convert the variable c, in a list of strings, which should have the
form ["5", "6", "7", "8", "9"], but it is not possible to do mathematical
operations with this type of data, as they are, to be more specific, as strings,
therefore we are going to proceed to convert all these items into integers, so
that you verify that it is true what we say here, we use the print of the list c,
so that you can see the list of strings.
To achieve our goal, first we declare the variable e as an empty list,
then we use a for cycle, in which the variable x, will iterate within the array c,
which has its items as strings, therefore, within a variable d, the integer that
results after applying the function int() to the element of the list c at that time.
Then the value of d is added, within the list e, until the number of iterations is
finished. The next action is to store in c, the list that was stored in e, in order
to have a better order of the variables.
Subsequently, the variable d was assigned the value of an empty list,
in order to store data within it. Then, with the help of a for, which is going to
iterate as many times as the number of items in the list a, as we are going to
have to move through all its items, since what we want is to create another
list, which contains the sum of a, b and c, so inside the same buble, it is said
that e will be equal to the sum of the item that is in position x, of lists a, b and
c. After adding the three items, the append function will be used to add the
value obtained to the d list.
How to create your own function?

To be able to create a function of our own, we must follow the "def"
sentence and proceed to name it, except that this time it will not be the name
of a predefined function, but this time it will have a name created by us.
How can I call a function?
To be able to call a function, we only have to declare it when we start
in our code. This is fundamental because it is not possible to invoke a
function that has not been created in advance. Example:
Parameters
We define parameters as a type of value that is entered into the
function when the function is invoked, a function may be able to receive one
or more parameters. These parameters must be separated by a comma "," in
order to be invoked.
Example:
As you can see in this small example, because it is very simple, really,
it was just to show how the first part of a function should be defined.
The sentence that can never be missing when defining a function is
the def, which is the one that specifies that a function is going to be created
or, better said, indicates that a function is being defined.
Then we can see that follows a word, in this case, funct, that word

was to put a name to our function, and then you can see a parenthesis, which
has two letters, a and b, meaning that these are going to be the parameters
that our function will receive to work.

How can we define arguments and parameters?
As we already know, we call parameters to the values that the
function receives when it is defined. When the function is invoked, these
values are called arguments and divided according to their type.
These arguments are divided into several types:
Arguments by name:
When we are going to invoke a function, we must indicate in the arguments
the value that each parameter will contain starting from its name.
As we can see, we continue with the funct function, in this case, we
still have the same parameters a and b, we also see how the definition is
exactly the same, the only difference is at line two, as it indicates that the sum
of a with b is going to return. The return sentence will be explained later, but
it is not something too complicated, the same name tells us what it does, to
return a value.
Then in the following lines, the variable c is created, which will be
equal to the value returned by the function we have created, and as we said
previously, it will be equal to the sum of its parameters a and b. As you can

see, when you call the function in line four, first write the name of the
function, in this case funct, and the arguments that are going to be passed, are
previously specified with the name, as you can see, the argument that has a
value of five, is specified that it will be parameter b of the funct function,
analogously is done with parameter a.
Finally, the value of c is printed on the screen, so that you can
visualize that the result is correct.
Argument by position:
When we send an argument to a function, they receive the defined parameters
in order.
In this example, another function will be created, which is called
hello, and has as parameters both name and color, this function was created to
make a message on screen, in which the user will be greeted with his name
and will also be told what is his favorite color.
To call this function first it is necessary to declare two variables, the
first one is the variable a, who is in charge of storing the value of the string
related to the user's name, while b, is in charge of storing the string related to
the user's favorite color, these variables are related to the input function,
which means that they will be waiting for the user to enter the value he
wants.

Finally, the hello function is called, making use of its name, but in
this case, the arguments were passed by order and not by name, so you have
to be very aware for the correct order, since, if there is an error in this, the
program can easily collapse or fail to do what is required.
As you could see, the ways to pass the arguments are different, you
can use the one you prefer, it depends on your preferences; in the case that
you find it easier or faster by position do it that way, but take into account
that you have to be aware that the argument is in the correct parameter
position, but if you like it more by name, do it that way, of course, you also
have to be aware that you are writing the parameter names correctly.
Call without arguments
When we call a function that has some defined parameters, if these are not
passed correctly an error will be generated.
In this example, the hello function is created, which is not going to
have parameters, and this will only make a screen print, with the message
"Hello".
Then, to call it, only the name of the function will be written with
parentheses, in the following way name().
Return statement

As we have seen before, most Python functions will contain a return
value which can be explicit or implicit.
We know that return is a reserved word whose purposes are to finish
the execution of some function and then return the value obtained as a result.
If you want to visualize an example of this, you can see the one that is in
arguments by position, since it can be observed that the function has the
return sentence, which will return the value of the sum of a plus b; and also,
as you can observe in this example, that value is stored in the variable c, to
then print it.
Lambda function
We define lambda functions as a special type of function which is part
of the predefined functions in Python. What do we mean by this? This type of
function is mainly noted for being ''exclusive'' because it allows us to create
"anonymous" functions quickly because it has a somewhat exclusive syntax. 
The lambda functions are able to execute an expression and return the
result of it, it can contain optional parameters in its structure, but
nevertheless, this function has its own restrictions.
Syntax of the lambda function
The syntax of the lambda function in Python is very simple since it is
based only on writing the reserved word lambda, followed by the arguments
that come with the action and finally separating with their respective double
point ":''.

In this example, we see the use of the function lambda, in this case to
the variable sum, we make use of the sentence lambda, in order to create a
function that has as purpose to make the sum of two numbers, both x and y.
For that reason, it is observed that the parameters that we have is the one of x
and y; for then inside the block of the function, return the sum of both.
Finally, to call the function, to the variable that we declared as a, we
assigned the value that returns sum, for then, to make sure that the result is
certain, we proceeded to print in screen the value that stores the variable a,
and if you get to run this program, you will be able to observe that it will give
13.
The lambda function is commonly used when you need to invoke a
function for a short time (this function does not require a name) and is mostly
used together with the integrated functions filter(), map().
Filter() function
The filter() function is the one (as its name indicates) that is in charge of
filtering. What does this mean? This function takes a sequence as arguments,
either a list or an iterator, then it will return an iterable with the elements
already filtered (this will return a true if the condition is met).

For this example, the first thing we need is a conditional function, to
know what we are going to filter, in our case, we will create the pair function,
which will have as parameter, the integer n, then we enter a conditional
block, in the part of the if, the condition would be that n has to be higher than
zero, since the zero is a number that is not even, the other condition that must
be fulfilled at the same time, is that the rest of the division between n and two
has to be strictly equal to zero, because as you should know, this is the
definition of a pair number.
The next step is to fill our arrangement of numbers that we are going
to filter, for it we create the variable numbers, which will be an empty list. To
then enter a for loop, in which a variable x will vary from zero to 24, as you
can see in line 8, this is thanks to the range function, which gives us the limits

of the for. The next thing to do is to fill in our list, this is done using the
append function, in the numbers variable, which, if you remember is an
empty list, after it is filled in, it already becomes a list with integer values as
items.
We are already able to filter the list, and we do it creating a list called
pairs, which will use the filter function, and the same one will return the
values of the arrangement that the function returns to us as True, as for
example 2, since this one is higher than zero and the module of the division
of the same one, between two is equal to zero, therefore, it fulfills the
requirements.
The last step is to print in screen all the obtained pairs, and we do it
with the help of another cycle for, in which a variable x, will iterate through
all the list and will print us that those numbers are even.
Function map()
The map() function is the one that is in charge of executing each element on a
list or tuple to be able to return a sequence of elements which will be the
result of the operation.

In this example, we can see in the first lines, the definition of a
function called sum, which has as parameters, variables a and b do not have
to be exclusively integers, they can be strings or any other type of data. It will
return a+b, whether it is a concatenation or a sum.
Later, we created two lists, the "List1" and the "List2", the same, are
lists that have within them, an iteration of numbers between one and zero,
this is for List1, now for the case two it is analogous, but in this case, are
iterations between the numbers two and zero.
Then, we declare a variable c, it will make use of the map function,
and will receive as arguments, the function sum, list1, and list2, what this will
do is to create a list that will be in a specific memory address, which will

have as items, the sum of list1 and list2. To print what is in c, it is important
to use the list() sentence, since if you want to show the desired data, we have
to tell the program that we want to see the list that is in that memory address.
Later, two variables were defined, the first is string1 and the second is
string2, which will have a message. After the declarations, the map variable
is used, and it receives the parameters sum, string1 and string2, what we are
doing in this case, is concatenating the strings that there are as item of each
list. Finally, we will print in screen the value of the list that is in the address
c.
What are the differences between the lambda
functions and the functions defined with "def"
sentence?
We know that functions created with the lambda function can also be
created with the "def" statement. What does this mean? This means nothing
more than creating a function with either of these two statements is
considered a correct action. This is because by both methods you can get the
same result, with simpler options.
We can see this as a path, both reach the same destination, the
difference is that one is longer and heavier and another is much simpler, as
that is the lambda function used for, to make it easier to use functions in our
code.
When we create a lambda type function, it will only focus on using a
single line of code, thus minimizing the number of lines that can be used in a
code, unlike the def statement, which usually occupies many times more than
one line of code.

When using the lambda keyword, we create an object or function
which is not going to have the need to be defined with a name, unlike the def
statement which must be defined at the beginning of the program so that it
can interpret it.
Although using the lambda function is much simpler for the code,
many times the def statement is more understandable for those users who are
starting as programmers and even for those users who have programming
knowledge but not so much experience.
It is of fundamental need that at the moment of operating with the
lambda function, this one is assigned a variable since if this is not done, the
same one is going to operate only in the line in which it is going to be
defined.

Chapter 6: Object-Oriented
Programming-OOP
At this level, we are already able to design the program based on
functions, so that we are able to use statements that manipulate the data. In
this programming language, we can find procedure-oriented programming
and object-oriented programming, which uses types defined by the
programmer to organize both codes and data.
What is OOP and what are its advantages?
It is a form of programming used by modern languages, which
consists of transferring the behavior that objects have in real life to the
programming code. It is a way of organizing your program combining data
and functionality by wrapping it in something called an object. Some of the
programming languages that use this object-oriented paradigm are Python,
C++, Java, Visual, etc.
As advantages we can mention the following:
- We can divide the programs into pieces, parts, modules or classes to this
concept in programming are called modularization.
- It is a code that can be reusable, unlike what happens with procedure-
oriented programming, so, if we get to create an application with this object-
oriented program and later want to make another similar application we can
reuse this code. Now in order to be able to reuse the code of one application
in another, we have to know and understand the concept of "inheritance".
- If there is a fault in any line of code, the program continues to work, it is
likely that the line of code that generated the error will not perform the

intended task, but the rest of the program will.
- Encapsulation.
Object-oriented programming is responsible for applying programming
techniques such as:
a. Abstraction:  Abstraction refers to the process of design and
interpretation, which focuses on recognizing the important
characteristics of an object; thus filtering out and ignoring the
particularities that will not be considered important.
Abstraction focuses on defining the characteristics of an object, which
distinguish it from other types. It focuses on what it is, not what it does, and
then specifies what it should be implemented in.
For example: We are going to apply abstraction to flowers.
Object: Flowers
Characteristics
- Colors
- Leaves
- Nectar
- Roots
Functionalities:
- Production of seeds and fruits
- Pollination
- Reproduction
b. Inheritance: some objects share the same properties and methods
as other objects, and also add new properties and methods. We

call this inheritance, a class that inherits from another, as
happens in real life when in a family group one of the children
inherits the skin color of one of the parents, he would be
inheriting or having their own characteristics or properties, but
also one in common with one of their parents, the same happens
in programming.
What does this mean? In a simpler way we can say that when we create a
new class, we can implement the same data of the base class. This new class
will have more specific data than the original class, which contains a more
general view.
In Python, when a class does not inherit another, it must be inherited from
an object, which is the main Python class that defines an object.
Once an object has been created, or once the class instance has been
made, it is possible to access its method and properties and for that Python
uses a very simple syntax which is, the name of the object, followed by the
point and the property or the method to which you want to access.
Python also supports a limited form of multiple inheritances.

Types of inheritance:
-          Basic Inheritance: This occurs when a class inherits only one base
class.
-          Multiple inheritance: This occurs when a class inherits two or more
base classes.
-          Polymorphism: Refers to those different behaviors, which are
associated with objects that are different, but may share the same
name. When you call an object by its name (which has several
objects), its behavior will be based on the object you are currently
using.
Types of polymorphism:
-          Parametric polymorphism: Parametric polymorphism is the one that
allows functions and classes to be written in a generic way, in this
way the data of the same can be manipulated without taking into
account its type.
-          Polymorphism of subtypes: The polymorphism of subtypes is the
one in which the subtypes of a type (class) allow to substitute the
behavior of the functions of the original type with an own
implementation.
-          Ad Hoc Polymorphism: Ad Hoc polymorphism refers to those
functions, which vary their behavior according to the type of
arguments they receive.
What is the terminology or vocabulary that we are going to use in OOP?
We will mention the most commonly used vocabulary to better understand
this code:

- Class: Classes are models on which objects are built, that is, models where
the common characteristics of a group of objects are written. To better
understand this term we will do it by means of analogies, for example, if we
have a car, the class would be the chassis and the wheels, since it is a
common characteristic among the group of objects that are the cars. If we
want to create a Python application that builds cars, the first thing we have to
do is to create a class that defines what are the common characteristics of the
cars we want to make and this class must have defined within it the
construction of a chassis and the construction of four wheels.
In this case, to see another abstraction, let's show an example of
classes, but in this case, the class will be a house.
As we can see in the example, the first thing to do is to declare that
house is a class, using the reserved word class. Within it, it has some
attributes, such as that the color is red, it has six doors, that it does have a
kitchen, it has three bathrooms and two floors.

Now the next step is to create a variable and convert it as a class, for
it, any name is placed and then the same is entered the name of the class and
parentheses. As you can see in the example, house1 is an object, which has a
house class and has all the attributes previously explained.
Finally, to know if the class has been created well, a print is made in
the console to verify the proper functioning of the program.
- Exemplar of class, which is the same as to speak of the instance of
class, and of object belonging to a class, which means that, exemplar,
instance and object of class are synonyms; an instance would be an object or
exemplar belonging to a class. For example, following with the automobile,
we have already talked about that the class defines the characteristics that are
common to it, and that define the objects that we are going to use, and we
have seen that the class is formed in our example by the chassis and the
wheels, but the objects that belong to that class could be different models of
automobiles, that share a common characteristic that is to have the same
chassis (it should be noted that there are cars that despite belonging to other
brands are assembled with identical chassis) and four wheels, so we can have
two cars with their own characteristics that are defined within the object itself
(the car), such as color, model, weight, seats, steering wheel, then we could
say that a specific car is an object belonging to the class, an exemplar of class
or that is an instance of class; and another car of another brand would be
another different object belonging to the same class, a different instance of
the same class, or a different exemplar of the same class.
- Modularization; When we create a complex application applied to
objects such as Python, for example, the most normal is that this application
is composed of several classes, not a single class, which can also occur, but
the normal is that if the application is complex it will be composed of several

classes, the concept of modularization derives from an application can be
composed of several classes, for example, applying it to real objects, if we
imagine an old sound system, they were made up of several modules, the
corresponding to the cassette, equalizer, radio, and disk, which means that the
object was made up of several modules. These modules have the advantage to
work in an independent way, that is to say, when the radio was damaged, we
could use the module of cassette, in programming this leads to an advantage,
if you have a program written in Python divided in modules and one of the
classes for any reason fails the most probable thing is that the program
continues working, just that the class in which you have problems will not be
able to carry out its task as with the analogy of the sound equipment.
-          Encapsulation; the functioning of a complete class of our object-
oriented program is encapsulated, that means that the other classes
do not handle any information about each other; going back to the
analogy of the previous sound equipment, if we take the equalizer
module of the sound equipment, the internal functioning of the
equalizer corresponds only to the equalizer, meaning the functioning
of the cassette module, nothing knows or understands the equalizer
module, and that is what is known as encapsulation. Somehow all
the classes are connected so that they function as equipment, but at
the same time, each of the classes is encapsulated so that the internal
functioning of that class is not accessible from outside. The different
parts of a program are connected so that they form part of a team
with something called access methods. Creating access methods we
get to connect one class with another so that they work as a unit or a
team, but these access methods will only have access to certain
characteristics of each of the classes. You can access from one class

to another so that they are connected to each other, but there are
certain characteristics of each of the classes that are encapsulated so
that they are not accessible
How do we build classes, objects, and how do we access the
properties and characteristics of an object in Python?
To access the properties and characteristics of an object we use what
is known as nomenclature of the point, commonly used in object-oriented
programming, to explain what it is, we will do it based on an example.
Suppose that we have given our object a name, we call it myCar, all
objects, instances or exemplars must have a name, in order to access the
properties of the car in our program we use the nomenclature of the point:
E.g. Syntax: Name of the object. Property = New Value
myCar.color="red"
This is the syntax in the case of Python that we have to follow if we want to
access the property of the object, we use the nomenclature of the point. To
access the behavior of the object from the code, we also use the nomenclature
of the point.
E.g. Syntax: Object name.behavior
myCar.starts()
myCar.stops()
In the following example, you will learn how to access the attributes
of a class, through the nomenclature of the point, so you can understand
better.

The first thing we see in this example is the creation of the house
class, which has its attributes, like the color, which in this case is red, the
doors that have six, or the floors that have two.
Then, we can see how we create our house1 instance, which is of the
house type. But we do not only want to stay with the creation of the class, but
we also want to access the data that these have, therefore we will make a
screen print of the attributes that the house has, as you can see, what we
proceed to do, is to concatenate the string that we have written, and
concatenate it with the attribute we want, now, to access to it, we have to
name the instance, and through the nomenclature of the point, the attribute
we want to access.
Now we are going to talk about how to build a code of what a class is;
being the class the base to later be able to create objects, examplers or
instances that belong to that class.

This, more than an example, is an explanation of the syntax to the
declaration of a class, because, although we sound repetitive, the declaration
of them, is something fundamental in the programming oriented to objects,
because as already you must suppose, it is the basis. Therefore, the first thing
is to make the statement of the class nameobject():, with this, we are creating
a class, which is named nameobject. Then, inside it, there is a cumulus of
statements, which are responsible for giving value to the attributes of the
instances and to work with the methods, which will be explained later.
There are cases in which you will ask yourself, but all the houses are
red or all the plants have three leaves? And well, obviously the answer is no,
for that we are going to work with the builders, they will allow us to give
uniqueness to the instances. These are methods, but it is not too much to say
since now that these are the ones that allow us to give different values to each
instance, at the moment of initializing them, we will see them later.
Although you should already know what an attribute is, since we have

worked with them previously in this chapter, we will now proceed to explain
them formally.
Attribute:
We define attributes as those values that variables possess within each
object. What do we mean by this? Let's imagine the case of a classroom in a
school; an attribute that each classroom may possess is the grade the students
are in or the age of them.
The word attribute can be used for anything after a point, for example,
if we have the expression, z.real, real is an attribute of the object z, what we
had previously called as the nomenclature of the point.
The attributes can be read-only, or write-only. In this last case, the
assignment to attributes is possible. The attributes of a module can be written:
module. the_answer = 42, these attributes can also be deleted when desired
with the instruction del. As, for example: del module.the_answer, will
eliminate the attribute the_answer of the object with module name.

The first thing we do in this example is the definition of the class
house(), and within it, we define each attribute of the same, like color,
bathroom, kitchen, among others.
The next step is the creation of the house1 instance, which is of the
house type, as you may have expected, but if you want to paint the house, we
will proceed to access the attribute, by means of the instruction house1.color
= "green" in this way, the color has been changed from house1 to "green".
To make sure that the color has been changed correctly, a screen print
of the color attribute of the house1 instance is made using the nomenclature
of the dot.
Methods:
Since we have seen that each object has certain attributes that have
certain specific behaviors; now we will call methods to each function created
within each class. How is this? So let's go back to the last example of the
classroom, it has two methods or actions which are to study and attend
classes.
To create a method we use the word def, that we already know, but
when we write it, there is a keyword that we cannot forget, which is a
parameter of the method, this word is self, and this one is used to be able to
access to the attributes of the class. We can observe that there is a difference
between method and function and is that a method is a special function that
belongs to the class being created, while a function does not belong to any
class. 
The characteristics of a method are the reserved word called def,
name of the function, a default parameter called self.

Often, the first argument of the method is called self. this is nothing
more than a convention; the name self means nothing to Python, in the sense
that it is indifferent to put this as first or last parameter (because the position
does not matter, but yes or yes it has to be the word self), but if you do not
follow this convention your code could be less readable to other Python
programmers.
If the concept of what attributes are, has been well understood, we
will be able to observe that working with the methods is very simple, only
that when working with them, we have to take into account that means to add
behavior to objects, so that you can change attributes when accessing a
method or return some value.
In this example, we see again, how to create the class house, but it

differs from the others because it has created a different method, called open,
as you can see, it makes use of the sentence def, then we will put the name of
the method, then, within some parentheses, place the parameters, always, but
always we must place the self as parameters, you can also add others, but the
self can not miss. After this, it is treated as a normal function, as you can see,
the method is responsible for sending a message, which communicates that
the door is open.
Later you can see how to create the instance house1, which is class
house, one of the actions that are done on house1, is to change the color of it,
the new color is white, another important action is access to the methods, and
as you can see, it is also done through the nomenclature of the dot.
Constructors:
Now that you have basic knowledge of classes, you should ask
yourself if all the instances of one class are the same as the others, because if
this were true, everything would be very monotonous, and the OOP would
not be very powerful, as it really is, for this reason, the constructors have
been created, which initialize the classes with values that the programmer
wants.
A constructor, is the one that creates or assigns values to the initial
attributes of an instance, and to do this, it is necessary to use a method,
moreover, a constructor is a method of a class, to use it, we make use of the
reserved word __init__(self, a, b, c, ...), being a, b, c, the parameters that we
want to initialize, since they are values that we can introduce as users and
thus be able to assign the values to the attributes, in order to achieve diversity
in our objects.

In this example, we can already see how things change and become
more fun, the first thing is that a constructor was used, the same has as
parameters the self, color, doors, kitchen, among others. After the
constructor's statement we use the word self and place the corresponding
value, as you can see between lines three and seven, for example, in the
instruction of line 3, what is said is that the variable color of that specific
instance, is going to have the value, what the argument has valued when the
instance was initialized.
Then you can see how the open method was created, that method,
only shows on screen that the door has been opened; the other method that
has been created, in this case, is one called paint, which is responsible for
changing the color of that instance, this was done using the sentence
self.color, to specify that the instance is going to change.
Subsequently, the house1 instance is created, and it is given as

argument "blue", 5, True, 2, 1 to the constructor so that he initializes his
attributes in those specific values and thus to be able to remove the monotony
that we had before.
After having created the instance, the color of the house is printed in
screen, or well, better said, of the house1 instance, at this moment, it should
print the string "blue", then, it makes use of the paint method, to change the
color of the instance, to the black color, to verify that the color has been
changed correctly, the color of the house1 instance is printed in screen, and
for this case, the string "black" should appear in console.
Finally, the open method is used, so that it appears on the screen that
the doors are open.
Since we know how to make use of the builders, we can apply the
concept of inheritance previously applied, so that a class related to it,
inherits,  behaviors and attributes of its parent class.

In this example, we can see how inheritance works, since we have
already seen the first lines of the code, it is not necessary to explain them in-
depth, since what we do is create the house class, initialize the house
constructor and create some methods such as paint and open.
Then, we define the second class, which is apartment. Why do we say
that it is a daughter of house class? Well, we already know that an apartment
is a house, but a house doesn't have to be an apartment, it can be a mansion or
a townhouse, therefore it doesn't have to be an apartment, whereas in the
opposite case, that is always true.
As we can see, at the moment of defining the apartment class, we

enter as parameter, the parent class, in this case, house. Then we start the
constructor, which should have the word reserved __init__, and put the
parameters self and all that those that are missing, with this we mean both the
parameters of entry of the class house, plus the additional ones of the class
apartment, as it can be stairs, and elevator, since the apartments can have
stairs or not, in an analogical way it is done with the elevators. They must be
initialized as well. Later, as we can see, we will call the function of
constructors of the parent class, so that the same ones are initialized, using
the nomenclature of the dot, then, it is when the other attributes that are not in
house, like stairs or elevator were initialized. A method that was created
within the apartment class, was the elevatoron() which, depending on
whether the instance created has an apartment or not, when calling this
method, will appear on screen that the elevator is on the ground floor.
Already after having created all the classes, we proceed to create the
instances, to verify that the classes were created correctly, in a similar way to
how the object house1 was created, this one is created, with the same values
of the previous example, the color of the object is printed, then the function
paint() is used, and the color is changed to black, and finally the door is
opened. Then, the other object that creates the apartment1, which has as
arguments the orange color, two doors, True on kitchen, two baths, one floor,
stairs and also has elevator. In the program is called the function elevatoron()
to call the elevator and reach the ground floor, and show the user that this in
PB, then proceeds to open the doors of the apartment with the help of the
open method.
As we can see, object-oriented programming is extremely useful,
since it allows us to see the problems of programming as problems of real-life
and make solutions as if they were objects with which we run into in

everyday life, for that reason, we strongly recommend programming this
way, as it reduces the number of lines to use, and makes the code reusable, in
addition to being more understandable.

Chapter 7: Modules
The modules are files with extension .py (that we have been using until now),
additionally a module instead of having extension py, it also has the
extension .pyc; (what would be a compiled Python file), a module can also be
a file written totally in C for those that are using CPython.
Modules have their own namespace, and in addition, they can contain
variables, functions, classes and even contain other modules, a module within
another or a submodule.
How useful are the modules?
The modules are mainly used to organize and reuse the code, this leads us to
two terms that are fundamental in OOP as are modularization and reuse.
When we want to make a complex application and we need a code to reuse it
since it was previously programmed in another application, this is one of the
advantages that modules have, they allow us to reuse our code in different
applications.
The modularization, in this case, we divide the module in codes, in small
parts, when we realize a complex application, we can do it in a single file of
thousands of lines of code, or we can divide it in small parts, in small files
with a smaller number of lines of codes since it is always going to be easier
for us to handle.
How can we create a module in Python?
We can easily create a module through the file extension .py, once created the
file we can save it where we want, this is what we know as import.

Python provides us with a large number of modules in its standard library, in
the official Python manual we can find this library through the following
link: http://docs.python.org/modindex.html.
Inside a module, its name is available in the value of the global variable
_name_.
Import Sentence
A module can contain executable statements and function definitions; with
these statements, we are able to initialize the module. They are executed only
the first time the module is in an import statement.
Modules can import other modules. It is actually usual to place all import
declarations at the beginning of the module (or script, for that matter). The
names of the imported modules will be placed in the global namespace of the
importing module.
The import sentence has the following syntax
Once the interpreter finds the import statement, it will import the module if it
is present in the search path, where a search path is nothing more than a list
of directories that the interpreter searches for before importing a module.

Chapter 8: File handling
The Python programming language allows us to work on two
different levels when we refer to file systems and directories. One of them is
through the module os, which facilitates us to work with the whole system of
files and directories, at the level of the operating system itself.
The second level is the one that allows us to work with files, this is
done by manipulating their reading and writing at the application level, and
treating each file as an object.
In python as well as in any other language, the files are manipulated
in three steps, first they are opened, then they are operated on or edited and
finally they are closed.
What is a file?
A python file is a set of bytes, which are composed of a structure, and
within this we find in the header, where all the data of the file is handled such
as, for example, the name, size and type of file we are working with; the data
is part of the body of the file, where the written content is handled by the
editor and finally the end of the file, where we notify the code through this
sentence that we reach the end of the file. In this way, we can describe the
structure of a file.
The structure of the files is composed in the following way:
-          File header: These are the data that the file will contain (name, size,
type)
-          File Data: This will be the body of the file and will have some
content written by the programmer.

-          End of file: This sentence is the one that will indicate that the file
has reached its end.
Our file will look like this:
How can I access a file?
There are two very basic ways to access a file, one is to use it as a text
file, where you proceed line by line, the other is to treat it as a binary file,
where you proceed byte by byte.
Now, to assign a variable a file type value, we will need to use the
function open (), which will allow us to open a file.
Open() function
To open a file in Python, we have to use the open() function, since
this will receive the name of the file and the way in which the file will be
opened as parameters. If the file opening mode is not entered, it will open in
the default way in a read-only file.

We must keep in mind that the operations to open the files are limited
because it is not possible to read a file that was opened only for writing, you
cannot write to a file which has been opened only for reading.
The open () function consists of two parameters:
- It is the path to the file we want to open.
- It is the mode in which we can open it.
Its syntax is as follows:
Of which the parameters:
File: This is an argument that provides the name of the file we want to
access with the open() function, this is what will be the path of our file.
The argument file is considered a fundamental argument, since it is
the main one (allowing us to open the file), unlike the rest of the arguments
which can be optional and have values that are already predetermined.
Mode: The access modes are those that are in charge of defining the
way in which the file is going to be opened (it could be for reading, writing,
editing).
There are a variety of access modes, these are:
r
This is the default open mode. Opens the file for reading only
r+
This mode opens the file for its reading and writing

rb
This mode opens the file for reading only in a binary format
w
This mode opens the file for writing only. In case the file does
not exist, this mode creates it
w+
This is similar to the w mode, but this allows the file to be read
wb
This mode is similar to the w mode, but this opens the file in a
binary format
wb+
This mode is similar to the wb mode, but this allows the file to be
read
a
This mode opens a file to be added. The file starts writing from
the end
ab
This is similar to mode a, but opens the file in a binary format
a+
This mode is pretty much like the mode a, but allows us to read
the file.
In summary, we have three letters, or three main modes: r,w and a.
And two submodes, + and b.
In Python, there are two types of files: Text files and plain files. It is
very important to specify in which format the file will be opened to avoid any
error in our code.

Read a file:
There are three ways to read a file:
1. read([n])
2. readlines()
3. readline([n])
Surely at this point, we have the question of what is meant by the
letter n enclosed in parentheses and square brackets? It's very simple, the
letter n is going to notify the bytes that the file is going to read and interpret.
Read method ([ ])
There we could see that inside the read() there is a number 9, which
will tell Python that he has to read only the first nine letters of the file
Readline(n) Method
The readline method is the one that reads a line from the file, so that
the read bytes can be returned in the form of a string. The readline method is
not able to read more than one line of code, even if the byte n exceeds the
line quantity.
Its syntax is very similar to the syntax of the read() method.

Readlines(n) Method
The readlines method is the one that reads all the lines of the file, so
that the read bytes can be taken up again in the form of a string. Unlike the
readline method, this one is able to read all the lines.
Like the read() method and readline() its syntax are very similar:
Once we have opened a file, there are many types of information
(attributes) we could get to know more about our files. These attributes are:
File.name: This is an attribute that will return the name of the file.
File.mode: This is an attribute that will return the accesses with which
we have opened a file. 
file.closed: This is an attribute that will return a "True" if the file we
were working with is closed and if the file we were working with is still
open, it will return a "False".
Close() function
The close function is the method by which any type of information
that has been written in the memory of our program is eliminated, in order to
proceed to close the file. But that is not the only way to close a file; we can
also do it when we reassign an object from one file to another file.
The syntax of the close function is as follows:


What's a buffer?
We can define the buffer as a file which is given a temporary use in
the ram memory; this will contain a fragment of data that composes the
sequence of files in our operating system. We use buffers very often when we
work with a file which we do not know the storage size.
It is important to keep in mind that, if the size of the file were to
exceed the ram memory that our equipment has, its processing unit will not
be able to execute the program and work correctly.
What is the size of a buffer for? The size of a buffer is the one that
will indicate the available storage space while we use the file. Through the
function: io.DEFAULT_BUFFER_SIZE the program will show us the size of
our file in the platform in a predetermined way.
We can observe this in a clearer way:
Errors
In our files, we are going to find a string (of the optional type) which
is going to specify the way in which we could handle the coding errors in our
program.
Errors can only be used in txt mode files.
These are the following:

Ignore_errors()
This will avoid the comments with a
wrong or unknown format
Strict_errors()
This is going to generate a subclass
or UnicodeError in case that any
mistake or fail comes out in our
code file
Encoding
The string encoding is frequently used when we work with data
storage and this is nothing more than the representation of the encoding of
characters, whose system is based on bits and bytes as a representation of the
same character.
This is expressed as follows:
Newline
The Newline mode is the one that is going to control the
functionalities of the new lines, which can be '\r', " ", none, '\n', and '\r\n'.
The newlines are universal and can be seen as a way of interpreting
the text sequences of our code.
1.
The end-of-line sentence in Windows: "\r\n".
2.
The end-of-line sentence in Max Os: "\r".
3.
The end-of-line sentence in UNIX: "\n"
On input: If the newline is of the None type, the universal newline

mode is automatically activated.
Input lines can end in "\r", "\n" or "\r\n" and are automatically
translated to "\n" before being returned by our program. If their respective
legal parameters when coding are met, the entry of the lines will end only by
the same given string and their final line will not be translated at the time of
return.
On output: If the newline is of the None type, any type of character
"\n" that has been written, will be translated to a line separator which we call
"os.linesep".
If the newline is of the type " " no type of translator is going to be
made, and in case the newline meets any value of which are considered the
legal for the code, they will be automatically translated to the string.
Example of newline reading for "  ".
Example of newline reading for none:
Manage files through the "os" module
The "os" module allows us to perform certain operations, these will
depend on an operating system (actions such as starting a process, listing files
in a folder, end process and others).

There are a variety of methods with the "os" module which allow us
to manage files, these are:
os.makedirs()
This method of the “os” module will create a
new file
os.path.getsize()
This method of the “os” module will show
the size of a file in bytes.
os.remove(file_name)
This method of the “os” module will delete a
file or the program
os.getcwd ()
This method of the “os” module will show
us the actual directory from where we will
be working
os.listdir()
This method of the “os” module will list all
the content of any folder of our file
os.rename (current_new)
This method of the “os” module will rename
a file
os.path.isdir()
This method of the “os” module will transfer
the parameters of the program to a folder
os.chdir()
This method of the “os” module will change
or update the direction of any folder or
directory
os.path.isfile()
This method of the “os” module will
transform a parameter into a file.
Xlsx files: xlsx files are those files in which you work with
spreadsheets, how is this? Well, this is nothing more than working with

programs like Excel. For example, if we have the windows operating system
on our computer, we have the advantage that when working with this type of
files, the weight of it will be much lighter than other types of files.
The xlsx type files are very useful when working with databases,
statistics, calculations, numerical type data, graphics and even certain types
of basic automation.
In this chapter we are going to learn to work the basic functionalities
of this type of files, this includes creating files, opening files and modifying
files.
To start this, first we will have to install the necessary library; we do
this by executing the command "pip3 install openpyxl" in our Python
terminal.
Once executed this command it is going to download and install the
openpyxl module in our Python files, we can also look for documentation to
get the necessary information about this module.
Create an xlsx file: To create a file with this module, let's use the
openpyxl() Workbook() function.

This is the first step that we will do to manage the files of the type
xlsx, we can see that first we have created the file importing the function
Workbook of the module openpyxl; followed by this to the variable wb we
have assigned the function Workbook() with this we declare that this will be
the document with which we are going to work (we create the object in the
form of a worksheet in this format). Once this is done, we activate the object
whose name is wb in order to assign it a name and finally save the file.
Add information to the file with this module:
In order to add information to our file, we will need to use another
type of functions that come included with the object, one of them is the
append function.
We can observe that this is similar to the last example that we needed
to create a document, for it we did the usual steps: we created in the function
xlsxdoc() the object wb, we activated the object and there we added the
information. In this new space we will need to know the specific position in
which we are going to write, in this case, we will write in the fourth box of
the second row "B4" and these will be matched with a string that says
"goodnight". The final steps are exactly the same as the last example,
therefore, we will place the name and save it with the save command.

There is a simpler way to write and enter data, we can do this through
the function append()
We can observe that we have created the document "test.xlsx" with
the steps that we explained previously, we can observe that we have created a
tuple called messages, this tuple has three items that are:
"Hello", "goodmorning", "goodnight".
Once the tuple is created, we use the append function, which will
allow us to attach all the information contained in the tuple messages and
finally save the document with the save function.
The append() function only admits iterable data, what does this mean?
This refers to the data of type arrangements, tuples since, if they are not
entered in this way, our program will return an error.

Read documents in xlsx
Let's go back to our first example to get information from xlsx files,
we could see that, for this, we imported the load_workbook class. The first
thing we need to know is the name of the file we want to open and for this,
we created the variable with the name.
It is important that the files are located in the same folder in which the
program is stored, because otherwise the program will throw us an error.
Inside the function xlsdoc() we will create the object wb that will be with
which we are going to work, followed by this the object "sheet" is created
which is going to represent the sheet that we are going to use.
Once all this is done, we are going to request the information of the
specific boxes "C1", "C2", "C3" next to the function value, to validate that
the information that we acquire is real, we print all the information requested.

Handling PDF files
It is known that the initials of this type of file are: "Portable
Document Format", which have grown significantly over the years, are
mostly used in business and education. This is due to the fact that they
provide a great amount of benefits in which its security is highlighted,
allowing to add access keys to control who can edit the document and even
add a watermark to it to avoid plagiarism of information.
Other outstanding data is that these documents can be seen from any
device since it is not necessary to have a specific program; in addition, the
weight of the files is much lower since these texts are compressed, unlike
Word documents.
A disadvantage of PDF files could be that they are not easy to edit
once they have been created.
In this chapter, we will only learn how to create PDF files.
To create a PDF file the first thing we will have to do is to download
the library through the command "Pip3 install fpdf", followed by this we can
proceed to create our document:
This is a simple level example, but at the same time, it is much more
difficult than other types of files. To start a document you need a lot of

commands, for it we will import the FPDF class from the fpdf library,
followed by this we create the pdfdoc object and this will be the pdf
document. Once created this document, we will have to customize the
formats, size, and style of the letters we are going to use. To do this we use
the command set_font.
In this case, the type of Font that we are going to use is going to be
Times New Roman, with bold style and a size of 12.
Followed by this we will add a page through the command
add_page(), since we will need a page on which to write and the function fpdf
does not create a blank page by default. Then, we're going to insert
information with the cell() function which contains a set of very important
arguments.
The cell function will contain the width and height that the cell will
occupy, it must include the message that will be written in string format, in
case it is required that the edges to come with some detail included we must
add 1 since the 0 is by default and does not allow anything to be inserted.
If you want to add a cell below or located to the right, you place a 0
and otherwise is placed 1, if you want the text to be centered to the right, left,
up or down a string will be placed and if you want in it to be centered you
write C
Finally, we will have to save the document through the command
output(), and the arguments that will go with them will be the name of the file
(with the ".pdf" included since we want a file in pdf) and then a string "F".
Managing BIN files

As we saw earlier, not all files are necessarily text files. These same
ones can be processed by lines and even there exist certain files that when
being processed, each byte contains a particular meaning for the program; for
that reason, they need to be manipulated in their specific format.
A clear example of this are the files in Binary, to work with this type
of files is no more than adding a b in the space of the parameter mode.
For example:
When we handle a binary file, it is very important to know the current
position of the data we need in order to modify it. If you don't know the
current position, the file.tell() function will indicate the number of bytes that
have elapsed since we started the file.
In case you want to modify the current position in the file, we use the
function file.seek(star, from) which will allow us to move a certain amount of
bytes from start to finish.

Conclusion
Thank you for making it through to the end of Python programming
for beginners: The ultimate crash course to learn python computer language
faster and easier, we really hope that you found it informative and that you
were able to approach all of the tools here provided that you needed to
achieve your goals of learning Python programming language
Now that you have finished this book, you should be able to do a lot
of programs for different situations. The next step is to keep practicing a lot,
in order to become a master of Python. While programming, sometimes you
might think that some things are impossible to code, or that you are not good
enough to do them. But that is not right; you just have to think a lot in order
to make it happen. Also while programming you may find that your code or
program is not working, do not worry, even the smartest people write codes
that do not work at the beginning. You just have to keep trying.
As you know, nowadays technology is everywhere and so
programming is, our recommendation is that you try to code and solve
problems of your daily activities in order to broaden your vision of the world
since all electronics have hundreds and hundreds of lines of codes on it.
Good luck with programming!!
if: (you_have_doubts)
print(“Read_The_Book_Again”)
else:
print(“GOODBYE”)

Networking for Beginners
Easy Guide to Learn Basic/Advanced
Computer Network, Hardware,
Wireless, and Cabling. LTE, Internet,
and Cyber Security
By Dylan Mach

© Copyright 2019 by Dylan Mach - All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or transmitted without direct
written permission from the author or the publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or author,
for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to the information contained within this book. Either
directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell,
use, quote or paraphrase any part, or the content within this book, without the consent of the author or
publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All effort has been executed to present accurate, up to date, and reliable, complete
information. No warranties of any kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is
not engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice. The content within this
book has been derived from various sources. Please consult a licensed professional before attempting
any techniques outlined in this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is the author responsible for
any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as a result of the use of the information contained
within this document, including, but not limited to, — errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.

Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: Introduction to Machine Learning and Computer
Networking
Computer Networking
History of Computer Networks
Components of Computer Networking
Routers
Network Interface Card
Protocols
Types of Computer Networks
Local Area Network (LAN)
Personal Area Network (PAN)
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
Wide Area Network (WAN)
Machine Learning
Machine Learning Vs. Computer Programming
General Steps in Machine Learning
Collection and Preparation of Data
Selection of Instructing Models
Evaluation of Models
Types of Machine Learning Algorithms
Supervised Algorithms
Unsupervised Algorithms
Reinforcement Algorithms
Applications of Machine Learning
Chapter 2: Properties of a Computer Network
Properties of Computer Network
Uses of Computer Networks
Use in Business Applications
Computer Networks: Mobile Users
More Information on Types of Computer Networks
Basic Elements of Computer Networks
Choosing a Suitable Computer Network
Chapter 3: Easy Guide to Learn Basic Computer Network
The Important Components of a Computer Network

The Classification of Computer Network
Basing on Geographical Location
Based on the Access Type
Basing on Relationships between End Devices
The Internetwork
Chapter 4: What Are the Basic Cybersecurity Fundamentals?
What Is Cybersecurity?
Botnets Attacks
Crypto-currency Hijacking
Ransomware
Phishing
Social Engineering Attacks
The History of Cybersecurity
The Importance of Cybersecurity
What Are Cybersecurity Fundamentals?
Chapter 5: What Are the Concepts of Networking?
Components of Network
Classification Based on Access Type
Classification Based on Relationships between Relevant Devices
Networking Plan
Networking Types and Structures
Networking Layout and Topologies
Networking Topology – Logical Vs. Physical
Classification of Computer Networks
Classification Based on Geographical locations
Networking Layers and Protocols
Transmission Control Protocol
Chapter 6: Information Tech Guide
Understanding Information Technology
Hardware
1. CPU
2. Peripherals
Wireless and LTE
LTE (Long Term Evolution)
An Overview of LTE
LTE Requirements
Standard Definitions on Wireless and LTE

Cabling
Types of Cable Network
Choosing a Cable Network
Advantages of Cabling Network
Cybersecurity
Significance of Cybersecurity
How to Managing Cyber Security
Network Address
Functions of the IP protocol
Private and Public IP Addresses
Assigning of IP Addresses
Data Transmission
Importance of Networks
Other Similarities
Chapter 7: What Are the Best Network Monitoring Tools?
Basic Fundamentals of Computer Networking
The Internet Protocol
Understanding Cyber Security
Chapter 8: Types of Firewall
How Do Firewalls Work?
The Types of Firewalls
The Application of This Kind of Firewalls
The Stateful Multilayer Firewall
The Proxy Firewalls
The Software Firewalls
Hardware Firewall
The Application Firewall
The Next Generation Firewalls
The Stateful Inspection Firewall
Telephony-Related Firewalls
Chapter 9: Understanding Cybersecurity
Importance of Cybersecurity
Data Security Measures and Its Importance
What Does Data Security Mean?
Data Security Technologies
Types of Data Security
Securing Data

Importance of Data Security
Chapter 10: Types of Cyber-Attacks and How to Prevent Them
Types of Cyber Attacks
Malware Attacks
Eavesdropping Attacks
Cross-Site Scripting Attacks
Password Attacks
Drive-By Attack
Phishing Attacks
Man-In-The-Middle Attacks
SQL Injection Attack
How to Prevent Cyber Attacks

Introduction
Congratulations on downloading Networking for Beginners, and thank you
for doing so. The world is becoming digital, and everyone has to keep up
with the constant emerging technologies. However, you can’t involve in any
type of technology without understanding the basics at first. That is, you have
to initially learn the principles of different computer components before
sinking deeper into complex activities such as computer programming and
more.
The following chapters will discuss all you need to know about networking in
the computing world essential for those who are venturing into the industry.
Some may have limited knowledge about networking, but you are likely to
become a pro soon when using this guide. Therefore, you will learn about
different protocols used in networking as well as interconnection and the
internet, among others. There are fundamental concepts in networking and
may also include other forms of operations related to computer networks.
That said, you will learn about computer networking and understand how the
modern telecommunication network facilitates the sharing of resources
among machines. Networking is a fundamental field of computer study which
allows for computers to become interconnected globally. Also, you will learn
about machine learning as a form of algorithms and statistical methods of
how machines acquire an ability to perform a given task. Machine learning is
a broad topic but essential for beginners, especially when they want to learn
about how computers are capable of making decisions on situations like
humans.
There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much
useful information as possible. Please enjoy!

Chapter 1: Introduction to Machine
Learning and Computer Networking
Machine learning and computer networking is both an essential field of study
in computing but accompany different concepts. That is, they are topics that
represent a similar study area on the contrary cover various sections of
computer systems. In this case, machine learning entails computer algorithms
and statistical models which facilitate the process of machine learning on data
fed, the identity of suitable patterns, and the selection of the most favorable
outcome. On the other hand, computer networking deals with the connections
and interconnection of different computers globally, therefore, enabling data
sharing, resource management, and user applications.
Computer Networking
Computer networking is the computing knowledge of studying and analyzing
the communications techniques of computing devices or systems connected
or interconnected together to exchange information or resources. A computer
network is therefore defined as a group of computers allied together to
communicate and share data and resources. Networking in computers solely
depends on theoretical and practical applications of computer engineering,
sciences, and telecommunication and information technologies. As to build
computer networking between machines, an individual is required to have a
router, network card, and specific protocols.
History of Computer Networks
Computer networking began during the rise of computers in the 1950s but
utilized closed network systems used by the military. Unlike the modern
networking systems, the late 1950s saw the use of military radars, which
transitioned into MOS transistors consisting of transceivers, routers
telecommunication circuits, and base station modules. Different developers
proposed various forms of computer networking, including the introduction
of a telephone switch in 1965 by the Western Electric. The first critical
progress of computer networks began in the 1970s, which saw multiple
modifications of devices used today to promote networking.
One of them includes the Xerox PARC, which refers to the use of Ethernet,

the X.25 used expanding IP network coverage and the creation of a host.
From the supply of 50kb/s circuit in 1969 to the current 10mb/s to 100mb/s,
the networking industry has undergone significant changes. However, the
improvement is predicted to increase in the future, seeing the fastest modes of
networks emerge, therefore building the computer networking sector.
Besides, the higher speeds of the system have already been experienced with
2018. And this is because of the introduction of rates of up to 400 GB/s
through the use of Ethernet fiber cables.
Components of Computer Networking
Routers
A router is the most common network device which forwards data packets in
computer networks with a primary function of directing traffic on the
internet. The packets such as web pages are transmitted from one router to
another comprising of an internetwork while waiting to reach a desirable
node destination. Routers are commonly used in homes and small networks
and perform using network cables rather than installed drivers and connected
to the computers by use of USBs or specific wires. 
Routers may either be wireless or consist of cables linked by ports to allow
for devices to connect to the internet. They usually linked to the modem, for
instance, fiber and DSL, or WAN ports via network cables to facilitate the
connection. Based on your desirable network link, your network speed will
vary, with some regulating the rate you receive per individual router. Besides,
routers may follow specific IP addresses depending on the internet
connection, with the private addresses being the primary gateway default one
for different devices in the network. Multiple links to one router, including
both wireless and wired devices, enable each one to communicate freely,
such as the sharing of a printer. 
Network Interface Card
A network card is an electronic device that connects one computer to a
network, usually to a Local Area Network (LAN). Most modern computers
have an embedded network interface card in the motherboard instead of
having an external chip to connect a network. These cards are critical when
the computer exchanges data with the computer network using a given

protocol such as CSMA/CD. Previous versions of network cards used
included protocols such as ARCNET incorporated in 1977, but today most
computers use Ethernet. The use of Ethernet network cards has been the most
common with the revolution of computer networking being witnessed each
year.
Internet speeds often vary on network interface cards based on the protocol
standards supported. The previous Ethernet cards supported up to 10mb/s
with the current adapters supporting from 100mb/s up to 1000mb/s. Network
cards do not necessarily support wireless connections, but routers also
contain these cards, which determines the speeds for a given computer
network. The same has been projected to increase in the near future with the
use of Ethernet network cards. In this case, speeds are to grow in the coming
years, with rates tripling the current figure. This is attributed to the expansion
of usage of computer networking across different platforms, both in small
enterprises to commercial use over the years.
Protocols
Computer networking also comprises connection protocols that consist of
rules for two or more systems to exchange data. Other than regulations,
protocols also include syntaxes, communications synchronization, and
semantics, as well as error recovery techniques, use in both hardware and
software of computer connection. In other words, protocols are a set of rules
which connect the server to the routers regardless of the variations in
infrastructure, designs, and standards. As to exchange information, both
parties much adhere to accept the protocols built in the hardware, software, or
both.
Networking protocols usually accompany similar languages for the devices to
facilitate the interaction between the two computers in the exchange of
information. Network protocols typically utilize the Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) model used to break down the complicated process to
readily defined functions and operations. There are multiple protocols used in
computer networking, Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), User Datagram
Protocol (UDP), Internal Protocol (IP), Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP),
and File Transfer Protocol (FTP), among others.
Types of Computer Networks

Local Area Network (LAN)
Local Area Network, commonly referred by its abbreviation, LAN, is a group
of computer systems using and sharing a particular internet connection within
a given small area such as the office or residential building. The LAN
connection is usually through a communication medium, for instance, coaxial
cables used by two or more personal computers. This type of computer
network is often cheaper than other types and accessed by those within the
area and uses hardware such as adapters and Ethernet cables. Transfer of data
is commonly extremely fast with considerably higher security. The
connection only supports those within the area, and anyone outside tends to
lack the transmission of information.
Personal Area Network (PAN)
This is a type of private network arranged within an area of 10 meters and
often for personal use with devices within a given range. Personal Area
Network was first researched and introduced by Thomas Zimmerman, who
established that an individual could create a connection with communities
with devices within 30 feet. Both wired and wireless PAN can be used in this
type to connect to devices around the source. The source more so may
generate from media players, laptops, and mobile phones. Wireless is usually
connected using hotspots, Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi connected to devices within a
given range. Wired PAN is connected by USB cables to facilitate the
connection of a given network. Personal Area Network always moves with
the person and can include offline systems and uses to connect devices using
a VPN in small home networks. 
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
Metropolitan Area Network is computer network which covers a wide range
of a geographical area by interconnecting several LAN connections. This
type of computer network is often used by government agencies to connect to
different federal facilities as well as their citizens and private organizations.
Some of the protocols in MAN include ISDN, Frame Relay, and OC-3,
among others, which connect to different LANs through an exchange line.
This form of a computer network is used in larger areas than that of LAN and
such as airline reservations, military communication, colleges, and between

banks.
Wide Area Network (WAN)
Wide Area Network is extended computer network coverage over a large
geographical area such as between states or countries. It is quite extensive
than LAN and WAN and not limited to one domain but covers an entirely
larger area by use of satellite connections or fiber optic cables. WAN is the
largest of all computer networks in the world and used in businesses,
government operations, and educational purposes. Some of the advantages of
WAN include centralized data, fast message transfer, coverage of a full
geographical area, higher bandwidth, and supports global businesses. On the
other hand, WAN can become disadvantageous in the case of a security
breach; it demands a firewall and rigid antiviruses, expensive setup costs, and
difficulty fixing problems due to its more comprehensive coverage.
Machine Learning
As mentioned, machine learning is the method of data analysis by computers
where algorithms and statistical models play a role for machines to learn from
data and patterns and then make decisions without human interactions. Since
its incorporation in the late 1950s, machine learning has gained popularity
and become a vast topic in computing. It is a branch of artificial intelligence
enabling computers to provide analytical information about the future with
limited human interaction. Machine learning can, therefore, be learned in
different ways depending on the part an individual chooses to follow.
The idea of machine learning takes the form of the human brain, including
the neurons and how they facilitate the assimilation of information, thinking,
and making decisions. When the concept was first introduced to computers in
1943, it focused on neural networks where machines became capable of
learning on their own, depending on the information fed. That is, machines
were able to observe, learn, understand, analyze, and make decisions based
on the event without depending on individual instructions. However, the slow
development of computers at the time increased the challenges of machine
learning when compared to the current days.
As humans have the ability to develop and expand their knowledge about an
event or something they first or learn, the same technique, therefore, facilitate
machine learning. Besides, humans depend on networks of neurons in the

brain, and computers utilize a similar pattern. As such, machine work with
the same technique, therefore, can manage to make decisions and conclusions
without any human interaction. However, the decisions made by computers
are widely based on mathematical and algorithms that have expanded to
make them predict the outcome of things that haven't happened yet.
Currently, different methods have been used, therefore enabling computers to
learn specific information; therefore, be able to provide predictions,
conclusions, and decisions based on specific datasets.
Machine Learning Vs. Computer
Programming
Machine learning has been widely confused with computer language
programming, which in this case, has significant dissimilarities. As defined,
machine learning is all about the machine receiving specific data sets,
selecting the most reliable algorithm, learn and determine the outcome
without any human interaction. It, therefore, has limited interaction,
especially when analysis the information, learning, and making positive
outcomes. On the contrary, computer programming requires human
interaction who first selects datasets to use and writing them in the machine.
The codes are then executed to create a specific program, which is, therefore,
the outcome. In programming, machines rarely learn but generated results
based on the instructions provided by humans.
General Steps in Machine Learning
Collection and Preparation of Data
Humans can never learn and have knowledge about something without
having an interaction or understanding the basics. Similarly, machines face a
similar challenge, as they also have to gain access to relevant information
about something before learning in detail about it. As such, the first step in
machine learning is to collect the necessary data and prepare it in a way that
fits a given criterion. The collection comprises of gaining access to specific
details about a given element and begin having an understanding about it.
The computer then prepares the system to internalize the information before
providing the needed knowledge.

Selection of Instructing Models
Humans also undergo trial and error in order to come up with an effective
solution to a problem at hand. Machine learning also creates multiple models
based on the instructions fed to provide the most suitable model, which can
solve a given problem. In this case, the computer uses algorithms which have
been modified differently since their incorporation. Over the years, more
models have been developed with the objective of making machines more
specific in some regions of specialization. In this step, computers, therefore,
select the most desirable model that best suits a given dataset and train itself
through learning more about the information at hand. This ensures that the
information fed and the outcomes are more likely to become beneficial and
provide the intended solution.
Evaluation of Models
The last step is now to put the model selected into practice by trying to figure
out if the model which enables the machine to learn and make decisions
without human interaction. Machines readily learn from the information fed
and create patterns and work like how we behave on newfound knowledge in
our minds. That is, when supplied with well-tested details, the machine will
offer excellent results with inadequate tests leading to vogue and harmful
outcomes. In this step, you need to feed the computer with the relevant
models and data which provide an algorithm where the machine will follow
and deliver effective results. Therefore, test the data and model, which
provides certainty of delivering exceptional results.
Types of Machine Learning Algorithms
Supervised Algorithms
As mentioned, machine learning comprises of multiple types depending on
how the data fed is to yield the outcome. One of the models is the supervised
algorithm, where the datasets undergo a given set of parameters, which in
turn determine the outcome. The machine initially specifies the data into
labels as well as the training data included. In this case, the data is initially
tested to ascertain its outcome, therefore, controlling the outcome. This type

of algorithm usually has a manageable as a result is generally intended.
Supervised algorithms are further subdivided into classification and
regression algorithms.
The classification algorithm uses the K-Nearest Neighbor classification
algorithm, which is responsible for sorting data into individual labels. The
data is classified depending on the similarities between variables or the
information inputted in the machine. On the other hand, regression
algorithms focus on mathematical relationships and the dependency of
variables. That is, it provides an immediate analysis of numerical datasets
with similarities essential for predicting the future. The regression algorithm
includes two forms depending on the information fed, linear, and logistic
regression models.
Unsupervised Algorithms
This is the opposite of supervised algorithms and consists of unlabeled
datasets, which in most cases, the results are undetermined. The unsupervised
algorithm is classified into K-means clustering, recurrent, and artificial neural
network. The artificial neural networks resemble the brain neurons, which are
connected and interconnected to enhance learning, thinking, and making
decisions without any interventions. K-means clustering entails the grouping
of similar data into clusters to promote learning in machines. While recurrent
neural networks use the memory in the nodes of computer neurons to analyze
sequential information for the benefit of encouraging decision making in
devices.
Reinforcement Algorithms
Reinforcement algorithms are where the machines determine specific
information is the datasets within particular contexts. As one of the types of
machine learning algorithms, reinforcement models are the most beneficial as
learning of specific datasets leads to the maximization of the outcome.
However, if the wrong dataset is fed into the machine, it may result in
extensive punishments or other related dangers. But when using the right
parameters, the device will make the needed corrections and yield positive
results. Besides, this type of machine learning algorithm enables you to
quickly make corrections, modifications, or change the outcome if you feel it
may become undesirable in the future.

Applications of Machine Learning
Since the introduction of machine learning in the computing industry,
different sectors have benefited significantly in their operations. More so, it
has popularity between developers as well as other users, making it
applicable in different areas. In this case, the applications of machine learning
range from small scale technological businesses to commercial use. One of
the common areas includes social media such as Facebook and Twitter used
for sentimental analysis, spam filtering, facial recognition, among others. It is
also applied in the e-commerce sector to display items that are mostly
searched by specific clients. Machine learning is also used in areas such as
transport, health, trading, visual assistance, and financial services.

Chapter 2: Properties of a Computer
Network
A computer network is defined as a digital telecommunications network that
allows resources to be shared between nodes. A telecommunication network
is a number of terminal nodes having connected links that would enable
telecommunication between some terminals. Transmission links in the
network act as a connection between nodes. Telecommunications network
allows for interactions and transfer of information over long distances.
Computer network involves a connection between computer systems and
computer hardware devices via communication channels. The communication
channels enable communication and sharing of resources amongst many
users. The connections between nodes are referred to as data links. The
establishment of the data links is usually from cable media, including optic
cables or wires, and wireless media, including Wi-Fi. 
Network nodes are the network computer devices originating, routing, and
terminating the data. Typically, the nodes are identified through network
addresses, and generally include elements such as phones, personal
computers, networking hardware, and servers. The devices are easily
networked together as long as one of the tools has the ability to exchange
information with the other devices. The devices can either have or not have a
direct connection with each other.
A wide range of services and applications are supported by computer
networks. Some of them include accessing the digital audio, digital video,
World Wide Web, the common use of storage servers, and applications, fax
machines, and printers. It may also include the use of instant messaging and
e-mail applications. Computer networks differ from other telecommunication
networks because of the transmitting mediums they use in carrying their
signals, protocols used in organizing network traffic, size of the networks, the
mechanism in controlling traffic, organizational intent, and topology. One of
the most common computer networks is the Internet.
Computer networks have been in existence since the late 1950s. During this
time, computer networks involved the Semi-Automatic Ground Environment.
The SAGE was a radar system used by the U.S military. A reorganization

was later planned in 1959. It was based on the network of the OGAS, which
were computing center networks. The MOS transistor was also invented in
1959 at Bell Labs by Dawon Kahng, and Mohamed Atalla. The conductor
was one of the significant steps towards computer network communication
infrastructure. It included base station modules, routers, memory chips,
telecommunication circuits, microprocessors, transceivers, and RF power
amplifiers. 
SABRE a system in the commercial airline reservation, managed to go online
with two mainframes that were connected together in 1960. The intergalactic
computer network was later invented in 1963. It allowed for general
communications amongst many computer users. In 1964, some researchers
came up with an operation where a computer was used in routing and
managing connections between telephones. 
The concept of packet switching was developed all through the 1960s. It
allowed for information to be transferred among computers through a
network. A telephone was also used in implementing the precise control of
computers. A paper was later published on Wide Area Network that allowed
computers to share time.
French CYCLADES hosts were developed by 1973. The hosts had the
responsibility to deliver data instead of centralizing services on the network
reliably. A formal memo was written in the same year with a description of
Ethernet. Ethernet is one of the most common networking systems used in the
world today. Robert Metcalfe worked from 1979 in a bid to make Ethernet
open standard. Ethernet continued being upgraded to a 10Mbit/s protocol in
the 1980s.
By 1995, Ethernet was supporting gigabit speeds. It has the capability of
having a transmission speed of up to 400Gbit/s as recorded in 2018. The
continued use of Ethernet results from its capacity to adapt and to scale
easily. 
Properties of Computer Network
Computer networking is considered a subdivision of electronics engineering,
computer engineering, computer science, electrical engineering, information
technology, or telecommunications. This is because the practical and
theoretical computer networking relies on have close relations to the fields.
Computer networks allow for efficient interpersonal communication between

users. They can effectively communicate through video telephone calls,
telephone, online chats, instant messaging, video conferencing, and e-mails.
It also allows for network and computing resources sharing among users.
Accessing and using resources is made easier through the devices on the
network. Users can, for instance, share printers and storage devices together.
Data, files, and other forms of information can also be shared effectively
using computer networks.
Uses of Computer Networks
If it were not beneficial, people would not have considered creating a
connection between computers through a network. There are numerous users
of computer networks in the world today. They are used to benefit both
individuals and companies in the long run.
Use in Business Applications
Resource Sharing
The main goal of computer networks is ensuring the anything about a
business is available to all those who take part. Computer networks allow for
this access by making all equipment, data, and programs available to any
person using the network. Any user can access the use of the computer
network regardless of their physical location.
Server-Client Model
In such a model, the information about a business is stored on servers, which
are powerful computers. The servers are housed centrally, and a system
administrator is used to maintain them. The business employees usually have
clients, which are simple machines on their office desks. The server-client
model allows for easier access to remote data and information by these
employees. 
Communication-Medium

Employees in a business setting need to communicate on various issues
affecting business operations regularly. Computer networks, therefore, offer a
powerful medium for communication among the employees. Almost all
companies have several computers with logged-in e-mails. Employees use
these computers when on great deals of communicating on a daily basis. An
employer can send a message, and everyone engaging in the business
operations can easily receive it.
eCommerce
One of the most significant targets of every business is the ability to do
business with potential customers through the Internet. In the modern world,
most customers prefer doing their shopping from home. Numerous ventures
such as music vendors, books, and food stores have considered using
computer networks to meet the needs of their customers.
High Reliability because of Alternative
Sources of Data 
Computer networks provide higher reliability by providing numerous sources
of data. This means that general files can be copied on many machines. When
one of the machines is not available, another one can be used to access the
same information. The concept of Reliability is significant in banking,
military, nuclear reactor safety, and military. This is because such sectors
require consistent operations, even when there are hardware and software
failures. 
Money-Saving
Computer networking is a significant concept of the financial aspect for many
companies and businesses. This is because it saves a considerable amount of
money. Computer networks provide an option for using personal computers
rather than mainframe computers that are quite expensive. Companies can
effectively use the peer to peer model by networking all personal computers
together. Everyone in the organization can access the network for many

purposes, such as communication. The domain model offered by computer
networks can help to provide security to the operations of an organization.
Clients involved in the organization can access data and communicate with
the organization through the server.
Computer Networks:
Home Applications
Home users also consider using computer networks for various reasons.
Some of these include:
Accessing remote information- People connect their devices for easier access
to useful information. 
Person-to- person communication- This communication includes sending e-
mails or other forms of communication. Remote users are able to
communicate with other people easily. They are able to see and hear from
other people who are away from them without delays. Video-conferencing is
one of the most popular person-to-person communication, is used in remote
schools, or receiving medical opinions from medical practitioners who are
distant. People also consider using computer networks to access information
posted by worldwide newsgroups easily. Through these networks, people
easily give their feedbacks regardless of their physical location.
Interactive Entertainment- Computer networks allow for easier access to
videos on demand, multi-person simulation games, and participation of
people in live television programs such as discussions, and quizzes. It is
through these networks that people can feel the entertainment from the
comfort of their homes. People also use computer networks as home
applications for electronic commerce. 
Computer Networks: Mobile Users
Mobile computers include personal digital assistants and notebooks. They are
one of the segments in the computer industry growing at a very rapid rate.
Owners of mobile computers usually possess desktop computers in their
offices and prefer connecting them to their portable computers based at home.
Computer networks allow for wireless connection to these devices, even
when in an airplane or a car. One main reason why people connect to these

mobile computers is to allow them to receive telephone calls and messages,
send faxes, e-mails, access remote files, and surf through the web. People are
able to do all this from any location away from their office. 
More Information on Types of Computer Networks
Computer networks are basically used for numerous tasks in the world today.
Some of the tasks include downloading attachments and printing documents.
This is done by referring to several devices within a room and spreading them
across the entire world. This can be defined based on their purpose or their
size. Below are some of the common types of computer networks.
Personal Area Network (PAN)
A personal area network is the most basic and smallest type of computer
network. It is comprised of a computer(s), phones, tablets, printers, and a
wireless modem. PAN revolves around a single person within a building. The
networks are commonly used in residences and small offices. Their
management is controlled by one organization or person from one device.
Local Area Network (LAN)
Local area networks are popularly discussed by people in the world today.
They are one of the most original, simplest, and common types of computer
networks. They are used in connecting together several computers and
devices of low voltage. The devices are usually within short distances, such
as different rooms within a building or several buildings close to each other.
They help in sharing resources and information among the connected devices.
LAN computer networks are commonly used by enterprises. They are easily
manageable and maintainable. 
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
WLAN networks function in a similar way as the LAN networks. The
networks use wireless network technology. Some of them include Wi-Fi.
WLAN networks do not require devices to have physical cables when

connecting to it. 
Campus Area Network
Campus area networks are quite larger than Local area networks but smaller
than the metropolitan area networks. CANs are commonly used in small
businesses, universities, colleges, and large school districts. Campus area
networks are spread across a number of buildings that are closer to each
other. They allow any user in the different buildings to connect and share
resources. 
Metropolitan Area Networks
Metropolitan networks are larger than the local area networks but smaller
than the wide-area networks. They include the elements of both types of
computer networks. MANS computer networks can spread on a whole
geographical area such as a city or a town. The ownership and management
of the computer network is usually under one company, such as a local
council or by a single person such as the owner of a particular company.
Wide Area Network
Wide area network is quite complex as compared to the local area network.
WANs computer networks easily create connections with computers in wide
distant locations. Low voltage devices, as well as computers, create a remote
connection with each other. They do this through a single large network
allowing communication even longer distances. WAN computer networks
have different categories, with the Internet being the most basic type. The
Internet allows for the connection of computers all over the globe. Numerous
public and administration entities typically own WAN computer networks.
This is possible due to its wider reach.

Storage-Area Network (SAN)
SAN computer networks are of high-speed and significantly dedicated. They
create connections between shared sources of storage devices and various
servers. SAN networks do not rely on WAN and LAN. The computer
networks typically removed the storage devices from the computer networks
and put them on their high-performance networks. The computer networks
are accessible similarly to drives attached to servers. Some of the types of
Storage Area Networks include, unified SANs, and converged virtual SANs. 
System-Area Network  
This type of computer network is quite new and is also abbreviated as SANs.
The computer networks are basically used in defining relative local networks.
The networks are designed high-speed connections in applications involving
servers, processors, as well as storage area networks. Computers are
connected to this type of network operating as single systems and offer very
rapid speeds.
Passive Optical Local Area Network
(POLAN)
POLAN computer networks are used as a substitute for traditional switch-
based Ethernet LANs. The technology used in POLAN computer networks is
added to structured cabling. The reason behind the integration is overcoming
concerns on the support of traditional network applications, and Ethernet
protocols. Optical splitters are used in POLAN to enhance the splitting of
optical signals from a single strand. Single-mode-mode optical fibers are
transformed into numerous signals that serve devices and users. 
Enterprise Private Network (EPN)
Enterprise private Networks are owned by businesses that typically build
them. Businesses prefer this type of computer networks as a way of securing

the connection between various locations that share the network. 
Virtual Private Network (VPN)
The extension of a private network all over the Internet is made possible by
the use of Virtual Private Network. Sending and receiving information and
data between connected devices is also made possible by the VPNs computer
networks. The process is also possible when users are using devices that are
not directly connected. Access to remote private networks is also made
possible through a connection referred to as point-to-point. 
Basic Elements of Computer Networks
Computer Networks comprise of systems through which a connection is
created between numerous nodes. The links help them to share resources and
information. Computer network elements are the fundamental objects used in
computer networks. Basically, there are four significant elements of computer
networking. These include computers, transmission medium, protocols, and
network software. For a computer network to successfully function, all the
elements have to work in coordination. 
Computers
Computers are digital devices that can accept input in the form of data,
process it through the use of data structures, and predefined algorithms,
performing tasks in the form of output. The process can be defined as
transforming raw data into useful information. The output provided includes
performing several physical tasks as well as storing data, transforming it as
well as retrieving it when in need. The network is created by computers to
allow for leveraging of distributed models of programming and interchanging
data to allow for equivalent processing. 
Transmission Medium
The transmission medium is the path through which users send data from one
place to a new place. When representing data, computers and

telecommunication devices make use of signals. The transmission of the
signals from one device to the other is generally through electromagnetic
energy. They are transmitted through air, vacuums, and different modes from
the sender to the receiver. There are two types of transmission mediums. The
Guided or Wired transmission mediums include optical fiber cables, twisted
pair cable, and coaxial cables. The Unguided or Wireless transmission
mediums include infrared, radio waves, and microwaves.
Protocols
Protocols are the defined conventions and rules guiding communication
between computer network devices. Computer network protocols consist of
device mechanisms used in identifying and making connections between each
other. Formality rules are used in specifying the method of packaging data in
the form of received and sent messages. There are three types of protocols.
The internet protocols, wireless network protocols, and network routing
protocols. 
Internet protocols are the rules set to govern the format of sending data
through the Internet or over another network. They are the standards used to
address and route data on the Internet. The internet protocols deliver packets
from the host to a destination host entirely depending on the addresses on the
headers of the packages. Wireless network protocols involve a collection of
wireless devices and laptops engaging in communication through radio
waves. Computer network routing protocols, on the other hand, are used in
specifying methods through which routers are communicating with each
other. They do this through the distribution of information, enabling them to
choose routes among nodes within computer networks. Routing algorithms
are used when determining particular routes of choice. Computer network
routing protocols are capable of adjusting dynamically to evolving
conditions, including disabled computers, and data lines.
Network Software
Computer networks use network software as foundation elements for all
networks. Network software assists administrators in deploying, managing,
and monitoring any network. Numerous traditional networks consist of

special hardware, including switches and routers that integrate networking
software in the combination. Networking software consists of a wide range of
software applied in designing, implementing, operating, and monitoring
computer networks. Most traditional computer networks were based on
hardware but embedded in the software. Defined Networking, that was
software like emerged and led to the separation of software from hardware.
This separation made network software much adaptable to the evolving
nature of computer networks.
Choosing a Suitable Computer Network
There are factors that one should consider when selecting a computer
network type for an organization. These factors include:
The Organization- One should consider finding out the sector of the economy
that the organization operates, what the organization is providing, the number
of people employed in the organization, as well as the jobs they are working
on.
Existing Systems- It is essential to check on the existing computer network
components, 
the 
network 
operating 
system, 
network 
architecture,
transmission medium, and topology. 
Number of Users- Prior to choosing a computer network for an organization,
it is crucial to check on the number of users. This is because organizations
tend to have users working on separate as well as shared workstations. 
Functionality- Consider checking on tasks undertaken by the network users
as well as software applications being used in carrying out the tasks. 
Budget- Consider choosing a computer network operator that is within your
budget. This helps to guarantee successful implementation and maintenance
of the network. 

Chapter 3: Easy Guide to Learn
Basic Computer Network
This article discusses the basic components of computer networking and the
easy ways you can learn them. It also extensively discusses the advanced
features of computer networking as well as how you can learn and apply
them. Read on to find out!
Computer Networking has been in existence for quite some time now, and
with time, technology has become quicker and more affordable. These
networks are a build-up of various devices and components, including
computers, routers, and switches, which are linked together by wireless
signals or cables. Learning how these networks and connections are
assembled is very essential in creating a network that can be used for many
purposes. 
In the quest of breaking this giant of a topic down, let us start by discussing
the essential components of any computer network.
The Important Components of a Computer Network
This is the first thing you need to look at when learning computer networks. 
Any computer network is made up of four very important components:
Media, Networking Devices, Protocols, and End Devices. Let us discuss each
of these essential components.
The End Devices
This is a kind of device that either sends or receives a set of data or
information within a particular network. End devices can be laptops,
smartphones, PC, or any kind of machine with the capabilities of receiving or
sending the set of data within the connected network. For your information,
you will need a minimum of two devices to build a network.
There are two types of end devices: client end devices and the server end
devices. The server end device is responsible for providing service or data.
On the other hand, the client end device is one which is responsible for

receiving the data offered from the former (the server end device).
The Media
This is a very important component of the computer network that provides
connectivity and linkage for the end devices. End devices are not able to
exchange services or data unless they are connected through any kind of
media. As of today, there exist mainly two categories or types of media: the
wired media and the wireless media. 
Radio signals are mainly applied in transferring data and information between
the end devices when using Wireless Media. In wired media, however, cables
are used instead.
The above-mentioned types of media are further subdivided into various
subtypes depending on factors like the data transfer speed, length, frequency
band, among others. The subtypes are commonly referred to as media
standards. The media standards that are popular and widely applied are the
IEEE802.11 (also known as Wi-Fi standards) and the Ethernet.
The two media standards play different essential roles. The Ethernet is
responsible for defining standards for wired media while the IEEE802.11
plays a role in defining standards for wireless media.
The Protocols
Just like the previous two, this is a very important component of a computer
network. Protocols are responsible for the communication between the
involved end devices; they could be two or more. A protocol is defined as a
group of rules that highlights and specifies the standards for a specific or all
the stages of communication.
Below are some known roles played by protocols.
Starting and ending the communication process.
Doing Encryption and compressions before transferring any
data.
Packaging data in such a format that it is able to travel within
a network.

Establishing and providing logical addresses
Carrying out error correction processes
Performing media authentication
Two popular models of networking describe the functionalities of most
common protocols: TCP/IP model and the OSI reference model. These
models categorize the entire process of communication into logical layers.
They further explain how each protocol works in every layer, which enables
the process of communication.
The Networking Device
This is an essential component of computer networking that works in
between the end devices. It is responsible for controlling the smooth flow of
data. Depending on its functionality, networking devices are categorized into
three different types; the forwarding device, the connecting device, and lastly,
the securing device. Below, we discuss the functionality of each of the
mentioned devices.
Connecting Device: It is responsible for connecting two or
more types of protocols and media. In situations where two
end devices are situated in different geographical networks or
connected via a distinct type of media, they will require a
connecting hatchet to carry out data exchange. This
functionality can be provided through Multilayer and Router
switch.
Securing Device: This device is responsible for securing data
from any unauthorized access. The securing device does
security checks basing on the predefined rules whenever it
receives a data packet. It then forwards it or rejects it based
on the decision made. Some of the commonly known devices
that perform these functions are NAT and Firewall.
Forwarding Device: This is a device responsible for
forwarding data. It has multiple sections and ports mainly
used in connecting more two or more end devices in just one
network. The two commonly known devices for these

functions are Hub, Ethernet, and Bridge switches.
Having learned about the four essential components of a computer network,
we next discuss other features that are much significance in computer
networking.
Routers, switches, and wireless access points play a very significant role in
computer networks. Below, discuss how this is done.
Switches
These are the basic requirement for the majority of business networks. A
switch, as most of us know, acts as controller linking printers, computers and
servers within a computer network.
They enable the devices within a network to establish communication within
themselves as wells as building a network commonly shared resources.
Switches save a lot of money through resource allocation and sharing. They
also increase the rate of productivity. There exist two commonly known types
of switches in computer networking; managed switches and unmanaged
switches.
An unmanaged type of switch is that which is able to work outside the box
and can not be configured. The network equipment established at home
specifically offers unmanaged switches. On the other hand, a managed switch
is that which can be configured. It gives you the capability to adjust and
monitor the progress of network traffic. It, therefore, gives you more control
over the entire networking process.
Routers
These are essential components that are responsible for connecting multiple
sets of networks. They are also tasked with connecting the computers within
a given network to a functioning Internet. They make it possible for all the
networked devices or computers to share one Internet connection, which in
the long run, saves you money.
Routers act as dispatchers. They analyze the data sent across a given network,
find the quickest route data can travel and sends it that way.
They are able to link your business to the outside world, protect the vital

information from threats, and even make decisions on the computers that are
eligible to receive more attention over others.
Apart from the known networking roles they play, routers are equipped with
a set of more features that make the networking process even easier and safer.
Basing on the needs you have, for instance, you can buy a router with a
virtual private network commonly known as VPN, a firewall, or the Internet
Protocol, which is commonly known as IP.
The Access Points
This is another essential aspect of a computer network that enables the
devices to link to the network (a wireless network) without using cables.
Wireless networks make it easier to invite fresh devices on online networks
and give a flexible form of assistance to remote workers.
They act as amplifiers for your computer network. While routers provide
bandwidth, the access point broadens the provided bandwidth in ways that
networks are able to provide support to a good number of devices. These
devices can then access the Internet from locations far away from where the
router is located.
What you should know, however, is that the access points don't just extend
the Wi-Fi reach. It also provides essential information about devices
connected to the network; it also gives proactive safety measures and plays
other critical functions.
Additionally, the access points can support various IEEE standards. Every
standard, as we have discussed earlier, is an assortment that has been ratified
over a period of time. Such standards run on a set of different frequencies,
produce a different set of bandwidth and provide the help needed from a host
of deferent channels.
Wireless Networks
When creating a wireless network, you have the option to choose between
four different types of deployment. Every form of deployment has
characteristics that work better in various solution searching missions.
Cisco Mobility Express: Cisco mobility is a simple, best

performing wireless solution that is aimed at helping medium
or small-sized companies. It is equipped with complete
features of cisco that usually preconfigured the best practices
of Cisco advance. The defaults created will enable the fast
and effortless deployment of Wi-Fi that can operate in a few
minutes. This is the most recommended module, especially
for small computer networking businesses.
The Centralized Deployment: The commonly known type
of computer networking system is centralized deployment.
They are basically used in learning institutions where
structures are located closer together. This kind of
deployment involves a wireless network that eases upgrades
and ensures the advanced functionality of wireless networks.
The controllers of these devices are installed based on-
premises and set up in mostly in a central location.
The Converged Deployment: This kind of deployment is
mostly done in small proximity establishments like small
campuses or branch offices. That provides a set of
consistency in both wired and wireless connections. The
convergent deployment redirects the wired and wireless
connections on a single network and then carries out the
double role of the switch and as the wifeless controller.
The Cloud-Based Deployment: This deployment method
puts into use the cloud to run the devices dispatched on-site at
different locations. This kind of solution needs a Cisco
Meraki cloud-managed gadget that gives a full view of a
computer network through visible dashboards.

The Classification of Computer Network
Having learned about the essential details of a computer network, it is time
we discussed the classification of computer networks. This is a very
important topic for anyone in quest of learning computer networking.
Computer networks are categorized based on various factors, namely: the
geographical location, the relationship between devices, and the access types.
Let us look at each criterion and find out the credentials in detail.
Basing on Geographical Location
When using the geographical coverage criteria, the network device is
subdivided into three different types: MAN, WAN, and LAN. The network
spread in small, medium, and much wider geographical areas are referred to
as the WAN, LAN, and MAN work networks in that order.
Based on the Access Type
When basing on allowing different users to have access to the network
resources, the network can be grouped into three different types: Intranet,
Extranet, and lastly, the Internet.
Intranet refers to any private network. In this kind of network, users from
outside do not have access to provided network resources.
An extranet is almost similar to an intranet as it is a private network. In this
network, however, external users are allowed access to a small portion of
internet resources after proper scrutiny and authorization.
The Internet, on the other hand, is a public network. Any individual or user
can have access to it provided they have devices that can access it.
Basing on Relationships between End Devices
In this criteria, the Internet is broken down into two sets: the clients/server
network and the peer to peer network. In the peer to peer network, the
available end devices all have fair, equal rights. In the client/server network,
however, the decision on which client will receive what rights lie in the hands
of the server.
Next, we look at the various types of computer networks. This is also a very
important area where, as a person learning computer networking, you need to
know.

Computer networks are categorized by their size. There are mainly four types
of 
computer 
networks, 
namely; 
WAN 
(Wide 
Area 
Network),
MAN(Metropolitan Area Network), PAN (Personal Area Network) and LAN
(Local Area Network). Let us discuss each of these networks extensively and
find out what they entail.
Local Area Network (LAN)
LAN refers to a number of computers linked and connected to one another
within a small space like a house or office. The Local Area Network is
mainly used in the connection of two or more computers via a
communication channel such as the coaxial cable and the twisted pair. LAN
is cheaper because it is constructed with affordable hardware, including
Ethernet cables, network adapters as well as hubs. Data is transferred quicker
in LAN than any other network. The Local Area Network gives more secure
network options.
The Personal Area Network (PAN)
This is a type of network that is arranged around an individual, to be more
specific, within ten meters. PAN is mainly used in connecting computer
devices that mainly for personal use. Thomas Zimmerman, a research
scientist, first brought the idea of Personal Area Network.  This kind of
network can cover an area of up to 30 feet. You can use personal computers
to develop this kind of network. Such kinds of computers are mobile phones,
laptops, desktops, play stations, and media players.
As of today, there exist two categories of Personal Area Network: Wired
Personal Area Network and the Wireless Personal Area Network. The
wireless one is developed by the use of wireless innovations like Bluetooth
and Wi-Fi. This is usually a low range network.
The wired network, on the other hand, is built by the use of USB cables.
Examples of PAN
The Body Area Network: this is a kind of network that is
moved along with a person. For instance, mobile networks are

moved with an individual. Now suppose that the individual in
possession of the mobile network establishes a connection and
invites other devices to share the information and connection.
Offline Networks: This kind of network can be built when just at
home. It is specially designed to connect and link different
devices, namely computers, printers, and radio sets. You,
however, need to note that the devices are not connected to the
Internet.
The Small Home Office: This kind of network is mainly used to
link and connect a number of elements to the internet connection
and a cooperate link through a VPN.
The Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
MAN is a kind of network that can cover a large geographical area by joining
a different kind of local area network to create a larger network. The
metropolitan area network is mainly used in government organizations as
well as private companies to connect citizens. In this kind of network, there
are several local area networks connected via a telephone line. Some of the
commonly used protocols in metropolitan area networks are ATM, Frame
Relay ADSL, among others. MAN has a wide coverage and range compared
to the local land network.
Uses of MAN
It is used in establishing communication between financial
institutions like banks within a city.
MAN can be applied in the reservation of airlines.
Additionally, a metropolitan area network is used in learning
institutions that are located within a city. It is also used in the
creation of communication modules in the military.
The Wide Area Network (WAN)
WAN is a kind of network that covers very large geographical locations and

regions like countries or States. WAN is very big compared to the local area
network. It is not pinned down to a single location but rather can be
distributed over large areas through fiber optic cables or satellite links. For
your information, the Internet is one of the best forms of WAN. The Wide
Area Network is largely used in fields of education, business, and
government.
Examples of WAN
The mobile broadband: in this kind of network, the 4G network
is popularly used across a country.
Last 
Mile 
Internet: 
This 
is 
the 
situation 
where 
a
telecommunication company provides internet services to users
in different locations by connecting their residences with fiber
optic internet.
The Private Network: Banks provide a set of private networks
that can connect up to forty-four offices. The private network is
build using telephone lines usually provided by telecom
companies in charge.
Advantages of WAN
Highlighted below are some of the advantages of WAN.
The geographical coverage: WAN covers a larger geographical
location than any other network. For instance, if a branch of a
certain office is located in a different town or city, you can be
connected to it through the Wide Area Network. The Internet
gives a leeway through which you can be able to connect with a
branch located in a different location.
It offers Centralized Data: Data is centralized in Wide area
networks. You, therefore, don't require to have emails or other
back up systems.
Wide Area Network has provided an updated file. Various
software organizations have work done on live servers. This
means that programmers are able to access updated files within a
matter of seconds.

WAN networks provide for the exchange of Messages where
they are transferred in a fast way. You can see how this is applied
in real life through web apps like Facebook and Skype, which
allow you to communicate with loved ones.
WAN enables the sharing of resources and software: You are
allowed to share software and a host of other resources like RAM
when using the wide-area network.
Additionally, WAN enables you to do business in large, global
regions.
Lastly, the wide-area network has higher bandwidth. It occurs If
you decide to use lines that have been leased for your company
when WAN gives you the highest bandwidth. Higher bandwidth
is capable of increasing the rate of data transfer, which in return
improves the productivity of your organization.
The Internetwork
This can be defined as a number of computer networks, WAN, or LANs that
are linked using devices and configured by the basic addressing machine. The
process of doing all this is referred to as interconnection. Having
interconnections between commercial, public, and private computer networks
can also be referred to as internetworking. Mostly, internetworking uses
internet protocol. Open System Interconnection (OSI) is the model of
reference used in internetworking.

Chapter 4: What Are the Basic
Cybersecurity Fundamentals?
Cybersecurity is a popular name in the internet and other technological
advancement areas. It has got many concerns recently due to the increased
cyber threats and attacks. Simply because; more systems are being targeted
using more sophisticated strategies in assaults. It is a menace that has an
impact on small-scale and large-scale businesses, individuals, organizations,
schools, workplaces, and so on. It is with great importance that we all have to
understand cybersecurity and what measures we can invent to solve any
threats and attacks.
Recently, there has been growth in the use of mobile banking, social
networking, and online shopping by individuals, businesses, organizations, or
enterprises. As much as it is a convenient way of getting services, it can come
with a lot of danger. Simply because all these services can be acquired online,
and that is an excellent harbor of cybercriminals who are waiting to lay a trap
on your system. To be on a safe side, you may need to have the basic
knowledge of cybersecurity fundamentals.
What Is Cybersecurity?
It is the process of protecting programs, computer systems, networks,
sensitive information, and software applications. It involves using several
techniques, practices, and procedures against cyber-attacks, damage, or
unauthorized access.
Cybersecurity is a vital aspect in any organization as it guarantees them the
safety of their data. However, in some cases, it tricky solving the cyber-attack
menace due to inadequate systems, advanced threats, and attackers. Though,
it does not mean it is entirely impossible to get the system going and protect
your information at any cost. Let's have a look at some of these attacks and
threats affecting information:
Botnets Attacks
Initially, botnets referred to as a network or group of devices connected on

the same network to work together. However, this worked in the wrong way.
Hackers and other cybercriminals have taken the objective of turning its
primary function to create chaos. They do this by injecting malware or other
malicious codes to disrupt its normal functioning. It happens due to stealing
sensitive and confidential data or emails and also spreading spam emails. In
most cases, these attacks are prone to large scale organizations that have a
large volume of data at their disposal. These hackers take advantage and
manipulate the system to their advantage and creating chaos within the
organization.
Crypto-currency Hijacking
In recent times, there has been the use of digital currency and mining. It is so
prevalent in the business world, and so is with cybercriminals. They are
inventing new ways of using the crypto-currency mining for their
convenience on a disruptive and harmful way. They use crypto hacking, a
program that injected into the mining systems. It then silently accesses the
CPU, GPU, and power resources of the affected system to mine for the
crypto-currency inform of Monero coins. It is an advanced threat that gets the
hacker using your resources such as the internet and electricity. The process
in itself is complex and wears off your system comfortably and later affects
its functionality. In most cases, the cryptocurrency traders and their investors
are at significant risk.
Ransomware
It is a type of software encryption program file that uses a unique, robust
encryption algorithm to encrypt data on a target system. This threat makes it
hard to view any files on any application. The authors of this threat have a
unique decryption key for the affected systems, which clears them using a
remote server. In this case, the hackers involved in its creation will demand a
ransom from the affected person to decrypt their data and save their systems.
However, this does not guarantee you will have all your data back after
paying the ransom.
Phishing
Here a typical kind of attack that involves sending spam emails to people or
organizations by imitating legitimate sources. Most of the emails sent through

this fraudulent way tend to have secure attachments to confuse you into
thinking they came from a real person. For instance, they have active job
offers, invoices, offers, and promotions from reputable companies or
organizations or can be an email from a higher official of the organization
and a government official.
However, the main objective of these emails is to steal sensitive and valuable
data such as bank account details, credit card numbers, login credentials,
company financial audits, and much more. To rule them out, you need
knowledge in phishing email campaigns and their solutions. You can also
consider using email filtering options to block the attacks.
Social Engineering Attacks
It is a new attack used by cyber attackers to gather all the sensitive
information about an individual or an organization. It comes in the form of
displays of attractive prizes, huge offers, and promotions, advertisements.
You will fall prey immediately. You provide your bank account details. All
the details you provide ere will be cloned and used for fraudulent financial
transactions, identity frauds, crimes, and so on.
Since 2007, the ZEUS virus acted as a social engineering attack used for
stealing bank account details and other banking related details from
unsuspecting people across the world. They not only come with financial
issues but can also lead to downloads of highly destructive threats to your
system, which may affect its functioning and capabilities.

The History of Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity is not that old in the technology sector as it dated back to 40
years ago when words like worms, spyware, malware, or viruses meant a
different thing. Not only in the information technology sector but for any
common man in the business sector, organization, and so on. Since its
beginning, it brought mixed reactions as it came as a result of a research
project. It is a fantastic fact from the 1970s.  Robert Thomas was a researcher
for BBN technologies in Cambridge, Massachusetts, at the time he created
the computer worm referred to as 'the creeper.' During that time, the creeper
infected several computers by attacking one machine after the other with the
message; "I'm THE CREEPER: CATCH ME IF YOU CAN."
It was an aggressive threat. Afterward, Ray Tomlinson, the inventor, and
creator of email created a similar program referred to as 'the Reaper.' It was to
be an antivirus that would delete and clear the creeper.
In the late 1980s, there was another creation of a man called Robert Morris,
whose idea was to test the size of the internet. He then wrote a program that
would invade the networks, UNIX terminals, and copied itself. The plan
referred to was the Morris worm. It was such an aggressive worm that it was
disabled and slowed down the functionality of the computer, leaving them
unusable. He was the first person to be convicted under the computer fraud
and abuse act.
Since then, there has been the creation of invasive, aggressive, and deadliest
computer viruses that are prone to cure and are hard to control and detect.
That is the main reason that brought about the idea of cybersecurity to help
protect data against these deadly attacks.
The Importance of Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity is so critical in an organization or the workplace as the results
that felt with its absence are unfriendly. Recently, the increase in threats that
led to a lot of damage to individuals and organizations. Handling this cyber
menace is hard and needs a lot of effort to ensure all your data is safe and
protected from unauthorized persons. There is a need to ensure you have the
right strategies to protect your data from threats and minimizing the damages
in the event of attacks. However, to be safer, you need a good grip on the
knowledge of cybersecurity fundamentals.
Here are the reasons as to why cybersecurity needs implementation at large:

There is an aggressive rise in threats and cyber-attacks. For this
reason, most organizations are finding it necessary to upgrade
their cybersecurity not to fall prey to these attacks. It is a
common issue and is taking a toll on individual, organization,
banking, business information, which later leads to losses and
destruction. It has been witnessed in several countries and giving
it the attention it requires will save you a lot. There have been
cases where cybercrimes and attacks have cost people up to
billions in shillings every year, and that is very alarming.
There is an increase in techniques and strategies used by the
cyber attackers on reaching their targeted persons. They are
using more advanced ways to attack, and that has been proven
more destructive. They have learned about modern technology
and how well to create their malicious threats to affect data to
gain profit. That is why you need to learn about cybersecurity
and its implementation to keep up with the advancements. It is
not that easy mastering all the protective measures, but learning
how well to protect your data from the attackers could keep you
safe for longer.
There are new regulations on data protection from GDR, who
are expecting every organization to protect the data at their
disposal. It is essential due to the increased threats to see to it
that your sensitive data is protected and taken care of. In recent
times, due to many cases of threats, there are new developments
in the courts regarding data theft. To be on the safe side,
protecting your information is more important than a long time
wasted in the courts.
Cyber-attacks are very demanding. Once you are affected by
threats or attacks, it will take a toll on your resources and
organization. There are cases you need to pay ransoms to clear
the risks but without surety of getting your information intact.
Depending on who took your data, you may end up in reputation
breaches and a total financial problem on your business and so
on. You can prevent all these scenarios by getting the right
preventive measure and ensure your data is protected.

What Are Cybersecurity Fundamentals?
For cybersecurity to be thoroughly analyzed, it follows three basic concepts
referred to as 'the CIA Triad,' including confidentiality, integrity, and
availability. This model was designed to offer guidance to organizations,
institutions, or companies to form an effective security policy. They are
essential as their working together will ensure you get the best results in
resolving your Cybersecurity issues about information security. These
include:
Confidentiality
This concept is beneficial in limiting the access o any information. It works
ion restricting sensitive and vulnerable information from being accessed by
third parties such as hackers and cyber attackers. In any organization, for
example, there is a need to protect one's information for easy access as that
may cause problems if breached. For this reason, organizations and
institutions avoid sharing information and educate their workers or colleagues
on the effects and how well to protect the data they hold using secure and
robust passwords.
You can easily protect your data by handling it differently. You do not have
to make the task too complicated. Making the people in an organization have
the idea of how dangerous it is to have your information out there for people
to access can significantly help. However, at some point, it may prove a
daunting task at first but may greatly be improved by sharing experiences
with the affected persons.
To ensure there is confidentiality, you can use data classification, data
encryption, biometric verification, and two-factor classification as well as
security tokens.
Integrity
Integrity gives you the guarantee of accurate, trustworthy, correct, and
consistent data that is unchanged over some time. To protect your data in the
transit from third users, ensure it is original, meaning; the data is not
changed, altered, deleted, or allowed illegal access. The safety of data starts

with you. Letting other people into your information is very risky.
Putting up proper data protection and security measures in your workplace,
institution, or organization will guarantee your data of safety. For this to
work, there needs to be user access rules and control as well as file
permissions to avoid data breaches and sharing. Ensure a trusted system or
person handle the data files. Not everybody can process your information the
same way; some may have a hidden agenda.
It is a need to monitor your data against theft, threats, and breaches. All this
requires an advanced tool and equipment.  These tools ensure your
information is intact at all times, and if any risk is detected, the organization
will know about it and create ways of amending the issue. In most cases,
organizations prefer the use of tools such as cryptographic checksum and
checksum to verify their data and information integrity.
Moreover, some attacks or threats can lead to data loss or destruction. For
this, there is a need for an effective and reliable backup plan. In most cases,
cloud backups are the number one trusted solutions as per now.
Availability
In this case, you need to have your systems in the right condition. Which
includes the software, hardware, devices, networks, and security equipment.
To give the best results, they should be up to date and well maintained. It will
ensure you have proper functionality and easy access to all the data you need
without any hindrances. It will also guarantee healthy communication within
the system, having a reliable bandwidth.
You will also need to look for types of equipment that are effective for
disaster management. In cases of disaster, system attacks, or threats, there
needs to be tools and utilities that will help you solve your issues. In this
case, disaster recovery plans, firewalls, effective backup plans, and proxy
servers are among the best services you can consider as attack solutions.
For these utilities to work accordingly, they should undergo multiple layers
of security to determine the safety of constituents of cybersecurity. In most
cases, this feature involves networks, computers, hardware systems, or
software programs involving the data shared through them.
For an organization to reap results of safe and reliable data storage and
protection, there ought to support from both ends. For instance, in an

organization, a practical cyber approach, there is a need to involve the people,
computers, networks, processes as well as the technology in large or small
scale or individually. Realizing a future with fewer cyber-attacks and threats
requires a better organization and support systems that work together. You
may also be amazed by how many solutions you can come up with to detect
the threats and solve them.

Chapter 5: What Are the Concepts
of Networking?
Networking is a series of interconnection of computers worldwide to form an
overall structure or system. The base or core for networking includes: types
of computer networks, types of network equipment/the hardware, Ethernet,
wireless local area network, internet service provider, TCP/IP, and other
internet protocols and Net routing, switching and bridging.
There are three critical types of computer networks that are geographically
based. These include the Local Area Network (LAN), the Wider Area
Network (WAN), and the Metropolitan Area Network (MAN). LAN involves
the interconnection of computers within a specific locality covering a small
geographical area. It is majorly within buildings. There are further three types
of LAN technology, which include Ethernet, Token Ring, and Fiber
Distributed Data Interconnect (FDDI). The three categories of LAN are based
on a specific arrangement of elements in the computer network. Ethernet
LANs is based on a bus topology and broadcast communication. The Token
Ring LANs are based on a ring topology. The (FDDI) uses optical fibers and
an improved Token Ring mechanism based on two rings flowing in opposite
directions. The WANs is an interconnection of computers covering a larger
geographical area than the LANs, probably between cities and countries.
Here, data is transmitted using such media as fiber optic cable and satellite in
most cases. It is based on packet switching technology in which information
is transmitted over a digital network is grouped into packets. Examples of
WAN technology include Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) and
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN). Metropolitan Area Network is
the interconnection of computers covering a much larger geographical area
than WANs. The interconnection here is majorly between continents. The
equipment sending data in this case to any significant distance is probably
sending it to a minicomputer or a mainframe computer. Data is transmitted
using terminal emulation software on the personal computer. This is because
more extensive networks are designed to be accessed by terminals. A
personal computer emulates or imitates a terminal.
Without networks, we wouldn't accomplish much. Just as human networks

make us more efficient, so do computer networks. In business, networks are
extremely important. All business operations depend on various forms of
networking. Networking helps organizations to save time and money. It also
helps organizations and individuals to create new streams of income.
Some concepts shape networking. At first glance, these concepts may seem
complex. But if you familiarize yourself with the principles of computer
networking, it gets easier.
The reality is that networks are everywhere, and we all work within them.
You are used to them to such an extent that you don’t even realize it. In this
article, we will focus on the concepts of networking. Our main objective is to
help you have a better grasp of networking.
A network is a group of several entities that are connected in one way or
another. This could be objects or people. It allows the flow of information
among the entities involved. However, this has to happen under a set of clear
guidelines.
In this piece, we’ll be focusing on computer networking. An individual
computer can help you accomplish a particular basic task. It undoubtedly
boosts your productivity. But when you are using numerous computers that
are connected, your productivity becomes greater.
Computers use data networks to process and share important information.
Ten staff members can access important information at the same time without
sharing a computer. Networking makes it possible for them to do so on
different computers. This is made possible by a bunch of interconnected
computers. It certainly enhances and promotes coordination within a team
working for a common goal.
Imagine what would happen without a network. A team would solely have to
rely on one computer to get work done. This could greatly undermine the
team's productivity. The team would need a lot of time to complete simple
tasks.
Therefore, a computer network can best be described as a group of computers
that are linked together. The linking may be done through physical lines. The
ultimate goal is to enable efficient exchanging of information in terms of
speed and convenience.
When one computer is connected to another, the output is increased. And
when several networks are linked together, they form one powerful network.
This helps employees to have access to a larger pool of information. With
such resources at their disposal, you can rest assured that they can accomplish

a lot more.
Components of Network
There are four essential components of a computer network. These are
networking devices, end devices, protocols, and the media.
End Devices
Networking takes between devices. End devices play the role of data
transmission. They either send or receive various types of data. These are
laptops, PCs, phones, or tablets. A network needs at least two devices to
function. There are server devices that are tasked with providing data and
client devices that depend on the data provided.
Media
Devices have to be connected through a special medium. This medium is
known as the media. There are two forms of media. That’s the wired and
wireless media.
Wireless media uses signals while wired media uses cables.
Protocols
Protocols are important rules in networking. They aid communication
between the devices and also set the standards of communication. Normally,
protocols can initiate as well as terminate any form of communication
between devices. Also, they encrypt the data before it is sent. The data
packaged in a form that can be transmitted within the relevant channels.
Networking Devices
In between devices, there is a networking device.  A networking device's
main role is to control the flow data between the end devices. It also forwards
the data. This device is categorized into three categories.  That's the
connecting device, securing device, and forwarding device.

Classification Based on Access Type
The classification based on access types includes Intranet, Extranet, and the
Internet.
Intranet
An intranet is a private network. External users can’t access this network
whatsoever. Not unless they use some unscrupulous methods to do so.
Extranet
An extranet is also a private network.  The resources within this network are
not available to the public. External are only granted access through a strict
authorization process. Full access is not granted to external users. Whatever
access they may be given is partial.
Internet
The internet is an open network that anyone with a computer can access. It
has a vast resource that the public can utilize.
Classification Based on Relationships between
Relevant Devices
This classification is based on the relationship between the end devices. The
network is classified into two. That’s the peer to peer network and client-
server network that will be covered in great detail later.
Networking Plan
When creating a network of computers, you ought to have a network plan.
This is because numerous computers are used, hence the need to manage
them. Also, you want to ensure that information is kept within particular
confines. 
The connections should be planned to control the flow of information.
Employees should have access to the information that’s relevant to their
duties. A computer network doesn’t mean that everybody in the organization

is allowed to access all the information available.
The plan should give clear guidelines on where various types of information
should be stored.  A plan also defines what information will be accessed by
the employees at a given time.
Networking Types and Structures
Networking types are structured differently. They can either be wired or
wireless. Also, they could be a combination of both. About a decade ago,
most networks were wired. The computer network landscape has since
changed. Modern networks mix both wired and wireless connections. Wired
networks use Ethernet technology.
Advantages of Wired Networks
Wired networks are not only reliable but also fast and secure.
Ethernet ports can also be found in most computing devices,
including laptops and desktops.
Disadvantages of Wired Networks
Wired networks must use cables. And it is costly to run cables.
Using a wired network within buildings is challenging. This is
due to the sophisticated infrastructure. Multiple cables would be
required to run between the buildings.
A wired network doesn’t support devices such as smartphones
and tablets.
Wireless Networks
Wireless networks don’t rely on cables. These networks used the Wi-Fi
protocol to transmit data.
Advantages of Wireless Networks
They are easy to set up. Moreover, you don’t require multiple
cables running from one point to the other.
A wireless network offers great flexibility and convenience.
They can be used in public places, offices, and homes. Mobile
devices use a wireless network. Therefore, you can use all your
internet supported devices at your convenience.

Disadvantages of Wireless Networks
A wireless network is certainly not as secure as a wired network.
A wireless network is also commonly limited by range. Once
you get out of the stipulated range, you can’t use it.
Wireless networks are much slower. The connectivity isn’t as
fast as it is with a wired network.
Networking Layout and Topologies
To expand a network, the nodes have to be connected. You might not need
this in your small office, but as you expand, you'll certainly need it. Though
there are many ways to connect these nodes, some of the most common
methods include Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and so on.
These methods of connection are built on various topologies. The common
ones are:
Ring
Bus
Mesh
Hybrid
Star
Each topology has its strengths and weak points. Wi-Fi and modern Ethernet
use a hybrid topology. The hybrid topology is a combination of bus and star.
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi can also run on a mesh topology.
Networking Topology – Logical Vs. Physical
The physical connection of network nodes doesn’t necessarily dictate how
they communicate. Typically, small offices and home networks use the
physical bus topology.
Peer to Peer Networking
In peer to peer networking, all the involved nodes are considered to be equal.
All nodes can communicate free with each other.

There are no superior nodes with special responsibilities in this kind of
networking.
Advantages of Peer to Peer Networking
☐     The peer to peer network doesn’t depend on a single node. It
is, therefore, unlikely that the failure of a single node will
undermine the entire network.
☐     Additionally, peer to peer network isn’t sophisticated. This
makes it easy to set up.
☐     A peer to peer network is quite reliable and resilient. It
doesn’t breakdown without a good reason.
☐     This network comes with an excellent distribution of data
traffic. And that makes it tremendously effective.
☐     The hardware used in peer to peer networking is
inexpensive. So, the initial cost of running this network is
affordable.
☐     Most networks require a strong central administrator.
However, the peer to peer network doesn’t rely on a central
administrator.
Disadvantages
☐     It is challenging to secure a peer to peer network. This
makes it susceptible to threats.
☐     Every network requires a backup. Nonetheless, peer to peer
the network is difficult to back up.
☐     Locating information on a peer to peer network isn’t easy.
Client-Server
A client-server network is based on a superior server. The server is tasked
with a special role. For example, it could be a control or a web server.
The client has to connect to the server to use certain services. An example of
this type of networking is the internet web.

Advantages
☐     The client-server network is administered with the utmost
ease.
☐     It has a specially dedicated node that makes locating of
information extremely easy.
☐     A client-server has exceptional safety levels.
☐     This network is easy to manage.
Disadvantages
☐     Servers can fail. When they fail, the network is jeopardized.
These are single points of failure that greatly undermine the
entire network.
☐     The client-server hardware doesn't come cheap. It requires a
significant investment, which can be out of rich for both
homes and small office owners.
☐     This network can get concentrated at some point. This may
cause some downtime within a network.
☐     The best modern examples of a client-server network
include Twitter, Facebook, and Google Search.
Classification of Computer Networks
Computer networks are classified into various categories. The classifications
are based on geographical locations, the relationship between the devices
used, and access types.
Classification Based on Geographical locations
LAN-Local Area Network: It links devices within one office or several
offices. Ethernet and Token Ring fall within this category.
MAN-Metropolitan Area Network: It is a slightly larger network with the
capacity to connect devices across buildings.
WAN-Wide Area Network: This is a massive network that links devices to
multiple devices across countries.  A good example of the WAN network
includes the Asynchronous Transfer Mode and the Integrated Services Digital

Network.
PAN-Personal Area Network: This network is used within a personal area
to link devices. It is the kind of network that you use to link your laptop to a
printer.
Networking Layers and Protocols
A protocol is a predetermined set of guidelines that dictates how computers
should communicate with each other. HTTP is one of the popular protocols,
which you may have across in your interactions with computers. This
protocol supports communication between a particular web browser and its
server.
Good examples of data link protocols include are Wi-Fi and Ethernet. These
protocols shape the data as it appears on the media. Both of them use a
physical address that’s referred to as the MAC address. It has a capacity of 48
bits.
Other popular MAC addresses include the EUI 64 that has 64 bits.
Networking can be divided into numerous layers or levels.
There is the OSI network that utilizes a seven-layer model. Also, there is a
common TCP/IP network, which uses a four-layer model. Here are the four
levels of the TCP/IP network, and their respective examples:
Data link-level- Ethernet or Wi-Fi.
Transport level- UDP or TCP.
Networking-IP
Application level-HTTP
As the sending process is progress, these layers add a distinct header to the
data. The headers are then systematically eliminated as the data moves
towards its destination.
Transmission Control Protocol
TCP provides a safe mode of transmitting data. The transmission takes place
through IP packets. The packets have accurate error detection capability. All
the data that’s transmitted in packets reach as their destination as sent. Data
can’t be accidentally altered in any way. You can rest assured that the data

reaches its destination in its original order.
Before the process of transmitting data is initiated, there has to be a safe
connection between the computers involved.
It is the role of TCP to convert the data into packets.
Other Applications Protocol in Networking
FTP (File Transfer Protocol)
File transfer protocol aids the transfer of various files of data
between two computers. The computers need to have an active
internet connection.
Telnet (Terminal Protocol)
Sometimes, the user needs to connect to a terminal mode. The
terminal protocol enables the user to do so.
SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol)
SMTP is a protocol that simply the electronic mail service.
Chapter 6: Information Tech Guide
Computer technology is used to assist and link people in the contemporary
world in many ways. The laptops, desktops, and mobile phones they all
network together to perform multiple operations at the same time. The
government, individual, and organization depend on these devices for
essential things like in the entertainment, food production, communication,
education, care, and transportation.
Understanding Information Technology
Information technology – It is the use of a computer, network, storage, and
other devices into to secure process, create, store electronic data or
information, and exchange all manner of electronic data. Computer
technology is the study of computer networks and developing several
software programs. It comprises of computer database design, programming,
and networking. All these programs correlate to ensure that a computer works

properly.
A computer machine is a programmable device that is designed to operate
arithmetic and logical operation given by the user and provides a desirable
processed output. The computer has two major categories, which are
hardware and software. The hardware consists of all layers of physical and
tangible components of a computer, such as CPU (central processing unit),
keyboard, monitor mouse, and motherboard. While Software is the
instructions stored in a computer to run the hardware, these instructions
command the computer to perform a specific task, and such Software is
operating systems and applications.
Computer technology is any machine that takes commands and calculates the
instructions accordingly; the operation can be record-keeping, bailing,
planning, and transactions. All these operations take place in a commercially
available machine that has been customized according to their functionality.
Such machines that are common to our daily process are gas station pumps,
ATM, barcode scanners, and GPS units. However, each of those machines
they all rely on circuit boards and digital data to meet the demand and needs
of the customer.
Most customers gain improvement in access to services through the internet
by ordering products, send emails, scan the barcode through a smartphone,
and read reviews before purchasing anything on the website. Most of the
programs in television use audio, visual, and animation and special effects in
the production of their programs. Audiovisual games employ graphics
created by a computer and plugged in a laptop or home-based entertainment
where the player can play by themselves or with others using the internet.
The use of applications on the mobile phone can be beneficial in the
following ways:
make order in a restaurant, preservation in a hotel, book an appointment with
a doctor, purchase movie tickets usually save time that could have been used
to wait in a queue.

Hardware
Computer hardware are physical, tangible components of a computer they
include. Examples are:
Monitor, control unit (CU), keyboard, mouse, motherboard, central
processing unit (CPU), hard driver, random access memory (RAM), and
power supply.
1. CPU
It is considered to be the mind of the computer machine that performs all
kinds of operations like data processing, storage of data, and instructions.
CPU controls all the activities that make up a computer. There are three
components of a CPU:
ALU (Arithmetic Logic Unit)
It is the logical part of the CPU in a computer. When you need to
carry out mathematical or logical decisions in a computer, the
information is carried out by ALU. The ALU contemplates the
information in bits. Bits are binary logic 0's and 1" s. They are made
up of memories built in the CPU know as registers, which are used
to hold data, and data at this point is classified as binary information.
They are processed accordingly to instructions. 
CU (Control Unit)
It is a component of a CPU in a computer that guides the operation
of the processor. It communicates to the computer memory, output,
and input devices and ALU on how to respond to the database
instruction and does not process any data.
Memory
Memory is a part of a computer that stores data and information that
is necessary for functioning. There are two types of memories:
Ram – Random Access Memory is the internal memory of
the CPU that is responsible for storing data, programs, and

the result of an application. The mind is read and writes
hence volatile meaning stores data when the computer is
working. When the machine is switched off, data is lost or
erased. Examples of RAM are Dynamic Random Access
Memory (DRAM) - it is a physical memory used in
personal computers. This type of memory must be
continuously refreshed, or it loses its contents, and it is
economical. Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) – this
memory is faster and less volatile than DRAM; hence
requires more power and very expensive and does not
require to be refreshed. Synchronous Dynamic Random
Access Memory this memory has a higher processing
speed.
Read-Only Memory (ROM) – this type of memory where
you can only read, but you cannot write. This kind of
memory is non-volatile. The information stored in this
memory in permanent, the memory stores instructions that
are required to start a computer machine or bootstrap. They
are many types of ROM. Examples are MROM (Masked
ROM), Programmable Read-only Memory, Erasable and
Programmable Read-Only Memory and EPROM
2. Peripherals
These are devices connected to the computer externally when these devices
are disconnected to the computer will still function, but the functions
performed by the peripheral will not be available. Examples of peripheral
are; 
Monitor  
A monitor is a visual display unit and is the primary output device of a
computer. They display images as small dots called pixels that are arranged
in a computer in a rectangular form that sharpens the images. The size of an
image will depend on the number of pixels used.

Keyboard
It is an input device that helps to input data into a computer. It consists of
keys that are responsible for inputting alphabets, numbers, and special
characters into a computer. They can also navigate using the keyboard to
perform a particular shortcut in a computer machine.
Mouse
It is a pointing device that uses cursor. A control device that has a small box
with a corpulent ball at its base, which intellects the movement of the mouse
and sends the signals to the CPU to process data.
Printer  
It is an output device that is used to print processes data into a paper.
Examples of printers are: Impact printers- They write the data by striking the
ribbon, which is usually pressed on the document to print. Non-impact
printers – this kind of printers print the characters without using the ribbon.
They print the whole page of a paper at a time. They are a laser printer, page
printer, or inkjet printers.
Joy Stick
This kind of peripherals moves the cursor into a position in a monitor and
used in a Computer-Aided Design (CAD).
Scanner  
This device allows the user to san printed papers and converts them into a file
that is used in a computer device.
Wireless and LTE
These are devices that change electrical signals into waves; they connect a
wired network using Wi-Fi. They are three main types of wireless devices
which are WAN, PAN, and LAN. Wireless Wide Area Network made

through the use of mobile phone signals. They are created and maintained by
a mobile phone service provider. Wireless local area network uses radio
waves, but the backbone of these networks are sustained using cables with a
wireless access point connecting the network. This kind of wireless can be
used in a room to being used in an entire university or a hospital. Wireless
Personal Area Network (WPAN) they are a form of network that is short in
range. They use Bluetooth technology and commonly interconnect
compatible devices near the central location. The range of WPAN has a
variety of thirty feet.
The devices that are used by networks vary from computers, tablets, phones,
and laptops and refer to as clients. When accessing the network through
hotspot or use of a router in office or home, the device is referred to as the
client. Some router can operate as a client; this can happen when a card is in a
computer and connect to other access points or connect to more detached
Apps. The Apps can be a standalone device that bridges between a wireless
and an Ethernet or a router. The Apps can cover a wide range of areas using
wireless networks depending on the power of the computer and type of
antenna used by the device.
Some phones, laptops, or wireless router, can support a mode known as Ad-
Hoc that allows the device to connect directly together without an access
point between that controls the connections. Not all the computers have the
Ad-Hoc, and some are hidden. The devices that Ad-Hoc enabled to create a
mesh of network, and when they are enabled is called Mesh Nodes.
The wireless network that connects distance areas like two building they need
a more focused antenna such as dish antenna. Dish antenna sent thin beams
of the network into a specific direction. This long-distance coverage is called
point to point connection; this means that two points are connected. The
process requires two devices, one configured to the Access point and the
other one as a client.
LTE (Long Term Evolution)
It is a term mostly used as 4G LTE and is the standard wireless data. The
transmissions that allow one to watch their favorite documentary online or
download and watch it later very fast.4g wireless communication was
developed by the 3rd generation partnership project that provides ten times
the speed of the 3G network on a mobile phone.

The 4G technologies are designed to provide an IP address based on data,
voice, and multimedia streaming. 
An Overview of LTE
This is a name given to 3GPP evolved, standard requirement to deal with the
increasing data throughout the provision of market. The group that started to
work with 3GPPRANstanderdized for LTE in late 2004, and by 20017, all
the LTE features that ware related to its functionality ware finished. And in
early 2018, most performances specification and protocol ware finished and
released.
LTE Requirements
Requirements are written, and defined concept from scuff, absolute fashion,
and others meant relation to UTRA nomenclature. The following are LTE
design parameters:
Mobility of up to 350km/h
Spectrum flexibility, seamless coexistence with other previous
technologies hence reduced flexibility and cost
All systems should support data rates of 100 Mbps in a
downlinked 50mbps in the uplink, within a 20MHz bandwidth
or a spectral efficiency value of 5bps/Hz and 2.4bps/Hz
respectively.
Downlink and uplink use throughput per MHz at five %point of
CDF
The 4g is ten times faster than 3G, can download something at a speed of 22
and 5 Mbps, while 4G is a significant improvement over 3G. Most cellular
phones caries and advertise their network as 4G LTE, as it sounds the same
as 4G, and some of the cell phones display a 4G LTE. 4G and 4G LTE
differences;
The consumer can tell the difference between a 4G and LTE by the speed of
downloading something. The mobile phone companies are always updating
their cellular LTE network and are closing a gap between a 4G and LTE. The

LTE-A is the currently fastest option available right now.
Standard Definitions on Wireless and LTE
Antenna – Converts the electrical signals into radio waves and generally
connected to a radio device that transmits the messages into a radio receiver
and the interface between the electrical signals in radio and the movement of
indicators through the inflight.
Ad-Hoc Network – this is a Device network that is available in a laptop or
computer machine connections and is shown as a computer to computer
networks. The Ad-hoc can be unplanned or decentralizes network
connections.
AP (Access Point) – these are devices that allow other wireless devices to
connect into a wired network using Wi-Fi. 
Ethernet – This is a type of networking protocol that defines some cable and
connections that are used for wiring devices together. In most cases, the
Ethernet cabling is categorized into five or six e.g., a cell phone, computer, or
tablet.
Node – this is an individual device in a mesh net of the network.
Power over the internet – these describe as the system which passes
electrical control along with figures on Ethernet cabling.
Cabling
A cable network is a service delivery that supplies the devices like computer,
television or a laptop programs that a user has subscribed to. The availability
of such depends on the local franchise area. The number of available
channels and networks will depend on some factors. The average cable
viewer has the option of viewing more than 150 networks through a cable
subscription. The cable system manager decides on the channels and
networks to be carried on a specific place. The channel and network are
selections are based on the viewer analysis and franchise agreement with the
viewer.
Types of Cable Network
They are three different types of a cable network: 
Basic, pay and pay per view. The basic network is available per at the lowest
and is very popular for people whose budget is limited. There are at least 60

cable channels that can be defined as a first cable network.
The pay cable network is those that charge a flat monthly subscription. The
flat-rate payment is required as the network does not run any television
advertisement. Hence they need some monthly subscription in order to profit
the company. A movie TV station is a good example of such a network.
Pay per view cable network is TV channels that charge a fee for every
individual program watched. The pay-per-view program is a network that
shows movies that can be rented and viewed. Other programs allow the
customer to go and watch the program elsewhere, like the movie theatre.
Choosing a Cable Network
You can only choose one cable network; each cable provider tends to offer
cable packages that deliver different Laval of programs. An example, a basic
cable network may provide 60 channels, and premium offers over 100
applications. It's only you who can choose the best package that fits your
budget.
Advantages of Cabling Network
It is essential to evaluate the cable network before installation. A net that will
make use of physical cabling will be more robust and secure compared to
wireless network technology.
Security – This is the most important advantage as the cabling network
offers a higher level of security than the wireless networks. However, the
measure of protection will include the protected WI-FI network and
passwords that help to improve the safety of a wireless network. Hence they
can never be securing than the cable network.
Speed – not all the cable networks will provide speedy connections, but the
newer types of twisted data cabling can operate up to 10 gigabits. An
example is a fiber optic cabling transmits light rather than standard data
information, making it optimal for high speed and ranges.
Reduced interference – with a proper installation cabling network will help
reduce the interference caused by electrical hitch, known as electrical,
mechanical obstruction, and radiofrequency. On the other hand, the wireless
network is more susceptible to radio frequency interference.
Consistence connections – Compared to the wireless connection, the cabling
is more consistence in connection. When the data is transferred in wireless

connections, there is a lapse in network connections caused by electrical
interferences.
Expandability – Each router or a hub will provide support of up to
255devices.

Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity is a process or practice that is designed to protect network
programs, devices, and data from being attached, authorized access or
damaged.
Significance of Cybersecurity
Most of the co-operations and organization collect and stored in a large
amount of data in storage devices, a large amount of the data can contain a
large amount of sensitive information. Organization and governmental bodies
transmit a large amount of raw data across some network and other devices
while doing their business. Cybersecurity is dedicated to protecting the
information, the programmers, and the system used to store data. The spying
on these data are national insecurity and can lead to terrorism.  
For an organization to function and coordinate effectively, they need
effective cybersecurity. There are a few elements of excellent cybersecurity.
They are:
Great data security
Application security
Network security cloud security
Endpoint security
Mobile security  
Disaster recovery continuity plan
And end-user education on security
The organization is advised to promote proactive measures and adapt more
approaches to cybersecurity. The NIST (National Institute of Standards and
Technology) issued necessary guidelines on the risk and a framework that
recommends a shift on continuous monitoring and data focus approach to
cabbing cybersecurity.
How to Managing Cyber Security
The NCSA (National Cyber Security Alliance) gives a recommendation on a

top-down approach to cybersecurity, which organization management leads
and prioritizing the management of cybersecurity. The NCSA advises all the
organizations to be ready and prepared for any eventuality. Cyber risk
assessment should be put in place in case of any behavior that impacts the
functioning of the organization. The organization should have an outline of
the damages that an organization would incur in the case of cyber-attack. The
cyber risk assessment should consider any regulation that impacts the way the
organization collects, stores, and secures data.
Having the best cybersecurity or combining cybersecurity measures and
educating the employees on cyber-attacks is the best effort an organization
can do to cab the cyber-attack. It may appear like a difficult task but it always
to start small and focus on securing the most sensitive information hence
going forward to protecting all the data
In conclusion, information technology helps organizations, individual
businesses, and governments to increase their efficiency and improvements in
effectively processing information. It helps the consumer to buy and sell new
relevant technology devices, thus creating a world of business-minded
people. Also, technology creates a safe environment by purchasing and
installing CCTV cameras. Regardless, there is a continuity of demand for
innovative technology solutions leaving room for advancement. 
Network Address
Networks come with an IP address. All devices attached to a network have an
IP address. You can locate the device using its IP address.
An IP address (Internet Protocol Address) is assigned to every device in a
numerical representation. This is for every device that participates in a
computing activity. The device has to be, however, dependent on an internet
protocol.
The IPv6 and the IPv4 are the two common versions of the Internet Protocol.
IPv4 has been used since the birth of the internet. It is used both in corporate
networks as well as the internet. Networking experts predict that it will be
replaced by IPv6 in the future. This is attributed to the fact that the IPv6 has a
larger capacity. While the IPv4 is just 32 bits, IPv6 is 128 bits. This means
that it can effortlessly accommodate a larger number of devices.
Functions of the IP protocol

During the sending of data, the initial data is decomposed into datagrams. 
Each datagram has a header. The header consists of the port number of the
destination and the IP address.
Datagrams are sent to specific getaways. The process is successive as the
getaways are sent from one getaway to the other. This process goes on until
the datagrams reach the intended getaways.
Private and Public IP Addresses
You might have heard of private IP addresses. Such addresses are not
routable. They can be used in both business and home networks.
On the other hand, public IP addresses are routable. They travel on the
internet.
Assigning of IP Addresses
In case you are wondering how IP addresses are assigned, we will tell you
how.
For modern networks, IP addresses are assigned automatically. This happens
under the DHCP. It doesn’t mean that they can’t be assigned manually. It is
possible, but only on rare occasions.
Domain Names and IP Addresses
People prefer to use names as a form of address. Names are easy to
remember. But computers use numbers. If you type a domain name into a
web browser, the system translates into an IP address. A DNS server that’s
found on the internet is tasked with the translation process.
Data Transmission
There is a lot of data transmission that takes place within a network. How
does it take place?  Data transmission is done through packet switching. The
messages are first segmented into segments that are known as packets. The
packets are then transmitted from one computer to the next. Upon delivery,
data is then extracted from each of these packets. The original message is
then reconstructed.
The packets are well-coiffed. They have a data area and a header.  Headers
consist of two addresses. That’s the source and the destination address.
Additionally, the header carries sequencing information that helps to
reconstruct the original message.

Importance of Networks
A computer machine has been designed for the sole purpose of manipulating
data. When computers are linked together, great things are accomplished. The
networks are instrumental in the sharing of information and other resources
among people. These resources include the internet, file sharing, and
applications.
Networks make it easy for colleagues to communicate either through email or
other platforms available on the internet. The same applies to industrial
computers because the information has to be shared constantly.
Networking enables businesses to save money. For example, instead of
buying a printer for all your employees, you can use networking to link one
printer to many computers. This allows all your employees to share a single
printer effectively.
Similarities between Different Types of Networks
Although there are various types of networks, there is a similarity between
them. For example, networks share servers. These are computers that are
endowed with sharable resources within a particular network.
Other Similarities
The server serves clients. Clients are computers that access depends on the
information held on the server. They all access the pool of information
offered by a network server.
A Connection medium that enhances the connection of several computers
within a network
Another similarity is computer peripherals. Printers and files are also used
within different networks.
As you can see, computer networking is a well-structured process that makes
work easy. Government agencies and business organizations use to rely on
networking to streamline their functions. Networking saves such
organizations millions of dollars every year.
Besides that, networking helps organizations to work more efficiently. Teams
can tackle various projects with much ease when they network.
Networking aids the sharing of important information between the involved
parties. Organizations store massive information. It is difficult to store,
manage, and process the data manually. Moreover, organizations are large.
And all the data that’s gathered and used can be overwhelming.

Apart from the complex duties that simplified by networking, there are other
minor but equally important functions. For example, networking aids the
configuration of various computers in an office. This enables the employs to
share the fax machine, or a printer through a network.
It is not only a large organization that benefits from networking. In this
digital area, all types of businesses depend on networks. Therefore, it is
important to be familiar with the concepts of networking.

Chapter 7: What Are the Best
Network Monitoring Tools?
Networking is also referred to as computer networking. It is a term used to
refer to transportation and exchange of data between nodes through a
universal medium in the information system. Networking involves using a
network, designing construction, managing, maintaining, and operating the
network software, infrastructure, and policies. 
Networking allows for the connection of devices and endpoints together on a
local area network or a bigger network. This is one of the most effective
services that business owners all over the world can take advantage of.
Computer networking provides valid and reliable ways of resources and
information sharing within an organization or a business. It helps people to
benefit from their information technology equipment and systems.
The significant benefits of networking include:
File sharing – Data can be easily shared among different users. Data can as
well be accessed remotely when it is kept on other connected devices. 
Resource sharing – Computer networking helps in sharing resources
between different peripheral devices connected to the network. They include
copiers, scanners, and printers. Resource sharing helps to save money
because the software can as well be shared among different users. 
Sharing one Internet connection – Having a single internet connection is
cost-efficient and enhances the protection of systems when the network is
adequately secured.
Increasing the storage capacity – Networking allows for the access of
multimedia, and vital files when they are stored remotely in other networks-
connected storage devices and machines. 
Computer networking also improves communication in that customers, staff,
and suppliers easily share information and keep in touch. It allows for
everyone interested in business access common databases, thus avoiding
duplication of data, preventing errors, and saving time. Networking also
makes it easier for organizational staff to work on queries, thus delivering
better standards of service. The improvements are possible because of
customer's data sharing through the networks.

Computer networking also has incredible benefits on costs. Information is
stored in one standard and centralized database, thus increasing the efficiency
of the drive and reducing costs. Staffs are able to deal with many customers
in little time because they are all accessing product and customer databases.
Minimum IT support is also required because network administration can be
efficiently centralized. Sharing of internet access, and peripherals sharing
cam also help in cutting costs. 
Improving consistency and reducing errors are other significant benefits of
computer networking. This is because all staff in a business or organization
are accessing similar information and from a single source. It allows for the
easier making of standard version manuals and directories accessible to each
staff. Backing up of data from individual points on a scheduled basis provides
for consistency.
The skills required when operating computer networking entirely depends on
the network’s complexity. Large enterprises, for instance, may have more
security requirements due to multiple nodes. Such companies, therefore,
require experienced network administrators who can successfully manage
and maintain the network. This may be different from smaller organizations
whereby there are few nodes involved, thus requiring less security. 
Basic Fundamentals of Computer Networking
Computer networking has been in existence for quite a long time, and as
years go by, advancements continue to be made. Networking involves
multiple devices such as routers, computers, and switches being connected to
each other through wireless signals or cables. Building a wireless network
needs one to understand all the basics of joining networks. 
Many people have an aim of becoming expert IT technicians, and
understanding only the hardware may not be so helpful to them. Many people
get stuck at the networking point due to misunderstandings. The paragraphs
below will explain some of the basic fundamentals of networking. They will
give an understanding of how computers communicate through networks.
Understanding the interaction and communication between computers is
essential to anyone who wants to become a networking administrator.
Networking protocols are essential for developers dealing with applications
relating to servers that use JAVA or programming based on Socket, such as
bash or python, as well as System Admin. Computer networking is done

through diverse sets of IP protocol suites. The most popularly used protocols
include IP and TCP. IP is an abbreviation for Internet Protocols. Each of the
protocols has unique architecture, as well as diverse functionalities. 
The Internet Protocol
The internet protocol gives the definition of the networking communication
protocols principals. It is helpful in relaying many datagrams through
network boundaries. The internet protocol’s primary purpose is providing
routing functions that help in the establishment of inter-networking
connection, enabling the internet. The primary function is delivering packets
from one host to the other host while depending on present IP addresses. The
IP addresses are available on the packets’ headers. 
The internet protocols have four layers, with each layer having a set of
instructions it carries out. The four layers include the application layer, the
data link layer, the network layer, and the transport layer. 
1. The Basic Fundamental of Networking Layer –
The Application Layer
The application layer appears at the topmost of IP and TCP protocols in
networking. The primary purpose of the layer is transferring data through
computers from a particular end to the other. The application layer works in
conjunction with processes and applications using transport layer protocols.
The processes and applications transport explicit instructions that help in the
execution of tasks and enhances communication with the second layer.
Application layer protocols have the following elements.
Hypertext transfer protocol that is commonly applied in modern
webs. It provided a base for the founding of the World Wide Web. The
protocol acts in the form of requesting and responding. It engages in multiple
activities for the client. 
File transfer protocol engages in the transfer of data to several
networks. Its main tasks involve transferring and controlling data between
computers using client and server architecture models. In many cases, the
protocol can either use a password for authentication or can anonymously and
automatically connect.
A simple mail transfer protocol is used when transmitting emails.
The protocol is based on texts. It consists of three elements the MAIL that
determines the returning address, RCTP allowing for connection with the

recipient, and DATA acting as the message’s body. 
The simple network management protocol is based on IP addresses.
Its principal function is consistently collecting information on IP addresses
from different machines. There are many devices that support the use of a
simple network management protocol. There are also many diverse versions
of the particular protocol. 
2. The Basic Fundamental of Networking – The
Presentation Layer
The presentation layer works on the translation or converting data, for
instance, encoding character, and compressing data between software
applications, and networking devices. It is considered to be efficient when
dealing with secure transactions such as money transfer and banking. It is
useful because it allows for encryption and decryption of such reliable data.
The presentation layer also helps in the conversion of formats. 
3. The Networking Session Layer
As a basic fundamental in networking, the networking session layer has the
responsibility of opening, closing, and managing end-user application’s
sessions. The sessions can include many requests and responses taking place
inside the software. The layer also facilitates the combinations of packets as
well as sorting them in an appropriate order.
4. The Transport Layer
The task of the transport layer is communicating with the application layer
about transferring data to the necessary hosts. In performing its role, the
transport layer uses the transmission control protocol in most cases due to its
reliability. The control protocol helps in the transmission of data from the
application layer into smaller sizes of data and later transferring them one by
one to the network. It is commonly used when people want to download and
upload large files. It ensures there is no loss of packets that could lead to the
corruption of downloaded and uploaded data.
5. The Networking Network Layer
The networking network layer is also referred to as the internet layer. Its main
purpose is to route data above networks. The Internet protocol is used when
differentiating addresses. The internet control message protocol is commonly
used in commanding the ping to check on whether the host is active. It also
sends error messages through the network, describing if a host is not

responding or is down. 
6. The Networking Data Link Layer
It is also referred to as the Network Interface Layer. Its main function is
providing drivers for diverse devices found in the Operating System. The
drivers communicate and transfer data to networks. The network interface
card facilitates communication between devices. The transfer of data is done
either through cables or wirelessly through routers and Wi-Fi. The significant
protocols used in transferring data are the address resolution protocols and
point to point protocols.
7. The Networking Physical Layer
The physical networking layer is a vital layer found in the OSI computer
networking model. It comprises of networking hardware. It is considered to
be the most complex layer in networking due to the diversity of networking
devices that are available. Its primary function is transferring raw bits over
physical hardware through nodes used for the connection. It comprises of the
hardware, including the wireless hardware consisting of Wi-Fi, connectors,
cables, and network interface cards. 
Understanding Cyber Security
Cybersecurity is also referred to as computer security or information
technology security. It is the act of protecting computer systems from damage
or theft to their software, hardware, and electronic data. It also means
preventing the misdirection and disruption of computer systems from the
services they are responsible for providing.
The increase in dependence on computer systems, wireless networks, and the
internet has led to the popularity in the field of cybersecurity. It is one of the
most concerned matters in the contemporary world due to overgrowing cases
of cyber-attacks and threats. Due to its complexity, cybersecurity has also
become one of the challenges facing the technology field today.
Cyber attackers are making use of more refined techniques to target and
attack computer systems. Small and large organizations, as well as
individuals, are being impacted by these cyber threats and attacks. They have
considered cybersecurity as a priority in their everyday operations. The focus
is on coming up with the best measures to control and eliminate cyber threats
and attacks. Employees in organizations are being trained on the best
measures to deal with cyber-attacks. Almost everything we do today is linked

to the internet, thus increasing chances for vulnerabilities, flaws, and
breaches.
Cybersecurity is defined as a process and techniques that are involved in the
protection of sensitive data, networks, computer systems, and software
applications from potential cyber-attacks. Cyber-attack is a terminology used
in covering multiple topics. Most of the common issues covered by cyber-
attacks include exploitation of resources, disruption of the normal functioning
of businesses and processes involved, tampering systems, and the data stored
in them, unauthorized access to sensitive information and targeted systems,
and use of ransomware attacks in encryption of data and extortion of money
from victims.
Cyber-attacks have been quite innovative, and attackers can disrupt security
and hack computer systems. Businesses, therefore, have to come up with
strategies through which they can effectively fight back the dangerous
attacks. Understanding the importance of cybersecurity needs one to
recognize some common forms of attacks and threats.
Ransomware – This is a software program involved in file encryption. It
uses exceptional algorithms in robust encryption in encrypting files within
the targeted system. Ransomware threat authors, applies a rare key for each
target, saving each on a remote server. Users are, therefore, unable to access
these files through any application. The attackers take advantage of the
situation by extorting money from the victims for decryption of data or
providing the decryption code.
Botnets Attacks – The main reason for designing botnets was for them to
perform particular tasks in a group. Cyber attackers are, however, using them
for all the wrong purposes. They use it by accessing and injecting malware or
malicious code that disrupts the functionality of the network. Common
botnets include spreading spam emails, stealing of personal data, and
distributed denial of service. Large-scale organizations and businesses are
primary victims of botnets attacks because of colossal data access.
Social engineering attacks – Cybercriminals are using social engineering
attacks strategy to gain computer user’s sensitive details. The tactic involves
tricking users through attractive prizes, advertisements, huge offers, and
requesting the user to feed their confidential and bank account information.
The information that users feed is cloned and used in identity and financial
fraud.
Cryptocurrency Hijacking – Cryptocurrency hijacking is a new addition in

the modern cyber world. Advancement in digital mining and currency has led
to an increase of cyber-crimes. Cybercriminals are coming up with ways
through which they can benefit from cryptocurrency. Traders and investors
who focus on cryptocurrency are becoming primary soft targets for this form
of attack. The hijacking process involves designing and injecting mining
codes silently to the computer systems. The crypto jacker uses power
resources, GPU, and CPU of the target system in mining for cryptocurrency.
Monero coins are particularly mined utilizing this kind of technique. The
target victim usually incurs the vast internet and electricity bills. The lifespan
of the victim devices is also reduced.
Phishing – This is a common cyber-attack whereby the attacker sends a spam
email and attempts to imitate any legitimate source. Emails sent through
phishing usually have strong messages and are followed by attachments such
as big job offers, and an invoice. The aim of the attacker is to steal
confidential and sensitive data. They are able to gather information such as
credit card numbers, login credentials, and information on bank accounts.
Email filtering techniques can help one in avoiding such attacks.
Experiencing cyber-attacks has become so prevalent in most organizations
and businesses today. It is vital to research techniques being applied and the
measures to avoid these attacks. Educating oneself on the basics of
cybersecurity and its use can as well reduce the risks of being attacked.
Cybersecurity is a broad term based on three major concepts. The concepts
are named "The CIA Triad." This means that it is comprised of
confidentiality, integrity, and availability. The model was designed to act as a
guide to businesses and organizations on crucial policies involved in
cybersecurity in information technology.
1. Confidentiality
These are the rules that provide some limitations to accessing information.
Confidentiality consists in taking appropriate measures to eliminate the risks
of confidential and sensitive information being accessed by cyber hackers
and attackers. In most organizations and large-scale businesses, people are
either denied or allowed access to information depending on how it is
categorized. The right person in each department is authorized to access the
information. Proper training is also given to these people about using strong
passwords to secure their accounts and sharing information. Data protection
is enhanced by changing how data is handled.

2. Integrity
Integrity guarantees accuracy, trustworthiness, and consistency of data over a
period. It ensures that the data in transit is not altered, deleted, changed, or
illegally accessed. Appropriate measures are taken to ensure the safety of the
data. A data breach is controlled through user access and file permission
control measures. Change or breach in particular data can be detected by the
use of appropriate technologies and tools. Regular backups help in coping
with potential data loss, unintended deletion, or cyber-attacks.
3. Availability
Availability means that all essential components, such as devices, networks,
software, hardware, and security tools, should be adequately maintained and
consistently upgraded. This helps in ensuring the proper functioning and data
access without disruption. It also means providing consistent communication
between multiple components by giving adequate bandwidth. Availability
also means providing diverse equipment for security in case of any cyber-
attacks. Disaster recovery plans, reasonable backup solutions, firewalls, and
proxy servers are efficient utilities in coping with cyber-attacks.

Chapter 8: Types of Firewall
A firewall is a kind of cybersecurity tool that protects a computer network
from being tempered or compromised: preventing attacks from hackers who
try breaking into the system from outside. Firewalls can be in various forms;
it can be in the form of a software or hardware on a computer. For a firewall
to work efficiently, it has to be connected to at least two network interfaces
with one protected and the other that is exposed to attacks or threats.
Therefore, you can consider a firewall to a form of gateway installed between
two sets of a network.
How Do Firewalls Work?
Having known what firewalls are and what they do, it is time you learned
how they work! Firewalls work by examining all the available data packets
that pass through them to assess whether they meet the guidelines and
regulations posed by the Access Control List (ACL) and created by the
person administrating the network. If the data packets meet the rules set by
ACL, they will be allowed to maneuver inside the connection.
Additionally, firewalls play a critical role in keeping a log of essential
procedures and activities occurring within a network. Again, the necessary
actions are only identified by the administrator. He then configures the
related firewall to keep the logs basing on the level of importance.
The process of filtering logs can be done basing on several things, including
the packet attributes, address, state, and protocols. Firewalls, however, only
display the packet headers on screens.
Having known how firewalls work, we next discuss the types of firewalls.
Read on to find out!
The Types of Firewalls
Firewalls are categorized into different types. This is done depending on the
level of security they provide and the advancement they have. Below, we
discuss extensively on the types of firewalls in existence today.
The Packet Filtering Firewall

This is a type of firewall that is usually installed on routers that connect or
link the network in the inside to the internet. The package filtering firewall is
only implemented on the OSI model of a network layer. It works based on the
rules defined by the Access Control Lists. Packet filtering firewalls work by
checking the whole set of packets provided and verify them against the set of
instructions provided by the administrator through the ACL. In situations
where a package doesn't meet the set of rules defined by the administrator,
that packet gets dropped immediately, and logs are informed and update
accordingly. When using packet filtering firewalls, administrators have the
power to build their ACL basing on the protocol, address, and packet
attributes.
Advantages of Packet Filtering Firewalls
☐     One of the significant benefits of packet filtering firewalls is
that they are very affordable.
☐     Packet filtering firewalls also need lower resource usage to
make them cost-efficient.
☐     Additionally, they are the best suited for those of us with
smaller networks.
Disadvantages of Packet Filtering Firewalls
☐     As we mentioned earlier, the packet filtering firewalls only
work network layers, and they cannot work on complex
instruction based type of models.
☐     Additionally, packet filtering firewalls are also very
vulnerable, especially to spoofing on most occasions.
The Circuit Level Gateway Firewalls
This is a type of firewall that is installed at session layers of any OSI model.
They are used to monitor events and sessions such as the TCP multiple way
handshakes to determine whether the connection requested is legit or not. In
circuit-level gateway firewalls, the significant and vital screening takes place
before the link is launched. The information channeled to a computer device
on the other side of the network via circuit-level gateway looks to have come
from a portal. This feature plays a vital role in establishing cover stealth for

private networks from strangers.
Advantages of Circuit Level Gateway Firewalls
☐     Just like the Packet Filtering Firewalls, the circuit-level
gateway firewalls are also very affordable and cost-friendly.
☐     Circuit Level Gateway Firewalls also give the private
network anonymity, making it very secure from threats and
hackers.
Disadvantages of Circuit Level Gateway Firewalls
☐     One of the significant drawbacks of the circuit-level
gateway firewalls is they are not able to filter the individual
packets. This makes them very vulnerable because once a
connection is established, hackers can take advantage of it.
The Application of This Kind of Firewalls
The gateway firewall circuit levels are applied in many dimensions of
technology in today's world. The application-level gateways, for instance, are
used in the layer one in the application of an OSI tool and can give security
and protecting the specific Application Layer of the Protocol in question. One
good example of the level application Gateway Firewalls is the proxy server.
This kind of firewall, however, can only work with protocols that are
highlighted. A good example is, if you installed a web application basing on a
firewall, it only will be able to enable the HTTP Protocols Data. The Circuit
level gateway firewalls are meant to understand app-specific commands like
the HTTP: POST and HTTP: GET as installed on application layers for
Special Protocols.
Additionally, the application level firewalls can also be used as the caching
servers that play an essential role in improving network performance, making
it easier to log the level of traffic.
The Stateful Multilayer Firewall

This firewall is made of a combination of all the firewalls we have discussed
so far. They are very advanced firewalls and complex in equal measure.
Stateful Multilayer Inspection Firewalls can be used to filter the packets in
network layers through the use of ACLs.
Additionally, the Stateful Multilayer Inspection firewall also checks for the
single sessions provided on the session layers as well as evaluating packets
on the ALG. This type of firewall is compatible with transparent mode
enabling direct linkage and connections between the server and the client,
something that wasn't possible a few years ago. The Stateful multilayer
inspection firewall implements the algorithms and critical security models
that are specified by protocols; hence, in the long run, making data transfer
and connections easier and secure.
The Proxy Firewalls
These kinds of firewalls operate in application layers with the primary
purpose of filtering the incoming traffic between the current network and the
source of traffic; this explains the name 'proxy firewall.' Proxy firewalls are
transported through a cloud-based tool or a different proxy element. Instead
of allowing traffic link up and connect directly, it first identifies a
relationship or connection to the origin of traffic and verifies the data packets
that come in.
This kind of inspection can be compared to that of a Stateful multilayer
inspection firewall because it focuses on both the TCP multiple way
handshake protocols and the data packets. Proxy firewalls, however, can also
carry out deep-layer packet checks and inspections, verifying the real
contents of the information-carrying package to ascertain it has no malware.
Upon completion of the check and the data, the packet is given the green light
to proceed to the destination; the proxy firewall transfers it off. This
procedure builds another layer of gap or separation between the individual
devices on operating on your network and the client. This enables them to
make another layer of anonymity hence securing your network.
The major advantage of Proxy Firewalls is that they are more secure thanks
to the extra layer of anonymity created. They are also pocket-friendly and
affordable.
If there is any setback when using proxy firewalls, is that they can slow down
the entire internet because they require more steps during the data packet
transfer process.

The Software Firewalls
This refers to any firewalls installed on a local device instead of a separate
piece of hardware. One of the significant advantages of software firewalls is
that they are critical when defensive measures by separating the individual
network point end from each other.
One of the significant setbacks of software firewalls, however, is that
maintaining them on different sets of devices can be time-consuming and
extremely difficult. Additionally, some tools on the network connection may
not be compatible with any of the software firewalls. In such occurrences,
you will, therefore, have to use various software firewalls for every asset.
Hardware Firewall
This is one of the most popular types of firewalls in the world. The hardware
firewall is applied majorly in the modern-day networks as either a LAN
network or a border device (used to protect internally placed LAN networks
acquired from the internet or any other unwarranted networks) or protecting
the internal systems in more significant enterprises. The hardware firewalls
mostly have a lot of physical network attributes that can be applied in
creating various security zones that are different from Layer 3 elements.
Every physical tool can be categorized further into sub-interfaces that, when
well propagated, can help expand the secure zones.
When the hardware firewall is operating on its separate hardware application,
it can handle vast volumes of data packets as well as millions of network
connections. Hardwire firewalls work best in generally high performing
machines. The feature that makes the hardware firewall one of the best
firewalls to work with is the ability to keep hackers and threats at bay. They
are well advanced to alert the administrator of any potential risks and how
they can deal with them. Hardware firewalls are, however, more expensive
compared to the other firewalls.
Some of the most popular brands that use the hardwire firewall are FortiGate,
Checkpoint, Sonic Wall, and Palo Alto.
The Application Firewall
Just as its name goes, the application firewall is a type of firewall that
operates at layer seven of the operating system model. Its primary functions

are controlling and inspecting the data packets at every application level. This
firewall has information about what a typical application should have and that
a malicious use contains. It is, therefore, well equipped to filter out any
unwarranted access.
For instance, the app firewall that secures a website server has knowledge of
the web associated HTTP attacks such as cross-site crippling, and it
guarantees the application from such threats by checking into HTTP app
traffic. Some of the popular elements that use the application firewall are the
Web app firewall. The website app firewall protects the traffic from internet
users that come in towards the computer network. Application firewalls are
fast gaining popularity thanks to its affordable pricing. It is also one of the
most efficient firewalls that help keep threats and hackers at bay.
The Next Generation Firewalls
The next-generation firewall is a term mostly used by manufacturers to refer
to a brand of firewalls that are advanced and use high technology standards.
What this means is that the next generation firewall combines almost all the
firewalls we have discussed above. It is a state of the art kind of firewall that
gives application-level inspection and protection.
The next-generation firewall provides comprehensive analysis and inspection
and can locate corrupted traffic in all the layers of the OSI model and any
layer associated with it. It contains a host of advanced features, including
antivirus features, intrusion detection, and prevention, among others.
These features are, however, licensed separately, forcing any interested buyer
to spend a little more money to activate all the protections. A good number of
next-generation firewalls establish communication using the cloud service
security that belongs to the manufacturer to obtain the threat level
information from the secure cloud.
What makes next-generation firewalls very efficient is that they have a
combination of other features that are well advanced and able to deal with
potential threats and incoming hacker detection. The feature that makes the
next-generation firewalls one of the best firewalls to work with is the ability
to detect security threats even with the slightest detection of malicious
activity. They are well advanced to alert the administrator of any system
dysfunctions and how they can deal with them. The next-generation firewalls
are, however, more expensive compared to the other firewalls. The reason
behind this, however, is that they are more advanced and sophisticated

compared to any other firewall.
The Stateful Inspection Firewall
A majority of the modern-day firewalls put into use the feature of tasteful
inspection. This might be difficult to understand, and the example highlighted
below will help you comprehend it.
In a communication medium between a server and a client (for instance, a
person with a website browser engaging in a conversation with a web server),
the indicated client browser will initiate an HTTP communication with the
server serving the website at port 80. Now assuming that this firewall (the
state inspection firewall) allows the HTTP traffic being transferred to pass
through it, the data packets will, therefore, be able to reach the servers, which
will initiate an instant reply as it is the case with every TCP communication
model.
The stateful inspection firewall will store the initiating link that exists
between the client, and the server is what is called a state table. The table will
have information about details such as the destination IP, the source IP, TCP
flags, and the destination ports. This means that any reply coming in from the
external web servers that are similar to the connection installed before will
have to go through the firewall first then reach the designated servers without
the need for extra configuration. The above-mentioned process makes setup
easier since the user doesn't have to apply any set of rules on the firewall to
reply to the incoming data packets. The data packets mentioned above will
instead be allowed automatically only if they are associated with the already
installed network connection from the client to the server.
The feature that makes the stateful inspection firewalls one of the best
firewalls to work with is the ability to detect security threats even with the
slightest detection of malicious activity. They are well advanced to alert the
administrator of any system dysfunctions and how they can deal with them.
The stateful inspection firewalls are, however, more expensive compared to
the other firewalls. The reason behind, however, is that they are more
advanced and sophisticated compared to most of the firewalls.
Telephony-Related Firewalls
Just as its name goes, the telephony related firewalls are a type of firewall
that operates at layer seven of the operating system model. The primary

functions of telephony related firewalls are controlling and inspecting the
data packets at every application level. This firewall has information about
what a regular application should have and that a malicious use contains. It is,
therefore, well equipped to filter out any unwarranted access.
For instance, the app firewall that secures a website server has knowledge of
the web associated HTTP attacks such as cross-site crippling, and it ensures
the application from such threats by checking into HTTP app traffic. Some of
the popular elements that use the application firewall are the Web app
firewall.
The website app firewall protects the traffic from internet users that come in
towards the computer network. Application firewalls are fast gaining
popularity thanks to its affordable pricing. It is also one of the most efficient
firewalls that help keep threats and hackers at bay.

Chapter 9: Understanding
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity is the protection of computers' mobile devices, servers,
networks, data, and electronic systems from cyber-attacks and malicious
viruses. Cybersecurity an also refer to as information technology security.
Cyber securities are designed to protect and maintain the confidentiality of
the data stored in the internet-connected systems. The organization should
have a secure and effective respond to cyber-attacks. The purpose of
installing such security measures is to prevent data breaches and identity
theft. Cybersecurity is classified into the following categories:
Information security
The protection of data from unauthorized personnel. Goals of securing data
protect the confidentiality of the data and preserve the integrity of
information either in storage or in transit.
Application security
The procedure of developing, adding, and testing safety features in an
application to prevent security attacks against opportunistic malware. A
conceded application could make available access to information designed to
protect the device. Adequate security always begins at the designing of the
app even before the application is installed.
Network security
They are policies and practices implemented to break and monitor
accessibility, modification, and misuse of computer or mobile network from
unauthorized. The security of the network mostly involves authorizing access
of information to authorized persons and usually controlled by the
administrator. Network users are assigned by passwords and authority

information to access data and programs that are within their security
clearance.
Operational security
Operational security includes the processes that recognize and identifies
critical information, also determine whether the information, if accessed by
malicious individuals, could be useful to them. Operational security also
executes and selects a measure that removes any exploitation of helpful
information.
Disaster recovery and continuity of business
It is a planning strategy that is capable of restoring data and critical
information in inventing that the system was hacked or destroyed during the
disaster. When protecting your data, it is good to understand and plan. The
plan arises when the application and usage of information after disaster tricks.
Continuity of business includes a strategy and action that guarantees that the
business will continues after the disaster.
End-user education  
The cybersecurity starts with your employees. The end-user is the specific
person who uses the hardware device or software program after installation in
the machine. Make sure that you educate your employees or yourself on the
matter concerning software program or device. The end-user education plays
a vital role in keeping the information of the organization safe. The end users
are the first line of protection against cyber-attacks. 
Importance of Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity considers as most important to an organization, government,
institution, and individual. It is essential to protect the family and loved ones
from cyber fraud and identity theft. Most of the cyber-attacks happen because
of lack of awareness. Cybersecurity has always evolved since the discovery
of computers. The modern-day the cyber attackers have improved their
tactics in breaking down the systems also installed the internet has improved,

making it easier to attack the businesses. 
The attackers have developed tools that are designed to exploit the
weaknesses of the computer or mobile device. Most hackers do not attack the
network, but the website or the server of the organization or individual.
Hackers find it difficult to hack the network, as the most network of the
organization has a firewall installed hence problematic for them to access.
The following are the requirement for cybersecurity:
Firewall
Web filtering software
Endpoint protection
Intrusion prevention systems
Radius server
Logging software
Encryption
Organizations and businesses can suffer a large amount of money when they
fail to safeguard and handle confidential data effectively. There are numerous
methods to use to make sure that your data is safe.
An example is hardening, which means that confidential data stored in the
corner of a structure, meaning that the information stored inside of a hard
shell that cannot be cracked. Placing logging software, any hacker who
attempts to access the information in the hardened network will be logged
and traced. Installing and using VPNs and encrypted links makes it harder for
hackers to access your data. Most hackers will not invest too much to hack
into a new security system. It takes time to hack the system, thus increasing
the chances of getting caught.
Honeypot is another method of cybersecurity. Placing the right software in
the system, any connection that goes in and out of the network can be traced
fast. This area of the network is set deliberately and makes the network seem
vulnerable. When the hacker attacks the systems, they go straight to the
vulnerable area of the net. When they reach there, they steal files and later
find out that the data are empty and leave a trace that they were attacking the
system.
When cyber network security is secure, the attackers will use a method of

social engineering. Social engineering is the method of sending emails telling
them to click here. Social engineering has evolved from being told to click
here to taking place in internet browsing. Hackers apply the following tactics,
phishing, vishing, smishing, and whaling. It is difficult to access the
information that was lost since it appears that the data was gladly given. In
social engineering, even the smallest mistake of giving out a password to a
user account is enough to provide access to hackers to hack data and
confidential information about the organization.
Salami cyber-attack hackers steal little money from several banks that lead to
a large amount. These attacks can go undetected since the nature of the type
of cybercrime.
An electrical protocol should be put in place to detect malware in real-time.
The use of heuristic analysis is to observe the behavior of an application or a
program to protect it against viruses that change their shape. The organization
should train and educate and make them understand their part in keeping the
data of the organization protected and report any malicious activity. The
organization should put plans in place to deal with any attacks effectively and
respond keenly to reduce the impact of the attack on the business.
Data Security Measures and Its Importance
We live in a world where most people use electronic devices & systems in
almost every deal and transaction. Technology has resulted in many computer
networks and electronic systems, and indeed, they all deal with data. What
you might not know is that data one element considered to be very valuable,
and internet users are very keen to find out how their information and
personal data are handled. Data is, therefore, a precious asset and can have a
massive impact on people. It needs severe protective measures to ensure
information is secure and brings us to what we shall be discussing in this
article: data security and its importance.
What Does Data Security Mean?
Data security refers to the technical process of safeguarding data and keeping
it from corrupted and unauthorized access. It isn't all types of data that are
essential and sensitive, but others are precious and essential. Having
unauthorized people get access to that kind of information can cause a lot of
problems because they can use them to do things they are not allowed to do.

Data security, therefore, is a defensive measure established to help keep data
safe and out of reach for any unauthorized access. There exist a lot of ways
you can protect data, as we have discussed below.
The basic concepts of any data security system are confidentiality, integrity,
and, lastly, availability. The three concepts are commonly abbreviated as
CIA. It is the underlying security model guiding organizations and companies
to protect their valuable data from unauthorized people and hackers. Now
let's break down each of the concepts and find out what they mean.
Confidentiality is a concept that makes sure data is available to
individuals with authorized access and does not fall in the wrong
hands.
Integrity makes sure that data is accurate and well reliable.
Availability, on the other hand, is a virtue that makes sure data is
readily accessible to serve the needs of clients.
So, what should you consider when setting up data security? Discussed below
are some of the essential things you ought to consider when coming up with a
security model.
Where is the valuable data placed or located? You can't say you are
protecting something if you have no idea where that thing is put.
The other thing you should consider is who can access your sensitive data? If
you have no records of people allowed to access sensitive data, leaves you at
high risk if getting accessed by an unauthorized individual. Know who has
access to your data because it will give you an idea of the kind of person you
are dealing with, and it makes it easier for you to pinpoint any unauthorized
access.
Have you actualized the consistent checking and instant alerting on the data?
Activating real-time alerts and establishing a continuous monitoring process
will ensure the security covers all high alert areas. The real-time alerts play a
role in detecting any malicious activity, unwarranted access, and alerts the
user before it gets too late.
Below we look at the types of data security, let us discuss some of the
technologies used in data security.
Data Security Technologies

Discussed below are some of the technologies applied in data security today.
They are used to reduce the risk involved as well as preventing the security
breaches.
Data Auditing
Auditing data when a security breach occurs plays a critical role in preventing
it from happening again. Data auditing helps discover essential details of
what might have caused the violation. It revealed the people that had access
to data during the time of the security breach, how it happened, and the path
followed when accessing the file. This kind of technology, therefore, plays a
vital role in the process of investigation.
Apart from that, when advanced data auditing solutions are implemented, the
information technology administrators can have access to critical visibilities
needed to keep unauthorized access at bay.
The Real-Time Data Alerts
In typical situations in today's world, it will take several months for a
company to notice they have been breached. One sad fact is that the majority
of the companies realize there has been a security breach from their
customers or other sources, instead of getting the information their
information technology departments.
The real-time data alert technology and constant monitoring of data activity
make it easier for you to able to detect security breaches, accidental
destruction, as well as unwarranted access to critical personal data.
The Data Risk Assessment Technology
In light of what we have discussed earlier, the data risk assessment
technology plays a crucial role in helping organizations know their most
vulnerable kind of data and give information about how it can be fixed. The
process of doing so starts by identifying the data that is very important and
vulnerable, and it can be easily accessible. The risk assessment technology
gives a summary of all the found details giving complex feedback on the
level of vulnerability and alerts you where you need to work on first.

Minimize Data
During the last ten years of information technology, there has been a
significant shift in how people perceive data. In the past, people preferred
having more data than less. The more data you had, the more ahead you were.
In today's world, however, data is more of a liability. The potential loss of
billions of shillings, securing breach that can destroy the reputation of an
entire company as well as the hefty fines associated with collecting more data
than what is recommended makes data a very risky asset.
In that connection, it is advised to have only the data you require. Don't ask
for people's telephone numbers and home addresses when you only need their
identification numbers.
Having learned the data protection technologies, we move on to the types of
data protection. Read on to find out!
Types of Data Security
As we have learned earlier, data security protects sensible and vulnerable data
from unauthorized access. Almost everything in today's world revolves
around computers and the Internet. Music and entertainment transport and
infrastructure, healthcare, shopping, and other social aspects have all gone
digital. Banks also run their transactions on online platforms.
This high dependency on the Internet should make us question the
vulnerability of the information and data we have shared. How easily can
critical data be accessed without an authorization? Such a question will
automatically lead to putting security measures into place.
Discussed below are some of the data security types that can help protect
your sensitive data.
Critical Security Infrastructure
This type of data pertains to the advanced cybersecurity systems we rely on
in modern society. Let us break it further down and mention a few examples
of critical infrastructure: traffic lights, shopping centers as well as the
electricity grid. Having any of these vital infrastructures makes it an easy
target for unauthorized access and cyber-attacks. For instance, an electricity

grid can easily be a target of cyber-attacks.
Therefore, companies and organizations whose data involves the critical
infrastructure should put measures in place to protect it from getting in the
wrong hands. They need to understand the sensitivity of the information they
are handling because it is a critical factor in society's well-being.
Additionally, those companies that do not directly deal with critical
infrastructure should come with defensive measures to protect it because an
attack on could have a significant impact on everyone, including them.
The Application Security
This is one of the must-have data security measures you should consider. It
works using the hardware and software techniques to handle impending
security threats that can arise towards any sensible data.
Having practical information kept in applications is high risk because they
are easily accessible over the Internet, and hackers will access it. Only do so
when there are adequate security measures to keep data secured from
unauthorized access.
Antivirus programs are some of the application security types. Such
protective measures help ensure there is no unauthorized access to data.
Additionally, these measures also provide companies that can detect any
suspicious activities and puts in place defensive counter attacks.
The Network Security
Having known that data security is more concerned with the threats coming
from outside, the network security protects your data from any unauthorized
access from people that could have malicious intentions. The network
security system keeps data safe by regulating who has access to it and setting
security measures; it also detects who has unauthorized access.
With the current technological advances, security measures are getting more
sophisticated with the introduction of machine learning to regulate any
abnormal traffic as well as detecting threats earlier enough. This type of data
protection keeps on implementing procedures and policies that help in
preventing unwarranted access and exploitation of data.
Examples of network security implementations include monitored internet

access, strong passwords, and software encryption firewalls.
The Cloud Security
The cloud is a result of competent security measures. This is a kind of data
security type that is software-based. It monitors and protects data in the cloud
resources. Cloud security companies are consistently implementing and
developing new cloud security tools that are playing a pivotal role in securing
data.
There is a particular myth associated with cloud computing that it is insecure
compared to other data security measures. People think that storing your data
manually is more secure because you can control it. Research has, however,
revealed that storing data in the cloud is safer than storing it physically in a
hard disc. It is also easier to control data stored in the cloud.
In 2018, a research carried out by Alert revealed that data stored on-premise
receives an average of 62 attacks while data kept in the cloud experiences an
average of 25 attacks.
Storing data in the cloud is more secure, saves you the stress of regularly
checking on it, and very affordable. It highly recommended using the cloud
as your data storage platform. The future is even bright for cloud security
thanks to ongoing technological advancements.
The IoT (Internet of Things) Security
Internet of things refers to various critical cyber-physical elements, including
printers, Wi-Fi routers, and CCTV cameras. IoT is a type of data security that
focuses more on the networks, consumer devices, and other places where data
is stored. There exist a lot of IoT devices that are vulnerable to security
breaches. This, therefore, needs severe protective measures from all
concerned users.
According to research, security is the biggest reason why enterprises hesitate
about buying the Internet of things devices. They fear involving it in their
business because sensible data might be accessed by unwarranted personnel.
It, therefore, needs everyone's efforts to come up with measures of how data
and information can be secured through the Internet of things. Failure to this,
we shall be losing critical information and data to unauthorized people who
will ruin it.

If your business is run on online platforms, for instance, someone can hack
into your system and get your products for free. They can also take your
funds and leave you in a financial crisis. This paints the picture of the
importance of data security.
Next, we discuss some of the steps you should take when securing data. Read
on to find out!
Securing Data
Data security is vital not only for business establishments but for a regular
computer user as well. We have discussed the various ways data is essential
to us and why we need to secure it. Losing valuable information like bank
account details, payment information, as well as client information, can be
very difficult to replace. You can imagine the level of damage that can
happen if such information falls into the wrongs hands.
Losing data to natural disasters like fires or floods is crushing and mostly
uncontrollable, but losing such sensitive data to malware infections or
hackers can result in such dire consequences. The good news, however, is
that you can control and prevent cybersecurity attacks. Discussed below are
the measures you need to take towards safeguarding your data.
Assess the Risks
Any data security measure begins with assessing the levels of risk available.
This goes a long way in helping you identify the possible risks and what can
be the case if you lost sensitive data through system crash or malware
infections.
Below are other threats you are likely to identify during a risk assessment
during natural disasters, such as floods, fires, and malicious
damage.
People authorized to have access to data.
Identify individuals that regularly use the Internet and e-mail
systems in which people are allowed to access sensitive data
and those who aren't.
The use of passwords and how you will maintain them.
Which kind of firewall and malware solutions are you going
to use?

Educate and sensitize people working with you about what
they should do when faced with a security breach.
After carefully analyzing the high potential security threats, go ahead and
identify more severe risks and prioritize them. It is also advisable to outline a
business continuity plan that your team will use in case of a system
breakdown. You likewise frequently check security implementations to
ensure they meet the standards of your growing business.
Secure Your Data
After carefully assessing the security threats your data is facing, the next
thing should be coming up with defensive measures to prevent that from
happening. Given the seriousness of the threats sensitive information faces in
the modern world, the best step you can take to keep off intruders should
involve a combination of advanced technology, physical preventive tools as
well as educated staff. Ensure you are operating on well-defined policies and
make your staff is aware of them. Highlighted below are some of the steps
you can take towards securing data.
Data security is vital not only for business establishments but for a regular
computer user as well. We have discussed the various ways data is essential
to us and why we need to secure it. Losing valuable information like bank
account details, payment information, as well as client information, can be
very difficult to replace. You can imagine the level of damage that can
happen if such information falls into the wrongs hands
Install alarms and monitoring cameras in your data center or
office.
Don't allow public access to computers that contain manage
sensitive data.
Come up with active security measures that will restrict
internet access.
Always update the anti-malware system. An outdated system
is as good as useless.
Additionally, ensure the operating system is equipped with
the latest features.
Prevent hacking attacks by installing intrusion detecting

software.
Ensure your system has a reliable supply of power.
Ensure Mobile Data is Secured
In today's world, handheld devices have become a popular way of storing
data and communication. It is, however, alarming how data is lost through
such devices. Handheld devices are very vulnerable to data theft by getting
damaged or being stolen. You, therefore, need to put different measures in
place to ensure data is secured and safeguarded. Below are some of the things
you can do.
Always back up your data on removable devices and stored
on multiple copies.
Whenever the device is left somewhere, always activate the
password protection.
When you are in a public place, always ensure you don't
leave the device in a home, it can be stolen
Mobile devices are very fragile; always ensure you protect
them from impending physical damage.
It takes a lot of effort to protect data from attacks and cyber threats. It might
be costly in some cases, but it is worth every penny. Losing sensitive data to
hackers can be something you will never recover from. To protect your data
when you can!
Importance of Data Security
From the beginning of the article up to this point, you are now are aware of
the significant data carries and why we should protect it. I believe that it has
been well tackled. Next, we discuss the importance of data and why it should
be kept from falling in the wrong hands. Below are some of the many
essential uses of data.
Data is liable
Those of us in the business industry will understand how data is important to

us and what it means by calling it an asset. The information regarding the
type of products and services provided is essential. In business, for example,
you cannot share your strategic plans with and financial objectives with a
competitor, they will use it against you, and you will be on the losing end.
Other forms of essential data, like client information, are also something
precious. It will cost you a lot when such kind of information is breached and
finds its way into the hackers. Not only will the clients sue you, but it will
also affect the company's image seriously. You are therefore advised to keep
information and data secure using the methods we discussed earlier in this
article or risk losing it all. Consequently, it needs everyone's efforts to come
up with measures of how data and information can be secured through the
Internet of things. Failure to this, we shall be losing critical information and
data to unauthorized people who will ruin it.
It Maintains the Business Reputation
Almost all kinds of businesses provide products and services to their
customers or rather clients. When a customer walks into your business
establishments and buys a product or service using the credit card, they trust
you with sensitive information. It is, therefore, up to you to keep such
sensitive data secure and prevent it from reaching unauthorized personnel.
Any kind of security breach, no matter how small that could lead to leaking
of information, can have severe damage to the reputation of your business.
The client whose data has been leaked might take legal action against your
business and trust me; you won't like the consequences. All firms and
companies are, therefore, advised to take data security seriously. It will not
only impact your business negatively by tainting its reputation but by making
you incur extra costs dealing with court proceedings and other legal actions
taken against your business.

Chapter 10: Types of Cyber-Attacks
and How to Prevent Them
In computing, there are situations where sensitive information may face a
threat of access by unwanted people. Computers and computer networks are
the critical points where these data can be exploited and used for various
reasons. People who gain access to this information usually attempt to steal,
benefit, destroy, expose, modify, disable, or control. The access is often
unauthorized and targets computer infrastructures, networks, information
systems, and private data. This way, cyber-attacks can, therefore, be termed
as cyber terrorism or cyber warfare undertaken by individuals, groups,
organizations, or society.
A cyber-attack is, therefore, deliberate access to unauthorized information of
computer networks, systems, and other technological devices by the use of
malicious datasets or codes. The outcome is usually a disruption as well as
the compromise of the information resulting in loss of essential data and
identity theft, among others. Also referred to as computer network attack,
cyber-attacks began in the 1980s and rose over the years. However, measures
have been implemented, especially in government and institutional data, to
ascertain the security of such information. An attacker, in this case, is an
individual, group, or the process of data access to restricted information.
The prevalence of cyber-attacks has become rampant in different regions
globally with 2017, seeing the rise of up to two billion stolen data
accompanied by a ransomware payment reaching two billion US dollars.
Some cyberattacks target private devices, therefore, resulting in identity theft,
especially for banks and credit cards. Others focus on user sensitive details to
access central databases. On the other hand, the world has also experienced
global cyber-attacks where viruses have been planted in computers.
Individuals behind such attacks often highlight their demands and provide an
antivirus after their conditions are met. As such, there have been multiple
types of cyberattacks depending on the attacker and specific data under
threat.
Types of Cyber Attacks

Denial of service attacks also includes distributed denial of service, is where
the attacker targets the resource system of the computer and makes it
unresponsive to service requests. However, the distributed denial of service
attack originates from different host machines damaged by malicious
software from an attacker. This type of cyber-attack does not necessarily
provide direct benefits to the attacker. It only stops the whole process, which
may become quite beneficial if the system is of a business competitor.
Besides, denial of service attacks may come in handy when an attacker wants
to launch an attack hence stops the resource system, including securities and
firewalls, and commence an attack.
Denial of service attacks may also come in different forms, TCP SYN flood
attack, botnets, ping-of-death, smurf, and teardrop. The TCP SYN flood
attack is where the attacker targets Transmission Control Protocols when the
system is awaiting connections requests in a queue and becomes
unresponsive during the initialization of the connection. Teardrop aims the
sequential IP packets by making them overlap, therefore confusing the
system and causing it to crash. Smurf attacks use IP spoofing while ping of
death focuses on IP packets as well. Botnets, on the other hand, are quite
different as they involve millions of computers affected by malware, and the
hacker can choose which to attack as he or she has control over all the
systems.
Malware Attacks
This is another type of cyber-attack consisting of unwanted software being
installed into a computer system without the knowledge of the owner. In most
cases, the software is established when an individual is online or has a
connection where a hacker can gain access to their computers. More so,
malware attacks come in different forms based on where it intends to
damage. Most of them attach to original codes and propagate to simulate the
application or the internet. Common types of malware attacks include macro
viruses, file and system infectors, stealth and polymorphic viruses, logic
bombs, Trojans, ransomware, worms, and droppers.
Viruses are the most common malware attack depending on how they are
meant to infect a given system. Macro viruses are specifically intended to
affect computer applications, for example, Microsoft Word and Excel, when
initialized. Polymorphic viruses focus on encryptions and decryption,

especially when using a decryption program, while stealth viruses are
responsible for compromising malware detection applications and conceal the
scope of an infected file. File and system infectors comprise cyber-attacks
that use a virus to infect specific areas within the computer, such as
executable codes of files and records in the hard disk.
Trojans are programs that hide within essential system applications but
accompany a malicious function. In this case, Trojans allows a hacker to
open and gain access to the necessary files without interacting with securities
installed. Worms are also a type of malware attack that is commonly
transferred by email attachments and activated once the mail is opened.
Droppers are another form of malware but used to spread and hide viruses
making scanning processes difficult to identify malware. Ransomware is the
most dangerous type of malware as it blocks the user from accessing
information; therefore, it may be used as a threat to specific demands to be
met.
Eavesdropping Attacks
These are cyber-attacks which occur when an attacker intercepts network
traffic and gain access to crucial data such as passwords and other
confidential information transferred through the connection. Researchers
have categorized eavesdropping into two, active, and passive eavesdropping.
Passive eavesdropping entails an attacker monitoring and listening to the
message being transferred and learning about it. Active eavesdropping
involves a hacker physical disguising as a beneficial party to the user by
requesting the message to the transmitter in a process refers to as probing or
scanning. Passive eavesdropping is the most dangerous form as they often go
unnoticed when compared to active eavesdropping. The best technique to use
to avoid eavesdropping attacks is through data encryption.
Cross-Site Scripting Attacks
In some cases, an attacker may use cross-site scripting to gain access to
sensitive data through thirty party web resources. That is, the attacker first
establishes the targeted information or system and introduces contents
consisting of malicious JavaScript in the website database. This malicious
program will remain in the database until when the victim opts to requests the
webpage. The website will accompany the content with the page embedded

within the HTML body to the browser of the victim. When the page
completes loading, the malicious script will execute, allowing the attacker to
gain access to the computer.
In some instances, the hacker may choose to accompany other vulnerabilities
that provide more loopholes to access different areas of your computer. The
hacker will then be able to collect all the information needed, including
controlling the machine. Cross-site scripting may take various forms, but
JavaScript is the most supported and standard used on the web today. Cross-
site scripting can, however, affected not only one victim, but also affect
others who load similar websites. As to avoid this type of cyber-attack,
ensure all the web information is first filtered and validated as well as
preventing sending specific information to the resource. Besides, you can
disable client-side scripting, making the user have control of the information
shared through the web resources.
Password Attacks
Passwords are the most common attacks experienced by victims as they are
the sole mechanisms to authenticate the access of user data in specific areas.
Acquiring someone's password is most preferably when peeking on their
devices or ATMs or other peeks. However, this is not cyber-attacks, as
hackers usually gain access to the computer and collect these passwords to
open private accounts through computer connections. Like most cyberattacks,
password attacks come in different forms and include decryption of
passwords, gaining access to the database, outright guessing, and through
social engineering.
One of the most common is brute-force password access, which is the
guessing of different possible potential words or numbers used as passwords
with the intention of one being correct. Another form is through a dictionary
attack where a hacker tries to gain access to the connection and computer,
and copy the encrypted file and compare it to the dictionary with a similar
and possible password format. Some may go ahead and decrypt the password
and gain access. One of the primary countermeasures to avoid password
attacks is by introducing an account lockout policy that automatically locks
after specific password attempts.
Drive-By Attack

These are another common type of cyber-attack where an attacker can readily
spread malware through insecure websites. That is, they quickly install
malicious script in HTTP or PHP codes in one or more webpages targeting
victims who visit these sites. Drive-by scripts may either install the malware
into the victim’s computer directly or redirect them to the websites of the
hacker. In this case, the malware can download immediately the web is
loaded or visiting a given website or pop-up pages. This type of cyber-attack
does not rely on the user clicking anything or accepting any downloads. This
will then enable an attacker to infect your computer without your consent.
When installed into your system, drive-by attacks may infect a program, the
operating system as a whole, or browser with security issues. The primary
solution for this type of cyber-attack is to keep your computer browser,
operating system, and applications updated. You can as well stay away from
websites that look suspicious or possess malicious codes essential for causing
infections. However, understand that any website can be hacked and
compromise the security of your computer. More so, remove any unnecessary
or excess applications and programs as they make your device more
vulnerable to threats. In other words, the more plugins you have, the more
susceptible you are to drive-by cyber-attacks.
Phishing Attacks
Phishing and spear-phishing is the process of sending emails to victims with
the aim of gaining access to their personal information or persuade them to
do something. The emails are often fake but seem genuine and accompany
malware, which quickly loads into your system when you open the
attachment. Some useful links to certain websites that lure you into following
the instructions given and ending up submitting private data to attackers. The
trickery used generally combines social engineering and related techniques to
ensure the victim is well influenced to accept to the terms highlighted.
Attackers usually have a deeper understanding of their victims, therefore,
creating content which suits their personality and relevance.
Identifying these forms of cyberattacks is ordinarily tricky to victims,
henceforth finding it hard to defend or resist from handing over crucial data,
primarily when a hacker uses email spoofing. Others use website cloning,
which commonly fools victims to believe that the emails are legitimate and
from trusted sources. There are several ways to reduce and protect yourself
from phishing attacks, and one of them is through the use of critical thinking

by taking the time to read through and understanding about the sender.
Another form is by hovering on the link by deciphering the URL and
understands it but never click at first. You can also analyze the headers by
learning about the domain and by sandboxing to try and figure out the
legitimacy of the mail.
Man-In-The-Middle Attacks
Man-in-the-middle cyber-attacks occur when an attacker gets access between
the connection of the victim and server. This type also comes in different
forms, which are session hijacking, IP spoofing, and replays. IP spoofing is
where the attacker convinces your computer that it is communicating with a
genuine entity, therefore, allowing for the access. Similarly, the attacker
sends packets with IP source resembling the host instead of the original IP
source address making its accept it and act on it. A replay attack is when the
attacker impersonates the victim by saving old messages and sending them
sooner after the interception. Replays are, however, not valid to hackers as
victims can readily prevent them through nonce and timestamps.
Session hijacking is where the attacker intervenes in a session of trusted
clients and servers while the primary IP address is substituted, and the server
continues with the session. The client first connects to the server, and when
the hijacking happens, the attacker gains control by disconnecting the server
the client. It then replaces the IP address and continues the sessions with the
server as well as the client. With limited countermeasures to man-in-the-
middles cyber-attacks, data encryption, and the use of digital certificates may
play a significant role in preventing these threats. You should know it is
always challenging to understand when an attacker is within a given service;
therefore, crucial to forever remain protected against man-in-the-middle
cyber-attacks.
SQL Injection Attack
This is a driven-database website attack that occurs when an attacker runs a
SQL query within a specific database through the data inputs of a client. The
commands are injected in data-planes to execute predefined SQL instructions.
When injected successfully, SQL queries access confidential and other
sensitive information from the database enabling the attacker to perform the
intended purpose. In this case, the data becomes open to the attacker who

then can read, change, execute operations, copy, recover and issue commands
within the operating system.
For example, a website form may require a user's account name or password,
which can be readily be pulled from the database. When such individuals use
SQL injections successfully, it allows the information to be drawn from the
database and delivered to the attacker at an instant as it already has the details
from the victim. The vulnerabilities typically arise due to SQL lacking the
ability to differentiate between controls and data planes, thus essential for
dynamic SQL, PHP, and ASP. As to protect yourself from this type of cyber-
attack, use the least privilege model, which facilitates permissions in your
database. This model allows for stable codes that only validate input data of
applications through stored procedures and prepared statements.

How to Prevent Cyber Attacks
Limit Individuals Accessing Your System
As already mentioned, among the primary causes of cyberattacks is public
use of computer networks and the sharing of communication devices. This
has been found to contribute to cyber threats and attacks commonly
happening today. As to cub this, you can begin by limiting the number of
people accessing your system, especially strangers and uninvited people. You
can achieve this by securing your computers by updating software and the
use of antiviruses as well as updating the operating system. You can again
use company-approved programs and applications rather than purchasing
from third parties. This method of prevention is quite useful, especially when
you have doubts about people and sources, which tend to cause a threat to
your files.
Learn About Cyber Attacks
You can never begin protecting yourself from something you have no idea
about how it works; therefore, the need to learn the basics. One of the best
ways to do this is through learning about cyber-attacks and become aware of
how they operate and harm computers. Having a general knowledge enables
you to figure out ways of handling threats and the accompanying attacks
when they happen as well as the mitigation measures. This will hence provide
exceptional results, especially when you receive emails that you have no idea
what they are and go ahead understanding instead of clicking every link you
see. Search about facts and continually gain more knowledge with time as
attackers also change their tactics over time.
Regulate System Infiltration
Malware is common, and sometimes avoiding them may become a challenge;
therefore, continually infect more computers globally. However, you can
prevent this type of cyber-attack by readily regulating infiltrations by
malware. As to achieve this, ensure any device inserted in your computer is
free from any malware such as viruses. You can check it while offline to

avoid spreading it through your network. Also, ensure that no third party
accesses your computer and enters unknown data as some may plant-specific
instructions that allow them to control your system remotely.
Enhance Physical Protection
Other than focusing on online, computer programs, and application security,
you should also put in mind the protection of the physical computer itself.
Begin by having a lengthy and robust password of not less than eight
characters with a mixture of lower and upper letters as well as numbers and
symbols. Use identity card authentications where the need is to ascertain your
data, especially when providing security to confidential information. Keep all
these securities protected at all times without having vulnerabilities that may
compromise your cyber-attack security measures.
Ghettoize Networks
Another primary source of computer cyber-attack is through the network,
which connects different devices to the server. The host typically has limited
threats to your system, but third parties, which are hackers, in this case, may
use your connection as an entry point to access your data. Then you have to
conceal these loopholes as they contribute to threats of cyber-attacks. One of
the practices to do is to prevent other people's devices from accessing private
networks by securing stations that facilitate file sharing. Another form is
through becoming very cautious, especially on what you share online, as
some information you share may be used against you. Besides, ensure that
you avoid using public networks with devices that consist of critical and
sensitive data as most hackers may take advantage and benefit from your
mistake.
Constantly Update Your Securities
Most often, the best way to prevent cyber-attacks is to ensure that your
system is full of all applications, software, and programs that facilitate the
needed protection. What many fail to understand is that cyber-attacks,
especially for malware change over time, and if you fail to make an update,

your securities may fail to protect the system. In this case, the best way to
handle these attracts is by ensuring that antiviruses, antispyware, firewalls,
and software in the operating system are updated. Make these updates
regularly to ensure you have the more recent version of your securities. You
should be aware that hackers also understand this, and any delays in making
updates may cost you. As such, ensure that you quickly make the updates as
soon as they are available.

Hacking
with
Kali Linux
A Comprehensive Guide for Beginners
to Learn Basic Hacking,
Cybersecurity, Wireless Networks, and
Penetration Testing
By Dylan Mach

© Copyright 2019 by Dylan Mach - All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or transmitted without direct
written permission from the author or the publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or author,
for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to the information contained within this book. Either
directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell,
use, quote or paraphrase any part, or the content within this book, without the consent of the author or
publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All effort has been executed to present accurate, up to date, and reliable, complete
information. No warranties of any kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is
not engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice. The content within this
book has been derived from various sources. Please consult a licensed professional before attempting
any techniques outlined in this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is the author responsible for
any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as a result of the use of the information contained
within this document, including, but not limited to, — errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.

Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: Definition of Hacking and Types of Hackers
Purpose of Hacking
Types of Hackers
Hacktivist
Grey hat
Ethical Hacker
Cracker
Types of Hacking
DNS Spoofing
Cookie Theft
UI Redress
Virus
Phishing
How Do Hackers Get Access into Computer Systems
Guarding Against Hacking
Chapter 2: Cybersecurity
Cyber Threat Scale
Advancement of Cybersecurity
Protecting the End-User
Chapter 3: Types of Cyber Attacks
Birthday Attack
Eavesdropping Attack
XSS, Cross-Site Scripting Attack
SQL Injection Attack
Password Attack
Drive-By Attack
Phishing and Spear Phishing Attacks
MitM, Man-in-the-Middle Attack
Replay
IP Spoofing
Session Hijacking
DoS, Denial-of Service, and DDoS Distributed Denial-of-Service
Attacks
Botnets

Ping of Death Attack
Smurf Attack
Teardrop Attack
TCP SYN Flood Attack
Chapter 4: Types of Malware
Spyware
Adware
Ransomware
Droppers
Worms
Logic Bombs
Trojans
Stealth Viruses
Polymorphic Viruses
System or Boot-Record Infections
File Infectors
Macro Viruses
Chapter 5: How the Hacking Process Works
Preparation Phase
Chapter 6: Why Hackers Use Linux
Why Hackers Prefer Linux Operating System
Easy to Use
Less RAM Consumption
Linux is the Future
No Requirement for Drivers
Serious Take on Privacy
Hacking Tools are Often Written for Linux
Several Programming Languages Have the Support of Linux
Less Vulnerable
Low Cost
Flexibility
Maintenance
Portable and Light
Command-Line Interface
Multitasking
Network Friendly
Stability

Chapter 7: Kali Linux Installation and Updates
Kali Linux Installation
Requirements for Installation
The Installation Process
Updating Kali Linux
Chapter 8: Installing Kali Linux on Virtual Machine
Chapter 9: How to Organize Kali Linux
Overview of the Desktop
Apache Webserver
Screencasting
Places Menu
Workspaces
Auto-Minimizing Windows
Command-Line Tools
Application Menu
Favorites Bar
Chapter 10: Scanning (nmap, massscan, hping3) and Managing
Networks (Wireshark)
Effective Use of nmap
Enumerating a Huge Quantity of Hosts with Massscan
Massscan Features
Uses of Masscan
Hping3 as a Packet Generator and Network Scanning Tool
Some of the Usages of hping Network Scanning Tool
Securing and Monitoring Your Network with Wireshark
Wireshark Installation
Chapter 11: Firewalls
Functions of Firewalls
The Definition of Personal Firewall
The Need for Personal Firewall
Using a Personal Firewall for Defense
Firewalls Types
SMLI, Stateful Multilayer Inspection Firewalls
NAT, Network Address Translation Firewalls
Proxy Firewalls
NGFW, Next-Generation Firewalls
Chapter 12: Obtaining User Information: Maltego, Scraping,

Shodan/Censys.io
Architecture of Maltego
Launching Maltego
Web Scraping with Python
Shodan and Censys
Chapter 13: Kali Linux on Portable Devices Like Raspberry Pi
Step 1: Installation of Kali on the Raspberry Pi
Installation of Kali to Windows SD Card
Kali installation in OS X SD Card
Step 2: the Display Hook-Up
Step 3: Have Everything Plugged in and Launch
Step 4: Enable Wi-Fi as you Log in
Chapter 14: MalDuino
Elite
Lite
The Hardware
The Setup
The Software
Protecting Yourself From MalDuino
Admin Rights Lockdown
Duckhunt
Physical Protection
Chapter 15: Kismet
Watching the Activities of Wi-Fi User Using Kismet
What We Can Get From Wi-Fi
Essential Tools
Chapter 16: Bypassing a Hidden SSH
Chapter 17: Bypassing a Mac Address Authentication and Open
Authentication
Chapter 18: Hacking WPA and WPA2
Chapter 19: Secure and Anonymous Using Tor, Proxy Chains, and
VPN
What is Tor
Using Proxy Chains
VPNs
Chapter 20: IP Spoofing
Chapter 21: Penetration Testing with Metasploit

Conclusion

Introduction
Congratulations on purchasing Hacking with Kali Linux, and thank you for
doing so.
The following chapters will discuss all of the different parts that we need to
know more about when it is time to work with the idea of hacking and
working with Kali Linux in order to get this all done. There are a lot of
different tools that we are able to utilize when it comes to hacking, but one of
the very best operating systems that we are able to use to make this into a
reality is the Kali Linux system. This guidebook is going to take some time to
go through all of that and learn more about how we can make it all work.
The start of this guidebook is going to take a look at some of the basics of
hacking, the reasons that we would want to spend some time looking at
hacking and using it for our own networks, and a good look at the difference
between ethical hackers, unethical hackers, and everyone in between.
From there, we are going to take a look at a bit about cybersecurity and cyber
attacks. With our modern world and the fact that so many people are online
and trying to share and look at information all of the time, it is no wonder that
hackers are trying to find methods that will allow them to get onto the
computers and networks out there to steal personal and financial information
any time that they would like. That is why we are going to take some time to
look at how we can keep our networks safe and secure with cybersecurity
while also knowing which types of cyber attacks are the most likely.
Now it is time to take this a bit further and look more at how hacking is going
to work. We are going to take a look at the hacking process in more details,
while also looking at malware, and how that, and a few other types of attacks
are going to be able to come into play to help us really see results.
Then it is time to move on to some of the things that we are able to do with
the Kali Linux system. This is often considered one of the best coding
operating systems to work with, and we are going to take the time to look at
what it is about and how we are able to use it for our needs. In this part, we
are going to look at the reasons that people like to work with Linux, how to
set up Kali Linux, how to work with Kali in a Virtual Machine if this is the

best option for us, and even how to organize Kali Linux, so it is ready for
some of the attacks that we want to do.
This is just the beginning of what we are able to do when it comes to hacking.
Now that we have set the stage and we are all ready to go with some of this, it
is time to take it a bit further and look at some of the neat things that we can
use Kali Linux to help us out with. We are going to look at how to scan and
manage our networks, the importance of firewalls, how to obtain user
information when we want, the use of Kali Linux on some of the portable
devices we want to use, and even how to work with MalDuino and Kismet.
This is not all, though. We are going to take a look at a few more of the steps
that we are able to work with when it is time to hack a network of our choice
and gather up the information that we would like. To finish out this
guidebook, we are also going to spend some time looking at how we are able
to bypass a hidden SSHS, how to hack onto the WPA and WPA2 wireless
systems, how to use some of the different tools out there to make sure that
you stay hidden and no one will be able to trace the attacks back to you, and
how we are able to use Metasploit to help us complete our own penetration
testing.
As we can see with this guidebook, there are a ton of different parts that need
to come into play so that we can really complete the attack that we would like
to work with. All of these are different methods that hackers, those who are
brand new and those who have been in the game for some time, are able to
do. When you are looking to protect your own network or the network for
someone else, or you would like to hack onto another network, you will be
happy that you have all of these tools ready to help you get this work done.
There are a lot of cool things that we are able to do when it is time to work
with the process of hacking, and having this all prepared and ready to go can
be one of the best methods you can choose to protect your own network.
When you are ready to learn more about hacking and all of the tools and
techniques that we are able to use when hacking along with the Kali Linux
system, make sure to check out this guidebook to get started.              
There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much
useful information as possible; please enjoy!

Chapter 1: Definition of Hacking and
Types of Hackers
The process of hacking involves getting unauthorized access into a computer
system, or a group of computer systems. Hackers get access to systems by
cracking codes or passwords. The technique hackers use to obtain code or
password is cracking and a hacker is someone that undertakes the process of
hacking. Hackers can hack an email account, a social media site, a website,
an entire LAN network, or a group of systems. Ultimately, it is through
password algorithms programs that the hackers obtain access to a password.
For each of their daily needs, people and also businesses make use of laptops
or computers. For a seamless flow of business applications and information,
several organizations have WAN, wide area network, website or domain, or a
computer network. As a result, there is a high-risk exposure of these
networks to hackers as well as the outside world of hacking.
Purpose of Hacking
Mostly, the objective of some hackers is to cause certain reputational or
financial harm to an entity, group, or person through their malicious or
criminal intent. They achieve this by spreading malicious or incorrect rumors
that can cause the disruption of the business after they embezzle their funds
or steal their confidential data. Companies can find themselves in some
socially detrimental situations with this misleading information. Also, as
punishable by law, hacking is a form of internet or cybercrime. However,
government law agencies and specific accredited institutions engage in
another side of hacking on a professional level. With this case, their intention
is to prevent individuals from causing any harm or counter the wrong
intentions of the hackers. Also, this type of hacking is done to protect and
save the citizens and society at large.
Types of Hackers
It is quite essential for us to differentiate between the objectives and roles of
hackers by knowing their types to get the detail on the above-broached
objectives.

Hacktivist
Leaving contentious information on a website that they hack is the focus of
these types of hackers. They do this to spread religious, social, and political
messages. Also, other nations can be targeted by these hackers.
Grey hat
These types of hackers have no intention of fraudulent when they access a
system without any authorization. They are between the black and white hat
hackers. The objective of these hackers is to show the stakeholders of the
system parts of its weaknesses and vulnerabilities.
Ethical Hacker
The objective of these types of hackers is to eliminate and identify suspected
weaknesses. They assess systems by getting access as officially and
recognized stamped hackers and they are known also as white hat. A few
things they also do is to retrieve critical information needed for security
purposes, crack codes of anti-social or illegal setups, and vulnerability
assessment. They are paid, certified, and trained experts.
The ethical hackers are the only individuals who are allowed to do this kind
of hacking legally. They know the same kinds of rules to follow as a black
hat hacker and will use some of the same ideas along the way. But they have
usually gained permission to go through and do some of these options, rather
than trying to do it to gain their own personal advantage.
For the ethical hacker, the goal is to keep the system as safe and secure as
possible along the way. They want to either protect their own network, or the
network of someone else who knows what they are here. This will make it
easier for them to get onto the network without doing so in an illegal manner.
These hackers are going to use a lot of the same methods for their attacks, as
we see with some of the other types of hackers. This means that they are
going to rely on penetration testing, mapping out attacks, and more. But they
are going to do it as a way to help them figure out where the vulnerabilities in
the system are rather than looking at ways that you can exploit them.
Cracker
These are black hat. They secure entry into websites or computer networks

through an unauthorized manner and also with a mala fide intention. There is
also an attachment of personal gain in their intention through privacy rights
violations to benefit criminal organizations, stealing of funds from online
bank accounts, stealing confidential organizational information, and so on.
These days, these hackers engage in their activities in a shady manner and
they belong to this category.
Types of Hacking
The threats that websites have to deal with are some of the most frequent
threats of hacking. Hackers engage in the process of making the contents of a
website public or changed with the use of unauthorized access. The
individuals or groups that are opposed to social or political organizations
most times target their websites. Also, they hack national or governmental
information website, and this is entirely common. Here are some of common
the hacking methods they use on the websites:
DNS Spoofing
Sometimes, users might forget about the cache data of a domain or website,
and this method of hacking uses this cache data. Then, it points the data to
another malicious website.
Cookie Theft
Cookies contain login passwords, confidential information, and so on, and
with the use of malicious codes, hackers will have access to the website to
steal cookies. When a legitimate company uses these, it is going to help them
provide you with a better service overall. But it does store a lot of extra
information on you and your system, and if the hacker is able to steal these
cookies, they will be able to use them in any manner that they would like.
This could be dangerous and is a big reason that it is often best to turn off and
disable the use of cookies in the first place.
UI Redress
Hackers use this method by creating a fake user interface. Thus, users will be
directed to another website altogether when they click with the intention of
going to a specific site.

Virus
When hackers get access to a specific website, they release a virus into the
files of the website. Their objectives are to corrupt the resources or
information on such a website. There are a lot of different types of viruses
that we are able to meet up with, and they can be spread through email
attachments, websites that have been compromised, and more.
These viruses can take over the computer, shutting down files, stealing
information, and even spreading to some of the contacts that you have on
your system to get the information that the hackers would like to have. This is
why it is so important to go through and be careful about the kinds of
websites that you open, and to make sure that you are not going to websites
that could harm your computer.
Phishing
They use this method to replicate the original website, and as such, the
hackers will easily seize and misuse the unsuspecting user’s information like
credit card details, account password, and so many more.
Many times these are going to be sent through email. The email is going to
appear as it comes from the legitimate source, such as your bank or another
site that you spend some time on, asking for you to check out a message or
change your username and password.
Because the hacker does a great job of hiding things and making it look
official, it does not take that long for people to fall for it. Even the website is
going to look legitimate so it is easy to click on the different items and enter
the information. If someone does fall for this, the hacker is able to take all of
that information and use it to actually get into the account of yours that they
would like.
How Do Hackers Get Access into Computer Systems
We can get information by working and communicating with others through
the help of some good guys in the computer world that create networks. And
then, for a variety of reasons, we have some not-so-good individuals that
cause troubles by using their computers to worm their way into those
networks. These set of individuals are hackers and part of the things they
engage in include:

Shut down a website by creating heavy traffic to it
Obtain credit card information
Get passwords
Steal secrets
Whether by disrupting business as usual or stealing information for their
gain, hackers are always at work. Every now and then, there will always be
news about them, and at a point, you may likely be wondering about just
exactly what hackers are doing. They are always getting in the system by
stealing passwords. For them to crack the security of a network, the first step
for them is to find out a password. As a result, to make your password hard to
figure out by anyone, it is quite useful to change them regularly. For you to
know what hackers do when people discuss them, here are some key terms
that you may probably hear about them:
Trojan horse: this technique appears to be a helpful program
and users are tricked into clicking and opening it. But the
computers of such users can get unexpected attacks which can
be behind the scenes or unnoticed. Because these are going to
sneak onto the computer through methods that are secret, such
as being on a program that seems legitimate, it is hard to detect
them. But when the Trojan horse gets into the system, it can
open up back doors and other things to help the hacker get the
information that they want.
Session hijacking: this technique involves hackers inserting
malicious data packets into an actual data transmission over the
internet connection.
Script kiddie: this is unsophisticated or young hackers who act
like a real hacker while using hackers’ tools. These individuals
are not going to care that much about learning how to hack.
They want to complete an attack, but they don’t really care
about the basics that go with it or the codes that they need to
use. Instead, they are going to just take on some of the tools and
programs that are already out there and will use these to help
them out. They just want to complete the hack and get the
information out of it, without having to worry about learning

any of the techniques along the way.
Root kit: an intruder can disguise and expand his control over
your system by using this set of tools.
Root access: for any hacker to get complete control over a
system, root access is the highest level of access. Root access is
the most desired by serious hackers to a computer system.
Email worm: hackers use a natural-looking email message to
send a mini-program or virus-laden script to an unsuspecting
victim.
Denial-of-service attack: hackers use this method to flood a
website with false traffic, thereby preventing the system of the
victim or crippling it from handling its normal traffic. This one
is going to turn down the server for a particular company and
can make it hard for legitimate users to get onto the system at
all. This allows the hacker to have a chance to leave a Trojan or
a back door or something else on that network.
Distributed Denial of Service: This one is going to
be a bit different because it is going to utilize more
than one computer to do the attack. In the DoS, the
hacker is just using one computer, and the firewall
can usually see that IP address and will stop
allowing the service from that address. With the
DDoS, the hacker is using a lot of different
computers to do the process which makes it harder
for the firewall to stop the attack.
Buffer overflow: hackers use this method by overrunning an
application buffer to deliver malicious commands to a system.
Back door: hackers get access to a computer system using this
secret pathway. Trojan horses, viruses, and other types of
malware are able to come in and utilize this option to help them
get onto the system and come back and forth as many times as
they would like. If you are trying to protect your own computer
or another system, make sure that when you are all done, you fix
it all up so there are no potential back doors for a hacker to get
through.

Guarding Against Hacking
A persistent threat that is continuously affecting the security of a nation and
its citizens is hacking. At the level of the individual, when hackers wipe away
the entire hard-earned financial savings of someone, it can result in untold
financial losses. Also, it can lead to long-term repercussions and major
financial losses through the theft of data at the organizational level. It is
essential to block this vicious menace and safeguard it.
There are a lot of things that you are able to do to make sure that you can
keep your own network safe against another hacker. Setting this up well, and
being careful about how your own network is going to behave is going to be
so important to keep the hackers out. Some of the different steps that you are
able to take in order to guard against any hackers that would like to get on
your network will include:
1. Be careful about the emails that you use. Many of the attacks
that we are going to explore in this guidebook are going to be
activated with the help of email. This isn’t true all of the time.
But if you are careful with some of the emails that you open,
especially the attachments, then you can avoid a lot of these
attacks from a hacker.
2. Pick out some strong passwords that are harder to guess or get
through with a brute force attack. Pick out passwords that are
long, use a combination of letters, numbers and symbols, and
ones that are not going to be related back to you or easy to guess
at all. Many hackers are going to start by trying to attack your
passwords because this is a weak point in your security. You can
ix this with the help of a strong password.
3. Do a penetration test to look for some of the vulnerabilities that
are on the system. We will take a look at how to work with
penetration testing later on, but this is a great way to figure out
which places the hacker may try to use in order to get onto your
network. Doing one for yourself will help to keep it protected.
4. Change passwords on a regular basis. When you change the
password on a regular basis, it is a lot harder for the hacker to
guess what it is or use some of the other methods of password

cracking to get through with the help of the password.
5. Do not share information about the network with anyone else.
Any important and sensitive information about your network
needs to be kept secret and hidden. The more people who know
about your network, the more likely it is that the information
will get out, and a hacker will be able to utilize this.
6. Consider encrypting the information that you send to others in
your communications. This makes it hard for anyone who does
not have the right key to read any of the information that you are
sending, even if it does get intercepted.
7. Pick out a strong security protocol to protect your network.
Make sure that you are not working with the WEP option
because this one is often easier for a hacker to get through.
While the WPA and WPA2 are still options that are vulnerable
to an attack, they are a lot stronger and can keep you safer along
the way.
8. Use anti-malware and anti-virus software. These will make it
harder for any of the attacks that the hacker is trying to send
your way to get through.
9. Make sure that you are updating your software and operating
system as often as it is needed. These updates are going to help
cut out some of the vulnerabilities that are found in the operating
system you use, and other software, so doing the update will
make it harder for a hacker to get onto your system.
As you can see, there are going to be a lot of options that you are able to
work with when it is time to protect your computer compared to some of the
hacks that are coming your way. Make sure to work with some of these
options, and you will find that it is a lot harder for a hacker to get on your
system and use it for their own advantage along the way.

Chapter 2: Cybersecurity
The practice of defending data, networks, electronic systems, mobile devices,
servers, and computers from malicious attacks is cybersecurity. Also, they
refer to it as electronic information security or information technology
security. Common categories can also fit into the terms as well as a variety of
contexts, from mobile to business computing.
The most unpredictable cybersecurity factor is end-user
education. When people fail to follow healthy security practices,
they can accidentally introduce a virus to an otherwise secure
system. Thus, it is quite vital for the security of any organization
to educate its employees not to plug in unidentified USB drives
and to delete suspicious email attachments.
For any causes of loss of data or operations, the manner with
which an organization responds to a cybersecurity incident is the
business continuity and disaster recovery. And for the
organization to return to the same operating capacity as before
the event, the processes that dictate how the organization
restores its information and operation are the disaster recovery
policies. While the organization is attempting to operate without
specific resources, the organization has a plan that it falls back
on, which is the business continuity.
The decisions and procedures of protecting and handling data
assets are operational security. This process encompasses the
activities that determine where and how data may be shared or
stored and the users’ permissions while accessing a network.
When data is in transit or in storage, the privacy and integrity of
data are protected by the information security.
For devices and software to be free of threats is the focus of the
application security. Even though it is designed to protect data, a
compromised application could provide access to the data.
Before the deployment of a device or program, the design phase
is the beginning of the successful security.
Irrespective of if an attack may come from opportunistic

malware or targeted attackers, the practice of securing a
computer network from intruders is the network security.
Cyber Threat Scale
Every year, about $19 billion is spent by the U.S. government on
cybersecurity. However, the pace at which the cyber-attacks are evolving is
quite fast. According to NIST, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, real-time monitoring of all electronic resources is recommended
to aid in early detection and combat the proliferation of malicious code.
Cybersecurity counter three-fold threats and they are:
1. To cause fear or panic, the intention of cyberterror is to
undermine electronic systems
2. Most times, politically motivated information gathering is
involved in cyber-attacks
3. For financial gain or to cause disruption, groups or single actors
can target systems through cybercrime.
Ransomware, Trojans, spyware, worms, and viruses are some of the common
techniques attackers utilize to control networks or computers. For
surreptitious data collection, they make use of Trojans and spyware and to
damage or self-replicate systems or files. They use worms or viruses. All the
information of the user is encrypted by ransomware, who waits for an
opportunity to do so, and for the use to get access to their encrypted
information, there will be demands for payment. A legitimate-looking
download can contain a malware payload and they use it and also unsolicited
email attachment to spread malicious code.
Irrespective of size, all industries have their fair share of the cybersecurity. In
recent years, government, finance, manufacturing, and healthcare are some of
the industries that reported the most cyberattacks. Since these industries
collect medical and financial data, several of these sectors are more appealing
to cybercriminals. However, they can also target all businesses that use
networks for customer attacks, corporate espionage, and customer data.
More than before, the world relies on technology. As such, there is a surge in
digital data creation. Today, computers are used to store a great deal of that
data by governments and businesses, and they transmit it across networks to

other computers. There is vulnerability in devices and their underlying
systems that undermine the objectives and health of an organization when
exploited. For any business, there can be a range of devastating consequences
with a data breach. Through the loss of partner and consumer trust, a data
breach can unravel the reputation of a company. A company can lose its
competitive advantage through the loss of vital data such as intellectual
property or source files. Also, because of non-compliance with data
protection regulations, corporate revenue can be impacted through a data
breach. About $3.6 million is the average cost that a data breach can cost an
affected organization. It is quite critical for organizations to implement and
adopt a strong cybersecurity approach with high-profile data breaches making
media headlines.
Advancement of Cybersecurity
The focus of traditional cybersecurity is on the implementation of defensive
measures around a defined perimeter. BYOD, Bring Your Own Device and
remote workers are the recent enablement initiatives that have expended the
attack surface, reduced the visibility into cyber activity, and dissolved the
perimeter. Today, despite the record levels of security spending, there is a
rapid increment in breaches. The focus is on human-centric cybersecurity for
a global organization. It is a new approach that, instead of an exponential
number of growing threats, places focus on changes in user behavior. Where
data resides, human-centric cybersecurity extends security controls into all
the systems and also offers insight into the manner with which an end-user
interacts with data even when the organization is not in control exclusively.
Ultimately, to reduce threat detection and investigation times as well as
prioritize and surface the most serious threats, this approach is designed to
identify behavioral anomalies.
Protecting the End-User
So, what are the security measures provided by cybersecurity for systems and
users? First, to encrypt files, emails, and other vital data, cybersecurity relies
on cryptographic protocols. Not only does this technique guard against theft
or loss, but it also protects information in transit. Also, the computer is
scanned by the end-user security software for pieces of malicious code,

quarantines this code, and then deletes it from the system. For malicious code
hidden in MBR, Master Boot Record with a specific design to wipe or
encrypt data from the hard drive of computers, security programs can also
remove them after it has detected them. There is also a focus on real-time
malware detection by electronic security protocols. For some to monitor the
behavior of a program and its code to defend against Trojans and viruses that
change their shape with each execution, both metamorphic and polymorphic
malware, they make use of behavioral analysis and heuristic. From the
network of a user, security programs can confine potentially malicious
programs to a virtual bubble to learn how to better detect new infections and
analyze their behavior. And as experts of cybersecurity identify new ways to
combat new threats, security programs continue to evolve new defenses.

Chapter 3: Types of Cyber Attacks
With the use of several techniques to destroy, alter, or steal information or
data systems, any targeted offensive action that focuses on personal,
computer devices, infrastructures, or computer information systems is a
cyberattack. Without further ado, here are some of the common cyberattacks
today:
Birthday Attack
The creation of the birthday attacks is developed against hash algorithms
which people use to confirm the integrity of a digital signature, software, or a
message. A fixed length MD, message digest, which is independent of the
input message length, is produced by a processed hash function message. The
message has the characteristics of this MD uniquely. The probability of
finding two random messages is the reference for the birthday attack, which,
when processed by a hash function, generates the same MD. The attacker can
safely replace the message of the user with his if the attacker calculates a
similar MD for the message as the user has. And even if they compare MDs,
the receiver will not be able to detect the replacement.
Eavesdropping Attack
Attackers intercept the network traffic for the eavesdropping attack to
happen. For some confidential information that a user might be sending over
the network such as credit card numbers and passwords, an attacker can
obtain those data by eavesdropping. There are two types of eavesdropping
attackers, and they are active and passive:
Active eavesdropping: by sending queries to transmitters, the
attackers will disguise themselves as friendly units as they
actively grab the information. They call this process as
tampering, scanning, or probing.
Passive eavesdropping: when attackers listen to the message
transmission in the network, they will detect the information.
Also, since by conducting passive eavesdropping before active attacks

require the attacker to gain knowledge of the friendly units, quite essential
than spotting active ones is detecting passive eavesdropping attacks. To guard
against eavesdropping, the best countermeasure is data encryption.
XSS, Cross-Site Scripting Attack
For running scriptable applications or scripts in the web browser of the
victim, it is the third-party web resources that the XSS attacks use.
Essentially, the attacker will use malicious JavaScript by injecting a payload
into the database of a website. Using the payload of the attacker as part of the
HTML body, the website will transmit the page to the browser of the victim
to execute the malicious script when the victim requests a page from the
website. For example, the attacker can use the cookie from the server of the
attacker after extracting it for session hijacking when it sends this cookie of
the victim. When they use XSS to exploit more vulnerability, there can be the
most dangerous consequences. Attackers can control and access the machine
of the victim remotely, collect as they discover network information, capture
screenshots, or log keystrokes in addition to stealing cookies through these
vulnerabilities. Since there is a wide support for JavaScript on the web, it is
the most widely abused while, within Flash, ActiveX, and VBScript, they can
take advantage of XSS.
Data input can be sanitized by the developers when users in an HTTP request
before reflecting it back to defend against XSS attacks. And before echoing
back anything to the user, it is essential to see that all data is escaped, filtered,
and validated, including the values of query parameters during searchers.
Special characters like >, <, /, &, ?, spaces can be converted to their
respective URL encoded equivalent of HTML. Users can have the option of
disabling client-side scripts.
SQL Injection Attack
For websites that are database-driven, one common issue is the SQL
injection. The process happens when, from client to server, a malefactor
executes a SQL query to the database through the input data. In order to run
predefined SQL commands, it is possible to insert SQL commands into data-
plane input, for example, instead of the password or login. From the database,
sensitive data can be exploited by a successful SQL injection. Also, it can

issue commands to the operating system, recover the content of a given file,
execute administration operations like shutdown on the database, and also
modify (delete, update, or insert) database data. For example, the account of a
user can be requested by a web form on a website and then to pull up the
connected account information using dynamic SQL, send it to the database.
The process can leave a hole for attackers even when this works for users
who are properly entering their account number.
There is no specific distinction between the data and control planes with the
vulnerability to this type of cybersecurity attack. Thus, if a site utilizes
dynamic SQL, SQL injections can work mostly. Also, because of the
prevalence of older functional interfaces, SQL injection is quite common
with ASP and PHP applications. And due to the availability of the
programmatic interface nature, the less likely easily exploited SQL injections
are ASP.NET and J2EE. In your database, apply the least0privilege model of
permission to protect yourself from a SQL injection attacks. It is vital not to
include any dynamic SQL as you adhere to the process and parameterized
queries for the prepared statements. And to prevent injection attacks, you will
require a strong database for the executed code. Also, at the application level,
it is vital to validate input data against a white list.
Password Attack
Obtaining passwords tend to be the effective and common attack approaches
since to authenticate users to an information system, passwords are the most
commonly used mechanism. Through outright guessing, gaining access to a
password database, using social engineering, acquiring unencrypted
passwords by sniffing the connection to the network, or looking around the
desk of a person, attackers can get access to the password of a person. Then,
they can use a systematic or random manner to execute the last approach.
Using the dictionary attack, attack attempts to gain access to
the network or computer of a user by using a dictionary of
common passwords. Attackers may compare the results after
applying similar encryption to a commonly used password
dictionary as they copy an encrypted file that contains the
passwords.
Attackers may hope that one password will work after using a

random approach to guess different passwords. This process is
called Brute-force. The process tends to be logical for attackers
when they use hobbies, title, job, name, and similar terms of the
person to guess passwords related to the person.
An account lockout policy that will lock your account after some invalid
password attempts is all that is needed to protect yourself from brute-force
and dictionary attacks.
Drive-By Attack
The prevalent technique to spread malware is the drive-by download attacks.
On one of the pages, attackers will have a malicious script planted into PHP
or HTTP code. With this planted, the script could redirect the victim to a site
controlled by the hackers or might install malware directly onto the visitor’s
computer. When viewing or visiting a pop-up window or an email message or
when you are visiting a website, drive-by downloads can take place. You can
be infected with a drive-by attack even if you don’t open a malicious email
attachment or click on a download button. For you to enable the attack, you
may not necessarily have to do anything, which makes drive-by attack
different from other kinds of cybersecurity attacks. Due to a lack of updates
or unsuccessful updates, a drive-by download can take advantage of a web
browser, operating system, or an app that contained security flaws.
You may be required to avoid websites that could contain malicious code and
keep your operating systems or browsers up to date to guard yourself against
drive-by attacks. Even though those websites are liable to hacking, try to
stick to the sites you use normally. And always delete unnecessary apps or
programs from your device. Drive-by attacks can exploit more vulnerability
on your system when you have more plug-ins.
Phishing and Spear Phishing Attacks
The purpose of a phishing attack is to influence users to do something or gain
personal information by sending an email that seems to originate from trusted
sources. This type of attack utilizes technical trickery and social engineering.
Malware can be loaded into your computer through an attachment of an
email. Also, you can be tricked into handing over your personal information

or downloading the malware through a link to an illegitimate website. A
phishing activity that is quite targeted is spear phishing. A bit of research
goes into the targets by the attacker, after which relevant and personal
messages are created. Spear phishing appears to be quite hard to be identified
and guarding against it can also be harder. Email spoofing is one of the
simplest approaches hackers use to conduct a spear-phishing attack. They
make the email seem like it is coming from a known person like your partner
or management since they have falsified the information in the section
“From” of the email. Also, website cloning is another method that scammers
use to infuse credibility to their story. They will fool you to enter login
credentials or personally identifiable information, PII.
Here are some methods you can engage in cutting down on the risk of
phishing:
Sandboxing: you can make use of a sandbox environment to
test the content of the email, clicking the links inside the email,
or logging activity from opening the attachment
Email header analysis: how an email got to your address is the
purpose of email headers. As is stated in the email, there must be
similarity in the domain of the “Return-Path” and the “Reply-to”
parameters.
Hovering over the links: don’t attempt to click it when you
move your mouse over the link. You will know where it will
actually take you when you hover your mouse over the link, and
to decipher the URL, you will need to apply critical thinking.
Critical thinking: just because you have 200 other unread
messages in your inbox or you are stressed or busy, you will
take it that an email is the real deal. You will want to take a
minute to analyze the email.
MitM, Man-in-the-Middle Attack
In the situation where a hacker plants itself between a server and the
communications, a MitM attack is happening. Some of the man-in-the-middle
attack types include:

Replay
Attackers can impersonate one of the participants by intercepting and saving
old messages and attempt to send them later; thereby, a replay attack is taking
place. You can use a string that changes later or a random number to counter
which nonce or session timestamps to easily counter it.
IP Spoofing
IP spoofing happens when a system provides the attacker with access to it,
thinking that it is communicating with a trusted, known entity. A target host
gets a trusted, known host from the attacker who, instead of its own IP source
address, sends a packet with such an IP source. It is possible for the target
host to act upon it after accepting the packet.
Session Hijacking
Between the network server and a trusted client, attackers can hijack a
session in this type of MitM attack. While the belief of the server is that of a
communication with the client as it continues the session, there will be a
substitution of the IP address of the attacking computer for the trusted client.
For example, the process of the attack can go thus:
1. There is a connection by the client to a server.
2. The client’s control is gained by the computer of the attacker.
3. The computer of the attacker disconnects the client from the
server.
4. The attacker uses their IP address to replace that of the IP
address of the client, thereby, spoofing the sequence numbers of
the client.
5. There is a continuous dialog by the computer of the attacker
with the server, and the belief of the server is that the
communication still continues with the client.
For the prevention of all MitM attacks at present, there is no configuration or
single technology to do the magic. Overall, effective safeguards against
MitM attacks are digital certification and encryption, with both assuring
integrity and confidentiality of communications. However, that encryption

might not help with the way attackers will inject a man-in-the-middle attack.
For example, the public key of a man named Greg may be intercepted by an
attacker and as such, makes the substitution of that key as his key. Then,
anyone could unknowingly use the substituted public key by the attacker,
thinking they are sending an encrypted message to Greg. Therefore, the
intended message for Greg can be read by the attacker and then uses the
genuine Greg’s encrypted key to send the message to Greg, and Greg will
never notice that the message has been compromised. Also, before sending
the message to Greg, the attacker can modify the message. Ultimately,
because of the MitM attack, Greg will believe that his information is
protected since he is using encryption.
Now, how do you distinguish between the ownership of the public key
between the two of them? Solving such a problem like this instigates the
development of hash functions and certificate authorities. The following
technique can be utilized when someone wants to be sure that an attacker will
not see a message they want to send to Greg and that the message will indeed
come from that message without any modification from an attacker:
1. A symmetric key will be encrypted by the person after they have
created it with their own public key.
2. Then, the person will forward the encrypted symmetric key to
Greg.
3. After that, the person will digitally sign a hash function of the
message that they have computed.
4. Then, with the use of the symmetric key, the person will encrypt
the signed hash message and their message and then sends
forward the whole thing to Greg.
5. Since only Greg has the private key to decrypt the encryption,
Greg will be able to receive the symmetric key from the person.
6. Since he has the symmetric key, the only person that can decrypt
the symmetric signed hash and encrypted message is Greg.
7. And because Greg can compare the received message’s hash
with digitally signed one and can compute the hash of the
received message, Greg can confirm that the message has not
been altered.
8. Since only the person can sign the hash for it to verify with the

person’s public key, Greg can also prove to himself that the
person was the sender.
DoS, Denial-of Service, and DDoS Distributed Denial-
of-Service Attacks
When the resources of a system cannot respond to service requests, it means
a denial-of-service attack has overwhelmed such a system. Though, the
attacker controls the malicious software that they have infected in a large
number of other host machines, the attack of a DDoS is also on the resources
of a system. Attackers don’t gain direct benefit from denial-0f-service, unlike
attacks that they developed to increase or gain access. DoS attacks satisfy
some of the attackers. However, there may be real enough benefits for
attackers if the attacked resources belong to a business competitor. Also, for
attackers to launch a new type of attack, they tend to result in DoS attacks to
take a system offline. Here are some of the various kinds of DDoS and DoS
attacks:
Botnets
For hackers to implement DDoS attacks, they can inflect millions of systems
with malware using botnets. And to carry out the attacks against the target
systems, they use these bots or zombie systems. Most times, these will
overwhelm the processing capacity and bandwidth of the target system. And
since the locations of the botnets are quite differing, it can be difficult to trace
these DDoS attacks. The mitigation of botnets can arise through:
Using black hole filtering. Before it enters a protected network,
it drops undesirable traffic. The host of the Border Gateway
Protocol is required to forward routing updates to ISP routers in
the event of detecting a DDoS attack. At the next hop, null0
interface will receive all traffic heading to victim servers.
To deny traffic from spoofed addresses, using RFC3704
filtering, which its correct source network can be traced for that
traffic. For example, from bogon list addresses, packets will be
dropped by RFC3704 filtering.

Ping of Death Attack
Ping of death attacks makes use of an IP size over the maximum of 65,535
bytes to ping a target system using IP packets. The IP packet is fragmented
by the attackers since IP packets of this size are not allowed. Then, other
crashes can ensue as well as buffer overflow when the target system
reassembles the packet. When you use a firewall, you can block the attack of
the ping of death as the IP packets that have been fragmented will be checked
for maximum size.
Smurf Attack
Attackers saturate a target network with traffic with the ICMP as well as
using IP spoofing with this attack. Attackers target the broadcast IP addresses
with the use of ICMP echo requests. As such, the origin of these ICMP
requests is from the address of a spoofed victim. For example, for the
attackers to broadcast address 10.255.255.255, the attacker would spoof an
ICMP echo request from 10.0.0.10 if the intended victim address is 10.0.0.10.
All IPs in the range will get this request, and it would overwhelm the network
since all the responses are going back to 10.0.0.10. Not only can this method
generate a vast amount of network congestion, but it can also be automated as
it can be repeatable. You may want to disable IP-directed broadcasts at the
routers for you to protect your devices from this attack. Then, you will be
able to protect the ICMP echo broadcast request at the network devices. Also,
to keep them from responding to ICMP packets from broadcast addresses,
another option is to configure the end systems.
Teardrop Attack
Attackers use this method to offset fields in sequential Internet Protocol
packets by causing the fragmentation and length to overlap one another on
the attacked host. Though it will fail, during the process, there will be an
attempt by the attacked system to reconstruct packets. Then, the system will
crash eventually due to confusion. You may want to block ports 445 and 139
as you disable SMBv2 for you to protect against this DoS attack if you don’t
have patches.
TCP SYN Flood Attack

It is during a TCP session initialization handshake when attackers exploit the
use of the buffer space that they use this attack. The small in-process queue if
the target system will be flooded with connection requests from the device of
the attackers. However, when the target system replies to those requests, it
doesn’t respond. And while waiting for the response from the device of the
attacker, the process will cause the target system to time out. Ultimately,
when the connection queue fills up, it makes the system to become unusable
or crash. For you to countermeasure a TCPSYN flood attacks, here are some
preventions:
On open connections, decrease the timeout, and increase the size
of the connection queue
For you to stop inbound SYN packets, place servers behind a
firewall configured

Chapter 4: Types of Malware
The unwanted software that someone installs in your system without your
consent is the precise definition of malicious software. There can be a
legitimate attachment of this software to propagate and code, meaning that,
across the Internet, it can replicate itself or lurk useful applications. A few
common malware types include:
Spyware
They use spyware to collect user’s browsing habits, their computer, as well as
their information. And without your knowledge, spyware tracks everything
you do, and a remote user gets those data. Also, spyware can have malicious
programs from the Internet installed or downloaded. When you install
another freeware application, spyware is usually a separate program that is
installed unknowingly and its working is quite similar to adware.
Adware
Companies use adware, a software application for marketing purposes. When
any program is running, there will be a display of the advertising banners.
While you browse any website, you can download adware automatically to
your computer. On the screen of your computer, through a bar or pop-up, you
can view it.
Ransomware
This type of malware threatens to delete or publish the data of the victim after
blocking them unless there will be payment of a ransom by the victim. The
more advanced malware utilizes the cryptoviral extortion technique. Doing
this will encrypt the files of the victim and without the decryption key, makes
it almost impossible to recover. It can be quite hard for a knowledgeable
individual to reverse the lock on the system with the use of some simple
computer ransomware.
Droppers
For the installation of viruses on computers, they make use of a program
called a dropper. Virus-scanning software cannot detect a dropper since it is

not affected by malicious code in several instances. Also, for virus software
that is resident on a compromised system, a dropper can connect to the
internet and download updates.
Worms
Worms propagate across computers and networks as self-contained programs,
and since they have no attachment to a host file, they differ from viruses.
They use email attachment to spread worms and it gets activated when you
open the program. Apart from conducting malicious activities, the worm can
also send a copy of itself to all contact of the email address of an infected
computer. Then, there can be an event of denial-of-service attacks against
nodes on the network when a worm spreads across the internet and overload
email servers.
Logic Bombs
Appended to an application is a type of malicious software, which is a logic
bomb. A specific occurrence triggers it such as a specific time and date or a
logical condition.
Trojans
Usually, Trojans has a malicious function and are hidden in a useful program.
Since Trojans do not replicate, this major trait separates it from viruses. Also,
attackers can exploit a backdoor established by a Trojan to launch attacks on
a system. For example, so hackers can perform an attack after using it to
listen, they can program a Trojan to open a high-numbered port.
Stealth Viruses
For stealth viruses to conceal themselves, they take over the functions of a
system. The report of the software is that of uninfected since they have
compromised the malware detection. They change the time and date of the
last modification of the file and conceal any increase in the size of an infected
file.
Polymorphic Viruses
When the viruses vary cycles of decryption and encryption, they use this

process to conceal themselves. So, initially decrypted by a decryption
program is a connected mutation engine and the encrypted virus. A code area
will be thus be infected by the encrypted virus. Then, there will be a
development of a new decryption routine by the mutation engine. Using an
algorithm corresponding to the new decryption routine, a copy of the virus
and the mutation engine will then be encrypted by the virus. The new code
will then have an attachment of the encrypted package of virus and mutation
engine. Thus, the process continues to repeat itself. It is quite tricky to detect
such viruses. However, due to the several modifications of their source code,
they have a high level of entropy. For quick detection, you can use Process
Hacker.
System or Boot-Record Infections
The hard disks will give a record of a boot-record by the virus attached to the
master boot. So it can propagate to other computers and disks, it will look at
the boot sector and load the virus into memory when you start the system.
File Infectors
These types of viruses associate themselves with executable code like .exe
files. As the code loads, the virus will be installed. And with the creation of a
virus file with a similar name, which is an .exe extension, another version of
a file infector will connect itself with a file. Thus, the virus code will execute
when the file is opened.
Macro Viruses
Those that get infected by these viruses are applications like Excel or
Microsoft Word. Macro viruses attach to the initialization sequence of an
application. Before it transfers control to the application, the virus executes
instructions when the application is opened. In the computer system, there
will be a replication of the virus before it attaches to other codes.

Chapter 5: How the Hacking Process
Works
System information leakage is the primary use of hacking before. There is
now dark connotation connected to hack in the recent years, courtesy of some
villain players. On the other hand, for them to be assured of their systems’
weaknesses and strengths, hackers are employed by various corporations to
do this. They earn a fat salary through a positive trust they build, and also,
they are aware of the point that they need to stop. So, without further ado,
let’s make a deep dive into the art of hacking.
Preparation Phase
A programming language is highly required here. Though you will see some
essential guidelines, you must not restrict yourself to a specific language.
Tolerance is quite needed in this stage because it might take time to learn
programming language.
It is compulsory to know assembly language. Though there are
several variables of it, your processor understands only this
language. Also, when you don’t know assembly, exploiting a
program may not be possible.
You will also need to know bash scripting. The manipulation of
Linux/Unix systems will be done with ease, including getting
most of the job done for you through writing scripts.
Since PHP is what most web applications use, you must try to
learn PHP, and also, in this field, a reasonable choice for you is
perl.
You can also automate several tasks with powerful, high-level
scripting languages like Ruby and Python.
The languages they used in building Windows and Linux are
C++ and C. most especially; it teaches how memory works and
also assemble language.
Then, your target needs to be in the picture. This process is referred to as

enumeration, which is how you will gather vital information about your
target. You will have fewer surprises when you know more about your target
in advance.
Now, the process of hacking can begin. For your commands, put a *nix
terminal into use. For users of Windows, a *nix will help in emulation
through Cygwin. Nmap doesn’t need Cygwin as it runs on Windows and uses
WinPCap. However, because of the lack of raw sockets, Nmap doesn’t work
well on Windows systems. Also, because of their flexibility, BSD and Linux
must be in your list of considerations. And there are several pre-installed
tools with several Linux distributions. Alternatively, in the Windows Store,
you can find a *nix terminal on Windows 10 fall Creators Updates or later
and courtesy of Windows Linux Subsystem, the Linux command-line can be
emulated by Windows.
Now, the first step is to secure your system. For you to give enough
protection to yourself, you need to quite understand all common techniques.
You need an authorization from your target for you to attack as you begin
with the fundamentals. You can do this by using virtual machines to set up
your laboratory, ask for written permission from your target, or even attack
your network. You will get in trouble if you attempt to attack a network
because it is illegal, no matter its content.
The process of testing your target is the next stage. Will you be able to get to
the remote system? Though it is what most operating systems use, the result
of using the ping utility to be sure your target is alive may not be quite
concrete. Paranoid administrators of systems can easily shut it off since it
relies on the ICMP protocol. Then, you will need to define the OS. When you
intend to run a port scan, try nmap or pOf. So you can make your plan of
action; running a scan of the ports will tell you the kind of router or firewall
your target is using and you will see the ports that are open on the OS and the
machine. Then, you can use the -0 switch to activate OS detection in nmap.
By now, you would have discovered an open port or a path in the system.
Most times, there is a strong protection for certain ports like HTTP (80) and
FTP (20).
The evidence of a secure shell, SSH, service running on the
target is an open port 22, and this can be brute force sometimes.
It is possible your target could have forgotten other UDP and
TCP ports, including several UDP ports left open for LAN

gaming and also Telnet.
The next process is the authentication after you must have cracked the
password. Brute force is among several techniques you can use to crack a
password. You can try every potential password that a predefined dictionary
of brute force software contains.
Most times, finding your way into a system tends to be much
easier even without cracking the password
For you to upload it to the secure site, you can go for a TCP scan
installation or acquire a rooted tablet. Then, you will cause the
password to appear on your proxy when the IP address opens
It may not be a good idea to attempt a login to a remote machine
using every possible password. While it may take some time to
complete, it could pollute the system logs, and intrusion
detection systems can detect it easily
For you to crack password quickly, you may result in using
Rainbow Tables. You need to understand that it is only if the
hash of the password is in your possession can the password
cracking be a good method
As it is thousands of times faster, another processor is the newer
techniques that use the graphics card
You can get a massive speed boost by cutting the MD5
algorithms and also exploiting the weaknesses of most hashing
algorithms can significantly improve the speed of the cracking
since they are generally weak
Brute force can take a lot of time since users are using strong
passwords. However, brute force techniques have improved with
several major improvements
The privilege of a super-user is what you need to get now. If it is a Windows
system you are trying to crack, you will need administrator privileges, and if
your target is a *nix machine, the root privileges are all you need.
You may not be able to access all the features of a connection
that you gain access into. However, you can do everything if

you have the root, administrator, or super-user account
Except it has been altered, the admin account comes by default
for routers, and it is administrator account for Windows
You may require a specific level of authentication for you to get
the most information because they have all been protected. You
will require super-user privileges to see all the files on a
computer. In BSD and Linux OS, root users get similar
privileges as a user account
Now, you may want to engage in some different tricks. Most times, you may
want to bump up your authorization level by causing the memory to dump so
you can inject code or perform a task at a higher level by creating a buffer
overflow to gain super-user status.
You can do this by finding or writing an insecure program that
you can execute on their machine
If the bugged software has setuid bit set, this will happen in
Unix-like systems, and as such, it is as a super-user that the
program will be executed
You may want to have a backdoor developed at this stage. It tends to be ideal
that you can come back again when you have gained complete access to a
system. You can backdoor certain essential system services like the SSH
server. Though, during the next upgrade of the system, your backdoor may be
removed. Then, the solution is to backdoor also the compiler itself so you
have a possible way of coming back through every compiled software. And
your tracks must be covered. It is quite critical that the system administrator
knows nothing about the compromise of the system. Never have more than
necessary files created or make a change to the website. Also, you don’t need
to create more users. Make fast actions. Ensure that your secret password is
hard-coded anytime you patch a server like SSHD. Though without
containing any crucial information, the server must let them in if anyone
attempts to login with this password.

Chapter 6: Why Hackers Use Linux
There are several special features on the Linux operating system that make it
more dominating than any other OS. With Unix as its old version, the
operating system of Linux is an open source. Day by day, there is a rapid
development in the use of Linux. And rather than using any other operating
systems such as Mac or Windows, hackers like to use Linux because of the
additional benefits Linux operating system has over others. The operating
system of Linux has remarkable special features that make it more
dominating than other systems even though their operating systems are more
user-friendly.
Why Hackers Prefer Linux Operating System
For the challenge of it, and because they want to make money from their
natural hacking capacities, hackers break into the networks of computers or
standalone personal computer systems. And to test their skills, hackers will
need the operating system, which offers maximum security. Thus, Linux
appears to be the best choice for hackers since it makes it more secure for
them in all of their activities. For libraries and Linux applications, they have
written millions of lines of code today. This process has allowed it to be
integrated into broadly diverse projects as it is done in an extremely modular
manner. For example, you can have a part of a library used as a network
hijacking code, even with it allowing you to sniff the network for proactive
performance monitoring. Also, network security can be hacked with ease.
As it is flexible, hackers have the opportunity of playing their entire
fashionable activities using the playground of Linux. Also, it is quite simple
for hackers to understand, learn, and use Linux since they can use their
penetrating testing methods to know if there is insecurity. Linux is quite
secure since when problems arise, hackers can patch it because they have the
ability to look at each and every line of Linux code. It can also be used at any
time by any user working on it and not only some programmers working in
some corporate organizations. Here are some of the benefits of Linux over
others:
Easy to Use

The general belief is that Linux is only for hackers and programmers, and
that tends to be the widespread myth. However, this analog is far from being
the truth. You will easily have a basic understanding of Linux if you have
been using it for some time. It is not the same as the operating system of
Windows. As such, it could be quite tricky when we make the switch to a
different operating system. You will find Linux to be user-friendly and more
convenient than Windows.
Less RAM Consumption
Linux consumes lesser processing utility and RAM as well as requires lesser
space for disk since it is quite light. Thus, you can have other operating
systems such as Windows and OS X installed with it.
Linux is the Future
First, Android is based on Linux and also, the choice for web servers is the
Linux operating system for its robustness, flexibility, and stability.
No Requirement for Drivers
You don’t need separate drivers before you can use Linux. Within the Linux
kernel, you will find all the necessary drivers you will need when you install
Linux. As a result, to install drivers for hardware, you won’t need CDs
anymore.
Serious Take on Privacy
All over the Internet, many people are talking about Windows 10 and the
issue of privacy. Usually, your data is collected by Windows 10. However,
there is no case of anyone collecting information and data about you for
monetary gain when you use Linux operating system.
Hacking Tools are Often Written for Linux
Nmap and Metasploit, some of the popular hacking tools are ported for
Windows. However, Linux has some better tools and in a much better way,
manages memory, and not all capabilities are transferred from Linux.
Several Programming Languages Have the Support of

Linux
Most programming languages have abundant support from Linux. On Linux,
working perfectly are Perl, Python, Ruby, PHP, Java, and C++/C. It is
effective and simple when you want to use Linux for any of the scripting
languages.
Less Vulnerable
There is so much vulnerability in virtually all the operating systems available
except Linux. Linux has fewer vulnerabilities, and it prides itself as the most
secure operating system.
Low Cost
It is widely known that Linux is an open-source operating system and so, you
can get it online for free as well as freely install and use app the applications
without any payment.
Flexibility
You can use Linux for high-performance desktop and server applications, as
well as embedded systems.
Maintenance
It is quite easy to maintain the operating system of Linux. You can install all
the software with ease. It is even easier to search for their software since
every variant of Linux has its central software repository.
Portable and Light
From nearly any Linux distribution that they want, the customized live boot
drives and disks are there for hackers to develop. Since the resources it
consumes are quite fewer, it is quick to install. The fact that it consumes
fewer resources makes Linux light-weight.
Command-Line Interface
Windows and Mac don’t have the specially designed, highly-integrated, and

strong command-line interface which Linux boasts of having. Other Linux
users and hackers will have control over their system with greater access.
Multitasking
All at the same time, you can make use of Linux, as that is how it is designed.
For example, your other works will not experience any form of slowdown
with a large printing job in the background. Also, your primary processes will
not be disturbed even with several works done at the same time.
Network Friendly
Linux is effective in managing network over it since it offers several
commands and libraries that hackers use to test network penetrations. Hence,
as an open-source operating system, the team that contributes to it does so
over the internet network. Also, more than any other operating system, Linux
makes network backup faster as a reliable operating system.
Stability
When you want to maintain performance levels, the only OS that doesn’t
require any periodic rebooting is Linux. Also, the cause of memory leaks
cannot slow it down or make it freeze up too. For many years, you can
continue to use this operating system.
Since hackers can increase their hacking capabilities and also test their skills
on this operating system, it makes Linux as their best choice. The setup
programs and installation is user-friendly, and several Linux distributions
have tools that make installation of more software quite user-friendly.

Chapter 7: Kali Linux Installation and
Updates
A security-focused operating system is one of the most essential things to
have when you are looking for a career in information security. You can
efficiently perform tedious and time-consuming tasks with the help of a
suitable operating system. At present, the operating systems of Linux are
indeed countless. However, one of the best choices is Kali Linux.
cybersecurity professionals use it for assessing network security, ethical
hacking, and penetration testing.
Kali Linux will be one of the first names to be mentioned when it comes to
offensive Linux distributions, hacking, and penetration testing. There are
several information security tasks as various command-line hacking tools that
Linux comes pre-packaged like application security, computer forensics,
network security, and penetration testing. Fundamentally, when you attempt
to engage in ethical hacking, the operating system of Linux is an ultimate
solution.
Kali Linux Installation
The process of installing Kali Linux can be quite simple, and the options of
installation are numerous. The techniques most people prefer are:
1. Using the operating system to dual boot Kali Linux
2. With virtualization software like VirtualBox or VMware
3. Installation of hard disk for Kali Linux
4. Making a Kali Linux bootable USB drive while installing Kali
Linux
The focus will be on using virtualization software to install Kali Linux even
while there are several options available. For you to perform a comprehensive
penetration test using all the tools you need, you can set up your machine by
following these steps.
Requirements for Installation

USB support / DVD-CD drive
While 
working 
with 
VirtualBox 
or 
VMware, 
the
recommendation is around 4 GB
The recommendation for your hard drive is a minimum free
space of 20 GB
The Installation Process
Step 1: VMware installation:
First, a kind of virtualization software is essential to run Kali Linux. For
many people, there is a preference for VMware even when they can use
VirtualBox by Oracle as part of several options that they can choose from.
From your applications folder, launch VMware when you have finished with
the installation.
Step 2: Kali Linux download and image integrity checking:
You can choose the one that best suits your needs when you go to the official
download page to download Kali Linux. Also, there are some hexadecimal
numbers on the download page. There is nothing so important about them.
Also, for the tasks that are related to security is the intention of Kali Linux.
As such, the integrity checking of your downloaded image is highly required.
The file’s SHA-256 fingerprint needs to be checked and make a comparison
with the one you see on the site you make the download.
Step 3: a new virtual machine launch:
You will hit the ‘create a new virtual machine’ button when you get to the
homepage of the VMware Workstation Pro. Before you configure the details
of virtual machine, you must have chosen the guest operating system after
selecting the iso file of Kali Linux. Choose the Kali Linux VM to start the
virtual machine, and you will click on the green button with ‘power on’
inscription. You will see the machine starting up!
The process of installation
In the GRUB menu, you will get the prompt to choose your preferred mode
of installation when the machine is powered up. Before you continue, choose
the graphical installation. You will be taken to another page where you will
be prompted to choose your layout for the keyboard, the location of your
country, and the language you prefer. Then, the loader will have the related

settings of your network configured after installing extra components when
you are through with the local information. Then, for this installation, a
domain and hostname will be prompted by the installer. Before you continue
with the installation, you will have to provide the appropriate information for
the environment. You will press continue when you have set a password for
the Kali Linux machine. An important note here: make sure you keep your
password carefully! Then, set your time zone will be prompted by the
installer after you must have set your password. At the partitioning of the
disk, it will pause. From the disk partition, four choices will be provided to
you by the installer. The ‘guided – use entire disk’ option is the easiest of
them all. For additional granular configuration options, the method of
‘manual’ partitioning can only be used by experienced users. If you are a new
user, the recommendation is to choose all files when you are choosing the
partitioning disk and you can click on ‘continue.’ Then, on the host machine,
the entire changes you want to make can then be confirmed. You must be
careful here since you can have the data on the disk erased if you continue.
So, the process of file installation will be run through by the installer when
you confirm the changes in the partition. As this process can take some
minutes, the installation will be done automatically. If you prefer to obtain
future pieces of updates and software, the setup for a network mirror will be
inquired by the system when the necessary files are installed. If you want to
use the repositories of Kali, make sure you have this functionality enabled.
Then, the related files of the package manager will be configured. Next, the
boot loader of GRUB is the next thing you will be asked to install. Choose
‘yes,’ and since it will be required to boot Kali, you will choose the device to
write the important information for boot loader to the hard drive. To finish
the installation, hit the ‘continue’ button when the installation of GRUB to
the disk has finished. Then, specific files for the final stage will be installed.
By now, brace up yourself because your journey of exploring Kali Linux has
just begun since you have successfully installed Kali.
Updating Kali Linux
The packages index list is the first step of an update for your Kali Linux
system. You will enter the following command when you open the terminal;
$ sudo apt update
As an option, for all scheduled packages for update, you can display them.

You have the opportunity of upgrading all packages at once with the use of
apt install PACKAGE-NAME  as well as individual package upgrade at this stage.
Now, you have completely upgraded your Kali Linux.

Chapter 8: Installing Kali Linux on
Virtual Machine
In similar hardware that you currently have, you can run different operating
systems in a number of ways. And some of the options available for you are
hard disks, USBs, and DVDs. In this chapter, the assumption is that for you
to run your Kali Linux, you have no dedicated computer and as such, we are
going to use a virtual PC or a virtualized environment to run it. You must
have had virtual box installed on your computer for us to begin the process.
And in case you don’t have it on your system, it is free to download when
you go to the official website of VirtualBox. For the hardware that we will be
using to install Kali Linux, this software will be emulating this hardware.
It is widely known that unless you have access to software, it can be quite
tricky to download such software. Thus, you will download Kali Linux ISO
image from its official page. And in case you want to follow along as you
mirror that, the flavor of the Kali Linux KDE 64-bit is what we will be using.
The size of its download is around 3.2 GB, and for you to download, it might
take a while. You will then have the .ISO image mounted into the virtual
machine when you have dealt with that one. If you have the intention of using
it in another machine, you can have it burned into a USB or bootable DVD.
However, you may need to take into account certain considerations. Then,
you may open VirtualBox when the image is downloaded.
Now, you will hit on the ‘new’ button for you to create a new virtual
machine, which is the first thing you will do. Then, in the natural operational
system, you will have to specify the existence of this machine’s files of the
service files.  You can select Linux for type because it is on top Linux that
Kali is built. And for version, Ubuntu 64-bit will be your choice. Though to
get Kali up and running on VirtualBox, it is an ideal default setting for us.
There is no guarantee it will work perfectly by specifying version and type.
Then, the prompt for the amount of memory we want will be the next. You
can go for 2GB as even 1GB will still work. Alternatively, you can go ahead
and give it as much as you want if you have enough memory.
The hard drive setup is the next step here, which the VirtualBox will ask you.
You may choose to use an existing one or create one. So as not to go back
and forth between several emulators, you can select VirtualBox Disk Image
after selecting the hard drive file type. If you are using VMware, for instance,

a more suitable option will be VHD. After that, your storage allocation on the
physical hard drive is the next option to choose. Then, you can select
dynamic allocation. Next, the amount of allocation for this machine is what
you will now choose. You must consider checking how much memory you
have available before you go ahead with this action. The place you want to
keep your virtual disks can be specified inside VirtualBox. You may then go
ahead and hit the ‘create’ button. But, that is not the end of the process. For
us to be sure we can understand them, we may want to play around the main
settings. For future reference, you will have the freedom of tackling the
virtual environment and this is quite essential. You may want to read more on
the topic of virtual machine settings because it is an extensive topic.
You can as well move on to the system settings since, during the creation
process, you have covered some items. If you don’t have a floppy drive, you
can remove floppy under the system. You can prompt VirtualBox to check
for any media in the DVD player first in the boot order. It is useful to know
that in the initial install, that is the base for our Kali image. If it is necessary,
you may want to check that later also, but you can have 2MB for the base
memory. As per the above image, ensure that you mirror the extended
features. Then, you can boost the memory of the image up to around 128 MB
when you move on to ‘Display.’ Also, in case you want to get naughty with
specific graphics, you can have the 3D acceleration enabled. You may run the
risk of burning some circuitry and do not give it excessive video memory of
you are running on old hardware. After that, you can do one of the most vital
settings, which is to check the storage. Ensure that the image file you have
downloaded from the official page of Kali Linux is pointing to the empty
CD-ROM drive. Also, for you to be given the options to choose your .ISO
file, you can achieve that by clicking on the disc icon under attributes.
Now, it is believed that you have mounted the CD-ROM image since the
drive represents the .ISO image. You can leave the live DVD/CD checkbox
as default and not tick it. You will have to pay attention to the main
configuration by checking the settings for the network. Some of them are:
Generic networking
Host-only networking
Internal networking
Bridged networking
NAT networking

Network Address Translation, NAT
Not attached
You can go to the official page of VirtualBox for you to know more about
each mode. And provided your internet connection is wired, this default
mode could be enough if all you want to do is to view email inside the guest,
download files, and browse the web. As it is for the beginners, you can, for
now, use NAT. When you launch the machine, everything should be working
well if you are connected via an Ethernet cable. Without an interface card, it
may not be possible for you to reach the web in case you don’t have a wired
connection. Then, you only have to hit on the ‘start’ to launch the operating
system if you intend running Kali in a virtual environment.

Chapter 9: How to Organize Kali
Linux
Kali 2.0 was launched by Offensive Security after ten years of evolution. And
of all the Kali/Backtrack releases, the easiest to use by far is Kali 2.0. There
are some new features with the new Kali if you are used to the original Kali.
However, there’s nothing better than this! They have streamlined and
reorganized the menus completely with a helpful icon representing many of
the tools. Here are some new things about Kali 2.0:
Built-in screencasting
Desktop notifications
For faster Metasploit loading, there is a native Ruby 2.0
New categories and menus
New user interface
They have streamlined the Kali 2.0 quite well, and compared to earlier
versions of Backtrack/Kali; the layout flows quite well. As it is laid out in a
concise and clear manner, the feel is that of having everything at your
fingertips. To organize your Kali, you can follow the following ways as we
examine some of its components.
Overview of the Desktop
Again, everything you will need is at your fingertips on the desktop, which
feels and looks quite good.
Apache Webserver
At present, it seems they have removed the Apache web server for restart,
start, and stop service icons from Kali 2.0. Well, you may want to use the
command below if you want to start them from a terminal prompt:
To restart – you can use “ /etc/init.d/apache2 restart ’ or “service
apache2 restart”

To stop – you can use “ /etc/init.d/apache2 stop ” or “service apache2
stop”
To start – you can use “ /etc/init.d/apache2 start ” or “service apache2
start”
You will notice the change from Kali 1 concerning the default webpage as
you can now surf the webserver of Kali. Now, located in a folder called
HTTP, there is one level deeper for the root website as well. As such, instead
of the old directory “/var/www/,” you can now drop the folders or pages of
your website into the directory “/var/www/html/” when you use the Apache
server.
Screencasting
You can now use screencasting because there is a built-in screencasting
feature in Kali 2.o. You have the ability to record in real-time the adventures
of your security testing.
Places Menu
Within your Kali, you have links to various locations contained in the Places
menu.
Workspaces
There are also workspaces in the earlier versions of Backtrack/Linux.
Workspace is the additional desktop screens that you can use in case you
don’t know the workspace. For all the windows that you have opened, you
can get an overview of them using the ‘super key.’ Also, you can open the
workspace menu if you have a touch-screen monitor. Between the
workspaces, you will have the ability of dragging and dropping specific
running programs.
Auto-Minimizing Windows
At times, some windows disappear or auto-minimize, which is another thing

in the new Kali 2.0. On the favorite bar, to the left of the associated icon, you
will see a white circle when a window is minimized. The first terminal
window will appear if you click on the terminal icon once, and both
minimized terminal windows will reappear when you click it twice. Also, to
see minimized windows, you can press “Alt-tab.” Then, to see additional
windows, you can arrow around when you have the “alt-tab” pressed.
Command-Line Tools
It is in the directory “/usr/share that they have the majority of tools installed.
When you type the names of these tools in a terminal, you can run these tools
and also other tools in the menu. For you to familiarize yourself with both the
share directory and the menu system, you may want to take a few moments
on that.
Application Menu
Under the Application menu, you will see the location of a list of common
program favorites. And by type, there is a logical layout of the tools. For
example, if you want to see the most common web app testing tools, all you
have to do is click on the Web Application Analysis menu item. You will see
a list of all of the tools for a specific category. It is due to the fact the top
tools are shown by the menu system, and in Kali, not all of the tools are
available. Essentially, available in the menu system of Kali are only a fraction
of the installed tools and it is only from the command-line that most of the
tools can be available.
Favorites Bar
On the desktop’s left side, you will see a customizable “Favorite bar” in the
new Kali. With this, you can get into the action quickly since you can get the
applications you use most time with this menu list. Through the required
dependencies, you can start the represented tool automatically with just a
click. For example, before you launch Metasploit, if you want to be sure you
have created the default database, you can prestart the database software by
clicking on the button for Metasploit. Then, you can see various applications
on the bottom of the favorites bar by clicking on the “show applications.” In

folders, you can arrange the programs by type. You can also use the search
bar by typing what you want if you don’t see the app you are looking for.

Chapter 10: Scanning (nmap,
massscan, hping3) and Managing
Networks (Wireshark)
During the course of penetration testing, a very essential host detector and
network scanning tool are network mapped, nmap. Mainly, they use nmap as
a security scanner and vulnerability detector which makes it a powerful utility
as well as using it to enumerate and gather information. Since it can run on
several different operating systems such as Mac, BSD, Linux, and Windows,
this makes nmap a multipurpose tool. They use nmap for several powerful
purposes including:
Securing holes and detecting the vulnerability, such as nmap
scripts
Operating system detection, software version, and hardware
address
It works for service discovery, that is, detecting the version and
software to the respective port
Port enumeration and discovery; detecting ports that are open on
the host
Host discovery; detecting the live host on the network
As a common tool, nmap is available for both the graphical user interface and
command-line interface. And to perform scanning, nmap utilizes several
methods, some of which are FTP bounce scanning, TCP reverse ident
scanning, TCP connect() scanning, and many more.
Effective Use of nmap
Since we have a difference between an advance scanning and basic, simple
scanning, the target machine has a huge dependence on the usage of nmap.
For 
us 
to 
get 
the 
right 
outcome 
by 
bypassing 
the 
intrusion
preventive/detection software and firewall, there is a need to make use of
advanced techniques. You will see some examples below of a few basic

commands their usage:
On the target system, if you intend to scan a specific port, such as scanning
only on the target computer Telnet, FTP, and HTTP, then you will need
relevant parameter to use the nmap command. Also, you may as well call the
file in the exclude parameter if the lists of IP addresses that you intend to
exclude are contained in a file that you have. Another scenario is that since it
tends to be dangerous for you, you may want to exclude specific IP addresses
if you want to scan the entire subnet. As such, use the excluding parameter
when you use the nmap command. You will need to add an –sL  parameter to
the command if you intend to see the entire list of the hosts that you are
scanning.
Enumerating a Huge Quantity of Hosts with Massscan
For a while now, massscan has been around, and all around the world,
pentesters are making use of it. In a second, masscan can transmit up to 10
million packets as a reconnaissance tool. Massscan utilizes a custom IP/TCP
stack and asynchronous transmission with different reception and
transmission of packets using different threads.
You can quickly enumerate a vast amount of hosts using massscan.
Essentially, massscan can scan the whole internet as quickly as 6 minutes,
according to the author of the tool. And because of the high rate of its
transmission, they also use massscan for stress testing. For anyone to
accomplish those high rates, they will need special drivers like NICs and
PF_RING. Since it interacts with the use of similar style of nmap, this part
makes it a convenient tool.
Massscan Features
Custom IP/TCP stack
Basic vulnerability scanning such as heartbleed
Banner grabbing
Nmap style target option and specification
Nmap style output
Ultrafast port scanning: up to 10M packets per second in
transmission (requiring PF_RING drivers and capable – NIC)

Uses of Masscan
Random scanning for knowledge or fun
Internet enumeration
Enumeration of several subnets within an organization
Enumeration of a large number of hosts
For the mapping of the network, massscan can be used as the
first recon tool
Hping3 as a Packet Generator and Network Scanning
Tool
As a free analyzer and packet generator for the IP/TCP protocol for the
Antirez distribution, hping is a network scanning tool. For network security,
hping3 is one kind of a tester, and for security testing and auditing of
networks and firewalls, it is one of the de facto tools. They also use it for the
exploitation of the idle scan scanning method, which now has its
implementation in the nmap security scanner. As an analyzer/assembler for
IP/TCP packet, a command-line oriented is the network scanning tool hping.
Even when hping can do more than sending ICMP echo requests, the ping(8)
Unix command inspired the interface. Its features include the ability to send
files between a covered channel, possession of a traceroute mode, and
support for RAW-IP, ICMP, UDP, and TCP protocols. In the past, they only
used hping as a network scanning tool. However, some people use it in
several manners to test hosts and networks.
Some of the Usages of hping Network Scanning Tool
Network scanning tool
Using Tk interface, it is simple to use networking utilities
Prototype IDS systems
Security and networking research in the event of emulating
complicated IP/TCP behaviour
Concept exploits proof
Automated firewalling tests
Write real applications related to IP/TCP security and testing

Learn IP/TCP
Networking research
Exploitation of identified vulnerabilities of IP/TCP stacks
Test IDSes
Test firewalling rules
Perform the idle scan (with an easy user interface for
implementation in nmap)
Using the standard utilities network scanning tool to
probe/ping/traceroute hosts behind a firewall that blocks
attempts
Students learning IP/TCP can also get adequate knowledge
through hping
Auditing IP/TCP stacks
Remote uptime guessing
Remote OS fingerprinting
Advanced traceroute, under all the supported protocols
Manual path MTU discovery
Using fragmentation, TOS, and different protocols for network
testing
Advanced port scanning
Firewall testing
Securing and Monitoring Your Network with
Wireshark
The toolkit for a network security analyst is one of the most powerful tools
known as wireshark that people also referred to before as Ethereal. Through a
variety of levels, from bits comprising a single packet to information on
connection, wireshark can examine the details of traffic as it peers inside the
network as a network packet analyzer. Wireshark can troubleshoot security
issues in the network of a device and also analyze security events through its
depth and flexibility inspection. Since it is free, the price of wireshark is also
great!
Wireshark Installation

It is as simple as ABC to install wireshark. For Mac OS X or Windows, you
can download the binary versions. Also, for most flavors of Unix/Linux,
there’s availability of wireshark through the standard software distribution
systems. And on other operating systems, the source code is available for
installation. For the Windows version, the team that developed wireshark
built it on top of the WinPcap packet capture library. And if you don’t have
WinPcap already in your installation and you are using Windows, you may
have to have it installed to run it. Here is a caveat: before you run wireshark
installer, you can use the manual process to remove an outdated version of
WinPcap through the “Add/Remove Programs” in the control panel. The
process of installation is the same with the wizard-based sequence that uses
two main prompts: at startup, it will ask if you intend to start the WinPcap
Netgroup Packet Filter, NPF service and if you want to have WinPcap
installed. For you to capture packets, you can choose the former option that
will allow you even if you don’t have administrator privileges. It is only
administrators that will be able to run wireshark if you have this service
enabled.

Chapter 11: Firewalls
Based on a set of security rules, when you intend to block or permit data
packets as well as monitor outgoing and incoming network traffic, a network
security device that you can use is a firewall. For a firewall to block
malicious traffic such as hackers and viruses, you will need to establish a
barrier between your incoming traffic and internal network from external
sources. You can improve the connection of computer security like the
internet or LAN when you use tools like firewalls. An integral part of your
network’s comprehensive security framework is the firewall. With the use of
a code wall that inspects each individual data packet as it arrives, the
firewall’s either side, both outbound and inbound from the system, to
determine whether it can give it access to be blocked or pass, a firewall
completely isolates your computer from the Internet.
When it enables granular control over the kinds of system processes and
functions that have access to the resources of networking, you can further
enhance the security through the capability of firewalls. For it to deny or
allow traffic, there are several host conditions and signatures that these
firewalls use. You can operate, setup, and install firewalls relatively easily
even when they sound complex. The belief of some people is that when they
have a firewall installed, the traffic that passes through the network segment
will be controlled. However, a firewall that is host-based can be suitable for
you. On your computer, you can have them executed, including using it with
Internet Connection Firewall, ICF. Fundamentally, there is a similarity to the
function of the two firewalls; to stop intrusion and offer a strong technique of
access control policy. To put it simply, as access control policy enforcement
points, a firewall is a system that safeguards your computer.
Functions of Firewalls
In essence, here are some of the basic functions of firewalls:
Act as an intermediary
Report and record events
Control and manage network traffic
Validate access

Defend resources
The Definition of Personal Firewall
In the world of secure computing, it’s quite essential for you to understand
your need for a firewall. And since it aids our understanding of how a
firewall may address those needs, we need to understand the goals of
information security.
The Need for Personal Firewall
Electronically, you will connect your computer to a broad network in the
times of high-speed Internet access. You will have limited protection or
control unless you have installed a personal firewall. There are some
drawbacks to any high-speed connection, typical of anything else. Ironically,
the same feature that makes a connection with a high-speed vulnerable is the
same reason that makes it attractive. In some ways, you may be leaving your
front door of your house unlocked and open with your connection to the high-
speed internet. Some of the features of high-speed internet connections
include:
Constant active connection – this is the fact that when your
computer is connected to the internet every time, it is vulnerable
Access of high-speed – this means that it can be quite faster for
intruders to break into your computer
A regular IP – it will be easier for an intruder to find your
computer again and again after they have discovered you
Using a Personal Firewall for Defense
Compared to an ordinary 56Kbps connection, now it is clear to you how,
when you are online on a high-speed internet connection, you are vulnerable.
Now, the threat posed by this type of connection is now known to you, and
how you can defend yourself against it is what you need to know. Here are
some of the vital reasons for a personal firewall:
You can easily develop policies for security to suit your

individual needs since most personal firewalls are highly
configurable
When your computer’s program tries to connect to the internet,
you wish to be kept informed
The home network that you run requires you to keep it isolated
from the internet
You use a public WiFi network when you connect to the internet
in an airport, café, or park
With an ‘always on’ broadband connection, you surf the internet
at home
Firewalls Types
Though the two are suitable, you can have firewalls as hardware or software.
With port applications and numbers, you can regulate traffic through the
installation of a software firewall program on your computer while you can
install the hardware firewall type between the gateway and your network. The
most common firewall type is the packet-filtering firewalls, and in case they
don’t match an established security rule set, they prevent packets from
passing through after they have examined them. The purpose of these firewall
types is to analyze the destination and source of the packets for IP addresses.
It will thus be trusted to enter the network if the packets match those of an
‘allowed’ rule on the firewall.
Stateless and stateful are the two categories of the packet-filtering firewalls.
The ones that are easy targets for hackers are the stateless firewalls since they
lack context by examining packets independently of one another. On the
other hand, stateful firewalls tend to be much more secure because they
remember information about previously passed packets. Though packet-
filtering firewalls ultimately offer quite basic protection and tend to be quite
inadequate, they can be indeed effective. For example, for them to determine
the adverse effect of the application that the content of the requests is
reaching can be quite hard for them. Thus, there will be no way for the
firewall to know when there could be a deletion of a database from a
misconceived trusted source if it allows a malicious request. Those that are
equipped to detect such threats are the proxy and next-generation firewalls.
SMLI, Stateful Multilayer Inspection Firewalls

While these firewalls compare them against trusted packets, they filter
packets at the application, transport, and network layers. Also, if they pass
the layer individually, SMLI only allows them to pass after they examined
the entire packet, which is typical of NGFW firewalls. They ensure the
potential of all initiated communications happening only with trusted sources
as they determine the state of the communication and also by examining the
packets.
NAT, Network Address Translation Firewalls
These firewalls keep individual IP address hidden when they use a single IP
address to connect to the internet by allowing several devices with
independent network addresses. As such, they offer greater security against
attacks because attackers can’t capture specific details when they are
scanning a network for IP addresses. These firewalls are rooted between
outside traffic and a group of computers with proxy firewalls having
similarities with NAT firewalls.
Proxy Firewalls
At the level of application, these firewalls have the network filtered. They are
planted between two end systems, which are not like the basic firewalls. The
firewall must receive a request from the client and using a set of security for
the evaluation, and after that, keep it blocked or give permission. Essentially,
layer 7 protocols like FTP and HTTP are monitored by proxy firewalls and
for them to detect malicious traffic, they utilize both deep packet and stateful
inspections.
NGFW, Next-Generation Firewalls
These firewalls blend additional functionality with the technology of
traditional firewall like anti-virus, intrusion prevention systems, encrypted
traffic inspection, and many more. Essentially, it has the inclusion of DPI,
deep packet inspection. It is within the packet itself that deep packet
inspection examines the data while looking at packet headers is what basic
firewalls only look. With this process, users can stop, categorize, and identify
packets effectively with malicious data.

Chapter 12: Obtaining User
Information: Maltego, Scraping,
Shodan/Censys.io
Maltego reveals how information is connected to each other as a forensic and
open-source application. The relationship between several information types
can aid in identifying the unknown relationship as well as giving a better
picture of their links. When you use maltego, you will have the ability to find
relationships and also the people’s link, such as mutual friends, social
profiles, websites, and companies with the gathered information
relationships. You may want to gather the connection between net blocks,
DNS names, and domains if you intend to gather information regarding any
infrastructure.
Architecture of Maltego
Seed servers receive the request from the maltego client over HTTPS in XML
format. Then, it is the TAS servers that will take the request from the seed
server before the service provider then get the request. The maltego client
will then get the results of the request. For more privacy, you may want to
consider having your TAS servers. At present, the basic and professional
modules are the two types of maltego, and the availability of the modules are
the two major differences between both servers. CTAS is what the basic
server has while in the professional server, you will see the PTTAS,
SQLTAS, and CTAS.
From within maltego, you can perform several pentesting related tasks with
PTTAS, including banner grabbing, port scan, and so on. Also, accessing
SQL database is possible for TAS through SQLTAS. You can also get results
after performing numerous SQL queries using this module. Postgress, Oracle,
DB2, MSSQL, and MySQL are some of the supported types. Then, available
in public sever are the transforms that are contained in the commercial TAS.
Launching Maltego

For anyone to start maltego, you will go to the applications and look for
backtrack. From there, you will get the information gathering and then to the
network analysis where you will then see DNS analysis. From there, you will
get into maltego. You will be prompted to register your product if you are
accessing it for the first time. You will only need to input your email address
and password if you have registered an account already. It will update the
transforms when you have validated your login.
Hit on the tab ‘investigate’ after the updates of the transforms, and from the
palette; you can choose your desired option. In the palette, you will see two
major categories, which are personal and infrastructure. Also, other entities
can be imported into the palette, for example, the Shodan entity. With the aid
of their banner, you can find specific switches, routers, servers, and so on
through a search engine like Shodan.
Web Scraping with Python
Let’s assume you want to quickly pull a huge quantity of data from websites
as fast as possible, how can you accomplish this feat without getting your
data by going to each website at a time? Well, the short answer is web
scraping. For what you intend to do to be faster and easier, you may want to
result to web scraping. If you want to collect data from websites and when
the volume is huge, you can use web scraping. However, what can instigate
someone to want to collect massive data from sites? It is essential to discuss
the web scraping application for us to understand the reason:
Job listings: some details from websites regarding interviews,
job openings, and so on, which users can easily access since it is
listed in one place.
Development and research: they collect temperature, general
information, statistics, and so on from websites, which are a
large set of information by using web scraping, and they use the
result for R&D or to carry out surveys after analyzing it.
Social media scraping: finding out what is trending by
collecting data from social media websites like Twitter through
web scraping.
Gathering email address: web scraping is used by several

organizations that use email marketing to send bulk emails after
collecting them.
Price comparison: for the comparison of the prices of products,
web scraping is used by services like ParseHub to obtain
information from online shopping sites.
The extraction of a massive quantity of information from websites is a
technique of web scraping. The website’s data are not structured, and to have
it is a structured form, these unstructured data are collected by web scraping
to do the job. Writing code, APIs, and online services are some of the
different ways to scrape websites. Web scraping is allowed by some websites,
while others don’t allow it if we want to shift to the legal side of it. You may
want to look at the “robots.txt” file of the website for you to know if such a
website allows web scraping or not.
Shodan and Censys
It is in the Internet of Things that we are now living. Starting from the street
security cameras and traffic light management systems to home WiFi routers,
things that are connected to the Internet are always in our encounter. And it is
both on the web and the real world that we can find all of them because they
have a connection. With Google helping to discover your sought-after data on
the web, you can also find these connected devices with some special search
engines.
Let’s welcome Shodan and Censys!
Since it has been in existence for about 7 years now, for the Internet of
Things, the foremost, as well as the first search engine, is shodan. The
inspiration behind the name came from a highly villainous artificial
intelligence named Shodan, who was the System Shock, the computer game
series’ main antagonist. Though it has the capability of wrecking harm,
shodan in the real-world is not as relentless. However, you will want to know
how the search engine works before we go on to the bad news.
Shodan is typically similar to someone that knocks on every door that they
see as they wander throughout the neighborhood. However, there is the whole
world instead of some city or knocking on every IPv4 address. This person
would have some information and will give it to you if you ask them about a
specific part of the neighborhood or a specific type of doors. The person
would tell you the number of the doors, the individuals who answer these

doors, and their utterances. And about those Internet of Things, you can get
their information from shodan, which includes whether there is a web
interface you can use, their type, and how they are called. Through, relatively
cheap, you will need to subscribe to you to use shodan because it is not
completely free.
Except there are no locks on some doors, you may find nothing so weird
about knocking on some doors. And for the bad guys to break in, it may not
be possible for anyone. Some systems that use default passwords and logins,
including IP cameras and unprotected routers, are the representations of these
doors in the world of Internet of things. You will see yourself gaining
complete access to the password and login when you have managed to figure
out them after entering their web-interface. And because you can easily find
these default information about passwords and logins on the manufacturers’
website, everything is no longer rocket science. And if it has the support of
an IP camera, you can control and even see everything if it is an IP camera.
Also, you may alter the settings if it is a router. You can even use a scary
voice to talk to the poor baby if it is a baby monitor. Everything is up to the
standards of your morals.

Chapter 13: Kali Linux on Portable
Devices Like Raspberry Pi
Though, it can be fun enough to test networks, spoof accounts, or crack WiFi
passwords. However, you may need an easily portable rig if you intend to
take the show on the road. And so, here come the Raspberry Pi and Kali
Linux. They designed Kali Linux for network penetration testing as an
operating system. For you to test for Bluetooth vulnerabilities, spoof
networks, WiFi passwords cracking, and plenty of other things, you have the
chance of running it on your laptop. You need to know that you can be
charged with a felony and get yourself arrested for violating the Computer
Security Act if you break into protected networks using this knowledge. You
can only use this knowledge to play with networks you control, for your
learning, or simply use it for good. Now, since we have talked extensively
about Kali Linux, and for the sake of not repeating all that you have read
before, our focus will be on how we will build our Raspberry Pi and the
version we will use. So, let’s get it done!
For you to use Raspberry Pi, they don’t require a lot of power for you to use
them as a credit sized, small computer. You will have a super-portable
system testing device that you can easily take with you anywhere you go with
the combination of Kali Linux and Raspberry Pi.
The Essentials
For you to perform initial installation, you will need a desktop
computer
Get a portable, small wireless keyboard with touchpad that one
side of a small bag can contain
It tends to be quite useful if you are carrying the Raspberry Pi
with you around. So, a case is fine but optional
New version of point-to-this-screen is essential though with
Raspberry Pi 2 or newer versions; it doesn’t fit flush
An 8 GB SD card
A Wi-Fi card
You will be fine with a few external 5V batteries that use a USB
part built for smartphones. So, you need a pack of battery

Model 2 or B/B+ of Raspberry Pi. Though to install Raspberry
Pi 2, you will need some additional steps; you may want to use
the Model B+ if you don’t wish to go through those steps.
Step 1: Installation of Kali on the Raspberry Pi
For the Raspberry Pi, downloading and installing the touch screen build for
Kali Linux will be the first thing you will need to do. The installation process
is quite typical of installing any other operating system for Raspberry Pi.
Here is a quick way to go about it:
Installation of Kali to Windows SD Card
1. For your hardware, you will need to download the Kali Linux
Raspberry Pi. You can grab the Pi 2 version for Raspberry Pi 2
and the TFT version for model B/B++. Inside it, you will unzip
the img file. You will need to take note here because, for
Raspberry Pi, you will have to download the standard version of
Kali Linux if you’re not using the touch screen display.
2. You will need to have the application (.exec file) unzipped
within after downloading Win32DiskImager.
3. With the use of a card reader, you will then have your SD card
inserted into the Windows computer.
4. Then, 
you 
will 
double-click 
on 
the 
application,
Win32DiskImager.exe that you have just downloaded.
5. At the top right of the device, you will click on the drop-down
menu to select from the list if the application doesn’t
automatically detect your SD card.
6. The Raspbian .img file that you have just downloaded can be
found when you click on the folder icon of the file from the
application’s image section.
7. Win32DiskImager will work its magic as you wait for it after
you have clicked the ‘write’ button. You can insert your card
into your Raspberry Pi after you have safely ejected your SD

card when it finishes.
Kali installation in OS X SD Card
1. For you to work with it on your hardware, you will firstly need
to have Kali Linux Raspberry Pi image downloaded. You will
take Pi 2 version for Raspberry Pi 2 and TFT version for model
B/B++. The standard version of Kali Linux for the Raspberry Pi
is essential to be downloaded if it is the screen display that you
are using.
2. For your installed version of OS X, have the appropriate version
selected as you unzip the application after you have downloaded
RPi-sd card builder.
3. With the use of a card reader, have your SD card inserted into
your Mac.
4. Then, you can have your RPi-sd card builder opened. There will
be an instant prompt for you to select an image of Raspbian. The
file that you have had downloaded earlier is all you will have to
select.
5. Then, another prompt will inquire about the connection of your
SD card. All that is required of you is to click on ‘continue’
since it is connected when you inserted it earlier. Then, the
options for SD card will be presented to you. It will be checked,
and you won’t see anything else on the list if you have only had
one inserted. Click ok on the card you want to use if not.
6. Then, you will enter the password for administration and press
enter.
7. If there is any ejection of the SD card, you will see yet another
prompt. Since for the application to perform a direct copy, it
needs to unmount; there’s nothing weird about it. In the Finder,
for your SD card not to be available any longer, you will need to
double-click it. A word of caution here: NEVER remove it from
your USB port. You can click continue when you are sure.
8. Your SD card prepping will finish by the RPi-sd card builder.
Then, you can insert it into your Raspberry Pi unit after you

have safely ejected it.
Step 2: the Display Hook-Up
The touch screen works perfectly with the general-purpose input/output,
which the Raspberry Pi has. You will see how this works ideally because, in
the corner, it is the set of pins on your Raspberry Pi. Click into the display of
the Raspberry Pi.
Step 3: Have Everything Plugged in and Launch
At this stage, you will need to plug in everything through the attacked
display. Have your Wi-Fi adapter plugged into the USB ports. After that,
plug the Pi into your pack of batteries. Here, you can experience a clunky and
slow process for the startup. If it takes some time, don’t panic. First, before
the startup process of the boot, for a bit while, you will see a white screen.
Finally, a login screen will greet you. For you to get your screen working,
you may have to work through some form of setup if you are using a
Raspberry Pi 2. You may simply have to go to the next step if it is the B+ that
you are using. Mainly, to get the screen running, there may be some needed
steps for the current Raspberry Pi 2. A white, sad screen will welcome you
when you boot it up initially. However, getting the screen working is not too
hard. Unfortunately, Pi attachment may not require an HDMI monitor or
through this part, you may need access into SSH. Then, to boot up your Pi,
simply connect either of those.
Step 4: Enable Wi-Fi as you Log in
For you to make use of the tools within Kali Linux, you will want to enable
the Wi-Fi card as you log in. your Wi-Fi card will be recognized
automatically by the Raspberry Pi. However, it is essential to get into your
network. The user interface of Kali Linux then needs to be powered up in the
first place. Finally, you must change your device’s password before you
engage in anything else. If you don’t, your device can be controlled by
another person with the hacking skills.

Chapter 14: MalDuino
MalDuino has the capabilities of keyboard injection as an arduino-powered
USB device. At superhuman speed, MalDuino will act as a typing, keyboard
commands when you power it. Anything is possible with MalDuino since
you can alter the desktop wallpaper or gain a reverse shell. Also, MalDuino
can work well for pranksters, hobbyists, and penetration testers. The best
BadUSB experience is all that MalDuino aims to provide. And using open-
source libraries, it is through the arduino IDE that they have MalDuino
programmed when it comes to software. You can convert the script written in
DuckyScript into the code MalDuino will understand. For them to program it
simply like, they would an Arduino; this makes it possible for expert arduino
tinkerers to program it as well as making it newbie-friendly. The two versions
of MalDuino are Lite and Elite.
Elite
You can select the script you intend running from the card since this version
has four DIP switches and a Micro-SD card reader, and it is quite bigger.
Also, you can program the keystroke injection scripts that the Micro-SD card
stored apart from burning the fireware only once. This process is in contrary
to the Lite version, which, when you want to run a different script, it will
need to be flashed. You can drop, repurpose, or reprogram all these features
altogether because it is straight from the Arduino that they programmed the
two MalDuinos. Although you may have a few pins to play around with, you
can purchase one and simply prefer to use it as a usual Arduino. You will be
prompted to participate in the crowd-funding campaign particularly with the
freedom that it offers.
Lite
The Lite version contains a switch apart from the USB connector, and this
version is quite small. You can choose between programming and running
mode with the function of the switch and the indication that the script has
finished running through a LED. With more than enough space for most
scripts, on its 32KB of onboard memory, the Lite stores a script. You can use
the script converter to convert the scripts to malduino-friendly code since you
can use a text editor to write scripts. Then, with the Arduino IDE, you can as

well upload a script. Using the switch at the back, you can toggle the Lite into
ready mode after you have unplugged the MalDuino Lite. Then, you can start
using it!
The Hardware
The board of the Elite version measures around 4.6 cm x 1.1 cm, roughly 1.8
in x 0.43 in, which you can use an old case for it. For the Micro-SD card and
DIP switches, you may need to cut some holes for them. It may come to your
realization that the firmware it ships with is likely some kind of QC test for
the dips after you exercise some RTFM and play around with the switches.
Depending on which switches are on, these features make the output of
MalDuino the numbers 1 to 4.
The Setup
Your Arduino IDE must not only be installed but also up to date when you
want to set up the MalDuino. Because they programmed the Elite as a
‘Sparkfun Pro Micro” that runs at 8 MHz and 3.3 V, it will be required of you
to install the Sparkfun boards and open up the board manager. Then, the
online portal of the Malduino Script Converter is your next point to go since
there so many purposes that it servers like:
For you to import to the IDE, it auto-generates the Arduino
project
You will have the freedom of selecting the language of your
keyboard layout
Between the Elite and Lite version, you can convert scripts
through it
You only need to have the MalDuino flashed once and then store new scripts
using the Micro-SD card when it is in normal operation as you empty script
to download the project or create a simple script for the Elite version.
The Software
For you to run a command, a quick shortcut will be the combination of the
ALT-F2 since you are running Linux. As such, you can save a file to 1111.txt
after scripting that into a file. Then, for a file that corresponds to the recent

dip switch state, the search will be on the Elite for the Micro-SD card if you
power the dip switch 4 and 2. As such, there will be an attempt by the
software on parsing the content and finding the file with the name 0101.txt,
i.e., not the binary representation of the number 4 and 2 but in dip switch
order 1,2,3, and 4. Then, there will be a quick flashing of the red LED when
it finishes. It is possible that only command functioning accurately is the
ALT-F2 combo, and nearly all commands worked. Thus, you won’t get any
run command window without ALT-F2.
Protecting Yourself From MalDuino
As keystroke injection tools, a wider family of USB devices, referred to as
BadUSBs is MalDuino. They have the capability of doing several types of
devilish things by taking advantage of keyboard input as a trusted method of
interfacing with a computer. However, what are the measures you can take to
guard yourself against MalDuino? You can mitigate or protect yourself from
the dangers of BadUSB attacks with the following 3 ways:
Admin Rights Lockdown
It doesn’t matter if you are concerned about BadUSB attack or you are not;
doing this can be quite useful. If you want to make changes to the admin-
level, you only have to provide the prompt of yes or no to make changes that
require admin rights on Windows 10. Even if the person is the admin, you
will see that it is wrong and silly to provide someone that level of control.
Before handling the keys to the castle, you can change this with a registry
level edit to make the operating system require your admin password.
Duckhunt
This technique is applicable on Windows. There is a small application on
github that can run as a backdoor process. The rate at which your keys are
typed is what it continually monitors. When it detects unusual typing speeds,
it will block all HID. However, some of the first few characters of an attach
can likely get through and that is the only downside of it.
Physical Protection
It is simply a catch-all solution, and it is quite vital not to allow unauthorized

devices from being plugged into your system. You can invest in some port
blocker devices to block all access to USB ports physically. You may have to
look deeper in the case of critical infrastructure. All the same, you can
prevent any attack by using it when you are out in public.

Chapter 15: Kismet
As a wireless intrusion detection framework, kismet is a wardriving tool,
sniffer, device detector, and wireless network. While kismet functions in
compliance with hardware such as RTLSDR as well as some specialized
capture hardware, it also works with certain software-defined radio,
Bluetooth interfaces, and Wi-Fi interfaces. To some extent and under the
WSL framework, kismet also functions with Windows but works well with
OS X and Linux. Kismet works with Bluetooth and Wi-Fi interfaces, as well
as other hardware devices on Linux. The built-in Wi-Fi interfaces enable it to
function on OS X and works with remote captures on Windows 10.
Watching the Activities of Wi-Fi User Using Kismet
With a sight’s direct line and directional Wi-Fi antenna, it is possible to
detect the signals of Wi-fi passing through the walls of your home, even with
its walls of privacy. People can learn a huge amount of data from this
information, such as nearby devices’ manufacturers, the movements of the
residents, and also the network they use at a given time. For fixed targets,
using kismet in a fixed situation can result in more nuanced information.
Thus, it is ideal at displaying relationships between devices over time instead
of just looking for the access point out there. The draw is from signal
intelligence methods when we spy on users using kismet, whereby it is
through the signals it conveys that we hope to learn about what we can’t see.
Here, Wi-Fi is the things we are dealing with and the devices that someone
owns, human activity, connected devices, and routers are the things we are
trying to see. Doing this goes a long way to your imagination.
You will be more inclined to put off your Wi-Fi on unused devices and make
a switch to a wired network if you are able to figure out that someone could
see whether you were using your laptop or on your PlayStation and whether
you were in your house. Using a wireless network, they use kismet to scan
every available Wi-Fi channels silently by putting it in monitor mode for
wireless packets for it to work its magic. You can see automated beacon
frames as these packets that can be broadcasted by the wireless APs several
times in a second. Also, not yet connected probe frames and data packets
exchanged from connected devices. Kismet has the ability to visualize the
activity of devices associated with specific networks as well as the networks

themselves.
What We Can Get From Wi-Fi
So, how do we manage this situation? You can get on to explore nuanced
details about a network you want to watch when you have identified it. You
may want to look for details such as the network connection of the hardware
and electronics of someone or an organization. You will be able to know the
kind of configuration for some devices and also the recognition of various
setups types for fingerprint. Not only will laptops and smartphones be plain
to you, but you will also have the ability to see connected hydroponics or 3D
printers with a setup such as this.
Now, the kind of person you are has a lot of dependence on the usefulness of
this information. It would be useful to a thief who wants to discover
expensive electronics by snooping around all homes in wireless range. Using
a jamming attack, you can potentially target one or avoid one completely
because wireless security cameras can be detected by kismet. And when no
one is in the house, we can easily infer since it’s quite possible for us to see
when the devices of clients use data, disappear, and appear. Also, with the
use of the Wi-Fi signal data, hackers can combine data of the GPS by
wardriving around a neighborhood. Doing this, each address of the wireless
network will be possible for hackers when they build a map. Essentially, as
there are already mapped networks by Google and Wigle Wifi, there could be
an existence of this data. In the neighborhoods, for the detection of suspicious
wireless activity, people can also use it as a neighborhood watch.
Essential Tools
There are some things needs to adhere to this guide. You will need kismet for
you to run a Linux system, and for the scanning, you will also need a wireless
network adapter that is compatible with Kali. Here, the older version which is
stable is what we will discuss even though different wireless cards like
macOS can run on the recent type of kismet. If your desire is to have it run on
the Raspberry Pi, kismet will function perfectly on a Kali-Pi installation as
well as a virtual machine.
Step 1: kismet installation:
The git repository will have to undergo a cloning process before the
installation of kismet on Kali Linux. You may not need to worry about any

dependencies based on the type of operating system that you are using.
However, the slightly longer list of dependencies for kismet may be needed
to be installed for smooth running of kismet. Since you will have to sort,
login, decode, and detect a huge number of wireless data, they are quite
needed. Also, you will need to install lots of libraries because you will be
controlling a wireless card. Then, you will need to have the installation
configured by navigating to the kismet directory. For your specific operating
system distribution, this process will have the installation configured. Then,
you can create the installation after the completion of that process. You will
use the suidinstall option to complete the installation by running the resulting
file with it. Then, you will install kismet. After the installation, you will need
to capture packets as a non-root user by adding yourself to the kismet group.
Ensure that your actual username is replaced in the space for
“YourUsername.”
Step 2: monitor-mode your wireless card:
With the USB settings, you will attach your wireless network card to the
virtual machine or to your computer. The commands ifconfig or ip a can be
used to find your card. You can use a “wlan0” or “wlan1” to name your card.
You can then put your care in a monitor mode after naming it. At the end of
the card’s name, you will see a “mon” as it is renamed with this process. And
to launch kismet, you will use this name.
Step 3: launch kismet:
It is simple to begin using kismet. For your card that you have put in wireless
monitor mode, ensure to put the term after the –c since to specify the source
it captures, kismet makes use of the –c. Then, kismet will start capturing
packets after starting up. Then, you can return to the menu and make some
customizations.
Several Wi-Fi devices that you can detect nearby will appear before you as
you start kismet. Based on whether you are using 5 GHz, 2.4 GHz, or the two
of them, you will have variance in the number of devices that you can detect.

Chapter 16: Bypassing a Hidden SSH
Now we need to take some time to look at going through and bypassing one
of the SSH logins. We are going to do this by adding our own key to a remote
server and then getting the access that we want. So if we want to go through
and setup the SSH keys so that we can quickly and efficiently log in without
a password, we are able to do this with a single command. This is going to be
a simple process to go through.
The SSH is going to be known as the Secure Shell, and it is going to be a
cryptographic network protocol that is going to be useful for helping us to
operate the network services securely over a network that is unsecured. The
typical applications that we are going to see with this one are going to include
options like logging in with the command line and remote command
execution, but it is possible that any network that you want to use is going to
be secured with the SSH protocol.
The first step in this process is to make sure that we have been able to run the
keygen command in order to generate the keys. If you have already generated
some of these keys, then we are able to skip these steps. The code that we are
able to use for this one is below
ssh -keygen -t rsa
Then we are able to go through and use this particular command in order to
push the key so that it becomes connected to the remote server. This is going
to be something that we are able to modify in order to match the user name of
the server and the host name of your server as well. We will be able to go
through and use the code below to make this happen.
cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub | ssh user@hostname 'cat >> .ssh/authorized_keys'
The first time that we copy over these keys, we are going to need to enter the
password to help the program get set up and ready to go. After that first time,
though, we should be able to login without needing a password, or even use
the rsync or scp without entering the password at all. You are able to test this
iwt the following command:

ssh user@hostname
It is definitely going to be a lot easier to go through compared to typing in a
password all of the time.
Nd, that is all that we need to do. It is going to spend some time helping us to
get onto the SSH and will make it easier for us to get onto this without
needing to use a password each time that we do the work. Getting this done
can be hard, and you do need to know the password the first time around, but
if you are able to get ahold of this, and you will be able to get onto the
network any time that you would like.

Chapter 17: Bypassing a Mac Address
Authentication and Open
Authentication
Another thing that we are able to do when it comes to hacking is to bypass
the Mac Address Authentication in order to get onto the network that we
want to use. This is going to be a feature that we are going to find with Mac
addresses that will allow us to get onto the system and use it in the manner
that we would like. This will ensure that we are able to either get onto our
network when it is not working well or on another option that we would like
to use, such as hacking into another computer. Let’s take a look at how this is
going to work.
The Media Access Control address, or the MAC address, is going to be
interesting because it is able to uniquely identify each node that is going to
show up in a network. It is going to take the form of six pairs of hexadecimal
digits, which can include 0 to 9, and all of the letters A to F, that are going to
be separated out by either dashes or colons.
This MAC address is usually going to be associated with the network adaptor
or a device that has some networking capabilities. Because of this reason, it is
going to be known in many cases as the physical address. The first three pairs
of these digits in the address are going to be called the Organizational Unique
Identifier, and we need to take some time to look at them because they help
us to identify the company that either sold or manufactured the device. Then
the last three pairs of digits that are going to show up are going to be the
specific numbers that just go to that device, and can be like the serial number
of the whole process.
With this in mind, we are going to spend some time going through and
looking at some of the steps that we need to use in order to bypass the MAC
address filtering on some of our wireless networks. The first step that we
need to work with is considering that we are going to working with a router
that has the MAC Filtering Configured in the first place. We can say that our
MAC address is going to be AA-BB-OO-11-22. This is one that is allowed to
show up when we are using the MAC filtering on our own wireless network.

Then it is time to move on. We can log into the machine that we are using for
Kali Linux and then put that Wi-Fi adapter into the mode that allows it to
monitor what is going on around it. This is going to be done with the airmon-
ng and can be done with the simple command into our terminal below:
Airmon-ng start wlan()
Now it is possible that some of the processes with Kali Linux when you do
this will show us some errors. If you do end up with some issues or an error
message here, then you need to kill the process in this program that seems to
be having the issue. You are able to do this with the command below:
Kill [pid]
Now it is time to go through and launch another part of this process, which is
the Airodum-ng. This will help us to locate the wireless network that we want
to work with, and will even help us to see which clients are connected in this
whole process. The command that we are able to use to make this one happen
is below:
airodump-ng –c [channel] –bssid [target router MAC Address] –i
wlan0mon
This should then show us a whole list of the clients who are connected to this
device at the bottom of our terminal. Then the second column is going to list
the MAC addresses of all the connected clients we will be able to spoof at
this time in order to get that wireless networked authenticated so we can do
what we would like on it.
The one thing to note at this time is that you are only going to get a list with
this step if there is actually someone who is connected to the wireless
network that we are looking at. If you do not have someone currently
connected to the device, then you will not get a list at this point.
Now it is time for us to go on to the next step. After having been able to go
through and find the MAC address that you want to use, it is time to go
through the process of using the MacChange rin order to spoof the MAC
address that we want to work with. We are going to spend our time spoofing
the MAC address of your wireless adapter, but the first thing that we need to

do here before we get started, we need to take down the interface for
monitoring known as wlan0mon and wlan0. This is going to allow us to make
some of the changes that we want to the MAC address. We are able to do this
with the following command to make things a little easier:
Airmon-ng stop wlan0mon
When that process is done, we are able to take down the wireless interface
who’s MAC address we want to spoof in the following command:
Ifconfig wlan0 down
Then this is going to bring us the MacChanger. We are able to use this tool in
order to change up the MAC address. The code that we are able to do with
this one will be below:
Macchanger -m [New MAC Address] wlan0
And then we want to go through and bring all of that back up. Remember, a
few steps above, we went through and closed down the system so that we
could change ours and get ourselves on this option. But now we want to go
through and bring it all back up again. The code that we are able to work with
here will include:
Ifconfig wlan0 up
Now that we have been able to change up the MAC address that is on our
wireless adapter to a white listed MAC address that the other network will
allow, we are able to try out authenticating with the network and see whether
this worked and if we are able to connect to the process as well.
And that is all there is to get this done. Keep in mind that this process can
take a bit of time if you are not going to find someone who is on the network
right in the beginning. You may need to have some patience with this one to
make sure that it is going to work the way that you would like and to ensure
that you can actually find the right MAC address that is going to work with
that router.

But once you have been able to go through and change up your MAC address
so that it works well with one of the other options that belong to that wireless
network so that you are able to get on as well. This is a simple process is
going to be able to help us learn more about the process and how we are able
to work with getting onto the network that we would like along the way.

Chapter 18: Hacking WPA and WPA2
The world of wireless networks is going to be great for a lot of consumers. It
adds on a lot of protection to the networks of the past, and it is going to be
important to helping us to work with our wireless network while on the move
and without having to be connected to your cable all of the time. The WPA
and WPA2 options are going to be some of the best when it comes to keeping
your information safe, but it is possible for hackers to get onto them if they
are patient, and they are ready to go through and take on the hard work. That
is why we are going to spend some time in this chapter taking a look at the
steps that are necessary to hack onto these two wireless networks.
The first thing that we need to take a look at is preparing our attack. We need
to first have a better understanding of when we are able to legally hack into a
Wi-Fi network. In most regions, the only time that you are able to legally
hack onto some of these networks is when the network belongs to you, or if it
belongs to someone who has given us written permission to hack into the
network so that you can check it and make sure that it is safe from a hacker.
Hacking networks that don’t meet the criteria that are above, then the hacking
process is illegal and it could be known as a federal crime if you are caught in
the act. 
Now that this is out of the way, it is time for us to go through and download
the disk image of Kali Linux. This is going to be one of the preferred tools to
work with when it is time to hack these networks. You can download the
installation image, also known as the ISO, by using the following steps:
1. The first step that we will work with is to go to the
https://www.kali.org/downloads/ on the web browser of your
needs.
2. Click HTTP next to any of the versions of this that you would
like to use.
3. Wait for the file to finish with the downloading process.
From here, we want to be able to attach a flash drive over to the computer
that we are working with. The flash drive that we are using is required to
come with 4 gigabytes of space or higher in order to complete this process.

Then we can make the flash drive bootabe. Finish up the rest of the steps that
you need to do to get the Kali Linux system set up and ready to go on your
own computer.
When the Kali Linux system is set up and ready, it is time to begin the actual
hack that we want to accomplish. We can do this by opening up the terminal
for Kali Linux on your computer. You can find and click on this Terminal
app icon, which is going to look like a black box that has a white “>_” on it.
You can also just click on Alt, Ctrl, T to open this terminal up.
This is the time where you will want to install Aircrack to help with the
attack. You are able to type in the command that is below to help you get this
one started:
sudo apt-get install aircrack-ng
When the prompt comes up for this one, you will want to enter in the
password. You can type in the password you use to log into that computer in
the first place. Then press on the Enter button. This is going to make sure that
the root access is going to be enabled for any of the other commands that you
would like to be able to execute in the Terminal. If you decide at this time to
open up another window for a Terminal, which is possible, remember that
you may have to go through and run a command with the sudo prefix or
choose to enter the password into the system again to get the best results.
This is where we are going to be able to install the Aircrack-ng program that
we were talking about before. When it prompts you to, you should press on
Y, then wait until the program has time to finish installing overall. When this
installation is done, it is time to turn on the airmon-ng. type in the command
to do this and then press on Enter to continue.
Then it is time for us to go through and find the name of the monitor that we
want to use. You are going to find this located somewhere in the Interface
column. If you are working to do this attack on your own network, then it is
going to be named as wlan0. If you do not see the name of the monitor at all,
then be aware that your specific card for Wi-Fi is not going to support this
kind of monitoring at all.
Now it is time for us to go through and start the process of monitoring our
network. You are able to do this with the following command below, and

then press enter when you are done
Airmon-ng start wlan0.
Make sure that you press the right name of the network that you would like to
monitor. If you are doing your own, then you would add in the wlan0. But if
you are trying to monitor the wireless of another computer, then you will
need to make some changes in order to handle this and make sure that you are
actually managing the different network that you would like.
Then we need to go through and enable a monitor mode interface with this.
When we find that, we are able to enter the following command to help us get
this set up:
Iwconfig
Now, there could be a few different processes that show up, and it is possible
that some of them are going to return errors to us. If this happens, then we
will want to kill any of the processes that are going to return errors to us. This
is often going to happen when the Wi-Fi card is going to conflict with some
of the running services on your computer. You are able to kill these processes
when you go through and use the command below:
Airmon-ng check kill
While we are here, we want to review the name of the monitor interface. In
most cases, the name is going to be something that is pretty simple, like
mon0 or wlan0mon. We also want to make sure to tell the computer that it is
time to listen to some of the nearby routers. To get a list of the routers that
happen to be in the same range as you, you are able to enter the command
below:
Airodump-ng mon0
Make that you replace the mon0 with the right part. We want to have it filled
in as the name of the monitor interface that we used in the previous step, or

this is not going to work the way that we would like.
As you are searching around, we need to make sure that we are doing some
searching here. We need to be able to find the router that we would most like
to hack. At the end of each string of text that comes your way, you are going
to see a name. You want to look through this to find the one that belongs to
the network that you would most like to hack into in the process.
During this process, we need to make sure that we are working with the right
router, and that we are choosing one that comes with WPA or WPA2 security
that is attached back to it. If you see one of these on the left of the name of
the network, then it is time to proceed. Otherwise, this is not going to be a
network that you are able to hack along the way.
This is where we are going to be able to note the MAC address and the
channel number of the router that we want to work with. These are going to
be the pieces of information that we should notice on the left of the name of
the network. The MAC address is going to be the line of numbers that we are
going to find on the far-left side of the line for the router. On the other hand,
the channel is going to be a number of some sort that is found to the left of
the tag that you have for the WPA or WPA2.
In this part, we are going to be able to monitor the selected network until we
see a handshake. This is going to occur when an item connects to a network,
or when the computer is able to connect to a router. Enter in the code below
in order to make sure that we are replacing the components that are necessary
of the command with the information on the network:
Airodum-ng -c channel – bssid MAC -w /root/Desktop/ mon0
In this one, there are going to be a few things that are going to happen. First,
we are able to replace the channel with the channel number that we were able
to find in the other step.
Then we want to replace MAC with the MAC address that we plan to us or
spy on here.
Remember that we also need to go through and replace the mon0 with
whatever the name of the interface is that you want to work with.
When this is all in place, we just wait around for some time to see that
handshake appears. Once you see a line that has the tag of WPA handshake,

and it is followed with a MAC address that shows up at the top of your screen
on the right, then it is time to proceed. It is also possible for us to move this
along and not wait around all of the time, it is possible for us to force a
handshake using the deauth attack before we continue on with this part.
When it is time to go through and get that handshake, then you will be able to
get onto the network and look at what is going on, as long as the other person
does not have the proper security on their network at that time. You will then
be able to get through some of the security protocols that are there, and this
allows you to look around, read through and change some of the packets that
are shown, and so much more. You need to work with a few tools to make
this happen, but it can be a successful method to finish the hack that you
would like to accomplish.

Chapter 19: Secure and Anonymous
Using Tor, Proxy Chains, and VPN
There are going to be some situations where you would like to get onto a
network and do some of the work that you want, without other people being
able to track where you are going. Being secure and anonymous online is
something that a lot of people aim for in their work, and it is sometimes hard
to make sure that you can get to this point, and maintain that secrecy. That is
why we are going to spend some time looking at the different methods that
we are able to use to keep ourselves hidden and safe when we are online.
What is Tor
Tor is going to be a protocol for internet networking that has been designed
in order to anonymize the data that is relayed across it. Using this software is
going to make it, at a minimum, hard, if not impossible, for snoops to come
onto the network and see your social media posts search history, webmail and
other online activity that you try to do. They will also find that it is hard to
figure out what country you are from, just by analyzing your IP address. This
can be useful for a lot of people who want to be online.
When you run this service, some of the bigger data collectors, like Google
Ads and other options will not be able to go through and perform some of the
traffic analysis that they want, and they will not be able to go through and
gather up some data on the habits that you are doing online. This also makes
it harder for hackers to gather that information as well.
The Tor network is interesting in that it is going to run through the servers of
thousands of volunteers who are found through the world. The data that you
use is going to be bundled up in packets that are encrypted when they enter
into this network. Then, unlike how we see with our traditional internet
connections, Tor is going to be able to strip away part of the header of the
packet, which is going to be part of the addressing information that can be
used to help us learn some things about the sender, such as the operating
system where this message was originally sent from.
Finally, Tor is going to be able to encrypt the rest of the information that we

use for addressing, called the packet wrapper. This is something that the
regular connections that we use with the internet are not going to use this.
Then our data packets, which are encrypted and modified, will be routed
through many of these volunteer servers, known as relays, while it makes its
way to the final destination. The roundabout way that these packets are going
to travel on this network is going to make it harder to track.
Each of the relay parts is going to decrypt just enough of that wrapper to
know which relay the data came from in the first place, and which relay it
needs to send that packet to the net. The relay is then able to rewrap this in a
new wrapper before sending it along again.
While this method is not 100 percent accurate all of the time, it is going to be
able to keep your information a lot safer than we will see with regular
connections to the internet. The fact that we are encrypting the data that we
use, and that we are able to work with this in a manner that relies on relays
rather than sending it just one place at a time, can make it a lot easier and
more secure to work with.
Using Proxy Chains
Another option that we are able to work with here to ensure that our
information is going to stay safe and secure along the way is to work with
these proxy chains. These are going to make it a lot harder for the hacker to
find us and what we are doing. It will utilize an intermediary machine whose
IP address is going to be the one left on the other system, rather than our
own. And the Proxy system is set up to make this all work.
The proxy chain is going to be used to help us to accept our own traffic, and
then we will forward it on to the target that should receive it. The proxy is
going to spend time logging all of the traffic that we would like to send in
either direction, but the good news is that if someone would like to look
through this log, they would need to get a search warrant or a subpoena to do
it, and this makes it harder for us to get onto the other network without
anyone finding us.
If we are able to take some of our coding skills and string more than one of
these proxies into a chain, it is going to become even more difficult for the
other computer to detect the original IP address that we want to work with.
On the other hand, if one of the proxies is found to be out of the jurisdiction

of the victim, then it is going to be really unlikely that any traffic is going to
actually come back to our own IP address.
The good news is that, if you would like to stay hidden with the help of
proxies, both BackTrack and Kali with Linux are going to have some good
tools that are going to help with doing this process, and this is going to be
known as a proxy chain. It is up to you to determine if this is the right option
to keep your network secret and hidden. 
VPNs
Another tool that we are able to work with when it is time to keep our
network safe is the VPN. This is going to stand for a Virtual Private Network,
and it is going to allow you a way to create a secure connection to another
network through the internet. These can be a great option to use in some
cases when we would like to access websites that are restricted based on your
region, to help your browsing activity from others seeing it, and more.
These VPNs are really popular though they are not going to be used in many
cases for the original purpose for what they were designed for. They were
originally made to help connect a business network together over the internet
or allow you a way to access a business network when we are at home.
To keep this as simple as possible, the VPN is going to be able to connect
your computer, tablet, or smartphone to another computer or another server
somewhere on the internet, and you are able to browse the internet with that
connection to keep things safe. So, if you see that this server is found in
another country, it is going to seem as if you are actually in that company and
allows us to pull up information and services that we would normally never
be able to gain access to at all.
There are a lot of great ways that we are able to benefit when it comes to
working on the VPN. These are going to include:
1. Will help us to bypass some of the restrictions on location when
it comes to websites or streaming some of the video and audio
that we would like to get ahold of.
2. It can make it easier to stream some of the content that we

would like on Hulu and Netflix.
3. Will make it easier to protect yourself from thins like snooping
or issues with hotspots of Wi-Fi so that it is harder for a hacker
to gain the access that they want.
4. Will help us to gain at least a little bit of anonymity when we are
online and can really hide our true location from others.
5. Makes it easier to protecting yourself from being logged when
you are torrenting.
It is common for people to work with VPN and other services when they
would like to bypass some of the geographic restrictions to watch the shows
and movies that they would like in different countries or even to help with
torrenting. This can be especially useful when you would like to hack,
though, because it makes it harder for others to find you and figure out where
all of the attacks are coming from in the first place.

Chapter 20: IP Spoofing
The next topic that we need to spend a bit of time on here is the idea of IP
spoofing. This is going to be a process where we are able to create packets
for the Internet Protocol that are going to have modified source addresses in
them, to either help us hide the identity of the person who is sending the
information, to help us to impersonate another system of computers, and
sometimes for both. This is often going to be the technique that a hacker is
going to use when they would like to perform a DDoS attack against their
target device or against the surrounding infrastructure.
Sending and receiving these packets is going to be one of the main methods
that these networked computers and devices are going to communicate, and it
is going to be kind of the basis of how the modern internet is going to work.
All of these IP packets are going to come with a header, which is then going
to be followed by the body of the packet, and will contain some of the
important information on routing like the source address. In a normal packet,
one that the hacker has not messed around with, the source IP address is
simply going to be the address of who sent the packet. But if the hacker has
been able to spoof the packet, then the address is going to be forged instead.
IP spoofing is going to be analogous to an attacker sending out a package to
someone with the wrong address to return listed out. If the person who
received the package wants to stop the sender from sending out this package,
blocking all of the packages that come from that address is not going to do
much good because the return address can be changed as well.
Along the same idea here, if the receiver would like to be able to respond to
the return address that they see on the packet, their response package is going
to not head to the real sender. Instead, it is going to head to whichever IP
address that the hacker stole to use. The ability to spoof the addresses of
packets is going to be one of the biggest vulnerabilities that we are going to
see with these DDoS attacks.
For example, the DDoS attack is going to be reliant on spoofing with the goal
of overwhelming a target with traffic while masking the identity of the source
that comes with it. This is going to make it harder to work with any
mitigating efforts if the IP address of the source is false, and it is randomized

on a continuous basis, blacking the requests that are malicious are going to be
a lot harder to do. IP spoofing, as a result, is going to make it really hard for
cyber security teams and law enforcement to track down who is causing the
attack.
Along the same lines, we are going to find that spoofing is also going to be
used to help us masquerade as another device when we would like. So that
the responses that come with this are going to be sent over to the device that
we are targeting instead of over to us. Some attacks, including the volumetric
attacks like DNS amplification, are going to rely on this kind of vulnerability.
The ability that we have in order to modify the source IP is going to be a big
part of the design that we are going to see with the TCP/IP protocol, which
means that we are always going to have to be worried about what is
happening here.
Tangential to the DDoS attacks that we talked about before, spoofing is going
to be done with the whole aim of hiding and pretending to be another device.
This is going to allow the hacker to come in and sidestep the authentication
and to gain access to or hijack the session of another user. The hacker is then
able to go through the process of doing whatever they would like with this
network, which is going to allow them to cause some damage and attack the
network, without anyone being able to attach it back to them.

Chapter 21: Penetration Testing with
Metasploit
The final thing that we are going to take a look at here is how to work on a
penetration test, and how we are able to use the Metasploit system to help us
get all of this done. Penetration testing, or a pen test, is going to be a process
that involves attacking some of the information systems in a similar way as
an attacker would to your system. This helps us to find some of the
vulnerabilities in the system and close them up before the hacker can get to
them.
The distinguishing characteristic that we are going to find with pen testing is
that there will not be any harm done to the system, and the owner of that
system will provide the necessary consent before you get started. The
vulnerability that we will see will be defined as a weakness in the security
that is going to exist in a part of our system that will provide an entry point
for the hacker to use to start their attack. There are a number of places where
these vulnerabilities are going to show up, such as errors in the design, bugs,
and more.
Some of the most common entry points for these attacks and places where we
need to check out before a hacker can get to them includes the browsers, SQL
injection, flash, ActiveX, and social engineering.
Due to the different scenarios that can cause an attack, different penetration
testing types are going to be needed. The three types of testing that we are
able to look through can include white box, black box, and gray box testing.
When we start out with some of the black box testing, then none of the
information about that system is going to be provided back to the person who
is doing the testing. It is going to be the responsibility of our tester in order to
gather up the right information about the system that they are supposed to
attack.
Then we are able to move on to the white box testing. This helps because it is
going to provide complete information about the target system from the
beginning. This is going to be useful because it helps us to understand some
of the impacts that can happen with an internal attack on the network.

And then we finally have the grey box attack. This is going to be where the
tester is going to get some of the information about this system, but not all of
it. These tests are going to be the most useful to help us better understand
what can happen, and the main impact, of one of these external attacks.
So, we need to work through the four stages that are going to happen when
we work with penetration testing and the Metasploit process. The first stage
that we are going to focus on is the planning out the test that we want to use.
The objective of this is to help us to identify the scope and even the strategy
that we want to use in order to carry out this test. The scope of this test is
going to be informed by currently practiced policies and standards.
The second stage that we are able to work with is going to be known as
discovery. There are going to be three things that we are able to do here. The
first one is to gather up some of the information on the system and some of
the data that it holds. This is going to be known as fingerprinting. Then we
reach the second activity and that is known as scanning and even probing
system ports. And finally, the third activity is going to help us to identify any
vulnerabilities that the system is going to have.
The third stage of this testing is going to be all about the attack. This stage is
going to be able to help us identify the exploits for the vulnerabilities. An
exploit is going to be a computer program that has the objective of utilizing a
vulnerability in order to get the necessary access to that system overall. after
the hacker is able to gain this access, the payload is going to be the software
that will help them to gain the necessary control over that compromised
system. The exploit is going to be done in order to help deliver the payload
that we are working with here.
And then we end up with the fourth stage. This is one that can often be
forgotten, but if you are doing this process for someone else, then you will
want to pay attention to it to help them out. This stage is going to be known
as reporting. The objective that we are going to see with this stage is that it
helps us to create a detailed report of some of the identified vulnerabilities of
the system, the impact that they have on our business, and some of the
necessary solutions.
Although there are going to be a ton of different tools that are able to help out
with this process, Metasploit is going to be one of the tools that is used the

most. That is why we are going to spend some time looking at how to do this
kind of process, the process of working with a penetration testing, and how it
can be done with Metasploit.
First, we have to realize that Metasploit is going to be a framework that has
been organized into modules. The first type is going to be to do the exploit.
These types of modules are designed in a manner so that they are able to take
advantage of any weaknesses that are found in a system. These are going to
be things like code injection, application exploits, and buffer overflow.
Then there are going to be some of the auxiliary modules. These are going to
be the ones that will perform some actions, but these actions are not set up to
take direct advantage of some of the weaknesses on the system. For example,
these can be things like service denial and scanning.
The third type of module that is found on this system is going to be the post-
exploitation modules. These are important as well because their main focus is
going to be helping us gather information on some of the target systems.
And finally, we are going to find the payload modules. These are going to be
the modules that can run after a weakness has been exploited in a successful
manner. The payload is going to provide the means to help us control the
system that w were able to exploit along the way. With this payload, it is
easier to open up the meterpreter to help write out the DLL files.
So now, we need to take a moment to download this system to get it up and
running. We are going to go through and do it with the Windows installation
here, but you are able to go through and make changes and do some of the
work that you would like to prevent other issues along the way as well, and it
will work in a similar manner on other systems. You just need to go to the
Metasploit website and then click that you want to do the Windows
installation.
From here, you will want to download the installer, and then there will be
some prompts that show up that will help you to get this installation
completed. To help confirm that the installation was a success, you need to
start the command prompt, making sure that you are the administrator, and
then use the command of “commanmsfvenom.bat -helpd.” If you get an
output, then this will show you that it worked, and it should list out all of the

different options that are available for you to use from this part.
There are a few options that we are able to work with here. For example, if
we would like to be able to list out all of the payloads that are available, we
would be able to work with the command of “msfvenom.bat -list payloads.”
This could be a long list, but it still shows us what is available here.
If you would like to go through and start up the console that is available with
Metasploit, you will need to use the command of msfconsole.bat. You will
then be able to access the msf console, which is going to be the tool that we
can use for the command line that is going to work with this program.
The next thing on the list that we are able to focus on, we need to list out all
of the exploits that we have available with the help of the command help
search. If we want to go through and search around for a specific exploit, you
will need to use the CVE number, platform, or name. Let’s say that we want
to be able to list out all of the exploits that happened in the year of 2018. To
do this, we would need to bring out the command of “search cve:2018” and
this should list out all of the parts that we need.
To go through this process and then gather up some of the information about
the exploit that happened, we need to pass the url of that exploit and make
sure that it is in the info command. The code that we are able to work with to
make this happen includes:
Exploit/multi/browser/java_jre17_exec.
After we are able to look through the list and then we can find an interesting
exploit that we want to use, it is time to use the command that we used above.
After we issue the command that we want to work with that specific exploit,
it is possible for us to set some of the options that we want to use with the set
command. This could be something like setting the local port and local host.
The commands that we are able to use to make this one is going to happen
will include the following:
set SRVHOST 0.0.0.0
set SRVHOST 8080
If you would like to be able to go through and check the variables that we are

able to set, we would want to work with the command, show options to get it
done. When the exploit that we are working with has more than one target,
we are able to set a specific target by specifying an ID to the set target
command. Some of the available targets that we will want to work with are
going to be listed with the help of the command of show targets.
Working with the Metasploit program is going to make it a lot easier for us to
go through and complete one of our own penetration tests. This is going to
make it easier for us to go through and learn a bit more about our system, and
figure out where some of the most common vulnerabilities are going to show
up and how we are able to close them up and keep the hackers out.

Conclusion
Thank you for making it through to the end of Hacking with Kali Linux, let’s
hope it was informative and able to provide you with all of the tools you need
to achieve your goals whatever they may be.
The next step is to get to be where we are able to spend a bit of time learning
more about the world of hacking and how we are able to utilize it for some of
our own needs. Whether you are looking to protect your own network and
make sure that a hacker is not able to get onto the system, or you are more
interested in hacking onto another network and taking the information
(which, as we discussed, is illegal), you can utilize a lot of the techniques and
other methods that are found in this guidebook.
There are a lot of different parts that come together when we are trying to
work with hacking, and Kali Linux is going to be a great resource to help us
get through some of these hacking, and will ensure that we are able to get this
all done. We spent some time taking a look at how to set up the Kali Linux
system so that it is ready to go and help us with all of the hacking that we
want to do along the way.
In addition to being able to work with the Kali Linux system in order to get
some of our hacking done, we also need to spend some time taking a look at
some of the other hacking techniques that we are able to use. We are going to
spend some time looking at how to do a penetration test, some of the man in
the middle attacks, denial of service attacks, how to get onto some of the
wireless networks, and the importance of a penetration test.
Then we took some time to look at the different parts that are able to help us
to keep our networks safe. For example, with the help of a good firewall and
the use of penetration testing, and even VPN’s and other options like this to
keep your anonymity when you are online, you will be able to make it a bit
harder for the hacker to find you, and this makes it so much easier for you to
keep all of that information as safe as possible.
There are many parts that come to the world of hacking, and it is important
that we learn some of the methods and techniques that come with this in
order to keep things organized and to keep the hackers out. When you are

ready to learn a bit more about hacking and how it can work for some of our
needs, make sure to check out this guidebook to help you to get started.

